Notes
on the
New Testament

Albert Barnes

Edited by
Robert Frew

ps Baker Books

A Division of Baker Book House Co
Grand Rapids, Michigan 49516

.

Heritage Edition Fourteen Volumes 0834-4

. Genesis (Murphy) 0835-2 8. Minor Prophets (Pusey) 0842-5

. Exodus to Esther (Cook) 0836-0 9. The Gospels 0843-3
0844-1

0837-9 . Acts and Romans

. Job

. Psalms 0838-7 . I Corinthians to Galatians 0846-8

. Proverbs to Ezekiel (Cook) 0839-5 12. Ephesians to Philemon 0847-6

0848-4

. Isaiah 0840-9 . Hebrews to Jude

. Daniel 0841-7 14. Revelation 0849-2

When ordering by ISBN (International Standard Book Number), numbers listed
above should be preceded by 0-8010-.

Reprinted from the 1847 edition published
by Blackie & Son, London

Reprinted 2005 by Baker Books
a division of Baker Book House Company
P.O. Box 6287, Grand Rapids, MI 49516-6287

Printed in the United States of America

For information about academic books, resources for Christian
leaders, and all new releases available from Baker Book House,
visit our web site:
http://www.bakerbooks.com/

§ 1. The Situation of Ephesus, and the Character of tts People.

THIS epistle purports to have been written to the “Saints in Ephesus, and
to the faithful in Christ Jesus,” though, as we shall see, the fact of its having been directed to the church at Ephesus has been called in question.
Assuming now that it was sent to Ephesus, it is of importance to have a
general view of the situation of that city, of the character of its people, and
of the time and manner in which the gospel was introduced there, in order
to a correct understanding of the epistle. Ephesus was a celebrated city of
Tonia in Asia Minor, and was about 40 miles south of Smyrna, and near the
mouth of the river Cayster. The river, though inferior in beauty to the
Meander which flows south of it, waters a fertile vale of the ancient Ionia.
Ionia was the most beautiful and fertile part of Asia Minor; was settled
almost wholly by Greek colonies; and embosomed Pergamos, Smyrna, Ephesus,
and Miletus; see Zvravels of Anacharsis, i. 91, 208; vi. 192, 97, 98. The
climate of Ionia is represented as remarkably mild, and the air as pure and
sweet, and this region became early celebrated for everything that constitutes softness and effeminacy in life. Its people were distinguished for amiableness and refinement of manners, and also for luxury, for music and dancing, and for the seductive arts that lead to vicious indulgence. Numerous
festivals occupied them at home, or attracted them to neighbouring cities,
where the men appeared in magnificent habits, and the women in all the
elegance of female ornament, and with all the desire of pleasure (Anachar).

Ephesus was not, like Smyrna, distinguished for commercial advantages.
The consequence has been that, not having such advantage, it has fallen
into total ruin, while Smyrna has retained some degree of its ancient importance. It was in a rich region of country, and seems to have risen into
importance mainly because it became the favourite resort of foreigners in the
worship of Diana, and owed its celebrity to its temple more than to anything
else. This city was once, however, the most splendid city in Asia Minor.
Stephens, the geographer, gives it the title of Hpiphanestate, or “ Most
Illustrious; ” Pliny styles it “the Ornament of Asia.” In Roman times it
was the metropolis of Asia, and unquestionably rose to a degree of splendour
that was surpassed by few, if any, oriental cities.

That for which the city was most celebrated was the Temple of Diana.
This temple was 425 feet in length, and’220 in breadth. It was encompassed by 127 pillars, each 60 feet in height, which were presented by as
many kings. Some of those pillars, it is said, are yet to be seen in the
mosque of St. Sophia at Constantinople, having been removed there when
the church of St. Sophia was erected. These, however, were the pillars

iv INTRODUCTION.

that constituted a part of the temple after it had been burned and was
repaired, though it is probable that the same pillars were retained in the
second temple which had constituted the glory of the first. All the provinces of Asia Minor contributed to the erection of this splendid temple,
and two hundred years were consumed in building it. This temple was
set on fire by a man named Herostratus, who, when put to the torture,
confessed that his only motive was to immortalize his name. The general
assembly of the states of Ionia passed a decree to devote his name to
oblivion; but the fact of the decree has only served to perpetuate it;
Cicer. De Nat. Deor. 2. 27; Plutarch, Life of Alex. comp. Anachar. Vi.
189. The whole of the edifice was consumed except the four walls and
some of the columns. It was, however, rebuilt with the same magnificence as before, and was regarded as one of the wonders of the world.
It is now in utter ruin. After the temple had been repeatedly pillaged
by the barbarians, Justinian removed the columns to adorn the church of
St. Sophia at Constantinople. The place where it stood can now be
identified certainly, if at all, only by the marshy spot on which it was
erected, and by the prodigious arches raised above as a foundation. The
vaults formed by them compose a sort of labyrinth, and the water is kneedeep beneath. There is not an apartment entire; but thick walls, shafts of
columns, and fragments of every kind are scattered around in confusion
(Ency. Geog. ii. 278, 274).

In the reign of Tiberius Ephesus was greatly damaged by an earthquake ;
but it was repaired and embellished by the emperor. In the war between
Mithridates and the Romans, Ephesus took part with the former, and massacred the Romans who dwelt in it. Sylla severely punished this cruelty ;
but Ephesus was afterwards treated with lenity, and enjoyed its own laws,
with other privileges. About the end of the eleventh century it was seized
by a pirate named Tangripermes, but he was routed by John Ducas, the
Greek admiral, in a bloody battle. Theodorus Lascarus, a Greek, made
himself master of it in 1206. The Mohammedans recovered it in 1283. In
the year 1401 Tamerlane employed a whole month in plundering the city
and the neighbouring country. Shortly after the city was set on fire, and
was mostly burnt in a combat between the Turkish governor and the Tartars.
In 1405 it was taken by Mahomet I., and has continued since that time in
the possession of the Turks (Calmet).

There is now a small mean village, named Ayasaluk, near the site of the
ancient town, consisting of a few cottages, which is all that now represents
this city of ancient splendour. Dr. Chavolla says, “The inhabitants are a
few Greek peasants, living in extreme wretchedness, dependence, and insensibility; the representatives of an illustrious people, and inhabiting the
wreck of their greatness--some in the substructions of the glorious edifices
which they raised--some beneath the vaults of the stadium, once the crowded
scene of their diversions--and some by the abrupt precipice in the sepulchres.
which received their ashes. Its streets are obscured and overgrown. A
herd of goats was driven to it for shelter from the sun at noon, and a noisy
flight of crows from the quarries seemed to insult its silence. "We heard the
partridge call in the area of the theatre and the stadium. The glorious pomp
of its heathen worship is no longer numbered; and Christianity, which was

INTRODUCTION. \f

here nursed by apostles, and fostered by general councils, until it increased
to fulness of stature, barely lingers on in an existence hardly visible” (7ravels, p. 131, Oxford, 1775). A very full and interesting description of Ephesus,
as it appeared in 1739, may be seen in Pococke’s Travels, vol. ii. part ii.
pp. 45-58, ed. Lond. 1745. Several ruins are described by him, but they
have mostly now disappeared. The Temple of Diana was on the western
side of the plain on which the city was built, and the site is now in the midst
of a morass which renders access difficult. The ruins of several theatres and
other buildings are described by Pococke.

In the year 1821 Mr. Fisk, the American missionary, visited the city of
Ephesus, of which he has given the following account :--“ We sent back our
horses to Aisaluck, and set out on foot to survey the ruins of Ephesus. The
ground was covered with high grass or grain, and a very heavy dew rendered
the walking rather unpleasant. On the east side of the hill we found nothing
worthy of notice; no appearance of having been occupied for buildings.
On the north side was the circus or stadium. Its length from east to west
is forty rods or one stadium. The north or lower side was supported by
arches which still remain. The area where the races used to be performed
is now a field of wheat. At the west end was the gate. The walls adjoining
it are still standing, and are of considerable height and strength. North of
the stadium, and separated only by a street, is a large square, inclined with
fallen walls, and filled with the ruins of various edifices. A street running
north and south divides this square in the centre. West of the stadium is
an elevation of ground, level at the top, with an immense pedestal in the
centre of it. What building stood there it is not easy to say. Between this
and the stadium was a street passing from the great plain north of Ephesus,
into the midst of the city.

“T found on the plains of Ephesus some Greek peasants, men and women,
employed in pulling up tares and weeds from the wheat. I ascertained, however, that they all belonged to villages at a distance, and came there to
labour. Tournefort says that, when he was at Ephesus, there were thirty or
forty Greek families there. Chandler found only ten or twelve individuals.
Now no human being lives in Ephesus; and in Aisaluck, which may be considered as Ephesus under another name, though not on precisely the same
spot of ground, there are merely a few miserable Turkish huts.

“The plain of Ephesus is now very unhealthy, owing to the fogs and mists
which almost continually rest upon it. The land, however, is rich, and the
surrounding country is both fertile and healthy. The adjacent hills would
furnish many delightful situations for villages if the difficulties were removed,
which are thrown in the way by a despotic government, oppressive agas, and
wandering banditti” (Missionary Herald for 1821, p. 319).

§ 2. The Introduction of the Gospel at Ephesus.

It is admitted by all that the gospel was introduced into Ephesus by the
apostle Paul. He first preached there when on his way from Corinth to
Jerusalem, about the year 54 (Acts xviii. 19). On this visit he went into the
synagogue, as was his usual custom, and preached to his own countrymen,
but he does not appear to have preached publicly to the heathen. He was

vi INTRODUCTION.

requested to remain longer with them, but he said he must by all means be
in Jerusalem at the approaching feast--probably the passover, Acts xviii. 21.
He promised, however, to visit them again if possible, and sailed from
Ephesus to Jerusalem. Two persons had gone with Paul from Corinth--
Priscilla and Aquila--whom he appears to have left at Ephesus, or who at
anyrate soon returned there, Acts xviii. 18, 26. During the absence of
Paul there came to Ephesus a certain Jew, born in Alexandria, named
Apollos, an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, who had received
the baptism of John, and who taught the doctrine that John had taught,
Acts xviii. 24, 25. What was the precise nature of that doctrine it is difficult
now to understand. It seems to have been in substance that repentance
was necessary, that baptism was to be performed, and that the Messiah was
about to appear. This doctrine Apollos had embraced with zeal, was ready
to defend it, and was in just the state of mind to welcome the news that the
Messiah had come. This zealous and talented man Priscilla and Aquila
instructed more fully in the doctrines of the Christian religion, and communicated to him the views which they had received from Paul, Acts xviii. 26.
Paul, having gone to Jerusalem as he purposed, returned again to Asia
Minor, and taking Phrygia and Galatia in his way, revisited Ephesus, and
remained there about three years, Acts xviii. 23; xix. 1, seq. It was during
this time that the church was founded, which afterwards became so prominent, and to which this epistle was written. The principal events in the
life of Paul there were, (1) His baptizing the twelve persons whom he found
there, who were disciples of John; Notes, Acts xix. 1-7. (2) Paul went
into the synagogue there and engaged in an earnest discussion with the
Jews, about three months, respecting the Messiah, Acts xix. 8-10. (38)
When many of the Jews opposed him he left the synagogue and obtained
a place to preach in, in the school-room of a man by the name of Tyrannus.
In this place he continued to preach without molestation for two years and
proclaimed the gospel, so that a large portion of the inhabitants had an
opportunity of hearing it. (4) The cause of religion was greatly promoted by
the miracles which Paul wrought, Acts xix. 11-17. (5) Paul remained
there until his preaching excited great commotion, and he was at last driven
away by the tumult which was excited by Demetrius, Acts xix. 23-41. At
this time the gospel had secured such a hold on the people that there was
danger that the temple of Diana would be forsaken, and that all who were
dependent on the worship of Diana for a livelihood would be thrown out of
employment. It is not probable that Paul visited Ephesus after this, unless
it was after his first imprisonment at Rome; see Intro. to 2 Timothy. On
his way from Macedonia to Jerusalem he came to Miletus, and sent for the
elders of Ephesus and gave them his deeply affecting parting address, expecting to see them no more, Acts xx. 16, seq.

Paul remained longer at Ephesus than he did at any other one place
preaching the gospel. He seems to have set himself deliberately to work to
establish a church there, which would ultimately overthrow idolatry. Several
reasons may have led him to depart so far from his usual plan by labouring
so long in one place. One may have been that this was’ the principal
seat of idolatry then in the world. The evident aim of Paul in his ministry
was to reach the centres of influence and power. Hence he mainly sought

INTRODUCTION. Vil

to preach the gospel in large cities, and thus it was that Antioch, and Ephesus, and Corinth, and Athens, and Philippi, and Rome, shared so largely in
his labours. Not ashamed of the gospel anywhere, he yet sought mainly that
its power should be felt where wealth, and learning, and genius, and talent
were concentrated. The very places, therefore, where the most magnificent
temples were erected to the gods, and where the worship of idols was celebrated with the most splendour and pomp, and where that worship was
defended most strongly by the civil arm, were those in which the apostle
sought first to preach the gospel. Ephesus, therefore, as the most splendid
seat of idolatry at that time in the whole Pagan world, particularly attracted
the attention of the apostle, and hence it was that he was willing to spend so
large a part of his public life in that place. It may have been for this
reason that John afterwards made it his permanent abode, and spent so many
years there as the minister of the church which had been founded by Paul;
see § 38. Another reason why Paul sought Ephesus as a field of labour may
have been that it was at that time not only the principal seat of idolatry,
but was a place of great importance in the civil affairs of the Roman empire.
It was the residence of the Roman proconsul, and the seat of the courts of
justice in Asia Minor, and consequently was a place to which there would be
attracted a great amount of learning and talent (Macknight). The apostle,
therefore, seems to have been anxious that the full power of the gospel should
be tried there, and that Ephesus should become as important as a centre
of influence in the Christian world as it had been in Paganism and in
civil affairs.
8 3. Notices of the History of the Church at Ephesus.

The church at Ephesus was one of the seven churches of Asia, and the
first one mentioned to which John was directed to address an epistle from
Patmos, Rev. ii. 1-7. Little is said of it in the New Testament from the
time when Paul left it until the book of Revelation was written. The tradition is, that Timothy was a minister at Ephesus, and was succeeded by the
apostle John; but whether John came there while Timothy was living, or
not until his removal or death, even tradition does not inform us. In the
subscription to the Second Epistle to Timothy, it is said of Timothy that he
was “ordained the first bishop of the church of the Ephesians;” but this is
of no authority whatever. All that can be with certainty learned about the
residence of Timothy at Ephesus, is what the apostle Paul says of him in his
First Epistle to Timothy, ch. i. 3, ‘““As I besought thee to abide still at
Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou mightest charge some that
they teach no other doctrine.” From this it would appear that the residence
of Timothy at Ephesus was a temporary arrangement, designed to secure a result which Paul wished particularly to secure, and to avoid an evil which he
had reason to dread would follow from his own absence. That it was a temporary arrangement, is apparent from the fact that Paul soon after desired
him to come to Rome, 2 Tim. iv. 9, 11. The Second Epistle cf Paul to
Timothy was written but a few years after the first. According to Lardner,
the first was written in the year 56, and the second in the year 62; according to Hug, the first was written in the year 59, and the second in the year
61; according to the editor of the Polyglott Bible, the first was written A.D.

viii INTRODUCTION.

65, and tlre second A.D. 66. According to either calculation the time of the
residence of Timothy in Ephesus was brief. There is not the slightest evidence from the New Testament that he was a permanent bishop of Ephesus,
or indeed that he was 4 bishop at all in the modern sense of the term. Those
who may be disposed to look further into this matter, and to examine the
relation which Timothy sustained to the church of Ephesus, and the claim
which is sometimes set up for his having sustained the office of a bishop, may
find an examination in the Review of Bishop Onderdonk’s Tract on Episcopacy, published in the Quarterly Christian Spectator in March, 1834, and
March, 1835, and republished in 1843 under the title of The Organization and
Government of the Apostolic Church, pp. 99-107.

Whatever was the relation which he sustained to the church in Ephesus,
it is agreed on all hands that John the apostle spent there a considerable
portion of his life. At what time he went to Ephesus, or why he did it, is
not now known. The common opinion is, that he remained at or near Jerusalem for some fifteen years after the crucifixion of the Lord Jesus, during
which time he had the special charge of Mary, the mother of the Saviour;
that he then preached the gospel to the Parthians and the Indians, and that
he then returned and went to Ephesus, in or near which he spent his latter
days, and in which, at a very advanced age, he died. It was from Ephesus
that, under the Emperor Domitian, a.D. 95, he was banished to the island
of Patmos, from which he returned A.D. 97, on the accession of Nerva to
the crown, who recalled all who had been banished. John is supposed at
that time to have been about ninety years of age. He is said to have died
at Ephesus in the third year of Trajan, A.D. 100, aged about ninety-four
years. For a full and interesting biography of the apostle John, the reader
may consult the Lives of the Apostles, by David Francis Bacon, pp. 307376.

Of the subsequent history of the church at Ephesus, little is known, and
it would not be necessary to dwell upon it in order to an exposition of the
epistle before us. It is sufficient to remark, that the “candlestick is removed
out of its place” (Rev. ii. 5), and that all the splendour of the temple of
Diana, all the pomp of her worship, and all the glory of the Christian church
there, have alike faded away.

§ 4. The Time and Place of writing the Epistle.

It has never been denied that the apostle Paul was the author of this
epistle, though it has been made a question whether it were written to the
Ephesians or to the Laodiceans; see § 5. Dr. Paley (Hore Pauline) has
shown that there is conclusive internal proof that this epistle was written by
Paul. This argument is derived from the style, and is carried out by a comparison of this epistle with the other undoubted writings of the apostle. The
historical evidence on this point also is undisputed.

It is generally supposed, and indeed the evidence seems to be clear, that
this epistle was written during the imprisonment of the apostle at Rome;
but whether it was during his first or his second imprisonment is not certain.
Paul was held in custody for some two years in Cesarea (Acts xxiv. 27), but
there is no evidence that during that time he addressed any epistle to the

INTRODUCTION. ix

churches which he had planted. That this was written when he was a
prisoner is apparent from the epistle itself. ‘The two years in which Paul
was imprisoned at Cesarea,” says Wall, as quoted by Lardner, “seem to
have been the most inactive part of St. Paul’s life. There is no account of
any proceedings or disputations, or of any epistles written in this space.”
This may have arisen, Lardner supposes, from the fact that the Jews made
such an opposition that the Roman governor would not allow him to have
any intercourse with the people at large, or procure any intelligence from
the churches abroad. But when he was at Rome he had more liberty. He
was allowed to dwell in his own hired house (Acts xxviii. 30), and had permission to address all who came to him, and to communicate freely with his
friends abroad. It was during this period that he wrote at least four of his
epistles--to the Ephesians, the Philippians, the Colossians, and Philemon.
Grotius, as quoted by Lardner, says of these epistles, that though all Paul’s
epistles are excellent, yet he most admires those written by him when a
prisoner at Rome. Of the Epistle to the Ephesians he says it surpasses all
human eloquence--rerum sublimitatem adzquans verbis sublimioribus, quam
ulla unquam habuit lingua humana--describing the sublimity of the things
by corresponding words more sublime than are found elsewhere in human
language. The evidence that it was written when Paul was a prisoner
is found in the epistle itself. Thus in ch. iii. 1, he says, “I, Paul, the
prisoner of Jesus Christ--o décu.os roi Xpeoro(--for you Gentiles.” So he
alludes to his afflictions in ch. iii, 13, “I desire that ye faint not at my
tribulations for you.” In ch. iv. 1, he calls himself the “ prisoner of the Lord,”
or in the margin, “in the Lord ”--6 décpsos év Kupiw. And in ch. vi. 19, 20,
there is an allusion which seems to settle the inquiry beyond dispute, and to
prove that it was written while he was at Rome. He there says that he
was an “ambassador in bonds”--év advcec--in chains, manacles, or shackles ;
and yet he desires (ver. 19, 20) that they would pray for him, that utterance
might be given him to open his mouth boldly to make known the mystery of
the gospel, that he might speak boldly as he ought to speak. Now this is a
_remarkable circumstance. A man in custody, in bonds or chains, and that
too for being an “ambassador,” and yet asking the aid of their prayers, that
in these circumstances he might have grace to be a bold preacher of the
gospel. If he was in prison this could not well be. If he was under a strict
prohibition it could not well be. The circumstances of the case tally exactly
with the statement in the last chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, that Paul
was in custody in Rome; that he was permitted to “dwell by himself with a
soldier that kept him” (ver. 16); that he was permitted to call the Jews
together and to debate with them freely (ver. 17-28); and that Paul dwelt
in his own hired house for two years, and “received all that came in with
him, preaching the kingdom of God,” &c. (ver. 30, 31). So exactly do
these circumstances correspond that I have no doubt that was the time when
the epistle was written. And so unusual is such a train of circumstances--
so unlikely would it be to occur to a man to forge such a coincidence, that it
furnishes a striking proof that the epistle was written, as it purports to be,
by Paul. An impostor would not have thought of inventing such a coincidence. If it had occurred to him to make any such allusion, the place and
time would have been more distinctly mentioned, and not have been left as

x INTRODUCTION.

a mere incidental allusion. The apostle Paul is supposed to have been at
Rome as a prisoner twice (comp. Intro. to 2 Tim), and to have suffered
martyrdom there about a.p. 65 or 66. If the Epistle to the Ephesians was
written during his second imprisonment at Rome, as is commonly supposed, then it must have been somewhere between the years 63 and 65.
Lardner and Hug suppose that it was written April, 61; Macknight supposes it was in 60 or 61; the editor of the Polyglott Bible places it at 64.
The exact time when it was written cannot now be ascertained, and ig not
material.

§ 5. To whom was the Epistle written?

The epistle purports to have been written to the Ephesians--“ to the saints
which are at Ephesus,’--i. 1. But the opinion that it was written to the
Ephesians has been called in question by many expositors. Dr. Paley
(Hor. Paul.) supposes that it was written to the Laodiceans. Wetstein also
maintained the same opinion. This opinion was expressly stated also by
Marcion, a “heretic” of the second century. Michaelis (Intro.) supposes
that it was a “circular epistle,” addressed not to any church in particular,
but intended for the Ephesians, Laodiceans, and some other churches of
Asia Minor. He supposes that the apostle had several copies taken; that
he made it intentionally of a very general character so as to suit all; that
he affixed with his own hand the subscription, ch. vi 24, to each copy--
“Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity ;”
that at the beginning of the epistle the name was inserted of the particular
church to which it was to be sent--as “to the church in Ephesus ”--“ in
Laodicea,” &c. When the several works composing the New Testament
were collected into a volume he supposes that it so happened that the copy
of this epistle which was used was one obtained from Ephesus, containing a
direction to the saints there. This is also the opinion of Archbishop Usher
and Koppe. It does not comport with the design of these Notes to go into
an extended examination of this question; and after all that has been
written on it, and the different opinions which have been entertained, it certainly does not become any one to be very confident. It is not a question of
great importance, as it involves no point of doctrine or duty; but those who
wish to see it discussed at length can be satisfied by referring to Paley’s Hore
Pauline; to Michaelis’ Intro., vol. iv. ch. xx., and to the Prolegomena of
Koppe. The arguments which are alleged to prove that it was addressed to
the church at Laodicea, or at least not to the church at Ephesus, are summarily the following:--(1) The testimony of Marcion, a heretic of the
second century, who affirms that it was sent to the church in Laodicea, and
that instead of the reading (ch. i. 1), “in Ephesus,” in the copy which he had
it was “in Laodicea.” But the opinion of Marcion is now regarded as of
little weight. It is admitted that he was in the habit of altering the Greek
text to suit his own views. (2) The principal objection to the opinion that
it was written to the church at Ephesus is found in certain internal marks,
and particularly in the want of any allusion to the fact that Paul had ever
been there, or to anything that particularly related to the church there.
This difficulty comprises several particulars. (a) Paul spent nearly three
years in Ephesus, and was engaged there in deeply interesting transactions

INTRODUCTION. xi

and occurrences. He had founded the church, ordained its elders, taught
them the doctrines which they held, and had at last been persecuted there
and driven away. If the epistle was written to them it is remarkable that
there is in the epistle no allusion to any one of these facts or circumstances.
This is the more remarkable, as it was his usual custom to allude to the events
which had occurred in the churches which he had founded (see the Epistles
to the Corinthians and Philippians), and as on two other occasions at least
he makes direct allusion to these transactions at Ephesus; see Acts xx. 1835; 1 Cor. xv. 32. (6) In the other epistles which Paul wrote it was his
custom to salute a large number of persons by name; but in this epistle there
is no salutation of any kind. There is a general invocation of “peace to the
brethren” (ch. vi. 23), but no mention of an individual by name. There is
not even an allusion to the “elders” whom, with so much affection, he had
addressed at Miletus (Acts xx.), and to whom he had given so solemn a
charge. This is the more remarkable, as in this place he had spent three
years in preaching the gospel, and must have been acquainted with all the
leading members in the church. To the church at Rome, which he had never
visited when he wrote his Epistle to the Romans, he sends a large number
of salutations (ch. xvi.); to the church at Ephesus, where he had spent a
longer time than in any other place, he sends none. (c) The name of Timothy does not occur in the epistle. This is remarkable, because Paul had left
him there with a special charge (1 Tim. i. 3), and if he was still there it is
singular that no allusion is made to him, and no salutation sent to him. If
he had left Ephesus, and had gone to Rome to meet Paul as he requested
(2 Tim. iv. 9), it is remarkable that Paul did not join his name with his own
in sending the epistle to the church, or at least allude to the fact that he had
arrived. This is the more remarkable, because in the Epistles to the Philippians, Colossians, and 1 and 2 Thessalonians, the name of Timothy is joined
with that of Paul at the commencement of the epistle. (d) Paul speaks of
the persons to whom this epistle was sent as if he had not been with them,
or at least in a manner which is hardly conceivable, on the supposition that
he had been the founder of the church. Thus in ch. i. 15, 16, he says,
“Wherefore also after I heard of your faith in Christ Jesus,” &c. But this
circumstance is not conclusive. Paul may have been told of the continuance
of their faith and of their growing love and zeal, and he may have alluded
to that in this passage. (e) Another circumstance on which some reliance
has been placed is the statement in ch. iii, 1, 2, “For this cause, I Paul,
the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles, if ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which is given to you-ward,” &. It is argued
(see Michaelis) that this is not language which would have been employed
by one who had founded the church, and with whom they were all acquainted.
He would not have spoken in a manner implying any doubt whether they had
ever heard of him and his labours in the ministry on account of the Gentiles.
Such are the considerations relied on to show that the epistle could not have
been written to the Ephesians. j

On the other hand there is proof of a very strong character that it was
written to them. That proof is the following :--

1. The common reading in ch. i. 1, “To the saints which are in Ephesus.”
It is true, as we have seen, that this reading has been called in question.

xii INTRODUCTION.

Mill says that it is omitted by Basil (lib. 2, Adversus Eunomium), as he
says, “on the testimony of the fathers and of ancient copies.” Griesbach
marks it with the sign om., denoting that it was omitted by some, but that
in his judgment it is to be retained. It is found in the Vulgate, the Syriac,
the Arabic, and the Ethiopic in Walton’s Polyglott. Rosenmiiller remarks
that “most of the ancient codices, and all the ancient versions, retain the
word.” To my mind this fact is conclusive. The testimony of Marcion is
admitted to be of almost no authority; and as to the testimony of Basil, it is
only one against the testimony of all the ancients, and is at best negative in
its character; see the passage from Basil, quoted in Hug’s Jntroduction.

2. A slight circumstance may be adverted to as throwing light incidentally
on this question. This epistle was sent by Tychicus, ch. vi. 21. The
Epistle to the Colossians was also sent from Rome by the same messenger,
Col. iv. 7. Now there is a strong improbability in the opinion held by
Michaelis, Koppe, and others, that this was a circular letter, sent to the
churches at large, or that different copies were prepared, and the name
Ephesus inserted in one, and Laodicea in another, &c. The improbability
is this, that the apostle would at the same time send such a circular letter
to several of the churches, and a special letter to the church at Colosse.
What claim had that church to special notice? What pre-eminence had it
over the church at Ephesus? And why should he send them a letter bearing
so strong a resemblance to that addressed to the other churches, when the
same letter would have suited the church at Colosse as well as the one which
was actually sent to them; for there is a nearer resemblance between these
two epistles, than any other two portions of the Bible. Besides, in 2 Tim. iv.
12, Paul says that he had sent “Tychicus to Zphesus;” and what is more
natural than that at that time he sent this epistle by him?

3. There is the utter want of evidence from MSS. or versions, that this
epistle was sent to Laodicea, or to any other church, except Ephesus. Not a
MS. has been found having the name Laodicea in ver. i. 1; and not one which
omits the words “in Ephesus.” If it had been sent to another church, or if
it had been a circular letter addressed to no particular church, it is scarcely
credible that this could have occurred.

These considerations make it plain to me that this epistle was addressed,
as it purports to have been, to the church in Ephesus. I confess myself
wholly unable, however, to explain the remarkable circumstances that Paul
does not refer to his former residence there; that he alludes to none of his
troubles or his triumphs; that he makes no mention of the “elders,” and
salutes no one by name; and that throughout he addresses them as if they
were to him personally unknown. In this respect it is unlike all the other
epistles which he ever wrote, and all which we should have expected from a
man in such circumstances. May it not be accounted for from this very
fact, that an attempt to specify individuals where so many were known,
would protract the epistle to an unreasonable length? There is, indeed, one
supposition suggested by Dr. Macknight, which may possibly explain to
some extent the remarkable circumstances above referred to. It is, that a
direction may have been given by Paul to Tychicus, by whom he sent the
letter, to send a copy of it to the Laodiceans, with an order to them to
communicate it to the Colossians. In such a case everything local would be

INTRODUCTION. Xili

designedly omitted, and the epistle would be of as general a character as

possible. This is, however, mere conjecture, and does not remove the whole
of the difficulty.

§ 6. The Object for which the Epistle was written.

Very various opinions have been formed in regard to the design for which
this epistle was written. Macknight supposes that it was with reference to
the Eleusinian mysteries, and to various religious rites in the Temple of
Diana, and that Paul intended particularly to state the “mysteries” of the
gospel in contradistinction from them. But there is no clear evidence that
the apostle had any such object, and it is not necessary to go into an explanation of those mysteries in order to an understanding of the epistle. The
epistle is such as might be addressed to any Christians, though there are
allusions to customs which then prevailed, and to opinions then held, which
it is desirable to understand in order to a just view of it. That there were
Jews and Judaizing Christians in Ephesus, may be learned from the epistle
itself. That there were those there who supposed that the Jews were to
have a more elevated rank than the Gentiles, may also be learned from the
epistle; and one object was to show that all true Christians, whether of
Jewish or heathen origin, were on a level, and were entitled to the same
privileges. That there was the prevalence of a false and dangerous philosophy there, may also be learned from the epistle; and that there were those
who attempted to cause divisions, and who had violated the unity of the
faith, may also be learned from it.

The epistle is divided into two parts--I. The doctrinal part, ch. i.--iii.; and
II. The practical part, or the application, ch. iv.--vi.

I. The doctrinal part comprises the following topics:--

(1.) Praise to God for the Revelation of his eternal counsels of recovering
mercy, ch. i. 38-14.

(2.) A prayer of the apostle, expressing his earnest desire that the Ephesians might avail themselves fully of all the advantages of this eternal purpose
of mercy, ch. i. 15-23.

(3.) The doctrine of the native character of man, as being dead in sins,
illustrated by the past lives of the Ephesians, ch. ii. 1-3.

(4.) The doctrine of regeneration by the grace of God, and the advantages
of it, ch. ii.-5--7.

(5.) The doctrine of salvation by grace alone without respect to our own
works, ch. ii. 8, 9.

(6.) The privilege of being thus admitted to the fellowship of the saints,
ch. ii, 11-22.

(7.) A full statement of the doctrine that God meant to admit the Gentiles
to the privileges of his people, and to break down the barriers between the
Gentiles and the Jews, ch. iii. 1-12.

(8.) The apostle prays earnestly that they might avail themselves fully of
this doctrine, and be able to appreciate fully the advantages which it was
intended to confer; and with this prayer he closes the doctrinal part of the
epistle, ch. iii. 13-21.

II. The practical part of the epistle embraces the following topics, viz.:--

(1.) Exhortation to unity, drawn from the consideration that there was
one God, one faith, &c., ch. iv. 1-16.

(2.) An exhortation to a holy life in general, from the fact that they differed from other Gentiles, ch. iv. 17-24.

(3.) Exhortation to exhibit particular virtues--spectfying what was required by their religion, and what they should avoid--particularly to avoid
the vices of anger, lying, licentiousness, and intemperance, ch. iv. 25-32;
ch. v. 1-20.

(4.) The duties of husbands and wives, ch. v. 21-83.

(5.) The duties of parents and children, ch. vi. 1-3.

(6.) The duties of masters and servants, ch. vi. 4-9.

(7.) An exhortation to fidelity in the Christian warfare, ch. vi. 10-20.

(8.) Conclusion, ch. vi. 21-24. y

The style of this epistle is exceedingly animated. The apostle is cheered
by the intelligence which he had received of their deportment in the gospel,
and is warmed by the grandeur of his principal theme--the eternal purposes
of divine mercy. Into the discussion of that subject he throws his whole
soul, and there is probably no part of Paul’s writings where there is more
ardour, elevation, and soul evinced, than in this epistle. The great doctrine
of predestination he approaches as a most important and vital doctrine;
states it freely and fully, and urges it as the basis of the Christian’s hope,
and the foundation of eternal gratitude and praise. Perhaps nowhere is
there a better illustration of the power of that doctrine to elevate the soul
and fill it with grand conceptions of the character of God, and to excite grateful emotions, than in this epistle; and the Christian, therefore, may study it
as a portion of the sacred writings eminently fitted to excite his gratitude,
and to fill him with adoring views of God.

AUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ
by the will of God, to the

S The salutation; ver. 1, 2.

2) The doctrine of predestination,
and its bearing and design; ver. 314.

(a) It is the foundation of praise
to God, and is a source of gratitude;
ver. 3.

(6) Christians have been chosen
before the foundation of the world;
ver. 4.

(c) The object was that they should
be holy and blameless; ver. 4.

(d) They were predestinated to be
the children of God; ver. 5.

(e) The cause of this was the good
pleasure of God, or he did it according to the purpose of his will; ver. 5.

(f) The object of this was his own
glory; ver. 6.

(8) The benefits of the plan of
predestination to those who are thus
chosen; ver. 7-14.

(a) They have redemption and the
forgiveness of sins; ver. 7, 8.

(6) They are made acquainted with
the mystery of the divine will; ver. 9,
10.

(c) They have obtained an inheritance in Christ; ver. 11.

(d) The object of this was the
praise of the glory of God; ver. 12.

(e) As the result of this, or in the
execution of this purpose, they were
sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise;
ver. 13, 14.

(4) An earnest prayer that they
might have a full understanding of
the great and glorious plan of redemption; ver. 15-23.

(a) Paul says that he had been informed of their faith; ver. 15.

(6) He always remembered them
in his prayers; ver. 16.

“saints which are at > Ephesus, and
to the °faithful in Christ Jesus:
a Ro.1.7. b Ac.19. & 20. ¢ Ool.1.2.

(c) His special desire was that they
might see the glory of the Lord Jesus,
whom God had exalted to his own
right hand in heaven; ver. 17-23.

1. Paul, an apostle; see Notes on
Rom. i. 1. | By the will of God;
see Notes on 1 Cor. i. 1. To the
saints. A name often given to Christians because they are holy; see
Notes on 1 Cor. i. 2. In Ephesus ;
see the Introduction, § 1,5. 4 And
to the fartthful in Christ Jesus. This
evidently refers to others than to those
who were in Ephesus, and it is clear
that Paul expected that this epistle
would be read by others. He gives
it a general character, as if he supposed that it might be transcribed,
and become the property of the church
at large. It was not uncommon for
him thus to give a general character
to the epistles which he addressed to
particular churches, and so to write
that others than those to whom they
were particularly directed, might feel
that they were addressed to them.
Thus the first epistle to the Corinthians was addressed to “the church of
God in Corinth--with all that in every
place call upon the name of Christ
Jesus our Lord.” The second epistle
to the Corinthians in like manner was
addressed to “the church of God
which is at Corinth, with all the saints
which are in all Achaia.” Perhaps,
in the epistle before us, the apostle
referred particularly to the churches
of Asia Minor which he had not visited,
but there is no reason for confining
the address to them. All who are
“faithful in Christ Jesus” may regard
the epistle as addressed by the Holy
Spirit to them, and may feel that they
are ag much interested in the doctrines, promises, and duties set forth
2 Grace “be to you, and peace,
from God our Father, and from
the Lord Jesus Christ.

3 Blessed «be the God and Fa-

d Ga.1.3; Tit.1.4. é2Co.1.3; 1 Pe.1.3,

in this epistle, as were the ancient
Christians of Ephesus. The word
“faithful” here is not used in the
sense of trustworthy, or in the sense
of fidelity, as it is often employed, but
in the sense of believing, or having
faith in the Lord Jesus. The apostle
addresses those who were firm in the
faith--another name for true Christians. The epistle contains great doctrines about the divine purposes and
decrees in which they, as Christians,
were particularly concerned; important “mysteries” (ver. 9), of importance for them to understand, and
which the apostle proceeds to communicate to them as such. The fact that
the letter was designed to be published, shows that he was not unwilling that those high doctrines should
be made known to the world at large;
still they pertained particularly to the
church, and they are doctrines which
should be particularly addressed to
the church. They are rather fitted
to comfort the hearts of Christians,
than to bring sinners to repentance.
These doctrines may be addressed to
the church with more prospect of
securing a happy effect than to the
world. In the church they will excite gratitude, and produce the hope
which results from assured promises
and eternal purposes; in the minds of
sinners they may arouse envy, and
hatred, and opposition to God.

2. Grace to you, &c.; see Notes,
Rom. i. 7.

3. Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ. This commences a sentence which continues to
the close of ver. 12. The length of
the periods in the writings of Paul, is
one cause of the obscurity of his style,
and renders an explanation often difficult. The meaning of this phrase is,
that God has laid a foundation for
gratitude for what he has done. The
ground or reason of the praise here
referred to, is that which is stated in

[a.D. 64.

ther of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
hath blessed us witlr all spiritual
blessings in heavenly ‘places in
Christ :

1 or, things, He.9.23.

the following verses. The leading
thing on which the apostle dwells is
God’s eternal purpose--his everlasting counsel in regard to the salvation
of manX\ Hoy breaks out into the exclamation that God is worthy of praise
for such a plan, and that his eternal
purposes, now manifest to men, give
exalted views of the character and
glory of God. Most persons suppose
the contrary. They feel that the plans
of God are dark, and stern, and forbidding, and such as to render his
character anything but amiable, They
speak of him, when he is referred to as
a sovereign, as if he were tyrannical
and unjust, and they never connect
the idea of that which is amiable and
lovely with the doctrine of eternal

oses,] There is no doctrine that
is usually so unpopular; none that is
so much reproached; none that is
so much abused. There is none that
men desire so much to disbelieve or
avoid; none that they are so unwilling to have preached; and none that
they are so reluctant to find in the
Scriptures. Even many Christians
turn away from it with dread; or if
they tolerate it, they yet feel that there
is something about it that is peculiarly dark and forbidding. Not so felt
Paul. He felt that it laid the foundation for eternal praise; that it presented glorious views of God; that it
was the ground of confidence and hope;
and that it was desirable that Christians should dwell upon it and praise
God for it. Let us feel, therefore, as
we enter upon the exposition of this
chapter, that God is to be praised for
ALL his plans, and that it is possible
for Christians to have such views of
the doctrine of eternal predestination
as to give them most elevated conceptions of the glory of the divine character. And let us also be willing to
know the truth. Let us approach
word after word, and phrase after
phrase, and verse after verse, in this

chapter, willing to know all that God
teaches ; to believe all that he has revealed ; and ready to say, “‘ Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ for all that he has done.” § Who
hath blessed us. Who does Paul mean
here by “us ?’’ Does he mean all the
world? This cannot be, for all the
world are not thus blessed with all
spiritual blessings. Does he mean
nations ? For the same reason this
cannot be. Does he mean the Gentiles in contradistinction from the
Jews? Why then does he use the
word us, including himself, who was a
Jew? Does he mean to say that they
were blessed with external privileges,
and that this was the only object of
the eternal purposes of God? ‘This
cannot be, for he speaks of “ spiritual
blessings ;”’ he speaks of the persons
referred to as having “ redemption’

and “ the forgiveness of sins ;’’ as haying ‘‘ obtained an inheritance,” and as
being sealed with the ‘‘ Holy Spirit of
promise.” These appertain not to nations, or to external privileges, or the
mere offers of the gospel, but to true
Christians ; to persons who have been
redeemed. ‘The persons referred to
by the word “ us,” are those who are
mentioned in ver. 1, as “ saints,’’--
eryios--holy ; and “‘faithfal’’--s#ierois--
believing, or believers. This observation is important, because it shows
that the plan or decree of God had reference to individuals, and not merely
to nations. Many have supposed (see
Whitby, Dr. A. Clarke, Bloomfield,
and others) that the apostle here refers to the Gentiles, and that his object isto show that they were now admitted to the same privileges as the
ancient Jews, and that the whole doctrine of predestination here referred
to, has relation to that fact. But, I
would ask, were there no Jews in the
church at Ephesus? See Acts xviii.
20, 24; xix. 1--8. The matter of
fact seems to have been, that Paul
was uncommonly successful there
among his own countrymen, and that
his chief difficulty there arose, not
from the Jews, but from the influence
ofthe heathen; Acts xix. 24. Besides,
what evidence is there that the apostle

1?

speaks in this chapter peculiarly of
the Gentiles, or that he was writing
to that portion of thechurch at Ephesus which was of Gentile origin? And
if he was, why did he name himself
among them as one on whom this blessing had been bestowed? The fact
is, that this is a mere supposition, resorted to without evidence, and inthe
face of every fair principle of interpretation, to avoid an unpleasant doctrine. Nothing can be clearer than
that Paul meant to write to Christians as such ; to speak of privileges
which they enjoyed as peculiar to
themselves ; and that he had no particular reference to nations, and did
not design merely to refer to external
privileges. (J With all spiritual blessings. Pardon, peace, redemption,
adoption, the earnest of the Spirit,
&c., referred to ia the following verses
-- blessings which individual Christians enjoy,andnot external privileges
conferred on nations. { In heavenly
places in Christ. The word places is
here understood, and is not in the original. It may mean heavenly places,
or heavenly things. The word places
does not express the best sense. The
idea seems to be, that God has blessed
us in Christ in regard to heavenly
subjects or matters. In ver. 20, the
word “‘ places ’’ seems to be inserted
with more propriety. ‘Thesame phrase
occurs again in ch. li. 6; ili. 10; and
it is remarkable that it should occur
in the same elliptical form four times
in this one epistle, and, I believe, in
no other part of the writings of Paul.
Our translators have in each instance
supplied the word “places,’’as denoting
the rank or station of Christians, of the
angels, and of the Saviour, to each of
whom it is applied. The phrase probably means, in things pertaining to
heayen ; fitted to prepare us for heaven; and tending toward heaven. It
probably refers here to every thing
that was heavenly in its nature, or
that had relation to heaven, whether
gifts or graces. As the apostle is
speaking, however, of the mass of
Christians on whom these things had
been bestowed, I rather suppose that
he refers to what are called Christian
4 According as he hath chosen
@us in him before the foundation
of the world, that we should be

a1 Pe.1.2.

holy, 2 and without blame before
him in love:
d Lu.1.75; Col.1.22,

graces, than to the extraordinary endowments bestowed on the few. The
sense is, that in Christ, ¢. ¢. through
Christ, or by means of him, God had
bestowed all spiritual blessings that
were fitted to prepare for heaven--
such as pardon, adoption, the illumination of the Spirit, &c.

4, According as. The importance
of this verse will render proper a somewhat minute examination of the words
and phrases of which it is composed.
The general sense of the passage is,
that these blessings pertaining to heaven were bestowed upon Christians
in accordance with an eternal purpose. They were not conferred by
chance or hap-hazard. They were
the result of intention and design on
the part of God. ‘Their value was
greatly enhanced from the fact that
(rod had designed from all eternity
to bestow them, and that they come
to us as the result of his everlasting
plan. It was not a recent plan; it
was not an after-thought ; it was not
by mere chance; it was not by caprice; it was the fruit of an eternal
counsel. Those blessings had all the
value, and all the assurance of permanency, which must result from that
fact. The phrase “ according as’’--
x29as--implies that these blessings
were in conformity with that eternal
plan, and have flowed to us as the expression of that plan. They are limited by that purpose, for it marks and
measures all. It was as God had
chosen that it should be, and had appointed in his eternal purpose. J He
hathchosen us. The word ‘ us” here
shows that the apostle had reference
to individuals, and not to communities.
It includes Paul himself as one of the

“‘chosen,’’ andthose whom he address- |

ed--the mingled Gentile and Jewish
converts in Ephesus. That it must
refer to individuals is clear. Of no
community as such can it be said that
it was “‘ chosen in Christ before the
foundation of the world to be holy.”

It is not true of the Gentile world as
such, nor of any one of the nations
making up the Gentile world. The
word rendered here “ hath chosen”--
ertzaro--is from a word meaning to
lay out together, (Passow,) to choose
out, to select. It has the idea of making a choice or selection among different objects orthings. Itis applied
to things, as in Luke x. 42, Mary
“hath chosen that good part ;’--she
has made a choice, or selection of it,
or has shown a preference for it. 1
Cor. i. 27, ‘‘ God hath chosen the
foolish things of the world ;” he has
preferred to make use of them among
all the conceivable things which might
have been employed “ to confound the
wise ;” comp. Acts i. 2, 24; vi. 5;
xv. 22,25. It denotes to choose out,
with the accessary idea of kindness or
favour. Mark xiii. 20, ‘“‘ For the
elect’s sake whom he hath chosen, he
hath shortened the days.” John xili.
18, ‘I know whom I have chosen.”
Acts xiii. 17, ‘‘ The God of this people of Israel chose our fathers ;’’ that
is, selected them from the nations to
accomplish important purposes. This
is evidently the sense of the word in
the passage before us. It means to
make a selection or choice with the
idea of favour or love. and with a view
to impart important benefits on those
whom he chose. The idea of making
some distinction between them and
others, is essential to a correct understanding of the passage--since there
can be no choice where no such distinction is made. He who chooses
one out of many things makes a difference, or evinces a preference--no
matter what the ground or reason of
his doing it may be. Whether this
refers to communities and nations, or
to individuals, still it is true that a
distinction is made or a prefereuce
given of one over another. It may be
added, that so far as justice is concerned, it makes no difference whether
it refers to nations or to individuals.

If there is injustice in choosing an}

indiviaual to favour, there cannot be
less in choosing a nation--for a nation is nothing but a collection of individuals. Every objection which
has ever been made to the doctrine of
election as it relates to individuals,
will apply with equal force to the
choice of a nation to peculiar privileges. Ifa distinction is made, it may
be made with as much propriety in
respect to individuals as to nations.
¥ In him. In Christ. The choice
was not without reference to any
means of saying them; it was not a
mere purpose to bring a certain number to heaven ; it was with reference
to the mediation of the Redeemer,
and his work. It was a purpose that
they should be saved by him, and
share the benefits of the atonement.
The whole choice and purpose of salvation had reference to him, and owé
of him no one was chosen to life, and
no one out of him will be saved.
Q Before the foundation of the world.
This is a very important phrase in determining the time when the choice
wasmade. It was not an after-thought.
It was not commenced in time. The
purpose was far back in the ages of
eternity. But what is the meaning
of the phrase ‘‘ before the foundation
of the world?” Dr. Clarke supposes
that it means ‘“‘ from the commencenent of the religious system of the
Jews, which,” says he, ‘‘ the phrase
sometimes means.’ Such principles
of interpretation are they compelled
to resort to who endeavour to show
that this refers to a national election
to privileges, and who deny that it refers to individuals. On such principles
the Bible may be made to signify
any thing and every thing. Dr.
Chandler, who also supposes that it
refers to nations, admits, however,
that the word ‘“‘ foundation” means
the beginning of any thing ; and that
the phrase here means, ‘“‘ before the
world began ’”’ There is scarcely any
phrase in the New Testament which
is more clear in its signification than
this. The word rendered ‘“ foundation’’--xara2Boay--means properly a
laying down, a founding, a foundation
--as where the foundation of a build-

ing is laid--and the phrase “before
the foundation of the world” clearly

[means before the world was made,

or before the work. of creation; see
Matt. xiii. 85 ; xxv. 34; Luke xi. 50;
Heb. ix. 26; Rev. xiii. 8, in all which
places the phrase “the foundation of
the world” means the beginning of
human affairs; the beginning of the
world; the beginning of history, &c.
Thus in John xvii. 24, the Lord Jesus
says, ‘‘thou lovedst me before the
foundation of the world,” 7%. ¢. from
eternity, or before the work of creation commenced. ‘Thus Peter says
(1 Epis. i. 20) of the Saviour, ‘‘who
verily was fore-ordained before the
foundation ofthe world.” It was the
purpose of God before the worlds
were made, to send him to save lost
men ; comp. Rey. xvii. 8. Nothing
can be clearer than that the phrase
before us must refer to a purpose that
was formed before the world was
made. Itisnotatemporary arrangement ; it has not grown up under the
influence of vacillating purposes ; it
is not a plan newly formed, or changed
with each coming generation, or variable like the plans of men. It has all
the importance, dignity, and assurances of stability which necessarily result from a purpose that has been
eternal in the mind of God. It may
be observed here, (1.) that if the plan
was formed ‘‘ before the foundation of
the world,” all objections to the doctrine of an eternal plan are removed.
If the plan was formed before the
world, no matter whether a moment,
an hour, a year, or millions of years,
the plan is equally fixed, and the
event equally necessary. All the objections which will lie against an
eternal plan, will lie against a plan
formed a day or an hour before the
event. The one interferes with our
freedom of action as much as the
other. (2.) If the plan was formed
“‘ before the foundation of the world,”
it was eternal. God has no new plan.
He forms nonew schemes. Heis not
changing and vacillating. If we can
ascertain what is the plan of God at
any time, we can ascertain what his
eternal plan was with reference to the
event. It has always been the same

6 Having predestinated “us unto | Christ to himself, according to the
the adoption ° of children by Jesus | good pleasure ¢ of his will,

a Bo.8.29,30. b John 1.12.

o Lu.12.32.

--for “he is of oNE MIND, and who can
turn him?’ Job xxiii. 13. In reference to the plans and purposes of
the Most High, there is nothing better settled than that wHaT HE ACTUwhich is the doctrine of eternal decrees--and the whole of it. § That
we should be holy. Paul proceeds to
state the object for which God had
chosen his people. It is not merely
that they should enter into heaven. It
is not that they may live insin. Itis
not that they may flatter themselves
that they are safe, and then live as
they please. The tendency among
men has always been to abuse the
doctrine of predestination and election; to lead men to say that if all
things are fixed there is no need of
effort; that if God has an eternal
plan, no matter how men live, they
will be saved if he has elected them,
and that at all events they cannot
change that plan, and they may as
well enjoy life by indulgence in sin.
The apostle Paul held no such view of
the doctrine of predestination. In his
apprehension it is a doctrine fitted to
excite the gratitude of Christians,
and the whole tendency and design of
the doctrine, according to him, is to
make men holy, and without blame
before God in love. { And without
blame before him in love. The expression ‘“‘in love,” is probably to be
taken in connection with the following
verse, and should be rendered “ Jn
love, having predestinated us unto the
adoption of children.’’ It is all to be
traced to the love of God. (1.) It was
love for us which prompted to it. (2.)
It is the highest expression of love to
be ordained to eternal life--for what
higher love could God show us? (8.)
It is love on his part, because we had
no claim to it, and had not deserved
it. If this be the correct view, then
the doctrine of predestination is not
inconsistent with the highest moral
excellence in the divine character,
and should never be represented as
the offspring of partiality and injus-

tice. Then too we should give thanks
that ‘ God has, in love, predestinated
us to the adoption of children by
Jesus Christ, according to the good
pleasure of his»will.”

5. Having predestinated us. On
the meaning of the word here used,
see Notes on Rom. i. 4; vili.29. The
word used (spospifw) means properly
to set bounds before ; and then to predetermine. There is the essential
idea of setting bounds or limits, and
of doing this beforehand. It is not
that God determined to do it when it
was actually done, but that he intended to do it beforehand. No language
could express this more clearly, and I
suppose this interpretation is generally
admitted. Even by those who deny
the doctrine of particular election, it
is not denied that the word here used
means to pre-determine; and they
maintain that the sense is, that God
had pre-determined to admit the Gentiles to the privileges of his people.
Admitting then that the meaning is
to predestinate in the proper sense,
the only question is, who are predestinated ? To whom does the expression apply? Is it to nations or to individuals? In reply to this, in addition to the remarks already made, I
would observe, (1.) that there is no
specification of nations here as such,
no mention of the Gentiles in contradistinction from the Jews. (2.) Those
referred to were those included in the
word “us,” among whom Paul was
one--but Paul was not a heathen. (3.)
The same objection will lie against
the doctrine of predestinating nations
which will le against predestinating
individuals. (4.) Nations are made
up of individuals, and the pre-determination must have had some reference to individuals. What is a nation
but a collection of individuals? There
is no such abstract being or thing as
a nation ; and if there was any purpose in regard to a nation, it must
have had some reference to the individuals composing it. He that would
act on the ocean, must act on the

drops of water that make up the ocean;
for besides the collection of drops of
water there is no ocean. He that
would remove a mountain, must act
on the particles of matter that compose that mountain ; for there is no
such thing as an abstract mountain.
Perhaps there was never a greater illusion than to suppose that all difficulty is removed in regard to the doctrine of election and predestination,
by saying that it refers to nations.
What difficulty is lessened ? What is
gained by it? How does it make
God appear more amiable and good ?
Does it render him less partial to
suppose that he has made a difference
among nations, than to suppose that
he has made a difference among individuals? Does it remove any difficulty
about the offer of salvation, to suppose that he has granted the knowledge of his truth to some nations, and
withheld it from others? The truth
is, that all the reasoning which has
been founded on this supposition, has
been merely throwing dust in the eyes.
If there is any well-founded objection to the doctrine of decrees or predestination, it is to the doctrine at all,
alike in regard to nations and individuals, and there are just the same difficulties in the one case as in the
other. But there is no real difficulty
in either. Who could worship or
honour a God who had no plan, or
purpose, or intention in what he did?
Who can believe that the universe
was formed and is governed without
design? Who can doubt that what God
does he always meant to do? When,
therefore, he converts and saves a
soul, it is clear that he always intended to doit. Hehasnonew plan. It
is not an after-thought. Itis not the
work of chance. If I can find out
any thing that God has done, I have
the most certain conviction that he
always meant to do it--and thisis all
that is intended by the doctrine of
election or predestination. What
God does, he always meant to do.
What he permits, he always meant to
permit. I may add further, that if it
is right to do it, it was right to intend
to do it. If there is no injustice or
partiality in the act itself, there is no

injustice or partiality in the intention
to perform it. If it is right to save a
soul, it was also right to intend to
save it. If it is right to condemn a
sinner to wo, it was right to intend to
do it. Tet us then look at the thing
itself, and if that is not wrong, we
should not blame the purpose to do it,
however long it has been cherished.
{| Unto the adoption, &c.; see Notes,
John i. 12. Rom. viii. 15. QJ Aecording to the good pleasure of his
will. The word rendered “good pleasure’’--(sid0~ia)--means a being well
pleased ; delight in any thing, favour,
good-will, Luke ii. 14; Phil. i. 15;
comp. Luke xii. 82. Then it denotes
purpose, or will, the idea of benevolence being included. Robinson.
Rosenmiiller renders the phrase,
“from his most benignant decree.”
The evident object of the apostle is to
state why God chose the heirs of salvation. It was done as it seemed
good to him in the circumstances of
the case. It was not that man had
any control over him, or that man was
consulted in the determination, or
that it was based on the good works
of man, real or foreseen. But weare
not to suppose that there were no
good reasons for what he has thus
done. Convicts are frequently pardoned by an executive. He does it
according to his own will, or as seems
good in his sight. He is to be the
judge, and no one has a right to
control him in doing it. It may
seem to be entirely arbitrary. ‘The
executive may not have communicated the reasons why he did it,
either to those who are pardoned,
or to the other prisoners, or to any
one else. But we are not to infer
that there was no reason for doing
it. If he is a wise magistrate, and
worthy of his station, it is to be
presumed that there were reasons
which, if known, would be satisfactory to all. But those reasons he is
under no obligations to make known.
Indeed, it might be improper that
they should be known. Of that he
is the best judge. Meantime, however, we may see what would be
the effect in those who were not forgiven. It would excite, very likely,
6 To the praise @ of the glory of
a 1Pe.2.9. b 1Pe.2.5.

his grace, wherein he hath made us
accepted © in the Beloved :

their hatred, and they would charge
him with partiality or with tyranny.
But they should remember that
whoever might be pardoned, and on
whatever ground it might be done,
they could not complain. They
would suffer no more than they deserve. But what if, when the act of
pardon was made known to one part,
it was offered to the others also on
certain plain and easy conditions ?
Suppose it should appear that while
the executive meant, for wise but concealed reasons, to forgive a part, he
had also determined to offer forgiveness to all. And suppose that they
were in fact disposed in the highest
degree to neglect it, and that no inducements or arguments could prevail
on them to accept of it. Who then
could blame the executive? Now
this is about the case in regard to
God, and the doctrine of election.
All men were guilty and condemned.
For wise reasons, which God has not
communicated to us, he determined
to bring a portion at least of the human race to salvation. ‘This he did
not intend to leave to chance and
hap-hazard. Tle saw that all would
of themselves reject the offer, and
that unless some efficient means were
used, the blood of the atonement
would be shed in vain. He did not
make known to men who they were
that he meant to save, nor the reason why they particularly were to be
brought to heaven. Meantime he
meant to make the offer universal; to
make the terms as easy as possible,
and thus to take away every ground
of complaint. If men will not accept
of pardon ; if they prefer their sins ;
if nothing can induce them to come
and be saved, why should they complain? Ifthe doors of a prison are
open, and the chains of the prisoners
are knocked off, and they will not
come out, why should they complain
that others are in fact willing to come
out and be saved? Let it be borne
in mind that the purposes of God correspond exactly to facts as they actually occur, and much of the difficulty

is taken away. If inthe facts there
is no just ground of complaint, there
can be none, because it was the intention of God that the facts should
be so.

6. To the praise of the glory of his
grace. This is a Hebraism, and
means the same as ‘to his glorious
grace.’ The object was to excite
thanksgiving for his glorious grace
manifested in electing love. The
real tendency of the doctrine in
minds that are properly affected, is
not to excite opposition to God, or to
lead to the charge of partiality,
tyranny, or severity ; it is to excite
thankfulness and praise. In accordance with this, Paul introduced the
statement (ver. 3) by saying that
God was to be regarded as ‘‘ blessed” for forming and executing this
plan. The meaning is, that the doctrine of predestination and election
lays the foundation of adoring gratitude and praise. This will appear
plain by a few considerations. (1.) It
is the only foundation of hope for
man. If he were left to himself, all
the race would reject the offers of
mercy and would perish. Iistory,
experience, and the Bible alike demonstrate this. (2.) All the joys
which any of the human race have,
are to be traced to the purpose of
God to bestow them. Man has no
power of originating any of them, and
if God had not intended to confer
them, none of them would have been
possessed, (3.) All these favours are
conferred on those who had no claim
on God. The Christian who is pardoned had no claim on God for pardon ; he who is admitted to heaven
could urge no claim for such a privilege and honour; he who enjoys comfort and peace in the hour of death,
enjoys it only through the glorious
grace of God. (4.) All that is done
by election is fitted to excite praise.
Election is to life, and pardon, and
holiness, and heaven. But why should
not aman praise God for these things?
God chooses men to be holy, not sinful; to be happy, not miserable ; to

«In whom ¢ we have redemp-
@ He.9.12;1Pe.1.18,19.

be pure, not impure ; to be saved, not

to be lost. For these things he should
be praised. He should be praised
that he has not left the whole race to
wander away and die. Had he chosen
but one to eternal life, that one should
praise him, and all the holy universe
should join in the praise. Should he
now see it to be consistent to choose
but one of the fallen spirits, and to
make him pure, and to readmit him
to heaven, that one spirit would have
occasion for eternal thanks, and all
heaven might join in his praises.
llow much more is praise due to him,
when the number chosen is not one,
or a few, but when millions which no
man can number, shall be found to be
chosen to life; Rev. vii. 9. (5.) The
doctrine of predestination to life has
added no pang of sorrow to any one
of the human race. It has made millions happy who would not otherwise
have been, but not one miserable. It
is not a choice to sorrow, it is a choice
to joy and peace. (6.) No one has a
right to complain of it. Those who
are chosen assuredly should not complain of the grace which has made
them what they are, and which is the
foundation of all their hopes. And
they who are not chosen, have no right
to complain; for (a) they have no
claim to life. (6) They are in fact
unwilling to come. ‘They have no
desire to be Christians and to be
saved. Nothing can induce them to
forsake their sins and come to the
Saviour. Why then should they complain if others are in fact willing to
be saved? Why should a man complain for being left to take his own
course, and to walk in his own way ?
Mysterious, therefore, as is the doctrine of predestination; and fearful
and inscrutable as it is in some of its
aspects, yet, in a just view of it, it is
fitted to excite the highest expressions of thanksgiving, and to exalt
God inthe apprehension of man. He
who has been redeemed and saved by
the love of God ; who has been pardoned and made pure by mercy ; on
whom the eye of compassion has been

tion through his blood, the forgive

tenderly fixed, and for whom the Son
of God has died, has abundant cause
for thanksgiving and praise. §] Whereim he hath made us accepted. Has regarded us as the objects of favour and
complacency. {In the Beloved. In
the Lord Jesus Christ, the well-beloved Son of God; Notes, Matt. iii.
17. He has chosen us in him, and it
is through him that these mercies
have been conferred on us.

7. In whom we have redemption.
On the meaning of the word here rendered redemption--(éverdrpwos )--see
Notes on Rom. iii. 24. The werd
here, as there, denotes that deliverance from sin and from the evil consequences of sin, which has been procured by the atonement made by the
Lord Jesus Christ. This verse is one
of the passages which prove conclusively that the apostle here does not
refer to nations and to national privileges. Of what nation could it be
said that it had ‘‘redemption through
the blood of Jesus, even the forgiveness of sins?’ J Zhrough his blood.
By means of the atonement which he
has made; see this phrase fully explained in the Notes on Rom. iii. 25.
{| The forgiveness of sins. We obtain through his blood, or through the
atonement which he has made, the
forgiveness of sins. We are not to
suppose that this is al/ the benefit
which we receive from his death, or
that this is all that constitutes redemption. Jt is the main, and perhaps the most important thing. But
we also obtain the hope of heaven,
the influences of the Holy Spirit,
grace to guide us and to support us
in trial, peace in death, and perhaps
many more benefits. Still forgiveness is so prominent and important,
that the apostle has mentioned that
as if it were all. § According to the
riches of his grace. According to his
rich grace ; see a similar phrase exXplained in the Notes on Rom. ii. 4.
The word riches, in the form in which
it is used here, occurs also in several
other places in this epistle; chap. i. 18;
ii, 7; iii. 8, 16. It is what Paley
ness of sins, according to the riches
of his grace ;

8 Wherein he hath abounded
toward us in all wisdom and prudence ;

(Hore Paul.) calls ‘a cant phrase,”
and occurs often in the writings of
Paul; see Rom. ii. 4; ix. 23; xi. 12,
335 Phil} ive 19); Cooly. 27 sails zon Lb
is not found in any of the other writings of the New Testament, except
once in a sense somewhat similar, in
James (ii. 5), ‘‘ Hath not God chosen
the poor of this world rich in faith,”
and Dr. Paley from this fact has constructed an argument to prove that
this epistle was written by Paul. It
is peculiar to him, and marks his style
in a manner which cannot be mistaken. An impostor, or a forger of
the epistle, would not have thought
of introducing it, and yet it isjust such
a phrase as would naturally be used
by Paul.

8. Wherein he hath abounded.
Which he has liberally manifested to
us. ‘This grace has not been stinted
and confined, but has been liberal and
abundant. ¥ Jn all wisdom. That is,
he has evinced great wisdom in the
plan of salvation ; wisdom in so saving
men as to secure the honour of his own
law, and in devising a scheme that was
eminently adapted to save men; see
Notes on 1 Cor. i. 24. § And prudence. ‘The word here used ( Qgovjais )
means understanding, thinking, prudence. ‘The meaning here is, that,
so to speak, God had evinced great
intelligence in the plan of salvation.
There was ample proof of mind and
of thought. It was adapted to the
end in view. It was far-seeing ;
skilfully arranged; and carefully
formed. The sense of the whole is,
that there was a wise design running
through the whole plan, and abounding in it in an eminent degree.

9. Having made known to us the
mystery of his will. The word mystery
(uv7r7e0v) means literally something
into which one must be initiated before
it is fully known (from wvéw, toinitiate,
to instruct) ; and then any thing which
is concealed or hidden. We commonly

9 Having made known unto us
the mystery of his will, according
to his good pleasure which he
hath purposed in himself :

10 That in the dispensation of
@ 2Ti.1.9.

use the word to denote that which is

above our comprehension or unintelligible. But this is never the meaning
of the word in the New Testament.
It means there some doctrine or fact
which has been concealed, or which
has not before been fully revealed, or
which has been set forth only by figures
and symbols. When the doctrine is
made known, it may be as clear and
plain as any other. Such was the
doctrine that God meant to call the
Gentiles, which was long concealed,
at least in part, and which was not
fully made known until the Saviour
came, and which had been till that
time a mystery--a concealed truth--
though when it was revealed, there
was nothing incomprehensible in it.
Thus in Col. i. 26, ‘“‘ The mystery
which hath been hid from ages and
from generations, but now is made
manifest to his saints.” So it was
in regard to the doctrine of election.
It was a mystery until it was made
known by the actual conversion of
those whom God had chosen. So in
regard to the incarnation of the Redeemer; the atonement; the whole
plan of salvation. Over all these
great points there was a veil thrown,
and men did not understand them
until God revealed them. When they
were revealed, the mystery was removed, and men were able to see
clearly the manifestation of the will
of God. § Which he hath purposed
in himself. Without foreign aid or
counsel, Ilis purposes originated in
his own mind, and were concealed until he chose to make them known;
see 2 Tim. i. 9.

10. That in the dispensation.
The word here rendered “ dispensation,’” oizoyouie, means properly the
management of household affairs.
Then it means stewardship or administration ; a dispensation or arrangement of things: a scheme or
plan. ‘The meaning here is, that

the fulness of times, he might ga-

this plan was formed in order (¢i;)
or unto this end, that in the full arrangement of times, orin the arrangements completing the filling up
of the times, God might gather together in one all things. Tindal renders it, ‘‘ to have it declared when the
time was full come,” &e. ¥ The fulness of times. When the times were
fully completed ; when all the periods
should have passed by which he had
prescribed, or judged necessary to
the completion of the object. The
period referred to here is that when
all things shall be gathered together
in the Redeemer at the winding up
of human affairs, or the consummation
of allthings. The arrangement was
made with reference to that, and embraced all things which conduced to
that. The plan stretched from before “the foundation of the world’
to the period when all times should
be completed ; and of course all the
events occurring in that intermediate
period were embraced in the plan.
{{ He might gather together in one.
The word here used--dvaxeharciso--
means literally, to sum up, to recapitulate, as an orator does at the close
of his discourse. ft is from xsaaz,
the head; or x:@aAaiv, the sum, the
chief thing, the main point. In the
New Testament, the word means to
collect under one head, or to comprehend several things under one ; Rom.
xlli. 9. “Itis briefly comprehended,
i.e. summed up under this one precept,” sc., love. In the passage before us, it means that God would sum
up, or comprehend all things in heaven and earth through the Christian
dispensation ; he would make one
empire, under one head, with common
feelings, and under the same laws.
The reference is to the unity which
will hereafter exist in the kingdom of
God, when all his friends on earth
and in heaven shall be united, and
all shall have a common head. Now
there is alienation. The earth has
been separated from other worlds by
rebellion. It has gone off into apostasy and sin. It refuses to acknowledge the Great Head to which other

ther together in one all things in

worlds are subject, and the object is

to restore it to its proper place, so
that there shall be one great and
united kingdom. All things. ca
zevre. It is remarkable that Paul
has here used a word which is in the
neuter gender. It is not all persons,
all angels, or all men, or all the elect,
but all things. Bloomfield and others
suppose that persons are meant, and
that the phrase is used for robs ravras.
But it seemstome that Paul did not use
this word without design. All things
are placed under Christ, (ver. 22;
Matt. xxviii. 18,) and the design of
God is to restore harmony in the universe. Sin has produced disorder not
not unly in mind, but in matter. The
world is disarranged. The effects of
transgression are seen everywhere ;
and the object of the plan of redemption is to put things on their pristine
footing, and restore them as they were
at first. Every thing is, therefore,
put under the Lord Jesus, and all
things are to be brought under his
control, so as to constitute one vast
harmonious empire. ‘The amount of
the declaration here is, that there is
hereafter to be one kingdom, in which
there shall be no jar or alienation ;
that the now separated kingdoms of
heaven and earth shall be united ander one head, and that henceforward
all shall be harmony and love. The
things which are to be united in
Christ, are those which are “in heaven and which are on earth.” Nothing is said of hell. Of course this
passage cannot teach the doctrine of
universal salvation, since there is one
world which is not to have a part in
this ultimate union. § In Christ.
By means of Christ, or under him,
as the great head and king. He is
to be the great agent in effecting this,
and he is to preside over this united
kingdom. In accordance with this
view the heavenly inhabitants, the
angels as well as the redeemed, are
uniformly represented as uniting in
the same worship, and as acknowledging the Redeemer as their common
head and king; Rev. v. 9, 10, 11, 12.
{ Both which arein heaven. Marg.
Christ, both which are in ! heaven

1 the heavens.

as in Gr., in the heavens.
ferent opinions have been formed of
the meaning of this expression. Some
suppose it to mean the saints in heaven, who died before the coming of
the Saviour ; and some that it refers
to the Jews, designated as the heavenly people, in contradistinction
from the Gentiles, as having nothing
divine and heavenly in them, and as
being of the earth. The more simple
and obvious interpretation is, howzver, without doubt, the correct one,
and this is to suppose that it refers to
the holy inhabitants of other worlds.
The object of the plan of salvation is
to produce a harmony between them
and the redeemed on earth, or to produce out of all, one great and united
kingdom. In doing this, it is not necessary to suppose that any change is
to be produced in the inhabitants of
heaven, All the change is to occur
among those on earth, and the object
is to make out of all, one harmonious
and glorious empire. § And which
are on earth. The redeemed on
earth. The object is to bring them
into harmony with the inhabitants of
heaven. ‘This is the great object proposed by the plan of salvation. It is
to found one glorious and eternal kingdom, that shall comprehend al! holy
beings on earth and all in heaven.
There is now discord and disunion.
Man is separated from God, and from
all holy beings. Between him and
every holy being there is by nature
discord and alienation. Unrenewed
man has no sympathy with the feelings and work of the angels ; no love
for their employment; no desire to
be associated with them. Nothing
can be more unlike than the customs,
feelings, laws, and habits which prevail on earth, from those which prevail in heaven. But the object of the
plan of salvation is to restore harmony
to those alienated communities, and
produce eternal concord and love.
Learn hence, (1.) The greatness and
glory of the plan of salvation. It is

Many dif-

and which are on earth: even in
him,

11 In whom also we have ob-

no trifling undertaking to reconcile
worlds, and of such discordant materials to found one great and glorious and eternal empire. (2.) The
reason of the interest which angels
feel in the plan of redemption; 1
Peter i. 12. They are deeply concerned in the redemption of those who,
with them, are to constitute that great
kingdom which is to be eternal.
Without envy at the happiness of
others; without any feeling that the
accession of others will diminish their
felicity or glory, they wait to hail the
coming of others, and rejoice to receive even one who comes to be united
totheirnumber. (3.) This plan was worthy of the efforts of the Sonof God. To
restore harmony in heaven and earth;
to prevent the evils of alienation and
discord; to rear one immense and
glorious kingdom, wasan object worthy
the incarnation of the Son of God.
(4.) The glory of the Redeemer. He
is to be exalted as the Head of this
united and eyer-glorious kingdom,
and all the redeemed on earth and
the angelic hosts shall acknowledge
him as their common Sovereign and
Head. (5.) This is the greatest and
most important enterprise on earth.
It should engage every heart, and
enlist the powers of every soul. It
should be the earnest desire of all to
swell the numbers of those who shall
constitute this united and ever-glorious
kingdom, and to bring as many as possible of the human race into union with
the holy inhabitants of the other world.

11. In whom also we /|.ave obtained
an inheritance. We who are Christians. Most commentators suppose
that by the word ‘‘ we” the Jews particularly are intended, and that it
stands in contradistinction from “ye,”’
as referring to the Gentiles, in ver.
13. This construction, they suppose.
is demanded by the nature of the passage. The meaning may then be,
that the Jews who were believers had
jirst obtained a part in the plan of redemption, as the offer was first made

tained an inheritance, # being predestinated according to the purpose
a Ac.20.32.

to them, and then that the same fa-

vour was conferred also on the Gentiles. Or it may refer to those who
had been first converted, without particular reference to the fact that they
were Jews; and the reference may
be to the apostle and his fellow-labourers. This seems to me to be the
correct interpretation. ‘“ We the
ministers of religion first believed,
and have obtained an inheritance in
the hopes of Christians, that we
should be to the praise of God’s glory ;
and you also, after hearing the word
of truth, believed ;”’ ver. 13. The
word which is rendered ‘obtained
our inheritance’ -- xAngow -- means
literally to acquire by lot, and then to
obtain, to receive. Here it means
that they had received the favour of
being to the praise of his glory for
having first trusted in the Lord Jesus.
| Being predestinated; ver.5. J According to the purpose. On the
meaning of the word purpose, see
Notes, Rom. viii. 28. {| Of him who
worketh all things. Of God, the universal agent. ‘The affirmation here is
not merely that God accomplishes the
designs of salvation according to the
counsel of his own will, but that he
does everything. Wis agency is not
‘confined to one thing, or to one class
of objects. Every object and event
is under his control, and is in accordance with his eternal plan. ‘The word
rendered worketh--itveoyiw--means to
work, to be active, to produce ; Eph.
i. 20; Gal. ii. 8; Phil. ii. 13. Auniversal agency is ascribed to him,
“The same God which worketh all
in all;” 1 Cor. xii. 6. Ile has an
agency in causing the emotions of our
hearts. ‘God, who worketh in you
both to will and to do of his good
pleasure ;” Phil. ii. 15. Mle has an
agency in distributing to men their
various allotments and endowments.
«* All these worketh that one and the
self-same Spirit, dividing to every
man severally as he will;’” 1 Cor.
xii. 11. The agency of God is seen
everywhere. Every leaf, flower, rose-

of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will ;

bud, spire of grass; every sun-beam,

and every flash of lightning ; every
cataract and every torrent, all declare
his agency; and there is not an object that we see that does not bespeak
the control of an All-present God.
It would be impossible to affirm more
explicitly that God’s agency is universal, than Paul does in the passage
before us. THe does not attempt to
prove it. It is one of those points on
which he does not deem it necessary
to pause and reason, but which may
be regarded asa conceded point in the
discussion of other topics, and which
may be employed without hesitation
in their illustration. Paul does not
state the mode in which this is done.
Ue affirms merely the fact. He does
not say that he compels men, or that
he overbears them by mere physical
force. lJis agency he affirms to be
universal ; but it is undoubtedly in
accordance with the nature of the
object, and with the laws which he
has impressed on them. Ilis agency
in the work of creation was absolute
and entire ; for there was nothing to
act on, and no established laws to be
observed. Over the mineral kingdom
his control must also be entire, yet in
accordance with the laws which he
has impressed on matter. The crystal and the snow are formed by his
agency; but itis inaccordance with the
laws which he has been pleased to appoint. So in the vegetable world his
agency is everywhere seen; but the
lily and the rose blossom in accordance with uniform laws, and not in an
arbitrary manner. So in the anima:
kingdom. God gives sensibility to
the nerve, and excitability and power
to the muscle. Ile causes the lungs
to heave, and the arteries and veins
to bear the blood along the channels
of life; but it is not in an arbitrary
manner, It is in accordance with
the laws which he has ordained and
he never disregards in his agency over
these kingdoms. So in his government of mind. He “ works’ everywhere. But he does it inaccordance
12 That we should be to the
1 or, hoped.

His agency is
not exactly of the same kind on the
rose-bud that it is on the diamond,
nor on the nerve that it is on the
rose-bud, nor on the heart and will

with the laws of mind.

that it is on the nerve. In all these
things he consults the laws which he
has impressed on them; and as he
chooses that the nerve should be affected in accordance with its laws and
properties, so it is with mind. God
does not violate its laws. Mind is

free. It is influenced by truth and
motives. It has a sense of right and
wrong. And there is no more reason

to suppose that God disregards these
laws of mind in controlling the intellect and the heart, than there is that
he disregards the laws of crystallization in the formation of the ice, or of
gravitation in the movements of the
heavenly bodies. The general doctrine is, that God works in all things,
and controls all; but that his agency
everywhere is in accordance with the
laws and nature of that part of his
kingdom where it 1s exerted. By this
simple principle we may secure the
two great points which it is desirable
to secure on this subject, (1.) the doctrine of the universal agency of God;
and (2.) the doctrine of the freedom
and responsibility of man. § A/ter
the counsel of his own will. Not by
consulting his creatures, or conforming
to their views, but by his own views
of what is proper and right. We are
not to suppose that this is by mere
will, as ifit were arbitrary, or that he
determines anything without good reason. The meaning is, that his purpose is determined by what he views
to be right, and without consulting
his creatures or conforming to their
views. His dealings often seem to
us to be arbitrary. We are incapable
of perceiving the reasons of what he
does. He makes those his friends
who we should have supposed would
have been the last to have become
Christians. He leaves those who
seem to us to be on the borders of the
kingdom, and they remain unmoved
and unaffected. But we are not thence

praise of his glory who first ! trusted in Christ.

to suppose that he is arbitrary. In
every instance, we are to believe that
there is a good reason for what he
does, and one which we may be permitted yet to see, and in which we
shall wholly acquiesce. The phrase
“counsel of his own will” is remarkable. It is designed to express in the
strongest manner the fact that it is
not by human counsel or advice. The
word ‘counsel’ -- fovray -- means @
council or senate; then a determination, purpose, or decree; see Rob.
Lex. Here it means that his determination was formed by his own will,
and not by human reasoning. Still,
his will in the case may not have been
arbitrary. When it is said of man
that he forms his own purposes, and
acts according to his own will, we are
not to infer that he acts without reason. He may have the highest and
best reasons for what he does, but he
does not choose to make them known
to others, or to consult others. So it
may be of God, and so we should presume it to be. It may be added, that
we ought to have such confidence in
him as to believe that he will do all
things well. The best possible evidence that anything is done in perfect wisdom and goodness, is the fact
that God does it. When we have ascertained that, we should be satisfied
that all is right.

12. That we should be to the
praise of his glory. Should be the
occasion or the means of celebrating
his glory; or that praise should be
ascribed to him as the result of our
salvation. Who first trusted in
Christ. Marg., hoped. This is in
accordance with the original. The
foundation of their hope was the
Saviour. Some suppose that the
apostle here refers to the Jews who
were converted before the gospel
was preached extensively to the Gentiles. The reason for this opinion is,
that in the following verse he contrasts those to whom he here refers
with others whom he was addressing.
But it may be that by the word “ we”
in ver. 11, 12, he refers to himself and

In whom ye also trusted, after
that ye heard * the word of truth,
the gospel of your salvation: in
whom also, after that ye believed,
ye were sealed > with that holy
Spirit of promise,

a, Ro.10.17. b 2Co.1.22.

to his fellow-labourers who had first
hoped in the Saviour, and had then
gone and proclaimed the message to
others; see Notes on ver. 11. They
first believed, and then preached to
others ; and they also believed, and
became partakers of the same privileges.

13. In whom ye also trusted. This
stands in contrast with those who
had first embraced the gospel.--
{ Heard the word of truth. The gospel; called the word or message of
truth, the word of God, &c. See
Rom. x.17. The phrase “ the word
of truth’ means “the true word or
message.” It was a message unmixed with Jewish traditions or Gen-.
tile philosophy. The gospel of
your salvation. The gospel bringing
salvation to you. § Jn whom also.
In the Lord Jesus. A little different
translation of this verse will convey
more clearly its meaning. ‘ In whom
also, ye, having heard the word of
truth, (the gospel of your salvation,)
in whom having also believed, ye
were sealed,’ &c. The sealing was
the result of believing, and that was
the result of hearing the gospel ;
comp. Rom. x. 14, 15. {| Ye were
scaled. On the meaning of the word
seal, see Notes on John iii. 33; vi.
27. On the phrase “ye were sealed,”
see Notes on 2 Cor.i. 22. § With
that holy Spirit of promise. With
the Iloly Spirit that was promised ;
see John xvi. 7--11, 13; xv. 26; xiv.
16,17. Itis not improbable, I think,
that the apostle here refers particularly to the occurrence of which we
have a record in Acts xix. 1--6.
Paul, it is there said, having passed
through the upper provinces of Asia
Minor, came to Ephesus. He found
certain persons who were the disciples of John, and he asked them if
they had received the Holy Ghost

since they “ believed,” ver. 2.
14 Which is the earnest ¢ of
our inheritance, until the redemption @ of the purchased ¢ possession, unto the f praise of his
glory.

¢ 2Co.5.5.

d@ Ro.8.23.
é Ac.20.28.

F ver.6,12.

They
replied that they had not heard whether there was any Holy Ghost, and
that they had been baptized unto
John’s baptism. Paul taught them
the true nature of the baptism of
John ; explained to them the Christian system ; and they were baptized
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
“the Holy Ghost came upon them,
and they spake with tongues, and
prophesied.’’ They were thus sealed
by the Holy Spirit of promise, “ after
they had believed’”’ (Eph. i. 13); they
had the full evidence of the favour of
God in the descent of the promised
Holy Spirit, and in his miraculous influences. If this be the true interpretation, it constitutes a striking coincidence between the epistle and the
Acts, of such a nature as constitute
the arguments in Paley’s Hore Pauline (though he has not referred to
this), which shows that the epistle
was not forged. Thecircumstance is
such that it would not have been alluded to in this manner by one who
should forge the epistle; and the mention of it in the epistle is so slight, that
no one, from the account there,
would think of forging the account
in the Acts. The coincidence is
just such as would occur on the supposition that the transaction actually
occurred, and that both the Acts and
the epistle are genuine. Atthe same
time, there is a sealing of the Holy
Spirit which is common to all Christians ; see the Notes referred to on
2 Cor. i. 22.

14. Which is the earnest of our
inheritance. On the meaning of
this, see Notes on 2 Cor. i. 22.
q Until the redemption ; see Notes
on Rom. viii. 23. The meaning here
is, we have the Holy Spirit as the
pledge that that shall be ours, and
the Holy Spirit will be imparted to
15 Wherefore I also, after I heard
of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and
love unto all the saints,

16 Cease not to give thanks for

us until we enter on that inheritance.
q Of the purchased possession. Heaven, purchased for us by the death of
the Redeemer. The word here used
--srteroinois--occurs in the following
places in the New Testament: 1
Thess. v. 9, rendered ‘‘to obtain salvation ;”? 2 Thess. ii. 14, “ to the obtaining of the glory of the Lord ;”
Ileb. x. 39, “to the saving of the
soul ;”’ 1 Pet. ii. 9, “a peculiar people ;’” literally, a people of acquirement to himself; and in the passage
before us. It properly means, an acquisition, an obtaining, a laying up.
Ilere it means, the complete deliverance from sin, and the eternal salvation acquired for us by Christ. The

influence of the Holy Spirit, renew-.

ing and sanctifying us, comforting us
in trials, and sustaining us in afflictions, is the pledge that the redemption is yet to be wholly ours. § Unto
the praise of his glory ; see ver. 6.
15. Wherefore, I also, after I heard
of your faith in the Lord Jesus. This
is one of the passages usually relied
on by those who suppose that this
epistle was not written to the Ephesians. The argument is, that he writes
to them as if they were strangers to
him, and that it is not language such
as would be used in addressing a people among whom he had spent three
years ; see the Intro. § 5. But this
inference is not conclusive. Paul had
been some years absent from Ephesus
when this epistle was written. Inthe
dificult communication in those times
between distant places, it is not to be
supposed that he would hear often
from them. Perhaps he had heard
nothing after the time when he bade
farewell to the elders of Ephesus at
Miietus (Acts xx.), until the time here
referred to. It would be, therefore,
a matter of great interest with him to
hear from them; and when in some
way intelligence was brought to him
at Rome of a very gratifying character
about their growth in piety, he says

you, making mention of you in my
prayers ;
17 That the God @ of our Lord

Jesus Christ, the Father of glory,
@ John 20.17.

that his anxiety was relieved, and that
he did not cease to give thanks for
what he had heard, and to commend
them to God in prayer.

16. Cease not to give thanks for
you. In the prosperity of the church
at Ephesus he could not but feel the
deepest interest, and their welfare
he never forgot. § Making mention
of you in my prayers. Paul was
far distant from them, and expected to see them no more. But he
had faith in prayer, and he sought
that they might advance in knowledge and in grace. What was the
particular subject of his prayers, he
mentions in the following verses.

17. That the God of our Lord Jesus
Chris‘. The God who has sent the
Lord Jesus into the world, and appointed him as the Mediator between
himself and man. ‘The particular
reason why Paul here speaks of him
as “the God of the Lord Jesus”’ is,
that he prays that they might be further acquainted with the Redeemer,
and be enlightened in regard to the
great work which he came to do.
{| The Father of glory. The glorious
Father, that is, the Father who is
worthy to be praised and honoured.
J May give unto you the Spirit of
wisdom. May make you wise to understand the great doctrines of the religion of the Redeemer. § And revelation. That is, revealing to you
more and more of the character of the
Redeemer, and of the nature and results of his work. It1is probable here
that by the word “Spirit” the apostle
refers to the Holy Spirit asthe author
of all wisdom, and the revealer of all
truth. is prayer is, that God would
grant to themthe Holy Spirit to make
them wise, and to reveal his will to
them. J In the knowledge of him.
Marg. for the acknowledgment. That
is, in order that you may more fully
acknowledge him, or know him more
intimately and thoroughly. They had
already made high attainments (ver.

may give unto you the Spirit of
wisdom 2 and revelation! in the
knowledge of him:

18 The eyes* of your understanding being enlightened ; that

b Co).1.9. ¢ Is.42.7.
1 or, for the acknowledgment.

15), but Paul felt that they might
niake still higher ; and theidea here is,
that however far Christians may have
advanced in knowledge and in love,
there is an unfathomed depth of knowledge which they may still explore,
aud which they should be exhorted
still to attempt to fathom. How far
was Paul from supposing that the
Ephesians had attained to perfection!

18. The eyes of your understandtng being enlightened. The construction here in the Greek is, probably,
“that he may give you (d2%, ver. 17)
the Spirit of wisdom, &c.--eyes of the
understanding enlightened,” &c. Or
the phrase, “ the eyes of your understanding being enlightened,’”’ may be
inthe accusative absolute,which Koppe
and Bloomfield prefer. ‘The phrase,
“the eyes of the understanding,” is a
figure that is common in all. languages. ‘Thus Philo says, ‘‘What the
eye is to the body, that is the mind to
the soul ;” comp. Matth. vi.22. The
eye is the instrument by which we see;
and in ike manner the understanding
is that by which we perceive truth.
The idea here is, that Paul not only
wished their hearts to be right, but he
wished their understanding to be
right also. NReligion has much to do
inenlightening the mind. Indeed, its
effect there is not less striking and
decisive than it is on theheart. The
understanding has been blinded by
sin. ‘The views which men entertain
of themselves and of God are narrow
and wrong. The understanding is enfeebled and perverted by the practice
of sin. It is limited in its operations
by the neeessity of the case, and by
the impossibility of fully comprehending the great truths which pertain to
the divine administration. Oneofthe
first effects of true religion is on the
understanding. It enlarges its views
of truth; gives it more exalted conceptions of God ; corrects its errors ;

3l

ye may know what is the hope 4 of
his calling, and what the riches
¢ of the glory of his inheritance in
the saints,

19 And what is the exceeding

d@ ch.4.4. éch.3.16.

raises it up towards the great Fountain of love. And nowhere is the effect of the true religion more apparent
than in shedding light on the intellect
of the world, and restoring the weak
and perverted mind to a just view of
the proportion of things, and to the
true knowledge of God. J That ye
may know what is the hope of lis
calling. What is the full import of
that hope to which he has called and
invited you by his Spirit and his promises. The meaning here is, that it
would be an inestimable privilege to
be made fully acquainted with the
benefits of the Christian hope, and to
be permitted to understand fully what
Christians have a right to expect in
the world of glory. ‘This is the first
thing which the apostle desires they
should fully understand. § And what
the riches of the glory of his inheritance. This is the second thing which
Paul wishes them to understand.
There is a force in this language
which can be found perhaps nowhere
else than in the writings of Paul. His
mind is full, and language is burdened and borne down under the weight
of his thoughts ; see Notes on 2 Cor.
iv. 17. On the word ‘riches ’’ here
used, see Notes on ver. 7. The phrase
“riches of glory’? means glorious
wealth ; or, as we would say, ‘“ how
rich and glorious!” The meaningis,
that there is an abundance--an infinitude of wealth. It is not such a possession as man may be heir to in this
world, which is always limited from
the necessity of the case, and which
cannot be enjoyed long; it is infinite
and inexhaustible; comp. Notes,
Rom. ii. 4. The “ inheritance’’ herc
referred to is eternal life. Notes,
Rom. viii. 17. In the saints.
Among the saints. Note, 1 Cor. ae

19. And what ts the exceeding greatness of his power. On the language
here used, comp. Notes on 2 Cor. iv.
greatness of his power @ to us-ward
who believe, according to the working ! of his mighty power,

a Ps,110.3.
1 the might of his power.

17. There is much emphasis and
energy of expression here, as if the
apostle were labouring under the greatness of his theme, and wanted words
to express the magnitude of his conception. This is the third thing which
he was particularly desirous they
should know --that they should be fully
acquainted with the power of God in
the salvation of men. He refers not
merely to the power which he had
evinced in their salvation, but also
to what the gospel was able to accomplish, and which they might yet experience. The ‘ power’’ referred to
here as exercised towards believers
does not refer to one thing merely.
It is the whole series of the acts of
power towards Christians which results from the work of the Redeemer.
There was power exerted in their conversion. ‘There would be power exerted in keeping them. There would
be power in raising them up from the
dead, and exalting them with Christ
to heaven. The religion which they
professed was a religion of power. In
allthe forms and stages of it the power
of God was manifested towards them,
and would be until they reached their
final inheritance. ( To us-ward.
Towards us, or in relation to us.
Who believe. Who are Christians.
{ According to the working of his
mighty power. Marg., The might of
his power. This should be taken with
the clause in the following verse,
“which he wrought in Christ ; and
the meaning is, that the power which
God has exerted in us is in accordance
with the power which was shown in
raising up the Lord Jesus. It was
the proper result of that, and was
power of a similar kind. The same
power is requisite to convert a sinner
which is demanded inraising the dead.
Neither will be accomplished but by
omnipotence (see Notes, ch. ii. 5);
and the apostle wished that they
should be fully apprised of this fact,
and of the vast power which God had

rA. D. 64.

20 Which he wrought in Christ,
when he®@ raised him from the
dead, and set him at his own right
hand in the heavenly places,

@ Ac.2.24,33.

put forth in raising them up from the
death of sin. To illustrate this sentiment is one of his designs in the following verses ; and hence he goes on
to show that men before their conversion were ‘“ dead in trespasses and
sins ;” that they had no spiritual life ;
that they were the “children of
wrath ;’ that they were raised up
from their death in sin by the same
power which raised the Lord Jesus
from the grave, and that they were
wholly saved by grace ; ch. il. 1--10.
In order to set this idea of the power
which God had put forth in their regeneration in the strongest light, he
goes into a magnificent description of
the resurrection and exaltation of the
Lord Jesus, and shows how that wag
connected with the renewing of Christians. God had set him over all things.
He had put all things under his feet,
and had made principalities and dominions everywhere subject to him. In
this whole passage (ch. i. 19 --28 ; ii.
1--10), the main thing to be illustrated is the PowER which God has shown
in renewing and saving his people;
and the leading sentiment is, that the
SAME power is evinced in that which
was required to raise up the Lord
Jesus from the dead, and to exalt him
over the universe.

20. Which he wrought in Christ.
Which he exerted in relation to the
Lord Jesus when he was dead. The
power which was then exerted was as
great as thatof creation. It was imparting life to a cold and “ mangled”
frame. It was to open again the arteries and veins, and teach the heart
to beat and the lungs to heave. It
was to diffuse vital warmth through
the rigid muscles, and to communicate
to the body the active functions of
life. It is impossible to conceive of
a more direct exertion of power than
in raising up the dead ; and there is
no more striking illustration of the
nature of conversion than in such a
resurrection, { And set him at his

a. D. 64. ]

21 Far ® above all principality,
and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world, but also in
that which is to come ;

b Ph. 2.9; Col.2.10.

own right hand. The idea is, that
great power was displayed by this,
and that a similar exhibition is made
when man is renewed and exalted to
the high honour of being made an heir
of God. On the fact that Jesus was
received to the right hand of God,
see Notes on Mark xvi. 19; comp.
Notes on Acts ii. 33. J In the heavenly places; see Notes on ver. 3.
The phrase here evidently means in
heaven itself.

21. Far above all principality.
The general sense in this verse is, that
the Lord Jesus was exalted to the
highest conceivable dignity and
honour ; comp. Phil. ii. 9; Col. ii. 10.
In this beautiful and most important
passage, the apostle labours for words
to convey the greatness of his conceptions, and uses those which denote the
highest conceivable dignity and glory.
The main idea is, that God had manifested great power in thus exalting
the Lord Jesus, and that similar
power was exhibited in raising up the
sinner from the death of sin to the life
and honour of believing. The work
of religion throughout was a work of
power ; a work of exalting and honouring the dead, whether dead in sin
or in the grave ; and Christians ought
to know the extent and glory of the
power thus put forth in their salvation.
The word rendered “far above ’--
b782avw--i8 a compound word, meaning
high above, or greatly exalted. He
was not merely above the ranks of the
heavenly beings, as the head ; he was
not one of their own rank, placed by
office a little above them, but he was
infinitely exalted over them, as of different rank and dignity. How could
this be if he were a mere man ; or if
he were an angel? The word rendered “ principality” --aexi--means
properly, the beginning ; and then
the first, the first place, power, domiulon, . pre-eminence, rulers, magistrates, &c. It mayrefer here to any

22 And hath put®@ all things
under his feet, and gave him Zo be
the head over all things to the
church,

@ Ps8.63 Mat.28,18.

rank and power, whether among men
or angels, and the sense is, that Christ
is exalted above all. § And power.
It is not easy to distinguish between
the exact meaning of the words which
the apostle here uses. The general
idea is, that Christ is elevated above
all ranks of creatures, however exalted,
and by whatever name they may be
known. As in this he refers to the
““world that is to come,’ as well as
this world, it is clear that there is a
reference here to the ranks of the
angels, and probably he means to allude to the prevailing opinion among
the Jews, thatthe angels are of different orders. Some of the Jewish
Rabbies reckon four, others ten orders
of angels, and they presume to give
them names according to their different ranks and power. But all this is
evidently the result of mere fancy.
The Scriptures hint in several places
at a difference of rank among the angels, but the sacred writers do not go
into detail. It may be added that
there is no improbability in such a
subordination, but it is rather to be
presumed to be true. The creatures
of God are not made alike; and difference of degree and rank, as far as
our observation extends, everywhere
prevails. On this verse comp. Notes
on Rom, viii. 88. § Dominion. Gr.
Lordship. § And every name that ts
named. Every creature of every
rank. § Not only in this world. Not
only above all kings, and princes, and
rulers of every grade and rank on

earth. J But also in that which i: to
come. This refers undoubtedly to
heaven. The meaning is, that he is

supreme over all.

22. And hath put all things wnder
his feet ; see Notes on 1 Cor. xv. 27.
{ And gave him to be the head over
all things. Appointed him to be the
supreme ruler. { Yo the church
With reference to the church, or for
its benefit and welfare ; see Notes ov

23 Which is his body, * the, fulness of him that filleth all in

@ 1 Co.12.12; Col.1.18,24.

John xvii. 2. The universe is under
his control and direction for the welfare of his people. (1.) All the elements--the physical works of God--
the winds and waves--the seas and
rivers--all are under him, and all are
to be made tributary to the welfare of
the church. (2.) Earthly kings and
rulers; kingdoms and nations are
under his control. Thus far Christ
has controlled all the wicked rulers
of the earth, and they have not been
able to destroy that church which
he redeemed with his own blood.
(3.) Angels in heaven, with all their
ranks and orders, are under his control with reference to the church;
see Notes on Leb. i. 14; comp.
Matt. xxvi. 53. (4.) Fallen angels
are under his control, and shall not
be able to injure or destroy the church.
See Notes on Matt. xvi. 18. The
church, therefore, is safe. All the
great powers of heaven, earth, and
hell, are made subject to its Head and
King; and no weapon that is formed
against it shall prosper.

23. Which is his body. This comparison of the church with a person
or body, of which the Lord Jesus is
the head, is not uncommon in the
New Testament; comp. Notes on 1
Cor. xi. 3; xii. 27; Eph. iv. 15, 16.
{ The fulness of him. The word
here rendered fulness--rarpapa--
means properly, that with which any
thing is filled; the filling up; the contents; Notes, Rom. xi. 12. The
exact idea here, however, is not very
clear, and interpreters have been by
no means united in their opinions of
the meaning. It seems probable that
the sense is, that the church is the
completion or filling up of his power
and glory. It is that without which
his dominion would not be complete.
He has control over the angels and
over distant worlds, but his dominion
would not be complete without the
control over his church, and that is
so glorious, that it fil/s wp the honour
of the universal dominion, and makes
his empire complete. Accordinz to

all.

Rosenmiller, the word fulness here
means a great number or multitude;
a multitude, says he, which, not confined to its own territory, spreads afar,
and fills various regions. Koppealso
regards it as synonymous with multitude or many, and supposes it to mean
all the dominion of the Redeemer
over the body--the church. He proposes to translate the whole verse,
‘“« He has made him the Head over his
church, that he might rule it as his
own body--the whole wide state of his
universal kingdom.”’ ‘ This,’ says
Calvin (in loc.), “is the highest honour of the church, that the Son of
God regards himself as in a certain
sense imperfect unless he is joined to
us.” ‘Fhe church constitutes the complete body of the Redeemer. A body
is complete when it has all its members and limbs in proper proportions,
and those members might be said to
be the completion, or the filling-up, or
the fulness--xAnpwua--of the body or
the person. This language weuld not,
indeed, be such as would usually be
adopted to express the idea now; but
this is evidently the sense in which
Paul uses it here. The meaning is,
that the church sustains the same relation to Christ, which the body does
to the head. It helps to form the
entire person. There is a close and
necessary union. The oneis not complete without the other. And one is
dependent on the other. When the
body has all its members in due proportion, and is in sound and vigorous
health, the whole person then is complete and entire. So itis to be in the
kingdom of the Redeemer. He is the
head; and that redeemed Churchis the
body, the fulness, the completion, the
filling-up of the entire empire over
which he presides, and which he rules.
On the meaning of the word fulness--
rr*pwux--the reader may consult
Storr’s Opuscula, vol. i. pp. 144--187,
particularly pp. 169--183. Storr understands the word in the sense of full
or abundant mercy, and supposes that
it refers to the great beniguity which

God has shown to his people, and renders it, “ The great benignity of him
who filleth all things with good, as he
called Jesus from the dead to life and
placed him in heaven, so even you,
sprung from the heathen, who were
dead in sin on account of your many
offences in which you formerly lived,
&c.--hath he called to life by Christ.”
This verse, therefore, he would connect with the following chapter, and
he regards it all as designed to illustrate the great power and goodness of
God Mr. Locke renders it, “ Which
is his body, which is completed by him
alone,’ and supposes it means, that
Christ is the head, who perfects the
church by supplying all things to all
its members which they need. Chandler gives an interpretation in accordance with that which I have first suggested, as meaning that the church is
the full “ complement” of the body of
Christ ; and refers to Elian and Dionysius Walicarnassus, who use the
word “fuiness” or rarcwua as referring to the rowers of a ship. Thus
also we say that the ship’s crew is its
“complement,” or that a ship or an
army has its complement of men ; that
is, the ranks are filled up or complete.
Tn like manner, the church will be the
filling-up, or the complement, of the
great kingdom of the Redeemer--that
which will give completion or perfectness to his universal dominion. {| Of
him. Ofthe Redeemer. § That jilleth all in all. That fills all things, or
who pervades all things; see Notes,
1 Cor. xii. 6; xv. 28; comp. Col. iii.
11. The idea is, that there is no
place where he is not, and which he
does not fill; and that he is the source
of all the holy and happy influences
that are abroad in the works of God.
It would not be easy to congeive of
an expression more certainly denoting omnipresence and universalagency
than this; and if it refers to the Lord
Jesus, as seems to be indisputable, the
passage teaches not only his supremacy, but demonstrates his universal
agency, and his omnipresence--things
that pertain only to God. From this
passage we may observe, (1.) That
just views of the exaltation of the
Redeemer are to be obtained only by

the influence of the Spirit of God on
he heart; ver. 17--19. Man, by nature, has no just conceptions of the
Saviour, and has no desire to have. It
is only as the knowledge of that great
doctrine is imparted to the mind by
the Spirit of God, that we have any
practicaland saving acqnaintance with
such an exaltation. The Christian
sees him, by faith, exalted to the right
hand of God, and cheerfully commits
himself and his all to him, and feels
that all his interests are safe in his
hands. (2.) It is very desirable to
have such views of an exalted Saviour.
So Paul felt when he earnestly prayed
that God would give such views to the
Ephesians, ver. 17--20. It was desirable in order that they might have a
right understanding of their privileges; in order that they might know
the extent of the power which had
been manifested in their redemption ;
in order that they might commit their
souls with confidence to him. In my
conscious weakness and helplessness ;
when I am borne down by the labours
and exposed to the temptations of
life; when I contemplate approaching sickness and death, I desire to feel
that that Saviour to whom I have
committed my all is exalted far above
principalities and powers, and every
name thatis named. When the church
is persecuted and opposed; when.hosts
of enemies rise up against it and
threaten its peace and safety, I rejoice to feel assured the Redeemer
and Jiead of the church is over all,
and that he has power to subdue all
her foes and his. (3.) The church is
safe. Her great Ilead is on the
throne of the universe, and no weapon
that is formed against her can prosper. Ile has defended it hitherto in
all times of persecution, and the past
is a pledge that he will continue to
protect it to the end of the world.
(4.) Let ws commit our souls to this
exalted Redeemer. Sucha Redeemer
we need--one who has all power in
heaven and earth. Such a religion we
need--that can restore the dead to life.
Such hope and confidence we need as
he can give--such peace and calmness
as shall result from unwavering confidence in him who filleth aJJ in all.

Ney you @ hath he quickened,
< a John 5.24; Col,2.13.

This chapter is closely connected
insense with the preceding, and should
not have been separated fromit. The
great object is to illustrate the subject which was commenced in the previous chapter (ver. 19)--the greatness
of the power of God, evinced in the
salvation of his people. The great
manifestation of his power had been
in raising up the Lord Jesus from the
dead. That had been connected with
and followed by their resurrection
from the death of sin; and the one
had involved the exercise of a power
similar to the other. In the illustration of this main idea, the apostle observes, (ver. 1) that God had quickened those who had been dead in trespasses and sins, and proceeds (ver.2,3)
to show the condition in which they
were before their conversion. He
then observes (ver. 4--7), that God of
his infinite mercy, when they were
dead in sin, had quickened them together with Christ, and had raised
them up to sit with him in heavenly
places. He then states that this was
not by human power, but was the work
of divine power, and that they were
the workmanship of God, ver. 8--10.
The remainder of the chapter (ver.
11--22) is occupied with a statement
of the privileges resulting from the
mercy of God in calling them into his
kingdom. The apostle endeavours to
impress their minds strongly with a
sense of the mercy and love and power
of God in thus calling them to himself. He reminds them of their former
condition when Gentiles, as being
without God, and that they were now
brought nigh by the blood of Christ
(ver. 11--13); he states that this had
been done by one great Mediator, who
came to break down the wall of partition between the Jews and Gentiles,
and who had now made both one (ver.
14--18); and he compares them now
to a temple raised for God, and to
coustitute the place of his dwelling on
the eartb; ver. 19--22, Byall these

| who were dead in trespasses and
sins ;

considerations he endeavours to im-

press their minds with a sense of obligation, and to lead them to devote
themselves to that God who had
raised them from the dead, and had
breathed into them the breath of immortal life.

1. And you hath he quickened.
The words ‘‘hath he quickened,” or
made to live, are supplied, but not improperly, by our translators. The
object of the apostle is to show the
great power which God had evinced
towards the people (ch. i. 19); and to
show that this was put forth in connection with the resurrection of the
Lord Jesus, and his exaltation to the
right hand of God in heaven; see
Notes on Rom. vi. 4--11; comp. Col.
ii. 12, 13; iii. 1. The words “ hath he
quickened”’ mean, hath he made alive,
or made to live; John v. 21; Rom.
iv. 17; 1 Cor. xv. 36. § Who were
dead in trespasses and sins. ‘On the
meaning of the word dead, see Notes
on Rom. v. 12; vi. 2. It is affirmed
here of those to whom Paul wrote at
Ephesus, that before they were converted, they were ‘dead in sins.”
There is not anywhere a more explicit proof of depravity than this,
and no stronger language can he
used. They were dead in relation to
that to which they afterwards became
alive--z. ¢., to holiness. Of course,
this does not mean that they were in
all respects dead. It does not mean
that they had no animal life, or that
they did not breathe, and walk, and
act. Nor can it mean that they had
no living intellect or mental powers,
| which would not have been true. Nor
does it settle any question as to their
ability or power while in that state.
It simply affirms a fact--that in relation to real spiritual life they were,
in consequence of sin, like a dead man
in regard to the objects which are
around him. A corpse is insensible.
It sees not, and hears not, and feels
not. The sound of music, and the
voice of friendship and of alarm, do
not arouse it. The rose and the lily

2 Wherein @ in time past ye, walked according to the course

@ Ac. 19.35.

breathe forth their fragrance around
it, but the corpse perceives it not.
The world is busy and active around
it, but it is unconscious of it all. It
sees no beauty in the landscape; hears
not the voice of a friend; looks not
upon the glorious sun and stars; and
is unaffected by the running stream
and the rolling ocean. So with the
sinner in regard to the spiritual and
eternal world. He sees no beauty in
religion; he hears not the call of God;
he is unaffected by the dying love of
the Saviour; and he has no interest
in eternal realities. In all these he
feels no more concern, and sees no
more beauty, than a dead man does in
the world around him. Such is, in
fact, the condition of a sinful world.
There ts, indeed, life, and energy, and
motion. There are vast plans and
projects, and the world is intensely
active. But in regard to religion, all
is dead. The sinner sees no beauty
there; and no human power can arouse
him to act-for God, any more than
human power can rouse the sleeping
dead, or open the sightless eye-balls
on the light of day. The same power
is needed in the conversion of a sinner which is needed in raising the
dead; and one and the other alike demonstrate the omnipotence of him
who can do it.*

2. Wherein. In which sins, or in
the practice of which transgressions.
4 Ye walked. You lived, life being
often compared to a journey or arace.
Note, Rom. vi. 4. §] According to the
course of this world. In conformity
with the customs and manners of the
world at large. The word here rendered world--aiw.--means properly
age, but is often used to denote the
present world, with its cares, temptations, and desires; and here denotes
particularly the men of this world.
The meaning is, that they had lived
formerly as other men lived, and the
idea is strongly conveyed that the
course of the men of this world is to

walk in trespasses and sins. The

* See Supplementary Note on Rom. viii.
7 also en Gal. v. 17, where the author’s views
on this subject are canvassed.

sense is, that there was by nature no
difference between them and others,
and that all the difference which now
existed had been made by grace.
4] According to the prince of the power
of the air; see ch. vi. 12 ; comp.
Notes on 2 Cor. iv. 4. There can be
no doubt that Satan is here intended,
and that Paul means to say that they
were under his control as their leader
and prince. The phrase, ‘the prince
of the power,” may mean either “ the
powerful prince,’”’ or it may mean that
this prince had power over the air,
aud lived and reigned there particularly. The word “ prince?’--éasyovra--
Archon, means one first in authority
and power, and is then applied to any
one who has the pre-eminence or rule.
It is applied to Satan, or the chief of
the fallen angels, as where he is called
“the prince--écxw»--of the devils,”
Matth. ix. 84; xii. 24; Mark iii. 22;
Luke xi. 15; ‘“‘the prince of this
world,” John xii. 381; xiv. 30; xvi. 11.
But why he is here called the prince
having power over the air, it is not
easy to determine. Robinson ( Lez.)
supposes it +o be because he is lord
of the powers of the air; that is, of
the demons who dwell and rule in the
atmosphere. So Doddridge supposes
that it means that he controls the
fallen spirits who are permitted to
range the regions of the atmosphere.
It is generally admitted that the apostle here refers to the prevailing opinions both among the Jews and heathen, that the air was thickly peopled
with spirits or demons. ‘That this
was a current opinion, may be seen
fully proved in Wetstein; comp.
Bloomfield, Grotius, and particularly
Koppe. Why the region of the air
was supposed to be the dwelling-place
of such spirits, is now unknown. The
opinion may have been either that
such spirits dwelt in the air, or that
they had control over it, according to
the later Jewish belief. Cocceius and
some others explain the word air here
as meaning the same as darkness, as
in profane writers. It is evident to
my mind that Paul does not speak of
of this world, according to the
prince @ of the power of the air,
the spirit that now worketh in the
children © of disobedience:

a ch.6.12. b Co}.3.6.

this as a mere tradition, opinion, or
vagary of the fancy, or as a superstitious belief; but that he refers to it
as a thing which he regarded as true.
In this opinion I see no absurdity that
should make it impossible to believe
ite
dantly teach that there are fallen,
wicked spirits; and the existence of
fallen angels is no more improbable
than the existence of fallen men. (2.)
The Bible teaches that they have
much to do with this world. They
tempted man; they inflicted disease
in the time of the Saviour; they are
represented as alluring and deceiving
the race. (5.) They must have some
locality--some part of the universe
where they dwell. That they were
not confined down to hell in the time
of the Redeemer, is clear from the
New Testament; for they are often
represented as having afflicted and
tortured men. (4.) Why is there any
improbability in the belief that their
residence should have been in the regions of the air? That while they
were suffered to be on earth to tempt
and afflict men, they should have been
permitted peculiarly to occupy these
regions? Who can tell what may be
in the invisible world, and what spirits
may be permitted to fill up the vast
space that now composes the universe?
And who can tell what control may
have been given to such fallen spirits
over the regions of the atmosphere--
over clouds, and storms, and pestilential air? Jfen have control over the
earth, and pervert and abuse the
powers of nature to their own ruin
and the ruin of each other. The elements they employ for the purposes
of ruin and oftemptation. Fruit and
grain they convert to poison ; minerals, to the destruction caused by war.
In itself ccnsidered, there is nothing
more improbable that spirits of darkness may have had control over the
regions of the air, than that fallen
man has over the earth ; and no more

‘each other.

For, (1.) the Scriptures abun-

5 Among whom also we © al!
had our conversation in times past
in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling
the ! desires of the flesh and o}

cl Pe.4.3.

improbability that tuat power has been
abused to ruin men, than that the
power of men is abused to destroy
No one can prove that
the sentiment here referred to by Paul
ls not true ; and no one can show how
the doctrine that fallen spirits may do
mischief in any part of the works of
God, is any more improbable than
that wicked men should do the same
thing. The word ‘‘ power’ here--
“power of the air’ --I regard as synonymous with dominion or rule; ‘‘a
prince having dominion or rule over
the air.”--{ The spirit that now
worketh. That still lives, and whose
energy for evil is still seen and felt
among the wicked. Paul here means
undoubtedly to teach that there was
such a spirit, and that he was still
active in controlling men. § The
children of disobedience. The wicked;
Col. iii. 6.

3.We all had our conversation; see
Notes on 2 Cor. i. 12; comp. 1 Pet.
iv. 3. Gf In the lusts of our flesh.
Living to gratify the flesh, or the
propensities of a corrupt nature. It
is observable here that the apostle
changes the form of the address from
“ye to “we,” thus including himself with others, and saying that this
was true of all before their conversion. He means undoubtedly to say,
that whatever might have been the
place of their birth, or the differences
of religion under which they had been
trained, they were substantially alike
by nature. It was a characteristic of
all that they lived to fulfil the desires
of the flesh and of the mind. The
design of the apostle in thus grouping
himself with them was, to show that
he did not claim to be any better by
nature than they were, and that all
which any of them had of value was to
be traced to the grace of God. There
is much delicacy here.on the part of
the apostle. [lis object was to remind
them of the former grossness of their.
life, and their exposure to the wrath

1 wills.

the mind; and were by nature
@ Ps.51.5.

of God. Yet he does not do it harshly.
He includes himself in their number.
He says that what he affirms of them
was substantially true of himself--of
all--that they were under condemnation, and exposed to the divine wrath.
q| Fulfilling the desires of the flesh and
of the mind. Marg. as in Greek,
wills. Complying with the wishes of
a depraved nature. The ‘will of the
flesh’’ is that to which the flesh, or the
unrenewed nature of man, prompts;
and Paul says that all had been engaged in fulfilling those fleshly propensities. This was clearly true of
the heathen, and it was no less true
of the unconverted Jew that he lived
for himself, and sought to gratify the
purposes of a depraved nature, though
it might manifest itself in a way different from the heathen. The ‘will
of the mind” referred to here relates
to the wicked thoughts and purposes
of the unrenewed nature--the sins
which relate rather to the intellect
than to the gross passions. Such, for
instance, are the sins of pride, envy,
ambition, covetousness, &c.; and Paul
means to say, that before conversion
they lived to gratify these propensities, and to accomplish these desires
of the soul. § And were by nature.
dicu. By birth, or before we were
converted By conversion and adoption they became the children of God;
before that, they were all the children
of wrath. This is, I think, the fair
meaning of this important declaration.
It does not affirm whenthey began to be
such, or that they were such as soon as
they were born, or that they were such
before they became moral agents, or
that they became such in virtue of
their connection with Adam--whatever may be the truth on these points ;
but it affirms that before they were
renewed, they were the, children of
wrath. So far as thistextis concerned,
this might have been true at their
very birth; but it does not directly
and certainly prove that. It proves
that at no time before their convergion were they the children of God,
but that their whole condition before

CHAPTER Ir.
the children of wrath, even as
others,

that was one of exposure to wrath;
comp. Rom. ii. 14, 27; 1 Cor. xi. 14;
Gal. ii. 15. Some men are born Jews,
and some heathen; some free, and
some slaves; some white, and some
black ; some are born to poverty, and
some to wealth; some are the children of kings, and some of beggars ;
but, whatever their rank or condition,
they are born exposed to wrath, or in
a situation which would render them
liable to wrath. But why this is, the
apostle does not say. Whether for
their own sinsor forthe sins of another;
whether by a corrupted soul, or by imputed guilt ; whether they act as moral
agents as soon as born, or &t a certain period of childhood,. Paul does
not say.*

* Whatis theimport of the expression “chil.
dren of wrath”? It is allowed on all hands
that it intimates obnoxiousness to punishment,
that the persons to whom it isapplied are worthy of wrath and punishment, or, as our author
has it, are exposed or liable to wrath.

But whence comes this obnoxiousness or
liability to punishment? Is it because of personal transgression, because of the practice or
habit of sin, in which men indulge from the
time they become moralagents? Onaccount
of these things, indeed, the wrath of God cometh on the children of disobedience. But such
is not the cause assigned here. Men are obnoxious to punishment in another way than by
personal transgression, than by acts or habits of
sin. How? ®4r«, by birth, by original constitution, by nature, in consequence of somes
thing that is coeval with one’s very being.
That this is the true meaning has been triumphantly established. Several commentators, indeed, have attempted to prove, by citation from the classics, that ¢ucrs may be ex:
plained of confirmed habit or practice, which
issometimes styled asecond nature. In most,
however, if notin all the places cited by thei,
the idea of natural, in opposition to acquired,
distinctly enough appears. Bloomfield speaks
most emphatically on the point, ‘My own
experience,” says he, “of the classical writers
enables me toconfirm the remark of Mr. Scott,
that the word was never used of any other
customs than such as resulted from innate
propensities.”

It may be alleged, however, that the text,
properly speaking, does not assign a cause for
the liability or obnoxiensness to punishment.
4 But God, who is rich in mercy,

6.2. EE EE SS SS eS
It simply states the fact that men are born so

liable, that they come into the world in this
condition. But the inference is uot far to
seek, that if the punishment come not in consequence of personal sin, as from the nature
of the case it cannot, it must come in consequence of the sin of Adam imputed to us--
unless we allow, that such obnoxiousness to
punishment might arise without sin of any
kind, which is repugnant to all our views of
God's character. To say that this obnoxiousness arises from our innate depravity, or is its
“regular result,” assigns as a cause that which
is merely aconsequence. The depraved nature itself is penal, and a consequence of our
union with Adam.

The author maintains, that the text proves
no more than that men are “born exposed to
wrath, or in a situation which would render

them liable to wrath, and says nothing about '

the time when they began to be children of
wrath. It may be at birth, or farther on, for
any thing this text affirms.” Without doubt,
however, the natural and just interpretation
of the words teaches, that men are obnoxious
to wrath from the moment of their birth, or
as Calvin has it, in a note on the place, “in ipso utero maledicti essent.” And so the passage has been explained by the general consent of evangelical Christians. Nor can this
universal condition of the race be otherwise
accounted for, than by reference to our connection with the first Adam, as our head and
representative. Even on the modified view,
that men are born in a situation that, at one
time or other, ultimately brings them to be
children of wrath, how shall we account for
such situation ? Why should God place men
init? It is impossible to escape the conclusion
stated above. See the Supplementary Notes
on Rom. vy. 12, et seq., for a full discussion of
the question of imputation.

{ The children of wrath. Exposed
to wrath, or liable to wrath. They
did not. by nature inherit holiness :
they inherited that which would subject them to wrath. The meaning has
been well expressed by Doddridge,
who refers it ‘to the original apostasy and corruption, in consequence of
which men do, according to the course
of nature, fall early into personal
guilt, and so become obnoxious to the
divine displeasure.’”” Many modern
expositors have supposed that this
has no reference to any original tendency of our fallen nature to sin, or

for his great love wherewith he
loved us,

to native corruption, but that it refers
to the habit of sin, or to the fact of
their having been the slaves of appetite and passion. I admit that the
direct and immediate sense of the
passage is that they were, when without the gospel, and before they were
renewed, the children of wrath ; but
still the fair interpretation is, that
they were born to that state, and that
that condition was the regular result
of their native depravity ; and I do
not know a more strong or positive
declaration that can be made to show
that men are by nature destitute of
holiness, and exposed to perdition.
q Even as others. That is, “do not
suppose that you stand alone, or that
you are the worst of the species. You
are indeed, by nature, the children of
wrath ; but not youalone. All others
were the same. You have a common
inheritance with them. I donot mean
to charge you with being the worst of
sinners, or as being alone transgressors. It is the common lot of man--
the sad, gloomy inheritance to which
we allare born.’ The Greek is, of
Aorroi--*“‘the remainder, or the others,”
--including all; comp. Notes on Rom.
v. 19. This doctrine that men without the gospel are the children of
wrath, Paul had fully defended in
Rom. i., i1., iii. No truth. perhaps,
is more frequently stated in the Bible ;
none is more fearful and awful in its
character. What a declaration, that
we ‘“‘are by nature the children of
wrath !”” Who should not inquire what
it means? Who should not make an
effort to escape from the wrath to
come, and becomea child of glory and
an heir of life ?

4. But God, who is rich in mercy.
On the use of the word rich by Paul,
see Notesonch.i. 7. Itis a beautiful expression. ‘ God is rich in
mercy;’’ overflowing, abundant. Mercy
is the riches or the wealth of God.
Men are often rich in gold, and silver,
and diamonds, and they pride themselves in these possessions; but God
is rich in mercy. In that he abounds:
and he is so rich in it that he is wih-

5 Even 4 when we were dead in
sins, hath quickened us together
with Christ, (by! grace ® ye are
saved ;

@ Ro.5.6,8,10. 1 by whose.

ing to impart it to others; so rich
that he can make allblessed. ¥ For
his great love. That is, his great love
was the reason why he had compassion
upon us. It is not that we had any
claim or deserved his favour ; but it
is, that God had for man original and
eternal love, and that love led to the
gift of a-Saviour, and to the bestowment of salvation.

5. Even when we were dead in sins.
Notes, ver. 1; comp. Rom. v. 8. The
construction here is, “‘ God, who is
rich in mercy, on account of the great
love which he bare unto us, even being
dead in sin, hath quickened us,” &c.,
It does not mean that he quickened
us when we were dead in sin, but that
he loved us then, and made provision
for our salvation. It was love to the
children of wrath ; love to those who
had no love to return to, him ; love to
the alienated and the lost. That is
true love--the sincerest and the purest
beneyolence--love, not like that of
men, but such only as God bestows.
Man loves his friend, his benefactor,
his kindred--God loves his foes, and
seeks to do them good. {¥ Hath
quickened us. [lath made us alive ;
see ver.]. ( Yogether with Christ.
In connection with him ; or in yirtue
of his being raised up from the grave.
The meaning is, that there was such
a connection between Christ and
those whom the Father hath given to
him, that his resurrection from the
grave involved their resurrection to
spiritual life. It was like raising up
the head and the members--the whole
body together ; comp. Notes on Rom.
vi. 5. Everywhere in the New Testament, the close connection of the believer with Christ is affirmed. We are
crucified with him. We die with him.
We rise with him. We live with him.
We reign with him. We are joint heirs
with him. We share his sufferings on
earth (1 Pet. iv. 13), and we share his
glory with him on his throne; Rev. iii.
21. 1 By grace ye are saved. Marg.,

4]

6 And hath raised ¢ ws up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus ;

b Ro.3.24. ¢ Col.2.12.

by whose ; see Notes on Rom. iii. 42.

Paul’s mind was full of the subject of
salvation by grace, and he throws it
in here, even in an argument, as a
point which he would never have them
lose sight of. The subject before him
was one eminently adapted to bring
this truth to mind, and though, in the
train of his arguments, he had no time
now to dwell on it, yet he would not
suffer any opportunity to pass without
referring to it.

6. And hath raised us up together.
That is, we are raised from the death
of sin to the life of religion, in connection withthe resurrection of Jesus,
and in virtue of that. So close is the
connection between him and his people, that his resurrection made theirs
certain ; comp. Col. ii. 12; Notes,
Rom. vi. 5. § And made us sit together. ‘Together with him. That is,
we share hishonours. Soclose is our
connection with him, that we shall
partake of his glory, and in some measure do now; comp. Notes on Matt.
xix. 28, and Rom. vilil.17. | Jn heavenly places ; see Notes on ch. i. 3.
The meaning is, that he has gone to
the heavenly world as our Head and
Representative. His entrance there
is a pledge that we shall also enter
there. Even here we have the anticipation of glory, and are admitted to
exalted honours, as if we sat in heavenly places, in virtue of our connection with him. § Ju Christ Jesus.
It is in connection with him that we
are thus exalted, and thus filled with
joy and peace. The meaning of the
whole is, ‘‘ We are united to Christ.
We die with him, and live with him.
We share his sufferings, and we share
his joys. We become dead to the
world in virtue of his death; we become alive unto God in virtue of his
resurrection. On earth we are exalted
to honour, peace, and hope, in virtue
of his resurrection ; in heaven we shall
share his glory and partake of his
triumphs.”

----_repeated.
7 That in the ages to come he
might shew the exceeding riches of
his grace, in Ais kindness % toward

us through Christ Jesus.
@ Tit.3.4.

7. That in the ages to come. In all

future times. The sense is, that the
riches of divine grace, and the divine
benignity, would be shown in the conversion of Christians and their salvation, to all future times. Such was
his love to those who were lost, that it
would be an everlasting monument of
his mercy, a perpetual and unchanging
proof that he was good. The sense
is, we are raised up with Christ, and
are made to partake of his honour and
glory in order that others may forever
be impressed with a sense of the divine
goodness and mercy to us. § Tie
exceeding riches of his grace. The
abounding, overflowing riches of
grace ; comp. Notes,ch.i. 7. Thisis

"~----~Paul’s favourite expression--an ex-

pression so beautiful and so full of
meaning that it will bear often to be
We may learn from this
verse, (1.) That one object of the conversion and salvation of sinners, is to
furnish a proof of the mercy and
goodness of God. (2.) Another object is, that their conversion may be
_an encouragement to others. The
fact that such sinners as the Ephesians
had been, were pardoned and saved,
affords encouragement also to others
to come and lay hold on life. And
so of all other sinners who are saved.
Their conversion is a standing encouragement to all others to come in like
manner ; and now the history of the
church for more than eighteen hundred years furnishes all the encouragement which we could desire. (3.)
The conversion of great sinners is a
special proof of the divine benignity.
So Paul argues in the case before us;
and so he often argued from his own
case ; comp. Notes on 1 Tim. i. 16.
(4.) Heaven, the home of the redeemed, will exhibit the most impressive
proof of the goodness of God that the
universe furnishes. There will be a
countless host who were once polluted
and lost ; who were dead in sins ; who
were under the power of Satan, and

8 For by grace ® are ye saved
through faith ; ¢ and that not @ of
yourselves ; @¢ 2s the gift of God:
6 2 Ti.1.9. ¢ Ro.4.16. d Jolin 6.44,65.

who have been saved by the riches of
the divine grace--a host now happy
and pure, and free from sin, sorrow,
and death--the living and eternal
monuments of the grace of God.

8. For by grace are ye saved. Vy
mere favour. Itis not by your own
merit ; it is not because you have any
claim. This is a favourite doctrine
with Paul, as it is with all who love
the Lord Jesus in sincerity; comp.
Notes on Rom. i. 7; iii. 24. | Through
faith. Grace bestowed through faith,
or in connection with believing ; see
Notes on Rom.i. 17; iv.16. J And
that not of yourselves. That is, salvation does not proceed from yourselves. The word rendered that--
covro--is in the neuter gender, and
the word fatth--sirri;--is in the feminine. The word “that,” therefore,
does not refer particularly to faith, as
being the gift of God, but to the salvation by grace of which he had been
speaking. ‘I'his is the interpretation
of the passage which is the most obvious, and which is now generally conceded to be the true one ; see Bloomfield. Many critics, however, as Doddridge, Beza, Piscator, and Chrysostom, maintain that the word “ that”’
(redo) refers to “ fa th” (riers); and
Doddridge maintains that such a useis
common in the New Testament. Asa
matter of grammar this opinion is
certainly doubtful, if not untenable ;
but asa matter of theo'ogy it is a question of very little importance. Whether
this passage proves it or not, it is certainly true that faith is the gift of God.
It exists in the mind only when the
Hioly Ghost produces it there, and is,

| in common with every other Christian

excellence, to be traced to his ageucy
on the heart. This opinion, however,
does not militate at all with the doctrine that man himself believes, It
is not God that believes for him, for
that is-impossible. It is his own
mind that actually believes, or that
exercises faith; see Notes on Rom.

9 Not of works, lest any man
should boast.
10 For we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good
@ch. 1. 4.

iv. 3. In the same manner repentance

is to be traced to God. It is one of
the fruits of the operation of the
IYoly Spirit on the soul. But the
Holy Ghost does not repent for us. It
is our own mind that repents; our
own heart that feels; our own eyes
that weep--and without this there can
be no true repentance. No one can
repent for another; and God neither
can uor ought to repent for us. Ife
has done no wrong, and if repentance
is ever exercised, therefore, it must be
exercised by our own minds. So of
faith. God cannot believe for us.
We must believe, or we shall be
damned. Still this does not conflict
at all with the opinion, that if we exercise faith, the inclination to do it is
to be traced to the agency of God on
the heart. JI would not- contend,
therefore, about the grammatical construction of this passage, with respect
to the point of the theclogy contained
in it; still it accords better with the
obvious grammatical construction, and
with the design of the passage to understand the word “that” as referring
not to faith only, but to salvation by
grace. So Calvin understands it, and
so it is understood by Storr, Locke,
Clarke, Koppe, Grotius, and others.
q Jt is the gift of God. Salvation by
grace is his gift. It is not of merit;
it is wholly by favour.

9. Not of works; see Notes on
Rom. iii. 20, 27.

10. For we are his workmanship.
We are his making--avinuc. Thatis,
we are created or formed by him, not
only in the general sense in which all
things are made by him, but in that
peculiar sense which is denoted by
the new creation; see Notes on 2
Cor. v. 17. Whatever of peace, or
hope, or purity we have, has been produced by his agency on the soul.
There cannot be conceived to be a
stronger expression to denete the
agency of God in the conversion of
mien, or the fact that salvation is

works, which @ God hath before
! ordained that we should walk in
them.
11 Wherefore remember, that ye
1 or, prepared.

wholly of grace. 4] Created in Christ
Jesus. On the word created, see
Notes on 2 Cor, v.17. | Unto good
works. With reference to a holy life;
or, the design for which we have been
created in Christ is, that we should
lead a holy life. ‘Che primary object
was not to bring us to heaven. It
was that we should be holy. Paul
held perhaps more firmly than any
other man, to the position that men
are saved by the mere grace of God,
and by a divine agency on the soul;
but it is certain that no man ever held
more firmly that men must lead holy
lives, or they could have no evidence
that they were the children of God.
¥ Which God hath before ordained.
Marg., preparcd. The word here
used means to prepare beforehand,
then to predestinate, or appoint before. The proper meaning of this
passage is, ‘‘ to which (sis) good works
God has predestinated us, or appointed
us beforehand, that we should walk in
them.’’ The word here used --
roorrnaecw--occurs in the New Testament nowhere else except in Rom.
ix. 23, where it is rendered ‘had
afore prepared.” It involves the idea
of a previous determination, or an
arrangement beforehand for securing
a certain result. The previous preparation here referred to was, the
divine intention; and the meaning is,
that God had predetermined that we
should lead holy lives. It accords,
thercfore, with the declaration in ch.
i. 4, that he had chosen his people
before the foundation of the world
that they should be holy; sce Notes
onthat verse. § Thatwe shoud walk
in them. That we should live holy
lives. The word walk is often used
in the Scriptures to denote the course
of life; Notes on Rom. vi. 4.

11. Wherefore remember. The design of this evidently is, to excite a
sense of gratitude in their bosoms for
that mercy which had called them from
the errors and sins of their former
being in time past Gentiles in the
flesh, who are called Uncircumci-

sion by that which is called the

lives, to the privileges of Christians.
It is a good thing for Christians to
“remember” what they were. No
faculty of the mind can be better employed to produce humility, penitence,
gratitude, and love, than the memory.
It is well to recall the recollection of
our former sins; to dwell upon our
hardness of heart, our alienation, and
our unbelief; and to remember our
wanderings and our guilt, until the
heart be affected, and we are made to
feel. The converted Ephesians had
much guilt to recollect and to mourn
over in their former life ; and so have
all who are converted to the Christian faith. § That ye being in time
past. Formerly--(sor:.) § Gentiles
in the flesh. Youwere Gentiles in the
flesh, 7. e. under the dominion of the
flesh, subject to the control of carnal
appetites and pleasures. § Who are
called Uncircumcision. That is, who
are called ‘‘the uncircumcised.” This
was a term similar to that which we
use when we speak of ‘the unbaptized.” It meant that they were
without the pale of the people of God;
that they enjoyed none of the ordinances and privileges of the true religion; and was commonly a term of
reproach; comp. Judges xiv. 3; xv.
18; 1 Sam. xiv. 6; xvii. 26; xxxi. 4;
Ezek. xxxi. 18. § By that which is
called the Circumcision. By those
who are circumcised, 7. ¢. by the
Jews. {J In the flesh made by hands.
In contradistinction from the circumcision of the heart; see Notes on
Rom. ii. 28,29. ‘They had externally
adopted the rites of the true religion,
though it did not follow that they had
the circumcision of the heart, or that
they were the true children of God.
12. Ye were without Christ. You
were without the knowledge of the
Messiah. You had not heard of him;
of course you had not embraced him.
You were living without any of the
hopes and consolations which you now
have, from having embraced him. The
object of the apostle is to remind them
of the deplorable coudition in which

Circumcision in the flesh made by
hands;
12 That at that time ye were

they were by nature; and nothing
would better express it than to say
they were ‘“ without Christ,” or that
they had no knowledge of a Saviour.
They knew of no atonement for sin.
They had no assurance of pardon.
They had no well-founded hope of
eternal life. They were in a state of
darkness and condemnation, from
which nothing but a knowledge of
Christ could deliver them. All
Christians may in like manner be reminded of the fact that, before their
conversion, they were ‘‘ without
Christ.” Though they had heard of
him, and were constantly under the
instruction which reminded them of
him, yet they were without any true
knowledge of him, and without any of
the hopes which result from having
ernbraced him. Many were infidels.
Many were scoffers. Many were profane, sensual, corrupt. Many rejected
Christ with scorn; many, by simple
neglect. All were without any true
knowledge of him; all were destitute
of the peace and hope which result

-from a saving acquaintance with him.

We may add, that there is no more
affecting description of the state of
man by nature than to say, he is without a Saviour. Sad would be the
condition of the world without a Redeemer--sa 7s the state of that portion of mankind who reject him.
Reader, are you without Christ?
{| Being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel. This is the second
characteristic of their state before
their conversion to Christianity. This
means more than that they were not
Jews. It means that they were strangers to that polity--soaireia--or arrangement by which the worship of
the true God had been kept up in the
world, and of course were strangers
to the true religion The arrangements for the public worship of JenovAH were made among the Jews.
They had his law, his temple, his
Sabbaths, and the ordinances of his
religion; see Notes on Rom. iii. 2.
To all these the heathens had been

without Christ, being aliens from
the commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the covenants of

strangers, and of course they were deprived of all the privileges which resulted from having the true religion.
The word here rendered commonwealth--soasreia--means properly citizenship, or the right of citizenship,
and then a community, or state. It
means here that arrangement or organization by which the worship of
the true God was maintained. The
word aliens -- arnrroteimmive: -- here
means merely that they were strangers to. It does not denote, of necessity, that they were hostile to it; but
that they were ignorant of it, and
were, therefore, deprived of the benefits which they might have derived
from it, if they had been acquainted
with it. And strangers. This
word--£ive;--means properly a guest,
or a stranger, who is hospitably entertained ; then a foreigner, or one
from a distant country; and here
means that they did not belong to the
community whére the covenants of
promise were enjoyed; that is, they
were strangers to the privileges of the
people of God. (| The covenants of
promise; see Notes on Rom. ix. 4.
The covenants of promise were those
various arrangements which God
made with his people, by which he
promised them future blessings, and
especially by which he promised that
the Messiah should come. To be in
possession of them was regarded as a
high honour and privilege; and Paul
refers to it here to show that, though
the Ephesians had been by nature
without these, yet they had now been
brought to enjoy all the benefits of
them. On the word covenant, see
Notes on Gal. iii. 15. It may be remarked, that Walton (Polyglott) and
Rosenmiiller unite the word “promise”
here with the word “ hope’’--having
no hope of the promise. But the more
obvious and usual interpretation is
that in our common version, meaning
that they were not by nature favoured
with the covenants made with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, &., by which
there was a promise of future bless-

promise, ® having no hope, and
without God in the world:
a 1 Thes.4.13.

ings under the Messiah. § Having
no hope. The apostle does not mean
to affirm that they did not cherish any
hope, for this is scarcely true of any
man ; but that they were without any
proper ground of hope. It is true of
perhaps nearly all men that they cherish some hope of future happiness.
But the ground on which they do this
is not well understood by themselves,
nor do they in general regard it asa
matter worth particular inquiry. Some
rely on morality; some on forms of
religion ; some on the doctrine of universal salvation ; all who are impenitent believe that they do not deseruc
eternal death, and expect to be saved
by justice. Such hopes, however,
must be unfounded. No hope of life
in a future world can be founded ona
proper basis which does not rest on
some promise of God, or some assurance that he will save us; and these
hopes, therefore, which men take up
they know not why, are delusive and
vain. § And without God in the
world. Gr. &3¢--atheists ; that is,
those who had no knowledge of the
true God. ‘This is the last specification of their miserable condition before they were converted ; and it is
an appropriate crowning of the climax.
What an expression! ‘To be without
God--without God in his own world,
and where he is all around us! To
have no evidence of his favour, no assurance of his love, no hope of dwelling with him! ‘The meaning, as applied to the heathen Ephesians, was,
that they had no knowledge of the
true God. ‘This was true of the heathen, and in an important sense also
it is true of all impenitent sinners, and
was once true of all who are now
Christians. They had no God. They
did not worship him, or love him, or
serve him, or seek his favours, or act
with reference to him and his glory.
Nothing can be a more appropriate
and striking description of a sinner
now than to say that he is ‘‘ without
God in the world.” He lives, and
feels, and acts, as if there were no
18 But now, in Christ Jesus, ye
who sometimes were far off, are
made nigh by the blood @ of
Christ.

a He.9.12.

God.
secret, nor in his family, nor in public. Ile acts with no reference to his
will.
promises, and fears not when he
threatens ; and were it announced to
him that there is no God, it would
produce no change in his plan of life,
or in his emotions. The announcement that the emperor of China, or
the king of Siam, or the sultan of
Constantinople, was dead, would produce some emotion, and might change
some of his commercial arrangements;
but the announcement that there is
no God would interfere with none of
his plans, and demand no change of
life. And, if so, what is man in this
beautiful world without a God? A
traveller to eternity without a God!
Standing over the grave without a
God! An immortal being without a
God! A man--fallen, sunk, ruined,
with no God to praise, to love, to confide in; with no altar, no sacrifice, no
worship, no hope; with no Iather in
trial, no counsellor in perplexity, no
support in death! Such is the state
of man by nature. Such are the
effects of sin.

13. But now, in Christ Jesus. By
the coming and atonement of the
Lord Jesus, and by the gospel which
he preached. § Ye who sometimes
were afar of. Who were formerly--
wort. Tindal translates it, a whyle
agoo. The phrase afar off--waxoaw--

means that they were formerly far off

from God and his people. ‘The expression is derived from the custom of
speaking among the Ilebrews. God
was supposed to reside in the temple.
Jt was a privilege to be near the temple. Those who were remote from
Jerusalein and the temple were regarded as far off from God, and hence
as peculiarly irreligious and wicked;
see Notes on Isa. lvii. 19. | Are
made nigh. Are admitted to the favour of God, and permitted to approach
him as his worshippers. § By the

IJe neither worships him in

He puts no confidence in his,

14 For he ® is our peace, who
hath made both ¢ one, and hath
broken down the middle wali of
partition between ws;

b Mi.5.5. e John 10.16; Ga.3.28.

blood of Christ. The Jews came
near to the mercy-seat on which the
symbol of the divine presence rested
(Notes on Rom. iii. 25), by the blood
that was offered in sacrifice ; that is,
the Iligh Priest approached that
mercy-seat with blood and sprinkled
it before God. Now we are permitted to approach him with the blood of
the atonement. The shedding of that
blood has prepared the way by which
Gentiles as well as Jews may approach
God, and it is by that offering that we
are led to seek God.

14. For he ts our peace. There is
evident allusion here to Isa. lvii. 19.
See Notes on that verse. ‘The peace
here referred to is that by which a
union in worship and in feeling has
been produced between the Jews and
the Gentiles. Formerly they were
alienated and separate. ‘They had
different objects of worship ; different
religious rites; different views and
feclings. The Jews regarded the
Gentiles with hatred, and the Gentiles
the Jews with scorn. Now, says the
apostle, they are at peace. They
worship the same God. They have
the same Saviour. They depend on
the same atonement. They have the
same hope. ‘They look forward tothe
same heaven. ‘They belong to the
same redeemed family. Reconciliation has not only taken place with
God, but with each other. The best
way to produce peace between alienated minds is to bring them to the
same Saviour. That will do more to
silence contentions, and to heal alienations, than any or all other means.
Bring men around the same cross;
fill them with love to the same Redeemer, and give them the same hope
of heaven, and you put a period to
alienation and strife. ‘The love of
Christ is so absorbing, and the dependence in his blood so entire, that
they will lay aside these alienations,
and cease their contentions. ‘The
work of the atonement is thusdesigned

15 Having abolished ¢ in his

flesh the enmity, even the law of

commandments contained in ordia Col.2.14.

not only to produce peace with God,

but peace between alienated and contending minds. The feeling that we
are redeemed by the same blood, and
that we have the same Saviour, will
uuite the rich and the poor, the bond
and the free, the high and the low,
in the ties of brotherhood, and make
them feel that they are one. This
great work of the atonement is thus
designed to produce peace in alienated minds every where, and to diffuse abroad the feeling of universal
brotherhood. J /Vho hath made both
one. Both Gentiles and Jews. He
has united them in one society.
{| Having broken down the middle
wall. ‘There is an allusion here undoubtedly to the wall of partition in
the temple by which the court of the
Gentiles was separated from that of
the Jews; see Notes and the plan of
the temple, in Matt. xxi. 12. The
idea here is, that that was now broken
down, and that the Gentiles had the
same access to the temple as the
Jews. ‘The sense is, that in virtue of
the sacrifice of the Redeemer they
were admitted to the same privileges
and hopes.

15. Having abolished. Waving
brought to naught, or put an end to
it--xaracyioas. YF In his flesh. By
the sacrifice of his body on the cross.
lt was not by instruction merely ; it
was not by communicating the knowledge of God; it was not as a teacher; it was not by the mere exertion
of ‘power; it was by his flesh--his
human nature--and this can mean
only that he did it by his sacrifice
of himself. It is such language as
is appropriate to the doctrine of the
atonement--not indeed teaching it
directly--but still such as one would
use who believed that doctrine, and
such as no other one would employ.
Who would now say of a moral teacher that he accomplished an important
result by his flesh ? Who would say
of a man that was instrumental in
reconciling his contending neighbours,

CHAPTER If.
nances; for to make in himself
of twain one new man, so making
peace ;

that he did it by his flesh? Who
would say of Dr. Priestley that he
established Unitarianism in his flesh ?
No man would have ever used this
language who did not believe that
Jesus died as a sacrifice for sin.
4 The enmity. Between the Jew
and the Gentile. ‘Tindal renders
this, ‘‘the cause of hatred, that is to
say, the law of commandments contained in the law written.’’ This is
expressive of the true sense. The
idea is, that the ceremonial law of the
Jews, on which they so much prided
themselves, was the cause of the hostility existing between them. ‘That
made them different people, and laid
the foundation for the alienation which
existed between them. They had different laws; different institutions; a
different religion. The Jews looked
upon themselves as the favourites of
Heaven, and asin possession of the
knowledge of the only way of salvation ; the Gentiles regarded their laws
with contempt, and looked upon the
peculiar institutions with scorn.
When Christ came and abolished by
his death their peculiar ceremonial
laws, of course the cause of this
alienation ceased. J Even the law
of commandments. The law of positive commandments. This docs not
refer to the moral law, which was
not the cause of the alienation, and
which was not abolished by the death
of Christ, but to the laws commanding sacrifices, festivals, fasts, dc.,
which constituted the peculiarity of
the Jewish system. These were the
occasion of the enmity between the
Jews and the Gentiles, and these
were abolished by the great sacrifice
which the Redeemer made; and of
course when that was made, the purpose for which these laws were instituted was accomplished, and they
ceased to be of value and to be binding. § Contained in ordinances. In
the Mosaic commandments. The
word ordinance means, decree, edict,
law; Luke ii. 1; Acts xvi. 4; xvil.
16 And that he might reconcile¢ both unto God in one body
by the cross, having slain the enmity ! thereby ;

17 And came and preached peace

a Col.1.20--22. 1 or, in himself.
7; Col. ii. 14. § For to make in
himself. By virtue of his death, or

under him as the head. J Of twain
one new man. Of the two--Jews
and Gentiles --one new spiritual person; that they might be united. The
idea is, that as two persons who had
been at enmity, might become reconciled and be one in aim and pursuit,

|to you? which were afar off, and
to them that were nigh.

18 For through¢ him we both
have access by one Spirit unto te

Father.

b Ac.2.39. ¢ John)4.6; 1 Pe.3..8.

17. And came and preached peace.
That is, the system of religion which
he proclaimed, was adapted to produce peace with God. This he
preached personally to those who
“were nigh,” that is, the Jews; to
those who were “‘ afar off ’’--the Gentiles--he preached it by his apostles.
He was the author of the system

so it was in the effect of the work of; which proclaimed salvation to both.

Christ on the Jews and Gentiles.
When they were converted they would
be united and harmonious.

16. And that he might reconcile
both unto God. This was another
of the effects of the work of redemption, and indeed the main effect. It
was not merely to make them harmonious, but it was that both, who
had been alienated from God, should
be reconciled to him. This was a
different effect from that of producing peace between themselves,
though in some sense the one grew
out of the other. They who are reconciled to God will be at peace
with each other. They will feel
that they are of the same family,
and are all brethren. On the subject of reconciliation, see Notes on
2 Cor. v. 18. § In one body. One
spiritual personage --the church;
see Notes on chap. i. 23. (| By the
cross. By the atonement which he
made on the cross; see Col. i. 20;
comp. Notes on Rom. iii. 25. It is
by the atonement only that men
ever become reconciled to God.
{ Having slain the enmity. Not
only the enmity between Jews and
Gentiles, but the enmity between
the sinner and God. He has by that
death removed all the obstacles to
reconciliation on the part of God
and on the part of man. It is made
efficacious in removing the enmity
of the sinner against God, and producing peace. {| Thereby. Marg.,
in himself. The meaning is, in his
cross, or by means of his cross.

| The word peace here refers to re-
; conciliation with God. ¥ To you
which were afar of, &c.; see Notes on
ver. 13; comp. Notes on Acts ii. 39.

18. For through him. That is,
he has secured this result that we
have access to God. This he did by
his death -- reconciling us to God,
by the doctrines which he taught --
acquainting us with God; and by
his intercession in heaven--by which
our ‘‘ prayers gain acceptance ”’ with
him. YJ We both have access. Both
Jews and Gentiles; see Notes on
Rom. v. 2. We are permitted to
approach God through him, or in his
name. The Greek word here --
rporayuwyr--relates properly to the
introduction to, or audience which we
are permitted to have with a prince
or other person of high rank. This
must be effected through an officer
of court to whom the duty is intrusted. Rosenmiiller, Alt und neu
Morgenland, in loc. ¢ By one Spirit
By the aid of the same Spirit--the
Holy Ghost ; see Notes, 1 Cor. xij
4. 4 Unto the Father. We are
permitted to come and address God
as our Father; see Notes on Rom.
viii. 15, 26.

19. Now therefore ye are no more
strangers and foreigners. You are
reckoned with the people of God.
You are entitled to their privileges,
and are not to be regarded as outcasts and aliens. The meaning is,
that they belonged to the same community--the same family--as the
people of God. The .word rendered

19 Now therefore ye are no more
stranger's and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of

the household® of God;
a He.12.: 2.23. bchap.3.15. ¢ 1 Co.3.9.10.

strangers--%:vo--means foreigners in
a state, as opposed to citizens. The
word rendered foreigners--sag sxo1---
means guests ina private family, as
opposed to the members of the family.
Rosenmiiller. Strangers and such as
proposed to reside for a short time in
Athens, were permitted to reside in
the city, and to pursue their business
undisturbed, but they could perform
no public duty ; they had no voice in
the public deliberations, and they had
no part in the management of the
state. They could only look on as
spectators, without mingling in the
scenes of state, or interfering in any
way in the affairs of the government.
They were bound humbly to submit
to all the enactments of the citizens,
and observe all the laws and usages
of the republic. It was not even allowed them to transact any business
in their own name, but they were
bound to choose from among the citizens one to whose care they committed themselves as a patron, and whose
duty it was to guard them against all
injustice and wrong. Potter’s Gr.
Ant. i. 55. Proselytes, who united
themselves to the Jews, were also
called in the Jewish writings, strangers. All foreigners were regarded
as ‘strangers,’ and Jews only were
supposed to have near access to God.
But now, says the apostle, this distinction is taken away, and the believing heathen, as well as the Jew, has
the right of citizenship in the New
Jerusalem, and one, as well as another, is a member of the family of
God. Burder, Ros. Alt. u.neu. Morgenland, in loc. The meaning here
is, that they had not come to sujourn
merely as guests or foreigners, but
were a part of the family itself, and
entitled to all the privileges and hopes
which others had. § Sut fe/low-citizens with the saints. Belonging to
the same community with the people
of God. § And of the household of
God. Of thesame family. Entitled to

20 And are built* upon dthe
foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being

the chief¢ corner-stone ;
d Mat.16.18; Re.21.14. ¢ Is.28.16.

the same privileges, and regarded by
him as his children ; see chap. iii. 16.

20. And are built upon the foundation. The comparison of the church
with a building, is common in the
Scriptures ; comp. Notes on 1 Cor.
ii. 9,10. The comparison was probably taken from the temple, and as
that was an edifice of great beauty,
expense, and sacredness, it was natural to compare the church with it.
Besides, the temple was the sacred
place where God dwelt on the earth ;
and as the church was the place where
he delighted now to abide, it became
natural to speak of his church as the
temple, or the residence of God ; see
Notes on Isa. liv. 11,12. That building, says Paul, was permanently
founded, and was rising with great
beauty of proportion, and with great
majesty and splendour. { Of the
apostles. The doctrines which they
taught are the basis on which the
church rests. Itis possible that Paul
referred here to a splendid edifice, particularly because the Ephesians were
distinguished for their skill in architecture, and because the celebrated temple of Diana wasamong them. An allusion to a building, however, as an illustration of the church, occurs several times in his other epistles, and was
an allusion which would be everywhere understood. § And prophets.
The prophets of the Old Testament,
using the word, probably, to denote
the Old Testament in general. That
is, the doctrines of divine revelation,
whether communicated by prophets
or apostles, were laid at the fuundation of the Christian church. It was
not tounded on plrilosophy, or tradition, or on human laws, or on a venerable antiquity, buton the great truths
which God had revealed. Paul does
not say that it was founded on Peter,
as the Papists do, but on the prophets
and apostlesin general. If Peter had
been the ‘‘ vicegerent of Christ,” and
the head of the church, it 13 incredi21 In whom all the building, fitly framed together, groweth unto
an holy@ temple in the Lord :

@ 1 Co.3.17; 2 Co.6.16.

ble that his brother Paul should not

have given him some honourable notice in this place. Why did he not
allude to so important a fact ? Would
one who believed it have omitted it ¢
Would a Papist now omit it? Learn
here, (1.) That no reliance is to be
placed on philosophy as a basis of religious doctrine. (2.) That the traditions. of men have no authority in
the church, and constitute no part of
the foundation. (3.) That nothing
is to be regarded as a fundamental
part of the Christian system, or as
binding on the conscience, which
cannot be found in the “‘ prophets and
apostles;’’ that is, as it means here,
in the Holy Scriptures. No decrees
of councils ; no ordinances of synods ;
no “standard ” of doctrines; no creed
or confession, is to be urged as authority in forming the opinions of men.
hey may be valuable for some purposes, but not for this; they may be
referred to as interesting parts of history, but not to form the faith of
Christians; they may be used in the
church to expres its belief, but not
to form it. What is based on the authority of apostles and prophets is
true, and always true, and only true ;
what may be found elsewhere, may be
valuable and true, or not, but, at any
rate, is not to be used to control the
faith of men. § Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone ; see
Notes on Isa. xxviii. 16; Rom. ix.
33. The corner-stone is the most
important in the building. (1.) Because the edifice rests mainly on the
corner-stones. If they are small, and
unstable, and settle down, the whole
building is insecure ; and hence care
is taken to place a large stone firmly
at each corner ofan edifice. (2.) Because it occupies a conspicuous and
honourable place. If documents or
valuable articles are deposited ‘at the
foundation of a building it is within the corner-stone. ‘The Lord Jesus is called the ‘ corner-stone,”’ uecause the whole edifice rests on him,

22 In whom ye also are © builded
together for an habitation of God
through the Spirit.

b 1 Pe.2.4,5.

or he occupies a place relatively as
important as the corner-stone of an
edifice. Were it not for him, the edifice could not be sustained for a moment. Neither prophets nor apostles
alone could sustain it ; see Notes on
1 Cork init" comp. 1) Pet: 11.6.

21. In whom. That is, by whom,
or upon whom. It was in connection
with him, or by being reared on him
asa foundation. {J All the building.
The whole church of Christ. Fitly
framed together. ‘The word here used
means to joint together, as a carpenter
does the frame-work of a building.
The materials are accurately and
carefully united by mortises and tenons. so that the building shall be
firm. Different materials may be
used, and different kinds of timber
may be employed, but one part shall
be worked into another, so as to constitute a durable and beautiful edifice.
Soin the church. The different materials of the Jews and Gentiles; the
people of various nations, though heretofore separated and discordant, become now united, and form an harmonious society. They believe the same
doctrines ; worship the same God;
practise the same holiness ; and look
forward to the same heaven. J Groweth unto an holy temple in the Cord;
see Notes on1 Cor. iii.17; 2 Cor.vi. 16.

22. In whom. In Christ, or on
Christ, as the solid and precious foundation. {| Ye also are builded together. You are built into that, or constitute a part of it. You are not
merely added to it, but you constitute a part of the building. § For
an habitation of God. For the indwelling, or the dwelling-place, of
God. Formerly he dwelt in the temple. Now he dwells in the church,
and in the hearts of his people ; see
Notes on 2 Cor. vi. 16.

1, We were by nature dead in sin;
ver. 1, We had no spiritual life.
We were insensible to the calls of
God, to the beauty of religion, to the

claims of the Creator. We were like
corpses in the tomb in reference to
the gay and busy and happy world
around them.--There we should have
remained, had not the grace of God
given us life, just as the dead will
remain in their graves for ever, unless
God shall raise them up. Tow humble should we be at the remembrance
of this fact! how grateful that God
has not left us to sleep that sleep of
death for ever !

2. Parents should feel deep solicitude for their children ; yer. 3. They,
in common with all others, are “ children of wrath.” They have a nature
prone to evil; and that nature will
develope itself in evil for ever, unless
itis changed--just as the young thornbush will be a thorn-bush, and will
put forth thorns and not roses ; and
the Bohon Upas will be a Bohon
Upas, and not an olive or an orange ;
and as the lion will be a lion, and the
panther a panther, and not a lamb, a
kid, or a gazelle. They will act out
their nature, unless they are changed ;
and they will not be changed, but by
the grace of God. I do not mean
that their nature is in every sense
like that of the lion or the asp; but
I mean that they will be as certainly
wicked, if unrenewed, as the lion will
be ferocious, and the asp poisonous.
And if so, what deep anxiety should
parents feel for the salvation of their
children! How solicitous should
‘they be that, by the grace of God, the
evil propensities of their nature may
be eradicated, and that they become
the adopted children of God!

3. The salvation of sinners involves
all the exercise of power that is put
forth in the resurrection of the dead;
ver. 5. It is not a work to be perfurmed by man; it is not a-work of
angelic might. None can impart spiritual life to the soul but he who gave
it life at first. On that great Source
of life we are dependent for our resurrection from spiritual death; and to
God we must look for the grace by
which we are to live.--It is true that
though we are by nature ‘dead in
sins,’ we are not in all respects like
the dead. Let not this doctrine be
abused to make us secure in sin, or

to prevent effort. The dead in the
grave are dead in all respects. We
by nature are dead only in sin. We
are active in other things ; and indeed
the powers of man are not less active
than they would be if he were holy.
But it is a tremendous activity for
evil, and for evil only. The dead in
their graves hear nothing, see nothing,
and feel nothing. Sinners hear, and
see, and feel ; but they hear not God,
and they see not his glory, any more
than if they were dead. ‘To the dead
in the grave, no command could with
propriety be addressed ; on them, no
entreaty could be urged to rise to life.
But the sinner may be commanded
and entreated; for he has power,
though it is misdirected ; and what is
needful is, that he should put forth
his powerin a proper manner. While,
therefore, we admit, with deep humiliation, that we, our children, and
friends, are by nature dead in sin, let
us not abuse this doctrine as though
we could be required to do nothing.
It is with us wilful death. It is death
because we do not choose to live. It
is a voluntary closing our eyes, and
stopping our ears, as if we were dead ;
and it is a voluntary remaining in this
state, when we have all the requisite
power to put forth the energies of
life. Tet a sinner be as active in the
service of God as he is in the service
of the deviland the world, and he would
be an eminent Christian. Indeed, all
that is required is, that the misdirected
and abused energy of this world should
be employed in the service of the Creator. Then all would be well.

[See Supplementary Notes, Rom. viii. 7, Gal.
v.17. Whenever it is said the sinner has
power, the kind of power should be defined,
Certainly he has not moral power. This, indeed, the author allows, but for want of distinct definition of what he understands by
** power,” both here and elsewhere, the reader is apt to misapprehend him.]

4. Let us remember our former
course of life; ver. 11, 12. Nothing
is more profitable for a Christian than
to sit down and reflect on his former
life--on his childhood, with its numerous follies and vanities ; on his youth,
with its errors, and passions, and sins :
and on the ingratitude and faults of
‘riper years. Jlad God left us in that
state, what would be now our condition? Had he cut us off, where had
been our abode? Should he now
treat us as we deserve, what would
be our doom? When the Christian
is in danger of becoming proud and
self-confident, let him REMEMBER what
he was. Let him take some period
of his life--some year, some month,
or even some one day---and think it
all over, and he will find enough to
humble him. These are the uses
which should be made of the past.
(1.) It should make us humble. Ifa
man had before his mind a vivid sense
of all the past in his own life, he would
never be lifted up with pride. (2.)
It should make us grateful. God cut
off the companions of my childhood --
why did he spareme? He cut down
many of the associates »f my youth in
their sins--why did he preserve me?
He has suffered many to live on in
their sins, and they are in the “ broad
road”--why am I not with them, treading the path to death and hell? (3.)
The recollection of the past should
lead us to devote ourselves to God.
Professing Christian, “ remember”
how much of thy life is gone to waste.
Remember thy days of folly and vanity. Remember the injury thou hast
done by an evil example. Remember
low many have been corrupted by
thy conversation ; perverted by thy
Opinions ; led into sin by thy example; perhaps ruined in body and soul
for ever by the errors and follies of
thy past life. And then REMEMBER
how much thou dost owe to God, and
how solemnly thou art bound to endeavour to repair the evils of thy life,
and to save at least as many as thou
hast ruined.

5. Sinners are by nature without
any well-founded hope of salvation ;
ver. 12. They are living without
Christ, having no belief in him, and
no hope of salvation through him.
They are “ aliens’’ from all the privileges of the friends of God. They
have no “hope.” They have no wellfounded expectation of happiness beyond the grave. They have a dim
and shadowy expectation that poss?-
bly they may be happy; but it is
founded on no evidence of the divine

fA. D. 64.

favour, and no promise of God. They
could not tell on what it is founded,
if they were asked ; and what is such
a hope worth? These false and delusive hopes do not sustain the soul
in trial; they flee away in death.
And what a description is this! In
a world like this, to be without hope!
Subject to trial ; exposed to death ;
and yet destitute of any well-founded
prospect of happiness beyond the
tomb! They are ‘without God”
also. They worship no God; they
confide in none. They have no altar
in their families ; no place of secret
prayer. They form their plans with
no reference to the will of God; they
desire not to please him. There
are multitudes who are living just as
if there were no God. Their plans,
their lives, their conversation, would
not be different if they had the assurance that there was no God. All
that they have ever asked of God, or
that they would now ask of him, is,
that he would let them alone. There
are multitudes whose plans would be
in no respect different, if it were announced to them that there was no
Godin heaven. The only effect might
be to produce a more hearty merriment, and a deeper plunge into sin.
What aworld! How strange that ir
God’s own world it should thus be!
How sad the view of a world of atheists
--a race that is endeavouring to feel
that the universe is without a Father
and a God! How wicked the plans
which can be accomplished only by
labouring to forget that there is a
God; and how melancholy that state
of the soul in which happiness can
be found only in proportion as it believes that the universe is without a
Creator, and moves on without the
superintending care of a God !

6. The gospel produces peace;
ver. 14--17. (1.) It produces peace
in the heart of the individual, reconciling himto God. (2.) It produces
peace and harmony between different
ranks and classes and complexions of
men, causing them to love each other,
and remeving their alienations and antipathies, The best way of producing
friendship between nations and tribes
of men; between those of different

complexions, pursuits, and laws, is, to
preach to them the gospel. The best
way to produce harmony between the
oppressor and the oppressed, is to
preach to both of them the gospel of
peace, and make them feel that they
have a common Saviour. (3.) It is
fitted to produce peace among the nations. Let it spread, and wars will
cease ; right and justice will universally prevail, and harmony and concord will spread over the world ; see
Notes on Isa. ii. 4.

7. Let us rejoice in the privileges
which we now have as Christians.
We have access to the Father ; ver.
18. None are so poor, so ignorant, so
down-trodden that they may not come
to God. In all times of affliction,
poverty, and oppression, we may approach the father of mercies. Chains
may bind the body, but no chain can
fetter the soul in its intercourse with
God. We may be thrown into a dungeon, but communion with God may
be maintained there. We may be
cast out and despised by men, but we
may come at once unto God, and he
will not cast usaway. Further. We
are not now strangers and foreigners. We belong to the family of God.
We are fellow-citizens with the saints;
ver. 19. Weare participants of the
hope of the redeemed, and we share
their honours and their joys. It is
right that true Christians should rejoice, and their joyis of such a character that no man can take it from them.

8. Let us make our appeal on all
doctrines and duties to the Bible--
to the prophets and the apostles ;
ver. 20. On them and their doctrine we can build. On them the
church is reared. It is not on the
opinion of philosophers and lawgivers; not on creeds, symbols, traditions, and the decisions of councils ;
it jis on the authority of the inspired
book of God. The church is in its
most healthy state when it appeals
for its doctrines most directly to the
Bible. Individual Christians grow
most in grace wnen they appeal
most to this “book of books.” The
church is in great danger of error
when it goes off from this pure
‘standard’? and wakes its appeal to

other standards--to creeds and symbols of doctrine. ‘“ The Bible is the
religion of Protestants ;” and the
church will be kept pure from error,
and will advance in holiness, just as
this is made the great principle
which shall always govern and control it. Ifa doctrine is not found
in the “apostles and prophets’’--in
some part of the Bible, it is not to
be imposed on the conscience. It
may, or may not be true; it may, or
may not be fitted to edify a people;
but itis not to be an article of faith, or
imposed on the consciences of men.

9. Let us evince always special
regard for the Lord Jesus; ver. 20.
Ile is the precious corner-stone on
which the whole spiritual temple is
reared. On him the church rests.
How important, then, that the church
should have correct views of the Redeemer! How important that the
true doctrine respecting his divine
nature ; his atonement ; his incarnation; his resurrection, should be maintained. It is not a matter of inditference whether he be God or man;
whether he died as an atoning sacrifice or as a martyr; whether he be
the equal of God, or whether he be
an archangel. Every thing depends
on the view which is held of that Redeemer--and as men entertain different opinions about him, they go off
into different systems as wide from
each other as the poles. Every thing
in the welfare of the church, and in
the individual peace of its members,
depends on proper views of the Lord
Jesus.

10. The church is designed as the
place of the special residence of the
[Ioly Spirit on earth; ver. 21, 22.
It is the beautiful temple where he
dwells ; the edifice which is reared for
his abode. How holy should that
church be ; how pure should be each
Christian to be an appropriate habitation forsuch a guest! Iloly should
be the heart where that Spirit dwells.
With what anxious care should we
cherish the presence of such a guest ;
with what solicitude should we guard
our conduct that we may not grieve
him away! How anxious we are so
to live that we may not grieve away

ra
tu?

)

yA

!
foe this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you
Gentiles,

our friends from our dwellings!
Should an illustrious guest become
an inmate in our abode, how anxious
should we be to do all that we can to
please him, and to retain him with us!
IJow much more anxious should we
be to secure the indwelling of the
eternal Spirit! Ilow desirous that
he should make our hearts and the
church his constant abode!

This chapter consists properly of
three parts :--

I.Astatement that the Gentileswere
to be made partakers of the gospel,
and that the work of proclaiming this
wasespeciallyintrusted to Paul; ver.1--
12. In illustrating this, Paui observes,

(1) That he was the prisoner of
Jesus Christ in behalf of the Gentiles ;
ver.1. Ie wasin bonds for maintaining that the gospel was to be preached
to the Gentiles, and for endeavouring
to. convey it:te.them;, 7a. = 5 ~

(2.) We reminds them all of the
fact that he was called by special
revelation to make known this truth,
and to convey to the Gentiles this gospel--supposing that they had heard ot
the manner of his conversion; ver.2,38.

(5.) He refers them to what he
had said before in few words on this
point as proof of his acquaintance with
this great plan of the gospel; ver. 3, 4.

(4.) Ile speaks of this great truth
as a “mystery’’--the ‘mystery of
Christ ;’ the great and important
truth which was concealed until
Christ came, and which was fuily

“made known by him; ver. 4, 5, 6.
This had been hidden for ages.

yah But now t+ had been fully revealed
wv by the Spirit of God to the apostles
,y' and prophets in the Christian church
“ \' that the great wall of partition was to
be broken down, and the gospel pro- |

claimed alike to all.

(5.) The apostle says, that to him
especially was this office committed to
proclaim among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; ver. 8, 9.

fA. D. 64.

2 (If ye have heard of the dispensation ¢ of the grace > of God,
which is given me to you-ward :

a Col.1.25. b Ro.12.3.

(6.) The design of this was to illustrate, in view of all worlds, the
great wisdom of God in the plan of
salvation ; ver. 10--12. It was intended to show to other intelligent
beings the glory of the divine perfections, and to make manifestations of
the divine character which could be
perceived nowhere else.

II. Paul expresses an earnest wish
that they should comprehend the
glory of this plan of salvation ; ver.
13 --19. Particularly he desires
them not to faint on account of his
afflictions in their behalf; declares
that he bows his knees in prayer before the Great Father of the redeemed family, that God would be pleased
to strengthen them, and enlighten
them, and give them clear views of
the glorious plan.

Ili. The chapter concludes with
an ascription of praise to God, in
view of the great goodness which
he had manifested, and of the glory
of the pian of salvation ; ver. 20, 21.

1. For this cause. On account of
preaching this doctrine ; that is, the
doctrine that the gospel was to be
proclaimed to the Gentiles. § J Paul,
the prisoner of Jesus Christ. A prisoner in the service of the Lord Jesus;
or made a prisoner inhis cause. Not
a prisoner for crime, or debt, or as a
captive in war, but a captive in the
service of the Redeemer. This proves
that at the time of writing this, Paul
was in bonds, and there can be no
question that he was in Rome. ‘This
would be more correctly rendered,
‘For this cause I, Paul, am the prisoner,’ d&c. So ‘Tindal renders it,
“ For this cause I, Paul, the servant
of Jesus, am in bouds.” So also
Locke, Rosenmiiller, Doddridge,
Whitby, Koppe, and others understand it. By this construction the,
abruptness now manifest in our common version is avoided. 4] For you
Gentiles. Made a prisoner at Rome
on your behaif, because I maintained
that the gospel was to be preached to

3 How that by revelation * he|tery; as I wrote afore! in few
made known unto me the mys- | words,

a Ga.1.12.

the Gentiles ; see. Acts xxii. 21--23,
Ile was taken first to--Gesarea, and
then to Rome. The cause of his imprisonment and of all his difficulties
was, that he maintained that the gospel was to be preacked to the Gentiles ; that when the Jewsrejected it
God rejected them; and that he was
specially called to carry the message
of salvation to the heathen world.

2. If ye have-heard. Ely. “ If
at least, if indeed, if so be, spoken of
what is taken for granted.” Robinson ; comp, 2 Cor. v. 3; Gal. iii. 43

Eph. iv. 21;°Col. i. 23, for the use of

the particle. The particle here is
not designed to express a doubt whether they had heard of it or not, for
he takes it for granted that they had.
Doddridge renders it, ‘since I well
know you have heard,” &c. He had
informed-them of his being called to
be the minister to the Gentiles (ver.
3), but still there was a possibility
that they had not received the letter
containing the information, and he
goes, therefore, into another statement
on the subject, that they might fully
comprehend it. Ilence this long
parenthetical sentence -- one of the
longest that occurs in the writings of
Paul, and expressed under the impulse of a mind full of the subject; so
full, as we would say, that_he did not
know what to say first. Hence it is
exceedingly difficult to understand
the exact state of mind in which he
was.. It seems to me that the whole

~~ of this long statement grew out of

the incidental mention (ver. 1) of
the fact that he was a prisoner for
the Gentiles. Instantly he seems to
have reflected that they would be
grieved at the intelligence that he was

~ suffering on their account.“ He goes,

therefore, into this long account, to
show them how it happened; that it
was by the appointment of God ; that
it was ia the evolving of a great and
glorious mystery ; that it was in a
cause adapted to promote, in an eminent degree, the glory of God; that
it was according to an eternal pur-

1 or, a little before.

a
pose; and he, therefore (ver. 13), says,
that he desires that they would not
“faint” or be unduly distressed on
account of his sufferings for them,
since his sufferings were designed to
promote their “glory.”’ J/¢ was comforted in the belief that he was making known the glorious and eternal
plan of God, and in the betief that it
was for the welfare of mankind; and
he, therefore, entreated them also not
to be troubled inordinately at his sufferings. § The dispensation. Gr.

\

&

economy; rendered stewardship, Luke _ /\

xvi. 2, 3, 4; and dispensation, Eph.
i. 10; iii. 2; Col. i. 25; see Notes on
chap. i. 10. It means here that this arrangement was made that he should
be the apostle to the Gentiles. In
the assignment of the different parts
of the work of preaching the gospel, the office had been committed to
him of making it known to the heathen. § Of the grace of God. In
the arrangements of his grace.
Q Which is given me to you-ward.
Toward you who are Gentiles. Not to_
the Ephesians particularly, but to the

nations at large; see Notes on @al.i1.7.

3. How that by revelation; see
Notes on Gal. i. 12. We refers to
the revelation which was made to him
when he was called to the apostolic
office, that the gospel was to be
preached to the Gentiles, and that he
was converted for the special purpose

of carrying it to them; see Acts ix. }

=
\

15; xxii. 21. 4 Unto me the mystery.--
The hitherto concealed trutfi that he e

gospel was to be preached to the Gentiles; see Notes, chap, i. 9, on the
meaning of the word mystery. J As
I wrote afore in few words. Marg.,
alittle before. ‘To what this refers
commentators are not agreed. Bluomfield, Doddridge, Rosenmiiller, Eras.
mus, Grotius, Locke, and others, sup:
pose that he refers to what he had
written in the two previous chapters
respecting the plan of God to call the
Gentiles to his kingdom. Calvin
supposes that he refers to some former epistle which he had written to
4 Whereby, when ye read, ye
may understand my knowledge in
the ¢ mystery of Christ ;

5 Which in other ages was not
b made known unto the sons of
men, as it is now revealed unto the

a chap.1.9.

them, but which is now lost. Tle remarks in regard to this, ‘ If the solicitude of Paul be rightly considered ;
if his vigilance and assiduity ; if his
zeal and studious habits ; if his kindness and promptitude in assisting his
brethren, it is easy to suppose that he
wrote many epistles publicly and privately to this place and to that place.
But those only which the Lord saw
necessary to the. welfare of his church
has he taken care to have preserved.”
In this opinion there is nothing in
itself improbable (comp. Introduction to Isaiah, $ 5, (1.) ), but it may
be doubted whether Paul here refers
to any such epistle. The addition
which he makes, “ whereby, when
ye read,’ &., seems rather to imply that he refers to what he had just
written.

4. Whereby, when ye read. By
the bare reading of which you may
understand the view which I entertain of the plan of salvation, and the
knowledge which I have of God's
method of saving men, particularly of
his intention in regard to the salvation
of the Gentiles. In the mystery of
Christ. This does not refer to any
thing mysterious in the person of
Christ; or the union of the divine and
human nature in him; or to any thing
difficult of apprehension in the work
of the atonement. It means the
hitherto concealed doctrine that
through the Messiah, the Gentiles
were to be received to the same privileges as the Jews, and that the plan
of salvation was to be made equally
free for all. This great truth had
been hitherto concealed, or but partially understood, and Paul says that
he was appointed to make it known
to the world. His knowledye on
the subject, he says, could be understood by what he had said, and from
that they could judge whether he

holy apostles and prophets by the
Spirit ;

6 That the Gentiles should be
fellow-heirs, and of the same body,
and partakers of his promise in
Christ by the gospel ;

b Mat.13.17; Ro.16.25;1Pe.1.10-12.

was qualified to state and defend the
doctrines of the gospel. Paul evidently supposed that the knowledge
which he had on that subject was
of eminent value; that it was possessed by few; that it was important
to understand it. Hence he dwells
upon it. He speaks of the glory of
that truth. He traces it back to the
counsels of God. He shows that it
entered into his eternal plans ; and
he evidently felt that the truth which
he had communicated in the former
part of this epistle, was among the
most important that could come before the mind.

5. Which in other ages. The
great purposes of God in regard to
the salvation of mankind were not
revealed; see Notes on Rom. xvi.
25. ¥ And prophets. Those who
exercised the office of a prophet or
inspired teacher in the Christian
church ; see Notes on 1 Cor, xii. 1.
q by the Spirit. This proves that
those who exercised the office of
prophet in the Christian church were
inspired. They were persons endowed in this manner for the purpose of imparting to the newly formed churches the doctrines of the
Christian system. There is no evidence that this was designed to be a
permanent order of men in the church.
‘They were necessary for settling the
church on a permanent basis, in the
absence of a full written revelation,
and when the apostles were away.
When the volume of revelation was
finished, and the doctrines of the gospel were fully understood, the functions of the office ceased.

6. That the Gentiles should be
fellow-heirs. Fellow-heirs with the
ancient people of God--the Jews--
and entitled to the same privileges ;
see Notes on Rom. viii. 17, and Eph
iil. 13--18.

_ 7 Whereof I was made a minister, according to the gift of the
grace of God given unto me by
the effectual © working of his
power.

8 Unto me, who am less ® than
the least of all saints, is this grace

given, that I should preach among
@ Is.43.13; chap.1.19. 6 1Co.15.9.
¢ Co.).27.

7. Whereof I was made a minis-

ter ; see Notes on ver. 2. § According to the gift of the grace of God.
It was not by my own seeking or
merit; it was a free gift. § Of the
arvace of God. The sentiment is, that
throughout it was a mere matter of
grace that he was called into the ministry, and that so important an office
was intrusted to him as that of bearing the gospel to the Gentiles. § By
the effectual working of his power.
Not by any native inclination which
Thad to the gospel, and not by any
power which I have put forth. It is
by “‘ the energy of his power ;’’ comp.
Notes, Gal. ii. 8. Locke understands
this of the energy or power which
God put forth in converting the Gentiles under his ministry. But it seems
to me that it refers rather to the
power which God put forth in the
conyersion of Paul himself, and putting him into the ministry. This is
clear from the following verse. The
meaning is, that such was his opposition to the gospel by nature, that nothing but the “ energy of God” could
overcome it, and that his conversion
was to be traced to that alone.

8. Unto me, who am less than the
least of all saints. This is one of
the class of expressions peculiar to
Paul. The ordinary terms of language do not express the idea which
he wishes to convey, and a word is
therefere coined to convey an idea
more emphatically ; comp. Notes on
2 Cor.iv.17. The word here used--
idayiororeong --does not occur elsewhere in the New Testament. . It is
a comparative made from the superlative. Similar expressions are
found, however, in later Greek writers; see Bloomfield and Rosenmiiller
for examples. The word means here,

the Gentiles the unsearchable riches
¢ of Christ ;

9 And to make all men see, what
is the fellowship of the 4 mystery,
which from the beginning of the
world hath been hid in God, who
created all things by ¢ Jesus

Christ :
d ver.4,5; 1£1.3.16.
é Ps.33.6; John!.3; Co.1.16; He.1.2.

“who am incomparably the least of

all the saints ; or who am not worthy
to be reckoned among the saints.”’
It is expressive of the deep sense which
he had of the sinfulness of his past
life; of his guilt in persecuting the
church and the Saviour ; and perhaps
of his sense of his low attainments in
piety ; see Notes on 1 Cor. xv. 9.
Paul never could forget the guilt of
his former life ; never forget the time
when he was engaged in persecuting
the church of God. §& The unsearchable riches of Christ. On the word
riches, as used by Paul, see Notes on
ch.i.7. The word rendered wsearchable, aveZiyviaerov, occurs but once
elsewhere in the New Testament
(Rom. xi. 83), where it is rendered
past finding out ; see Notes on that
verse. It means that which cannot
be traced out, or explored ; which is
inscrutable, or incomprehensible. The
meaning here is, that there was a
sufficiency in Christ which could not
be traced out or explored. It was
wholly incomprehensible. The fulness of the riches in him could not be
appreciated. There is no more emphatic expression in the New Testament than this. It shows that the
heart of the apostle was full of admiration of the sufficiency and glory that
was in the Saviour; that he wanted
words to express it; and that he considered it the highest honour to be
permitted to tell the world that there
were such riches in the Redeemer.

9. And to make all men see. In
order that the whole human family
might see the glory of God in the
plan of salvation. Hitherto the revelation of his character and plans
had been confined to the Jews. Now
it was his design that all the race
should be made acquainted with it.
{ What is the fellowship of the mystery. Instead of fellowship here --xoswvie --most MSS. and versions read
olzrvouia -- dispensation ; see Mill.
This reading is adopted by Gricsbach, Tittman, Rosenmiiller, Koppe,
and is regarded by most critics as
being the genuine reading. The
mistake might easily have been made
by a transcriber. The meaning then
would be, ‘to enlighten all in respect
to the dispensation of this mystery ;”
that is, to cause all to understand the
manner in which this great truth of
the plan of salvation is communicated
tomen. Ifthe word fellowship is to
be retained, it means that this doctrine, or secret counsel of God, was
now common to all believers. It was
not to be confined to any class or rank
ef men. Locke renders it, “and to
make all men perceive how this mystery comes now to be communicated
to the world.” Archbishop Whately
(Errors of Romanism, ch. ii. § 1)
renders it, the common participation
of the mystery ;” that is, of truths
formerly unknown, and which could
not be known by man’s unaided powers, but which were now laid open by
the gracious dispensation of Divine
Providence ; no longer concealed, or
confined to a few, but to be partaken
of by all. The allusion, according to
him, is to the mysteries of the ancient
pagan religions ; and he supposes that
the apostle designs to contrast those
“mysteries” with Christianity. In
those “mysteries” there was a distinction between the initiated and
uniniciated. ‘There was a revelation
to some of the worshippers, of certain
holy secrets from which others were
excluded. There were in some of the
mysteries, as the Eleusinian, great
and lesser doctrines in which different
persons were initiated. In strong
contrast with these, the “ great mystery” in Christianity was made known
to all. It was concealed from none,
and there was no distinction made
among those who were initiated. No
truths which God had revealed were
held back from any part, but there
was a common participation by all.
Christianity has no hidden truths for
avart only of its friends; it has no

“‘ veserved’’ doctrines; it has no truths
to be intrusted only to a sacred
priesthood. Its doctrines are to be
published to the wide world, and
every follower of Christ is to be a
partaker of all the benefits of the
truths which Christ has revealed.
It is difficult to determine which is
the true reading, and it is not very
important. The general sense is,
that Paul felt himself called into the
ministry in order that all men might
understand now that salvation was
free for all--a truth that had been
concealed for ages. Bearing this
great truth, he felt that he had a
message of incalculable value to
mankind, and he was desirous to go
and proclaim it to the wide world.
On the word mystery, see Notes, ch.
i. 9. GY Had been hid in God.
With God. It has been concealed
in his bosom. The plan was formed,
but it had not before been made
known. | Who created all things.
This is plain enough; but it is not
quite so plain why the declaration is
introduced in this place. Locke and
Nosenmiiller suppose that it refers
to the new creation, and that the
sense is, that God frames and manages this new creation wholly by
Jesus Christ. But the expression
contains a truth of larger import, and
naturally conveys the idea that all
things were made by God, and that
this was only a part of his great and
universal agency. The meaning is,
that God formed all things, and that
this purpose of extending salvation
to the world was a part of his great
plan, and was under his control.
{| By Jesus Christ. As this stands
in our common Greek text, as well
asin our English version, there is a
striking resemblance between the
passage and that in Col. i. 15, 16.
But the phrase is wanting in the
Vulgate, the Syriac, the Coptic, and
in several of the ancient MSS. Mill
remarks that it was probably inserted
here by some transcriber from the
parallel passage in Col. i. 16; and it is
rejected as an interpolation by Griesbach. It is not very material whether it be retained in this place or
not, as the sane sentiment is else-

10 To the intent that now unto |
the principalities and powers in
heavenly places might be known,

@ Ro.11.33; 1Co.2.7.

where abundantly taught ; see John
leno Golo Mebuie es Mit itis to
be retained, the sentiment is that the
Son of God--the second person of
the Trinity--was the great and immediate agent in the creation of the
universe.

10. To the intent. Greek, “ that’’
--lva. The sense is, that it was
with this design, or that this was the
purpose for which all things were
made. One grand purpose in the
creation of the universe was, that the
wisdom of God might be clearly shown
by the church. It was not enough to
evince it by the formation of the sun,
the stars, the earth, the seas, the
mountains, the floods. It was not
enough to show it by the creation of
intelligent beings, the formation of
immortal minds on earth, and the
various ranks of the angelic world.
There were views of the divine character which could be obtained only in
connection with the redemption of
the world. Ifence the universe was
created, and man was made upon the
earth, not merely to illustrate the divine perfections in the work of creation, but in a still more illustrious
manner in the work of redemption.
And hence the deep interest which
.the angelic hosts have ever evinced in
the salvation of man. 4 That now.
The word now--rv»--is wanting in the
Vulgate, Syriac, and Arabic; and is
omitted by many of the Fathers ; see
Koppe. If it is to be retained, it
means that this display is to be made
under the gospel. ‘“ Now, since the
Messiah is come; now, under the
Christian dispensation, this revelation
is to be made to distant worlds.”
q Unto the principalities and powers.
To the angelic hosts--the intelligent
beings that surround the throne of
God; see Notes on chap. i. 21.
q By the church. By the incarnation of the Redeemer to save it; by
the mercy shown to it ; by the wise
arrangement made to recover his people from the fall; and by all the

by the church, the manifold wisdom 2 of God,
11 According to the © eternal
b chap.1.9.

graces and beauties which that redeemed church will evince on earth
and in heaven.-- The manifold wisdom of God. Literally, much-variegated. It means the greatly-diversijied wisdom. It does not mean
merely that there was great wisdom,
but that the wisdom shown was diversified and varied; like changing,
variegated colours. There was a
“beautiful and well-ordered variety
of dispensations’’ towards that church,
all of which tended to evince the
wisdom of God. Itis like a landscape,
or a panoramic view passing before
the mind, with a great variety of
phases and aspects, all tending to
excite admiration. Inthe redemption
of the church, there is not merely one
form or one phase of wisdom. It is
wisdom, ever-varying, ever-beautiful.
There was wisdom manifested when
the plan was formed; wisdom in the
selection of the Redeemer ; wisdom
in the incarnation; wisdom in the
atonement ; wisdom in the means _ of
renewing the heart, and sanctifying
the soul ; wisdom in the various dispensations by which the church is
sanctified, guided, and brought to
glory. The wisdom thus shown is
like the ever-yarying beauty of
changing clouds, when the sun is reflected on them at evening. Each
aspect is full of beauty. One bright
cloud differs in appearance from
others; yet all tend to fill the mind
with elevated views of God.

11. According to the eternal purpose ; see Note chap.i.4. Literally,
‘the purpose of ages,” or of eternity. Locke, Chandler, and Whitby
render this, ‘‘ according to that disposition or arrangement of the ages
which he made in Jesus Christ, or
through him.” The object of such
an interpretation seems to be to avoid
the doctrine that God had a purpose
or plan in the salvation of men, and
hence such expositors suppose it refers to the arrangement of the ages
of the world by which the plan of repurpose which he purposed in
Christ Jesus our Lord :
12 In whom we have @ boldness
a He.4.16.

and access with confidence by the
faith of him.

13 Wherefore I desire that ye

demption was introduced. On the
word here rendered purpose--xeodions
--see Notes on Rom. viii. 28; comp.
Eph.i.11. It.is rendered shewbread
--‘‘the bread of setting before,” Matt.
xii. 4; Mark ii. 26 ; Luke vi. 4; [leb.
ix. 2; purpose, Acts xi. 23; XXVil.
13); Rom, yiii.28\six, is Epbs a:
1 ees We CD 4 We oe |
does not occur elsewhere in the New
Testament. In most of these cases
it refers to the purpose or intention
of God; in not a single case does it
mean arrangement or disposition in
any sense like that of making an arrangement of ages or periods of the
world; and the interpretation proposed by Whitby, Locke, Clarke, and
others, is wholly at variance with the
settled use of the word. The word
rendered efernal--a«idva»--may mean
ages ; but it also most usually means
eternity ; see ver. 9. Here it may
mean “the purpose of ages ;” 1. ¢.
the purpose formed in past ages ; but
the word is most commonly used in
the New Testament in the sense of
ever, and for ever; comp. the following places, where it is so rendered in
our common version, and beyond a
doubt correctly; Matt. vi. 13; xxi.
19 ; Mark iii. 29; xi. 14; Luke i. 33,
55; John iv. 14; vi. 51, 58; viii.
SOL XTV ee LOne ECOM dye Oi nn LXe LouexIe
SO xV. 205 2 Cone 1x9: X1.03 le:
Gal.i.5. The fair meaning of the
passage here is, that God had formed
a plan which was eternal in reference
to the salvation of men; that that
plan had reference to the Lord Jesus;
and that it was now executed by the
gospel. It is impossible to get away
from the idea that God has a plan.
It is too often affirmed in the Scriptures, and is too consonant with our
reason, to be disputed. It is as wndesirable as it is impossible to escape
from that idea. Who could respect
or honour an intelligent being that
had no plan, no purpose, no intention,
and that did all things by caprice and
hap-hazard? If God has any plan, it

must be eternal. He has no new
schemes; he has no intentions which
he did not always have. J Which he
purposed. _J.iterally, “which he
made.’ YF In Clwist Jesus. With
reference to him; or which were to
be executed through him. The eternal plan had respect to him, and was
to be executed by his coming and
work.

12. We have boldness. The word
here used -- rapjnciav--means, properly, boldness of speaking ; 2 Cor.
vii. 4; John vii. 26; Acts iv. 13, 29,
31. Here it seems to mean “freedom
of utterance ;’’ and the idea is, that
we may come to God now in prayer
with confidence through the Lord
Jesus; see Heb. iv. 16. § And access ; see Notes chap.ii.18. § By
the faith of him. By faith in him.
The sense is, that we may now come
confidently and boldly to the throne
of grace for mercy in the name of
the Redeemer. Boldness is not rashness ; and faith is not presumption ;
but we may come without hesitating,
and with an assurance that our prayers will be heard.

13. Wherefore 1 desire that ye faint
not. The connection here is this.
Paul was then a prisoner at Rome.
He had been made such in consequence of his efforts to diffuse the
Christian religion among the Gentiles ; see Notes on ver. 1. His zeal
in this cause, and the opinions which
he held on this subject, had roused
the wrath of the Jews, and led to all
the calamities which he was now suffering. Of that the Ephesians, he
supposes, were aware. It was natural that they should be distressed at
his sufferings, for all his privations
were endured on their account. But
here he tells them not to be troubled
and disheartened, He was indeed
suffering; but he was reconciled to it,
and they should be also, since it was
promoting their welfare. The word
rendered “ faint”? -- ixxaxéw -- means
literally, to turu out a cuward, or to

faint not at my tribulations for
you, which @ is your glory.
14 For this cause I bow my
a2Co.1.6.

knees unto the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ,

15 Of whom the whole family
in heaven and earth is named,

lose one’s courage ; then to be fainthearted, &c.; Notes, 2 Cor. iv. 1.
It is rendered faint in Luke xviii. 1 ;
2 Cor. iv. 1, 16; Eph. iii.13, and weary
in Gal. vi. 9; 2 Thess. iii. 13. It does
not elsewhere occur. It is rendered
here by Locke dismayed. Koppe
supposes it means that they should
not suppose that the Christian religion was vain and false because he
was suffering so much from his countrymen on account of it. But it rather
means that they might be in danger
of being discouraged by the fact that
he was enduring so much. They
might become disheartened in their
attachment to a system of religion
which exposed its friends to such calamities. Paul tells them that this
ought not to follow. They were to
be profited by all Ais sufferings, and
they should, therefore, hold fast to a
religion which was attended with so
many benefits to them--though he
should suffer. § Which is your glory.
Which tends ta your honour and welfare. You have occasion to rejoice
that you have a friend who 1s willing
thus to suffer for you; you have occasion to rejoice in all the benefits
which will result to you from his trials
in your behalf.

14. For this cause. Some suppose
that this is a resumption of what he
had commenced saying in ver. 1, but
which had been interrupted by a long
parenthesis. So Bloomfield explains
it. But it seems to me more probable that he refers to what immediately
precedes. ‘‘ Wherefore, that the great
work may be carried on, and that the
purposes of these my sufferings may
be answered in your benefit and glory,
I bow my knees to God, and pray to
him.” { J bow my knees. I pray.
The usual, and the proper posture of
prayer is to kneel; Comp. 2 Chron.
vi. 13; Dan. vi. 10; Luke xxii. 21;
Acts vil. 60; ix. 40; xx. 26; xxi. 5. It
is a posture which indicates reverence,
and should, therefore, be assumed
when we come before God. It has

been an unhappy thing that the custom of kneeling in public worship has
ever been departed from in the Christian churches. { Unto the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom,
undoubtedly, prayer should ordinarily
be addressed. But this does not make
it improper to address the Lord Jesus
in prayer ; see Notes on Acts i. 24;
vii. 59, 60.

15. Of whom the whole family.
This expression ‘‘of whom,” may refer
either to ‘“‘the Father,’ or to the
Lord Jesus. Commentators have
been divided in opinion in regard to
it. Bloomfield, Chandler, Erasmus,
Koppe, and some others, refer it to
the Father. Locke, Doddridge, Calvin, and some others, refer it to the
Lord Jesus. This is the more natural interpretation. ‘The whole “ family of God,” means all his children;
and the idea is, that they all bear the
same name, derived from the Redeemer; all are Christians. No matter where they are, in heaven or in
earth ; no matter from what nation
they are converted, whether Jews or
Gentiles, they all have one name, and
one Redeemer, and all belong to one
family; see chap. iv.4--6. {| Inheaven.
Spirits of just men made perfect. It
does not properly refer to angels, for
he is not speaking of them, but of the
family of the redeemed. If the
phrase ‘in heaven,’’ could ever be
taken to denote the Jews as contradistinguished from the Gentiles, I
should think that this was one of the
places, Many expositors have supposed that it is frequently so used in
this epistle, but I see no clear evidence of it, and no instance where it
seems very probable, unless this should
be one. And it is not necessary here,
for it may mean all the redeemed,
whether in heaven or earth, though
the connection would seem rather to
have suggested a reference to the
Jews and the Gentiles. An expression similar to this occurs in Col. i.
20. “ To reconcile all things to him16 That he would grant you
according to the riches # of his
glory, to be? strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inner
man ; ¢

17 That Christ may dwell @ in
@ Ph.4.19. Bb chap.6.10; Col.!.11. ¢ Ro.7.22.

your hearts by faith ; that ye being ¢ rooted and grounded in love,

18 May be able to comprehend
with all saints, what 7s the
breadth, and length, and depth,
and height ;

d@ John14.23; chap.2.22. e Co.2.7.

self, whether they be things in earth,
or things in heaven.” The passage
before us is one that is commonly explained by a reference to Jewish opinions. The Jews were accustomed
to call the angels in heaven God’s
upper family, and his people on earth
his lower family. See the passages
cited from the Rabbinical writers in
Wetstein. Js named. This means
substantially the same as 7s. They
are all of one family. They all have
one father, and are all of one community. ‘The expression is taken fromm
the custom in a family, where all bear
the name of the head of the family;
and the meaning is, that all in heaven
and on earth are wnited under one
head, and constitute one community.
It does not mean that all are called by
the same name, or that the name
Christian is given to the angels, but
that they all pertain to the same community, and constitute the same great
and glorious brotherhood. Part are
in heaven, near his throne; part in
distant worlds; part are angels of
light; part redeemed and happy spirits; part are in the church en earth;
but they are all united as one family,
and have one head and Father. This
glorious family will yet be gathered
together in heaven, and will encompass the throne of their common Father rejoicing.

16. According to the riches of his
glory. According to the glorious
abundance of his mercy; see Phil.
iv. 19. Out of those stores of rich
grace which can never be exhausted.
The word riches, so often used by
Paul, denotes abundance, and the
idea here is, that his grace was inexhaustible and ample for all their

wants. § To be strengthened with
might. ‘To be powerfully strengthened. That is, to give you abundant

strength to bear trials; to perform
your duties; to glorify his name. !

|] In the inner man.

In the heart,
the mind, the soul; see Notes on
Rom. vil. 22.. The body needs to be
strengthened every day. In like manner the soul needs constant supplies
of grace. Piety needs to be constantly invigorated, or it withers and
decays. Every Christian needs grace
given each day to enable him to bear
trials, to resist temptation, to discharge his duty, to live a life of faith.

17. That Christ inay dwell in your

| hearts by faith ; see Notes, chap. ii.

22, Expressions like this often occur
in the Scriptures, where God is said
to dwell in us, and we are said to be
the temples of the [oly Ghost; see
Notes on John xiv. 23; 1 Cor. vi. 19.
] That ye being rooted. Firmly established--as a tree is whose roots
strike deep, and extend afar. ‘The
meaning is, that his love should be as
firm in our hearts, as a tree is in the
soil, whose roots strike deep into tle
earth. 4] And grounded. r:Seusruwuivn
--founded--as a building is on a foundation. ‘The word is taken from ar
chitecture, where a firm foundation is
laid, and the meaning is, that -he
wished them to be as firm in the love
of Christ, as a building is that rests
ona solid basis. J love. In love
to the Redeemer--perhaps also in
love to each other--and to all. Love
was the great principle of the true
religion, and the apostle wished that
they might be fully settled in that.
18. May be able to comprehend with
all saints. ‘That all others with you
may be able to understand this. It
was his desire that others, as well as
they, might appreciate the wonders of
redemption. { What is the breadth,
and length, &c. It has been doubted
to what this refers. Locke says it
refers to the mystery of calling the
Gentiles as well as the Jews. Chandler supposes there is an allusion in
all this to the temple at Ephesus, [t

19 And to know the love of
Christ, which passeth knowledge,

that ye might be filled with all the
fulness 4 of God.
a@ Johnl.6.

was one of the wonders of the world--
exciting admiration by its length, and
height, and dimensions in every way,
as well as by its extraordinary riches
and splendour. In allusion to this,
the object of so much admiration and
pride to the Ephesians, he supposes
that Paul desires that they should become fully acquainted with the extent
and beauty of the spiritual temple.
But I do not see that there is clear
evidence that there is allusion here
to the temple at Ephesus. It seems
rather to be the language of a heart
that was full of the subject, and impressed with its greatness; and the
words are employed to denote the
dimensions of that love, and are simitar to what would be meant if he had
said, “ that you may know how large,
or how great is that love.’ The
apostle evidently meant to express the
strongest sense of the greatness of
the love of the Redeemer, and to show
in the most emphatic manner how
much he wished that they should fully
understand it. On the phrase “denth
and height,’’ comp. Notes on Rom.
Vill. 39.

19. And to know the love of Christ.
The love of Christ towards us; the
immensity of redeeming love. It is
not merely the love which he showed
‘for the Gentiles in calling them into
‘his kingdom, which is here referred
to; it is the love which is shown for
the lost world in giving himself to
die. This love is often referred to in
the New Testament, and is declared
to surpass all other which has ever
been evinced ; see Notes on Rom. v.
4”. 8; John xv.18. To know this; to
feel this; to have a lively sense of it,
is one of the highest privileges of the
Christian. Nothing will somuch excite gratitude in our hearts; nothing
will prompt us so much to a life of
self-denial; nothing will make us so
benevolent and so dead to the world ;
see Notes on 2 Cor. v.14. Which
passeth knowledge. There seems to
be a slight contradiction here in ex-

be known, or in a desire that they
should understand that which cannot
be understood. But it is the language of a man whose heart was full
to overflowing. Ie had a deep sense
of the love of Christ, and he expressed
a wish that they should understand it.
Suddenly he has such an apprehension of it, that he says it is indeed
infinite. No one can attain to a full
view of it. It had no limit. It was
unlike any thing which had ever been
evinced before. It was love which
led the Son of God to become incarnate; to leave the heavens; to be a
man of sorrows; to be reviled and persecuted; to be put to death in the
most shameful manner--on A CROSS.
Who could understand that? Where
else had there been any thing like
that? What was there with which to
compare it? What was there by
which it could be illustrated? And
how could it be fully understood ?
Yet something of it might be seen,

| known, felt; and the apostle desired

that as far as possible they should
understand that great love which the
Lord Jesus had manifested for a dying
world. § That ye might be filled with
all the fulness of God. What an expression! IJJow rich and glorious!
Who can comprehend all that it implies? Let us inquire into its meaning. ‘There may be here in these
verses an allusion to the temple. The
apostle had spoken of their being
founded in love, and of surveying the
length, and breadth, and depth, and
height of that love, as of a vast and
splendid edifice, and he now desires
that those whom he addressed might
be pervaded or filled with the indwelling of God. The language here is
cumulative, and is full of meaning and
richness. (1.) They were to be full
of God. That is, he would dwell in
them. (2.) They were to be filled
with the fulness of God--zéi rrnguua
rou @eu. On the word rendered /ulness, see Notes on chap. i. 10, 23. It is
a favourite word with Paul. ‘Thus he

pressing a wish to know what cannot | speaks of the fulness of the Gentiles,
20 Now @ unto him that is able
to do exceeding abundantly above
all that we ask or think, according
to the power that worketh in us,
@ Rio.16.25; He.13.20,21; Jude 24.

Rom. xi. 25; the fulness of time, Gal.

iv. 4; the fulness of him that filleth
all in all, Eph. i. 23; the fulness of
Christ, Eph. iv. 13; the fulness of
the Godheadin Christ, Col. i. 19; il.
9. It means here, ‘that you may
have the richest measures of divine
consolation and of the divine presence;
that you may partake of the entire
enjoyment of God in the most ample
measure in which he bestows his favours on his people.” (3.) It was to
be with all the fulness of God; not
with partial and stinted measures of
his gracious presence, but with all
which he ever bestows. Religion is
not a name. It is not a matter of
form. It is not a trifie. It is the
richest, best gift of God to man. It
enncbles our nature. It more clearly
teaches us our true dignity than all
the profound discoveries which men
can make in science ; for none of them
will ever fill us with the fulness of
God. Religion is spiritual, elevating,
pure, Godlike. We dwell with God;
walk with God; live with God ; commune with God; are like God. We
become partakers of the divine nature (2 Pet. i. 4); in rank we are associated with angels; in happiness
and purity we are associated with
God !

20. Now unto him. It is not uncommon for Paul to utter an ascription of praise in the midst of an argument; see Rom. ix. 5; xi. 86; Gal.
i. 5. Here his mind is full of the
subject ; and in view of the fact that
God communicates to his people such
blessings--that they may become filled
with all his fulness, he desires that
praise should be given tohim. 4 That
is able to do ; sce Notes, Rom. xvi.
25. § Exceeding abundantly. The
compound word here used occurs only
in this place, and in 1 Thess. iii. 10;
v.13. It means, to an extent which
we cannot express. | Above all that
we ask or think. More than all that
we can desire in our prayers ; more

21 Unto him be glory in the
church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end.
Amen.

than all that we can conceive ; see
Notes on 1 Cor. ii. 9. J According
to the power that worketh in us. The
exertion of that same power can accomplish for us more than we can now
conceive.

21. Unto him be glory ; see Notes,
Rom. xvi.27. § In the church. Or,
by the church; ver. 10. The church
was to be the instrument by which the
glory of God would be shown; and it
was by the church that his praise
would be celebrated. § Throughout
all ages, world without end. 'There
is a richness and amplification of language here which shows that his heart
was full of the subject, and that it
was difficult to find words to express
his conceptions. It means, in the
strongest sense, FOR EVER. It is ona
of ‘the apostle’s self-invented phrases’ (loomfeld); and Blackwall says
that no version can fully express the
meaning. It is literally, ‘“‘ Unto all
generations of the age of ages,” or
“unto all the generations of the eternity of eternities, or the eternity of
ages.” It is the language of a heart
FouL of the love of God, and desiring
that he might be praised without ceasing for ever and ever.

1. It isa great and glorious truth
that the offers of the gospel are made
to us, who are by nature Gentiles ;
and that those offers are confined to
no class or condition of men--to no
nation or tribe; ver. 1--6. This
truth had been concealed for ages.
The Jews regarded themselves as a
peculiar people, and as exclusively the
favourites of Ileaven. The great
effort has been made everywhere to
show that there was a favoured class
of men--a class whom God regarded
with peculiar affection, on account of
their birth, or rank, or nation, or
wealth, or complexion. In one nation,
there has been a distinction of caste
carefully kept up from age to age, and

sustained by all the power of the
priesthood and the laws; and it has
been held that that one class was the
favourite of Ileaven, and that every
other was overlooked or despised. In
another nation, it has been held that
the services of an illustrious ancestry
made a difference among men, and
that this fact was to be regarded, even
in religion. In another, complexion
has made a difference; and the feeling
has insensibly grown up that one class
were the favourites of Ileaven, because they had a skin not coloured
like others, and that those not thus
favoured might be doomed to hopeless
toil and servitude. In another, the
attempt is made to create such a distinction by wealth; and it is felt that
the rich are the favourites of Heaven.
In all these cases, there ‘is the secret
feeling that in virtue of rank, or blood,
or property, one class are the objects
of divine interest, more than others;
and that the same-plan of salvation is

not needed for them which is required

for the poor, for the ignorant, and for
the slave. The gospel regards all men
as on a level; offers the same salvation to all; and offers it on the same
terms. This is one of its glories ; and
for this we should love it. It meets
man as he is--as everywhere a fallen
and a ruined being--and provides a
plan adapted to raise all to the glories of the same heaven.

2. Humility becomes us; ver. 8.

Paul felt that he was the least of all
saints. He remembered his former
life. He recalled the time when he
persecuted the church. He felt that
he was not worthy to be enrolled in
that society which he had so greatly
injured. If Paul was humble, who
should not be? Who, since his time,
has equalled his ardour, his zeal, his
attainments in the divine lifé? Yet
the remembrance of his former life
served always to keep him humble,
and operated as a check on all the
tendencies to pride in his bosom. So
it should be with us --with all Christians. There has been enough in our
past lives to make us humble, if we
would recall it, and to make us feel
that we are not worthy to be enrolled
among the saints. One has been an

infidel ; one licentious ; one intemperate; one rash, revengeful, passionate; one has been proud and ambitious ; one has been false, dishonest,
faithless ; all have had hearts opposed
to God, alienated from good, and
prone to evil; and there is not a
Christian in the world who will not
find enough in his past life to make
him humble, if he will examine himself--enough to make him feel that
he deserves not even the lowest place
among the saints. So we shall feel
if we look over our lives since we
made a profession of religion. The
painful conviction will come over our
souls, that we have lived so far from
God, and done so little in his cause,
that. we are not worthy of the lowest
place among the blessed.

3. It is a privilege to preach the
gospel; ver. 8. So Paul felt. It was
an honour of which he felt that he
was ly no means worthy. It was
proof of the favour of God towards him
that he was permitted to do it. It ¢s
a privilege--an honour--to preach the
gospel, anywhere, arid to any class of
men. It is an honour to be permitted to preach in Christian lands; it
is an honour to preach among the
heathen. It is an honour far above
that of conquerors; and he who does
it will win a brighter and more glorious crown than he who goes forth to
obtain glory by dethroning kings, and
laying nations waste. ‘lhe warrior
goes with the sword in one hand, and
the torch in the other. His path is
marked with blood, and with smouldering ruins. He treads among the
slain; and the music of his march is
made up of dying groans, and the
shrieks of widows and orphans. Yet
he is honoured, and his name is blazoned abroad ; he is crowned with the
laurel, and triumphal arches are
reared, and monuments are erected to
perpetuate his fame. The man who
carries the gospel goes for a different
purpose. He is the minister’of peace.
He goes to tell of salvation. He fires
no city; lays waste no field; robs no
one of a home, no wife of a husband,
no child of a father, no sister of a
brother ;--he goes to elevate the intellect, to mould the heart to virtue,
to establish schools and colleges; to
promote temperance, industry, and
chastity; to wipe away tears, and to
tell of heaven. His course is marked
by intelligence and order; by peace
and purity; by the joy of the domestic circle, and the happiness of a virtuous fire-side ; by consolation on the
bed of pain, and by the hope of heaven that cheers the dying. Who
would not rather bea preacher of the
gospel than a blood-stained warrior ?
Who would not rather have the wreath
that shall encircle the brows of Paul,
and Schwartz,and Martin, and Brainerd, than the laurels of Alexander and
Cesar ?

4, There is ample fulness in the
plan of salvation by the Redeemer ;
ver..8. In Christ there is unsearchable riches. None can understand
the fulness that there 1s in him; none
can exhaust it. Millions, and hundreds of millions, have been saved by
the fulness of his merits; and still
those merits aré as ample as ever.
The sun in the heavens has shone for
six thousand years, and has shed light
and comfort. on countless millions ;
but his beams are not exhausted or
diminished in splendour. ‘To-day,
while I write--this beautiful, calm,
sweet day--(June 24, 1840) his beams
are as bright, as rich, as full, as they
were when they were shed on Eden.
So of the Sun of righteousness. Millions have been enlightened by his
beams; but to-day they are as full,
and rich, and glorious, as they were
when the first ray from that sun
reached the benighted mind of a penitent sinner. And that fulness is
not to be exhausted. No matter how
many partake of his abundance; no
matter how many darkened minds are
enlightened ; no matter though nation
after nation comes and partakes of
lis fulness, yet there is no approach
to exhaustion. ‘The sun in the heavens may waste his fires and burnout,
and become a dark orb, diffusing horror Over a cold and cheerless world ;
but not so with the Sun of righteousness. That will shine on in glory for
ever and ever; and the last penitent
sinner on. earth who comes to partake
ofthe riches of the grace of Christ,

|; Can answer.

shall find it as full and as free as did
the first who sought pardon through
his blood. Oh, the UNSEARCHABLE
ricnes of Christ! Who can understand this? Who can grow weary in
its contemplation?

5. There is no good reason why any
sinner should be lost; ver. 8. If the
merits of the Saviour were limited; if
his arm were a feeble human arm; if
he died only for a part, and if his
merit were already well-nigh exhausted, we might begin to despair. But
it isnot so. The riches of his grace
are unbounded and _ inexhaustible.
And why then does the sinner die? I
He does like the man
who expires of thirst while fountains
bubble and streams flow all around
him ; like him who is starving amidst
trees loaded with fruit; like him who
is dying of fever in the midst of medicines that would at once restore him;
like him who holds his breath and
dies while the balmy air of heaven--
pure, full, and free--floats all around
him. Ifa man thus dies, who is to
blame? If a man goes down to hell
from lands where the gospel is
preached, whose is the fault? It is
not because the merits of Christ are
limited ; it is not because they are
exhausted.

6. The church is designed to accomplish a most important purpose in
the manifestation of the divine glory
and perfections; yer. 10. It is by
that that his great wisdom is shown.
It is by that entirely that his mercy
is displayed ; chap. ii. 7. His power
is shown in the creation and support
of the worlds; his goodness in the
works of creation and Providence ;
his truth in his promises and threatenings ; his greatness and majesty are
everywhere displayed in the universe

-which he has brought into being. His

mercy is shown in the church; and
there alone. Angels in heaven not

having sinned, have had no occasion

for its exercise ; and angels that are
fallen have had no offer of pardon,
Throughout the wide universe there
has been so far as we know, no exercise of mercy but in the church.
Ifence the interest which the angelic
beings feel in the work of redemption.

Hence they desire to look into these
things, and to see more of the heighth
and depth and length and breadti of
the love of God evinced in the work
of redemption. Hence the church is
to be honoured for ever as the means
of making known to distant worlds the
way in which God shows mercy to
rebellious creatures.
enough for one world thus to be the
sole means of making known to the
universe one of the attributes of God;
and while other worlds may contain
more proofs of his power and greatness, it is enough for ours that it
shows to distant worlds how he can
exercise compassion.

7. Alltribulation and attliction may
be intended to do some good, and may
benefit others; ver. 13. Paul felt that
his sufferings were for the ‘“ glory’’--
the welfare and honour of the Gentiles, in whose causé he was suffering.
Ue was then a prisoner at Rome. He
was permitted no longer to go abroad
from land to land to. preach the gospel. How natural would it have been
for him to be desponding, and to feel
that he was leading a useless life.
But he did not feel thus. He felt
that in some way he might be doing
good. He was suffering in a good
cause, and his trials had been brought
on him by the appointment of God.
Ile gave himself to writing letters ;
he talked with all who would come to
him (Act xxviii. 30, 31), and he expected to accomplish something by
his example in his sufferings. The
sick, the afflicted, and the imprisoned
often feel that they are useless. They
are laid aside from public and active
life, and they feel that they are living
in vain. But itis notso. The long
imprisonment of John Bunyan--so
mysterious to him and to his friends--
was the means of producing the Pilgrim’s Progress, now translated into
more than twenty languages, and already blessed to the salvation of thousands, The meekness, and patience,
and kindness of a Christian on a bed
of pain, may do more for the honour
of religion than he could do in a life
of health. It shows the sustaining
power of the gospel ; and this is much.

It is worth much suffering to show to :

CHAPTER Til,

It is honour’
a world what the gospel can do in
supporting the soul in times of trial ;
and he who is imprisoned or persecuted ; he who lies month after month
or year after year on a bed of languishing, may do more for the honour
of religion than by many years of
active life.

8. There is but one family among
the friends of God; ver. 15. They
all have one Father, and all are brethren. In heaven and on earth they
belong to the same family, and worship the same God. Let Christians,
therefore, first love oneanother. Let
them lay aside all contention and
strife. Let them feel that they are
brethren--that though they belong to
different denominations, andare called
by different names, yet they belong to
the same family, and are united under
the same glorious head. Let them,
secondly, realize how highly they are
honoured. ‘They belong to the same
family as the angels of light and the
spirits of just men'made perfect. It
is an honour to belong to such a
family ; an honour-to be a Christian.
Oh, if we saw this in its true light,
how much more honourable would it
be to belong to this *‘ family”’ than to
belong to the families of the great on
earth, and to bave our names enrolled
with nobles and with kings!

9. Let us seek to know more of the
love of Christ in our redemption--to
understand more of the extent of that
love which he evinced for us; ver. 16
--19. Itis worth our study. It will
reward our efforts. There are few
Christians--if there are any--who
understand the richness and fulness
of the gospel of Christ ; few who have
such elevated views as they might
have and should have of the glory of
that gospel. It is wonderful that they
who profess to love the Lord Jesus
do not study that system more, and
desire more to know the heighth, and
depth, and length, and breadth of the
love of Christ. True, it passes knowledge. We cannot hope fully to fathom it in this world. But we may
know more of it than we do. We may
aspire to being filled with all the fulness of God. We may long for it;
pant for it; strive for it; pray for it
| THEREFORE, the prisoner
1 of the Lord,) beseech you that |.

ye walk ¢ worthy of the vocation
wherewith ye are called.
1 or, in. a Col. 1. 10.

--and we shall not strive in vain.
Though we shall not attain all we
wish ; though there will be an infinity beyond what we can understand
in this world, yet there will be
enough attained to reward all our
efforts, and to fill us with love and joy
and peace. ‘The love of God our
Saviour is indeed an_ iliimitable
ocean ; but we may see enough of it
in this world to lead us to adore and
praise God with overflowing hearts.

This chapter is the commencement
of the practical part of the epistle.
and is made up, like the remaining
chapters, of various exhortations. It
is in accordance with the usual habit
of Paul to conduct an argument in
his epistles, and then to enforce various practical duties, either growing
out of the argument which the had
maintained, or, more commonly,
adapted .to some particular state of
things in the church to which he
wrote. The points of exhortation in
this chapter are, in general, the
following:

I. An exhortation to wnity; ver.
1--6.
worthy of their vocation (ver. 1);
shows them how it could be done, or
what he meant; and that, in order
to that, they should show meekness
and kindness (ver. 3), and particularly exhorts them to unity (ver. 3) ;
for they had one God, one Saviour,
one baptism, one religion; ver. 4--6.

II. Ife shows them that God had
made ample provision for his people,
that they might be sound in the faith,
and in unity of life and of doctrine,
and need not be driven about with
every wind of opinion; ver. 7--16.
He assures them that to every Christian is given grace in the Redeemer
adapted to his circumstances (ver. 7);
that the Lord Jesus ascended to
heaven to obtain gifts for his people
(ver. 8--10) ; that he had given apostles, prophets, and evangelists, for the
very purp ose of imparting instruction,

He entreats them to walk.

and confirming them in the faith of
the gospel (ver. 11, 12) ; that this was
in order that they might attain to the
highest elevation in Christian knowledge and piety (ver. 13); and particularly that they might not be driven
to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine; ver. 14--16.

III. Having these arrangements
made for their knowledge and piety,
he exhorts them not to live as the
heathen around them lived, but to
show that they were under a better
influence ; ver. 17--24. Their understanding was darkened, and they were
alienated from the life of God, or
true religion (ver. 18); they were
past feeling, and were given over to
every form of sensuality; ver. 19.
The Ephesians, however, had been
taught a different thing (ver. 20, 21),
and the apostle exhorts them to lay.
aside everything pertaining to their
former course of life, and to become
wholly conformed to the principles
of the new man; ver. 22--24.

IV. He exhorts them to perform
particular Christian duties, and to
put away certain evils, of which they
and all others were in danger; ver.
25 --32. In particular, he entreats
them to avoid lying (ver. 25).; anger
(ver. 26); theft (ver. 28) ;. corrupt
and corrupting conversation (ver. 29) ;
grieving the Holy Spirit (ver. 30);
bitterness, evil-speaking, and malice
(ver. 31); and entreats them to manifest in their intercourse with each
other a spirit of kindness and forgiveness; ver. 32.

1. I, therefore. In view of the
great and glorious truths which God
has revealed, and of the grace which
he has manifested towards you who
are Gentiles. See the previous chapters. The sense of the word “therefore’’--ody--in this place, is, “ Such
being your exalted privileges; since
God has done so much for you; since
he has revealed for you such a glorious system; since he has bestowed on
you the honour of cailing you into his
kingeom, and making you partakers

of his mercy, I entreat you to live in
accordance with these eievated privileges, and to show your sense of his
goodness by devoting your all to his
service.” The force of the word ‘‘J,”’
they would all feel. It was the appeal and exhortation of the founder
of their church--of their spiritual
father--of one who had endured much
for them, and who was now in bonds
on account of his devotion to the
welfare of the Gentile world.--§ The
prisoner of the Lord. Marg.,in. It
means, that he was now a prisoner,
or in confinement zn the cause of the
Lord; and he regarded himself as
having been made a prisoner because
the Lord had so willed and ordered
it. He did not feel particularly that
he was the prisoner of Nero; he was
bound and kept because the Lord
willed it, and because it was in his
service ; see Notes on chap. iii. 1.
qQ Beseech you that ye walk worthy.
That you live as becomes those who
have been called in this manner into
the kingdom of God. The word walk
is often used to denote life, condyct,.
&c.; see Notes on Rom. iv. 12; vi.
Asa COre Vertes Oy, tne vocation. |
Of the calling--rijs kd\jocews. This
word properly means a call, or an,
invitation--as to a banquet. Hence
it means that divine invitation or
calling by which Christians are introduced into the privileges of the
gospel. The word is translated calling in Rom. xi. 29; 1 Cor. i. 26; vii.
20° "Eph 1.7183 iv.7ly 45° Phil “in
Ue Sibhesse yen lieve 2 ein lor
Heb. i. 15" 2) Pet: 7.10." “It “does
not elsewhere occur. The sense of
the word, and the agency employed
in calling us, are well expressed in
the Westminster Shorter Catechism. |
“Effectual calling is the work of
God’s Spirit, whereby convincing us
of our sin and misery, enlightening
our minds in the knowledge of Christ,
and renewing our wills, he doth persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus
Christ freely offered to us in the gospel.” This calling or vocation is
through the agency of the Holy Spirit,
and is his appropriate work on the
human heart. It consists essentially
in influencing the mind to turn to

God, or to enter into his kingdom,
It is the exertion of so much influence
on the mind as is necessary to secure the turning of the sinner to God.
In this all Christians are agreed,

| though there have been almost endless

disputes about the actual influence
exerted, and the mode in which the
Spirit acts on the mind. Some suppose it is by ‘‘ moral suasion ;” some
by physical power; some by.an act of
creation ; some by inclining the mind
to exert its proper powers in a right
way, and to turn to God, What is
the precise agency employed perhaps
we are not to expect to be able to decide; see John iil. 8. The great, the
essential point is held, if it be maintained that it is by the’ agency of the
Holy Spirit that the result is secured
--and this I suppose to be held by all
evangelical Christians. But though
it is by the agency of the Iloly Spirit,
we are not to suppose that 1t 1s without the employment of means. It is
not literally like the act of creation.
It is preceded and attended with
means adapted to the end; means
which are almost as various as the
individuals who are called into the
kingdom of God. Among those means
are the following. (1.) Preavhing.

‘Probably more are called into the

kingdom by this means than any
other. It is “God’s great ordinance
for the salvation of men.” It is
eminently fitted for it. The pulpat
has higher advantages for acting on
the mind than any other means of
affecting men. The truths that are
dispensed; the sacredness of the
place; the peace and quietness of the
sanctuary; and the appeals to the
reason, the conscience, and the heart
--all are fitted to affect men, and to
bring them to reflection. The Spirit
makes use of the word preached, but
in a great variety of ways. Sometimes many are impressed simultaneously; sometimes the same truth
affects one mind while others are unmoved; and sometimes truth reaches
the heart of a sinner which he has
heard a hundred times before, without
being interested. The Spirit acts
with sovereign power, and by laws
which have never yet been traced
out.
are used to call men into his kingdom.

God appeals to men by laying them | mind with conscious
on a bed of pain, or by requiring them | memory of crime.

to follow a friend in the still and
mournful procession to the grave.
They feel that they must die, and they
are led to ask the question whether
they are prepared. Much fewer are
affected in this way than we should
suppose would be the case; but still
there are many, in the aggregate, who
can trace their hope of heaven to a
fit of sickness, or to the death of a
friend. (3.) Conversation is one of
the means by which sinners are called
into the kingdom of God. In some
states of mind, where the Spirit has
prepared the soul like mellow ground
prepared for the seed, a few moments’
conversation, or a single remark, will
do more to arrest the attention than
much preaching.
often the means of calling men into
the kingdom. The Bible is the great
means--and if we can get men to
read that, we have very cheering indications that they will be converted.
The profligate Earl of Rochester was
awakened and led to the Saviour by
reading a chapter in Isaiah. And
who can estimate the number of those
who have been converted by reading
Baxter’s Call to the Unconverted;
Alleine’s Alarm; the Dairyman’s
Daughter ; or the Shepherd of Salisbury Plain? He does good who places
a good book in the way of a sinner.
That mother or sister is doing good,
and making the conversion of a son
or brother probable, who puts a Bible
in his chest when he goes to sea, or
in his trunk when he goes on a journey.
Never should a son be allowed to go
from home without one. The time
will come when, far away from home,
he will read it. He will read it when
his mind is pensive and tender, and
the Spirit may bear the truth to his
heart for his conversion. (5.) The
Spirit calls men into the kingdom of
Christ by presiding over, and directing in some unseen manner their own
reflections, or the operations of their
own minds, In some way unknown
to us, he turns the thoughts to the
past life; recalls forgotten deeds and

(2.) The events of Providence | plans; n.akes long past sins rise to

(4.) Reading is

fA. D. 64.

remembrance; and overwhelms the
guilt from the
He holds this
power over the soul; and it is among
the most mighty and mysterious of all
the influences that he has on the
heart. Sometimes--a man can hardly
tell how--the mind will be pensive,
sad, melancholy; then conscious of
guilt; then alarmed at the future.
Often, by sudden transitions, it will
be changed from the gay to the grave,
and from the pleasant to the sad; and
often, unexpectedly to himself, and
by associations which he cannot trace
out, the sinner will find himself reflecting on death, judgment, and
eternity. It is the Spirit of God that
leads the mind along. It is not by
force; not by the violation of its
laws, but in accordance with those
laws, that the mind is thus led along
to the eternal world. In such ways,
and by such means, are men “called”
into the kingdom of God. To “walk
worthy of that calling,” is to live as
becomes @ Christian, an- heir of
glory ; to live as Christ did. It is,
(1.) To bear our religion with us to
all places, companies, employments.
Not merely to be-a Christian on the
Sabbath, and at the communion table,
and in our own land, but every day,
and everywhere, and in any land
where we may be placed. We are to
live religion, and not merely to profess it. We are to be Christians in
the counting-room, as well as in the
closet ; on the farm as well as at the
communion table; among strangers,
and in a foreign land, as well as in
our own country and in the sanctuary.
(2.) It is to do nothing inconsistent
with the most elevated Christian
character. In temper, feeling, plan,
we are to give expression to no emotion, and use no language, and perform no deed, that shall be inconsistent with the most elevated Christian
character. (3.) It is to do riyht always: to be just to all; to tell the
simple truth; to defraud no one; to
maintain a correct standard of morals;
to be known to be honest. There is
a correct standard of character and
conduct; and a Christian should be

,

te

2. With all lowliness @ and meek- | ness, with long-suffering, forbear-

a Mat. 11. 29.

&® man s0 living, that we may always
know exactly where to find him. He
should so live, that we shall have
no doubts that, however others may
act, we shall find him to be the unflinching advocate of temperance,
chastity, honesty, and of every good
work--of every plan that is really
fitted to alleviate human woe, and
benefit a dying world. (4.) It is to
live as one should who expects soon
to be in heaven. Such a man will
fee] that the earth is not his home;
that he is a stranger and a pilgrim
here; that riches, honours, and pleasures are of comparatively little importance; that he ought to watch
and pray, and that hé€ ought to be
holy. A man who feels that he may
die at any moment, will watch and
pray. A man who realizes that tomorrow he may be in heaven, will
feel that he ought to be holy. He
who begins a day on earth, feeling
that at its close he may be among
the angels of God, and the spirits of
just men made perfect; that before
its close he may have seen the Saviour
glorified, and the burning throne of
God, will feel the importance of living
a holy life, and of being wholly devoted to the service of God. Pure
should be the eyes that are soon to
look on the throne of God; pure the
bands that are soon to strike the
harps of praise in heaven; pure the
feet that are to walk the “golden
streets above.”

2. With all lowliness. Jumility ;
see Notes on Acts xx. 19, where the
same Greek word is uscd; comp.
a'so the following places, where the
same Greek word occurs: Phil. ii. 3,
*“ in lowliness of mind, let gach esteem
other better than themselves;’’ Col.
ii. 18, “in a voluntary humility ;” Col.
ii. 23; iii. 12; 1 Pet. v.5. The word
does not elsewhere occur in the New
‘estament. ‘The idea is, that humility of mind becomes those who are
“called” (ver. 1.), and that we walk
worthy of that calling when we evince
it. § And weekness ; sec Notes on
Matt. v. 5. Meekness relates to the

ing one another in love;

manner in which we receive injuries.
We are to bear them patiently, and
not to retaliate, or seek revenge,
The meaning here is, that we adorn
the gospel when we show its power in
enabling us to bear injuries without
anger or a desire of revenge, or with
a mild and forgiving spirit; see 2
Core xmleGakv2250 vision Tim
il. 25; Titus iii. 2; where the same
Greek word occurs. J With longsuffering, &c. Bearing patiently with
the foibles, faults, and infirmities of
others; see Notes on 1 Cor. xiii. 4.
The virtue here required is that
which sis to be manifested in our
manner of receiving the provocations
which we meet with from our brethren.
No virtue, perhaps, is more frequently
demanded in our intercourse with
others. We do not go far with any
fellow-traveller on the journey of
life, before we find there is great occasion for its exercise. He has a
temperament different from our own.
Ile may be sanguine, or choleric, or
melancholy; while we may be just
the reverse. Ie has peculiarities of
taste, and habits, and disposition,
which differ much from ours. He has
his own plans and purposes of life, and
his own way and time of doing things.
He may be naturally irritable,or he may
have been so trained that his modes
of speech and conduct differ much
from ours. Neighbours have occasion
to remark this in their neighbours ;
friends in their friends; kindred in

| their kindred ;-one church-member in

another. A husband and wife--such
is the imperfection of human nature
--can find enough in each other to embitter life, if they choose to magnify
imperfections, and to become irritated
at trifles; and there is no friendship
that may not be marred in this way,
if we will allow it. Hence, if wo

would have life move. on smoothly,
we must learn to bear and forbear.
We must indulge the friend that we
love in the little peculiarities of saying and doing things which may be
important fo him, but which may
be of little moment tous. Like chil-

8 Endeavouring to keep the unity | of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

dren, we must suffer each one to build
his play-house in his own way, and
not quarrel with him because he does
not think our way the best. All usefulness, and all comfort, may be prevented by an unkind, a sour, a crabbed
temper of mind--a mind that can bear
with no difference of opinion or temperament. A spirit of fault-finding ;
an unsatisfied temper ; a constant irritability ; little inequalities in the
look, the temper, or the manner; a
brow cloudy and dissatisfied--your
husband or your wife cannot tell why
--wili more than neutralize all the
good you can do, and render life anything but a blessing. It is In such
gentle and quiet virtues as meekness
and forbearance, that the happiness
and usefulness of life consist, far more
than in brilliant eloquence, in splendid talent, or illustrious deeds, that
shall send the name to future times.
It is the bubbling spring which flows
gently ; the little rivulet which glides
through the meadow, and which runs
along day and night by the farmhouse, that is useful, rather than the
swollen flood or the roaring cataract.
Niagara excites our wonder; and we
stand amazed at the power and greatness of God there, as he “pours it
from his hollow hand.”’ But one Niagara is enough for a continent ora
world; while that same world needs
thousands and tens of thousands of
silver fountains, and gently flowing
rivulets, that shall water every farm,
and every meadow, and every garden,
and that shall flow on, every day and
every night, with their gentle and
quiet beauty. So with the acts of
our lives. It is not by great deeds
only, like those of Howard--not by
great sufferings only, like those of the
martyrs--that good is to be done; it
is by the daily and quiet virtues of
life--the Christian temper, the meek
forbearance, the spirit of forgiveness
in the husband, the wife, the father,
the mother, the brother, the sister,
the friend, the neighbour--that good
is to be done; and in this all may be
useful.

8. The unity of the Spirit A

united spirit, or oneness of spirit.
This does not refer to the fact that
there is one Holy Spirit ; but it refers
to unity of affection, of confiderce, of
love. It means that Christians should
be united in temper and affection, and
not be split up into factions and parties. It may~be implied here, as is
undoubtedly true, that such a unity
would be produced only by the Holy
Spirit ; and that, as there was but one
Spirit which had acted on their hearts
to renew them, they ought» to evince
the same feelings and views. There
was occasion among the Ephesians
for this exhortation ; for they were
composed of Jews and Gentiles, aud
there might be danger of divisions
and strifes, as there had been in other
churches. There is always occasion
for such an exhortation ; for (1.) wnity
of feeling is eminently desirable to
honour the gospel (see Notes on John
xvii. 21); and (2.) there is always
danger of discord where men are
brought together in one society. There
are somany different tastes and habits ;
there is sucha variety of intellect and
feeling; the modes of education have
been so various, and the temperament
may be so different, that there is constant danger of division. Hence the
subject is .so often dwelt on in the
Scriptures (see Notes on 1 Cor. ii.
seq.), and hence there is so much need
of caution and of care in the churches.
q] In the bond of j eace. ‘This was to
be by the cultivation of that peaceful
temper which binds all together. The
American Indians usually spoke of
peaceas a “chain of friendship’ which
was to be kept bright, The meaning
here is, that they should be bound or
united together in the sentiments and
affections of peace. It is not mere
external unity ; it is not a mere unity
of creed; it is not a mere unity
in the forms of public worship ; it is
such as the Iloly Spirit produces in
the hearts of Christians, when it fills
them all with the same love, and joy,
and peace in believing. The following verses contain the reasons fer this.

4, There is one body. One church
--for so the word body means here--

4 4 There is one body, and cne
@ Rom. 12, 5.

denoting the body of Christ; see

Notes on Rom. xii. 5; comp. Notes
on Eph. i. 23. The meaning here is,
that as there is really but one church
on earth, there ought to be unity.
The church is, at present, divided
into many denominations. It has different forms of worship, and different
rites and ceremonies. It embraces
those of different complexions and
ranks in life, and it cannot be denied
that there are often unhappy contentions and jealousies in different parts
of that church. Still, there is but
one--‘‘one holy, catholic (7. €., universal) church;”’ and that church
should feel that it is one. Christ did
not come to redeem and save different churches, and to give them a different place in heaven. He did not
come to save the Episcopal communion merely, or the Presbyterian or
the Methodist communions only ; nor
jid he leave the world to fit up for
them different mansions in heaven.
IIe did not come to save merely the
black man, or the red, o+ the white
man; nor did he leave the world to
set up for them separate mansions in
the skies. fe came that he might
collect into one community a multitude of every complexion, and from
every land, and unite them in one
great brotherhood on earth, and ultimately assemble them in the same
heaven. The church is one. Every
sincere Christian is a brother in that
church, and has an equal.right with
all others to its privileges. Being
one by the design of the Saviour,
they should be one in feeling ;- and
every Christian, no matter what his
rank, should be ready to hail every
other Christian as a fellow-heir of
heaven. § One Spirit. The Holy
Spirit. There is one and the selfsame Spirit that dwelis in the church.
The same Spirit has awakened all;
enlightened all; convicted all; converted all. Wherever they may be,
and whoever, yet there has been substantially the same work of the Spirit
on the heart of every Christian.
There are circumstantial differences

Spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your calling ;

arising from diversities of tempera-

ment, disposition, and education;
there may be a difference in the depth
and power of his operations on the
soul ; there may be a difference in the
degree of conviction for sin and in
the evidence of conversion, but. still
there are the same operations on the
heart essentially produced by the
same Spirit; see Notes on 1 Cor. xii.
6--11l. All the gifts of prayer, and
of preaching; all the zeal, the ardour,
the love, the self-denial in the church,
are produced by the same Spirit.
There should be, therefore, unity.
The church is united in the agency
by which it is saved; it should be
united in the feelings which influence
its members. J Lven as ye are called;
see ver.1. The sense is, ‘‘there is
one bodyand one spirit,in like manner
as there is one hope resulting from
your calling.’ The same notion -of
oneness is found in relation to each of
these things. J In one hope of your
calling. In one hope resulting from
your being called into his kingdom.
On the meaning of the word hope,
see Notes on chap. ii. 12. The meaning here is, that Christians have the
same hope, and they should therefore
be one. They are looking forward to
the same heaven; they hope for the
same happiness beyond the grave.
It is not as on earth among the people of the world, where there is a
variety of hopes--where one hopes
for pleasure, and another for honour,
and another for gain ; but there is the
prospect of the same inexhaustible
joy. This hope is fitted to promote
union. There is no rivalry--for there
is enough for all. Hope on earth
does not always produce union and
harmony. Two men hope to obtain
the same office; two students hope to
obtain the same honour in college’;
two rivals hope to obtain the same
hand in marriage--and the consequence is jealousy, contention, and
strife. The reason is, that but one
can obtain the object. Not so with
the crown of life--with the rewards
of heaven. All may obtain that crown;
5 One Lord, one faith, one baptism,

all may share those rewards. Llowcan

Christians contend in anangry manner
with each other, when the hope of
dwelling in the same heaven swells
their bosoms and animates their hearts?

5. One Lord. This evidently refersto the Lord Jesus. The “ Spirit”
is mentioned in the previous verse ;
the Father in the verse following.
Onthe application of the word “ Lord”’
to the Saviour, see Notes on Acts i.

24, The argument here is, that there |

ought to be unity among Christians,
because they have one Lord and
Saviour. They have not different
Saviourg adapted to different classes ;
not one for the Jew and another for
the Greek; not one for the rich and
another for the poor; not one for the
bond and another for the free. There
is but one. He belongs in common
to all as their Saviour; and he has a
right to rule over one as much as over
another. There is no better way of
promoting unity among Christians
than by reminding them that they
have the same Saviour. And when
jealousies and heart-burnings arise ;
or when they are disposed to contend
about trifles ; when they magnify unimpertant matters until they are in
danger of rending the church asunder,
let them feel that they have one
Lord and Saviour, and they will lay
aside their contentions and be one
again. Let two men who have never
seen each other before, mcet in a distant land, and feel that they have
the same Redeemer, and their hearts
will mingle into one. They are not
aliens, but friends. A cord of sympathy is struck more tender than that
which binds them to country or home;
and though of different nations, complexions, or habits, they will feel that
they are one. Why should contentions ever arise between those who
have the same Redeemer? 4 One
faith. The same belief. That is,
aither the belief of the same doctrines, or faith of the same nature in
the heart. The word may be taken
in either sense. I see no reason why
it should not include both here, or be
uscd in the widest sense, If so used,

lA. D. 64
6 One God and Father of all,

it means that Christians should be
united because they hold the same
great doctrines; and also, because
they have the same confidence in the
Redeemer in their hearts. They hold
the same system as distinguished from
Judaism, Paganism, Mohammedanism, Deism; and they should, therefore, be one. They have the same
trust in Christ, as a living, practical
principle--and they should, therefore,
be one. They may differ in. other
attachments; in temperament; in
pursuit ; in professions in life--but
they have a common faith--and they
should be onz. {[ One baptism. This
does not affirm that there is one mode
of baptism, but it refers to the thing
itself. They are all baptized in the
name of the same Father, Saviour,
Sanctifier. They have all in this
manner been consecrated unto God,
and devoted to his service. Whether
by immersion, or by pouring, or by
sprinkling, they have all been baptized with water; whether it is done
in adult years, or in-infancy, the same
solemn act has been performed on all
--the act of consecration to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
This passage cannot be adduced to
prove that only one mode of baptism
is lawful, unless it can be shown that
the thing referred to here was the
mode and not th? thin7 itself; and
unless it can be proved that Paul

‘meant to build his argument for the

unity of Christians en the fact that
the same form was used in their baptism. But this is evidently not the
point of his argument. The argument is, that there was really but one
baptism--not that there was but one
mode of baptism. I could not use
this argument in this form, ‘ Christians should be one because they have
been all baptized by sprinkling ;” and
yet the argument would be just as
forcible as to use it in this form,
‘Christians should be one because
they have all been baptized by dmmersion.” There.is one baptism, not
one mode of baptism; and no man
has a right to asswme that there can
be but one mode, and then apply this

who 7s above all, and through all,
and in you all.
7 But unto every one of us is

passage to that. The essential thing
in the argument before us is, that
there has been a consecration to the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
by the application of water. Thus.
understood, the argument is one that
will be felt by all who have been devoted to God by baptism. ‘They have
taken the same vows upon them. They
have consecrated themselves to the
same God. They have made the
same solemn profession of religion.
Water has been applied to one and
all as the emblem of the purifying
influences of the Holy Spirit; and
having been thus initiated in a solemn
manner into the same profession of
religion, they should be one.

6. One God. The same God;
therefore there should be unity.
Were there ‘many gods to be worshipped, there could be no more hope
of unity than there is among the worshippers of Mammon and Bacchus,
and the various other idols that men
sct up. Men who have different pursuits, and different objects of supreme
affection, can be expected to have no
union. Men who worship many gods,
cannot hope to be united. Their affections are directed tu different objects, and there is no harmony or
sympathy offeéling. But where there
is one supreme object of attachment,
there may be expected to be unity.
Vhe children of a family that are devoted to a parent, will be united
among themselves ; and the fact that
all Christians have the same great
object of worship, should constitute a
strong bond of union among themselves--a chain always kept bright.
{| The Father of all. One God who
is the Father of all; that is, who isa
common Father to all who believe.
That this refers to the Father, in
contradistinction from the Son and
+he Lloly Spirit, seems evident. The
Spirit and the Son are mentioned in
the previous verses. But the fact
that the “ Father of all’’ is mentioned
as ‘“ God,” does not prove that the

‘dowed with divine attributes.
given grace according to the measure @ of the gift of Christ.
@ Ro.12.3.

That
question is to be determined by the
attributes ascribed to the Son and the
Holy Spirit in other places. All
sincere Christians worship one God,
and but one. But they suppose that
this one God subsists as Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, united in a mysterious manner, and constituting Tur
one God, and that there is no other
God. | That the Father is divine, they
all hold, as Paul affirms here ; that
the Son and the Holy Spirit are also
divine, they also hold; see Notes on
Jobni.; Heb. i.; Phil. ii. 6; Rom.
ix.5. The meaning here is, that God
is the common Father of all his people
--of the rich and the poor; the bond
and the free; the learned and the
unlearned. He is uo respecter of
persons. Nothing would tend more
to overcome the prejudices of colour,
rank, and wealth, than to feel that
we all have one Father ; and that we
are all equally the objects of his favour; comp. Notes on Acts xvii. 26.
| Who is above all. Who is supreme;
who presides over all things. § And
through all. He pervades universal
nature, and his agency is seen everywhere. ( And in you all. There
is no one in whose heart he does not
dwell. You are his temple, and he
abidesin you; see chap. ii. 22; Notes,
1 Cor. vi. 19. The argument here is,
that as the same God dwelt in every
heart, they ought to be one. See
this argument beautifully expressed
in the Saviour’s prayer, John xvii
21; comp. Jobn xiv. 23.

7. But unto every one of us
Every Christian. {J Js given grace
The favour of God; meaning here
that God had bestowed upon each
sincere Christian the means of living
as he ought to. do, and had in his gospel made ample provision that they
might walk worthy of their vocation.
What are the endowments thus given,
the apostle states in the following
verses. The grace referred to here,
most probably means the gracious in-

Spirit and the Son are not also en- ‘fluences of the Holy Spirit, or lie
8 Wherefore he saith, © When
he ascended up on high, he led
a Ps.68.18.

1 captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men.
l or, a multitude of captives.

operations on the heart in connection
with the use of the means which God
has appointed. {| According to the
measure of the gift cf Christ. Grace
is bestowed upon all true Christians,
and all have enough to enable them
to live a life of holiness. Yet we are
taught here, (1.) That itisagift. It
is bestowed on us. It is not what is
originated by ourselves. (2.) Itis by
acertain measure. It is not unlimited,
and without rule. There. is a wise
adaptation ; an imparting it by a certain rule. The same grace is not
given to all, but toall is given enough
to enable them to live as they ought
to live. (3.) That measure is the gift
of Christ, or what is given in Christ.
It comes through him. It is what he
has purchased ; what he has obtained
by his merits. All have enough for
the purposes for which God has called
them into his kingdom, but there are
not the same endowments conferred
on all. Some have grace given them
to qualify them for the ministry; some
to be apostles ; some to be martyrs;
some to make them eminent as public
benefactors. All this has been obtained by Christ; and one should
not complain that another has more
distinguished endowments than he has;
comp. Notes on Rom. xii.3; John i.16.

8. Wherefore he saith. The word
“he” is not in the original ; and it
may mean ‘the Scripture saith,” or
“God saith.’ The point of the argurnent here is, that Christ, when he
ascended to heaven, obtained certain
gifts for men, and that those gifts are
bestowed upon his people in accordaace with this. To prove that, he
adduces this passage from Ps. Ixviii.
18. Much perplexity has been felt in
regard to the principle on which Paul
quotes this Psalm, and applies it to
the ascension of the Redeemer. ‘The
Psalm seems to have been composed
on the occasion of removing the ark
of the covenant from Kirjath-jearim
to Mount Zion; 2 Sam. vi. 1, seq.
It is a song of triumph, celebrating
the victories of JeHovaH, and parti-

cularly the victories which had been
achieved when the ark was at the
head of the army. It appears to have
no relation to the Messiah ; nor would
it probably occur to any one on reading it, that it referred to his ascension, unless it had been so quoted
by the apostle. Great difficulty has
been felt, therefore, in determining on
what principle Paul applied it to the
ascension of the Redeemer. Some
have supposed that the Psalm hada
primary reference to the Messiah ;
some that it referred to him in only a
secondary sense ; some that it is applied to him by way of ‘‘ accommodation ;’’ and some that he merely uses
the words as adapted to express his
idea, as a man adopts words which
are familiar to him, and which will
express his thoughts, though not meaning to say that the words had any such
reference originally. Storr supposes
that the words were used by the Ephesian Christians in their hymns, and
that Paul quoted them as containing
a sentiment which was admitted among
them. This is possible; but it is mere
conjecture. It has been also supposed
that the tabernacle was a type of
Christ; and that the whole Psalm,
therefore, having original reference to
the tabernacle, might be applied to
Christ as the antitype. But this is
both conjectural and fanciful. On
the various modes adopted to account
for the difficulty, the reader may consult Rosenmiiller ix loc. To me it
seems plain that the Psalm had original reference to the bringing up the
ark to Mount Zion, and is a triumphal
song. In the song or Psalm, the poet
shows why God was to be praised--
on account of his greatness and his
benignity to men; ver. 1--6. He
then recounts the doings of God in
former times -- particularly his conducting his people through the wilderness, and the fact that his enemies
were discomfited before him; ver.
7--12. All this refers to the God,
the symbols of whose presence were
on the tabernacle, and accompanying

the ark. He then speaks of the various fortunes that had befallen the
ark of the covenant. It had lain
among the pots, ver. 13, yet. it had
formerly been white as snow when
God scattered kings by it; ver. 14.
He then speaks of the hill of God --
the Mount Zion to which the ark was
about to be removed, and says that it
is an ‘‘ high hill’’--“ high as the hills
of Bashan,” the hill where God desired to dwell forever; ver.16. God
is then introduced as ascending that
hill, encompassed with thousands of
angels, as in Mount Sinai; and the
poet says that, in doing it, he had triumphed over his enemies, and had led
captivity captive; ver. 18. The fact
that the ark of God thus ascended the
hill of Zion, the place of rest ; that it
was to remain there as its permanent
abode, no more to be carried about at
the head of armies ; was the proof of
its triumph. It had made every thing
captive. It had subdued every foe ;
and its ascent there would be the
means of obtaining invaluable gifts
for men: Mercy and truth would go
forth from that mountain; and the
true religion would spread abroad,
even to the rebellious, as the results
of the triumph of God, whose symbol
was over the tabernacle and the ark.
The placing the ark there was the
proof of permanent victory, and would
be connected with most important
benefits to men. The ‘“ ascending on
high,’ therefore, in the Psalm, refers,
as it seems to me, to the ascent of the
symbol of the Divine presence accompanying the ark on Mount Zion, or to
the placing it “on high” above all
its foes. The remainder of the Psalm
corresponds with this view. This
ascent of the ark on Mount Zion ;
this evidence of its triumph over all
the foes of God; this permanent residence of the ark there; and this
fact, that its being established there
would be followed with the bestowment of invaluable gifts to men, might
be regarded as a BEAUTIFUL EMBLEM
of the ascension of the Redeemer to
heaven. There were strong points of
resemblance. He also ascended on
high.. His ascent was the proof of
victory over his foes. He went there

for a permanent abode. And his ascension was connected with the bestowment of important blessings to men.
It is as such emblematic language, I
suppose, that the apostle makes the
quotation. It did not originally refer
to this; but the events were so similar in many points, that the one would
suggest the other, and the same language would describe both. It was
language familiar to the apostle;
language that would aptly express his
thoughts, and language that was not
improbably applied to the ascension
of the Redeemer by Christians at that
time. The phrase, therefore, ‘“ he
saith ’--aiyss--or “it saith,’’ or “the
Scripture saith,” means, ‘‘it is said ;”’
or, ‘‘this language will properly express
the fact under consideration,towit, that
there is grace given to each one of us,
or that the means are furnished by the
Redeemer for us to lead holy lives.”’

{For remarks on the subject of -accommodation, in connection with quotations from the
Old Vestament into the New, see the Supplementary Notes, Heb. i. 5. andii.6. The principle of accommodation, if admitted at all, should
be used with great caution. Doubtless it is
sanctioned by great names both in Europe
and America. Yet it must be allowed, that
the apostles understood the mind of the Spirit, in the Old Testament, that their inspiration preserved them from every error. When,
therefore, they tell us that certain passages
have an ultimate reference to the Messiah
and his times, though we should never have
discovered such reference without their aid,
nothing of the kind, it may be, appearing in
the original places, yet we are bound to receive it on their testimony. It is alleged, indeed, that the apostles sometimes use the ordinary forms of quotation, without intending
to intimate thereby any prophetic reference in
the passages thus introduced, nay, when suc:
reference is obviously inadmissible, This, in
the. opiuion-of many, isa very hazardous sta ement, and introduces into the apostolic writings, and especially into the argumentative
part of them, where. so great use is made ct
the Old Testament, no small measure ot uncertainty. Let the reader examine the passages in question, keeping in view, at the same
time, the typical nature of the ancient economy, and he will have little difficulty in admitting the prophetic reference in most, if not in
all of them. See Haldane on Rom. 1. 17, fora
very masterly view of this subject, with remarks on Mat. ii. 15, aud other passages sup9 (Now that he ascended, what
is it but that he also descended

first into the lower parts of the
earth 2

posed to demand the accommodation theory.
Nothing can be more dishonourable,”’ says
dhat prince of English commentators, on the
epistle to the Romans, “to the character of.
divine revelation, and injurious to the edification of believers, than this method of explaining the quotationsin the New Testament
from the Old, not as predictions or interpretations, but as mere illustrations, by way of
accommodation. In this way,.many of the
prophecies referred to in the epistles are set
aside-from their proper application, and Christians are taught that they do uot prove what
the apostles adduced them to establish.’’ In
reference to the quotation in this place, there
seems little difficulty in connection with the
view, that though the primary reference be
to the bringing up of the ark to Mount Zion,
the ultimate one is to the glorious ascension
of Jesus into the highest heavens. The Jews
rightly interpret part of this psalm (68) of
the Messiah. Nor is it to be believed that the
apostle would have applied it to the ascension of Christ unless that application had been
admitted by the Jews in his time, and unless
himself were persuaded of its propriety.]

Q When he ascended up on high.
To heaven. The Psalm is, “‘ Thou

hast ascended on high;’’ comp.
Eph. i. 22, 23. ( He led captivity
captive. The meaning of this in the

Psalm is, that he triumphed over
his foes. The margin is, “a@ multitude of captives.” But this, I think,
is not quite the idea. It is language
derived from a conqueror, who not
only makes captives, but who makes
captives of those who were then prisoners, and who conducts them asa
part of his triumphal procession. He
not only subdués his enemy, but he
leads his captives in triumph. The
allusion is to the public triumphs of.
conquerors, especially as celebrated
among the Romans, in which captives
were led in chains (Tacitus, Ann. xii.
388), and to the custom insuch triumphs
of distributing presents among the
soldiers; comp. also Judges v. 30,
where it appears that this was also
an early custom in other nations.
Burder, in Res. Alt u. neu Morgenland, im loc. When Christ ascended
to heaven, he triumphed over all his
foes. It was a complete victory over
the malice of the great enemy of God,

and over those who had sought his
life. But he did more. He rescued
those who were the captives of Satan,
and led them in triumph. Man was
held by Satan as a prisoner. His
chains were around him. Christ rescued the captive prisoner, and designed to make him a part of his triumphal procession into heaven, that
thus the victory might be complete--
triumphing not. only over the great
foe himself, but swelling his procession with the attending hosts of those
who had been the captives of Satan,
now rescued and redeemed: § And
gave gifts.unto men. Such as he specifies in ver. 11.

9. Now that he ascended. Thatis,
it is affirmed in the Psalm that he
ascended --*‘ Thou hast ascended on
high.’ This implies that there must
have been a previous descent ; or, as
applicable to the Messiah, “7 7s a

‘truth that he previously descended.”

It is by no means certain that Paul
meant to say that the word ‘“ascended’’ demonstrated that there must
have been a previous descent ; but he
probably means that in the case of
Christ there was, in fact, a descent
into the lower parts of the earth first.
The language here used will appropriately express his descent to earth.
q Into the lower parts of the earth.
To: the lowest state of humiliation.
This seems to be the fair meaning ot
the words. Heaven stands opposed
to earth. One is above; the other is
beneath. From the one Christ descehded to the other; and he came
not only to the earth, but he stooped
to the most humble condition of humanity here; see Phil. ii. 6--8;
comp. Notes on Isa. xliv. 23. Some
have understood this of the grave;
others of the region of departed spirits ; but these interpretations do not
seem to be necessary. It is the earth
ttself that stands in contrast with the
heavens; and the idea is, that the
Redeemer descended from his lofty
eminence in heaven, and became a
man of humble rank and condition;
comp, Ps. exxxix. 15,

10 He that descended is the same
also that ascended up far above all
heavens that he might ! fill all
things.)

11 And “he gave some, apostles;
and some, prophets; and some,

1 or, fulfil.

10. He that descended is the same
also that ascended. The same Redeemer came down from God, and
returned to him. It was not a different being, but the same. 4 Far above
all heavens; see Notes on chap. i.
20--23; comp. Heb. vii. 26. He is
gone above the visible heavens, and
has ascended into-the highest abodes
of bliss; see Notes on 2 Cor. xii. 2,
q That he might fill all things. Marg,,
fulfl, The meaning is, “that he
might fill all things by his influence,
and direct and overrule all by his wisdom and power.” Doddridge. See
Notes on chap. i, 238.

11. And he gave some,. apostles.
He gave some to be apostles. The
object here is to show that he has made
ample provision for the extension and
edification of his church On the
meaning of the word apostles, and on
their appointment by the Saviour, see
Notes on Matt. x. 1. §& And some,
prophets. Ile appointed some to be
prophets ; see Nétes on Rom. xii. 7;
1 Cor. xii. 28; xiv. 1. (J And some,
evangelists ; see Notes on Acts xxi.
8; comp. 2 Tim. iv. 5. The word
does not elsewhere occur in the New
Testament. What was the precise
office of the evangelist in the primitive church, it is now impossible to
determine. The evangelist may have
been one whose main business was
preaching, and who was not particularly engaged in the government of
the church. The word properly means
“a messenger of good tidings ;”’ and
Robinson ( Lex.) supposes that it denotes a minister ef the gospel who
was not located in any place, but who
travelled as a missionary to preach
the gospel, and to found churches.
The word is so used now by many
Christians ; but it cannot be proved
that it is so used in the New Testament. An explanation of the words

evangelists ; and some, pastors and
teachers;

12 For the perfecting of the
saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ :

@1Co.12. 8

Neander on the Primitive Church, in

the Biblical Repository, vol. iv. p.
258, seq.. The office was distinct from
that of the pastor, the teacher, and
the prophet: and was manifestly an
office in which preaching was the main
thing. { And some pastors. Literally. shepherds -- aoméves ; comp.
Matt. ix. 36 ; xxv. 32 ; xxvi. 31 ; Mark
Wie toe Xe wo fee UIKC enn Smal eys elise
20; John x. 2,11, 12, 14, 16, where
it isrendered shepherd and shepherds;
also Heb. xiii. 20; I Pet. ii. 25; in
Matt. xxvi. 31; Mark xiv. 27; Heb.
xiii. 20; 1 Pet. ii. 25, itis applied to
the Lord Jesus as the great shepherd
of the flock--the church. It is rendered pvstors only in the place before
us. The word is given to ministers
of the gospel with obvious propriety,
and with great beauty. They are to
exercise the same watchfulness and
care dyer the people of their charge
which a shepherd does over his flock ;
comp. Notes on John xxi. 15, 16.
The meaning. here is, that Christ exercised a special care for his church
by appointing pastors who would
watch over it as a shepherd does over
his flock. {And teachers; see Notes
on Rom. xii. 7.

12. For the perfecting of the saints.
On the meaning of the word here rendered perfecting -- xaraprizucy -- see
Notes on 2 Cor. xiii. 9. It properly
refers to the restoring of anything to
its place ; then putting in order, making complete, &c’ Jlere it means
that these various officers were appointed in order that everything in
the church might be well arranged,
or put into its proper place ; or that
the church might be complete. It is
that Christians may have every possible advantage for becoming complete
in love, and knowledge, and order.
4 For the work of the ministry. All
these are engaged in the work of the

which here occur may be found in! ministry, though in different depart-

13 Till we all come lin the unity |man, 2 unto the measure of the

of “the faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, uato a perfect

Jor, into, a Col.2.2,

rents.
THE ministry by which Christ meant
to establish and edify the church.
All these offices had an existence at
that time, andall were proper; though
it is clear that they were not all designed to be permanent. The apostolic office was of course to cease with
the death of those who were the’ witnesses of the life and doctrines of Jesus
(comp. Notes on 1 Cor.ix.1); the office
of prophets was to cease with the ce.sation of inspiration ; and in like manner
it is possible that the office of teacher
or evangelist might be suspended, as
circumstances might demand. But
is it not clear from this that Christ
did not appoint merely three orders
of clergy to be permanent in the
church? Here are five orders enumerated, and in | Cor. xii. 28, there are
eight mentioned ; and how can it be
demonstrated that the Saviour intended that there should be three only,
and that they should be permanent ?
The presumption is rather that he
meant that there should be but one
permanent order of ministers, though
the departments of their labour
might be varied according to circumstances, and though there might be
helpers, as occasion should demand.
In founding churches among the heathen, and in instructing and governing them there, there is need of reviying nearly all the offices of teacher,
helper, evangelist, &c., which Paul
has enumerated as actually existing
in his time. For the edifying.
For building it up; that is, in the
knowledge of the truth and in piety ;
see Notes on Rom. xiv. 19. § The
body of Christ. The Church; see
Notes on chap. i. 23.

13. Till we all come. Till all
Christians arrive at a state of complete unity, and to entire perfection.
{i Jn the unity of the faith. Marg.,
into. The meaning is, till we all hold
the same truths, and have the same
confidence in the Son of God; see
Notes on John xvii. 21--23. § And

Together they constituted

simplicity and docility.

stature2 of the fulness of Christ:
14 That we henceforth be no

6100.14.20, 2 or, age.

of the knowledge of the Son of God
That they might attain to the same
practical acquaintance with the Son
of God, and might thus come to the
maturity of Christian piety; see Notes
on chap. iii. 19. | Unto a perfect man.
Untoacompleteman. This figure is obvious. Theapostle compares their condition then toastate of childhood. The
perfect man here refers to the man
grownup, the man of mature life. He
says that Christ had.appointed pastors
and teachers that the infant church
might be conducted to maturity ; or become strong --likea man. He does not
refer to the doctrine of sinless perfection--but to the state of manhood as
compared with that of childhood--a
state of strength, vigour, wisdom,
when the full growth should be attained; see 1 Cor. xiv. 20. FY Unto the
measure of the stature. Marg., or age.
The word stature expresses the idéa.
It refers tothe growth ofaman. ‘The
stature to be attained to was that of
Christ. Ile was the: standard --not
in size, not in age--but in moral character. The measure to be reached
was Christ; or we are to grow till
we become like him. § Of the fulness of Crist; see Notes on chap.
1.23. The phrase “the measure of
the fulness,’ means, probably, the
“full measure ’--by a form of construction that is common in the Hebrew writings, where two nouns are
so used that one is to be rendered as
an adjective--as trees of greatness--
meaning great trees. Here it means,
that they should so advance in piety
and knowledge as to become wholly
like him.

14, That we henceforth be no more
children. Insome respects Christians
are to be like children. They are to
be docile, gentle, mild, and free from
ambition, pride, and haughtiness ; see
Notes-on Matt. xviii. 2,3. Butchildren have other characteristics besides
They are
often changeable (Matt. xi.17); ther

"are credulous, and are influenced easily

morechildren, tossed to and fro, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
carried ¢ about with every wind of lie in wait to deceive ;

doctrine, by the sleight of men. and |

a Ja.1.6.

15 But, } speaking the truth?

1 or, being sincere. b 2 Co.4.2.

by others, and led astray. In tnese
respects, Paul exhorts the Ephesians
to be no longer children, but urges

them to put on the characteristics of.

manhood ; and especially to put on
the firmness in religious opinion which
became maturity of life. J Tossed
to and fro. xAvowviCoueyr.
is taken from waves or billows that
are constantly tossed about--in all
ages an image of instability of character and purpose. § And carried
about with every wind of doctrine.
With no firmness; no settled course;
no.helm. The idea is that of a vessel
on the restless ocean, that is tossed
about with every varying wind, and
that has no settled line of sailing. So
many persons are in regardto religious
doctrines. ‘They have no fixed views
and principles. Theyholdno doctrines
that are settled in their minds by careful and patient examination, and the
consequenceis, that they yield toevery
new opinion, and submit to the guidance of every newteacher. The doctrine taught here is, that we should
have settled religious opinions. We
should carefully examine what is
truth, and having found it, should adhere to it, and not yield on the eoming of every newteacher. Weshould
not, indeed, close our minds against
conviction. We should be open to
argument, and be willing to follow the
truth wherever it will lead us. But
this state of mind is not inconsistent
with having settled opinions, and with
berng firm in holding them until we
are convinced that we are wrong. No
man can be useful who has not settled
principles. No one who has not such
principles can inspire confidence or
be happy, and the first aim of every
young convert should be to acquire
settled views of the truth, and to become firmly grounded in the doctrines
of the gospel. {[ By the sleight of
men. The cunning, skill, trickery of
men. The word used here--xu6cia--
is from a word (xvB-s) meaning a cube,
» die, and properly means a game at

This word |

dice. Hence it means game, gamb!-
ing; and then any thing that turns
out by mere chance or hap-hazard --
asa game at dice does. It may possibly also denote the trick or fraud
that is sometimes used in such games ;

but it seems rather to denote a mans
forming his religious opinions by the
throw of a die; or, in other words,
it describes a man whose opinions
seem to be the result of mere chance.
Any thing like casting a die, or
like opening the Bible at random to
determine a point of duty or doctrine,
may come under the description
of the apostle here, and would all
be opposed to the true mode, that by
calm examination of the Bible, and
by prayer. <A man who forms his religious principles by chance, can wnform them in the same way; and he
who has determined his faith by one
cast of the die, will be likely to throw
them into another form by another.
he phrase “ the sleigh’ of men.”
therefore, I would render ‘“‘ by tie
mere chance of men, or as you may
happen to find men, one holding this
Opinion, and the next that, and allowing yourself to be influenced by them
without any settled principles.”
{ Cunning craftiness. Deceit, trick.
art ; see 2 Cor. xii. 16; Luke xx. 23;
1 Cor. iii. 19; Notes, 2 Cor iv. 2; xi.
3. J Whereby they lie in watt to de-

vo.

ecive. Literally, “ Unto the method
of deceit ;” that is, in the usual way of
deceit. Doddridge, ‘‘ In every method of deceit.’’ This is the true
idea. The meaning is, that men

would use plausible pretences, and
| would, if possible, deceive the pro-
‘fessed friends of Christ. Against
such we should be on our guard ; and
not by their arts should our opinion
be formed, but by the word of God.
15. But speaking the truth in love.
Marg., being sincere. The translation in the text is correct--literally,
truthing in love--aandeioyvres. Two
things are here to be noted. (1.) The
truth is to be spoken--the simple, unin love, may grow up into him in
all things, which is the head, ¢ even
Christ :

@ Co.1.18,19,

yarnished truth. This is the way to

avoid error, and this is the way to
preserve others from error. In opposition to all trick, and art, and cunning, and fraud, and deception, Christians are to speak the simple truth,
and nothing but the truth. Every

statement which they make should be-

unvarnished truth; every promise
which they make should be true;
every representation whichthey make
of the sentiments of others should be
simple truth. TJruth ts the represenfation of things as they ave ; andthere
is no virtue that is more valuable in a
Christian than the love of simple truth.
(2.) The second thing is,that the truth
should be spoken tn love. There are
other ways of speaking truth. It is
sometimes spoken ina harsh, crabbed,
sour manner, which does nothing but
disgust and offend. When we state
truth to others, it should be with love
to their souls, and with a sincere desire to do them good. When we admonish a brother of his faults, it should
not bein a harsh and unfeeling manner, but in love. Where a minister
pronounces the awful truth of God
about depravity, death, the judgment,
and future woe, it should be in love.
It should not be done in a harsh and
repulsive manner; it should not be
done as if he rejoiced that men were

in danger of hell, or as if he would’

like to pass the final sentence; it
should not be with indifference, or in
a tone of superiority. And in like
manner, if we go to convince one who
is in error, we should approach him in
love. We should not dogmatize, or
denounce, or deal out anathemas.
Such things only repel. He has done
about half his work in convincing
another of ERROR who has first convinced him that he soves him ; andif
he does not do that, he may argue to
the hour of hig death and make no
progress in convincing him. § May
grow up into him. Into Christ; that
is, to the stature of a complete man

16 From whom ° the whole body
fitly joihed together, and compacted
by that which every joint supplieth,

b John 15.5.

in him. § Whichis the head; Notes,
ch. i. 22; 1 Cor. xi. 3.

16. From whom the whole body.
The church, compared with the human
body. ‘he idea is, that as the head
in the human frame conveys vital influence, vigour, motion, &c., to every
part of the body; so Christ is the
source of life, and vigour, and energy,
and increase to the church. ‘The
sense is, ‘‘ The whole human body is
admirably arranged for growth and
vigour. Every member and joint contribute to its healthful and harmonious action. One part lends vigour
and beauty to another, so that the
whole is finely proportioned and admirably sustained. All depend on
the head with reference to the most
important functions of life, and all derive their vigour from that. So it is
in the church. It is as well arranged
for growth and vigour as the body is.
It. is as heautifully organized in its
various members and officers as the
body is. Everything is designed to
be in its proper place, and nothing by
the divine arrangement is wanting in
its organization, to its perfection. Its
officers and its members are, in their
places, what the various parts of the
body are with reference to the human
frame. The church depends on Christ,
as the head, to sustain, invigorate,
and guide it, as tae body is dependent
on the head.” See this figure carried
out to greater length in 1 Cor. xii. 12
--26. § Fitly joined together. The
body, whose members are properly
united so asto produce the most beauty
and vigour, iach member is in the
best place, and is properly united to
the other members. Let any ono
read Paley’s Natural Theology, orany
work on anatomy, and he will find innumerable instances of the truth of
this remark ; not only in the proper
adjustment and placing of the members, but in the manner in which it is
united to the other parts of the body.
The foot, fur instance, is in its proper

according to the effectual working
inthe measure of every part, maketh

place. It should not be where the
head or the hand is. The eye is in
its proper place. It should not be in
the knee orthe heel. ‘The mouth, the
tongue, the teeth, the lungs, the heart,
are in their proper places. No other
places would answer the purpose -so
well. The brain is in its proper place.
Anywhere else in the body, it would
be subject to compressions and injuries which would soon destroy life.
And these parts are as admirably
united to the other parts of the body,
as they are admirably located. Let
any one examine, for instance, the
tendons, nerves, muscles, and bones,
by which the foot is secured to the
body, and by which easy and graceful
motion is obtained, and he will be satisfied of the wisdom by which the
body is ‘joined together.’’ How far
the knowledge of the apostle extended
on this point, we have not the means
of ascertaining ; but all the investigations of anatomists only serve to give
increased beauty and force to the
general terms which he uses here. All
that he says here of the human frame
is strictly accurate, and is such lan-

guage as may be used by an anatomist
now. The word which is here used
(covapworarytw) means properly to sew
together ; to fit together; to unite,
to make one. It is applied often to
musicians, who produce /iarmony of
various parts of music. Passow. The
idea of harmony, or appropriate union,
isthatin the word. § And compacted.
cui Baousvey. Tindal renders this,
“knit together in every joint.’ The
word properly means, to make to come
together ; to join or knit together.
It means here that the different parts
of the body are wnited and sustained
inthis manner. {| By that which every
Joint supplieth. Literally, “ through
every joint of supply;” that is, which
affords or ministers mutual aid. The
word joint here--agy--(from aarru to
fit) -- means anything which binds,
Fustens, secures ; and does not refer
to the joint in the sense in which. we
commonly use it, as denoting the artirulation of the limbs, or the joining of |
increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love.

two or more bones; but rather that

which unites or fastens together the
different parts of the frame--the bloodvessels, cords, tendons, and muscles.
The meaning is, that every such means
of connecting one part of the body with
another ministers nourishment, and
that thus the body is sustained. One
part is dependent on another; one
part derives nourishment from another;
and thus all become mutually useful
as contributing to the support and
harmony of the whole. Thus it furnishes an illustration of thé connection
in the members of the church, and of
the aid which one can render to
another. § According to the effectual
working. Gr., ‘“ According to the
energy in the measure of each one
part.” Tindal, “ According to the
operation as every part has its measure.’ The meaning is, that each
part contributes to the production of
the whole result, or labours for this.
This is in proportion to the ‘ measure ” of each part; that is, in proportion to its power. Every part labours to produce the great result.
No one is idle ; none isuseless. But.
none are overtaxed or overworked. The
support demanded and furnished by
every part is inexact proportion to its
strength. This is a beautiful account
of the anatomy of the human frame.
(1.) Nothing is useless. Every part
contributes to the general result --
the health, and beauty, and vigour of
the system. Not a muscle is useless;
not a nerve, not an artery, not avein.
All are employed, and all have an important place, and all contribute something to the health and beauty of the
whole. So numerous are the bloodvessels, that you cannot perforate the
skin anywhere without piercing one ;
so numerous are the pores of the skin,
that a grain of sand will cover thousands of them ; so minute the ramifications of the nerves, that wherever
the point of a needle penetrates, we
feel it; and so numerous the absorbents, that millions of them are employed in taking up the chyme of the
food, and conveying it to the veins.
17 This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth

walk not as other Gentiles walk, in
the vanity of their mind,

And yet all are employed--all are
useful--all minister life and strength
to the whole. (2.) None are overtaxed. They all work according to
the “measure” of their strength.
Nothing is required of the minutest
nerve.or blood-vessel which it is not
fitted to perform ; and it will work on
for years without exhaustion or decay.
So of the church. There is no member so obscure and feeble that he may
not contribute something to the welfare of the whole ; and no one is required to labour beyond his strength
in order to secure the great object.
Each one in his place, and labouring
as he should there, will contribute to
the general strength and welfare ; out
of his place--like nerves and arteries
out of their place, and crossing and
recrossing others--he will only embarrass' the whole, and disarrange the
harmony of the system. § Maketh
tnerease of the body. The body
grows in this manner. {J Unto the
ed fying of itself. To building itself
up that is,it grows up to a complete
stature. § Jn /ove. In mutual harmony. This refers tothe body. The
meaning is, that it seems to be made
on the principle of love. There
Is no jar, no collision, no disturbance
of one part with another. A great
number of parts, composed of different substances, and with different
functions -- bones, and nerves, and
muscles, and blood-vessels -- are united
in one, and live together without collision; and so it should be in the
church. Learn, hence, (1.) That no
member of the church need be useless,
any more than a minute nerve or
blood-vessel in the body need be useless. No matter how obscure the individual may be, he may contribute
to the harmony and vigour of the
whole, (2.) Every member of the
church should contribute something
to the prosperity of the whole. He
should nomore be idle and unemployed
than a nerve or a blood-vessel should be
in the human system. What would be
tne effect if the minutest nerves and
arteries of the body should refuse to

forth walk not.

perform their office? Langour, disease, and death. So it is in the
church. The obscurest member may
do something to destroy the healthful
action of the church, and to make its
piety languish and die. (38.) There
should be union inthe church, It is
made up of materials which differ
much from each other, as the body is
made ap of bones, and nerves, and
muscles. Yet, in the body these are
united ; and so it should be in the
church. There need be no more jarring in the church than in the body;
and a jar in the church produces the
same effect as would be produced in
the body if the nerves and muscles
should resist the action of each other,
or as if one should be out of its place,
and impede the healthful functions of
the other. (4.) Every member in the
church should keep his place, just as
every bone, and nerve, and muscle in
the human frame should. Every member of the body should be in its right
position ; the heart, the lungs, the
eye, the tongue, should occupy their
right place ; and every nerve in the
system should be laid down just where
it is designed to be. I[fso,all is well.
If not so, allis deformity, or disorder;
just as it is often in the church.

17. This I say, therefore,and testify
in the Lord. I bear witness in the
name of the Lord Jesus, or ministering by his authority. The object of
this is, to exhort them to walk worthy
of their high calling, and to adorn the
doctrine of the Saviour. With this
view, he reminds them of what they
were before they were converted, and
of the manner in which the heathen
around them lived. § That ye henceThat you do not
henceforth live --the Christian life
being often in the Scriptures compared to a journey. { As other Gentiles walk. This shows that probably
the mass of converts in the church at
Ephesus were from among the heathen, and Paul regarded them as Gentile converts. Or it may be that he
here ad.lressed himself more particularly to that portion of the church, as

18 Having the understanding | life of God through the ignorance

darkened, being alienated from the

@ Ac.26.18. 1 or, hardness.
espécially needing his admonition and
care. § In the vanity of thetr mind.
In the way of folly, or in mental folly.
What he means by this hé specifies
in the following verses. The word
“vanity” in the Scriptures means
more than mere emptiness. It denotes
moral wrong, being applied usually to
those who worshipped vain idols, aud
then those who were alienated from
the true God.

18. Having the understanding darkened. That is, because they were
alienated from the true God, and particularly because of ‘the blindness of
their hearts.” The apostle does not
say that this was a “judicial” darkening of the understanding ; or that
they might not have perceived the
truth ; or that they had no ability to
anderstand it. He speaks of a simple
and well-known fact--a fact that is
seen now as well as then--thai the
understanding becomes darkened by
indulgence in sin. A man who is intemperate, has no just views of the
government, of the appetites. A man
who is unchaste, has no perception of
the ioveliness of purity. A man who
is avaricious or covetous, has no just
views of the beauty of benevolence.
A man who indulges in low vices, will
weaken his mental powers, and render himself incapable of intellectual
effort. Indulgence in vice destroys
the intellect as well as the body, and
untits a man to appreciate the truth
of a proposition in morals, or in mathematics, or the beauty of a poem, as
well as the truth and beauty of religion. Nothing is more obvious than
that indulgence in sin weakens the
mental powers, and renders them unfit
for high intellectual effort. ‘Uhis is
seen all over the heathen world now--
in the stolid, stupid mind ; the perverted mora! sense; the incapacity
for profound or protracted mental effort, as really as it was among the
heathens to whom Paul preached.
The missionary who goes among the
heathen has almost to create an in-

that is in them, because of the !

blindness of their heart ;
i}

tellect as well as a conscience, before
the gospel will make an impression,
It is seen, too, in all the intellect -f
the bar, the senate, the pulpit, and
the medical profession, that is ruined
by intemperance, and in the intellect
of multitudes of young men wasted by
licentiousness and drunkenness. 1
know that under the influence of ambition and stimulating drinks, the intellect may seem to put forth unnatural efforts, and to glow with an
intensity nowhere else seen. But it
soon burns out--and the wastes. of
such an intellect become soon like
the hardened scoriz of the volcano, or
the cinders of the over-heated furnace.
Learn hence, that if a man wishes to
be blessed with a clear understanding,
he should he a good man. He who
wishes a mind wall balanced and clear,
should fear aud love God; and had
Christianity done no other good on
earth than to elevate the iute//ect of
mankind, 1t would have been the riciiest blessing which has ever been
vouchsafed to the race. It follows,
too, that as mau has debased his wnderstanding by sin, it is needful to make
an exertion to elevate it again; and
hence a large part of the efforts to
save men must consist in patient tnstruction. ence the necessity of
schools at missionary stations. § Being
alienated ; see Notes on chap. li. 12.
q From the life of God. From a life
like that of God, or a life of which he
is the source andauthor. The meaning is, that they lived a lite which was
unlike God, or which he could not
approve, Of the truth of this in regard to the heathen everywhere, there
can be no doubt ; see Notes on Rom. i.
§ Through the ignorance thatis in them.
The ignorance of the true God, and of
what constituted virtue ; comp. Notes
on Rom. i. 20--23. ¥ Because of the
blindness of their hearts. Marg. hardness. Hardness is abetter word. It is a
better translation of the Greek; and it
better accords with the design of the
apostle. Ilere tlhe reason is stated
19 Who being past feeling, have @
given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness
with greediness.

20 But ye have not so learned
Christ ;

21 If so be that ye have heard

why they lived and acted as they did,
and why the wnderstanding was blinded. It is not that God has enfeebled
the human intellect by a judicial sentence on account of the sin of Adam,
and made it incapable of perceiving
the truth. It is not that there is any
deficiency or incapacity of natural
powers. It is not that the truths of
religion are so exalted that. man has
no natural ability to understand them,
for they may be as well understood as
any other truth ; see Notes on 1 Cor.
i. 14. The simple reason is, ‘the
hardness o¥ THE HEART.” That is
the solution given by an inspired apostle, and that is enough. A man who
has a blind and hard heart sees no
beguty in truth, and feels not its force,
and is insensible to all its appeals.
Learn, then, (1.) That men are to
blame for the blindness of their understanding. Whatever proceeds froma
wicked heart they are responsible for.
But for mere inferiority of intellect
they would not be toblame. (2.) They
are under obligation to repent and love
God. Ifit was required of them to
enlarge their intellects, or create additional faculties of mind, they could
not be bound to do it. But where
the whole thing required is to have a
better heart, they may be held responsible. (3.) The way to elevate the
understandings of mankind is to purify
the heart. The approach must be made
through the affections. Let men feel
right towards God, and they will soon
think right; let the heart be pure,
and the understanding will be clear.
{Doubtless there is a reciprocal influence
between the dark mind and depraved heart.
The one acts on the other. Admitting that
the understanding is affected first, through
the will or heart, and that it is a bad heart
which makes a spiritually dark mind, still the
fact remains the same, that in consequence of
our union with Adam, in consequence of the
fall, aLL Gur faculties, understanding, will,

aside, or renounce.

him, and have been taugut by- hin,
as the truth isin Jesus ;

22 That ye put © off, concerning
the former conversation, the old ¢
man, which is corrupt according tu
the deceitful lusts;

@ Ro.1.24,26. b Co.3.8,9. c Re.6.6.

aifections, have been corrupted. See Supplementary Notes, Rom. v.]

19. Who being past feeling. Wholly
hardenedinsin. ‘here isa total want
of all emotion on moral subjects. This
is an accurate description of the state
ofa sinner. He has no feeling, no emotion. He often gives an intellectual assent to the truth, but it is without emotionofany kind. The heart is insensible
as the hard rock. § Have given themselves over. They have done it voluntarily. In Rom. 1. 24, it is said that
“ God gave them up.” There is no
inconsistency. Whatever was the
agency of God init, they preferred it;
comp. Notes on Rom. i. 21. § Unto
lasciviousness ; see Notes on Rom. i.
24--26.

20. But ye have not so learned
Christ. You have been taught a different thing by Christ ; you have been
taught that his religion requires you
to abandon such a course of life.

21. If so be that ye have heard him.
If you have listened attentively to his
instructions, and learned the true nature of his religion. There may be a
slight and delicate dowbt implied here
whether they had attentively listened
to his instructions. Doddridge, however, renders it, “‘Seeing ye have heard
him ;” comp. Notes on chap. iii. 2.
¥ And have been taught by him. By
his Spirit, or by the ministers whom
he had appointed. (| As the truth 7s
in Jesus. If you have learned the
true nature of his religion as he himself taught it. What the truth was
which the Lord Jesus taught, or what,
his principles implied, the apostle
proceeds to state in the following
verses.

22. Tlat ye put of. That you lay
_ The manner in
which the apostle states these duties,
renders if not improbable that there
had been some instruction atnong

of your mind ;
@ Ro.}2.2

tuem of a contrary character, and
that it is possible there had been some
teachers there who had not enforced,
as they should have dene, the duties
of practical religion. J Concerning
the former conversation. The word
conversation here means conduct--as
it commonly does in the Bible; see
Notes, 2 Cor. i. 12. The meaning here
is, “‘ with respect to your former conduct or habits of life, lay aside all that
pertained to a corrupt and fallen nature.’’ You are not to lay every thing
aside that formerly pertained to you.
Your dress, and manners, and modes
of speech and intercourse, might haye
Leen in many respects correct. But
every thing that proceeded from sin;

every habit, and custom, and mode of.

speech and of conduct that was the
result of depravity, is to be laid aside.
The peculiar characteristics of an unconverted man you are to put off, and
are to assume those which are tne

proper fruits of a renewed heart |

{ Zhe old man ;.see Notes on Rom.
vi. 6° Y Which is corrupt according
to the deceitful lusts. The meaning is,
(1.) That the unrenewed man is not
under the direction of reason and
sound sense, but is controlled by his
pzsstons and desires. The word lusts,
has a more limited signification with
us than the original word. That word
we now confine to one class of sensual
appetites ; but the original word denotes any passion or propensity of the
heart. It may include avarice, ambition, the love of pleasure, or of gratification in any way ; and the meaning here is, that the heart is by nature
under the control of such desires.
(2.) Those passions are deceitful.
They lead us astray. They plunge us
into,ruin. All the passions and pleasures of the world are illusive. They
promise more than they perform ; and
they leave. their deluded votaries to
disappointment and to tears. Nothing
is more ‘‘deceitful”’ than the promised
pleasures of this world ; and all who
yield to them find at last that they
“ flatter but to betray.”

23 And be renewed @ in the spirit |
24 And that ye put on the new

man, which after God is created >
b Ga.6. 15; chap.2.10.

23. And be renewed, ‘That is, it is
necessary that a man who has been
following these should become a new
man; see Notes on John iii. 3, seq.,
comp. Notes on 2 Cor. iv. 16. The
word here used--ayav:ow--does not occur elsewhere in the New Testament;
but it has the same meaning as the
word used in 2 Cor. iv. 16, and Col,
ili. 10. It means to make new, and is
desciiptive of the work of regeneration. This was addressed to the
church, and to those whom Paul regarded as Christians ; and we learn
from this, (1.) That it is necessary
that man should be renewed in order
to be saved. (2.) That it is proper

-to exhort Christians to be renewed.

They need renovated strength every
day. (38.) That it is a matter of obltgation to berenewed. Menare bound
thus to berenovated. Ane (4,) That
they have sufficient natural ability to
change from the condition of. the old
to that of the new man, or they could
not be exhorted to it.

ie Supplementary Notes Rom. viii.7; Gal.
Vv. .

q In the spirit of your nind. Inyour
temper ; your heart ; yournature.
24. And that ye put on the newman.
The new man refers to the renovated
nature. ‘his is called,in other places,
the ‘“‘new creature, or the new creation” (see Notes on 2 Cor. v.17),and
refers to the condition after the heart
is changed. ‘The change is so great,
that there is noimpropriety in speaking
of one who has experienced it as “‘a new
man.” Ile has new feelings, principles, and desires, He has laid aside
his old principles and practices, and,
in everything that pertains to mora.
character, he is new. His body is
indeed the same; the intellectua’
structure of his mind the same; but
there has been a change in his principles and feelings which make him,
in ail the great purposes of life, a new
being. Learn, that regeneration is
not a trifling change. It isnot a mere
change of relations, or of the outwar!
condition. It is not merely heine
in righteousness and! true holiness.
1 or, holiness of truth, John 17.17.

La. D. 64.

25 Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth 4 with
@ Zec.8.16.

brought from the world intothe church,
and being baptized, though by the most
holy hands; it is much more. None
of these things would make proper the
declaration, ‘‘ he isa newman.” Regeneration by the Spirit of God does.
{| After God, xarx Oey. In respect
to God. The idea is, evidently, that
mian is so renewed as to become like
God, or the divine image is restored
to the soul. In the parallel passage
in Colossians (iii: 9), the idea is expressed more fully, “renewed in knowledge after the image of him that
created him.” Man, by regeneration,
is restored to the lost image of God ;
comp. Gen. i. 26. J Js created. A
word that is often used to denote the
new birth, from its strong resemblance
to the first act of creation; see it explained in the Notes on 2 Cor. v. 17.
4] In righteousness. That is, the renewed man is made to resemble God
in righteousness. This proves that
man, when he was made, was righteous ; or that righteousness constituted a part.of the image of God in
which he was created. The object of
the work of redemption is to restore to
man the lost image of God, or to bring
him back to the condition in which
he was before he fell. { And true
holiness. Marg. asin Greek, holinese
of truth--standing in contrast with
“lusts of deceit” (Greek), in ver. 22.
Holiness properly refers to puyity
towards God, and righteousness to integrity towards men ; but it is not cer

tain that this distinction is observed
here. The general idea is, that the
renovated man is made an upright and
a pious man ; and that, therefore, he
should avoid the vices which are practised by the heathen, and which the
apostle proceeds to specify. This
phrase also proves that, when man was
created, he was a holy being.

25. Wherefore putting away lying.
It may seem strange that the apostle
should seriously exhort Christians to
put away lying, implying that they
were in the habit of indulging in falsehood. But we are to remember, (1.)

that lying is the universal vice of the
heathen world. Among the ancient
heathens, as. among the moderns, it
was almost universally practised. It
has been remarked by a distinguished
jurist who had spent much time in
India, that he would not believe a
Hindoo on his oath. The same testimony is borne by almost all the missionaries, of the character of heathens
everywhere. No confidence can be
placed in their statements; and,
where there is the slightest temptation to falsehood, they practise it without remorse. (2.) The Ephesians had
been recently converted, and were, to
a great extent, ignorant of the requirements of the gospel. A conscience
has to be created when heathens are
converted, and it is long before they
see the evils cf many things which appear to us to be palpably wrong. (3.)
The effects of former habits abide

| long, often, after’a man is converted,

He who has been. in the habit of profane swearing, finds it difficult to
avoid it ; and he who has been all his
life practising deception, will find himself tempted to practise it still. It
was for reasons suchas these, probably,
that the apostle exhorted the Ephesians to put away lying, and to speak the
truth only. Nor is the exhortation
now inappropriate to Christians, and
there are many classes to whom it
would now be proper--such as the
following : (1.) He who is in the habit
of concealing the defects of an article
in trade, or of commending it for more
than its real value--let him put awau
lying. (2.) He, or she, who instructs
a servant to say that they are not at
home, when they are at home: or that
they are sick, when they are not sick :
or that they are engaged, when they
are not engaged--let them put away
lying. (3.) He that is in the habit o1
giving a colouring to his narratives;
of conveying a false impression by tie
introduction or the suppression of circumstances that are important to the
right understanding of an account--

let him put away lying, 4,) He

his neighbour: for we 4 are members one of another.

@ Ro.12.5. b Ec.7.9.

that.is at no pains to ascertain the |

exact truth in regard to any facts

that may affect his neighbour; that |

catches up flying rumours without investigating them, and that circulates
them as undoubted truth, though they

may seriously affect the character and |

peace of another--let him put away
‘ying. (5.) He that is in the habit of
making promises only to disregard
them --let him put away lying. The
community is full of falsehoods of that
kind, and they are not all confined to
the people of the world. Nothing is
more important in a community than
simple truth--and yet, it is to be
feared that nothing is more habitually
disregarded. No professing Christian
can do any good who has not an unimpeachable character for integrity and
truth--and yet who can lay his hand
on his breast and say before God that
he is in all cases a man that speaks
the simple and unvarnished trourtH ?
4, Fur we are members one of another.
We belong to one body---the church--
which is the body of Christ; see
Notes Rom. v. 12. The idea is, that
falsehood tends to loosen the bonds of
brotherhood. In the human body
harmony is observed. The eye never
deceives the hand, nor the hand the
foot, nor the heart the lungs. ‘The
whole move harmoniously as if the
one could put the utmost confidence
in the other--and falsehood in the
church is as ruinous to its interests as
it would be to the body if one member
was perpetually practising a deception
on another.

26. Be ye angry and sin not. It
has been remarked that the direction
here is conformable to the usage of the
Pythagoreans, who were bound, when
there were any differences among
them, to furnish some token of reconciliation before the sunset. Burder, in Ros. Alt. u. neu. Morgenland,
inloc.. It is implied here (1.) that
there may be anger without sin ; and
(2.) that there is special danger in
all cases where there is anger that it
will be accoiapanied with sin. Anger

26 Be ye angry, and. sin not; ?
let not the sun go down upon your
wrath:

is a passion too common to need any
description. It is an excitement or
agitation of mind, of more or less
violence, produced by the reception of
a real or supposed injury, and attended
commonly with a desire or purpose of
revenge. The desire of revenge,
however, is not essential to the existence of the passion, though it is probably always attended with a disposition to express displeasure, to chide,
rebuke, or punish ; comp. Mark iii. 5.
To a great extent the sudden excitement on the reception of an injury is
involuntary, and consequently innocent. Anger is excited when a horse
kicks us ; whena serpent hisses ; when
we dash our foot against a stone--and
so when a man raises his hand to
strike us. The object. or final cause
of implanting this passion in the mind
of man is, to rouse him to an immediate defence of himself when suddenly
attacked, and before his reason woul |
have time to suggest the proper
means of defence. It prompts at once
to. self-protection ; and when that is
done its proper office ceases. If perseveredin, it becomes sinful malignity,
or revenge--always wrong. Anger
may be excited against a thing as well
as a person ; as well against an act as
aman. We are suddenly excited by
a wrong thing, without any malignancy
against the man ; we may wish to rebuke or chide that, without injuring
him. Anger is sinful in the following
circumstances. (1.) When it is excited without any sufficient cause--
when we are in no danger, and do not
need it fora protection. We should
be safe without it. (2.) When it

transcends the cause, if any cause
really exists. All that is beyond the

necessity of immediate self-protection,
is apart from its design, and is wrong

(3.) When it is against the person
rather than the offence. The object
is not to injure another ; it is to protect ourselves. (4.) When it is attended with the desire of revenge.
That is always wrong ; Rom. xii. 17.

19. (5.) When it is cherished aud
27 Neither% give place to the

devil.
a Ja.4.7.

Se

heightened by reflection. And (6.)
When there is an unforgiving spirit ;
a determination to exact the utmost
satisfaction for the injury which
has been done. If men were perfeetly holy, that sudden arousing
of the mind in danger, or on the reception of an injury, which would
serve to prompt us to save ourselves
from-danger, would exist, and would
be an important principle of our na-

ture. As it is now, it is violent; excessive; incontrollable ; persevered
in--and is almost always wrong, If
men were holy, this excitement of the
mind would obey the first injunctions
of reason, and be wholly under its |
control; as it is now, it seldom obeys
reason at all--and is wholly wrong.
Moreover, if all men were holy ; if
there were none disposed to do -an
insury, it would exist only in the form
of a sudden arousing of the mind
against immediate danger -- which
would allbe right, Now, it is excited
not only in view of physical dangers,
but in view of the wrongs done by
others--and hence it terminates on
the person and not the thing, and be- |
comes often wholly ev l. {[ Let not
the sun go down. De not cherish.
anger. Do not sleep upon it. Do
not harbour a purpose of revenge ; do
not cherish ill-will against another.
When the sun sets on @ man’s anger,
he may be sure itis wrong. The meaning of the whole of this verse then is,
“« If you be angry, which may be the
case, and which may be unavoidable,
see that the sudden excitement does
not become sin. Do not let it overleap its proper bounds ; do not cherish
it; do not let it remainin your bosom
evento the setting of the sun. Though
the sun be sinking in the west, let not
the passion linger in the bosom, but
let his last rays find you always
peaceful and calm.”

27. Neither give place to the devil.
This has respect probably to the ex-

hortation in the former verse. ‘ Do
not yield to the suggestions and temptations of Satan, who would take

28 Let him that stole steal no

more ; but rather let ¥ him labour,
b Ac.20.35.

every opportunity to persuade you to
cherish unkind and angry feelings,
and to keep up a spirit of resentment.
among brethren.”” Many of our feelings, when we suppose we are mercly
defending our rights, and securing
what is our own, are produced by the
temptations of the devil. The heart
is deceitful ; and seldom more dcceitful in any case than when a man is
attempting to vindicate. himself from
injuries done to his person and reputation. The devil is always busy
when we are angry, and in some way,
if possible, will lead us into sin ; and
the best way to avoid his wiles is to
curb the temper, and restrain eyen
sudden anger. No man sins by restraining his anger : no man is certain that he will not who indulges it
for a moment.

28. Let him that stale steal no more.
Theft, like lying, was, and is, almost
a universal vice among the heathen.
The practice of pilfering prevails in,
probably, every pagan community, and
no property is safe whicn is.not guarded, or so locked up as to be inaccessible. Hence, as the Christian converts at Ephesus had been long addicted to it, there was danger that
they would fall into it again; and
hence the necessity of special cautions
on that head. We are not to suppose
that pilfering was a common vice in
the church, but the cautions on this
point proceed on the principle that,
where a man has been long in the
habit of a particular sin, he is in
great danger of falling into it again.
IIence we caution tke man who has
been intemperate against the least
indulgence in intoxicating drinks ; we
exhort him not to touch that which
would be so strong a temptation to
him. The object of the apostle was
to show that the gospel requires holy
living in all its friends, and to entreat
Christians at Ephesus in a special
manner to avoid the vices of the surrounding heathen. § But rather let
him labour, Let him seek the meanr
of living in-an honest manner, by-hi:

working with Azs hands the thing

1 or, distribute.

own industry, rather than by wronging others. { Working with his
hands. Pursuing some honest employment. Paul was not ashamed to
labour with ‘Ais own hands” (Acts

xx. 85); and no man is dishonoured .

by labour. God made man for toil
(Gen. ii. 15); and employment is essential to the happiness of the race.
No man, who is able to support himself, has a right to depend on others ;
see Notes on Rom. xii. 11. YJ That
he may have to give to him that needeth. Marg.. distribute. Not merely
that he may have the means of support, but that he may have it in his
power to aid others. The reason and
propriety of this isobvious. The human race is one great brotherhood.
A considerable part cannot labour to
support themselves. They are too
old, or too young ; or they are crippled, or feeble, or laid on beds of
sickness. If others do not divide with
them the avails of their labours, they
will perish. We are required to labour in order that we may have the
privilege of contributing to their
comfort. Learn from this verse, (1.)
That every Christian should have
some calling, business, or .profession,
by which he may support himself.
T'ke Saviour was acarpenter; Paula
tentmaker ; and no man is disgraced
by being able to build a house or to
‘construct.a tent. (2.) Christianity
promotes industry. It is rare that an
idle man becomes a Christian; but if

he does, religion makes him indus-.|

trious just in proportion as it has influence over his mind. To talk of a
lazy Christian, is about the same as
to talk of burning water or freezing
fire. (3.) Christians should have
some useful and honest employment.
They should work “that which is good.”
They should not pursue an employment which will necessarily injure
others. No man has a right to place
a nuisance under the window of his
neighbour ; nor has he any more right
to pursue an employment that -shall
lead his neighbour into sin or ruin him.
An honest employment benefits every-

oF

which is good, that he may have
| to ! give to him that needeth.,,

body. A good farmer is a benefit to
his neighbourhood and country ; and
a good shoemaker, blacksmith, weaver, cabinetmaker, watchmaker, machinist, is a blessing to the community.
Ile injures no one ;. he benefits all.
Ilow is it with the distiller, and the
vender of alcoholic drinks? Ile
benefits no one; he injures every body.
Every quart of intoxicating drink
that is taken from his house does evil
somewhere--evil, and only evil, and
that continually. No one is made
better, or richer; no one is made
more moral or industrious; no one
is helped on the way te heaven by: it.
Thousands are helped on the way to
rhell by. it, who are already in the
path ; and thousands are znduced to
walk in the way to death who, but for
that distillery, store, or tavern, might
have walked in the way to heaven.
Is this then “ working that wuicw 138
coop ?”” Would Paul have done it 2
Would Jesus do it? Strange, that
by a professing Christian it was ever
done! See a striking instance of the
way in which the Ephesian Christians
acted when they were first converted,
in the Acts of the Apostles, chap. xix.
19; comp. Notes on that place. (4.)
The main business of a Christian is
not to make money, and to become
rich. It is that he may have the
means of benefiting others. Beyond
what he needs for himseif, his poor,
and sick, and aged, and afflicted
brother and friend has a claim on his
carnings--and they should be liberally
bestowed. (5.) We should labour in
order that, we may have the means of
doing good to others. It should. be
just as much a matter of plan and
purpose to do this, as it is to labour
in order to buy a coat, or to build a
house, or to live comfortably, or to
have the means of a decent burial.
Yet how few are those who have any
such end in view, or who pursue their
daily toil definitely, that they may
have something to give away’ The
world will be soon converted when all
Christians make that the purpose of
life ; see Notes on Rom. xin. 14
29 Let * no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth,
but that which is good! to the use

a Col.4.6. 1 or, to edify profitably.

of edifying, that it may minister
grace unto the hearers.
30 And grieve ? not the holy

6 Is.63.10.

29. Let no corrupt communication
proceed ; see Notes on 1 Cor. xv. 33.
The word rendered corrupt (capo: )
means bad, decayed, rotten, and is
applied to putrid vegetable or animal
substances. ‘Then it is applied to a
tree that is of a useless character,
that produces no good fruit ; Matt.
vii, 17. Then it is used in a moral
sense, as our word “‘corrupt’’ is, to
denote that which is depraved, evil.
contaminating, and may denote here
any thing that is obscene, offensive,
or that tends to corrupt others. The
irnportance of this admonition will be
appreciated when it is remembered,
(1.) that such obscene and filthy conversation prevailed everywhere, and
does still among the heathen. Sa
general is this, that at almost every
missionary station it has been found
that the common conversation is so
corrupt and defiling that missionaries
have felt it necessary to send their
children home to be educated, in order
to secure them from the contaminating influence of those around them,
(2.) Those who have had the misfortune to be familiar with the common
conversation of the lower classes in
any community, and especially with

the conversation of young men, will

see the importance of this admonition.
Scarcely anything can be conceived
more corrupt or corrupting, than that
which often prevails among young
men--and even young men in the
academ.es and colleges of this land.
(3.) Its importance will be seen
from the influence of such corrupt
communications. “The passage of
an impure thought through the mind
leaves pollution behind it 7’ the expression of such a thought deepens
the pollution on the soul, and corrupts
others. Itis like retaining an offensive carcase above ground, to pollute
the air, and to diffuse pestilence and
death, which should at once be buried
out of sight. A Christian should be
PuRE in his conversation. His Masler was pure, His Godis pure. The

heaven to which he yoesis pure. The
religion which he professes is pure.
Never should he indulge himself in an
obscene allusion ; never should he retail anecdotes of an obscene character, or smile when they are retailed
by others. Never should he indulge
in a jest having a double meaning ;
never should he listen to a song of
this character. If those with whom
he associates have not sufficient respect for themselves and him to abstain
from such corrapt and corrupting allusions, he should at once leave them.
q{ But that which is good to the use of
edifying. Marg., to edify profitably.
Greek, ‘‘ to useful edification ;”’ that
is, adapted to instruct, counsel, and
comfort others ; to promote their intelligence and purity. Speech 1s an
invaluable gift ; a blessing of inestimable worth. We may so speak ar
always to do good to others. We
may givethem some information which
they have not : impart some consolation which they need; elicit some
truta by friendly discussion which we
did not know before, or recall by
friendly admonition those who are in
danger of going astray. He who talks
for the mere sake of talking will say
many foolish things; he whose great
aim in life is to benefit others, will
not he likely to say that which he will

‘ have occasion to regret ; comp. Matt.

XU Ooms Ey eCle evan es
James i. 19.

30. And grieve not the holy Spirit
of God. This is addressed to Christians, and it proves that it is possible
for them to grieve the Holy Spirit.
The word here used --Avweire--means
properly to afflict with sorrow; to
make sad or sorrowful. It is rendered
to make sorry, or sorrowful, Matt.
BIV.09'S SV coe exvul. Sloe xt, oo
xxvi, 22, 87; Mark xiv. 19; John
Xvi. 20; 2 Cor. ii. 2; vi. 10; vii. 8, 9,
11; 1 Thess. iv. 13. It is rendered
grieved, Mark x. 22; John xxi 17;
Rom. xiv. 15; 2 Cor. ii. 4,5; Eph,
iv. 20: and once. “in heaviness,” 1

Prov. x. 19;

Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed “unto the day of redemption.
31 Let all bitterness, and wrath,
and anger, and clamour, and ¢ evil-
@ chap.1.13,14. 6 Col.3.8. ¢e Tit.3.2.

Pet. i. 6. The verb does not elsewhere occur in the New Testament.
The common meaning is, to treat
others so as to cause grief. We are
not to suppose that the Holy Spirit
literally endures grief, or pain, at the
conduct of men. The language is
such as is fitted to describe what men
endure, and is applied to him to denote that kind of conduct which is fitted
to cause grief; andthe meaning here is,
‘‘do not pursue sucha course as is fitted
in its own nature, to pain the benevalent heart of a holy being. Do not
act towards the Holy Spirit in a
manner which would produce pain in
the bosom of a friend who loves you.
There is a course of conduct which
will drive that Spirit from the mind
as if he were grieved and pained--as
a course of ingratitude and sin would
pain the hear’ of an earthly friend,
and cause him to leave you.” If
asked what that conduct is, we may
reply (1.) Open and gross sins, They
are particularly referred to here ; and
the meaning of Paul is, that theft,
falsehood, anger, and kindred vices,
would grieve the Holy Spirit, and
cause him to depart. (2.) Anger, in
all its forms. Nothing is more fitted
to drive away all serious and tender impressions from the mind, than
the indulgence of anger. (38.) Licentious thoughts and desires. The
Spirit of God is pure, and he dwells
not in a soul that is filled with corrupt imaginings. (4.) Ingratitude.
We feel ingratitude more than almost
anything else; and why should we
suppose that the Holy Spirit would
not feel italso? (5.) Neglect. The
Spirit of God is grieved by that.
Often he prompts us to pray ; he disposes the mind to seriousness, to the
perusal of the Bible, to tenderness
and penitence. We neglect those favoured moments of our piety, and
lose those happy seasons for becoming like God. (6.) Resistance.

speaking, be put away from you,
with all malice:
32 And be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving 4
d Mar.11.25, 26.

Christians often resist thé Holy Ghost.
He would lead them to be dead to the
world; yet they drive on their plans
of gain. He would teach them the
folly of fashion and vanity; yet they
deck themselves in the gayest apparel. He would keep them from the
splendid party, the theatre, and the
ball-room; yet they go there. All
that is needful for a Christian to do
in order to be eminent in piety, is to
yield to the gentle influences which
woulddraw himto prayer and to heaven.
{ Whereby ye are seated; see Notes
on 2 Cor. i. 22. J Unto the day of
redemption; see Notes on chap. i. 14,

31. Let all bitterness; see Notes
on ver. 2 of this chapter. § And
wrath. The word here does not differ
essentially from anger. J Anger;
see Note on ver. 26. All cherished,
unreasonable anger. § dnd clamour.
Noise, disorder, high words; such as
men use in a brawl, or when they are
excited. Christians are to be calm
and serious. Harsh contentions and
strifes; hoarse brawls and tumults,
are to be unknown among them.
q And evil-speaking. Slander, backbiting, angry expressions, tale-bearing, reproaches, &c. §J With all malice. Rather, “ with all evil” --zaxia.
Every kind and sort of evil is to be
put away, and you are to manifest
only that which is good.

32. And be ye kind one to another.
Benignant, mild, courteous, polite--
xonrro. 1 Pet. ili. 8. Christianity
produces true conrteousness,.or politeness. It does not make one rough,
crabbed, sour; nor does it dispose its
followers to violate the proper rules
of social intercourse. ‘The secret ot
true politeness is benevolence, or a
desire to make others happy; anda
Christian showld be the most polite
of men. There is no religion in a
sour, misanthropic temper; none in
ruderess, stiffness, and repulsiveness ;
none in violating the rules of good
“one another, even as God for
Christ’s sake hath forgiven you.

a Mat.6.14.

E ye therefore followersof God,
as dear children;

breeding. There is a hollow-hearted
politeness, indeed, which the Christian is not to aim at or copy. His
politeness is to be based on kindness;
Col. iii. 12. His courtesy is to be
the result of love, good-will, and a
desire of the happiness of all others ;
and this will prompt to the kind of
conduct that will render his intercourse. with others agreeable and profitable. 9 Tender-hearted. Having a
lreart disposed to pity and compassion,
and especially disposed to show kindness to the faults of erring brethren ;
for so the connection demands. § Jorgiving one another; see Notes on
Matt. vi. 12. € As God for C/rist’s
sake hath foryiven you. As God, on
account of what Christ has suffered
and done, has pardoned you. THe
has done it, (1.) freely--without merit
on your part--when we were confessedly in the wrong. (2.) Fully; he
hay forgiven every offence. (3.) Lidverally; he has forgiven many offences, for our sins have been innumerable. This is to be the rule
which we are to observe in forgiving
others. We are to do it freely, /ully,
liberaliy. The forgiveness is to be
entire, cordial, constant. We are not
to rake. up old offences, and charge

them again upon them; we are to-

treat them as though they had not
offended, for so God treats us. Learn,
(1.) That the forgiveness of an offending brother is-a pury which we
are not at libery to neglect. (2.)
The peace and happiness of the church
depend on it. All are liable to offend
their brethren, as all areliable to offend
God; all need forgiveness of one another, as we all need it of God. (3.)
There is no danger of carrying it too
far. Let the rule be observed, “ As
God has forgiven you, so do you forgive others.’ Let a man recollect
his own sins and follies; let him look
over his life, and see how often he
has offended God; let him remember
that all has been forgiven ; and then,
fresh with this feeling, let him go and

meet an offending brother, and say,
“My brother, I forgive you. I do it
frankly. fully, wholly. So Christ has
forgiven me; so I forgive you. The
offence shall be no more remembered.
It shall not be referred to in our intercourse to harrow up your feelings ;
it shall not diminish my love for you ;.
it shall not prevent my uniting with
you in doing good. Christ treats me,
a poor sinner, as a friend; and so I
will treat you.’

This chapter is a continuation of
the practical exhortations commenced
in chap. iv.. It comprises the following
points, or subjects :

1. The exhortation to be followers
of God, and to walk in Jove; ver. 1, 2.

2 The duty of avoiding the impure
practices of the surrounding heathen,
and of wholly breaking off from the
vices in which even they themselves
had indulged, before their conversion
to Christianity ; ver. 3--17.

8. The apostle cautions them particularly against the use of wine, and
the revelry which attends its. use, and
exhorts them rather to engage in the
exercises to which the Holy Spirit
would prompt them, and to the services of praise and thanksgiving ; ver.

'18--20.

4, He exhorts them to mutual subjection ; and particularly enjoing on
wives the duty of being subject to
their husbands; ver. 21--24.

5. The chapter closes with a statement of the duty of husbands to love
their wives, illustrated by that which
Christ showed for the church; ver.
25 --33.

1. Be ye therefore followers of God.
Gr., “Beimitators--punrai--of God.”
The idea is not that they were to be
the friends of God, or numbered
among his followers, but that they
were to tmitate him in the particular
thing under consideration. The word
“therefore” -- oJ»--connects this with

| the previous chapter, where he h:ad

2 And walk in love, # as Christ
also hath loved us,
@ John13.34 :Le.1.9.

himself for us, an offering and a

and hath given | sacrifice to God ‘or a 4 sweet-smell-

ing savour,

been exhorting them to kindness, and
to a spirit of forgiveness, and he here
entreats them to imitate God, who
was always kind and ready to forgive ;
comp. Matt. vy. 44--47: As he forgives us (chap. iv. 82), we should be
ready to forgive others; as he has
borne with our faults, we shou!d bear
with theirs; as he is ever ready to
hear our cry when we ask for mercy,
we should be ready to hear others
when they desire to be forgiven; and
as he is never weary with doing us
good, we should never be weary in
oenefiting them. J 4s dear children.
The meaning is, ‘tas those children
which are beloved follow the example
of a father, so we, who are beloved of
God, should follow his example.”
What a simple rule thisis! And how
much contention and strife would be
avoided if it were followed! If every
Christian who is angry, unforgiving,
and unkind, would just ask himself
the question, ‘“‘ How dees God treat
me?” it would save all the trouble
and heart-burning which ever exists
in the church.

2. And walk in love, That is, let
your lives be characterized by love;
let that be evinced in all your deportment and conversation ; see Notes on
John xili. 84. J As Christ also hath
loved us. Weare to evince the same
love for one another which he has
done for us. He showed his love by
giving himself to die for us, and we
should evince similar love to one another; 1 John iii. 16 § And hath
given himself for us. his is evidently added by the apostle to show
what he meant by saying that Christ
loved us, and what we ought to do to
evince our love for each other. The
strength of his love was so great that
he was willing to give himself up to
death on our account; our love for our
brethren should be such that we would
be willing to do the same thing for
them; 1 John iii. 16. § An offering.
The word here used--=errGoeé--means

in any way, or whatever it may be
It is, however, in the Scriptures,

; commonly used to denote an offering

without blood--a thank-offering--and
thus is distinguished from a Sacrifice
or a bloody oblation. The word oecurs only in Acts xxi 26; xxiv. 17:
Rom. xv. 16; Eph. y. 2; Heb. x. 5,
8, 10, 14, 18. It means here that he
regarded himself as an offering to
God. § And a sacrifice. Susiay.
Christ is here expressly calleda Sacrijfice--the usual word in the Scriptures
to denote a proper sacrifice. A sacrifice was an offering made to God by
killing an animal and burning it on
an altar, designed to make atonement
for sin. It always implied the killing
of the animal as an acknowledgment
of the sinner that /e deserved to die.
It was the giving up of life, which
was supposed to reside in the blood
(see Notes on Rom. iii. 25), and hence
it was necessary that blood should be
shed. Christ was such a sacrifice ;
and his love was shown in his being

‘willing that his blood should be shed

to savemen. § For a sweet-smelling
savour; see Notes on 2 Cor. ii. 15,
where the word savour is explained.
The meaning here is, that the offering which Christ made of himself to
God, was like the grateful and pleasant
smell of tncenseé, that is, it was acceptable to him. It was an exhibition
of benevolence with which he was
pleased, and it gave him the opportunity of evincing his own benevolence
in the salvation of men. The meaning of this in the connection here is
that the offering which Christ made
was one of love. So, says Paul, do
you love one another. Christ sacriticed himself by Jove, and that sacrifice was acceptable to God. So do
you show love one to another. Sacrifice every thing which opposes it, and
it will be acceptable to God. He will
approve all which is designed to promote love, as he approved the sacri-

fice which was made, under the inproperly that which is offered to God |

tluence of love, by his Son.
% But fornication, @ and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it

a@ 1Cor.6.18; 1Thes.4.3.

cA. D. 64

not be once named ® among you,
as becometh saints ;
4 Neither filthiness, nor foolish
b chap.5.12.

8. But fornication. A common
vice among the heathen then as it is
now, and one into which they were in
special danger of falling ; see Notes
on Rom. i. 29; 1 Cor. vi. 18. 4 And
all uncleanness. Impurity of life;
see Notes on Rom.i 24; comp. Rom.
vi. 19; Gal. v.19; Eph. iv. 19; Col.
ili. 5. YJ Or covetousness. The connection in which this word is found is
remarkable. It is associated with the
lowest and most debasing vices, and:
this, as well as those vices, was not
once to be named among them. What
was Paul’s estimate then of covetousness? He considered it as an odious
and abominable vice ; a vice to be regarded in the same light as the most,
gross sin, and as wholly to be abhorred

by all who bore the Christian name; |

see ver. 5. The covetous man, according to Paul, is to be ranked with
the sensual, and with idolaters (ver.
5), and with those who are entirely
excluded from. the kingdom of God.
Is this the estimate in which the vice
is held now? Is it the view which
professing Christians take of it? Do
we not feel that there is a great difference between a covetous man and
a man of impure and licentious life ?
Why is this? Because, (1) it is so
common; (2.) because it is found
among those who make pretensions to
refinement and even religion; (3.)
because it is not so easy to define what
is covetousness, as it is to define impurity of life; and (4.) because the
public conscience is seared, and the
mind blinded to the low and grovelling
character of thesin. Yet is not the
view of Paul the right view? Who is
a covetous man? A man who, in the
pursuit of gold, neglects his soul, his
intellect, and his heart. A man who,
in this insatiable pursuit, is regardless
of justice, truth, charity, faith, prayer,
peace, comfort, usefulness, conscience;
and who shall say that there is any
vice more debasing or degrading than
this? The time may come, therefore, when the covetous man will be

-becometh saints.

regarded as deserving the same rank
in the public estimation with the most
vicious, and when to covet will be
considered as much opposed to the
spirit of the gospel as any of the vices
here named. When that time shall
come, the world’s conversion will probably be not a distant event. J Led
it not be once named among you.
That is, let it not exist; let there be
no occasion for mentioning such a
thing among you; let it be wholly unknown. This cannot mean that it is
wrong to mention these vices for the
purpose of rebuking them, or cautioning those in danger of committing
them--for Paul himself in this manner mentions them here, and frequently elsewhere--but that they
should not exist among them. { As
As befits the character of Christians, who are regarded
as holy. Literally, “as becometh
holy ones” --aytos.

4. Neither filthiness. That is, obscene, or indecent conversation. Literally, that which is shameful, or deformed --aisycorns. The ward doesnot
elsewhere occur in the New Testament.
{ Nor foolish talking. This word--
pwooroyia-- does not occurelsewhere in
the New Testament. It means that
kind of talk which is insipid, senseless,
stupid, foolish ; which is not fitted to
instruct, edify, profit--the idle chitchat
whichis so common inthe world. The
meaning is, that Christians should aim
to have their conversation sensible,
serious, sincere -- remembering the
words of the Lord Jesus, “‘ that every
idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereofin the day of

| judgment ;”” Matt. xii.36. § Nor jest-

ing. <ireamreaia2. This word occurs
also nowhere else in the New Testa~
ment. It properly means, that which
is well-turned (ed --well, and reerw--
to turn); and then that which is sportive, refined, courteous ; and then urbanity, humour, wit ; and then jesting,
levity--which is evidently the meaning
here. The apostle would not forbid

talking, nor jesting, which @ are
not convenient ; but rather giving
of thanks.

5 For this ye know, that > no
whoremonger, nor unclean person

@ Ro. 1.28. b He.13.4; Re.22.15.

courteousness, or refinement of manners (comp. | Pet. iii. 8), and the
reference, therefore, must be to that
which is light and trifling in conversation ; to that which is known among
us asjesting. It may be observed, (1.)
that courteousness is not forbidden in
the Scripturegz, but is positively required; 1 Pet. ili. 8. (2.) Cheerfulness
is not forbidden--forif any thing can
make cheerful, it is the hope of heaven.
(3.) Pleasantry cannot be forbidden.
I mean that quiet and gentle humour
that arises from good-nature, and that
makes one good-natured in spite of
himself. Such are many of the poems
of Cowper, and many of the essays of
Addison in the “Spectator’’--a benevolent humour which disposes us tosmile,
but not to be malignant; to be goodnatured, but not toinspirelevity. But
levity andjesting,though often manifested by ministers and other Christians,
are as inconsistent with true dignity
as with the gospel. Where were they
seen in the conversation of the Redeemer? Where in the writings of
Paul? § Which are not convenient.
That is, which are not fit or proper ;
which do not become the character of
Christians; Notes, Rom.i. 28. Christians should be grave and serious--
though cheerful and pleasant. They
should feel that they have great interests at stake, and that the world has
too. They are redeemed--not to
make sport ; purchased with precious
blood-- for other purposes than to make
men laugh. They are soonto be in
heayen-- and a man who has any impressive sense of that will habitually
feel that he has much else to do than to
make men laugh. ‘The true course of
life is midway between moroseness and
levity ; sourness andlightness ; harshness andjesting. Be benevolent, kind,
cheerful, bland, courteous, but serious.
Be solemn, thoughtful, deeply impressed with the presence of God and with
eternal things, but pleasant, affable,
and benignant. Think not a smile

sinful ; but think not levity and jesting |

harmless. {| But rather giving of
thanks. Thanks to God, or praises
are more becoming Christians than
jesting. The idea here seems to be,
that such employment would be far
more appropriate to the character of
Christians, than idle, trifling, and indelicateconversation. Instead,therefore, of ineeting together for low wit
and jesting ; for singing songs, and for
the vulgar discourse which often attends such ‘gatherings’ of friends,
Paul would have them come together
for the purpose of praising God, and
engaging in his service. Men are
social in their nature ; and if they do
not assemble for good purposes, they
will for bad ones. It is much more
appropriate to the character of Christians to come together to sing praises
to God, than to sing songs; to pray
than to jest ; to converse of the things
of redemption than to tell anecdotes,
and to devote the time to a contemplation of the world to come, than to
trifles and nonsense.

5. For this know. Be assured of
this. The object hereis, to deterfrom
indulgence in those vices by the solemn
assurance that no one who committed
them could possibly be saved. {J Nor
unclean person. No one of corrupt
and licentious life can be saved ; see
Rey. xxii. 15. YNor covetous man,who
is anidolater. ‘That is, he bestows on
money the affections due to God; see
Col. ili. 5. To worship money is as
real idolatry as te worship a block of
stone. Ifthis beso, what anidolatrous
world is this! How many idolatrous
are there in professedly Christian
lands! How many, it is to be feared,
in the church itself! And since every
covetous man is certainly to beexcluded from the kingdom of God, how
anxious shouid we be to examine our
hearts, and to know whether this sin
may not lie at our door! J Hath any
inheritance, &c. Such an one shall
never enter heaven. ‘This settles the
inquiry about the final destiny ofa
large portion of the world ; and thi:
nur covetous man, who “isan idolater, hath any inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ and of God.

6 Let no man deceive ® you
@ Co.3.5, 6 Je.29.8,9.

with vain words: for because of
these things cometh the wrath of
God upon the children of ! dis-

obedience.
lor, unbelief.

solemn sentence our conscience and

all our views of heaven approve. Let
us learn hence, (1.) that heaven will
be pure. (2.) That it will be a desirable place --for who would wish to live
always with the licentious and the
impure? (3.) It is right to reprove
these vices and to preach against them.
Shall we not be allowed to preach
against those sins which will certainly
exclude men from heaven? (4.) A
large part of the world is exposed to
the wrath of God. What numbers are
covetous! What multitudes are licentious ! In how many places is licentiousness openly and unblushingly
practised! Inhowmany more places in
secret! Andin how many moreis the
heart polluted, whilethe external conduct is moral ; the soul corrupt, while
the individual moves in respectable
society! (5.) What a world of shame
will hell be! How dishonourable and
disgraceful to be damned for ever, and
to linger on in eternal fires, because the
man was TOO POLLUTED to be admitted
into pure society! Here, perhaps, he
moved in fashionable life, and was rich
and honoured, and flattered ; there he
will be sent down to hell because his
whole soul was corrupt, and because
God would not suffer heaven to be
contaminated by his presence! (6.)
What doom awaits the covetous man !
He, like the sensualist, is to be excluded from the kingdom of God.
And what is to be his doom? Will
he have a place apart from the common damned--a golden palace and a
bed of down in hell? No. It willbe
no small part of his aggravation that
he will be doomed to spend an eternity with those in comparison with
whom on earth, perhaps, he thought
himself to be pure as an angel of
light. (7.) With this multitude of
the licentious and the covetous, will
sink to hell al/ who are not renewed
and sanctified. What a prospect for
the gay, the fashionable, the moral,
the amiable, and the lovely, who have

no religion! For all the impenitent
and the unbelieving, there is but one
home in eternity. Hell is less terrible from its penal fires and its smoke
of torment, than from its being made
up of the profane, the sensual, and
the vile; and its supremest horrors
arise from its being the place where
shall be gathered all the corrupt and
unholy dwellers in a fallen world ; all
who are so impure that they cannot
be admitted into heaven. Why then
will the refined, the moral, and the
amiable not be persuaded to seek the
society of a pure heaven? to be
prepared for the world where holy
beings dwell ?

6. Let no man deceive you. Let

-no one by artful pleas persuade you

that there will be no danger from
practising these vices. We may suppose that they would be under strong
temptations to mingle in the gay and
festive scenes where these vices were
not frowned on, or where they were
practised; or that they might be
tempted to commit them by some of
the plausible arguments which were
then used for their indulgence. Many
of their friends may have been in these
circles ; and they would endeavour to
convince them that such were the customs which had been long practised,
and that there could be no harm still
in their indulgence. Not a few philosophers endeavoured, as is well
known, to defend some of these practices, and even practised them themselves ; see Notes on Rom. i. It required, therefore, all the authority
of an apostle to convince them, that
however plausible were the arguments
in defence of them, they certainly exposed those who practised them to.
the wrath of God. J For because
of these things cometh the wrath of
God ; see Notes on Rom. i. 18; ii.
8, 9. Gf Upon the children of disobedience ; see Notes on Matt. i. 1 ;
Rom. ii. 8.

7. Be not ye therefore partakers

7 Be not ye therefore partakers
with them,

8 For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light > in the
Lord : walk as children ¢ of light ;

9 (For the fruit 4 of the Spirit
s in all goodness and righteousness
ind truth ;)

¢chap.2.11,12.

7 6 1Th.5.5. ¢ John 12.36.

Ga.5.22,&¢.

with them. Since these things displease God and expose to his wrath,
ayoid them.

8. For ye were sometimes darkness ; see Notes on chap. ii. 11, 12;
1 Cor. vi. 11. The meaning here is,
that they were themselves formerly
sunk in the same ignorance, and
practised the same abominations.
{| But now are ye light in the Lord.
Light is the emblem of happiness,
knowledge, holiness. The meaning
is, that they had been enlightened by
the Lord to see the evil of these practices, and that they ought, therefore,
to forsakethem. | Walkas children
of light ; see Notes on Matt. i. 1, on
the use of the word son, or children.
The meaning here is, that they should
live as became those who had been enlightened to see the evil of sin, and the
beauty of virtue and religion ; comp.
John xii. 86, where the same phrase
occurs.

9. For the fruit of the Spirit. That
is, since the Holy Spirit through the
gospel produces goodness, righteousness, and truth, see that you exhibit
these in your lives, and thus show that
you are the children of light. Onthe
fruits of the Spirit, see Notes on Gal.
vy. 22, 23. § Is in all goodness. Is
seen in producing all kinds of goodness. He whois not good is neta
Christian.

10. Proving what is acceptable unto
the Lord. That is, ‘© Walk as children of light (ver. 8), thus showing
what is acceptable to the Lord.”
Rosenmiiller supposes that the participle is used here instead of the
imperative. The meaning is, that by
so living you will make a fair trial of
what isacceptable tothe Tord. The
result on your happiness in this life
and the next, will be such as to show

10 Proving ¢ what is acceptable
unto the Lord,

11 And havef no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather reprove 9 them.

12 For it is a shame even to
speak of those things which are
done of them in secret.

e Ro.12.2. f 1C0.5.9,11.
g \Ti.5.20:

that such a course is pleasing in his
sight. Dr. Chandler, however, renders
it as meaning that by this course they
would show that they discerned and
approved of what was acceptable to
the Lord. See Notes on Rom. xii. 2,
where a similar form of expression
occurs.

ll. And have no fellowship. See
the sentiment here expressed fully explained in the Notes on 2 Cor. vi. 14
--18. § Theunfruitful works. The
deeds of darkness that produce no
benefit to the body or the soul. The
word unfraitful is here used in contrast with the “fruit of the Spirit,”
ver. 9. J But rather reprove them.
By your life, your conversation, and
all your influence. This is the business of Christians. Their lives should
be a standing rebuke of a sinful world,
and they should be ever ready to express their disapprobation of its wickedness in every form.

12. For itis a shame even to speak,
&c.; comp. Notes, Rom. i. 24 -- 32.
It is stilla shame to speak of the
practices of the heathen. Missionaries tell us that they cannot describe
the images on the car of Juggernaut,
or tell us what is done in the idol
temples. Allover the world the same
thing istrue. The cheek of modesty
and virtue would be suffused with
shame at the very mention of what is
done by the worshippers of idols; and
the same is true of what is done by
multitudes in Christian Jands, who
are not worshippers of idols. Their
deeds cannot be described in the circles of the refined and the delicate ;
they cannot be told in the presence
of mothers and sisters, Is there not
emphasis here in the words “‘ even to
spEak of these things!’ If the apostle would not allow them to name

18 But all things that are ! re-| light: for whatsoever doth make

proved are made manifest ¢ by the
1 or, discovered.

those things, or to speak of them, is
it wise or safe for Christians now to
be familiar with the accounts of those
practices of pollution, and for ministers to portray them in the pulpit,
and for the friends of “moral reform ”’
to describe them before the world ?
The very naming of those abominations often produces improper associations in the mind; the description
creates polluting images before the
imagination; the exhibition of pictures, even for the purpose of condemning them, defiles the soul.
There are some vices which, from
the corruptions of the human heart,
cannot be safely described, and it is
to be feared that, under the plea of
faithfulness, many have done evil by
exciting improper feelings, where
they should have only alluded to the
crime, and then spoken in thunder.
Paul did not describe these vices, he
denounced them; he did not dwell
upon them long enough for the imagination to find employment, and to
corrupt the soul. He mentioned the
vice -- and then he mentioned the
wrath of God; he alluded to the sin,
and then he spoke of the exclusion
from heaven; comp. Notes on 1
Cor. vi. 18. § Which are done of
them in secret. Many have supposed
that there is an allusion here to the
““mysteries’” which were celebrated
in Greece, usually at night, and far
from,the public eye. Many of these
were indeed impure and abominable, but there is no necessity for
supposing that there is such an allusion here. The reference may be to
the vices which were secretly practised then as now; the abominations
which flee from the eye of day,and which
are performed far from thepublic gaze.

13. But all things that are reproved. Marg., discovered. The
word here used properly means proved,
demonstrated, reproved, or convicted
(see Notes on John xvi. 8); but it
seems here to be used in the sense of
disclosed, or discovered. The sense
is, that ets true nature is demonstrat-

| manifest is light.
a John 3.20,21,
ed; that is, it is made known. { Are
made manifest by the light. The

sense is, “light is the means of
secing what things are. We discern
their form, nature, aj)pearance, by it.
So it is with the gospel--the light of
the world. It enables us to see the
true nature of actions. They are
done in darkness, and are like objects
in the dark. Their form and nature
cannot then be known; but, when
the light shines, we see what they
are ;’’ comp. Notes on John iii. 20,
21. § For whatsoever doth make
manifest ts light. ‘ Anything which
will show the real form and nature of
an object, deserves to be called light.”
Of the truth of this, no one can doubt.
The meaning in this connection is,
that that system which discloses the
true nature of what is done by the
heathen, deserves to be considered as
light; and that the gospel which
does this, should be regarded as a
system of light and truth. It discloses their odiousness and vileness,
and it stands thus in strong contrast
with all the false and abominable systems which have upheld or produced
those vices.

14. Wherefore he saith. Marg.,
or it. Aw Aiye. The meaning may
be, either that the Lord says, or the
Scripture. Much difficulty has been
experienced in endeavouring to ascertain where this is said. It is
agreed on all hands that it is not
found, in so many words, in the Old
Testament. Some have supposed
that the allusion is to Isa. xxvi. 19,
“ Thy dead men shall live --awake
and sing, ye that dwell in the dust,
for thy dew is as the dew of herbs,”’
&c. But the objections to this are
obvious and conclusive. (1.) This
is not a quotation of that place, nor
has it a resemblance to it, except in
the word ‘“‘awake.” (2.) The passage in Isaiah refers to a different
matter, and has a different sense altogether ; see Notes on the passage,
To make it refer to those to whom
the gospel comes, is most forced and

14 Wherefore ! he saith, Awake

thou that sleepest, and arise from

1 or, it.

the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light.
@ [3.60.1.

unnatural. Others have supposed
that the reference is to Isa. lx. 1--8,
‘« Arise, shine; for thy light is come,”
&c. But the objection to this is not
less decisive. (1.) It is not a quotation of that passage, and the resemblance is very remote, if it can be
seen at all. (2.) That is addressed
to the church, calling on her to let
her light shine; this, to awake and
arise from the dead, with the assurance that Christ would give them
light. The exhortation here is to
Christians, to avoid the vices of the
heathen around them; the exhortation in Isaiah is to the church, to
rejoice and ewult in view of the fact
that the day of triumph had come,
and that the heathen were to be converted, and to come in multitudes
and devote themselves to God. In
the design of the two passages there
is no resemblance. Some have supposed that the words are taken from
some book among the Hebrews which
is now lost. Epiphanius supposed
that it was a quotation from a prophecy of Elijah ; Syncellus and Euthalius, from some writing of Jeremiah ; Hippolytus, from the writing
of some now unknown prophet. Jerome supposed it was taken from
some apocryphal writings. Grotius
supposes that it refers to the word
light in ver. 13, and that the sense
is, ‘‘ That light says ; that is, that a
man who is pervaded by that light,
let him so say to another.”’ Heumann, and after him Storr, Michaelis, and Jennings (Jewish Ant. ii. 252),
suppose that the reference is to a
song or hymn that was sung by the
early Christians, beginning in this
manner, and that the meaning is,
“Wherefore, as it is said in the
hymns which we sing,

*‘ Awake, thou that sleepest ;

Arise from the dead ;

Christ shall give thee light.’ ”

Others have supposed that there is
an allusion to a sentiment which prevailed among the Jews, respecting

the significancy of blowing the trumpet on the first day of the month, or
the feast of the new moon. Maimonides conjectures that that call of
the trumpet, especially in the month
Tisri, in which the great day of atonement occurred, was designed to signify a special call to repentance ;
meaning, ‘“‘ You who sleep, arouse
from your slumbers ; search and try
yourselves ; think on your Creator,
repent, and attend to the salvation of
the soul.’’ Burder, in Ros. Alt. u.
neu. Morgenland, im loc. But all
this is evidently conjecture. I see
no evidence that Paul meant to make
a quotation at all. Why may we not
suppose that he speaks as an inspired
man, and that he means to say, simply,
that God now gives this command, or
that God now speaks in this way?
The sense then would be, ‘“ Be separate from sinners. Come out from
among the heathen. Do not mingle
with their abominations; do not
name them. You are the children
of light; and God says to you, awake
from false security, rouse from the
death of sin, and Christ shall enlighten you.’”” Whatever be the origin of the sentiment in this verse, it
is worthy of inspiration, and accords
with all that is elsewhere said in the
Scriptures.

[The grand objection to this view of our author is, that the apostle evidently introduces
a citation. In the writings of Paul, the form
dio Atyes ig never used in any other sense.
Whence then is the quotation taken? There
is nothing absurd in supposing, with Scott
and Guyse, that the apostle gives the general
sense of the Old Testament prophecies con
cerning the calling of the Gentiles. But Isa.
1x.1--3, bears a sufficiently close resemblance to
the passage in Ephesians, to vindicate the very
commonly received opinion, that the apostle
quotes that prophecy, in which the subject is
the increase of the Church by the accession of
the heathen nations. The church is called to
arise and shine, and the apostle reminds the
converted Ephesians of their lofty vocation,
It forms no very serious objection, that between the place in Isaiah and that in Ephesians,
there are certain verbal discrepancies. No
yne will make much of this, v‘ho remembers,
nat in a multitude of cases similar variations
occur, the apostles contenting themselves
with giving the sense of the places to which
they refer. “ Accordingly,” says Dr. Dodridge, “the sense of the passage before us is
so fairly deducible from the words of Isa‘ab,
that I do not see any necessity of having recourse to this supposition,”’ viz., that the quotation was from an apocryphal book ascribed
to Jeremiah.]

{ Awake thou that sleepest. Arouse
from a state of slumber and false security. Sleep and death are striking representations of the state in which men
are by nature. In sleep we are, though
living, insensible to any danger that
may be near; we are unconscious of
what may be going on around us; we
hear not the voice of our friends ; we
see not the beauty of the grove or the
landscape ; we are forgetful of our real
vharacter andcondition. So with the
sinner. It is as if his faculties were
locked in a deep slumber. He hears
not when God calls; he has no sense
of danger; he is insensible to the
beauties and glories of the heavenly
world; he is forgetful of his true
character and condition. To see all
this, he must be first awakened; and
hence this solemn command is addressed toman. Ile must rouse from
this condition, or he cannot be saved.
But can he awaken himself? Is it not
the work of God to awaken a sinner ?
Can he rouse himself to a sense of
his condition and danger ?, How do we
do in other things? ‘The man that is
sleeping on the verge of a dangerous
precipice we would approach, and
say, “Awake, youareindanger.”’ The
child that is sleeping quietly in its bed,
while the flames are bursting into
the room, we would rouse, ane say,
“Awake, or you will perish.” Why
not use the same language to the sin-

ner slumbering on the verge of ruin,’

in a deep sleep, while the flames of
wrath are kindling around him? We
have no difficulty in calling on sleepers
elsewhere to awake when in danger;
how can we have any difficulty when
speaking to the sinner? J And arise
from the dead. The state of the sinner is often compared to death; sce
Notes on chap. ii.]. Menare by nature

fA. D. 64.

dead in sins; yet they must rouse from
this condition, or they will perish.
How singular, it may be said, to call
uponthedeadtorise! Tow cowd they
raise themselves up? Yet God speak
thus to men, and commands them to
rise from the death of sin. Learn,
then, (1.) That men are not dead in
sin in any such sense that they are
not moral agents, or responsible. (2.)
That they are not dead in any such
sense that they have no power of any
kind. (3.) That it is right to call on
sinners to arouse from their condition,
and live. (4.) That they must put
forth their efforts as if they were to
begin the work themselves, without
waiting for God to doit for them,
They are to awake; they are to
arise. It isnot God who js to awake;
it isnot Christ who isto arise. Itis the
sinner who is to awake from his slumber, and arise from the state of death:
nor is he to wait for God to do the
work forhim. § And Christ shall give
thee light. Christ is the light of the
world; see Notes on John i. 4, 9; viii.
12; Hleb.i. 3. The idea here is, that if
they will use all the powers with whick
God has endowed them, and arouse
from their spiritul slumber, and make
an appropriate effort for salvation,then
they may expect that Christ will shine
upon them, and bless them in their
efforts. ‘This is just the promise that
we need, and it is all that we
need. All that man can ask is, that
if he will make efforts to be saved,
God willbless those efforts, sothat they
shall not be in vain. Faculties of
mind have been given us to be employed in securing our salvation ; and
if we will employ them as they were
intended to be employed, we may look
for the divine aid ; if not, we cannot
expect it. ‘God helps those who help
themselves ;”’ and they who will make
no effort for their salvation must perish
as they who will make no effort to
provide food must starve. This command was indeed addressed at first to
Christians ; but it involves a principle
which 1s applicable to all. Indeed, the
language here is rather descriptive
of the condition of impenitent sinners,
than of Christians. In a far more
important sense they are ‘asleep,’’ and

15 See then that ye walk ¢ circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,

a Co.4.5.

are ‘“‘ dead ;”’ and with the more earnestness, therefore, should they be
entreated to awake, and to rise from
the dead, that Christ may give them
light.

15. See then that ye walk circumspectly. Carefully, anxiously, solicitous lest you fall into sin. The
word rendered ‘ circumspectly’--
axcibas--means diligently, and the idea
here is, that they were to take special
pains to guard against the temptations
around them, and to live as they ought
to. § Not as fools, but as wise. Not
as the people of this world live, indulging in foolish pleasures and desires,
but as those who have been taught
to understand heavenly wisdom, and
who have been made truly wise.

16. Ltedeeming the time. The
word here rendered redeeming,
means to purchase; to buy up from
the possession or power of any one;
and then to redeem, to set free--as
from service or bondage ; Notes, Gal.
ill. 18. Tlere it means, to rescue or
recover our time from waste ; to improve it for great and important purposes. § Because the days are evil.
Because the times in which you live
are evil. There are many allurements and temptations that would
lead you away from the proper improvement of time, and that would
draw you into sin. Such were those
that would tempt them to go to places
of sinful indulgence and revelry. where
their time would be wasted, and worse
than wasted. As these temptations
abounded, they ought therefore to be
more especially on their guardagainst
a sinful and unprofitable waste of
time. This exhortation may be addressed to all, and is applicable to all
periods. The sentiment is, that we
ought to be solicitous to improve our
time to some useful purpose, because
there are, inan evil world, so many
temptations to wasteit. Timeis given
us for most valuable purposes. ‘here
are things enough to be done to occupy it all, and no one need have it
hang heavy on his hands. Ile that

16 Redeeming the time, because
the days are evil.

b Ps.37.19.

has a soul to be saved from eternal
death, need not have onc idle moment.
He that has a heaven to win, has
enough to do to occupy all his time.
Man has just enough given him to accomplish all the purposes which God
designs, and God has not given him
morethanenough. They redeem their
time who employ it (1.) in gaining useful knowledge ; (2.) in doing good to
others ; (3.) in employing it for the
purpose of an honest livelihood for
themselves and families ; (4.) in prayer
and self-examination to make the
heart better; (5.) in seeking salvation, and in endeavouring to do the
will of God. They are to redeem
time from all that would waste and
destroy it--like recovering marshes
and fens to make them rich meadows
and vineyards. There is time enough
wasted by each sinner to secure the
salvation of the soul; time enough
wasted to do all that is needful to be
done to spread religion around the
world, and to save the race. We
should still endeavour to redeem our
time for the same reasons which are
suggested by the apostle--because
the days are evil. There are evil
influences abroad; allurements and
vices that would waste time, and from
which we should endeavour to rescue
it. There are evil influences tending
to waste time (1.) in the allurements
to pleasure and amusement in every
place, and especially in cities ; (2.) in
the temptations to novel-reading, consuming the precious hours of probation to no valuable purpose; (3.) in
the temptations of ambition, most of
the time spent for which is wholly
thrown away, for few gain the prize,
and when gained, it is all a bauble,
not worth the effort ; (4.) in dissipation
--for who can estimate theamount. of
valuable time that is worse than thrown
away in the places of revelry and dissipation; (5.) in wild and visionary
plans--temptations to which abound in
alllands, and pre-eminently in ourown;
(6) and in luxurious indulgence--in
dressing, and eating, and drinking.
17 Wherefore be ye not unwise,
but understanding what @ the will

of the Lord 7s.
a John 7.17.

18 And be not drunk 8 withwine,
wherein is excess; but be filled
with the Spirit ;

b Lu.21.34,

------------- - ----{

17. Be ye not unwise. Be nex fools
in the employment of your time, and
in your manner of life. Show true
wisdom by endeavouring to understand
what the will of the Lord is, and then
doing it.

18. And be not drunk with wine.
A danger to which they were exposed
and a vice to which those around them
were much addicted. Comp.Notes on
Luke xxi. 84. It is not improbable
that in this verse there is an allusion
to the orgies of Bacchus, or to the
festivals celebrated in honour of that
heathen god. He was ‘‘the god of
wine,” and during those festivals, men
and women regarded it as an acceptable act of worship to become intoxicated, and with wild songs and cries to
run through streets, and fields, and
vineyards. To these things the apostle
opposes psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, as much more appropriate
modes of devotion, and would have the
Christian worship stand out in strong
contrast with the wild and dissolute
habits of the heathen. Plato says,
that while those abominable ceremonies in the worship of Bacchus continued, it was difficult to find in all Attica a single sober man. Rosenmiiller,
Alt. u.neu. Morgenland, im loc. On
the subject of wine, and the wines used
by the ancients, see Notes on John ii.
10,11. We may learn from this verse
(1.) that it was not uncommon in those
times to become intoxicated on wine;
and (2.) that it was positively forbidden. All intoxication is prohibited
in the Scriptures--no matter by what
means itis produced. There is, in fact,
but one thing that produces intoxication. It is aleohol--the poisonous
substance produced by fermentation.
This substance is neither created nor }
changed, increased nor diminished, by
distillation. [t exists in the cider, the
heer, and the wine, after they are fermented, and the whole process of distillation consists in driving it off by
heat, and collecting it in a concentrated form, and so that it may be pre-

served. But distilling does not make
it, nor change it. Alcohol is precisely
the same thing in the wine that it is
in the brandy after it is distilled ; in
the cider or the beer that it is in the
whisky or the rum ; and why is it right
to become intoxicated on it in one
form rather than in another? Since
therefore there is danger of intoxication in the use of wine, as well as in
the use of ardent spirits, why should
we not abstain from one as well as the
other? How can aman prove that it
is right for him to drink alcohol in the
form of wine, and that it is wrong for
me to drink it in the form of brandy or
rum ? Wherein ts excess. There
has been much difference of opinion
about the word here rendered excess
--décwria. It occurs only in two other
places in the New Testament, where
it is rendered riot; Tit.i.6; 1 Pet.
iv. 4. The adjective occurs once
(Luke xy. 13),where it isrendered riotous. The word (derived, according
to Passow, from a, and cagw--to save,
deliver) means that which is unsafe,
not to be recovered ; lost beyond recovery ; then that which is abandoned
to sensuality and lust; dissoluteness,
debauchery, revelry. The meaning
here is, that all this follows the use of
wine. Is it proper then for Chiristians to be in the habit of drinking it?
“Wine is so frequently the cause of
this, by the ungrateful abuse of the
bounty of providence in giving it, that
the enormity is represented by a very
strong and beautiful figure as contained in the very liquor.” Doddridge.
| But be filled with the Spirit. The
Holy Spirit, How much more appropriate to Christians than to be filled
with the spirit of intoxication and revelry! Let Christians, when about to
indulge in a glass of wine, think ot
this admonition. Let them remember that their bodies should be the
temple of the Holy Ghost, rather than
a receptacle for intoxicating drinks.
Was any man ever made a better
Christian by the use of wine? Was

19 Speaking to yourselves 2 in
@ Co.3.16.

psalms and hymns, and spiritual

any minister ever better fitted to counsel an anxious sinner, or to pray, or to
preach the gospel, by the use of intoxicating drinks? Let the history of
wine-drinking and intemperate clergymen answer.

19. Speaking to yourselves. Speaking among yourselves, that is, endeavouring to edify one another, and to
promote purity of heart, by songs of
praise. This has the force of a command, and it is a matter of obligation
on Christians. From the beginning,
praise was an important part of public
worship, and is designed to be to the
end of the world; see Notes on 1
Cor. xiv. 15. Nothing is more clear
than thatit was practised by the Saviour himself and the apostles (see
Matt. xxvi. 30), and by the primitive
church, as well as by the great body
of Christians in all ages. ¥ In psalms.
The Psalms of David were sung by
the Jews at the temple, and by the
early Christians (Notes Matt. xxvi.
30), and the singing of those psalms
has constituted a delightful part of
public worship inallages. They speak
the language of devotion at all times,
and a large part of them are as well
fitted to the services of the sanctuary
now as they were when first composed.
{| And hymns. It is not easy to determine precisely what is the difference in the meaning of the words here
used, or to designate the kind of compositions which were used in the early
churches. A hymn is properly a song
or ode in honour of God. Among the
heathen it was a song in honour of
some deity. With us now it denotes
a short poem, composed for religious
service, and sung in praise to God.
Such brief poems were common among
the heathen, andit was natural that
Christians should early introduce and
adopt them. Whether any of them
were composed by the apostles it is
impossible now to determine, though
the presumption is very strong that
if they had been they would have
been preserved with as much care
as their epistles, or as the Psalms.
One thing is proved clearly by this

passage, that there were other compositions used in the praise of God
than the Psalms of David ; and if it
was right then to make use of such
compositions, it is now. They were
not merely ‘ Psalms” that were
sung, but there were hymns and odes.
Q Spiritual songs. Spiritual odes
--adais. Odes or songs relating to
spiritual things in contradistinction
from these which were sung in places
of festivity and revelry. An ode is
properly a short poem or song adapted to be set to music, or to be sung ;
a lyric poern. In what way these
were sung, it is now vain to conjecture. Whether with or without instrumental accompaniments; whether
by a choir or by the assembly ; whether by an individual only, or whether
they were by responses, it is not possible to decide from anything in the
New Testament. It is probable that
it would be done in the most simple
manner possible. Yet as music constituted so important a part of the
worship of the temple, it is evident
that the early Christians would be by
no means indifferent to the nature of
the music which they had in their
churches. And as it was so important a part of the worship of the heathen gods, and contributed so much
to maintain the influence of heathenism, it is not unlikely that the early
Christians would feel the importance
of making their music attractive, and
of making it tributary to the support
of religion. If there is attractive
music at the banquet, and in the theatre, contributing to the maintenance
of amusements where God is forgot~
ten, assuredly the music of the sanctuary should not be such as to disgust
those of pure and refined taste.
7 Singing. ddevrss. The prevailing
character of music in the worship of
God should be vocal. If instruments
are employed, they should be so subordinate that the service may be characterized as singing. J And making melody. Melody is an agreeable
succession of sounds ; a succession so
regulated and modulated as to please
songs, singing @ and making me- |

lody in your ® heart to the Lord ;
@ Ps.147.7. b Ps.57.7,8.

fA. D. 64.

20 Giving thanks ¢ always for
all things unto God and the Father
¢ Is.63.7.

ihe ear. It differs from harmony,
inasmuch as melody is an agreeable
succession of sounds by a single voice ;
harmony consists in the accordance
of different sounds. It is not certain,
however, that the apostle here had
reference to what is properly called
melody. The word which he uses--
zaaw--means to touch, twitch, pluck
--as the hair, the beard; and then
to twitch a string--to twang it--as
the string of a bow, and then the
string of an instrument of music. It
is most frequently used in the sense
of touching or playing a lyre, or a
harp; and then it denotes to make
music in general, to sing-- perhaps
usually with the idea of being accompanied with a lyre or harp. It is
used, in the New Testament, only in
Rom. v. 19; 1 Cor. xiv. 15, where it
is translated sing ; in James v. 13,
where it is rendered sing psalms, and
in the place before us. The idea
here is, that of singing in the heart,
or praising God fromtheheart. The
psalms, and hymus, and songs were to
be sung so that the heart should be
engaged, and not so as to be mere
music, or a mere external performance. On the phrase “inthe heart,”
see Notes on 1 Cor. xiv. 15. J Z'o
the Lord. In praise of the Lord, or
addressed to him. Singing, as here
meant, is a direct and solemn act of
worship, and should be considered
such as really as prayer. In singing
we should regard ourselves as speaking directly to God, and the words,
therefore, should be spoken with a
solemnity and awe becoming such a
direct address.to the great Jehovah.
So Pliny says of the early Christians,
Carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere
secum winvicem -- ‘and they sang
among themselves hymns to Christ
as God.” If this be the true nature
and design of public psalmody, then
it follows (1.) that all should regard
it as an act of solemn worship in
which they should engage--in heart
at least, if they cannot themselyes
sing. (2.) Public psalmody should

not be intrusted wholly to the light
and gay ; to the trifling and careless
part of a congregation. (3.) They
who conduct this part of public worship ought to be pious. The leader
ought to be a Christian ; and they
who join in it ought also to give their
hearts to the Redeemer. Perhaps it
would not be proper to say absolutely
that no one who is not a professor of
religion should take part in the exercises of a choir in achurch; but there
can be no error in saying that such
persons ought to give themselves to
Christ, and to sing from the heart.
Their voices would be none the less
sweet ; their music no less pure and
beautiful ; nor could their own pleasure in the service be lessened. A
choir of sweet singers in a church --
united in the same praises here --
ought to be prepared to join in the
same praises around the throne of
God.

20. Giving thanks always. This
is probably designed to be connected
with the preceding verse, and to denote that the proper subject of psalms
and hymns is thanksgiving and praise.
This is indeed always the main design, and should be so regarded; ane
this part of worship should be so conducted as to keep up in the heart a
lively sense of the mercy and goodness of God. § For all things. sai,
savrav--for all things, or all persons.
Dr. Barrow supposes that the meaning here is, that they were to give
thanks for all persons, and to regard
themselves as under obligations to
give thanks for the mercies bestowed
upon the human race, in accordance
with the idea expressed in the Liturgy of the Episcopal church, “ We,
thine unworthy servants, do give thee
most humble and hearty thanks for
thy goodness and loving-kindness to
us, and to all men.” This idea is
beautiful; and it accords with the
requirements of the Scriptures elsewhere § deTim ii" 1)°I extort;
therefore, that first of all, suppli:ations, prayers, intercessions, and giv-

in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ ;

21 Submitting yourselves one to
; another in the fear of God.

ing of thanks, be made for all men.”
Such is the duty of Christians ; and
I see no departure from the fair
meaning of the words here, in supposing that the apostle may have designed to express such an idea. ‘The
sense, according to titis, would be,
that we are to praise God for his general mercy to mankind; for all the
fiappiness which mortals are permitted to enjoy ; for the love of God to
mankind in creation, in providence,
and in redemption--just as a grateful
child will yive thanks for all the kindness shown to his brothers and sisters One obvious effect of this
would be to overcome seljishness, and
to make us rejoice in the happiness
of others as well as in our own.
Another effect would be to make us
feel a deeper interest in the condition
of our fellow creatures. Another
would be to elevate and enlarge our
conceptions of the goodness of God--
ilirecting the mind to al the favours
which he has bestowed on the race.
Man has much for which to be grateful; and the duty of acknowledging
the mercy of God to the race should
not be forgotten. We are often
prone so to magnify our calamities,
and to contemplate the woes of the
race, that we overlook the occasions
for gratitude; and we should, therefore, look upon the mercies which
we enjoy as well as the miseries
which we endure, that our hearts may
be right. Ile who looks only on his
trials will soon find his mind soured
and complaining ; he who endeavours
to find how many occasions for gratitude he has, will soon find the burden
of his sorrows alleviated, and bis mind
tranquil and calm. Yet, if the words
here are to be taken as in our translation, ‘*‘ for all things.” they are full
of force and beauty. Atthe close of
life, and in heaven, we shall see occasion to bless God for all his dealings
with us. We shail see that we have
not suffered one pang too much, or
been required to perform one duty too
severe. We shall see that all our
afflictions, as well as our mercies,

were designed for our good, and were
needful for us. Why then should we
not bless God in the furnace as well
as in the palace; on a bed of pain as
well as on a bed of down ; in want as
well as when sitting down at the
splendid banquet? God knows what
is best for us; and the way in which
he leads us, mysterious though it
seem to be now, will yet be seen to
have been full of goodness and mercy.
q Unto God and the Father. Or,
“to God, even the Father.’”’ It cannot mean to God as distinguished
from the Father, or first to God and
then to the Father, as if the Father
were distinct from God. The meaning is, that thanks are to be given
specially to God the Father --the
great Author of all mercies, and tie
source of all blessings. 4 Ji the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ. That
is, through his mediation, or trusting
in him; see Notes on John xiv. 18.
The meaning is, that we are always
to approach God through the mediation of the Lord Jesus. When we
ask for mercy, it is to be on his account, or through his merits; when
we plead for strength and grace to
support us in trial, it is to be in dependence on him ; and when we give
thanks, it is to be through him, and
because it is through his intervention
that we receive all blessings, and by
his merits that even the gratitude of
beings so sinful as we are can be accepted.

21. Submitting yourselves one to
another. Maintaining due subordination in the various relations of life.
This general principle of religion, the
apostle proceeds now to illustrate in
reference to wives (ver. 22--24) ; to
children (chap. vi. 1--38); and to seryants, chap. vi. 5--8. At the same
time that he enforces this duty of
submission, however, he enjoins on
others to use their authority in a proper manner, and gives solemn injunctions that there should be no abuse of
power. Particularly he enjoins on
husbands the duty of loving their
wives with all tenderness (ver. 25--~

22 Wives, * submit yourselves | unto your own husbands, as unto

a )Pe.3.1,&c.; Co.3.18,&c.

the Lord.

83); on fathers, the duty of treating
their children so that they might
easily obey them (chap. vi. 4) ; and
on masters, the duty of treating their
servants with kindness, remembering
that they have a Master also in heaven; chap. vi. 9. The general meaning here 1s, that Christianity does not
break up the relations of life, and
produce disorder, lawlessness, and insubordination ; but that it will confirm every proper authority, and make
every just yoke lighter. Infidelity is
always disorganizing; Christianity,
never.

22, Wives, submit yourselves unto
your own husbands. On this passage, comp. Notes on 1 Cor. xi. 3--9.
The duty of the submission of the
wife to her husband is everywhere
enjoined in the Scriptures; see 1
Penis Colette le ce hituseii ro.
While Christianity designed to elevate the character of the wife, and to
make her a fit companion of au intelligent and pious husband, it did not
intend to destroy all subordination
and authority. Man, by the fact that
he was first created; that the woman
was taken from him; that he is better qualified for ruling than, she is, is
evidently designed to be at the head
of the little community that constitutesa family. In many other things,
woman may be his equal; in loveliness, and grace, and beauty, and tenderness, and gentleness, she is far his
superior ; but these are not the qualities adapted for government. ‘Their
place is in another sphere ; and there,
man should be as cautious about invading her prerogative, or abridging
her liberty, as she should be about
invading the prerogative that belongs
to him. In every family there should
be a head--some one who is to be
looked up to as the counsellor and the
ruler; some one to whom all should
be subordinate. God-has given that
prerogative to man; and no family
prospers where that arrangement is
violated. Within proper metes and
limits, therefore, it is the duty of the
wife to obey, or to submit herself to

her husband. Those limits are such
as the following: 1. In domestic arrangements, the husband is to be regarded as the head of the family ; and
he has a right to direct as to the style
of living, the expenses of the family,
the clothing, &c. 2. In regard to the
laws which are to regulate the family,
he is the head. It is his to say what
is to be done ; in what way the children are to employ themselves, and
to give directions in regard to their
education, &c. 3. In business matters, the wife is to submit to the husband. She may counsel with him, if
he chooses; but the affairs of business
and property are under his control,
and must be left at his disposal. 4.
In everything, except that which relates to conscience and religion, he
has authority. But there his authority ceases. He has no right to require
her to commit an act of dishonesty,
to connive at wrong-doing, to visit a
place of amusement which her conscience tells her is wrong, nor has he
aright to interfere with the proper
discharge of her religious duties. He
has no right to forbid her to go to
church at the proper and usual time,
or to make a profession of religion
when she pleases. He has no right
to forbid her endeavouring to exercise
a religious influence over her children,
or to endeavour to lead them to God.
She is bound to obey God, rather than
any man (see Notes on Acts iy. 19);
and when even a husband interferes
in such cases, and attempts to control
her, he steps beyond his proper bounds,
and invades the prerogative of God,
and his authority ceases to be binding. It ought to be said, however,
that in order to justify her acting independently in such a case, the following things are proper: (1.) It
should be really a case of conscience
--a case where the Lord has plainly
required her to do what she proposes
to do--and not a mere matter of
whim, fancy, or caprice. (2.) When
a husband makes opposition to the
course which a wife wishes to pursue in religious duties, it should

23 For the husband is the head
of the wife, even as Christ is the
head of the church: and he is the
Saviour of the body

24 Therefore as the church is
subject unto Christ, so let the wives
be to their own husbands in every
thing.

lead her to re-examine the matter,
to pray much over it, and to see whether she cannot, with a good conscience, ccmply with his wishes.
(3.) If she is convinced that she is
right, she should still endeavour to
see whether it is not possible to win
him to her views, and to persuade
him to accord with her; see 1 Pet.
ii. 1. It is possible that, if she does
right, he may be persuaded to do
right also. (4.) If she is constrained,
however, to differ from him, it should
be with mildness and gentleness.
There should be no reproach, and no
contention. She should simply state
her reasons, and leave the event to
God. (5.) She should, after this, be
a better wife, and put forth more and
more effort to make her husband and
family happy. She should show that
the effect ofher religion has been to
make her love her husband and children more; to make her more and more
attentive to her domestic duties, and
more and more kind in affliction. By
a life of pure religion, she should aim
to secure what she could not by her
entreaties--his consent that sheshould
live as she thinks she ought to, and
and walk to heaven in the path in
which she believes that her Lord calls
her. While, however, it is to be conceded that the husband has authority
over the wife, anda right to command
in all cases that do not pertain to the
conscience, it should be remarked, (1)
That his command should be reasonable and proper. .(2.) He has no
right to require anything wrong, or
contrary to the will of God. (3.)
WHERE COMMANDS BEGIN 17 this relation, HAPPINESS USUALLY ENDS; and
the moment a husband requires a wife
to do anything, it is usually a signal
of departing or departed affection and
peace. When there are proper feelings in both parties in this relation,
there will be no occasion either to
command orto obey. There should
be such mutual love and confidence,
that the known wish of the husband

should be a law to the wife: and that
the known desires of the wife should
be the rule which he would approve.
A perfect governmentis that where the
known wish of the lawgiver is a sufficient rule to the subject. Suchis the
government of heaven ; and a family on
earth should approximate as nearly
as possible to that. { As unto the
Lord. As youwould to the Lord, because the Lord requires it, and has
given to the husband this authority.

23 For the husband is the head
of the wife; see Notes on 1 Cor. xi. 8.
4 As Christ is the head of the church.
As Christ rules over the church, and
has a right to direct and control it,
i And he is the Saviour of the body.
That is, of the church, represented as
his body ; see Notes, chap.i.23. The
idea here seems to be, that as Christ
gave himself to save his body, the
church ; as he practised self-denial and
made it anobject of intense solicitude
to preserve that church, so ought the
husband to manifest a similar solicitude to make his wife happy, and to
save her from want, affliction, and
pain. He ought to regard himself as
her natural protector; as bound to
anticipate and provide for her wants ;
as under obligation to comfort her in
trial, even as Christ does the church.
What a beautiful illustration of the
spirit which a husband should manifest
is the care which Christ has shown
for his “ bride,’’ the church! see
Notes on ver. 25--29.

24. In every thing. In every thing
which is not contrary to the will of
God ; see Notes on ver. 23.

25.Husbands, love your wives. The
duty of the wife is to obey ; the right
of the husband is to command. But
the apostle would guard against the
abuse of that right by enjoining the
manifestation of such a spirit on the
husband as would secure obedience on
the part of the wife. He proceeds,
therefore, to show, that the husband,
in all his intercourse with the wife,
should manifest the same spirit which
25 Husbands, love your wives,
even as Christ also loved the church,
and gave himself for it ;

26 That he might sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing @ of
water by the word:

a 7i.3.5.

the Lord Jesus did towards the church ;
or, in other words, he holds up the
conduct of the Redeemer towards the
church, as the model for a husband to
imitate. Ifahusband wished a rule
that would be short, simple, clear, and
efficacious, about the manner in which
he should regard and treat his wife, he
could not find a better one than that
here suggested. ( Even as Christ
lovedthechurch. 'This was thestrongest love that has ever been evinced in
this world. It follows, that a husband
is inno danger of loving his wife too
much, provided she be not loved more
than God. We are to make the love
which Christ had for the church the
model. Q And gave himself for tt.
Gave himself to die to redeem it.
The meaning here is, that husbands
are to imitate the Redeemer in this
respect. As he gave himself to suffer
on the cross to save the church, so we
are to be willing to deny ourselves,
and to bear toil and trial, that we may
promote the happiness of the wife. It
is the duty of the husband to toil for
her support ; to provide for her wants ;
to deny himself of rest and ease, if
necessary, in order to attend on her
in sickness ; to go before herin danger ;
to defend her if she isin peril; and to
be ready to die to save ter. Why
should he not be? If they ave shipwrecked, and there is a single plank
on which safety can be secured, should
he not be willing to place her on that,
and see her safe at all hazards to himself? But there may be more implied
in this than that a man is to toil, and
even to lay down his life for the welfare of his wife. Christ laid down
his life to save the church; anda husband should feel that it should be one
great object of his life to promote the
salvation of his wife. He is bound so
to live as not to interfere with her
salvation, but so as to promote it in
every way possible. He is to furnish
her all the facilities that she may need,
to enable her to attend on the worship
of God; and to throw no obstacles in

her way. He isto set her the example; to counsel her if she needs
counsel, and to make the path of salvation as easy for her as possible. If
a husband has the spiritand self-denial
of the Saviour, he will regard no sacrifice too great if he may promote the
salvation of his family.

26. That he might sanctify. The
great object of the Redeemer was to
purify and save the church. The
meaning here is, that a husband is to
manifest similar love towards his wife,
and a similar desire that she should be
prepared to “walk before himin white ”
{{ And cleanse it with the washing of
water. In all this there is an allusion
doubtless to the various methods of
purifying and cleansing those who were
about to be married, and who were to
be united to monarchs as their brides.
In some instances this previous preparation continued for twelve months.
The means of purification were various, but consisted usually in the
use of costly unguents; see Esther
ii. 12. “Six months with oil of
myrrh, and six months with sweet
odours, and with other things for the
purifying of women; comp. Ps.
Xivyoelon 14e wR zeke xvine{--1 4 es
such a virgin was purified and prepared for her husband by washing
and by anointing, so the church is to
be prepared for Christ. It is to be
made pure and holy. Outwardly
there is to be the application of
water--the symbol of purity ; and
within there is to be holiness of heart ;
see Notes on 2 Cor. xi. 2, where Paul
says of the Corinthians, ‘‘I have espoused you to one husband, that I
may present you as a chaste virgin to
Christ.” § By the word. ‘There
has been much diversity of opinion
respecting the meaning of this. Probably the sense of the expression is,
that all this was to be accomplished
by the instrumentality of the truth---.
the word of God. By that truth they
were to be sanctified (John xvii. 17) ;
and in accordance with that the whole

27 That he might present it
to himself a glorious church, not
having spot, © or wrinkle, or any
such thing ; but that it should be
holy and without blemish.

a Jude 24, 6 Ca.4.?

28 So ought men to love their
wives as their own Lodies ; he that
loveth his wife loveth himself.

29 For no man ever yet hated
his own flesh ; but nourisheth and

work from the commencement to the
close was to be accomplished. It was
not by external ceremonies, and not
by any miraculous power on the heart,
but by the faithful application of truth
to the heart.

27. That he may present it to
limself. In the last day, when he
shall receive the church as his spouse
to heaven ; Rey. xxi. 9. Perhaps the
word prepare would better express
the sense here than present--that he
may prepare it for himself as a holy
church. Tindal renders it, ‘‘to make
it untohimself.” A glorious church.
A church full of honour, splendour,
beauty. The idea of shining, or of
being bright, would convey the sense
here. Probably there is still here an
allusion to a bride ‘‘adorned for her
husband”’ (Rey. xxi.2; comp. Ps. xlv.
9-- 14); and the ideais, that the church
will be worthy of the love of the bridegroom, to whom it will then be presented. § Not having spot. Not
having a stain, a defect, or any impurity--still retaining the allusion to
a bride, andto the care taken to remove every blemish. { Or wrinkle.
In the vigour and beauty of youth ;
like a bride in whom there is no
wrinkle of age. J Or any such thing.
Nothing to deform, disfigure, or offend. To this beautiful illustration
of the final glory of the church, the
apostle was Jed by the mention of the
relation of the husband and the wife.
It shows, (1.) The tendency of the
thoughts of Paul. He delighted to
allow the associations inhis mind, no
matter what the subject was, to draw
him along;to the Redeemer. (2.) The
passage here shows us what the church
will yet be. There will be a period in
its history when there shall not be any
imperfection; when there shall be
neither spot, nor wrinkle, nor any
such thing. In heaven all will be
pure. On earth we are preparing
for that world of purity ; and it cannot

be denied that here there is much
that is imperfect and impure. But
in that future world, where the church
shall be presented to Christ, clothed
in the robes of salvation, there shall
not be one unholy member; one deceiver or hypocrite ; one covetous or
avaricious man; one that shall pain
the hearts of the friends of purity by an
unholy life. And in all the millions
that shall be gathered there out ot
every land, and people, and tongue,
and age, there shall beno envy, malice,
backbiting, pride, vanity, worldliness;
there shall be no annoying and vexing
conflict in the heart with evil passions,
“nor any such thing.” How different
from the church as it now is ; and how
we should pant for that blessed world !

28. So ought men to love their
wives as their own bodies. Because
they are one flesh; ver. 31. This is
the subject on which Paul had been
speaking, and from which he had been
diverted by the allusionto the glorified
church. The doctrine here is, that
a husband should have the same care
for the comfort of his wife which he
has for himself. He should regard
her as one with himself; and as he
protects his own body from cold and
hunger, and, when sick and suffering,
endeavours to restore it to health, so
he should regard and treather. 4 He
that loveth his wife, loveth himself.
(1.) Because she is one with him, and
their interests are identified, (2.)
Because, by this, he really promotes
his own welfare, as much as he does
when he takes care of his own body.
A man’s kindness to his wife will be
more than repaid by the happiness
which she imparts ; and all the real
solicitude which he shows to make
her happy, will come to more than
it costs. Ifa man wishes to promote
his own happiness in the most effectual way, he had better begin by
showing kindness to his wife.

29. For no man ever yet hated his
cherisheth it ; even as the Lord the
church :
30 For we are members? of his
a 1Co.12.27.

body, of his flesh, and of his

bones.
31 For ° this cause shall a man

6 Gen.2.24.

own flesh. This is urged as an argument why a man should love his wife
and show kindness to her. As no
man disregards the happiness of his
own body, or himself, so he should
show equal care to promote the
happiness of his wife. A sentiment
similar to this is found in the classic
writers. Thus Curtius (lib. vil.) says,
Corporibus nostris que utique non
odimus--* We do not hate those
things that pertain to our own bodies.”
So Seneca (Epis. 14), Fateor insitam
nobis esse corporis nostri charitatem--
“JT confess that there is implanted in
us the love of our own body.” The
word nourisheth here means properly
to bring up, ase. g., children. The
sense here is, that he provides for it,
and guards it from exposure and want.
The word cherisheth--Sdavei--means
properly to warm; and may mean
here that he defends it from cold by
clothing--and the two expressions
denote that he provides food and raiment for the body. So he is to do
for his wife ; and in like manner the
Lord Jesus regards the church, and
ministers to its spiritual necessities.
But this should not be spiritualized
too far. The general idea is all that
we want--that Christ has a tender
concern for the wants of the church,
asa man has for his own body, and
that the husband should show a similar regard for his wife.

30. For we are members of his
body. Of the body of Christ; see
Notes on 1 Cor. xi. 3; xii. 27; John
xv. 1--6, and Eph. i. 23. The idea
here is, that there is aclose and intimate union between the Christian
and the Saviour--a union so intimate
that they may be spoken of as one.
{ Of his flesh, and of his bones.
There is an allusion here evidently
to the language which Adam used
respecting Eve. ‘This is now bone
of my bones, and flesh of my flesh ;”
Gen. ii. 23. It is language which
is employed to denote the closeness
of the marriage relation, and which

Paul applies to the connection between Christ and his people. Of
course, it cannot be understood Jiterally. It is not true literally that our
bones are a part of the bones of
Christ, or our flesh of his flesh ; nor
should language ever be used that
would imply a miraculous union. It
is not a physical union, but a union
of attachment; of feeling; of love.
If we avoid the notion of a physical
union, however, it is scarcely possible
to use too strong language in describing the union of believers with the
Lord Jesus. The Scriptures make
use of language which is stronger
than that employed to describe any
other connection; and there is no
union of affection so powerful as that
which binds the Christian to the
Saviour. So strong is it, that he is
willing for it to forsake father, mother,
and home ; to leave his country, and
to abandon his possessions ; to go to
distant lands and dwell among barbarians to make the Redeemer known;
or to go to the cross or the stake from
simple love to the Saviour. Account
for it as men may, there has been
manifested on earth nowhere else so
strong an attachment as that which
binds the Christian to the cross. It
is stronger love than that which a
man has for his own flesh and bones ;
for it makes him willing that his flesh
should be consumed by fire, or his
bones broken on the wheel rather
than deny him. Can the infidel account for this strength of attachment
on any other principle than that it
has a divine origin ?

(See Supplementary Note, Rom. viii. 10, on
the union between Christ and his people, in
which it is shown that a mere union of feeling and love is far beneath the truth.]

31. For this cause. ’Avr) révrov.
This verse is a quotation from Gen.
il. 24, and contains the account of the
institution of marriage. The meaning of the phrase rendered “ for this
cause’’ is, ‘‘ answerably to this ;” or
corresponding to this--that is, to

leave his father and mother, and
shall be joined unto his wife, and
they two @ shall be one flesh.

@ 1Co.6.16.

32 This is a great inystery; but
I speak concerning Christ and the
church.

33 Nevertheless, let every one

what Paul had just said of the union
of believers and the Redeemer. On
the meaning of this verse, see Notes
on Matt. xix. 4. There is no evidence thas the marriage connection
was originally designed to symbolize
or typify this union, but it may be
used to illustrate that connection,
and to show the strength of the attachment between the Redeemer and
his people. The comparison should
be confined, however, strictly to the
use made of it in the New Testament.

32. This is a great mystery. The
Latin Vulgate translates this, sacramentum hoc magnum est --“ this is a
great sacrament’’--and this is the
proof, I suppose, and the only proof
adduced by the Papists that marriage
is a sacrament. But the original
here conveys no suchidea. The word
my stery--pu7 rey --means something
which is concealed, hidden, before
unknown ; something into which one
must be zinitzated or instructed before
he can understand it. It does not
mean that it is encomprehensible when
it is disclosed, but that hitherto it has
been kept secret. When disclosed it
may be as intelligible as any other
truth ; see the word explained in the
Notes on chap. i. 9. Here it means,
simply, that there was much about
the union of the Redeemer with his
people, resembling the marriage connection, which was not obvious, except to those who were instructed ;
which was obscure to those who were
not initiated ; which they did not understand who had not been taught.
Tt does not mean that no one could
understand it, but that it pertained to

the class of truths into which it was |

necessary for one to be initiated in
order to comprehend them. The
truth that was so great a mystery
was, that the eternal Son of God
should form such an union with men;
that he should take them into a connection with himself, implying an ar-

dour of attachment, and a strength o1
affection superior to even that which
exists in the marriage relation. ‘This
was a great and profound truth, to
understand which, it was necessary
to receive instruction. No one would
have understood it without a revelation; no one understands it now except they who are taught of God.
q but I speak concerning Christ and
the church. This, it seems to me, is
an explicit disclaimer of any intention
to be understood as affirming that the
marriage contract was designed to be
a type of the union of the Redeemer
and his people. The apostle says expressly, that his remarks do not refer
to marriage at all when he speaks of
the mystery. They refer solely to the
union of the Redeemer and his people.
Ilow strange and unwarranted, therefore, areallthe comments of expositors
on this passage designed to explain
marriage as @ mysterious type of the
union of Christ and the church! If
men would allow the apostle to speak
for himself, and not force on him sentiments which he expressly disclaims,
the world would be saved from such
insipid allegories as Macknight and
others have derived from this passage.
The Bible is a book of sense; and the
time will come, it is hoped, when,
freed from ali such allegorizing expositions, it will commend Itself to tue
good sense of mankind. Marriage is
an important, a holy, a noble, a pure
institution, altogether worthy of God;
but it does not thence follow that
marriage was designed to be a type of
the union between Christ and the
church, and it is certain that the
apostle Paul meant to teach no such
thing.

33. Nevertheless. The apostle here
resumes the subject which he had
been discussing in ver. 21--29, and
says that it was the duty of every
man to love his wife as he did himself.
This was the main topic, from which
he had been diverted by the discusof you in particular, so love his
wife even as himself; and the

wife see that she reverence he7
husband.

sion respecting the love which the
Redeemer had shown for his church.
{ And the wife see that she reverence
her husband. ‘The word ‘see’ is
supplied by our translators. The
meaning is, that it was the especial
duty of the wife to show respect for
her husband as the head of the family,
and as set over her in the Lord; see
Notes on ver. 22,23. The word rendered reverence, is that which usually
denotes fear -- QsSiru. She is to
fear ; 7. e. to honour, respect, obey
the will of her husband. It is, of
course, not implied that it is not also
her duty to love her husband, but that
there should be no usurping of authority; no disregard of the arrangement which God has made ; and that
order and peace should be secured in
a family by regarding the husband as
the source of law.

From what is here said of the duties of husband and wife we may remark,

(1.) That the happiness of society
depends on just views of the marriage
relation. It is true the world over,
that the views which prevail in regard
to this relation, determine every thing
in reference to all other relations of
life, and to all other sources of enjoyment.

(2.) God designed that woman
should occupy a subordinate, though
an important place in the relations
of social life. Thts arrangement is
never disregarded without evils which
cannot be corrected until the original
intention is secured. No imaginary
good that can come out of the violation of the original design; no benefits which females, individual or associated, can confer on mankind by
disregarding this arrangement, can
be a compensation for the evil that is
done, nor can the evil be remedied
unless woman occupies the place
which God designed she should fill.
Lhere nothing else can supply her
place ; and when she is absent from
that situation--no matter what good
she may be doing elsewhere--there is
a silent evil reigning, which can be

removed only by her return. It is
not hers to fight battles, or to command armies and navies, or to control
kingdoms, or to make laws. Nor is
it hers to go forward as a public
leader even in enterprises of benevolence, or in associations designed
to act on the public mind. Her empire is the domestic circle ; her first
influence is there; and in connection
with that, in such scenes as she can
engage in without trenching on the
prerogative of man, or neglecting the
duty which she owes to her own
family.

(3.) It is not best that there should
be the open exercise of authority in a
family. When commands begin in
the relation of husband and wife,
happiness tlies; and the moment a
husband is disposed to coMMaND his
wife, or is under a necessity of doing
it, that moment he may bid adieu to
domestic peace and joy.

(4.) A wife, therefore, should never
give her husband occasion to command
her to do any thing, or forbid any thing.
Ifis known wish, except in cases of
conscience, should be lawto her. The
moment she can ascertain what his
will is, that moment ought to settle
her mind as to what is to be done.

(5.) A husband should never wish
or expect any thing that it may not
be perfectly proper for a wife to render. He, too, should consult her
wishes; and when he understands
what they are, he should regard what
she prefers as the very thing whica
he would command. ‘he known wish
and preference of a wife, unless there
be something wrong in it, should be
allowed to influence his mind, and be
that which he directs in the family.

(6.) There is no danger that a husband will love a wife too much, provided his love be subordinate to the
love of God. The command is, to
love her as Christ loved the church.
What love has ever been like that?
IIow can a husband exceed it? What
did not Christ endure to redeem the
church? So should a husband be
willing to deny himself to promote

the happiness of his wife; to watch
by her in sickness, and, if need be, to
peril health and life to promote her
welfare. Doing this, he will not go
beyond what Christ did for the church.
He should remember that she has a
special claim of justice on him. For
him she has left her father’s home,
forsaken the friends of her youth, endowed him with whatever property
she may have, sunk her name in his,
confided her honour, her character,
and her happiness, to his virtue; and
tke least that he can do for her is
to love her, and strive to make her
happy. This was what she asked
when she consented to be ome his ;
and a husband's love is what she still
asks to sustain and cheer her in the
trials of life. If she has not this,
whither shall she go for comfort ?

(7.) We may see, then, the guilt of
those husbands who withhold their
affections from their wives, and forsake those to whom they had solemnly
pledged themselves at the altar ; those
who neglect to provide for their wants,
or to minister to them in sickness ;
and those who become the victims of
intemperance, and leave their wives

to tears. There is much, much guilt
of this kind on earth. There are
many, many broken vows. There are

many, many hearts made to bleed.
There is many a pure and virtuous
woman who was once the object of
tender affection, now, by no fault of
hers, forsaken, abused, broken-hearted, by the brutal conduct of a husband.

(8.) Wives should manifest such a
character as to be worthy of love.
They owe this to their husbands.
They demand the confidence and affection of man; and they should show
that they are worthy of that confidence and affection. It is not possible to love that which is unlovely,
nor to force affection where it is undeserved ; and, as a wife expects that
a husband will love her more than he
does any other earthly being, it is but
right that she should evince such a
spirit as shall make that proper. A
wife may easily alienate the affections
of her partner in life. If she is irri-

ways please her; if she takes no interest in his plans, and in what he
does ; if she forsakes her home when
she should be there, and seeks happiness abroad; or if, at home, she never
greets him with a smile; if she is
wasteful of his earnings, and extravagant in her habits, it will be imposstble to prevent the effects of such a
course of life onhis mind. And when
a wife perceives the slightest evidence
of alienated affection in her husband,
she should inquire at once whether
she has not given occasion for it, and
exhibited such a spirit as tended inevitably to produce such a result.

(9.) To secure mutual love, therefore, it is necessary that there should
be mutual kindness, and mutual loveliness of character. Whatever is seen
to be offensive or painful, should be
at once abandoned. All the little
peculiarities of temper and modes of
speech that are observed to give pain,
should be forsaken; and, while one
party should endeavour to tolerate
them, and not to be offended, the
other should make it a matter of conscience to remove them.

(10.) The great secret of conjugal
happiness is in the cultivation of a
proper temper. It is not so much in
the great and trying scenes of life
that the strength of virtue is tested ;
it is in the events that are constantly
occurring ; the manifestation of kindness in the things that are happening
every moment; the gentleness that
flows along every day, like the stream
that winds through the meadow and
around the farm-house, noiseless but
useful, diffusing fertility by day and
by night. Great deeds rarely vccur.
The happiness of life depends little
on them, but mainly on the little acts
of kindness in life. We need them
everywhere ; we need them always.
And eminently in the marriage relation there is need of gentleness and
love, returning cach morning, beaming in the eye, and dwelling in the
heart through the livelong day.

This chapter comprises the follow-

table-and fault-finding ; if none of his; ing subjects: (1.) An exhortation to
HWILDREN, + obey your pa-

@ Pr.23.22; Co.3.20,&¢.

rents © in the Lord: for this is

right.

b Ro.16.2; 1C0.15.58.

children to obey their parents, with a
promise of the blessing that would
follow from obedience; ver. 1--3.
(2.) An exhortation to fathers to
manifest such a character that children could properly obey them, and
to train them up in a proper manner;
ver. 4, (8.) The duty of servants ;
ver, 5--8, (4.) The duty of masters
towards their servants; ver.9. (5.) An
exhortation to put on the whole armour of God, with a description of the
Christian soldier, and of the Christian
panoply; ver. 10--17. (6.) The

duty of prayer, and especially of

prayer for the apostle himself, that
he might be enabled to speak with
boldness in the cause of his Master ;
ver. 18--20. (7.) In the conclusion
(ver. 21--24), he informs them that
if they wished to make any inquiries
about his condition, Tychicus, who
conveyed this letter, could acquaint
them with his circumstances; and
then closes the epistle with the usual
benedictions.

1. Children. tina Chis word
usually signifies those who are young;
but it is here used, evidently, to denote those who were under the care
and government of their parents, or
those who were not of age. ¥ Obey
your parents, This is the first great
duty which God has enjoined on children. It is, to do what their parents
command them to do. The God of
nature indicates that this is duty; for
he has impressed it on the minds of
all in every age ; and the Author of
revelation confirms it. It is particularly important, (1.) Because the good
order of a family, and hence of the
community, depends on it; no community or family being prosperous
where there is not due subordination
in the household. (2.) Because the
welfare of the child depends on it ; it
being of the highest importance that
a child should be early taught obedience to Jaw, as no one can be prosperous or happy who is not thus
obedient. (3.) Because the child is
nob competent as yet to reason on

' a profession of religion.

what is right, or qualified to direct
himself; and, while that is the case,
he must be subject to the wil of some
other person. (4.) Because tne parent, by his age and experience, is to
be presumed to be qualified to direct
and guide a child. The love which
God has implanted in the heart of a
parent for a child secures, in general,
the administration of this domestic
government in such a way as not to
injure the child. A father will not,
unless under strong passion or the
excitement of intoxication, abuse his
authority. He loves the child too
much. He desires his welfare ; and
the placing of the child under the
authority of the parent is about the
same thing in regard to the welfare
of the child, as it would be to endow
the child at once with all the wisdom
and experience of the parent himself.
(5.) It is important, because the
family government is designed to be
an imitation of the government of
God. The government of God is
what a perfect family government
would be; and to accustom a child to
be obedient to a parent, is designed
to be one method of leading him to be
obedient to God. No child that is
disobedient to a parent will be obedient to God; and that child that is
most obedient to a father and mother
will be most likely to become a Christian, and an heir of heaven. And it
may be observed, in general, that no
disobedient child is virtuous, prosperous, or happy. Every one foresees
the ruin of such a child ; and most of
the cases of crime that lead to the
penitentiary, or the gallows, commence by disobedience to parents.
q In the Lord. That is, as far as
their commandments agree with those
of God, and no farther. No parent
can have a right to require a child to
steal, or lie, or cheat, or assist him in
committing murder, or in doing any
other wrong thing. No parent has a
right to forbid a child to pray, to read
the Bible, to worship God, or to make
The duties

2 Honour @ thy father and mother, (which is the first commandment with promise, )

@ Ex.20.12.

3 That it may be well with thee,
and thou mayest live long on the
earth.

and rights of children in such cases
are similar to those of wives (see
Notes on chap. vy. 22); and in all
cases, God is to be obeyed rather than
man. When a parent, however, is
opposed to achild; when he expresses an unwillingness that a child
should attend a particular church, or
make a profession of religion, such
opposition should in all cases be a
sufficient reason for the child to pause
and re-examine the subject. He
should pray much, and think much,
and inquire much, before, in any case,
he acts contrary to the will ofa father
or mother ; and, when he does do it,
he should state to them, with great
gentleness and kindness, that he believes he ought to love and serve God.
q For this is right. It is right, (1.)
because it is so appointed by God as
a duty; (2.) because children owe a
debt of gratitude to their parents for
what they have done for them; (3.)
because it will be for the good of the
children themselves, and for the welfare of society.

2. Honour thy father und mother ;
see Ex. xx. 12; comp. Notes on
Matt. xv. 4. § Which is the first
commandment with promise. Witha
promise annexed to it. The promise
was, that their days should be long
in the land which the Lord their
God would give them. It is not to
be supposed that the observance of
the four first commandments would
not be attended with a blessing, but
no particular blessing is promised.
It is true, indeed, that there is a
general declaration annexed to the
second commandment, that God
would show mercy to thousands of
generations of them that loved him
and that kept his commandments.
But that is rather a declaration in
regard to all the commands of God
than a promise annexed to that specific commandment. It is an assurance that obedience to the law of
God would be followed with blessings
to a thousand generations, and is

given in view of the first and second
commandments together, because
they related particularly to the honour that was due to God. But the
promise in the fifth commandment is
a special promise. It does not relate
to obedience to God in general, but
it is a particular assurance that they
who honour their parents shall havea
particular blessing as the result of
that obedience.

3. That it may be well ‘with thee.
This is found in the fifth command.
ment as recorded in Deut. v. 16.
The whole commandment as there
recorded is, ‘“‘ Honour thy father and
thy mother, as the Lord thy God hath
commanded thee ; that thy days may
be prolonged, and that it may go well
with thee in the land which the Lord
thy God giveth thee.” The meaning
here is, that they would be more
happy, useful, and virtuous if they
obeyed their parents than if they disobeyedthem. § And thou mayest live
long on the earth. In the commandment as recorded in Ex. xx. 12, the
promise is, ‘‘that thy days may be
long upon the land which the Lord
thy God giveth thee.” This referred
to the promised land--the land of
Canaan. The meaning doubtless, is,
that there would be a special providence, securing to those who were
obedient to parents length of days.
Long life was regarded as a great
blessing; and this blessing was promised. ‘The apostle here gives to the
promise a more general form, and
says that obedience to parents was
connected at all times with long life.
We may remark here (1.) that long
life 7s a blessing. lt affords a longer
space to prepare for eternity ; it enables a man to be more useful; and it
furnishesa longer opportunity to study
the works of God on earth. It is not
improper to desire it ; and we should
make use of all the means in our
power to iengthen out our days, and
to preserve and protract our lives.
(2.) It is still true that obedience to
4 And ye fathers, provoke not
your children to wrath : but bring

parents is conducive to iength of life,
and that those who are most obedient
in early life, other things being equal,
have the best prospect of living long.
This occurs because (a) obedient children are saved from the vices and
crimes which shorten life. No parent
will command his child to be a
drunkard, a gambler, a spendtlrift,
a pirate, or a murderer. But these
vices and crimes, resulting in most
cases from disobedience to parents,
ail shorten life ; and they who early
commit tltem are certain of an early
grave. No child who disobeys a parent can have any security that he
will not fall a victim to such vices and
crimes. (b) Obedience to parents is
connected with virtuous habits that
are conducive to long life. It will
make a child industrious, temperate,
sober; it will lead him to restrain
and govern his wild passions ; it will
lead him to form habits of self-government which will in future life save
him from the snares of vice and temptation. (c) Many a life is lost early
by disobeying a parent. <A child disobeys a father and goes into a dramshop ; or he goes to sea ; or he becomes
the companion of the wicked--and he
may be wrecked at sea, or his character on land may be wrecked for ever.
Of disobedient children there is perhaps not one in a hundred that ever
reaches an honoured old age. (d)
We may still believe that God, in his
providence, will watch over those who
are obedient to a father and mother.
If he regards a falling sparrow ( Matt.
x. 29), he will not be unmindful of an
obedient child; if he numbers the
hairs of the head ( Matt. x. 30), he will
not be regardless of the little boy that
honours him by obeying a father and
mother.

4. And ye fathers. A command
addressed particularly to fathers, because they are at the head of the family, and its government is especially
committed to them. ‘The object of
the apostle here is, to show parents
that their commands should be such
that they can be easily obeyed, or such

them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

as are entirely reasonable and proper.
If children are required to obcy, it is
but reasonable that the commands of
the parent should be such that they
can be obeyed, or such that the child
shall not be discouraged in his attempt to obey. ‘Ihis statement is in
accordance with what he had said
(chap. v. 22--25) of the relation of
husband and wife. It was the duty
of the wife to obey--but it was theo
corresponding duty of the husband to
manifest such a character that it
would be pleasant to yield obedience
--so to love her, that his known wish
would be Jaw to her. In like manner
it is the duty of children to obey a
parent ; but it is the duty of a parent to
exhibit such a character, and to maintain such a government, that it would
be proper for the child to obey; to
command nothing that is unreasonable or improper, but to train up his
children in the ways of virtue and
pure religion. § Provoke not your
children to wrath. That is, by unreasonable commands; by needless
severity; by the manifestation of
anger. So govern them, and so punish them--if punishment is necessary
--that they shall not lose their confidence in you, butshallloveyou. The
apostle here has hit on the very danger to which parents are most exposed
in the government of their children.
It is that of souring their temper ; of
making them feel that the parent is under the influence of anger, and that it
is right for them to be so too. ‘This
is done (1.) when the commands of a
parent are unreasonable and severe.
The spirit of a child then becomes
irritated, and he is ‘“ discouraged ;”
Col. iii. 21. (2.) When a parent is
evidently excited when he punishes a
child. ‘The child then feels (a) that
if his father is angry, it is not wrong
for him to be angry; and (6) the very
fact of anger in a parent kindles
anger in his bosom--just as it does
when two men are contending. Ifhe
submits in the case, it is only because
the parent is the strongest, not because he is right, and the child

cherishes anger, while he yields to
power. There is no principle of parental government more important
than that a father should command
his own temper when he inflicts punishment. IIe should punish a child
not because he is angry, but because
it is right; not because it has become
a matter of personal contest, but becanse God requires that he should do
it, and the welfare of the child demands it. The moment when a child
sees that a parent punishes him under
the influence of anger, that moment
the child will be likely to be angry too
--and his anger will be as proper as
that of the parent. And yet, how often is punishment inflicted in this
manner! And how often does the
child feel that the parent punished
him simply because he was the strongest, not because it was right; and
how often is the mind of a child left
with a strong conviction that wrong
has been done him by the punishment
which he has received, rather than
with repentance for the wrong that
he has himself done. { But bring
them up. Place them under such
discipline and instruction that they
shall become acquainted with the
Lord. § Jn the nurture. ty radeiz.
The word here used means training
of a child; hence education, instruction, discipline. Here it means that
they are to train up their children in
such a manner as the Lord approves;
that is, they are to educate them for
virtue and religion. § And admonttion. The word here used--vov9:cia
means literally, a putting in mind,
then warning, admonition, instruction.
The sense here is, that they were to
put them in mind of the Lord--of his
existence, perfeotions, law, and claims
on their hearts and lives. This command is positive, and is in accordance
with all the requirements of the Bible
on the subject. No one can doubt
that the Bible enjoins on parents the
duty of endeavouring to train up their
children in the ways of religion, and
of making it the grand purpose of this
life to prepare them for heaven. It
has been often objected that children
should be left on religious subjects to
form their own opinions when they

are able to judge for themselves. Infidels and irreligious men always oppose or neglect the duty here enjoined; and the plea commonly is, that
to teach religion to children is to
make them prejudiced; to destroy
their independence of mind; and
to prevent their judging as impartially on so important a subject as
they ought to. In reply to this,
and in defence of the requirements
of the Bible on the subject, we may
remark, (1.) That to suffer a child to
grow up without any instruction in religion, is about the same as to suffer a
garden to lie without any culture.
Such a garden would soon’ be overrun
with weeds, and briars, and thorns--
but not sooner, or more certainly,
than the mindofa child would. (2.)
Men do instruct their children ina
great many things, and why should they
not in religion ? They teach them how
to behave in company; the art of
farming ; the wayto make or use tools;
how to makemoney; how to avoid
the arts of the cunning seducer. But
why should it not be said that all this
tends to destroy their independence,
and to make them prejudiced? Why
not leave their minds open and free,
and suffer them to form their own judgments about farming and the mechanic
arts when their minds are matured ?
(3.) Men do inculcate their own sentiments in religion. An infidel is not
usually very anxious to conceal his
views from his children. Men teach
by example; by incidental remarks;
by the neglect of that which they regard as of no value. Aman who does
not pray, is teaching his children not
to pray ; he who neglects the public
worship of God, is teaching his children to neglect it; he who does not
read the Bible, is teaching his children not to read it. Such is the constitution of things, that it is impossible
for a parent not to inculcate his own
religious views on hischildren. Since
this 1s so, all that the Bible requires
is, that his instructions should be
rnigHT. (4.) To inculcate the truths
of religion is not to make the mind
narrow, prejudiced, and indisposed to
perceive the truth. Recligion makes
the mind candid, conscientious, open
5 Servants, # be obedient to them
that are your masters according to
a 1Pe.2.18,&c.

to conviction, ready to follow the truth.
Superstition, bigotry, infidelity, and
all error and falsehood, make the mind
narrow and prejudiced. (5.) Ifa man
does not teach his children truth,
others will teach them error. The
young sceptic that the child meets in
the street; the artful infidel ; the hater
of God; the unprincipled stranger ;
will teach the child. But is it not
better for a parent to teach his child
the éruth than for a stranger to teach
him error? (6.) Religion is the most
important of all subjects, and therefore it is of most importance that children on that subject should be taught
rrura. Of whom can God so properly
require this as of a parent? Ifit be
asked in what way a parent is to bring
up his children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, I answer, 1.
By directly inculcating the doctrines
and duties of religion--just as he does
any thing else that he regards as of
value. 2. By placing them in the
Sabbath-school, where he may havea
guarantee that they will be taught the
truth. 3. By conducting them--not
merely sending them--to the sanctuary, that they may be taught in the
house of God. 4. By example--all
teaching being valueless without that.
5. By prayer for the divine aid in
his efforts, and for the salvation of
their souls. These duties are plain,
simple, easy to be performed, and are
such as a man knows he ought to perform. If neglected, and the soul of
the child be lost, a parent has a most
fearful account to render to God.

5. Servants. O% dour. The word
here used denotes one who is bound
to render service to another, whether
that service be free or voluntary, and
may denote, therefore, either a slave,
or one who binds himself to render
service to another. Itis often used
in these senses in the New Testament,
just as it is elsewhere. It cannot be
demonstrated that the word here necessarily means slaves; though, if slavery existed among those to whom this
ep.stle was written--as there can be

the flesh, with fear and trembling,
in singleness of your heart, as unto
Christ.

little doubt that it did--it is a word
which would apply to those in this
condition; comp. Notes on 1 Cor. vil.
21; Gal, iii. 28. On the general subject of slavery, and the Scripture doctrine in regard to it ; see Notes on
Isa. lviii.6. Whetherthe persons here
referred to were slaves, or were those
who had bound themselves to render a
voluntary servitude, the directions
here given were equally appropriate.
It was not the design of the Christian
religion to produce a rude sundering
of the ties which bind man to man,
but to teach all to perform their duties
aright in the relations in which Christianity found them, and gradually to
modify the customs of society, and te
produce ultimately the universal prevalence of that which is right. { Be
obedient to them. Thisis the uniform
direction in the New Testament ; see
I Pet. a1. 1851) Lim: vvi-gl--3e. Notes
1 Cor. vii. 21. ‘The idea is that they
were to show in that relation the excellence of the religion which they professed. Ifthey could be made free,
they were to prefer that condition to
a state of bondage (1 Cor. vii. 21), but
while the relation remained, they were
to be kind, gentle, and obedient, as became Christians. Inthe parallel place
in Colossians (iii. 22), iv is said that
they were to obey their masters “in
all things.”” But evidently this is to
be understood with the limitations
implied in the case of wives and children (see Notes on chap. v. 24; vi. 1),
and a master would have noright to
command that which was morally
wrong. {| According to the flesh.
This is designed, evidently, to limit
the obligation to obedience. The
meaning is, that they had control over
the body, the flesh. They had the
power to command the service which
the body could render ; but they were
not lords of the spirit. The soul acknowledged God as its Lord, and to
the Lord they were to be subject in a
higher sense than to their masters.
{ With fear and trembling. With
reverenceand with a dread ofoffending

6 Not with eye-service, as men-

7 With good-will doing ser-

pleasers; but as the servants of| vice,“ as to the Lord, and not to

Christ, doing the will of God from
the heart ;

men};
a1Co.10.31,

them. They haveauthority and power
over you, and you should be afraid to
incur their displeasure. Whatever
might be true about the propriety of
slavery, and whatever might be the
duty of the master about setting the
slave free, it would be more to the
honour of religion for the servant to
perform his task with a willing mind
than to be contumacious and rebellious. He could do more for the
nonour of religion by patiently submitting to even what he felt to be
wrong, than by being punished for
what would be regarded as rebellion.
It may be added here, thatit was presumed that servants then could read.
These directions were addressed to
them, not to their masters. Of what
use would be directions like these addressed to American slaves--scarce
any of whom can read? { Jn singleness
of your heart. With a simple, sincere
desire to do what ought to be done.
{| As unto Christ. Feeling that by
rendering proper service to your masters, you are in fact serving the Lord,
and that you are doing that which
will be well-pleasing to him; see Notes
on | Cor. vii. 22. Fidelity, in whatever situation we may be in life, is
acceptable service to the Lord. A
Christian may as acceptably serve the
Lord Jesus in the condition of a servant, as if he were a minister of the
gospel, ora king on a throne. Besides, it will greatly lighten the burdens of sucha situation, and make the
toils of an humble condition easy, to
remember that we are then serving
the Lord.

6. Nor with eye-service. That is,
not with service rendered only under
the eye of the master, or when his
eye is fixed on you. The apostle has
here adverted to one of the evils of
involuntary servitude as it exists
everywhere. It is, that the slave will
usually obey only when the eye of the
master is upon him. The freeman
who agrees to labour for stipulated
wages may betrusted when the master

is out of sight; but not the slave.
Hence the necessity where there are
slaves of having ‘‘drivers’’ who shall
attend them, and who shall compel
them to work. ‘This evil it is impossible to avoid, except where true
religion prevails--and the extensive
prevalence of true religion would set
the slave at liberty. Yet as long as
the relation exists, the apostle would
enjoin on the servant the duty of
performing his work conscientiously,
as rendering service to the Lord.
This direction, moreover, is one of
great importance to all who are employed inthe service of others. They are
bound to perform their duty with as
much fidelity as though the eye of the
employer was always upon them, remembering that though the eye of man
may beturned away,that ofGod never is.
{| As men-pleasers. Asif it were the
main objectto please men. The object
should be rather to please and honour
God. ¥ But as the servants of Christ ;
see Noteson 1 Cor. vil. 22. { Doing
the will of God from the heart. ‘That
is, God requires industry, fidelity, conscientiousness, submission, and obedience in that rank of life. We render
acceptable service to God when, from
regard to his will, we perform the
services which are demanded of us in
the situation in life where we may be
placed, however humble that may be.

4". As to the Lord, and not to men.
That is, he should regard his lot in
life as having been ordered by Divine
Providence for some wise and good
purpose ; and until he may be permitted to enjoy his liberty in a quiet
and peaceable manner (Notes, 1 Cor.
vii. 21), he should perform his duties
with fidelity, and feel that he was
rendering acceptable service to God.
This would reconcile him to much of
the hardships of his lot. The feeling
that God has ordered the circumstances of cur lives, and that he has
some wise and good ends to answer
by it, makes us contented there ;
though we may feel that our fellow8 Knowing that whatsoever good
thing any man doeth, the same shall
he receive of the Lord, whether he
be bond or free.

9 And, ye masters, do the same
things unto them, ! forbearing
threatening: knowing that ? your
1 moderating. 2someread,both your and their.

man may be doing us injustice. It
was this principle that made the
martyrs so patient under the wrongs
done them by men; and this may
make even aslave patient and submissive under the wrongs of a master.
But let not a master think, because a
pious slave showsthis spirit, that, therefore, the slave feels that the master
is right in withholding his freedom ;
nor let him suppose, because religion
requires the slave to be submissive and
obedient, that, therefore, it approves
of what the master does. It does this
no more than it sanctioned the conduct of Nero and Mary, because religion required the martyrs to be
wnresisting, and to allow themselves
to be led tothe stake. A conscientious slave may find happiness in
submitting to God, and doing his will,
just as a conscientious martyr may.
But this does not sanction the wrong,
either of the slave-owner or of the
persecutor.

8. Knowing that whatsoever good
thing. Whatever aman does that is
right, for that he shall be appropriately rewarded. No matter what
his rank in life, if he discharges his
duty to God and man, he will be accepted. Aman in a state of servitude may so live as to honour God ;
and, so living, he should not be
greatly solicitous about his condition.
A master may fail to render suitable
recompense to a slave. But, if the
servant is faithful to God, he will
recompense him in the future world.
It is in this way that religion would
make the evils of life tolerable, by
teaching those who are oppressed to
bear their trials ina patient spirit,
and to look forward to the future
world of reward. Religion does not
approve of slavery. It is the friend
of human rights. If it had full influence on earth, it would restore
every man to freedom, and impart to
each one his rights. Christianity
nowhere requires its triends to make
or to own a slave. No one under the

proper influence of religion ever yet
made a man a slave; there is no one
under its proper influence who would
not desire that all should be free;
and just in proportion as true religion spreads over the world, will
universal freedom be its attendant.
But Christianity would lighten the
evils of slavery even while it exists,
and would comfort those who are
doomed to so hard a lot, by assuring
them that there they may render acceptable service to God, and that
they soon will be admitted to a world
where galling servitude will be known
no more. If they may not haye freedom here, they may have contentment
if they feel that wrong is done them
by men, they may feel that right will
be done them by God ; if their masters
do not reward them for their services
here,God will; and if they may not
enjoy liberty here, they will soon be
received into the world of perfect
freedom-- heaven.

9. And, ye masters. The object of
this is, to secure for servants a proper
treatment. It is evident, from this,
that there were inthe Christian church
those who were masters; and the
most obvious interpretation is, that
they were the owners of slaves.
Some such persons would be converted, as such are now. Paul did not
say that they could not be Christians.
le did not say that they should be
excluded at once from the communion.
He did not hold them up to reproach,
or use harsh and severe language in
regard to them. He taught them
their duty towards those who were
under them, and laid down principles
which, if followed, would lead ulti-

mately to universal freedom. {| Do
the same things unto them. 2 aire.
The ‘same things,” here seem to

refer to what he had said in the previous verses. They were, to evince
towards their servants the same spirit
which he had required servants to
evince towards them--the same kindness, fidelity, and respect for the will

Master also is in heaven; neither
@ Ro.2.11,

of God. He had required servants to
act conscientiously ; to remember
that the eye of God was upon them,
and that in that condition in life they
were to regard themselves as serving
God, and as mainly answerable to him.
The same things the apostle would
have masters feel. They were to be
faithful, conscientious, just, true to the
interests of their servants, and to remember that they were responsible to
God. They were not to take advantage of their power to oppress them, to
punish them unreasonably, or to suppose that they were freed from responsibility in regard to the manner
in which they treated them. In the
corresponding passage in Colossians
(iv, 1), this is, ‘‘ Masters, give unto
your servants that which is just and
equal ;”’ see Note on that place.
{| Forbearing threatening. Marg.,
moderating. The Greek word means,
to relax, loosen ; and then, to omit,
cease from. This is evidently the
meaning here. ‘The sense is, that
they were to be kind, affectionate,
just. It does not mean that they
were to remit punishment where it
was deserved ; but the object is to
guard against that to which they were
so much exposed in their condition--
a fretful, dissatisfied temper ; a disposition to govern by terror rather than
by love. Where this unhappy state
of society exists, it would be worth
the trial of those who sustain the relation of masters, to see whether it
would not be possible to govern their
servants, as the apostle here advises,
by the exercise of love. Might not
kindness, and confidence, and the
fear of the Lord, be substituted for
threats and stripes?-- Knowing
that your Master also is in heaven.
Marg., ‘Some read, both your and
their.’ Many MSS. have this reading; see Mill. The sense is not materially affected, further than, according to the margin, the effect would
be to make the master and the servant feel that, in a most important
sense, they were on anequality. According to the common reading, the

is there respect * of persons with
him.

sense is, that masters should remember that they were responsible to God,
and this fact should be allowed to influence them in a proper manner.
This it would doin two ways. (1.) By
the fact that injustice towards their
servants would then be punished asit
deserved--since there was no respect
of persons with God. (2.) It wouid
lead them to act towards their servants as they would desire God t«
treat them. Nothing would be bettea
adapted to do this than the feeling
that they had a common Master, and
that they were soon to stand at his
bar. § Neither is there respect of persons with him; see this expression
explained in the Notes on Rom. ii. 11.
The meaning here is, that God would
not be influenced in the distribution of
rewards and punishments, by a regard
to the rank or condition of the master or the slave. He would show
no favour to the one because he was
a master; he would withhold none
from the other because he was a
slave. He would treat both according to their character. In this
world they occupied different ranks
and conditions ; at his bar they would
be called to answer before the same
Judge. It follows from this, (1.)
that a slave is not to be regarded
as a “chattel,” or a “thing,” or as
“ property.” He is a man; a redeemed man; an immortal man. He
is one for whom Christ died. But
Christ did not die for ‘‘ chattels” and
“things.” (2.) The master and the
servant in their great interests are on
a level. Both are sinners; both will
soon die; both will moulder back in
the same manner to dust ; both will
stand at the tribunal of God; both
will give up their account. The one
will not be admitted to heaven because
he isa master ; nor will the other be
thrust down to hell because he is a
slave. If both are Christians, they
will be admitted to a heaven where
the distinctions of rank and coluur are
unknown. If the master is not a
Christian and the servant is, he who
has regarded himself as superior to
10 Finally, my brethren, be
strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might.

the servant in this life, will see him
ascend to heaven while he himself
will be thrust down to hell. (3.) Con-

siderations like these will, if they |

have their proper influence, produce
two effects. (a) They will lighten the
yoke of slavery while it continues,
and while it may be difficult to remove it at once. If the master and
the slave were both Christians, even
if the relation continued, it would be
rather a relation of mutual confidence.
The master would become the protector, the teacher, the guide, the friend ;
the servant would become the faithful helper--rendering service to one
whom he loved, and to whom he felt
himself bound by the obligations of
gratitude and affection. (6) But this
state of feeling would soon lead to
emancipation. There is something
shocking to the feelings of all, and
monstrous to a Christian, in the idea
of holding a Christian brother in bondage. So long as the slave is regarded as a “ chattel” or a mere piece of
“‘ property,’ like a horse, so long men
endeavour to content themselves with
the feeling that he may be held in
bondage. But the moment it is felt
that he is a Christian brother--a redeemed fellow-traveller to eternity, a
joint heir of hfe--that moment a
Christian should feel that there is
something that violates all the principles of his religion in holding him
AS A SLAVE; in making a “chattel”’
of that for which Christ died, and in
buying and selling like a horse, an ox,
or an ass, a child of God, and an heir
of life. Accordingly, the prevalence
of Christianity soon did away the evil
ofslavery in the Roman empire ; and
if it prevailed in its purity, it would
soon banish it from the face of the
earth,

10. Finally, my brethren, be strong
in the Lord. Paul had now stated to
the Ephesians the duties which they
were to perform. He had considered
the various relations of life which
they sustained, aud the obligations
resulting from them.

He was not:

11 Put onthe whole armour 4
of God, that ye may be able to
a Ro.13.12 ; 2 Co.6.7.

unaware that in the discharge of their
duties they would need strength from
above. He knew that they had great
and mighty foes, and that to meet
them, they needed to be clothed in the
panoply of the Christian soldier. He
closes, therefore, by exhorting them
to put on all the strength which they
could to meet the enemies with which
they had to contend ; and in the commencement of his exhortation he reminds them that it was only by the
strength of the Lord that they could
hope for victory. To be “strong in
the Lord,’’ is, (1.) to be strong or
courageous in his cause ; (2.) to feei
that he is our strength, and to rely on
him and his promises.

11. Put on thewhole armour of God.
The whole description here is derived
from the weapons of an ancient soldier. The various parts of those weapons--constituting the ‘‘ whole panoply’--are specified in ver. 14--17.
The word rendered ‘‘ whole armour ”’
(ravmraiav, panoply), means complete
armour, offensive and defensive ; see
Luke xi. 22; Notes, Rom. xiii. 12;
2 Cor. vi. 7. ‘The armour of God”
is not that which God wears, but
that which he has provided for the
Christian soldier. The meaning here
is, (1.) that we are not to provide in
our warfare such weapons as men employ in their contests, but such as
God provides; that we are to renounce
the weapons which are carnal, and put
on such as God has directed for the
achievement of the victory. (2.) We
are to put on the “whole armour.”
We are not to go armed partly with
what God has appointed, and partly
with such weapons as men use; nor
are we to put on @ part of the armour
only, but the whole of it. A man
needs all that armour if he is about
to fight the battles of the Lord; and
if he lacks one of the weapons which
God has appointed, defeat may be the
consequence. {| That ye may be able
to stand. The foes are so numerous
and mighty, that unless clothed with
the divine armour, victory will be im-

stand against the wiles of the
devil.
12 For we wrestle not against
@ flesh and blood, but against prina blood and flesh. b Rom.8.38.

cipalities, against powers, against
the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against ¢ spiritual wickedness in @ high places.

cor, wicked spirits. d or,heavenly, as chap.1.3.

possible. {] Against the wiles of the
devil. The word rendered ‘ wiles’’
(weSodeiz), means properly that which
is traced out with method; that
which is methodized; and then that
which is well laid--art, skill, cunning.
It occurs in the New Testament only
in Eph. iv. 14, and in this place.
It is appropriately here rendered
wiles, meaning cunning devices, arts,
attempts to delude and destroy us.
The wiles of the devil are the various
arts and stratagems which he employs
to drag souls down to perdition. We
can more easily encounter open force
than we can cunning; and we need
the weapons of Christian armour to
meet the attempts to draw us into a
snare,as much as to meet open force.
The idea here is, that Satan does not
carry on an open warfare. He does
not meet the Christian soldier face to
face. He advances covertly; makes
his approaches in darkness ; employs
cunning rather than power, and seeks
rather to delude and betray than to
vanquish by mere force. Hence the
necessity of being constantly armed
to meet him whenever the attack is
made. A man who has to contend
with a visible enemy, may feel safe
if he only prepares to meet him in the
open field. But far different is the
case if the enemy is invisible ; if he
steals upon us slyly and stealthily ; if
he practises war only by ambushes
and by surprises. Such is the foe
that we have to contend with--and
almost all the Christian struggle is a
warfare against stratagems and wiles.
Satan does not openly appear. He
approaches us not in repulsive forms,
but comes to recommend some plausible doctrine, to lay before us some
temptation that shall not immediately
repel us. He presents the world in
an alluring aspect ; invites us to pleasures that seem to be harmless, and
leads us in indulgence until we have
gone so far that we cannot retreat.
12. For we wrestle. Gr., “ The

wrestling to us;” or, “ There is not
to us a wrestling with flesh and blood.”
There is undoubtedly here an allusion
to the ancient games of Greece, a
part of the exercises in which consisted in wrestling; see Notes on
1 Cor. ix. 25--27. The Greek word
here used--wrdéan--denotes awrestling ;
and then a struggle, fight, combat.
Ilere it refers to the struggle or combat which the Christian has to maintain--the Christian warfare. § Not
with flesh and blood. Not with men;
see Notes on Gal. i.16. The apostle
does not mean to say that Christians
had no enemies among men that opposed them, for they were exposed
often to fiery persecution ; nor that
they had nothing to contend with in
the carnal and corrupt propensities
of their nature, which was true of them
then as it is now; but that their main
controversy was with the invisible
spirits of wickedness that sought to
destroy them. They were the source
and origin of all their spiritual conflicts, and with them the warfare was
to be maintained. J But against
principalities. There can be no doubt
whatever that the apostle alludes here
to evil spirits. Like good angels,
they were regarded as divided into
ranks and orders, and were supposed
to be under the control of one mighty
leader ; see Notes on chap. i. 21. Ii
is probable that the allusion here is
to the ranks and orders which they
sustained before their fall, something
like which they may still retain. The
word principalities refers to principal
rulers, or chieftains. § Powers.
Those who had power, or to whom
the name of powers was given. Milton represents Satan as addressing
the fallen angels in similar language :
“Thrones, dominations, princedoms. virtues,
powers.”
{ Against the rulers of the darkness
of this world. The rulers that preside over the regions of ignorance
and sin with which the earth abounds,
13 Wherefore take unto you the

comp. Notes on chap. ii. 2. Darkness
is an emblem of ignorance, misery,
and sin; and no description could be
more accurate than that of representing these malignant spirits as ruling
over a dark world. The earth--dark,
and wretched and ignorant, and sinful--is just such a dominion as they
would choose, or as they would cause ;
and the degradation and woe of the
heathen world are just such as foul
and malignant spirits would delight

in. It is a wide and a powerful empire. It has been consolidated by
ages. It is sustained by all the an-

thority of law; by all the omnipotence
of the perverted religious principle ;
by all the reverence for antiquity ; by
all the power of selfish, corrupt, and
base passions. No empire has been
so extended, or has continued so long,
as that empire of darkness; and nothing on earth is so difficult to destroy. Yet the apostle says that it
was on that kingdom they were to
make war. Against that, the kingdom of the Redeemer was to be set
up; and that was to be overcome by
the spiritual weapons which he specifics. When he speaks of the Christian warfare here, he refers to the
contest with the powers of this dark
kingdom. Tle regards each and every
Christian as a soldier to wage war on
it in whatever way he could, and
wherever he could attack it. ‘The contest therefore was not primarily with
men, or with the internal corrupt propensities of the soul; it was with this
vast and dark kingdom that had been
set up over mankind. I do not regard
this passage, therefore, as having a primary reference to the struggle which
a Christian maintains with his own
corrupt propensities. It is a warfare
on a large scale with the entire kingdom of darkness over the world. Yet
in maintaining the warfare, the struggle will be with such portions of that
kingdom as we come in contact with,
and will actually relate (1.) to our
own sinful propensities--which are a
part of the kingdom of darkness; (2.)
with the evil passions of others--
their pride, ambition, and spirit of

whole armour of God, that ye may

revenge--which are also a part of
that kingdom ; (3.) with the evil
customs, laws, opinions, employments,
pleasures of the world--which are
also a part of that dark kingdom ; (4.)
with error, superstition, false doctrine
--which are also a part of that kingdom ; and (5.) with the wickedness cf
the heathen world--the sins of benighted nations--also a part of that
kingdom. Wherever we come in contact with evil--whether in our own
hearts or elsewhere--there we are to
make war. YJ Against sptritu ul wickedness; Marg., “or wicked spirits.”
Literally, “The spiritual things of
wickedness;” but the allusion is undoubtedly to evil spirits, and to their
influences on earth. | Jn high places.
iv rois orovexvions -- ‘in celestial or
heavenly places.” The same phrase
occurs in chap. i. 3; ii. 6, where it
is translated, “in heavenly places.”
The word (ireugévos) is used of those
that dwell in heaven, Matt. xviii. 35;
Phil. ii. 10; of those who come from
heaven, 1 Cor. xv. 48; Phil. ili. 21;
of the heavenly bodies, the sun, moon,
and stars, 1 Cor. xv. 40. Then the
neuter plural of the word is used to
denote the heavens; and then the
lower heavens, the sky, the air, represented as the seat of evil spirits;
Notes, chap. ii. 2, This is the allusion
here. The evil spirits are supposed
to occupy the lofty regions of the air,
and thence to exert a baleful influence on the affairs of man. What
was the origin of this opinion it is not
needful here to inquire. No one can
prove, however, that it is incorrect.
It is against such spirits, and all their
malignant influences, that Christians
are called to contend. In whatever
way their power is put forth--whether
in the prevalence of vice and error;
of superstition and magic arts; of
infidelity, atheism, or antinomianism;
of evil customs and laws; of pernicious fashions and opinions, or in the
corruptions of our own hearts, we are
to make war on all tnese forms of
evil, and never to yield in the conflict.

13. In the evil day.

The day ot

be able to withstand in the evil day, | loins girt > about with truth, and

and, having done all, @ to stand.
14 Stand therefore, having your

a@ or, overvome.

temptation ; the day when you are
violently assaulted. And having
done all, to stand. Marg. “ or overcome.” The Greek word means, to
work out, effect, or produce ; and then
to work up, to make an end of, to
vanquish. Robinson, Lex. The idea
seems to be, that they were to overcome or vanquish all their foes, and
thus to stand firm. The whole language here is taken from war; and
the idea is, that every foe was to
be subdued--no matter how numerots
or formidable they might be.
and triumph could be looked for only
when every enemy was slain.

14. Stand therefore. Resist every
attack---as a soldier does in battle.
In what way they were to do this,
and how they were to be armed, the
apostle proceeds to specify; and in

It may not be easy to
determine with entire accuracy the
resemblance between the parts of the
armour specified in this description,

q With truth.

Safety |

having on the breast-plate of righteousness ;
6 Is. 11.6.

doing it, gives a description of the
ancient armour of a soldier. 4 Having your loins girtabout. ‘The girdle,
or sash, was always with the ancients
an important part of their dress, in
war as well as in peace. They wore
loose, flowing robes; and it became
necessary to gird them up when they
travelled, or ran, or laboured. The
girdle was often highly ornamented,
and was the place where they carried
their money, their sword, their pipe,
their writing instruments, d&c.; see
Notes on Matt. v. 88-41. The “ girdle ’’ secms sometimes to have been a
cincture of iron or steel, and designed
to keep every part of the armour in its
place, and to gird the soldier on every
side. The following figures will give an
idea of part of the armour of an ancient
soldier.

and the things with which they are
compared, or to determine precisely
why he compared truth to a girdle,
and righteousness to a breast-plate,
rather than why he should have chosen
a different order, and compared righteousness to a girdle, &c. Perhaps in
themselves there may have been no
special reason for this arrangement,
but the object may have been merely
to specify the different parts of the
armour of a soldier, and to compare
them with the weapons which Christians were to use, though the comparison should be made somewhat at
random. In some of the cases, however, we can see a particular significancy in the comparisons which are
made ; and it may not be improper to
make suggestions of that kind as we
go along. The idea here may be, that
as the girdle was the bracer up, or
support of the body, so truth is fitted
to brace us up, and to gird us for constancy and firmness. The girdle kept
all the parts of the armour in their
proper place, and preserved firmness
and consistency in the dress; and so
truth might serve to give consistency
and firmnessto ourconduct. ‘Great,’
says Grotius, “‘is the laxity of falsehood ; truth binds the man.” ‘Truth
preserves a man from those lax views
of morals, of duty and of religion,
which leave him exposed to every
assault. It makes the soul sincere,
firm, constant, and always on its
guard. A man who has no consistent views of truth, is just the man for
the adversary successfully to assail.
q And having on the breast-plate.
The word here rendered ‘ breastplate’? (Saea%) denoted the cutrass,
Lat., lorica, or coat of mail; 7. e.,
the armour that covered the body
from the neck to the thighs, and consisted of two parts, one covering the
front and the other the back. It was
made of rings, or in the form of scales,
or of plates, so fastened together that
they would be flexible, and yet guard
the body from a sword, spear, or arrow. It is referred to in the Scriptures as a coat of mail (1 Sam. xvii.
5); an habergeon (Neh. iv. 16). or
as a breast-plate. We are told that
Goliath’s coat of mail weighed five
thousand shekels of brass, or nearly
one hundred and sixty pounds.

of a fish. The following cuts wil
give an idea of this ancient piece o'
armour.

veers]

Neea nein!

Coata of Mail.

q Of righteousness. Integrity, holiness, purity. of life, sincerity of piety.
The breast-plate defended the vita]
parts of the body ; and the idea here
may be that the integrity of life, and
righteousness of character, 1s as necessary to defend us from the assaults
of Satan, as the coat of mail was to
preserve the heart from the arrows of
anenemy. It was the incorruptible
integrity of Job, and, in a higher
sense, of the Redeemer himself, that
saved them from the temptations of
the devil. And it is as true now that
no one can successfully meet the
power of temptation unless he is righteous, as that a soldier could not defend himself against a foe without
such a coat of mail. A want of integrity will leave a man exposed to
the assaults of the enemy, just asa
man would be whose coat of mail
was defective, or some part of which
was wanting. The king of Israel
was smitten by an arrow sent from
a bow, drawn at a venture, “ between
the joints of his harness” or the
“breast-plate’’ (margin), 1 Kings xxii.
34; and many a man who thinks he
has on the Christian armour is smitten in the same manner, There is
some defect of character; some
want of incorruptible integrity ; some
point that is unguarded---and thai
will be sure to be the point of attack
by the foe. So David was tempted
to commit the enormous crimes that
stain his memory, and Peter to deny
his Lord. So Judas was assailed, for

It the want of the armourvof righteous-

was often formed of plates of brass, | ness, through his avarice; and so, by
laid one upon anothor. like the scales! some want of incorruptible integrity

18 And your feet * shod with
a@Ca.7.1.

--

in a single point, many a minister of
the gospel has been assailed and has
fallen. It may be added here, that we
need a righteousness which God alone
can give ; the righteousness of God our
Saviour, to make us perfectly invulnerable to all the arrows of the foe.

15. And your feet shod. There is
undoubtedly an allusion here to what
was worn by the ancient soldier to
guard his feet. The Greek is, literally,
“having underbound the feet ;” that |
is, having bound on the shoes, or sandals, or whatever was
worn by the ancient soldier. The protection of
the feet and ancles consisted of two parts. (1.)
The sandals, or shoes,
which were probably
made so as to cover the
foot, and which often
were fitted with nails,
or armed with spikes, to Liz
make the hold firm in&éV/(f oy
the ground; or (2.) >
with greaves that were ‘“#n"#!-
fitted to the legs, and designed to de-

--)

!
i

|

fond them from any danger. These.
greaves, or boots(1 Sam. xvii.6), were
made of brass, and were in almost
universal use among the Greeks and
Romans. § With the preparation.
Prepared with the gospel of. peace.
The sense is, that the Christian soldier is to be prepared with the gos-

Greaves.

the preparation of the gospel of
peace ;

pel of peace to meet attacks similar
to those against which the ancient
soldier designed to guard himself by
the sandals or greaves which he wore.
The word rendered préparation--
(roreaoia )--means properly readiness,
fitness for, alacrity ; and the idea,

according to Robinson (Zez.), is, that

they were to be ever ready to go forth
to preach the gospel. ‘Taylor (Fragments to Calmet’s Dic., No. 219) supposes that it means, ‘‘ Your feet shod
with the preparation ofthe gospel; not
iron, not steel--but patient investigation, calm inquiry, assiduous, laborious, lasting; or with firm footing
in the gospel of peace.’’ Locke supposes it to mean, “‘ with a readiness to
walk in the gospel of peace.” Doddridge supposes that the allusion is to
greaves, and the spirit recommended
is that peaceful and benevolent temper recommended in the gospel, and
which, like the boots worn by soldiers,
would bear them safe through many
obstructions and trials that might be
opposed to them, as a soldier might
encounter sharp-pointed thorns that
would oppose his progress. It is difficult to determine the exact meaning; and perhaps all expositors have
erred in endeavouring to explain the
reference of these parts of armour by
some particular thing in the gospel.
The apostle figured to himself a soldier, cladinthe usual manner. Christians were to resemble him. One
part of his dress or preparation consisted in the covering and defence of
the foot. It was to preserve the
foot from danger, and to secure the

' facility of his march, and perhaps to
| make him firm in battle.

Christians
were to have the principles of the gospel of peace--the peaceful and pure
gospel--_to facilitate them; to aid
them in their marches ; to make them
firmin the day of conflict with their foes,
They were not to be furnished with carnal weapons, but with the peaceful gospel of the Redeemer ; and, sustained
by this, they were to go on in their
march through the world. ‘The principles of the gospel were to do fos
16 Above all, taking the shield

of faith, * wherewith ye shail be
a 1 John 5.4.

able to quench all the fiery darts
of the wicked.

them what the greaves and iron-spiked

sandals did for the soldier--to make
thern ready for the march,to make them
firm in their foot-tread, andto bea part
of their defence against their foes.
16. Above all, "Ext xray. Not
above all in point of importance or
value, but over all, as a soldier holds
his shield to defend himself. It constitutes a protection over every part
of his body, as it can be turned in
every direction. The idea is, that as
the shield covered or protected the
other parts of the armour, so faith had
a similar importance in the Christian
virtues. § The shicld ; Note, Isa.
xxi. 9. The shield was usually made
of light wood, or arim of brass, and
covered with several folds or thicknesses of stout hide, which was preserved by frequent anointing. It was
held by the left arm, and was secured
by straps, through which the arm
passed, as may be seen in the annexed:
figures. The outersurfaceof the shield

_---->

ce)

Shield.
was made more or less rounding from
the centre to the edge, and was polished smooth, or anointed with oil, so
that arrows or darts would glance off,
orrebound. J Of faith. On the nature of faith, see Notes on Mark xvi.
16. Faith here is made to occupy a
more important place than either of
the other Christian graces. It bears,
to the whole Christian character, the
same relation which the shield does to
the other parts of the armour of a
soldier. It protects all, and is indispensable to the security of all, as is
the case with the shield. The shield

was an ingenious device by which
blows and arrows might be parried off,
and the whole body defended. Itcould
be made to protect the head, or the
heart, or thrown behind to meet an
attack there.. As long as the soldier
had his shield, he felt secure ; and as
long as a Christian has faith, he is
safe. It comes to his aid in every
attack thatis made on him, no matter
from what quarter ; it is the defence
and guardian of every other Christian
grace; and it secures the protection
which the Christian needs it the
whole of the spiritual war. § Wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the
fiery darts of the wicked. Or,rather,
‘‘ of the WICKED ONE.”
--ro9 Trovnpov. The allusion is undoubtedly
| to the great enemy
of the people of God,
called, by way of eminence, THE wicked
oné ; comp. 2 Thess.
ili. 8. Mr. Locke
renders this, ‘“‘ Wherein you may receive,
and so render ineffecfualee mde There
seems a little incongruity in the idea of
quenching darts by. a
shield. But the word
quench, here, means
only that they would
be put out by being
thrown against the
shield, as a candle

would by being thrown
i) :
Noe
Fiery Darts.

against anything. The fery darts

17 And take the helmet @ of
@. 13.59.17. b We.4.12.

that were used in war were small,
slender pieces of cane, which were
filled with combustible materials, and
set on fire; or darts around which
some combustible material was wound,
and which were set on fire, and then
shot slowly against a foe. The object
was to make the arrow fasten in the
body, and increase the danger by the
burning ;
darts were thrown against ships, forts,
tents, &c., with an intention to set
them on fire. They were in common use among theancients. Arrian
(Exped. Alexan. 11) mentions the
zupdopz Bern, the fire-bearing weapons; Thucydides (ii. c. 75), the
xupQopo oioros, the fire-bearing arrows ;
and Livy refers to similar weapons as in common use in war;
lib. xxi. c. 8. By the ‘fiery darts
of the wicked,’ Paul here refers,
probably, to the temptations of
the great adversary, which are like
fiery darts; or those furious suggestions of evil, and excitements to sin,
which he may throw into the mind
like fiery darts. They are--blasphemous thoughts, unbelief, sudden temptation to do wrong, or thoughts that

or, more frequently, those -
salvation, and the sword ® of the

Spirit, which is the word of God.

wound and torment the soul. In reyard to them, we may observe, (1.)
that they come suddenly, like arrows
sped from a bow ; (2.) they. come from
unexpected quarters, like arrows shot
suddenly from an enemy in ambush ;
(3.) they pierce, and penetrate, and
torment the soul, as arrows would that
are on fire ; (4.) they set the soul on
fire, and enkindle the worst passions,
as fiery darts do a ship or camp against
which they are sent. The only way
to meet them is by the “shield of
faith ;’” by confidence in God, and by
relying on his gracious promises and
aid. It is not by our own strength ;
and, if we have not faith in God, we are
wholly defenceless. We should havea
shield that we can turn in any direction, on which we may receive the
arrow, and by which it may be put out.

17. And take the helmet. The
helmet was a cap made of thick leather, or brass, fitted to the head, and
was usually crowned with a plume, or
crest, as an ornament. Its use was
to guard the head from a blow by a
sword, or war-club, or battle-axe.
The cuts will show its usual form.
It may be seen, also, in the figure of

Helmets.

the “ Grecian warriors,” on p. 12%.
{ Of salvatiqn. That is, of the hope
of salvation ; for so it 1s expressed in
the parallel place in 1 Thess. v. 8.
The idea is, that a well-founded hope
of salvation will preserve us in the
day of spiritual conflict, and will

guard us from the blows whicn an
enemy would strike. The helmet
defended the head, a vital part ; and
so the hope of salvation will defend
the soul, and keep it from the blows
of the enemy. A soldier would not
fight well without a hope of victory.

A Christian could not contend with | sword. The sword was an essential
his focs, without the hope of final | part of the armour of an ancient solsalvation; but, sustained by this,|dier. His other weapons were the
vhat has he to dread? § And the! bow, the spear, or the battle-axe.

Spears.

Bow.

Lut, without a sword, no soldier | bled very much a dagger, as may be

would have regarded himself as well
armed. The ancient sword was short,
and usually two-edged, and resem-

seen in the annexed engraving, representing Roman swords. { Of the
Spirit. Which the Holy Spirit fur-

Swords.

nishes ; the truth which he has revealed. {| Which isthe word of God.
What God has spoken--his truth and
promises ; see Notes on Heb. iv. 12.
It was with this weapon that the Saviour met the tempter in the wilderness; Matt. iv. It is only by this
that Satan can now be met, Error
and falsehood will not put back.temptation ; nor can we hope for victory,
unless we are armed with truth.
Learn, hence, (1,) That we should
study the Bible, that. we may understand.what the truth is. (2.) We
should have texts of Scripture at
command, as the Saviour did, to meet
the various forms of temptation.

(3.) We should not depend on our own
reason, or rély on our own wisdom. A
singletextof Scripture is better tomeet
a temptation, than all the philosophy
which the world contains. The tempter can reason, and reason plausibly
too. But hecannot resist a direct and
positive command of the Almighty.
Had Eve adhered simply to the word
of God, and urged his command, without attempting to reason about it,
she would have been safe. The Saviour (Matt. iv. 4, 7, 10), met the
tempter with the word of God, and
he was foiled. So we shall be safe if
we adhere to the simple declarations
of the Bible, and oppose a temptation

18 Praying always ¢ with all
prayer and supplication in the
a Lu.18.1 b Mat.26.41.

by a positive command of God. But,
the moment we leave that, and begin
to parley with sin, that moment we
are gone. It is asif a man should
throw away his sword, and use his
naked hands only in meeting an adversary. Hence, (4.) we may see the
importance of training up the young
in the accurate study of the Bible.
There is nothing which will furnish a
better security to them in future life,
when temptation comes upon them,
than to have a pertinent text of
Scripture at command. Temptation
often assails us so suddenly that it
checks all reasoning ; but a text of
Scripture will suffice to drive the
tempter from us.

18. Praying always. It would be
well for the soldier who goes forth to
battle to pray--to pray for victory ;
or to pray that he may be prepared
for death, should he fall. But soldiers do not often feel the necessity
of this. To the Christian soldier,
however, it is indispensable. Prayer
crowns all lawful efforts with success,

and gives a victory when nothing else.

would. No matter how complete the
armour; no matter how skilled we
may be in the science of war; no
matter how courageous we may be,
we may be certain that without prayer
we shall be defeated. God alone can
give the victory; and when the Christian soldier goes forth armed com:
pletely for the spiritual conflict, if he
looks to God by prayer, he may be
sure of a triumph. ‘This prayer is
not to be intermitted. It is to be
always. In every temptation and
spiritual conflict we are to pray ; see
Notes on Luke xviii. l. § With all
prayer and supplication. With all
kinds of prayer; prayer in the closet,
the family, the social meeting, the
great assembly ; prayer at the usual
hours, prayer when we are specially
tempted, and when we feel just like
praying (see Notes, Matt. vi. 6);
prayer in the form of supplication for
ourselves, and in the form of intercession for others. This is, after all,

Spirit, and watching > thereunto
with all perseverance and supplication for all saints;

the great weapon of our spiritual
armour, and by this we may hope to
prevail.

“ Restraining prayer, we cease to fight ;
Prayer makes the Christian armour bright,
And Satan trembles when he sees
The meanest saint upon his knees.”

| In the Spirit. By the aid of the
Holy Spirit; or perhaps it may mean
that it is not to be prayer of form
merely, but when the spirit and the
heart accompany it. The former
idea seems, however, to be the correct one. | And watching thereunto.
Watching for opportunities to pray ;
watching for the spirit of prayer;
watching against all those things
which would hinder prayer; see

Notes, Matt. xxvi. 38, 41; comp. 1

Pet. iv. 7. With all perseverance.

Never becoming discouraged and dis-

heartened; comp. Notes, Luke xviii.
1. ( And supplication for all saints.
For all Christians. We should do
this (1.) because they are our brethren
--though they may have a different
skin, language, or name. (2.) Because, like us, they have hearts prone
to evil, and need, with us, the grace of
God. (3.) Because nothing tends so
much to make us love others and to
forget their faults, as to pray for them.

(4.) Because the condition of the

church is always such that it greatly
needs the grace of God. Many

Christians have backslidden ; many

‘are cold or lukewarm; many are in

error; many are conformed to the
world; and we should pray that they
may become more holy and may devote themselves more to God (5.)
Because each day many a Christian
is subjected to some peculiar temptation or trial, and though he may be
unknown to us, yet our prayers may
benefit him. (6.) Because each day
and each night many Christians die.
We may reflect each night as we
lie down to rest, that while we ‘sleep,
some Christians are kept awake by
the prospect of death, and are now
passing through the dark valley ;
and each morning we may reflect
19 And for “me, that utterance
may be given unto me, that I may
open my mouth boldly, to make
known the mystery of the gospel,

a 2Th.3.1. 1 or, a chain.

that to-day some Christian will die,
and we should remember them before God. (7.) Because we shall
soon die, and it will be a comfort to
us if we can remember then that we
have often prayed for dying saints, and
if we may feel that they are praying
for us.

19. And for me. Paul was then
a prisoner at Rome. Ue specially
needed the prayers of Christians, (1.)
that he might be sustained in his afflictions ; and (2.) that he might be
able to manifest the spirit which he
ought, and to do good as he had opportunity. Learn hence that we should
pray for the prisoner, the captive, the
man in chains, the slave. There are
in this land(the United States) about
ten thousand prisoners---husbands,
fathérs, sons, brothers; or wives,
mothers, daughters. True, they are
the children of crime, but they are also
the children of sorrow; and in either
case or both they need our prayers.
There are in this land not far from
three millions of slaves--and they need
our prayers. They are children of
misfortune and of many wrongs; they
are sunk in ignorance and want and
wo; they are subjected to trials, and
exposed to temptations to the lowest
vices. But many of them, we trust,
love the Redeemer ; and whether they
do or do not, they need an interest in
the prayers of Christians. ¥ That
ulterance may be given unto me.
Paul, though a prisoner, was permitted to preach the gospel; see Notes,
Acts xxviii. 30, 31. § That I may
open my mouth boldly. We was in
Rome. He was almost alone. He
was surrounded by multitudes of the
wicked. Ile was exposed to death.
Yet he desired to speak boldly in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and to invite
sinners to repentance. A Christian
in chains, and surrounded by the
wicked, may speak boldly, and may
have hope of success--for Paul was not
an unsuccessful preacher even whena

or at large.

pA. D.64,

20 For which I am an ambassador in! bonds; that 2 therein I
may speak boldly, as 1 ought © to
speak.

_ 2or, thereof, b Is.58.1.

captive at Rome; sce Notes on Phil.
iv. 22. J The mystery of the gospel.
Notes, chap. i. 9.

20. For which Iam an ambassador
in bonds. In chains (see the margin’;
orin confinement. There is semething peculiarly touching in this. He
was an ambassador--sent to proclaim
peace toa lost world: But he was
now in chains. An. ambassador is a
sacred character. No greater affront
can be given to anation than to put
its ambassadors to death, or even to
throw them into prison. But Paul
says here that the unusual spectacle
was witnessed of anambassador seized,
bound, confined, imprisoned; an ambassador who ought to have the priv~
ileges conceded to all such men, and
to be permitted to go everywhere publishing the terms of mercy and salyation. See the word ambassador explained in the Notes on 2 Cor. vy. 20.
{| That therein. Marg. or thereof.
Gr., ty avra--in it; that is, says
Rosenmiiller, in the gospe]. It means
that in speaking the gospel he might
bebold. Qf Imay speak boldly. Openly, plainly, without fear ; see Notes
on Acts iv. 13 ;ix. 27; xiii. 46; xiv.
BOs ailig MOS SIS MIP Sea ae, WA wAlG
I ought to speak. Whether in bonds
Paul felt that the gospel
ought always to be spoken with plainness, and without the fear of man.
It is remarkable that he did not ask
them to pray that he might be released. Why he did not we do not know;
but perhaps the desire of release did
not lie so near his heart as the duty
of speaking the gospel with boldness.
It may be of much more importance
that we perform our duty aright when
we are afflicted, or are in trouble,
than that we should be released,

21. But that ye may know my
affairs. May understand my condition, my feelings,and in what I am engaged. To them it could not but be
a subject of deep interest. YJ And
how 1 dv. Gr., ** What I do; that is

21 But that ye also may know
my affairs, and how I do, Tychicus, a beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make
known to you all things:

22 Whom ° I havesent unto you
for the same purpose, that ye might
know our affairs, and that he might
comfort your hearts,

@ Ac.20.4, b Co.4.7,8.

bow I am employed. | Tychicus.
Tychicus was of the province of Asia,
in Asia Minor, of which Ephesus was
the capital; see Acts xx. 4. It is
not improbable that he was of Ephesus, ana that he was well known to the
church there. He also carried the
letter to the Colossians; Col. iv. 7),
and probably the Second Epistle to
Timothy ; 2 Tim. iv.12. Paul also
proposed to send him to Crete to succeed Titus ; Tit. iii. 12. He was high
in the confidence of Paul, but it is not
known when he was converted, or
why he was now at Rome. ‘The
Greeks speak of him as one of the

seventy disciples, and make him bishop |

of Colophon, in the province of Asia.
22. Whom I have sent unto you.
The churches where Paul had preached, would feel a great interest in his
welfare. Ile wasa prisoner at Rome,
and it was doubtful what the result
would be. In this situation, he felt
it proper to despatch a special messenger to give information about his
condition; to state what was doing in
tome ; toask the prayers ofthe churches; and to administer consolation to
them in their various trials. The
same sentiment in regard to the embassy of Tychicus, is expressed in the
Epistle to the Colossians ; chap. iv. 7,8.
No small part of the consclation which
he would impart to them would be
found in these invaluable letters which
he bore to them from the apostle.
23. Peace be to the brethren. ‘The
epistle is closed with the usual salututions. The expression “peace to

23 Peace ¢ de to the brethren, and
love with faith, from God the
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

24 Grace be with all them that
love our Lord Jesus Christ ! in
sincerity. Amen.

Written from Rome unto the

Ephesians by Tychicus,

c 1Pe.5.14.
1 or, with incorruption.

you,’ was the common form of salutation in the East (Notes, Matt. x. 13;
Luke xxiv. 36; Rom. xy. 33 ; comp
Gal. vi. 16; 1 Pet. v. 14;38 John 14),
and is still the ‘“‘salam” which is used
--the word salam meaning peace.
{| And love with faith. Love united
with faith; not only desiring that they
might have faith, but the faith which
worked by love. § From God the
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
The Father and the Son are regarded
as equally the author of peace and
love; comp. Noteson 2 Cor. xiii. 14.

24. Gracebe, &c. Note, Rom. xvi.
20. ¥Y That love our Lord Jesus
Christ; see Notes on 1 Cor. xvi. 22.
q In sincerity. Marg., with incorruption. . With a pure heart; without dissembling ; without hypocrisy. There
could not be a more appropriate close
of the epistle than such a wish; there
will be nothing more needful for us
when we come to the close of life than
the consciousness that we love the
Lord Jesus Christ 1n sincrrity. To
-writer and reader may this be equally
the inestimable consolation then !
Better, far better then will be the
evidence of such sincere love, than all
the wealth which toil can gain, all the
honours which the world can bestow
--than the most splendid mansion, or
the widest fame, The subscription to
this epistle, ike those affixed to the
other epistles, is of no authority, but
in this instance there is every reason
to believe that it is correct. Comp.
Notes at the end of the Epistle to the
Romans and 1 Corinthians:

ae

a

pre :: yerhae
ihyyaatin ait ire ies apt I

gen =~} ig oh

ee

te abd”

a oe te

coe

ay a

aa

4 Vay HY nl) a nay j

Jo AG: oe ite

ona) ality e
a) Ad a, by Pied Rive
hy J J ett ie)

1 i POL Uke Se te Lu sa
2 Wig Lady 2 -- ’
pike fee? ea A <
a ron | We ald. b
f 1 ula

wily PY

” Ac

j

--

otf 2

j ee

Ll

rae --

eye

fi © Sage ,

| oun pani Oe

ue ay ey “‘ 4 oa “

a 4
x a pid

‘a , Pree ot im
AAG iene oe a 7 id -
‘ y "

i= Pontes bg a’ 2

|
abe 7 on y as etal)» \
bn ee ae te ed

- Mh dibya, ae
rare ei yD gate a ue
vous at pie di A 7 ‘%
yeni iatcas je ates
es 1 ee + ph , hf
Dope Rm

; , ara a He

ats
is : >
ns ea
re nl hay)
vat fs ey Bay re

‘4 ne

_ ies: ms nil
yt, ani, th yehrat 2 Aw ei

vet donldanie hohe <--

Ute) nie Wels ? “vital
What [doothne a

$1. The situation of Philippt.

Puitippr is mentioned in the New Testament only in the following places
and connections. In Acts xvi. 11, 12, it is said that Paul and his fellowtravellers “loosed from Troas, came with a straight course to Samothraica
and Neapolis, and from thence to Philippi.” It was at this time that the
‘‘ Lord opened the heart of Lydia to attend to the things which were spoken
by Paul,” and that the jailer was converted under such interesting circumstances. In Acts xx. 1--6, it appears that Paul again visited Philippi after
he had been to Athens and Corinth, and when on his way to Judea. From
Philippi he went to Troas. In 1 Thess. ii.2, Paul alludes to the shameful
treatment which he had received at Philippi, and to the fact, that having
been treated in that manner at Philippi, he had passed to Thessalonica,
and preached the gospel there.

Philippi received its name from Philip, the father of Alexander the Great.
Before his time, its history is unknown. It is said that it was founded on
the site of an old Thasian settlement, and that its former name was Crenides
from the circumstance of its being surrounded by numerous rivulets and
springs descending from the neighbouring mountains (from xe%vn--krene, a
spring). The city was also called Dathos, or Datos--Azaros ; Notes, Acts
xvi. 12. The. Thasians, who inhabited the island of Thasus, lying off the
coast in the AXgean sea, had been attracted to the place by the valuable
mines of gold and silver which were found in that region. It wasa city of
Macedonia, to the north-east of Amphipolis, and nearly east of Thessalonica.
It was not far from the borders of Thrace. It was about fifteen or twenty
miles from the Aigean sea, in the neighbourhood of Mount Pangzeus, and
hada small river or stream running near it which emptied into the Aigean sea.
Of the size of the city when the gospel was preached there by Paul we have
no information.

This city was originally within the limits of Thrace. Philip of Macedon
having turned his attention to Thrace, the situation of Crenides and Mount
Pangzus naturally attracted his notice. Accordingly he invaded this
country ; expelled the feeble Cotys from his throne, and then proceeded to
found anew City, on the site of theold Thasian colony, which he called after his
own name, Philippi. Anthon, Class. Dic. When Macedonia became subject
to the Romans, the advantages attending the situation of Philippi induced that
people to send a colony there, and it became one of the most flourishing cities
of the empire ; comp. Acts xvi. 12; Pliny, iv. 10. There is a medal of this
city with the following inscription. Cou. Jun. Ava. Pxin; from which it

CXXXViil INTRODUCTION,

appears that there was a colony sent there by Julius Cesar. Michaelis.
The city derived considerable importance from the fact that it was a principal thoroughfare from Asia to Europe, as the great leading road from one
continent to the other was in the vicinity. This road is described at length
by Appian, De Bell. Civ. L. iv. c. 105, 106.

This city is celebrated in history from the fact that it was here that a great
victory--deciding the fate of the Roman empire--was obtained by Octavianus
(afterwards Augustus Cesar) and Antony over the forces of Brutus and
Cassius, by which the republican party was completely subdued. In this
battle, Cassius, who was hard pressed and defeated by Antony, and who
supposed that every thing was lost, slew himself in despair. Brutus deplored
his loss with tears of the sincerest sorrow, calling him‘ the last of the
Romans.” After an interval of twenty days, Brutus hazarded a second battle.
Where he himself fought in person he was successful ; but the army everywhere else gave way, and the battle terminated in the entire defeat of the
republican party. Brutus escaped with a few friends ; passed a night ina
cave, and seeing that all was irretrievably lost, ordered Strato, one of his
attendants, to kill him. Strato for a long time refused ; but seeing Brutus
resolute, he turned away his face, and held his sword, and Brutus fell upon
it. The city of Philippi is often mentioned by the Byzantine writers in.
history. Its ruins still retain the name of Filibah. Two American missionaries visited these ruins in May, 1834. They saw the remains of what might
have been the forum or. market-place, where Paul and Silas were beaten
(Acts xvi. 19); and also the fragments of a splendid palace. The road by
which Paul went from Neapolis to Philippi, they think is the same that is
now travelled, as it is cut through the most difficult passes in the mountains.
It is still paved throughout.

} 2. The establishment of the church in Philippi.

Philippi was the first place in Europe where the gospel was preached ;
and this fact invests the place with more interest and importance than it
derives from the battle fought there. The gospel was first preached here,
in very interesting circumstances, by Paul and Silas. Paul had been called
by a remarkable vision (Acts xvi. 9) to go into Macedonia, and the first
place where he preached was Philippi--having made his way, as his custom
was, directly to the capital. The first person to whom he preached was
Lydia, a seller of purple, from Thyatira, in Asia Minor. She was converted,
and received Paul and Silas into her house, and entertained them hospitably,
In consequence of Paul’s casting out an evil spirit from a ‘‘damsel possessed
of a spirit of divination,” by which the hope of gain by those who kept her
in their employ was destroyed, the populace was excited, and Paul and Silas
were thrown into the inner prison, and their feet were made fast in the stocks.
Here, at midnight, God interposed in aremarkable manner. An earthquake
shook the prison ; their bonds were loosened; the doors of the prison were
thrown open, and their keeper, who before had ‘treated them with peculiar
severity, was converted, and all his family were baptized. It was in such
solemn circumstances that the gospel was first introduced into Europe.
After the tumult, and the conversion of the jailer, Paul was honourably
released, and soon left the city; Acts xvi. 40. Ile subsequently visited
Macedonia before his imprisonment at Rome, and doubtless went to Philippi
(Acts xx. 1, 2). It is supposed, that after his first imprisonment at Rome,
he was released and again visited the churches which he had founded. In
this epistle (chap. i. 25, 26 ; ii, 24) he expresses a confident hope that he would
be released, and would be permitted to see them again; and there isa

probability that his wishes in regard to this were accomplished ; sec Intro.
to 2 Timothy.

INTRODUCTION. CXXXiX

§ 3. The time when the epistle was written.

Tt is evident that this epistle was written from Rome. This appears,
(i.) because it was composed when Paul was in “bonds” (chap. i. 18, 14);
(2.) because circumstances are suggested, such as to leave no doubt that the
imprisonment was at Rome; thus in chap. i. 13, he says that his “‘ bonds were
manifested in all. the palace ;” a phrase which would naturally suggest. the
idea of the Roman capitol; and, in chap. iv. 22, he says, “all the saints salute
you, chiefly they that are of Cesar’s household.” It is further evident that it
was after he had been imprisoned for a considerable time, and, probably, not
long before his release. This appears from the following circumstances :
(1.) The apostle had been a prisoner so long in Rome, that the character
which he had manifested in his trials had contributed considerably to the
success of the gospel ; chap. i. 12--14. His bonds, ne says, were manifest “in
all the palace ;”’ and many of the brethren had become increasingly bold by
his “ bonds,” and had taken occasion to preach the gospel without fear. (2.)
The account given of Epaphroditus imports that, when Paul wrote this
cpistle, he had been a considerable time at Rome. Ile was with Paul in
Rome, and had been sick there. The Philippians had received an account of
his sickness, and he had again been informed how much they had been affected
with the intelligence of his illness ; chap. 11. 25,26. ‘The passing and repassing
of this intelligence, Dr. Paley remarks, must have occupied considerable
time, and must have all taken place during Paul’s residence at Rome. (3.)
After a residence at Rome, thus proved to have been of considerable duration,
Paul, at the time of writing this epistle, regards the decision of his destiny
as at hand. He anticipates that the matter would soon be determined ; chap.
ii. 23. “Him therefore (Timothy) I hope to send presently, so soon as I
see how it will go with me.” He had some expectation that he might be
released, and be permitted to visit them again; chap. ii.2!. ‘I trust in the
Lord that I also myself shall come shortly ;’’ comp. chap. i: 25, 27. Yet he
was not absolutely certain how it would go with him, and though, in one place,
he speaks with great confidence that he would be released (chap. 1. 25), yet in
another he suggests the possibility that he might be put to death; chap. ii. 17.
“Yea, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy
and rejoice with you all.’’ These circumstances concur to fix the time of
writing the epistle to the period at which the imprisonment in Rome was
about to terminate. From Acts xxviii. 30, we learn that Paul was in Rome
‘two whole years;” and it was during thé latter part of this period that the
epistle was written. It is commonly agreed, therefore, that it was written
about A. D. 61 or62. Ilug (Intro.) places it atthe end of the year 61, or the
beginning of the year 62; Lardner, at the close of the year 62. It is evident
that it was written before the great conflagration at Rome in the time of
Nero (A. D. 64); for it is hardly credible that Paul would have omitted a
reference to such an event, if it had occurred. It is certain, from the
persecution of the Christians which followed that event, that he would not
have been likely to have represented his condition to be so favourable as he
has done in this epistle. He could hardly have looked then for a release.

§ 4. The design and character of the epistle.

The object of the epistle isapparent. It was sent by Epaphroditus (chap.
ii. 25), who appears to have been a resident at Philippi, and a member of the
church there, to express the thanks of the apostle for the favours which they
had conferred on him, and to comfort them with the hope that he might be
soon set at liberty. Epaphroditus had been sent by the Philippians to convey
their benefactions to him in the time of bis imprisonment ; chap. iv. 18. While

or INTRODUCTION.
at Rome, he had been taken ill; chap. ii. 26. 27. On his recovery, Panl
deemed it proper that he should return at once to Philippi. It was natural
that he should give them some information about his condition and prospects.
A considerable part of the epistle, therefore, is occupied in giving an account
of the effects of his imprisonment in promoting the spread of the gospel, and
of his own feelings in the circumstances in which he then was. He was not
yet certain what the result of his imprisonment would be (chap. i. 20); but he
was prepared either to live or to die, chap. i. 23. He wished to live only that
he might be useful to others ; and, supposing that he might be made useful,

he had some expectation that he might be released from his bonds.
There is, perhaps, no one of the epistles of the apostle Paul which 1s so
tender, and which abounds so much with expressions of kindness, as this.
In relation to other churches, he was often under the necessity of using the
language of reproof. The prevalence of some error, as in the churches of
Galatia; the existence of divisions and strifes, or some aggravated case
requiring discipline, or some gross irregularity, as in the church at Corinth ;
frequently demanded the language of severity. But, in the church at
Philippi, there was scarcely anything which required rebuke ; there was
o> very much that demanded commendation and gratitude, Their conduct
2 towards him, and their general deportment, had been exemplary, generous,
wa ___noble. They had evinced for him the tenderest regard in his troubles ;
providing for his wants, sending a special messenger to supply him when
no other opportunity occurred (chap. iv. 10), and sympathizing with him in
his trials; and they had,in the order, peace, and harmony of the church,
eminently adorned the doctrine of the Saviour. ‘The langnage of the
apostle, therefore, throughout the epistle, is of the most affectionate character--such asa benevolent heart would always choose to employ, and
such as must have been exceedingly grateful to them. Paul never hesi-
\o" tated to use the language of commendation where it was deserved, as he
never shrank from reproof where it was merited ; and he appears to have
regarded the one as a matter of duty as much as the other. We are to
remember, too, the circumstances of Paul, and to ask what kind of an
epistle an affectionate and grateful spiritual father would be likely to write
to a much-beloved flock, when he felt that he was about to die; and we shall
find that this is just such an epistle as we should suppose such a man would
write. It breathes the spirit of a ripe Christian, whose piety was mellowing
for the harvest ; of one who felt that he was not far from heaven, and might
soon ‘‘be with Christ.” Though there was some expectation of a release, yet
his situation was such as led him to look death in the face. Ile was lying under
| heavy accusations ; he had no hope of justice from his own countrymen ; the
\00.q character ofthe soverejgn, Nero, wasnot such as to inspire him with great confidence of having justice done ; and it is possible that the fires of persecution
had already begun to burn. At the mercy of such a man as Nero ; a prisoner;
among strangers, and with death staring him in the face, it is-natural to suppose that there would be a peculiar solemnity, tenderness, pathos, and ardour
of affection, breathing through the entire epistle. Such isthe fact; and in
none of the writings of Paul are these qualities more apparent than in this
letter to the Philippians. He expresses his grateful remembrance of all
their kindness ; he evinces a tender regard for their welfare ; and he pours
forth the full-flowing language of gratitude, and utters a father’s feelings
toward them by tender and kind admonitions. Itis important to remember
these circumstances in the interpretation of this epistle. |It breathes the
language of a father, rather than the authority of an apostle; the entreaties
of a tender friend, rather than the commands of one in authority. It expresses the affections of aman who felt that he might be near death, and who
tenderly loved them ; and it will be, to all ages, a model of affectionate counsel

and BONE

pace and Timotheus, the ser- |

vants of Jesus Christ, to all

This chapter embraces the following points :--

I. The salutation to the church,
ver. 1, 2.

II. In ver. 3--8, the apostle expresses his gratitude for the evidence
which they had given of love to God,
and for their fidelity in the gospel
from the time when it was first proclaimed among them. He says that
he was confident that this would continue, and that God, who had so
mercifully imparted grace to them
to be faithful, would do it to the end.

III. He expresses the earnest hope

_that they might abound more and
more in knowledge, and be without
offence tothe day ofChrist ; ver.9--11.

IV. In ver. 12--21, he states to
them what had been the effect of his
imprisonment in Rome--presuming
that it would be grateful intelligence
to them that even his imprisonment
had been overruled for the spread of
the gospel. His trials, he says, had
been the means of the extension of
the knowledge of Christ even in the
palace, and many Christians had been
emboldened by his sufferings to increased diligence in making known
the truth. Some, indeed, he says,
preached Christ from unworthy motives, and with a view to increase his
affliction,|but in the great fact that
Christ was preached, he says, he rejoiced. Forgetting himself and any
injury which they might design to do
to him, he could sincerely. rejoice
that the gospel was proclaimed--no
matter by whom or with what motives.
The whole affair he trusted would
be made conducive to his salvation.

;the saints in Christ Jesus which
are at Philippi, * with the bishops

and deacons :
a Ac.16.12,&¢,

----4

Christ was the great end and aim of |

his life ;and if he were made known
everything else was of minor impor- |
tance.

V. The mention of the fact (ver.21 }
that his great aim in living was
“Christ,’”’ leads him to advert to the
probability that he might soon be with
him; ver. 22--26. So great was his}
wish to be with him, that he would
hardly know which to choose--whether to die at once, or to live and to}
make him known to others. Believ-|
ing, however, that his life might be|
still usefulto them, he hadan expec-|
tation of considerable confidence that |

his life would be spared, and that. he |

would be released.

VI. The chapter closes, ver. 27--30,
with an earnest exhortation that they
would live as became the gospel of
Christ. Whatever might befall him
--whether he should be permitted to
see them, or should hear of them, he
entreated that he might know that

they were living as became the gospel. _

They were not to be afraid of their
adversaries; and if called to suffer,
they wereto remember that ‘‘it was
given” them not only to believe on

the Redeemer, but also to suffer in

his cause.

1. Paul and Timotheus. Paul
frequently unites some person with
him in his epistles; see Notes on 1
Cor. i.1. It is clear from this, that
Timothy was with Paul at Rome.
Why he was there is unknown. It
is evident that he was not there as a
prisoner with Paul, and the probability is, that he was one of the friends
who had gone to Rome witha view
to show his sympathy with him in his
sufferings; comp. Notes on 2 Tim. iv.

'.9, There was special propriety in
the fact that Timothy was joined with
the apostle in writing the epistle, for
he was with him when the church was
founded, and doubtless felt a deep interest in its welfare ; Acts xvi. ‘Timothy had remained in Macedonia after
Paul went to Athens, and it is not
improbable that he had visited them.

afterwards. § The servants of Jesus
Christ; Notes, Rom.i.1. § Zo all
the saintsin Christ Jesus. The com-

mon appellation given to the church,
denoting that it was holy; Notes,
Rom. i.7. § With the bishops. avy
torirnomos ; see Notes, Acts xx. 28,

The word here used occurs in the |
.~ -New Testament only in the following |

places: Acts xx. 28, translated over-

seers; and Phil. i. 1; 1 Tim. iii. 2; |
Ditwinneelo bet-tlweco mln each oty,

which places it is rendered bishop.
The word properly means an inspector, overseer, or guardian, and was
given to the ministers of the gospel
because they exercised this care over

the churches, or were appointed to |
It is a term, |
_ the ministers of the gospel as being the

oversee their interests.
therefore, which might-be given to
any of the officers of the churches, and
was originally equivalent to the term
presbyter. It is evidently used in
this sense here. It cannot be used to
denote a diocesan bishop ; or a bishop
having the care of the churches in a
large district of country, and of a
superior rank to other ministers of
the gospel, for the word is here used
in the plural number, and it isin the
highest degree improbable that there
were dioceses in Philippi. It is clear,
moreover, that they were the only
officers of the church there except
‘deacons ;’’ and the persons referred
to, therefore, must have been those
who were invested simply with the
pastoral office. Thus Jerome, one of
the early Fathers, says, respecting
the word bishop: ‘ A presbyter is
the same asabishop. And until there
arose divisions in religion, churches
were governed by a common counsel
of presbyters. But afterwards, it
was everywhere decreed, that one
person, elected from the presbyters,
should be placed over the others.”

‘“‘ Philippi,” says he, “is a single city

of Macedonia; and certainly there

could not have been several like these
who are now called bishops, at one
time in the same city. But as, at
that time, they called the same bishops
whom they called presbyters also,
the apostles spuke indifferently of
bishops as of presbyters.’ Annotations on the Epistle to Titus, as quoted by Dr. Woods on Episcopacy, p. 63.
{ And deacons. Onthe appointment
i of deacons, and their duty, see Notes
on Acts vi.]. The word deacons does
‘not occur before this place in the
' common version of the New Testament, though the Greek word here
rendered deacon frequently occurs.
It is rendered minister and ministers
‘in Matt. xx.26; Mark x. 43; Rom.
Mild Kv Sas le COM tl. no, ecole
TG Vid eke ae oral plo lagas
PB phe Wie ( sie Bl C0 le (eos 2 pwc
7; 1'Tim. iv. 6; servant and servants,
Matt. xxii. 13; xxiii. 11; Mark ix.
25; John ii. 5, 9; xii. 26 ; Rom. xv..
1; and deacon or deacons, Phil. i. 1;
1 Tim. iii. 8.12. The word properly
means servants, and is thenapplied to

servants of Christ, and ofthe churches.
Hence it came especially to denote
those who had charge of the alms of

‘the church, and who were the over-

seers of the sick and the poor. In
this sense the word is probably used
in. the passage before us, as the officers
here referred to were distinct in some
way from the bishops. The apostle
here mentions but. two orders of

‘ministers in the church at Philippi,

and this account is of great import_ance in its bearing on the question
‘about the way in which Christian
churches were at first organized, and
‘about the officers which existed in
‘them. In regard to this we may re-
,mark, (1.) that but two orders of
| ministers are mentioned. This is un-
|deniable, whatever rank they may
| have held. (2.) There is no intima-
| tion whatever that a minister like a
| prelatical bishop had ever been ap-
| pointed there, and that the incum-
‘bent of the office was absent, or that
‘the office was now vacant. If the
_ bishop was absent, as Bloomfield and
others suppose, it is remarkable that
no allusion is made to him, and that

2 Grace @ de unto you, and peace, |

from God our Father, and from the

Lord Jesus Christ.
a@ Ro.).7.
3 I thank my God upon every
1 remembrance of you.

1 or, mention.

Paul should have left the impression
that there were in fact but two
‘‘orders’’ there.
late there, why did not Paul refer to
him with affectionate salutations ?
Why does he refer to the two other
“orders of clergy’’ without the slightest allusion to the man who was set
over them as “ superior in ministerial
rank and power?’’ Was Paul jealous
of this prelate? But if they had a
prelate, and the see was then vacant,
why is there no reference to this fact?
Why no condolence at their loss?
Why no prayér that God would send
them a man to enter into the vacant
diocese? It is a mere assumption to
suppose, as the friends of prelacy
often do, that they had a prelatical
bishop, but that he was then absent.
But even granting this, it isan inquiry
which has never been answered, why
Paul did not make some reference to
this fact, and ask their prayers for
the absent prelate. (3.) The church
was organized by the apostle Paul
himself, and there can be no doubt
that it was organized on the’ “ truly
primitive and apostolic plan.” (4.)
The church at Philippi was in the
centre of a large territory; was the
capital of Macedonia, and was not
likely to be placed in subjection to the
diocesan of another region. (5.) It
was surrounded by other churches, as
we have express mention of the church
at Thessalonica, and the preaching

of the gospel at Berea; Acts xvii. |

(6.) There is more than one bishop
mentioned as connected with the
church in Philippi. But these could
not have been bishops of the Episcopal or prelatical order, if Episcopalians choose to say that they were
prelates, then it follows (a) that there
was a plurality of such persons in the
same diocese, the same city, and the
game church--which is contrary to
the fundamental idea of Episcopacy.
It follows also (b) that there was
entirely wanting in the church at
Philippi what the Episcopalians call

If there were a pre- |

the “ second order’’ of clergy; that a

church was organized by the apostles
defective in one of the essential
grades, with a body of prelates without presbyters--that is, an -order of
men of ‘superior’ rank designated
to exercise jurisdiction over ‘‘ priests”
who had no existence. If there were
such presbyters or “ priests’ there,
why did not Paul name them? If
their office was one that was contemplated in the church, and was then
vacant, how did this happen? And
if thts were so, why is there no allusion to so remarkable a fact? (7.}
It follows, therefore, that in this
church there were but two orders
of officers; and further that it is
right and proper to apply the term
bishop to the ordinary ministers of
the churches. As no mention is
made of a prelate; as there are but
two orders of men mentioned to
whom the care of the church was intrusted, it follows that there was one
church at least organized by the apostles without any prelate. (8.) The
same thing may be observed in regard
to the distinction between “teaching”
elders and “ruling” elders. No such
distinction is referred to here; and
however useful such an office as that
of ruling elder may be, and certain as
it is, that such an office existed in
some of the primitive churches, yet
here is one church where no such
officer is found, and this fact proves
that such an officer is not essential
to the Christian church.

2. Grace be unto you,-&c.; see Note,
Rom. i. 7.

3. I thank my God upon every remembrance of you. Marg., mention.
The Greek word means, recollection,
remembrance. But this recollection
may have been suggested either by
his own reflections on what he had
seen, or by what he had heard of
them by others, or by the favours
which they conferred on him reminding him of them. The meaning is,
that as often as he thought on them,
4 Always in every prayer “of

5 For your fellowship in the

mine for you all making request| gospel, from the first day until

with joy,
@ Ep.1.14,&0,; 1Th.1.2.

from whatever cause, he had occasion
of thankfulness. He says that he
thanked Ais God, intimating that the
conduct of the Philippians was a
proof of the favour of God to him;
that is, he regarded their piety as one
of the tokens of the favour of God fo
his own soul--for in producing that
piety he had been mainly instrumental.

4. Always. There is much emphasis in the expressions which are
here used. Paul labours to show
them that he never forgot them;
that he always remembered them in
his prayers. § Jn every prayer of
mine. This was a proof of particular
and special affection, that while there
were so inany objects demanding his
prayers, and so many other churches
which he had founded, he never for-

got them. ‘The person or object that

we remember in every prayer must
be very dear to the heart. { For
you all. Not for the church in
general, but for the individual members. “ He industriously repeats the
word all, that he might show that he
loved them all equally well, and that
he might the more successfully excite
them to the manifestation of the same
love and benevolence.” -- Wetstein.
q Making request with joy. With
joy at your consistent walk and benevolent lives--mingling thanksgiving
with my prayers in view of your holy
walk.

5. For your fellowship in the gu spel.
“For your liberality towards me,
a preacher of the gospel.” -- Wetstein.
There has been, however, no little difference of opinion about the meaning
of this phrase. Many--as Doddridge,
Koppe, and others--suppose it refers
to the fact that they participated in
the blessings of the gospel from the
first day that he preached it until the
time when he wrote this epistle.
Others suppose that it. refers to their
constancy in the Christian faith.
Others--as Pierce, Michaelis, Wetstein, Bloomfield, and Storr--suppose

now ;

it refers to their liberality in contributing to the support of the gospel ;
to their participating with others, or
sharing what they had zm common
with others, for the maintenance of
the gospel. That this is the true
sense seems apparent, (1.) because it
accords with the scope of the epistle,
and what the apostle elsewhere says
of their benefactions. He speaks particularly of their liberality, and indeed
this was one of the principal occasions
of his writing the epistle ; chap. iv..10
--12, 15--18. (2.) It accords with a
frequent meaning of the word rendered fellowship--xovuyvia. It denotes
that which is in common; that of
which we participate with others,
communion, fellowshi»; Acts ii. 42;
1 Cor. i. 9; x. 16; Philem. 6; thep
it means communication, distribution,
contribution; Rom. xv. 26; 2 Cor. ix,
13. That it cannot mean “accession
to the gospel’ as has been supposed
(see Rob. Lex.), is apparent from
what he adds--‘‘ from the first day
until now.” The fellowship must
have been something constant, and
continually manifest--and the general meaning is, that in relation
to the gospel--to its support, and
privileges, and spirit, they all shared
in common. They felt a common
interest in every thing that pertained
to it, and they showed this in every
suitable way, and especially in ministering to the wants of those who were
appointed to preach it. {| From the
first day. The time when it was first
preached to them. They had been
constant. ‘This is honourable testimony. It is much to say of a church
or of an individual Christian, that
they have been constant and uniform
in the requirements of the gospel.
Alas, of how few can this be said!
On these verses (3--5) we may remark, (1.) That one of the highest
joys which a minister of the gospel
can have, is that furnished by the
holy walk of the people to whom he
has ministered ; comp, 3 John 4. It

G Being confident 4 of this very
a He.10.35.

is joy like that of a farmer when he
sees his fields whiten for a rich harvest; like that of a teacher in the

good conduct and rapid progress of '

his scholars ; like that of a parent in
the virtue, success, and piety of his
sons. Yet it is superior to all that.
The interests are higher and more
important ; the results are more farreaching and pure; and the joy is
more disinterested. Probably there
is nowhere else on earth any happiness so pure, elevated, consoling, and
rich, as that of a pastor in the piety,
peace, benevolence, and growing zeal
of his people. (2.) It is right to
commend Christians when they do
well. Paul never hesitated to do this,
and never supposed that it would do
injury. Flattery would injure--but
Paul never flattered. Commendation
or praise, in order to do good, and
not to injure, should be (a) the simple statement of the truth; (6) it
should be without exaggeration; (c)
it should be connected with an equal
readiness to rebuke when wrong ; to
admonish when in error, and to counsel
when one goes astray. Constant
fault-finding, scolding, or fretfulness,
does no good ina family, a school, or
a church. The tendency is to dishearten, irritate, and discourage. To
commend a child when he does well,
may be as important, and as much a
duty, as to rebuke him when he does
ill. God is as careful to commend
his people when they do well, as he is
to rebuke them when they do wrong--
and that parent, teacher, or pastor,
has much mistaken the path of wisdom, who supposes it to be his duty
always to find fault. In this world
there is nothing that goes so far in
promoting happiness as a willingness
to be pleased rather than displeased ;
to be satisfied rather than dissatisfied
with the conduct of others. (3.) Our
absent friends should be remembered
in our prayers. On our knees before
God is the best place to remember
them. We know not their condition.
If they are sick, we cannot minister

to their wants; if in danger, we can-

|
thing, that he > which hath begun
b Ps.138.8,,

not run to their relief ; if tempted, we
cannot counsel them. But God, who
is with them, car do all this; and it
is an inestimable privilege thus to be
permitted to commend them to his
holy care and keeping. Besides, it is
a duty to doit. It is one way--and
the best way--to repay their kindness.
A child may always be repaying the
kindness of absent parents by supplicating the divine blessing on them
each morning; and a brother may
strengthen and continue his love for
a sister, and in part repay her tender
love, by seeking, when far away, the
divine favour to be bestowed on her.
6. Being confident. This is strong
language. It means to be fully
and firmly persuaded or convinced ;
Part. Mid., voice from wzi##--to persuade ; comp. Luke xvi. 31. ‘‘ Neither
will they be persuaded, though one
rose from the dead;”’’ that is, they
would not be convinced ; Acts xvii. 4;
Heb: xi-- 13 3 Acts xxvii, 245 It
means here that Paul was entirely
convinced of the truth of what he said.
It is the language of a man who had
no doubt on the subject. § That he
which hath begun avood work in you.
The “ good work” here referred to,
can be no other than religion, or true
piety. This is called the work of
God; the work of the Lord ; or the
work of Christ; John vi. 29; comp.
LUC Of se x2 55.7 XVI 10 Penile, 30!
Paul affirms here that that work was
begun by God. It was not by their
own agency or will; comp. Notes on
John i. 13. It was on the fact that
it was begun by God, that he based
his firm conviction that it would be
permanent. Had it been the agency
of man, he would have had no such
conviction, for nothing that man does
to-day can lay the foundation of a
certain conviction that he will do the
same thing to-morrow. If the perseverance of the Christian depended
wholly on himself, therefore, there
could be no sure evidence that he
would ever reach heaven. § Will
perform it. Marg., “Or, finish” The
Greek Be tee era that
a good 2 work in you will! perform it until the day & of Jesus
Christ :

a John 6.29.

1 or, finish. 62 Pe.3.10.

7 Even as it is meet for me to
think this of you all, because ? I
have you in my heart; inasmuch

2 or, ye have me in your.

he would carry it forward to completion; he would perfect it. It is an
intensive form of the word, meaning
that it would be carried through to
the end. It occurs in the following
places: Luke xiii. 32, “ I do cures ;”
Rom. xv. 28, ‘when I have performed
this ;”” 2 Cor. vii. 1, “‘ perfecting holiness ;”’ viii. 6, “‘ so he would also fin'sh
in you; 11, “perform the doing of
it ;’’ Gal iii. 3, ‘‘are ye now made
perfect by the flesh;” Heb. viii. 5,
‘when he was about to make the
tabernacle ;” ix. 6, ‘ accomplishing
this service ;’’ and 1 Pet. v. 9, ‘‘are
accomplished in your brethren.” The
word occurs nowhere else; and here
means that God would carry on the
work which he had begun to completion. Te would not leave it unfinished. lt would not be commenced and
then abandoned. ‘'his would or could
be “performed” o1 “ finished’’ only
(1.) by keeping them from falling
from grace, and (2.) by their ultimate
entire perfection. { Until the day of
Jesus Christ. The day when Christ
shall so manifest himself as to be the
great attractive object, or the day
when he shall appear to glorify himself, so that it may be said emphatically to be his day. That day is
often called “‘Azs day,” or ‘‘the day of
the Lord,” because it will be the
day of his triumph and glory. It
refers here to the day when the
Lord Jesus will appear to receive
his people to himself--the day of
judgment. We may remark on this
verse, that Paul believed in the perseverance of saints. It would be impossible to express a stronger conviction of the truth of that doctrine than
he has done here. Language could
not be clearer, and nothing can be
more unequivocal than the declaration
of his opinion that where God has
begun a good work in the soul, it will
not be finally lost. The ground of
this belief he has not stated in full,
but has merely hinted at it. It is

the good work. That ground of belief
is something like the following. (1.)
It is in God alone. It is not in man
in any sense. No reliance is to be
placed on man in keeping himself.
He is too weak ; too changeable ; too
ready to be led astray ; too much disposed to yield to temptation. (2.)
The reliance, therefore, is on God;
and the evidence that the renewed
man will be kept is this: (a) God
began the work of grace in the soul.

(b) He had a design in it. It was
deliberate, and intentional. It was
not by chance or hap-hazard. It was

because he had some object that was
worthy of his interposition. (c) There
is no reason why he should begin such
a work and then abandon it. It cannot be because he has no power to
complete it, or because there are
more enemies to be overcome than
he had supposed ; or because there
are difficulties which he did not foresee; or because it is not desirable
that the work should be completed.
Why then should he abandon it ? (d)
God abandons nothing that he undertakes. There are no unfinished worlds
or systems; no half-made and forsaken works of his hands. There is
no evidence in his works of creation of
change of plan, or of having forsakcn
what he began from disgust, or disappointment, or want of power to complete them. Why should there be in
the salvation of the soul? (¢) He has
promised to keep the renewed soul to
eternal life; see John x. 27, 28, 29;
Heb. vi. 17-20 ; comp. Rom. vii. 29,30.

7. Even as it is meet for me to think
this of you all. ‘‘ There is a reason
why I should cherish this hope of you,
and this confident expectation that
you will be saved. ‘hat reason is
found in the evidence which you have
given that you are sincere Christians.
Having evidence of that, it is proper
that I should believe that you will
finally reach heaven.” | Because J
have you in my heart. Marg., Ye

based on the fact that God had begun! have me in your. The Greek wiil

as both in my bonds, and in the
defence “ and confirmation of the
gospel, ye all are partakers ! of my
grace.

8 For God is my record, how

aver.37 1 or, with me of grace.

bear either, though the former trans-

lation is the most obvious. The meaning is, that he was warmly attached
to them, and had experienced many
proofs of their kindness; and that
there was, therefore, a propriety in
his wishing for their salvation. Their
conduct towards him, moreover, in his
trials, had convinced him that they
were actuated by Christian principle ;
and it was proper that he should believe that they would be kept to eternal life. § Both in my bonds. While
I have been a prisoner--referring to
the care which they had taken to minister to his wants ; chap. iv. 10, 14, 18.
{ And in the defence. Gr., apology.
Probably he refers to the time when
he made his defence before Nero, and
vindicated himself from the charges
which had been brought against him ;
see Notes,2 Tim. iv.16. Perhaps he
means here, that on that occasion he
was abandoned by those who should
have stood by him, but that the Philippians showed him all the attention
which they could. It is not impossible
that they may have sent some of their
number to sympathize with him in his
trials, and to assure him of the unabated confidence of the church.
{| And confirmation of the gospel. In
my efforts to defend the gospel, and
to make it known ; see ver. 17. The
allusion is probably to the fact that,
in all his efforts to defend the gospel,
he had been sure of their sympathy
and co-operation. Perhaps he refers
to some assistance which he had derived from them in this cause, which
is now to us unknown. § Ye all are
partakers of my grace. Marg., “ Or,
with me of grace.” The meaning is,
that asthey had participated with him
in the defence of the gospel; as
in all his troubles and persecutions
they had made common cause with
him, so it followed that they would
partake ofthe same tokens ofthe divine

most desirable of all favours,
greatly I long after you all in the
bowels of Jesus Christ.

9 And this I pray, that your
love may abound } yet more and
more in knowledge and ¢z all
2 judgement ;

6) Th.3.123 2 Pe.3.18. 2 or, sense.

favour. Ile expected that the divine
blessing would follow Azs_ efforts
in the cause of the gospel, and he
says that they would share in the
blessing. They had shown all the
sympathy which they could in his
trials ; they had nobly stood by him
when others forsook him; and he anticipated, as a matter of course, that
they would all share in the benefits
which would flow to him in his efforts
in the cause of the Redeemer.

8. For God is my record. My witness; I can solemnly appeal to him
{| How greatly I long after you all.
To see you; and how much I desire
your welfare. ¥ Jn the bowels of Jesus
Christ. The word ‘ bowels,” in the
Scriptures denotes the upper viscera
--the region of the heart and lungs;
see Notes on Isa. xvi. 11. That region was regarded as the-seat of affection, sympathy, and compassion, as
the heart is with us. The allusion
here is to the sympathy, tenderness,
and love of the Redeemer ; and probably the meaning is, that Paul regarded them with something of the
affection which the Lord Jesus had
for them. This was the tenderest
and strongest expression which he
could find to denote the ardour of his
attachment.

9. And this I pray. We pray for
those whom we love, and whose welfare we seek. We desire their happiness; and there is no way more appropriate of expressing that desire
than of going to God, and seeking it
at his hand. Paul proceeds to enumerate the blessings which he sought
for them; and it is worthy of observation that he did not ask riches, or
worldly prosperity, but that his supplications were confined to spiritual
blessings, and he sought these as the
q That
your love may abound, &c. Love to
God; love to one another; love to
10 That@ ye may ! approve
things that are 2 excellent; that
@ Ro.2.18. 1 or, try. 2 or, differ.

absent Christians; love to the world. |
This is an appropriate subject of
prayer. We cannot wish and pray |
for a better thing for our Christian
friends, than that they may abound
in love. Nothing will promote their
welfare like this ; and we had better
pray for this, than that they may ob- }
tain abundant riches, and share the |
honours and pleasures of the world.
{| In knowledge. The idea is, that
he wished them to have intelligent |
affection. It should not be mere |
blind affection, but that intelligent
love which is based on an enlarged
view of divine things--on a just apprehension of the claims of God.
{] Andin all judgment. Marg., sense ;
comp. Notes on Leb. v. 14. The
word here means, the power of discer.-
tmy ; and the meaning is, that he
wished that their love should be exercised with proper discrimination.
It should be in proportion to the relative value of objects ; and the meaning of the whole is, that he wished
their religion to be intelligent and
discriminating ; to be based on knowledge, and a proper sense of the relative value of objects, as well as to
be the tender affection of the heart.
10. That ye may approve things.
Marg., “Or, try.” ‘The word used
here denotes the kind of trial to which
metals are exposed in order to test
their nature ; and the sense here 1s,
that the apostle wished them so to try
the things that were of real value, as
to discern that which was true and
genuine. § That are excellent. Marg.,
“Or, difer.’ The margin here more
correctly expresses the sense of the
Greek word. The idea is, that he
wished them to be able to distinguish
between things that differed from
each other; to have an intelligent
apprehension of what was right and
wrong--of what was good and evil.
He would not have them love and
approve all things indiscriminately
They should be esteemed according
to their real value. It is remarkable
here how anxious the apostle was, not

| on Eph. vi. 24.

| nifest.
‘are no clouds; which is not doubtful
'and dark ; which is pure and bright.

e may be ® sincere and without
offence till the day of Christ ;
b Ep.s.27.

only that they should be Christians,
but that they should be intelligent
Christians, and should understand
the real worth and value of objects.
q That ye may be sincere ; see Notes
The word here used
--eiAsmpivis --occurs nowhere else in
the New Testament, except in 2 Pet.
ili. 1, where it is rendered pure. The
NOUN eidrixpivea, however, occurs in |
Wor) v.82) 2) Corse 1a aie inal)
which places it is rendered sincerity.
The word properly means, that which

| is judged of in sun-shine (ian xpivw) ;

and then that which is clear and maIt is that over which there

The word sincere means literally without wax (sine cera); that is, honey
which is pure and transparent. Applied to Christian character, it means
that which is not deceitful, ambiguous, hypocritical ; that which is rot
mingled with error, worldliness, and
sin; that which does not proceed
from selfish and interested motives,
and where there is nothing disguised.
There is no more desirable appellation that can be given to a man than
to say that he is sincere--a sincere
friend, benefactor, Christian; and
there is nothing more lovely in the
character of a Christian than sincerity.
It implies, (1.) that he is truly converted --that he has not assumed
Christianity as a mask ; (2.) that his
motives are disinterested and pure ;
(3.) that his conduct is free from

, double-dealing, trick, and cunning ;

(4.) that his words express the real
sentiments of his heart ; (5.) that he
is true to his word, and faithful to his
promises ; and, (6.) that ile is always
what he professes to be. A sincere
Christian would bear to have the
light let in upon him always ; to have
the emotions of his heart seen; to be
scanned everywhere, and at all times,
by men, by angels,and by God. 4 And
without offence. Inoffensive to others.
Not injuring them in property, feelings, or reputation, This is a nega-

11 Being filled with the fruits
of righteousness, which are by
Jesus Christ unto the glory # and
praise of God.

12 But I would ye should un-

derstand, brethren, that the things
a John 15.8. 1 or, for.

tive virtue, and is often despised by
the world. But it is much to say of
aman that he injures no one; that
neither by example, nor opinions, nor
conversation, he leads them astray ;
that he never does injustice to their
motives, and neyer impedes their influence ; that he never wounds their
feelings, or gives occasion for hard
thoughts ; and that he so lives that
all may see that his is a blameless life.
{| Till the day of Christ; see Notes
on yer. 6.

11. Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness. That which righteousness in the heart produces. The
fruits, or results, will be seen in the
life; and those fruits are--honesty,
truth, charity, kindness, meekness,
goodness. The wish of the apostle is,
that they might show abundantly by
their lives that they were truly righteous. He does not refer to liberality
merely, but to everything which true
piety in the heart 1s fitted to produce
in the life. Which are by Jesus
Christ. (1.) Which his religion is
fitted to produce. (2.) Which result from endeavouring to follow his
example. (3.) Which are produced
by his agency on the heart. {| Unto
the glory and praise of God. Ilis
honour is never more promoted than
by the eminent holiness of his friends ;
see Notes, John xv. 8. If we wish,
therefore, to honour God, it should
not be merely with the lips, or by acts
of prayer and praise; it should be
by a life devoted to him. It is easy
to render the service of the lips ; it is
far more difficult to render that service which consists in a life of patient
and consistent piety; and in proportion to the difficulty of it, is its value
in his sight.

12. But I would ye should understand. Paul here turns to himself,
and goss into a somewhat extended

CHAPTER Tf.
which happened unto me have
fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the gospel ; -

13 So that my bonds! 'n Christ
are manifest in all 2? the palace,
and 3 in all other p/ares ;

2or, Ce'sar’s court, chap.4.22.
3 to all others.

account of his own feelings in his
trials, and of the effects of his imprisonment at Rome. He wished them
to understand what his circumstances
were, and what had been the effect
of his imprisonment, probably, for
such reasons as these: (1l.) They
were tenderly attached to him, and
would feel an interest in all that pertained to him. (2.) It was possible
that they might hear unfounded rumours about the manner of his treatment, and he wished that they should
understand the exact truth. (3.) He
had real intelligence to communicate
to them that would be joyful to them,
about the effect of his imprisonment,
and his treatment there; and he
wished them to rejoice with him.
Q That the things which happened
unto me. The accusations against
him, and his imprisonment at Rome.
Iie had been falsely accused, and had
been constrained to appeal to Cesar,
and had been taken to Rome as a
prisoner; Acts xxv.--xxvilil. This
arrest and imprisonment would seem
to have been against his success
as a preacher ; but he now says tl.at
the contrary had been the fact.
{ Have fallen out. Have resulted
in. Literally, ‘have come.” Tindal.
“« My business is happened.” {J Zhe
furtherance. The increase, the promotion of the gospel. Instead of
being a hindrance, they have been
rather an advantage.

13. So that my bonds in Christ.
Marg., for. The meaning is, his
bonds in the cause of Christ. He was
imprisoned because he preached Christ
(Notes, Eph. vi. 20), and was really
suffering because of his attachment
to the Redeemer. It was not for
crime, but for being a Christian - for
had he not beena Christian, he would
have escaped all this. The manner
of Pauls imprisonment was, that he
was suffered to occupy a house by
himself, though chained to a soldier
who was his guard; Acts xxviil. 16.
We was not in a dungeon indeed, but
he was not at liberty, and this was a
severe mode of confinement. Who
would wish to be chuined night and
day to a living witness of all that he
did; to a spy on all his movements ?
Who would wish to haye such a man
always with him, to hear all he said,
and to see all that he did? Who
could well bear the feeling that he
could mever be alone--and never be
at liberty to do any thing without the
permission of one too who probably
had little disposition to be indulgent?
q Are manifest. That is, it has become known that IJ am imprisoned
only for the sake of Christ.-- Grotius.
The true reason why I am thus accused and imprisoned begins to be
understood, and this has awakened
sympathy for me as an injured man.
They see that it is not for crime, but
that it is on account of my religious
opinions, and the conviction of my
innocence has spread abroad, and has
produced a favourable impression in
regard to Christianity itself. It must
have been a matter of mnch importance for Paul to have this knowledge
of the real cause why he was imprisoned go abroad. Such a knowledge
would do much to prepare others to
sisten to what he had to say --for
there is no man to whom we listen
more readily than to one who is suffering wrongfully. J Jn all the palace.
Marg., ‘Or, Cesar’s court.’ Gr., iv
OAw re xputwpin--in all the preetoriwm. This word properly denotes the
general's tent .n a@ camp; then the
house or palace of a governor of a
province, then any large hall, house,
or palace. It occurs in the New
Testament only in the following
places: Matt. xxvii. 27, where it is
vendered common hall; Mark xy. 16,
rendered Pretorium,; John xviii. 28,
33; xix. 9; Acts xxii, 35, rendered
judgment hall; andin Phil. i. 13. It
is employed to denote (1.) the palace
of Herod at Jerusalem, built with
great magnificence at the northern
part of the upper city, westward of
the temple, and overlooking the tem-

ple; (2.) the palace of Herod at
Cesarea, which was probably occupied
by the Roman procurator ; and (3.)
in the place before us to denote either
the palace of the emperor at Rome,
or ‘the pretorian camp, the head
quarters of the pretorian guards or
cohorts. These cohorts were a body
of select troops instituted by Augustus
to guard his person, and have charge
of the city; see Rob. Lex, Bloomfield, Rosenmiller, and some others,
understand this of the pretorian camp,
and suppose that Paul meant to say
that the cause of his imprisonment
had become known to all the band of
the pretorians. Grotius says that the
usual word to denete the residence of
the emperor at Rome was palatium
-- palace, but that those who resided
in the provinces were accustomed to
the word pretorium, and would use it
when speaking of the palace of tlie
emperor. Chrysostom says that the
palace of the emperor was called
pretorium, by a Latin word derived
from the Greek; see Erasmus 77 loc.
Calvin supposes that the palace of
Nero is intended. The question about
the meaning of the word is important,
as it bears on the inquiry to what extent the gospel was made known at
Rome in the time of Paul, and perhaps as to the question why he was
released from his imprisonment. Ii
the knowledge of his innocence had
reached the palace, it was a ground
of hope that he might be acquitted ;
and if that palace is here intended, it
is an interesting fact, as showing that
in some way the gospel had been introduced into the family of the emperor himself. That the palace or
residence of the emperor is intended
here, may be considered at least probable from the following considerations. (1.) It is the name which
would be likely to be used by the
Jews who came up from Judea and
other provinces, to denote the chief
place of judgment, or the principal
residence of the highest magistrate.
So it was used in Jerusalem, in Cesarea, and in the provinces generally,
to denote the residence of the genera]
in the camp, or the procurator in the
cities--the highest representative of

14 And many of the brethren in
the Lord, waxing confident by my

bonds, are much more bold to
speak the word without fear.

the Roman power. (2.) If the remark of Chrysostom, above referred
to, be well founded, that this was a
common name given to the palace in
Rome, then this goes far to determine
the question. (3.) In chap. iv. 22,
Paul, in the salutation of the saints
at Rome to those of Philippi, mentions particularly those of “* Casar’s
household.’ From this it would
seem that some of the family of the
emperor had been made acquainted
with the Christian religion, and had
been converted. In what way the
knowledge of the true cause of Paul’s
imprisonment had been circulated in
the ‘palace,’ is not now known.
There was, however, close intimacy
between the military officers and the
government, and it was probably by
means of some of tlie soldiers or
officers who had the special charge of
Paul, that this had been communicated. To Paul, in his bonds, it
must have been a subject of great rejoicing, that the government became
thus apprized of the true character of
the opposition which had been excited against him; and it must have
done much to reconcile him to the
sorrows and privations of imprisonment, that he was thus the means of
introducing religion to the very palace
ofthe emperor. § And in all other
places. Marg., to all others. The
Greek will bear either construction.
But if, as has been supposed, the reference in the word pretoriwin is to
the palace, then this should be rendered ‘all other places.’ It then
means, that the knowledge of his
innocence, and the consequences of
that knowledge in its happy influence
in spreading religion, were not con-
£ned to the palace, but were extended
to other places. The subject was
generally understood, so that it might
be said that correct views of the matter pervaded the city, and the fact of
his imprisonment was accomplishing
extensively the most happy effects on
the public mind.

14. And many of the brethren.
Many Christians. It is evident from

this, that there were already “many”
in Rome who professed Christianity.
In the Lord. In the Lord Jesus;
that is, united to him and to each
other by a professed attachment to
him. This 1s a common phrase tv

designate Christians. § Waxing
confident by my bonds. Becoming
increasingly bold and zealous in

consequence of my being confined.
This might have been either (1.)
that from the very fact that so distinguished a champion of the truth
had been imprisoned, they were excited to do all they could in the cause
of the gospel. Or (2.) they were
aroused by the fact that the cause of
his imprisonment had become generally understood, and that there was
a strong current of popular favour
setting towards Christianity in consequence of it. Or (3.) they had had
intercourse with Paul in his own
‘hired house,’ and had been incited
and encouraged by him to put forth
great efforts in the cause. Or (4.)
it would seem that some had been
emboldened to promulgate their views,
and set themselves up as preachers,
who would have been restrained if
Paul had been at liberty: They were
disposed to form parties, and to secure followers, and rejoiced in an
opportunity to increase their own
popularity, and were not unwilling
thus to diminish the popularity and
lessen the influence of so great a man
as Paul. Had he been at liberty,
they would have had no prospect of
success; see ver. 16. ‘To this may
be added a suggestion by Theodorct.
‘Many of the brethren have increased
boldness--S¢éec0s--on account of my
bonds. For seeing me bear such
hard things with pleasure, they announce that the gospel [which sustains me] is divine.’’ ‘The same sentiment occurs in Oecumen, and Theophyl.; see Bloomfield. In Paul himself they had an illustration of the
power of religion, and being convinced
of its truth, they went and proclaimed
it abroad. § To speak the word
without fear. That is, they sce that
15 Some indeed preach Christ
even of envy and strife, and some
also of good will.

16 The one preach Christ of
contention, not sincerely, sup-

posing to add affliction to my
bonds ;

17 But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defence
of the gospel.

I remain safely (comp. Acts xviii. 30),
and that there is no danger of persecution, and, stimulated by my sufferings and patience, they go and make
the gospel known.

15. Some indeed preach Christ even
of envy and strife. What was the
ground of this ‘envy and strife” the
apostle does not mention. It would
seem, however, that even in Rome
there was a party which was jealous of
the influence of Paul, and which supposed that this was a good opportunity to diminish his influence, and
to strengthen their own cause. He
was not now at large so as to be able
to meet and confute them. They had
access to the mass of the people. It
was easy, under plausible pretences,
to insinuate hints about the ambitious
aims, or improper influence of Paul,
or to take strong ground against him
and in favour of their own views, and
they availed themselves of this opportunity. It would seem most probable, though this is not mentioned,
that these persons were Judaizing
teachers, professing Christianity, and
who supposed that Paul’s views were
derogatory to the honour of Moses
and the law. § And some also of
good will. From pure motives, having no party aims to accomplish, and
not intending in any way to give me
trouble.

16. The one preach Christ of contention. So as to form parties, and
to produce strifes among his professed
followers. | Not sincerely. Not
purely--déyvas--not with pure motives or intentions. Their real aim
is not to preach Christ, but to produce difficulty, and to stir up strife.
They are ambitious men, and they
have no real regard for the welfare
of the church and the honour of
religion. {| Supposing to add afRiction to my bonds. To make my
trial the greater. How they did this is
unknown. Perhaps they were those
who were strongly imbued with Jew-

ish notions, and who felt that his
course tended to diminish respect for
the law of Moses, and who now took
this opportunity to promote their
views, knowing that this would be
particularly painful to him when he
was not at liberty to meet them
openly,and to defend his own opinions.
It is possible also that they may
have urged that Paul himself had met
with a signal reproof for the course
which he had taken, and, as a consequence, was now thrown into chains.
Bloomfield suggests that 1t was the
opinion of many of the ancient expositors that they endeavoured to do
this by so preaching as to excite the
fury of the multitude or the rulers
against Paul, and to produce increased
severity in his punishment. But the
way in which they did this is unknown,
and conjecture is altogether useless.
17. But the other of love. From
pure motives, and from sincere affection to me. { Knowing that I am
set for the defence of the gospel. They
believe that Iam an ambassador from
God. They regard me as unjustly
imprisoned, and while I am disabled,
they are willing to aid me in the
great cause to which my life is devoted. To alleviate his sorrows, and
to carry forward the great cause to
defend which he was particularly appointed, they engaged in the work
which he could not now do, and went
forth to vindicate the gospel, and to
make its claims better known. Coverdale renders this, “for they know
that I lie here for the defence of the
gospel.” So Piscator, Michaelis; and
Endius render it, supposing that the
meaning is, that he lay in prison for
the defence of the gospel, or as a
consequence of his efforts to defend
it. But this is not in accordance
with the usual meaning of the Greek
word (x¢izos). It means to lie, and
in the perf. pass. to be laid, set, placed.
If the apostle had referred to his
being in prison, he would have added

18 What then ? notwithstanding
every way, whether in pretence orin

truth,Christis preached; and Itherein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice,

that fact to the statement made. The
sense is, that he was appointed to be
a defender of the gospel, and that
they being well convinced of this,
went forth to promulgate and defend
the truth. That fact was one of
Paul’s chief consolations while he
was thus in confinement.

18. What then? What follows from
this? What effect does it have on
my mind? Does the fact that some
preach from a spirit of envy and contention give me pain? | Notwithstanding every way. No matter in
what way it is done. We are not to
suppose, however, that Paul was indifferent as to the way in which the
gospel was preached, or the spirit
with which it was done; but the
meaning is, that it was a matter of
rejoicing that it was done at all,
whatever the motives might be.
{ Whether in pretence or in truth.
Whether as a mere pretext to cover
up some other design, or from pure
motives. Their pretence was that
they preached the gospel because

they believed it true and loved it; ,

their real object was to build up a
party, and to diminish the influence
and authority of Paul. Christ is
preached. They made known the
name of the Saviour, and announced
that the Messiah had come. They
could not go forth under any pretence
as preachers, without making known
some truth about the Redeemer. So
now, it is hardly possible that any
persons should attempt to preach,
without stating some truth that would
not otherwise be known. The name
of a Saviour will be announced, and
that will be something. Some views
of his life and work will be presented,
which, though they may be far enough
from full views, are yet better than
none. Though there may be much
error in what is said, yet there will
be also some truth. It would be better to have preachers that were better
instructed, or that were more prudent,
or that had purer motives, or that
held a more perfect system, yet it is

| an do rejoice.

of the Redeemer announced in any
way, and even to be told, in the most
stammering manner, and froin whatever motives, that man has a Saviour.
The announcement of that fact in any
way may save a soul; but ignorance
of it couldsave none. {J And J thereThis is an instance of
great magnanimity on the part of
Paul, and nothing, perhaps, could
better show his supreme love for the
Saviour. Part preached to increase
his afflictions, and the tendency of
that preaching was, probably, as it
was designed to be, to unsettle confidence in him, and to lessen his influence. Yet this did not move him.
‘he more important matter was secured, and Christ was made known ;
and if this were secured, he was willing that his own name should be cast
into the shade. This may furnish
valuable lessons to preachers of the
gospel now. When (1.) we are laid
aside from preaching by sickness, we
should rejoice that others are in
health, and are able to make the
Saviour known, though we are forgotten. (2.) When we are unpopular
and unsuccessful, we should rejoice
that others are more popular and successful --for Christ is preached. (3.)
When we have rivals, who have better
plans than we for doing good, and
whose labours are crowned with success, we should not be envious or
jealous--for Christ is preached. (4.)
When ministers of other denominations preach what we regard as error,
and their preaching becomes popular,
and is attended with success, we can
find occasion +9 rejoice--for they
preach Christ. Inthe error we should
not, we cannot rejoice; but in the
fact that the great truth is held up
that Christ died for men, we can always find abundant occasion for joy.
Mingled as it may be with error, it
may be nevertheless the means of
saving souls, and though we should
rejoice more if the truth were preached
without any admixture of error, yet
still the very fact that Christ is made

much in our world to have the name! known lays the foundation for grati19 For I kaow that this @ shall
turn to my salvation through © your
prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,

a Ko.8.28. Oe ComMalilis

20 According to my earnest
expectation and my hope, that in
nothing I shall be ashamed, ¢ but
that with all boldness, ¢as always,

c¢ Ro5.5. d Ep.6.19,20.

tude and rejoicing. Had all Christians, and Christian ministers, the
feelings which Paul expresses here,
there would be much less envy and
uncharitableness than there is now in
the churches. May we not hope that
the time will yet come when all who
preach the gospel will have such supreme regard for the name and work
of the Saviour, that they will find
sincere joy in the success of a rival
denomination, or a rival preacher, or
in rival plans for doing good? Then,
indeed, contentions would cease, and
the hearts of Christians, “like kindred drops,” would mingle into one.
19. For I know that this shall turn
to my salvation. Will be a means of
my salvation. Whether the effect
shall be to turn public favour towards
the Christian religion, and secure my
release ; or whether it shall be to nstigate my enemies more, so as to
lead to my death ; I am satisfied that
the result, so far as I am concerned,
will be well. The word “salvation,”
here, does not refer to his release
from captivity, as Koppe, Rosenmiller, Clarke, and others, suppose ;
for he was not absolutely certain of
that, and could not expect that to be
etiected by “the supply of the Spirit
of Jesus Christ’ But the meaning
is, that all these dealings, including
his imprisonment, and especially the
conduct of those who thought to add
affliction to his bonds, would be among
the means of his salvation. Trying
and painful as all this was, yet trial
and pain Paul reckoned among the
Means of grace ; and he had no doubt
that this would prove so. J Through
your prayer; see Notes on 2 Cor. i.
11. (| And the supply of the Spirit
of Jesus Christ. ‘To sustain me, and
to cause those happy results to come
out of these trials. Ile needed the
same spirit which Jesus Christ had,
to enable him to bear his trials with
patience, and to impart to him the
consolations which he required. He

)

had no idea that these trials would
produce these effects of their own
accord, nor that it could be by any
strength of his own.

20. According to my earnest eaipectation. The word here used occurs but in one other place in the
New Testament; see it explained in
the Noteson Rom.vyiii.19. Theearnest
desire and hope which Paul had was
not, primarily, that he might be released ; but it was that, in all circumstances, he might be able to honour the
gospel, living or dying. ‘To that he
looked as a much more important
matter than to save his life. Life
with him was the secondary consideration ; the main thing was, to stand
up everywhere as the advocate of the
gospel, to maintain its truth, and to
exhibit its spirit. § That in nothing
I shall be ashamed. That I shall do
nothing of which I shall have occasion
to be ashamed. ‘That in these heavy
trials, I may not be left to deny the
truth of the Christian religion; that,
even before the emperor, I may maintain its principles; and that the dread
of death may not lead me to do a dishonourable thing, or in any way so to
shrink from an avowal of my belief,
as to give me or my friends occasion
of regret. § But that with all boldness. By my speaking the truth, and
maintaining my principles with all
boldness ; Notes, 2 Cor. vii. 4; Eph.
vi. 19,20. § Christ shall be magnified. Shall be held up to the view of
man as the true and only Saviour,
whatever becomes of me. § Whether
it be by life. If I am permitted to
live. He was not yet certain how
the case would terminate with him.
ile had not been put on his trial, and,
whether that trial would result in his
acquittal or not, he could not certainly know. But he felt assured
that, if he was acquitted, the effect
would be to honour Christ. He would
ascribe his deliverance to his gracious
interposition ; he would devote him-

so now also, Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether ¢ it be by
life or by death.

self with new ardour to his service;

and he felt assured, from his past efforts, that he would be able to do
something that would “magnify”’
Christ in the estimation of mankind.
q Or by death. If my trial shall result
in my death. ‘Then, he believed, he
would be able to show such a spirit
as to do honour to Christ and his
cause. IHewas not afraid to die, and
he was persuaded that he would be
enabled to bear the pains of death in
such a manner as to show the sustaining power of religion, and the value
of Christianity. Christis“‘magnified”’
in the death of Christians, when his
gospel is seen to sustain them ; when,
supported by its promises, they are
enabled to go calmly into the dark
valley; and when, in the departing
moments, they confidently commit
their eternal all into his hands. The
effect of this state of feeling on the
mind of Paul must have been most
happy. In whatever way his trial
terminated, he felt assured that the
great object for which he lived would
be promoted. Christ would be honoured, perhaps, as much by his dying as
a martyr, as by his living yet many
years to proclaim his gospel. Ee was,
therefore, reconciled to his lot. He
had no anxiety. Come what might,
the purpose which he had most at
heart would he secured, and the name
of the Saviour would be honoured.
21. For to me to live is Christ. My
sole aim in living is to glorify Christ.
He is the supreme End of my life,
and I yalue it only as being devoted
to hishonour. Doddridge. His aim
was not honour, learning, gold, pleasure; it was, to glorify the Lord
Jesus. This was the single purpose
of his soul--a purpose to which he
devoted himself with as much singleness and ardour as ever did a miser to
the pursuit of gold, or a devotee of
pleasure to amusement, or an aspirant
for fame to ambition. This implied
the following things: (1.) A purpose
to know as much of Christ as it was
possible to know--to become as fully

CHAPTER tf.

|
21 For to me to live zs Christ,
and to die > ¢s gain.
a Ro.14.7,8. b Re.14.13.

acquainted as he could with his rank,
his character, his plans, with the relations which he sustained to the Father,
and with the claims and influences of
his religion ; see Phil. iif. 10 ; Eph.
iii. 19; comp. John xvii. 8. (2.) A
purpose to dmitate Christ--to make
him the model of his life. It wagya
design that his Spirit should reign in
his heart, that the same temper should
actuate him, and that the same great
end should be constantly had in view.
(3.) A purpose to make his religion
known, as far as possible, among mankind. To this Paul seriously gave
his life, and devoted his great talents.
His aim was to see on how many
minds he could impress the sentiments
of the Christian religion ; tosee to
how many of the human family he
could make Christ known, to whom
he was unknown before. Never was
there a man who gave himself with
more ardour to any enterprise, than
Paul did to this ; and never was one
more successful, in any undertaking,
than he was in this. (4.) It was a
purpose to enjoy Christ. He drew
his comforts from him. His happiness
he found in communion with him. It
was not in the works of art; not in
the pursuits of elegant literature ;
not in the gay and fashionable world ;
but it was in communion with the
Saviour, and in endeavouring to
please him. Remark, (1.) Paul never
had occasion to regret this course.
It produced no sadness when he looked over his life. He never felt that he
had had an unworthy aim of living ; he
did not wish that his purpose had been
different when he came to die. (2.)
If it was Paul’s duty thus to live, it
is no less that of every Christian.
What was therein his case that made it
his duty to “live unto Christ,” which
does not exist in the case of every
sincere Christian on earth? No be
liever, when he comes to die, will regret that he has lived unto Christ,
but how many, alas! regret that this
has not been the aim and purpose of
their souls! § And to die is gain;

92 But if [ live in the flesh,} yet what I shall choose 1 wot

this és the fruit of my labour :

comp. Rey. xiv. 18, <A sentiment
similar to this occurs frequently in
the Greek and J.atin classic writers.
See Wetstein, in loc., who has collected numerous such passages. With
them, the sentiment had its origin in
the belief that they would be freed
from suffering, and admitted to some
happy world beyond the grave. To
them, however, all this was conjecture anduncertainty. The word gain,
here, means profit, advantage ; and
the meaning is, there would be an a/-
vantage in dying above that of living.
Important benefits would result to
him personally, should he die; and
the only reason why he should wish
at all to live was, that he might be
the means of benefiting others ; ver.
24,25. But how would it be gain to
die? What advantage would there
be in Paul’s circumstances? What
in ours? It may be answered, that
it will be gain for a Christian to die
in the following respects: (1.) He
will be then freed from sin. Here it
is the source of perpetual humiliation
and sorrow ; in heaven he will sin no
more. (2.) He will be freed from
doubts about his condition. Here the
best are liable to doubts about their
personal piety, and often experience
many an anxious hour in reference to
this point; in heaven, doubt will be
known no more. (3.) He will be freed
from temptation. Here, no one knows
when he may be tempted, nor how
powerful the temptation may be ; in
heaven, there will be no allurement
tolead himastray ; no artful, cunning,
and skilful votaries of pleasure to place
inducements before him to sin; and
no heart to yieldto them, if there were.
(4.) Ie will be delivered from all his
enemies--from the slanderer, the calumniator, the persecutor. Here the
Christian is constantly liable to have
his motives called in question, or to
be met with detraction and slander;
there, there will be none to do him
injustice ; all will rejoice in the belief
that he is pure. (5.) He will be delivered from suffering. Here he is
constantly liable to it. His health

not.

fails, his friends die, his mind is sad.

There, there shall be no separation of
friends, no sickness, and no tears.
(6.) He will be delivered from death.
Here, death is ever nigh--dreadful,
alarming, terrible to our nature.
There, death will be known no more.
No face willever turn pale, and no
knees tremble, at his approach ; in
all heaven there will never be seen a
funeral procession, nor will the soil
there ever open its bosom to furnish
a grave. (7%.) To all this may be
added the fact, that the Christian will
be surrounded by his best friends ;
that he will be reunited with those
whom he loved on earth ; that he will
be associated with the angeis of light ;
and that he wil] be admitted to the
immediate presence of his Saviour
and his God! Why, then, should a
Christian be afraidto die? And why
should he not hail that hour, when it
comes, as the hour of his deliverance,
and rejoice that he is going home ?
Does the prisoner, long confined ina
dungeon, dread the hour which is to
open his prison, and permit him to return to his family and friends? Does
the man in a foreign land, long an
exile, dread the hour when he shall
embark on the ocean to be conveyed
where he may embrace the friends of
his youth? Doesthe sick man dread
the hour which restores him to health;
the afflicted, the hour of comfort ? the
wanderer at night, the cheering light
of returning day? And why then
should the Christian dread the hour
which will restore him to immortal
vigour ; which shall remove all his
sorrows ; which shall introduce him
to everlasting day ?

Death is the crown of life:
Were death denied, poor man would live in
vain:
Were death denied, to live would not be life;
Were death denied, even fools would wish to

die.
Death wounds to cnre ; we fall; werise; we
reign!
Spring from our fetters ; fasten in the skies;
Where blooming Eden withers in our sight.
Death gives us more than was in Eden lost,
The king of terrors is the prince of peace.
Night Thoughts, iii.

22. But if Ilivein the flesh. If]

23 For I am in a strait betwixt | and to be with Christ 3 which is

two, having a desireto depart,
@ 20).5.8.

continue to live; if I am not condemned and make a martyr at my approaching trial. Q This is the fruit
of my labour. The meaning of this
passage, which has given much perplexity to commentators, it seems to
me is, ‘“‘If I live in the flesh, it will
cost me labour; it will be attended,
as it has been, with much effort and
anxious care, and I know not which to
prefer --whether to remain on the earth
with these cares and the hope of doing
good, orto go at once to a world of
rest.”" A more literal version of the
Greek will show that this is the mean

ing. rovTd wor xapros tpyou --“this to me
is [or would be] the fruit of labour.”
Coverdale, however, renders it, ‘Inasmuch as to live in the flesh is fruitful to me for the work, I wot not what
I shall choose.”’ So Luther, ‘ But
since to live in the flesh serves to produce morefruit.’’ Andso Bloomfield,
‘But if my life in the flesh be of use
to the gospel (be it so, I say no more),
verily what I shall choose I see and
know not.” See also Koppe, Rosenmiller, and Calvin, who give the
same sense. According to this, the
meaning is, that if his life were of
value to the gospel, he was willing to
live; or that it was a valuable object
--opere pretiwn--worth an effort
thus to live. Thissense accords well
with the connection, and the thought
is a valuable one, but it is somewhat
doubtful whether it can be made out
from the Greek. To doit, it is necessary to suppose that ~«--my--is
expletive (Koppe , and that xzi--and
--is used jn an unusual sense. See
Erasmus. According to the interpretation first suggested, it means,
that Paul felt that it wonld be gain to
die, and that he was entirely willing ;
that he felt that if he continued to

live it would involve toil and fatigue, |

and that, therefore, great as was the
natural love of life, and desirous as he
was to do good, he didnot know which
to choose--an immediate departure
to the world of rest, or a prolonged
life of toil and pain, attended even

far better : ®
b Ps. 16.11.

with the hope that he might do good.
There was an intense desire to be
with Christ, joined with the belief
that his life here must be attended
with toil and anxiety; and on the
other hand an earnest wish to live in
order to do good, and he knew not
which to prefer. (J Yet. The sense
has been obscured by this translation.
The Greek word (a!) means and,
and should have been so rendered
here, in its usual sense. ‘‘To die
would be gain; my life here would be
one of toil, anp I know not which to
choose.’ § What I shall choose J
wot not. I do not know which I
should prefer, if it were left to me.
On each side there were important
considerations, and he knew not which
overbalanced the other. Are not
Christians often in this state, that if
it were left to themselves they would
not know which to choose, whether to
live or to die ?

23. For I am in a strait betwiat
two. ‘Two things, each of which I
desire. I earnestly long to be with
Christ ;and I desire to remain to be
useful to the world. The word rendered ‘I am ina strait” --cvvéyouas --
means to be pressed on or constrained,
as in a crowd ; to feel one’s self pressed or pent up so as not to know
what to do; and it here means that
he was in perplexity and doubt, and
did not know what to choose. “ The
words of the original are very emphatic. They appear to be derived from
a ship when lying at anchor, and when
violent winds blow upon it that would
drive it out to sea. The apostle represents himself as in a similar condition. His strong affection forthem
bound his heart to them--as an anchor holds a ship to its moorings --and
yet there was a heavenly influence
bearing upon him--like the gale upon
the vessel--which would bear him
away to heaven.” Burder,in Ros.
Alt. u. neu. Morgenland, in loc.
{| Having a desire to depart. To die
--to leave this world for a better.
Men, as they are by nature, usnally
dread to die. Few are even made
willing to die. Almost none desire
to die--and even then they wish it
only as the least of two evils. Pressed down by pain and sorrow ; or sick
and weary of the world, the mind may
be wrought up into a desire to be
away. But this with the world is, in
all cases, the result of misanthropy,
or morbid feeling, or disappointed ambition, or an accumulation of many
sorrows. Wetstein has adduced on
this verse several most beautiful passages from the classic writers, in
which men expressed a desire to depart--but all of them probably could
be traced to disappointed ambition, or
to mental or bodily sorrows, or to dissatisfaction with the world. It was
from no such wish that Paul desired
to die. It was not because he hated
man,--for he ardently loved him. It
was not because he had been disappointed about wealth and honour--
for he had sought neither. It was
not because he had not been sucessful--for no man had been more so.
It was not because he had been subjected to pains and imprisonments--
for he was willing to bear them. It
was not because he was old, and infirm, and a burden to the world --for,
from any thing that appears, he was
in the vigour of life, and in the fulness
of his strength. It was froma purer,
higher motive than any ofthese --the
strength of attachment which bound
him to the Saviour, and which made
him long to be with him. § And to
be with Christ. We may remark on
this expression, (1.) That this was
the true reason why he wished to be
away. It was his strong love to
Christ ; his anxious wish to be with
him ; his firm belief that in his presence was “fulness ofjoy.”’ (2.) Paul
believed that the soul of the Christian
would be immediately with the Saviour at death. It was evidently his
expectation that he would at once
pass to his presence, and not that he
would remain in an intermediate state
to some far distant period. (3.) The
soul does not sleep at death. Paul
expected to be with Christ, and to be
conscious of the fact--to see him, and
to partake ofhis glory. (4.) The soul

of the believer is made happy at death.
To be with Christ is synonymous
with being in heaven--for Christ is
in heayen, and is its glory. We
may add, (a) that this wish to be
with Christ constitutes a marked
difference between a Christian and
other men. Other men may be willing to die; perhaps be desirous to
die, because their sorrows are so great
that they feel that they cannot be
borne. But the Christian desires to
depart from a different motive altogether. It is to be with Christ--and
this constitutes a broad line of distinction between him and other men.
(b) A mere willingness to die, or even
a desire to die, is no certain evidence
of preparation for death. If this willingness or desire is caused by mere
intensity of suffering ; if it is produced
by disgust at the world or by disappointment; if it arises from some
view of fancied Elysian fields beyond
the grave, it constitutes no evidence
whatever of a preparation for death.
I have seen not a few persons who
were not professed Christians on a
bed of death, and not a few willing
to die, nay, not a few who wisled to
depart. But in the vast majority of
instances it was because they were
sick of life, or because their pain made
them sigh for relief, or because they
were so wretched that they did not care
what happened--and this they and
their friends construed into an evidence that they were prepared to
die! In most instances this is a
miserable delusion; in no case is a
mere willingness to die an evidence
of preparation for death. Which is
far better. Would be attended with
more happiness ; and would be a
higher, holier state than to remain on
earth. This proves also that the soul
of the Christian at death is made at
once happy--for a state of insensibility can in no way be said to be a better condition than to remain in this
present worll The Greek phrase
here--morag warroy xpsiorov--iS very
emphatic, and the apostle seems to
labour for language which will fully
convey hisidea. It means, “by much
more, or rather better,” and the sense

is, ‘better beyond all” expression.”

a. D. 64]

24 Nevertheless to abide in the
flesh 7s more needful for you.

25 And having this confidence,
I know that I shall abide and continue with you all, for your furtherance and joy of faith ;
Doddridge. See numerous examples
illustrating the phrase in Wetstein.
Paul did not mean to say that he was
merely willing to die, or that he aecquiesced in its necessity, but that the
fact of being with Christ was a condition greatly to be preferred to remaining on earth. ‘This is the true
feeling of Christian piety; and having
this feeling, death to us will have no
terrors.

24. Nevertheless to abide in the
flesh. To live. All this is language
derived from the belief that the soul
will be separate from the body at
death, and will occupy a separate state
of existence. § Is more needful for
you. Another object that was dear
to the heart of Paul. He never supposed that his life was useless; or
that it was a matter of no importance
to the cause of religion whether he
lived or died. He knew that God
works by means ; and that the life of
a minister of the gospel is of real
value to the church and the world.
His experience, his influence, his
paternal counsels, he felt assured
would be of value to the church, and
he had, therefore, a desire to live --
and it was no part of his religion
affectedly to undervalue or despise
himself.

25. And having this confidence.
“Being persuaded of this, that my
continuance on earth is desirable for
your welfare, and that the Lord has
a work for me to do, I confidently
expect that I shall be permitted to
live.’ The “confidence” here referred to was, that his life was needful
for them, and hence that God would
spare him. A literal translation
would be, ‘And being persuaded as
to this, or of this’ --rovro rero9as--
*T know,” &c. The foundation of his
expectation that he should live does
not appear to have been any reyvelation to that effect, as Doddridge sup-

26 That your rejoicing may be
more abundant in Jesus Christ for
me, by my coming to you again.

27 Only @ let your conversation
be as it becometh the gospel of

@ Ep.4.13 chap.3.20.
poses ; or any intimation which he had
from the palace of the intentions of
the government, as some others suppose, but the fact that he believed his
life to be necessary for them, and that
therefore God would preserve it. J
know that I shall abide. The word
know, however, (oz) is not to be
pressed as denoting absolute necessity
--for it appears from ver. 27, and
chap. ii. 17, that there was some ground
for doubt whether he would live--
but is to be taken in a popular seuse,
as denoting good courage, and an earnest hope that he would be permitted
to live and visit them. Heinrichs.
{ And continue with you all. That
is, that he would be permitted not
only to live, but to enjoy their society.
q For your furtherance and joy of
faith. Forthe increase of your faith,
and the promotion of that. joy which
is the consequence of faith. Wetstein has quoted a beautiful passage
from Seneca (Epis. 104) which strikingly resembles this sentiment of
Paul. He says that when a man had
meditated death, and when on his own
account he would be willing to die,
yet that he ought to be willing to live
--to come back again to life--for the
sake of his friends. He then adds,
“Jt pertains to a great mind to be
willing to come back to life for the
sake of others; which distinguished
men often do.”

26. That your rejoicing may be
more abundant im Christ Jesus.
Through the mercy and grace of
Christ. If he was spared, his deliverance would be traced to Christ,
and they would rejoice together in
one who had so mercifully delivered
him. § For me by my coming to
you again. Their joy would not
only be that he was delivered, but
that he was permitted to see them
again.

27. Only let

your conversation
Christ ; that, whether I come and

see you, or else be absent, I may

hear of your affairs, that ye “ stand
a chap.4.1.

The word conversation we now apply
almost exclusively to oral discourse,
or to talking. But it was not formerly confined to that, and is never
so used in the Scriptures. It means
conduct in general -- including, of
course, our manner of speaking, but
not limited to that--and should be so
understood in every place where it
occurs in the Bible. The original
word here used--roduredw--politeuo,
means properly to administer the
state; to live as acitizen; to conduct oneself according to the laws and
customs of a state ; see Acts xxiii. 1;
compare examples in Wetstein. It
would not be improperly rendered,
“let your conduct as a citizen be as
becomes the gospel ;”’ and might without impropriety, though not exclusively, be referred to our deportment
as members of a community, or citizens of a state. It undoubtedly implies that, as citizens, we should act,
in all the duties which that relation
involves --in maintaining the laws,
in submission to authority, in the
choice of rulers, &c., as well as in
other relations--on the principles of
the gospel ; for the believer is bound
to perform every duty on Christian
principles. But the direction here
should not be confined to that. It
doubtless includes our conduct in all
relations in life, and refers to our deportment in general ; not merely as
citizens of the state, but as members
of the church, and in all other relations. In our manner of speech, our
plans of living, our dealings with
others, our conduct and walk in the
church and out of it--all should be
done as becomes the gospel. The
direction, therefore, in this place, is
to be understood of everything pertaining to conduct. | As tt becometh
the gospel of Christ. (1.) The rules
of the gospel are to be applied to all
our conduct--to our conversation,
business transactions, modes of dress,
style of living, entertainments, dc.
There is nothing which we do, or

fast in one spirit, with one mind,
striving & together for the faith of
the gospel ;

b Jude 3.

say, or purpose, that is to be excepted from those rules. (2.) There zs
a way of living which is appropriate
to the gospel, or which is such as the
gospel requires. There is something
which the gospel would secure as tts
proper fruits in all our conduct, and
by which our lives should be regulated. It would distinguish us from
the gay, and from those who seek
honour and wealth as their supreme
object. If all Christians were under
the influence of the gospel, there
would be something in their dress,
temper, conversation, and aims, which
would distinguish them from others;
The gospel is not a thing of naught ;
nor is it intended that it should exert
no influence on its friends. (8.) It is
very important that Christians should
frame their lives by the rules of the
gospel, and, to this end, should study
them and know what they are. This
is important, (a) because they are
the best and wisest of all rules; (6)
because it is only in this way that
Christians can do good; (c) because
they have solemnly covenanted with
the Lord to take his laws as their
guide ; (d) because it is only in this
way that they can enjoy religion ;
and (e€) because it is only by this that
they can have peace ona dying bed.
If men live as “‘ becometh the gospel,”
they live well. Their lives are honest and honourable ; they are men
of truth and uprightness; they will
have no sources of regret when they
die, and they will not give occasion
to their friends to hang their heads
with shame in the remembrance of
them. Noman on a dying bed ever
yet regretted that he had framed his
life by the rules of the gospel, or felt
that his conduct had been conformed
too much to it. § Yhat whether I
come and see you. Alluding to the
possibility that he might be released,
and be permitted to visit them again.
q Or else be absent. Either at
Rome, still confined, or released, and
permitted to go abroad. JI may

28 And in nothing terrified * by
your adversaries: which ® is to
them an evident token of perdition,

a 1.51.7,12; Mat.10.28. b2Th.1.5.

but * to you of salvation, and that
of God.
29 For unto you it is given@ in
¢ Ro.8.17. d@ Ac.5.4l.

hear of your affairs, &c. I may
hear always respecting you that you
are united, and that you are vigorously striving to promote the interests
of the gospel.

28. And in nothing terrified by
your adversaries. Adversaries, or
opponents, they had, like most of the
other early Christians. There were
Jews there who would be likely to
oppose them (comp. Acts xvii. 5),
and they were exposed to persecution
by the heathen. In that city, Paul
had himself suffered much (Acts xvi.);
and it would not be strange if the
same scenes should be repeated. It
is evident from this passage, as well
as from some other parts of the epistle,
that the Philippians were at this time
experiencing some form of severe
suffering. But in what way, or why,
the opposition to them was excited,
is nowhere stated. The meaning
here is, ‘‘do not be alarmed at anything which they can do. Maintain
your Christian integrity, notwithstanding all the opposition which they can
make. They will, in the end, certainly
be destroyed, and you will be saved.”
Which is to them an evident token
of perdition. What, it may be asked,
would be the token of their perdition?
What is the evidence to which Paul
refers that they will be destroyed?
The relative “which’’--a7.;--is probably used as referring to the persecution which had been commenced,
and to the constancy which the apostle supposed the Philippians would
evince. The sentence is elliptical ;
but it is manifest that the apostle
refers either to the circumstance then
occurring, that they were persecuted,
and that they evinced constancy ; or
to the constancy which he wished
them to evince in their persecutions.
He says that this circumstance of
persecution, if they evinced such a
spirit as he wished, would be to them
an evidence of two things: (1.) Of
the destruction of those who were
engaged in the persecution. This

would be, because they knew that
such persecutors could not ultimately
prevail. Persecution of the church
would be a certain indication that
they who did it would be finally destroyed. (2.) It would be a proof of
their own salvation, because it would
show that they were the friends of
the Redeemer; and they had the assurance that all those who were persecuted for his sake would be saved.
The gender of the Greek relative
here is determined by the following
noun (#s3:%s), in a manner that is not
uncommon in Greek; see Wetstein,
in loc., and Koppe. J And that of
God. That is, their persecution is a
proof that God will interpose in due
time and save you. The hostility of
the wicked to us is one evidence that
we are the friends of God, and shall
be saved.

29. For unto you. Unto you as
Christians. This favour is granted
unto you in your present circumstances. § Jt ts given. God concedes to you this privilege or advantage. | In the behalf of Christ. In
the cause of Christ, or with a view to
honour Christ. Or, these things are
brought on you in consequence of
your being Christians. {] Not only to
believe on him. It is represented
here as a privilege to be permitted to
believe on Christ. Itisso. (1.) It
is an honour to a man to believe one
who ought to be believed, to trust
one who ought to be trusted, to love
one who ought tobe loved. (2.) It
is a privilege to believe on Christ,
because it is by such faith that out
sins are forgiven; that we become
reconciled to God, and have the hope
of heaven, 3.) It is a privilege,
because it saves the mind from the
tortures and the deadly influence of
unbelief--the agitation, and restlessness, and darkness, and gloom ofa
sceptic. (4.) It is a privilege, because we have then a friend to whom
we may go in trial, and on whom we
may roll all our burdens. If there is
the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer
for his salce ;

30 Having the same conflict
which ye saw # in me, and now

hear to de in me.
@ Ac.16.19; 1) Th.2.2

anything for which a Christian ought
to give unfeigned thanks, it is that
be has been permitted to believe on
the Redeemer. Let a sincere Christian compare his peace, and joy, and
hope of heaven, and support in trials,
with the restlessness, uneasiness, and
dread of death, in the mind of an unbeliever; and he will see abundant
occasion for gratitude. J But also to
suffer for his sake. Mere it is represented as a privilege to suffer in the
cause of the Redeemer--a declaration
which may sound strange to the world.
Yet this sentiment frequently occurs
in the New Testament. ‘Thus it is
said of the apostles (Acts v. 41), that
“they departed from the presence of
the council, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for
his name ;’’ Col. i. 24. ‘*Who now
rejoice in my sufferings for you;” 1
Pet. iv. 13. “But rejoice, inasmuch
as ye are partakers of Christ’s sufferings;’’ comp. James i. 2; Mark x.
30 ; see Notes on Acts v.41. Itisa
privilege thus to suffer in the cause of
Christ, because (1.) we then resemble
the Lord Jesus, and are united with
him in trials ; (2.) because we have
evidence that we are his, if trials
come upon us in his cause; (3.) because we are engaged in a good cause,
and the privilege of maintaining such
a cause is worth much of suffering ;
and (4.) because it will be connected
with a brighter crown and more exalted honour in heaven.

30. Having the same conflict. The
same agony--ayavx--the same strife
with bitter foes, and the same struggle in the warfare. § Which ye saw
in me. When I was in Philippi, opposed by the multitude, and thrown
into prison ; Acts xvi. § And now
hear to be in me. In Rome. He
was a prisoner there, was surrounded
by enemies, and was about to be tried
for his life. He says that they ought
to rejoice if they were called to pass
through the same trials.

In this chapter we have a _ beauti-

ful illustration of the true spirit ofa
Christian in circumstances exceedingly trying. The apostle was in a
situation where religion would show
itself, if there were any in the heart;
and where, if there was none, the bad
passions of our nature would be developed. Ile was a prisoner. Ile
had been unjustly accused. Ile was
about to be put on trial for his life,
and it was wholly uncertain what the
result would be. Ile was surrounded
with enemies, and there were not a
few false friends and rivals who took
advantage of his imprisonment to
diminish his influence and to extend
their own. Ile was, perhaps, about
to die ; and at any rate, was in such
circumstances as to be under a necessity of looking death in the face.
In this situation he exhiited some
of the tenderest and purest feelings
that ever-exist in the heart of man--
the genuine fruit of pure religion.
He remembered them with affectionate and constant interest in his prayers. Ile gave thanks for all that God
had done for them. Looking upon
his own condition, he said that the
trials which had happened to him,
great as they were, had been overruled to the furtherance of the gospel.
The gospel had become known even
in the imperial palace. And though
it had been preached by some with
no good will towards him, and with
| muck: error, yet he cherished no hard
feeling; he sought for no revenge ;
he rejoiced that in any way, and from
any motives, the great truth had been
made known that a Saviour died.
Looking forward to the possibility
that his trial before the emperor might
terminate in his death, he calmly anticipated such a result, and looked at
it with composure. He says that in
reference to the great purpose of his
life, it would make no difference whether he lived or died, for he was assured that Christ would be honoured,
whatever was the result. To him
personally it would be gain to die;

AP here be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any com-

fort of love, if any fellowship of
the Spirit, if any bowels 4 and mercies,

@ Co.3.12,

and, as an individual, he longed for
the hour when he might be with
Christ. This feeling is religion, and
this is produced only by the hope of
eternai life through the Redeemer.
An impenitent sinner never expressed
such feelings as these ; nor dves any
other form of religion but Christianity enable a man to look upon death
in this manner. It is not often that
a man is even willing to die --and
then this state of mind is produced,
not by the hope of heaven, but by
disgust at the world ; by disappointed
ambition ; by painful sickness, when
the sufferer feels that any change
would be for the better. But Paul
had none of these feelings. His desire to depart was not produced by a
hatred of life; nor by the greatness
of his sufferings; nor by disgust at
the world. It was the noble, elevated, and pure wish to be with Christ--
to see him whom he supremely loved,
whom he had so long and so faithfully
served, and with whom he was to
dwell for ever. To that world where
Christ dwelt he would gladly rise;
and the only reason why he could be
content to remain here was, that he
might be a little longer useful to his
fellow men. Such is the elevated
nature of Christian feeling. But,
alas ! how few attain to it; and even
among Christians, how few are they
that can habitually feel and realize
that it would be gain for them to die!
IJow few can say with sincerity that
they desixe to depart and to be with
Christ! Ilow rarely does even the
Christian reach that state of mind,
and gain that view of heaven, that,
standing amidst his comforts here,
and looking on his family, and friends,
and property, he can say from the
depths of his soul, that he feels it
would be gain for him to go to heaven! Yet such deadness to the world
may be produced--as it was in the
case of Paul; such deadness to the
world should exist in the heart of
every sincere Christian. Where it

‘themselves unity and concord.

does exist, death loses its terror, and
the heir of life can look calmly on
the bed where he will lie down to
die; can think calmly of the moment when he will give the parting
hand to wife and ehild, and press
them to his bosom for the last time,
and imprint on them the last kiss ;
can look peacefully on the spot
where he will moulder back to dust,
and in view of all can triumphantly
say, ‘“‘Come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly.”

This chapter is made up principally
of exhortations to the performance of
various Christian duties, and the exhibition of Christian virtues. The
apostle first exhorts the Philippians,
in the most tender manner, so to live
as to give him joy, by evincing among
Ile
entreats them to do nothing by strife
and a desire of distinction, but to
evince that humility which is manifested when we regard others as more
worthy than we are; ver. 1--4. This
exhortation he enforces in a most. impressive manner bya reference to tho
example of Christ --an example of
condescension and humiliation fitted
to repress in us all the aspirings of
ambition, and to make us ready to
submit to the most humble offices to
benefit others ; ver. 5--11. He then
exhorts them to work out their salvation with diligence, assuring them,
for their encouragement, that God
worked in them to will and to do of
his good pleasure; ver. 12,13. To
this he adds an exhortation that they
would avoid everything like murmuring and disputing -- that they
would be blameless and harraless in
their walk, showing the ex«cellency
of the religion which they loved to
all around them, and eryerting such
an influence on others that Paul
might feel that he hac not laboured
in vain; ver. 14--16. To excite
them to this, he assures them that

ye
he was ready himself to be sacrificed
for their welfare, and should rejoice
if by his laying down his life their
happiness would be promoted. He
asked the same thing in return from
them; ver. 17, 18. He then tells
them, in expressing his interest in
them, that he hoped soon to be able
to send Timothy to them again --a
man who felt a deep interest in their
welfare, and whose going to them
would be one of the highest proofs of
the apostle’s love; ver. 19 -- 24.
The same love for them, he says, he
had now shown by sending to them
Epaphroditus --a man to whom he
was tenderly attached, and who had
an earnest desire again to return to
the church from which he had been
sent. Paul sent him, therefore, again
to Philippi, that he might be with
them and comfort them, and he asked
for him a kind reception and affectionate treatment, in view of the
sufferings which he had experienced
in the cause of the Redeemer ; ver.
25--30.

1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ. This, with what is
said in the remainder of the verse, is designed as a motive for what he exhorts
them to in ver. 2 -- that they would
be of the same mind, and would thus
fulfil his joy. To urge them to this,
he appeals to the tender considerations which religion furnished--and
begins by a reference to the consolation which there was in Christ. The
meaning here may be this: “I am
now persecuted and afflicted. In my
trials it will give me the highest joy
to learn that you act as becomes
Christians. You also are persecuted
and afflicted (chap. i. 28--30) ; and,
in these circumstances, I entreat that
the highest consolation may be sought;
and by all that is tender and sacred
in the Christian religion, I conjure
you, so to live as not to dishonour the
gospel. So live as to bring down the
highest consolation which can be obtained--the consolation which Christ
alone can impart.” We are not to
suppose that Paul doubted whether
there was any consolation in Christ,
but the form of expression here is one
that is designed to urge upon them

the duty of seeking the highest possible. ‘The consolation in Christ is
that which Christ furnishes or imparts. Paul regarded him as the
source of all comfort, and earnestly
prays that they might so live that he
and they might avail themselves in
the fullest sense of that unspeakable
enjoyment. ‘The idea is, that Christians ought at all times, and especially
in affliction, so to act as to secure the
highest possible happiness which their
Saviour can impart to them. Such
an object is worth their highest effort ; and if God sees it needful, in
order to that, that they should endure
much affliction, still it is gain. eligious consolation is always worth
all which it costs to secure it. § If
any comfort of love. If there be any
comfort in the exercise of tender affection. That there 7s, no one can
doubt. Our happiness is almost ail
centred in love. It is when we love
a parent, a wife, a child, a sister, a
neighbour, that we have the highest
earthly enjoyment. It is in the love
of God, of Christ, of Christians, of
the souls of men, that the redeemed
find their highest happiness. Hatred
is a passion full of misery; love an
emotion full of joy. By this consideration, Paul appeals to them, and
the motive here is drawn from all the
joy which mutual love and sympathy
are fitted to produce in the soul
Paul would have that love exercised
in the highest degree, and would have
them enjoy all the happiness which
its mutual exercise could furnish,
q If any fellowship of the Spirit.
The word ‘fellowship’? -- xoivavice --
means that which is common to two
or more; that of which they partake
together ; Notes, Eph. iii. 9; Phil.
i.5. The idea here is, that among
Christians there was a participation
in the influences of the Holy Ghost ;
that they shared in some degree the
feelings, views, and joys of the sacred
Spirit himself; and that this was a
privilege of the highest order, By
this fact, Paul now exhorts them to
unity, love, and zeal--so to live that
they might partake in the highest
degree of the consolations of this
Spirit. ¥ If any bowels and mercies.

2 Fulfil @ ye my joy, that ye be
like-minded, & having the same
love, being of one accord, of one
mind.

a John 3.29. b 2Co0.13.11; 1 Pe.3.8.

If there is any affectionate bond by
which you are united to me, and any
regard for my sorrows, and any desire to fill up my joys, so live as to
impart to me, your spiritual father
and friend, the consolation which I
seek,

2. Fulfil ye my joy. Fill up my
joy so that nothing shall be wanting
to complete it. This, he says, would
be done by their union, zeal, and
humility; comp. John iii. 29. § That
ye be like-minded. Gr. That ye
think the same thing; see Notes on
2 Cor. xiii. 11. Perfect unity of sentiment, opinion, and plan would be
desirable if it could be attained. It
may be, so far as to prevent discord,
schism, contention and strife in the
church, and so that Christians may
be harmonious in promoting the
same great work -- the salvation of
souls. § Having the same love.
Love to the same objects, and the
same love one for another. Though
their opinions might differ on some
points, yet they might be united in
love; see Notes on 1 Cor. 1. 10.
{| Being of one accord. cipepuxa--
of one soul; having your souls joined together. The word used here
does not occur elsewhere in the New
Testament. It means a union of
soul ; or an acting together as if but
one soul actuated them. {| Of one
mind. Gr. Thinking the same thing.
The apostle here uses a great variety
of expressions to denote the same
thing. The object which he aimed
at was union of heart, of feeling, of
plan, of purpose. He wished them
to avoid all divisions and _ strifes ;
and to show the power of religion by
being united in the common cause.
Probably there is no single thing so
much insisted on in the New Testament as the importance of harmony
among Christians. Now, there is
almost nothing so little known ; but
if it prevailed, the world would soon

be converted to God; comp. Notes] 26; see Notes on that place.

3 Let nothing ¢ be done through
strife or vain glory ; but in lowliness of mind let each @ esteem
other better than themselves.

¢ Ga.5.263 Ja.3.14. d1Pe5.5.

on John xvii. 21--or see the text it-

self without the Notes.

3. Let nothing be done through
strife. With a spirit of contention.
This command forbids us to do any
thing, or attempt any thing as the
mere result of strife. This is not the
principle from which we are to act,
or by which we are to be governed.
We are to form no plan, and aim at
no object which is to be secured in
this way. The command probibits
all attempts to secure any thing over
others by mere physical strength, or
by superiority of intellect or numbers,
or as the result of dark schemes and
plans formed by rivalry, or by the indulgence of angry passions, or with the
spiritofambition. Weare not toattempt
to do any thing merely by outstripping
others, or by showing that we have
more talent, courage, or zeal. What
we do is to be by principle, and with
a desire to maintain the truth, and to
glorify God. And yet how often is
this rule violated! How often do
Christian denominations attempt to
outstrip each other, and to see which
shall be the greatest! How often do
ministers preach with no better aim!
How often do we attempt to outdo
others in dress, andin the splendour
of furniture and equipage! Ilow
often, even in plans of benevolence,
and in the cause of virtue and religion,
is the secret aim to outdo others.
This is all wrong. There is no holiness in such efforts. Never once did
the Redeemer act from such a motive, and never once should this motive be allowed to influence us. ‘The
conduct of others may be allowed to
show us what we can do, and ought
to do; but it should not be our sole
aim to outstrip them; comp. 2 Cor.
ix. 2--4. 4 Or vain glory. The
word here used--xevodo%ia--kenodoxia,
occurs nowhere else in the New Testament, though the adjective--xevadogos
--kenodoxos, occurs onee in Gal. Hs

t
means properly empty pride, or glory,
and is descriptive of vain and hollow
parade and show. Suidas renders it,
‘any vain opinion about one’s self” --
Matai TIS TEEt taurcv olnois. The idea
seems to be that of mere self-esteem ;
a mere desire to honour ourseives, to
attract attention, to win praise, to make
ourselves uppermost, or foremost, or
the main object. The command here
solemnly forbids our doing any thing
with such an aim--no matter whether
it be in intellectual attainments, in
physical strength, in skill in music,
in eloquence or song, in dress, furniture, or religion. Se/f is not to be
foremost; selfishness is not to be
the motive. Probably there is no
command of the Bible which would
have a wider sweep than this, or
would touch on more points of human
conduct, if fairly applied. Who is
there who passes a single day without,
in some respect, desiring to display
himself? What minister of the gospel preaches, who never has any wish
to exhibit his talents, eloquence, or
learning? How few make a gesture,
but with some wish to display the
grace or power with which it is done!
Who, in conversation, is always free
from a desire to show his wit, or his
power in argumentation, or his skill
in repartee? Who plays at the piano
without the desire of commendation ?
Who-thunders in the senate, or goes
to the field of battle; who builds a
house, or purchases an article of apparel; who writes a book, or performs
a deed of benevoience, altogether uninfluenced by this desire? If all could
be taken out of human conduct which
is performed merely from ‘strife,’
or from ‘yain-glory,” how small
a portion would be left! But in lowliness of mind. Modesty, or humility.
‘The word here used is the same which
is rendered humility in Acts xx. 19;
Col... 18, 23 ; 1 Pet. v. 53 humbleness, in Col. iii. 12; and lowliness, in
Eph. iv. 2; Phil. ii. 38. It does not
elsewhere occur in tha New Testament. It here means humility, and
it stands opposed to that pride or
self-valuation which would lead us to
strive for the ascendancy, or which
acts froma wish for flattery, or praise.

The best and the only true correction
of these faults is humility. This virtue consists in estimating ourselves
according to truth It is a willingness to take the place which we ought
to take in the sight of God and man;
and, having the low estimate of our
own importance and character which
the truth about. our insignificance as
creatures and vileness as sinners

would produce, it will lead us to a
willingness to perform lowly and humble offices that we may benefit others.
q Let cach esteem other better than
themselves ; comp. 1 Pet. vy. 5. This
is one of the effects produced by
true humility, and it naturally exists
in every truly modest mind. The
reasons are these. (1.) We’ are sensible of our own defects, but we have
not the same clear view of the defects
of others. We see our own hearts; we
are conscious of the great corruption
there ; we have painful evidence ofthe
impurity of the motives which often
actuate us--of the evil thoughts and
corrupt desires in our own souls; but
we have not the same view of the
errors, defects, and follies of others.
We can see only their outward conduct; but, in our own case, we can
look within. Jt is natural for those
who have any just sense of the depravity of their own souls, charitably to
hope that it is not so with others, and
to believe that they have purer hearts,
This will lead us to feel that they are
worthy of more respect than we are.
lence this is always the characteristic of modesty and humility--graces
which the gospel is fitted eminently
to produce. <A truly pious man will
be always, therefore, an humble man,
and will wish that others should be
preferred in office and honour to himself. Of course, this will not make
him blind to the defects of others
when they are manifested; but he will
be himself retiring, modest, unambitious, unobtrusive. This rule of
Christianity would strike a blow at

all the ambition of the world. I+
; Would rebuke the leve uf office, and
would produce universal contentment
in any low condition of life where
the providence of God may have cas‘
our lot; comp. Notes on ] Cor. vii. 21.

4 Look not every man on % his
@ 1Co,13.5.

4. Look not every man on his own
things. That is, be not selfish. Do
not let your care and attention be
wholly absorbed by your own concerns,
or by the concerns of your own family. Evince a tender interest for the
happiness of the waole, and let the
welfare of others lie near your hearts.
This, of course, does not mean that
there is to be any improper interference in the business of others, or that
we are to have the character of “‘busybodies in other men’s matters” (comp,
Notes, 2 Thess. iii. 11; 1 Tim. v.13;
1 Pet. iv, 15); but that we are to
regard with appropriate solicitude the
welfare of others, and to strive to do
them good. 4 But every man also
on the things of others. It is the
duty of every man to do this. No
one is at liberty to live for himself
or to disregard the wants of others.
The object of this rule is to break up
the narrow spirit of selfishness, and
to produce a benevolent regard for
the happiness of others. In respect
to the rule we may observe, (1.) We
are not to be ‘ busy-bodies” in the
concerns of others; see the references above. We are not to attempt
to pry into their secret parposes.
Every man has his own plans, and
thoughts, and intentions, which no
other one has a right to look into.
Nothing is more odious than an intermeddler in the concerns of others.
(2.) We are not to obtrude our advice where it is not sought, or at unseasonable times and places, even if
the advice is in itself good. No man
likes to be interrupted to hear advice; and I have no right to require
that he should suspend his business
in order that J may give him counsel.
(3.) We are not to find fault with
what pertains exclusively tu him. We
are to remember that there are some
things whichare his business, not owrs ;
and we are to learn to ‘‘ possess our
souls in patience,” if he does not give
just as much as we think he ought to
benevolent objects, or if he dresses
ina manner not to please our taste,
cr if he indulges in things which do

CHAPTER If.
own things, but every man also on
the things of others.

not accord exactly with our views.

Ile may see reasons for his conduct
which we do not; and it is possible
that he may be right, and that, if we
understood the whole case, we should
think and act as he does. We often
complain of a man because he docs
not give as much as we think he ought,
to objects of charity ; and it is possible
that he may be miserably niggardly
and narrow. But it is also possible
that he may be more embarrassed than
we know of; or that he may just then
have demands against him of which
we are ignorant ; or that he may have
numerous poor relatives dependant on
him ; or that he gives much with “the
left hand” which is not known by “the
right hand.” At any rate, it is hiy
business, not ours; and we are not
qualified to judge until we understand
the whole case. (4.) We are not to be
gossips about the concerns of others.
We are not to hunt up small stories,
and petty scandals respecting their
families ; we are not to pry into domestic affairs,and divulge them abroad,
and find pleasure in circulating such
things from house to house. ‘There
are domestic secrets, which are not
to be betrayed ; and there is scarcely
an offence of a meaner or more injurious character than to divulge to the
public what we haye seen in a family
whose hospitality we have enjoyed.
(5.) Where Christian duty and kindness
require us to look into the concerns
of others, there should be the utmost
delicacy. Even children have their
own secrets, and their own plans and
amusements, ona small scale, quite as
important to them as the greater
games which we are playing in life ;
and they will feel the meddlesomeness of a busy-body to be as odious
to them as we should in our plans.
A delicate parent, therefore, who has
undoubtedly a right to know all about
his children, will not rudely intrude
into their privacies, or meddle with
their concerns. So, when we visit
the sick, while we show a tender sympathy for them, we should not be toa
particular in inquiring into their ma-

5 Let this¢ mind be in you,|whicn was also in Christ Jesus:

a John 13,143 1 Pe.2.21.

ladies or their feelings.
those with whom we sympathize have
brought their calamities on themselves
by their own fauit, we should not ask
too many questions about it. We
should not too closely examine one
who is made poor by intemperance, or
who is in prison for crime. And so,
when we go to sympathize with those
who have been, by a reverse of circumstances, reduced from affluence to
penury, we should not ask too many
questions. We should let them tell
their own story. If they voluntarily
make us their confidants, and tell us
all about their circumstances, it 1s
well; but let us not drag out the circumstances, or wound their feelings
by our impertinent inquiries, or our
indiscreet sympathy in their affairs.
There are always secrets which the
sons and daughters of misfortune
would wish to keep to themselves. But,
while these things are true, it is also
true that the rule before us positively
requires us to show an interest in the
concerns of others; and it may be
regarded as implying the following
things: (1.) We are to feel that the
spiritual interests of every one in the
church is, in a certain sense, our own
interest. The church is one. It is
confederated together for a common
object. Each one is intrusted with a
portion of the honour of the whole,
andthe conduct of one member affects
the character of all. Weare, therefore, to promote, in every way possible,
the welfare of every other member of
the church. If they go astray, we are
to admonish and entreat them; if
they are in error, we are to instruct
them ; if they are in trouble, we are
to aid them. Every member of the
church has a claim on the sympathy
of his brethren, and should be certain
of always finding it when his circumstances are such as to demand it. (2.)
There are circumstances where it is
proper to look with special interest on
the temporal concerns of others. It
is when the poor, tlie futherless, and
the afflicted must be sought out in
order to be aided and relieved. They
are too retiring and modest to press

So, when

their situation on the attention of
others, and they need that others
should manifest a generous care in
their welfare in order to relieve them.
This is not improper interference in
their concerns, nor will it be so regarded. (3.) For a similar reason,
we should seek the welfare of all others
in a spiritual sense. We should seek
to arouse the sinner, and lead him to
the Saviour. He is blind, and will
not come himself; unconcerned, and
will not seek salvation; filled with
the love of this world, and will not seek
a better; devoted to pursuits that
will lead him to ruin, and he ought to
be apprized of it. It is no more an
improper interference in his concerns
to apprize him of his condition, and
to attempt to lead him to the Saviour, than it is to warn a man in a
dark night, who walks on the verge
of a precipice, of his peril; or to
arouse one from sleep whose house is
in flames. In like manner, it is no
more intermeddling with the concerns
of another to tell him that there is a
glorious heaven which may be his,
than it is to apprizea man that thereis
a mine of golden ore onhis farm. It
is for the man’s own interest, and it is
the office of a friend to remind him of
these things. He does a man a favour who tells him that he has a Redeemer, and that there is a heaven
to which he may rise; he does his
neighbour the greatest possible kindness who apprizes him that there 1s a
world of infinite woe, and tells bim of
an easy way by which he may escape
it. The world around is dependant
on the church of Christ to be apprized
of these truths. The gay will not
warn the gay of their danger; the
crowd that presses to the theatre or
the ball-room will not apprize those
who are there that they are in the
broad way to hell; and every one who
loves his neighbour, should feel sufficient interest in him to tell him that
he may be eternally happy in heaven,

5. Let this mind be in you, whiA
was also in Christ Jesus. ‘Lhe object of this reference to the example
of the Saviour is partiewarly to en-

6 Who, being “in the form of
a John 1.1,2; Co.1.15. --_b John 5.18.

force the duty of humility. This was
the highest example which could be
furnished, and it would illustrate and
confirm all the apostle had said of this
virtue. The principle in the case is,
that we are to make the Lord Jesus
our model, and are in all respects to
frame our lives, as far as possible, in
accordance with this great example.
The point here is, that he left a state
of inexpressible glory, and took upon
hirn the most humble form of humanity,
and performed the most lowly offices,
that he might benefit us.

6. Who, being in the form of God.
There is scarcely any passage in the
New Testament which has given rise
to more discussion than this. The
importance of the passage on the quession of the Divinity of the Saviour will
be perceived at once, and no small
part of the point of the appeal by the
apostle depends, as will be seen, in the
fact that Paul regarded the Redeemer
as equal with God. If he was truly
divine, then his consenting to become
a man was the most remarkable of all
possible acts of humiliation. The
wordrendered form--pogon--morphé ,
occurs only in three places in the
New Testament, and in each place is
rendered form. Mark xvi. 12; Phil.
ii. 6, 7. In Mark it is applied to the
form which Jesus assumed after his
resurrection, and in which he appeared
to two of his disciples on his way to
Emmaus. “ After that he appeared
in another form unto two of them.”
This “ form ”’ was so unlike his usual
appearance, that they did not know
him. The word properly means, form,
shape, bodily shape, especially a beautiful form, a beautiful bodily appearance. Passow. In ver. 7, it is applied
to the appearance of a servant--“ and
took upon him the form of a servant ;”’
that is, he was in the condition of a
servant--or of the lowest condition.
The word form is often applied to the
gods by the classic writers, denoting
their aspect or appearance when they
became visible to men; see Cic. de
Nat. Deor. ii. 2; Ovid, Meta. i. 37;
Silius, xili. 643 ; Xeno. Memora. iv:

God, thought it not robbery to be
equal © with God :

Aineid, iv. 556, and other places cited
by Wetstein, in loc. Jesychius explains it by idé« ¢7d.. The word occurs often in the Septuagint, (1.) as
the translation of the word “xs --Ziv
--splendour, Dan. iv. 33 ; v. 6, 9, 10;
vli. 28; (2.) as the translation of the
word msan-- Zabnith, structure, model, pattern--as in building, Isa, xliv.
13 ; (3.) as the translation of Ha12m--
temuna -- appearance, form, shape,
image, likeness, Job iv. 16; see also
the Book of Wisdom xvili. 1. The
word can have here only one or two
meanings, either (1.) splendour, majesty, glory--referring to the honour
which the Redeemer had, his power
to work miracles, &c¢.-- or (2.) nature,
or essence--meaning the same as
Qvois, nature, or ovzia, being. The first
is the opinion adopted by Crellius,
Grotius, and others, and substantially
by Calvin. Calvin says, “ The form
of God here denotes majesty. For as
a man is known from the appearance
of his form, so the majesty which
shines in God, is his figure. Or to
use a more appropriate similitude, the
form of a king consists of the external
marks which indicate a king--as his
sceptre, diadem, ccat of mail, attendants, throne, and other insignia of
royalty ; the form of a counsul is the
toga, ivory chair, attending lictors,
&c. Therefore Christ before the
foundation of the world was in the
form of God, because he had glory
with the Father before the world was;
John xvii. 5. For in the wisdom of
God, before he put on our nature,
there was nothing humble or abject,
but there was magnificence worthy of
God.’ Comm. in loc. The second
opinion is, that the word is equivalent
to nature, or being ; that is, that he
was in the nature of God, or his mode
of existence was that of God, or was
divine. This is the opinion adopted
by Schleusner (Lex.); Prof. Stuart
(Letters to Dr. Channing, p. 40); Doddridge, and by orthodox expositors in
general, and seems to me to be the
correct interpretation. in support of
this interpretation, and in opposition
to that which refers it to his power of
working miracles, or his divine appear-

ance when on earth, we may adduce |
(1.) ‘ean be g |
(John xvii. 5.) of “ the glory which he
had with the Father before the world
| was's”

the following considerations.
The “form” here referred to must
have been something before he became aman, or before he took upon
him the form of a servant. It was
something frum which he humbled
himself by making “ himself of no reputation ;” by taking upon himself
“‘the form of a servant ;” and by being made “in the likeness of men.”
Of course, it must have been something which existed when he had not
the likeness of men; that is, before he
became incarnate. He must therefore have had an existence before he
appeared on earth as a man, and in
that previous state of existence there
must have been something which rendered it proper to say that he was ‘‘zn
the form of God.” (2.) That it does
not refer to any moral qualities, or to
his power of working miracles on
earth, is apparent from the fact that
these were not laid aside. When did
he divest himself of these in order that
he might humble himself? There was
something which he possessed which
made it proper to say of him that he
was ‘“‘in the form of God,” which he
laid aside when he appeared in the
form of a servant and in the likeness
of men. But assuredly that could not
have been his moral qualities, nor is
there any conceivable sense in which
it can be said that he divested himself
of the power of working miracles in
order that he might take upon himse!f
the ‘‘form of a servant.’’ All the
miracles which he ever wrought were
performed when he sustained the form
of a servant, in his lowly and humble
condition. ‘These considerations make
it certain that the apostle refers to a
period before the incarnation. It may
be added (3.) that the phrase ‘ form
cf God”’ is one that naturally conveys
the idea that he was God. When it
is said that he was ‘“‘in the form of a
servant,’ the idea is, that he was
actually in a humble and depressed
con tition, and not merciy that he

appeared to be. Still it may be
asked, what was the ‘form’? which he
bad before his incarnation? What is

‘the form of God?”

meant by his having been then “in
To these questions perhaps no satisfactory answer
can be given. We himself speaks

,

and the language naturally
conveys the idea that there was then
a manifestation of the divine nature
through him, which in some measure
ceased when he hecame incarnate ;
that there was some visible splendour
and majesty which was then laid aside.
What manifestation of his glory God
may make in the heavenly world, of
course, we cannot now fully understand, Nothing forbids us, however,
to suppose that there 7s some such
visible manifestation ; some splendour
and magnificence of God in the view
of the angelic beings such as becomes
the Great Sovereign of the universe
--for he ‘dwells in light which no
mam can approach unto ;” 1 Tim. vi.
16. That glory, visible manifestation,
or splendour, indicating the nature of
God, it is here said that the Lord
Jesus possessed before his incarnation,
Q Thought it not robbery to be equal
with God. This passage, also, has
given occasion to much discussion.
Prof. Stuart renders it, “‘did not regaid his equality with God as an object of solicitous desire ;” that is, that
though he was of a divine nature or
condition, he did not eagerly seek to
retain his equality with God, but
took on him an humble condition
--even that of a servant. Letters
to Channing, pp. 88 -- 92, That
this is the correct rendering of the
passage 1s apparent from the following
considerations ;--(1.) It accords with
the scope and design of the apostle’s
reasoning. flis object is not to show,
as Our common translation would seem
to imply, that he aspired to be equal
with God, or that he did not regard
it as an improper invasion of the prerogatives of God to be equal with him,
but that he did not regard it, in the
circumstances of the case, as anobject
to be greatly desired, or eagerly sought
to retain his equality with God. Instead of retaining this by an earnest
effort, or by a grasp which he was unwilling to relinquish, he chose to

7 But “made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
a Ps.22.6.

forego the dignity, and to assume the
humble condition of aman. (2.) It
accords better with the Greek than
the common version. The word rendered robbery--daoraymuos;--is found
nowhere else in the New Testament,
though the verb from which itis derived frequently occurs; Matt. xi. 12;
XO Wohnevialotex. 125.2852 9e:
Acts viii. 29; xxxiii. 10 ; 2 Cor. xii. 2,
4; b Thessiniv. 1%; Jude 23 > Rev.
xii.5. The notion of violence, or sezing, or carrying away, enters into the
meaning of the word in all these
places. The word here used does not
properly mean an act of robbery, but
the thing robbed--the plunder--das
Teauben (Passow), and hence something to be eagerly seized and appropriated. Schleusner; comp. Storr,
Opuscul. Acade. i. 322, 323. According to this, the meaning of the word
here is, something to be seized and
eagerly sought, and the sense is, that
his being equal with God was not a
thing to be anxiously retained. ‘The
phrase ‘‘thought it not,’ means ‘did
not consider ;” it was not judged to
be a matter of such importance that
it could not be dispensed with. The
sense is, ‘““he did not eagerly seize
and tenaciously hold” as one does who
seizes prey or spoil. So Rosenmiiller,
Schleusner, Bloomfield, Stuart, and
others understand it. § To be equal
with God. +o ches ize @:9. That is,
the being equal with God he did not
consider a thing to be tenaciously retained. The plural neuter form of
the word equal in Greek--irz--is
used ia accordance with a known rule
of the langnage, thus stated by Buttman: ‘When an adjective as predicate ‘s separated from its substantive, it often stands in the neuter
where the substantive is a masculine
or feminine, and in the singular where
the substantive isin the plural. That

which the predicate expresses is, in-

this case, considered in generalas a
thing.” Gr. Gram., § 129. 6. The
phrase “equal with God,” or ‘‘ equal
with the gods,” is of frequent occur-

form of a servant, ® and was made
in the ! likeness of men:
b Lu. 22.27. 1 or, habit.

ance in the Greek Classics; see Wetstein tn loc. ‘lhe very phrase here
used occurs in the Odyssey, O.

eee a 9
Toy viv ica OG Waxijaros tloogiwct..

Comp. John v. 18. ‘Made himseif
equal with God.” The phrase means
one who sustains the same rank, dignity, nature. Now it could not be
said of an angel that he was in any
sense equal with God ; much less could
this be saidofamereman. The natural and obvious meaning of the language is, that there was an equality
of nature and of rank with God, from
which he humbled himself when he became a man. ‘The meaning of the
whole verse, according to the interpretation suggested above, is, thac
Christ, before he became a man, was
invested with honour, majesty, and
glory, such as was appropriate to God
himself ; that there was some manifestation or splendour in his existence
and mode of being then, which showed
that he waa equal with God ; that he
did not consider that that honour, indicating equality with God, was to be
retained at all events, and so as to do
violence, as it were, to other interests,
and to rob the universe of the glory of
redemption ; and that he was willing,
therefore, to forget that, or lay it by
for atime, in order that he might redeem the world. ‘There were a glory
and majesty which were appropriate
to God, and which indicated equality
with God--such as none but God
could assume. For how could an angel have such glory, or such external
splendour in heaven, as to make it
proper to say that he was “equal with
God?” With what glory could he be
invested which would be such as became God only? The fair interpretation of this passage, therefore, is, that
Christ before his incarnation was
equal with God.

7. But made himself «f no reputation. This translation by no means
conveys the sense of the original.
According to this it would seem that
he consented to be without distinction or honour among men; or that
he was willing to be despised or disregarded. The Greek is taurdy txévuce.
The word xvaw means literally, to
empty, to make empty, to make vain
or void. It is rendered made void in
Rom. iv. 14; made of none effect, 1
Cor.i. 17 ; make void, 1 Cor. ix. 15;
should be vain, 2 Cor. ix. 3. The
word does not eccur elsewhere in the
New Testament, except in the passage
before us. The essential idea is that
of bringing to emptiness, vanity, or
nothingness ; and hence it is applied
to a case where one lays aside his
rank and dignity, and becomes in respect to that as nothing ; that is, he
assumes a more humble rank and station. In regard to its meaning here,
we may remark (1.) that it cannot
mean that he literally divested himself of his divine nature and perfections, for that was impossible. He
could not cease to be omnipotent, and
omnipresent, and most holy, and true,
and good. (2.) It is conceivable that
he might have laid aside, for atime,
the symbols or the manifestation of
his glory, or that the outward expressions of his majesty in heaven might
have been withdrawn. It is conceivable for a divine being to intermit
the exercise of his almighty power,
since it cannot be supposed that God
is always exerting his power to the
utmost. And in like manner there
might be for a time a laying aside or
intermitting of these manifestations or
symbols, which were expressive of the
divine glory and perfections. Yet (3.)
this supposes no change in the divine
nature, or in the essential glory of
the divine perfections. When the sun
is obscured by a cloud, or in aneclipse,
there is no reali change ofits glory,
nor are his beams extinguished, nor
is the sun himself in any measure
changed. His lustre is only for a time
obscured. So it might have been in
regard to the manifestation of the
glory of the Son of God. Of course,
there is much in regard to this which
is obscure, but the language of the
apostle undoubtedly implies more than
that he took an humble place, or that
he demeaned himself in an humble
manner. In regard to the actual

change respecting his manifestations
in heaven, or the withdrawing of the
symbols of his glory there, the Scriptures are nearly silent, and conjecture is useless--perhaps improper.
The language before us fairly implies
that he laid aside that which was
expressive of his being divine--that
glory which is involved in the phrase
“being in the form of God’’--and
took upon himself another form and
manifestation in the condition of a
servant. § And took upon him the
form of a servant. The phrase
“form of a servant,’ should be allowed to explain the phrase “form of
God,” in ver. 6. The “ form of a servant’ is that which indicates the condition of a servant, in contradistinction from one of higher rank. It
means to appear as a servant, to perform the offices of a servant, and to
be regarded as such. He was made
like a servant in the lowly condition
which he assumed. The whole connection and force of the argument
here demands this interpretation.
Storr and Rosenmiller interpret this
as meaning that he became the servant or minister of God, and that in
doing it, it was necessary that he
should become a man. But the objection to this is obvious. It greatly
weakens the force of the apostle’s argument. His object is to state the
depth of humiliation to which he descended, and this was best done by
saying that he descended to the lowest
condition of humanity, and appeared
in the most humble garb. The idea of
being a “‘servant or minister of God”
would not express that, for this is a
term which might be applied to the
highest angel in heaven. Though the
Lord Jesus was not literally a servant
or slave, yet what is here affirmed was
true of him in the following respects :
--(1.) he occupied a most lowly condition in life ; and(2.) he condescended
to perform such acts as are appropriate only to those who are servants.
“‘T am among youas he that serveth ;”’
Luke xxii. 27 ; comp. John xiii. 4--15.
{| And was made in the likeness of
men. Marg., habit. The Greek word
means likeness, resemblance. The
meaning is, he was made like unto

8 And being found in fashion | became ¢ obedient unto death, even

as a man, he humbled himself and

the death of the cross.
a He. 1222:

men by assuming such a body as theirs;
see Notes, chap. viii. 3.

8. And being found. Thatis, being
such, or existing as a man, he humbled himself. § Jn fashion as a man.
The word rendered fashion--eyana--
means figure, mien, deportment. Here
it is the same as state, or condition.
The sense is, that when he was reduced to this condition he humbled
himself, and obeyed even unto death.
He took upon himself all the attributes
of a man. He assumed all the innocent infirmities of our nature. He
appeared as other men do, was subjected to the necessity of food and raiment, like others, and was made liable
to suffering, as other men are. It was
still he who had been in the “ form of
God” whothus appeared ; and, though
his divine glory had been for a time
laid aside, yet it was not extinguished or lost. It is important to remember, in all our meditations on the
Saviour, that it was the same Being
who had been invested with so much
glory in, heaven, that appeared on
earth in the formof aman. ¥ He
humbled himself. Even then, when
he appeared as aman. He had not
only laid aside the symbols of his glory
(ver. 7), and become a man ; but when
he was a man, he humbled himself,
Humiliation was a constant characteristic of him asa man. [fle did not
aspire to high honours; he did not affect pomp and parade; he did not demandthe service of a train of menials ;
but he condescended to the lowest conditions of life; Luke xxii. 27. The
words here are very carefully chosen.
In the former case (ver. 7), when he
became a man, he “emptied himself,”
or laid aside the symbols of his glory ;
now, when aman, he humbled himself.
That is, though he was God appearing
inthe form of man--a divine person
on earth--yet he did not assume and
assert the dignity and prerogatives appropriate to a divine being, but put
himself in a condition of obedience.
For such a being to obey law, implied
voluntary humiliation ; and the great-

ness of his humiliation was shown by
his becoming entirely obedient, even
till he died on the cross. And became obedient. He subjected himself
to the law of God, and wholly obeyed
it; Heb. x.7,9. It was a characteristic of the Redeemer that he yielded
perfect obedience tothe will of God.
Should it be said that, if he was God
himself, he must have been himself
the lawgiver, we may reply that this
rendered his obedience the more wonderful and the more meritorious. If
a monarch should for an important
purpose place himself in a position to
obey his own laws, nothing could show
in amore striking manner their importance in his view. The highest
honour that has been shown to the
law of God on earth was, that it was
perfectly observed by him who made
the law--the great Mediator. | Unto death. He obeyed even when obedience terminated in death. The
point of this expression is this: One
may readily and cheerfully obey another where there is no particular
peril. But the case is different where
obedience is attended with danger.
The child shows a spirit of true obedience when he yields to the commands
ofa father, thoughit should expose him
to hazard; the servant who obeys his
master, when obedience is attended
with risk of life ; the soldier, when he
is morally certain that to obey will be
followed by death. Thus many a
company or platoon has been ordered
into the “deadly breach,” or directed
to storm a redoubt, or to scale a wall,
or to face a cannon, when it was
morally certain that death would be
the consequence. No profounder
spirit of obedience can be evinced
than this. It shouldbe said, however,
that the obedience of the soldier is in
many cases scarcely voluntary, since,
if he did not obey, death would be the
penalty. But, in the case of the Redeemer, it was wholly voluntary. He
placed himself in the condition of a
servant to do the will of God, and
then never shrank from what that con9 Wherefore * God also hath
highly exalted him, and given
him a name which is above every

name,
a He.2.9; Re.3.21.

fA. D. 64,

10 That at the name of Jesus
every » knee should bow, of things
in heaven, and things in earth, and

things under the earth.
b Is.45.23; Rev.5.13.

dition involved. J Hwven the death of
the cross. It wasnot such adeath as
a servant might incur by crossing a
stream, or by. falling among robbers,
cr by being worn out by toil; it was
not such as the soldier meets when he
is suddenly cut down, covered with
glory as he falls;it was the long lingering, painful, humiliating death of the
cross. Many a one might be willing
to obey if the death that was suffered
was regarded as glorious ; but when it
is ignominious, and of the most degrading character, and the most torturing that human ingenuity can invent, then the whole character of the
obedience is changed. Yet this was
the obedience the Lord Jesus evinced;
and it was in this way that his remarkable readiness to suffer was shown.

9. Wherefore. As a reward of
this humiliation and these sufferings.
‘The idea is, that there was an appropriate reward for it, and that that
was bestowed upon him by his exaltation as Mediator to theright hand
of God; comp. Notes on Heb. ii. 9.
{ God also hath highly exalted him.
As Mediator. Though he was thus
humbled, and appeared in the form
of a servant, he is nowraised up to
the throne of glory, and to universal
dominion. ‘This exaltation is spoken
of the Redeemer ashe was, sustaining a divine and a human nature.
If there was, as has been supposed,
some obscuration or withdrawing of
the symbols of his glory (ver. 7), when
he became a man, then this refers to
the restoration of that glory, and
would seem to imply, also, that there
was additional honour conferred on
him. ‘There was all the augmented
glory resulting from the work which
he had performed in redeeming man.
q And given him a name which is
above every name. No other name
can be compared with his. It stands
alone. He only is Redeemer, Saviour.
He only is Christ, the Anointed of
God; see Notes on Heb. i. 4. He

only is the Son of God. Ilis rank,
his titles, his dignity, are above aiJ
others; sce this illustrated in the
Notes on Eph. i. 20, 21.

10. That at the name cf Jesus every
knee should bow. ‘The knee should
bow, or bend, in token of honour, or
worship ; that is, all men should adore
him. This cannot mean merely that
at the mention of the name of Jesus
we should bow; nor is there any
evidence that God requires this. Why
should we bow at the mention of that
name, rather than at any of the other
titles of the Redeemer? Is there
any special sacredness or honour in it
above the other names which he bears?
And why should we bow at his name
rather than at the name of the Father?
Besides, if any special homage is te
be paid to the name of the Saviour
under the authority of this passage--
and this is the only one on which the
authority of this custom is based--it
should be by bowing the knee, not
the “head.” But the truth is, this
authorizes and requires neither; and
the custom of bowing at the name of
Jesus, in some churches, has arisen
entirely from a misinterpretation of
this passage. There is no other place
in the Bible to which an appeal is
made to authorize the custom ; comp.
Neal’s History of the Puritans, chap.
5. Ninth 5. The meaning here is,
not that a special act of respect or
adoration should be shown wherever
the name ‘“ Jesus” occurs in reading the Scriptures, or whenever it
is mentioned, but that he was so
exalted that it would be proper that
all in heaven and on earth should
worship him, and that the time would
come when he would be thus everywhere acknowledged as Lord. The
bowing of the knee properly expresses
homage, respect, adoration (comp.
Notes, Rom. xi. 4); and it cannot be
done to the Saviour by those who are
in heaven, unless it be divine. { Of
things in heaven. iwoveaviww--rather

11 And that every tongue should

12 Wherefore, my peloved, as

confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, | ye have always obeyed, not as in

* to the glory of God the Father.
@ John13.13; Ro.14.9.

my presence only, but now much

of beings in heaven, the word “things”
being improperly supplied by our
translators. The word may be in the
neuter plural; but it may be also in
the masculine plural, and denote
beings rather than things. Things
do not bow the knee; and the reference here is undoubtedly to angels,
and to the ‘spirits of the just made
perfect” in heaven. If Jesus is worshipped there, he is divine; for there
is no idolatry ofa creature in heaven.
In this whole passage there is probably an allusion to Isa. xlv. 23; see it
illustrated in the Notes on Rom. xiv,
11. In the great divisions here specified
--of those in heaven, on the earth,
and under the earth--the apostle intends, doubtless, to denote the universe. The same mode of designating
the universe occurs in Rev. vy. 13;
Ex: xx. (4. Compr obs: sCvl. lor lz.
This mode of expression is equivalent
to saying, ‘all that is above, around,
and beneath us,’’ and arises from what
appears to us. The division is natural and obvious--that whichis above
us in the heavens, that which is on
the earth where we dwell, and all that
is beneath us. § And things in
earth. Rather, “ beings on earth,”
to wit, men; for they only are capable of rendering homage. And
things under the earth. Beings under
the earth. ‘The whole universe shall
confessthatheis Lord. Thisembraces,
doubtless, those who have departed
from this life, and perhaps includes also
fallen angels. ‘The meaning is, that
they shall all acknowledge him as
universal Lord; all bow to his sovereign will; all be subject to his control; all recognise. him as divine.
The fallen and the lost will do this ;
for they will be constrained to yield
an unwilling homage to him by submitting to the sentence from his lips
thatshall consign them to woe; andthus
the whole universe shall acknowledge
the exalted dignity of the Son of
God. But this does not mean that
they will all be saved, for the guilty

and the lost may be compelled to acknowledge his power, and submit to
his decree as the sovereign of the
universe. ‘There is the free and
cheerful homage of the heart which
they who worship him in heaven will
render ; and there is the constrained
homage which they must yield who
are compelled to acknowledge his authority.

11. And that every tongue should
confess. Every one should acknowledge him. On the duty and importance of confessing Christ, see Notes
on” Rom. x, 9, 10) q Phat sesus
Christ is Lord. ‘The word Lord,
here, is used in its primitive and proper sense, as denoting owner, ruler,
sovereign; comp. Notes, Rom. xiv.
9. The meaning is, that all should
acknowledge him as the universal
sovereign. § Yo the glory of God
the Father. Such a universal confession would honour God; see Notes
on John y. 23, where this sentiment
is explained.

12. Wherefore, my beloved, as ye
have always obeyed. ‘The Philippians
had from the beginning manifested a
remarkable readiness to show respect
to the apostle, and to listen to his
teaching. This readiness he more
than once refers to and commends.
IIe still appeals to them, and urges
them to follow his counsels, that they
might secure their salvation. | Now
much more in my absence. Though
they had been obedient when he was
with them, yet circumstances had occurred in his absence which made
their obedience more remarkable,
and more worthy of special commendation. § Work out your own salvation. This important command
was first addressed to Christians, but
there is no reason why the same command should not be regarded as addressed to all--for it is equally applicable to all. ‘The duty of doing
this is enjoined here; the reason for
making the effort, or the encourages
ment for the effort, is stated in the
more in my absence, work @ out

a Pr.10.16; John 6.27-29; He.4.11; 2Pe.
1.5-10.

your own salvation with fear > and
trembling ;
b Ep.6.5.

next verse. In regard to the command here, it is natural to inquire
why it is a duty; and what is necessary to be done in order to comply
with it? On the first of these inquiries, it may be observed that it is
a duty to make a personal effort to
secure salvation, or to work out our
salvation: (1.) Because God commands it. There is no command
more frequently repeated in the Scriptures, than the command to make to
ourselves a new heart; to strive to
enter in at the strait gate; to break
off from sin, and to repent. (2.) It
is a duty because it is our own personal interest that is at stake. No
other one has, or can have, as much
interest in our salvation as we have.
It is every man’s duty to be as happy
as possible here, and to be prepared
for eternal happiness in the future
world. No man has a right either to
throw away his life or his soul. He
has no more right to do the one than
the other; and if it is a man’s duty
to endeavour to save his life when
in danger of drowning, it is no less
his duty to endeavour to save his soul
when in danger of hell. (3.) Our
earthly friends cannot save us. No
effort of theirs can deliver us from
eternal death without our own exertion. Great as may be their solicitude for us, and much as they may
do, there zs a point where their efforts
must stop--and that point is always
short of our salvation, unless we are
roused to seek salvation. They may
pray, and weep, and plead, but they cannot save us. ‘There is a work to be done
on our own hearts which they cannot
do. (4.) It is a duty, because the
saivation of the soul will not take
care of itself without an effort on our
part. There is no more reason to
suppose this than that health and life
will take care of themselves without
our own exertion. And yet many
live as if they supposed that somehow
all would yet be well ; that the matter
of salvation need not give them any
concern, for that things will so ar-

range themselves that they will be
saved. Why should they suppose this
any more in regard to religion than in
regard to anything else? (5.) It is
a duty, because there is no reason to
expect the divine interposition without our own effort. No such interposition is promised to any man, and
why should he expect it? In the
case of all who have been saved, they
have made an effort--and why should
we expect that God will favour us
more than he didthem? ‘‘ God helps
them who help themselves ;’”’ and what
reason has any man to suppose that
he will interfere in his case and save
him, if he will put forth no effort to
“‘ work out his own salvation?”” In
regard to the other inquiry-- What
does the command imply; or what is
necessary to be done in order to comply with it? we may observe, that it
does not mean (1.) that we are to attempt to deserve salvation on the
ground of merit. That is out of the
question ; for what can man do that
shall be an equivalent for eternal happiness in heaven? Nor (2.) does it’
mean that we are to endeavour to
make atonement for past sins. That
would be equally impossible, and it is,
besides, unnecessary. 7'hat work has
been done by the great Redeemer.
But it means, (1.) that we are to
make an honest effort to be saved in
the way which God has appointed;
(2.) that we are to break off from our
sins by true repentance ; (3.) that we
are to believe in the Saviour, and
honestly to put our trust in him; (4.)
that we are to give up all that we
have to God; (5.) that we are to
break away from all evil companions
and evil plans of life; and (6.) that
we are to resist all the allurements
of the world, and all the temptations
which may assail us that would lead
us back from God, aud are to persevere unto the end, The great difficulty in working out salvation is in
forming a purpose to begin at once.
When that purpose is formed, salvation is easy. With fear and trem-

13 For it is God & which worka He.13.21.

bling. That is, with that kind of
anxiety which one has who feels that
he has an important interest at stake,
and that he is in danger of losing it.
The reason or the ground for *‘ fear’
in this case is in general this: there
is danger of losing the soul. (1.) So
many persons make shipwreck of all
hope and perish, that there is danger
that we may also. (2.) There are so
many temptations and allurements in
the world, and so many things that
lead us to defer attention to religion,
that there is danger that we may be
lost. (3.) There is danger that if the
present opportunity passes, another
may not occur. Death may soon
overtake us. No one has a moment
to lose. No one can designate one
single moment of his life, and say, ‘“ I
may safely lose that moment. I may
safely spend it in the neglect of my
soul.’ (4.) It should be done with
the most earnest concern, from the
immensity of the interest at stake. If
the soul is lost, all is lost. And who
is there that can estimate the value

of that soul which is thus in danger |

of being lost for ever ?

13. For it is God that worketh in
you. This is given as a reason for
making an effort to be saved, or for
working out our salvation. It is often
thought to be the very reverse, and
men often feel that if God works ‘in
us to will and to do,” there can be no
need of our making an effort, and that
there would be no use init. If God
does all the work, say they, why should
we not patiently sit still, and wait
until he puts forth his power and accomplishes in us what he wills? It is
of importance, therefore, to understand what this declaration of the
apostle means, in order to see whether
this objection is valid, or whether the
fact that God “ works in us” is to be
regarded as a reason why we should
make no effort. The word rendered
worketh--iveoya»--working--is_ from
a verb meaning to work, to be active,
to produce effect--and is that from
which we have derived the word energetic. The meaning is, that God

eth in you beth to will and to do
of his good pleasure.

produces a certain effect in us; he
exerts such an influence over us as to
lead to a certain result in our minds
--to wit, “to wili and to do.’ Nothing is said of the mode in which this
is done, and probably this cannot be
understood by us here; comp. John
i.8. In regard to the divine agency
here referred to, however, certain
things, though of a negative character, are clear. (1.) Itis not God who
acts for ws. We leads ws to ‘will
and to do.” It is not said that he
wills and does for us, and it cannot
be. It is man that -‘ wills and does”
--though God so influences him that
he does it. (2.) He does not compel
or force us against our will. He leads
us to “ will as well as to “do.” The
will cannot be forced ; and the meaning here must be that God exerts such
an influence as to make us willing to
obey him ; comp. Ps. ex. 8. (8.) It

jis not a physical force, but it must be

a moral influence. A physical power
cannot act:on the wil. You may
chain a man, incarcerate him in the
deepest dungeon, starve him, scourge
him, apply red-hot pincers to his flesh,
or place on him the thumb-screw, but
the will is still free. You cannot
bend that or control it, or make
him believe otherwise than as he
chooses to believe. The declaration
here, therefore, cannot mean _ that
God compels us, or that we are any
thing else but free agents still,
though he ‘works in us to will and
to do.’ It must mean merely that
he exerts such an influence as to secure this result. § Zo will and to do
of his good pleasure. Not to will and
to do every thing, but ‘ his good pleasure.’ The extent of the divine
agency here referred to, is limited to
that, and no man shou!d adduce this
passage to prove that God “ works”
in him to lead him to commit sin.
This passage teaches no such doctrine,
It refers here to Christians, and means
that he works in their hearts that
which is agreeable to him, or leads
them to ‘ will and to do”’ that which
is in accordance with his own will.
14 Do all things without murmurings “ and disputings ; ?

15 That ye may be blameless
a1 Co.19.10. b Ro.14.1.

The word rendered ‘‘ good pleasure ”’
--)oxia--means delight, good-will,
favour ; then good pleasure, purpose,
will ; see Eph. i. 5; 2 Thess. i. 11.
IJere it means that which would be
agreeable to him; and the idea is,
that he exerts such an influence as to
lead men to will and to do that which
is in accordance with his will. Paul
regarded this fact as a reason why we
should work out our salvation with
fear and trembling. It is with that
view that he urges it, and not with any
idea that it willembarrass our efforts,
or be a hindrance to us in seeking
salvation. ‘The question then is, how
this fact can be a motive to us to make
an effort? In regard to this we may
observe, (1.) That the work of our
salvation is such that we need he/p,

and such help as God only can impart. :

We need it to enable us to overcome
our sins; to give us such a view of
them as to produce true penitence ;
to break away from our evil companions; to give up our plans of evil,
and to resolve to lead different lives.
We need help that our minds may be
enlightened ; that we may be led in

the way of truth; that we may be |

saved from the danger of error, and

that we inay not be suffered to fall |

back into the ways of transgression.
Such help we should welcome from
any quarter ; and any assistance furnished on these points will not interfere with our freedom. (2.) The influence which God exerts on the
mind is in the way of help or aid.
What he does will not embarrass or
hinder us. It will prevent no effort
which we make to be saved; it will
throw no hindrance or obstacle in the
way. When we speak of Gods working ‘‘in us to will and to do,’ men
often seem to suppose that his agency
will hinder us, or throw some obstacle
in our way, or exert some evil influence
on our minds, or make it more difficult for us to work out our salvation
than it would be without his agency.
But this cannot be. We may be sure
that all the influence which God exerts over our minds, will be to aid us

in the work of salvation, not to embarrass us; will be to enable us to
overcome our spiritual enemies and
our sins, and not to put additional
weapons into their hands or to confer on them new power. Why should
men ever dread’the influence of God
on their hearts, as 7f he would hinder
their efforts for their own good? (3.)
The fact that God works is an encouragement for usto work. When
amar. is about to set out a peach or
an apple tree, it is an encouragemert
for him to reflect that the agency of
God is around him, and that he can
cause the tree to produce blossoms,
and leaves, and fruit. When he 1s
about to plough and sowhis farm, it ts
an encouragement, not a hindrance,
to reflect that God works, and that he
can quicken the grain that is sown, and
produce an abundant harvest. What
encouragement of a higher order can
manask?% And what farmer 7s afraid
of the agency of God in the case, or
supposes that the fact that God exerts
an agency is a reason why he should
not plough and plant his field, or set
out his orchard? Poor encouragement would a man have in these things
if God did not exert any agency in the
world, and could not be expected to
make the tree grow or to cause the
grain to spring up; and equally poor
would be all the encouragement in religion without his aid.

14. Do all things without murmurtings and disputings. In a quiet,
peaceful, inoffensive manner. Let
there be no brawls, strifes, or contentions. The object of the apostle here
is, probably, to illustrate the sentiment which he had expressed in ver.
3--5, where he had inculecated the
general duties of humbleness of mind,
and of esteeming others better than
themselves. In order that that spirit
might be fully manifested, he now enjoins the duty of doing every thing in
a quiet and gentle manner, and of
avoiding any species of strife; see
Notes on Eph. iy. 81, 32.

15. That ye may be blameless. That
you may give no occasion for others

and ! harmless, the sons 4 of God,
without rebuke, in the midst of a
sruoked ® and perverse nation,
1 or, sincere. a Mat.5.45; Ep.5.1. b De.32.5.

to accuse you of having done wrong.
i And harmless. Marg., sincere. The
Greek word (azép2is) means properly
that which is wxmixed; and then pure,
sincere. The idea here is, that they
should be artless, simple, without
guile. Then they would injure no one.
The word occurs only in Matt. x. 16;
Phil. ii. 15, where it is rendered harmless, and Rom. xvi. 19, where it is rendered sincere ; see Notes on Matt. x.
16, and Rom. xvi.19. § The sons of
God. Thechildren of God ; a phrase
by which true Christians were denoted ; see Notes, Matt. v. 45; Eph. v.
1. GF Without rebuke. Without
blame; without giving occasion for
any one to complain of you. Jn the
midst of a crooked and perverse nation. Among those of perverted sentiments and habits; those who are
disposed to complain and find fault ;
those who will take every occasion to
pervert what you do and say, and who
seek every opportunity to. retard the
cause of truth and righteousness. It
is not certainly known to whom the
apostle refers here, but it seems not
improbable that he had particular reference to the Jews who were in Philippi. The language here used was
employed by Moses (Deut. xxxii. 5),
as applicable to the Jewish people,
and it is accurately descriptive of the
character of the nation in the time of
Paul. The Jews were among the
most bitter foes of the gospel, and did
perhaps more than any other péople
to embarrass the cause of truth and
prevent the spread of the true religion.
|] Among whom ye shine. Marg., “or,
shine ye.’ The Greek will admit of
either construction, and expositors
have differed as to the correct interpretation. Rosenmiller, Doddridge,
and others regard it as imperative,
and as designed toenforce on them the
duty of letting theirlight shine. Erasmus says it is doubtful whether it is
to be understood in the indicative or
imperative. Grotius, Koppe, Bloomfield; and others regard it as in the

among whom ? ye shine as ¢ lights
in the world ;
16 Holding forth the word of

2 or, shine ye. ¢ Mat.5.14,16.

indicative, and as teaching that they
did in fact shine as lights in the world.
The sense can be determined only by
the connection ; and in regard to it
different readers will form different
opinions. It seems to me that the
connection seems rather to require
the sense of duty or obligation to
be understood. ‘The apostle is enforcing on them the duty of being
blameless and harmless ; of holding
forth the word of life ; and it is in accordance with his design to remind
them that they ought to be lights to
those around them. { As lights inthe
world. The comparison of Christians
with light, often occurs in the Scriptures; see Notes on Matt. vy. 14, 16.
The image here is not improbably
taken from light-houses on a seacoast. The image then is, that as
those light-houses are placed on a
dangerous coast to apprize vessels of
their peril, and to savethem from shipwreck, so the light of Christian piety
shines on a dark world, and in the
dangers of the voyage which we are
making ; see the Note of Burder, in
Ros. Alt. u. neu. Morgenland, in loc.

16. Holding forth the word of life.
That is, you are under obligation to
hold forth the word of life. It is a
duty incumbent on you as Christians
to do it. ‘The “ word of life’’ means
the gospel, called the “ word of life”’
becauseit is the message that promises
life ; or perhaps this isa Hebraism,
denoting the living, or life-giving word.
The gospel stands thus in contrast with
all human systems of religion--for
they have no efficacy to save--and to
the law which ‘ killeth;’’ see Notes
on John vi. 63, and 2 Cor. iii. 6. The
duty here enjoined is that of making
the gospel known to others, and of
thus keeping up the knowledge of it
in the world. ‘This duty rests on
Christians (comp. Matt. vy. 14, 16.),
and they cannot escape from the obligation. hey are bound to do this,
not only because God commands it,
vut (1.) because they are called into
life ; that I may rejoice in the day
ot Christ, that I have not run in
vain, “ neither laboured in vain.

the church that they may be witnesses for God, Isa. xliii. 10. (2.) Because they are kept on the earth for
that purpose. If it were not for some
such design, they would be removed
to heaven at once on their conversion. (3.) Because there are no
others to do it. The gay will not
warn the gay, nor the proud the proud,
nor the scoffer the scoffer. The
thoughtless and the vain will not go
and tell others that there is a God
and a Saviour; nor will the wicked
warn the wicked, and tell them that
they are in the way to hell. There
are none who will do this but Christians; and, if they neglect it, sinners
will go unwarned and unalarmed down
to death. This duty rests on every
Christian. The exhortation here isnot
made to the pastor, or to any officer of
the church particularly ; but to themass
of communicants. They are to shine
as lights in the world ; they are to hold
forth the word of life. There isnot one
member of a church who is so obscure
as to be exempt from the obligation ;
and there is not one who may not do
something in this work. Ifwe are asked
how this may be done, we may reply, (1.)
They are to doit by example. Every
one is to hold forth the living word in
that way. (2.) By efforts to send
the gospel to those who have it not.
There is almost no one who cannot
contribute something, though it may
be but two mites, to accomplish this.
(3.) By conversation. There is no
Christian who has not some influence
over the minds and hearts of others ;
and he is bound to use that influence
in holding forth the word of life. (4.)
By defending the divine origin of religion when attacked. (5.) By rebuking sin, and thus testifying to the value
ofholiness, ‘he defence ofthe truth,
under God, ana the @ffusion of a
knowledge of the way of salvation,
rests on those who are Christians.
Paganism never originates a system
which it would not be an advantage
to the world to have destroyed as soon
as it is conceived. Philosophy has

17 Yea, and if I be! offered °
upon the sacrifice and service of
a1Co.9.26. 1 poured forth. b% Ti.4.6.

never yet told ofa way by which a sinner may be saved. The world at large
devises no plan for the salvation of
the soul. The most crude, ill-digested,
and perverse systems of belief conceivable, prevail in the community
called “ the world.” Every form of
opinion has an advocate there ; every
monstrous vagary that the human
mind ever conceived, finds friends and
defenders there. The human mind
has of itself no elastic energy to bring
it from the ways of sin; it has no recuperative power to lead it back to
God. The world at large is dependant on the church for any just views
of God, and of the way of salvation ;
and every Christian is to do his part
in making that salvation known.
q That I may rejoice. This was one
reason which the apostle urged, and
which it was proper to urge, why they
should let their light shine. He had
been the instrument of their conversion, he had founded their church, he
was their spiritual father, and had
shown the deepest interest in their
welfare ; and he now entreats them,
as a means of promoting his highest
joy, to be faithful and holy. The exemplary piety and holy lives of the
members of a church will be one of
the sources of highest joy to a pastor
in the day of judgment ; comp. 3 John
4. In the day of Christ. The day
when Christ shall appear--the day of
judgment. It is called the day of
Christ, because he will be the glorious
object which will be prominent on that
day ; it will be the day in which he
will be honoured as the judge of all
the world. {| That Ihave not run in
vain, That is, that I have not lived
in vain--life being compared with a
race ; see Notes on 1 Cor. ix. 26.
{| Neither laboured invain. In preaching the gospel. Their holy lives
would be the fullest proof that he was
a faithful preacher.

Wieecas and if I be offered. Marg.,
poured forth. ''he mention of his labours in their behalf, in the previous
verse, seems to have suggested to him

your faith, I joy, and rejoice with
you all.

the sufferings which he was likely yet

to endure on their account. He had
laboured for their salvation. Hehad
exposed himself to peril that they and
others might have the gospel. On
their account he had suffered much ;
he had been made a prisonerat Rome;
and there was a possibility, if not a
probability, that his life might be a
forfeit for his labours in their behalf.
Yet he says that, even if this should
happen, he would not regret it, but it
would Se a source of joy. The word
which is here used--crdvdowas--properly means, to pour out, to make a
libation ; and is commonly used, in the
classic writers, in connection with sacrifices. It refers toa drink-offering,
where one who was about to offer a
sacrifice, or to present a drink-offering to the gods, before he tasted of it
himself, poured out apart of it on the
altar. Passow. It is used also to denote the fact that, when an animal
was about to be slain in sacrifice, wine
was poured on it asa solemn act of devoting it to God ; comp. Num. xv. 5;
xxviii. 7,14. In like manner, Paul
may have regarded himself as a victim
prepared for the sacrifice. In the
New Testament it is found only in this
place, and in 2 Tim. iv. 6, where it is
rendered, “‘ I am ready to be offered ;”’
comp. Notes on that place. It does
not here mean that Paul really expected to be a sacrifice, or to make
an expiation for sin by his death ;
but that he might be called to pour
out his blood, or to offer up his life
as if he were a sacrifice, or an offering to God. We have a similar use
of language, when we say that a man
sacrifices himself for his friends or his
country. § Upon the sacrifice. emi
7% Svucig. ‘The word here rendered
sarifice, means (1.) the act of sacrificing ; (2.) the victim that is offered ;
and (3.) any oblation or offering.
Robinson, Lex. Here it must be used
inthe latter sense, and is connected
with “faith’’--‘the sacrifice of your
faith.” The reference is probably to
the faith, z.¢., the religion of the
Philippiaus, regarded as a sacrifice or

18 For the same cause also do ye
joy, and rejoice with me.

an offering to God ; the worship which
they rendered to him. The idea of
Paul is, that if, 72 order to render
that offering what it should be--to
make it as complete and acceptable
to God as possible--it were necessary
for him to die, pouring out his blood,
and strength, and life, as wine was
poured out to prepare a sacrifice for
the altar and make it complete, he
would not refuse to do it, but would
rejoice in the opportunity. He seems
to have regarded them as engaged in
making an offering of faith, and as
endeavouring to make the offering
complete and acceptable; and says
that if his death were necessary to
make their piety of the highest and
most acceptable kind, he was ready to
die. (| And service. Asrevayi2a--a
word taken from an act of worship,
or public service, and especially the
ministry of those engaged in offering
sacrifices ; Luke 1. 23; Heb. viii. 6.
Here it means, the ministering or
service which the Philippians rendered to God ; the worship which they
offered, the essential element of which
was faith. Paul was willing to endure
anything, even to suffer death in their
cause, if it would tend to make their
“service” more pure, spiritual, and
acceptable to God. The meaning of
the whole 1s, (1.) that the sufferings
and dangers which he nowexperienced
were in their cause, and on their behalf; and (2.) that he was willing to
lay down his life, if their piety would
be promoted, and their worship be
rendered more pure and acceptable
to God. § Ljoy. That is, I am not
afraid of death; and if my dying can
be the means of promoting your piety,
it will be a source of rejoicing ; comp.
Notes on chap. i. 23. {J And rejoice
with you all. My joy will be increased
in anything that promotes yours. The
fruits of my death wiJl reach and
benefit you, and it will be a source of
mutual congratulation.

18. For the same cause. Because
we are united, and what affects one ot
us should affect both. Do ye joy and
rejoice with me. . That is, ‘do not
19 1! But I trust in the Lord
Jesus to send Timotheus @ shortly
unto you, that I also may be of good

comfort, when I know your state.
1 morcover.

grieve at my death. Be not overwhelmed with sorrow, but let your
nearts be filled with congratulation.
It will be a privilege and a pleasure
thus to die.” This is a noble sentiment, and one that could have been
uttered only by a heroic and generous
mind--by a man who did not dread
death, and who felt that it was honourable thus to die. Doddridge has
illustrated the sentiment by an appropriate reference to a fact stated
by Plutarch. A brave Athenian returned from the battle of Marathon,
bleeding with wounds and exhausted,
and rushed into the presence of the
magistrates, and uttered only these
two words--yaisere, xa1g0u:v--“Te] OIC,
we rejoice,’ and immediately expired.
So Paul felt that there was occasion
for bim, and for all whom he loved, to

rejoice, if he was permitted to die in |

the cause of others, and in such a
manner that his death would benefit
the world.

19. But I trust in the Lord Jesus.
Ilis hope was that the Lord Jesus
would so order affairs as to permit
this--an expression that no man could
use who did not regard the Lord
Jesus as on the throne, and as more
than human. ¥ Zo send Timotheus
shortly unto you. ‘There was a special reason why Paul desired to send
Timothy to them rather than any
other person, which he himself states,
ver. 22. ‘ Ye know the proo/ of him,
that as a son with the father, he hath
served with me inthe gospel.’ From
this passage, as well as from chap. 1.
1, where ‘Timothy is joined with Paul
in the salutation, it is evident that he
had been with the apostle at Philippi.
But this fact is nowhere mentioned in
the sixteenth chapter of the Acts of
the Apostles, which contains an account of the visit of Paul to that
place. The narrative in the Acts,
however, as Dr. Paley has remarked
(Hore Pauline, in loc.), is such as
to render this altogether probable,

20 For I have no man ? likeminded, who will naturally care
for your state.

a 17Th.3.2.
2 or, so dear unto me.

and the manner in which the fact is
adverted to here is such as would
have occurred to no one forging an
epistle like this, and shows that the
Acts of the Apostles and the epistle
are independent books, and are not
the work of imposture. In the Acts
of the Apostles it is said that when
Paul came to Derbe and Lystra he
found a certain disciple named 'Timothy, whom he would have go forth
with him; chap. xvi. 1--3. The nar.
rative then proceeds with an account
of the progress of Paul through various provinces of Asia Minor, till it
brings him to Troas. There he was
warned in a vision to go over into
Macedonia. In pursuance of this call,
he passed over the Augean sea, came
to Samothracia, and thence to Neapolis, and thence to Philippi. No
mention is made, indeed, of ‘limothy
as being with Paul at Philippi, but
after he had left that city, and had
gone to Berea, where the ‘ brethren
sent away Paul,” it is added, ‘ but
Silas and Timotheus abode therestill.”
From this it is evident that he had
accompanied them in their journey,
and had no doubt been with them at
Philippi. For the argument which
Dr. Paley has derived from the manner in which this subject is mentioned
in the Acts, and in this epistle, in
favour of the genuineness of the
Scripture account ; see IJorx Paul.
on the evistle to the Philippians, No.
iv. (| When JI know your state. It
was a considerable time since Epaphroditus had left the Philippians,
and since, therefore, Paul had been
informed of their condition.

20. For Ihave no manlike-minded.
Marg., so dear unto me. The Greek
is, ioorpurxov--similar in mind, or likeminded. ‘The meaning is, that there
was no one with him who would feel
so deep an interest in their welfare.
Who will naturally care. The
word rendered naturally--yncies--
means sincerely, and the idea is, that

21 For all seek their own, @ not

the things which are Jesus Christ’s.

22 But ye know the proof of

him, that, as a son with the father,
@2 Ti. 3. 2.

he would regard their interests with

a sincere tenderness and concern.
IIe might be depended on to enter
heartily into their concerns. This
arose doubtless from the fact that he
had been with them when the church
was founded there, and that he felt a
deeper interest in what related to the
apostle Paul than any other man.
Paul regarded Timothy as a son, and
his sending him on such an occasion
would evince the feelings of a father
who should send a beloved son on an
important message,

21. For all seek their own. That
is, all who are with me. Who Paul
had with him at this time is not fully
known, but he doubtless means that
this remark should apply to the mass
of Christians and Christian ministers
then in Rome. Perhaps he had proposed to some of them to go and visit
the church at Philippi, and they had
declined it because of the distance
and the dangers of the way. When
the trial of Paul came on before the
emperor, all who were with him in
Rome fled from him (2 Tim. iv. 16),
and it is possible that the same disregard of his wishes and his welfare
had already begun to manifest itself
among the Christians who were at
Rome, so that he was constrained to
say that, as a general thing, they
sought their own ease and comfort,
and were unwilling to deny themselves
in order to promote the happiness of
those who lived in the remote parts
of the world. Let us not be harsh in
judging them. How many professing
Christians in ewr cities and towns are
there now who would be willing to
leave their business and their comfortable homes and go on embassy
like this to Philippi? How many
are there who would not seek some
excuse, and show that it was a characteristic that they “sought their
own’’ rather than the things which
pertained to the kingdom of Jesus
Christ? § Not the things which are

CHAPTER It,
he hath served with me in the
gospel.

23 Him therefore I hope to send
presently, so soon as I shall see how
it will go with me.

Jesus Christ's. Which pertain to his
cause and kingdom. ‘They are not
willing to practise self-denial in order
to promote that cause. It is implied
here (1.) that it is the duty of those
who profess religion to seek the things
which pertain to the kingdom of the
Redeemer, or to make that the great
and leading object of their lives.
They are bound to be willing to sacrifice “their own’’ things--to deny
themselves of ease, and to be always
ready to expose themselves to peril
and want if they may be the means
of advancing his cause. (2.) That
frequently this is not done by those
who profess religion. It was the
case with the professed Christians at
Rome, and it is often the case in the
churches now. There are few Christians who deny themselves much to
promote the kingdom of the Redeemer; few who are willing to lay
aside what they regard as “their own’”’
in order to advance his cause. Men
live for their own ease; for their
families ; for the prosecution of their
own business--as if a Christian could
have anything which he has aright
to pursue independently of the kingdom of the Redeemer, and without
regard to his will and glory.

22. But ye know the proof of him.
You have had evidence among yourselves how faithfully Timothy devoted
himself to the promotion of the gospel, and how constantly he served
with me. This proves that Timothy
was with Paul when he was at Philippi.
{| Asa son with the father. Manifesting the same spirit towards me
which a son does towards a father,
and evincing the same interest in my
work. Ile did all he could do to aid
me, and lighten my labours and sufferings.

23. So soonas I shall sce how tt will
go with me. Paul was a prisoner at
Rome, and there was not a little uncertainty whether he would be condemned or acquitted. Ile was, it ir

24 But @ 1 trust in the Lord that | brother, and companion in labour,

I also myself shall come shortly.
25 Yet I supposed it necessary
to send to you Epaphroditus, ® my
@ chap.1.25.

commonly supposed, in fact released
on the first trial; 2 Tim. iv. 16. He
now felt that he would soon be able
to send Timothy to them at any rate.
If he was condemned and put to
death, he would, of course, have no
further occasion for his services, and
if he was released from his present
troubles and dangers, he could spare
him for a season to go and visit the
churches.

24. But I trust in the Lord, Sc.
Note, chap. i. 25.

25. Yet I supposed it necessary to
send to you Epaphroditus. Epaphroditus is nowhere else mentioned
but in this epistle; see chap. iv. 18,
All that is known of him, therefore,
is what is mentioned here. He was
from Philippi, and was a member of
the church there. Ile had been employed by the Philippians to carry
relief to Paul when he was in Rome
(chap. iv. 18), and while in Rome he
was taken dangerously sick. News
of this had been conveyed to Philippi,
and again intelligence had been
brought to him that they had heard
of his sickness and that they were
much affected byit. On his recovery,
Paul thought it best that he should
return at once to Philippi, and doubtless sent this epistle by him. He is
much commended by Paul for his
faithfulness and zeal. {| My brother.
In the gospel; or brother Christian.
These expressions of affectionate regard must have been highly gratifying
to the Philippians. § And companton in labour. It is not impossible that he may have laboured with
Paul in the gospel, at Philippi; but
more probably the sense is, that he
regarded him as engaged in the same
great work that he was. It is not
probable that he assisted Paul much
in Rome, as he appears to have been
sick during a considerable part of the
time he was there. { And fellowsoldier. Christians and Christian
ministers are compared with soldiers

and fellow-soldier, ¢ but your messenger, and he that ministered to
my wants.

b chap. 4.18. c Phile.2.

(Philem. 2; 2 Tim. ii. 3, 4), because

of the nature of the service in which
they are engaged. The Christian life
is a warfare; there are many foes to
be overcome ; the period which they
are to serve is fixed by the Great
Captain of salvation, and they will
soon be permitted to enjoy the triumphs
of victory. Paul regarded himself as
enlisted to make war on all the spiritual enemies of the Redeemer, and
he esteemed Epaphroditus as one who
had shown that he was worthy to be
engaged in so good acause. § But
your messenger. Sent to convey supplies to Paul; chap. iv. 18. The original is, “your apostle’’--suav 2d
axooroxov---and some have proposed to
take this /iterally, meaning that he
was the apostle of the church at Philippi, or that he was their bishop.
The advocates for Episcopacy have
been the rather inclined to this, because in chap. 1. 1, there are but
two orders of ministers mentioned--
“bishops and deacons’’-- from which
they have supposed that “the bishop”
might have been absent, and that
“the bishop’’ was probably this Epaphroditus. But against this supposition the objections are obvious. (1.)
The word ézécroa0; means properly
one sent forth, a messenger, and it is
uniformly used in this sense unless
there is something in the connection
to limit it to an apostle, technically
so called. (2.) The supposition that
it here means @ messenger meets all
the circumstances of the case, and
describes exactly what Epaphroditus
did. He was in fact sent as a messenger to Paul; chap. iv. 18. (8.)
He was not an apostle in the proper
sense of the term--the apostles haying been chosen to be witnesses of the
life, the teachings, the death, and the
resurrection of the Saviour; see, Acts
i, 22 ; comp. Notes, 1 Cor.ix.1. (4.)
If he had been an apostle, it is altogether improbable that he would have
seen sent on an errand comparatively

26 For he longed after you all,
and was full of heaviness, because
that ye had heard that he had been
sick,

27 For indeed he was sick nigh
unto death: but God had mercy
on him ; and not on him only, but
on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow.

so humble as that of carrying supplies
to Paul. Was there no one else who
could do this without sending their
bishop ? Would a diocese be likely
to employ a “ bishop”’ for such a purpose now? ¥ And he that ministered
to my wants ; chap. iv. 18.

26. For he longed after you all.
Ie was desirous to see you all, and to
relieve your anxiety in regard to his
safety.

27. For indeed he was sick nigh
unto death. Dr. Paley has remarked
(Hor. Paul. on Phil. No. ii.) that the
account of the sickness and recovery
of Epaphroditus is such as to lead us
fo suppose that he was not restored
by miracle ; and he infers that the
power of healing the sick was conferred on the apostles only occasionally, and did not depend at all on
their will, since, if it had, there is
every reason to suppose that Paul
would at once have restored him to
health. This account, he adds, shows
also that this epistle 1s not the work
of an impostor. Had it been, a miracle would not have been spared.
Paul would not have been introduced
as showing such anxiety about a
friend lying at the point of death, and
as being unable to restore him. It
would have been said that he interposed at once, and raised him up to
health. {But God had mercy on
him. By restoring him to health,
evidently not by miracle, but by the
use of ordinary means. § On me
alzo, lest I should have sorrow upon
sorrow. In addition to all the sorrows of imprisonment, and the prospect of a trial, and the want of friends.
The sources of his sorrow, had Epaphroditus died, would have been such
as these: (1.) He would have lost a
valued friend, and one whom he

28 I send him therefore the
more carefully, that when ye see
him again, ye may rejoice, and that
I may be the less sorrowful.

29 Receive him therefore in the
Lord with all gladness; and ! hold
such in reputation :

30 Because for the work of Christ

1 or, honour such; 1 Co.16.18.
esteemed as a brother and worthy fellow-labourer. (2.) He would have
felt that the church at Philippi had
lost a valuable member. (3.) His
grief might have been aggravated from
the consideration that his life had been
lost in endeavouring to do him good.
He would have felt that he was the
occasion, though innocent, of his exposure to danger.

28. I send him therefore the more
carefully. With more diligence, or
speed ; I was the more ready to send
him. § That I may be the less sorruwful. That is, on account of my
solicitude for you ; that I may know
that your minds are at ease, and that
you rejoice in his being among you.

29. Receive him therefore in the
Lord. As the servant of the Lord,
or as now restored to you by the
Lord, and therefore to be regarded
as a fresh gift from God. Our friends
restored to us after a long absence,
we should receive as the gift of God,
and as a proof of his mercy. §[ And
hold such in reputation. Marg.,
honour such. This is a high commendation of Epaphroditus, and, at
the same time, it enjoins an important duty in regard to the proper
treatment of those who sustain such
a character. It is a Christian duty
to honour those who ought to be honoured, to respect the virtuous and
the pious, and especially to honour
those who evince fidelity in the work
of the Lord.

30. Because for the work ofChrist. That is, either by exposing
himself in his journey to see the
apostle in Rome, or by his labours
there: J Not regarding his life.
There is a difference in the MSS.
here, so great that it is impossible
now to determine which is the true
he was nigh unto death, not rea 1 Co.16.17.

reading, though the sense is not ma-

terially affected. ‘The common reailing of the Greek text is, ruexSsuAgvowperes; literally mdsconsulting,
not consulting carefully, not taking
pains. he other reading is, rzgaCorrvoduevos; exposing oneself to danager, regardless of life ; see the authorities for this reading in Wetstein ;
comp. Bloomfield, im loc. This reading suits the connection, and is generally regarded as the correct one.
{| To supply your lack of service toward me. Not that they had been
indifferent to him, or inattentive to
his wants, for he does not mean to
blame them ; but they had not had an
opportunity to send to his relief (see
chap. iv. 10),and Epaphroditus therefore made a special journey to Rome
ou hisaccount. Ile cameand rendered
to him the service which they could
not do 7m person; and what the church
would have done, if Paul had been
among them, he performed in their
name and on their behalf.

1. Let us learn to esteem others
as they ought to be; ver. 3. Hvery
person who is virtuous and pious has
some claim to esteem. Ile has a
reputation which is valuable to him
and to the church, and we should not
withhold respect from him. It is
one evidence, also, of true humility
and of right feeling, when we esteem
them as better than ourselves, and
when we are willing to see them
honoured, and are willing to sacrifice
our own ease to promote their welfare. It is one of the instinctive
promptings of true humility to feel
that other persons are better than we
are.

2. We should not be disappointed
or mortified if others think little of
us--if we are not brought into protninent notice among men; ver. 3.

We profess to have a low opinion of |

ourselves, if we are Christians, and
we ought to have ; and why should we

be chagrined and mortified if others ;

have the same opinion of us ?

(AID s64;

garding his life*to supply your
lack of service toward me.

should we not be willing that they
should accord in judgment with us in
regard to ourselves ?

83. We should be willing to occupy
our appropriate place in the church ;
ver. 3. That is true humility ; and
why should any one be unwilling to
be esteemed just as he ought to be?
Pride makes us miserable, and is the
grand thing that stands in the way
of the influence of the gospel on our
hearts. No one can become a Christian who is not willing to occupy just
the place which he ought to occupy ;
to take the lowly position as a penitent which he ovght to take; and to
have God regard and treat him just
as he ought to be treated. ‘The first,
second, and third thing in religion is
humility ; and no one ever becomes
a Christian who is not willing to take
the lowly condition of a child.

4. We should feel a deep interest
in the welfare of others; ver. 4.
Men are by nature selfish, and it is
the design of religion to make them
benevolent. They seek their own
interests by nature, and the gospel
would teach them to regard the welfare of others. If we are truly under
the influence of religion, there is not
a member of the church in whom we
should not feel an interest, and
whose welfare we should not strive
to promote as far as we have opportunity. And we may have opportunity every day. It is an easy matter
to do good to others. A kind word,
or even a kind look, does good; and
who so poor that he cannot render
this? Every day that we live, we
come in contact with some who may
be benefited by our example, our
advice, or our alms; and every day,
therefore, may be closed with the
feeling that we have not lived in vain.

5. Let us in all things look to the
example of Christ ; ver.5. Ilecame
that he might be an exampic; and
he was exactly such an example as
we need. We may be always sure
that we are right when we follow his
example and possess his spirit. We
cannot be so sure that we are right

in any other way. Ile came to be
our model in all things, and in all the
relations of life. (1.) He showed us
what the law of God requires of us.
(2.) Ile showed us what we should
aim to be, and what human nature
would be if it were wholly under the
influence ofreligion. (3.) Ie showed
us what true religion is, for it is just
such as was seen in his life. (4.)
IIc showed us how to act in our
treatment of mankind. (5) Ile
showed us howto bear the ills of
poverty, and want, and pain, and
temptation, and reproach, from the
world. We should learn to manifest
the same spirit in suffering which
he did, for then we are sure we are
right. (6.) And he has showed us
how to die. Ile has exhibited in
death just the spirit which we should
when we die; for it is not less desirable to die well than to live well.

6. It is right and proper to worship Christ; ver. 6. IIe was in the
form of God, and equal with God ;
and, being such, we should adore
him. No one need be afraid to render too high honour to the Saviour ;
and all piety may be measured by
the respect which is shown to him.
Religion advances in the world just
in proportion as men are disposed
to render honour to the Redeemer;
it becomes dim and dies away just
in proportion as that honour is withheld.

7. Like the Redeemer, we should
be willing to deny ourselves in order
that we may promote the welfare of
others; ver. G--8. We can never,
indeed, equal hiscondescension. We
can never stoop from such a state of
dignity and honour as he did ; but, in
our measure, we should aim to imitate
him. If we have comforts, we should
be willing to deny ourselves. of them
to promote the happiness of others.
If we occupy an elevated rank in life,
we should be willing to stoop to one
more humble. If we live ina palace,
we should be willing to enter the
most lowly cottage, if we can render
its inmates happy.

8. Christ was obedient unto death ;
ver. 8,
she will of God in all things.

his service we are called to pass
through trials, even those which will
terminate in death, let us obey. Le
has aright to command us, and we
have the example of the Saviour to
sustain us. If he requires us, by his
providence, and by the leadings of his
Spirit, to forsake our country and
home ; to visit climes of pestilential
air, or to traverse wastes of burning
sand, to make his name known ; if
he demands that, in that service, we
shall die far away from kindred and
home, and that our bones shall be
laid on the banks of the Senegal or
the Ganges,--still, let us remember
that these sufferings are not equal
to those of the Master. Ile was an
exile from heaven, in a world of suffering. Our exile from our own land
is not like that from heayen; nor
will our sufferings, though in regions
of pestilence and death, be like his
sufferings in the garden and on the
cross.

9. Let us rejoice that we havea
Saviour who has ascended to heaven,
and who is to be for ever honoured
there; ver.9--11. Ile is to suffer
no more. Ile has endured the last
pang; has passed through a state of
humiliation and woe which he will
never repeat ; and has submitted to
insults and mockeries to which it
will not be necessary for him to submit again. When we now think of
the Redeemer, we can think of him
as always happy and_ honoured.
There is no moment, by day or by
night, in which he is not the object
of adoration, love, and praise--nor
will there ever be such a moment to
all eternity. Our best friend is thus
to be eternally reverenced, and in
heaven he will receive a full reward
for all his unparalleled woes.

10. Let us diligently endeavour
to work out our salvation; ver. 12,
13. Nothing else so much demands
our unceasing solicitude as this, and
in nothing else have we so much
encouragement. We are assured
that God aids us in this work. Ile
throws no obstructions in our path,
but all that God docs in the matter

Let ws be obedient also, doing | of salvation is in the way of help.
If in! Ile does not work in us evil passions,

or impure desires, or unbelief ;--his | every situation in life; ver. 25--30.
agency is to enable us to perform | It was much to have the praise of an

“his good pleasure,” or that which
will please him--that is, that which
is holy. The farmer is encouraged
to plough and plant his fields when
God works around him by sending
the warm breezes of the spring, and
by refreshing the earth with gentle
dews and rains. And so we may be
encouraged to seek our salvation
when God works in our hearts, producing serious thoughts, and a feeling that we need the blessings of salvation.

11. Christians should let their light
shine; ver. 14--16. God has called
them into his kingdom that they may
show what is the nature and power of
true religion. They are to illustrate
in their lives the nature of that gospel
which -he has revealed, and to show
its value in purifying the soul, and
in sustaining it in the time of trial.
The world is dependent on Christians
for just views of religion, and every
day that a Christian lives he is doing
something to honour or dishonour the
gospel. Every word that he speaks,
every expression of the eye, every
cloud or beam of sunshine on his
brow, will have some effect in doing
this. Ile cannot live without making some impression upon the world
around him, either favourable or unfavourable to the cause of his Redeemer.

12. We should be ready to die, if
called to such a sacrifice in behalf
of the church of Christ; ver. 17.
We should rejoice in being permitted
to suffer, that we may promote the
welfare of others, and be the means
of saving those for whom Christ died.
It has been an honour to be a martyr
in the cause of religion, and so it ever
will be when God calls to such a sacrifice of life. If he calls ws to it,
therefore, we should not shrink from
it, nor should we shrink from any
sufferings by which we may honour
the Saviour, and rescue souls from
death.

13. Let us learn, from the interesting narrative respecting Epaphroditus at the close of this chapter, to
live and act as becomes Christians in

apostle and to be commended for his
Christian conduct, as this stranger in
Rome was. Ile went there, not to
view the wonders of the imperial city,
and not to run the rounds of giddy
pleasure there, but to perform an important duty of religion. While there
he became sick--not by indulgence
in pleasures; not as the result of
feasting and revelry, but in the work
of Christ. In astrange city, far from
home, amidst the rich, the great, the
gay ; in a place where theatres opened
their doors, and where places of
amusement abounded, he led a life
which an apostle could commend as
pure. There is nothing more difficult for a Christian than to maintain
an irreproachable walk when away
from the usual restraints and influences that serve to keep him in the
paths of piety, and when surrounded
with the fascinations and allurements
of a great and wicked city. There
strangers, extending the rites of hospitality, often invite the guest to
places of amusement which the Christian would not visit were he at home.
There the desire to see all that is to
be seen, and to hear all that is to be
heard, attracts him to the theatre,
the opera, and the gallery of obscene
and licentious statuary and painting.
There the plea readily presents itself
that an opportunity of witnessing
these things may never occur again;
that he is unknown, and that his
example, therefore, can do no harm;
that it is desirable, from personal observation, to know what is the condition of the world; or that perhaps
his former views in these matters may
have been precise and puritanical.
To such considerations he yields ;
but yields only to regret it in future
life. Rarely is such a thing done
without its being in some way soon
known ; and rarely, very rarely does
a Christian minister or other member of the church travel much without injury to his piety, and to the
cause of religion. A Christian man
who is under a necessity of visiting
Europe from this country, should fee}
that he has special need of the pray-

same © things to you, to me indeed
| Eee rao my brethren, rejoice | 2s not grievous, but for you 7 7s

@in the Lord.
a 1Vh.5.16.

ers of his friends, that he may not
dishonour his religion abroad; he
who is permitted to remain at home,
and to cultivate the graces of piety
in his own family, and in the quiet
scenes where he has been accustomed to move, should regard it as
a cause of special thankfulness to
God.

This chapter consists in the main,

of exhortations to holy living, and to

in the divine life. Itis full of tenderness and affection, and is one of the
most beautiful appeals which can anywhere be found to induce Christians
to devote themselves to the service of
the Redeemer. ‘The appeal is drawn
in a great measure from the apostle’s
statement of his own feelings, and is
one which the Philippians could not
but feel, for they knew him well. In
the course of the chapter, he adverts
to the following points.

He exhorts them to rejoice in the
Lord; ver. 1. aes

He warns them against the Jewish:
teachers who urged the necessity of
complying with the Mosaic laws, and
who appear to have boasted of their
being Jews, and to have regarded
themselves as the favourites of God
on that account; ver. 2, 3.

To meet what they had said, and
to show how little all that on which
they relied was to be valued, Paul
says that he had had advantages of
birth and education which surpassed
them all, and that all the claim to the
favour of God, and all the hope of
salvation which could be derived from
birth, education, and a life of zeal and
conformity to the law, had been his ;
ver. 4, 5.

Yet he says, he had renounced all
this, and now regarded it as utterly
worthless in the matter of salvation.
He had cheerfully suffered the loss
of all things, and was willing still to
do it, if he might obtain salvation

To write the | safe.

b 2 Pe.1.12-15.

through the Redeemer. Christ was
more to him than all the advantages
of birth, and rank, and blood; and all
other grounds of dependence for salvation, compared with reliance on
him, were worthless; ver. 7--11.

The object which he had sought in
doing this, he says, he had not yet
fully attained. Je had seen enough
to know its inestimable value, and he
now pressed onward that he might
secure all that he desired. The mark
was before him, and he pressed on to
secure the prize; ver. 12--14.

Ile exhorts them to aim at the
same thing, and to endeavour to secure the same object, assuring them
that God was ready to disclose to
them all that they desired to know,
and to grant all that they wished to
obtain; ver. 15, 16.

This whole exhortation he enforces
in the end of the chapter (ver. 17--21)
by two considerations. One was, that
there were not a few who had been
deceived and who had no true religion
--whom he had often warned with
tears, ver. 18, 19; the other was, that
the home, the citizenship of the true
Christian, was in heaven, and they
who were Christians ought to live as
those who expected soon to be there.
The Saviour would soon return to
take them to glory. He would change
their vile body, and make them like
himself, and they should therefore
live as became those who had a hope
so blessed and transforming.

1. Finally, my brethren, rejoice in
the Lord. ‘hat is, in the Lord Jesus;
see ver. 3; comp. Notes on Acts i.
24, and 1 ‘Thess. vy. 16. The idea
here is, that it is the duty of Christians to rejoice in the Lord Jesus
Christ. This duty implies the following things. (1.) They should rejoice that they have such a Saviour.
Men everywhere have felt the need
of a Saviour, and to us it should be a
subject of unfeigned joy that one has
been provided forus. When we think
of our sins, we May now rejoice that

2 Beware of dogs, # beware of @ evil workers, beware of the ¢ concision,

@ 13.56.10,11; Re.22.15.

there is one who can deliver us from
them; when we think of the worth of
the soul, we may rejoice that there is
one who can save it from death;
when we think of our danger, we can
rejoice that there is one who can
rescue us from all peril, and bring us
to a world where we shall be for ever
safe. (2.) We may rejoice that we
have such a Saviour. Je is just such
as we need. Je accomplishes just
what we want a Saviour todo. We
need one to make known to us a way
of pardon, and he does it. We need
one to make an atonement for sin,
and he does it. We need one to give
us peace from a troubled conscience,
and he does it. Weneed one to support us in trials and bereavements,
and he does it. We need one who
ean comfort us on the bed of death,
and guide us through the dark valley,
and the Lord Jesus is just what we
want. When we look at his character, it is just such as it should be to
win our hearts, and to make us love
him; and when we look at what he
has done, we see that he has accomplished ali that we can desire, and
why should we not rejoice? (3.) We
may and should rejoice tn him. The
principal joy of the true Christian
should be iz the Lord. Ile should
find his happiness not in riches, or
gayety, or vanity, or ambition, or
books, or in the world in any form,
but in communion with the Lord
Jesus, and in the hope of eternal life
through him, In his friendship, and
in his service, should be the highest
of our joys, and in these we may always be happy. It is the privilege,
therefore, of a Christian to rejoice.
lle has more sources of joy than any
other man--sources which do not fail
when all others fail. Religion is not
sadness or melancholy, it is joy; and
the Christian should never leave the
impression on others that his religion
makes him either gloomy or morose.
A cheerful countenance, an eye of
benignity, a conversation pleasant
and kind, should always evince the
joy of his heart, and in all his inter-

6 Ps.119.115. c Ga.5.1-3.

course with the world around him he

should show that his heart is full of
joy. § To write the same things.
That is, to repeat the same truths
and admonitions. Perhaps he refers
in this to the exhortations which he
had given them when he was with
them, on the same topics on which
he is now writing to them. Ile says,
that for him to record these exhortations, and transmit them by a letter,
might be the means of permanent
welfare to them, and would not be
burdensome or oppressive to him. It
was not absolutely necessary for them,
but still it would be conducive tu their
order and comfort as a church. We
may suppose that this chapter is a
summary of what he had often inculcated when he was with them. 4 7’o
me indeed is not grievous. It is not
burdensome or oppressive to me to
repeat these exhortations in this
manner. They might suppose that
in the multitude of cares which he
had, and in his trials in Rome, it
might be too great a burden for him
to bestow so much attention on their
interests. § But for you it is safe.
It will contribute to your security as
Christians, to have these sentiment:
and admonitions on record. They
were exposed to dangers which made
them proper. What those dangers
were, the apostle specifies ir the following verses.

2. Beware of dogs. Dogs in the
east are mostly without masters ; they
wander at large in the streets and
fields, and feed upon offals, and even
upon corpses ; comp. 1 Kings xiv. 11;
xvl. 4; xxl. 19. They are held as unclean, and to call one a dogis a much
stronger expression of contempt there
than “with-us; 1 Sam. xvii. 43:35 2
Kings vill. 13. ‘The Jews called the
heathen dogs, and the Mobhammedans
call Jews and Christians by the same
name. ‘The term dog also is used to
denote a person that is shameless,
-impudent, malignant, snarling, dissatisfied, and contentious, and is evidently so employed here Ii is possible that the /anguage used here may

3 For we ¢ are the circumcei-) sion, which worsnip God in the

@ Ro.2.28,29,

have been derived from some custom
of affixing a caution, on a house that
was guarded by a dog, to persons approaching it. Lenfant remarks that
at Rome it was common for a dog
to le chained before the door of a
house, and that a notice was placed
in sight, ‘‘ Beware of the dog.”” ‘The
same notice I have seen in this city
affixed to the kennel of dogs in front
of a bank, that were appointed to
guard it. The reference here is,
doubtless, to Judaizing teachers, and
the idea is, that they were contentious, troublesome, dissatisfied, and
would produce disturbance. ‘The
strong language which the apostle
uses here, shows the seuse which he
had of the danger arising from their
influence. It may be observed, however, that the term dogs is used in
ancient writings with great frequency,
and even by the most grave speakers.
It is employed by the most dignified
characters in the Iliad ( Bloomsield ),
and the name was given to a whole
class of Greek philosophers -- the
Cynics. It is used in one instance
by the Saviour; Matt. vil. 6. By
the use of the term here, there can
be no doubt that the apostle meant
to express strong disapprobation of
the character and course of the persons referred to, and to warn the
Philippians in the most solemn manner against them. § Beware of evil
workers. Weferring, doubtless, to the
same persons that he had characterized as dogs. ‘The reference is to
Jewish teachers, whose doctrines aud
influence he regarded only as evil.
We do not know what was the nature
of their teaching, but we may presume that it consisted much in urging
the obligations of the Jewish rites
and ceremonies ; in speaking of the
advantage of having been born Jews;
and in urging a compliance with the

law in order to justification before |
In this way their teachings

God. )
teuded to set aside the great doctrine

of salvation by the merits of the Re-
§ Beware of the concision. |

deemer.
Keferring, doubtless, also to the Jew-

spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus,

ish teachers. The word rendered
concision--xararoz7--means properly
a cutting of, a mutilation. It is used
here contemptuously for the Jewish
circumcision in contrast with the true
circumcision. Robinson, Lex. It 1s
not to be understood that Paul meant
to throw contempt on circumcision as
enjoined by God, and as practised by
the pious Jews of other times (comp.
Acts xvi. 3), but only as it was held
by the false Judaizing teachers. As
they held it, it was not the true circumcision. They made salvation to
depend on it, instead of its being
only a sign of the covenant with God.
Such a doctrine, as they held it, was
ainere cutting of of the flesh, without
understanding anything of the true
nature of the rite, and hence the unusual term by which he designates it.
Perhaps, also, there may be included
the idea that a doctrine so held would
be in fact a cutting off of the soul ;
that is, that it tended to destruction.
Their cutting and mangling the flesh
might be regarded as an emblem of
the manner in which their doctrine
would cut and mangle the church.--
Doddridye. The meaning of the
whole is, that they did not understand
the true nature of the doctrine of circumcision, but that with them it was
a mere cutting of the flesh, and tended
to destroy the church.

8. For we are the circumcision.
We who are Christians. We have
and hold the true doctrine of circumcision. We have that which was intended to be secured by this rite--
for we are led to renounce the flesh,
and to worship God in the spirit.
The apostle in this verse teaches that
the ordinance of circumcision was
not designed to be a mere outward
ceremony, but was intended to be
emblematic of the renunciation of
the flesh with its corrupt propensities, and to lead to the pure and
spiritual worship of God. In this,
he has undoubtedly stated its true
design, ‘They who now urged it as
necessary to salvation, and who made
salvation depend on its mere outward
and have no confidence
flesh :

4 Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any other
man thinketh that he hath where-

in the

of he might trust in the flesh, 1
more :

5 Circumcised the eighth day,
of the stock of Israel, of the tribe
of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the

observance, had lost sight of this object of the rite. But this, the real
design of circumcision, was attained
by those who had been led to renounce the flesh, and who had devoted themselves to the worship of
God; see Notes on Rom, il. 28, 29.
{ Which worship God in the spirit ;
see Notes on John iv. 24 ; comp. Gen.
xvii. lU--14. J And rejoice in Christ
Jesus; see ver. 1. ‘That is, we have,
through him, renounced the flesh ;
we have become the true worshippers
of God, and have thus attained what
was originally contemplated by circumcision, and by all the other rites
of religion. § And have no confidence in the flesh. In our own
corrupt nature ; or in any ordinances
that relate merely to the flesh. We
do not depend on circumcision for
salvation, or on any external rites and
forms whatever--on any advantage of
rank, or blood. The word ‘‘flesh”’
here seems to refer to every advantage which any may have of birth ;
to any external conformity to the
law, and to everything which unaided human nature can do to effect
salvation. On none of these things
can we put reliance for salvation ;
none of them will constitute a ground
of hope.

4. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. That is, though
I had uncommon advantages of this
kind; and if any one could have
trusted in them, I could have done
it. The object of the apostle is to
show that he did not despise those
things because he did not possess
them, but because he now saw that
they were of no value in the great
matter of salvation. Once he had
confided in them, and if any one
could find any ground of reliance on
them, he could have found more than
any of them. But he had seen that
all these things were valueless in
regard to the salvation of the soul.
We may remark here, that Christians

do not despise or disregard advantages
of birth, or amiableness of manners,
or external morality, because they do
not possess them--but because they
regard them as insufficient to secure
their salvation. They who have been
most amiable and moral before their
conversion will speak in the most decided manner of the insufficiency ot
these things for salvation, and of the
danger of relying on them. They
have once tried it, and they now see
that their feet were standing on a
slippery rock. The Greek here is,
literally, ‘although I [was] having
confidence in the flesh.”” The meaning is, that he had every ground of
confidence in the flesh which any one
could have, and that if there was any
advantage for salvation to be derived
from birth, and blood, and external]
conformity to the law, he possessed
it. He had more to rely on than
most other men had; nay, he could
have boasted of advantages of this
sort which could not be found united
in any other individual. What those
advantages were, he proceeds to
specify.

5. Circumeised the eighth day.
That is, he was circumcised in exact
compliance with the law. If there
was any ground of confidence from
such compliance with the law, he
had it. The law required that circumcision should be performed on
the eighth day (Gen. xvii. 12; Lev.
xii. 3; Luke 1. 59); but it is probable
that, in some cases, thiswas delayed
on account of sickness, or from some
other cause; and, in the case on
proselytes, it was not performed until
adult age ; see Acts xvi. 8. But Paul
says that,in his case, the law had been
literally complied with ; and, consequently, all the advantage which could
be derived from such a compliance,
was his. {[ Of the stock of Israel.
Descended from the patriarch Israel,
or Jacob ; and, therefore, able to trace
his genealogy back as far as any vew

Hebrews ; as touching the law, a
Pharisee ; 4
@ Ac.23.6.

could. He was not a proselyte himself from among the heathen, nor
were any of his ancestors proselytes.
Hehad all the advantages which could
be derived from a regular descent
from the venerable founders of the
Jewish nation. He was thus distinguished from the Edomites and
others who practised circumcision ;
from the Samaritans, who were made
up of a mixture of people; and from
many, even among the Jews, whose
ancestors had been once heathen, and
who had become proselytes. { Of
the tribe of Benjamin. Benjamin
was one of the two tribes which remained when the ten tribes revolted
under Jeroboam, and, with the tribe
of Judah, it ever afterwards maintained its allegiance to God. The idea
of Paul is, that he was not one of the
revolted tribes, but that he had as
high a claim to the honour of being
a Jew as any one could boast. The
tribe of Benjamin, also, was located
near the temple, and indeed it has
been said that the temple was on the
dividing line between that tribe and
the tribe of Judah; and it might
have been supposed that there was
some advantage in securing salvation
from having been born and reared
so near where the holy rites of religion were celebrated. If there were
any such derived from the proximity
of the tribe to the temple, he could
claim it; for, though his birth was
in another place, yet he was a member of the tribe. § An Hebrew of
the Hebrews. This is the Hebrew
mode of expressing the superlative
degree ; and the idea is, that Paul enjoyed every advantage which could
possibly be derived from the fact of
being a Hebrew. He had a lineal
descent from the very ancestor of the
nation; he belonged toa tribe that
was as honourable as any other, and
that had its location near the very
centre of religious influence; and he
was an Hebrew by both his parents,
with no admixture of Gentile blood.
On this fact--that no one of his an-

6 Concerning zeal,» persecuting
the church ; touching the righteb Ac.22.3,4 5 Ga.1.13,14.

cestors had been a proselyte, or of
Gentile extraction--a Jew would pride
himself much; and Paul says that he
was entitled to all the advantage
which could be derived fromit. As
touching the law, a Pharisee. In my
views of the law, and in my manner
of observing it, I was of the straitest
sect--a Pharisee ; see Notes on Acts
xxvi. 5. The Pharisees were distinguished among the Jewish sects
for their rigid adherence to the letter
of the law, and had endeavoured to
guard it from the possibility of violation by throwing around it a vast body
of traditions, which they considered
to be equally binding with the written
law ; see Notes on Matt. iii. 7. The
Sadducees were much less strict;
and Paul here says that whatever
advantage could be derived from the
most rigid adherence to the letter of
the law, was his.

6. Concerning zeal, persecuting
the church. Showing the greatness
of my zeal for the religion which I
believed to be true, by persecuting
those whom I considered to be in
dangerous error. Zeal was supposed
to be, as itis, an important part of
religion ; see 2 Kings x.16; Ps. lxix.
Osiexixe oor Usalixel ys vomax oe.
Paul says that he had shown the
highest degree of zeal that was possible. He had gone so far in his attachment for the religion of his fathers, as to pursue with purposes of
death those who had departed from
it, and who had embraced a different
form of belief. If any, therefore,
could hope for salvation on the ground
of extraordinary devotedness to religion, he said that he could. J Touching the righteousness which is in the
law, blameless. So far as the righteousness which can be obtained by
obeying the law is concerned. It is
not needful to suppose here that he
refers merely to the ceremonial law;
but the meaning is, that he did all
that could be done to obtain salvation by the mere observance of law.
It was supposed by the Jews, and

ousness which isin the law, blame- i to me, those I counted loss for
less, 4 Christ.

7 But what things were gain 8 Yea, doubtless, and I count

a Lu.1.6.

especially by the Pharisees, to which
sect he belonged, that it was possible
to be saved in that way; and Paul
says that he had done all that was
supposed to be necessary for that.
We are not to imagine that, when he
penned this declaration, he meant to
be understood as saying that he had
wholly complied with the law of God;
but that, before his conversion, he
supposed that he had done all that
was necessary to be done in order to
be saved by the observance of law.
He neglected no duty that he underStood itto enjoin. He was not guilty of
deliberately violating it. Heled a moral and strictly upright life, and no one
had occasion to “blame” or to accuse
him as a violator of the law of God.
There is every reason to believe that
Paul, before his conversion, was a
young man of correct deportment,
of upright life, of entire integrity ;
and that he was free from the indulgences of vice and passion, into
which young men often fall. In all
that he ever says of himself as being
‘the chief of sinners,” and as being
“unworthy to be called an apostle,”
he never gives the least intimation
that his early life was stained by
vice, or corrupted by licentious passions. On the contrary, we are left
to the fair presumption that, if any
man could be saved by his own works,
he was that man. This fact should
be allowed to make its proper impression on those who are seeking salvation in the same way; and they should
be willing to inquire whether they
may not be deceived in the matter,
as he was, and whether they are not
in as much real danger in depending
on their own righteousness, as was
this most upright and zealous young
man.

4, But what things were gain to
me. The advantages of birth, of
education, and of external conformity tothe law. “I thought these to
be gain--that is, to be of vast advantage in the matter of salvation. I

b Mat.13.44.

valued myself on these things, and
supposed that I was rich in all that
pertained to moral character and to
religion.’”’ Perhaps, also, he refers
to these things as laying the foundation of a hope of future advancement
in honour and in wealth in this
world. They commended him to the
rulers of the nation; they opened
before him a brilliant prospect of distinction; they madeit certain that
he could rise to posts of honour and
of office, and could easily gratify all
the aspirings of his ambition.-- | Those
I counted loss. “I now regard them
allasso much loss. They were really
a disadvantage--a hindrance--an injury. Ilook upon them, not as gain
or an advantage, but as an obstacle
to my salvation.’ He had relied on
them. Je had been led by these
things to an improper estimate of his
own character, and he had been thug
hindered from embarcing the true religion. He says, therefore, that he
now renounced all dependence on
them; that he esteemed them not as
contributing to his salvation, but, so
far as any reliance should be placed
on them, as in fact so much loss.
q For Christ. Gr., ‘‘ On account of
Christ.’”? That is, so far as Christ
and his religion were concerned, they
were to be regarded as worthless. In
order to obtain salvation by him, it
was necessary to renounce all dependence on these things.

8. Yea, doubtless, and I count all
things butloss. Not only those things
which he had just specified, and
which he had himself possessed, he
says he would be willing to renounce
in order to obtain an interest in the
Saviour, but every thing which could
be imagined. Were all the weaith
and honour which could be conceived
of his, he would be willing to renounce them in order that he might
obtain the knowledge of the Redeemer. He would be a gainer who
should sacrifice every thing in order
to win Christ. Paul had not only

all things but loss for® the excel-

feney of the knowledge of Christ

Jesus my Lord: for whom I have

suffered the loss of all things,
@ [s.53.11 3 Je.9.23,24 ; John17.33 1Co.2.2.

acted on this principle when he became a Christian, but had ever afterwards continued to be ready to give
up every thing in order that he
might obtain an interest in the Saviour. He uses here the same word
--Cnuiav--which he does in the Acts
of the Apostles, chap. xxvii. 21, when
speaking of the loss which had been
sustained by loosing from Crete, contrary to his advice, on the voyage to
Rome. The idea here seems to be,
“What I might obtain, or did possess,
IT regard as loss in comparison with
the knowledge of Christ, even as
seamen do the goods on which they
set a high value, in comparison with
their lives. Valuable as they may be,
they are willing to throw them all
overboard in order to save themselves.” Burder, in Ros. Alt. u. neu.
Morgenland, in loc. | For the excellency of the knowledge. A Hebrew expression to denote excellent
knowledge. The idea is, that he
held everything else to be worthless
in comparison with that knowledge,
and he was willing to sacrifice everything else in order to obtain it. On
the value of this knowledge of the
Sayiour, see Notes on Eph. ili. 19.
Q For whom Ihave suffered the loss
wf all things. Paul, when he became a Christian, gave up his brilliant prospects in regard to this life,
and everything indeed on which his
heart had been placed. He abandoned the hope of honour and distinction ; he sacrificed every prospect of gain or ease; and he gave
up his dearest friends and separated
himself from those whom he tenderly
loved. He might have risen to the
highest posts of honour in his native
land, and the path which an ambitious young man desires was fully
open before him. But all this had
been cheerfully sacrificed in order
that he might obtain an interest in
the Saviour, and partake of the
blessings of his religion.

Ile has!
and do count them bu dung, that
I may win Christ,
9 And be found in him, not

having mine own @ righteousness,
b 2C0.11.25-27. ¢ Ro.10.3,5.

not, indeed, informed us of the exact

extent of his loss in becoming a
Christian. It is by no means improbable that he had been excommunicated by the Jews; and that he had
been disowned by his own family.
{| And do count them but dung.
The word here used--cxvBzr0v --occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It means, properly, dregs ;
refuse; what is thrown away as
worthless; chaff; offal, or the refuse
of a table or of slaughtered animals,
and then filth of any kind. No language could expressa more deep
sense of the utter worthlessness of
all that external advantages can confer in the matter of salvation. In
the question of justification before
God, all reliance on birth, and blood,
and external morality, and forms of
religion, and prayers, and alms, is to
be renounced, and, in comparison
with the merits of the great Redeemer, to be esteemed as vile. Such
were Paul’s views, and we may remark that if this was so in his case,
it should be in ours. Such things.
can no more avail for our salvation
than they could for his. We can no
more be justified by them than he
could. Nor will they do anything
more in our case to commend us to
God than they did in his.

9. And be found in him. That is,
united to him by a living faith. The
idea is, that when the investigations
of the great day should take place in
regard to the ground of salvation, it
might be found that he was united to
the Redeemer and depended solely
on his merits for salvation ; comp.
Notes on John vi. 56. (J Not having
mine own righteousness. That is,
not relying on that for salvation.
This was now the great aim of Paul,
that it might be found at last that
he was not trusting to his own merits,
but. to those of the Lord Jesus.
q Which is of the law; see Notes on
Rom. x. 3. The “righteousness which
which is of the law, but that which |

is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness @ which is of God
by faith;

@ Ro.1.17 33.21,22.

10 That I may know him, andthe
power of his resurrection, and the
© fellowship of his sufferings, being

made conformable unto his death :
b 1Pe.4.13.

is of the law” is that which could be
obtained by conformity to the precepts of the Jewish religion, such as
Paul had endeavoured to obtain before he became a Christian. He
now saw that no one complied perfectly with the holy law of God, and
that all dependence on such a righteousness was vain. All men by nature
seek salvation by the law. They set
up some standard which they mean
to comply with, and expect to be
saved by conformity to that. With
some it is the law of honour, with
others the law of honesty, with others
the law of kindness and courtesy, and
with others the law of God. If they
comply with the requirements of these
laws, they suppose that they will be
safe, and it is only the grace of God
showing them how defective their
standard is, or how far they come from
complying with its demands, that can
ever bring them from this dangerous
dependence. Paul in early life depended on his compliance with the
laws of God as he understood them,
and supposed that he was safe. When
he was brought to realize his true
condition, he saw how far short he
had come of what the law of God required, and that all dependence on
his own works was vain. § But that
which is through the faith of Christ.
That justification which is obtained
by believing on the Lord Jesus Christ;
see Notes on Rom. i. 17; iii. 24; iv. 5.
q Righteousness which is of God by
faith. Which proceeds from God, or
of which he is the great source and
fountain. his may include the following things. (1.) God isthe author
of pardon--and this is a part of the
righteousness which the man who is
justified has. (2.) God purposes to
treat the justified sinner as if he
had not sinned--and thus his righteousness is of God. (8.) God is the
source of all the grace that will be
imparted to the soul, making it really
holy. In this way, all the righteous-

ness which the Christian has is ‘ of
God.’ The idea of Paul is, that he
now saw that it was far more desirable to be saved by righteousness
obtained from God than by his own.
That obtained from God was perfect,
and glorious, and sufficient; that
which he had attempted to work out
was defective, impure, and wholly
insufficient to save the soul. It is
far more honourable to be saved by
God than to save ourselves; it is
more glorious to depend on him
than to depend on anything that we
can do.

10. That I may know him. That
I may be fully acquainted with his
nature, his character, his work, and
with the salvation which he has
wrought out. It is one of the highest objects of desire in the mind of
the Christian to know Christ; see
Notes on Eph. iii. 19. J And the
power of his resurrection. That is,
that I may understand and experience the proper influence which the
fact of his resurrection should have
on the mind. That influence would
be felt in imparting the hope of immortality ; in sustaining the soul in
the prospect of death, by the expectation of being raised from the grave
in lke manner; and in raising the
mind above the world; Rom. vi. 11.
There is no one truth that will have
greater power over us, when properly believed, than the truth that Christ
has risen from the dead. Tis resurrection confirms the truth of the
Christian religion (Notes, 1 Cor. xv.);
makes it certain that there isa future
state, and that the dead will also rise;
dispels the darkness that was around
the grave, and shows us that our
great interests are in the future
world. The fact that Christ has
risen from the dead, when fully believed, will produce a sure hope that
we also shall be raised, and will animate us to bear trials for his sake,
with the assurance that we shall be

raised up as he was. One of the
things which a Christian ought most
earnestly to desire is, to feel the
power of this truth on his soul--that
his great Redeemer has burst the
bands of death; has brought life and
immortality to light, and has given
us the pledge that our bodies shall
rise, What trials may we not bear
with this assurance? What is to be
dreaded in death, if this is so?’ What
glories rise to the view when we
think of the resurrection! And what
trifles are all the things which men
seek here, when compared with the
glory that shall be ours when we shall
be raised from the dead! J And the
fellowship of his sufferings. That I
may participate in the same kind of
sufferings that he endured; that is,
that I may in all things be identified
with him. Paul wished to be just
like his Saviour. He felt that it was
an honour to live as he did ; to evince
the spirit that he did, and to suffer in
the same manner. All that Christ
did and suffered was glorious in his
view, and he wished in all things to
resemble him. He did not desire
merely to share his honours and
triumphs in heaven, but, regarding his
whole work as glorious, he wished to be
wholly conformed to that, and, as far
as possible, to be just like Christ.
Many are willing to reign with Christ,
put they would not be willing to suffer
with him; many would be willing to
wear a crown of glory like him, but
not the crown of thorns ; many would
be willing to put on the robes of
splendour which will be worn in heaven, but not the scarlet robe of contemptand mockery. They would desire
to share the glories and triumphs of
redemption, but not its poverty, contempt, and persecution. This was
not the feeling of Paul. He wished
in all things to be just like Christ, and
hence he counted it an honour to be
permitted to suffer as he did. So
Peter says, ‘‘Rejoice, inasmuch as ye
are partakers of Christ’s sufferings ;”
1 Pet. iv.13. So Paul says (Col. i.
24) that he rejoiced in his sufferings
in behalf of his brethren, and desired
“to fill up that which was behind, of
the afflictions of Christ,’ or that in

which he had hitherto come short of
the afflictions which Christ endured.
The idea is, that it is an honour to
suffer as Christ suffered; and that
the true Christian will esteem it
a privilege to be made just like him,
not only in glory, but in trial. To do
this, is one evidence of piety ; and we
may ask ourselves, therefore, whether
these are the feelings of our hearts.
Are we seeking merely the honours of
heaven, or should we esteem it a privilege to be reproached and reviled as
Christ was--to have our names cast
out as his was--to be made the object
of sport and derision as he was--and
to be held up to the contempt of a
world as he was? If so, it is an
evidence that we love him; if not so,
and we are merely seeking the crown
of glory, we should doubt whether we
have ever known anything of the nature of true religion. { Being made
conformable to his death. In all
things, being just like Christ--to live
as he did, and to dieashe did. There
can be no doubt that Paul means to
say that he esteemed it so desirable
to be just like Christ, that he would
regard it as an honour to die in the
same manner. He would rejoice to
go with him to the cross, and to pass
through the circumstances of scorn and
pain which attended sucha death. Yet
how few there are who would be willing
to die as Christ died, and how little
would the mass ofmen regard it asa privilegeandhonour! Indeed, it requires
an elevated state of pious feeling to be
able to say thatit wouldbe regarded as
aprivilege and honour to die like Christ
to have such a sense of the loveliness of
his character in all things, and such
ardent attachment to him, as to rejoice in the opportunity of dying as he
did! When we think of dying, we
wish to have our departure made as
comfortable as possible. We would
have our sun go down without a cloud.
We would wish to lie on a bed of down;
we would have our head sustained by
the kind arm ofa friend, and not left
to fall, in the intensityof suffering, on
the breast ; we would wish to have the
place where we die surrounded by sympathizing kindred, and not by those
who would mock our dying agonies.
11. If by any means I might @
attain unto the resurrection of the
dead.

@ Ac. 26.7.

And, if such is the willof God, it is
not improper to desire that our end
may be peaceful and happy; but we
should also feel, if God should order
it otherwise, that it would be an
honour, in the cause of the Redeemer,
to die amidst reproaches--to be led
to the stake, as the martyrs have been
--or to die, as our Master did, on a
cross. They who are most like him
in the scenes of humiliation here, will
be most like him in the realms of glory.

ll. If by any means. Implying,
that he meant to make use of ‘the
inost strenuous exertions to obtain
the object. § L might attain unto.
I may come to, or may secure this
object. ¢ The resurrection of the dead.
Paul believed that a//J the dead would
be raised (Acts xxiv. 15; xxvi. 6--8) ;
and in this respect he would certainly
attain to the resurrection of the dead,
in common with all mankind. But
the phrase, ‘‘ the resurrection of the
dead,” also might be used, in a more
limited sense, to denote the resurrection of the righteous as a most desirable object ; and this might be secured
by effort. It was this which Paul
sought --this for which he strove--
this that was so bright an object in
his eye that it was to be secured at
any sacrifice. To rise with the saints ;
to enter with them into the blessedness of the heavenly inheritance, was
an object that the apostle thought
was worth every effort which could
he made. The doctrine of the resurrection was, in his view, that which
distinguished the true religion, and
which made it of such inestimable
value (Acts xxvi. 6, 7; xxiii. 6 ; 1 Cor.
xv.) ; and he sought to participate in
the full honour and glory of such a resurrection,.

12. Not as though Lhad already
attained. This verse and the two
following are full of allusions to the
Grecian races. ‘I'he word rendered
‘attained’ signifies, to have arrived at
the goal and won the prize, but withcut having as yet received it” Pict.

12. Not as though I had already
attained, either were already perfect : ’ but I follow after, if that I

b He.12.25.

Bib. The meaning here is, I do not
pretend to have attained to what I
wish or hope to be. He had indeed
been converted ; he had been raised up
from the death of sin; he had been
imbued witb spiritual life and peace ;
but there was a glorious object before
him which he had not yet received,
There was to be a kind of resurrection
which he had not arrived at. It is
possible that Paul here may have had
his eye on an error which prevailed to
some extent in the early church, that
“the resurrection was already past”
(2 Tim. ii. 18), by which the faith of
some had been perverted. How far
this error had spread, or on what it
was founded, is not now known ; but
it is possible that it might have found
advocates extensively in the churches,
Paul says, however, that he entertained no such opinion. He looked forward
to a resurrection which had not yet
occurred. He anticipated it as a glorious event yet to come, and he purposed to secure it by every effort whick
he could make. {| Either were already
perfect. This is a distinct assertion
of the apostle Paul that he did not
regard himself as aperfect man. IIe
had not reached that state where he
was free from sin. It is not indeed a
declaration that no one was perfect,
or that no one could be in this life

but it is a declaration that he did not
regard himself as having attained to
it. Yet who can urge better claims
to having attained perfection than
Paul could have done? Who has
surpassed him in love, and zeal, and
self-denial, and true devotedness to
the service of the Redeemer? Who
has more elevated views of God, and
of the plan of salvation? Who prays
more, or lives nearer to God than he
did? That must be extraordinary
piety which surpasses that of the
apostle Paul; and he who lays claim
toa degree of holiness which even
Paul did not pretend to, gives little
evidence that he has any true knowledge of himself, or has ever been im-

may apprehend that for which

bued with the true humility which the

gospel produces. It should be observed, however, that many critics,
as Bloomfield, Koppe, Rosenmiiller,
Robinson (Lex.), Clarke, the editor
of the Pictorial Bible, and others,
Suppose the word here used--reAsiow
--not to refer to moral or Christian
perrection, but to be an allusion to
the games that were celebrated in
Greece, and to mean that he had not
completed his course and arrived at
the goal, so as to receive the prize.
According to this, the sense would be,
that he had not yet received the crown
which he aspired after as the result of
his efforts in this life. It is of importance to understand precisely what he
meant by the declaration here ; and,
in order to this, it will be proper to
ook at the meaning of the word elsewhere in the New Testament. The
word properly means, to coinplete, to
make perfect, so as to be full, orso
that nothing shall be wanting. In
the New Testament it is used in the

following places, and is translated in |

the following manner: It is rendered
fiflled in Luke ii. 23; John xix. 28:
perfect, and perfected, in Luke xiii.
32: John xvii. 23 ; 2 Cor. xii..9; Phil.
Miele Web, us wr? v9 s vit. 10 Six. OM
x. 1, 14; xi. 40 ; xii. 23; Jamies il. 22 ;
1 John ii. 5 ; iv. 12,17, 18: finish, and
fintshed, John vy. 86; Acts xx. 24:
and consecrated, {leb. vii. 28. In one
case (Acts xx. 24), it is applied to a
race or course that is run--‘‘ That I

might finish my course with joy ;” but ,
this is the only instance, unless it be |

in the case before us. ‘The proper
sense uf the word is that of bringing
fo an end, or rendering complete, so
that nothing shall be wanting.
idea of Paul evidently is, that he had
not yet attained that which would be
the completion of his hopes. There
was something which he was striving
after, which he had not obtained, and
which was needful to render him perfect, or complete. He lacked now
what he hoped yet to attain to; and
that which he lacked may refer to all

those things which were wanting in |
also I am apprehended of Christ
Jesus.

his character and condition then,
which he expected to secure in the resurrection. What he would then obtain, would be--perfect freedom from
sin, deliverance from trials and temptations, victory over the grave, and
the possession of immortal life. As
those things were needful in order to
the completion of his happiness, we
may suppose that he referred to them
now, when he says that he was not yet
“perfect.” This word, therefore, while
it will embrace an allusion to moral
character, need not be understood of
that only, but may include all those
things which were necessary to be observed in order to his complete felicity. Though there may be, therefore, an allusion in the passage to the
Grecian foot-races, yet still it would
teach that he did not regard himself
as in any sense perfect. In all respects, there were things wanting to
render his character and condition
coniplete, or what he desired they
might ultimately be. ‘The same 1s
true of all Christians now. We are
imperfect in our moral and religious
character, in our joys, in our conditicn.
Our state here is far different from that
which will exist in heaven; and no
Christian can say, any morethan Pau}
could, that he has obtained that
which is requisite to the compiction
or perfection of his character and
condition. Ile looks for something
brighter and purer in the world beyond the grave. ‘Though, therefore,
there may be--as I think the connection and phraseology seem to de-

‘mand--a reference to the Grecian

' games, yet the sense of the passage

The >

is not materially varied. It was still
a struggle for the crown of perfection

'--a crown which the apostle says he

‘to obtain it.

had not yet obtained. {{ But I follow
after. 1 pursue the object, striving
to obtain it. ‘The prize was seen in
the distance, and he diligently sought
There is a reference
here to the Grecian races, and the
meaning is, ‘‘I steadily pursue my
course;” comp. Notes on 1 Cor. ix. 24.
q If that I may apprehend, lf Imay
13 Brethren, I count not my-

obtain, or reach, the heavenly prize.
There was a glorious object in view,
and he made most strenuous exertions
to obtain it. ‘The idea in the word
‘apprehend’ is that of taking hold
of, or of seizing suddenly and with
eagerness; and, since there is no
doubt of its being used in an allusion
to the Grecian foot-races, it is not
improbable that there is a reference
to the laying hold of the pole or post
which marked the goal, by the racer
who had outstripped the other competitors, and who, by that act, might
claim the victory and the reward.
q That for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. By Christ
Jesus. he idea is, that he had been
called into the service of the Lord
Jesus, with a view to the obtaining of
an important object. He recognised
(1.) the fact that the Lord Jesus had,
as it were, laid hold on him, or seized
him with eagerness or suddenness, for
so the word used here--xareangdnv--
means (comp. Mark ix. 18; John viii.
3,4; xii. 35; 1 Thess. v. 4; and (2.)
the fact that the Lord Jesus had laid
hold on him, with a view to his obtaining the prize. He had done it
in order that he might obtain the
crown of life, that he might serve
him faithfully here, and then be rewarded in heaven. We may learn,
from this, (1.) That Christians are
seized, or laid hold on, when they are
converted, by the power of Christ, to
be employed in his service. (2.) That
there is an object or purpose which
he has inview. He designs that they
shall obtain a glorious prize, and he
“ apprehends’’ them with reference to
its attainment. (3.) That the fact that
Christ has called us into his service
with reference to such an object, and
designs to bestow the crown upon us,
need not and should not dampen our
exertions, or diminish our zeal. It
should rather, as in the case of Paul,
excite our ardour, and urge us forward. We should seek diligently to
gain that, for the securing of which,
Christ has called us into his service.
The fact that he has thus arrested us
in our mad career of sin; that he has

self to have apprehended : but this

by his grace constrained us to enter
into his service, and that he contemplates the bestowment upon us of the
immortal crown, should be the highest
motive for effort. The true Christian, then, who feels that heaven is
to be his home, and who believes that
Christ means to bestow it upon him,
will make the most strenuous efforts
to obtain it. The prize is so beautiful and glorious, that he will exert
every power of body and soul that it
may be his. The belief, therefore,
that God means to save us, is one of
the highest incentives to effort in the
cause of religion.

13. Brethren, I count not myself to
have apprehended. That is, to have
obtained that for which [ have been
called into the service of the Redeemer. There is something which
I strive after which I have not yet
gained. This statement is a confirmation of the opinion that in the
previous verse, where he says that he
was not “‘already perfect,” he includes
a moral perfection, and not merely
the obtainment of the prize or reward ; for no one could suppose that
he meant to be understood as saying
that he had obtained the crown of
glory. § This one thing Ido. Paul
had one great aim and purpose of life.
He did not attempt to mingle the
world and religion, and to gain both.
He did not seek to obtain wealth and
salvation too; or honour here and
the crown of glory hereafter, but he
had one object, one aim, one great
purpose of soul. To this singleness
of purpose he owed his extraordinary
attainments in piety, and his uncommon success as a minister. A man
will accomplish little who allows his
mind to be distracted by a multiplicity of objects. A Christian will accomplish nothing who has not a single great aim and purpose of soul.
That purpose should be to secure the
prize, and to renounce everything
that would be in the way to its attainment. Let us then so live that
we may be able to say, that there is
one great object which we always
have in view, and that we mean to

cne thing J do, forgetting ¢ those
things which are behind, and reacha@P3.45.10; He.6.1.

avoid everything which would interfere with that. § Forgetting those
things which are behind. There is
an ailusion here undoubtedly to the
Grecian races. One running to secure the prize would not stop to look
behind him to see how much ground
he had run over, or who of his competitors had falien or lingered in the
way. He would keep his eye steadily
on the prize, and strain every nerve
that he might obtain it. If his attention was diverted for a moment
from that, it would hinder his flight,
and might be the means of his losing
the crown. So the apostle says it
was with him. He looked onward
to the prize. le fixed the eye intently on that. It was the single object in his view, and he did not allow
his mind to be diverted from that by
anything--not even by the contemplation of the past. He did not stop
to think of the difficulties which he
had overcome, or the troubles which
he had met, but he thought of what
wasyet to be accomplished. This does
not mean that he would not have regarded a proper contemplation of the
past life as useful and profitable for a
Christian (comp. Notes on Eph.ii.11),
but that he would not allow any reference to the past to interfere with
the one great effort to win the prize.
It may be, and is, profitable for a
Christian to look over the past mercies of God to his soul, in order to
awaken emotions of gratitude in the
heart, and to think of his shortcomings and errors, to produce penitence
and humility. But none of these
things should be allowed for one moment to divert the mind from the purpose to win the incorruptible crown.
And it may be remarked in general,
that a Christian will make more rapid
advances in piety by looking forward
than by looking backward. Forward
we see everything to cheer and animate us--the crown of victory, the
joys of heaven, the society of the
blessed--the Saviour beckoning to us
and encouraging us. Backward, we

ing forth unto those things which
are before,

see everything to dishearten and to

humble. Our own unfaithfulness;
our coldness, deadness, and dulness ;
the little zeal and ardour which we
have, all are fitted to humble and
discourage. He is the most cheerful
Christian who looks onward, and who
keeps heaven always in view; he who
is accustomed much to dwell on the
past, though he may be a true Christian, will be likely to be melancholy
and dispirited, to be a recluse rather
than a warm-hearted and active friend
of the Saviour. Or if he looks backward to contemplate what he has
done--the space that he has run over
--the difficulties which he has surmounted --and his own rapidity in the
race, he will be likely to become selfcomplacent and self-satisfied. He
will trust his past endeavours, and
feel that the prize is now secure, and
will relax his future efforts. Let us
then look onward. Let us not spend
our time either in pondering the
gloomy past, and our own unfaithfulness, or in thinking of what we
have done, and thus becoming puffed
up with self-complacency; but let us
keep the eye steadily on the prize,
and run the race as though we had
just commenced it.. § And reaching

forth. Asonedoesinarace. {{ Unto

those things which are before. Before
the racer there was a crown or garland to be bestowed by the judges of
the games. Before the Christian
there is a crown of glory, the eternal
reward of heaven. ‘There is the favour of God, victory over sin and
death, the society of the redeemed
and of angelic beings, and the assurance of perfect and eternal freedom
from all evil. These are enough to
animate the soul, and to urge it on
with ever-increasing vigour in the
christian race.

14. I press toward the mark. As
he who was running a race did. The
‘mark’? means properly the object
set up at a distance at which one
looks or aims, and hence the goal, or
post which was set up at the end of a
14 I press “ toward the mark for
the prize of the high ® calling of
God in Christ Jesus.

15 Let us therefore, as many
as be perfect, ¢ be thus 4 minded :

@ 1Co.9.24; He.12.1. b He.3.1.

race-course, and which was to be
reached in order that the prize might
be won. Here it means that which
is at the end of the Christian race--
in heaven. §] For the prize. The
prize of the racer was a crown or
garland of olive, laurel, pine, or apple;
see Notes on | Uor. ix. 24. The
prize of the Christian is the crown
that is incorruptible in heaven. §f Of
the high calling of God. Which 1s
the end or result of that calling.
God has called us to great and noble
efforts; to a career of true honour
and glory; to the obtainment of a
bright and imperishable crown. It is
a calling which is “high,” or upward
--(évw)--that is, which tends to the
skies. The calling of the Christian
is from heaven, and to heaven; comp.
Prov. xv.24. Hehas been summoned
by God through the gospel of the
Lord Jesus to secure the crown. It
is placed before and above him in
heaven. It may be his, if he will not
faint or tire or look backward. It
demands his highest efforts, and it is
worth all the exertions which a mortal
can make even in the longest life.

15. Let us therefore, as many as
be perfect; see Notes on ver. 12. Or,
rather, those who would be perfect ;
or who are aiming at perfection. It
can hardly be supposed that the apostle
would address them as already perfect, when be had just said of himself
that he had not attained to that state.
But those whom he addressed might
be supposed to be aiming at perfection, and he exhorts them, therefore,
to have the same spirit that he himself had, and to make the same efforts
which he himself put forth. Be
thus minded, That is, be united in
the effort to obtain the prize, and to
become entirely perfect. ‘* Let them
put forth the same effort which I do,
forgetting what is behind, and pressing forward to the mark.” § And if
‘ any thing ye be otherwise minded.

and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you.
16 Nevertheless, whereto we
have already attained, let us walk
c 1Co.2.6. d Ga.5.10.

That is, if there were any among
them who had not these elevated
views and aims, and who had not been
brought to see the necessity of such
efforts, or who had not learned that
such high attainments were possible.
There might be those among them
who had been very imperfectly instructed in the nature of religion;
those who entertained views which
impeded their progress, and prevented
the simple and earnest striving for
salvation which Paul was enabled to
put forth. Me had laid aside every
obstacle ; renounced all the Jewish
opinions which had impeded his salvation, and had now one single aim--
that of securing the prize. Butthere
might be those who had not attained
to these views, and who were still impeded and embarrassed by erroneous
opinions. § God shall reveal even
this unto vou. We will correct your
erroneous opinions, and disclose to
you the importance of making this
effort for the prize. ‘This is the expression of an opinion, that to those
who were sincere and true Christians, God would yet make a full
revelation of the nature of religion,
or would lead them on so that they
would fully understand it. They who
are acquainted with religion at all, or
who haye been truly converted, God
will teach and guide until they shall
have a full understanding of divine
things.

16. Nevertheless, whereto we have
already attained, let us walk by the
same rule. This is a most wise and
valuable rule, andarule that would
save much difficulty and contention
in the church, if it were honestly applied. The meaning jis this, that
though there might be different degrees of attainment among Christians,
and different views on many subjects,
yet there were points in which all
could agree ; there were attainments
which they all had made, and in re-

by the same rule, ¢ let us mind the
same thing.

a Ga.6.16.

ference to them they should walk in
harmony and love. It might be that
some had made much greater advances than others. They had more
elevated views of religion ; they had
higher knowledge ; they were nearer
perfection. Others had had less advantages of education and instruction,
had had fewer opportunities of making progress in the divine life, and
would less understand the higher
mysteries of the Christian life. They
might not see the truth or propriety
of many things which those in advance of them would see clearly. But
it was not worth while to quarrel
about these things. There should be
no angry feeling, and no fault-finding
on either side. There were many
things in which they could see alike,
and where there were no jarring sentiments. In those things they could
walk harmoniously; and they who
were in advance of others should
not complain of their less informed
brethren as lacking all evidence of
piety ; nor should those wha had not
made such advances complain of those
before them as fanatical, or as disposed
to push things to extremes. ‘They
who bad the higher views should, as
Paul did, believe that God will yet
communicate them to the church at
large, and in the mean time should not
denounce others; and those who had
less elevated attainments should not
censure their brethren as wild and
visionary. There were common
grounds on which they might unite,
and thus the harmony of the church
would be secured. No better rule than
this could be applied to the subjects
of inquiry which spring up among
Christians respecting temperance,
slavery, moral reform, ard the various
doctrines of religion ; and, if this rule
had been always observed, the church
would have been always saved from
harsh contention and from schism. If
a man does not see things just as I do,
let me try with mildness to “ teach ”’
him, and let me believe that, if he is a

Christian, God will make this known/ tate the most holy men.

17 Brethren, be followers » together of me, and mark them whick
b1Th.I1.6.

to him yet; but let me not quarrel
with him, for neither of us would be
benefited by that, nor would the object be likely to be attained. In the
mean time, there are many things in
which we can agree. In them let us
work together, and strive, as far as we
can, to promote the common object.
Thus we shall save our temper, give
no occasion to the world to reproach
us, and be much more likely to come
together in all owr views. The best
way to make true Christians harmonious is, to labour together in the
common cause of saving souls. As far
as we can agree, let us go and labour
together; and where we cannot yet,
let us “agree to differ.’ We shall
all think alike by-and-by.

17. Brethren, be followers together
of me. That is,live asIdo. A minister of the gospel, a parent, or a
Christian of any age or condition,
ought so to live that he can refer to
his own example, and exhort others to
imitate the course of life which he had
led. Paul could do this without ostentation orimpropriety. They knew
that he lived so as to be a proper example for others; and he knew that
they would feel that his hfe had been
such that there would be no impropriety in his referring to it in this
manner. But, alas! how few are there
who can safely imitate Paul in this!
q And mark them which walk so, as
ye haveus for an ensample. ‘There
were those in the cliurch who endeavoured to live ag he had done, renouncing all confidence in the flesh,
and aiming to win tlie prize. There
were others, it would seem, who were
actuated by different views; see ver.
18. There are usually two kinds of
professing Christians in every church
--those who imitate the Saviour, and
those who are worldly and vain. The
exhortation here is, to ‘‘ mark’’--that
is, to observe with a view to imitate--
those who lived as the apostles did.
We should set before our minds the
best examples, and endeavour to imiA worldly
which walk so, as ye have us @ for
an ensample.
18 (For many walk, of whom

@ 1Pe.5.36 b Ga.1.7; 6.12.

and fashionable professor of religion

is a very bad example to follow ; and
especially young Christians should set
before their minds for imitation, and
associate with, the purest and most
spiritual members of the church. Our
religion takes its form and complexion
much from those with whom we associate ; and he will usually be the most
holy man who associates with the
most holy companions.

18. For many walk. Many live,
the Christian life being often in the
Scriptures compared with a journey.
In order to induce them to imitate
those who were the most holy, the
apostle says that there were many,
even in the church, whom it would not
be safe for them to imitate. Ile evidently hererefers mainly to the church
at Philippi, though it may be that he
meant to make the declaration general, and to say that the same thing
existed in other churches. There has
rot probably been any time yet inthe
Christian church when the same thing
might not besaid. { Of whom I have
told you often. When he preached
in Philippi. Paul was not afraid to
speak of church-members when they
did wrong, and to warn others not to
imitate their example. He did not
attempt to cover up or excuse guilt
because it was in the church, or to
apologize for the defects and errors
of those who professed to be Christians. The true way is, toadmit that
there are those in the church who do
not honour their religion, and to warn
others against following their example.
But this fact does not make religion
any the less true or valuable, any
more than the fact that there is
counterfeit money makes all money
dad, or makes genuine coinof no value.
\ dnd now tell you even weeping. This
's the true spirit with which to speak
of the errors and faults of Christians.
[t is not to go and blazon their inconsistencies abroad, It is not to find
pleasure in the fact that they are inconsistent. It is not to reproach re-

I have told you often, and now
tell you even weeping, that they
are the enemies 8 of the cross of
Christ ;

ligion on that account, and to say that

all religion is false and hollow, and
that all professors are hypocrites.
We should rather speak of the fact
with tears ; for, if there is any thing
that should make us weep, it is, that
there are those in the church who are
hypocrites, or who dishonour their
profession. We should weep, (1.) because they are in danger of destroying their own souls ; (2.) because they
are destined to certain disappointment
when they come to appear before God;
and (3.) because they injure the cause
of religion, and give occasion to the
‘enemies of the Lord to speak reproachfully.”’ Ile who loves religion,
will weep over the inconsistencies of
its friends; he who does not, will
exult and triumph. { That they are
the enemies of the cross of Christ.
The “cross” was the instrument of
death on which the Redeemer died to
make atonement for sin. As the
atonement made by Christ for sin is
that which peculiarly distinguishes
his religion from all others, the
“cross”? comes to be used to denote
his religion; and the phrase here
means, that they were the enemies ot
his religion, or were strangers to the
gospel. It is not to be supposed that
they were open and avowed enemies
of the cross, or that they denied that
the Lord Jesus died on the cross to
make anatonement. The characteristic of those persons mentioned in
the following verse is, rather, that
they were living in a manner which
showed that they were strangers to
his pure gospel. An immoral life is
enmity to the cross of Christ ; for he
died to make us holy. A life where
there is no evidence that the heart
is renewed, is enmity to the cross ;
for he died that we might be renewed. They are the enemies of the
cross, in the church, (1.) who have
never been born again ; (2.) who are
living in the indulgence of known
sin; (3.) who manifest none of the
peculiarities of those who truly love

19 Whose end @7s destruction,
whose God ° is their belly, and
whose glory © zs in their shame,
who mind earthly things.)

@ 2Conal. 15: 2Pe2e1.
b1Ti.6.5. ¢ Ho.4.7.

tim ; (4.) who have a deeper interest

in worldly affairs than they have in
the cause: of the Redeemer; (5.)
whom nothing can induce to give up
their worldly concerns when God
demands it ; (6.) who are opposed to
all the peculiar doctrines of Christianity ; and (7.) who are opposed
.o all the peculiar dutzes of religion,
or who live in the habitual neglect
of them.
all times there are such enemies of
the cross in the church, and the language of the apostle implies that it
is a proper subject of grief and tears.
He wept over it, and so should we.
It is from this cause that so much
injury is done to the true religion in
the world. One secret enemy in a
camp may do more harm than fifty
men who are open foes ; and a single
unholy or inconstant member in a
church may do much more injury
than many men who are avowedly
opposed to religion. It is not by infidels, and scoffers, and bJasphemers,
so much, that injury is done to the
cause of religion ; it is by the unholy
lives of its professed friends -- the
worldliness, inconsistency, and want
of the proper spirit of religion, among
those who are in thechurch. Nearly
all the objections that are made to
religion are from this quarter ; and,
if this objection were taken away,
the religion of Christ would soon
spread its triumphs around the globe.

19. Whose end is destruction.
That is, as they have no true religion,
they must perish in the same manner

as all sinners. A mere profession
will not save them. Unless they are
converted, and become the true

friends of the cross, they cannot enter heaven. § Whose God is their
belly. Who worship their own appetites ; or who live not to adore and
honour God, but for self-indulgence
and sensual gratifications; see Rom.
xvi. 18. § And whose glory is in

It is to be feared that at’
20 For our conversation @is in
heaven; from whence also we
look ¢ for the Saviour, the Lord
Jesus Christ ;

d Ep.2.6,19. e He.9.28.

their shame. hat is, they glory in
things of which they ought to be
ashamed. They indulge in modes of
living which ought to cover them
with confusion. { Who mind earthly
things. That is, whose hearts are set
on earthly things, or who live to obtain them. Their attention is directed to honour, gain, or pleasure,
and their chief anxiety is that they
may secure these objects. This is
mentioned as one of the characteristics of enmity to the cross of Christ;
and if this be so, how many are there
in the church now who are the real
enemies of the cross! How many
professing Christians are there who
regard little else than worldly things!
Tlow many who live only to acquire
wealth, to gain honour, or to enjoy
the pleasures of the world! How
many are there who have no interest
in a prayer-meeting, in a Sabbathschool, in religious conversation, and
in the advancement of true religion
on the earth! ‘Thesé are the real
enemies of the cross. It is not so
much those who deny the doctrines
of the cross, as it is those who oppose
its influence on their hearts; not so
much those who live to scoff and deride religion, as it 1s those who “‘ mind
earthly things,” that injure this holy
cause in the world.

20. For our conversation ts in heaven, That is, this is true of all who
are sincere Christians. It is a
characteristic of Christians, in contradistinction from those who are the
“enemies of the cross,” that their
conversation is In heaven. ‘The word
“conversation” we now apply almost
entirely to oral discourse. It formerly, however, meant conduct in
general, and it is usually employed
in this sense in the Scriptures; see
Notes on chap. i. 27, where the verb
occurs, from which the noun here is
derived. The word here used --
woairiywa--is found nowhere else in
the New Testament. It properly
means, any public measure,, administration of the state, the manner in
which the affairs of a state are administered ; and then the state itself,
the communitu. commonwealth, those
who are bound under the same laws,
and associated in the same society.
JIere it cannot mean that their ‘ con7ersation,” in the sense of discourse
or talking, was in heaven ; nor that
their “‘ conduct’ was in heaven -- for
this would convey no idea, and the
original word does not demand it ;
but the idea is, that they were heavenly citizens, or citizens of the heavenly world, in contradistinction from
a world/y community. They were
governed by the laws of heaven; they
vere a community associated as citizens of that world, and expecting
there to dwell, The idea is, that
there are two yreat communities in
the universe--that of the world, and
that of heaven; that governed by
worldly laws and institutions, and that
by the laws of heaven; that associated
for worldly purposes, and that associated for heavenly or religious
purposes; and that the Christian belonged to the latter,--the enemy of
the cross, though in the church, belonged to the former. Between true
Christians, therefore, and_ others,
there is all the difference which arises
from belonging to different communities ; being bound together for different purposes; subject to different
laws; and altogether under a different administration. There is more
difference between them than there
is between the subjects of two earthly
governments ; comp. Notes on Eph.
li. 6, 19. § From whence also we
look fer the Saviour. From heaven. That is, it is one of the characteristics of the Christian that he beheves that the Lord Jesus will return
from heaven, and that he looks and
waits for it. Other men do not believe this (2 Pet. iii. 4), but the
Christian confidently expects it. Tis
Saviour has been taken away from
the earth, and is now in heaven, but
it is a great and standing article of
his faith that that same Saviour will
again come, and take the believer to

himself; see Notes on John xiv. 2.

3; 1 Thess. iv. 14. This was’ the
firm belief of the early Christians,
and this expectation-with them was
allowed to exert a constant influence
on their hearts and lives. It led
them (1.) to desire to be prepared
for his coming; (2.) to feel that
earthly affairs were of little importance, as the scene here was soon to
close; (8.) to live above the world,
and in the desire of the appearing of
the Lord Jesus. This was one of the
elementary doctrines of their faith,
and one of the means of producing
deadness to the world among them ;
and among the early Christians there
was, perhaps, no doctrine that was
more the object of firm belief, and
the ground of more delightful contemplation, than that their ascended
Master would return. In regard to
the certainty of their belief on this
point, and the effect which it had on
their minds, see the following texts
of the New Testament; Matt. xxiv.
49Oe 4A Wke -XLlo toy es OMMEXTVe On;
Acts i. 11: 1 Cor..iv. 5; Col. iii. 4;
1 Thess! 11.19); 2" Thess2iel;” Heb:
x. 87; James v. 7, 8; 1 John iii. 2;
Rey. 'xxii. 7, 12, 26°° It may be
asked, with great force, whether
Christians in general have now any
such expectation of the secoud appearing of the Lord Jesus, or whether
they have not fallen into the dangerous error of prevailing unbelief,
so that the expectation of his coming is allowed to exert almost no
influence on the soul. In the passage before us, Paul says that it was
one of the distinct characteristics of
Christians that they looked for the
coming of the Saviour from heaven.
They believed that he would return.
They anticipated that important etfects would follow to them from his
second coming. So we should look.
There may be, indeed, a difference of
opinion about the time when he will
come, and about the question whether
he will come to reign “literally, on
the earth--but the fact that Christ
will return to our werld is common
ground on which all Christians may
meet, and is a fact which should be
allowed to exert its full influence on

21 Who shall change ¢ our vile{ to the working ? whereby he is
body, that it may be fashioned like | able even ¢ to subdue all things

unto his glorious body, according
21 Co.15.43,&¢; 1 John 3.2.

unto himself,

b Ep.1.19. ¢ 1 Co.15.26,27.

the heart. It is a glorious truth--for
what a sad world would this be, and
what a sad prospect would be before
the Christian, if the Saviour were
never to come to raise his people from
their graves, and to gather his redeemed to himself! The fact that he
will come is identified with all our
hopes. It is fitted to cheer us in
trial; to guard us in temptation; to
make us dead to the world; to lead
us to keep the eye turned toward
heayen.

21. Who shall change our vile body;
comp. Notes on 1 Cor. xv. The original words, which are here rendered
‘vile body,’ properly mean ‘the
body of humiliation ;’ that is, our
humble body. It refers to the body
as it is in its present state, as subject
to infirmities, disease, and death. It
is different far from what it was when
man was created, and from what it
will be in the future world. Paul
says that itis one of the objects of the
Christian hope and expectation, that
this body, so subject to infirmities and
sicknesses, will be changed. ¥ That
it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. Gr., ‘“ The body of his
glory ;’’ that is, the body which he has
in his glorified state. What change
the body of the Redeemer underwent
when he ascended to heaven, we are
not informed,--nor do we know what
is the nature, size, appearance, or
forrn of the body which he now has.
It is certain that it is adapted to the
glorious world where he dwells; that
it has none of the infirmities to which
it was liable when here; that it is not
subject, as here, to pain or death;
that it is not sustained in the same
manner. ‘The body of Christ in heaven is of the same nature as the
bodies of the saints will be in the resurrection, and which the apostle
calls ‘‘spiritual bodies,’ (Notes, 1
Cor. xv. 44); and it is doubtless accompanied with all the circumstances
of splendour and glory which are appropriate to the Son of God. The

idea here is, that it is the object of
the desire and anticipation of the
Christian, to be made just like Christ
in all things. He desires to resemble
him in moral character here, and to
be lke him in heaven. Nothing else
will satisfy him but such conformity
to the Son of God; and when he shall
resemble him in all things, the wishes
of his soul will all be met and fulfilled.
{| According to the working, &c. That
is, such a change demands the exertion of vast power. No creature can
do it. But there is One who has
power intrusted to him over all things,
and he can effect this great transformation in the bodies of men ; comp. 1
Cor. xy. 26, 27. He can mould the
mind and the heart to conformity to
his own image, and thus also he can
transform the body so that it shall
resemble his. Every thing he can
make subject to his will. (Notes on
Matt. xxviii. 18; John xvil. 2.) And
he that has this power can change our
humbled and debased bodies, so that
they shall put on the glorious appearance and form of that of the Son of
God himself. What a contrast between our bodies here--frail, feeble,
subject to sickness, decay, and corruption--and the body as it will be in
heaven! And what a glorious prospect awaits the weak and dying believer, in the future world !

1. It is a privilege of the Christian
to rejoice; ver. 1. He has more
sources of real joy than any other
persons; see 1 Thess. v.16. He has
a Saviour in whom he may always
find peace; a God whose character he
can always contemplate with pleasure;
a heaven to look forward to where
there is nothing but happiness; a
Bible that is full of precious promises,
and at all times the opportunity of
prayer, in which he may roll all his
sorrows on the arms of an unchanging friend. If there is any one on
earth who ought to be happy, it is the
Christian.

2. The Christian should so live as
to leave on others the impression that
religion produces happiness. In our
intercourse with our friends, we should
show them that religion does not cause
sadness or gloom, sourness or misanthropy, but that it produces cheerfulness, contentment, and peace. ‘This
may be shown by the countenance,
and by the whole demeanour--by a
calm brow, and a benignant eye, and
by a cheerful aspect. The internal
peace of the soul should be evinced by
every proper external expression. A
Christian may thus be always doing
good--for he is always doing good who
leaves the impression on others that
religion makes its possessors happy.

3. The nature of religion is almost
always mistaken by the world. They
suppose that it makes its possessors
melancholy and sad. The reason is,
not that they are told so by those who
are religious, and not that even they
can see any thing in religion to produce misery, but because they have
fixed their affections on certain things
which they suppose to be essential to
happiness, and which they suppose religion would require them to give up
without substituting any thing in
their place. But never was there a
greater mistake. Let them go and
ask Christians, and they will obtain
but one answer from them. It is,
that they never knew what true happiness was till they found it in the
Saviour. This question may be proposed to a Christian of any denomination, or in any land, and the answer
will be uniformly the same. Why is
it, then, that the mass of persons regard religion as adapted only to make
them unhappy? Why will they not
take the testimony of their friends in
the case, and believe those whom they
would believe on any other subject,
when they declare that it is only true
religion that ever gives them solid
péace ?

4, We cannot depend on any external advantages of birth or blood for
salvation; ver. 4--6. Few or no persons have as much in this respect to
rely on as Paul had. Indeed, if sal-

vation were to be obtained at all by
such external advantages, it is impossible to conceive that more could have
been united in one case than there was
in his. He had not only the advantage of having been born a Hebrew ;
of having been early trained in the
Jewish religion; of being instructed
in the ablest manner, but also the
advantage of entire blamelessness in
his moral deportment. He had showed
in every way possible that he was
heartily attached to the religion of his
fathers, and he began life with a zeal
in the cause which seemed to justify
the warmest expectationsof his friends.
But all this was reusunced, when he
came to see the true method of salvation, and saw the better way by which
eternal life is to be obtained. And if
Paul could not depend on this, we
cannot safely do it. It will not save
us that we have been born in the
church ; that we have had pious parents ; that we were early baptized and
consecrated to God; that we were
trained in the Sabbath-school. Nor
will it save us that we attend regularly on the place of worship, or that
we are amiable, correct, honest, and
upright in our lives. Wecan no more
depend on these things than Saul of
Tarsus could, and if all his eminent
advantages failed to give him a solid
ground of hope, our advantages will be
equally vain in regard to our salvation. It almost seems as if God designed in the case of Saul of Tarsus,
that there should be one instance
where every possible external advyantage for salvation shouid be found,
and there should be every thing that
men ever could rely on in moral character, in order to show that no such
things could be sufficient to save the
soul. All these may exist, and yet
there may not be a particle of love to
God, and the heart may be full of
selfishness, pride, and ambition, as it
was in his case.

5. Religion demands humility ; ver.
7,8. It requires us to renounce all
dependence on our own merits, and to
rely simply on the merits of another--
the Lord Jesus Christ. If we are
ever saved, we must be brought to
esteem all the advantages which birth

and blood and our own righteousness
can bestow as worthless, and even vile,
in the matter of justification. We
shall not despise these things in themselves, nor shall we consider that vice
is as desirable as virtue, nor that a
bad temper is to be sought rather
than an amiable disposition, nor that
dishonesty is as commendable as honesty; but we shall feel that in comparison with the merits of the Redeemer all these are worthless. But
the mind is not brought to this condition without great humiliation.
Nothing but the power of God can
bring a proud and haughty and selfrighteous sinner to this state, where
he is willing to renounce all dependence on his own merits, and to be
saved in the same way as the vilest of
the species.

6. Let us seek to obtain an interest
in the righteousness of the Redeemer;

ver. 9. Our own righteousness cannot save us. But in him there is
enough. ‘here is all that we want,

and if we have that righteousness
which is by faith, we have all that is
needful to render us accepted with
God, and to prepare us for heaven.
When there is such a way of salvation--so easy, so free, so glorious, so
ample for all, how unwise is any one
to rest on his own works, and to expect to be saved by what he has done!
The highest honour of man is to be
saved by the merits of the Son of
God, and he has reached the most
elevated rank in the human condition
who has the most certain hope of salvation through him.

7, There is enough to be gained to
excite us to the utmost diligence and
effort in the Christian life; ver. 10--
14. If men can be excited to effort
by the prospect of an earthly crown
in a race or a game, how much more
should we be urged forward by the
prospect of the eternal prize! To
seek to know the Redeemer; to be
raised up from the degradation of sin;
to have part in the resurrection of
the just; to obtain the prize of the
high calling in heaven--to be made
everlastingly happy and _ giorious
there--what object was ever placed
before the mind \ike this? What ar-

dour should it excite that we may
gain it! Surely, the hope of obtaining such a prize as is before the
Christian, should call forth all our
powers. The struggle will not be
long The race will soon be won.
The victory will be glorious; the defeat would be overwhelming and awful
No one need fear that he can put fort.
too much effort to obtain the prize. It
is worth every exertion, and we shoulii
never relax our efforts, or give over
in despair.

8. Let us, like Paul, ever cherish an
humble sense of our attainments in
religion; ver. 12, 13. If Paul had
not reached the point of perfection, it
is not to be presumed that we have ;
if he could not say that he had ‘‘attained,” it is presumption in us to
suppore that we have, if he had occasion for humiliation, we have more;
if he felt that he was far short of the
object which he sought, and was
pressed down with the consciousness
of imperfection, sucha feeling becomes
us also. Yet let us not sink down in
despondency andinaction. Like him,
let us strain every nerve that we may
overcome our imperfections and wir
the prize. That prize is before us.
It is glorious. We may be sensible
that we, as yet, have not reached it,
but if we will strive to obtain it, it will
soon be certainly ours. We may feel
that we are far distant from it now in
the degree of onr attainments, but we
are not far from it in fact. It will be
but a short period before the Christian will lay hold on that immortal
crown, and before his brow will be
encircled with the diadem of glory.
For the race of life, whether we wia
or lose, is soon run; and when a
Christian begins a day, he knows not
but he may end it in heaven; when he
lies down on his bed at night, he
knows not but he may awake with thc
“ prize” in his hand, and with the dia
dem of glory sparkling on his brow.

9. Our thoughts should be much in
heaven; ver.20. Our home is there;
our citizenship is there, Here we are
strangers and pilgrims. Weare away
from home, in a cold and unfriendiy
world. Our great interests are in the
skies; our eternal dwelling is to be
cnere; our best friends are already
there. There is our glorious Saviour,
with a body adapted to those pure
abodes, and there are many whom we
have loved on earth already with him.
‘They are happy now, and we should
not love them less because they are in
heaven. Since, therefore, our great
interests are there, and our best
friends there; and since we ourselves
are citizens of that heaven!y world,
our best affections should be there.
10. We look for the Saviour; ver.
20, 21. He will return to our world.
lle will change our vile bodies, and
make them like his own glorious body.
And since this is so, let us (1.) bear
with patience the trials and infirmities
to which our bodies here are subject.
These trials will be short, and we may
well bear them for a few days, knowing that soon all pain will cease, and
that all that is humiliating in the
body will be exchanged for glory. (2.)
Let us not think too highly or too
much of our bodies here. They may
be now beautiful and comely, but they
are ‘“‘vile’’ and degraded. compared
with what they will soon be. They
are subject to infirmity and to numerous pains and sicknesses. Soon the
most beautiful body may become
loathsome to our best friends. Soon,
too offensive to be looked upon, it will
be hidden in the grave. Why then
should we seek to pamper and adorn
these mortal frames? Why live only
to decorate them? Why should we
idolize a mass of mouided and animated clay$ Yet (3.) let us learn to
honour the body in a true sense. It
is soon to be changed. It will be
made like the glorified body of Christ.
Yes, this frail, diseased, corruptible,
and humbled body; this body, that is
soon to be laid in the grave, and to
return to the dust, is soon to put
on a new form, and to te clothed
with immortality. It will be what
the body of Christ now is--glorious and immortal. What achange!
Christian, go and look on the
creeping caterpillar, and see it
changed to the gay and gilded butterfly--yesterday, a crawling and offensive insect ; to-day, with gaudy colours
gn inhabitant ofthe air, and adweller

amidst flowers; and see an image of
what thy body shall be, and of the
mighty transformation which thou
wilt soon undergo. See the change
from the cold death of winter to the
fragrance and life of spring, and behold an image of the change which
thou thyself wilt ere long experience
anda proof that some such change
awaits thece

“ Shall spring the faded world revive ?

Shall waning moons their light renew ?

Again shall setting suns ascend ag bs
And chase the darkness from our view?

Shall life revisit dymg worms,
And spread the joyful insect’s wing ?
And, oh, shall man awake no more,
To see thy face, thy name to sing ?

Faith sees the bright, eternal doors
Unfold to make her children way 3
They shall be cloth’d with endless life,
And shine in everlasting day.”
Dwicnrt.
11. Let us look for the coming of
the Lord; ver. 21. All that we hope
for depends on his reappearing. Our
day of triumph and of the fulness of
cur joy isto be when he shall return.
Then we shall be raised from the
grave; then our vile bodies shall be
changed ; then we shall be acknowledged as his friends ; then we shall go
to be for ever with him. The earth is
not our home; nor is the grave to be
our everlasting bed of rest. Our
home is heaven--and the Saviour
will come, that he may raise us up to
that blessed abcde. And who knows
when he may appear? Ile himself
commanded us to be ready, for he
said he would come at an hour when
we think not. We should so desire
his coming, that the hours of his delay
would seem to be heavy and long. and
should so live that we can breathe
forth with sincerity, at all times, the
fervent prayer of the beloved disciple,
“Come, Lord Jesus, coME QUICKLY ;”’
Rey. xxii. 20.
“* My faith shall triumph o’er the grave,
And trample on the tombs 3
My Jesus, my Redeemer, lives,
My God, my Saviour, comes 3
Ere Jong I know he shall appear,
In power and glory great ;
And death, the !ast of all his foes,
Lie vanquish'd at his feet.

Then, though the worms my flesh @e vous.
And make my form their prey,

1know I shall arise with power,
On the last judgu.ent-day ;--

"THEREFORE, my

brethren,

dearly beloved and longed

When God shall stand upon the earth,
Him then mine eyes shall see ;

My flesh shall feel a sacred birth,
And ever with him be.

Then his own hand shall wipe the tears
From every weeping eye ;

And pains, and groatis, and griefs, and fears,
Shall cease eternally.

How long, dear Saviour! Oh, how long
Shall this bright hour delay ?

Fly swift around, ye wheels of time,
And bring the welcome day.”

This chapter comprises the following points :

I. Exhortations.

II. Solemn commands to live as
became Christians.

III. The expression of a grateful
acknowledgment of the favours which
he had received from them; and,

IV. The customary salutations.

I, Exhortations; ver. 1--8. (1.)
Iie exhorts them to stand fast in the
Lord; ver 1. (2.) He entreats Euodias and Syntyche, who appear to
have been alienated from each other,
to be reconciled; ver. 2. (3.) He
entreats one whom he calls a “ true
yoke-fellow”’ to render assistance to
those women who had laboured with
him in the gospel; ver. 3.

II. Commands ; ver. 4--9. Ile
commands them to rejoice in the
Jord always, ver. 4; to let their
moderation be known to all, ver. 5 ; to
have no anxiety about worldly matters,
but in all their necessities to go to
God, ver. 6,7; andto do whatever
was honest, just, pure, Jevely, and of
good report, ver. 8, 9.

Ill. A grateful acknowledgment of
their kindness; ver. 10--19. He says
that their care of him had been manifested again, in such a wayas to be
highlygrateful to his feelings; ver. 10.
He did not indeed say that he had suffered, for he had learned, in whatever
state he was, to be content (ver. 11--
13); but they had shown a proper spirit
in endeavouring to relieve his necessities ; ver. 14. [le remarks that their

Watts.

for, my joy and crown, so stand
fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved.

church was the only one that had aided
him when he was in Mavedonia, and
that they had sent to him more than
once when he was in Thessalonica,
and says that their favour now was
an offering acceptable to God, who
would abundantly reward them ; ver.
15 --20.

IV. Salutations ; ver. 21--23.

1. Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and longed for. Doddridge
unites this verse with the previous
chapter, and supposes that it is the
proper close of the solemn statement
which the apostle makesthere. The
word therefore--#ers--has undoubted
reference to the remarks made there ;
and the meaning is, that in view of
the fact that there were many professed Christians who were not sincere
--that the “citizenship” of all true
Christians was in heaven, and that
Christians looked for the coming of
the Lord Jesus, who would make
them like to himself, the apostle exhorts them to stand fast in the Lord.
The accumulation of epithets of endearment in this verse shows his tender
regard for them, and is expressive of
his earnest solicitude for their welfare,
and his deep conviction of their danger. The term “longed for” is expressive of strong affection ; see chap.
i. 8, and ii. 26. § My joy. The
source of my joy. He rejoiced inthe
fact that they had been converted
under him; and in their holy walk,
and their friendship. Our chief joy
is in our friends ; and the chief happiness of a minister of the gospel is in
the pure lives of those to whom he
ministers; see3 John4. J Andcrown,
comp. 1 Thess. ii. 19. The word crown
means a circlet, chaplet, or diadem,
(1) as the emblem of royal dignity --
the symbol of office ; (2) as the prize
conferred on victors in the public
games, 1 Cor. ix. 25, and hence as an
emblem of the rewards of a future life;
2 Tim. iv. 8; James i. 12; 1 Pet. v.
4; (3) anything that is an ornament
2 I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche, that they be of
the same mind in the Lord.

3 And I entreat thee also, true

yoke-fellow, help those women
which laboured with me in the
gospel, with Clement also, and
with other my _ fellow-labourers

or honour, as one glories in a crown ;
comp. Prov. xii. 4, “A virtuous woman
is a crown to her husband ;” xiv. 24,
“The crown of the wise is their
riches ;’ xvi. 31, “‘ The hoary headisa
crown of glory ;’’ xvii. 6, ‘Children’s
children are the crown of old men.”
The idea here is, that the church at
Philippi was that in which the apostle
gloried. Ile regarded it as a high
honour to have been the means of
founding such achurch, and he looked
upon it with the same interest with
which a monarch looks upon the diadem which he wears. 4 So stand
‘ast in the Lord. In the service of
the Lord, and in the strength which
he imparts; see Notes on Eph. vi.
13, 14.

2. I beseech Euodias, and beseech
Syntyche. These are doubtless the
names of females. ‘The name Syntyche is sometimes the name of a man ;
but, if these persons are referred to in
ver. 3, there can be no doubt that they
were females. Nothing more is known
of them than ig here mentioned. It
has been commonly supposed that they
were deaconesses, who preached the
gospel to those of their own sex ; but
there is no certain evidence of this.
All that is known is, that there was
some disagreement between them, and
the apostle entreats them to be reconciled to each other. § That they be
of the same mind. That they be united, or reconciled. Whether the difference related to doctrine, or to something else, we cannot determine from
this phrase. The language is such as
would properly relate to any difference.
q In the Lord. in their Christian
walk and plans. They were doubtless
professing Christians, and the apostle
exhorts them to make the Lord the
great object of their affections, and
in their regard for him, to bury all
their petty differences and animosities.

3. And I entreat thee also, true

yoke-fellow. It isnot known to whom
the apostle refers here. No name is
mentioned, and conjecture is useless.
All that is known is, that it was somc
one whom Paul regarded as associated
with himself in labour, and one who
was so prominent at Philippi that it
would be understood who was referred
to, without more particularly mentioning him. The presumption, therefore,
is, that it was one of the ministers, or
“bishops” (see Notes, chap. i. 1) of
Philippi, who had been particularly
associated with Paul when he was
there. The epistle was addressed to
the “church with the bishops and
deacons” (chap. 1. 1); and the fact that
this one had been particularly associated with Paul, would serve to designate him with sufficient particularity. Whether he was related to
the women referred to, is wholly unknown. Doddridge supposes that he
might be the husband of one of these
women ; but ofthat there is no evidence. The term ‘‘yoke-fellow’’--
ovGuyo:--some have understood as a
proper name (Syzygus) ; but the proper import of the word is yoke-fellow,
and there is no reason to believe that
itis used here to denote a proper name.
If it had been, it is probable that some
other word than that here used and
rendered true--y:%710s--would have
been employed. The word true--
yvrous--ineans that he was sincere,
faithful, worthy of confidence. Paul
had had evidence of his sincerity and
fidelity ; and he was a proper person,
therefore, to whom to intrust a delicate
and important business. § Help those
women. ‘The common opinions, that
the women here referred to were
Euodias and Syntyche, and that the
office which the friend of Paul was
asked to perform was, to secure a reconciliation between them. ‘There is,
however, no certain evidence of this
The reference seems rather to be to
influential females who had rendered

gen names are in the book of
tife,

4 Rejoice in the Loid alway :
and again i say, Rejoice.

important assistance to Paul when he
was there. ‘The kind of “help” which
was to be imparted was probably by
counsel, and friendly co-operation in
the duties which they were called to
perform. ‘There is no evidence that
it refers to pecuniary aid; and, had it
referred to a reconcilation of those
who were at variance, it is probable
that some other word would have been
used than that here rendered help--

cvrauBavov. YJ Which laboured with ,

me in the gospel. As Paul did not
permit women to preach (see 1 Tim.
ii. 12; comp. Notes on 1 Cor. x. 5),
he must have referred here to some
other services which they had rendered. There were deaconesses in the
primitive churches (Notes, Rom. xvi.
1; 1 Tim. v. 9, seq.), to whom was
probably intrusted particularly the
care of the female members ofa church.
In the custom which prevailed in the
oriental world, of excluding females
from the public gaze, and of confining
them to their houses, it would not ve
practicable ‘for the apostles to have
access to them. ‘The duties of instructing and exhorting them were
then probably intrusted chiefly to
pious females ; and in this way important aid would be rendered in the
gospel. Paul could regard such as
“labouring with him,” though they
were not engaged in preaching. {] With
Clement also. That is, they were
associated with Clement, and with
the other fellow-labourers of Paul,
in aiding him inthe gospel. Clement
was doubtless some one who was well
known among them; and the apostle
felt that, by associating them with him,
as having been real helpers in the
gospel, their claim to respectful attention would be better appreciated.
Who Clement was, is unknown. Most
of the ancients say. it was Clement
of Rome, one of the primitive fathers.
But there is no evidence of this. The
name Clement was common, and there
is no improbability in supposing that

| & Let your moderation © be
| known unto all men: The Lord ¢
7g at hand

|) Sraichapisil.

610.4%.25. ¢ Re,22.7,20,

there might have been a preacher of
this name in the church at Philippi.
{| Whose names are in the book of life;
see Notes on Isa. iv. 3. The phrase,
‘the book of life,’’ which occurs here,
and in Rey. iii.5; xili. 8; xx. 12,15;
xxi. 27; xxii. 19, is a Jewish phrase,
and refers originally to a record or catalogue of names, asthe roll of an army.
It then means to be among the living,
as the name of an individual would be
erased from a catalogue when he was
deceased. The word life here refers
to eternal tife ; and the whole phrase
refers to those who were enrolled
among the true friends of God, or who
would certainly be saved. The use
of this phrase here implies the belief
of Paul that these persons were true
Christians. Names that are written
in the book of life will not be blotted
out. If the hand of God records them
there who can obliterate them ?

4. Rejoice in the Lord alway; see
Notes, chap.iii. 1. It is the privilege of
Christians to do this, not at certain
periods and at distant intervals, but
at all times they may rejoice that
there is a God and Saviour ; they may
rejoice in the character, law, and governinent of God--in his promises,
and in communion with him. ‘The
Christian, therefore, may be, and
should be, always a happy man. If
everything else changes, yet the Lord
does not change ; if the sources of all
other joy are dried up, yet this ia not ;
and there is not a moment of a Christian’s life in which he may not find
joy in the character, law, and promises of God.

5. Let your moderation be known
unto all men. That is, let it be such
that others may see it. This does
not mean that they were to make an
ostentatious display of it, but that it
should be such a characteristic of
their lives that it would be constantly visible to others. The word
moderation--triixts--refers to re~
straint on the passions, general so-

G Be careful@ for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and sup-

a Mat.6.25; 1 Pe.5.7.

berness of living, being free from all
excesses. ‘The word properly means
that which is fit or suitable, and then
propriety, gentleness, mildness.--
They were to indulge in no excess of
passion, or dress, or eating, or drinking. They were to govern their appetites, restrain their temper, and to
be examples of what was proper for
men in view of the expectation that
the Lord would soon appear. ¥ The
Lordisathand. Isnear; see Notes,
chap. ii. 20; 1 Cor. xvi. 22. This
has the appearance of being a phrase
in common use among the early Christians, and as being designed to keep
before their minds a lively impression
of an event which ought, by its anticipation, to produce an important
effect. Whether, by this phrase, they
commonly understood the coming of
the Lord to destroy Jerusalem, or to
remove them by death, or to judge
the world, or to reign personally on
the earth, it is impossible now to determine, and is not very material to
a proper understanding of its use here.
The idea is, that the expectation that
the Lord Jesus will “‘ come,’ ought
to be allowed to produce moderation
of our passions, in our manner of liying, in our expectations of what this
world can furnish, and in our desires
of earthly good. On him who feels
that he is soon to die, and to stand
at the bar of God--on him who expects soon to see the Lord Jesus
coming in the clouds of heaven, it
cannot fail to have this effect. Men
indulge their passions --are extravagant in their plans of life, and in their
expectations of earthly good for themselves and for their families, because
they have no realizing sense of the
truth that there is before them a vast
eternity. Hethat hasa lively expectation that heaven will soon be his,
will form very moderate expectations
of what this world can furnish.

6. Be careful for nothing. That
is, be not anxious or solicitous about
the things of the present life. The
word here used--yegiuvart---does not
mean that we are to exercise no care

about worldly matters---no care to
preserve our property, or to provide
for our families (comp. 1 Tim. v. 8) ;
but that there is to be such confidence
in God as to free the mind from anxiety, and such a sense of dependence
on him as to keep it calm; see the
subject explained in the Notes on
Matt. vi. 25. J But in everything.
Everything in reference to the supply
of your wants, and the wants of your
families; everything in respect to
afflictions, embarrassments, and trials;
and everything relating to your spiritual condition. There is nothing
which pertains to body, mind, estate,
friends, conflicts, losses, trials, hopes,
fears, in reference to which we may
not go and spread it all out before the
Lord. § By prayer and supplication.
The word rendered supplication is a
stronger term than the former. It is
the mode of prayer peculiarly which
arises from the sense of need, or want
--from due, to want, to neal.
q With thanksgiving Thanksgiving
connected with prayer. We can always find something to be thankful for,
no matter what may be the burden of
our wants, or the special subject of
our petitions. When we pray for the
supply of our wants, we may be thankful for that kind providence which has
hitherto befriended us ; when we pray
for restoration from sickness, we may
be thankful for the health we have
hitherto enjoyed, and for God’s merciful interposition in the former days
of trial, and for his goodness in now
sparing our lives ; when we pray that
our children and friends may be preserved from danger and death, we may
remember how often God has interposed to save them ; when, oppressed
with a sense of sin, we pray for pardon, we have abundant cause of thanksgiving that there 7s a glorious way by
which we may be saved. The great
est sufferer that lives in this world of
redeeming love, and who has the offer
of heaven before him, has cause of
gratitude. {| Let your request be
made known unto God. Not as if
you were to give him information,

plication, with thanksgiving, let
your request be made known unto
God:

7 And the peace @ of God, which
a Is.26.3; Johnl4.27.

but to express to him your wants.
God needs not to be informed of our
necessities, but he requires that we
come and express them to him; comp.
Ezek. xxxvi. 37. “Thus saith the
Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel to do
it for them.”

7. And the peace of God. The
peace which God gives. ‘The peace
here particularly referred to is that
which is felt when we have no anxious
care about the supply of our wants,
and when we go confidently and commit everything into the hands of God.
“Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace
whose mind is stayed on thee ;” Isa.
xxvi. 3; see Notes on John xiv. 27.
{| Which passeth all understanding.
That is, which surpasses all that men
had conceived or imagined. The expression is one that denotes that the
peace imparted is of the highest possible kind. The apostle Paul frequently used terms which had somewhat of a hyperbolical cast (see Notes
on Eph. iii. 19; comp. John xxi. 25),
and the language here is that which
one would use who designed to speak
of that which was of the highest order.
The Christian, committing his way to
God, and feeling that he will order
all things aright, has a peace which
is nowhere else known. Nothing else
will furnish it but religion. No confidence that a man can have in his
own powers; no reliance which he
can repose on his own plans or on the
promises or fidelity of his fellow-men,
and no calculations which he can
make on the course of events, can
impart such peace to thesoulas simple
confidence in God. { Shall keep
your hearts and minds. That is,
shall keep them from anxiety and
agitation. The idea is, that by thus
making our requests known to God,
and going to him in view of ali our
trials and wants, the mind would be
preserved from distressing anxiety.
The way to find peace, and to have

passeth all understanding, shall
keep your hearts and minds through
Christ Jesus.

8 Finally, brethren, whatsoever

oe ee eee

the heart kept from trouble, is thus
to go and spread out all before tho
Lord; comp. Isa. xxvi. 3,4,20; xxxvii.
1--7. The word here rendered shall
keep, is a military term, and means
that the mind would be guarded as a
camp or castle is. It would be preserved from the intrusion of anxious
fears and alarms. § Through Christ
Jesus. By his agency, or intervention. It is only in him that the mind
can be preserved in peace. It is not
by mere confidence in God, or by
mere prayer, but it is by confidence
in God as he is revealed through the
Redeemer, and by faith in him. Paul
never lost sight of the truth that
all the security and happiness of a believer were to be traced to the Saviour.

8. Finally, brethren. As for what
remains--ro Aadv--or as a final counsel or exhortation. J Whatsoever
things are true. In this exhortation
the apostle assumes that there were
certain things admitted to be true,
and pure, and good, inthe world, which
had not been directly revealed, or
which were commonly regarded as
such by the men of the world, and his
object is to show them that such things
ought to be exhibited. by the Christian. Everything that was honest
and just towards God and towards
men was to be practised by them, and
they were in all things to be examples
of the highest kind of morality. ‘They
were not to exhibit partial virtues;
not to perform one set of duties to the
neglect or exclusion of others ; not to
be faithful in their duties to God,
and to neglect their duty to men;
not to be punctual in their religious
rites, and neglectful of the common
laws of morality ; but they were to do
everything that could be regarded aa
the fair subject of commendation, and
that was implied in the highest moral
character. The word true refers here
to everything that was the reverse of
falsehood. ‘They were to be true to
their engagements ; true to their prothings are true, ‘whatsoever things
are + honest, & whatsoever things
ure just, ¢ whatsoever things are

a Ep.4.25. 1 or, venerable. b 2 Co.8.21.

c De.16.20; Is.26.7.

pure, whatsoever chings are lovely, ¢whatsoever things are of good
report; fif there be any virtue,

d Ja.3.17. 1 John3.3.
f Col.4.5; He.11.2.

é 1 Co. xiii.

mises; true in their statements ; and
true in their friendships. They were
to maintain the truth about God;
about eternity ; about the judgment ;
and about every man’s character.
Truth is a representation of things as
they are; and they were constantly
to live under the correct impression
of objects. A man who is false to his
engagements, or false in his statements
and promises, is one who will always
disgrace religion. { Whatsoever
things are honest. osuva. Properly,
venerable, reverend ; then honourable,
reputable. ‘The word was originally
used in relation to the gods, and to
the things that pertained to them, as
Leing worthy of honour or veneration.
Passow. As applied to men, it commonly means grave, dignified, worthy
of veneration or regard. In the New
Testament it is rendered grave in 1
Tim. ii. 8, 11, and Titus ii. 2, the
only places where the word occurs
except this; and the noun (ceuvorns)
is rendered honesty in 1 Tim, ii. 2,
and gravity in 1 Tim. iii. 4, and Tit.
ii. 7. It occurs nowhere else in the
New Testament. The word, therefore, does not express precisely what
the word honest does with us, as confined to dealings or business transactions, but rather has reference to what
was regarded as worthy of reputation
or honour ; what there was in the
customs of society, in the respect due
to age and rank, and in the intercourse
of the world, that deserved respect or
esteem. It tncludes indeed what is
right in the transaction of business,
but it embraces also much more, and
means that the Christian is to show
respect to all the venerable and proper customs of society, when they did
not violate conscience or interfere
with the law of God; comp. 1 Tim.
iil. 7. (| Whatsoever things are just.
The things which are right between
man and man, A Christian should
be just in all his dealings. His religion does not exempt him from the

strict laws which bind men to the
exercise of this virtue, and there is
no way by which a professor of religion can do more injury perhaps than
by injustice and dishonesty in his
dealings. It is to be remembered
that the men of the world, in estimat-~
ing a man’s character, affix much more
importance to the virtues of justice
and honesty than they do to regularity in observing the ordinances of religion; and therefore if a Christian
would make an impression on his fellow-men favourable to religion, it is
indispensable that he manifest uncorrupted integrity in his dealings.
{ Whatsoever things are pure. Chaste
--in thought, in feeling, and in the
intercourse between the sexes ; comp.
Notes, 1 Tim. v. 2. § Whatsoever
things are lovely. The word here
used means properly what is dear to
any one ; then what is pleasing. Here
it means what is amiable--such a temper of mind that one can love it; or
such as to be agreeable to others.
A Christian should not be sour, crabbed, and irritable in his temper--for
nothing almost tends so much to injure the cause of religion as a temper
always chafed; a brow morose and
stern ; an eye that is severe and unkind, and a disposition to find fault
with everything. And yet it is to be
regretted that there are many persons
who make no pretensions to piety,
who far surpass many professors of
religion in the virtue here commended.
A sour and crabbed temper in a professor of religion will undo all the
good that he attempts to do. { Whatsoever things are of good report. That
is, whatsoever is truly reputable in the
worldat large. There are actions which
all men agree in commending, and
which in all ages and countries are
regarded as virtues. Courtesy, urbanity, kindness, respect for parents,
purity between brothers and sisters,
are among those virtues, and the
Christian should be a pattern and ao

@ and if there be any praise, ® think
on these things.

9 ‘hose things which ye have
both learned, and received, and
heard, and seen in me, do: and the
God ¢ of peace shall be with you.

a 2 Pe.1.3,4. bd Ro.13.3 c He.13.20.

example in them all. Tlis usefulness
depends much more on the cultivation
of these virtues than is commonly
supposed. { Jf there be any virtue.
lf there is anything truly virtuous.
Paul did not suppose that he had
given a full catalogue of the virtues
which he would hayvecultivated. Ile,
therefore, adds, that if there was anyshing else that had the nature of true
virtue in it, they should be careful to
cultivate that aiso. The Christian
should be a pattern and an example
of every virtue. {[ And if there be
any praise. Anything worthy of
praise, or that ought to be praised.
q Think on these things. Let them
be the object of your careful attention
and study, so as to practise them.
Think what they are; think on the
obligation to observe them; think on
theinfluence which they would have on
the world around you.

9. Those: things which ye have
both learned, and received, and
heard, and seen in me, do. ‘That is,
what you have witnessed in me, and
what you have learned of me, and
what you have heard about me, practise yourselves. Paul refers them to
his uniform conduct--to all that they
had seen, and known, and heard of
him, as that which it was proper for
them to imitate. The same thing,
substantially, he urges in chap. iii.
17; see Notes on that verse. It
could have been only the consciousness of a pure and upright life which
would make such counsel proper.
Elow few are the men at this day
who can urge others to imitate all
that they have seen in them, and
learned from them, and heard of
them. § And the God of peace
shall be with you. The God who
gives peace; comp. Heb. xiii. 20;
1 Thes, v. 23; see also Notes on
ver. % The meaning here is, that

10 But I rejoiced in the Lord
greatly, that now at the last your
care of me ? hath flourished again ;
wherein ye were also careful, but
ye lacked opportunity.¢

11 Not that I speak in respect

1 or, is revirens d@ 2 Co.6.7.

Paul, by pursuing the course of life

which he had led, and which ke here
counsels them to follow, had found
that it had been attended with the
blessing of the God of peace, and he
felt the fullest assurance that the same
blessing would rest on them if they
imitated his example. The way to
obtain the blessing of the God of peace,
is to lead a holy life, and to perform
with faithfulness all the duties which
we owe to God and to our fellow-men,

10. But I rejoiced in the Lord
greatly. The favour which Paul had
received, and for which he felt so
much gratitude, had been received of
the Philippians ; but he regarded “‘the
Lord”’ as the source of it, and rejoiced
in it as the expression of his kindness.
The effect was to lead his heart with
cheerfulness and joy up to God.
q That now at the last. After so
long atime. ‘The reason why he had
not before received the favour, was
not neglect or inattention on their
part, but the difficulty of having communication with him. {J Your care of
me hath flourished again. In the
margin this is rendered ‘‘ts revived,”
and this is the proper meaning of the
Greek word. It is a word properly
applicable to plants or flowers, meaning to grow green again; to flourish
again; to spring up again. Here the
meaning is, that they had been again
prospered in their care of him, and to
Paul it seemed as if their care had
sprung up anew. § Wherein ye were
also careful. That is, they were desirous to render him assistance, and to
minister to his wants. Paul adds this,
lest they should think he was disposed
to blame them for inattention. {] Bus
ye lacked opportunity. Because there
were no persons going to Rome from
Philippi by whom they could send to
him. The distance was considerable,
and it is not probable that the interof want: for I have learned, in
whatsoever state I am, cherewith
to be content.

a Heb. 13.5.

course between the two places was
very constant.

11. Not that I speak in respect of
want. Though Paul was doubtless
often in circumstances of necessity,
yet he did not make these remarks on
that account. In his journeys, in his
imprisonments, he could not but be at
times in want; but he had learned to
bear all this; and that which most
impressed itself on his mind was the
interest which the church ought to
show in the cause of religion, and the
evidence which it would thus furnish
of attachment to the cause. As to
his own personal trials, he had learned
to bear them, so that they did not
give him’ great uneasiness. {| For I
have learned, in whatsoever state Jam,
therewith to be content. That is, to
have a contented mind. Paul says
that he had ‘‘learned”’ this. Probably
by nature he had a mind as prone to
impatience as others, but he had been
in circumstances fitted to produce a'
different state of feeling. He had had
ainple experience (2 Cor. xi. 26), and,
in his life of trials, he had acquired
invaluable lessons on the subject. He
had had abundant time for reflection,
and he had found that there was grace
enough in the gospel to enable him
to bear trials with resignation. ‘The
considerations by which he had been
taught this, he does not state; but
they were probably such as the following :--that it is wrong to murmur at
the allotments of Providence; that
a spirit of impatience does no good,
remedies no evil, and supplies no want;
that God could provide for him ina
way which he could not foresee, and
that the Saviour was able abundantly
to sustain him A contented mind is
an invaluable blessing, and is one of
the fruits of religion in the soul. It
arises from the belief that God is
right in all his ways. Why should we
be impatient, restless, discontented 2
What evil will be remedied by it?
what want supplied? what calamity

12 I know both how to he
abased, and I know how to abound;
every where, and in all things, ]

removed? ‘Tie that is of a merry
heart hath a continual feast ’’ (Prov.
xv. 15); and one of the secrets of
happiness is to have a mind satisfied
with all the allotments of Providence.
‘he members of the Episcopal church
beautifully pray, every day, ‘‘ Give us
minds always contented with our present condition.’”” No prayer can be
offered which will enter more deeply
inte all our happiness on earth.

12. I know both how to be abased.
To be in circumstances of want.
q And I know how to abound. ‘To
have an abundance. Ile had been in
circumstances where he had an ample
supply for all his wants, and knew
what it was to have enough. It requires as much grace to keep the heart
right in prosperity, as it docs in adversity, and perhapsmore. Adversity,
of itself, does something to keep the
mind in a right state ; prosperity does
nothing. 4 Lverywhere and in all
things. In all my travels and impri-
; sonments, and in reference to everything that occurs, I learn important
lessons on tiiese points. § J am instructed. The word here used --
“einuoi--is one that is commonly
used in relation to mysteries, and denoted being instructed in the secret
doctrines that were taught in the ancient ‘‘mysteries.”” Passow. In those
mysteries, it was only the ‘initiated ”
who were made acquainted with the
lessons that were taught there. Paul
says that he had been initiated into
the lessons taught by trials and by
prosperity. The secret and important
lessons which these schools of adversity are fitted to teach, he had had an
ample opportunity of learning; and
he had faithfully embraced the doctrines thus taught, {J Both to be full.
That is, he had learned to have an
ample supply of his wants, and yet to
observe the laws of temperance and
soberness, and to cherish gratitude
for the mercies which he had enjoyed.
q And to be hungry. That is, to be

am iustructed, both to be full and
to be hungry, both to abound and
to suffer need.

in circumstances of want, and yet not
to murmur or complain. He had
learned to bear all this without discontent. This was then, as it is now,
no easy lesson to learn; and it is not
improper to suppose that, when Paul
says that he had ‘‘ been instructed” in
this, even he means to say that it was
only by degrees that he had acquired
it. It is a lesson which we slowly
learn, not to murmur at the allot-

|
13 I can do all things througha
Christ which strengtheneth me.

@ John 15.5; 2 Co.12.9.

_tian character are developed in these

ments of Providence; not to be envi-!
ous at the prosperity of others ; not to
repine when our comforts areremoved.
There may be another idea suggested
here. ‘The condition of Paul was not’
always the same. He passed through
great reverses. At one time he had
abundance ; then he was reduced to
want ;--now he was in a state which
might be regarded as affluent; then
he was brought down to extreme
poverty. Yesterday, he was poor and
hungry ; to-day, all his necessities are
supplied. Now, it is in these sudden
reverses that grace is most needed,
and in these rapid changes of life that
it is most difficult to Jearn the lessons
of calm contentment. Men get accustomed to an even tenor of life, no
matter what it is, and learn to shape
their temper and their calculations
according to it.
philosophy vanish when they pass
suddenly from one extreme to another,
and find their condition in life suddenly changed. The garment that
was adapted to weather of an uniform
temperature, whether of heat or cold,
fails to be fitted to our wants when
these transitions rapidly succeed each
other. Such changes are constantly
occurring in life. God tries his people,
not by a steady course of prosperity,
or by long-continued and uniform adversity, but by transition from the one
to the other; and it often happens that
the grace which would have been sufficient for either continued prosperity
or adversity, would fail in the transition from the one to the other. Hence,
new grace is imparted for this new
form of trial, and new traits of Chris-

But these lessons of |

rapid transitions in life, as some of
the most beautiful exhibitions of the
laws of matter are brought out in the
transitions produced in chemistry.
The rapid changes from heat to cold,
or from a solid to a gaseous state, develope properties before unknown, and
acquaint us much more intimately
with the wonderful works of God. ‘The
gold or the diamond, unsubjected to
the action of intense heat, and to the
changes produced by the powerful
agents brought to bear on them, might
have continued to shine with steady
beauty and brilliancy; but we should
never have witnessed the peculiar

beauty and brilliancy which may be

produced in rapid chemical changes,
And so there is many a beautiful trait
of character which would never have
been known by either continued prosperity or adversity. There might
have been always a beautiful exhibition of virtue and piety, but not that
peculiar manifestation which is produced in the transitions from the one
to the other.

13. I can do all things. From the
experience which Paul had in these
various circumstances of life, he comes
here to the general conclusion that he
could “do all things.’ He could bear
any trial, perform any duty, subdue
any evil propensity of his nature, and
meet all the teinptations incident to
any condition of prosperity or adversity. His own experience in the various changes of life had warranted
him in arriving at this conclusion ;
and he now expresses the firm confidence that nothing would be required
of him which he would not be able to
perform. In Paul, this declaration
was not a vain self-reliance, nor was
it the mere result of his former experience. Je knew well where the
strength was to be obtained by which
to do all things, and on that arm that
was able to uphold him he confidently
relied. Qf Through Christ which
strengtheneth me; see Notes on John
xv. 5. Of the strength which Christ
14 Notwithstanding, ye have
well done that ye did communteate with my affliction.

15 Now, ye Philippians, know
also, that in the beginning of the

can impart, Paul had had abundant
experience; and now his whole reliance was there. It was not in any
native ability which he had; not in
any vigour of body or of mind ; not in
any power which there was in his own
resolutions; it was in the strength
that he derived from the Redeemer.
By that he was enabled to bear cold,
fatigue, and hunger; by that, he met

temptations and persecutions; and by

that, he engaged in the performance
of his arduous duties, Let us learn,
hence, (1.) That we need not sink
under any trial, for there is one who
can strengthen us. (2.) That we need
not yield to temptation. There is
one who is able to make a way for our
escape. (3.) That we need not be
harassed, and vexed, and tortured with
improper thoughts and unholy desires.
There is one who can enable us to
banish such thoughts from the mind,
and restore the right balance to the
affections of the soul. (4.) That we
need not dread what is to come.
Trials, temptations, poverty, want,
persecution, may await us; but we
need not sink into despondency. At
every step of life, Christ is able to
strengthen us, and can bring us triumphantly through. What a privilege it is, therefore, to be a Christian--to feel, in the trials of life, that
we have one friend, unchanging and
most mighty, who can always help us!
How cheerfully should we engage in
our duties, and meet the trials that
are before us, leaning on the arm of
our Almighty Redeemer! Let us not
shrink from duty; let us not dread
persecution let us not fear the bed
of death. In all circumstances,
Christ, our unchanging Friend, can
uphold us. Let the eye and the affections of the heart be fixed on him; let
the simple, fervent, believing prayer
be directed always to him when trials
come, when temptations assail, when
duty presses hard upon us, and when
a crowd of unholy and forbidden

gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no ¢ church ecm municated
with me as concerning giving and
receiving, but ye only.

a 2 Co. 11.8,9.

thoughts rush into the soul; and we
shall be safe.

14. Notwithstanang, ye have well.
done. hough he had learned the
grace of contentment, and though he
knew that Christ could enable him to
do all things, it was well for them to
show sympathy for his sufferings; for
it evinced a proper regard for a benefactor and an apostle. § Ye did communicate. You took part with my
affliction. That is, you sympathized
with me, and assisted me in bearing it.
The relief which they had sent, not
only supplied his wants, but it sus-

tained him by the certainty that he
was not forgotten.

15. In the beginning of the gospel.
“At the time when I first preached
the gospel to you; or when the gospel
‘began its benign influence on your
hearts.” § When I departed from
Macedonia; see Acts xvii. 14. The
last place that Paul visited in Macedonia, at that time, was Berea. There
a tumult was excited by the Jews, and
it was necessary for him to go away.
He left Macedonia to go to Athens;
and left it in haste, amidst scenes of
persecution, and when he needed
sympathizing aid. At that time, as
well as when he was in Thessalonica
(Acts xvii. 1--10), he needed the assistance of others to supply his wants;
and he says that aid was not withheld.
The meaning here is, that this aid was
sent to him “‘ as he was departing from
Macedonia;”’ that-is, alike in Thessalonica and afterwards. This was
about twelve years before this epistle was written. Doddridge. {| No
church éommunicated with me. No
church so participated with me in my
sufferings and necessities, as to send
to my relief; comp. 2 Cor. xi. 8, 9.

Why they did not, Paul does not intimate. It is not necessary to suppose that he meant to blame them.
They might not have been acquainted
with his necessities. All that is
implied here is, that he specially com.

16 For even in Thessalonica
ye sent once and again unto my
necessity.

17 Not because I desire a gift ;
but I desire fruit that may abound

to your account.
1 or, have received.

18 But I! have all, and abound;
I am full, having received ot
Epaphroditus the things which
were sent from you,an odour of

a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God.

a He.13.16.

mends the Philippians for their attention to him.

16. For even in Thessalonica ;
Notes, Acts xvii. 1. Paul remained
there long enough to establish a
flourishing church. He met, indeed,
with much opposition and persecution there; and hence it was necessary that his wants should be supplied
by others.

17. Not because I desire a gift.
“The reason why I rejoice in the reception of what you have sent to me,
is not that I am covetous.”’ From
the interest with which he had spoken
of their attention to him, some might
perhaps be disposed to say, that it
arose from this cause. He says,
therefore, that, grateful as he was for
the favour which he had received, his
chief interest in it arose from the fact
that it would contribute ultimately to
their own good. It showed that they
were governed by Christian principle,
and this woutd not fail to be rewarded.
What Paul states here is by no means
impossible ; though it may not be very
common. In the reception of favours
from others, it is practicable to rejoice in them mainly, because their
bestowment willbe a means of good
to the benefactor himself. All our
selfish feelings and gratifications may
be absorbed and lost in the superior
joy which we have in seeing others
actuated by a right spirit, and in the
belief that they will be rewarded.
This feeling is one of the fruits of
Christian kindness. It is that which
leads us to look away from self, and
to rejoice in every evidence that others
will be made happy. J / desire fruit.
The word “‘fruit’’ is often used in the
Scriptures, as elsewhere, to denote
results, or that which is produced.
Thus we speak of punishment as the
fruit of sin, poverty as the fruit of
idleness, and happiness as the fruit of
a virtuous life. The language is taken

from the fact, that a man reaps or

gathers the fruit or result of that
which he plants. § Yo your account.
A phrase taken from commercial
dealings. The apostle wished that it
might be set down to their credit. Le
desired that when they came to appear before God, they might reap the
benefit of all the acts of kindness
which they had shown him.

18. But I have all. Marg., “or,
have received.”” The phrase here
is equivalent to, “I have received
every thing. Ihave all I want, and
desire no more.”’ Ile was entirely
satisfied. What they had sent to him
is, of course, now unknown. It is
sufficient to know, that it was of such
a nature as to make his situation comfortable. § J am full. I have enough.
This is a strong expression, denoting
that nothing was lacking. § Having
recewed of Epaphroditus; see Notes,
chap.1i.25. J Anodour of a sweet smell.
This does not mean that it was such
an odour to Paul, butto God. He regarded it as an Offering which they
had made to God himself; and he was
persuaded that he would regard it as
acceptable to him. They had doubtless made the offering, not merely
from personal friendship for Paul, but
because he was a minister of Christ,
and from love to his cause; and Paul
felt assured that this offering would
be acceptable to him; comp. Matt. x
41, 42. The word ‘odour’ refers
properly to the pleasant fragrance
produced in the temple by the burning
of incense; Notes on Luke i. 9. On
the meaning of the word rendered ‘a
sweet smell,”--:twI/a--see Notes on
2 Cor. ii 15. The whole language
here is taken from an act of worship ;
and the apostle regarded what he had
received from the Philippians as in
fact a thank-offering to God, and a
presented with the spirit of true de
votion to him. It was not, indeed, a
19 But my God shall supply
Tall your need, according to his
tiches © in glory by Christ Jesus.

20 Now ¢unto God and our
a Ps,23.1. b Ep.3.16. ¢ Ro.16.27.

Father be glory for ever and ever
Amen.

21 Salute every saint in Christ
Jesus. The brethren which are
with me greet you.

Zormalact of worship; but it was ac- |
ceptable to God as an expression of
their regard for his cause. § A sacri- |
fice acceptable. Acceptable to God ;'
comp. Ileb. xiii. 16 ; Notes, Rom. xii.
1, ¥ Well-pleasing te God. Because it evinced a regard for true re- |
ligion. Learn hence, (1.) That kindness done to the ministers ofthe gospel
is regarded as an acceptable offering
to God. (2.) That kindness to the
servants of God in distress and want,
is as well-plexsing to God as direct
acts of worship. (8.) That such acts
of benevolence are evidences of attachment to the cause of religion, and are |
proofs of genuine piety ; Notes, Matt.
Xe aes

19. But my God shall supply all
your need. That is, “You have shown
your regard for me asafriend of God,
by sending to me in my distress, and I
have confidence that. in return for all
this, God will suppiy ail your wants,
when you are in circumstances of necessity.” Paul’s confidence in this
seems not to have been founded on any
express revelation; but on the general
principle that God would regard their |
offering with favour. Nothingis lost,
even in the present life, by doing good. |
In thousands of instances it is abundantly repaid. . The benevolent are
not usually poor; and if they are, God
chen raises up for them benefactions,
and sends supplies in a manner as unexpected, and bearing proofs of divine
interposition as decided, as when supplies were sent by the ravens to the
prophet. § According to his riches in
gloru; Notes, Eph. iii. 16. The word
riches here means, his abundant fulness ; his possessing all things ; hisinexbaustible ability to supply their |
wants The phrase “in glory,” is |
probabiy to be connected with the |
following phrase, “in Christ Jesus ;”
and means that the method of imparting supplies to men wasthrough Jesus

=

Christ, and wasa glorious method; or,
that it was done in a glorious manner,
It is such an expression as Paul is accustomned to use, when speaking of
what God docs. Le is not satisfied
with saying simply that 7¢ 7s so; but
connects with it the idea that whatever God does is done in a way worthy
of himself, and so as to illustrate his
own perfections. ¥ In Christ Jesus.
By the medium of Christ; or through
him. All the favours that Paul expected for himself, or his fellow-men,
he believed would be conferred through
the Redeemer. Even the supply of
ourtemporal waxts comes tous through
the Saviour. Were it not for the

!atonement, thereis nomore reason toa

suppose that blessings would be conferred on men than that they would
be on fallen angels. For them no
atonement has been made; and at the
hand of justice they have received
only wretchedness and woe.

20. Now unto God and our Fatier,
&c.; see Notes on Rom. xvi. 27. It
was common for Paul to address such
an ascription of praise to God, at the
close of his epistles.

21. Salute every saint in Christ
Jesus. It was usual for him also to
close his epistles with affectionate
salutations to various members of the
churches to which he wrote. These salutations are generally specific, and
mention the names, particularly if prominent members of the churches ; see
the close of the epistles to the Romans ; 1 Corinthians ; Colossians, and
2 Timothy. In this epistle, however,
as in some others, the salutation igeneral. Why none are specified in
particular is not certainly known.
{i The brethren which are with me, &e
The word “brethren”? here probably
refers to ministers that were with Paul.
as the ‘saints’? in general are mentioned in the next verse. It is possible that at Rome the ministers were

22 All the saints salute you,
schiefly they that are of Cwsar’s
household.

a chap 1.13.

known by the general name of the
brethren. Pierce.

22. All the saints salute you. All
in Rome, where this epistle was written. No individuals are specified,
perhaps because none of the Christians at Rome were personally known
to the church at Philippi. They
would, however, feel a deep intcrest
in a church which had thus the confidence and affection of Paul. There
is reason to believe that the bonds of
affection among the churches then
were much stronger than they are
now. There was a generous warmth
in the newness of the Christian affection--the first ardour of love ; and the
common trials to which they were exposed would serve to bind them closely
together. § Chiefly they that are of
Ceesar’s household. That is, of Nero,
who was at that time the reigning
emperor. The name Cesar was given
to all the emperors after the time of
Julius Cesar, as the name Pharaoh
was the common name of the kings of
Egypt. The phrase here used--“ the
household of. Casar’’--may refer to
the relatives of the emperor ; and it is
certainly possible that some of thein
may have been converted to Christianity. But it does not of necessity
refer to those related to him, but may
be applied to his domestics, or to some
of the officers of the court that were
more particularly employed around
his person ; and as it ismore probable
that some of them would be converted
than his own relatives, it is more safe
to suppose that they were intended ;
see Notes on chap. i. 13.

23. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, &c.; Notes, Rom. xvi. 20.
In regard to the subscription at the

and of this epistle, it may be remark- |

ed, as lias been done of the other subscriptions at the end of the epistles,
that it is of no authority whatever.
[There is no reason, however, to doubt
that in this case it is correct. The
apistle bears internal evidence of
saving been written from Rome, and

23 The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ de with youall. Amen.

There is considerable variety in the subscription.
The Greek is, ‘‘ It was written to the
Philippians from Rome by Epaphroditus.’ The Syriac, ‘‘ The epistle to
the Philippians was written from
Rome, and sent by Epaphroditus.”
The Aithiopic, “To the Philippians,
by Timothy.”

The principal lessons taught in this
closing chapter are the following :--

1. It is our duty to be firm in the
Lord, in all the trials, temptations,
and persecutions to which we may be
exposed; ver.1. This duty should be
pressed on Christians by their teachers, and by each other, by all that is
tender and sacred in the Christian profession, and all that is endearing in
Christian friendship. Like Paul, we
should appeal to others as “ brethren
dearly beloved and longed for,’’ and
by all their affection for us we should
entreat them to be steadfast in the
Christian profession. As their “joy
and crown,’ also, ministers should desire that their people should be holy.
Their own happiness and reward is to
be closely connected with the firmness
with which their people maintain the
principles of the Christian faith. If
Christians, therefore, wish to impart
the highest joy to their religious
teachers, and toexalt them as highas
possible in future happiness and glory,
they should strive to be faithful to
their great Master, and to be steadfast
in attachment to his cause.

2. Ii is the duty of those who have
from any cause been alienated, to seek
to be reconciled; ver 2. They should
be of thesame mind. Almost nothing
does more to hinder the cause of re-

‘ ligion than alienations and bickerings

among its professed friends. It is
possible for them to live in harmony,
and to be of the same mind in the
Lord; and such is the importance of
this, that it well deserves to be enforced by apostolic authority and persuasion. It may be observed, also,
that in the case referred to in this,
chapter--that of Euodias and Syn- |
tyche--the exhortation to reconcilia- |
tion is addressed to both. Which was |
in the wrong, or whether both were, |
is not intimated, and is not needful

for us to know. , It is enough to know |
that there was alienation, and both of ;
them were exhorted to see that the

quarrel was made up. So, in all cases

where members of the church are at

variance, it is the business of both |
parties to seek to be reconciled, and

neither party is right if he waits for |
the other before he moves in the
matter. If you feel that you have
been injured, go and tell your brother
kindly wherein you think he has done |
you wrong. Ile may at once explain
the matter, and show that you have
misunderstood it, or he may make pro- |
per confession or restitution. Or, if
he will do neither, you will have done.
your duty; Matt. xvii. 15. If you,
are conscious that you have injured,

him, then nothing is more proper than

that you should go and make confes-

sion. The blame ofthe quarrel rests |
wholly on you. And ifsome meddling |
third person has got up the quarrel |
between you, then go and see your |
brother, and disappoint the devices of
the enemy of religion.

3. It is our duty and our privilege
to rejoice in the Lord always; ver. 4.
As God is unchanging, we may always
find joy in him. The character of |
God which we loved yesterday, and in
the contemplation of which we found |
happiness then, is the same to-day, |
and its contemplation will furnish the |
same joy tous now. His promisesare
the same; his government is the same;
his readiness to impart consolation is
the same; the support which he can
give in trial and temptation is the
same. Though in our own hearts
we may find much over which to
mourn, yet when we look away from
ourselves we may find abundant
sources of consolation and peace.
The Christian, therefore, may be
always happy. If he will look to
God and not to himself; to heaven
and not to earth, he will find perma-

about anything.

tA. D. 64,

nent and substantial sources of en.
joyment. But in nothing else than
God can we rejoice always. Our
friends, in whom we find comfort, are
taken away; the property that we
thought would make us happy, fails
to do so; and pleasures that we
thought would satisfy, pall upon the
sense and make us wretched. No
man can be permanently happy who
does not make tag Lorp the source
of joy, and who does not expect to
find his chief pleasure in him.

4. It is a privilege to be permitted
to go and commit everything to God;
ver. 6,7. The mind may 6e in such
a state that it shall feel no anxiety
We may feel so certain that God will supply all our
wants ; that he will bestow upon us

‘all that is really necessary for as in

this life and the next, and that he
will withhold from us nothing which
it is not for our real good to have
withheld, that the mind may be constantly in a state of peace. Witha
thankful heart for all the mercies
which we have enjoyed--and in all
cases they are many--we may go and
commit ourselves to God for all that
we need hereafter. Such is the privilege of religion ; such an advantage
is it to be a Christian. Such a state
of mind will be followed by peace.
And it is only in such a way that true
peace can be found. In every other
method there will be agitation of
mind and deep anxiety. If we have
not this confidence in God, and this
readiness to go and commit all to
him, we shall be perplexed with
the cares of this life; losses and
disappointments will harass us; the
changes which occur will weary and
wear out our spirits, and through
life we shall be tossed as on a restless
ocean.

5. It is the duty of Christians to
be upright in every respect; ver. 8.
Every friend of the Redeemer should
be a man of incorruptible and unsuspected integrity. He should be one
who can always be depended on to do
what is right, and pure, and true, and
lovely. I know not. that there isa
more important verse in the New
Testament than the eighth verse of

this chapter. It deserves to be recorded in letters of gold in the dwelling of every Christian, and it would
be well if it could be made to shine
on his way as if written in characters
of living light. There should be no
virtue, no truth, no noble plan of
benevolence, no pure and holy undertaking in society, of which the Christian should not be, according to his
ability, the patron and the friend.
The reasons are obvious. It is not
only because this is in accordance
with the law of God, but it is from
its effect on the community. The
people of the world judge of religion
by the character of its professed
friends. It is not from what they
hear in the pulpit, or learn from the
Bible, or from treatises on divinity ;
it is from what they see in the lives
of those who profess to follow Christ.
They mark the expression of the eye;
the curl of the lip ; the words that we
speak--and if they perceive peevishness and irritability, they set it down
to the credit of religion, They watch
the conduct, the temper and disposition, the manner of doing business,
the respect which a man has for
truth, the way in which he keeps his
promises, and set it all down to the
credit of religion. If a professed
Christian fails in any one of these
things, he dishonours religion and
neutralizes all the good which he
might otherwise do. It is not only
the man in the church who is untrue,
and dishonest, and unjust, and unlovely in his temper, that does evil;
it is he who is ezther false, or dishonest,
or unjust, or unlovely in his temper.
One evil propensity will neutralize all
that is good; and one member of the
church who fails to lead a moral and
upright life will do much to neutralize all the good that can be done by
all the rest of the church; comp.
Kecl. x. 1.

6. It is the duty of Christians to
show kindness to the ministers of the
gospel, especially in times and circumstances of want; ver. 10, 14--17.
Paul commended much what the Philippians had done for him. Yet they
had done no more than they ought to
do;see 1 Cor. ix. 11. He had es-

tablished the gospel among them,
carrying it to them by great persona!
sacrifice and self-denial. What he
had done for them had cost him much
more than what they had done for
him--and was of much more value.
He had been in want. He was a
prisoner ; among strangers ; incapable of exerting himself for his own
support ; not in a situation to minister
to his own wants, as he had often done
by tent making, and in these circumstances he needed the sympathizing
aid of friends, He was not a man to
be voluntarily dependent on others,
or to be at any time a burden to them.
But circumstances beyond his control
had made it necessary for others to
supply his wants. The Philippians
nobly responded to his claims on them,
and did all that he could ask, Their
conduct is a good example for other
Christians to imitate in their treatment of the ministers of the gospel.
Ministers now are often in want.
They become old, and are unable to
labour ; they are sick, and cannot
render the service which they have
been accustomed to; their families
are afflicted, and they have not the
means of providing for them comfortably in sickness. It is to be remembered also that such cases often
happen where a minister has spent
the best part of his life in the service of a people ; where he has devoted his most vigorous days to their
welfare; where he has heen unable
to lay up anything for sickness or
old age; where he may have abandoned what would have been a lucrative calling in life, for the purpose
of preaching the gospel. If there
ever is a claim on the generosity of
a people, his case is one, and there
is no debt of gratitude which a people ought more cheerfully to pay
than that of providing for the wants
of an aged or an afilicted and disabled servant of Christ, who has spent
his best years in endeavouring to
train them and their children up for
heaven. Yet, it cannot be denied,
that great injustice is often done in
such cases, ‘The poor beast that has
served a man and his family in the
days of his vigour, is often turned
out in old age to die; and something
like this sometimes occurs in the
treatment of ministers of the gospel.
The conduct of a people, generous
in many other respects, is often unaccountable in their treatment of
their pastors ; and one of the lessons
which ministers often have to learn,
like their Master, by bitter experience, is the ingratitude of those for
whose welfare they have toiled, and
prayed, and wept.

7. Let us learn to be contented
with our present condition; ver. Il,
12. Paul learned this lesson. It is
not a native state of mind. It is a
lesson to be acquired by experience.
By nature we are all restless and
impatient; we are reaching after
things that we have not, and often
after things that we cannot and
ought not to have. We are envious
of the condition of others, and suppose that if we had what they have
we should be happy. Yet, if we
have right feelings, we shall always
find enough in our present condition
to make us contented. We shall
have such confidence in the arrangements of Providence as to feel that
things are ordered for the best. If
we are poor, and persecuted, and in
want, or are prostrated by sickness,
we shall feel that there is some good
reason why this is so arranged--
though the reason may not be known
to us. If we are benevolent, as we
ought to be, we shall be willing that
others shall be made happy by what
they possess, instead of coveting it
for ourselves, and desiring to wrest
it from them. If we are disposed to
estimate our mercies, and not to give
up our minds toa spirit of complaining, we shall see enough around us
to make us contented. Paul was
a& prisoner; he was poor; he was
among strangers; he had neither
wife nor children ; he was about to
be tried for his life, and probably put
to death--yet he learned to be content. He had agood conscience ; the
hope of heaven; a sound intellect ;
a heart disposed to do good, and confidence in God, and why should a

Says Jeremy Taylor, “Am I fallen
into the hands of publicans and sequestrators, who have taken all from me?
What now? Let me look about me.
They have left me the sun and moon,
fire and water, a loving wife, and
many friends to pity me, and some
to relieve me, and I can still discourse ; and unless I list, they have
not taken away my merry countenance, and a cheerful spirit, and a
good conscience ; they still have left
me the providence of God, and all
the promises of the gospel, and my
religion, and my hopes of heaven,
and my charity to them too; and
still I sleep and digest; I eat and
drink; I read and meditate; I can
walk in my neighbour’s pleasant
fields, and see the varieties of natural beauties, and delight in all in
which God delights, that is, in virtue
and wisdom, in the whole creation,
and in God himself. And he who
hath so many causes of joy, and so
great, is very much in love with sorrow and peevishness. who loses all
these pleasures, and chooses to sit
down upon his little handful of
thorns.” --Holy Living, chap. ii. sect.
vi. Let the whole of this section
‘on Contentedness”’ be read. It
is one of the most beautiful arguments for contentment that ever procevded from uninspired lips.

8. In all these things; in all the
duties and the trials of life; in all
our efforts to meet temptation, and
to cultivate contentment with our
present condition, let us put our trust
in the Saviour; ver. 13. Paul said
that he could ‘do all things through
Christ who strengthened him.’’ Ilis
strength was there; ours is there
also. If we attempt these things,
relying on our own strength, we
shall certainly fail. The bad passions of our nature will get the ascendency, and we shall be left to
discontent and murmuring, The
arm that is to uphold us is that
of the Redeemer; and relying on
that, we shall find no duty so arduous that we may not be able to perform it ; no temptation so formidable

man in such circumstances murmur?! that we may not be able to meet it;

no trial so great that we may not be; beautiful epistle to the Philippians,
able to bear it; no situation in lite | abundant grace thus to confide in
through which we may be called to’ the Saviour, and to practise all the
pass, where we may not find con- | duties so tenderly enjoined on the
tentment and peace. And may God! Philippian Christians and on us by
of his rich mercy give to each one this illustrious prisoner in the cause
who shall read these Notes on this of Christ.

ie ,
a a ae eye-7 ae >> OF
th an baiede ale om

on ae. eee

-- oe <= ;

t
-e-

:

i
v
seFe

daeere Sr pees arate
ta ee aia We gh”

(Leva eiel. ne Or -2he vere.
“dnt at Pre a tele Stim;
ae “ te Ges Oe
) penal at ce
Aras S Penne brett a 1 weg fe
etal Ses Vive Wes peri t mente Wr oman ane

>

eee Ve Gt te a er nn ged~-~ prone ee po ytee
Bari EN Ge sane Sar nee be: haves &; ta eit Gams
be er Tl We BA treeioatont. ny +e | dation md the a a
ae tim wy aha » Hag Dey thet aie Per be maps
rea sa, Be abt Ka to cultivar von trot
(er ies, entesd o Pied otieg ia yeenens nailer Pot on
Sek. Thee? 6, aad vie -- th tg By ithe Estlawe ¢ cee

fom Srear. 7T we ate ate Slipeund to | thnk Tic goat de atl
CViehie as wares, end cae siot by Bien’) Uibrigt HS ef
yp One niinds ite Gyerig’ oF haaip iain bee ea aes
Ve, ee shal eer See iro 4 t o> siterip
: take x Gh niled Pi wis} t a |
2 pier, 5 ae seni he owes | stor omrradaly bel hip Ai
Wting evaagersg Tre hid selthes 2% SF AAP cabute with
wre nor oriliekire i r " TO te? pf AOF, apd we shall -%
he tive far bla tlie: wel = y Soil) Aine wlene “alu Yearvarin HE
tn death --v9Se leirqe Wi Se een im eb a plate “le | a

4 : ‘ ,

--_

Pity Pee Ds } Vi 7] 4 \ Te Ldtweins® 7 T° a q .
9 Bt ;- 8 rou io betipsd © | Chat Sey thad fis? we Ty “a: pees: =
tiepaved 16 ga ye é24 a /coe vk, we ay bythe poor Ae ye >
Seti dac Yet! ind why Bente th fotm 1} So Soin ra % tanto - -
mize Io sche bees ere 3 22? Voat we wily 1 hee 5 Bike (oy -
4 : red
ae <> nuts

§ 1. The situation of Colosse.

Cotosss, or, as it is written in many manuscripts, Colasse, was a celebrated city of Phrygia, in Asia Minor. See the map prefixed to the Notes
on the Acts of the Apostles. It was in the southern part of that province,
was nearly directly east of Ephesus, north of Laodicea, and nearly west
of Antioch in Pisidia. It is mentioned by [lerodotus (Polyhymn. Lib.
vili. c. 30) as “a great city of Phrygia, in that part where the river Lycus
descends into a chasm of the earth and disappears, but which, after a distance of five stadia, rises again and flows into the Meander ’’--es rov Masav
deov. Xenophon also mentions the city of Colosse as being Modrs omougeevn
tvdaimoy x1 wsyarn--“<a city well inhabited, pleasant, and large.” Expedi.
Cyr. Lib. i. In the time of Strabo, however, it seems to have been much
diminished in size, as it is mentioned by him among the “ smaller towns ”--
miucware. Jib. xii. p. 864. In the latter part of the reign of Nero, and
not long after this epistle was written, Colosse, Laodicea, and Hierapolis,
were at the same time overwhelmed by an earthquake. Pliny, Hist. Nat.
Lib. v. e. 41. Colosse recovered, however, from this shock, and is mentioned by the Byzantine writers as among the most opulent cities; see
Koppe, Proleg. The ancient town is now extinct, but its site is occupied
by a village called Chonos, or Khonas. This village is described by Mr.
Arundell as being situated most picturesquely under the immense range
of Mount Cadmus, which rises to a very lofty and perpendicular height
behind the village, in some parts clothed with pines, in others bare of soil,
with vast chasms and caverns, An immense perpendicular chasm, affords
an outlet to a wide mountain torrent, the bed of which is dry in summer,
The approach to the village is as wild as the village itself is beautiful,
abounding in tall trees, from which vines of most luxuriant growth are
suspended. In the immediate neighbourhood are several vestiges of an
ancient city, consisting of arches, vaults, squared stones, while the ground
igs strewed with broken pottery, which so generally and so remarkably
indicates the site of ancient towns in the East. That these ruins are all
that now remain of Colosse, there seers no reason to doubt.

ccxxx INTRODUCTION.

Colosse, as has been remarked, was situated in Phrygia. On the name
Phrygia, and the origin of the Phrygians, very different opinions have
been entertained, which it is not necessary to specify in order to an
understanding of this epistle. They claimed to be the most ancient people of the world ; and it is said that this claim was admitted by the Egyptians, who, though boastful of their own antiquity, were content to regard
themselves as second to the Phrygians. Pict. Bib. Like other parts of
Asia Minor which were distinguished as provinces under the Roman
empire, Phrygia is first historically known as a kingdom, and continued
such until it was made a province of the Lydian monarchy. It remained
a province of that monarchy until Croesus, king of Lydia, was conquered
by Cyrus of Persia, who added the Lydian kingdom to his empire. | After
that, Phrygia, like the rest of Asia Minor, became successively subject to
the Greeks, the Romans, and the Turks. In the time when the gospe
was preached there, it was subject to the Romans; it is now under the
dominion of the Turks. Phrygia was anciently celebrated for its fertility ;

but, under the Moslem yoke, a great part of the country lies uncultivated.

2. The establishment of the church in Colosse.

The gospel was first preached in Phrygia by Paul and Silas, accompanied also by Timothy; Acts xv. 40, 41; xvi. 1--3, 6. Itis said that they
“went throughout Phrygia,’ which means, doubtless, that they went to
the principal cities and towns; in Acts xviil. 23, it is said that Paul visited
Phrygia again, after he had been to Philippi, Athens, Jerusalem, and
Antioch. He “ went over all the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order,
strengthening all the disciples.” It is not, indeed, expressly said of Paul
and Silas that they went to Colosse ; but, as this was one of the principal
cities of Phrygia, there is every reason to suppose that they preached the
gospel there.

It has been doubted, however, whether Paul was ever at Colosse. Is
is expressly affirmed by Hug (Jntro.), and by Koppe (Proleg.), that Paul
had not taught at Colosse himself, and that he had no personal acquaintance with the Christians there. It has been maintained that the gospel
was, probably, first preached there by Epaphras, who heard the apostle at
Ephesus, and who returned and preached the gospel to his own countrymen. ‘The opinion that Paul had not been there, and was personally
unacquainted with the church, is founded on his declaration in chap. ii. 1:
“For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and for
them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh.”
rrom this it is inferred that he was neither at Colosse nor at Laodicea.
Yet it may be justly doubted whether this passage will authorize this conclusion. Theodoret long since suggested that the meaning of this was--
**T have not only a concern for you, but I have also great concern for those
who have not seen me.” Dr. Lardner, however, maintains that the gospel
was preached in Colosse by Paul. The reasons which he gives for the
Opinion are briefly these:

(1.) The declarations of Luke, already quoted, that Paul more than
Once passed through Phrygia. The presumption is, that he would visit
the chief cities of that province in passing and repassing through it. It is
to be remembered that, according to chap. ii. 1, Colosse and Laodicea are
placed on the same footing ; and hence the difficulty of the supposition that
he did not visit the former is increased. Can it be supposed that Paul
would go again and again through that region, preaching the gospel in the
points where it would be likely to exert the widest influence, and yet
never visit either of these principal cities of the province, especially when
it is remembered that Laodicea was the capital? (2.) Dr. Lardner appeals

INTRODUCTION. ecxxxi

to what Paul says in chap. i. 6, and ii. 6, 7, in proof that he knew that they
had been rightly taught the gospel. From this he infers that Paul had
himself communicated it to them. ‘This conclusion is not perfectly clear,
since it is certain that Paul might have known their first teachers, and
been satisfied that they taught the truth; but it is such language as ke
would have used on the supposition that he was the spiritual father of the
church. (3.) Epaphras, says Dr. Lardner, was not their first instructor in
the gospel. This he infers from what is said of him in chap. i. 7, and in chap.
iv. 12,13. We is commended as “one of them,” asa “ fellow-servant,”
as ‘‘a faithful minister of Christ,” as one “ beloved.” But he is not spoken
of as sustaining any nearer relation to them. Ifhe had been the founder
of their church, he thinks it is incredible that there is no allusion to this
fact in writing to them; that the apostle should have spoken more than
once of him, and never referred to his agency in establishing the church
there. (4.) Paul does, in effect, say that he had himself dispensed the
gospel to these Colossians ; chap. i. 21--25. The salutations at the end of
the epistle, to various persons at Laodicea and Colosse, show that he was
personally acquainted there. See these and other reasons drawn out in
Lardner’s Works, vol. vi., pp. 151 seq., Ed. Lond. 1829. The considerations
suggested by Dr. Lardner seem to me to be sufficient to render it in the
highest degree probable that the church at Colosse was founded by Paul.

§ 3. When and where the epistle was written.

This epistle 1s believed to have been written at Rome, when Paul was
a prisoner there, and at about the same time that the epistle to the Ephesians, and the epistle to Philemon, were written; and that they were all
sent by the same persons. It is said in the epistle itself (chap. iv. 7, 9), that
it was sent by Tychicus and Onesimus, both of whom are commended as
“faithful and beloved’”’ brethren. But the epistle to the Ephesians was
written at Rome (see the Intro.) and was sent by Tychicus (Eph. vi. 21);
and the epistle to Philemon was sent by Onesimus. It is probable, therefore, that these persons visited Ephesus, Colosse, and the place where
Philemon resided; or, rather, that Tychicus and Onesimus visited Coiosse
together, and that then Tychicus went to Ephesus, and Onesimus went to
his former master Philemon. ‘That this epistle and the one to Philemon
were written at about the same time, is further apparent from the fact that
Epaphras is mentioned in both as with the apostle, and as joining in the
salutation; Col. iv, 12 ; Phile. 23. The epistle to the Colossians bears internal marks of having been written at Rome, when the apostle was a prisoner,
Thus, in chap. i. 24, he says, ‘‘ who now rejoice in my sufferings for you; ’
chap. iv. 18, ““ Remember my bonds.’ If this be so, then it is not difficult
to fix the date of the epistle with some degree of accuracy. This would ke
abuut the year 62.

$4. The occasion and design of the epistle.

The general drift of this epistle has a strong resemblance to that addressed
to the Ephesians, and it bears internal marks of being from the same hand.
It was evidently written in view of errors which extensively prevailed among
the churches of that part of Asia Minor, and was designed to inculcate the
same general duties. It is of importance, therefore, to possess a general
understanding of the nature of these errors, in order to a correct interpretation of the epistle.

The church at Colosse was one of a circle or group of churches, lying
near each other, in Asia Minor; and it is probable that the same general
views of philosophy, and the same errors, prevailed throughout the entire

CCXXXiLi INTRODUCTION.

region where they were situated. That group of churches embraced those
at Ephesus, Laodicea, Thyatira, and, in general, those addressed in the
Apocalypse as “the seven churches of Asia.” From some of the notices
of those churches in the New Testament, as well as from the epistle
Sefore us, we may learn what errors prevailed there in general, and against
what form of error particularly the epistle to the Colossians was designed to
guard.

’ (1.) Several classes of errorists are mentioned as existing within the limits
of the “seven churches of Asia.’’ Thus, in the church at Ephesns, ‘those
which say they are apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars” (Rev.
ii. 2); in Smyrna, those “ which say they are Jews, and are not, but are of
the synagogue of Satan” (Rev. ii. 9); in Thyatira, “that woman Jezebel,
which calleth herself a prophetess’’ (Rev. ii. 20); in Pergamos, “ them
that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes ;’’ those ‘‘ who hold the doctrine
of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling-block before the children
of Israel’ (Rev. ii. 14, 15), The near proximity of these churches to Colosse would render it probable that the infection of these errors might have
reached that church also.

(2.) The apostle Paul, in his parting speech to the elders of the church
at Ephesus, alludes to dangerous teachers to which the church there might
be exposed, in such a manner as to show that there was some peculiar danger from such teachers in that community. ‘ For I know that after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
Also of your ownselves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
away disciples after them ;” Acts xx. 29, 30. He does not specify, indeed,
the kind of danger to which they would be exposed; but it is evident that
the danger arose from plausible teachers of error. These were of two classes
--those who would come in from abroad, implying probably that there were
such teachers in the neighbouring churches ; and such as would spring up
among themselves.

(3.) In that vicinity there appear to have been numerous disciples of John
the Baptist, retaining many Jewish prejudices and prepossessions, who would
be tenacious of the observances of the Mosaic law. What were their views,
is not precisely known. But it is clear that they regarded the Jewish law
as still binding ; that they would be rigid in its observance, and in insisting
on its observance by others ; that they had at best, if any, a very imperfect
acquaintance with Christianity ; and that they were ignorant of the miraculous power of the Holy Spirit, and of the fact that that had been poured
out in a remarkable manner under the preaching of the apostles. Paul
found a number of these disciples of John at Ephesus, who professed not to
have received the Holy Ghost, and who said that they had been baptized
unto John’s baptism ; Acts xix. 1--3. Among the most distinguished and
influential of the disciples of John in that region was Apollos (Acts xviii.
24, 25), who is represented as an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures. He taught at Ephesus, but how long before he was made more fully acquainted with the gospel, is unknown. He is represented as having been
zealously engaged in that work, and as being eminently successful; Acts
xviii. 25. There is no reason to doubt that he contributed not a little in
diffusing, in that region, the peculiar views held by those who were known
as the disciples of John. What was precisely the doctrine which Apollos
taught, before “the way of God was expounded more perfectly to him”
(Acts xviii. 26), is not now known, There is every reason, however, to
suppose that he would insist on the observance of the Jewish laws, and the
customs of their nation. The opinions which would be likely to be defended
by one in his circumstances, would be those which prevailed when John
preached--when the law of Moses was considered to be in full force, and
when it was necessary to observe all his institutions. The advocates for

INTRODUCTION. Ccxxxill

the Jewish law among the churches would be likely to appeal with great
force to the sentiments of so good and so eloquent a man as Apollos. So
extensive was his influence, that Koppe supposes that the principal errors
prevailing in the churches in Phrygia, which it was the design of the apostle
in this epistle to correct, could be traced to the influence of the disciples
of John, and especially to the teachings of this eloquent man. Proleg., p.
160.

(4.) If we look into the epistle itself, we shall be abie to dgtermine with
some degree of certainty the errors which prevailed, and which it was the
design of this epistle to correct, and we shall find that they correspond
remarkably with what we might anticipate, from what we have seen to be
the errors abounding in that region. (a) Their first danger arose from the
influence of philosophy ; chap. ii. 4--8. The apostle warns them to beware
lest any one should “ beguile them with enticing words ;’”’ he cautions them
against ‘‘ philosophy and vain deceit ’’--a philosophy that was based on the
“ tradition of men,’’ “‘ after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.”
Such philosophy might be expected to prevail in those cities so near to
Greece, and so much imbued with the Grecian spirit, and one of the chief
dangers which would beset them would arise from its prevalence. (b) A
second source of danger referred to, was that arising from the influence of
those who insisted on the observance of the rites and customs of the Jewish
religion. This the apostle refers to in chap. ii. 16. ‘ Let no man, therefore, judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the
new moon, or of the Sabbath days.” These are subjects on which the Jews
would insist much, and in this respect the disciples of John would be likely
to sympathize entirely with them. It is evident that there were those among
them who were endeavouring to enforce the observance of these things.
(c) There is some evidence of the prevalence there of a philosophy more
Oriental than Grecian--a philosophy that savoured of Gnosticism. This
philosophy was subsequently the foundation of a large part of the errors that
crept into the church. Indications of its prevalence in Colosse, occur in
places like the following ; chap. ii. 9--‘ For in him [Christ] dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily ;’’ from which it would seem probable that
there were those who denied that the fulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily in
the Lord Jesus--a favourite doctrine of the Gnostics, who maintained that
the assumption of human nature by the Son of God, was in appearance only,
and that he died on the cross only 7n appearance, and not in reality. So in
chap. ii. 18, there is a reference to ‘‘a voluntary humility and worshipping
of angels, intruding into those things which are not seen, and which tend
vainly to puff up a fleshly mind ”--a description that will apply with remarkable accuracy to the homage paid by the Gnostics to the ons, and to the
general efforts of those who held the doctrines of that philosophy to intrude
into those things which are not seen, and to offer an explanation of the
mode of the divine existence, and the nature of the divine agency. See
Notes on the verses here referred to. It will contribute not a little to a
proper understanding of this epistle, to keep these things in remembrance
respecting the kind of philosophy which prevailed in the region in which
Colosse was situated, and the nature of the dangers to which they were
exposed. ; ;

(5.) It will be seen from these remarks, and from the epistle itself, that
the difficulties in the church at Colosse did not relate to the moral and
religious character of its members. ‘There is no mention of any improper
conduct, either in individuals or in the church at large, as there was in
the church at Corinth; there is no intimation that they had been guilty
of any sins but such as were common to all heathens before conversion.
There are, indeed, intimations that they were exposed to sin, and there
are solemn charges against indulgence in it. But the sins to which they

were exposed were such as prevailed in all the ancient heathen world,
and doubtless such as the Gentile part of the church particularly, had been
guilty of before their conversion. The following sins particularly are mentioned: ‘“ Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, covetousness,
anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communications, and lying; chap.
iii. 5--9. These were common sins among the heathen (comp. Notes on
Rom. i.), and to a relapse into these they were particularly exposed ; but
it does not appear that any of the members of the church had given occasion for public reproach, or for apostolic reproof, by falling into them. As
they were sins, however, in which they had formerly indulged (chap. iii. 7),
and as they were therefore the more liable to fall into them again, there
was abundant occasion for all the solicitude which the apostle manifests on
the subject.

From the remarks now made, it is easy to see what was the design of the
epistle to the Colossians. It was primarily to guard the church against the
errors to which it was exposed from the prevalence of false philosophy, and
from the influence of false teachers in religion ; to assert the superior claims
of Christianity over all philosophy, and its independence of the peculiar
rites and customs of the Jewish religion.

It has been asked why the apostle wrote an epistle to the church at Colosse, rather than to the church in Laodicea, especially as Laodicea was the
capital of Phrygia? And it has been asked also, why an epistle was addressed
to that church so strikingly resembling the epistle to the Ephesians (see § 5),
especially as it has been supposed that the Epistle to the Ephesians was designed to be a circular letter, to be read by the churches in the vicinity ?
The reasons why an epistle was addressed particularly to the church at Colosse, seem to have been such as the following :--

(1.) Onesimus was at that time with Paul at Rome, and was about to return to his master Philemon, at Colosse ; see the Introduction to the Epistle
to Philemon. It was perfectly natural that Paul should avail himself of the
oer epa ly thus afforded him, to address a letter to the church at Colosse
also.

(2.) Epaphras, a principal teacher of the church at Colosse, was also with
Paul at Rome; chap. i. 7; iv. 12. He was at that time a fellow-prisoner
with him (Philem. 23), and it is not improbable that it was at his solicitation
particularly that this epistle was written. Paul had learned from him the
state of the church at Colosse (chap. i. 6, 7), and it is not impossible, as
Koppe conjectures, that he had been sent to Rome by the church to seek
the counsel of the apostle in the state of things which then existed in Colosse. Epaphras was, at any rate, greatly interested in the state of things
in the church, as well as in the condition of the churches at Laodicea aud
Hierapolis (chap. iv. 13), and nothing was more natural than that he should
endeavour to induce the apostle to direct a letter that might be of benefit
to them all. 7

(3.) A particular reason for sending this epistle appears t
ee the authority of Epaphras, and to pirette saageiCh Ne fie te
ee Re meee aes taught. In their difficulties and dangers Epaphras
Rane ip portant part in giving them counsel. His views might have

pposed; or his authority might have been disputed by the teachers of
error there, and it was important that the apostolic sanction should be given
pueian ee here : fo the apostle speaks with so much affection of
iy. 2s 13. armly of him as a faithful servant of Christ ; chap. i. 7;

(4.) It may be added, that although there i
tween this epistle and that to the eatcvic, Paani mtv pratt AE ie
garded as probable that the epistle to the Ephesians was intended in pat
& circular, yet this epistle would not have been needless. It contains many

things which are not in that epistle ; is especially adapted to the state of things
in the church at Colosse, and would have the greater weight with Christians
there from being specifically addressed to them. See Michaelis’ Intro. to
the New Testament, vol. v. 122, and Koppe, Proleg. pp. 163,.164.

§ 5. The resemblance between this epistle and that to the Ephesians.

Every person whe nas given any considerable degree of attention to this
epistle, must have been struck with its remarkable similarity to the epistle
to the Ephesians. That resemblance is greater by far than exists between
any other two of the epistles of Paul--a resemblance not only in the general
style and manner which may be expected to characterize the different productions of the same author, but extending to the course of thought ; the
structure of the argument ; the particular instructions, and to some phrases
which do not occur elsewhere. This similarity relates particularly to the
following points :--

(1.) In the representation of the reason for which the apostle was imprisoned at Rome. This resemblance, Dr. Paley (Hore Paul.) remarks,
is too close to be accounted for from accident, and yet too indirect and
latent to be imputed to design, and is one which cannot easily be resolved
into any other source than truth. Itis not found in any other of his epistles. It consistsin this, that Paulin these two epistles attributes his imprisonment not to his preaching Christianity in general, but to his asserting the right of the Gentiles to be admitted into the church on an equal
footing with the Jews, and without being obliged to conform themselves to
the Jewish law. ‘This was the doctrine to which he considered himself a
martyr. ‘Thusin chap. i. 24, he says, ‘‘Who now rejoice in my sufferings for
you ;” and in chap. ii. 1, “for I would that ye knew what great conflict I have
for you, and for them at Laodicea.” That is, his conflicts and trials, hiy
imprisonment and danger of death, had somehow come upon him in consequence of his endeavouring to spread the gospel in such places as Colosse and
Laodicea. These were Gentile communities; and the meaning is, that his
trials were the result of his efforts to preach among the Gentiles. The same
representation is made in the epistle to the Ephesians--likewise written from
Rome during his imprisonment. ‘For this cause I, Paul, the prisoner of
Jesus Christ for you Geutiles;” chap. iii. 1. And this coincidence is also apparent by comparing two other places in the epistles. Thus Col. iv. 3, ‘‘Praying for us, that God would open unto usa door of utterance to speak the
mysteries of Christ, for which I am in bonds.’”’ An allusion to the same
“mystery” occurs also in the Epistle to the Ephesians. ‘Whereby when
ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ--that
the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs of the same body. and partakers of his
promise in Christ by the gospel;” chap. ili. 4--6. In the Acts ofthe Apostles
the same statement occurs in regard to the cause for which the apostle was
persecuted and imprisoned --and it is on this coincidence, which is so eyvidently undesigned, that Paley has founded the argument for tne genuineness
of the epistles: to the Ephesians and Colossians. Hore Pauline. The
statement in the Acts of the Aposties is, that the persecutions of Paul which
led to his appeal to the Roman emperor and to his imprisonment, at Rome,
were in consequence of his maintaining that the Gentiles were, in the Christian administration, to be admitted to the satne privileges as the Jews, or
that there was no distinction between them in the matter of salvation ; and
his sufferings, therefore, were, as he says, ‘‘ in behalf of the Gentiles.’”’ See,
particularly, Acts xxi, 28; xxii. 21, 22. From these passages it appears that
the offence which drew down on Paul the vengeance of his countrymen was,
nis mission to the Gentiles, and his maintaining that they were to be admitted to the privileges of salvation on the same terms as the Jews.

ecxxxvi INTRODUCTION.

(2.) There is a strong resemblance between the course of thought and ive
general structure of the Epistles to the Ephesians and the Colossians. 10
an extent that does not occur in any other of Paul’s epistles, the same topics
are introduced, and in the same order and connection. Indeed, in some portions, they are almost identical. Particularly the order in which the various
topics are introduced is nearly the same. ‘The following portions of the two
epistles will be seen to correspond with each other.

Ephesians. Colossians.
ON Oa I re with. Metter terre tle -- Di
$590 2-93 Gee SE ae Se eee el LOO.
SE OF See AEE Be SI ee eel, C234
iii. 9, 10 sf 1.26, 27
A Ly wea ee Ole T(
ii. 11--22.... ie Atoll --15
iv. 1435. & r eal. -S
ive lon lOne. e . apal 9
HV Ot LOesere ‘ A ee FEE!)
lv. 22--24... “ Pill: ON 10
1Ve On sees ee Hoibing, OX,
VL ED ee ee a Sa ee treats LLL ORAL Ks
Vee DH SOV Ge anaes cee ee eee oth denen see see eee LLL el Oe Suh Le
Vie Oe, Sere ee ee Pere ee eee Ase cre cee sae eel Van oe
Vie ee ee Betas tener Ce nsaetssseatttet eee week Vents
This resembiance, thus carried almost through the epistle, shows that

there was a similarity of condition in the two churches in reference to the
dangers to which they were exposed, the kind of philosophy which prevailed,
the false teachers who might have an influence over them, and the particular
daties to which it was desirable their attention should beturned. ‘There is,
indeed, some considerable variety of phraseology in the discussion of these
topics, but still the resemblance is remarkable, and would indicate that the
epistles were written not far from the same time, and clearly by the same
person. It is remarkable, among other things, as Michaelis has observed,
that it is only ir these two epist}es that the apostle warns his readers against
lying; Eph. iv. 25 ; Col. iii. 9. Hence we may conclude that this vice was
one that particularly prevailed in the region where these churches were
situated, and that the members of these churches had been particularly addicted to this vice before their conversion,

§ 6. The epistle from Lavdicea

In chap. iv. 16 of this epistle, the apostle gives this direction: “And when
this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of the
Laodiceans, and that ye likewise read the epistle from Laodicea.’ The
former part of this verse is clear, and the direction was given, doubtless,
because the churches of Colosse and Laodicea were in the vicinity of each
other, and the instructions were adapted to both churches. Doubtless the
same form of philosophy prevailed, and the churches were exposed to the
same errors. But it is not so clear what is meant by the “epistle from Laodicea.”” The most natural and obvious interpretation would be, that Paul had
sent a letter also to that church, and that he wished them to procure it ana
read it. But no such epistle is now extant, and, consequently, much difficulty has been felt in determining what the apostle referred to. A brief ex

INTRODUOTION, CCXXXVii

amination of the opinions entertained on the subject seems necessary in thi:
place. They are the following :

1. It has been supposed that the reference is to a letter sent from the Laodiceansto Paul, proposing to him some questions which they desired him to
answer, and that he now wishes the Colossians to procure that letter, in order
that they might more fully understand the drift of the epistle which he now
sent to them. ‘This opinion was held by Theodoret, and has been defended
by Storr, Rosenmiiller, and others. But the objections to it are obvious
and conclusive. (1.) It isnot the fair meaning of the language used by Paul,
If he had referred to a letter to him, he would have said so; whereas the obvious meaning of the language used is, that the Colossians were to procure a
letter in the possession of the Laodiceans, in exchange for the one which
they now received from Paul. The churches were to make an exchange of
letters, and one church was to read that which had been addressed to the
other. (2.) If the letter had been addressed to Paul, it was doubtless in his
possession ; and if he wished the church at Colosse to read it, nothing would
be more natural or obvious than to send it, by Tychicus, along with the letter
which he nowsent. Why shouldhe give directions to send to Laodicea to
procure a copy of it? (3.) Ifaletter had been sent to him by the Laodiceans,
proposing certain questions, why did he send the answer to the church at
Colosse, and not tothe church at Laodicea? The church at Laodicea would
certainly have been the one that was entitled tothe reply. There would have
been a manifest impropriety in sending an epistle to one church, made up of
answers to questions proposed by another, and then at the end requesting
them to procure those questions, that they might understand the epistle.
(4.) It may be added, that it is not necessary to suppose that there was any
such epistle, in order to understand this epistle to the Colossians. This is
not more difficult of interpretation than the other epistles of Paul, and does
not furnish in its structure any particular evidence that it was sent in answer
to inquiries which had been proposed to the author.

2. It has been supposed by some that the epistle referred to was one written
to Timothy, by the apostle himself, at Laodicea. This opinion was defended
by Theophylact. The only show of authority for it is the subscription at the
end of the First Epistle to Timothy---‘ The first to Timothy was written
from Laodicea, which is the chiefest city of Phrygia Pacatiana.’”’ But that
this is erroneous, can be easily shown. (1.) The subscription to the epistle
to Timothy is of no authority. (2.) Ifthisepistle had been referred to, Paul
would not have designated it in this manner. It would have been rather by
mentioning the person to whom it was addressed, than the place where it was
written. (3.) There is nothing in the epistle to Timothy which would throw
any important light on this to the Colossians, or which would be particularly
important to them as achurch. It was addressed to one individual, and
it contains counsels adapted to a minister of the gospel, rather than
to a church.

3. Many have supposed that the “‘epistle from Laodicea,” referred to, was
one which Paul had written to the Laodiceans, partly for theiy use, but which
was of the nature of a circular epistle, and that we still haye it under another
name. Those who hold this opinion suppose that the epistle to the Ephesians is the one referred to, and that it was, in fact, sent also to the church at
Laodicea. See this question treated at length in the Introduction to the Epistle
to the Ephesians § 5. The reasons for supposing that the epistle now known
as the “ Epistle to the Ephesians” was neither a circular letter, nor addressed
to the church at Laodicea, are there given. But if the common reading of
the text in Eph. i. 1, “‘ the saints which are ut Ephesus,” be correct, then it 1s
clear that that epistle was really sent to the church in that place. The only
question, then, is, whether it is of so general a character that it might as well
be sent to other churches as to that, and whether Paul actually sent it as a

cexxxvili INTRODUCTION.

circular, with a direction to different churches? Against this supposition,
there are strong improbabilities. (1.) It is contrary to the usual practice or
Paul. Ile addressed letters to particular churches and individuals ; and, unless this case be one, there is no evidence that he ever adopted the practice
of sending the same letter to different individuals or churches. (2.) There
would have been some impropriety in it, if not dishonesty. An avowed circular letter, addressed to churches in general, or to any number whose names
are enumerated, would be perfectly honest. But how would this be, if the
same letter was addressed to one church, and then, with a new direction,
addressed to another, with no intimation of its circular character? Would
there not be a species of concealment in this which we should not expect of
Paul? (3.) How happens it, if this had occurred, that all remembrance of it
was forgotten? When those epistles were collected, would not the attention
be called to the fact, and some record of it be found in some ancient writer ?
Would it fail to be adverted to that the same epistle had been found to have
been addressed to different churches, with a mere change in the name ?

4. There is but one other opinion which can exist on this question ; and
that is, that the apostle refers to some letter which had been sent to the
Laodiceans, which we have not now in the New Testament. If this be so,
then the reference could only be to some epistle which may be extant elsewhere, or which is now lost. There is an epistle extant which is known by
the name of ‘ St. Paul’s Epistle to the Laodiceans;” but it has no well-founded
claims to being a genuine epistle of Paul, and is universally regarded as a
forgery. ‘It is,” says Michaelis, ““a mere rhapsody, collected from St.
Paul’s other epistles, and which no critic can receive as a genuine work of the
apostle. It contains nothing which it was necessary for the Colossians to
know, nothing which is not ten times better and more fully explained in the
epistle which St. Paul sent to the Colossians ; in short, nothing which could
be suitable to St. Paul’s design.’ Intro. to the New Tes. iv. 127, The
Greek of this epistle may be found at length in Michaelis ; and, as it may be
a matter of curiosity, and will show that this cannot be the epistle referredtoby
Paulin Col. ivy. 16, [will subjoin herea translation. It is as follows: “Paul
an apostle, not of men,neither by men, but by Jesus Christ, to the brethren
in Laodicea. Grace be to you, and peace, from God the Father, and our
Lord Jesus Christ. Igive thanksto my God in Christ always, in my prayers,
that you are mindful of and are persevering in good works, waiting for the
promise in the day of judgment. And let not the vain speeches of some who
would conceal the truth disturb you, to turn you away from the truth of the
gospel which has been preached unto you. Now God grant that all they who
are of me may be borne forward to the perfection of the truth of the gospel,
to perform those excellent good works which become the salvation of eternal
life. And now are my bonds manifest, in which bonds I am in Christ, and
at the present time ; but I rejoice, for I know that this shall be for the furtherance of my salvation, which is through your prayer and the supply of
the Holy Ghost, whether by life or by death. For to me to live is Christ,
and to die is joy. But our Lord himself shall grant you his mercy with
us, that possessing love you may be of the same mind andthinkthe same
thing. On this account, brethren, as ye have heard of the appearing ot
the Lord, so think and do in the fear of God, and it shall be eternal life to
you, for it is God who worketh in you. Do all things without murmurings
and disputings. And for the remainder, brethren, rejoice in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and see that ye keep yourselves from all base gain of covetousness. Letall your requests be made known with boldness unto God, and
be firm in the mind of Christ. And finally, brethren, whatsoever things are
true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are holy, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are lovely, these things do, And what you
have heard and received, keep in your hearts, and it shall give you veace

INTRODUCTION. CCXXxix

Salute all the brethren with an holy kiss. All the saints salute you. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen. Cause that
this epistle be read in the church of the Colossians, and do you also read the
epistle from Colosse.”” Nothing can be plainer than that this is not such an
epistle as the apostle Paul would have written; it is therefore a mere forgery. The conclusion to which we are conducted is, that the reference in
Col. iv. 16, is to some epistle of Paul to the church at Laodicea which is not
now extant, and that the probability is, that, having accomplished the object
for which it was sent, it has been suffered to be lost. Thus, it is to be numbered with the writings of Gad, and Iddo the seer, and Nathan, and the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite. and the book of Jehu (1 Chron. xix. 29; 2
Chron. ix. 29; xx. 84; 1 Kings xvi. 1); works which, having accomplished
the object for which they were composed, have been suffered to become extinct. Nor is there any thing improbable or absurd in the supposition that
an inspired book may have been lost. There is no special sacredness in a
mere writing, or in the fact that inspired truth was secorded, that makes it
indispensable that it should be preserved. The oral discourses of the Saviour were as certainly inspired as the writings of Paul; and yet but a small
part of what he said has been preserved; John xxi. 25. Why should there
be any improbability in supposing that an inspired book may also have been
lost? And, if it has, how does that fact weaken the evidence of the importance or the value of what we now possess? How does the fact that a large
part of the sermons of the Saviour have perished, by not being recorded,
diminish the value, or lessen the evidence of the divine authority, of the
Sermon on the Mount’?

poms erad ble dns (ooo :

1 Wg Pe ats Pe cpa etl apg Rid

or rd pip A Mh gm Pe pe
dk eee trasshlie-thann “a1. Béien wae al

ho vA Ebagined, er a

Ag © 9 fat arya 4 ai
eal offi apiatles: ae? ary oo orn = =~.
--TM apurtia, te cuntatus malijop ahiok it wpe ---- ‘
Touw, xctliing #tito’ Iewol tee Lier Vetrer unt q@erre fille 6 c
ryunis whink Si. Favliers* = the © volves ling = J ee ardy whteles eitohnee
he Suitable ud) 84. Peale Solyn.” Loto. tor vbw ‘Mest Soe-tes © ete
Greek of Quis. opiee imap Do rt at ities M Bibhvers | aed ee
hbatier af pc Hlostey, ard oi!) oiow thal Uienwmadt he thea wfoaihe ente
Pai ty Cols ln. 14, LW subse hors + weestlation, (tp as Galton:
ipeqest' 6) eoh Of ion noise he mon, we Mp Serae Celol. pe
ev Tianthieta. Geuot bo 40 tou. aod phagn from Gad the i
und Some treet 1 gre) kp to as odin Pee plweyey
Se peu Are mic Mfatef nad @e parre evening ih -gaed wakes, wi! bing
ehinied (nthe they af Judy Weal. And lett oY véal_qeedhew of
Saud Couous Mier wots wel yeasts tury you aWar 4pome dhe Oath
‘wee idk rel Sten Graal anlage, aw od pranhinah eld &
le of bie reay be Loree Coreuhd P the paeteoilon of the iwath af bh
a tirnse tian eeondes! oud worte-whieb >4houww Mae eal ention
Me fed now sive only Peae, ncn ileet, ST whint Gonted ante

wl,
df ree (Murcns thee | Lettcoivde, (oe 1 dew gab ile ane te for too

Chive dives of : ay walration, whtah Isndoroagh gut oraeey and Ge wt

te Tay Geet, whedliey ly is of By jant Kor ly qe te tive tte my
wes f = t . Fr

Aen te have But op wu Aixmeell ‘atypil Cryp4 ShG thi. ' with: j

+ 4 Peco aig Ve ym aE fe Vu ean eind Astin & = _
4 beat. Tree ® ode ‘7 hase nee of Ihe@ pas
4 B: o> Ake. int GU i “(Re gear of stl, aug it ai) als we arent fe
-- . hte works ia ron *ie.@]] alin os = (“ond maven -
ud 4) toys od fue. the- rennin lietiires res te. te dhe
Reve ba iby a % WAS oH ‘pp vari dove &! wee gee st aoretine ve s
Kem: Lab el ySae-tevatee Oe ned “ew Wil Lultoew ante tjedy Gad
ie “a Neds, 4 Alte: i aT} hiothrs, bait eree thingy Ere ra
A 1s i if c7o 25 r us Vor Tyintw ir hat » Wh
arerrs pa : Laer Gi “¢4 in, en
‘ ise. Ww Sow =», ond 1) opel pled yew pente
be ee ~
=, -- : _
be -- i

AUL, @ an apostle of Jesus
Christ, by the will of God, and
Timotheus own brother,
2 To the saints ® and faithful
a Ep.1.1. b Ps.16.3.

, brethren in Christ which are at

Colosse :¢ Grace be unto you, and
peace, from God our Father, and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

3 We @ give thanks to God and

c Ga. 1.3. d Ep.1.15,16.

This chapter embraces the following topics :--

(1.) The usual salutation to the
church ; ver. 1, 2.

(2.) Thanks to God for what he
had done for the Colossians, and for
the fruits of the gospel among them ;
ver. 3--8.

(3.) Prayer that they might persevere in the same course, and might
walk worthy of theircalling; ver. 9--11.

(4.) An exhortation to render thanks
to God for what he had done for them
in redemption ; ver. 12--14.

(5.) A statement of the exalted dignity of the Redeemer; ver. 15--18.

(6.) A statement of what he had
done in the work of redemption, in
making peace by the blood of his cross
and reconciling the world to God;
ver. 19, 20.

(7.) Through this gospel, Paul says,
they had been reconciled to God, and
‘were now brought into a state in
which they might be presented as
holy and unblameable in his sight ;
ver. 21--23.

(8.) Of this gospel, Paul says he
was a minister; in preaching it he
had been called to endure trials, but
those trials he endured with joy ; and
in preaching this gospel he used the
utmost diligence, warning every man,
und teaching every man in all wisdom,
that he might present every one perfect in Christ Jesus ; ver. 24--29.

1. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ ;
see Notes, Rom. i. 1. ¥ By the will
of God; Notes, 1 Cor. i. 1. ¥ And

Timotheus our brother. On the question why Paul associated others with
him in his epistles, see Notes on 1
Cor. i. 1. There was a particular
reason why Timothy should be associated with him in writing this epistle. He was a native of the region
where the church was situated (Acts
xvi, 1--3), and had been with Paul
when he preached there, and was
doubtless well known to the church
there; Acts xvi. 6. It is evident,
however, from the manner in which
Paul mentions him here, that he did
not regard him as “an apostle,” and
did not wish the church at Colosse to
consider him as such. It is not
“Paul and Timothy, apostles of Jesus Christ,” but ‘‘ Paul, an apostle of
Jesus Christ, and Timothy owr brother.’”’ Paul is careful never to apply
the term apostle to Timothy; Phil. i.
1. ‘“ Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ; comp. 1 Thess.
la, es oe Lhessesive laeectt shes hadure:
garded Timothy as an apostle, or as
having apostolic authority, it is not
easy to conceive why he should not
have referred to him as such in these
letters to the churches. Could he
have failed to see that the manner in
which he referred to him was adapted
to produce a very important difference
in the estimate in which he and 'Timothy would be held by the Colossians?

2. Grace be unto you; see Notes,
Rom. 1. 7.

3. We give thanks to God; see
Notes on the parallel place in Eph.i.
15,16. {J Praying always for you;
see Notes on Rom. i. 9; Eph.i. 1;
comp. | Thess. i. 2.
the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, praying always for you,
4 Since we heard of your faith in

Christ Jesus, and of the love which | since the day

ye have to all the saints ;
5 For the hope which is laid

6 Which is come unto you, as #
is in all © the world ; and bringeth
¢ forth fruit as 7t doth also in you,
ye heard 4 of it, and
knew the @ grace of God in truth./

7 As ye also learned of 9 Epa-

up ¢ for you in heaven, whereof ye | phras our tear fellow-servant, who

heard before in the word of the|is for you a

{ruth of the gospel,

a2 Ti.4.8;1 Pe.1.4. bvef 25. Johnl5.10.

faithful minister ot
Christ ; .
Ro.10.17. e Tit.2.11,12. fJohn4.23. g Phi.23.

4, Sinve we heard of your faith in
Christ Jesus. To wit, by Epaphras,
who had informed Paul of the steadfastness of their faith and love; ver.
7,8. This does not prove that Paul

6. Which is come unto you. It has
not been confined to the Jews, or
Timited to the narrow country where
it was first preached, but has been
‘sent abroad to the Gentile world.

had never been at Colosse, or that he | The object of the apostle kere seems
did not establish the church there, for tio be, to excite ii Ehgn-A-semse--ot--

cite In vn

he uses a similar expression respect-| gratitude that the gospel had been

ing the church at Ephesus (Eph. i.
15), of which he was undoubtedly the
founder. ‘lhe meaning is, that he had
heard of their faith at that time, or of
their perseverance in faith and love.

sent to them. It was owing éntirely
fo the goodness of God in sending
them the gospel, that they had this
hope of cternal life. § As it is in all __
the world. It is confined to no place

{| Which ye have to all the saints. In| or people, “but is designed to bea
what way they had manifested this is | universal religion. It offers the

not known. It would seem that Paul
had been informed that this was a
character of their piety, that they had
remarkable love for all who bore the
Christian name. Nothing could be
more acceptable information respect-

same blessedness,in heaven to all;
comp. Notes on¥yer, 233 § And
bringing forth fruit. The fruits of
righteousness or good living; see
Notes on 2 Cor. ix. 10.

ing them to one who himself so ar- | effect wherever it was preached. The

dently loved the church ; and nothing
could have furnished better evidence
that they were influenced by the true
spirit of religion; comp. 1 John iii. 14.

5. For the hope which is laid up for
you in heaven. That is, “I give
thanks that there is such a hope laid
up for you.” The evidence which he
had that this hope was theirs, was
founded on the faith and love to the
saints which he heard they had evinced.
lle fully believed that where there was
such faith and love, there was a wellfounded hope of heaven. The word
“hope” here is used, as it often is,
for the thing hoped for. The object of
hope--to wit, eternal happiness, was
reserved for them inheaven. § Whereof
ye heard before. When the gospel
was first preached to you. You were

same results were observable everywhere else as in Colosse, that it produced most salutary influences on the
hearts and lives of those who received
it. On the nature of the “ fruits’ of --
religion, see Notes on Gal. v. 22, 23.
q Since the day ye heard of it. \
has constantly been producing these |
fruits since you first heard it preached. § And knew the grace of Ged
in truth. Since the time ye knew
the true grace of God; since you became acquainted with the real benevolence which God has manifested
in the gospel. The meaning is, that
ever since they had heard the gospel it had been producing among
them abundantly its appropriate fruit,
and that the same thing had also/
characterized it wherever it had been |

told of the blessed rewards of a life of | dispensed. os

faith, in heaven. § In the word of

the truth of the gospel.
word of the gospel.

In the true | Epaphras was then with Paul.

7. As ye also learned of Epaphras.
Phi-

lem. 23. He had probably been sent

----a

Ni.

| Notes on The meaning _
is, that the gospel was not without

r
'

8 Who also declared unto us
your love “in the Spirit.

9 For this cause we also, since
the day we heard ¢#, do not cease
to pray for you, and to desire that

@ Ro.15.30. E Ro.12.2; Ep.5.10,17.
¢ Ps.119.99.

{ie Se) a eae
to him by the church at Colosse to

consult him in reference to some
matters pertaining to the church
there. It is evident from this, that
Epaph

_ Ep ras was a minister of th
church at Colosse, thoug ere is no

1a

Th IH y ha

learned from Epaphras the truenature
of the gospel, and he designs undoubtedly to confirm what he had taught
them in opposition to the teachings
of errorists; sec the Introduction,
§ 4. He had doubtless conferred
with Epaphras respecting the doctrines which he had taught there.
{ Our dear fellow-servant. This
shows that Paul had contracted a
strong friendship for Epaphras. There

--is_no reason to believe that he had
known him before, but his acquaintance with him now had served to attach him strongly to him. It is possible, as has been conjectured (see
the Introduction), that there was a
party in the church at Colosse opposed to Epaphras and to the doctrines which he preached, and if this
were s0;>Paul’s strong expression of
attachment for him would do much to
silence the opposition. Qo Who is for
you a faithful minister of Christ.
** For you,” when he is with you, and
in managing your interests here.

8. Who also declared unto us your
love in the Spirit. The love wrought
in you by the Holy Spirit. It was
not mere natural affection, but love
~ wrought in their hearts by the agency

{oisene JiGly AgHOSb. se cvs aad ons
~) 9. Do not cease to pray for vou;
<) ver. 3. The progress which they had

already made, and the love which
they had shown, constituted an encouragement for prayer, and a reason
~~“why higher blessings still should be
sought. We always feel stimulated
and encourazed to pray for those who

evidence, as has been often supposed,
ye migut be filled with the knowledge of his will, ® in all ¢ wisdom
and spiritual understanding ;4

10 That ye might walk ¢ worthy
of the Lord unto all pleasing f be.

d | John 5.20. e Phi.1.27.
| fi ThA

+ are-doing well. Q That ye might be
filled with the knowledge of his will

They had shown by their faith and-------_
Tove that they wer® disposed to do his ‘P
they might be fully acquainted with
what he would have them do. He
offered a similar prayer in behalf of
the Ephesians ; see the parallel place
_in Eph. i. 17--19, and the Notes on /
those vérses. J Znall wisdom. That
you may be truly wise in all things;
Eph.i. 17. §{ And spiritual understanding. In understanding those
things that pertain to the ‘“ Spirit ;”
that is, those things taught by the
Holy Spirit, and those which he produces in the work of salvation; see
_Notes on 1 Cor, ii. 12, 13; comp. 1
John ii. 20; v. 20.

10. That ye might walk worthy of
the Lord. That you may live as becomes the followers of the Lord.
How this was to be done he states in

yo

his and the following verses. {J Unto all pleasing. So as to please him o
in all things; co i Mn Aes

q Being fruitful in every good work.
This is one way in which we are to
walk worthy of the Lord, and su as
to please him; see Notes on. John xv. _
8. J And increasing in the knowledge of God. ‘This is another way
in which we may walk worthy of the --
t 1s

Lord, and so as to please him,

by endeavouring to become better
acquainted with his true character.
God is pleased with those who desire
to understand what he is; what he
does; what he purposes; what he
commands. Hence he not only commands us to study his works (comp.
Ps. cxi. 2), but he has made a worlt--
so beautiful as to invite us to contemplate his perfections as reflected
in that world. All good beings desire that others should understand
their character, and God delights in
those who are sincerely desirous of

Lf
fot

ae

counsels and his will.
ing ¢ fruitful in every good work,

‘according to his glorious power,

and increasing ® in the knowledge unto all patience 4 and long-suffer-

of God ;
11 Strengthened ¢ withall might,
a John LOL b 2Pe.3.18.
c is. ‘de

knowing what he is, and who inquire

with humility and reverence into his
Men are often
displeased when others attempt to
look into their plans, for they are
sensible they will not bear the light
of investigation. God has no plans
which would not be seen to be, inthe
highest degree, glorious to him.

11. Strengthened with all might,
This was also an object of Paul’s
earnest prayer. He desired that they
night be strengthened for the performance of duty; to meet tempta-

tions; and to bear up under the va- |

rious trials of life. { According to
his glorious power. Not by any human means, but by the power of God.
There is a manifestation of power in
the spirit with which Christians are
enabled to bear up under trials, which
shows that it is not of human origin.
It is the power which God gives them
in the day of trial. This power is
‘‘ glorious,” or, as it is in the Greek,
it is the “‘ power of his glory.” It is
manifestly the power of the great and
glorious God, and it tends to promote
his glory, and to show forth his praise.
{ Unto all patience. So that you
may be enabled to bear all your trials
without murmuring. It is only the
power of God that can enable us to
do that. § <And long-suffering ;
Notes, 1 Cor. xiii. 4. 4] With joyfulness ; Notes, Rom. y. 8; 2 Cor.
vil. 4. The Syriac version, Chrysostom, and a few MSS. attach this to
the following verse, and read it,
‘‘ With joyfulness giving thanks to
the Father,” &c. The only difference
is in the pointing, and either reading
makes good sense.

12. Giving thanks to the Father.
This is another mode by which we
inay “ walk worthy of the Lord unto
all pleasing” (ver. 10); to wit, by
rendering appropriate thanks to God
for his mercy, --Ihe particular point

which the apostle here says demanded

ing, with joyfulness ; ¢
12 Giving thanks unto the Fa:
é Ro.5.3.

| d Ja.1.4.
|

_thanksgiving was, that they had been
‘called from the kingdom of darkness
“to the kingdom of light. This had
“been done by the special mercy of the
Father who had provided the plan ct
salvation, and had sent his Son to
redeem them. The connection shows
that the word ‘ Father” refers, in
this place, not to God as the Father
of his creatures, but to the Father as
| distinguished from the Son. Itis the
“ Father” who has translated us into
the kingdom of the “Son.” Our
|especial thanks are due to the
‘‘ Father’ in this, as he is represented
_as the great Author of the whole plan
' of salvation--as he who sent his Son
;to redeem us. § Who hath made us
meet. The word here used--ixavea--
‘means properly to make sufficient,
\from ixaves -- sufficient, abundant,
much. The word conveys the idea
| of having sufficient or enough to ac-
/complish anything ; see it explained

I The

“verb is not elsewhere used in the

“New Testament. Ir

_ there seems to be implied the idea of

| conferring the privilege or the ability

_ to be thus made the partakers of the

kingdom, and the idea also of render-

_ing us fit for it. The sense is, he has

| conferred on us grace sufficient to_

of the blessings of his kingdom. In
regard to this “fitness” or ‘ meetness” for that kingdom, we may remark, (1.) that it does not mean that
we are rendered fit by our own merits,

_ or by anything which we have done;

for it is expressly said that it is God
who has thus rendered us ‘“‘ meet” fo:
. it. No one, by his own merits, eve1
; made himself fit for heaven. His gooé
works cannot be an equivalent for the
eternal rewards of heaven; nor is the
‘ heart when unrenewed, even in the
best state, fit for the society and the
‘employments of heaven. There isno
adaptedness of such a heart, however

ther, which hath made us 4
meet to be partakers of the >
a Re.22.14. b Ac.20.32.

amiable and however refined, to the
pure spiritual joys of the upper world.

Those joys are the joys of religion, of

___the love of God, of pleasure in_holi-

_ness; and the unrenewed heart can

__light.

never be wrought up to a fitness to
enter into those joys. Yet (2.) there
7s a fitness or meetness which Christians possess for heaven. It consists
in two things. First, in their having
complied with the conditions on which
God promises heaven, so that, although they have no merit in themselyes, and no fitness by their own
works, they have that meetness which
results from having complied with the
terms of favour. They have truly
repented of their sins, and believed in
the Redeemer ; and they are thus in

b= “the proper state of mind to receive

the mercy of God ; for, according to
the terms of mercy, there is a propriety that pardon should be bestowed
on the penitent, and peace on the believing. A child that is truly brokenhearted for a fault, is in a fit state of

mind to be forgiven; a proud, and

obstinate, and rebellious child, is not.

_ Secondly, there is, in fact, a fitness

in the Christian for the participation
of the inheritance of the saints in
He has a state of feeling that
is adapted to that. There is a congruity between his feelings and heaven--a state of mind that can be satisfied with nothing but heaven. He

has in his heart substantially the same

principles which reign in heaven ;
‘and he is fitted to -find-happiness-onty
in the same objects in which the inhabitants of heaven do He loves
the same God and Saviour; has pleasure in the same truths; prefers, as
they do, holiness to sin; and, Jike the
inhabitants of heaven, he would choose
to seek his pleasure in holy living,
rather than in the ways of vanity.
His preferences are all on the side of
holiness and virtue; and, with such
preferences, he is fitted for the enjoyments of heaven. In character,
views, feelings, and preferences, therefore, the Christian is made “ fit” to

jinheritance of the saints in

light :
18 Who hath delivered us from

articipate in the employments and

joys of the saints in light. §
partakers of the inheritance.
privileges of religion are often represented as an heirship, or an inheritance ; see es on Rom. viii. 17.
Of the saints in light. Called in
ver. 18, “the kingdom of his dear
Son.” This is a kingdom of Ji

opposed to the kingdom of darkness
in which they formerly were.’ In the
East, and particularly in Persia, there
prevailed( early the belief that there
were two gréat kingdoms in the universe ----- that of light, and that of
darkness.| We find traces of this
opinion in the Scriptures, where (the
kingdom of God is called “light,”
and that of Satan is called “ darkness.’ These are, of course, figurative éxpressions ; but they convey
important truth. Light, in the Scriptures, is the emblem of holiness,
knowledge, happiness ; and all these
are found in the kingdom over which
God presides, and of which Christians
are the heirs. Accordingly, we find

this kingdom. Thus it is said of God,
who presides over it, that he “is light
and in him is no darkness at all,’’ 1
John i. 5; of Christ, that he is “the
light of man,” John i. 4; that he is

12; comp. xii. 35; Luke ii. 32. The
angels of that kingdom are “ angels
of light,” 2 Cor. xi. 14. Those who
compose that kingdom on earth are
| 1 Thess. v.5. And all the descriptions of that kingdom in heaven repre

13. Who hath delivered us from
the power of darkness. The power
exerted over us in that dark kingdom
to which we formerly belonged- the
kingdom of Satan. The characteristic of this empire is darkness-- the
emblem of (1.) sin; (2.) error; (3.)
misery and death. Over us, by nature, these things had uncontrollable

the word light often used to describe.

rar

k

“the true light,” John i. 9; that he {©
is ‘‘the light of the world,” John viii. |

66 the children of light,” Luke rh. 8:8 e

Ye

the power of darkness, # and hath | tion through his bloed, even the
translated ws into the kingdom of | forgiveness of sins :

1 his dear Son ;
14 Tn > whom we have redempa) Pc.2.9. lthe Sonofhislove. bEp.1.7. cHe.1.3.

power ; but now we are delivered from
them, and brought to the enjoyment
of the privileges of those who are connected with the kingdom of light.
Darkness is often used to represent
the state in which men are by nature;
comp. Luke i. 79; Acts xxvi. 18;
Rom. xiii. 12; 1 Pet. ii. 9; 1 Johnii.
8. F And hath translated us. The

15 Who is the image ¢ of the
invisible God, the first-born of
every creature:

phrase occurring here, ‘the image

of the invisible God,” see the Notes
on Heb. i 8, and 2 Cor. iv. 4. The
meaning is, that he represents to mankind the perfections of God, as an
image, figure, or drawing does the
object which if is made to resemble.
See the word zmage--tixav--explained
in the Water on fleb. x. I. It pro-

word here rendered “translated” is} perly denotes that which is a copy or

» . often used in the sense of removing a | delineation of a thing ; which accur-

people from one country to another; | ately and fully represents it, in consee Josephus, Ant. ix. 11. 1. It means, | tradistinction from a rough sketch, or

here, that they who are Christians
have been transferred from one king-

outline; comp. Rom. viii. 29; 1 Cor.
xi. 7; xv. 49. The meaning here is,

dom to another, as if a people were| that the being and perfections of

thusremoved. ‘They become subjects

of a new kingdom, are under different | sented by Christ.

laws, and belong to a different community. .This change is made in
regeneration, by which we pass from
the kingdom of darkness to the king-

dom of light; from the empire of
ET Pe > bes a,
sin, ignorance, and misery, to one of

~ holiness, knowledge, and happiness.
No change, therefore, in a man’s life
is so important as this; and no words
can suitably express the gratitude
which they should feel who are thus
transferred from the empire of darkness to that of light. |
14, In whom we have redemption;
see this explained in the Notes on
Eph. i. 7. The passage here proves

~ that we obtain forgiveness of sins
) through the blood of Christ; but it

|
God are accurately and fully repreIn what respects
particularly he was thus a representative of God, the apostle proceeds to
state in the following verses, to wit,
in his creative power, in his eternal
existence, in his heirship over the
universe, in the fulness that dwelt in
him. This cannot refer to him merely
as incarnate, for some of the things
affirmed of him pertained to him before
his incarnation ; and the idea is, that
tn all things Christ fairly represents
to us the divine nature and perfections.
God is manifest to us through him;
1 Tim. iii, 16. We see God in him
as we see an object in that which is
in all respects an exact copy of it.
God is invisible. No eye has seen
him, or can see him; but in what

/ does not prove that this is ad/ that we
| obtain through that blood.

Christ is, and has done in the works
| of creation and redemption, we have
15. Who ts the image of the ‘nvisi- a fair and full representation of what

ble God. tixay rod Jeet 710 aordrov. The _God is; see Notes on John i. 18; xiv.
object here, as it is in the parallel 9. { The first-born of every creature.

place in Eph. i. 20--23, is to give a
just view of the exaltation of the Redeemer. It is probable that, in both
cases, the design is to meet some erroneous opinion on this subject that
prevailed in those churches, or among
those that claimed to be teachers
there. See the Introduction to this
epistle, and comp. the Notes on Eph.
i. 20-23. For the meaning of the

Among all the creatures of God, or
over all his creation, occupying the
rank and pre-eminence of the firstborn. ‘The first-born, or the eldest
son, among the Hebrews as elsewhere,
had peculiar privileges. Ile was cntitled to a double portion of the inheritance. It has been, also, and especially in oriental countries, a common
thing for the eldest son to succeed to

the estate and the title of his father. + might be pre-eminent among those

In early times, the first-born son was
the officiating priest in the family, in
the absence or on the death of the
father. ‘here can be no doubt. that
tne apostle here has reference to the
usual distinctions and honours conferred on the first-born, and means to
say that, among all the creatures of
God, Christ occupied a pre-eminence
similar to that. He does not say
that, in all respects, he resembled the
first-born in a family; nor docs he
say that he himself wasa creature, for
the point of his comparison does not
turn on these things, and what he proceeds to affirm respecting him is inconsistent with the idea of his being
a created being himself. (Ile that
“ created all things-that are in heaven’
and that are in earth,” was not him-

____ selfcreated.| That the apostle did not

mean to represent him as a creature,
is also manifest from the reason which
he assigns why he is called the firstborn. ‘“ He is the image of God, and
the first-born of every creature, for--
o7:--by him were all things created.”
That is, he sustains the elevated rank
of the first-born, or a high eminence
over the creation, because by him “‘all
things were created in heaven and in
earth.” The danguage here used, also,
does not fairly imply that he was a
creature, or that he was in nature and
rank one of those in relation to whom
it is said he was the first-born. It is
true that the word first-born---zeu 7oroxos--properly means the first-born
child of a father or mother, Matt. i.
25; Luke ii. 7; or the first-born of
animals. But two things are also to
be remarked in regard to the use of
the word: (1.) It does not necessarily
imply that any one is borr afterwards
in the family, for it would be used of
the first-born, though an only child;
and (2.) it is used to denote one who
is chief, or who is highly distinguished
and pre-eminent. Thus it is employed
in Rom. vili. 29, “That he might be
the first-born among many brethren.”
So, in verse 18 of this chapter, it is
said that he was “ the first-born from
the dead ;’’ not that he was literally
the first that was raised from the dead,
which was not the fact, but that he

that are raised; comp. Ex. iv. 22,
The meaning, then, is, that Christ
sustains the most exalted rank in the
universe ; he is pre-eminent above all
others ; he is at the head of all things.
The expression does not mean that
he was “begotten before all creatures,’ as it is often explained, but
refers to the simple fact that he sustains the highest rank over the creation. Ile is the Son of God. He is
the heir of all things. All other
creatures are also the “ offspring of
God;” but he is exalted as the Son of
God above all.

[This clause has been variously explained.
The most commonly received, aud, as we
think, best supported opinion, is that which
renders wgwtotoxos terns xtictws *¢ begotten
before all creation.” This most natural and
obvious sense would have been more readily
admitted, had it not been supposed hostile to
certain views on the sonship uf Christ. Somo
explain zeor. actively, and render “first begetter or producer of all thiugs,’’ which gives,
at all events, a sense consistent with truth
and with the context, which immediately assigns as the reason of Christ being styled 7¢4-.,
the clause beginning ¢7 €y autw extieOn, “ For
by him were all things created."’ Others,
with the author, explain the word fig uratively, of pre-eminence or lordship. To this view
however, there are serious objections. It
seems not supported by sufficient evidence.
No argument can be drawn from verse !€
until it be proved, that “firstborn from the
dead,” does not mean the first that was raised
to die no more, Which Doddridge affirms to
be “‘the easiest, surest, most natural sense,
in which the best commentators are agreed.”
Nor is the argument from Rom. viii. 29 satisfactory. © Igwrs7.,” says Bloomfield, at the
close of an admirable note on this verse, ‘is
not well taken by Whitby and others, ina
figurative sense, to denote ‘Lordof all things,
since the word is never so used, except in reference to primogeniture. And although,
in Rom. viii. 29, we have tov me. éy ToAhois a
deAposs, yet there his followers are reprezented
not as his creatures, but as his brethren. On
which, and other accounts, the interpretation,
according to which we have here a strong tes.
timony to the eternal filiation of our Saviour
is greatly preferable; and it is clear that ver.
15 and 18 are illustrative of the nature, as ver
16 and 17 are an evidence of the pre-existence
and divinity of Christ.”]

16. For by him were all things creas
ted. ‘This is one of the reasons why
16 For by him @ were all things
created, that are in heaven, arid
that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or

dominions, or principalities, or
powers: all things were created by
® him, and for him:

@ John1.3. 6 Ro.11.36.

he is called “ the image of God,” and
the ‘ first-born.”” He makes God
known to us by his creative power,
and by the same power in creation
shows that he is exalted over all
things as the Son of God. ‘The
phrase which is here used by the
apostle is universal. He does not
declare that he created all things in
the spiritual kingdom of God, or that
he arranged the events of the gospel
dispensation, as Socinians suppose
(see Crellius); but that every thing
was created by him. A similar form
of expression occurs in Johni. 3; see
Notes on that verse. ‘There could
not possibly be a more explicit declaration that the universe was created by
Christ, than this. As if the simple
declaration in the most comprehensive terms were not enough, the apostle goes into a specification of things
existing in heaven and earth, and so
varies the statement as if to prevent
the possibility of mistake. {[ That
are in heaven. The division of the
universe into ‘‘ heaven and earth”’ is
natural and obvious, for it is the one
that is apparent; see Gen. i. 1.
Heaven, then, according to this division, will embrace all the universe,
except the earth; and will include the
heavenly bodies and their inhabitants,
the distant worlds, as well as heaven,
more strictly so called, where God
resides. The declaration, then, is,
that all things that were in the worlds
above us were the work of his creative
power, §] And that are in earth. All
the animals, plants, minerals, waters,
hidden fires, &c. Every thing which
the earth contains. § Visible and
‘nvisible. We see but a small part of
she universe. The angels we cannot
3ee. The inhabitants of distant
worlds we cannot see. Nay, there are
multitudes of worlds which, even with
the best instruments, we cannot see.
Yet all these things are said to have
been created by Christ. Q Whether
they be thrones. Whether those invisible things be thrones. ‘The refer-

ence is to the ranks of angels, called
here thrones, dominions, d&c.; see
Notes on Eph. i. 21. The word
“thrones” does not occur in the parallel place in Ephesians; but there
can be no doubt that the reference is
to an order of angelic beings, as those
to whom dominion and power were
intrusted. ‘The other orders enumerated here are also mentioned in Eph.
i. 21. YJ All things were created by
him. The repetition, and the varied
statement here, are designed to express the truth with emphasis, and so
that there could not be the possibility
of mistake or misapprehension ; comp.
Notes on John i. 1--3. The importance of the doctrine, and the fact that
it was probably denied by false teachers, or that they held philosophical
opinions that tended to its practical
denial, are the reasons why the apostle dwells so particularly on this point.
{| And for him. For his glory; for
such purposes as he designed. There
was areference to himself in the work
of creation, just as, when a man builds
a house, it is with reference to some
important purposes which he contemplates, pertaining to himself. The
universe was built by the Creator to
be his own property ; to be the theatre
on which he would accomplish his
purposes, and display his perfections.
Particularly the earth was made by
the Son of God to be the place where
he would become incarnate, and exhibit the wonders of redeeming love.
There could not be a more positive
declaration than this, that the universe was created by Christ; and, if
so, he is divine. The work of creation
is the exertion of the highest power ot
which we can form a conception, and
is often appealed to in the Scriptures
by God to prove that he is divine, in
contradistinction from idols. If,
therefore, this passage be understood
literally, it settles the question about
the divinity of Christ. Accordingly,
Unitarians have endeavoured to show
that the creation here referred to isa

17 And he is before @ all things,

a John}.1.

moral creation; that it refers to the
arrangement of affairs in the Christian church, or to the kingdom of God
on earth, and not to the creation of
the material universe. This interpretation has been adopted even by Grotius, who supposes that it refers to
the arrangement by which all things
are fitted up in the new creation, and
by which angels and men are reconciled. By ‘the things in heaven and
in earth,” some Unitarian expositors
have understood the Jews and the
Gentiles, who are reconciled by the
gospel; others, by the things in heaven, understand the angels, and, by the
things on earth, men, who are brought
into harmony by the gospel plan of
salvation. But the objections to this
interpretation are insuperable: (1.)
The word created is not used in this
sense properly, and cannot be. That
it may mean to arrange, to order, is
true; but it is not used in the sense
of reconciling, or of bringing discordant things into harmony. ‘To the,
great mass of men, who have no theory
to support, it would be understood in
its natural and obvious sense, as denoting the literal creation. (2.) The
assertion is, that the ‘‘ creative”
power of Christ was exerted on “all
things.” It is not in reference to
angels only, or to men, or to Jews, or
to Gentiles; it is in relation to
“ everything in heaven and in earth;”’
that is, to the whole universe. Why
should so universal a declaration be
supposed to denote merely the intelligent creation? (3.) With what propriety, or in what tolerable sense, can
the expression ‘‘ things in heaven and
things in earth” be applied to the

Jews and Gentiles? In what sense |
can it be said that they are ‘visible
and invisible?” And, if the language
could be thus used, how can the fact |
that Christ is the means of reconcilng them be a reason why he should |
be called ‘the image of the invisible
God?” (4.) If it be understood of a
moral creation, of a renovation of
things, of a change of nature, how can
this be applied to the angels? Has
and by him all things consist;

Christ created them anew? Has he
changed their nature and character ?
Good angels cannot need a spiritual
renovation ; and Christ did not come
to convert fallen angels, and to bring
them into harmony with the rest of
the universe. (5.) The phrase here
employed, of ‘‘ creating all things in
heaven and on earth,” is never used
elsewhere to denote a moral or spiritual creation. It appropriately expresses the creation of the universe.
It is language strikingly similar to
that used by Moses, Gen. i. 1; and it
would be so understood by the great
mass of mankind. If this be so, then
Christ is divine, and we can see in
this great work a good reason why he
is called “the ¢mage of the invisible
God,” and why he is at the head of
the universe--the first-born of the
creation. It is because, through him,
God is made known to us in the work
of creation; and because, being the
great agent in that work, there is a
propriety that he should occupy this
position at the head of all things.

17. And he is before all things.
As he must be, if he created all things.
Those who regard this as referring to

amoral creation, interpret it as mean-

ing that he has the pre-eminence over
all things ; not as referring to his preexistence. But the fair and proper
meaning of the word before (x¢e) is,
that he was before all things in the
order of existence; comp. Matt. viii.
29: John xi. 55; xiii. 1; Acts v. 36;
xxi. 838; 2 Cor. xii. 2. It is equivalent to saying that he was eternal--for
he that had an existence before any
thing was created, must be eternal.
Thus it is equivalent to the phrase,
‘“‘In the beginning; Gen. i. 1; comp.
Notes, Johni. 1. § And by him alt
things subsist. Or are sustained ; see
Notes on Heb.i.3. The meaning is,
that they are kept in the present
state; their existence, order, and arrangement are continued by his power.
If unsupported by him, they would
fall into disorder, or sink back to
nothing. If this be the proper interpretation, then it is the ascription to
18 And he is the head @ of the
body, the church ; who is the beginning, © the first-born from the

a Kp.5.23. b 1 Co,15.20,

dead ; that | in all things he might
have the pre-eminence.
19 For it pleased the Father

1 among all.

Christ of infinite power--for nothing
less could be sufficient to uphold the
universe; and of infinite wesdom--
for this is needed to preserve the
harmonious action of the suns and
systems of which it is composed.
None could do this but one who
is divine; and hence we see the
reason why he is represented as the
image of the invisible God. IIe is
the great and glorious and everactive agent by whom the perfections
of God are made known.

18 And he is the head of the body,
the church ; Notes Eph. i. 22; v. 23.
q Who is the beginning. In all
things--alike in the work of creation
andinthe church. I eis the fountain
of authority and power, and commences everything that is designed
to uphold the order of the universe,
and to save the world. § The jfirstborn from the dead. At the head of
those who rise from their graves.
This does not mean literally that he
was the first who rose from the dead,
for he himself raised up Lazarus and
others, and the bodies of saints arose
at his crucifixion ; but it means that
he had the pre-eminence among them
all; he was the most illustrious of
those who will be raised from the
dead, and is the head over them all.
Especially, he had this pre-eminence
in the resurrection in this respect,
that he was the first who rose from
death to immortality. Others who
were raised undoubtedly died again.
Christ rose to die no more; see Notes
on 1 Cor. xv. 20.

[And Supplementary Note on y. 14]
q That in all things. Marg., among
all. The Greek will bear e‘ther construction, and either will accord with
the scope of the apostle’s remarks.
If the former, it means that he is at
the head of all things --the universe ;
if the latter, that he is chief among
those who rose from the dead. Each
of these is true, but the scope of the
passage seems rather to require us to

understand this of everything, and to
mean that all the arrangements respecting him were such as to give
him supremacy over the universe.
{ He might have the pre-eminence.
Gr., might be first--arewriav. That
is, might be first in rank, dignity, honour, power. Ife has the pre-eminence
(1) as over the universe which he
has formed--as its Creator and Proprietor; (2.) as chief among those
who shall rise from the dead--since
he first rose to die no more, and their
resurrection depends on him ; (3.) as
head of the church--all synods, councils, and governments being subject
to him, and he alone having a right
to give law to his people ; and (4.) in
the affections of his friends--being
in their affections and confidence
suporior to all others.

19. For it pleased the father.
The words ‘‘the Father ’”’ are not in
the original, but they are not improperly supplied. Some word must be
understood, and as the apostle in ver.
12 referred to ‘‘the Father” as haying
a claim to the thanks of his people
for what he had done, and as the
great favour for which they ought t»
be thankful is that which he immediately specifies--the exaltation of
Christ, it is not improper to suppose
that this is the word to be understood here. The meaning is, that
he chose to confer on his Son such a
rank, that in all things he might
have the pre-eminence, and that
there might be in him “all fulness.”
Ilence, by his appointment, he was
the agent in creation, and hence he
is placed over all things as the head
of the church. q That in him
should all fulness dwell. ‘That in
him there should be such dignity,
authority, power, and moral excellence as to be fitted to the work of
creating the world, redeeming his
people, and supplying everything
needful for their salvation. On the
word fulness, see Notes on John i,

that in him@ should all fulness
dwell ;
20 And, ! having made ® peace

@ John 1.16. 1 or, making.

14. 16; comp Rom. xi. 12, 25; Gal.
Vind 2 EDA eo fall, a1 ds Colitis O,
This is to us a most precious truth.
We have a Saviour who is in no respect deficient in wisdom, power, and
grace to redeem and save us. There
is nothing necessary to be done in
our salvation which he is not qualified
to do; there is nothing which we need
to enable us to perform our duties,
to meet temptation, and to bear trial,
which he is not able to impart. In
no situation of trouble and danger
will the church find that there is a
deficiency in him ; in no enterprise to
which she can put her hands will
there be a lack of power in her great
Ilead to enable her to accomplish
what he calls her to. We may go to
him in all our troubles, weaknesses,
temptations, and wants, and may be
supplied from his fulness--just as, if
we were thirsty, we might go to an
ocean of pure water and drink.

20. And having made peace.
Marg., making. The Greek will
bear either. ‘ The meaning is, that
by his atonement he produces reconciliation between those who were
alienated from each other ; see Notes
on Eph. ii. 14. It does not mean
here that he had actuaily effected
peace by his death, but that he had
laid the foundation for it; he had
done that which would secure it.
q By the blood of his cross. By his
blood shed onthe cross. ‘That blood,
making atonement for sin, was the
means of making reconciliation between Godandman. On the meaning
of the word blood, as used in this connection, see Notes on Rom, iii. 25,
q By him to reconcile all things to
himself. On the meaning of the word
reconcile, see Notes on Matt. v. 24.;
Rom. v. 10, and 2 Cor. v, 18. When

it is said that “it pleased the Father |
/are now at variance with God and

by Christ to reconcile all things to
himself,’ the declaration must be understood with some limitation. (1.)

| men who are there.

| alienation
through the blood of his cross, by

him to reconcile all things unto
himself ; by him, Z say, whether

b Ep.2.14-16,

are in heaven and earth--for those
only are specified. Nothing is said
of the inhabitants of hell, whether
fallen angels, or the spirits of wicked
(2.) It cannot
mean that all things are actually reconciled--for that never has been
true. Multitudes on earth have remained alienated from God, and have
lived and died his enemies. (3.) It
can mean then, only, that he had executed a plan that was adapted to
this ; that if fairly and properly applied, the blood of the cross was fitted
to secure entire reconciliation between heavenand earth. here was
no enemy which it was not fitted to
reconcile to God ; there was no guilt,
now producing alienation, which it
could not wash away. § Whether
they be things in earth, or things in
heaven. ‘That is, to produce harmony between the things in heaven
and in earth ; so that all things shall
be reconciled to him, or so that there
shall be harmony between heayen
and earth. The meaning is not, that
“the things i heaven’’ were alienated from God, but that there was
in the universe which
affected heaven, and the object was

|to produce again universal concord

and love. Substantially the same
sentiment is found in Eph. i. 10; see
Notes on that verse. Much has been
written on the meaning of this expression, and a great variety of opinions have been entertained of it. It is
best, always, unless necessity require

'a different interpretation, to take

words in their usual signification.
If that rule be adopted here, “ things
in heaven ”’ will refer to God and the
angels, and perhaps may include the
principles of the divine government.
“Things on earth,” will embrace men,
and the various things on earth which

with heaven. Between these, it is
designed to produce harmony by the

It relates only to those things which , blood of the cross, or by the atonethey be things in earth, or things
in heaven.
21 And you, that were sometime alienated, and enemies ! in
1 or, by.

your mind 2 by wicked works, yet
now hath he reconciled,

22 In the body of his flesh
through death, to present * you

2 or, in. a Jude 24.

ment. As in heaven nothing is
wrong; as it is not desirable that
anything should be changed there,
all the change that is to take place
in order to produce reconciliation, is
to be on the part of men and the
things of this world. The only effect
of the blood of the atonement on the
“things” of heaven in effecting the
reconciliation is, to render it consistent for God to be at peace with sinners. The effect on earth is, to dispose the sinner to a willingness to
be reconciled; to lead him to lay
aside his enmity ; to change his heart,
and to effect a change in the views
and principles prevailing on earth
which are now at variance with God
and his government. When this shall
be done there will be harmony between heaven and earth, and an alienated world will be brought into
conformity with the laws and government of the Creator.

21. And you, that were sometime
alienated. In this work of reconciling heaven and earth, you at Colosse, who were once enemies of
God, have been reached. The benefit of that great plan has been extended to you, and it has accomplished
in you what it is designed to effect
everywhere--to reconcile enemies to
God. The word sometime here--
zore--means formerly. In common
with all other men they were, by
nature, in a state of enmity against
God ; comp. Notes on Eph. ii. 1--3.
{ Jn your mind. It was not merely
by wicked works, or by an evil life ; it
was alienation seated in the mind,
and leading to wicked works. It was
deliberate and purposed enmity. It
was not the result of passion and excitement ; it hada deeper seat, and
took hold of the intellectual powers.
The understanding was perverse and
alienated from God, and all the powers
of the soul were enlisted against him.
It is this fact which renders reconciliation with God so difficult. Sin

has corrupted and perverted alike the
moral and the intellectual powers,
and thus the whole man is arrayed
against his Creator; comp. Notes on
Eph. iv. 18. By wicked works.
The alienation of the mind showed
itself by wicked works, and those
works were the public evidence of
the alienation ; comp. Eph. ii. 1, 2.
q Yet now hath he reconciled. UHarmony has been secured between you
and God, and you are brought to
friendship and love. Such a change
has been produced in you as to bring
your minds into friendship with that
of God. Allthe change in producing
this is on the part of man, for God
cannot change, and there is no reason
why he show/d, if he could. In the
work of reconciliation man lays aside
his hostility to his Maker, and thus
becomes his friend ; see Notes, 2 Cor.
Vers:

22. In the body of his flesh through
death. The death of his body, or
his death in making an atonement,
has been the means of producing
this reconciliation. It (1.) removed
the obstacles to reconciliation on the
part of God--vindicating his truth
and justice, and maintaining the
principles of his government as much
as if the sinner had himself suffered
the penalty of the law--thus rendering it consistent for God to indulge
the benevolence of his nature in
pardoning sinners; and (2.) it was
the means of bringing the sinner
himself to a willingness to be reconciled--furnishing the strongest possible appeal to him ; leading him to
reflect on the love of his Creator,
and showing him his own guilt and
danger. No means ever used to produce reconciliation between two alienated parties has had so much tenderness and power as those which
God has adopted in the plan of salvation ; and if the dying love of the
Son of God fails to lead the sinner
back to God, everything else will

holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight ;

23 If ye continue * in the faith

@ He.10.38.

fail.
flesh ”’ means, the body of flesh which
he assumed in order to suffer in making an atonement. ‘The reconciliation could not have been effected but
by his assuming such a body, for his
divine nature could not so suffer as
to make atonement for sins. J Zo
present you. That is, before God.
The object of the atonement was to
enable him to present the redeemed
to God freed from sin, and made
holy in his sight. The whole work
had reference to the glories of that
day when the Redeemer and the redeemed will stand before God, and
he shall present them to his Father
as completely recovered from the
ruins of the fall. § Holy. Made
holy, or made free from sin; comp.
Luke xx. 86. § And unblameatlle. |
Not that in themselves they will not
be deserving of blame, or will not
be unworthy, but that they will be
purified from their sins. The word
here used--a#uwuos--means, properly
spotless, ; without blemish ; see the
Notes on Eph. i. 4; v.27; Heb. ix. 4.
It is applied to a lamb, 1 Pet. i. 19;
to the Saviour, Heb. ix. 14, and to
the church, Eph. i. 4; v. 27; Jude
24; Rev. xiv. 5. It does not elsewhere occur. When the redeemed
enter heaven, all their sins will have
been taken away; not a spot of the
deep dye of inquity will remain on
their souls; Rev. 1. 5; vii. 14. § And
unreproveable in his sight. ‘There
will be none to accuse them before
God; or they will be free from ali
accusation. The law will not accuse them--for the death of their
Redeemer has done as much to honour it as their own punishment would
have done; God will not accuse
them--for he has freely forgiven
them ; their consciences will not accuse them--for their sins will all
have been taken away, and they will |
enjoy the favour of God asi they

The phrase “the body of his |

had not sinned ; holy angels will not
accuse them--for they will welcome
grounded and settled, and be not
moved away from the hope of the
gospel, which ye have heard, ana

them to their society ; and even Sa-

tan will not accuse them, for he will
have seen that their piety is sincere,
and that they are truly what they
profess to be ; comp. Notes on Rom.
Vill. 33, 34.

23. If ye continue in the faith.
In the belief of the gospel, and in
holy living. If this were done, they
would be presented unblameable be
fore God; if not, they would not be.
The meaning is, that it will be impossible to be saved unless we continue to lead lives becoming the gospel. Grounded. Ona firm foundation; see Notes on Eph. iii. 17,
where the same word occurs. Q And
settled. Gr., frm; as a building is
that is founded on a rock; comp.
Matt. vil. 25. | And be not moved
away from the hope of the gospel.
By the arts of philosophy, and the
allurements of sin. § Which was
preached to every creature which is
under heaven. It cannot be supposed
that it was literally true that every
creature under heaven had actually
heard the gospel. But this may
mean, (1.) That it was designed to be
preached to every creature, or that
the commission to make it known
embraced every one, and that, so far
as the provisions of the gospel are
concerned, it may be said that it was
a system proclaimed to all mankind ;
see Mark xvi. 15. If a vast army,
or the inhabitants of a distant province, were in rebellion against a
government, and a proclamation of
pardon were issued, it would not be
improper to say that 7¢ was made to
every one of them, though, as a matter of fact, it might not be true that
every one in the remote parts of the
army or province had actually heard
of it. (2.) The gospel in the time
of Paul seems to have been so extensively preached, that it might be
said that 1t was proclaimed to everybody. All known countries appear
to have been visited ; and so zealous
and laborious had been the heralds
which was preached to % every
creature which is under heaven ;
whereof I Paul am made a minister ;

24 Who now rejoice in my suf-
@ Mat.24.14; Mar.16.15.

of salvation, that it might be said
that the message had been proclaimed
to all the world; see ver. 6 ; comp.
Notes on Matt. xxiv.14. YJ Whereof
I Paul am made a minister; see
Notes, Eph. iii. 1--7% Paul here
pursues the same train of thought
which he does in the epistle to the
Ephesians, where, having shown the
exalted nature of the Redeerner, and
the design of the gospel, he adverts
to his own Jabours and sufferings in
making it known. The object seems
to be to show that he regarded it as
the highest honour to be thus intrusted with the message of mercy to
mankind, and considered it as a privilege to suffer in that cause.

24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you. For you as a part of
the Gentile world. It was not for
the Colossians alone, but he regarded
himself as suffering on account of his
labours in preaching to the heathen
at large. His trials at Rome had
come upon him because he had maintained that the wall of partition between Jews and Gentiles was broken
down, and that the gospel was to be
preached indiscriminately to all mankind ; see this i/lustrated in the Introduction, § 5. § And fill up that

which is behind of the afflictions of |

Christ. ‘That which I lack of coming
up to the sufferings which Christ endured in the cause of the church.
The apostle seems to mean, (1.) that

he suffered in the same cause as that |

for which Christ suffered; (2.) that
he endured the same kind of sufferings, to some extent, in reproaches,
persecutions, and opposition from the
world; (3.) that he had not yet suffered as much as Christ did in this
cause, and, though he had suffered
greatly, yet there was much that was

lacking to make him equal in this re- |

spect to the Saviour; and (4.) that
he felt that it was an object to be
earnestly desired to be made ip all

ferings for you, and fill up that
which is behind of the afflictions “
of Christ in my flesh, for his body s
sake, which is the church;

25 Whereof I am made a minis-

b Phi.3.10.

| respects just like Christ, and that in
| his present circumstances he was fast
‘filling up that which was lacking, so
i that he would have a more complete
'resemblance to him. What he says
‘here is based on the leading desire
'of his soul--the great principle of
‘his life -- to Be JUST LIKE CHRIST;
, alike in moral character, in suffering,
/and in destiny ; see Notes on Phil.
iii. 10. Waving this strong wish, he
had been led to pursue a course of
life which conducted him through
_trials strongly resembling those which
| Christ himself endured ; and, as fast
‘as possible, he was filling up that in
| which he now fell short. He does
‘not mean that there was anything
lacking or deficient in the sufferings
‘which Christ endured in making an
atonement which was to be supplied
by his followers, so that their merits
might be added to his in order to secure the salvation of men, as the
Romanists seem to suppose ; but that
there was still much lacking on his
part before he should be entirely conformed to the Saviour in his sufferings, and that his present condition
was such as rapidly to fill that up.
| This seems to me to be the fair mean-
| ing of this expression, though not the
one commonly given. The usual interpretation is, ‘“‘ that which remains
to me of affliction to be endured in
, the cause of Christ.” But this seems
, to me to be cold and tame, and not to
suit the genius ot Paul. § Jn my
| flesh. In bodily sufferings. § For his
| body’s sake, which is the church; see
Notes on Eph. i. 23.

25. According to the dispensation of
God. The arrangement which God
has made. That is, he designed that
the gospel should be preached to the
| Gentiles, and, in accordance with that
arrangement, he has called me to be
a minister. Notes, Eph. iii. 2. | To
fulfil the word of God. Marg., ‘fully
‘to preach.”’ The Greek is, “to fill up

A. D, 64.j

ter, according to the dispensation
of God which is given to me for
you, ! to fulfil the word of God ;
26 Even the mystery # which
hath been hid from azes and from
generations, but now © is made

manifest to his saints:
lor, fully to preach. @Ep.3.9. b2Ti.1.10.

the word of God; the meaning is,
“fully to teach and promulgate the
gospel; ’ comp. Notes, Rom. xv. 19.

26. Even ihe mystery. To make
that mystery fully known. See this
explained in the Notes on Eph. iii. 2
--9. The great doctrine that salvation was to be proclaimed to all mankind, Paul says, had been concealed
for many generations. Hence it was
called a mystery, or a hidden truth.
{ But now ts made manifest to his
saints. It was communicated especially to the apostles who were appointed to proclaim it, and through
them to all the saints. Paul says that
he regarded himself as specially called
to make this truth known, as far ag
possible, to mankind

27. To whom. To the saints.
§ God would make known. “ Willed
(Gr.) to make known ;” that is, he was
pleased to make this known. It was
cencealed in his bosom until he chose
{uo reveal it to his apostles. It was
a doctrine which the Jewish people
did not understand; Eph. iii. 5, 6.
{ What is the riches of the glory of
this mystery. The rich glory of this
great, long-concealed truth. On the
use of the word riches, see Notes on
Rom. ii. 4. It is a favourite word
with the apostle Paul to denote that
which is valuable, or that which
abounds. The meaning here is, that
the truth that the gospel was to be
preached to all mankind, was a truth
abounding in glory. Y Amonq the
Gentiles. That is, the glory of this
truth is manifested by the effects
which it has produced among the
Gentiles. J Which is Christ in you,
ihe hope of glory. Or, Christ among
you. Margin. The meaning is, that

the whole of that truth, so full of;

glory, and so rich and elevated in its
effect, is summed up in this--that

Christ is revealed among you as the: § And teaching every man.

27 To whom God would make
known what 7s the riches of the
glory of this mystery among the
Gentiles ; which is Christ! in you,
the ¢ hope of glory:

28 Whom we preach, warnin :

@ every man, and teaching ever
lor, among. e1Ti.l.l. @ Ac.20.28,31.

source of the hope of glory ina better
world. This was the great truth
which so animated the heart and fired
the zeal of the apostle Paul. The
wonderful announcement had burst on
his mind like a flood of day, that the
offer of salvation was not to be confined, as he had once supposed, to the
Jewish people, but that all men were
now placed on a level; that they had
a common Saviour; that the same
heaven was now opened for all, and
that there were none so degraded and
vile that they might not have the offer
of life as well as others. This great
truth Paul burned to communicate to
the whole world; and for holding it,
and in making it known, he had involved himself in all the difficulties
which he had with his own countrymen; had suffered from want, and
peril, and toil; and had finally been
made a captive, and was expecting to
be put to death. It was just such a
truth as was fitted to fire such a mind
as that of Paul, and to make it known
was worth all the sacrifices and toils
which he endured. Life is well sacrificed in making known such a doctrine
to the world.

28. Whom we preach, warning every
man. This does not mean warning
of danger, but “admonishing all of
the claims of the gospel to attention.”
Our word warn is commonly used in
the sense of cautioning against danger. The Greek word here means to
put in mind; to admonish ; to exhort.
The idea of the apostle is, that he
mnade it his great business to bring
the offers of the gospel fairly before
the mind of every man. As it had the
same claims on all; as it might be
freely offered to all, and as it furnished the only hope of glory, he made
it the object of his life to apprize
every man of it, as far as he could.
Paul
4 man in all wisdom; ® that we may
present every man perfect in Christ
Jesus:

@ 2Ti.2.25. b2 Co,11.2.

made it his business to znstruct men,
as well as to exhort them. Exhortationand warning are of little use where
there is not sound instruction and a
careful inculcation of the truth. It
is one of the duties of the ministry to
instruct men in those truths of which
they were before ignorant; see Matt.
xxvill. 19; 2 Tim. ii. 25. J Jn all wisdom; comp. Notes on Matt. x. 16;
Col. i. 9. The meaning is, that he
and his fellow-labourers endeavoured
to manifest true wisdom in the method in which they instructed others.
{ That we may present every man.
When we come to appear before God;
Notes, 2 Cor. xi. 2. Paul was anxious
that no one to whom this gospel was
preached should be lost. He believed
it to be adapted to save every man;
and as he expected to meet all his
hearers at the bar of God, his aim was
to presentthem made perfect by means
of that gospel which he preached.

29. Whereunto I also labour; see
Notes, 1 Cor. xv. 10. {J Striving.
Gr. agonizing. We taxed all his energiesto accomplish this, as the wrestlers strove for the mastery in the
Grecian games. {| According to his
working. Not by my own strength,
but by the power which God alone
can give; see Notes on 1 Cor. xv. 10.

Among the truths of practical importance taught by this chapter are
the following :--

1. We should rejoice in the piety
of others; ver. 2--8. It should be to
us a subject of unfeigned gratitude to
God, when others are faithful to their
high calling, and when they so live as
to adorn the blessed gospel. In all
their faith, and love, and joy, we
should find occasion for thankfulness
to God. Weshould not envy it, or be
disposed to charge it to wrong motives, or suspect it of insincerity or
hypocrisy ; but should welcome every
account of the zeal and faithfulness of
those who bear the Christian name--

fA. D. 64

29 Whereunto ¢ I also labour,
striving according to his working,
which worketh in me mightily.

¢ 1 Co.15.10,

no matter who the persons are, or
with what denomination of Christians
they may be connected. Especially
is this true in relation to our friends,
or to those for whose saivation we
have laboured. The source of high~
est gratitude to a Christian, in relation to his friends, should be, that
they act as becomes the friends of
God; the purest joy that can swell
the bosom of a minister of Christ, is
produced by the evidence that they
to whom he has ministered are advancing in knowledge and love.

2. Weshould earnestly pray that they
who have been much favoured should
be prospered moreand more; ver. 9-11.

8. It is a good time to pray for
Christians when they are already
prosperous, and are distinguished for
zeal and love; ver. 9--11. We have
then encouragement to do it. We
feel that our prayers will not be in
vain. Fora man that is doing well,
we feel encouraged to pray that he
may do still better. For a Christian
who has true spiritual joy, we are encouraged to pray that he may have
more joy. For one who is aiming to
make advances in the knowledge of
God, we are encouraged to pray that
he may make still higher advances ;
and if, therefore, we wish others to
pray for us, we should show them by
our efforts that there is some encouragement for them to do it.

4, Let us cherish with suitable gratitude the remembrance of the goodness of God, who has translated us
from the kingdom of darkness into
the kingdom of his dear Son; ver. 12,
13. By nature we, like others, were
under the power of darkness. In that
kingdom of sin, and error, and misery,
we were born and reared, until God,
in great compassion, brought us out
from it, and made us heirs of light,
Now, if we are true Christians, we
belong to a kingdom of holiness, and
knowledge, and happiness. No words
can express appropriately the goodness of God in thus making us heirs

membrance of his mercy.
5. In the affections of our hearts let

pre-eminence; ver. 15--18. He is
the image of God ; and when we think
of him, we see what God is--how holy,
pure, benevolent. He is the first-born
of all things; the Son of God; exalted
to the highest seat in the universe.
When we look on the sun, moon, and

stars, let us remember that he created |

them all. When we think of the angels, let us remember that they are
the workmanship of his hands. When
we look on the earth--the floods, the
rivers, the hills, let us remember that
all these were made by his power. The
vast universe is still sustained by him.
Its beautiful order and harmony are
preserved by him;and all its movements are under his control. So the
church is under him. It is subject to
his command ; receives its laws from
his lips, and is bound to do his will.
Over all councils and synods ; over all
tule and authority in the church,
Christ is the Head; and whatever
may be ordained by man, his will is to
be obeyed. So, when we think of the
resurrection, Christ is chief. He first
rose to return to death no more; he
rose as the pledge that his people
should also rise. As Christ is thus
head over all things, so let him be
first in the affections of our hearts ; as
it is designed that in every thing he
shall have the pre-eminence, so let
him have the pre-eminence in the affections of our souls. None should
be loved by us as Christ is loved ; and
no friend, however dear, should be allowed to displace him from the supremacy in our affections.

6. In all our wants let us go to
Christ; ver. 19, ‘‘ It pleased the
Father that in him should all fulness
dwell.” We have not a want which
he cannot supply ; there is not a sorrow of our lives in which he cannot
comfort us; not a temptation from
which he cannot deliver us; not a
pain which he capnot relieve, or enable us to bear. Every necessity of

body or mind he can supply ; and we!

of light ; and not an hour of our lives |
should pass without a thoughtful re- '
never can go to him, in any circumstance of life in which we can possibly
be placed, where we shall fail of con-

: § 'solation and support because Christ is
the Saviour in all things have the |

not able to help us. True piety learns
day by day to live more by simple dependence on the Saviour. As we advance in holiness, we become more
and more sensible of our weakness
and insufficiency, and more and more
disposed to live by the faith of the
Son of God.”

7. By religion we become united
with the angels; ver. 20. Iarmony
is produced between heaven and earth.
Alienated worlds are reconciled again,
and from jarring elements there is
rearing one great and harmonious empire. ‘lhe work of the atonement is
designed to remove what separated
earth from heaven ; men from angels;
man from God. The redeemed have
substantially the same feelings now,
which they have who are around the
throne of God ; and though we are far
inferior to them in rank, yet we shall
be united with them in affection and
purpose, for ever and ever. Whata
glorious work is that of the gospel!
It reconciles and harmonizes distant
worlds, and produces concord and love
in millions of hearts which but for that
would have been alienated for ever.

8. By religion we become fitted for
heaven; ver. 12, 22. We are made
“meet” to enter there; we shall be
presented there unblamable and unreprovable. No one will accuse us before the throne of God. Nor Satan,
nor our own consciences nor our fellowmen will then urge that we ought not
to beadmittedtoheaven. Redeemed
and pardoned, renewed and sanctified,
the universe will be satisfied that we
ought to be saved, and will rejoice,
Satan will no longer charge the friends
of Jesus with insincerity andhypocrisy ;
our own minds will be no longer troubled with doubts and fears; and holy
angels will welcome us to their presence. Not avoice will be lifted up
in reproach or condemnation, andthe
Universal Father will stretch out L's
arms and press to his bosom the returning prodigals. Clothed in the
white robes of salvation, we shali be
welcome even in heaven, and the universe will rejoice that we are there.
9. It is a privilege to suffer for the
welfare of the church ; ver. 24. Paul
regarded it as such and rejoiced in the
trials which came upon him in the
cause of religion. The Saviourso r+
garded it, and shrank not from the
creat sorrows involved in the work of
saving his people. We may suffer
much in promoting the same object.
We may be exposed to persecution and
death. We may be called to part
with all we have--to leave country
and friends and home, to go and preach
the gospel to benighted men. Ona
foreign shore, far from all that we
hold dear on earth, we may lie down
and die, and our grave, unmarked by
sculptured marble, may be soon forgotten. But todogood; to defend
truth ; to promote virtue ; to save the
souls of the perishing, is worth all
which tt costs, and he who accomplishes
these things by exchanging for them
earthiy comforts, and even life, has
made a wise exchange. ‘The universe gains by it in happiness ; and the
benevolent heart should rejoice that
there zs such a gain, though attended with our individual and personal

suffering.
10. Ministers ave a noble office ;|
ver. 24--29. It is their privilege to}

make known to men the most glorious
truths that can come before the human mind ; truths which were hid from
ages and generations, but which are
now revealed by the gospel. These
great truths are intrusted to the ministry to explain and defend, and are by
them to be carried around the world.
The ministers of religion strive not
for gold and honour and worldly pleasures ; they strive in the noble effort
to show to every man that he has a
Saviour; that there is a heaven to
which he may come; and to present
every one perfect before God. With
allits sacrifices and self-denials, therefore, it is an inestimable privilege to
he a minister of the gospel--for there
1s nO man who diffuses through a comtaunity so much solid happiness ; there
18 no One, the result of whose labours
reaches so far into future ages. Toa

! benevolent heart there is no higher
privilege than to be permitted to go to
every man--to the poor, the tempted,
the oppressed, the slave, the penitent,
and the dying sinner, and to say to him
that he has a Saviour, that Christ

‘died for h'm, and that, if he will have

it so, he may have a home in heaven.

No matter whom he meets; no matter
how debased and degraded he may be
to whom he ministers, no matter

though it be the poor slave, or the

lonely wanderer on pathless sands, or
the orphan, or the outcast, the herald
of salvation may tell him that there is

a heaven for him--a Saviour who died
for him--a God who is ready to par-

don and save his soul. Insucha work

itis a privilege to exhaust our strength ;
in the performance of the duties of
such an office, it is an honour to be
permitted to wear out lifeitself. Doing this, a man when he comes to die
will feel that he has not lived in vain ;
and whatever self-denial he may practise in it; however much comfort, or
however many friends he may forsake,
all these things will give him no pang
of regret when from a bed of death he
looks out on the eternal world.

This entire chapter may be regarded as designed to guard the Colossians against the seductive influence
of the false philosophy which tended
to draw them away from the gospel.
It is evident from the chapter that
there were at Colosse, or in the vicinity, professed instructors in religion,
who taught an artful and plausible
philosophy, adapting themselves to
the prejudices of the people, and inculcating opinions that tended to lead
them away from the truths whichthey
had embraced. These teachers were
probably of Jewish origin, and had
adopted many of the arts of a plausible
rhetoric, from the prevailing philosophy inthat region. See the Intro.
§ 4. Against the seductiveinfluences
of this philosophy, it is the design of
thischapterto guard them, andthough
the apostle does not seem to have intended to pursue an exact logical order;
, yet the argument in the chapter can

[2 I would that ye knew
what great ! conflict I have

lor, feur ; or care.

be conveniently regarded as consisting
of two parts :--A statement of the
reasons why they should be on the:r
guard against the arts of that philos

ophy ; and a specification of the particular errors to which they were exposed.

1. A statement of the reasons why
they should not allow themselves to
ve drawn away by the influence of the
prevalent philosophy ; ver. 1--15.
This also consists of two parts.

A. The importance ofthe subject ; |

ver. 1--7.

(1.) The apostle felt great solicitude for them, and for all whom
he had not seen, that they might
hold the truth in reference to
the divine existence and perfections ;_ver. 1, 2.

(2.) All the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge were in Christ,
and it was, therefore, of the
greatest importance to hold to
the truth respecting him ; ver 3.

(38.) They were in danger of being led astray by enticing words;
ver-4.

(4.) Paul says that he was with
them in spirit, and he exhorted
them, therefore, to remain rooted and grounded in the doctrines
which they had received respecting the Saviour ; ver. 5--7.

B. Reasons why they should be
steadfast and not drawn away
by the influence of false philosophy ; ver. 8--15.

(1.) The danger of depending on
traditions and worldly principles
in religion; of being “spoiled”
or robbed by philosophy ; ver. 8.

(2.) All that we need to desire is
to be found in Christ; ver. 9, 10.

‘8.) We have received through |
him the true circumcision--the |
putting away our sins ; ver. 11.

(4.) We have been buried with |
him in baptism, and have so- |
lemnly devoted ourselves tohim, |

ver. 12,
for you, and for them at Laodicea,
4 and for as many as have not seen
my face in the flesh ;

a@ Re, 3.14, &u

(5.) We have been quickened by
him; our sins have been for.
given ; and everything that hindered our salvation has been
taken out of the way by him,
and he has triumphed over our
foes; ver. 18--15.

II. Specification of particular errors to which they were exposed, or of
particular things to be avoided; ver.
16--23.

The chapter closes (ver. 20--23)
with an earnest exhortation wholly to
avoid these things; not to touch or
taste or handle them. [However plausible the pretences might be on which
they were urged; whatever appearance of wisdom or humility there
might be, the apostle assures thein
that there was no real honour in
them, and that they were wholly to
be avoided.

1. For I would that ye knew. 1
wish you knew or fully understood.
He supposes that this would deeply
affect them if they understood the solicitude which he had had on their account. | What great conflict. Marg.,
fear, or care. The Greek word is
agony--iyave, It is not, however,
the word rendered agony in Luke
Xxii. 44--dyevia--though that is derived from this. The word is rendered conflict in Phil. i. 80 ; contention, 1
Thess. ii. 2; fight, 1 Tim. vi. 12; 2
Tim iv. 7; and race, Ieb. xii. 1. It
properly refers to the combats, contests, struggles, efforts at the public
games ; the toil and conflict to obtain
a victory. It refers here tothe anxious care, the mental conflict, the
earnest solicitude which he had in
their behalf, in view of the dangers to
which they were exposed from Judaizing Christiansand Pagan philosophy.
This mental struggle resembled that

| which the combatants had at the pub-

lic games ; comp. Notes on 1 Cor. ix
25, 2%, And for them at Laodicea
For Christians there, who were exposed to similar danger. y,aodicea

2 That their hearts might be | love, # and unto all riches of the
comforted, being knit together in| full © assurance of understanding,

a chap. 3. 14.

was the capital of Phrygia, in Asia
Minor, and a little south of Colosse.
See Intro.§ 1. 6. Notes on chap. iv.16.
Chere wasachurch early planted there
--the “lukewarm ” church mentioned
in Rev. iii. 14. Being in the vicinity
of Colosse, the church there would be
exposed to the same perils, and the rebuke in Rev. iii. 14, showed that the
fears of Paul were well founded, and
that the arts of the false teachers were
too successful. { And for as many as
have not seen my face in the flesh.
That is, evidently inthatregion. He
had, doubtless, a general solicitude
for all Christians, but his remark here
has reference to those in theneighbourhood of the church at Colosse, or in
that church. On the question which
has been raised, whether this proves
that the apostle Paul had never been
at Colosse or Laodicea, see Intro. §
2.4. This passage does not seem to me
to prove that he had not been there. It
may mean that he had great solicitude
for those Christians there whom he
knew, and for all others there, or in
the vicinity, even though he was not
personally acquainted with them. He
may refer (1.) to some churches in the
neighbourhood formed since he was
there ; or (2.) to strangers who had
come in there since he was with them ;
or (3.) to those who had been converted since he was there, and with whom
he had no personal acquaintance. For
all these he would feel the same solicitude, for they were all exposed to
the same danger. ‘To ‘“‘see one’s face
in the flesh,” is a Hebraism, meaning
to become personally acquainted with
him.

2. That their hearts might be comforted. Like all other Christians in
the times of the apostles, they were
doubtless exposed to trials and persecutions. J Being knit together in
love. The same word which is here
used (cvu6iG%fw) occurs in Eph. iv.
16, and is rendered compacted ; see
Notes on that place. In Acts ix. 22,
it is rendered proving ; Acts. xvi. 10,

6 Isa. 32.17; He. 6. 11.

assuredly gathering; 1 Cor. ii. 16,
instruct ; and here, and in ver. 19,
knit together. It means, properly, to
make to come together, aud hence refers to a firm union, as where the heart
of Christians are one. Here it means
that the way of comforting each other
was by solid Christian friendship, and
that the means of cementing that was
love. It was not by a mere outward
profession, or by mere speculative
faith ; it was by a union of affection.
q And unto all riches. On the
meaning of the word riches, as used
by the apostle Paul, see Notes on.
Rom. ii. 4. There is a great energy
of expression here. ‘The meaning
is, that the thing referred to--‘‘ the
full understanding” of the “‘ mystery”
of religion--was an invaluable possession, like abundant wealth. This passage also shows the object for which
they should be united. It should be
in order that they might obtain this
inestimable wealth. If they were
divided in affections, and split up into
factions, they could not hope to secure it. § Of the full assurance of
understanding. This word(xinpop pia)
means firm persuasion, settled convic~
tion. It occurs only here and in 1
ihesssivo cp Heb. vies Lie xe oo and
is rendered by assurance, or full assurance, in every instance. See the
verb, however, in Luke i. 1; Rom. iv.
OM xiv. ols 2 Lim wives, 17 welbiwas
the desire of the apostle that they
might have entire conviction of the
truth of the Christian doctrines.
{ To the acknowledgment. So as
fully and openly to acknowledge or
confess this mystery. | The mystery.
On the meaning of this word, see
Notes on Rom. xi. 25; Eph.i.9. The
meaning is, the doctrine respecting
God, which had before been concealed
or hidden, but which was nowrevealed
in the gospel. It does not mean that
there was any thing unintelligible or
incomprehensible respecting this doctrine when it was made known. That
might be as clear as any other truth

to the acknowledgment of the mystery * of God, and of the Father,
and of Christ ;

3 In } whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdum and knowledge.

1 John 5.7.

q Of God. Of God as he actually
subsists. This does not mean that the
mere fact of the existence of God was
a “mystery,” or a truth which had
been concealed, for that was not true.
But the sense plainly is, that there
were truths now made known in the
gospel to mankind, about the mode of
the divine existence, which had not
before been disclosed; and this “ mystery” he wished them to retain, or
fully acknowledge. The ‘ mystery,”
or the hitherto unrevealed truth, related to the fact that God subsisted
in more persons than one, as “ Father,” and as “Christ.” And of
the Father. Or,rather, ‘‘ even of the
Father ; ’ for so the word xai (and) is
often used. The apostle does not
mean that he wished them to acknowledge the hitherto unrevealed truth
respecting “‘ God ' and another being
called “the Father; but respecting
“God” as the ‘“‘ Father,” or of God
as ‘‘ Father ‘and as“ Christ.’ § And
of Christ. Asa person of the Godhead. What the apostle wished them
to acknowledge was, the full revelation now made known respecting the
essential nature of God, as the ‘‘ Father,”’ and as ‘‘ Christ.”’ In relation
to this, they were in special danger of
being corrupted by the prevalent philosophy, as itis in relation to this that
error of Christian doctrine usually
commences. It should be said, however, that there is great variety of
reading in the MSS. on this whole
clause, and that many critics (see
Rosenmiiller) regard it as spurious. I
do not see evidence that it is not
genuine ; and the strain of exhortation
of the apostle seemsto me to demandit.

3. In whom. Marg., wherein. The
more correct translation is ‘“‘in whom.”
The reference is doubtless to Christ,
as his name is the immediate antecedent, and as what is affirmed here pro-

1 or, wherein.

4 And this I say lest any man
should beguile # you with enticing
words.

5 For though I be absent in the
flesh, yet am | with you in the
LSpIaL, joying and beholding your

b Mar. 13.22.

perly appertains to him. J Are hid,
Like treasures that are concealed or
garnered up. It does not mean that
none of those ‘treasures’ had been
developed; but that, so to speak,
Christ, as Mediator, was the great
treasure-house where were to be found
all the wisdom and knowledge needful for men. ¥ All the treasures. It
is common to compare any thing valuable with ‘‘treasures’ of silver or gold.
The idea here is, that in reference to
the wisdom and knowledge needful for
us, Christ is what abundant treasures
are in reference to the supply of om’
wants. {| Wisdom. The wisdom need-
| ful for our salvation. Notes, 1 Cor. i.
24. J And knowledge. The knowledge which is requisite to guide us in
the way to life. Christ is able to instruct us in all that it is desirable for
us to know, so that it is not necessary
for us to apply to philosophy, or to
the teachings of men.

4. And this Isay. Respecting the
character and sufficiency of the truth
revealed in Christ. J Lest any man
should beguile you. Deceive you, lead
you away from the truth. §] With
enticing words. Artful words, smooth
and plausible arguments, such as were
employed by the Greek sophists and
rhetoricians,

5. For though I be absent in the
flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit.
That is, I seem to see you; [ feel as if
I were there, and were looking upon
you; and I have the same solicitude
as if I were there, and saw all the
danger which exists that your beautiful order and harmony should be disturbed by the influence of false philosophy; see Notes on 1 Cor. vy. 3.
The word “spirit,” here, does not
refer to the Holy Spirit, or to any
inspiration by which the apostle was
enabled to see them ; but it is equivalent to what we mean when we say,
order, and the stedfastness of your
faith in Christ.

6 As ye have therefore received
Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk 4
ye in him ;

@1 John 2.6 Db Ep.3.17.

“ My heart is with you.’”’ He seemed
to be beholding them. {| Joying and
beholding your order. That is, I rejoice as of I saw your order. Ile had
such confidence that everything would
be done among them as became Christians, that he could rejoice as if he
actually saw it.

6. As ye have therefore received
Christ Jesus the Lord. Wave received
him by faith as your Saviour, oras you
were instructed respecting his rank,
character, and work. The object here
is to induce them not to swerve from
the views which they had of Christ
when he was made known to them.
They had at first probably received
their ideas of the Saviour from the
apostle himself (see the Intro.); and,
at any rate, the apostle designs to assure them that the views which they
had when they ‘received him,” were
founded in truth. § So walk in him.
Continue in those views of Christ;
live in the maintenance of them; let
them regulate your whole conduct.
The word walk, in the Scriptures, is
used to denote the manner of life ; and
the sense here is, that they should
live and act wholly under the infiuence of the conceptions which they
had of the Saviour when they first
embraced him. ‘The particle ‘“ so”’ is
supplied by our translators, and rather
weakens the sense. No stress should
be laid on it, as is often done. The
meaning is, simply, ‘‘ Since you have
received Christ as your Lord, as he
was preached to you, hold fast the
doctrine which you have received, and ,
do not permit yourselves to be turned
aside by any Jewish teachers, or
teachers of philosophy.’

7. Rooted--in him. As a tree
strikes its roots deep in the earth, so
our faith should strike deep into the
doctrine respecting the Saviour. See
the phrase here used explained in the
parallel place in Eph. iii. 17. J And
established tn the faith, as ye have been

7 Rooted ® and built up in him,
¢ and stablished in the faith, as
ye have been taught, abounding
therein with thanksgiving.

8 Beware @ lest any man spoil
oe John15.4,5. d Ro.16,17; Ep.5.6; He.13.9.

taught. To wit, by the founders of
the church, and by those faithful ministers who had succeeded them; Notcs,
chap.i. 7. (J Abownding therein with
thanksgiving. Expressing overflowing thanks to God that you have been
made acquainted with truths so precious and glorious. If there is any
thing for which we ought to be thankful, it is for the knowledge of the
great truths respecting our Lord and
Saviour.

8. Beware lest any man spoil you.
The word spoil now commonly means,
to corrupt, to cause to decay and perish, as fruit is spoiled by keeping too
long, or paper by wetting, or hay bya
long rain, or crops by mildew. But
the Greek word here used means to
spoil in the sense of plunder, rob, as
when plunder is taken in war. The
meaning is, ‘“ Take heed lest any one
plunder or rob you of your faith and
hope by philosophy.” These false
teachers would strip them of their
faith and hope, as an invading army
would rob a country of all that was
valuable. {| Through philosophy. The
Greek philosophy prevailed much in
the regions around Colosse, and perhaps also the oriental or Gnostic philosophy. Sce the Intro. They were
exposed to the influences of these
plausible systems. They consisted
much of speculations respecting the
nature of the divine existence; and
the danger of the Colossians was, that
they wouldrely rather on the deductions of that specious reasoning, than
on what they had been taught by their
Christian teachers. § And vain decett. Mere fallacy. The idea is, that
the doctrines which were advanced in
those systems were maintained by
plausible, not by solid arguments; by
considerations not fitted to lead to the
truth, but to lead astray. After the
tradition of men. There appear to
have been two sources of danger to
which the Christians at Colosse were

you through philosophy and vain
deceit, after the tradition of men,
atter the ! rudiments of the world,
and not after Christ:

lor, elements. achap.1.19. bHe.5.9. cl Pe.3.22.

exposed, and to which the apostle in
these cautions alludes, though he is
not careful to distinguish them. The
one was that arising from the Grecian
philosophy; the other, from Jewish
opinions. The latter is that to which
he refers here. The Jews depended
much on tradition (see Notes on Matt.
xy. 2); and many of those traditions
would have tended much to corrupt
the gospel of Christ. § After the rudiments of the world. Marg., elements.
See this explained in the Notes on
Gal. iv. 3. § And not after Christ.
Not such as Christ taught.

9. For in him dwelleth. That is,
this was the great and central doctrine that was to be maintained about
Christ, that all the fulness of the
Godhead dwelt in him. Every system which denied this was a denial of
the doctrine which they had been
taught; and against every thing that
would go to undermine this, they were
especially to be on their guard. A\lmost all heresy has been begun by
some form of the denial of the great
central truth of the incarnation of the
Son of God. § All the fulness; Notes,
vhap.i.19. ¥ Of the Godhead. Of the
Divinity, the divine nature--eorns.
The word is one that properly denotes
the divine nature and perfections.
Robinson, Lex. It occurs nowhere
else inthe New Testament. §[ Bodily.
comerixnas. This word also is found
nowhere else in the New Testament,
though the adjective bodily--cupaqixos--occurs twice; Luke iil. 22,
“in a bodily shape;’’ and 1 Tim. iv.
8, “for bodily exercise profiteth little.”
The word means, ‘having a bodily
appearance, instead of existing or appearing in a spiritual form;” and the
fair sense of the phrase is, that the
fulness of the divine nature became
incarnate, and was indwelling in the
body of the Redeemer.
meet the case to say, as Crellius does,
that the “whole divine will was in
him,” for the word 9:472:--qodhead

Ls
| ing.

It does not |
9 For in him @ dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily.

10 And ye are complete ° in him,
which is the head ¢ of all principality and power;

--does not mean the will of God; and
it is as certainly true that the inspired
prophets were under the control ot
the divine will, as that the Saviour
was. Nor can it mean, as Socinus
supposes, that the fulness of divine
knowledge dwelt in him, for this is not
the proper meaning ofthe word (924775)
godhead ; nor can it mean, for the
same reason, that a fulness of divine
gifts was intrusted to him. The language is such as would be obviously
employed on the supposition that God
became incarnate, and appeared in
human form; and there is no other
idea which it so naturally expresses,
nor is there any other which it can be
made to express without a forced construction. The meaning is, that it
was not any one attribute cof the Deity
that became incarnate in the Saviour;
that he was not merely endowed with
the knowledge, or the power, or the
wisdom of God; but that the whole
Deity thus became incarnate, and
appeared in human form; comp. John
xiv. 9; 1 18. No language could,
therefore, more clearly demonstrate
the divinity of Christ. Of what mere
man--of what angel, could it be used ?

10. And ye are complete in him.
Having no need, for the purposes of
salvation, of any aid to be derived
from the philosophy ef the Greeks, or
the traditions of the Jews. All that
is necessary to secure your salvation
is to be found in the Lord Jesus.
There is a completion, or a filling up,
in him, so as to leave nothing want
This is true in respect (1.) tc
the wisdom which is needful to guide
us ; (2.) the atonement to be made for
sin; (3.) the merit by which a simnet
can be justified; and (4.) the grace
which is needful to sustain us in the
trials, and to aid us in the duties, of
‘life; comp. Notes on 1 Cor. i. 30.
There is no necessity, therefore, that
we shouldlook tothe aid of philosophy,
| as if there was a defect in the teach-
|ings of the Saviour; or to human
11 In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision # made
without hands, in putting off the
body of the sins of the flesh by
the circumcision of Christ ;

12 Buried » with him in bap-

a Je.4.43 Phi.3.3.
strength, as if he were unable to save
ns; or to the merits of the saints, as
if those of the Redeemer were not sufficient to meet all our wants.
sentiment advanced in this verse would

overthrow the whole papal doctrine of | :
/ we have thus been enabled by Christ

the merits of the saints, and, of course,
the whole doctrine of papal “ indulgences.” § Which is the head; see
Notes on Eph. i. 21, 22.

11. In whom. In connection with
whom, or in virtue of whose religion.
q Ye are circumcised. You have re-

hes : L
‘renouncing of sin.

!

ceived that which was designed to be |

represented by circumcision--the putting away of sin; Notes, Phil. iii. 3.
q With the circumcision made without
hands. That made in the heart by
the renunciation of all sin. The
Jewish teachers insisted on the necessity of the literal circumcision in
order to salvation (comp. Eph. ii. 11);
and hence this subject is so often in
troduced into the writings of Paul,
and he is at so much pains to show
that, by believing in Christ, all was
obtained which was required in order
to salvation. Circumcision was an
ordinance by which it was denoted
that all sin was to be cut off or renounced, and that he who was circumcised was to be devoted to God and to
a holy life. All this, the apostle says,
was obtained by the gospel; and, consequently they had all that was denoted by the ancient rite of circumcision. What Christians had ohtained, moreover, related to the heart; it
was not a mere ordinance pertaining

| sins; Notes, Eph. ii. 1.
i - ohue . A
| uneircumcersion of your flesh. That is,

tism, wherein also ye are risen
with him through the faith of the
operation ¢ of God, who hath raised
him from the dead. j
13 And g you, being dead in
your sins and the uncircumcisiou
bDRo.6. 4,5. ¢ Ep. 1.19. d Eph.2.1,5,11.

circumcision of Christ. Notby the
fact that Christ was circumcised, but
that we have that kind of circumcision
which Christ established, to wit, the
The idea of the
apostle here seems to be, that since

to renounce sin, and to devote ourselves to God, we should not be induced by any plausible arguments to
return to an ordinance pertaining to
the flesh, as if that were needful for
salvation.

12. Buried with him in baptism ;
see Notes on Rom. vi. 4. § Wherein also. In which ordinance, or by
virtue of that which is signified by the
ordinance. Ye are risen with him.
From the death of sin to the life of
religion ; Notes Rom. vi 4, 5; comp.
Notes Eph. ii. 5,6. § Through the
faith of the operation of God. By a
firm belief on the agency of God in
raising him up ; that is, a belief ofthe
fact that God has raised him from
the dead. The resurrection of Christ
is often represented as the foundation
of all our hopes ; and, as he was raised
from the grave to die no more, so, in
‘virtue of that we are raised from the
death of sin to eternal spiritual life.
The belief of this is shown by our
baptism, whatever be the mode in
which that ordinance is performed,
and as well shown in one mode ag
another.

13. And you, being dead in your
qi And the

to the flesh. § In putting off the body | Gentiles, and giving unrestrained in-

if the sins of the flesh. That is, in renouncing the deeds of the flesh, or becoming holy. The word “body,”
here, seems to be used with reference
to circumcision. In that ordinance,

the body of the rues was subjected ' Notes, Eph.
to the rite; with Christians, it is the | him.

dulgence to the desires of the flesh.
They lived as those who had not by
any religious rite or covenant brought
themselves under obligations to lead
holy lives. ( Hathhe quickened ;

ii. 1. Together with
In virtue of his being restored

body of stn that is cut off. ( By the ‘to life. That is, the resurrection of

of your flesh, hath he quickened
together with him, having forgiven
you all trespasses ;

14 Blotting * out the handa Ep.2.15,16.

the Lord Jesus was the means of imparting to us spiritual life.

14, Blotting out the handwriting.
The word rendered handwriting
means something written by the hand,
2 manuscript ; and here, probably, the
writings of the Mosaic law, or the law
appointing many ordinances or observancesin religion. The allusion is
probably to a written contract, in
which we bind ourselves to do any
work, or to make a payment, and
which remains in force against us until the bond is cancelled. That might
be done, either by blotting out the
names, or by drawing lines through it,
or, as appears to have been practised
in the East, by driving a nail through
it. The Jewish ceremonial law is here
represented as sucha contract, binding those under it to its observance,
until it was nailed to the cross. The
meaning here is, that the burdensome
requirements of the Mosaic law are
abolished, and that its necessity is superseded by the death of Christ.
His death had the same effect, in reference to those ordinances, as if
they had been blotted from the statute-book. This it did by fulfilling
them, by introducing a more perfect
system, and by rendering their observance no longer necessary, since all
that they were designed to typify had
been now accomplished in a better
way ; comp. Notes, Eph. ii. 15. | Of;
ordinances. Prescribing the numerous rites and ceremonies of the Jewish religion. §| That was against us.
That is, against our peace, happiness,
comfort ; or in other words, which was
oppressive und burdensome; comp.
Notes, Acts xv. 10. Those ordinances bound and fettered the soul, restrained the expansive spirit of true
piety which seeks the salvation of ail
alike, and thus operated as a hindrance to the enlarged spirit of true religion. Thus they really operated
against the truly pious Jew, whose
religion would lead him to seek the

writing of ordinances that was
against us, which was contrary to
us, and took it out of the way,
nailing it to his cross

salvation of the world; and to the
Gentile, since he was notin asituation to avail himself of them, and since
they would be burdensome if he could.
It is in this sense, probably, that the
apostle uses the word ‘ws,’ as referring to all, and as cramping and restraining the true nature of religion.
| Which was contrary to us. Operated as a hindrance, or obstruction, in
the matter of religion. The ordinances of the Mosaic law were necessary, in order to introduce the gospel ;
but they were always burdensome.
They were to be confined to one
people ; and, if they were continued,
they would operate to prevent the
spread of the true religion around the
world; comp. Notes on 2 Cor. it. 7, 9
Ilence the exulting language of the
apostle in view of the fact that they
were now taken away, and that the
benefits of religion might be diffused
all over the world. The gospel con

tains nothing which is “ against,” or
“contrary to,’ the true interest and
happiness of any nation or any class of
men. {[ And took it out of the way.
Gr., “ Out ofthe midst ;”’ that is, he
wholiy removed it. He has removed
the obstruction, so that it no longer
prevents union and harmony between
the Jews and the Gentiles. { Nailing it to his cross. As ifhe had nailed it to his cross, so that it would be
entirely removed out of our way. The
death of Jesus had the same effect, in
regard to the rites and institutions of
the Mosaic religion, as if they had
been affixed to his cross. It is said
that there is an allusion here to the
ancient method by which a bond or
obligation was cancelled, by driving a
nailthrough it, and affixing it to apost.
This was practised, says Grotius, in
Asia. In asomewhat similar manner,
in our banks now, a sharp instrument
like the blade of a knife is driven
: through acheck, making ahole through
it, and furnishing to the teller of
| the bank a sign or evidence that it has
15 And having @ spoiled prin-

shew of them openly, triumphing

cipalities and powers, he made aj over them in? it.

a@ Ps. 68.38; Is. &3.12; Lu. 10.18; 11. 223
John 12. 31; He. 2.14.

--

been paid. If this be the meaning,
then the expression here denotes that
the obligation of the Jewish institu-

tions ceased on the death of Jesus, as |

if he had taken them and nailed them
to his own cross, in the manner in
which a bond was cancelled.

15. And having spoiled. Plundered -
as a victorious army does a conquered
country. Notes on ver. 8. The
terms used in this verse are all military, and the idea is, that Christ las
completely subdued our enemies by
his death. A complete victory was
achieved by his death, so that every
thing is now in subjection to him, and
we have nothing to fear. § Prineipalities and powers ; Notes, Eph. i.
21; vi.12. ‘The “principalities and
powers ’”’ here referred to, are the
formidable enemies that had held man
in subjection, and prevented his serying God. There can be no doubt, I
think, that the apostle refers to the
ranks of fallen, evil spirits which had
usurped a dominion over the world ;
Notes, John xii 31; Eph. ii.2. The
Saviour, by his death, wrested the dominion from them, and seized upon
what they had captured as a conqueror
seizes upon his prey. Satan and his
legions had invaded the earth and
drawn its inhabitants into captivity,
and subjected them to their evil reign.
Christ, by his death, subdues the invaders and recaptures those whom they
had subdued. {| He made a show of
them open'y. Asa conqueror, returning from a victory, displays in a
triumphal procession the kings and
princes whom he has taken, and the
spoils of victory. This was commonly
done when a “ triumph ” was decreed
for a conqueror. On such occasions
it sometimes happened that a considerable number of prisoners were

ledalong am.dst the scenes of triumph ; |
, seq.) that we should not be made cap-

see Notes on 2 Cor. ii. 14. Paul
says that this was now done “openly” --
that is, it was in the face of the whole

1 or, himself.

triumph over ali the powers of hell.
It does not refer to any public procession or display on the earth ; but to
the grand victory as achieved in view
of the universe, by which Christ, as a
conqueror, dragged Satan and his
legions at his triumphal car; comp.
Rom. xvi. 20. § Triumphing over
them in it. Marg., “ or, himself.”
Either “ by the cross,” or by “‘ himself.”
Or, it may mean, as Rosenmiller suggests, that ‘‘God (ver. 12) triumphed
over these foes in him; i. e., 72 Christ
The sense is substantially the same,
that this triumph was effected by the
atonement made for sin by the Redeemer. See the word triumph explained in the Notes on 2 Cor ii. 14.
The meaning of all thisis, that since
Christ has achieved for us such a
victory, and has subdued all the foes
of man, we should not be led captive.
but should regard ourselves as free.
men. We should not be made again
the slaves of custom, or habit, or
ritual observances, or superstitious
rites, or anything whatever that has
its origin in the kingdom of darkness.
We are bound to assert and to use
our freedom, and should not allow
any hostile power in the form of philosophy or false teaching of any kind,
to plunder or “ spoil” us; ver. 8.
The Christian is a freeman. His
great Captain has subdued all his
enemies, and we should not allow them
again to set up their dark empire over
our souls. The argument of the apostle in these verses (183--15) is derived from what Christ has done for
us. He mentions four things. (1.)
He has given us spiritual life ; (2.) he

‘has forgiven all our trespasses; (3.) he

has blotted out or abolished the “ or-

| dinances ”’ that were against us; and

(4.) he has triumphed over all our
foes. From all this he infers (ver. 16,

tive or subdued by any of the rites oz
superstition, or any of the influences

universe--a grand victory; a glorious of the kingdom of darkness.

16 Let no man therefore judge @
gou in! meat, or in drink, or in
2 respect ofan holy day, or of the
new moon, or of the Sabbath days ;

16. Let no man, therefore, judge you;
comp. Notes on Rom. xiv. 10, 13.
The word judge here is used in the
sense of pronouncing a sentence. The
meaning is, “since you have thus
been delivered by Christ from the
evils which surrounded you ; since you
have been freed from the observances
of the law, let no one sit in judgment
on you, or claim the right to decide
for you in those matters. You are
not responsible to man for your conduct, but to Christ ; and no man has
aright to impose that on you as a
burden from which he has made you
free.” § In meat. Marg., or eating and drinking. The meaning is,
“In respect to the various articles of
food and drink.’’ ‘There is reference
here, undoubtedly, to the distinctions

which the Jews made on this subject, |

implying that an effort had been made
by Jewish teachers to show them that
the Mosaic laws were binding on all.
{ Or in respect of a holy day. Marg.,
part. The meaning is, ‘in the

17 Which are a shadow ° of
things to come; but the body és
of Christ

a Ro.14.10,13. 1 or, for eating and drinking.
2 or. part. e.8.5.

enly to the seventh day, but to all
the days of holy rest that were observed by the Hebrews, and particularly to the beginning and close of
their great festivals. ‘There is, doubtless, reference to those days in this
place, as the word is used in the plural number, and the apostle does not
refer particularly to the Sabbath properly so called. There is no eyvidence from this passage that he would
teach that there was no obligation to
observe any holy time, for there is
not the slightest reason to believe
that he meant to teach that one of
the ten commandments had ceased
to be binding on mankind. If he
had used the word in the singular
number--‘ tHe Sabbath,’”’ it would
then, of course, have been clear that
he meant to teach that that commandment had ceased to be binding,

/and that a Sabbath was no longer to

part, or the particular of a holy day ; |

that is, in respect to it.’ The word
rendered ‘ holy-day ’’--£.er7--means
properly a feast or festival; and the allusion here isto the festivals of the Jews.
The sense is, that no one had aright
to impose their observance on Christians, or to condemn them if they did
not keep them. ‘They had been delivered from that obligation by the
death of Christ; ver.14. § Or of
the new moon. On the appearance of
the new moon, among the Hebrews, in
addition to the daily sacrifices, two
bullocks, a ram, and seven sheep,
with a meat offering, were required
to be presented to God ; Num. x. 10;
xXvill. 11--14. The new moon inthe
beginning of the month Tisri( October)
was the beginning of their civil year,
and was commanded to be observed
as a festival ; Lev. xxiii. 24, 28. § Or
of the Sabbath days. Gr., ‘of the
Sabbaths.” The word Sabbath in
the- Old Testament is applied not

be observed. But the use of the
term in the plural number, and the
connection, show that he had his eye
on the great number of days which
were observed by the Hebrews as

| festivals, as a part of their ceremo-

nial and typical law, and not to the
moral law, or the ten commandments. No part of the moral law--
no one of the ten commandments
could be spoken of as “a shadow of
good things to come.” These commandments are, from the nature of
moral law, of perpetual and universal obligation.

17. Which are a snadow of things
to come; see Notes on Heb. vili. 5;
x. 1. They were only a dim outline
of future things, not the reality.
q But the body is of Christ. The
reality, the substance. All that they
signified is of or in Christ. Between
those things themselves which are
in Christ, and those which only represented or prefigured them, there
is as much difference as there is between a body and a shadow; a solid
substance and a mere outline. Ilav18 Let 4 no man ! beguile you
of your reward, ? in a voluntary
@ Re.3.11. 1 or, judge against you.

2 being a voluntary in humility.

ing now, therefore, the thing itself
the shadow can be to us of no value;
and that having come which was prefigured, that which was designed merely
to represent it, is no Jonger binding.
18, Let no man beguile you of
your reward. Marg., judge against
you. The word here used--zarabpzfevw--occurs nowhere else in the
New Testament. It isa word which
was employed with reference to the
distribution of prizes at the Grecian
games, and means, to give the prize
against any one, to deprive of the
palm. Hence it means to deprive
of a due reward ; and the sense here
is, that they were to be on their
guard lest the “‘reward’’--the crown
of victory to which they looked forward--should be wrested from. them
by the arts of others. That would
be done if they should be persuaded
to turn back, or to falter in the race.
The only way to secure the prize
was to hold on in the race which
they then were running ; but if they
yielded to the philosophy of the
Greeks, and the teachings of the
Jews, they would be defrauded of
this reward as certainly as a racer
at the games would if the crown of
victory should be unjustly awarded
to another. In this case, too, as real
injustice would be done, though the
apostle does not say it would be in
the same manner. Here it would
be by art; in the case of the racer
it would be by a wrong decision--
but in either case the crown was lost.
This exhortation has the more force
from this consideration. Against an
unjust judge we could have no power; but we may take care that the
reward be not wrested from us by
fraud. § In a voluntary humility.
Marg., “ being a voluntary in humility.” Tindal renders this, “ Let no
man make you shoot at a wrong
mark, which, after his own imagination, walketh in the humbleness of
angels.’ The word used here (varu-

-pect of great humility, and

humility and worshipping of an
gels, intruding ® into those things

6 De.29.29; Job38.2.

vodpocvv7) means lowliness of mind,
modesty, humbleness of deportment :
and the apostle refers, doubtless, to
the spirit assumed by those agamst
whom he would guard the Colossians
--the spirit of modesty or of humble
inquirers. The meaning is, that
they would not announce their opinions with dogmatic certainty, but
they would put on the appearance
of great modesty. In this way, they
would become really more dangerous--for no false teachers are so dangerous as those who assume the aswho
manifest great reverence for divine
things. The word rendered “ voluntary’ here--32awy--does not, properly, belong to the word rendered “ humility.”” It rather appertains to the
subsequent part of the sentence, and
means that the persons referred to
were willing, or had pleasure in attempting, to search into the hidden
and abstruse things of religion. They
were desirous of appearing to do this
with an humble spirit--even with the
modesty of an angel--but still they
had pleasure in that profound and
dangerous kind of inquiry. { And
worshipping of angels.--Spnrxcia cay
ayyiswy. ‘This does not mean, as it
seems to me, that they would themselves worship angels, or that they
would teach others to do it-- for there
is no reason to believe this. Certainly
the Jewish teachers, whom the apostle
seems to have had particularly in his
eye, would not do it; nor is there any
evidence that any class of false
teachers would deliberately teach
that angels were to be worshipped
The reference is. rather to the profound reverence ; the spirit of lowly
piety which the angels evinced, ans
to the fact that the teachers referred
to would assume the same spirit, and
were, therefore, the more dangerous.
They would come professing profound
regard for the great mysteries of religion, and for the incomprehensible

which he hath not seen, vainly
puffed up by his fleshly mind ;

19 And not holding the Head, ¢ |

from which all the body by joints
a Ep.4.15,16.

perfections of the divinity, and would
approach the subject professedly with
the awful veneration which the angels have when they “ look into these
things;”” 1 Pet. i. 12. There was
no bold, irreverent, or confident declamation, but the danger in the case
arose from the fact that they assumed
so much the aspect of modest piety;
so mueh the appearance of the lowly
devotion of angelic beings. The
word here rendered worship --Spnexsiz--occurs in the New Testament
only here, in Acts xxvi. 5; and James
i. 26, 27, in each of which places it
is rendered religion. It means here
the religion, or the spirit of humble
reverence and devotion which
evinced by the angels; and this accords well with the meaning in James
i. 26, 27. (| Intruding into those
things which he hath not seen. Or
inquiring into them. The word
used here (iuBerevwv) means to go
in, or enter; then to investigate, to
inquire. It has not, properly, the
meaning of intruding, or of impertinent inquiry (see Passow), and I
do not see that the apostle meant to
characterize the inquiry here as
such. He says that it was the object
of their investigations to look, with
great professed modesty and reverence, into those things which are not
visible to the eye of mortals. The
“things” which seem here to be particularly referred to, are the abstruse
questions respecting the mode of the
divine subsistence ; the ranks, orders,
and employments of angelic beings ;

and the obscure doctrines relating to |

the divine government and plans.

These questions comprised most of |

the subjects of inquiry in the Oriental and Grecian philosophy, and inquiries on these the apostle apprehended would tend to draw away
the mind from the “simplicity that
isin Christ.” Of these subjects what
gan be known more than is revealed ?
q Vainly puffed up by his firshly

is |

|
and bands having nourishment
ministered, and knit together, increaseth with the increase of God.

20 Wherefore, if ye be dead

mind. Notwithstanding the avowed
“humility,” the modesty, the angelic
reverence, yet the mind was full of
vain conceit, and self-confident, carnal wisdom. The two things are by
no means incompatible--the men
apparently most meek and modest
being sometimes the most bold in
their speculations, and the most reckless in regard to the great landmarks
of truth. It is not so with true modesty, and real “ angelic veneration,”
but all this is sometimes assumed for
the purpose of deceiving ; and sometimes there is a native appearance
of modesty which is by no means
an index of the true feelings of the
soul. The most meek and modest
men in appearance are sometimes
the most proud and reckless in their
investigations of the doctrines of religion.

19. And not holding the Head.
Not holding the true doctrine respecting the Great Head of the
church, the Lord Jesus Christ ; Notes,
Eph. i. 22. This is regarded here
as essential to the maintenance of
all the other doctrines of religion.
He who has just views of the Redeemer will not be in much danger
of erring respecting the other points
of religious belief. J From which
all the body, &c. This passage is
almost word for word the same as
in Eph. iv. 15, 16. See it explained
in the Notes there.

20. Wherefore. In view of all
that has been said. If it be true that
you are really dead to the world, why
do you act as if you still lived under
the principles of the world? ¥ Jf ye
be dead with Christ. If you are dead
to the world in virtue of his death.
The apostle here, as elsewhere, speaks
of a very close union with Christ.
We died with him ; that is, such was
the efficacy of his death, and such is
our union with him, that we became
dead also to the world; Notes, Rom.
vi. 2,4, 8,11. ¥ From the rudiments

270)

with Christ from the ! rudiments
of the world, why, as though
living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances,

1 or, elements.

of the world. Marg., elements. The
elements or principles which are of
a worldly nature, and which reign
among worldly men; see Notes on
Gal. iv. 38. 4 Why, as though living
in the world. Why do you allow
them to influence you, as though you
were living and acting under those |
worldly principles? They ought no
more to do it, than the things of this
world influence those who are in
their graves. § Are ye subject to
ordinances. The rites and ceremonies of the Jewish religion ; see Notes,
Gal. v. 1--4.

21. Touch not; taste not; handle
not. These words seem intended as
a specimen of the kind of ordinances’
which the apostle refers to, or an
imitation of the language of the
Jewish teachers in regard to various
kinds of food and drink. ‘‘ Why are
ye subject to ordinances of various
kinds, such as this--Touch not, taste
not, handle not?’’ That is, such as
prohibit you from even touching certain kinds of food, or tasting certain
kinds of drink, or handling certain
prohibited things. The rapid succession of the words here, without
any connecting particle, is supposed
to denote the eagerness of the persons who imposed this injunction,
and their earnestness in warning
others from contaminating themselves with the prohibited things.
Many injunctions of this kind. are
found in the writings of the Jewish
Rabbins ; and the ancient Jewish sect
of the Essenes (Notes, Matt. ili. 7)
abounded in precepts of this kind.
See Schoetgen, and Pict. Bib. in loc.
“They allowed themselves no food
that was pleasent to the taste, but
ate dry, coarse bread, and drank only
water. Many of them ate nothing
until sunset, and, if any one touched
them who did not belong to their sect,
they washed themselves as if they had
been most deeply defiled. Perhaps ,

| them.

21 (Touch not ; taste not ; handle not ;

22 Which all are to perish with
the using ;) after the commandments and doctrines of men ?

there was at Colosse a society of this
kind, as there were in many other
places out of Judea; and, if there
was, it is not improbable that many
Christians imitated them in the peculiarity of their rules and observances ;’’ comp. Jenning’s Jew. Ant.
i. 471, and Ros. Alt, u. neu. Morgenland, in loc. If this be the correct
interpretation, then these are not the
words of the apostle, forbidding Christians to have anything to do with
these ordinances, but are introduced
as a specimen of the manner in which
they who enjoined the observance of
those ordinances pressed the subject
on others. There were certain thing:
which they prohibited, in conformity
with what they understood to be the
law of Moses; and they were constantly saying, in regard to them, “do
not touch them, taste them, handle
” These words are often used
as a kind of motto in reference to the
use of intoxicating drinks. They express very well what is held by the
friends of total abstinence; but it is
obvious that they had no such reference as used by the apostle, nor should
they be alleged as an authority, or as
an argument, in the question abont
the propriety or impropriety: of the
use of spirituous liquors. They may
as well be empioyed in reference to
anything else as that, and would
have no authority in either case. Intoxicating drinks should be abstained
from; but the obligation to do it
should be made to rest on solid arguments, and not on passages of Scripture like this. This passage could
with more plausibility be pressed into
the service of the enemies of the total abstinence societies, than into
their support ; but it really has nothing to do with the subject, one way
or the otver.

22.Which ail are to perish with the
using. his is commonly marked
as a part of the parenthesis, or the

23 Which things have indeed

quotation; and there is considerable
alfficulty in ascertaining its true meaning. It seems most probable that
these are the words of the apostle
himself, thrown in in the rapidity of
composition, and that they are not to
be connected with the phrase “touch
not,’ &c. Ifso, the idea is, that it
cannot be of so much consequence as
the Jewish teachers supposed, to
mark distinctly the difference between
meats and drinks. ‘They were all to
perish with the use of them. Nothing was permanent about them.
It could really then be of no great
importance what was eaten, or what
was drunk, provided it was not in
itself injurious. These ordinances
had a value among the Hebrews
when it was designed to keep them
as a distinct people ; but they had no
value in themselves, so as to make
them binding on all mankind. To
suppose this, was the common error
of the Jews; and hence the apostle
so frequently laboured to show thatthe
Jewish rites had no permanent value ;
see Notes on Rom. xiv. 1--6; 1 Cor.
viii ; comp. Notes on Matt. xv. 17, 18.
According to this i:terpretation, the
21st verse should be regarded as expressing the common maxim of the
Jewish teachers, and the clause before us as the words of the apostle,
and should be marked as a parenthesis
So it is marked in Hahn’s Ed. of the
New Testament. J After the commandments and doctrines of men.
Many of the ordinances on which the
Jews insisted were those which were
handed down by tradition. They depended on human authority only, and
of course, should not bind the conscience. Others take the words here
to mean, ‘‘ All which things tend to
the corruption of religion( Doddridge),
or are cause of destruction or condemnation (Rob. Lex.), by the use of
these things, according to the commandments and doctrines of these
men,”

23. Which things. Which scrupulous observance of the numerons precepts enjoining rites and ceremonies,

the observance of days, and the dis- |

‘| corrupt pure religion.
a shew of wisdom in will-worship,

tinctions between meats and drinks
{| Have indeed a show of wisdom
Have a great appearance of piety
and of regard for the will of God
They have a show of ‘‘ wisdom,” too,
or of a deep acquaintance with divine
things. They who insist on them appear to be learned in what constitutes
religion, and to have a deep insight
into its mysteries. Doubtless they
who urged the obligation of these
things laid claim to uncommon acquaintance with the nature of religion,
and urged the observance of these
things on the ground of their tendency to promote piety, just as they
always do who insist much on the observance of religiousrites and ceremonies. § Jn will-worship, Voluntary worship; i. e., worship beyond
what God strictly requires --supererogatory service. Probably many of
ee things they did not urge as be-

ing strictly required, but as conducing greatly to piety. The plea doubt-
| less was, that piety might be promot
ed by service rendered beyond what
was absolutely enjoined, and that thus
there would be evinced a spirit of uncommon piety--a readiness not only
to obey all that God required, but
even to go beyond this, and to render
him voluntary service. There is
much plausibility in this; and this
|has been the foundation of the appointment of the fasts and festivals of
the church; of penances and self-inflicted tortures; of painful vigils and
pilgrimages ; of works of supererogation, and of the merits of the ‘‘saints. ”
A large part of the corruptions of religion have arisen from this plausible
but deceitful argument. God knew
best what things it was most conducive to piety for his people to observe ;
and we are most safe when we adhere most closely to what he has appointed, and observe no more days
and ordinances than he has directed.
There is much apparent piety about
these things ; but there is much wick-
‘edness of heart at the bottom, and
there is nothing that more tends to
q And hum
There isa

lity ; Notes on ver. 18.
and humility, and ! neglecting of

1, or, punishing ; or, not sparing.

great show of reverence for divine
things in the manner in which they
pursue their investigations, and in
their humble and meek compliance
with painful rites and ceremonies; in
fastings, abstinence, and penances.
Under all this there lurks often the
worst kind of pride; for

“ Pride may be pampered while the flesh
grows lean.”

{ And neglecting the body. Putting
on sackcloth and ashes ; subjecting it
to painful fastings and penances ; appearing in a form of squalid poverty,
as if the body were not worth regarding, and as 7f the attention were so
much engrossed by the nobler care of
the soul, as to be entirely regardless
ofthe body. Yet, we may observe,
(1.) God made the body as well as
the soul, and has shown his care of it
by its ‘ being fearfully and. wonderfully made,” and by all the provision
which he has made for all its wants.
(2.) Religion pertains to the body as
well as the soul, and should teach a
man properly to regard it. Man is
bound so to take care of the body, as
to have the most health and the longest life possible in the service of his
Creator, and so as to be able to employ it in the best manner. There is
no religion in ragged or squalid clothing, in a dirty face, in offensive personal habits, in filth and defilement,
and in setting at defiance the decencies of life. (3.) Much affected sanctity may exist where there is a most
proud and corrupt heart. A long
face, a demure countenance, a studied disregard of the decencies of dress
and the courtesies of life, as if they
were unworthy of notice, may be the eavonent of the most hateful pride, and
of the basest purposes ofthe soul. A
man should be on his guard always
against one who, under pretence of
extraordinary sanctity, professes to despise the ordinary dress and usages of
society. {| Notinany honour. That
is, there is no real honour in these
things; there is nothing to ennoble
and elevate the soul ; nothing that is

the body ; not in any honour to
the satisfying of the flesh.

to be commended. § To the satisfying of theflesh. The only effect is,
to satisfy or please the flesh ; that is,
the carnal and corrupt nature, for so
the word flesh is often used in the
Scriptures. The effect of these observances, on which so much stress is
laid as if they would promote piety,
is merely to gratify pride, self-righteousness, the love of distinction, and
the other carnal propensities of our
nature. There seems to be a great
deal of humility and piety in them ;
there is really little else than pride,
selfishness, and ambition.

1. We should feel a deep interest
for the welfare of other Christians,
even those whom we have never seen ;
ver. 1, 2. All belong to the same
family, have the same enemies to contend with, are engaged in the same
warfare, are travelling to the same
heaven. By our prayers and sympathy, we may often do much good to
those whom we shall never see till we
meet them in heaven.

2. We should be on our guard
against the seductive arts of false teachers. They are often plausible; they
can urge arguments which we may
not be able to answer; they may
have much more learning than we
have; and they may put on the appearance of great humility and of real
piety ; ver. 3, 4,

8. It is, in general, a safe rule for
a Christian to abide by the views
which he had onthe great subjects of
religion when he became converted ;
ver. 6. Then the heart was tender
and soft--like wax--and received the
impression which the Spirit made on
it. There are some things in which
the heart judges better than the head;
and in which we are quite as likely to
| go right if we followthe former as we
are the latter. In relation to the
performance of many of the duties of
life--the duties of kindness and char-

ity--the heart is often a more safe
guide than the head; and so in many

things pertaining more immediately
to religion, a man is more likely to
judge right if he follows the promptings of his feelings in the happiest moments of piety, than he is to wait for
the more cool and cautious course of
argument. The same thing may be
true even of many of the doctrines of
religion. When a poor sinner trembles on the verge of hell, he feels that
none but an Almighty Saviour can
deliver him, and he goes and commits
himself to Jesus as God--and he is
not in much danger of erring in that.
He will be more likely to be drawn
aside from the truth by the artful
reasonings of the advocates of error,
than he will by his feelings at that
moment.

4. Our views of the “mystery of
God ”--of the divine nature, and especially of the rank and character of
Christ, will determine all our views
of theology; ver. 2. This has been
so in all ages; and however it may be
accounted for, the fact is undoubted,
that if at any time we can ascertain
what are the prevalent views of Christ
we can easily see what is the prevailing character of the theology of that
age. The influence of this will be felt
on the views which are held of the
native character of man: of regeneration, the divine purposes, the nature
of holiness, and the retributions beyond the grave. Hence, the reason
why the apostle Paul insisted so much
on this, and urged so earnestly the
importance of adhering to just views
of the Saviour.

5. Christ has laid us under the
highest obligations to love and serve
him; ver. 11--15. He has enabled
us to put off our sins; he has raised us
from spiritual death to spiritual life ;
he has removed the old ordinances
that were against us, and has made
religion easy and pleasant; he has
subdued our enemies, and triumphed
over them. He achieved a glorious
victory over “‘ principalities and powers,’ and has led our great enemy
captive. He met the enemy of man
when on earth, and overcame his
power of temptation; expelled him
from the bodies of men; laid the
foundation for a permanent victory

over him on the cross, and triumphed
over him when he rose and ascended
to heaven. Satan is now an humbled
foe. His power is broken and limited, and the Lord Jesus will yet completely triumph over him. He will
return from heaven; raise all the
dead; and reascend, in the face of
the universe, to his native skies,
with all his ransomed hosts--the
“spoils” of victory. We should
not then fear what Satan can do to
us; nor should we fear that the great
enemy of the church will ever be
triumphant.

Stand up, my soul, shake off thy fears,
And gird the gospel armour on;

March to the gates of endless joy,
Where thy great Captain Saviour’s gone.

Hell and thy sins resist thy course,
But hell and sin are vanquish’d foes;

Thy Jesus nail’d them to the cross,
And sung the triumph when he rose,

Then let my soul march boldly on,

Press forward to the heavenly gate;
There peace and joy eternal reign,

And glittering robes for conquerors wait.

Then shall I wear a starry crown,
And triumph in Almighty grace;
While all the armies of the skies
Join in my glorious Leader's praise.

6. Noindividual has aright to appoint
ceremonies and ordinances in the
church to be binding on the consciences of others; nor is this authority intrusted to any body of men; ver. 16.
What God has enjoined is to be obeyed. What man enjoins beyond that, is
of no binding force on the conscience:
and it is the solemn and sacred
duty of all Christians to resist all
such attempts to make ceremonial observances binding on the conscience.
Christ has appointed a few ordinances
of religion--and they are enough.
They are simple, easily observed, and
all adapted to promote piety. He
appointed baptism and the Lord’s supper; but he appointed no stated festivals or fasts; no days in commemoration of the saints, or of his own birth
or death; he enjoined no rites of religion but those which are most simple
and which are easily observed. He
well knew how those observances
would be abused to the purposes of
superstition, and obscure the great doc-

ifs ye then be risen * with Christ,
seek those things which are

trine of justification by faith. He
knew how ready men would be to rely
onthem rather than on the merits of
the great Sacrifice, and hence he appointed no ordinance where that danger could exist.

7, Pride is often united with apparent humility ; ver.18. It is easy to
assume the appearance of humility in
the outer deportment, but no such assumed appearance reaches the heart.
That remains the same, whatever external appearance is assumed, until it
is renewed by the grace of God.

8. A meek, modest, and candid demeanour is consistent with great boldness and daring in speculation ; ver.
18. The most daring speculators in
religion; they who make the most,
reckless attacks on the truth, are
often,to appearance, eminently candid, |
and even put on the aspect of angelic
devotion. Yet they are bold ‘ where
angels fear to tread ;’’ and they de- |
claim with confidence on _ subjects
which must be for ever beyond the
grasp of the human mind.

9. We should not infer, because a
man is modest and humble, and because he appears to be endued with
uncommon meekness and piety, that,
therefore, he isa good man or a safe
guide ; ver. 18. The teachers in
Colosse, against whom Paul warned
the Christians there, appear to have
been men just of this stamp; and this!
is commonly asswmed by those who |
would iead their fellow-men into error.
“Satan isoften transformed into an
angel of light.”’

10. We should not attempt to penetrate into those things which lie be-|
yond the grasp of the human mind; ver. |
18. We should not “intrude into those
things which are unseen.” There is
an outer limit to our investigations on |
all subjects, and we soon reach it. In
life we are to act chiefly on facts; not
on the reason why those facts exist.
When we have ascertained or established a fact, our feet stand on a
solid rock ; and there we shall stand
securely. We act safely and wisely if

|
|

above, where Christ ® sitteth on the
right hand of God.

@ chap.2.12.

we act in view of that fact ; we do not
act safely or wisely if we disregard
that, and act on theory or imagination.

11. Many real Christians are in
danger of being “‘ beguiled of the reward’ which they might obtain ; ver.
18. They are allured by the world ;
they are drawn into error by the arte
of philosophy ; they obscure the lustre of their piety by conformity to the
world, and thus they lose the high recompense which they might have obtained in heaven. For the rewards of
heaven will be strictly in proportion
tothe measure of our religion here--
the zeal, and faith, and love which we

b Ko.8.34.

| eviace in the cause of our Master.

12. Many persons are in danger of
losing the “reward” altogether--for
the ‘‘reward”’ of a life of piety is set
before all; ver. 18. Heaven is offer-

' ed freely to all, and there is no one

who might not obtain it. But, alas!
how many there are who are drawn
aside by the allurements of error and
of sin ; whoareledto defer to a future
time the great subject of preparation
for death; who spend their lives in disregard of the commands of God and
the invitations of mercy, until it is too
late to seek salvation, and they sink
down to final ruin. Every impenitent
sinner isin imminent danger of losing
his soul. Fhe great deceiveris endeavouring to blind him and decoy himdown
to death, and a thousand snares on
every side are spread for his feet, into
which he is in constant danger of
falling. In a world of allurements,

: where the work of death from the

beginning has been carried on chiefly
by deception, with what solicitude
should man guard himself lest he be
“‘beguiled of heaven’ and sink toa
world where heaven will be offered ne
more !

In the previous chapter, the apostle
had showed what a true Christian
ought not to follow after. He had
warned the Colossians against the
dangers of false philosophy, and the

2 Set your ! affection on things
above, not % on things on the earth.
1 or, mind. @1 John 2.15.

doctrines of erroneous teachers. In

this chapter, he teaches them what
they ought to pursue and to seek.
He therefore enjoins various duties
in the different relations of life, which
they ought to perform in such a way
as to show that true religion had a
controlling influence over their hearts.
He specifies the following: (1.) The
duty of setting the affections on things
above; ver. 1--4. They were risen
with Christ (chap. ii. 12), they were
dead to sin (ver. 3); they were soon
to be like Christ (ver. 4), and they
should, therefore, fix their affections
on heavenly things. (2.) The duty of
mortifying their corrupt passions and
carnal propensities ; ver. 5--8. (3.)
The duty of speaking the truth, since
they had put off the old man with his
deeds ; ver. 9--11. (4.) The duty of
kindness, gentleness, charity, and the
spirit of peace; ver. 12--15. (5.)
The duty of edifying one another by
psalms and songs of praise ; ver. 16,
17. (6.) The duty of wives, ver. 18;
(7.) of hasbands, ver. 19; (8.) of children, ver. 20; (9.) of fathers, ver. 21;
(10.) of servants, ver. 22--25. There
is a very striking similarity between
this chapter and the fifth and sixth
chapters of the epistle to the Ephesians, and a full exposition of the
principal subjects adverted to here
may be found in the Notes there.

1. Lf ye then be risen with Christ.
The apostle in this place evidently
founds the argument on what he had
said in chap. il. 12; see Notes on that
passage. The argument is, that there
was such an union between Christ
and his people, that in virtue of h’'s
death they become dead to sin ; that
in virtue of Ais resurrection they rise
to spiritual life, and that, therefore, as
Christ now livesin heaven, they should
live for heaven, and fix their affections
there. {| Seek those things which are
above. That is, seek them as the
objects of pursuit and affection ; strive
to secure them. § Where Christ
sitteth on the right hand of God;
Notes, Mark xvi. 19. The argument

3 For © ye are dead, and your
life is hid with Christ in God.
b Ro.6.2.

here is, that since Christ is there, and

since he is the object of our supreme
attachment, we should fix our affections on heavenly things, and seek to
be prepared to dwell with him.

2. Set your affections. Marg., “or
mind.’ Gr.“ think of --@povercs. The
thoughts should be occupied about
the things where Christ now dwells,
where our final home is to be, where
our great interests are. Since we
are raised from the death of sin, and
are made to live anew, the great object of our contemplation should be
the heavenly world. {] Not on things
on the earth. Wealth, honour, pleasure. Our affections should not be
fixed on houses and lands; on scenes
of fashion and gaiety ; on lowand debasing enjoyments.

3. For ye are dead. Dead to the
world; dead to sin; dead to earthly
pleasures. On the meaning of the
word dead, see Notes on Rom. vi. 2;
Eph. ii.1. The idea of the apostle
is, that as Christ became literally
dead in the tomb, so we, in virtue of
our connection with him, have become
dead to sin, to worldly influences,
pleasures, andambition. Or,in other
words, we are to be to them as if we
were dead, and they had no more influence over us than the things of
earth had over him in the grave ;
Notes, Rom. vi. 2. § And your life.
There is still life. Though dead to
one class of objects, you are alive to
others. See the sentiment here expressed, explained at large in the
Notes on Gal. ii. 20. § Js hid with
Christ in God. ‘The language here
is taken probably from treasure which
is “ hid’? or concealed in a place of
security ; and the idea is, that eternal
life is an invaluable jewel or treasure,
which is laid up with Christ in heaven where God is. There it is safely
deposited. It has this security, that
it is with the Redeemer, and that he
is in the presence of God; and thus
nothing can reach it or take it away.
It is not left with us, or intrusted to
our keeping--for thenit might be lost
4 When “Christ, who is » our
life, shall appear, then shall ye
also appear with him in glory.

5 Mortify ¢ therefore your members which are upon the earth;
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate

affection, evil concupiscence, and
_of your mouth.

covetousness, which is idolatry :

6 For which things’ sake the
a 1 John 3.2.

as we might lose an invaluable jewel; |

or it might be wrested from us; or,
we might be defrauded of it ; but it,

is now laid up far out of our sight, and
far from the reach of all our enemies,

and with one who can “keep that which |

we have committed to himagainst that
day ;’ 2 Tim. i. 12. Our eternal life,
therefore, is as secure as it could
possibly be made. ‘The true condition
of the Christian is, that he is ‘“‘ dead”
to this world, but that he has immortal life in prospect, and that is secure,
being in the holy keeping of his Redeemer, now in the presence of God.
From this it follows that he should
regard himself as living for heaven.
4. When Christ, who is our life ;
Notes, John i. 4; xi. 25. J Shall
appear. In the day when he shall
come to judge the world. { hen
shall ye also appear with him in glory;
1 Thess. iv. 16,17. Christians shall
then be raised from the dead, and
ascend with the Redeemer to heaven.
5. Mortify therefore your members.
Since you are dead to sin and the
world, and are to appear with Christ
in the glories of his kingdom, subdue
every carnal and evil propensity of
your nature. The word mortify
means to put to death (Notes, Rom.
vill. 13 ; Gal. v. 24), and the meaning
here is that they were entirely to subdue their evil propensities, so that
they would have no remains of life ;
that is, they were not at all to indulge
them. The word ‘ members’’ here,
refers to the different members of the
body--as the seat of evil desires and
passions ; comp. Notes, Rom. vi. 13.
They were wholly to extirpate those
evil passions which he specifies as
having their seat in the various members of the earthly body, {J Fornica-

tion ; Notes, Rom. i. 2. J Unclean-

wrath of God cometh on the children of disobedience.
7 In @ the which ye also walked
sometime, when ye lived in them.
8 But now ye also put off all
these ; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication out
b John )1.25; 14.6. c¢ Ro.8.13; Ga.5.24;
Ep.d.3-6. d Ti.3.3,

ness ; Notes, Rom. i. 24. § Inordin
ate affection. réz30s. Rendered in Rom.
i. 26, “‘ vile affections ;” see Notes on
that verse. In 1 Thess. iv. 5, the
word is rendered l/wst--which is its
meaning here. § Evil concupiscence.
Evil desires; licentious passions ;
Rom. i. 24. Greek. ¥ And covetousness, which isidolatry. Itis remarkable that the apostle always ranks
covetousness with these base and detestable passions. The meaning here
is, (1.) that it is a low and debasing
passion, like those which he had
specified ; and (2.) that it secures the
affections which properly belong to
God, and is, therefore, idolatry. Of
all base passions, this is the one that
most dethrones God from the soul.
See this whole passage more fully explained in the Notes on Eph. vy. 83--5.

6. For which things’ sake, &c.; see
Notes, Eph. v. 6, where the same expression occurs.

7. Inthe which. In all which evil
passions. § Ye also walked sometime.
You formerly lived. These were the
common vices of the heathen; Notes,
Eph. v. 8; 1 Cor. vi. 10, 11; comp.
Notes, Rom. i. 24--82.

8. But now ye also put of all these.
All these which follow, as being also
inconsistent with the Christian calling. {| Anger, wrath; Notes, Eph.
iv. 26. {[ Malice; Notes, Eph. iv.
31. | Blasphemy ; Notes, Matt. ix.
3. The word here seems to mean all
injurious and calumnious speaking--
whether against God or man. § Filthy
communication out of your mouth.
Lewd, indecent, and immodest discourse ; Notes, Eph. iv. 29. The conversation of the heathen everywhere
abounds with this. A pure method
of conversation among men is the fruit
of Christianity.

9 Lie not one to another, seeing
that ye have put off the old man
with his deeds ;

10 And have put on the new
man, which is renewed @ in know-

a Ep.4.23,24, b Ro.10.12.

ledge after the image of him that
created him :

11 Where? there isneither Greek
nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian,
bond nor free: but Christ is all,
and in all.

9. Lie not one to another ; Notes
Eph. iv. 25. § Seeing that ye have
put of the old man with his deeds.
Your former corrupt and evil nature ;
Notes, Eph. iv. 22. The reason for
putting away lying, stated in Eph. iv.
25, is, that we ‘“‘ are members one of
another ” -- or are brethren.
reason assigned here is, that we have
put off the old man with his deeds.
The sense is, that lying is one of the
fruits of sin. It is that which the
corrupt nature of man naturally produces ; and when that is put off, then
all that that nature produces should
be also put off with it. The vice of
lying is a universal fruit of sin, and
seems to exist everywhere where the
gospel does not prevail ; comp. Notes
on Titus i. 12. There is, perhaps, no
single form of sin that reigns so universally in the heathen world.

10. Whichis renewed in knowledge.
In Eph: iv. 24, it is said that the new
man is “created after God in righteousness and true holiness.” In this
place it is added that to the renewed
soul knowledge is imparted, and it is
made in that respect as man was when
he was first created. This passage,
in connection with Eph. iv. 24, proves
that before man fell he was endowed
with ‘righteousness, true holiness,
and knowledge.’ The knowledge here
referred to, is not the knowledge of
everything, but the knowledge of God.
Man was acquainted with his Creator.
He resembled him in his capacity for
knowledge. He was an intelligent
being, and he had an acquaintance
with the divine existence and perfections ; comp. Notes on Rom. vy. 12.
But especially had he that knowledge
which is the fear of the Lord; that
knowledge of God which is the result
of love. Piety, in the Scriptures, is
often represented as the “knowledge”
of God; see Notes on John xvii. 3;
comp. Notes on Eph. iii.19. { After

The |

| the image of him that created him.
_So astoresemble God. In knowledge
he was made in the likeness of his
| Maker.
1l. Where there is neither Greek nor
| Jew ; see this fully explained in the
_ Notes on Gal. iii. 28. The meaning
| here is, that all are on a level; that
there is no distinction of nation inthe
'church; that all are to be regarded
-and treated as brethren, and that
therefore no one should be false to
another, orlietoanother. § Circumcision nor uncircumctsion. No one is
admitted into that blessed society because he is circumcised ; no one is
excluded because he is uncircumcised.
| That distinction is unknown, and all
‘are on a level. § Barbarian. No
| one is excluded because he is a bar_barian, or because he lives among
‘those who are uncivilized, and is unpolished in his manners ; see the word
barbarian explained in the Notes on
Rom. i. 14. §& Scythian. This word
' does not occur elsewhere in the New
Testament. The name Scythian is
applied in ancient geography to the
people who lived on the north and
north-east of the Black and Caspian
seas, a region stretching indefinitely
into the unknown countries of Asia.
They occupied the lands now peopled
by the Monguls and Tartars. The
name was almost synonymous with
barbarian, for they were regarded as
a wild and savage race. The mean-
| ing here is, that even such a ferocious
and uncivilized people were not excluded from the gospel, but they were
as welcome as any other, and were entitled to the same privileges as others,
No one was excluded because he belonged to the most rude and uncivilized portion of mankind. {§] Bond nor
free ; see Notes, Gal. iii. 28. { But
Christ is all, andin all. The great
thing that constitutes the peculiarity
of the church is, that Christ is its Sa12 Put on therefore, as the elect
of God, holy and beloved, bowels
of mercies, kindness, humbleness
of mind, meekness, long-suffering ;

13 Forbearing @ one another, and
forgiving 8 one another, if any man
have a quarrel ! against any: even
as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

a Mar.11.25; Ep.4.2,32. 6 Mat.6.14,15.

14 And above all these things
put on charity, ¢ which is 4 the bond
of perfectness.

15 And let the peace ¢ of God
rule in your hearts, to the which
also ye are called in one body; and
be ye thankful.

1 or. complaint.

c 1 Pe.4.8.
d 1 Co.13.2,8,13.

é Phi.4.7.

viour, and that all are his friends and
followers. Its members lay aside all
other distinctions, and are known only
as his friends. They are not known
as Jews and Gentiles ; as of this nation or that; as slaves or freemen,
but they are known as Christians ;
distinguished from all the rest of
mankind as the united friends of the
Redeemer; comp. Notes on Gal. iii.
28.

12. Put on, therefore, as the elect of
God. The fact that you thus belong
to one andthe same church ; that you
have been redeemed by thesame blood,
and chosen by the same grace, and
that you are all brethren, should lead
you to manifest a spirit of kindness,
gentleness, and love. Bowels of
mercies ; Notes, Phil. ii.1. § Kindness, &c.; see Notes on Eph. iv. 32.
The language here is a little different
from what it is there, but the sentiment is the same.

13. Forbearing one another; Notes,
Eph. iv. 2. Q And forgiving one
another; Notes, Matt. vi. 12, 14. {| Jf
any man have a quarrel against any.
Marg., “or complaint.” The word
here used--pougi--occurs nowhere
else in the New Testament. It means,
fault found, blame, censure; and here
denotes occasion of complaint. The
idea is, that if another one has given
us just occasion of complaint, we are
to forgive him ; that is, we are (1.) to
harbour no malice against him; (2.)
we are to be ready to do him good as
if he had not given us occasion of
complaint; (3.) we are to be willing
to declare that we forgive him when
he asks it; and (4.) we are always
afterwards to treat him as kindly as if
he had not injured us--as God treats
us when he forgives us; see Notes,
Matt. xviii. 21. {| Evenas Christ forg we you, so also do ye. Learn here

bond of perfectness.

that Christ has power to forgive sin;
comp. Notes, Matt. ix. 6; Acts v. 31.
Christ forgave us (1.) freely--he did
not hesitate or delay when we asked
him; (2.) entirely--he pardoned all
our offences ; (3.) for ever--he did it
so as to remember our sins no more,
and to treat us ever onward as tf we
had not sinned. So we should forgive an offending brother.

14, And above all these things. Over,
or uponall these things ; comp. Notes,
Eph. vi. 16. QJ Charity. Love.
Notes, 1 Cor. xiii. 1. § Which is the
The bond of all
perfection ; the thing which will unite
all other things, and make them complete; comp. the parallel place in Eph.
iv. 3. he ideaseems to be that love
will bind all the other graces fast together, and render the whole system
complete. Without love, though there
might be other graces and virtues,
there would be a want of harmony
and compactness in our Christian
graces, and this was necessary to unite
and complete the whole. There is
great beauty in the expression, and it
contains most important truth. If it
were possible to conceive that the
other graces could exist among a
Christian people, yet there would be
a sad incompleteness, a painful want
of harmony and union, if love were not
the reigning principle. Nor faith, nor
zeal, nor prophecy, nor the power of
speaking with the tongue of angels,
would answer the purpose. See this
sentiment expressed in 1 Cor. xili.,
and the effect of love more fully explained in the Notes on that chapter.

15. And let the peace of God. The
peace which God gives; Notes, Phil.
iv. 7. J Rule in your hearts. Preside
in your hearts; sit as umpire there
(Doddridge); govern and control you
The word here rendered rule--feaBev-

16 Let the word 4 of Christ dwell
in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another
in psalms ® and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in
your hearts to the Lord.

17 And whatsoever ¢ ye do in
word or deed, do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to
God and the Father by him.

@ Ps.119,11. b Ep.5.19.
¢ 1 Co.10.31.

srw--is commonly used in reference
to the Olympic and other games. It
means, to be a director, or arbiter of
the public games; to preside over them
and preserve order, and to distribute
the prizes to the victors. The meaning here is, that the peace which God
gives to the soul is to be to us what
the brabeutes, or governor at the games
was to those who contended there. It
is to preside over and govern the
mind; to preserve every thing in its
place ; and to save it from tumult, disorder, and irregularity. The thought
is a very beautiful one. The soul is
liable to the agitations of passion and
excitement--like an assembled multitude of men. It needs something to
preside over it, and keep its various
faculties in place and order; and
nothing is so well fitted to do this as
the calm peace which religion gives,
a deep sense of the presence of God,
the desire and the evidence of his
friendship, the hope of his favour, and
the belief that he has forgiven all our
sins. The “ peace of God”’ will thus
calm down every agitated element of
the soul ; subdue the tumult of passion,
and preserve the mind in healthful
action and order--as a ruler sways and
controls the passions of assembled
multitudes of men. {| To the which
ye are also called. To which peace.
| In one body. To be one body; or
to be united as one; Notes, Eph. iv.
4--6. J And be ye thankful. For all
mercies, and especially for your privileges and hopes as Christians. A
spirit of thankfulness, also, would tend
much to promote harmony and peace.
An ungrateful people is commonly a
tumultuous, agitated, restless, and
dissatisfied people. Nothing better
tends to promote peace and order than
gratitude to God for his mercies.

16. Let the word of Christ. The
doctrine of Christ. ( Dwell in you
richly in all wisdom. Abundantly,
producing the spirit of true wisdom.

That doctrine is adapted to make you
wise. The meaning is, that they were
to lay up the doctrines of the gospel
in their hearts; to meditate upon
them ; to allow them to be their guide,
and to endeavour wisely to improve
them to the best purpose. { Teaching
and admonishing, &c.; see this explained in the Notes on Eph. v. 19,
20. The only additional thought here
is, that their psalms and hymns were
to be regarded asa method of “ teaching” and ‘“ admonishing;” that is, they
were to be imbued with truth, and to
be such as to elevate the mind, and
withdraw it from error and sin. Dr.
Johnson once said, that if he were
allowed to make the ballads of a nation, he cared not who made the laws.
It is true in a more important sense
that he who is permitted to make the
hymns of a church, need care little
who preaches, or who makes the creed.
He will more effectually mould the
sentiments of a church than they who
preach or make creeds and confessions. Hence, it is indispensable, in
order to the preservation of the truth,
that the sacred songs of a church
should be imbued with sound evangelical sentiment.

17. And whatsoever ye do in word
or deed. Whatever ye say or do--
whether relating to temporal affairs
or to religion. The command here
extends to all that we do. J Do all
in the name of the Lord Jesus. Do
it all because he requires and commands it, and with a desire to honour
him. His authority should be the
warrant ; his glory the aim of all our
actions and words. See the general
sentiment here expressed, fully illustrated in the Notes on 1 Cor. x. 31.
q Giving thanks to God and the Father by him. Through him; or in his
name. All our actions are to be accompanied with thanksgiving ; Notes,
Phil. iv. 6. We are to engage in
every duty, not only in the name of
18 Wives, * submit yourselves
unto your own husbands, as it is
fit in the Lord.

19 Husbands, love your wives,
and be not bitter against them.

20 Children, © obey your parents
in all things: for this is well pleasing unto the Lord.

21 Fathers, provoke not your
children to anger, lest they be discouraged.

22 Servants,¢ obey in all things
your masters according to the flesh:
not with eye-service, as men-pleasers; but in singleness of heart,
fearing God:

@ Ep.5.22,&c.; Ti.2.4,5; 1 Pe.3.1, &e.
b Ep 6.1,&¢. el Pe.2.18.

23 And whatsoever ye do, do %
heartily, as to the Lord and not
unto men;

24 Knowing, that of the Lord ye
shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord
Christ.

25 But he that doeth wrong shall
receive for the wrong which he
hath done: and there is no respect

of persons.

ASTERS, @ give unto your

servants that which is just
and equal; knowing that ye also
have a Master in heaven.

d Ep.6.9,&c.

Christ, but with thankfulness for
strength and reason; for the privilege

of acting so that we may honour him; '

and with a grateful remembrance of
the mercy of God that gave us such a
Saviour to be an example and guide.

Ile is most likely to do his duty well |

who goes to it with a heart overflowing with gratitude to God for his mercies, and he who is likely to perform
his duties with the most cheerful fidelity, is he who has the deepest sense
of the divine goodness in providing a
Saviour for his lost and ruined soul ;
see Notes on 2 Cor. vy. 14, 15.

18. Wives, submit yourselves, &e.;
Notes on the parallel passage in Eph.
v. 21--24,

19. Husbands, love your wives, &c.;
Notes on Eph. iv. 25--29.

20. Children, obey your parents, &.;
Notes on Eph. vi. 1--4.

21. Fathers, provoke not, &c.; Notes
on Eph. vi.4. J Lest they be discouraged. Lest, by your continually finding fault with them, they should lose
all courage, and despair of ever pleasing you. There is much sound sense
and practical wisdom in this observation of the apostle. Children should
not be flattered, but they should be
encouraged. ‘They should not be so
praised as to make them vain and
proud, but they should be commended
when they do well. The desire of
praise should not be the principle from
which they should be taught to act,

but they should feel that the approbation of parents is a desirable thing, and
when they act so as to deserve that
approbation, no injury is done them
by their understanding it. He who
always finds fault with a child; who is
never satisfied with what he does;
who scolds and frets and complains,
let him do as he will, breaks his spirit,
and soon destroys in the delicate texture of his soul all desire of doing
well. The childin despair soon gives
over every effort to please. He becomes sullen, morose, stupid, and indifferent to all the motives that can
be presented to him, and becomes to
a great extent indifferent as to what
he does--since all that he does meets
with the same reception from the
parent.

22--25. Servants, obey in all things,
&c.; see Notes on Eph. vi. 5--8.

1. Masters, give unto your servants,
&c.; see Notes on Eph. vi. 9. | That
which is just and equal. What they
ought to have; what is fairly their
due. The apostle here, probably, refers to bondmen or slaves, and the
propriety of thisruleisapparent. Such
persons were subject to their masters’
control ; their time and services were
at their disposal, and they could not
enforce their just and equal claims by
an appeal to the laws. They were,
therefore, dependent on the equity and
kindness of their masters. There can

2 Continue ¢ in prayer, and
a Lu.18.1. b Mar.13.33.

be no doubt that not a few who were
converted to the Christian faith were
held to involuntary servitude (see 1
Cor. vii.); and it is as clear that the
apostles did not design to make a violent disruption of these bonds, or to
lead the slaves to rise and murder
their masters ; see Notes, 1 Tim. vi.
1--4, But it is equally clear that they
meant to represent slavery as a hard
and undesirable condition ; that they
intended to instruct the slaves to embrace the earliest opportunity to be
free which was presented (1 Cor. vii.
21); and that they meant to suggest
such considerations, and to lay down
such principles as would lead masters
to emancipate their slaves, and thus
ultimately to abolish it. Among these
principles are such as these. (1.) That
all men were of one and the same
blood; Acts xvii. 26. (2.) That they
were allredeemed by the same Saviour,
and were brethren; 1 Tim. vi. 2;
Philem. 16. If redeemed; if they
were “brethren;” if they were heirs
of glory, they were not “ chattels,”’ or
“ things;’’ and how could a Christian
zonscientiously hold or regard them
as property? (3.) That they were to
“render them that which was just and
equal.”’ What would follow from this
if fairly applied? What would be just
and egual to a man in those circumstances? Would it not be (a) to
compensate him fairly for his labour;
to furnish him an adequate remuneration for what he had earned? But
this would strike a blow at the root of
slavery--for-one of the elementary
principles of it is, that there must be
“unrequited labour;” that is, the
slave must earn as much more than he
receives as will do his part in maintaining the master in idleness, for it is
of the very essence of the system that
he is to be maintained in indolence by
the slaves which he owns--or just so
far as he owns a slave, If he were
disposed to earn his own living, he
would not need the labour of slaves.
No man ever yet became the permanent owner ofa slave from benevolence
to him, or because he desired to pay

watch © in the same with thanksgiving ;

him fully for his work, or because he

meant himself to work in order to
maintain his slave in indolence. (6)
If a man should in fact render to his
slaves ‘‘ that which is just and equal,”
would he not restore them to freedom?
Have they not been deprived of their
liberty by injustice, and would not
“‘justice” restore it? What has the
slave done to forfeit his liberty? | If
he should make him “ equal”’ in rights
to himself, or to what he is by nature,
would he not emancipate him? Has
he not been reduced to his present
condition by withholding that which
is “ equal?’ Has he “ equal” rights,
and “equal” privileges with other
men? Has he not been cut off
from them by denying him the equality to which he is entitled in the
arrangements of God’s government ?
Can he be held at all without vioiating all the just notions of equality? Though, therefore, it may
be true that this passage only enjoins
the rendering of that which was ‘‘ just”
and “equal” in their condition as
slaves, yet it contains a principle
which would “ lay the axe at the root”
of slavery, and would lead a conscientious Christian to the feeling that his
slaves ought to be free. These principles actually effected the freedom
of slaves in the Roman empire in a
few centuries after Christianity was
introduced, and they are destined
to effect it yet all over the world.
{ Knowing that ye also have a Master
in heaven; Notes, Eph. vi. 9.

2. Continue in prayer. That is,
do not neglect it; observe it at all
stated times; maintain the spirit of
prayer, and embrace all proper occasions to engage in it; comp. Notes,
Luke xviii. 1; Eph. vi. 18; 1 Thess.
iv.17. (And watch in the same with
thanksgiving. Watch for favourable
opportunities ; watch that your mind
may be in a right frame when you
pray; and watch, that when your
mind 7s in a right frame you may not
neglect to pray; see Notes on Eph.
vi. 18; Phil. iv. 6.

3. Withal. With all the supplica8 Withal praying also for us, |
that God would open 4 unto us a
door of utterance, to speak the
mystery of Christ, for which I am
also in bonds:

4 That I may make it manifest,
as I ought to speak.

@ 2Th.3.1.

tions which you offer for other persons and things ; or at the same time
that you pray for them. { Praying
also for us; Notes, Eph. vi. 19, 20;
comp. 2 Cor. i. 11; Phil. i. 19; Heb.
xiii. 18,19. § That God would open
to us a door of utterance. To preach
the gospel. He earnestly desired to
have liberty to preach the gospel, and
asked them to pray that this might
be restored to him; see Notes on
Eph. vi. 19. § Yo speak the mystery
of Christ. Called in Eph. vi. 19, the
“mystery of the gospel ;”” see Notes
there. { For which Lalso am in bonds.
A prisoner at Rome ; Notes, Eph. vi.
4. That I may make it manifest,
&c.; Notes, Eph. vi. 20.

5. Walk in wisdom. That is, conduct uprightly and honestly. Deal
with them on the strictest principles
of integrity, so that they may not have
occasion to reproach the religion
which you profess. {| Toward them
that are without. Without the pale
of the church, or who are not professing Christians; see Notes on 1
Cor. v. 12. They were surrounded
by heathens, as Christians now are
by men of the world. The injunction
is one that requires us to act with
prudence and propriety (éy cogiz) towards them; and there is perhaps
not a more important direction in the
New Testament than this. Among
the reasons for this are the following :
(1.) Men of the world judge of religion, not from the profession, but
from the life of its friends. (2.) They
judge of religion, not from preaching,
or from books, or from the conduct of
its Founder and his apostles, but
from what they see in the daily walk
and conversation of the members of
the church. (3.) They wnderstand
the nature of religion so well as to

5 Walk in wisdom ? toward
them that are without, redeeming

the time :
6 Let your speech be alway with

grace, seasoned ¢ with salt, that ye
may know how ye ought to answer
every man.

. Ps.90.12; Ep.5,15,16- oe Mar.9.50.

know when its friends are or are not
consistent with their profession. (4.)
They set a much higher value on
honesty and integrity than they do
on the doctrines and duties of religion ; and if the professed friends of
religion are destitute of the principles
of truth and honesty, they think they
have nothing of any value. They
may be very devout on the Sabbath ;
very regular at prayer-meetings; very
strict in the observance of rites and
ceremonies--but all these are of little
worth in the estimation of the world,
unless attended with an upright life.
(5.) No professing Christian can possibly do good to others who does not
live an upright life. If you have
cheated a man out of never so small
a sum, it is vain that you talk to him
about the salvation of his soul; if
you have failed to pay him a debt
when it was due, or to finish a piece
of work when you promised it, or to
tell him the exact truth in conversation, it is vain for you to endeavour
to induce him to bea Christian. He
will feel, if he does not say--and he
might very properly say--that he
wants no religion which will not make
aman honest. (6.) No man will attempt to do much good to others
whose own life is not upright. He
will be sensible of the inconsistency,
and will feel that he cannot do it with
any sense of propriety ; and the honour of religion, therefore, and the
salvation of our fellow-men, demand
that in all our intercourse with others,
we should lead lives of the strictest’
integrity. {| Redeeming the time;
Notes, Eph. v. 6.

6. Let your speech. Your conversation. In the previous verse the
apostle had given a general direction
that our conduct towards those who
are not professing Christians should

7 All my state shall Tychicus| know your estate, and comfort
declare unto you, who is a beloved | your hearts ;

brother, and a faithful minister
and fellow-servant in the Lord :
8 Whom I have sent unto you

for the same purpose, that he might |

a Ep.6.21,22.

be wise and prudent; he here gives a
particular direction in regard to our
conversation. {| Be alway with grace.
Imbued with the spirit of religion.
It should be such as religion is fitted
to produce ; such as to show that the
grace of God isin our hearts. Bloomfield supposes that this means ‘‘ courteous and agreeable, not morose and
melancholy.” But though this may
be included, and though the rule here
laid down would lead to that, it cannot be all thatisintended. It rather
means that our conversation should
be such as to show that we are governed by the principles of religion,
and that there is unfeigned piety in
the heart. This will indeed make us
mild, courteous, agreeable, and urbane in our conversation ; but it will
do more than this. It will imbue our
discourse with the spirit of religion,
s0 as to show that the soul is under
the influence of love to the Redeemer.
Q Seasoned with salt. Salt, among
the Greeks, was the emblem of wit.
Here the meaning seems to be, that
our conversation should be seasoned
with piety or grace in a way similar
to that in which we employ salt in
our food. It makes it wholesome and
palatable. So with our conversation.
If it be not imbued with the spirit
of piety, it is flat, insipid, unprofitable, injurious. The spirit of piety
will make it what it should be--useful, agreeable, beneficial to mankind.
This does not mean that our conversation is to be always, strictly speaking, religious--wherever we may be
--any more than our food should be
mere salt; but it means that, whatever be the topic, the spirit of piety
should be diffused through it--as the
salt in our food should properly season
it all--whatever the article of food
may be.
ye ought to answer every man.

9 With Onesimus, ® a faithful and
beloved brother, who is one of you.
They shall make known unto you
all things which are done here.

b Phile.10.

imbued with the spirit of piety, that
you may not utter any thing that
would be rash and foolish, but be prepared to answer any one who may
question you about your religion in a
way that will show that you understand its nature, and that will tend to
edification. This remark may be extended farther. It may be understood
as meaning also, ‘‘be imbued with
the spirit of religion, and you will be
able to answer any man appropriately
on any subject. If he asks you about
the evidence or the nature of religion,
you will be able to reply to him. If
he converses with you on the common
topics of the day, you will be able to
answer him in a mild, kind, affable
spirit. If he asks you of things of
which you are ignorant; if he introduces some topic of science with
which you are not acquainted, you
will not be ashamed to confess your
ignorance, and to seek instruction.
If he addresses you in a haughty, insolent, and overbearing manner, you
will be able to repress the risings of
your temper, and to answer him with
gentleness and kindness ;” comp. Luke
li. 46,

7,8. All my state shall Tychicus
declare unto you; see these verses
explained in the Notes, Eph. vi. 21,
22.

9. With Onesimus. Who had been
formerly a servant of Philemon, an
inhabitant of Colosse; see Notes,
Philem 10. Onesimus had probably
been recently converted; and Paul
felt towards him the warm attachment of a brother; Philem. 16. In
what way he became acquainted with
him is unknown. A more full account
of him will be found in the Notes on the
Epistle to Philemon. § Who ts one
of you. That is, either who is from

4 That ye may know how | your city, or one of your own people
Be | and nation.

It is clear from this, that
10 Aristarchus *my fellow-prisoner salutet! you, and Marcus, ?
@ Ac.27.2. b Ac.15.37; 2Ti4.11.

sister’s son to Barnabas (touching
whom ye received commandments:
if he come unto you, receive him ;)

Onesimus was from Phrygia, and probably from the city of Colosse itself.
It would seem also that he was ofa
higher rank than is designated by the
word “ slave’? now. He was, indeed,
a ‘“servant’--dovA0s --of Philemon.
but would the apostle have addressed
the Colossians, and said that he was
“one of them,’ if he had occupied
precisely the condition which is now
denoted by the word slave? Would
a minister of the gospel now in the
Northern States, who should send a
letter by a run-away slave to a community of masters at the South, say
of him that he was “one of them?”
Would it be kindly received, or produce a good impression, if he did?
There is reason, therefore, to think
that Onesimus was not a slave in the
proper sense, but that he might have
been a respectable youth, who had
bound himself to service for a term
of years; comp. Philem.18. {| They
shall make known to you all things
which are done here. Relating to
Paul himself and the state of the
church in Rome. As the epistle
which Paul sent was designed not
only for them, but to be a part of the
volume of revealed truth, he wrote
only those things which would be of
permanent interest. Other matters
he left for those who carried the epistle to communicate. It would also
serve to give Tychicus and Onesimus
more respectability in view of the
church at Colosse, if he referred the
church to them for information on
important points.

10. Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner.
Aristarchus was of Thessalonica, and
is mentioned in Acts xix. 29; xx. 4,
as Paul’s companion in his travels.
In Acts xxvii. 2, it is said that he
accompanied him in his voyage to
Rome, and from the passage before
us it appears that he was there imprisoned with him. As he held the
same sentiments as Paul, and was
united with him in his travels and
labours, it was natural that he should
be treated in the same manner. He,

together with Gaius, had been seized
in the tumult at Ephesus and treated
with violence, but he adhered to the
anostle in all histroubles, and attended
uimin all his perils. Nothing further
is certainly known of him, though
“the Greeks say that he was bishop
of Assamea in Syria, and was beheaded
with Paul at Rome, under Nero.”--
Calmet. J And Marcus, sister’s son to
Barnabas. John Mark, in relation
to whom Paul and Barnabas had formerly disagreed so much as to cause
a separation between Barnabas and
Paul. The ground of the disagreement was, that Barnabas wished to
take him, probably on account of relationship, with them in their travels;
Paul was unwilling to take him, because he had, on one occasion, departed from them; Notes, Acts xv.
37--89. They afterwards became reconciled, and Paul mentions Mark
here with affection. He sent for him
when he sent Tychicus to Ephesus,
and it seems that he had come to
him in obedience to his request; 2
Tim. iv. 11. Mark had probably become more decided, and Paul did not
harbour unkind and unforgiving feelings towards any one. §] Touching
whom ye received commandments.
What these directions were, and how
they were communicated, whether
verbally or by writing, is now unknown.
It was, not improbably, on some occasion when Paul was with them.
He refers to it here in order that
they might know distinctly whom he
meant. {| If he come to you, receive
him. In Philem. 24, Mark is mentioned as a “ fellow-labourer”’ of Paul.
It would seem probable, therefore,
that he was not a prisoner. Paul
here intimates that he was about
to leave Rome, and he enjoins it on
the Colossians to receive him kindly.
This injunction may have been necessary, as the Colossians may have been
aware of the breach between him and
Paul, and may have been disposed to
regard him with suspicion. Paui retained no malice, and now commend-

11 And Jesus, which is called
Justus ; who are of the circumcision. These only are my fellowworkers unto the kingdom of God,
which have been a comfort unto
me.

12 Epaphras, who is one of
you, a servant of Christ, saluteth

1 or, striving. @ Ja.5.16.

ed, in the warmest manner, one from
whom he was formerly constrained to
separate.

1l. And Jesus, who ts called Justus. The name Jesus was probably
that which he bore among the Jews.
Justus is a Roman name, and was
probably that by which he was
known among the Romans. It was
not uncommon thus to assume another name when one went among a
foreign people; comp. Notes, Acts
xiii. 9. § Who are of the circumcision. Jews, or Jewish Christians.
Nothing more is known of Justus.
Q These «nly are my felluw-workers
unto the kingdom of Gol. The word
‘‘only” here, probably refers to the
fact that they only of all the Jews
who were at Rome assisted Paul in
his work. Epaphras and Luke were
also with him at Rome, and doubtless
aided him. | Which have been a
comfort unto me. The more so because they were Jews. The other
Jews in Rome stood aloof, and doubtless endeavoured to augment the trials
of the apostle; comp. Acts xxviii.
23--29.

12. Epaphras; Notes, chap. i. 7.
{ Always labouring fervently for
you in prayers. Marg., ‘or striving.’ Gr., agonizing. The word
denotes the intense desire which he
had for their salvation; his fervent,
earnest pleading for their welfare.
“| That ye may stand perfect and
complete. Marg., as in Gr., filled.
The desire was, that they might maintain their Christian principles unadulterated by the mixture of philosophy
and error, and completely perform the
will of God in every respect. This is
the expression of a pious wish in regard to them, without any affirmation
that any had beea absolutely perfect,

you, always labouring ! fervently
@ for you in prayers, that ye may
stand © perfect and 2 complete in
all the will of God.

138 For I bear him record, that
he hath a great zeal for you, and
them that are in Laodicea and
them in Hierapolis.

b Matt.5.48 ; He.6.1. 2 or, filled.

or that they would be perfect in this
world. It is, however, a command of
God that we should be perfect (see
Matt. v. 48), and it is the highest
wish of benevolence in reference to
any one that he may be complete in
moral character, and may do all the
will of God ; comp. Notes on 1 Cor.
Xs 90s

18. For lI bear him record. Paul
had had abundant opportunity te know
what were his feelings in regard to
these churches. §] A great zeal for
you. A great desireto promote your
welfare. §[ And them that are in
Laodicea. Laodicea was the capital
of Phrygia, and not far from Colosse,
There was a church there. See the
Introduction, and Notes on ver. 16.
Q And them in HMierapolis. This
was also a city in Phrygia, and not
far from Laodicea and Colosse. It
was situated under a hill to the north,
and had on the south a large plain
about five milesover. On the south
of that plain, and opposite to Hierapolis, was Laodicea, with the river
Lycus running between them, nearer
to Laodicea than to Hierapolis. This
place is now called by the Turks Pambuck-Kulasi, or the Cotton- Tower, on
account of the white cliffs which lie
round about it. It is now utterly
forsaken and desolate, but the ruins
are so magnificent as to show that it
was once one of the most splendid
cities in the East. It was celebrated
for the hot springs in its vicinity; and
on account of the numerous temples
erected there, it received the name
of Hierapolis, or the holy city. ‘The
principal deity worshipped there was
Apollo, See Travels by T. Smith.
B. D. 1678. Comp. Notes on ver. 16.
From the allusion to it here, it would
seem that there were Christians there
14 Luke, # the beloved physician, and Demas, greet you.
15 Salute the brethren which
are in Laodicea, and Nymphas,
@ 2 Ti.4.10,11.

in the time of Paul, though there is
no mention of a church there. It is
nowhere else mentioned in the New
Testament.

14. Luke, the beloved physician.
This was undoubtedly the author of
the Gospel which bears his name, and
of the Acts of the Apostles. He is
mentioned as the travelling companion of Paul in Acts xvii. 10, and appears to have accompanied him afterwards until his imprisonment at Rome
see 2 Tim. iv. 11. From ver. 11.
of this chapter, it is evident that he
was not by birth a Jew, but was probably a proselyte. He is supposed to
have been anative of Cyrene, and to
have died in Achaia, soon after the
martyrdom of Paul, at the advanced
age of eighty-four. See Rob. Cal.
Art. Luke. He is here mentioned as
a physician, and in his Gospel, and
in the Acts, there are incidental evidences that he was acquainted with
the science of medicine, and that he
observed the events which he has recorded with the eye of one who practised the healingart. It is easy to imagine that the presence of a physician
might have been of important service
to the apostle Paul inhis travels; and
that his acquaintance with the art of
healing may have aided not a little in
the furtherance of the gospel. The
miraculous power of healing, possessed
by the Saviour and his apostles, contributed much to the success of their
preaching ; for the power of alleviating pain of body--of restoring to
health by miracles, would not only be
an evidence of the divine origin of
their mission--a credential that they
were sent from God, but would dispose
those who had received such important
benefits to listen attentively to the
message of salvation. One of the best
qualifications in missionaries in modern times, in order to gain access to
the heathen, is an acquaintance with
the healing art. And Demas.

and the > church which is in his
house.
16 And when “this epistle is
read among you, cause that it be
b Ro.16.53 1 Co.16.19. ¢ 1 Th.5.27.

--

Demas is mentioned in two other
places, Philem. 24, and 2 ‘lim.iv. 10.
He is here spoken of with commendation as one in whomthe apostle had
confidence. Afterwards,when troubles thickened, he was not found proof
to the trials which threatened him in
Rome, and forsook the apostle and
went to Thessalonica. He did this
under the influence of the ‘“‘love of
this present world,” or of life, evidently unwilling to lay down his life in the
cause for which Paul suffered ; see
Notes on 2 Tim. iv. 10. His departure, and that of the others on whom
Paul relied in Rome, was one of the
severest trials which he was called
there to endure; see Notes on 2
Tim. iv. 16.

15. Salute the brethren which are in
Laodicea; Notes, chap.ii.1. { And
Nymphas. This person is nowhere
else mentioned, and nothing more is
known of him. {§ And the church
which is in his house; Notes, Rom.
oA, Bic

16.And when thisepistleis read among
you, cause that it be read also in the
church of the Laodiceans. Laodicea
was near to Colosse, and the church
there was evidently exposed to the
same dangers from philosophy and
false teachers as that at Colosse. The
counsels in this epistle, therefore,
would be equally applicable to both.
In1 Thess. vy. 27, the apostle also
charges those to whom that epistle
was addressed to see that it be ‘‘ read
unto all the holy brethren.” It is
evident that the apostles designed
that the letters which they addressed
to the churches should be read also by
others, and should become the permanent source of instruction to the
friends of Christ. Laodicea, hereweferred to, wasthe seat of one of the
“Seven churches” of Asia (Rev. iii.
14); was a city of Phrygia, and was its
capital. It was situated on the river
Lycus (hence called Aaodixsia trl Adxy

read also in the church of the

b heed to the ministry which

Laodiceans ; and that ye likewise|thou hast received in the Lord,

read the epistle from Laodicea.
17 And say to Archippus, * Take

@ Philem, 2.

that thou fulfil it.
18 The salutation ¢ by the

b1 Ti4.17. ¢2 Th. 3.17.

--Laodicea on the Lycus) and stood at
the southwestern angle of Phrygia. Its
early name appears to have been Diospolis, changed subsequently to Rhoas.
The name Laodicea was given to it by
Antiochus Theos, in honour of his wife
LLaodice. Underthe Romansit became
avery flourishing commercial city. It
was often damaged by earthquakes, but
was restored by the Roman emperors.
It is supposed to have been destroyed
during the inroad of Timur Leng, A.D.
1402. The ruins are called by the Turks
Eski Hissar. These ruins, and the
ruins of Hierapolis, were visited by
Mr. Riggs, an American Missionary,
in 1842, who thus speaks of them:
““These spots, so interesting to the
Christian, are now utterly desolate.
The threatening expressed in Rev. iii.
10, has been fulfilled, and Laodicea is
but aname. In the midst of one of
the finest plains of Asia Minor, it is
entirely without inhabitant. Sardis,
in like manner, whose church had a
name to live, but was dead, is now an
utter desolation. Its soilis turned up
by the plough, or overgrown by rank
weeds : while in Philadelphia, since the
day when our Saviour commended
those who had there ‘‘ kept the word
of his patience,’ there has never
ceased to bea nominally Christian
church. The ruins of Laodicea and
Hierapolis are very extensive. The
stadium of the former city, and the
gymnasia and theatres of both, are the
most complete which I have anywhere
seen. Hierapolis is remarkable algo
for the so-called frozen cascades, a
natural curiosity, in its kind probably
not surpassed for beauty and extent
in the world. It consists of a deposit
of carbonate of lime, white as the
driven snow, assuming, when closely
examined, various forms; and covering
nearly the whole southern and western declivities of the elevation on

which the city was built. It is visible | me Paul.

the place the name by which alone
Hierapolis is known among the Turks,
of the Cotton Castle.” J And that
ye likewise read the epistle from
Laodicea. Inregard to this episile,
see Introduction, § 6.

17. And say to Archippus. Archippus is mentioned also in Philem. 2.
He is not elsewhere referred to in the
New Testament, and nothing further
is known of him. 4 Take heed to the
ministry, &c. The Greek here is,
rny d:a-xoviev--meaning the office of
ministering in divine things ; but it is
not certain precisely what office he
held there. It seems probable from
the language which the apostle applies to him--“ the ministry” --(comp,
Acts 1. 17, 26 ; vi. 45 xx. 24 3 xxi. 19):
Rom. xi. 13; 1 Cor. xii. 5; 2 Cor. iii.
7, 8,9; iv.1;v.18; vi. 3 ;Eph.iv.12),
that he was not @ deacon, properly
so called, but that he was a preacher
of the word. In Philem. 2, he is
mentioned by Paul as his “ fellowsoldier,’’? and it is evident that the
apostle meant to speak of him with
honour. ‘There is no evidence, as has
been supposed by some, that he intended to imply, by what he said, that
he had been remiss in the performance
of his duties, but the apostle doubtless meant to encourage him and to
excite him to increased ardour and
zeal in the work of the Lord; comp.
Notes Acts xx. 28. It is always proper to caution even the most faithful
and self-denyiag servants of the Lord
to ‘take heed,” orsee to it, that they
perform their duties with fidelity.
The office of the ministry is such, and
the temptations to unfaithfulness are
so great, that we need constant watchfulness. {| That thou fulfil it. That
there be nothing wanting, or lacking,
in any of the departments of labour
which you are called to perform.

18. The salutation by the hand of
Probably the rest of the

for many miles, and has procured for | epistle was written by an amanuensis,

hand of me Paul. Remember*| Written from Rome to the Comy bonds. Grace be with you. lossians, by Tychicus and
Amen, Onesimus,

a He. 13. 3, 25.

As was his custom, Paul affixed his
own hand to it in the form of a salutation; comp. Notes, 1 Cor. xvi. 21;
2 Thess, iii, 17. | Remember my
bonds. Also evidently written by his
own hand, to make the injunction
more impressive; comp. Notes, Heb.
xiii. 8. The meaning is, that they
should not forget him in his confine-

ment. They should remember that he
was suffering on their account (Notes,
chap. i. 24), and that he was entitled
to every expression of sympathy and
love. ] Grace be with you; Notes,
Rom. xvi. 20.

The subscription to this epistle is
undoubtedly correct, See the Introduction,

ee)

Notes
on the
New Testament

Albert Barnes

Edited by
Robert Frew

-e Baker Books
Diino Bner ook Hose

Grand Rap’

Heritage Edition

1. Genesis (Murphy ) 0835-2
2. Exodus to Esther (Cook) 0836-0
3. Job 0837-9
4. Psalms 0838-7
5. Proverbs to Ezekiel (Cook) 0839-5
6. Isaiah 0840-9
7. Daniel 0841-7

13.
14.

Fourteen Volumes 0834-4

. Minor Prophets (Pusey )

. The Gospels

. Acts and Romans

. I Corinthians to Galatians

. Ephesians to Philemon

Hebrews to Jude

Revelation

Reprinted from the 1847 edition published
by Blackie & Son, London

Reprinted 2005 by Baker Books
a division of Baker Book House Company
P.O. Box 6287, Grand Rapids, MI 49516-6287

Printed in the United States of America

For information about academic books, resources for Christian
leaders, and all new releases available from Baker Book House,
visit our web site:
http:/Awww.bakerbooks.com/

0842-5
0843-3
0844-1
0846-8
0847-6
0848-4
0849-2

When ordering by ISBN (International Standard Book Number), numbers listed
above should be preceded by 0-8010-.

§ 1. The situation of Thessalonica.

THESSALONICA was a city and sea-port of Macedonia. It was at the head
of the bay Thermaicus, or the Gulf of Thessalonica (see the map prefixed to
the Notes on the Acts of the Apostles), and was, therefore, favourably situated for commerce. It was on the great Egnatian Way ; was possessed of
an excellent harbour, and had great advantages for commerce through the
Hellespont, and with Asia Minor and the adjacent countries. It was southwest of Philippi and Amphipolis, and a short distance north-east of Berea,
Macedonia was an independent country until it was subdued by the Romans.
The occasion of the wars which led to its conquest by the Romans was an
alliance which was formed by Philip II. with Carthage, during the second
Punic war. The Romans delayed their revenge for a season; but Philip
having laid siege to Athens, the Athenians called the Romans to their aid,
and they declared war against the Macedonians. Philip was compelled to
sue for peace, to surrender his vessels, to reduce his army to 500 men, and
to defray the expenses of the war. Perseus, the successor of Philip, took up
arms against the Romans, and was totally defeated at Pydna by Paulus
Emilius, and the Romans took possession of the country. Indignant at
their oppression, the Macedonian nobility and the whole nation rebelled under
Andriscus ; but after a long struggle they were overcome by Quintus Cacilius, surnamed, from his conquest, Macedonius, and the country became a
Roman province, B. C. 148. It was divided into four districts, and the city
of Thessalonica was made the capital of the second division, and was the
station of a Roman governor and questor. At the time, therefore, that the
gospel was preached there, this whole country was subject to Roman authority.

The city, called, when Paul visited it, Thessalonica, was anciently called
Therme, and by this name was known in the times of Herodotus, Thucydides,
and Aischines. We are informed by Strabo that Cassander changed the
name of Therme to Thessalonica, in honour of his wife, who was a daughter
of Philip. Others have said that the name was given to it by Philip himself,
in memory of a victory which he obtained over the armies of Thessaly. In
tne time of Brutus and Cassius it was a city of so much importance that the
promise of being permitted to plunder the city, as the reward of victory, infused new courage into tneir armies.

The city was inhabited by Greeks, Romans, and Jews. It adored many
gods, but particularly Jupiter, as the father of Hercules, the alleged founder
of its ancient royal family. It had a celebrated amphitheatre, where gladiatorial shows were exhibited for the amusement of the citizens, and a circus

tv INTRODUCTION.

for public games. The Roman part of the population was, of course, introduced after the conquest, and it is impossible now to estimate the relative
number of the Greeks and the Romans in the time when the gospel was
preached there. In common with most of the other cities of Greece, a considerable number of Jews resided there, who had a synagogue at the time when
the city was visited by Paul; Acts xvii. 1. Little is known of the morals of
the place, but there is reason to believe that it was somewhat distinguished
for dissoluteness of manners. ‘ The females, particularly, could claim little
credit on the score of modest, retiring demeanour ; for this virtue was in so
low estimation in the city, that the place was selected as the scene of the
wanton fancies of the satirist.” (Lucian.) See Hug. Intro.

The name of the place now is Saloniki. Itis a Turkish commercial town,
and contains about 70,000 inhabitants. Its situation and appearance are
thus described by Dr. Clarke :--‘“ The walls of Salonica give a very remarkable appearance to the town, and cause it to be seen at a great distance, being
white-washed ; and what is still more extraordinary, they are painted. They
extend in a semi-circular manner from the sea, enclosing the whole of the
buildings within a pertbolus, whose circuit is five or six miles; but a great
part of the space within the walls is void. It is one of the few remaining
cities which has preserved the ancient form of its fortifications ; the mural
turrets yet standing, and the walls that support them, being entire. Their
antiquity is perhaps, unknown, for, though they have been ascribed to the
Greek emperors, it is very evident they were constructed in two distinct
periods of time ; the old Cyclopean masonry remaining in the lower parts of
them, surmounted by an upper structure of brickwork. Like all the ancient
and modern cities of Greece, its wretched aspect within is forcibly contrasted
with the beauty of its external appearance. The houses are generally built
of unburnt bricks, and, for the most part, they are no better than so many
hovels.” It is, however, a flourishing commercial town, from which is exported the corn, cotton, wool, tobacco, bees-wax, and silk of Macedonia. It
is the seat of a Pasha, and has still among its population a considerable proportion of Jews. Rabbi Benjamin of Tudela, who visitedit in A. D. 1160,
describes it, under the name of Saiunki, and says that it was built by Seleucus, one of the four Greek nobles who arose after Alexander, and that when,
he visited it, it was “a large city containing about five hundred Jewish inhabitants.” ‘‘ The Jews,” says he, “ are much oppressed in this place, and live by
the exercise of handicrafts.” Itinerary, vol. i. 49, 50. Ed. 1840. He describes it as having at that time more Jewish inhabitants than any other town
in Greece, Thebes alone excepted. It is said at present to contain about
20,000 Jewish inhabitants. Its favourable situation for commerce is probably the cause of the numerous assemblage of the Jews there. See Asher’s
Ed. of Benjamin of Tudela, vol. ii. p. 42.

§ 2. The establishment of the church in Thessalonica.

The gospel was first preached in Thessalonica by Paul and Silas. After
their release from imprisonment at Philippi, they passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, and came to Thessalonica. For some cause they
appear not to have paused to preach in either of the first two places, but
went at once to the city of Thessalonica. That was a much more important place, and they may have been attracted there particularly because
many Jews resided there. It was customary for the apostle Paul, when he
came to a place where there were Jews, to preach the gospel first to them ;
and as there was a synagogue in Thessalonica, he entered it, and, for three
Sabbath days, reasoned with the Jews in regard to the Messiah. The
points on which he endeavoured to convince them were, that, according

INTRODUCTION. v

to the Scriptures, it was necessary that the Messiah should be put to death,
and that he would rise from the dead, and that all the predictions on these
points were completely fulfilled in Jesus of Nazareth ; Acts xvii. 2, 3. A
few of the Jews believed, and a much larger number of the “ devout
Greeks,’ and also a considerable number of females of the more elevated
ranks. From these converts the church was organized, and the number at
the organization would seem to have been large. It is not quite certain
how long Paul and Silas remained at Thessalonica, It is known only that
they preached in the synagogue for three Sabbaths, and if that were all the
time that they remained there, it could not have been more than about
three weeks. But it is not certain that they did not remain in the city a
longer time. It is possible that they may have been excluded from the
synagogue, but still may have found some other place in which to preach.
This would seem probable from one or two circumstances referred to in
the history and in the Epistle. In the history (Acts xvii. 5), it appears
that Paul and Silas, for a time at least, made the house of Jason their
home, and that so large numbers attended on their ministry asto give occasion to great excitement among the Jews. In the epistle (1 Thess. ii
9), Paul says that when he was among them, he “ laboured night and day,
because he would not be chargeable unto any of them, and preached unto
them the gospel of God” (comp. 2 Thess. iii. 8), which looks as if he had
been with them a longer time than the “three Sabbaths,” and as if he had
laboured at his usual occupation for support, before he shared the hospitality of Jason. It appears also, from Phil. iv. 16, that he was there long
enough to receive repeated supplies from the church at Philippi. ‘ For
even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my necessity.”

Paul and Silas were driven away from Thessalonica by the opposition
of the Jews. A mob was created by them; the house of Jason was
assailed ; he and “certain brethren,”’ who were supposed to have harboured
and secreted Paul and Silas, were dragged before the magistrates and
accused of receiving those who ‘‘had turned the world upside down,’’ and
who were guilty of treason against the Roman emperor; Acts xvii. 5--7
So great was the tumult, and such would be the danger of Paul and Silas
if they remained there, that the members of the church judged it best
that they should go to a place of safety, and they were conveyed by night
to the neighbouring city of Berea. There the gospel was received with
more favour, and Paul preached without opposition, until the Jews from
Thessalonica, hearing where he was, came thither and excited the people
against him; Acts xvii. 13. It became necessary again that he should
be removed to a place of safety, and he was conducted to Athens, while
Silas and Timothy remained at Berea. Timothy, it appears, had accompanied Paul, and had been with him, as well as Luke, at Philippi and
Thessalonica, though he is not mentioned as present with them until the
arrival at Berea. When Paul went to Athens, he gave commandment
to those who conducted him, that Silas and Timothy should come to him
as soon as possible ; and while he waited for them at Athens, he delivered
the memorable speech on Mars’ hill, recorded in Acts xvii. Their actual
arrival at Athens is not mentioned by Luke (Acts xvii.), but that Timothy
came to him there appears from 1 Thess. iii. 1, 2, “ Wherefore when
we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to be left at Athens alone,
and sent Timotheus our brother, &c., to comfort you concerning your faith.”’
Timothy appears, therefore, to have been with Paul at Athens but a short
time, for he sent him back to Thessalonica, and before his return, Paul had
gone to Corinth, whither Timothy followed him ; Acts xviii. 5,

§ 3. The time and place of writing the Epistle.
Th> subscription at the close of this epistle affirms that it was writter

vi INTRODUOTION.

at Athens. But these subscriptions are of no authority whatever (see
Notes at the close of 1 Corinthians), and in this case, as in several others,
the subscription is false. Paul remained but a short time at Athens, and
there is internal evidence that the epistle was not written there. In 1
Thess. iii. 1, 2, Paul says that, such was his anxiety for them, that he had
concluded to remain at Athens alone, and that he had sent Timothy to
them from that place to impart to them consolation. In the same epistle
(chap. iii.6), he speaks of Timothy’s return to him before the epistle was
written. But from Acts xvii. and xviii. 5, it is evident that Timothy did
not return to Paul at Athens, but that he and Silas came to him after he
had left Athens and had gone to Corinth. To that place Paul had gone
after his short visit to Athens, and there he remained a year and a half;
Acts xviii. 11. It is further evident that the epistle was not written to
the Thessalonians so soon as it would be necessary to suppose, if it were
written from Athens. In chap. ii. 17, 18, the author says, “ But we, brethren, being taken from you a short time in presence, not in heart, endeavoured the more abundantly to see your face with great desire. Wherefore
we would have come unto you, even I Paul, once and again; but Satan
hindered us.” From this it is evident that the apostle had repeatedly endeavoured to visit them, but had been hindered. But it is not reasonable
to suppose that he had attempted this during the short time that he was in
Athens, and so soon after having been driven away from Berea. It is more
probable that this had occurred during his residence at Corinth, and it
would seem also from this, that the epistle was written towards the close of
his residence there. At the time of writing the epistle, Silas and Timothy
were with the apostle (chap. i. 1), and we know that they were with him
when he was at Corinth; Acts xviii. 5.

If this epistle was written at the time supposed, at Corinth, it must
have been about the 13th year of the reign of Claudius, and about A. D.
52. That this was the time in which it was written, is the opinion of
Mill, of Lardner, of Hug, and is indeed generally admitted. It was the
first epistle written by the apostle Paul, and, in some respects, may be
allowed to excite a deeper interest on that account than any others of his.
The Second Epistle to the Thessalonians is supposed to have been written
at the same place, and probably in the same year; see Lardner, vol. vi. 4--
6. Grotius, indeed, supposes that the order of the epistles has been inverted,
and that that which is now called the “Second Epistle to the Thessalonians”
was in fact first sent. But there is no evidence of this.

4. The character of the church at Thessalonica, and the design of the Epistle.

The church at Thessalonica, at first, was composed of the following classes
of persons :--(1.) Jews. To them Paul preached first, and though the mass
of them opposed him, and rejected his message, yet some of them believed ;
Acts xvii. 4. (2.) Greeks who had been proselyted to the Jewish faith, and
who seem to have been in attendance on thesynagogue; Acts xvii. 4. They are
called “devout Greeks --osPouivo ‘EAArves --that is, religious Greeks, or those
who had renounced the worship of idols, and who attended on the worship of
the synagogue. They were probably what the Jews called <“ Proselytes of
the Gate ;” persons who were admitted to many privileges, but who were not
proselytes in the fullest sense, There were many such persons usually where
a synagogue was established among the Gentiles. (3.) Females of the more
elevated rank and standing in the community; Acts xvii. 4. They were
women of influence, and were connected with distinguished families. Possibly they also may have been of the number of the proselytes. (4.) Not a
few members of the church appear to have been converted from idolatry b
the preaching of the apostle, or had connected themselves with it atte H

INTRODUCTION. vii

had left them. Thus, in chap. i. 9, it is said, “‘ For they themselves show of
us what manner of entering in we had unto you, and how ye turned to God
from idols, to serve the living and true God.’

Though the apostle had been much opposed when there, and the gospel
had been rejected by the great body of the inhabitants of Thessalonica, yet
it had been most cordially embraced by these different classes (chap. ii. 13),
and they were entirely harmonious in the belief of it. They forgot all their
enue differences in the cordiality with which they had embraced the
gospel.

The characteristics of the church there, and the circumstances existing,
which gave occasion for the two epistles to the Thessalonians, appear to have
been, so far as can be gathered from the history (Acts xvii.), and the epistles
themselves, the following :--

(1.) The members of the church had very cordially embraced the gospel ;
they were the warm friends of the apostle; they greatly desired to receive his
instruction ; and these things prompted him to the earnest wish which he had
cherished to visit them (chap. ii. 17), and now led him to write to them ;
comp. chap. i. 5, 6; ii. 8, 9,13, 19,20. Paulhad for them the strong affection
which a nurse has for the children committed to her charge (chap. ii. 7), or
a father for his children (chap. ii. 11),and hence the interest shown for them
by writing these epistles.

(2.) They were disposed not only to embrace the gospel, but to spread it
abroad (chap. i. 8), and Paul was evidently desirous of commending them for
this, and of exciting them to greater love and zeal in doing it.

(3.) They had at first embraced the gospel amidst scenes of strife (chap. ii.
2); they were now opposed, as they had been there, by the Jews, and by
their own countrymen (chap. ii. 14) ; and they appear to have been called to
some peculiar trials, by the loss of some valued members of the church---
friends who were peculiarly dear to their hearts; chap. ii. 3,5; iii. 13. To
console them in view of these afflictions was one design of the first epistle,
and in doing it the apostle states one of the most interesting views of the
resurrection to be found in the Scriptures ; chap. iv. 14--18.

(4.) They had been instructed in reference to the future coming of the
Saviour ; the day of judgment, and the fact that the appearing of the ‘‘ day
of the Lord’”’ would be like a thief in the night; chap. v. 2, But they seem
to have inferred that that day was near, and they were looking for the immediate advent of the Redeemer, and the close of the world. To this view
they seem to have been led by two things. One was, a misinterpretation of
what the apostle says, chap. iv. 14--18; v. 2,8, about the advent of the Redeemer, which they seem to have understood as if it meant that it would be
‘goon ;’ and the other was, probably, the fact that certain letters had been
forged in the name of Paul which maintained this doctrine; 2 Thess. ii. 2.
To correct this view was one of the leading objects of the second epistle, and
accordingly the apostle in that shows them that events must occur preceding
the coming of the Lord Jesus which would occupy a long time, and that the
end of the world, therefore, could not be near ; 2 Thess. ii. 3--12.

(5.) An error seems also to have prevailed among them in regard to the
resurrection, which was the cause of great uneasiness to those who had lost
Christian friends by death; 1 Thess. iv. 13, They seem to have supposed
that when the Lord Jesus appeared, they who were alive would have great
advantages over those who were deceased ; that the living would be allowed
to behold his giory, and to participate in the splendours of his personal reign,
while those who were in their graves would slumber through these magnificent scenes. ‘T'o correct these views, appears to have been one design of the
firstepistle. The apostle shows them that at the coming of the Saviour, all the
redeemed, whether living or dead, would participate alike in his glory. They
who were alive would not anticipate those who were in their graves. In fact,

vili INTRODUCTION.

he says, those who were dead would rise before the change would take place
in the living that was to fit them to dwell with the Lord, and then all would
be taken up to be for ever with him; 1 Thess. iv. 15--18.

(6.) It would appear to be not improbable that after the departure of the
apostle from Thessalonica, he had been accused by the enemies of the gospel
there, of a want of courage, and that they had urged this as proof that he
was conscious that the gospel was an imposture. Besides, his leaving the
church there without any instructors in a time when they greatly needed
them, may have been urged as a proof that he had no real affection for them,
or concern for their welfare. ‘To meet this charge, the apostle urges several
things, vindicating his conduct, and showing the strength of his attachment
for them. He says, 1. that, as they knew, so far from being deterred by persecution from preaching, after a violent persecution at Philippi, he and his
fellow-labourers had at once preached the same gospel at Thessalonica, and
they had done it there amidst the same kind of opposition; chap. il. 2.
2. That they themselves were witnesses that it had been done without any
appearance of fraud or of guile. They had given them all possible proofs of
sincerity ; chap. il. 3--5. 3. That they had given every proof possible that
they did not seek glory from men, and that their aims were not selfish. They
were willing to have imparted, not the gospel only, but also their own lives ;
and to show that they had had no selfish aim while with them, they had supported themselves by the labour oftheir own hands ; chap. ii.6--9. 4. That so
far from not feeling any interest inthem, he had repeatedly sought to visit them,
but had in every instance been prevented (chap. ii. 17, 18); and 5. that, since
he was prevented from going to them, he had submitted to the personal sacrifice of parting with Timothy at Athens, and of being left alone there, in
order that he might go to them and comfort their hearts ; chap. iii. 1, 2.

(7.) In common with other churches, gathered in part or in whole from the
heathen, they were in danger of falling into the sins to which they had been
addicted before their conversion, and one object of the first epistle is to put
them on their guard against the leading vices to which they were exposed ;
chap. iv. 1--%.

(8.) It would seem, also, that there were some in the church who had a
spirit of insubordination towards their religious teachers, and who, under
pretence of edifying others, were guilty of disorder. To correct this was also
one object of the epistle; 1 Thess. v. 12--14.

From these views, the design of this epistle, and also of the second epistle
to the same church, which seems to have been written soon after this, will be
apparent. They were the effusions of warm attachment towards a church
which the apostle had founded, but from which he had been soon driven away,
and which he had been prevented from revisiting when he had earnestly desired it. They are filled with expressions of tender regard; they remind
the members of the church of the ardour with which they had at first embraced the gospel ; caution them against the dangers to which they were exposed ;
commend them for their fidelity hitherto, and encourage them in their trials
and persecutions. ‘They present some most interesting views of the nature
of the gospel, and especially contain statements about the resurrection of the
saints which are not found elsewhere in the New Testament, and views in relation to the great apostasy, and the “ man of sin,’’ which demonstrate that
the writer was inspired, and which are of inestimable importance in guarding
the true church from the power of Antichrist. No one could have drawn
the picture of the Papacy in the second chapter of the second epistle who
was not under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost ; and no true Christian can
be sufficiently grateful that the apostle was thus inspired to reveal the features of that great apostasy, to put the church on its guard against the wiles
and the power of him who “ exalteth himself above all that is called God.”

pave and Silvanus, 4 and Timotheus, unto the church of
the > Thessalonians which zs in God
the Father, and im the Lord Jesus

| Christ : Grace ¢ de unto you, and
peace, from God our Father, and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

2 We give thanks to God always
@1 Pe.5,12. b Ac.17.1,&¢. 6 Ep,1.2.

The first chapter of this epistie embraces the following subjects :--

1. The inscription by Paul, Silas,
and Timothy, to the Thessalonians,
and the usual salutations ; ver. 1.

2. An expression of thanks for their
fidelity in the gospel ; ver. 2--4. The
apostle says that he made mention of
them continually in his prayers ; that
he remembered their faith, and love,
and patience, for by these things they
had shown that they were among the
elect of God.

3. He reminds them of the manner
in which they received the gospel
when it was first preached to them ;
ver. 5, 6. The power of God had
been manifested among them in a remarkable manner ; they had embraced
the gospel with strong assurance,
and though in the midst of deep afflictions, they had received the word with
oy.
ue The effect of the estabiishment
of the church in Thessalonica had
been felt far abroad, and had been
of the most happy character ; ver. 7
--10. They had become examples to
all that believed in Macedonia and
Achaia. From them the gospel had
been sounded abroad throughout
Greece, and indeed in all places with
which they had connection by their
commercial relations, Those who
dwelt in distant places bore witness
to the influence of the gospel on
them, and to the power of that religion which had turned them from
idols to serve the living God. These
verses contain a beautiful illustration
of the effect of the gospel in a place
favourably situated for commerce, and

having extensive intercourse with
other regions.

1. Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus. On the reasons why Paul
associated other names with his in
his epistles, see Notes on 1 Cor. i. 1,
and 2 Cor. ii. 1. Silvanus, or Silas,
and Timothy were properly united
with him on this occasion, because
they had been with him when the
church was founded there, Acts xvii.,
and because Timothy had been sent
by the apostle to visit them after he
had himself been driven away ; chap.
ii. 1, 2. Silay is first mentioned in
the New Testament as one who was
sent by the church at Jerusalem with
Paul to Antioch (Notes, Acts xv. 22);
and he afterwards became his travelling companion. {J Which is in God
the Father, and in the Lord Jesus
Christ. Who are united to the true
God and to the Redeemer ; gr who
sustain an intimate relation to the
Father and the Lord Jesus. This is
strong language, denoting that they
were a true church ; comp. 1 Johny.
20. YJ Grace be unto you, &.; see
Notes, Rom. i. 7.

2. We give thanks to God always
for you all; see Notes, Rom. i. 9.
¢ Making mention of you in our
prayers ; Notes, Eph. i. 16. It may
be observed here, (1.) that the apostle
was in the habit of constant prayer.
(2.) That he was accustomed to extemporary prayer, and not to written
prayer. It is not credible that “forms”
of prayer had been framed for the
churches at Thessalonica and Ephesus, and the other churches for which
Paul says he prayed, nor would it

have been possible to have adapted
such forms to the varying circumfor you all, making mention of you
in our prayers ;

3 Remembering without ceasing
your work ¢of faith, and labour

> of love, and patience ¢ of hope in
@ John 6.29 ; 2 Th.1.11.

stances attending the organization of
new churches.

3. Remembering without ceasing.
Remembering your faith and love
whenever we pray. ‘lhis is not to be
anderstood literally, but it is language
such as we use respecting anything
that interests us much. It is constantly in our mind. Such an interest the apostle had in the churches
which he had established. § Your
work of faith. That is, your showing
or evincing faith. The reference is
probably to acts of duty, holiness, and
benevolence, which proved that they
exercised faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ. Works of faith are those
to which faith prompts, and which
show that there ¢s faith in the heart.
This does not mean, therefore, a work
of their own producing faith, but a
work which showed that they had
faith. § And labour of love. Labour produced by love, or showing
that youare actuated by love. Such
would be all their kindness toward the
poor, the oppressed, and the afflicted ;
and all their acts which showed that
they loved the souls of men. § And
patience of hope. Patience in your
trials, showing that you have such a
hope of future blessedness as to sustain you in your afflictions. It was
the hope of heaven through the Lord
Jesus that gave them patience; see
Notes on Rom. viii. 24. ‘‘ The phrases
here are Hebraisims, meaning active
ath, and laborious love, and patient
hope, and might have been so translated.” Doddridge.
Jesus Christ. That is, your hope is
founded only on him. The only hope
that we haye of heayen is through the
Redeemer.
and our Father.
our Father.

Before God, even
It is a hope which we

1 In our Lord |

q In the sight of God |

following verses.

our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sigh
of God and our Father ;

4 Knowing, brethren ! beloved,
your election of God.

b He.6.10. e¢ Ro.12.12.
1 or, beloved of God, your election.

God; when we reflect that we must

'soon stand before him, we are per-

mitted to cherish this hope. It is a
hope which will be found to be genuine even in the presence of a holy and
heart-searching God. ‘This does not
mean thatit had been merely professed
before God, but that it was a hope
which they might dare to entertain
even in the presence of God, and which
would bear the scrutiny of his eye.

4. Knowing, brethren beloved, yous
election of God. The margin here
reads, “beloved of God, your election.”
The difference depends merely on the
pointing, and that which would require the marginal reading has been
adopted by Hahn, Tittman, Bloom.
field, and Griesbach. The sense is
not materially varied, and the common version may be regarded as giving
the true meaning. There is no great
difference between “ being beloved of
God,” and “being chosen of God.”
The sense then is, ‘‘ knowing that you
are chosen by God unto salvation ;”
comp. Notes on Eph.i.4,5,11. The
word “‘ knowing” here refers to Paul
himself, and to Silas and Timothy,
who united with him in writing the
epistle, and in rendering thanks for
the favours shown to the church at
Thessalonica. The meaning is, that
they had so strong confidence that
they had been chosen of God as a
church unto salvation, that they might
say they knew it. The way in which
they knew it seems not to have been
by direct revelation or by inspiration,
but by the evidence which they had
furnished, and which constituted such
a proof of piety as to leave no doubt
of the fact. Calvin. What this evidence was, the apostle states in the
I was shown by
the manner in which they embraced

have through the merits of the Re-|the gospel, and by the spirit which
deemer, and which we are permitted | they had evinced under its influence.
to cherish before God; that is, in his, The meaning here seems to be, not

very presence.

When we think of that all the wisnibers of the church at

5 For our gospel came @not.
unto you in word only, but also,
a Is 55.11; Mark 16.20,

Thessalonica were certainly chosen of
God to salvation--for, as in other
churches, there might have been those
there who were false professors--but
that the church, as such, had given
evidence that it was a true church--
that it was founded on Christian prin- |
ciples--and that, as a church, it had |
furnished evidence of its “ election by
God.” Nor can it mean, as Clarke
and Bloomfield suppose, that God
“had chosen and called the Gentiles
to the same privileges to which he
chose and called the Jews ; and that
as they (the Jews) had rejected the
gospel, God had now elected the Gentiles in their stead ;”’ for a considerable portion of the church was composed of Jews (see Acts xvii. 4, 5),
and it cannot, therefore, mean that
the Gentiles had been selected in the
place of the Jews. Besides, the election of the Gentiles, or any portion of
the human family, to the privileges of
salvation, to the neglect or exclusion
of any other part, would be attended
with all the difficulties which occur
in the doctrine of personal and individual election. Nothing is gained on
this subject in removing the difficulties, by supposing that God chooses
nasses of men instead of individuals.
Ifow can the one be more proper
than the other? What difficulty in
the doctrine of election is removed by |
the supposition? Why is it not as
right to choose an individual as a nation? Why uot as proper to reject
an individual as a whole people? If
this means that the church at Thessalonica had shown that it was a true
church of Christ, chosen by God, then ,
we may learn, (1.) that a true church |
owes what it has to the “ election of |
God.” It is because God has chosen
it; has called it out from the world ;
and has endowed it in such a manner |
as to be atruechurch. (2.) A church |
may give evidence that it is chosen of.
God, and is a true church. ‘There,
are things which it may do, which will | |
show that it is undoubtedly such a}
church as God has chosen, and such

as he approves.

in power, ¥ and in the ¢ Holy
Ghost, and in much assurance ; as
b 1 Co.2.4 0 2 Co.6.6.

There are just principles on which a church should be
organized, and there zs a spirit which
may be manifested by a church which
will distinguish it from any other association of men. (3.) It is not improper to speak with strong confidence
of such a church as undoubtedly
chosen of God. ‘There are churches
which, by their zeal, self-denial, and
deadness to the world, show beyond
question their “ election of God,”’ and
the world may see that they are founded on other principles and manifest a
different spirit from other organizations of men. (4.) Every church
should evince such a spirit that there
may be no doubt of its ‘election of
God.” It should be so dead to the
world; so pure in doctrine and in
practice, and so much engaged in
spreading the knowledge of salvation,
that the world will see that it is governed by higher principles than any
worldly association, and that nothing
could produce this but the influence
of the Holy Spirit of God.

5. For our gospel came not unto you.
When first preached ; Acts xvii. 1--3.
Paul speaks of it as ‘‘our gospel,”
because it was the gospel preached by
him and Silas and Timothy; comp
2 Thess. ii. 14; 2 Tim. ii.8. He did
not mean to say that the gospel had
been originated by him, but only that
he had delivered the good news of salvation to them. He is here stating

‘the evidence which had been given

that they were a church “chosen by
God.” Herefers, first, to the manner
in which the gospel was received by
them (ver. 5--7), and, secondly, to
the spirit which they themselves manifested in sending it abroad; ver. 8--
10. §& Jn word only. Was not
merely spoken; or was not merely
heard. It produced a powerful effect
on the heart and life. It was not a
mere empty sound that produced no
other effect than to entertain or amuse;
comp. Ezek. xxxili. 82. J But also
in power. That is, in such power as
to convert the soul. The apostle
4 ye know what manner of men we
were among you for your sake.
a He.2.3

evidently refers not to any miracles
that were wrought there, but to the
effect of the gospel on those who
heard it. It is possible that there
were miracles wrought there, as there
were in other places, but there is no
mention of such a fact, and it is not
necessary to suppose it, in order to
see the full meaning of this language.
There was great power manifested in
the gospel in its leading them to break
off from their sins, to abandon their
idols, and to give their hearts to God ;
see this more fully explained in the
Notes on 1 Cor. ii. 4. ¥ And in the
Holy Ghost ; comp. Notes on 1 Cor.
ii. 4. It is there called the “‘ demonstration of the Spirit.” And in
much assurance. That is, with firm
conviction, or full persuasion of its
truth. It was not embraced as a
doubtful thing, and it did not produce
the effect on the mind which is
taused by anything that is uncertain in its character. Many seem to
embrace the gospel as if they only
half believed it, or as if it were a
matter of very doubtful truth and importance ; but this was not the case
with the Thessalonians. There was
the firmest conviction of its truth, and
they embraced it ‘“‘heart and soul ;”
comp. Col. ii. 2; Heb. vi.11. From
all that is said in this verse, it is evident that the power of God was remarkably manifested in the conversion of the Thessalonians, and that
they embraced the gospel with an uncommonly strong conviction of its
truth and value. This fact will account for the subsequent zeal which
the apostle somuch commends in them
--for it is usually true that the character of piety in a church, as it is in
an individual, is determined by the
views with which the gospel is first embraced, and the purposes which are
formed at the beginning of theChristian
life. | Asye know what manner of men,
&c. Pauloftenappeals to those among
whom he had laboured as competent
witnesses with respect to his own
conduct and character ; see chap. ii. 9,

6 And ye became ? followers of
us, and of the Lord, having reb 2 Co.8.5. :

10; Acts xx. 33--35. He means her
that he and his fellow-labourers had
set them an example, or had shown
what Christianity was by their manner of living, and that the Thessalonians had become convinced that the
religion which they taught was real.
The holy life of a preacher goes far
to confirm the truth of the religion
which he preaches, and is among the
most efficacious means of inducing
them to embrace the gospel.

6. And ye became followers of us.
“You became imitators--piynrei--
of us,’ This does not mean that
they became followers of Paul, Silas,
and Timothy, in the sense that they
had set themselves up as teachers, or
as the head of a sect, but that they
imitated their manner of living ; see
Notes on 1 Cor. iv. 16; xi.1. § And
of the Lord. The Lord Jesus. You
also learned to imitate him. From
this it is evident that the manner in
which the Saviour lived was a prominent topic of their preaching, and
also that it was one of the means of
the conversion of the Thessalonians.
It is probable that preaching on the
pure and holy life of the Lord Jesus
might be made a much more important means of the conversion of sinners than it is. Nothing is better
adapted to show them the evil of their
own guilty lives than the contrast between their lives and his; and nothing
can be conceived better fitted to win
them to holy living than the contemplation of his pure and holy deportment. {[ Having received the word
in much affliction. That is, amidst
much opposition from others; see
Acts xvii. 5--8. It was in the midst
of these trials that they had become
converted--and they seem to have
been all the better Christians for
them. In this they were imitators
of the Saviour, or shared the same
lot with him, and thus became his
followers. Their embracing and
holding fast the truths of religion
amidst all this opposition, showed
that they were controlled bv the same

ceived the word in much affliction,
with joy * of the Holy Ghost ;
@ Ac.13.52.

principles that he was, and that they
were truly his friends. { With joy
of the Holy Ghost. With happiness
produced by the Holy Ghost. Though
they were much afflicted and persecuted, yet there was joy. There was
joy in their conversion--in the evidence of pardoned sin--in the hope
of heaven; see Notes, Acts viii. 8.
However great may be the trials and
persecutions experienced in receiving
the gospel, or however numerous and
long the sufferings of the subsequent
life in consequence of having embraced it, there is a joy in religion
that more than overbalances all, and
that makes religion the richest of all
blessings.

7. So that ye were ensamples to
all that believe. Examples in reference to the firmness with which you
embraced the gospel, the fidelity
with which you adhered to it in trials,
and the zeal which you showed
in spreading it abroad. These things
are specified in the previous and subsequent verses as characterizing their
piety. The word here rendered ensamples--rtrous--is that from which
the word type is derived. It properly
denotes anything caused or produced
by the means of blows (from rirrw),
and hence a mark, print, or impression, made by a stamp or die; and
then a resemblance, figure, pattern,
exemplar--a model after which anything is made. This is the meaning
here. They became, as it were, a
model or pattern after which the piety
of others should be moulded, or showed what the piety of others ought to
be. § In Macedonia. Thessalonica
was an important city of Macedonia
(see the Intro.; comp. Notes, Acts
xvi. 9), and of course their influence
would be felt on the whole of the
surrounding region. This is a striking instance of the effect which a
church in a city may have on the
country. The influence of a city
church may be felt, and will usually
be felt afar on the other churches of
a community--just as, in all other

7 So that ye were ensamples
to all that believe in Macedonia
and Achaia.

respects, a city has an important influence onthecountryat large. § And
Achaia. Achaia proper was the part
of Greece of which Corinth was the
capital. The word, however, was
sometimes so used as to comprehend
the whole of Greece, and in this sense
it seems to be employed here, as there
is no reason to suppose that their influence would be felt particularly in
the province of which Corinth was
the centre. Koppe observes that
Macedonia and Achaia were the two
provinces into which all Greece was
divided when it was brought under
the Roman yoke, the former of which
comprehended Macedonia proper, IIlyricum, Epirus, and Thessaly, and the
otherGreece properly so called. The
meaning here is, therefore, that theit
influence was felt on all the parts of
Greece ; that their piety was spoken
of, and the effect of their conversion
had been felt in all those places.
Thessalonica was a commercial city,
and a sea-port. It had intercourse
with all the other parts of Macedonia,
with Greece, and with Asia Minor.
It was partly owing to the advantages
of its situation that its influence was
thus felt. Its own merchants and
mariners who went abroad would carry
with them the spirit of the religion
of the church there, and those who
visited it from other ports would see
the effect of religion there. This is
just an instance, therefore, of the influence which a commercial town and
a sea-port may have in religion on
other parts of the world. A revival
of religion in such a place will extend its influence afar to other places,
and appropriate zeal among the
friends of the Redeemer there may
have an important effect on sea-ports,
and towns, and lands far remote. It
is impossible to over-estimate the
importance of such places in regard
to the spread of the gospel; and
Christians who reside there--be they
merchants, mechanics, lawyers, physicians, mariners, or ministers of the
gospel, should feel that on them God
8 For from you sounded @ out
the word of the Lord not only in
Macedonia and Achaia, but also

@ Ro.10.18. b2 Th. 1.4.

has placed the responsibility of using
a vast influence in sending the gospel
to other lands. He that goes forth
from a commercial town should be
imbued with the spirit of the gospel,
and churches located there
be so under tke influence of religion,
that they who come among them
from abroad shall bear to their own
lands honourable testimony of the
power of religion there.

8. For from you sounded out the
word of the Lord. The truths of
religion were thus spread abroad.
The word rendered “sounded out ’’?--
Sngnrai--refers to the sounding of
a trumpet (Bloomfield), and the idea
is, that the gospel was proclaimed
like the sonorous voice of a trumpet
echoing from place to place; comp.
Isa. lviii. 1; Rev. i. 10. Their influence had an effect in diffusing the
gospel in other places, as if the
sound of a trumpet echoed and reechoed among the hills and along the
vales of the classic land of Greece.
This seems to have been done (1.) tnvoluntarily ; that is, the necessary result of their conversion, even without
any direct purpose of the kind of their
own, would be to produce this effect.
Their central and advantageous commercial position ; the fact that many
of them were in the habit of visiting
other places ; and the fact that they
were visited by strangers from abroad,
would naturally contribute to this result. But (2.) this does not appear to
be all that is intended. The apostle
commends them in such a way as to
make it certain that they were volunfary in the spread of the gospel ; that
they made decided efforts to take advantage of their position to send the
knowledge of the truth abroad. If so,
this 1s an interesting instance of one
of the first efforts made by @ church
to diffuse the gospel, and to send it to
those who were destitute of it. There
ig no improbability in the supposition
that they sent out members of their

i. THESSALONIANS.

should |

in every place ® your faith to God.
ward is spread abroad; so that
we need not to speak any thing.

9 For they themselves show

church--messengers of salvation--to
other parts of Macedonia and Greece
_ that they might communicate the same
| gospel to others. See Doddridge
i § But also in every place. ‘Thessalonica was connected not only with
Macedonia and Greece proper, in its
commercial relations, but also with
the ports of Asia Minor, and not improbably with still more remote regions. ‘The meaning is, that in all the
places with which they trafficked the
effect of their faith wasseen andspoken
of. {| Faith to God-ward. Fidelity
toward God. ‘They showed that they
had a true belief in God and in the
truth which he had revealed. So
that we need not to speak anything.
That is, wherever we go, we need say
nothing of the fact that you have been
turned to the Lord, or of the character of your piety. These things are
sufficiently made known by those
who come from you, by those whc
visit you, and by your zeal in spreading the true religion.

9. For they themselves. They wh«
have visited you, and they whom you
have sent out; all persons testify of
your piety. The apostle seems to refer to all whom he had met or had
heard of “in all places,’’ who said
anything about the ‘Thessalonians
They were unanimous in bearing testimony to their fidelity and piety
{ Show of us what manner ef entering inwe had unto you. The testimony
which they bear of you is, in fact,
testimony of the manner in which we
preached the gospel, and demeaned ourselves when we were with you. IH
shows that we were intent on our
Master’s work, and that we were not
actuated by selfish or sinister motives
The argumeut is, that such effect:
could not have been produced amon;
them if Paul, Silas, and their fellow:
labourers had been impostors. Thei.
sound conversion to’ God; their change
from idolatry to the true teligion, anc
the zeal which had been the result «

Ave Dawe

of us what manner of entering in
we had unto you, and how ye
turned to God @ from idols, to serve
the living and true God ;

a@1Co.12.2 Ga 4.8.

Ld

10 And to wait ° for his Son
from heaven, whom he raised from
_the dead, even Jesus, which deliv-
| ered us from the wrath ¢ to come.

| bd Ph. 3.20. ¢ Mat.3.7; Bo.5.9.

|

their conversion, was an argument to Paul. Perhaps we are not to infer,
which Paul and his fellow-labourers | however, that this doctrine was made
might appeal in proof of their sincerity more prominent there than others, or
and their being sent from God. Paul that it had been inculcated there
often makes a similar appeal ; comp. | more frequently than it had been elseNotes on 2 Cor. iii 2,3. It is certain where, but the apostle adverts to it

that many ofthe Jews in Thessalonica,
when Paul and his fellow-labourers
were there, regarded them as impost-

ors (Acts xvii. 6, 8), and there is |

every reason to suppose that after
they left the city, they would endeavour to keep up this impression among
the people. ‘To meet this, Paul now
says that their own undoubted conversion to a life of holiness and zeal
under their ministry, was an unanswerable argument that this was not
so. How could impostors and deceiyers have been the means of producing
such effects? { And how ye turned
to God fromidols. That is, under our
preaching. This proves that the
church was to a considerable extent
composed of those who were converted
from idolatry under the preaching of
Paul ; comp. Intro.§ 4. The meaning here is, that they who came from
them, or they who had visited them,
bore abundant testimony to the fact
that they had turned from idols to the
worship of the true God ; comp. Notes
1 Cor. xii. 2; Gal. iv. 8. § To serve
the living and true God. He is
called the ‘‘living God” in opposition
to idols--who are represented as dead,
dumb, deaf, and blind; comp. Ps.
exxxv. 15--17 ; Notes, Is. xliv. 19--17 ;
Mat. xvi. 16; John v. 26; Ac. xiv. 15.

10. And to wait for his Son from
heaven. It is clear from this and from
other parts of these two epistles, that
the return of the Lord Jesus to this
world was a prominent subject of the
preaching of Paul at Thessalonica.
No small part of these epistles is occupied with stating the true doctrine
on this point (1 Th. iv. v.), and in
correcting the errors which prevailed
in regard to it after the departure of

here particularly because it was a doctrine so well fitted to impart comfort
| to them in their trials (chap. iv. 13--
18), and because, in that connection,
it was so well calculated to rouse them
to vigilance and zeal ; chap. v. 1--11.
He makes it prominent in the second
epistle, because material errors prevailed there in reference to it which
needed to be corrected. In the pas

sage before us, he says that the return
of the Son of God from heaven was an
important point which had been insisted on when he was there, and that
their conduct, as borne witness to by
all, had shown with what power it had
seized upon them, and what a practical
influence it had exerted in their lives.
They lived as if they were “ waiting”
for his return. They fully believed in
it; they expected it. They were
looking out for it, not knowing when
it might occur, and as tf it might
occur at any moment, ‘They were,
therefore, dead to the world, and were
animated with an earnest desire to do
good. This is one of the instances
which demonstrate that the doctrine
that the Lord Jesus will return to
our world, is fitted, when understood
in the true sense revealed in the
Scriptures, to exert a powerful infinence on the souls of men. It is
eminently adapted to comfort the
hearts of true Christians in the sorrows, bereavements, and sicknesses of
life (John xiv. 1--8; Actsi 11; 1Th.
iv. 18--18; 2 Pet. iii. 8, 9); to lead
us to watchfulness and to an earnest
inquiry into the question whether we
are prepared to meet him (Mat. xxiv.
37--44 ; xxv. 13); to make us dead to
the world, and to lead us to act as
becomes the children of light (1 Th.
v. 6--9); to awaken and arouse
impenitent and careless sinners (1
Thess. v. 2,3; 2 Pet. ili. 3--7), and
to excite Christians to self-denying efforts to spread the gospel in
distant lands, as was the case at
Thessalonica. Every doctrine ofthe
gospel is adapted to produce some
happy practical effects on mankind,
but there are few that are more full of
elevated and holy influences than that
which teaches that the Lord Jesus
will return to the earth, and which
leads the soul to wait for his appearing ; comp. Notes, 1 Cor. i. 7; Phil.
iii. 20. § Whom he raised from the
dead; Notes, Acts ii.24--32;1 Cor.
xv.4--9. Paul probably means to intimate here, that this was one of the
great truths which they had received,
that the Lord Jesus had been raised
from the dead. We know it was a
prominent doctrine wherever the gospel waspreached. {| Which delivered
us from the wrath to come. Another
of the prominent doctrines of Christianity, which was undoubtedly always
inculcated by the first preachers of
religion. ‘The “ wrath to come”’ is
the divine indignation which will come
upon the guilty ; Matt. iii. 7. From
that Christ delivers us by taking our
place, and dying in our stead. It was
the great purpose of his coming to
save us from this approaching wrath.
It follows from this (1.) that there
was wrath which man had to dread--
since Jesus came to deliver us from
something that was real, and not from
what was imaginary; and (2.) that
the same wrath is to be dreaded now
by all who are not united to Christ,
since in this respect they are now just
as all were before he died; that is,
they are exposed to fearful punishment, from which He alone can deliver. It may be added, that the existence of this wrath is real, whether
men believe it or not, for the fact of
its existence is uot affected by our
belief or unbelief

This chapter teaches--

(1.) That it is right to commend
those who do well; ver. 3. Paul was

nor was he ever afraid to rebuke when
censure was due.

(2.) Christians are chosen to salvation; ver. 4. Their hope of heaven depends on the “election of
God.”

(3.) It is possible for a people to
know that they are chosen of God,
and to give such evidence of it that
others shall know it also; ver. 4. It
is possible for a church to evince such
a spirit of piety, self-denial, love, and
holiness, and such a desire to spread
the gospel, as to show that they are
“chosen of God,” or that they are a
true church. This question is not to
be determined by their adherence to
certain rites and forms ; by their holding to the sentiments of an orthodox
creed : or by their zeal in defence of
the “apostolic succession,” but by
their bringing forth ‘‘the fruits of
good living.” In determining that
the church at Thessalonica was
“chosen of God,” Paul does not refer to its external organization, or to
the fact that it was founded by apostolic hands, or that it had a true ministry and valid ordinances, but to the
fact that it evinced the true spirit of
Christian piety ; and particularly that
they had been zealous in sending the
gospel to others. There were three
things to which he referred : 1. That
the gospel had power over themselves,
inducing them to abandon their sins ;
2. that it had such influence on their
lives that others recognized in them
the evidence of true religion ; and, 3.
that it made them benevolent, and excited them to make efforts to diffuse
its blessings abroad.

(4.) If a church may know that it is
chosen or elected of God, it is true of
an individual also that he may know
it. It is not by any direct revelation
from heaven ; not by aninfallible communication of the Holy Spirit ; not by
any voice or vision; but it is in the
same way in which this may be evinced
by achurch. The conversion of an
individual, or his “ election of God,”
may be certainly known by himself, if,
1. the gospel is received as “ the word
of God,” and induces him to abandon

never afraid of injuring any one by his sins; 2. if it leads him to pursue
commending him when he deserved it: such a life that others shall see that

he is actuated by Christian principles ;
and, 3. if he makes it his great aim in
life to do good, and to diffuse abroad,
as far as he can, that religion which
he professes to love. He who finds
in his own heart and life evidence of
these things, need not doubt that he
is among the ‘chosen of God.”

(5.) The character of piety in the
life of an individual Christian, and
in a church, is often determined by
the manner in which the gospel is
embraced at first, and by the spirit
with which the Christian life is entered on; see Notes on ver. 5, 6. If so,
then this fact is of immense importance in the question about organizing
a church, and about making a profession of religion. If a church is so organized as to have it understood that
it shall be to a considerable extent
the patron of worldly amusements--
a “half-way house”’ between the world
and religion, that purpose will determine all its subsequent character--
unless it shall be counteracted by the
grace of God. If it is organized so
as to look with a benignant and tolerant eye on gayety, vanity, self-indulgence, ease, and what are called the
amusements and pleasures of life, it is
not difficult: to see what will be its
character and influence. How can
such a church diffuse far and near the
conviction that it is ‘‘ chosen of God,”
as the church at Thessalonica did?
And so of anindividual. Commonly,
the whole character of the religious
life will be determined by the views
with which the profession of religion
is made, If there is a purpose to
enjoy religion and the world too ; to
be the patron of fashion as well as a
professed follower of Christ ; to seek
the flattery or the plaudits of man as
well as the approbation of God, that
purpose will render the whole religious
life useless, vacillating, inconsistent,
miserable. The individual will live
without the enjoyment of religion, and
will die leaving little evidence to his
friends that he has gone to be with
God. If, on the other hand, there be
singleness of purpose, and entire dedication to God at the commencement
of the Christian life, the religious career will be one of usefulness, respec-

tability, and peace. The most important period in a man’s life, then, is
that when he is pondering the question whether he shall make a profession of religion.

(6.) A church in a city should
cause its influence to be felt afar;
ver. 7--9. This is true, indeed, of
all other churches, but it is especially so of a church in a large town.
Cities will be centres of influence in
fashion, science, literature, religion,
and morals. A thousand ties of interest bind them to other parts of a
land, and though in fact there may
be, as there often is, much more intelligence in a country neighbourhood than among the same number
of inhabitants taken promiscuously
from a city; and though there may
be, as there often is, far more good
sense and capability to appreciate
religious truth in a country congregation than in a congregation in a
city, yet it is true that the city will
be the radiating point of influence.
This, of course, increases the responsibility of Christians in a city, and
makes it important that, like those of
Thessalonica, they should be models
of seif-denial and of efforts to spread
the gospel.

(7.) A church ina commercial town
should make use of its peculiar influence to spread the gospel abroad;
yer. 7--9. Such aplace is connected
with remote lands, and those who, for
commercial purposes, visit distant
ports from that place, should bear
with them the spirit of the gospel.
Such, too, should be the character of
piety in the churches in such a city,
that all who visit it for any purpose,
should see the reality of religion, and
be led to bear the honourable report
of it again to their own land.

(8.) Such, too, should be the piety
of any church. Thechurch at Thessalonica evinced the true spirit of
religion; ver. 7--9. Its light shone
afar. It sent out those who went to
spread the gospel. Its members,
when they went abroad, showed that
they were influenced by higher and
purer principles than those which
actuated them before conversion, and
than were evinced by the heathen
world. Those who visited them, also,
saw that there was a reality in religion, and bore an honourable report
of it again to their own lands. Let
any church evince this spirit, and it
willshow thatit is “chosen of God,”’ or
a true church; and wherever there is
a church formed after the primitive
model, these traits will always be
seen.

(9.) It is owr duty and privilege to
“wait for the Son of God to return
from heaven.” We know not when
his appearing, either to remove us by
death, or to judge the world, will be
--and we should therefore watch and
be ready. The hope of his return to
our world to raise the dead, and to
convey his ransomed to heaven, is
the brightest and most cheering prospect that dawns on man, and we should
be ready, whenever it occurs, to hail
him as our returning Lord, and to rush
to his arms as our glorious Redeemer.
It should be always the characteristic
of owr piety, as it was that of John
to say, ‘‘ Even so, come, Lord Jesus;”’
Rey. xxii. 20.

The principal subjects embraced in
this chapter are the following :--

I. A statement of the conduct of
Paul and his fellow-labourers when
they first preached the gospel at
Thessalonica ; ver. 1--12. In this
statement, the apostle specifies particularly the following things. (1.)
That he and his fellow-labourers
had been shamefully treated at Philippi, and had been obliged to encounter much opposition at Thessalonica; ver. 1,2. (2.) That in their
efforts to convert the Thessalonians
they had used no deceit, corruption,
or guile; ver. 3,4. (3.) That they
had not sought the praise of men,
and had not used the weight of authority which they might have done
as the apostles of Christ; ver. 6.
(4.) That they had been gentle and
mild in all their intercourse with
them ; ver. 7,8. (5.) That, in order not to be burdensome, or to subject themselves to the charge of
selfishness, they had supported themselves by labouring night and day;

ver.9. (6.) That the Thessalonians
themselves were witnesses in what
a holy and pure manner they had
lived when there, and how they had
exhorted them to a holy life; ver.
10--12.

II. The apostle refers to the manner in which the Thessalonians had
received the truth at first, as undoubtedly the word of God, and not
as the word of men; ver. 13.

I1I. He reminds them of the fact
that they had met with the same
opposition from the Jews which the
churches in Judea had, for that everywhere the Jews had made the same
opposition to the messengers of God,
killing the Lord Jesus and their own
prophets, and forbidding the apostles
everywhere to speak to the Gentiles ;
ver. 14--16.

IV. In the conclusion of the chapter, the apostle expresses the earnest
desire which he had to visit them,
and the reason why he had not done
it. It was because he had been prevented by causes beyond his control,
and now his earnest and sincere wish
was that he might be permitted to
see them--for they were his hope, and
joy, and crown ; ver. 17--20.

It is reasonable to suppose that
the statements in this chapter were
designed to meet a certain condition
of things in the church there, and if
so, we may learn something of the
difficulties which the Thessalonians
had to encounter, and of the objections which were made to Paul and
to the gospel. It is often in this way
that we can get the best view of the
internal condition of a church referred to in the New Testament--not
by direct statement respecting difficulties and errors in it, but by the
character of the epistle sent to it.
Judging by this rule, we should infer
that there were those in Thessalonica who utterly denied the divine
origin of the gospel. This general
charge, the apostle meets in the first
chapter, by showing that the power
of the gospel evinced in their conversion, and its effects in their lives,
demonstrated it to be of heavenly
origin.

In reference to the state of things

OR yourselves, brethren, know
4 our entrance in unto you, that
lt was not in vain:

-- --

as referred to in this chapter, we
should also infer the following
things :

1. That it was represented by some
that the apostle and his fellow-labourers sought influence and power;
that they were dictatorial and authoritative ; that they were indisposed to labour; and were, in fact,
impostors. This charge Paul refutes
abundantly by his appeal to what
they knew of him, and what they had
seen of him when he was there; ver.
1--12.

2. That the church at Thessalonica met with severe and violent
opposition from the Jews who were
there; ver.14--17. This appears
to have been a formidable opposition ;
comp. Acts xvii. 5, seg. They would
not only be likely to use violence,
but it is not improbable that they
employed the semblance of argument
that might perplex the church.
They might represent that they were
from the same country as Paul and
his fellow-labourers ; that they,
while pretending to great zeal for
religion, were, in fact, apostates, and
were engaged in overturning the revealed doctrines of God. It would
be easy to represent them as men
who, from this cause, were worthy
of no confidence, and to urge the
fact that those who thus acted in
opposition to the religion of their
own country, and to the sacred rites
of the temple at Jerusalem, could
be entitled to no regard. These
charges, if they were made, the
apostle meets, by assuring the Thessalonians that they were suffering
precisely the same things which the
churches in Judea did; that the Jews
manifested the same spirit there
which they did in Thessalonica ; that
they had killed alike the Lord Jesus
and their own undoubted prophets,
and that it was a characteristic of
them that they were opposed to all
other men. ‘Their opposition, there-

2 But even after that we had
suffered before, and were shamefully entreated, as ye know, at
Philippi, ¢ we were 8 bold in our

a Ac.16.12,&c. 6 Ac.17.253.

fore, was not to be wondered at, nor
was it to be regarded as any argument that the apostles, though Jews,
were unworthy of confidence; ver.
15, 16.

3. It was very probably represented by the enemies of Paul and his
fellow-labourers, that they had fled
from Thessalonica on the slightest
danger, and had no regard for the
church there, or they would have remained there in the time of peril, or,
at least, that they would have returned to visit them. Their continued absence was probably urged as a proof
that they had no concern for them.
The apostle meets this by stating
that they had been indeed “taken
froin them ”’ for a little time, but that
their hearts were still with them, and
by assuring them that he had often
endeavoured to visit them again, but
that ‘‘ Satan had hindered” him ;
ver. 17--20. He had, however, given
them the highest proof of interest and
affection that he could, for when he

: was unable to go himself, he had, at
‘great self-denial, sent Timothy to

establish them in the faith, and to
comfort their hearts ; chap. iii. 1--8.
His absence, therefore, should not be
urged as a proof that he had no regard for them.

1. For yourselves, brethren, know
our entrance in unto you; Notes,
chap. i. 9. Paul appeals to themselves for proof that they had not
come among them asimpostors. They
had hada full opportunity to see them,
and to know what influenced them.
Paul frequently appeals to his own
life, and to what they, among whom
he laboured, knew of it, as a full refutation of the slanderous accusations
of his enemies ; comp. Notes, 1 Cor.
Ivo LO----NG exe lo---2 70; 2 COreevl:
38--10. Every minister of the gospel ought so to live as to be able,
when slanderously attacked, to make
such an appeal to his people. J That
it was notin vain. xen. This word
God to speak unto you the gospel
of God with much contention. @

3 For our exhortation was not

means (1.) empty, vain, fruitless, or |
without success ; (2.) that in which |

there is no truth or reality--false,
fallacious; Eph. v. 6; Col. ii. 8.
Here it seems, from the connection
(ver. 3-5), to be used in the latter
sense, as denoting that they were
not deceivers. The object does not
appear to be so much to show that
their ministry was successful, as to
meet a charge of their adversaries
that they were impostors. Paul tells
them that from their own observation they knew that this was not so.
2. But even after that we had suf-

fered before. Before we came among
you. | And were shamefully en-

treated, as ye know, at Philippi ;
Acts xvi. 19, seg. By being beaten
and cast into prison. The shame of
the treatment consisted in the fact
that it was wholly undeserved ; that
it was contrary to the laws ; and that
it was accompanied with circumstances designed to make their punishment as ignominious as possible. The
Thessalonians knew of this, and Paul
was not disposed to palliate the conduct of the Philippians. What was
‘‘shameful treatment’ he speaks of
as such without hesitation. It is not
wrong to call things by their right
names, and when we have been abused,
it is not necessary that we should
attempt to smooth the matter over
by saying that it was not so. ¥ We
were bold in our God. By humble
dependence on the support of our God.
It was only his powerful aid that
could have enabled them to persevere
with ardour and zeal in such a work
after such treatment, The meaning
here is, that they were not deterred
from preaching the gospel by the treatment which they had received, but
at the very next important town, and
on the first opportunity, they proclaimed the same truth, though there
was no security that they might not
meet with the same persecution there.
Paul evidently appeals to this in order
to show them that they were not im-

postors, and that they were not in-' tagem.

| reverse,

ot deceit, ’ nor of uncleanness,
nor in guile:

a Jude 3. b2 Pe. 1.16.

fluenced by the hope of ease or of selfish gains. Men who were not sincere
and earnest in their purposes would
have been deterred by such treatment
as they had received at Philippi.
9 With much contention. Amidst
much opposition, and where great
effort was necessary. The Greek word
here used is aya (agony), a word referring usually to the Grecian games ;
Notes, Col.ii.1. It means the course,
or place of contest ; and then the contest itself, the strife, the combat, the
effort for victory; and the apostle
here means, that owing to the oppo
sition there, there was need of an
effort on his part like the desperate
struggles of those who contended for
the mastery at the Grecian games ;
comp. Notes on 1 Cor. ix. 24--27.
The triumph of the gospel there was
secured only by an effort of the highest kind, and by overcoming the most
formidable opposition.

8. For our exhortation. That is,
the exhortation to embrace the gospel. The word seems to be used
here so as to include preaching in
general. The sense is, that the
means which they used to induce
them to become Christians were not
such as to delude them. { Was not
of deceit. Was not founded on sophistry. The apostle means to say,
that the Thessalonians knew that his
manner of preaching was not such
as was adopted by the advocates of
error. { Nor of uncleanness.--Not
such as to lead to an impure life. It
was such as to lead to holiness and
purity. The apostle appeals to what
they knew to be the tendency of his
doctrine as an evidence that it was
true. Most of the teaching of the
heathen philosophers led to a life of
licentiousness and corruption. The
tendency of the gospel was just the
q Nor in guile. Not by
the arts of deceit. There was no
craftiness or trick, such as could not
bear a severe scrutiny. No point
was carried by art, cunning, or straEverything was done on the

4 But as we were allowed of God
be put in trust © with the gospel, even so we speak; not as pleas-

b1 Ti.t.11,12.

most honourable and fair principles.
It is much when a man can say that
he has never endeavoured to accomplish anything by mere trick, craft,
or cunning. Sagacity and shrewdness are always allowable in ministers as well as others; trick and cunning never. Yet stratagem often
takes the place of sagacity, and trick
is often miscalled shrewdness. (uile,
eraft, cunning, imply deception, and
can never be reconciled with that
entire honesty which a minister of
the gospel, and all other Christians,
ought to possess ; see Notes on 2 Cor.
Xd oO COMP rE Saya XXX) RXV
13°; John i. £7; 1 Pet. ii. 1, 22; Rev.
xly. 5.

4. But as we were allowed of God
to be put in trust with the gospel;
comp. 1 Tim. i. 11,12. Since there
had been committed to us an office
so high and holy, and so much demanding sincerity, fidelity, and honesty, ve endeavoured to act in all
vespects in conformity to the trust
reposed in us. The gospel is a system of truth and sincerity, and we
evinced the same. ‘The gospel is
concerned with great realities, and
we did not resort to trick and illusion. The office of the ministry is
most responsible, and we acted in
view of the great account which we
must render. The meaning is, that
Paul had such a sense of the truth,
reality, and importance of the gospel,
and of his responsibility, as effectually
to keep him from anything like craft
or cunning in preaching it. An effectaal restrainer from mere management
and trick will always be found in a
deep conviction of the truth and importance of religion. Artifice and
cunning are the usual accompaniments
of a bad cause--and, when adopted by
a minister of the gospel, will usually,
when detected, leave the impression
that he feels that he is engaged in
such acause. [fan object cannot be
secured by sincerity and straight-forward dealing, it is not desirable that

2)

ing men, but God, which trieth
our hearts.
| 5 For neither ¢ at any time used

c 2 Co.2.17.

it should be secured at all. YJ Even
so we speak. Inaccordance with the
nature of the gospel; witb the truth
and sincerity which such a cause demands. { Not as pleasing men. Not
in the manner of impostors, who make
it their object to please men. ‘The
meaning of the apostle is, that he did
not aim to teach such doctrines as
would flatter men ; as would win their
applause; or as would gratify their
passions or their fancy. We are not
to suppose that he desired to offend
men ; or that he regarded their esteem
as of no value ; or that he was indifferent whether they were pleased or
displeased ; but that it was not the
direct object of his preaching to please
them. It was to declare the truth,
and to obtain the approbation of God
whatever men might think of it; see
Notes on Ga. i. 10. J Which trieth
our hearts. It is often said to be an
attribute of God that he tries or
searches the hearts of men; 1 Ch.
XK VIM Oe RKIX wl es VOL Xie 0) se exvlle
LOBS Psy xiee4 eel Onan Villaeoi ieee Che
meaning here is, that the apostle had
a deep conviction of the truth that
God knew all his motives, and that
all would be revealed in the last day.
5. For neither at any time used we
flattering words; see Notes on Job
SO.0.41 ONE TZPED BiG! oo Pz (are, soy Le,
The word here rendered “ flattering ”’
--xorwxeia --occurs nowhere else in
the New Testament. The meaning
is, that the apostle did not deal in the
language of adulation; he did not
praise them for their beauty, wealth,
talent, or accomplishments, and conceal from them the painful truths
about their guilt and danger. He
stated simple truth--not refusing to
commend men if truth would admit of
it, and never hesitating to declare his
honest Convictions about their guilt
and danger. One ofthe principal
arts of the deceiver on all subjects is
flattery ; and Paul says, that when
preaching to the Thessalonians he had
carefully avoided it. Henow appeals
we flattering words, as ye know,
nor acloke of covetousness; God
'g witness .

6 Nor of men® gought we glo-

aJolin 5. 41, 44; Ga. 1.10.

to that fact as a proof of his own integrity. They knew that he had been
faithful to their souls. Nor a cloke
of covetonsness, The word rendered
‘« cloke’”’ here--zpePac1s --means, properly, “‘ what is shown or appears before any one ;” 3. e., show, pretence,
pretext, put forth in order to cover
one’s realintent ; Matt. xxii. 14; Mark
xii. 40; Luke xx. 47. The meaning
here is, that he did not put ona pretence or appearance of piety for the
sake of promoting the schemes of covetousness. The evidence of that was
not only what they observed of the
general spirit of the apostle, but also
the fact that when with them he had
actually laboured with his own hands
for a support ; ver. 9. It is obvious
that there were those there, as sometimes there are now, who, under the
pretence of great zeal for religion,
were really seeking wealth, and it is
possible that it may have been alleged
against Paul and his fellow-labourers
that they were such persons. § God
is witness. This is a solemn appeal to
God for the truth of what he had said.
He refers not only to their own observation, but he calls God himself to
witness his sincerity. God knew the
truth in the case. There could have
been no imposing on him; and the
appeal, therefore, is to one who was
intimately acquainted with the truth.
Learn hence, (1.) That it is right, on
important occasions, to appeal to God
for the truth of what we say. (2.)
We should always so live that we
can properly make such an appeal
to him.

6. Nor of men sought we glory. Or
praise. The love of applause was not
that which influenced them; see Notes

on Col. i. 10. Ye Neither of you, nor
yet of others. Nowhere has this been
our object. The love of fame is not

that which has influenced us. The
particular idea in this verse seems to
be that though they had uncommen

ry, neither of you, nor ye of
others, when we might have ! been
burdensome, ® as the apostles of
Christ.

1 or, used authority. b 2 Co. 12.13-15,

advantages, as the apostles of Christ,
for setting up a dominion or securing
an ascendancy over others, yet they
had not availed themselves of it. As
an apostle of Christ ; as appointed by
him to found churches ; as endowed
with the power of working miracles,
Paul had every advantage for securing
authority over others, and turning
it to the purposes of ambition or gain.
{ When we might have been burdensome. Marg., “or, used authority.”
Some understand this as meaning that
they might have demanded a support
in virtue of their being apostles ;
others, as Calvin, and as itis in the
margin, that they might have used
authority, and have governed them
wholly in that manner, exacting unqualified obedience. The Greek properly refers to that which is weighty
--iv Bapts--heavy, burdensome. Anything that weighs down or oppresses
--as a burden, sorrow, or authority,
would meet the sense of the Greek.
It seems probable, from the context,
that the apostle did not refer either to
authority or to support exclusively,
but may have included both. In their
circumstances it might have been
somewhat burdensome for them to
have maintained him and his fellowlabourers, though as an apostle he
might have required it ; comp. 1 Cor.
ix.8--15. Rather than be oppressive
in this respect, he had chosen to forego his right, and to maintain himself
by his own labour. As an apostle also
he might have exerted his authority,
and might have made use of his great
office for the purpose of placing himself at the head of churches, and
givin» them laws. But he chose to do
nothing that would be a burden: he
treated them with the gentleness with
which a nurse cherishes her children
(ver. 7), or a father his sons (ver. 11),
and employed only the arts of persuasion ; comp. Notes on 2 Cor. xii. 13--
16. {| As the apostles of Christ

7 But we were gentle among |
you, even as a nurse cherisheth
her children :

8 So, being affectionately desirous
of you, we were willing to have

bo ie Se nT ge Ba ai See ae OE
Though the writer uses the word
apostles here in the plural number, it is |
not certain that he means to apply it
to Silas and Timothy. He often uses
the plural number where he refers
to himself only; and though Silas
and Timothy are joined with him in
this epistle (chap. i. 1), yet itis evident
that he writes the letter as if he were
alone and that they had no part in
the composition or the instructions.
Timothy and Silas are associated
with him for the mere purpose of salutation or kind remembrance. That
this is so, is apparent from chap. iil.
In ver. 1 of that chapter, Paul uses
the plural term also. ‘ When we
could no longer forbear, we thought
it good to be left at Athens alone ;
comp. ver. 5. “ For this cause, when
J could no longer forbear, J sent to
know your faith.’” Neither Silas nor
Timothy were apostles in the strict
and proper sense, and there is no
evidence that they had the ‘“ authority’ which Paul here says might
have been éxerted by an apostle of
Christ.

7. But we were gentle among you.
Instead of using authority, we used
only the most kind and gentle methods
to win youand to promote your peace
and order. The word here rendered
“nurse,” may mean any one who
nurses a child, whether a mother or
another person. It seems here to refer to a mother (comp. ver. 11), and
the idea is, that the apostle felt for
them the affectionate solicitude which
a mother does for the child at her
breast.

8. So, being affectionately desirous
of you. The word here rendered
“being affectionately desirous ”---
iusipw--occurs nowhere else in the
New Testament. It means to long
after, to have a strong affection for.
The sense here is, that Paul was so
strongly attached to them that he
would have been willing to lay down
his life for them. § We were willing

imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own
souls, because ye were dear unto us.
9 For ye remember, brethren, out

@ Ro.}.11.

to have imparted unto you. 'To have
given or communicated ; Rom. i. 11.
| Not the gospel of God only. To be
willing to communicate the knowledge
of the gospel was in itself a strong
proof of love, even ifit were attended
with no self-denial or hazard in doing
it. We evince a decided love for a
man when we tell him of the way of
salvation, and urge him to accept of
it. We show strong interest for one
who is in danger, when we tell him of
a way of escape, or for one who is
sick, when we tell him of a medicine
that will restore him; but we manifest a much higher love when we tell
a lost and ruined sinner of the way in
which he may be saved. There is no
method in which we can show so
strong an interest in our fellow-men,
and so much true benevolence for
them, as to go to them and tell them
of the way by which they may be rescued from everlasting ruin. {| But
also our own souls. Or rather lives
-- Yorn: ; Matt. vi. 25 ; xx. 28; Luke
xli. 22, 13; Mark ili. 4. This does
not mean that the apostle was willing to be damned, or to lose his soul
in order to save them, but that if it
had been necessary he would have
been ready to lay down his life ; see
1 John iii. 16. ‘* We ought to lay
down our lives for the brethren;”’ comp.
Notes, Johnxv.13. His object seems
to be to assure them that he did not
leave them from any want of love to
them, or fromthe fear of being put to
death. It was done from the strong
conviction of duty. He appears to
have left them because he could not
longer remain without exposing others
to danger, and without the certainty
that there would be continued disturbances ; see Acts xvii. 9, 10.

9. Ye remember, brethren, our labour. Doubtless in the occupation oi
a tent-maker ; Notes, Acts xx. 34;
1 Cor. iv. 12. § And travail; see
Notes on 2 Cor. xi. 27, The word
means wearisome labour. J For ialabour and travail: for labouring night and day, because we
would not be chargeable unto any
of you, we preached unto you the
gospel of God.

10 Ye are witnesses, and God
also, how holily and justly and
unblameably we behaved ourselves
among you that believe :

@ Ac.20 34,35; 2 Th.3.7,8.

bouring night and day. That is, when
he was not engaged in preaching the
gospel. He appears to have laboured
through the week and to have preached on the Sabbath ; or if engaged in
preaching in the day time during the
week, he made it up by night labour.
{ We preached unto you the gospel
of God. That is, I supported myself when I preached among you. No
one, therefore, could say that I was
disposed to live in idleness; no one
that I sought to make myself rich at
the expense of others.

10. Ye are witnesses. They hada
full opportunity of knowing his manner of life. § And God also; Notes
on ver.5. §.How holily. Piously--
observing all the duties of religion.
q{ And justly. In our intercourse with
men. I did them no wrong. { And
unblameably. This seems to refer to
his duties both to God and man. In
reference to all those duties no one
could bring a charge against him.
Every duty was faithfully performed.
This is not a claim to absolute perfection, but it is a claim to consistency of character, and to faithfulness
in duty, which every Christian should
be enabled tomake. Every man professing religion should so live as to be
able to appeal to all who have had an
opportunity of knowing him, as witnesses that he was consistent and
faithful, and that there was nothing
which could be laid to his charge.

11. How we exhorted. That is, to
a holy life. { And comforted. In
the times of affliction. And charged.
Gr., testified. The word testify is used
here in the sense of protesting, or
making an earnest and solemn appeal.
They came as witnesses from God of
the truih of religion, and of the importance of living in a holy manner

11 As ye know how we exhorted,
and comforted, and charged every
one of you, as a father doth his
children,

12 That ye would walk? worthy
of God, who ¢ hath called you unto
his kingdom and glory.

18 For this cause also thank we
God without ceasing, because, when

»b Ep.4.h 6 1)Coi1.9.

They did not originate the gospel
themselves, or teach its duties and
doctrines as their own, but they came
in the capacity of those who bore witness of what God had revealed and
required, and they did this in the
earnest and solemn manner which became such an office. § As a father
doth his children. With an interest
in your welfare, such as a father feels
for his children, and with such a method as a father would use. It was not
done in a harsh, dictatorial, and arbitrary manner, but in tenderness and
love.

12. That ye would walk worthy of
God, &c. That you would live in
such a manner as would honour God,
who has chosen you to be his friends ;
Notes, Eph. iv. 1. A child “ walks
worthy of a parent ”’ when he lives in
such way as to reflect honour on that
parent for the method in which he
has trained him ; when he so lives as
to bring no disgrace on him, so as not
to pain his heart by misconduct, or so
as to give no occasion to any to speak
reproachfully of him. ‘This he does,
when (1.) he keeps all his coramands ;
(2.) when he leads a life of purity and
virtue ; (3.) when he carries out the
principles of the family into his own
life; (4.) when he honours a father
by evincing a profound respect for his
opinions ; and (5.) when he endeavours
to provide for his comfort and to promote his welfare. In a manner similar
to this, a true Christian honours God.
He lives so as not to bring a reproach
upon him or his cause, and so as to
teach the world to honour him who
has bestowed such grace upon him.
{ Who hath called you; Notes, 1
Cor. i. 9.

13. For this cause also thank we
God. In addition to the reasons for

ye received the word of God which
ye heard of us, ye received 7¢ not® as
the word of men, butas it isin truth,
the word of God, which effectually
worketh ® also in you that believe.

thankfulness already suggested, the

apostle here refers to the fact that |
they received the truth, when it was ,
preached, in such a way as to show
that they fully believed it to be the
word of God. § Not as the word of |
men. Not of human origin, but as a
divine revelation. You were not led
to embrace it by human reasoning, or
the mere arts of persuasion, or from
personal respect for others, but by
your conviction that it was a revelation from God. It is only when the
gospel is embraced in this way that
religion will show itself sufficient to
abide the fiery trials to which Christians may be exposed. He who is
convinced by mere human reasoning |
may have his faith shaken by opposite

artful reasoning; he who is won by

the mere arts of popular eloquence j
will have no faith which will be proof
against similar arts in the cause of
error ; he who embraces religion from

mere respect for a pastor, parent, or |
friend, or because others do, may

abandon it when the popular current |
shall set in a different direction, or |
when his friends shall embrace dif- |
ferent views; but he who embraces

religion as the truth of God, and from

the love of the truth, will have a faith, |
like that of the Thessalonians, which |
will abide everytrial. § Which effec- |
tually worketh also in you that believe. |
The word rendered “which” here --é;
--may be referred either to “truth” or
to “God.” The grammatical construction will admit of either, but it is
not material which is adopted. Either |
of them expresses a sense undeniably |
true, and of great importance. The

meaning is, that the truth was made

efficacious in the minds of all who

became true Christians. It induced

them to abandon their sins, to devote |
themselves to God, to lead pure and

holy lives, and enabled them to abide

the trials and temptations of life ;

comp. Notes on Phil. ii. 12, 13 ; Heb.

xiii. 21. The particular dlustration

|

14 For ye, brethren, became followers of thechurches of God which
‘in Judea are in Christ Jesus: for
ye also have suffered like things of
@ Mat.10.40; 2 Pe.3.2. b Ja.1.18; 1 Pe.1.23

here is, that when they embraced the

gospel it had such an efficacy on their
hearts as to prepare them to meet all
the terrors of bitter persecution without shrinking.

14. For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God which in
Judea are in Christ Jesus.-- Which
are united to the Lord Jesus, or which
are founded on his truth: that is,
which are true churches. Of those
churches they became imitators--
fuyznrei--to wit, in their sufferings.
This does not mean that they were
founded on the same model ; or that
they professed to be the followers of
those churches, but that they had been
treated in the same way, and thus

| were like them. They had been per-

secuted in the same manner, and by
the same people--the Jews ; and they
had borne their persecutions with the
same spirit. The object of this is to
comfort andencourage them, by showing them that others had been treated
in the same manner, and that it was
to be expected that a true church
would be persecuted by the Jews.
They ought not, therefore, to consider
it as any evidence that they were not
a true church that they had been persecuted by those who claimed to be
the people of God, and who made extraordinary pretensions to piety. | For
ye also have suffered like things of your

!own countrymen. Literally, ‘of those

who are of your fellow-tribe, or fellowclansmen ’--cuugvacrav. The Greek
word means ‘“‘one of the same tribe,’’
and then a fellow-citizen, or fellowcountryman. It is not elsewhere
used in the New Testament. ‘The
particular reference here seems not
to be to the heathen who were the
agents or actors inthe scenes of tumult
and persecutions, but to the Jews by
whom they were led on, or who were
the prime movers in the persecutions
which they had endured. It isnecessary to suppose that they were principally Jews who were the cause of the
our own countrymen, even as they
ave of the Jews ;

15 Who both killed the Lord

persecution which had been excited
against them, in order to make the
parallelism between the church there
and the churches in Palestine exact.
At the same time there was a propriety in saying that, though the parallelism was exact, it was by the
“hands of their own countrymen”
that it was done; that is, they were
the visible agents or actors by whom
it was done--the instruments in the
hands of others. In Palestine, the
Jews persecuted the churches directly ;
out of Palestine, they did it by means
of others. They were the real authors
of it, as they were in Judea, but they
usually accomplished it by producing
an excitement among the heathen,
and by the plea that the apostles were
making war on civil institutions. This
was the case in Thessalonica. ‘‘ The
Jews which believed not, moved with
envy, set all the city on an uproar.”
“ They drew Jason and certain bre
thren unto the rulers of the city, crying,
Those that have turned the world upside downhave come hither also;’ Acts
xvii. 5,6. The same thing occurred
a short time after at Berea. ‘ When
the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither
also and stirred up the people; Acts
XV ploaec OMDseNClSe SV. 2m ewe) Le
unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds evil-affected against the brethren.’’ ‘ The
epistle, therefore, represents the case
accurately as the history states it.

It was the Jews always who set on |

foot the persecutions against the
apostles and their followers ;’’ Paley,
Hor Paul. in loc. It was, therefore,
strictly true, as the apostle here
states it, (1.) that they were subjected to the same treatment from the
Jews as the churches in Judea were,
since they were the authors of the
excitement against them; and (2.)
that it was carried on, as the apostle
states, “by their own countrymen ;”
that is, that they were the agents or
instruments by which it was done.

pA. D. 62

Jesus and their 4 own prophets.
{and have ! persecuted us; anc
@ Ac.7.52. 1 or, chased us out

This kind of undesigned coincidence
between the epistle and the history in
the Acts of the Apostles, is one of
the arguments from which Paley (Hor.
Paul.) infers the genuineness of both
q As they have of the Jews. Directly.
In Palestine there were no others but
Jews who could be excited against
Christians, and they were obliged to
appear as the persecutors themselves.

15. Who both killed the Lord Jesus ;
see the Notes on Acts ii 23. The
meaning here is, that it was characteristic of the Jews to be engaged in
the work of persecution, and that they
should not regard it as strange that
they who had put their own Messiah
to death, andslain the prophets, should
now be found persecuting the true
children of God. { And their own
prophets ; see Notes on Matt. xxi. 33
--40; xxiii. 29--37; Acts vii. 52.
| And have persecuted us. As at Iconium (Actsxiv. 1), Derbe, and Lystra
(Acts xiv. 6), and at Philippi, Thessalonica, and Berea. The meaning
is, that it was characteristic of them
to persecute, and they spared no one.
If they had persecuted the apostles
themselves, who were their own countrymen, it should not be considered
strange that they should persecute
those who were Gentiles. | And
they please not God. Their conduct
is not such as to please God, but such
as to expose them to his wrath ; ver.
16. The meaningis not that they did
not aim to please God--whatever may
have been the truth about that--but
that they had shown by all their history that their conduct could not meet
with the divine approbation. They
made extraordinary pretensions to
being the peculiar people of God, and
it was important for the apostle to
show that their conduct demonstrated
that they had no such claims. Their
opposition to the Thessalonians, therefore, was no proof that God was opposed to them, and they should not
allow themselves to be troubled by
such opposition. It was rather proof
that they were the friends of God--

shey please not God, and are conrary to all men;
16 Forbidding@ us to speak to

CHAPTER Il.
the Gentiles that they might bi
saved, to fill ® up their sins alway ;
@Ac.17.5,135 18.12, b Gelb. 16; Mat.23.32.

since those who now persecuted them
had been engaged in persecuting the
most holy men that had lived. ¥ And
are contrary toallmen. They do not
merely differ from other men in customs and opinions--which might be
harmless--but they keep up an Lactive
opposition to all other people. It was
not opposition to one nation only, but
to all; it was not to one form of
religion only, but to all--even including God’s last revelation to mankind ;
it was not opposition evinced in their
own country, but they carried it
with them wherever they went. The
truth of this statement is confirmed,
not only by authority of the apostle
and the uniform record in the New
Testament, but by the testimony borne
of them in the classic writers. This
was universally regarded as their national characteristic, for they had so
demeaned themselves as to leave this
impression on the minds of those with
whom they had intercourse. Thus
Tacitus describes them as “‘cherishing
hatred against all others’--adversus
omnes alios hostile odium; Hist. v. 5.
So Juvenal (Sat. xiv. 103, 104), describes them.
Non monstrare vias eadem niai sacra colenti,
Quesitum ad fontem solos deducere verpos.
“ They would not even point out the
way to any one except of the same
religion, nor, being asked, guide any
to afountain except the circumcised.”
So they are called by Appollonius
“atheists and misanthropes, and the
most uncultivated barbarians’’--a9so
xa) pucavSporn mal aduecraru
BaépBapav; Josephus Con. Ap. ii. «14.
So Diodorus Siculus (xxxiv. p. 524),
describes them as ‘‘those alone among
all the nations who were unwilling to
have any intercourse [or intermingling--exiuiZ:a:] with any other nation,
and who regarded all others as enemies’ roreulovs vroruuBavesy
wxdyraeg. Their history had givenabundant occasion for these charges.

16. Forbidding us to speak to the
Gentiles; see Acts xvii. 5, 13.
particular instance is mentioned in

-- xa

No

the life of Paul previous to this, when
they had formally commanded him not
to preach to the heathen, but no one
can doubt that this was one of the
leading points of difference between
him andthem. Paul maintained that
the Jews and Gentiles were now ona
level with regard to salvation; that
the wall of partition was broken down;
that the Jew had no advantages over
the rest of mankind in this respect,
and that the heathen might be saved
without becoming Jews, or being circumcised ; Rom. ii. 25--29 ; iii. 22--

1; Notes, Col. i. 24. The Jews did
not hold it unlawful “to speak to the
Gentiles,’ and even to offer to them
eternal life (Matt. xxiii. 15), but it
was only on condition that they should
become proselytes to their religion,
and should observe the institutions of
Moses. If saved, they held that it
would be as Jews--either originally
such, or such by becoming proselytes.
Paul maintained just the opposite
opinion, that heathens might be saved
without becoming proselytes to the
Jewish system, and that, in fact, salvation was as freely offered to them
astothechildrenof Abraham. Though
there areno express tnstances in which
they prohibited Paul from speaking to
the Gentiles recorded before the date
of this epistle, yet events occurred
afterwards which showed what were
their feelings, and such as to make
it in the highest degree probable that
they had attempted to restrain him ;
see Acts xxi. 21, 22, “And he
[Christ] said unto me [Paul], Depart,
for I will send thee far hence unto
the Gentiles. And they [the Jews]
gave him audience unto this word,
and then lift up their voices and said,
Away with such a fellow from the
earth, for it is not fit that he should
live.’ § That they might be saved.
That is, as freely as others, and on
the same terms, not by conversion to
Judaism, but by repentance and faith.
q To fill up their sins alway. At
all times--réyrore--in every generation. That is, to do now as they
for the wrath is come upon them
to the uttermost, @
@ Re,22.1).

have always done, by resisting God
and exposing themselves to his wrath.
The idea is, that it had been a characteristic of the nation, at all times,
to oppose God, and that they did it
now in this manner in conformity
with their fixed character ; comp.
Acts vii. 51 -- 53, and Notes on
Matt. xxiii. 82, on the expression,
“Fill ye up then the measure of
your fathers.” J For the wrath is
come upon them. This cannot mean
that the wrath of God had been then
actually poured out upon them in
the extreme degree referred to, or
that they had experienced the full
expressions of the divine displeasure,
for this’ epistle was written before
the destruction of their city and temple (see the Introduction) ; but that
the cup of their iniquity was full;
that they were in fact abandoned by
God; that they were the objects even
then of his displeasure, and that their
destruction was so certain that it
might be spoken of as an indubitable fact. The ‘“ wrath of God” may
be said to have come upon a man
when he abandons him, even though
there may not be as yet any external
expressions of his indignation. It is
not punishment that constitutes the
wrath of God. That is the mere
outward expression of the divine
indignation, and the wrath of God
may in fact have come upon a man
when as yet there are no external
tokens of it. The overthrow of Jerusalem and the temple, were but
the outward expressions of the divine displeasure at their conduct.
Paul, inspired to speak of the feelings of God, describes that wrath as
already existing in the divine mind ;
comp. Rom. iv. 17. (| To the uttermost. Gr.--eis rtr0s--to the end ;
that 1s, until wrath shall be complete
or exhausted ; or wrath in the extremest degree. It does not mean
‘to the end of their race or history;”’
nor necessarily to the remotest periods
of time, but to that which constitutes completion, so that there should

17 But we, brethren, being
taken from you for a short time in
presence, not in heart, endeavoured

be nothing lacking of that which
would make indignation perfect : ‘ ¢is
rtdos--gantz und gar’’--thoroughly,
entirely, through and through.” Passow. Some have understood this as
meaning at the last, or at length, as
Macknight, Rosenmiller, Koppe, and
Wetstein; others as referring to duration, meaning that it would follow
them everywhere; but the more correct interpretation seems to be to refer
it to that extremity of calamity and
woe which was about to come upon
the nation. For an account of this,
see Notes on Matt. xxiy. 21.

17. But we, brethren, being taken
from you. There is more implied
in the Greek word here rendered,
“being taken from you ”’--éropdaveSévres--than appears from our translation. It properly has relation to
the condition of an orphan (comp.
Notes on John xiv. 18), or one who
is bereaved of parents. Then it is
used in a more general sense, denoting to be bereaved of ; aud in this
place it does not mean merely that
he was ‘taken from them,’’ but there
is included the idea that it was like
a painful bereavement. It was such
a state as that of one who had lost a
parent. No word, perhaps, could
have expressed stronger attachment
for them. { Fora short time. Gr.,
“For the time of an hour ;”’ that is,
for a brief period. The meaning is,
that when he left them he supposed
it would be only for a short time.
The fact seems to have been (Acts
xvii. 10), that it was supposed, when
Paul was sent to Berea, that things
would soon be in such a state that
he could safely return to Thessalonica. He was ‘‘sent”’ there by those
who thought it was necessary for
the safety of some of his friends at
Thessalonica, and he evidently purposed to return as soon as it could
properly be done. It had, in fact,
however, turned out to be a long and
painful absence. § Jn presence, not
in heart. My heart was still with
you. Thisis an elegant and touch-

the more abundantly to see your
face with great desire.

18 Wherefore we would have
come unto you, even I Paul, once
and again; but Satan hindered us.

19 For what is our hope, or
joy, or crown of! rejoicing¢ Are

ing expression, which we still use to

denote affection for an absent friend.
{ Endeavoured the more abundantly
to see your face. Made every endeavour possible. It was from no
want of affection that I have not
done it, but from causes beyond my
control, {| With great desire ; comp.
Notes, Luke xxii. 15.

18. Wherefore we would have come
unto you, even I Paul. The phrase
“even I Paul,’ seems to be used by
way of emphasis. He had a special
desire to go himself. He had sent
Timothy to them (chap. iii. 2, 5), and
perhaps, some might have been disposed to allege that Paul was afraid
to go himself, or that he did not feel
interest enough in them to go, though
he was willing to send one to visit
them. Paul, therefore, is at much
pains to assure them that his long
separation from them was unavoidable.
q But Satan hindered us; comp.
Notes on 2 Cor. xii. 7. In what way
this was done is unknown, and conjecture would be useless. The apostle
recognised the hand of Satan in frustrating his attempt to do good, and
preventing the accomplishment of his
strong desire to see his Christian
friends. In the obstacles, therefore,
to the performance of our duty, and
in the hindrances of our enjoyment,
it is not improper to trace the hand
of the great enemy of good. The
agency of Satan may, for aught we
can tell, often be employed in the
embarrassments that we meet with
in life. The hindrances which we
meet with in our efforts to do good,
when the providence of God seems
to favour us, and his word and Spirit
seem to call us to a particular duty,
often look very much like the work
of Satan. They are just such obstructions as a very wicked being
would be glad to throw in our way.

19, For what is our hope. That

not even ye in@the presence
> of our Lord Jesus Christ at his ¢
coming?
_ 20 For ye are our glory and
joy.
1 or, glorying.
b Jude 24.

a 2 Co.1.14; Phi.4.!.
c Rel.7.

is, “I had a strong desire to see you;
to assist you; to enjoy your friendship ; for you are my hope and joy, and
my absence does not arise from a
want of affection.’ The meaning,
when he says that they were his
“hope,” is, that their conversion and
salvation was one of the grounds of
his hope of future blessedness. It
was an evidence that he was a faithful servant of God, and that he would
be rewarded in heaven. {J Or joy.
The source of joy here and in heaven.
{ Or crown of rejoicing. Marg., as
in Gr., glorying ; that is, boasting,
or exulting. The allusion is, probably,
to the victors at the Grecian games ;
and the sense is, that he rejoiced in
their conversion as the victor there
did in the garland which he had won;
Notes, 1 Cor. ix. 24--27. { Are not
even ye. Or, will not you be? § Ln
the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ
at hiscoming. ‘‘ Whenthe Lord Jesus
appears at the end of the world, then
our highest source of happiness and
honour will be your conversion and
salvation.” Then their salvation
would be a proof of his fidelity. It
would fill his soul with the highest
happiness, that he had been the
means of saving them from ruin.

20. For ye are our glory and joy.
The meaning is, that the source of
happiness to a minister of the gospel
in the day of judgment will be the
conversion and salvation of souls.
The object of the apostle in dwelling
on this in a manner so tender and
affectionate is, to show them that his
leaving them, and his long absence
from them, were not caused by any
want of affection for them.

(1.) Ministers of the gospel should
be entirely sincere, and without guile.
They should attempt to carry no measure--not even the conversion of sinners--by trick or management; ver.3-5-
(2.) They shouid not make it a
point to please men; ver. 4. If
they do please men; or if their
ministry is acceptable to men, they
should not regard it, indeed, as proof
that they are unfaithful, for they
“should have a good report of them
that are without ;” nor should they
make it a point to displease men, or
consider it a proof that because men
are offended, therefore they are faithful ; but it should not be their leading
aim or purpose to gratify men. They
should preach the truth ; and if they
do this, God will take care of their
reputation, and give them just as much
ys they ought to have. The same
principle should operate with all
Christians. They should do right,
and leave their reputation with God.

(3.) Ministers of the gospel should be
gentle, tender, and affectionate. They
should be kind in feeling, and courteous in manner--like a father or a
mother ; ver. 7,11. Nothing is ever
gained by a sour, harsh, crabbed, dissatisfied manner. Sinners are never
scolded either into duty or into heaven.
“ Flies are not caught with vinegar.”

No man is a better or more faithful |

preacher because he is rough in manner, coarse or harsh in his expressions,
or sour in his intercourse with mankind. Not thus was the Master or
Paul. There is no crime in being
polite and courteous ; none in observing the rules of good breeding, and
paying respect to the sensibilities of
others ; and there is no piety in outraging all the laws which society has
found necessary to adopt to promote
happy intercourse. What is wrong we
should indeed oppose--but it should
be in the kindest manner towards the
versons of those who do wrong ; what
is true and right we should maintain
and defend--and we shall always do it
more effectually if we do it kindly.
(4.) Ministers should be willing to
labour in any proper calling, if it is
necessary for their own support or to
do good; ver. 9. It is, indeed, the
Nuty of a people to support the gospel,
yut there may be situations where
they are not able to do it, and a minister should be able to earn something,
in some other way, and should be

willing to do it. Paul made tents:
and if he was willing to do that, a
minister should not feel himself degraded if heis obliged to make shoes,
or to hoe corn, or to plough, or to keez
cattle. He had better not do it, if he
can avoid it well--for he needs his
time for his more important work ; but.
he should feel it no dishonour if he is
obliged to do it--and should feel that
it is a privilege to preach the gospel
even if he 7s obliged to support himself by making either tents or shoes.
It is no dishonour for a minister to
work hard ; and it is not well for a man
to enter the ministry wholly unacquainted with every other way of procuring an honest living.

(5.) Every minister should be able
to appeal to the people among whom
he has laboured in proof that he is an
honest man, and lives consistently
with his profession ; ver. 1, 9, 10, 11.
The same remark applies to all other
Christians. They should so live that
they may at once refer to their neighbours in proof of the uprightness 0!
their lives, and their consistent walk.
But to be enabled to do this, a man
should live as he ought--for the world
generally forms avery correct estimate
of character.

(6.) The joy ofa minister in the day
of judgment will be measured by the
amount of good which he has done, and
the number of souls which he has been
the means of converting and saving ;
ver 19. It will not be the honour which
he has received from men; the titles
which they have conferred on him; the
commendation which he has received
for eloquence or talent, or the learning
which he has acquired, but it will be
found in the number of those who have
been converted from the error of their
ways, and in the evidence of the good
which he did onthe earth. And will
not the same thing be substantily true
of all others who bear the Christian
name? Will it then be a source of joy
to them that they were richer than their
neighbours ; or that they were advanced to higherhonours; or that they had
a inore splendid mansion, or were able
to fare more ‘‘sumptuously?”” The
good that we do will be remembered
certainly with pleasure in the day of

judgment : of how many other things
which now interest us so much can
the same thing be said?

(7.) Paul expected evidently to recognise the ‘Thessalonian Christians at
the day of judgment, for he said that
they would be then his “joy and crown
of rejoicing ;” ver. 19. But this could
not be, unless he should be able to
know those who had been converted
by his instrumentality. If he expected then to recognise them, and to rejoice with them, then we also may
hope to know our pious friends in that
happy world. Nothing in the Bible
forbids this hope, and we can hardly
believe that God has created the
strong ties which bind us to each
other, to endure for the present life
only. If Paul hoped to meet those
who had been converted’ by his instrumentality, and to rejoice with
them there, then the parent may hope
to meet the child over whose loss he
mourned ; the husband and wife will
meet again ; the pious children of a
family will be re-assembled ; and the
pastor and his flock will be permitted
to rejoice together before the Lord.
This hope, which nothing in the Bible
forbids us to entertain, should do much
to alleviate the sorrow of the parting
pang, and may be an important and
powerful inducement to draw our own
thoughts to a brighter and a better
world. Of many of the living it is true
that the best and dearest friends which
they have are already in heaven--and
how should their own hearts pant that
they may meet them there !

This chapter is a continuation of
the course of thought pursued in the
previous chapter, and seems designed
to meet the same state of feeling existing in Thessalonica, and the same objection which some there urged against
the apostle. The objection seems to
have been, that he had really no attachment for them, and no regard for
their welfare ; that he had fled from
them on the slightest danger, and
that when the danger was passed he
had not returned, but had left them
to bear their afflictions alone. It

CHAPTER Il.
appears to have been inferred from
his long absence, that he had no solicitude for their welfare, and had
brought them into difficulties, te
escape from which, or to bear which,
he was now indisposed to render any
assistance. It was important, therefore, for him to remind them of what
he had actually done, and to state his
real feelings towards them. He refers
them, therefore, to the following things
as proof of his interest in them, and
his affection for them :--

(1.) He had sent Timothy to them
at great personal inconvenience, when
he could not go himself ; ver. 1--5.

(2.) He had been greatly comforted
by the report which Timothy had
brought of their steadfastness in the
faith; ver.6--8. Evory expression
of their attachment to him had gone
to his heart, and their faith and charity
had been to him in his trials the source
of unspeakable consolation. His very
life depended, as it were, on their
fidelity, and he says he should live
and be happy if they stood fast in the
Lord ; ver. 8.

(3.) He expresses again the ear.
nest desire which he had to see them ;
says that it had been to him the subject of unceasing prayer night and
day, and beseeches God again now
that he would be pleased to direct
his way to them; ver. 9--11.

(4.) As a proof of affection, the
chapter is closed with a fervent prayer
that God would cause them to abound
more and more in love, and would
establish their hearts unblameable
before him ; ver. 12, 13. The Thessalonians well knew the apostle Paul.
They had had abundant proof of his
love when he was with them ; and if
his enemies there had succeeded in
any degree in causing their affection
towards him to become cool, or to
excite suspicions that he was not
sincere, their love must have been
rekindled, and their suspicions must
have been entirely allayed by the
expressions of attachment in this
chapter. Language of warmer love,
or of deeper interest in the welfare
of others, it would not be possible to
find anywhere.

CHAPTER Ii.
HEREFORE when we
could no longer forbear, we

thought it good to be left at Athen:
alone ;
2 And sent Timotheus, our

1. Wherefore; see chap. ii. 18.
This particle (3) is designed here
to refer to another proof of his affection for them. One evidence had
becn referred to in his strong desire
to visit them, which he had been unable to accomplish (chap. ii. 18), and
he here refers to another--to wit, the
fact that he had sent Timothy to
them. J We could no longer forbear. That is, when J could not
(ver. 5), for there is every evidence
that Paul refers to himself only
though he uses the plural form
of the word. There was no one
with him at Athens after he had sent
Timothy away (Acts xvii. 15; xviil.
5), and this shows that when, in chap.
ii, 6, he uses the term aposties in the
plural number, he refers to himself
only, and does not mean to give the
name to Timothy and Silas. If this
be so, Timothy and Silas are nowhere
called ‘‘aposties ’’ in the New Testament. The word rendered here
could forbear (ortysvres), Means, properly, to cover, to conceal ; and then
to hide or conceal anger, impatience,
weariness, &c.; that is, to hold out
as to anything, to bear with, to endure. It is rendered suffer in 1 Cor.
ix. 12; beareth, 1 Cor. xiii. 7; and
forbear, 1 Thess. iii. 1, 5. It is not
elsewhere used in the New Testament. It means that he could no
longer bear up under, hide, or suppress his impatience in regard to
them--his painful emotions--his wish
to know of their state ; and he therefore sent Timothy to them. {| We
thought it good. Iwas willing to
suffer the inconvenience of parting
with him in order to show my concern for you. § To be left at Athens
alone. Paul had been conducted to
Athens from Berea, where he remained until Silas and Timothy
could come to him; Acts xvii. 15.
It appears from the statement here
that Timothy had joined him there,
but such was his solicitude for the
church at Thessalonica, that he very
soon after sent him there, and chose

to remain himself alone at Athens.
Why he did not himself return to
Thessalonica, is not stated. It is
evidently implied here that it was a
great personal inconvenience for
him thus to.part with Timothy, and
to remain alone at Athens, and that
he evinced the strong love which he
had for the church at Thessalonica
by being willing to submit to it.
What that inconvenience consisted
in, he has not stated, but it is not
difficult to understand. (1.) He was
among total strangers, and, when
Timothy was gone, without an acquaintance or friend. (2.) The aid
of Timothy was needed in order to
prosecute the work which he contemplated. He had requested that
Timothy should join him as soon as
possible when he left Berea (Acts
xvii, 15), and he evidently felt it desirable that in preaching the gospel
in that city he should have all the
assistance he could obtain. Yet he
was willing to forego those comforts
and advantages in order to promote
the edification of the church at Thessalonica.

2. And sent Timotheus. That is,
evidently, he sent him from Athens
--for this is the fair construction of
the passage. But in the history
(Acts xvii.) there is no mention that
Timothy came to Athens at all, and
it may be asked how this statement
is reconcilable with the record in the
Acts? It is mentioned there that
“the brethren sent away Paul [from
Berea] to go, as it were, to the sea:
but Silas and Timotheus abode there
still. And they that conducted Paul
brought him to Athens;’’ Acts xvii.
14, 15. The history further states,
that after Paul had remained some
time at Athens, he went to Corinth,
where he was joined by Timothy
and Silas, who came to him “from
Macedonia ;” Acts xviii. 5. But in
order to reconcile the account in the
Acts with the statement before us in
the epistle, it is necessary to suppose
that Timothy had come to Athens

brother, and minister of God, and
our fellow-labourer in the gospel

of Christ, to establish you, and to

In reconciling these accounts, we
may observe, that though the history
does not expressly mention the arrival of Timothy at Athens, yet there
are circumstances mentioned which
render this extremely probable. First,
as soon as Paul reached Athens, he
sent a message back to Silas and
Timothy to come to him as soon as
possible, and there is every probability
that this request would be obeyed;
Acts xvii. 15. Secondly, his stay at
Athens was on purpose that they
might joinhim there. ‘ Now whilst
Paul waited for them at Athens, his
spirit was stirred within him ;’’ Acts
xvil. 16. Thirdly, his departure from
Athens does not appear to have been
in any sort hastened or abrupt. He
had an opportunity of seeing the city
(Acts xvii. 23); he disputed in the
synagogue and in the market “ daily ”
(Acts xvii. 17); he held a controversy with the philosophers (Acts xvii.
18--22); he made converts there
(Acts xvii. 24), and “after these
things”? he calmly went to Corinth.
There was no tumult or excitement,
and it is not suggested that he was
driven away, asin other places, because his life wasin danger. There
was, therefore, ample time for Timothy to come to him there--for Paul
was at liberty to remain as long as
he pleased, and as he stayed there
for the express purpose of having

Timothy and Silas meet him, it is to | /

be presumed that his wish was in
this respect accomplished. Fourthly, the sending back of Timothy to
Macedonia, as mentioned in the
epistle, is a circumstance which will
account for the fact mentioned in Acts
xviii. 5, that Timothy came to him
“at Corinth,’ instead of at Athens.
We had given directions for him to
meet him at Athens Acts xvii, 15),
but the history mentions only that
he met him, after a long delay, at
Corinth. This delay, and this change
of place, when they rejoined each
other for the purpose of labouring
together, can only be accounted for

comfort you

concerning your
faith ;

by the supposition that Timothy had
come to him at Athens, and had been
immediately sent back to Macedonia, with instructions to join him
again at Corinth. This is one of the
“undesigned coincidences” between
the history in the Acts of the Apostles and the epistles of Paul, of which
Paley (Hor. Paul.) has made so good
use in demonstrating the genuineness
of both. ‘The epistle discloses a
fact which is not preserved in the
history ; but which makes what is said
in the history more significant, probable, and consistent. The history
bears marks of an omission; the
epistle furnishes a circumstance which
supplies that omission.” J Our
brother; Notes, Col. i. 1. The mention of his being a “ brother” is designed to show his interest in the
church there. He did not send one
whose absence would be no inconvenience to him, or for whom he had no
regard. He sent one who was as dear
to him as a brother. And minister
of God. Another circumstance showing his affection for them. He did
not send a layman, or one who could
not be useful with him or to them,
but he sent one fully qualified to preach
to them, and to break to them the
bread of life. One of the richest tohens of affection which can be shown
to any people, is to send to them a
| faithful minister of God. § And our
| fellow-labourer inthe gospel of Christ.

A third token of affectionate interest
|in their welfare. The meaning is,
“T did not send one whom [I did not
' want, or who could be of no use here,
but one who was a fellow-labourer
with me, and whose aid would have
/been of essential service to me. In
parting with him, therefore, for your
| welfare I showed a strong attachment
for you. I was willing to endure per-
‘sonal inconvenience, and additional
toil, in order to promote your welfare.”
-¥ To establish you. To strengthen
you; to make you firm--sernpiza
This was to be done by presenting
‘such considerations as would enable
38 That * no man should be
moved by these afflictions: for
yourselves know that we 8 are appointed thereunto.

4 For verily, when we were

a Ep. 3. 13. b John 16. 2; 1 Co. 4. 9;
2 Ti 3:12; 1 Pe. 2.215

them to maintain their faith steadfastly in their trials. | And to comfort you concerning your faith. It
is evident that they were suffering
persecution on account of their faith
in the Lord Jesus; that is, for their
belief in him asa Saviour. The object of sending Timethy was to suggest such topics of consolation as
would sustain them in their trials--
that is, that he was the Son of God;
that the people of God had been persecuted in all ages; that God was
able to support them, &c.

8. That no man should be moved.
The word rendered moved (cuivw) occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It properly means to wag, to
move to and fro, as of dogs which wag
their tails in fondness (Hom. Od. K.
ZIG. we AE Ale Net Xena OVI axle
258); then to caress, to fawn upon, to
flatter; then to move or waver in
mind--as from fear; to dread, to
tremble. See Passow and Wetstein.
Here the sense is, to be so moved or
agitated by fear, or by the terror of
persecution, as to forsake their religion. The object of sending Timothy
was, that they might not be thus
moved, but that amidst all opposition
they might adhere steadfastly to their
religion. {| These afflictions; Notes,
chap. ii. 14. § For yourselves know
that we areappointed thereunto. Itis
aot quite certain whether by the word
“we” here the apostlerefers to himself;
or to himself and the Thessalonians ;
or to Christians in general. On either
supposition what he saysis true, and
either would meet thecase. It would
be most to the purpose, however, to
suppose that he means to state the
general idea that all Christians are
exposed to persecution and could not
hope to avoid it. Ut would then appear that the Thessalonians had partaken only of the common lot. Still
there may have been a special refer-

with you, we told you before
that we should suffer tribulation ;
even as it came to pass, and ye
know.

5 For this cause, when @ I could

@ ver, |.

ence to the fact that Paul and his
fellow-labourers there were subjected
to trials ; and if this be the reference,
then the idea is, that the Thessalonians should not be ‘‘moved”’ by their
trials, for even their teachers were
not exempt. Even their enemies
could not say that the apostle and his
co-workers were impostors, for they
had persevered in preaching the gospel when they knew that these trials
were coming uponthem. The phrase,
“we are appointed thereunto,” means
that such was the divine arrangement.
No one who professed Christianity
could hope to be exempted from trial,
for it was the common lot of all believers ; comp. Notes on 1 Cor. iv. 9;
2 Tim. iii. 12.

4. For verily, when we were with
you, we told you before, &e. Itis not
mentioned in the history (Acts xvii.)
that Paul thus predicted that peculiar
trials would come upon them, but
there is no improbability in what is
here said. He was with them long
enough to discourse to them on a
great variety of topics, and nothing
can be more probable, than that in
their circumstances, the subjects of
persecution and affliction would be
prominenttopics of discourse. There
was every reason to apprehend that
they would meet with opposition on
account of their religion, and nothing
was more natural than that Paul
should endeavour to prepare their
minds for it beforehand. { That we
should suffer tribulation. We who
preached to you; perhaps also including those to whom they preached.
q Even asit came to pass, and ye know.
When Paul, Silas, and Timothy were
driven away, and when the church
was so much agitated, by the opposition of the Jews; Acts xvii. 5--8.

5. For this cause. Since I knew
that you were so liable to be persecuted, and since I feared that some might

no longer forbear, I sent to know

your faith, lest * by some means

the tempter have tempted you, and
our labour © be in vain.
6 Butnow when Timotheus came

from you unto us, and brought us|

good tidings of your faith and cha-

city and that ye have good remem-
@2 Co.11.2,3. 6 Ga.4,li. 6 Phi.l.8.

be turned from the truth by this op-

position. § When JI could no longer
forbear; Notes, ver.1. (J sent to
know your faith. Thatis, your fidelity, or your steadfastness in the gospel.
| Lest by some means. Either by allurements to apostasy, set before you
by your former heathen friends; or

by the arts of false teachers ; or by |}

the severity of suffering. Satan has
many methods of seducing men from
the truth, and Paul was fearful that
by some of his arts he might be successful there. § The tempter. Satan ;
for though the Jews were the immediate actors in those transactions, yet
the apostle regarded them as being
under the direction of Satan, and as
accomplishing his purposes. He was,
therefore, the real author of the persecutions which had been excited.
He is here called the “ Tempter,” as
he is often (comp. Matt. iv.), and the
truths taught are (1.) that Satan is
the great author of persecution ; and

(2.) that in a time of persecution--or |
of trial of any kind--he endeavours
to tempt men to swerve from the |

truth, and to abandon their religion.
In persecution, men are tempted to

apostatize from God, in order to avoid |

suffering. In afflictions of other
kinds, Satan often tempts the sufferer
to murmur and complain ; to charge
God with harshness, partiality, and
severity, and to give vent to expressions that will show that religion has
none of its boasted power to support
the soul in the day of trial; comp.
Job i. 9--11. In all times of affliction, as well as in prosperity, we may

be sure that “the Tempter” is not.

far off, and should be on our guard
against his wiles. §] And our labour
be in vain. By your being turned
from the faith; Notes, Gal. iv. 11.

6. But now when Timotheus came

brance of us always, desiring ¢
greatly to see us, as we also fo sev
you;

7 Therefore, brethren, we were
comforted 4 over you, in all our affliction and distress, by your faith :

8 For now we live, if ye stand

fast ¢ in the Lord.
d 2 Co.7.6,7. ¢ Ep.6.13,14; Phi4.1.

from you unto us. To Corinth, after
he had been sent to Thessalonica ;
Acts xviii. 5; comp. Notes on ver. 2.
{| And brought us good tidings. A
cheerful or favourable account. Gr.
“evangelizing ;”’ that is, bringing
good news. § Ofyour faith. Of your
faithfulness or fidelity. Amidst all
their trials they evinced fidelity to the
Christian cause. {| And charity.
Love ; Notes, 1 Cor. xiii. 1. § And
that ye have good remembrance of us
always. Thatis, probably, they showed their remembrance of Paul by
obeying his precepts, and by cherishing an affectionate regard for him,
notwithstanding all the efforts which
had been made to alienate their affec -
tions fromhim. J Greatly desiring to
see us, as we also to see you. ‘here
was no disposition to blame him for
having leftthem, or because he did not
return to them. ‘They would have
welcomed him again as their teacher
and friend. The meaning of this is,
that there was between him and them
a strong mutual attachment.

7. We are comforted over you ; sec
Notes, 2 Cor. i. 8--7 ; vii. 6, 7. The
sense here is, that their steadfastness
was a great source of comfort to him
in his trials. It was an instance
where the holy lives and the fidelity
of a people did much, as will always
be the case, to lighten the burdens
and cheer the heart of a minister. of
the gospel. In the inevitable trials
of the ministerial office there is no
source of comfort more rich and pure
than this.

8. For now we live, if ye stand fast
inthe Lord. This is equivalent to
saying, “‘ My life and comfort depend
on your stability in the faith, and your
correct Christian walk ;” comp. Martial vi.70. Non est vivere, sed valere,
vita--‘‘ Life consists not merely in
9 For what thanks can we render to God again for you, for all
the joy wherewith we joy for your
sakes before our God ;
10 Night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your

face, and might perfect 4 that which
is lacking in your faith ?

11 Now God himself and our
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
1 direct our way unto you.

@2Co0.13.9,11; Col.4.12. lor, guide.

living, butin the enjoyment of health.”
See also Seneca, Epis. 99, and Manilius,iv. 5, as quoted by Wetstein. The
meaning hereis, that Paul now enjoyed
life ; he had that which constituted
real life, in the fact that they acted
as became Christians, and so as to
show that his labour among them had
not been in vain. The same thing
here affirmed is true of all faithful
ministers of the gospel. They feel
that they have something that may
be called life, and that is worth living
for, when those to whom they preach
maintain a close walk with God.

9. For what thanks can we render to
Godagain. That is, what expression
of thanksgiving can we render to God
that shall be an equivalent for the joy
which your holy walk has furnished,
or which will suitably express our
gratitade for it.

10. Night and day. Constantly.
{ Praying exceedingly. Gr., abundantly ; that is, there was much more
than ordinary prayer. He made this
a special subject of prayer; he urged
it with earnestness, and without intermission ; comp. chap. ii. 17. § And
might perfect that which ts lacking in
your faith. Might render it complete,
or fill up anything which is wanting.
The word here used (xarapricas),
means, properly, to make fully ready,
to put full in order, to make complete ;
see Notes, Rom. ix. 22; 2 Cor. xii.
9; Gal. vi. 1. It is rendered mending, Matt. iv. 21; Mark i. 19; perfect and perfected, Matt. xxi. 19;
Luke vi. 40; 2 Cor. xiii. 11 ; 1 Thess.
ii. 10; Heb. xiii. 21; 1 Pet. v.10;
fitted, Rom. ix. 22; perfectly joined
together, 1 Cor. i. 10; vestore, Gal.
vi. 1; prepared, Tleb. x. 5; and
framed, Heb. xi. 8. It is not elsewhere used in the New Testament.
The meaning here is, that whatever
was deficient in their views of religious doctrine the apostle desired to
supply. Itis to be rememhered that

he was with them but a comparatively
short time before he was compelled
to depart to Berea, and it is reasonable to suppose that there were many
subjects on which he would be glad to
have an opportunity to instruct them
more fully.

11. Now God himself. This is evidently a prayer. He earnestly sought
of God that he might be permitted to
visit them, and that he would so prepare the way that he might do it.
Q Andour Father. Evenour Father.
The reference is particularly to the
“Father,” the First Person of the
Trinity. It does not refer to the
divine nature in general, or to God
as such, but to God as the Father of
the Lord Jesus. It is a distinct
prayer offered to him that he would
direct his way to them. It is right
therefore to offer prayer to God as
the First Person of the Trinity.
q And our Lord Jesus Christ. This
also is a prayer, as much as the former was, for it can be understood in
no other way. What can be its meaning, unless the apostle believed that
the Lord Jesus had power to direct.
his way to them, and that it was proper for him to express this wish to
him ; that is, to p. ay to him? If this
be so, then it is right to pray to the
Lord Jesus, or to worship him ; see
Notes on John xx. 28; Acts i. 24.
Would Paul have prayed to an angel
to direct his way to the church at
Thessalonica? Direct our way
unto you. Marg., guide. The Greek
word -- xarevduyw -- means, to guide
straight tewards or upon anything.
It is rendered guide, in Luke i. 79,
and direct here and in2 Thess. iii. 5.
It does not elsewhere occur in the
New Testament. The idea is that ot
conducting one straight to a place,
and not by a round-about course.
Here the petition is, that God would
remove all obstacles so that he could
come directly to them.

12 And the Lord make you tojat the coming of our Lord Jesus
increase and abound in love @ one| Christ with all his saints.
toward another, and toward all CHAPTER IV.

men, even as we do toward you: URTHERMORE then we ! be13 To the end he may stablish seech you, brethren, and 2 ex-

your hearts © unblameable in holi- | hort you by the Lord Jesus, that
ness before God, even our Father, ' as ye have received of us, how ye

@1 John 4.7-12. 6 2 Th.2.17; 1 John3.20,21. |
¢ Zec.14.5; Jude 14.

1 or, request. 2 or, beseech.

12. And the Lord make you to in-| come to appear amidst that vast ascrease and abound in love; comp.|semblage of holy beings, the honours
Notes, 2 Cor. ix. 8. Theword*Lord’’ | of the world will appear to be small
here probably refers tothe Lord Jesus, | things; the wealth of the earth will
as this is the name by which he is} appear worthless, and all the pleacommonly designated in the New| sures of this life beneath our notice.
Testament ; see Notes on Acts i. 24.| Happy will they be who are prepared
If this be so, then this is a petition to | for the solemnities of that day, and
the Lord Jesus as the fountain of all| who shall have led such a life of holy
grace and goodness. leve--of pure devotion to the Re-

13. To the end he may establish your | deemer--of deadness to the world---
hearts. Thatis, “may the Lord cause | and of zeal in the cause of pure reyou to increase in love (ver. 12), zm | ligion--of universal justice, fidelity,
order that you may be established, | honesty, and truth, as to be without
and be without blame in the day of} reproach, and to meet with the apjudgment.” The idea is, that if cha- | probation of their Lord.

rity were diffused through their hearts, CHAPTERVIV:
they would abound in every virtue, ANALYSIS OF THE CHAPTER.
and would be at length found blame- This chapter, properly, comprises

less. | Unblaimeable; see Notes on| two parts :--First, various practical!
chap. i. 10; Phil. ii. 15; iii. 6; Heb. | exhortations, ver. 1--12; and secondly,
viii. 7; comp. Luke i. 6; 1 Thess. v.| suggestions designed to console those
23. The meaning is, so that there | who have been bereaved; ver. 13--
couldbenochargeor accusationagainst | 18.

them. ¥ Jn holiness. Notinoutward| The first part embraces the followconduct merely, or the observance of | ing topics: --

rites and forms of religion, but in (1.) An exhortation to increase
purity ofheart. § At the coming of our and abound in the Christian virtues
Lord Jesus Christ. To judge the, which they had already manifested ;
world ; Notes, chap.i.10. Asweare ver. 1, 2.

to appear before him, we should so (2.) A particular exhortation on the
live that our Judge will find nothing! subject of sanctification (ver. 3--8),
in us to be blamed. §J With all his in which two points are specified, prosaints. With all his holy ones--ray | bably as illustrations of the general
éyiwy. The word includes his angels, subject, and embracing those in rewho will come with him (Matt. xxv.| gard to which they were exposed to
31), and all the redeemed, who will | special danger. The first was fornithen surround him. The idea is, that | cation, the other was fraud.

before that holy assemblage it is de- (3.) An exhortation to brotherly
sirable that we should be prepared | love; ver. 9, 10.

to appear blameless. We should be| (4.) An exhortation to quiet indusfitted to be welcomed to the “ goodly | try, and to honesty in their dealings.
fellowship” of the angels, and to be| particularly with those who ‘were
regarded as worthy to be numbered | Christians ; ver. 11, 12.

with the redeemed who “ have washed The second part is designea to comtheir robes and have made them pure | fort the Thessalonians who had been
in the.blood of the Lamb.” When we! bereaved ; ver. 13 -- 18. Some of their
ought to walk @ and to please God,
so ye would abound > more and
more.

2 For ye know what commanda Col.1.10. 61 Co.15.58. ¢1 Co. 6.15,18.

number had died. They appear to
have been beloved members of the
church, and dear friends of those to
whom the apostle wrote. To console
them he brings into view the doctrine
of the second coming of the Saviour,
andthe truth that they would be raised
up to live with him for ever. He reminds them that those who had died
were ‘asleep ’’--reposing in a gentle
slumber, as tf they were to be awakened again (ver. 13); that they should
not sorrow as they did who have no
hepe (ver. 13); that if they believed
that Jesus died and rose again, they
ought to believe that God would raise
up all those who sleep in Jesus (ver.
14); that in the last day they would
rise before the living should be changed, and that the living would not be
taken up to heaven and leave their
departed friends in their graves (ver.
15, 16), and that both the living and
the dead would be raised up to heaven,
and would be for ever with the Lord ;
ver. 17. With this prospect, they had
every ground of comfort which they
could desire, and they should sustain
each other in their trials by this
bright hope; ver. 18.

1. Furthermore then. Tod Amey.
“ As to what remains.” That is, all
that remains is to offer these exhortations; see Notes, 2 Cor. xiii. 11;
Gal. vi. 17; Eph. vi. 10; Phil. iv. 8.
The phrase is a formula appropriate
to the end of an argument or discourse.
{ We beseech you. Marg., request.
The Greek is, “we ask you’’--ipwtaey. It is not as strong a word as
that which follows § And exhort you.
Marg., beseech. This is the word
which is commonly used to denote
earnest exhortation. The use of these
words here implies that Paul regarded
the subject as of great importance.
He might have commanded them--
but kind exhortation usually accom
plishes more than a command. J By
the Lord Jesus. In his name and by
his authority J Thatas ve have re-

ments we gave you by the Lord
Jesus.

8 For this is the will of God,
even your sanctification, that ° ye
should abstain from fornication ;

ceived of us. As you were taught by
us. Paul doubtless had given them
repeated instructions as to their duty
as Christians. § How ye ought te
walk. That is, how ye ought to live.
Life is often represented as a journey;
Rom vi. 43 viii. 1; 1 Cor. v. 7;
Gal. v1. 16 ; Eph.iv.1. So ye would
abound more and more. ‘‘ That is,
follow the directions which they had
received more andmore fully.” Abdott.

2. For yeknow what commandments.
It was but a short time since Paul
was with them, and they could not
but recollect the rules of living which
he had laid down. § By the Lord
Jesus. By the authority of the Lord
Jesus. Some of those rules, or commandments, the apostle refers to, probably, in the following verses.

3. For this is the will of God,
even your sanctification. It is the
will or command of God that you
should be holy. This does not refer
to the purpose or decree of God, and
does not mean that he intended to
make them holy--but it means that
it was his command that they should
be holy. It was also true that it
was agreeable to the divine will or
purpose that they should be holy, and
that he meant to use such an influence as to secure this; but this is not
the truth taught here. This text,
therefore, should not be brought as
a proof that God intends to make his
people holy, or that they are sanctified. It is a proof only that he requires holiness. The word here rendered sanctification--ayiacuis--is not
used in the Greek classics, but is
several times found in the New Testament. It is rendered holiness, Rom.
Viel 95022)-ed| Thesss tvee 7a ke binds
15; Heb. xii. 14; and sanctification,
1 Cor. i. 30; 1 Thess. iv. 3, 4; 2
Thess. ii. 18, and 1 Pet. i. 2; see
Notes, Rom. vi. 19; 1 Cor. i. 30. It
moans here purity of life, and particularly abstinence from those vices
which dehase and degrade the soul

A.D. 52.j
4 That every one of you should

know how to possess his vessel in |

sanctification and honour ;
5 Not in the lust of concupis-

Sanctification consists in two things,
(1.) in ‘‘ ceasing to do evil ;” and (2.)
in “learning to do well.” Or in
other words, the first work of sanctification is in overcoming the propensities to evil in our nature, and
checking and subduing the unholy
habits which we had formed before
we became Christians; the second
part of the work consists in cultivating the positive principles of holiness
in the soul. § Thatye should abstain
from fornication. A vice which was
freely indulged among the heathen,
and to which, from that fact, and
from their own former habits, they
were particularly exposed. On the
fact that they were thus exposed, and
on the reasons for these solemn commands on the subject, see Notes on
Acts xv. 20, and 1 Cor. vi. 18.

4. That every one of you should
know how to possess his vessel. The
word vessel here (cxevos), probably
refers to the body. When it is so
used, it is either because the body is
frail and feeble, like an earthen vessel,
easily broken (2 Cor. iv. 7), or because it is that which contains the
soul, or in which the soul is lodged.
Lucret. Lib. iii. 441. The word
vessel also (Heb. dz, Gr. cxeios) was
used by the latter Hebrews to denote
a wife, as the vessel of her husband.
Schettg. Hor. Heb. p. 827. Comp.
Wetstein im loc. Many, as Augustine, Wetstein, Schettgen, Koppe,
Robinson (Lex.), and others, have
supposed that this is the reference
here ; comp. 1 Pet. iii. 7. The word
body, however, accords more naturally with the usual signification of

the word, and as the apostle was |

giving directions to the whole church,
embracing both sexes, it is hardly
probable that he confined his direction to those who had wives. It was
the duty of females, and of the un-

married among the males, as well as of |

married men, to observe this command.

we should preserve the body pure ;’ Many

\
cence, even as the Gentiles * which
know not God:
6 That no man go beyond and
@ Ep.4.17,18.

see Notes on 1 Cor. vi. l8--20. § In
sanctification and honour. Should
not debase or pollute it ; that is, that
we should honour it as a noble work
of God, to be employed for pure purposes ; Notes, 1 Cor. vi. 19.

5. Not in the lust of concupiscence.
In gross gratifications. J Even as
the Gentiles. This was, and is, a
common vice among the heathen;
see Notes, Acts xv. 20 ; Rom. i. 29;
Eph. iv. 17, 18, and the reports of
missionaries everywhere. {| Which
know not God; see Notes, Rom. i.
21, 28; Eph. ii. 12.

6. That no man go beyond. satpBaivey. This word means, to make to
go over, as, é. g., a wall or mountain; then, to overpass, to wit, certain limits, to transgress ; and then
to go too far, t. é, to go beyond
right--hence to cheat or defraud. It
is not used elsewhere in the New
Testament. The idea of overreaching is that which is implied in its
use here. {| And defraud. ratovexrely. Marg., oppress, or overreach.
This word properly means, to have
more than another ; then to have an
advantage ; and then to take advantage of any one, to circumvent, defraud, cheat. It is rendered got an
advantage, 2 Cor. ii. 11; defraud,
2 Cor. vii. 2; 1 Thess. iv. 6; make
a gain, 2 Cor. xii. 17, 18. Comp.
for the use of the adjective, 1 Cor. v.
10, 11; vi. 10; Eph. v. 5; and the
noun, Mark vii. 22; Luke xii. 15;
Rom. i. 29; 2 Cor. ix. 5; Eph. v. 3;
Col. iii. 5; 1 Thess. ii. 5 ; 2 Pet. ii.
8,14. It is the word commonly used
to denote civetousness. Taking advantage of, is the idea which it conveys here. § Jn any matter. Marg.,
“or the.” According to the reading
in the margin, this would refer to

| the particular matter under discussion

(ver. 3--5), to wit, concupiscence,
and the meaning then would be, that
no one should be guilty of illicit in-

The injunction then is, that tercourse with the wife of another.

expositors -- as Hammond
1 defraud his brother in ? any mat- :

ter ; because that the Lord és the
avenger of all such, as we also
have forewarned you and testified.

7 For God hath not called us
unto uncleanness, but ¢ unto holiness.

1 or, oppress; or, overreach. 2 or, the.
@ Le.11.44; He.12.14; 1 Pe.1.14-16.

Whitby, Macknight, Rosenmiiller, and
others, suppose that this is a prohibition of adultery, and there can be no
doubt that it does include this. But
there is no reason why it should be
confined to it. The Greek is so
general that it may prohibit all kinds
of fraud, overreaching, or csvetousness,
and may refer to any attempt to
deprive another of his rights, whether
it be the right which he has in his
property, or his rights as a husband,
or his rights in any other respect. It
is a general command not to defraud ;
in no way totakeadvantage of another ;
in no way to deprive him of his rights.
q Because that the Lord is the avenger of all such. Of all such as are
guilty of fraud; that is, he will punish
them; comp. Notes on Rom. xii. 19;
Eph. vi.9. € As we havealsoforewarned. Doubtlesswhen he was withthem.

7. For God hath not called us unto
uncleanness. When he called us to
be his followers, it was not that we
should lead lives of impurity, but of
holiness. We should, therefore, fulfil
the purposes for which we were called
into his kingdom. The word uncleanness ( axaSapoix), means, properly,
impurity, filth ; and then, in a moral
sense, pollution, lewdness, as opposed
to chastity; Rom. i. 24; vi. 19; 2
Cor. xii. 21 ; Gal. vy. 19; Eph. iv. 19;
¥. 03 Colsa1i.-5.

8. He therefore that despiseth--
Marg., rejecteth. That is, he who
disregards such commands as these
which call him to a holy life, is really
rejecting and disobeying God. Some
might be disposed to say that these
were merely the precepts of man,
and that therefore it was not important whether they were obeyed or
not. The apostle assures them in
the most solemn manner, that, though

8 He therefore that 3 despiseth,
despiseth not man, but God, who
hath also given unto us his holy
Spirit.

9 But as touching brotherly
love, ye need not that I write unte
you; for ye yourselves are taught
» of God to love one another.

Zor, rejecteth. b John 15.12,17.
communicated to them by man, yet
they were really the commands of
God. § Who hath also given unto
us his holy Spirit. This is a claim
to inspiration. Paul did not give
these commands as his own, but as
taught by the Spirit of God; comp.
Notes on 1 Cor. vii. 40.

9. But as touching brotherly love.
The ‘peculiar charity and affection
which one Christian owes to another.”
Doddridge; see Notes on John xiii.
34. ¥ Yeneed not that 1 write unto
you. ‘'Thatis, ‘as I have done on the
other points.’’ They were so taught
of God in regard to this duty, that they
did not need any special instruction.
{| For ye yourselves are taught of God.
The word here rendered ‘ taught of
God ” --9:03idaxr0i --occurs nowhere
else in the New Testament. It is correctly translated, and must refer here to
some direct teaching of God on their
own hearts, for Paul speaks of their
being so taught by him as to need no
special precepts in the case. He
probably refers to that influence exerted on them when they became
Christians, by which they were led to
love all who bear the divine image.
He calls this being “ taught of God,”’
not because it was of the nature ot
revelation or inspiration, but because
it was in fact the teaching of God in
this case, though it was secret and
silent. God has many ways of teaching men. The lessons which we learn
from his Providence are a part of his
instructions. The same is true of the
decisions of our own consciences, and
of the secret and silent influence of
his Spirit on our hearts, disposing us
to love what is lovely, and to do what
ought to be done. In this manner al!
true Christians are taught to love
those who bear the image of their

10 And indeed ye do it toward
all the brethren which are in all
Macedonia: but we beseech you,
brethren, that ye increase more
and more ;

Saviour. They feel that they are
yrethren ; and such is their strong attachment to them, from the very
nature of religion, that they do not
reed any express command of God to
teach them to love them. It is one
of the first --the elementary effects of
religion on the soul, to lead us to love
“the brethren ”-- and to do this is one
of the evidences of piety about which
there need be no danger of deception ;
comp. 1 John iii. 14.

10. And indeed ye do it; see Notes
on chap.i. 7. (| But we beseech you,
brethren. that ye increase more and
more; Notes, chap. iii. 12. Here, as
elsewhere, the apostle makes the fact
that they deserved commendation for
what they had done, a stimulus to
arouse them to still higher attainments. Bloomfield.

ll. And that ye study to be quiet.

11 And that ye study to be
quiet, and to 4 do your own business, and to work with your own
hands, as we commanded you ;

a} Pe.4.15.

The injunction here is one of the
beautiful precepts of Christianity so

_well adapted to promote the good

order and the happiness of society. It
would prevent the impertinent and
unauthorized prying into the affairs of
others, to which many are so prone,
and produce that careful attention to
what properly belongs to our calling
in life, which leads to thrift, order,
and competence. Religion teaches
no man to neglect his business. It
requires no one to give up an honest
calling and to be idle. Jt asks no
one to forsake a useful occupation,
unless he can exchangeit for one
more useful. It demands, indeed,

| that we shall be willing so far to sus-
/ pend our ordinary labours as to ob-

serve the Sabbath; to maintain ha-

| bits of devotion ; 10 improve our minds

and hearts by the study of truth, to

Orderly, peaceful; living in the pracdo good to others as we have an op-

tice of the calm virtues of life. The
duty to which he would exhort them

was that of being subordinate to the,
laws ; of avoiding all tumult and dis- |

order; ofcalmly pursuing their regular
avocations, and of keeping themselves
from all the assemblages of the idle,

the restless, and the dissatisfied. No |

Christian should be engaged in a
mob; none should be identified with
the popular excitements which lead to
disorder and to the disregard of the
laws. Theword rendered “ye study”
(Q:roriuéouas), means properly, to love
honour, to be ambitious; and here
means the same as when we say “ to
make it a point of honour to do soand
so. Robinson, Lex. It is to be regarded as a sacred duty; a thing in
which our honouris concerned. Every
man should regard himselfas disgraced
who is concerned ina mob. { And
to do yourown business. To attend
to their own concerns, without interfering with the affairs of others ; see
Notes on Phil. ii. 4; comp. 2 Thess.
Wikies Tim vealone) Lets lye lo.

cultivate the social affections, and to

portunity ; but it makes no one idle,
and it countenances idleness in no one,
A man who is habitually idle can have
very slender pretensions to piety.

| There is enough in this world for

every one to do, and the Saviour set
such an example of untiring ¢ndustry
in hts vocation as to give each one
occasion to doubt whether he is his
true follower if he is not disposed to
be employed. And t») work with your
own hinds, as we cmminded you.
This command is not referred to in
the history (Acts xvii.), but it is probable that the apostle saw that many
of those residing in Thessalonica were
disposed to spend their time in indolence, and hence insisted strongly on
the necessity of being engaged in
some useful occupation; comp. Acts
xvii. 21. Idleness is one of the great
evils of the heathen world in almost
every country, and the parent of no
small part of their vices. The effect
of religion everywhere is to make mer
industrious ; and every man, who is
12 That ye may walk honest-

ly * toward them that are without,
a Ro. 13.13. lor, no man,

able, should feel himself under sacred
obligation to beemployed. God made
man to work (comp. Gen. ii. 15 ; ili.
19), and there is no more benevolent
arrangement of his government than
this. No one who has already enough
for himself and family, but who can

make money to do good to others, has |

a right to retire from business and to
live in idleness (comp. Acts xx. 34 ;
Eph. iv. 27); no one has a right to
live in such a relation as to be wholly
dependent on others, if he cansupport
himself; and no one has a right to
compel others to labour for him, and
toexact their unrequited toil, in order
that he may be supported in indolence
and ease, The application of this
tule to all mankind would speedily put
an end to slavery, and would convert
multitudes, even in the church, from
useless to useful men. Ifa nian has

no necessity to labour for himself and |

family, he should regard it as an inestimable privilege to be permitted to
aid those who cannot work--the sick,
the aged, the infirm.
no need to add to what he has for his
own temporal comfort, what a privilege it is for him to toil in promoting
public improvements: in founding
colleges, libraries, hospitals, and asylums ; and in sending the gospel to
those who are sunk in wretchedness
and want !
the blessings which God has bestowed
on him, if he has hands to work and
will not work.

12. That ye maywalk honestly toward them that are without. Out of
the church ; comp Notes on Col. iv. 5.
The word rendered honestly, means
becomingly, decorously, in a proper
manner; Rom. xiii. 18; 1 Cor. xiy. 40.
It does not refer here to mere honesty
in the transaction of business, but to
their general treatment of those who
were not professing Christians. They
were to conduct themselves towards
them in all respects in a becoming
manner--to be honest with them; to
be faithful to their engagements; to
be kind and courteous in their inter-

No man understands fully |

jand that ye may have lack of
nothing.
13 But I would not have you

course ; to show respect where it was
due, and to endeavour in every way to
do them good. There are few precepts of religion more important than
those which enjoin upon Christians
the duty of a proper treatment of
those who are not connected with the
church. § And that ye may have
lack of nothing. Marg.,no man. The
Greek will bear either construction,
but the translation in the text is probably the correct one. The phrase
is to be taken in connection not merely
with that which immediately precedes
it--as if ‘‘their walking honestly towards those who were without ”’ would
preserve them from want--but as
meaning that their industrious and
quiet habits ; their patient attention to
their own business, and upright dealing with every man, would doit. They
would, in this way, have a competence, and would not be beholden tc
others. Learn hence, that it is the
duty of a Christian so to live as not

| to be dependent on others, unless he
If a man has.

is made so by events of divine Providence which he cannot foresee or control. No man should be dependent
on others as the result of idle. habits ;
of extravagance and improvidence ; of
the neglect of his own business, and of
intermeddling with that of others. If
by age, losses, infirmities, sickness, he
is made dependent, he cannot be
blamed, and he should not repine at
his lot. One of the ways in which a
Christian may always do good in society, and honour his religion, is by
quiet and patient industry, and by
showing that religion prompts to those
habits of economy on which the happiness of society so much depends.

13. But I would not have you to be
ignorant. I would have you fully informed on theimportant subject which
is here referred to, It is quite probable from this, that some erroneous
views prevailed among them in reference to the condition of those who
were dead, which tended to prevent
their enjoying the full consolatior,
which they might otherwise haw

to be ignorant, brethren, concern- |
ing them which are asleep, that ye

done. Of the prevalence of these
views, it is probable the apostle had
been informed by Timothy on his return from Thessalonica ; chap. ili. 6.
What they were we are not distinctly
informed, and can only gather from
the allusions which Paul makes to
them, or from the opposite doctrines
which he states, and which are evidently designed to correct those which prevailed among them. From these statements, it would appear that they supposed that those who had died, though
they were true Christians, would be
leorived ofsome important advantages
vhich those would possess who should
survive to the coming of the Lord.
There seems some reason to suppose, as
Koppe conjectures (comp. also Saurin,
Serm. vol. vi.1), thatthe case of their
grief was two-fold; one, that some
among them doubted whether there
would be any resurrection (comp. 1 Cor.
xv. 12), and that they supposed that
they who had died were thus cut off
from the hope of eternal happiness, so
as to leave their surviving friends to sorrow ‘‘as those who had no hope;’’ the
other, that some of them believed that,
though those who were dead would indeed rise again, yet it would be long
after those who were living when the
Lord Jesus would return had been
taken to glory, and would be always in
a condition inferior to them. See
Koppe, tv loc. The effect of such opinions as these can be readily imagined.
[It would be to deprive them of the consolation which they might have had,
and should have had, in theloss oftheir
pious friends. They would either
mourn over them as wholly cut off
from hope, or would sorrow that they
were to be deprived of the highest
privileges which could result from redemption. It is not to be regarded
as wonderful that such views should
have prevailed in Thessalonica. There
were those even at Corinth who wholly
denied the doctrine of the resurrection (1 Cor. xv. 12); and we are to
remember that those to whom the
apostle now wrote had been recently

converted from heathenism ; that they
sorrow not, even as others which
have no hope.

had enjoyed his preaching but a short
time ; that they had few or no books
on the subject of religion; and that
they were surrounded by those who
had zo faith in the doctrine of the resurrection at all, and who were doubtless able--as sceptical philosophers
often arenow--to urge their objections
to the doctrine in sucha way as greatly
to perplex Christians. ‘The apostle,
therefore, felt the importance of stateing the exact truth on the subject,
that they might not have unnecessary
sorrow, and that their unavoidable
grief for their departed friends might
not be aggravated by painful apprehensions about their future condition.
{| Concerning them which are asleep.
It is evident from this that they had
been recently called to part with some
dear and valued members of their
church. The word sleep is frequently
applied in the New Testament to the
death of saints. For the reasons why
it is, see the Notes on John xi. 11; 1
Cor. xi. 30; xv. 51. (| That ye sorrow not, even as others which have no
hope. That is, evidently, as the heathen, who had no hope of future life ;
comp. Notes on Eph. ii. 12. ‘Their
sorrow was caused not only by the
fact that their friends were removed
from them by death, but from the fact
that they had no evidence that their
souls were immortal; or that, if they
still lived, that they were happy ; or
that their bodies would rise again.
Hence, when they buried them, they
buried their hopes in the grave, and
so far as they had any evidence, they
were never to see them again. Their
grief at parting was not mitigated
by the belief that the soul was now
happy, or by the prospect of again
being with them in a better world.
It was on this account, in part, that
the heathens indulged in expressions of such excessive grief. When
their friends died, they hired men to
play in a mournful manner on a pipe
or trumpet, or women to howl and
lament in a dismal manner. They
beat their breasts ; uttered loud
shrieks; rent their garments; tore
off their hair; cast dust on their |
heads, or sat down in ashes. It is;
not improbable that some among the
Thessalonians, onthe death of their
pious friends, kept up these expressions of excessive sorrow. ‘To prevent this, and to mitigate their sorrow, the apostle refers them to the
bright hopes which Christianity had
revealed, and points them to the: future glorious re-union with the departed pious dead. Learn hence,
(1.) That the world without religion
is destitute of hope. It is just as
true of the heathen world now as it
was of the ancient pagans, that they
have no hope of a future state. They
have no evidence that there is any

such future state of blessedness; and
without such evidence there can be
no hope; comp. Notes on Eph. ii. 12.
(2.) That the excessive sorrow of the
children of this world, when they lose
a friend, is not to be wondered at.
They bury their hopes in the grave.
They part, for all that they know or
believe, with such a friend for ever.
The wife, the son, the daughter, they
consign to silence--to decay -- to
dust, nat expecting to meet them
again. ‘They look forward to no
glorious resurrection when that body
shall rise, and when they shall be reunited to part no more. It is no
wonder that they weep--for who would
not weep when he believes that he
parts with his friends for ever ? (3.)
It is only the hope of future blessedness that can mitigate this sorrow.
Religion reveals a brighter world--a
world where all the pious shall be reunited ; where the bonds of love shall
be made stronger than they were
here; where they shall never be
severed again. It is only this hope
that can sooth the pains of grief at
parting ; only when we can look forward to a better world and feel that
we shall see them again--love them
again--love them for ever--that our
tears are made dry. (4.) The Christian, therefore, when he losesa Christian friend, should not sorrow as others
do. Ile will feel, indeed, as keenly
as they do, the loss of their society ;
the absence of their well-known faces;
she want of the sweet voice of friend- |

ship and love; for religion does not
blunt the sensibility of the soul, or
make the heart unfeeling, Jesus wept
at the grave of Lazarus, and religion
does not prevent the warm, gushing
expressions of sorrow when God comes
into a family and removes a friend.
But this sorrow should not be like
that of the world. It should not be
(a) such as arises from the feeling
that there is to be no future union ;
(6) it should not be accompanied with
repining or complaining; (c) it should
not be excessive, or beyond that
which God designs that we should
feel. It should be calm, submissive,
patient; it should be that which is
connected with steady confidence in
God ; and it should be mitigated by
the hope of a future glorious union
in heaven. The eye of the weeper
should look up through his tears to
God. The heart of the sufferer
should acquiesce in him even in the
unsearchable mysteries of his dealings, and feel that all is right. (5.)
It is a sad thing to die without hope
--so to die as to have no hope for
ourselves, and to leave none to our
surviving friends that we are happy
Such is the condition of the whole
heathen world; and such the state
of those who die in Christian lands,
who have no evidence that their
peace is made with God. As [I love
my friends--my father, my mother,
my wife, my children, I would not
have them go forth and weep over
my grave as those who have no hope
in my death. I would have their
sorrow for my departure alleviated
by the belief that my soul is happy
with my God, even when they commit
my cold clay to the dust ; and were
there no other reason for being a
Christian, this would be worth all the
effort which it requires to become one.
It would demonstrate the unspeakable
value of religion, that my living friends
may go forth to my grave and be
comforted in their sorrows with the
assurance that my soul is already in
glory, and that my body will rise again!
No eulogium for talents, accomplishments, or learning; no pwans of
praise for eloquence, beauty, or martial deeds; no remembrances of

14 For if we believe that Jesus) also which sleep in vesus will God

lied and rose again, even so % them
a 1C0.15.20,&¢

wealth and worldly greatness, would

then so meet the desires which my
heart cherishes, as to have them enabled, when standing around my open
grave, to sing the song which only
Christians can sing :--

Unveil thy bosom, faithful tomb,

Take this new treasure to thy trust;
And give these sacred relics room

To seek a slumber in the dust.

Nor pain, nor grief, nor anxious fear
Invade thy bounds. No mortal woes

Can reach the peaceful sleeper here,
While ange!s watch th2 soft repose.

So Jesus slept: God's dying Son
Pass'd thro’ the grave, and blest the bed ;
Rest here, blest saint, till from his throne
The morning break, and pierce the shade.

Break from his throne, illustrious morn ;
Attend, O Earth, his sovereign word ;
Restore thy trust--a glorious form--
Call’d to ascend, and meet the Lord.
Watts.

14. For if we believe that Jesus
died and rose again. That is, if we
believe this, we ought also to be-

lieve that- those who have died in-

the faith of Jesus will be raised from
the dead. The meaning is not that
the fact of the resurrection depends
on our believing that Jesus rose, but
that the death and resurrection of
the Saviour were connected with
the resurrection of the saints; that
the one followed from the other, and
that the one was as certain as the
other. ‘The doctrine of the resurrection of the saints so certainly follows
from that of the resurrection of
Christ, that, if the one is believed,
the other ought to be also; see Notes
on 1 Cor. xv. 12--14. § Which sleep
in Jesus. A most beautiful expression. It is not merely that they
hare calm repose --like a gentle slumber--in the hope of awaking again,
but that this is ‘in Jesus’’--or
“through” (3) him; that is, his
death and resurrection are the cause
of their quiet and calm repose. They
do not “sleep” in heathenism, or in
infidelity, or in the gloom of atheism
--but in the blessed hope which Jesus
has imparted. They lie, as he did,

bring with him.

in the tomb--free from pain and sorrow, and with the certainty of being
raised up again.
They sleep in Jesus, and are bless’d,
How kind their slumbers are;

From sufferings and from sin released,
And freed from every spare.

When, therefore, we think of the
death of saints, let us think of what
Jesus was in the tomb of Joseph of
Arimathea. Such is the sleep of
our pious friends now in the grave;
such will be our own when we die.
9 Will God bring with him. This
does not mean that God will bring
them with him from heaven when
the Saviour comes--though it will
be true that their spirits will descend
with the Saviour; but it means that
he will bring them from their graves,
and will conduct them with him to
glory, to be with him; comp. Notes,
John xiv. 8. The declaration, as it
seems to me, is designed to teach the
general truth that the redeemed are
so united with Christ that they shall
share the same destiny as he does.
As the head was raised, so will all
the members be. As God brought
Christ from the grave, so will he
bring them ; that is, his resurrection
made it certain that they would rise.
It is a great and universal truth that
God will bring all from their graves
who “sleep in Jesus;” or that they
shall all rise. The apostle does not,
therefore, refer so much to the time
when this would occur -- meaning
that it would happen when the Lord
Jesus should return--as to the fact
that there was an established connection between him and hispeople, which
made it certain that if they died united with him by faith, they would be as
certainly brought from the grave as
he was. If, however, it means, as
Prof. Bush (Anastasis, pp. 266, 267)
supposes, that they will be brought
with him from heaven, or will accompany him down, it does not prove that
there must have been a previous resurrection, for the full force of the
language would be met by the sup15 For this we say unto you
by the word of the Lord, that
we which are alive, and remain
unto the coming of the Lord,

position that their spirits had ascended to heaven, and would be brought
with him to be united to their bodies
when raised. If this be the correct
interpretation, then there is probably
an allusion to such passages as the
following, representing the coming of
the Lord accompanied by his saints.
“The Lord my God shall come, and
all the saints with thee.’ Zech. xiv. 5.
“‘ And Enoch, theseventhfrom Adam,
prophesied of these, saying, Behold,
the Lord cometh, with thousand of
his saints ;’ Jude 14. ‘* Who,” says
President Dwight (Serm. 164), “are
those whom God will bring with Him
at this time? Certainly not the
bodies of his saints. ... The only answer is, he will bring with him ‘the
spirits of just men made perfect.’”’
15. For this we say unto you by the
word of the Lord. By the command
or inspired teaching of the Lord.
Prof. Bush (Anastasis, p. 265) supposes that the apostle here alludes to
what the Saviour saysin Matt. xxiv.
30, 31, “‘ And they shall see the Son
of man coming in the clouds of heaven,’ d&c. Itis possible that Paul
may have designed a general allusion
to all that the Lord had said about
his coming, but there cannot have
been an exclusive reference to that
passage, for in what he says here there
are several circumstances mentioned
to which the Saviour in Matthew does
not allude. ‘The probability, therefore, is, that Paul means that the
Lord Jesus had made a special communication to him on the subject.
Q That wewhich are alive; see this
fully explained in the Notes on 1 Cor.
xv.51. From this expression, it would
seem, that some ofthe Thessalonians
supposed that Paul meant to teach
that he himself, and many of the liying, would survive until the coming of
the Lord Jesus, and, of course, that
that event was near at hand. That
this was not his meaning, however, he
is at special pains to show in 2 Th. ii.
L--10. ¢ And remain unto the coming

shall not prevent them which are
asleep.
16 For @ the Lord himself shall
a Matt. 24.30,31.

of the Lord. Those Christians who
shall then be alive. §] Shall not prevent them which are asleep. Shall
not precede; anticipate ; go before,
The word prevent with us is now commonly used in the sense of hinder, but
this is never its meaning in the Scrip:
tures. The word, in the time of the
translators of the Bible, was used in
its primitive and proper sense (prevento), meaning to precede, or anticipate. Job iii. 12, ‘‘ Why did the knees
prevent me?’ That is, why did they
anticipate me, so that I did not perish,
Ps. lxxix. 8, “ Let thy tender mercies
speedily prevent us;’’ that is, go before us in danger. Ps. cxix. 147, “1
prevented the dawning of the morning
and cried ;”’ that is, I anticipated it, or
I prayed before the morning dawned.
Matt. xvii. 25, “‘ Jesus prevented him,
saying ;’’ that is, Jesus anticipated him ;
he commenced speaking before Peter
had told him what he had said ; comp.
Ps. xvii. 13 ; lix. 10; lxxxviii. 13; xev.
2;2 Sam. xxii.6,19; Jobxxx.27;xli.11
The meaning here is, that they who
would be alive at the coming ofthe Lord
Jesus,would not be ‘changed ’’ and received up into glory before those who
were in their graves wereraisedup. The
object seems to be to correct an opinion which prevailed among the Thessalonians that they who shonld survive
to the coming of the Lord Jesus would
have greatadvantages over those who
had died. What they supposed those
advantages would be--whether the privilege of seeing him come, or that they
would be raised to higher honours in
heaven, or that they who had died
would not rise at all, does not appear,
nor is the origin of this sentiment
known. Itis clear, however, that it
was producing an increase of their
sorrow on the death of their pious
friends, and hence it was very importantto correct theerror. The apostle,
therefore, states that no such disadvantage could follow, for the matter of
fact was, that the dead would rise first
16. For the Lord himself shali de-

descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the archangel,

scend from heaven; Notes, Acts i. 11.
{ With a shout. The word here used
(xfAsuzua), does not elsewhere occur
in the New Testament. It properly
means a cry of excitement, or of
arging on; an outcry, clamour, or,
shout, as of sailors at the oar, Luc.
Catapl. 19; of soldiers rushing to
battle, Thuc. iii 14; of a multitude
of people, Diod. Sic. iii.15 ; of a huntsman to his dogs, Xen. Ven. vi. 20. It
does not mean here, that the Lord
would himself make such a shout, but
that he would be attended with it;
that is, with a multitude who wouldlift
up the voice likethat of an army rushing tothe conflict. With the voice
of the archangel. ‘The word archangel occurs nowhere else in the New
Testament, except in Jude 9, where
it is applied to Michael. It properly
means a chief angel; one whois first, or
whois over others--zpyw». The word is
not found in the Septuagint, and the
only archangel, therefore, which is
named in the Scriptures, is Michael ;
Jude 9; comp. Rev. xii. 7. Seven
angels, however, are referred to in
the Scriptures as having an eminence
above others, and these are commonly
regarded as archangels. Rev. viii. 2,
“ And I saw the seven angels which
stood before God.” One of these is
supposed to be referred to in the Book
of Tobit, xii. 15, ‘‘ 1am Raphael, one
of the seven holy angels, which present the prayers of the saints, and
which go in and out before the glory
of the Holy One.” The names of
three only of the seven are mentioned
in the Jewish writings: Michael, the
patron of the Jewish nation, Da. x.
13, 21; xii. 1. Gabriel, Da. viii.
16;ix. 21; comp. Luke i: 19, 26.
Raphael, Tobit iii. 17; v. 4; viii. 2;
ix. 1,5; xii. 15. The Book of Enoch
adds that of Uriel, pp. 187, 190, 191,
193. Michael is mentioned as one
“of the chief princes,’’ Da. x. 13;
and as “the great prince,’ Da. xii.
1 ;.comp. Notes on Eph, i. 21, and
see an article by Prof. Stuart in the

and with the trump of God: and

the dead in Christ shall rise first :4
@ Ke.20.5,6.

ology. It seems evident from the
Scriptures, that there is one or more
among the angels to whom the name
archangel properly belongs. ‘his
view is in accordance with the doctrine in the Scriptures that the heavenly beings are divided into ranks
and orders, for if so, it is not unreasonable to suppose that there should
be one or more to whom the most exalted rank appertains ; comp. Rev. xil.
7. Whether there is more than one
to whom this name appropriately belongs, it is impossible now to determine, and is not material. The word
here (in Greek) is without the article.
and the phrase might be rendered,
“with the voice of an archangel.”
The Syriac renders it, ‘with the
voice of the prince of the angels.” On
an occasion so august and momentous
as that of the coming of the final
Judge of all mankind; the resurrection of the dead, and the solemn transactions before the tribunal of the Son
of God deciding the destiny of countless millions for ever, it will not be
inappropriate that the highest among
the heavenly hosts should be present
and take an important part in the solemnities of the day. It is not quite
certain what is meant here by “the
voice of the archangel,” or for what
purpose that voice will be heard. It
cannot be that it will be to raise the
dead--for that will be by the ‘‘ voice
of the Son of God’”’ (John y. 28, 29),
and it seems most probable that the
meaning is, that this will be a part of
the loud shout or cry which will be
made by the descending hosts of heaven ; or perhaps it may be for the purpose of summoning the world to the
bar of judgment; comp. Matt. xxiv.
31. § And with the trump of God.
The trump which God appoints to be
sounded on that solemn occasion. It
does not mean that it will be sounded
by God himself; see Notes on Matt.
xxiv. 81. § And the deadin Christ.
Christians. J Shall rise first. ‘That
is, before the living shall be changed.

Bibliotheca Sacra, No. |, on Angel-

A doctrine similar to this was held by

17 Then we which are alive and | with them in “ the clouds, to meet

remain, shall be caught up together

the Jews. ‘“ Resch Lachisch said,
Those who die in the land of Israel,
shall rise first in the days of the Messiah.”’ See Wetstein, in loc. It is
implied in all this description, that
the interval between their resurrection and the change which will occur
to the living, will be brief, or that the
one will rapidly succeed the other;
comp. Notes, 1 Cor. xv. 23, 51, 52,
17. Then we which are ale. Those
who shall then be alive; see ver. 15.
The word here rendered then (?rura),
does not necessarily mean that this
would occur immediately. It properly marks succession in time, and means
afterwards, neat, next in the order of
events; Luke xvi. 7; Ga. i. 21; Ja. iv.
14. ‘There may be a considerable interval between the resurrection of the
pious and the time when the living
shall be caught up to meet the Lord,
for the change is to take place in
them which will fit them to ascend
with those who have beenraised The
meaning is, that after the dead are
raised, or the next thing in order,
they and the living will ascend to meet
the Lord. The proper meaning of
the word, however, denotes a succession so close as to exclude the idea of
a long interval in which other important transactions would occur, such an
interval, for example, as would be involved in a long personal reign of the
Redeemer on earth. The word demands this interpretation--that the
next thing in order after the resurrection of the righteous, will be their
being caught up with the living, with
an appropriate change, into the air--
though, as has been remarked, it will
admit of the supposition of such a
brief, momentary interval (iy ersum,
ty prrn 60daArAwou, 1 Cor. xv. 51, 52) as
shall be necessary to prepare for it.
q Shall be caught up. The word here
used implies that there will be the
application of external force or power
by which this will be done. It will
not be by any power of ascending
which they will themselves have; or
by any tendency of their raised or

a Re, 11.12.

changed bodies to ascend of their owr
accord, or even by any effort of their
own will, but by @ power applied to
them which will cause them to rise.
Comp. the use of the word aprdfw in
Matt. xi. 12, “the violent take it by
force ;” xiii. 19, ‘‘ then cometh the
wicked one and snatcheth away;’
John vi. 15, “that they would come
and take him by furce ; x. 12, “ the
wolf catcheth them;’’ Acts vili. 39,
“the Spirit of the Lord caught away
Philip; 2 Cor. xii. 2, “such an one
caught up to the third heaven ;” also,
John xii. 28, 29; Acts xxiii. 10 ; Jude
23 ; Rev. xil.5. The verb does not
elsewhere occur inthe New Testament
In all these instances there is the
idea of either foreign force or violence
effecting that which is done. What
force or power is to be applied in
causing the living and the dead to
ascend, is not expressed. Whether
it is to be by the ministry of angels,
or by the direct power of the Son of
God, is not intimated, though the
latter seems to be most probable.
The word should not be construed,
however, as implying that there will
be any reluctance on the part of the
saints to appear before the Saviour,
but merely with reference to the
physical fact that power will be necessary to elevate them to meet him
inthe air. Will their bodies then be
such that they will have the power of
locomotion at will from place to place?
q In the clouds. Gr., “in clouds ’--
ty vePtAous --without the article. This
may mean “in clouds;” that is, in
such numbers, andin such grouping
as to resemble clouds. So it is rendered by Macknight, Koppe, Rosenmiller, Bush (Anasta. 266), and
others. The absence of the article
here would rather seem to demand this
interpretation Still, however, the
other interpretation may be true, that
it means that they will be caught up
into the region of the clouds, or to
the clouds which shall accompany the
Lord Jesus on his return to our world.
Matt. xxiv. 30; xxvi. 64; Mark xvi,

the Lord in the air: and so shall ;

we ever be @ with the Lord. |
a John 14.3.

26 ; xiv. 62; Rev. i. 7; comp. Dan. vii.
13. In whichever sense it is understood, the expression is one of great
sublimity, and the scene will be immensely grand. Some doctrine of
this kind was held by the ancient
Jews. Thus Rabbi Nathan (Midras
Tillin, xlviii. 13) says, ‘‘ What has
been done before will be done again.
As he led the Israelites from Egypt
in the clouds of heaven, so will he do
to them in the future time.” J Zo
meet the Lord in the air. In the
regions of the atmosphere--above the
earth. It would seem from this, that
the Lord Jesus, in his coming, would
not descend to the earth, but would
remain at a distance from it in the
air, where the great transactions of
the judgment will occur. It is, indeed,
nowhere said that the transactions
of the judgment will occur wpon the
earth. The world would not be spacious enough to contain all the assembled living and dead, and hence
the throne of judgment will be fixed
in the ample space above it. § And
so shall we ever be with the Lord.
This does not mean that they will
always remain with him in the air
--for their final home will be heaven--and after the trial they will
accompany him to the realms of glory; Matt. xxv. 34, ‘Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom,” d&c. The time during
which they will remain with him
“in the air” is nowhere mentioned
inthe Bible. It will be as long as
will be necessary for the purposes
of judging a world and deciding the
eternal doom of every individual
“according to the deeds done in the
body.’’ There is no reason to suppose that this will be accomplished in
a single day of twenty-four hours ;
but it is impossible to form and conjecture of the period which will be

occupied.

18. Wherefore comfort one another.
Marg., exhort. The word comfort
probably best expresses the meaning.
They were to bring these glorious
18 Wherefore ! comfort one an-

other with these words.
1 or, exhort.

truths and these bright prospects be
fore their minds, in order to alleviate
the sorrows of bereavement. The

: topics of consolation are these: first,

that those who had died in the faitk
would not always lie in the grave;
second, that when they rose they would
not occupy an inferior condition because they were cut off before the
coming of the Lord; and third, that
all Christians, living and dead, would
be received to heaven and dwell for
ever with the Lord. (| With these
words. That is, with these truths.

1. This passage (ver. 13--18) contains a truth which is to be found in
no heathen classic writer, and nowhere else, except in the teachings
of the New Testament. For the
elevated and glorious view which it
gives of future scenes pertaining to
our world, and for all its inestimable
consolations, we are wholly indebted
to the Christian religion. Reason,
unassisted by revelation, never dared
to conjecture that such scenes would
occur ; if it had, it would have had
no arguments on which the conjecture
could be supported.

2. The death of the Christian isa
calm and gentle slumber; ver. 13.
It is not annihilation; it is not the
extinction of hope. It is like gentle
repose when we lie down at night,
and when we hope to awake again
in the morning; it is like the quiet,
sweet slumber of the infant. Why,
then, should the Christian be afraid
to die? Is he afraid to close his eyes
in slumber? Why dread the night
--the stillness of death? Is he afraid
of the darkness, the silence, the chilliness of the midnight hour, when
his senses are locked in repose?
Why should death to him appear so
terrible? Is the slumbering of an
infant an object of terror ?

8. There are magnificent scenes
before us. There is no description
anywhere which is more sublime than

_that in the olose of this chapte:,

Great events are brought together
here, any one of which is more grand
than all the pomp of courts, and all
the sublimity of battle, and all the
grandeur of a triumphal civic procession. ‘The glory of the descending Judge of all mankind ; the attending retinue of angels, and of the spirits
of the dead; the loud shout of the
descending host; the clangour of the
archangel’s trumpet; the bursting
of graves and the coming forth of the
millions there entombed ; the rapid,
sudden, glorious change on the millions
of living men; the consternation of
the wicked ; the ascent of the innumerable host to the regions of the air,
and the solemn process of the judginent there--what has ever occurred
like these events in this world. And
how strange it is that the thoughts of
men are not turned away from the
trifles--the show--the shadow--the
glitter--the empty pageantry here--
to these bright and glorious realities !

4. In those scenes we shall all be
personally interested. If we do not
survive till they occur, yet we shall
have an important part to act in them.
We shall hear the archangel’s trump;
we shall be summoned before the descending Judge. In these scenes
we shall mingle not as careless spectators, but as those whose eternal
doom is there to be determined, and
with all the intensity of emotion derived from the fact that the Son of
God will descend to judge ws, and to
pronounce our final doom! Can we
be too much concerned to be prepared
for the solemnities of that day?

5. We have, in the passage before
us, an interesting view of the order in
which these great events will occur.
There will be (1.) the descent of the
judge with the attending hosts of heaven; (2.) the raising up of the righteous dead; (3.) the change which the
living will undergo (comp. 1 Cor. xv.
52); (4.) the ascent to meet the Lord
in the air; and (5.) the return with
him to glory. What place in this
series of wonders will be assigned for
the resurrection of the wicked, is not
mentioned here. The object of the
apostle did not lead him to advert to
that, since his purpose was to comfort
the afflicted by the assurance that

their pious friends would rise again,
and would suffer no disadvantage by
the fact that they had died before the
coming of the Redeemer. From
John vy. 28, 29, however, it seems
most probable that they will be raised
at the same time with the righteous,
and will ascend with them to the
place of judgment in the air.

6. There is no intimation here of
a‘‘personal reign” of Christ upon the
earth. Indeed, there is no evidence
that he will return to the earth at
all. All that appears is, that he will
descend ‘‘ from heaven”’ to the regions
of “the air,’ and there will summon
the living and the dead to his bar.
But there is no intimation that he
will set up a visible kingdom then
on earth, to continue a thousand or
more years; that the Jews will be
re-collected in their own land; that
a magnificent city or temple will be
built there; or that the saints will
hover in the air, or reign personally
with the Lord Jesus over the nations.
There are two considerations in view
of this passage, which, to my mind,
are conclusive proof that all this is
romance--splendid and magnificent
indeed as an Arabian tale--but wholly
unknown to the apostle Paul. The
one is, that 7f this were to occur, it
is inconceivable that there should
have been no allusion to it here. It
would have been such a magnificent
conception of the design of the Second
Advent, that it could not have failed
to have been adverted to in a description like this. The other consideration is, that such a view would have
been exactly 7m point to meet the
object of the apostle here. What
could have been more appropriate in
comforting the Thessalonian Christians respecting those who had died in
the faith, than to describe the gorgeous
scenes of the ‘personal reign” of
Christ, and the important part which
the risen saints were to play in that
greatdrama? How canitbe accounted
for that the apostle did not advert to
it? Would a believer in the “ personal
reign” now be likely to omit so material a point in a description of the
scenes which are to occur at the *‘ Second Advent ?”

7. The saints will be for ever with
the Lord. They will dwell with
him in his own eternal home; John
xiv. 3. This expression comprises
the sum of all their anticipated felicity and glory. To be with Christ
will be, in itself, the perfection of
bliss; for it will be a security that
they will sin no more, that they will
suffer no more, and that they will be
shielded from danger and death.
They will have realized the object
of their long, fond desire--that of
seeing their Saviour; they will have
suffered the last pang, encountered
the last temptation, and escaped for
ever from the dominion of death.
What a glorious prospect is this!
Assuredly we should be willing to
endure pain, privation, and contempt
here for the brief period of our earthly
pilgrimage, if we may come at last
to a world of eternal rest. What
trifles are allearthly sorrows compared
with the glories of an endless life with
our God and Saviour!

8. It is possible that even the
prospect of the judgment-day should
be a source of consolation; ver. 18.
To most men it is justly an object
of dread--for all that they have to
fear is concentrated on the issues of
that day. But why should a Christian fear it? In the descending
Judge he will hail his Redeemer and
friend; and just in proportion as he
has true religion here, will be the
certainty of his acquittal there. Nay,
his feelings in anticipation of the
judgment may be more than the
mere absence of fear and alarm. It
may be to him the source of positive
joy. It will be the day of his deliverance from death and the grave.
It will confirm to him all his longcherished hopes. It will put the
seal of approbation on his life spent
in endeavouring to do the will of
God. It will reunite him to his dear
friends who haye died in the Lord.
It will admit him to a full and glorious view of that Saviour whom
‘having not seen he has loved;”’ and
it will make him the companion of
angels and of God. If there is anything, therefore, which ought to
cheer and sustain our hearts in the

6]

sorrows and bereavements of this life,
it is the anticipation of the glorious
scenes connected with the Second
Advent of our Lord, and the prospect of standing before him clothed
in the robes of salvation, surrounded
by all those whom we have loved who
have died in the faith, and with the
innumerable company of the redeemed
of all ages and lands.

This chapter consists of two parts.
I. The continuation of the subject
of the coming of the Lord ; ver. 1--
11; and, II. Various practical exhortations.

In the first part, the apostle states
(1.) that it was well understood by the
Thessalonians that the coming of the
Lord would be sudden, and at an unexpected moment, ver. 1, 2; (2.) he
refers to the effect of his coming on
the wicked and the righteous, and
says that it would be attended with
the sudden and inevitable destruction
of the former, ver. 3; but that the
result of his coming would be far
different on the righteous; ver. 4--11.
The prospect of his coming was fitted
to make them watchful and sober, ver.
6--8 ; and his advent would be attended with their certain salvation ; ver
9--11.

In the second part of the chapter,
he exhorts them to show proper respect for their spiritual teachers and
rulers, ver. 12, 13; to endeavour to
restrain the unruly, to support the
feeble, and to evince towards all the
spirit of patience and forbearance,
ver. 14; to manifest a meek and
benevolent manner of life, ver. 15;
to rejoice always, ver. 16; to pray
constantly, ver. 17; to render thanks
to God in every situation, ver. 18;
to cherish the influences of the Holy
Ghost on their souls, ver. 19; to
show respect for all the divine prophetic communications, ver. 20; to
consider and examine carefully everything submitted to them for belief;
to adhere steadfastly to all that was
good and true, ver. 21; and to avoid
the very appearance of evil, ver. 22.
The epistle closes with a fervent
prayer that God would sanctify them
JUT of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no
need that I write unto you.
2 For yourselves know per-

fectly that the day of the Lord so
cometh @ as a thief in the night.
3 For when they shall say,
Peace and safety ; then sudden
a Lu.12.39,40; 2 Pe.3.10; Re.16.15.

entirely; with an earnest entreaty
that they would pray for him; with a
command that the epistle should be
read to all the churches, and with the
benediction ; ver. 22 --28.

1. But of the times and the seasons ;
see Notes, Acts i. 7. The reference
here is to the coming of the Lord
Jesus, and to the various events connected with his advent ; see the close
of chap.iv. J Ye have no need that
I write unto you. That is, they had
received all the information on the
particular point to which he refers,
which ‘t was necessary they should
have. He seemsto refer particularly
to the suddenness of his coming. It
is evident from this, as well as from
other parts of this epistle, that this
had been, from some cause, a prominent topic which he had dwelt on
when he was with them; see Notes
on chap. i. 10.

2. For yourselves know perfectly.
That is, they had been fully taught

this. There could be no doubt in
their minds respecting it. § The
day of the Lord so cometh. Of the

Lord Jesus--for so the word “ Lord”’
in the New Testament commonly
means; see Notes, Acts i. 24. The
“day of the Lord”’ means that day in
which he will be manifested, or in
which he will be the prominent object
in view of the assembled universe.
qi As a thief in the night. Suddenly
and unexpectedly, as a robber breaks
into a dwelling. <A thief comes
without giving any warning, or any
indications of his approach. He not
only gives none, but he is careful
that none shall be given. It isa
point with him that, if possible, the
man whose house he is about to rob
shall have no means of ascertaining
his approach until he comes suddenly upon him; comp. Notes on Matt.
xxiv. 37--43 ; Luke xii. 39, 40. In
this way the Lord Jesus will return
to judgment; and this proves that
ah the attempts to determine the day,

the year, or the century when he will
come, must be fallacious. He intends
that his coming to this world shall be
sudden and unexpected, “like that of
a thief in the night ;”’ that there shall
be no such indications of his approach
that it shall not be sudden and unexpected; and that no warning of it
shall be given so that men may know
the time of his appearing. If this be
not the point of the comparison in
expressions like this, what is it? Is
there anything else in which his
coming will resemble that of a thief?
And if this be the true point of comparison, how can it be true that men
can ascertain when that is to occur?
Assuredly, if they can, his coming
will not be like that of a thief; comp
Notes on Acts 1. 7.

3. Fo. when they shall say, Peace
and safety. That is, when the wicked shall say this, for the apostle here
refers only to those on whom “ sudden destruction” will come ; comp.
Notes on Matt. xxiv. 836--42.; 2 Pet.
ui. 3, 4. It is clear from this, (1.)
that when the Lord Jesus shall come
the world will not all be converted.
There will be some to be “destroyed.”
How large this proportion will be,
it is impossible now to ascertain.
This supposition, however, is not inconsistent with the belief that there
will be a general prevalence of the
gospel before that period. (2.) The
impenitent and wicked world will be
sunk in carnal security when he
comes. They will regard themselves
as safe. They will see no danger.
They will give no heed to warning.
They will be unprepared for his advent. So it has always been. It
seems to be a universal truth in re-

gard to all the visitations of God to

wicked men for punishment, that he
comes upon them at a time when they
are not expecting him, and that they
have no faith in the predictions of his
advent. So it was in the time of the
flood; in the destruction of Sodom

destruction cometh upon them,
as travail @ upon a woman with
child ; and they shall not escape.

4 But ye, > brethren, are not in

darkness, that that day should
overtake you as a thief.

5 Ye are all the children of light,
a Je.13.21. 6 Ep.5.8 ; John 2.8,

Gomorrah, and Jerusalem ; inthe overthrow of Babylon: so it is when the
sinner dies, and so it will be when the
Lord Jesus shall return to judge the
world. One of the most remarkable
facts about the history of man is, that
he takes no warning from his Maker;
he never changes his plans, or feels
any emotion, because his Creator
‘thunders damnation along his path,”
and threatens to destroy him in hell.
{ Sudden destruction. Destruction
that was unforeseen (ai@vidus) or unexpected. The word here rendered
sudden, occurs nowhere else in the
New Testament, except in Luke xxi.
34, “Lest that day come upon you
unawares.” The word rendered destruction--oatbpos--occurs in the New
Testament only here and in 1 Cor. y,
bec 2eThesssi29); ok Pimayvis 9; Pineal
of which places it is correctly translated destruction. ‘The word destruction is familiar to us, It means,
properly, demolition; pulling down ;
the annihilation of the form of anything, or that form of parts which constitutes it what it is; as the destruction
of grass by eating; of a forest by
cutting down the trees; of life by
murder ; of the soul by consigning it
to misery. It does not necessarily
mean annihilation--for a house or
city is not annihilated which is pulled
down or burnt ; a forest is not annihilated which is cut down ; and a man is
not annihilated whose character and
happiness are destroyed. In regard
to the destruction here referred to, we
may remark, (1.) it will be after the
return of the Lord Jesus to judgment ;
and hence it is not true that the wicked experience all the punishment which
they ever will in the present life ; (2.)
that it seems fairly implied that the
destruction which they will then suffer
will not be annihilation, but will be
connected with conscious existence ;
and (3.) that they will then be cut off
from life and hope and salvation
How can the solemn affirmation that
they will be ‘“ destroyed suddenly,” be

consistent with the belief that all men
will be saved? Is it the same thing
to be destroyed and to be saved?
Does the Lord Jesus, when he speaks
of the salvation of his people, say that
he comes to destroy them? J As
travail upon a woman with child.
This expression is sometimes used to
denote great consternation, as in Ps.
xlvill. 6; Jer. vi. 24; Micah iv. 9, 10;
great pain, as Isa. lili. 11; Jer. iv. 31;
John xvi. 21; or the suddenness with
which anything occurs ; Jer. xili. 21.
It seems here to be used to denote
two things ; first, that the coming of
the Lord to a wicked world will be
sudden ; and, secondly, that it will be
an event of the most distressing and
overwhelming nature. § And they
shall not escape. That is, the destruction, or punishment. They calculated
on impunity, but now the time will
have come when none ofthese refuges
will avail them, and no rocks will
cover them from the “‘ wrath to come.”
4. But ye, brethren, are notin darkness, that that day should overtake
you asa thief. The allusion here is
to the manner in which a thief or
robber accomplishes his purpose. [He
comes in the night, when men are
asleep. So, says the apostle, the Lord
will come to the wicked. They are
like those who are asleep when the
thief comes upon them. But it is not
so with Christians. They are, in relation to the coming of the day of the
Lord, as men are who are awake when
the robber comes. They could see his
approach, and could prepare for it, so
that it would not take them by surprise
5. Ye are all the children of light. All
who are Christians. The phrase “ children of light”’ isa Hebraism, meaning
that they were the enlightened childrenof God. § And the childre» o/ the
day. Who live asif light always shone
round about them. The meaning is,
that in reference to the coming of the
Lord they are as men would be in reference to the coming ofa thief, ifthere
were no night and no necessity of slumand the children of the day : we are
not of the night, nor of darkness,
6 Therefore 4 let us not sleep,
a Mat. 25.53; Ro. 13.12.13.

ber. They wouldalways be wakeful and
active, and it would be impossible to
come upon them by surprise. Christians are always to be wakeful and
vigilant; they are so to expect the
coming of the Redeemer, that he will

not find them off their guard, and will |

not come upon them by surprise.

6. Therefore let us no sleep, as do
others. As the wicked world does;
comp. Notes Matt. xxv.5. | But let
us watch. That is, for the coming of
the Lord. Let us regard it as an
event which is certainly to occur, and
which may occur at any moment;
Notes Matt. xxv. 13. 9 And be sober. The word here used (»4Qw) is
rendered sober inl Thess. vy. 6, 8;
1 Pet. i. 18; v. 8; and watch in 2 Tim.
iv. 5, and 1 Pet. iv. 7 It does not
elsewhere occur in the New Testament. It properly means, to be temperate or abstinent, especially in respect to wine. Joseph. Jewish Wars,
5. 5, 7; Xenophon, Cyr. 7. 5, 20;
and then it is used ina more general
sense, as meaning to be sober-minded,
watchful, circumspect. In this passage there is an allusion to the fact
that persons not only sleep in the night,
but that they are frequently drunken
in the night also. The idea is, that
the Lord Jesus, when he comes, will
find the wicked sunk not only in carnal security, but in sinful indulgences,
and that those who are Christians
ought not only to be awake and to
watch as in the day-time, but to be
temperate. They ought to be like
persons engaged in the sober, honest,
and appropriate employments of the
day, and not like those who waste
thei: uays in sleep, and their nights in
revelry. A man who expects soon to
see the Son of God coming to judgment, ought to be a sober man. No
one would wish to be summoned from
a scene of dissipation tohisbar. And
who would wish to be called there
from the ball-room ; from the theatre;
from the scene of brilliant worldly
amusement ?

|

The most gay votary' sipation.

as do others ; but let us watch and
be sober. ® ‘
7 For they that sleep, sleep in
6 1Pe. 5.8.

of the world ; the most accomplished

and flattered and joyous patron of the
ball-room ; the most richly-dressed
and admired daughter of vanity, would

tremble at the thought of being sum-

moned from those brilliant halls, where
pleasure is now found, to the judgment
bar. They would wish to have at
least a little time that they might
prepare for so solemn a scene. But
if so, as this event may at any moment
occur, why should they not be habitually sober-minded? Why should they
not aim to be always in that state e
mind which they know would be appropriate to meet him? Especially
should Christians live with such vigi
lance and soberness as to be always
prepared to meet the Son of God.
What Christian can think it appro
priate for him to go up to meet his
Saviour from the theatre, the ballroom, or the brilliant worldly party ?
A Christian ought always so to live
that the coming of the Son of God in
the clouds of heaven would not excite
the least alarm.

1. For they that sleep, sleep in the
night. Night is the time for sleep.
The day is the time for action, and in
the light of day men should be employed. Night and sleep are made for
each other, and so are the day and
active employment. The meaning
here is, that it is in accordance with
the character of those who are of the
night, that is, sinners, to be sunk in
stupidity and carnal security, as if
they were asleep ; but for the children
of the day, that is, for Christians, it
is no more appropriate to be inactive
than it is for men to sleep in the daytime. ‘It is not to be wondered at
that wicked men are negligent and
are given to vice, for they are ignorant of the will of God. Negligence in
doing right, and corrupt morals,
usually accompany ignorance.” Rosenmiller. | And they that be drunker.
are drunken in the night. The night
is devoted by them to revelry and disIt is in accordance with the

the night ; and they that be drunken, are drunken in the night.
8 But let us, who are of the day,
be sober, putting on the breasta Is.59. 17. 6 Ro.9.223 1 Pe.2.8.

usual custom in all lands and times,
that the night is the usual season for
riot and revelry. The leisure, the
darkness, the security from observation, and the freedom from the usual
toils and cares of life, have caused
those hours usually to be selected for
indulgence in intemperate eating and
drinking. This was probably more
particularly the case among the ancients than with us, and much as
drunkenness abounded, it was much
more rare to see a man intoxicatedin
the day-time than it is now. To be
drunk then in the day-time was regarded as the greatest disgrace. See
Polyb. Exc. Leg. 8, and Apul. viii., as
quoted by Wetstein; comp. Notes,
Actsii. 15; Is. v.11. The object of
the apostle here is, to exhort Christians to be sober and temperate, and
the meaning is, that it is as disgraceful for them to indulge in habits of revelry, as for a man to be drunk in the
day-time. The propriety of this exhortation, addressed to Christians, is
based on the fact that intoxication
was hardly regarded as a crime, and,
surrounded as they were with those
who freely indulged in drinking to excess, they were then, as they are now,
exposed to the danger of disgracing
their religion. The actions of Christians ought always to be such that
they may be performed in open day
and in the view of all the world.
Other men seek the cover of the night
to perform their deeds ; the Christian
should do nothing which may not be
done under the full blaze of day.

8. But let us, who are of the day, be
sober. Temperate, as men usually are
inthe day-time. J Putting on the
breast-plate of faith and love. Thisis
a favourite comparison of the apostle

Paul; see it explained at length in the |

Notes on Eph. vi. 14. § And for an
helmet, the hope of salvation; Notes,
Eph. vi. 17.

9. For God hath not appointed us to
wrath. This isdesigned as an encour-

‘plate, ¢ of faith and love; and for
an helmet, the hope of salvation.

9 For God hath not appointed
bus to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ,

agement to effort to secure our salva.
tion. ‘The wish of God is to save us,
and therefore we should watch and be
sober; we should take to ourselves
the whole of the Christian armour,
and strive for victory. If he had appointed us to wrath, effort would have
been in vain, for we could do nothing
but yield to our inevitable destiny.
The hope of a final triumph should animate us in our efforts, and cheer usin
our struggles with our foes. How
much does the hope of victory animate
the soldier in battle! When morally
certain ofsuccess, howhis arm is neryed! When everything conspires to favour him, and when he seems to feel that
God fights for him, and intends to give
him the victory, how his heart exults,
and how strong is he in battle!
Hence, it was a great point among
the ancients, when about entering into battle, to secure evidence that the
gods favoured them, and meant to
give them the victory. For this purpose they offered sacrifices, and consulted the flight of birds and the entrails of animals ; and for this armies
were accompanied by soothsayers
and priests, that they might interpret
any signs which might occur that
would be favourable, or to propitiate
the favour of the gods by sacrifice.
See Homer, passim; Arrian’s Expedition of Alexander, and the classic
writers generally. The apostle alludes
to something of this kind here. He
would excite us to maintain the Christian warfare manfully, by the assurance
that God intends that we shall be
triumphant. This weare to learn by
no conjectures of soothsayers ; by no
observation of the flight of birds; by
no sacrifice which we can make to
propitiate his favour, but by the unerring assurance of his holy word. Ii
we are Christians, we know that he
intends our salvation, and that victory
will be ours ; if we are willing to become Christians, we know that the
' Almighty arm will be stretched out tc
10 Who died for us, that, whether 4 we wake or sleep, we should
live together with him.

11 Wherefore ! comfort yourselves together, and edify one another, even as also ye do.

aid us, and that the ‘“ gates of hell”
cannot prevent it.

10. Who died for us. That is, to
redeem us. He designed by his death
that we should ultimately live with
him ; and this effect of his death could
be secured only as it was an atoning
sacrifice. § Whether we wake or sleep.
Whether we are found among the
living or the dead when he comes.
The object here is to show that the
one class would have no advantage
over the other. This was designed to
calm their minds in their trials, and
to correct an error which seems to
have prevailed in the belief that those
who were found alive when he should
return would have some priority over
those who were dead; see Notes on
chap. iv. 13--18. J Should live together with him; Notes, John xiv. 3.
The word rendered “together ’”’ (ua)
isnot to be regarded as connected
with the phrase “with him ’’--as
meaning that he and they would be
“‘ together,” but it refers to those who
‘wake andthosewho sleep’’--those who
are alive and those who are dead--
meaning that they would be together
or would be with the Lord at the same
tume; there would be no priority or
precedence. Rosenmiiller.

11. Wherefore comfort yourselves,
Notes, chap. iv. 18. § And edify one
another. Strive to build up each
other, or to establish each other in
the faith by these truths; Notes,
Rom. xiv. 19. | Even as also ye do.
Continue to do it. Jet nothing intervene to disturb the harmony and
consolation which you have been accustomed to derive from these high
and holy doctrines.

12. And we beseech you, brethren,
to know them which labour among
you. Who they were is not mentioned. It is evident, however, that
the church was not left without appointed persons to minister to it when
its founders should be away.

fA. D. 62

12 And we beseech you, brethren,
to know them? which labour among
you, and are over you in the Lord,
and admonish you ;

a Ro. 14.8,9 ; 2 Co. 5.15.
a@ He.13.7,17.

lor, exhort.

know that there were presbyters or-

dained over the church at Ephesus,
and over the churches in Crete (Acts
xx. 17; Titus i. 5), and that there
were bishops and deacons at Philippi
(Phil. i. 1), and there is every reason
to believe that similar officers would
be appointed in every newly organized
church, The word ‘‘know” seems to
mean that they were not to make
themselves strangers to them--to be
cold and distant towards them--to
be ignorant of their wants, or to be
indifferent to them. While a people
are not obtrusively to intermeddle
with the business of a minister, any
more than they are with that of any
other man, yet there are things in
regard to him with which they should
be acquainted. They should seek
to be personally acquainted with him,
and make him their confidant and
counsellor in their spiritual troubles.
They should seek his friendship, and
endeavour to maintain all proper intercourse with him. They should not
regard him as a distant man, or asa
stranger among them. They should
so far understand his circumstances
as to know what is requisite to make
him comfortable, and should be on
such terms that they may readily and
cheerfully furnish what heneeds. And
they are to “know” or regard him as
their spiritual teacher and ruler; not
to be strangers to the place where he
preaches the word of life, and not to
listen to his admonitions and reproofs
as those of a stranger, but as those
of a pastor and friend. Which
labour among you. ‘There is no reason to suppose, as many have done,
that the apostle here refers to different classes of ministers. He rather
refers to different parts of the work
which the same ministers perform.
The first is, that they “labour ’”’--that
is, evidently, in preaching the gospel.
For the use of the word, see John iv.

We | 38, where it occurs twice; 1 Cor. sv.

138 And to esteem them very
highly in love for their work’s

sake. And be%at peace among |
yourselves.
@ Mar.9.50. lor, beseech. 2 or, disorderly.

10; xvi. 16. The word is one which
properly expresses wearisome toil, and
implies that the office of preaching is
one that demands constant industry,
q And are over you in the Lord.
That is, by the appointment of the,
Lord, or under his direction. They
are not absolute sovereigns, but are
themselves subject to one whois over |
them--the Lord Jesus. On the word
here rendered “are over you” (apoi- |
oramevovs), see Notes on Rom. xii. 8, |
where it is translated rwleth. § And
admonish you. The word here used
(vouSeréu) is rendered admonish, and
admonished, in Rom. xv. 14 ; Col. iii.
16; 1 Thess. v.12; 2 Thess. iii. 15;
and warn, and warning, 1 Cor. iv. 14;
Col.i. 28> 1 "Thessev. 14.. dtedoes
not elsewhere occur in the New Testament. It means, to put in mind;
and then to warn, entreat, exhort. It
isa part of the duty of a minister to
put his people in mind of the truth ;
to warn them of danger; to exhort
them to perform their duty; to admonish them if they go astray.

13. And to esteem them very highly in love. To cherish for them an
affectionate regard. ‘The office of a
minister of religion demands respect.
They who are faithful in that office
have a claim on the kind regards of
their fellow-men. The very nature
of the office requires them to do good
to others, and there is no benefactor
who should be treated with more affectionate regard than he who endeayours to save us from ruin; to
impart to us the consolations of the
gospel in affliction; and to bring us
and our families to heaven. 4j for
their work’s sake. Not primsrily as
a personal matter, or on their own
account, but on account of the work
in which they are engaged. It isa
work whose only tendency, when |
rightly performed, is to do good. It
injures no man, but contributes to
the happiness of all. It promotes

intelligence, industry, order, neat- |
14 Now we! exhort you, brethren,
warn them that are 2 unruly, ? comfort the feeble-minded, support the

weak, ¢ be patient 4 toward all men.
b He.12,12. c Ro.15. 1. d Ep.4.2.

ness, economy, temperance, chastity,
charity, and kindness in this world,
and leads to eternal blessedness in the
world to come. A man who sincerely devotes himself to such a work
has a claim on the kind regards of
his fellow-men. {[ And be at peace
among yourselves; Notes, Mark ix.
50; Rom. xii. 18; xiv. 19.

14. Now we exhort you, brethren.
Marg., beseech. This earnest entreaty is evidently addressed to the
whole church, and not to the ministers of the gospel only. The duties
here enjoined are such as appertain
to all Christians in their appropriate
spheres, and should not be left to be
performed by ministers only. J Warn
them. The same word which in ver.
12 is rendered admonish. It is the
duty of every church member, as well
as of the ministers of the gospel,
affectionately toadmonish those whom
they know to be living contrary to
the requirements of the gospel. One
reason why there is so little piety in
the church, and why so many professors of religion go astray, is, that
the great mass of church members
feel no responsibility on this subject.
They suppose that it is the duty only
of the officers of the church to admonish an erring brother, and hence
many become careless and cold and
worldly, and no one utters a kind word
to them to recall them to a holy walk
with God. { Thatareunruly. Marg.,
disorderly. The word here used
(araxros), is one which properly
means not keeping the ranks, as of
soldiers; and then irregular, confused, neglectful of duty, disorderly.
The reference here is to the members of the church who were irregular in their Christian walk. It is
not difficult, in an army, when soldiers get out of the line, or leave their
places in the ranks, or are thrown
into confusion, to see that little cau
be accomplished in such a state of
irregularity and confusion. As little

15 See that none render @ evil : follow » that which is good, botl

for evil unto any man; but ever

a Pr.20.22,24,29 ; Mat.5.39,44; 1 Pe.3.9.

difficult is it, when the members of
a church are out of their places, to
see that little can be accomplished
in such a state. Many a church is
like an army where half the soldiers
are out of the line; where there is
entire insubordination in the ranks,
and where not half of them could be
depended on for efficient service in
acampaign. Indeed, an army would
accomplish little if as large a proportion of it were irregular, idle, remiss, or pursuing their own aims to
the neglect of the public interest, as
there are members of the church
who can never be depended on in
accomplishing the great purpose for
which it was organized. {[ Comfort
the feeble-minded. The dispirited ;
the disheartened ; the downcast. To
do this is also the duty of each church
member. There are almost always
those who are in this condition, and
it is not easy to appreciate the value
of a kind word to one in that state.
Christians are assailed by temptation ;
in making efforts to do good they are
opposed and become disheartened ; in
their contests with their spiritual foes
they are almost overcome; they walk
through shades of spiritual night, and
find no comfort. In such circumstances, how consoling is the voice of
a friend! How comforting is it to
feel that they are not alone! How
supporting to be addressed by one
who has had the same conflicts, and
has triumphed! Every Christian--
especially every one who has been
long in the service of his Master--
has a fund of experience which is the
property of the church, and which
may be of incalculable value to those
who are struggling now amidst many
embarrassments along the Christian
way. He who has that experience
should helpa weak andsinking brother;
he should make his own experience
of the efficacy of religion in Azs trials
and conflicts, the means of sustaining
others in their struggles. There is
no one who would not reach out his

among yourselves, and to all men,
b Ga. 6.10.

hand to save a child borne down 2
rapid stream; yet how often do experienced and strong men in the
Christian faith pass by those who are
struggling in the “deep waters, where
the proud waves have come over their
souls!’”? ¥ Support the weak; Notes,
Rom. xv. 1. 4 be patient toward all
men. See the Greekword here used,
explained in the Notes on 1 Cor. xiii
4; comp. Eph. iv. 2; Gal. v. 22; Col.
ii. 12.

15. See that none render evil for
evil; see Notes on Matt. v. 39, 44.
The meaning here is, that we are
not to take vengeance; comp. Notes
on Rom. xii. 17,19. This law is
positive, and is universally binding.
The moment we feel ourselves acting from a desire to “return evil for
evil,’ that moment we are acting
wrong. It may be right to defend
our lives and the lives of our friends ;
to seek the protection of the law for
our persons, reputation, or property,
against those who would wrong us;
to repel the assaults of calumniators
and slanderers, but in no case should
the motive be to do them wrong for
the evil which they have done us.
q But ever follow that which is good.
Which is benevolent, kind, just, generous; see Notes, Rom. xii. 20, 21.
q Both among yourselves, and to all
men. The phrase ‘to all men,”
seems to have been added to avoid the
possibility of misconstruction. Some
might possibly suppose that this was
a good rule to be observed towards
those of their own number, but that
a greater latitude in avenging injuries
might be allowable towards their enemiesout ofthechurch. The apostle,
therefore, says that the rule is universal. It relates to the heathen, to
infidels, sceptics, and persecntors, as
well as to the members of the church.
To every man we are to do good as
we are able--no matter what they do
to us. This is the rule which God
himself observes towards the evil and
unthankful (Notes, Matt. v. 45), and

16 Rejoice * evermore.

17 Pray © without ceasing.

18 In ¢ every thing give thanks:
a Ph.4.4; 6b Ro.12.12. ce Ep.5.20.

‘for this is the will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning you.
.9 Quench? not the Spirit,
a Ep.4.30.

is one of the original and beautiful

laws of our holy religion.

16. Rejoice evermore; see Notes on
Phil. ili. 1; iv. 4.

17. Pray without ceasing ; see Notes
on Rom. xii. 12. The direction here
may be fairly construed as meaning
(1.) That we are to be regular and
constant in the observance of the stated
seasons of prayer. Weare to observe
the duty of prayer in the closet, in the
family, and in the assembly convened
to call on the name of the Lord. We
are not to allow this duty to be interrupted or intermitted by any trifling
cause. We areso to act that it may
besajd we pray regularly in the closet,
in the family, and at the usual seasons
when the church prays to which we
belong. (2.) We are to maintain
an uninterrupted and constant spirit
of prayer. We are to be in such a
frame of mind as to be ready to pray
publicly if requested ; and when alone,
to improve any moment of leisure
which we may have when we feel ourselve strongly inclined to pray. That
Christian is in a bad state of mind
who has suffered himself, by attention
to worldly cares, or by light conver-

sation, or by gayety and vanity, or by |!

reading an improper book, or by eating or drinking too much, or by late
hours at night among the thoughtless
and the vain, to be brought into such
a condition that he cannot engage in
prayer with proper feelings. There
has been evil done to the soul if it is
not prepared for communion with God
at alltimes, and if it would not find
pleasure in approaching his holy
throne.

18. In every thing give thanks ;
Notes, Eph. v. 20; Phil. iv. 6.
can always find something to be
thankful for, and there may be rea-

sons why we ought to be thankful .
for even those dispensations which |
| stantly burning.

appear dark and frowning. Chrysostom, once the archbishop of Constantinople, and then driven into
exile, persecuted, and despised, died

We |

far away form all the splendours of
the capital, and all the comforts and
honours which he had enjoyed, uttering his favourite motto--dita ra Ia
revray tvexev--glory to God for all
things. Bibliotheca Sacra, i. 700.
So we may praise God for everything
that happens to us under his government. A man owes a debt of obligation to him for anything which
will recall him from his wanderings,
and which will prepare him for heaven. Are there any dealings of God
towards men which do not contemplate such an end? Is a man ever
made to drink the cup of affliction
when no drop of mercy is intermingled? Is he ever visited with calamity which does not in some way
contemplate his own temporal or
eternal good! Could we see all, we
should see that we are never placed
in circumstances in which there is
not much for which we should thank
God. And when, in his dealings, a
cloud seems to cover his face, let us
remember the good things without
number which we have received,
and especially remember that we are
in the world of redeeming love, and
we shai! find enough for which to be
thankful. § For this ts the will of
God. That is, that you should be
grateful. This is what God is pleased
to require you to perform in the name
of the Lord Jesus. In the gift of
that Saviour he has laid the foundation for that claim, and he requires
that you should not be unmindful
of the obligation; see Notes, Heb
xiii. 15.

19. Quench not the Spirit. This
language is taken from the way of putting out a fire, and the sense is, we are
not to extinguish the influences of the
Holy Spirit in our hearts. Possibly
there may be an allusion here to fire
on an altar, which was to be kept conThis fire may have
been regarded as emblematic of devo
tion, and as denoting that that devotion
wasnevertobecomeextinct. The IIol)
20 Despise * not prophesyings.
@ 1 Co.14.1,39. b1 John4.1. ¢ Ph. 4.8.

21 Prove % all things; hold
fast ¢ that which is good.

Spirit is the source of true devotion,
and hence the enkindlings of piety in
the heart, by the Spirit, are never to
be quenched. Fire may be put out
by pouring on water; or by covering
it with any incombustible substance ;
or by neglecting to supply fuel. If it
is to be made to burn, it must be
nourished with proper care and attention. The Holy Spirit, in his influences on the soul, is here compared
with fire that might be made to burn
more intensely, or that might be extinguished. Ina similar manner the
apostle gives this direction to Timothy, ‘I put thee in remembrance that
thou stir up (avalwrupeiv, kindle up,
cause to burn) the gift of God;”’ 2 Tim.
i.6. Anything that will tend to damp
the ardour of piety in the soul; to
chill our feelings ; to render us cold
and lifeless in the service of God, may
be regarded as “ quenching the Spirit.”
Neglect of cultivating the Christian
graces, or of prayer, of the Bible, of
the sanctuary, of a careful watchfulness over the heart, will do it. Worldliness, vanity, levity, ambition, pride,
the love of dress, or indulgence in an
improper train of thought, will do it.
It isa great rule in religion that all
the piety which there is in the soul is
the fair result of culture. A man has
no more religion than he intends to
have ; he has no graces of the Spirit
which he does not seek; he has no
deadness to the world whichis not the
object of his sincere desire, and which
he does not aim to have. Any one, if
he will, may make elevated attainments in the divine life; or he may
make his religion merely a religion of
form, and know little of its power and
its consolations.

20. Despise not prophesyings. On
the subject of prophesyingsin the early |
Christian church, see Notes on1 Cor.
xiv.l,seq. The reference here seems
to be to preaching. They were not
to undervalue it in comparison with
other things. It is possible that in
Thessalonica, as appears to have been
the case subsequently in Corinth |
(comp. 1 Cor. xiv. 19), there were

those who regarded the power of working miracles, or of speaking in unknown tongues, as a much more eminent endowment than that of stating
the truths of religion in language
easily understood. It would not be
unnatural that comparisons should be
made between these two classes of
endowments, much tothe disadvantage
of the latter; and hence may have
arisen this solemn caution not to disregard or despise the ability to make
known divine truth in intelligible language, A similar counsel may not
be inapplicable to us now. The office of setting forth the truth of God
is to be the permanent office in the
church ; that of speaking foreign languages by miraculousendowment, was
to be temporary. But the office of
addressing mankind onthe great duties
of religion, and of publishing salvation, is to be God’s great ordinance
for converting the world. It should
not be despised, and noman commends
his own wisdom who contemns it--for
(1.) it is God’s appointment --the
means which he has designated for
saving men. (2.) It has too much to
entitle it to respect to make it proper
to despise or contemn it. There is
nothing else that has so much power
over mankind as the preaching of the
gospel ; there is no other institution
of heaven or earth among men that is
destined to exert so wide and permanent an influence as the Christian ministry. (3.) It is an influence which is
wholly good. No man is made the
poorer, or the less respectable, or
more miserable in life or in death, by
following the counsels of a minister of
Christ when he makes known the gospel. (4.) He who despises it contemns that which is designed to pro

mote his own welfare, and which is
indispensable for his salvation. It remains yet to be shown that any man

, has promoted his own happiness, or

the welfare of his family, by affecting

| totreat with contempt the instructions
ofthe Christian ministry.

21. Prove all things. Subject
everything submitted to vou to be be-

22 Abstain @ from all appearance

of evil.
@ {s.33.15.

lieved to the proper test. The word
here used (Joxma:re), is one that is
properly applicable to metals, referring to the art of the assayer, by
which the true nature and value of
the metal is tested ; see Notes, 1 Cor.
iii. 18. This trial was usually made
by fire. The meaning here is, that
they were carefully to examine everything proposed for their belief. They
were not to receive it on trust; to
take it on assertion; to believe it because it was urged with vehemence,
zeal, or plausibility. In the various
opinions and doctrines which were
submitted to them for adoption, they
were to apply the appropriate tests
from reason and the word of God, and
what they found to be true they were
to embrace; what was false they were
to reject. Christianity does not require men to disregard their reason,
or to be credulous. It does not expect
them to believe anything because
others say it is so. It does not make
it a duty to receive as undoubted truth
all that synods and councils have de-

creed ; or all that is advanced by the’
more)
than any other form of religion, the:

ministers of religion. It is,
friend of free inquiry, and would lead
men everywhere to understand the.
reason of the opinions which they en-'
tertain; comp. Acts xvii. 11, 12; 1;
Pet. iii. 15. § Hold fast that which
is goid. Which isin accordance with
reason and the word of God ; which is

6]

23 And the very God of peace
sanctify you wholly: and I pray

whatis the true natureof Christianity,
and it is arule whose practical value
cannot but be felt constantly in our
lives. Other religions require their
votaries to receive everything upon
trust; Christianity asks us to examine
everything. Error, superstition, bigotry, and fanaticism attempt to repress free discussion, by saying that
there are certain things which are
too sacred in their nature, or which
have been too long held, or which
are sanctioned by too many great
and holy names, to permit their being subjected to the scrutiny of common eyes, or to be handled by common hands. In opposition to all this,
Christianity requires us to examine
everything--no matter by whom held;
by what councils ordained; by what
venerableness of antiquity sustained ;
or by what sacredness it may be invested. We are to receive no opinion
until we are convinced that it is true;
we are to be subjected to no pains or
penalties for not believing what we do
not perceive to be true; we are to be
prohibited from examining no opinion
which our fellow-men regard as true,
and which they seek to make others
believe. No popular current in favour
of any doctrine; no influence which
name and rank and learning can give
it, is to commend it to us as certainly
worthy of our belief. By whomsoever
held, we are to examine it freely before we embrace it; but when we are

adapted to promote the salvation of, convinced that it is true, it is to be

the soul and the welfare of society.
This is just as much a duty as it is to
“ prove all things.’”? A man who has
applied the proper tests,
found out what is truth, is bound to
embrace it and to hold it fast. He is
not at liberty to throw it away, as if
it were valueless; or to treat truth
and falsehood alike. It is a duty
which he owes to himself and to God
to adhere to it firmly, and to suffer
the loss of all things rather than to
abandon it, There are few more important rules in the New Testament
than the one in this passage.

and has!

It shows |

|held, no matter what current of popu-

lar pinion or prejudice may be against
1t; no matter what ridicule may be
poured upon it ; and no matter though
the belief of it may require us to die
a martyr’s death.

22. Abstain from all appeurance of
evtl, Not only from evil itself, but
from that which seems to be wrong.
There are many things which are
known to be wrong. ‘They are positively forbidden by the laws of heaven,
and the world concurs in the sentiment
that they are wicked. But there are
also many things about which there
God your whole spirit and soul
and body be preserved blameless @
a 1 Co.).8,9.

may be some reasonable doubt. It is

not quite easy to determine in the case
what is right or wrong. The subject
has not been fully examined, or the
question of its morality may be so
difficult to settle, that the mind may
be nearly or quite balanced in regard
to it. There are many things which,
in themselves, may not appear to us
to be positively wrong, but which are
so considered by large and respectable
portions of the community ; and for us
to do them would be regarded as inconsistent and improper. ‘There are
many things, also, in respect to which
there is great variety of sentiment
among mankind--where one portion
would regard them as proper, and another as improper. There are things,
also, where, whatever may be our motive, we may be certain that our conduct will be regarded asimproper. A
great variety of subjects, such as those
pertaining to dress, amusements, the
opera, the ball-room, games of chance
and hazard, and various practices in
the transaction of business, come under this general class; which, though
on the supposition that they cannot be
proved to be in themselves positively
wrong or forbidden, have much the
“appearance” of evil, and will be so
interpreted by others. The safe and
proper rule is to lean always to the
side of virtue. In these instances it
may be certain that there will be no
sin committed by abstaining; there
may be by indulgence. No command
of God, or of propriety, will be violated if we decline complying with
these customs ; but on the other hand
we may wound the cause of religion
by yielding to what possibly is a mere
temptation, No oneever does injury
or wrong by abstaining from the pleasures of the ball-room, the theatre, or
a glass of wine; who can indulge in
them without, in the view of large and
respectable portions of the community, doing that which has the “ appearance”’ at least of “evil ?”

23. And the very God of peace.
The God who gives peace or happi-

unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

‘ness; comp. Notes, Rom.i.7. § Sane-

tify you. Notes, John xvii. 17.
G Wholly. sdroreacis. In every part;
completely. It is always proper to

pray that God would make his people
entirely holy. A prayer for perfect
sanctification, however, should not be
adduced as a proof that it is in fact
attained in the present life. § Your
whole spirit and soul and body. There
is an allusion here, doubtless, to the
popular opinion in regard to what constitutes man. We have a body; we
have animal life and instincts in common with the inferior creation; and
we have also a rational and immortal
soul. This distinction is one that appears to the mass of men to be true,
and the apostle speaks of it in the
language commonly employed by mankind. At the same time, no one can
demonstrate that it is mot founded in
truth. The body we see, and there
can be no difference of opinion in regard to its existence. The soul (1
~oxn--psyche), the vital principle, the
animal life, or the seat of the senses,
desires, affections, appetites, we have
in common with other animals. It
appertains to the nature of the animal
creation, though more perfect in some
animals than in others, but is in all
distinct from the soul as the seat of
conscience, and as capable of moral
agency. See the use of the word in
Matt. xxii. 87; Mark xii. 30; Luke
x. 27; xil. 20; Acts xx. 10; Heb. iy.
12; Rev. viii. 9, et al. In the Pythagorean and Platonic philosophy this
was distinguished from the higher
rational nature (6 vois, rd avedua) as
this last belonged to manalone. This
psyche (~oxn) “soul,” or life, it is
commonly supposed, becomes extinct
at death. It isso connected with the
bodily organization, that when the
tissues of the animal frame cease their
functions, this ceases also, This was
not, however, the opinion of the ancient Greeks. Homer uses the term
to denote that which leaves the body
with the breath, as escaping from thi
texos sdovrav--the fence or sept of th

24 Faithful zs he ¢ that calleth
you, who also will do it.

teeth--and as also passing out through
a wound.--This Yoxr--psyche--continued to exist in Hades, and was
supposed to have adefinite form there,
but could not be seized by the hands.
Ody. ii. 207. See Passow, 2; comp.
Prof. Bush, Anasta. pp. 72, 73.
Though this word, however, denotes
the vital principle or the animal life,
in man it may be connected with
morals--just as the body may be--
for it is a part of himself in his present organization, and whatever may
be true in regard to the inferior creation, itis his duty to bring his whole
nature under law, or so to control it
that it may not be an occasion of sin.
Hence the apostle prays that the
‘“‘whole body and soul’’--or animal
nature--may be made holy. This distinction between the animal life and
the mind of man (the anima and animus, the ~uxn and the wvedjua), was
often made by the ancient philosophers. See Plato, Time. p. 1048, A.
Nemesius, de Nat. Hom. 1 Cit. Glyca,
p. 70; Lucretius, iii. 94; 116, 1381;
Juvenal, xv. 146; Cicero, de Divinat.
129, as quoted by Wetstein in loc. A
similar view prevailed also among the
Jews. Rabbi Isaac (Zohar in Lev.
fol. 29, 2), says, ‘‘ Worthy are the
righteous in this world and the world
to come, for lo, they are all holy; their
body is holy, their sow! is holy, their
spirit and their breath isholy.’’ Whether the apostle meant to sanction
this view, or merely to speak in common and popular language, may indeed
be questioned, but there seems to be
a foundation for the language in the
nature of man. The word here rendered spirit (wvtvya), refers to the intellectual or higher nature of man;
that which is the seat of reason, of
conscience, and of responsibility. This
is immortal. It has no necessary con~
nection with the body, as animal life
or the psyche (ux) has, and consequently will be unaffected by death.
It is this which distinguishes man
from the brute creation; this which
allies him with higher intelligences
around the throne of God. {| Be pre-

25 Brethren, pray for us,
a1 Co.10.13; 2 Th.3.3.

served blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. The apostle
does not intimate here that either the
body or the vital principle wiil be admitted to heaven, or will be found in
a future state of being, whatever may
be the truth on that subject. The
prayer is, that they might be entirely
holy, and be kept from transgression,
until the Lord Jesus should come;
that is, until he should come either to
remove them by death, or to wind up
the affairs of this lower world; see
Notes on chap.i. 10. By his praying
that the ‘‘ body and the soul’’--meaning here the animal nature, the seat
of the affections and passions--might
be kept holy, there is reference to the
fact that, connected as they are with
a rational and accountable soul, they
may be the occasion of sin. The same
natural propensities; the same excitability of passion; the same affections
which in a brute would involve no responsibility, and have nothing moral
in their character, may be a very different thing in man, who is placed
under a moral law, and who is bound
to restrain and govern all his passions
by a reference to that law, and to his
higher nature. For acur to snarl and
growl; for a lion to roar and rage ; for
a hyena to be fierce and untameable;
for a serpent to hiss and bite, and for
the ostrich to leave her eggs without
concern (Job xxxix. 14), involves no
blame, no guilt for them, for they are
not accountable; but for man to evince
the same temper, and the same want
of affection, does involve guilt, for he
has a higher nature, and all these
things should be subject to the law
which God has imposed on him as a
moral and accountable being, As
these things may, therefore, in man
be the occasion of sin, and ought to be
subdued, there was a fitness in praying that they might be ‘“ preserved
blameless” to the coming of the Saviour ; comp. Notes on 1 Cor. ix. 27.

24. Faithful is he that calleth you,
That is, your sanctification after all
depends on him, and as he has begun
a work of grace in your hearts, you
26 Greet all the brethren with
an holy kiss.

27 1! charge you by the Lord,
that this epistle be read unto all the
holy brethren.

1 or, adjure,

may depend on his faithfulness to com-

plete it; see Notes on chap. iv. 3;
Phil. i. 6; 1 Cor. i. 9.

25. Brethren, pray for us. A request which the apostle often makes ;
Notes on Heb. xiii. 18. He was a
man of like passions as others: liable
to the same temptations ; engaged in
an arduous work; often called to meet
with opposition, and exposed to peril
and want, and he peculiarly needed
the prayers of the people of God. A
minister, surrounded as he is by temptations, is in great danger if he has not
the prayers of his people. Without
those prayers, he will be likely to accomplish little in the cause of his
Master. His own devotions in the
sanctuary will be formal and frigid,
and the word which he preaches will
be likely to come from a cold and
heavy heart, and to fall also on cold
and heavy hearts. There is no way
in which a people can better advance
the cause of piety in their own hearts,
than by praying much for their minister.

26. Greet all the brethren with an
holy kiss ; see Notes on Rom xvi. 16.

27. 1 charge you by the Lord.
Marg., adjure. Gr., ‘I put you under oath by the Lord”--igzigw twas
tov Kogiov. It is equivalent to binding
persons by an oath; see Notes on
Matt. xxvi. 63; comp. Gen. xxi. 23,
24; xxiv. 3,87; 1. 25. 9 That this
epistle be read unto all the holy brethren. To all the church ; comp. Notes
on Col. iv. 16. The meaning is, that
the epistle was to be read to the whole
church on some occasion. on which it
was assembled together. It was not
merely designed for the individual or

individuals into whose hands it might |

happen to fall, but as it contained

matters of common interest, and was |

designed for the whole body of believers at Thessalonica, the apostle
gives a solemn charge that it should
not be suppressed or kept from them.

28 The grace of our Lord Jesus

: Christ de with you. Amen.

The first epistle unto the Thessalonians was written from
Athens.

Injunctions of this kind oecurring in
the epistles, look as if the apostles regarded themselves as under the influence of inspiration, and as having
authority to give infallible instructions to the churches.

28. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, &c.; Notes, Rom. xvi. 20.

In regard to the subscription at the
close of the epistle, purporting that it
was written from Athens, see the
Intro. § 3. These subscriptions are
of no authority, and the one here, like
several others, is probably wrong.

From the solemn charge in ver. 27,
of this chapter, that ‘this epistle
should be read to all the holy brethren,’ that is, to the church at large.
we may infer that it is in accordance
with the will of God that all Christians should have free access to the
Holy Scriptures. What was the particular reason for this injunction in
Thessalonica, is not known, but it is
possible that an opinion had begun to
prevail even then that the Scriptures
were designed to be kept in the hands
of the ministers of religion, and that
their common perusal was to be prohibited. At all events, whether this
opinion prevailed then or not, it is not
unreasonable to suppose thatthe Holy
Spirit, by whom this epistle was dictated, foresaw that the time would
come when this doctrine would be defended by cardinals and popes and
councils; and that it would be one of
the means by which the monstrous
fabric of the Papacy would be sustained and perpetuated. It is worthy
of remark, also, that the apostle Paul,
in his episties to the Thessalonians,
has dwelt more fully on the fact that
the great apostasy would occur under
the Papacy, and on the characteristics of that grand usurpation over
| the rights of men, than he has any-
' where else in his epistle ; see 2 Thess.
li. 11. It is no improbable supposi-

tion that with reference to that, and

a. D. 52.)

to counteract one of its leading dogmas, his mind was supernaturally directed to give this solemn injunction,
that the contents of the epistle which
he had written should be communicated without reserve to all the Christian brethren in Thessalonica. In
view of this injunction, therefore, at
the close of this epistle, we may remark, (1.) that it is a subject of express divine command that the people
should have access to the Holy Scriptures. So important was this considered, that it was deemed necessary to enjoin those who should
receive the word of God, under the
solemnities of an oath, and by all
the force of apostolic authority, to
communicate what they had received
to others. (2.) This injunction had
reference to all the members of the
church, for they were all to be made
acquainted with the word of God.
The command is, indeed, that it be
“read ” to them, but by parity of reasoning it would follow that it was to
be in their hands; that it was to be
accessible to them; that it was in no
manner to be withheld from them.
Probably many ofthem could not read,
but in some way the contents of revelation were to be made known to
them--and not by preaching only, but
by reading the words of inspiration.
No part was to be kept back; nor
were they to be denied such access
that they could fully understand it;
nor was it to be insisted on that there

should be an authorized expounder of
it. It was presumed that all the members of the church were qualified to
understand what had been written to
them, and to profit by it. It follows
therefore, (3.) that there is great iniquity in all those decisions and laws
which are designed to keep the Scriptures from the common people. This
is true (a) in reference to the Papal
communion, and to all the ordinances
there which prohibit the free circulation of the Sacred Volume among the
people ; (0b) it is true of all those laws
in slave-holding communities which
prohibit slaves from being taught to
read the Scriptures ; and (c) itis true
of all the opinions and dogmas which
prevail in any community where the
right of “ private judgment”’ is denied,
and where free access to the volume
of inspiration is forbidden. The richest blessing of heaven to mankind is
the Bible ; and there is no book ever
written so admirably adapted to the
common mind, and so fitted to elevate
the sunken, the ignorant, and the degraded. There is no more decided
enemy of the progress of the buman
race in intelligence, purity, and freedom, than he who prevents the free
circulation of this holy volume ; and
there is no sincerer friend of the species than he who “causes it to be
read by all,’’ and who contributes to
make it accessible to all the families
and all the inhabitants of the world.

< A a “ é
a
e \ eae =
=~ =e a
hd ee ee ? ia
Y orn 1D. pee ny hve
hae ay, Pie tein Ae a
yer u at PP cup ae er er ry “s
Tay 1 ethdayy HO AIC mele og wah
aa a Tus Nags tr ini bates Ya yen

IP dare elite tase PS a oo wary

iia -- 2 ev heateieatians vem

Ree nthe lnael

7 Sou,

<--

ees be, of pth YON, oss 8
dee oath 1 the LHe aso bifiy Tatu |

10 Mean.” pF ogal

is Le NY, ts
hi ¥

poh é

7 oth

ere

"agenut le nite)
Ke did Wy hE tats ath Notew En

dolirida) whdep Oks

ihe ai

iL

| rer et Ore, oP
: Srey | Pibphinany rg
\. wwe iw rf % ayy s Aieats inal nal meeeell ane band J

uly hed:

Pal ene A om atime Nad ed eet tess le
© ee ae ee ee er a We he an. ee ah ienaaianee?

- , wv;
hy
Pay pe 4 - eo
‘ - ~s
haa bh
ae | : i
é 7 an y we ‘e4 y ~<
4 _-- i tmp ay eer
n
Tw > > “ae om* eas
ia * lone ms

ye ' oe Bee beet
y Ae Wrap owt h 4 ap th Wepe) cogs
peg Gey: ape we aera ME Aa ee
i eh Reels. het es were
a? beri n . ee. 2 ee 7 ho Ctrl. ees
adhe col i i.
ee ia paw whlng a.

errs Ai bois cebaed mod ~--

Jes a.
Bi arin 4 -y
an-madan _
ae ine; danprelting. 1
“ore!

utreg apt te angen Fh on
wit, by wh dee Mile opietia Gab
of, Save Cie The Gime:
lmatring Neaond “fwealine
Lind Dy a ome Hopen ane
“ral “oie tht wud be over of
he Means by whe> tir ergtranms
laprid a 4 Papaiy woud bea Pt
; veryotonried, It wewtipeny --
, (ha) (he's pestle Pub),
ib Wis Silat te thy ‘Targed borlaheng =
: ru “ily ar the Geetha’,
we Tria Cpaetory Oakes pdhwe anger :
on We ebaraqteis,
od Werpilion on
» than he tes arly.
ye , oe ieee
| ha wi} pane
‘en. 064 TH thal, aad

"a

rt | 4

* lp
f ivay) 7)

ett) 4 see

Livi hee

sy -

For a general view of Thessalonica ; of the establishment of the church
there ; of the character of the church, and of the design for which the
spose addressed these letters to it, see the Introduction to the First

pistle.

This epistle appears to have been written soon after the first, and from
the same place--Corinth. See Intro. to the First Epistle, § 3. The proof
of this indeed is not certain, for there are no marks of time or place in the
epistle by which these points can be determined. The probavility rests upon
these grounds: (1.) That the same persons--Paul, Silas, and Timothy--are
associated in both epistles, and are mentioned as being together at the time
when they were written (1 Thess. i. 1; 2 Thess. i. 1); but as there is
reason to believe that they did not continue long together, it is to be presumed that one epistle was written soon after the other. (2.) Paul refers
to an error which had grown up, apparently in consequence of a misunderstanding of his first epistle (chap. ii. 1, 2); an error which he regarded as of
great magnitude, and which was producing very unhappy results (chap. iii. 11,
12), and it was natural that he should hasten to correct that error as soon
as possible. (3.) There is some probability, as Benson has remarked, that
the epistle was written before the troubles came upon him at Corinth under
the administration of Gallio (Acts xviii. 12--16), and yet that he saw that
the storm was approaching, and hints at it in chap. ii. 2, ‘‘ And that we may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men.” If so, this epistle was
written but a few months at farthest after the first. We may regard the
evidence, therefore, as sufficiently clear, that this epistle was written at
Corinth some time during the latter part of A. D. 53, or the beginning of

There is little doubt as to the design for which it was written. Either
by a false interpretation of his former epistle, or by an epistle forged in his
name and sent to them, the opinion had become prevalent in the church at
Thessalonica that the Saviour was about to appear, and that the end of the
world was at hand; see chap. ii.2, comp. Hug’s Intro. § 94, and Stuart’s
Notes on the same, pp. 741, seq. To correct this impression was the leading
design of this epistle. Some had become alarmed, and were suffering from
unnecessary apprehension (chap. ii. 2); and some, under the natural belief
that labour then was useless, and that property was of no value, had given
up all attention to their worldly concerns (chap. iii. 10,11); and it was ofthe
utmost importance that the error should be corrected. This was done in
this second epistle, and in doing it, Paul, as was usual, intermingled several

(xvill INTRODUCTION:

other topics of importance, adapted to the condition of those to whom he
wrote.

This epistle, though short, has great permanent value, and is indispensable
to a proper understanding of the great doctrine of the Second Advent of the
Redeemer. It was written, indeed, to correct an error in a single church,
and at a particular time, but history has shown there is a tendency to that
same error in all ages, and that there was need of some permanent inspired
statement to check it. It was inferred from the First Epistle of Paul to
the Thessalonians, that he meant to teach that the day of judgment was not
far off. Had not this second epistle been written to correct that false interpretation, and to show what was his belief, it would have been charged on
him that he was mistaken, and then the inference would have been naturally
made that all the prophecies respecting that event were false. ‘The distance
between this and absolute infidelity, it is easy to see, is very small. Paul,
by his prompt explanation, arrested that danger, and showed that he intended to teach no such doctrine as had been drawn from his first letter to
them. This epistle, therefore, is of importance to show (1-) that the apostle
did not believe, or mean to teach, that the end of the world was near.
There are many expressions, indeed, which like those in First Thessalonians,
would seem to imply that the apostle held that belief, but the explanation of
an inspired apostle of his own sentiments at the time, settled that matter. No
one has now a right to charge that belief on him, or on others who then used
the same language. No one can pretend that they held the opinion that the
end of the world was near. ‘There is no stronger language on that subject
in any of their writings than occurs in the First Epistle to the Thessalonians,
and Paul in the second epistle expressly says that he held no such opinion,
and meant to teach no such thing. (2.) This epistle isa standing rebuke
of the kind of interpretation which attempts to determine the time when the
Saviour will come, and of all those theories which represent “the day of
Christ as at hand.’”” The declarations in the Scriptures are positive and
abundant that the time of his appearing is not made known to mortals
(Notes on Acts i. 7), and it is not possible now to make out a stronger argument to prove that that time is near, than could have been made out from
the First Epistle to the Thessalonians; and yet Paul deemed it necessary
to write them a second letter, expressly to show them that the interpretation
which they put on his language was unauthorized. The truth is, that it was
not the design of God to make known to men the exact time when the Lord
Jesus will return to judgment; and all attempts since the time of Paul to
settle that have failed, and all will doubtless continue to fail, as they always
have done.

PpAle and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto * the church of
the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

2 Grace ® unto you, and peace,
from God our Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ.

3 We are bound to thank God

always for you, brethren, as it is
b1 Co.1.3.

This chapter comprises the following points :--

(1.) The salutation ; ver. 1, 2.

(2.) An expression of thanks for
the progress which the Thessalonians
had made in-piety, and especially for
the manner in which they had been

a1 Th.1.1,&ce.

--

enabled to bear their trials; ver. 3,4./in the churches of God.

(8.) An assurance that the manner
in which they had been enabled to
bear their trials was an evidence that
they were true Christians; ver. 5.

(4.) A declaration that those who
had persecuted them, and all others
who were wicked, would be punished
when the Lord Jesus should come,
and that when this should occur the
righteous would appear in glory and}
honour; ver. 6--10.

(5.) The expression of an earnest!
desire that they might be prepared,
for the solemn scenes of that day ;;
ver. 11, 12.

1, 2. Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus; see Notes on 1 Thess. i. 1.

8. We are bound to thank God al-

ways for you ; Notes on 1 Thess. i.
2. § As it is meet. As it is fit or!
proper. J Because that your faith
groweth exceedingly. It would seem
probable from this that Paul had
heard from them since his first epistle |

meet, because that your faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity
of every one of you all toward each
other aboundeth :

_ 4 So that we ourselves glory ¢
in you in the churches of God,
for your patience and faith in all
your persecutions and tribulations

that ye endure ; 4

5 Which ts a manifest token
ce 2 Co.9.2, 1 Th.2.19,20.
@ Ja.5.11. é Ph.1.28.

was written. He had doubtless received intelligence of the error which
prevailed among them respecting his
views of the coming ofthe Lord Jesus,
and of the progress which the truth
was making, at the same time. J And
the charity of every one of you all toward each other. Your mutual love.

4. So that we ourselves glory in you
That is,
we mention your example to other
churches, and glory in it, as an evidence of what the gospel is fitted to
do; see Notes on 1 Thess. ii. 19, 20;
comp. Notes on 2 Cor. ix. 2. J For
your patience. Your patient endurance of trials. § And faith. Fidelity, or constancy. You have shown
unwavering confidence in God in your
afflictions. § In all your persecutions
and tribulations that ye endure; see
Notes on 1 Thess. ii. 14; iv. 13. It
would seem from this that the persecutions and trials to which the apostle
referred in his first epistle were still
continued.

5. Which is a manifest token of the
righteous judgment of God. The word
“which” is supplied by our translators,
and there may be some doubt to what
the apostle has reference as being “a
manifest token of the righteous judgment of God.” The general sense
seems to be, that the fact that they
of the righteous judgment of God, |

that ye may be counted worthy of
the kingdom of God, for which ye
also suffer : %

were thus persecuted was an evidence

that there would be a future judgment, when the righteous who were
persecuted would be rewarded, and
the wicked who persecutedthem would
be punished. The manner in which
they bore their trials was an indication also of what the result would be
in regard to them. Their patience
and faith under persecutions were constantly showing that they would “ be
counted worthy of the kingdom of
God, for which they were called to
suffer.” It is evident that a relative
must be supplied here, as our translators have done, but there has been
a difference of view as to what it refers. Some suppose that it is to
“‘natience,” others to “persecutions and
tribulations,’ and others to the whole
sentence preceding. The latter is
probably the true construction, and
the sense is, that the endurance of
affliction in a proper manner by the
righteous is a proof that there will be
arighteous judgment of God in the
last day. (1.) It is evidence that there
will be a future judgment--since the
righteous here suffer so much, and the
wicked triumph. (2.) These things
are now permitted in order that the
character may be developed, and that
the reason of the sentence in the last
day may be seen. (3.) The manner
in which these afflictions are borne is
an evidence--an indication (tvduypua)
of what the results of the judgment will
be. The word rendered ‘ manifest
token”’ (¢deiyuea), occursnowhere else
in the New Testament. Jt means an
indication, token, proof--anything
that shows or points out how a thing
is, or ts to be (from éyd:ixvuus, to show,
to point out). The meaning here is,
therefore, that the course of evenis
referred to--the persecutions which
they endured, andthe manner in which
they were borne--furnished a proof
that there would be a righteous judgment, and also afforded an indication
of what the result of that judgment
would be. We may, in general, learn

6 Seeing ® 2 ¢s a righteous thing
with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you;

@ Th.2.14; He.10.32,23¢ b Re.6.10.

what will be the issues of the judg
ment in the case of an individual from
the manner in which he bears trials.
{ Of the righteous judgment of God.
That there will be a just judgment
hereafter. The crimes of the wicked
who go unpunished on the earth, and
the sufferings of the good who are unavenged, are a demonstration that
there will be a judgment, when al]
these inequalities will be adjusted.
q That ye may be counted worthy.
As the result of your affliction, that
you may be fitted for the kingdom of
God. This does not mean that
Christians will merit heaven by their
sufferings, but that they may show that
they have such a character that there
is a fitness or propriety that they
should be admitted there. They may
evince by their patience and resignation, by their deadness to the world
and their holy lives, that they are not
disqualified to enter into that kingdom where the redeemed are to
dwell. No true Christian will ever
feel that he is worthy on his own account, or that he has any claim to
eternal life, yet he may have evidence
that he has the characteristics tc
which God has promised salvation,
and is fitted to dwell in heaven. ¥ Of
the kingdom of God. In heaven,
see Notes on Matt. ili. 2. J For
which ye also sifer. The sufferings
which you now endure are because
you are professed heirs of the kingdom ; that is, you are persecuted because you are Christians; see 1 Thess,
ii. 14.

6. Seeing it is a righteous thing
with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you. The sense is,
“ There will be a future judgment, because it is proper that God should
punish those who now persecute you.
It is not right that they should go unpunished, and triumph forever. It is
not an arbitrary thing, a thing which
is indifferent, a thing which may or
may not be done; it is a just and
proper thing that the wicked should

% And to you who are troubled, |
rest *@ with us; when the Lord
a Re.14.13. b1 Th.4.16;

be punished.” The doctrine is, that |
the future punishment of the wicked |
is just and proper; and that, being
just and proper, it will be inflicted.
Many suppose that there would be no
justice in the eternal punishment of
the wicked ; that the threatening of
that punishment is wholly arbitrary;
that it might easily be dispensed with,
and that because it is unjust it will not ,
be inflicted, and need not be dreaded.
But that it is just and proper, a very
slight degree of reflection must show.
For (1.) it is inconceivable that God
should threaten such punishment unless it were just. How can it be reconciled with his perfections that he
can hold up before mankind the assurance that any of them will be punished for ever, unless it be right that
it should be so? Can we believe
that he deliberately threatens what is
wrong, or that, in the face of the universe, he publicly declares his intention to do what is wrong? (2.) Men
themselves believe that itis just that
the wicked should be punished. They
are constantly making laws, ana affixing penalties to them, and executing
them, under the belief that it is right.
Can they regard it as wrong in God
to do the same thing? Can that be
wrong in him which is right in themselves? (3.) If it is right to punish
wickedness here, it is not wrong to
punish it in the future world. There
is nothing in the two places which can
change the nature of what is done. If
it is right for God to visit the sinner
here with the tokens of his displeasure,
there is nothing which can make it
wrong to visit him in like manner in
the future world. Why should that
be wrong in another world which is
right and properin this? (4.) It will
be a righteous thing for God to punish
the wicked in a future state, for they
are not always punished here as they
deserve. No one can seriously maintain that there is an equal distribution
of rewards and punishments on the
earth: Manya man goes to the grave
having received no adequate punish- |

Jude 14. :

7]

Jesus > shall be revealed from heaven with ! his mighty angels.

1 the angels of his power.

ment for his crimes. Many a murderer, pirate, robber, traitor, and
plunderer of nations under the name
of a conqueror, thus dies. No one
can doubt that it would be a “just ”’
thing to punish them here if they
could be arrested. Why should it be
any the less “just” to punish them
when they enter another world? In
like manner, many a man lives a life
of profligacy ; or is an open scoffer ;
or aims to cast off the government of
God ; or is a seducer of innocence;
and yet lives in the midst of wealth,

| and goes down in calmness and peace

to the grave; Ps. Ixxiii. 3--5; Job
xxi. 23--33. Why is it not “just”
that such an one should be punished
in the future world? comp. Ps.
Ixxill. 16--20. But, if it is right
that God should punish the wicked
in the future world, it will be done.
For (1.) there is nothing to hinder
him from doing it. He has all power,
and has all necessary means of inflicting punishment, entirely at his disposal. (2.) It would not be right not
to doit. Itis not right for a magistrate to treat the righteous and the
wicked alike, or to show that he has
as much regard to the one as to the
other. (3.) It cannot be believed that
God has uttered a threatening which
he never meant to execute, or to appear before the universe as having
held up before men the terror of the
most awful punishment which could
be inflicted, but which he never intended to carry into effect. Who
could have confidence insuch a Being?
Who could know what to believe when
he makes the most solemn declaration? (4.) The Judge ofall the earth
“will do right ;” and if it is right to
declare that ‘“‘the wicked shall be
turned into hell,” it will not be wrong
to inflict the sentence. And if, on
the whole, it is right that the sinner
should be punished, 7 will be done.
q Them that trouble you. Those
who persecute you; see 1 Thess.
ii. 14.

7. And to you who are troubled
8 In @ flaming fire, ! taking ®

vengeance on them that know ¢ not
God, and 4 that obey not the gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ :

a He.10.27; 2 Pe.3.7. 1 or, yielding.

6 De.32.41 43. c Ps.79.6; Zep.1.6.
d@ Ro.2.8.

9 Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction ¢ from the
presence of the Lord, and from the
glory f of his power;

eé Ph.3.19; 2 Pe.3.%
f Is.2.19.

That is, “it will be a righteous thing

for God to give to you who are persecuted rest in the last day.”’ As it
will be right and proper to punish the
wicked, so it will be right to reward
the good. It will not, however, be in
precisely the same sense. The wicked
will deserve all that they will suffer,
but it cannot be said that the righteous will deserve the reward which
they will receive. It will be right and
proper, because (1.) there is a fitness
that they who are the friends of God
should be treated as such, or it is proper that he should show himself to be
their friend ; and (2.) because in this
life this is not always clearly done.
They are often less prospered, and
less happy in their outward circumstances, than the wicked. There is,
therefore, a propriety that in the future state God should manifest himself as their friend, and show to assembled worlds that he is not indifferent to character, or that wickedness
does not deserve his smiles, and piety
incur his frown. At the same time,
however, it will be owing wholly to his
grace that any are ever admitted to
heaven. {[ Rest. The future happiness of believers is often represented
under the image of rest. It is rest
like that of the weary labourer after
his day of toil; rest, like that of the
soldier after the hardships of a long
and perilous march; rest, like the
calm repose of one who has been
racked with pain ; see Notes on Heb.
iv. 9. The word rest here (év:0is)
means a letting loose, a remission, a
relaxation; and hence composure,
quiet ; 2 Cor. ii. 12; vii. 5. YJ With
us. That is, with Paul, Silas, and
Timothy ; ver.1. It would increase
the comfort of the Thessalonians derived from the anticipation of the
future world, to reflect that they
would meet their religious teachers
and friends there. It always augments

the anticipated joy of heaven to reflect
that we are to share its blessedness
with them. There is no envy among
those who anticipate heaven ; there
will be none there. They who desire
heaven at all, desire that it may be
shared in the highest degree by all
who are dear to them. § When the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven. Shall appear; shall come from
heaven; Notes, 1 Thess. iv.6. { With
his mighty angels. Marg., angels of
his power. Sothe Greek. The sense
is, that angels of exalted rank and
glory will accompany him; Notes on
Iie Dhess;.iv. 163, Matt, xxiv. )31u:
xxv. 3l.

8. In flaming fire. This is a circumstance which is not noticed in the
account of his appearing in the parallel place in 1 Thess. iv. 16. ‘The object of the apostle here seems to be to
represent him as coming amidst vivid
flashes of lightning. Ile is commonly
described as coming in clouds, and to
that common description there is here
added the image of incessant lightnings, as if the whole heavens were
illuminated with a continued blaze.
{| Taking vengeance. Marg., yielding. Gr., giving. The word vengeance is used in the sense of punishment, for there cannot be in God what
literally corresponds with the passion
of revenge; comp. Notes on Rom.
xii. 19. J On them that know not God.
On all who are strangers to him ; that
is, who are living in heathenish darkness, or who, having heard of him,
have no practical acquaintance with
him. { And that obey not the gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who do
not embrace it, and practise its precepts in their lives; comp. Notes on
Rom. ii. 9.

9. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction ; see Notes on Matt.
xxv. 41, 46. The word which is here
rendered destruction (dasQgov), is dif-

10 When he shall come to be
glorified “in his saints, and to be

a@ Mat.25.31. b Ps.68.35.

ferent from that which occurs in Matt.

xxv. 46, and which is there rendered
punishment --xoracis. The word oaeSeay
--olethron--occurs only here and in
1 Cor. v. 5; 1 Thess. v. 83; 1 Tim. vi.
9; in each of which places it is rendered destruction. It does not denote
annihilation, but: is used in the same
sense in which we use the word when
we say that a thing is destroyed. Thus
health is destroyed when it fails;
property is destroyed when it is burned
or sunk in the ocean; a limb is destroyed that is lost in battle ; life is
destroyed when one dies. Inthe case
before us, the destruction, whatever
it be, is (1.) to be continued for ever ;
and (2.) is to be of the nature of punishment. The meaning then must be,
that the soul is destroyed as to the
great purposes of its being--its enjoyment, dignity, honour, holiness,
happiness. It will not be annihilated,
but will live and linger on in destruction. It seems difficult to conceive
how any one can profess to hold that
this passage is a part of the word of
God, and yet deny the doctrine of future eternal punishment. It would
not be possible to state that doctrine
in clearer language than this. It
never is stated in clearer language in
any creed or confession of faith, and
if it be not true that the wicked will
be punished for ever, it must be admitted that it would not have been
possible to reveal the doctrine in human language. § From the presence
of the Lord. That is, a part of their
punishment will consist in being banished from the immediate presence of
the Lord. There is a sense in which
God is everywhere present, and in
that sense he will be in the world
where the wicked will dwell, to punish
them. But the phrase is also used to
denote his more immediate pzesence ;
the place where are the symbols of
his majesty and glory; the home of
the holy and the blessed. It isin that
sense that the word is used here, and
the idea is, that it will be one of the

admired ° in all them that believe
(because our testimony among you
was believed) in that day.

circumstances contributing to the
deeper woe of the place of punishment,
that those who dwell there will be
banished from that holy abode, and
will never be permitted to enter there,
{ And from the glory of his power.
The meaning seems to be, that they
will not be able to endure the manifestation of his power and majesty
when he shall appear, but will be
driven away by it into outer darkness ;
see chap. ii. 8. The Saviour, in describing his Second Advent, uses this
language : ‘‘ They shall see the Son
of man coming in the clouds of heaven,
with power and great glory ;” Matt.
xxiv. 30. There will be a great ex.
hibition of both. The power will be
seen in the convulsions of nature
which will precede or attend him; in
the resurrection of the dead; and in
the bringing of all to judgment : and
the glory will be seen in his own person; the dignity and number of his
attendants; and the honour that shall
then be conferred on him as the final
Judge of all mankind. By the manifestation of that power and glory the
wicked will be driven away into eternal ruin. They will not be able to
stand before it, and though, in common
with the righteous, they may see the
majesty of the Redeemer in the last
day, yet they will be driven away to
witness it no more.

10. When he shall come to be glortJied in his saints. That is, the redeemed in that day will be the means
of promoting his glory, or the universe
will see his glory manifested in their
redemption. His chief glory as seen
in that day will be connected with the
fact that he has redeemed his people ;
and he will come in order that all the
appropriate honour of such a work
may then be manifested, He will be
“ glorified ”’ then by the numbers that
shall have been redeemed; by their
patience in the trials through which
they have passed; by the triumphs
which religion shall have made on the
earth ; by their praises and songs, and
11 Wherefore also we pray always for you, that our God would

1 count you worthy @ of this call1 or, vouchsafe aCol.1.12; Re.3.4.

by their ascent with him to the realms
of blessedness. § And to be admired
in all them that believe. This may
either mean that he will be admired
among or by them that believe; or
that the ground of the admiration
which he will receive in that day will
be what will be seen zn them ; that is,
their graces, their numbers, their joys,
their triumphs will be the occasion of
producing admiration of him--for he
will be regarded as the source of it all.
Tindal renders it, ‘‘and to be made
marvellous in all them that believe.”
The latter interpretation seems to me
to be the correct one. The general
idea is, that Christ in that day will be
manifested in a glorious manner, and
that the source of his highest triumphs
will be what is seen zm the saints.
His main honour when he returns to
the world will not be the outward
splendours which will attend his
coming, nor the angels that will accompany him, nor the manifestation
of his power over the elements, but
the church which he has redeemed.
It will then be seen that he is worthy
of universal admiration, for having redeemed that church. He shall then
be admired or glorified in his people,
(1.) for having conceived the plan of
redeeming them ; (2.) for being willing to become incarnate and to die to
save them ; (3.) forthe defence of his
churchinallits persecutions and trials ;
(4.) for raising his people from the
dead ; (5.) for the virtues and graces
which they will exhibit in that day.
This appropriate honour of Christ in
the church has never yet been fully
seen. His people on earth have, in
general, most imperfectly reflected
his image. They have in general been
comparatively few in number, and
scattered upon the earth. They have
been poor and despised. Often they
have been persecuted and regarded as
the ‘‘filth of the world and the offscouring of all things.” The honours
of this world have been withheld from
them, The great have regarded it as

ll. THESSALONIANS.

ing, and fulfil all the good pleasure
of his goodness, and the work o!
faith with power;

no honour to be identified with the
church, and the proud have been
ashamed to be enrolled among the followers of the Lamb. In the last day
all this will be changed, and the assembled church will show to admiring
worlds how great and glorious is itt
Redeemer, and how’‘glorious was the
work of redemption. { Because our
testimony among you was believed.
The meaning of this seems to be, that
they would be among the number of
those who would in that day honour
the Saviour, because they had embraced what the apostle had preached
to them respecting these future scenes.
Thus interpreted, this clause should
be regarded as connected with ver. 7.
“ Andto you it is a righteous thing
that he should give rest with us, because our testimony among you was
believed,” That is, you have shown
that you are true Christians, and it is
proper that you should partake of the
triumphs and hopes of that day.

11. Wherefore also we pray always
for you; Notes, 1 Thess. i. 2. § That
our God would count you worthy of
this calling. Marg., “ or, vouchsafe.”
The meaning is, ‘that he would regard you as worthy of this calling ;”’
see Notes on ver. 5. § Of this calling;
Notes, Eph. iv.1. The “calling ” here,
is that which had brought them into
the kingdom, and led them to become
Christians. { And fulfil all the good
pleasure of his goodness. That is,
make the work of salvation complete
and effectual. Oldshausen has wel]
expressed the sense: ‘‘ May God fil)
you with all that good which is pleas -
ing to him.” The thoughts in the
passage are, (1.) that the purpose towards them on the part of God wa;
one of ‘ goodness”’ or benevolence:
(2.) that there was a state of ming
which would be regarded by him as
pleasing, or as his “ good pleasure ;”
and (3.) that Paul wished that thi:
might be accomplished in them. He
desired that there might be in them
everything which wonld be pleasing t«

Jesus Christ may be glorified in
@1 Pe.l.7.

God, and which his benevolence was
fitted to secure. § And the work of
faith. The work which faith is adapted to produce on the soul; see 1 John
v.4,5. J With power. Effectually,
completely. The apostle prays that
so much power may be exerted as will
be sufficient to secure the object. The
work of religion on the soul is always represented in the Bible as one
of power.

12. That the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. That is, that the Lord
Jesus himself may be honoured among
you; the name often denoting the
person. ‘The idea is that the apostle
wished that the Lord Jesus might be
honoured among them by the fair application and development of the principles of his religiou. Qf And ye in
him. That you may be regarded and
treated as his friends when he shall
come to judge the world. According to the grace of our God and the
Lord Jesus Christ. That is, that you
may experience all the honour which
his grace is-fitted to impart.

In view of the exposition given of
this chapter, we may remark :--

(1.) That the wicked will certainly
be punished when the Lord Jesus shall
come tojudgment. Words cannot reveal this truth more plainly than is
done in this chapter, and if itis not to
ve so, then language has no meaning.

(2.) The punishment of the wicked
will be eternal. It is impossible for
language to teach that doctrine more
clearly than is done in this chapter.
Ifit were admitted to have been the
intention of God to teach the doctrine
of eternal punishment, it is impossible
to conceive that he could have chosen
more plain and positive language to
express the doctrine than has been
done here. Can it be, then, that he
means to trifle with men on so solemn
a subject, by using words which have
nomeaning ?

(8.) It will greatly aggravate the
punishment of the wicked that it will
he “a righteous thing” for God thus
to punish them.

CHAPTER l.
12 That ¢ the name of our Lord ,
you, and ye in him, according to
the grace of our God and the Lord
Jesus Christ.

fer as martyrs; if in their sufferings
they could feel that they were oppressed and crushed beneath mere power;
if they could feel that they were right
and that God was wrong ; if they could
get up a party in the universe against
God, sympathizing with them as if
they were wronged, the case would be
changed. A man can endure suffering much more easily when he has a
good conscience, and feels that he is
right, than he can when he feels that
what he endures is deserved. But
the sinner in hell can never have this
consolation. He will for ever feel
that God is right and that he is wrong,
and that every pang which he endures
is deserved.

(4.) If it be a ‘righteous thing”
that the wicked shall be punished,
then they never can be saved by mere
justice. No one will go to heaven
because he deserves or merits it. All
dependence on human merit, therefore, is taken away in the matter of
salvation, and if the sinner is ever
saved, it will be by grace, and not by
justice.

(5.) If it is a “righteous thing ”
that the sinner should perish, he will
perish. God will do right to all.

(6.) It is amazing that the mass of
men have so little concern about their
future condition. God has plainly revealed that he will destroy the wicked
for ever, and thatit will be a righteous thing for him to doit; and yet
the mass of mankind are wholly unconcerned, and disregard all thesolemn
declarations ofthe Bible on this subject
as ifthey were idle tales. One would
suppose that the very possibility ofeternal suffering would rouse all the sensibilities of thesoul,and lead to the earnest inquiry whether it is not possible
to avoid it. Yet the mass of men feel
no concern in this inqu.ry. It is impossible to get them ever to think of
it. We cannot get them even to ask
the question, seriously, whether they
themselves are to be happy or miserable to all eternity, This stupidity

If thev were to suf-! and indifference is the most unac-

countable fact on earth, and probably
distinguishes this world from all others.

(7.) It is rational to think of religion ; to reflect on eternity ; to be
serious; to be anxious about the future state. If there is even a posstbility that we may be miserable for
ever, it is proper to be serious about
it. And if there is a solemn declaration of God that it will be a “ righteous thing’? for him to punish the
wicked, and that he will “ punish them
with everlasting destruction,’ assuredly the mind should be concerned.
Is there anything more worthy the
calm and sober attention of the human soul than such solemn declarations of the infinite God ?

The main object of this chapter is
to correct an erroneous impression
which had been made on the minds
of the Thessalonians respecting the
second coming of the Saviour, either
by his own former letter, or by one
forged in his name. They had received the impression that that event
was about to take place. This belief
had produced an unhappy effect on
their minds; ver. 2. It became, therefore, necessary to state the truth on
the subject, in order to free their
minds from alarm; and this purpose
of the apostle leads to one of the most
important prophecies in the New
Testament. The chapter comprises
the following points :--

I. An exhortation that they would
not be alarmed or distressed by the
expectation of the speedy coming of
the Saviour ; ver. 1, 2.

II. A statement of the truth that
he would not soon appear, and of the!
characteristics of a great apostasy
which must intervene before his advent ; ver. 3--12.

In this part of the chapter, the
apostle shows that he did not mean to
teach that that event would soon
happen, by stating that before that |
there would occur a most melancholy |
apostasy, which would require a con-

OW we beseech you, brethren,
by the coming of our Lord

CHAPTER II. i

Jesus Christ, and by our gathering
together unto him,
2 That ye be not soon shaken in

siderable time before it was matured.

(a) That day would not come until there should be a great apostasy,
and arevelation ofthe man ofsin ; ver.3.

(b) The character of this man of
sin was to be such that it could not
be mistaken : he would be opposed to
God; would exalt himself above all
that is called God; and would sit in
the temple showing himself as God;
ver, 4.

(c) There was a restraint then exercised which prevented the development of the great apostasy. There
were indeed causes then at work which
would lead to it, but they were then
held in check, and God would restrain
them until some future time, when he
would suffer the man of sin to be revealed ; ver. 5--%.

(ad) When that time should come,
then that “ wicked ” one would be revealed, with such marks that he could
not be mistaken. His coming would
be after the working of Satan, with
power and signs and lying wonders,
and under him there would be strong
delusion, and the belief of a lie; ver.
8--12. This great foe of God was to
be destroyed by the coming of the
Saviour, and one object of his appearing would be to put an end to his dominion; ver. 8.

III. The apostle then says, that
there was occasion for thankfulness
to God, that he had chosen them to
salvation, and not left them to be destroyed ; ver. 13, 14.

IV. An exhortation to stand fast,
and to maintain what they had been
taught (ver. 15), and a prayer that
God, who had given them a good hope,
would comfort their hearts, closes the
chapter; ver. 16, 17.

1. Now we beseech you, brethren,
by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The phrase “by the coming,”
is not here, as our translators seem to
have supposed, a form of solemn adjuration. Itis not common, ifit ever occurs,
inthe Scriptures, to make a solemn
adjuration in view of an event, and the

mind, or be troubled, neither by
spirit, nor by word, nor by letter,

connection here demands that we
give to the phrase a different sense.
It means, respecting his coming; and
the idea of Paul is, “In regard to
that great event of which I spoke to
you in my former epistle--the coming
of the Saviour--I beseech you not to
be troubled, as if it were soon to
happen. _As his views had been misunderstood or misrepresented, he now
proposes to show them that there was
nothing in the true doctrine which
should create alarm, as if he were
about to appear. { And by our
gathering together unto him. There
is manifest allusion here to what is
said in the first epistle (chap. iv. 17),
‘then we shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds;”’ and the
meaning is, ‘“‘in reference to our
being gathered unto him, I beseech
you not to be shaken in mind, as if
that event were near.”

2. That ye be not soon shaken in
mind. 'The word here used signifies,
properly, to be moved as a wave of
the sea, or to be tossed upon the
waves, as a vessel is. Then it means
to be shaken in any way; see Mat.
xi. 7; xxiv. 29; Luke vi. 38; Acts
iv. 81; Heb. xii. 26. The reference
here is to the agitation or alarm felt
from the belief that the day ef judgment would soon occur. It is uniformly said in the Scriptures, that the
approach of the Lord Jesus to judge
the world, will produce a great consternation andalarm. Mat. xxiv, 30,
‘‘Then shall appear the sign of the
Son of man in heaven, and then shall
all the tribes of the earth mourn.”
Rev. i. 7, ‘‘ Behold, he cometh with
clouds ; and every eye shal] see him ;
and they also which pierced him ; and
all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him.” Luke xxiii. 30, ‘“‘ Then
shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills,
Cover us;” comp. Isa. ii. 21, 22.
Of the truth of this, there can be no
doubt. We may imagine something
of the effects which will be produced
by the alarm caused in a community

as from us, as * that the day of
Christ is at hand.
a Mat. 24. 4-6.

when a belief prevails that the day ot
judgment is near. In a single year
(1848) seventeen persons were admitted to the Lunatic Asylum in Worcester, Mass., who had become deranged in consequence of the expectation that the Lord Jesus was about
to appear. It is easy to account for
such facts, and no doubt, when the
Lord Jesus shall actually come, the
effect on the guilty world will be overwhelming. The apostle here says,
also, that those who were Christians
were ‘shaken in mind and troubled”
by this anticipation. There are,
doubtless, many true Christians who
would be alarmed at such an event,
as there are many who, like Hezekiah
(Isa. xxxviii. 1, 2), are alarmed at
the prospect of death. Many real
Christians might, on the sudden occurrence of such an event, feel that
they were not prepared, and be
alarmed at the prospect of passing
through the great trial which is to determine their everlasting destiny. It
is no certain evidence of a want of
piety to be alarmed at the approach
of death. Our nature dreads death,
and though there may be a well-

founded hope of heaven, it will not

always preserve a delicate physical
frame from trembling when it comes.
q Or be troubled. That is, disturbed,
or terrified. It would seem that this
belief had produced much consternation among them. § Neither by spirit.
By any pretended spirit of prophecy.
But whether this refers to the predictions of those who were false prophets
in Thessalonica, or to something which
it was alleged the apostle Paul had
himself said there, and which was construed as meaning that the time was
near, is not certain. This depends
much on the question whether the
phrase ‘‘as from us,” refers only to
the letters which had been sent to
them, or also to the ‘ word” and to
the ‘spirit,’ here spoken of; see
Oldshausen on the place. It would
seem, from the connection, that all
their consternation had been caused
by some misconstruction which had
been put on the sentiments of Paul
himself, for if there had been any
other source of alarm, he would naturally have referred to it. It is probable, therefore, that allusion is made
to some representation which had been
given of what he had said under the
influence of the Holy Spirit, and that
the expectation that the end of the
world was near, was supposed to be a
doctrine of inspiration. Whether,
however,the Thessaloniansthemselves
put this construction on what he said,
or whether those who had caused the
alarm represented him as teaching
this, cannot be determined. { Nor
by word. That is, by public instruction, or in preaching. It is evident
that when the apostle was among them,
this subject, from such causes, was
prominent in his discourses ; see ver.
5. It had been inferred, it seems,
from what he said, that he meant to
teach that the end of the world was
near. {| Nor by letter. Either the
one which he had before written to
them--the First Epistle to the Thessalonians--or one which had been
forged in his name. § As from us.
That is, Paul, Silas, and Timothy,
who are united in writing the two
epistles (1 Thess.i.1; 2 Thess. i. 1),
and in whose names a letter would be
forged, if one of this description were
sent to them. It has been made a
question, whether the apostle refers
here to the former epistle which he
had sent to them, or to a forged letter ; and on this question critics have
been about equally divided. The reasons for the former opinion may be
seen in Paley’s Hore Pauline, in loc.
The question is not very important,
and perhaps cannot be easily settled.
There are two or three circumstances,
however, which seem to make it probable that he refers to anepistle which
had been forged, and which had been
pretended to be received from him. (1.)
One is found in the expression “ as
from us.” If he had referred to his
own former letter, it seems to me
that the allusion would have been
more distinct, and that the particle

have been employed if the reference
were to such a forged letter. (2.) A
second circumstance is found in the
expression in the next verse, “ Let
no man deceive you by any means,”
which looks as if they were not led
into this belief by their own interpretation of his former epistle, but by
a deliberate attempt of some one to
delude them on the subject, (3.)
Perhaps a third circumstance would
be found in the fact that it was not
uncommon in early times of Christianity to attempt to impose forged
writings on the churches. Nothing
would be more natural for an impostor
who wished to acquire influence, than
to do this; and that it was often done
is well known. That epistles were
forged under the names ofthe apostles,
appears very probable, as Benson has
remarked, from chap. iii. 17; Gal. vi.
11; and Philem.19. There are, indeed,
none of those forged epistles extant
which were composed in the time of
the apostles, but there is extant an
epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, besides the two which we have ; another
to the Laodiceans, and six of Paul’s
epistles to Seneca--all of which are
undoubted forgeries; see Benson in
loc. If Paul, however, here refers to
his former epistle, the reference
is doubtless to 1 Thess. iv. 15, and
vy. 2, 3, 4, which might easily be
understood as teaching that the end
of the world was near, and to which
those who maintained that opinion
might appeal with great plausibility.
We have, however, the authority of
the apostle himself that he meant te
teach no such thing. { As that the
day of Christ is at hand. The time
when he would appear--called ‘the
day of Christ,” because it would be
appointed especially for the manifestation of his glory. The phrase “ at
hand,” means near. Grotius supposes
that it denotes thatsame year, and refers for proof to Rom. viii. 38 ; 1 Cor.
iii. 22; Gal. i. 4. Heb. ix. 9, If so,
the attempt to fix the day was an early
indication of the desire to determine
the very time of his appearing--a disposition which has been so common

“ as ” (#s) would not have been used. | since, and which has led into so many
This is such an expression as would! sad mistakes.

3 Let no man deceive you by
any means: for that day shall
not come, except * there come a

@ 1 Ti.4,1.

3. Let no man deceive you by any

means. That is, respecting the coming of the Lord Jesus. This implies
that there were then attempts to deceive, and that it was of great importance for Christians to be on their
guard. The result has shown that
there is almost no subject on which
caution is more proper, and on which
men are more liable to delusion. The
means then resorted to for deception
appear from the previous verse to have
been either an appeal to a pretended
verbal message from the apostle, or
a pretended letter from him. The
means now, consist of a claim to uncommon wisdom in the interpretation
of obscure prophecies of the Scriptures. ‘The necessity for the caution
here given has not ceased. § For
that day shall not come, except there
come a falling away first. Until an
apostasy (arocracia) shall have occurred--the great apostasy. There is
scarcely any passage of the New Testament which has given occasion to
greater diversity of opinion than this.
Though the reference seems to be
plain, and there is scarcely any prophecy of the Bible apparently more
obvious and easy in its general interpretation ; yet it is proper to mention
some of the opinions which have been
entertained of it. Some have referred
it toa great apostasy from the Christian church, particularly on account
of persecution, which would occur before the destruction of Jerusalem.
The “coming of the Lord ” they suppose refers to the destruction of the
holy city, and according to this, the
meaning is, that there would be a
great apostasy before that event
would take place. Of this opinion was
Vitringa, who refers the ‘ apostasy’’
to a great defection from the faith
which took place between the time of
Nero and Trajan. Whitby also refers it
to an event which was to take place before the destruction of Jerusalem, and
supposes that the apostasy would consistin areturn from the Christian tothe

CHAPTER lI.
falling away first, and that man
of sin ® be revealed, the “son of
perdition :

b Da.7.25. ¢ John 17.12.

Jewish faith by multitudes of professed
converts. The “man of sin,” according to him, means the Jewish nation,
so characterized on account of its
eminent wickedness. Hammond explains the apostasy by the defection to
the Gnostics, by the arts of Simon
Magus, whom he supposes to be the
man of sin, and by the “day of the
Lord” he also understands the destruction of Jerusalem. Grotius takes
Caius Cesar or Caligula, to be the
man of sin, and by the apostasy he
understands his abominable wickedness. Inthe beginning of his government, he says, his plans of iniquity
were concealed, and the hopes of all
were excited in regard to his reign ;
but his secret iniquity was subsequently ‘revealed,’ and his true character understood. Wetstein understands by the “man of sin,” “ Titus
and the Flavian house.” He says
that he does not understand it of the
Roman Pontiff, who ‘is not one such
as the demonstrative pronoun thrice
repeated designates, and who neither
sits in the temple of God, nor calls
himself God, nor Caius, nor Simon
Gioriae, nor any Jewish impostor, nor
Simon Magus.” Koppe refers it to
the King mentioned in Dan. xi. 36.
According to him, the reference is to
a great apostasy of the Jews from the
worship of God, and the “ man of sin”’
is the Jewish people. Others have
supposed that the reference is to
Mohammed, and that the main characteristics of the prophecy may be
found in him. Of the Papists, a part
affirm that the apostasy is the falling
away from Rome in the time of the
Reformation, but the greater portion
suppose that the allusion is to Antichrist, who, they say, will appear in
the world before the great day of judgment, to combat religion and the
saints. See these opinions stated at
length, and examined, in Bishop Newton on the Prophecies, Diss. xxii.
Some more recent expositors have

‘referred it to Napoleon Bonaparte,
and some (as Oldshausen) suppose
that it refers to some one who has not
yet appeared, in whom all the characteristics here specified will be
found united Most Protestant commentators have referred it to the great
apostasy under the Papacy, and, by
the “man of sin,”’ they suppose there
is allusion to the Roman Pontiff, the
Pope. It is evident that we are in
better circumstances to understand
the passage than those were who immediately succeeded the apostles.
Eighteen hundred years have passed
away since the epistle was written, and
the “day of the Lord”’ has not yet
come, and we have an opportunity
of inquiring, whether in all that long
tract of time any one man can be
found, or any series of men have
arisen, to whom the description here
given is applicable. If so, it is in
accordance with all the proper rules
of interpreting prophecy, to make
such an application. If it is fairly
applicable to the Papacy, and cannot be applied in its great features to
anything else, it is proper to regard
it ashaving such an original reference.
Happily, the expressions which are
used by the apostle are, in themselves,
not difficult of interpretation, and all
that the expositor has to do is, to ascertain whether in any one great
apostasy all the things here mentioned
have occurred. If so, it is fair to apply
the prophecy to such an event; if
not so, we must wait still for its fulfilment. The word rendered ‘“ falling away” (drccracia, apostasy), is
of so general a character, that it
may be applied to any departure from
the faith as it was received in the
time of the apostles. It occurs in
the New Testament only here and
in Acts xxi. 21, where it is rendered
“to forsake” --“thou teachest all the
Jews which are among us to forsake |
Moses ” -- apostasy from Moses --
anrorraciay and Mwtctws. The word
means @ departing from, or a defection ; see the verb used in 1 Tim. iv.
1, “ Some shall depart from the faith”
--arorrnoovra: ; comp. Notes on that |
passage ; see also Heb. iii. 12 ; Luke viii. |
13; Acts v.37. The reference here is.
evidently tosome general falling awav,

Il. THESSALONIANS.

or to some great religious apostasy
that was to occur, and which would be
under one head, leader, or dynasty,
and which would involve many in the
same departure from the faith, and
in the same destruction. The use of

the article here, “the apostasy ’’(Gr.),
Erasmus remarks, ‘signifies that
great and before-predicted apostasy.’
It is evidently emphatic, showing that
there had been a reference to this
before, or that they understood well
that there was to be such an apostasy.
Paul says (ver. 5), that when he was
with them, he had told them of these
things. The writers in the New
Testament often speak of such a defection under the name of Antichrist ;
see Rey. xili. 14; 1 John ii. 18, 22;
iv.3;2 John7. § And that man of

sin. This isa Hebraism, meaning a
man of eminént wickedness ; one distinguished for depravity ; comp. John
Xvii. 12; Prov. vi. 12, in Heb. The
use of the article here--s @ySpusos--
“the man of sin,’ is also emphatic, as
in the reference to “ the falling away,”

and shows that there is allusion to
one of whom they had before heard,
and whose character was well known ;

who would be the wicked one by way
of eminence; see also ver. 8, ‘‘ that
wicked ”’--6 évouos. There are two

general questions in regard to the

proper interpretation of this appel-

lative ; the one is, whether it refersto

an individual, or to a series of indi-

viduals of the same general charac-

ter, aiming at the accomplishment of
the same plans; and the other is,
whether there has been any individual, or any series of individuals,
since the time of the apostle, who, by
eminence, deserved to be called “ the
man of sin.” That the phrase, “the
man of sin,” may refer to a succes
ston of men of the same general character, and that it does so refer here,
is evident from the following considerations: (1.) The word “king’’ is
used in Dan. vii. 25; xi. 36, to which
places Paul seems to allude, to denote
a succession of kings, (2.) The same
is true of the beast mentioned in Dan.
vil., vili., Rev. xill., representing a
kingdom or empire through its successive changes and revolutions, (3.3

The same is true of the “woman arcayed in purple and scarlet” (Rev.
xvii. 4), which cannot refer to a single
woman, but is the emblem of a continued corrupt administration. (4.)
It is clear that a succession is intended here, because the work assigned to “the man of sin,” cannot
be supposed to be that which could
be accomplished by a single individual. The statement of the apostle is, that there were then tendencies to such an apostasy, and that
the ‘‘ man of sin’ would be revealed
at no distant period, and yet that he
would continue his work of “ lying
wonders’’ until the coming of the
Saviour. In regard to this “man of
sin,” it may be further observed, (1.)
that his appearing was to be preceded by “ the great apostasy; ’’ and (2.)
that he was to continue and perpejuate it. His rise was to be owing toa
great departure from the faith, and
then he was to be the principal agent
in continuing it by “signs and lying
wonders.”’ He was not himself to
originate the defection, but was to
be the creation, or result of it. He
was to rise upon it, or grow out of it,
and, by artful arrangements adapted
to that purpose, was to perpetuate it.
The question then is, to whom this
phrase, descriptive of a succession of
individuals so eminent for wickedness
that the name “the man of sin”’ could
be applied, was designed by the spirit
of inspiration to refer. Bishop Newton has shown that it cannot refer to
Caligula, to Simon Magus, to the
revolt of the Jews from the Romans,
or to the revolt of the Jews from the
faith, or to the Flavian family, or to
Luther, as some of the papists suppose, or to one man who will appear
just before the end of the world, as
others of the Romanists suppose ; see
his Dissertations on the Prophecies,
xxii. pp. 393--402; comp. Oldshausen,
in loc. The argument is too long to
be inserted here. But can it be referred to the papacy: Can it denote
the pope of Rome, meaning not a
single pope, but the succession? If
all the circumstances of the entire
passage can be shown to be fairly applicable to him, or if it can be shown

that all that is fairly implied in the
language used here has received a
fulfilment in him, then it is proper to
regard it as having been designed to
be so applied, and then this may be
numbered among the prophecies that
are in part fulfilled. The question
now is on the applicability of the
phrase ‘‘the man of sin’ to the pope.
That his rise was preceded by a great
apostasy, or departure from the purity
of the simple gospel, as revealed in
the New Testament, cannot reasonably be doubted by any one acquainted
with the history of the church. That
he is the creation or result of that
apostasy, is equally clear. ‘That he is
the grand agent in continuing it, is
equally manifest. Is the phrase itself
one that is properly applicable to him?
Is it proper to speak of the pope of
Rome, as he has actually appeared, as
“the man of sin?” In reply to this,
it might be sufficient to refer to the
general character of the papacy, and
to its influence in upholding and perpetuating various forms of iniquity ip
the world. It would be easy to show
that there has been no dynasty or
system that has contributed so much
to uphold and perpetuate sins of various kinds on the earth, as the papacy.
No other one has been so extensively
and so long the patron of superstition ;
and there are vices of the grossest
character which have all along been
fostered by its system of celibacy, indulgences, monasteries, and absdélutions. But it would be a better illustration of the meaning of the phrase
‘man of sin,’ as applicable to the
pope of Rome, to look at the general
character of the popes themselves.
Though there may have been some
exceptions, yet there never has been
a succession of men of so decidedly
wicked character, as have occupied
the papal throne since the great
apostasy commenced. A very few
references to the characters of the
popes will furnish an illustration of
this point. Pope Vagilius waded to
the pontifical throne through the
blood of his predecessor. Pope Joan
--the Roman Catholic writers tell us
--a female in disguise, was elected
and confirmed pope, as John VIII.
4 Who opposeth and exalteth?
@ [s.14.13; Re.13.6,

| himself above all that is called God,

eres

Platina says, that “she became with
child by some of those that were round
about her; that she miscarried, and
died on her way from the Lateran to
the temple.” Pope Marcellinus sacrificed to idols. Concerning pope
Honorius, the council of Constantinople decreed, ‘‘ We have caused
Honorius, the late pope of Old Rome,
to be accursed; for that in all things
he followed the mind of Sergius the
heretic, and confirmed his wicked doctrines.” The council of Basil thus
condemned pope Eugenius ; ‘‘ We condemn and depose pope Eugenius, a
despiser of the holy canons; a disturber of the peace and unity of the
church of God; a notorious offender
of the whole universal church; a
Simonist ; a perjurer; a man incorrigible ; a schismatic ; a man fallen from
the faith, and a wilful heretic.” Pope
John II., was publicly charged at
Rome with incest. Pope John XIII.
usurped the Pontificate, spent his time
in hunting, in laciviousness, and monstrous forms of vice; he fied from
the trial to which he was summoned,
and was stabbed, being taken in the
act of adultery. Pope Sixtus IV.
licensed brothels at Rome. Pope
Alexander VI. was, as a Roman Catholic historian says, “one of the
greatest and most horrible monsters
in nature that could scandalize the
holy chair. His beastly morals, his
immense ambition, his insatiable
avarice, his detestable cruelty, his
furious lusts, and monstrous incest
with his daughter Lucretia, are, at
large, described by Guicciardini Ciaconius, and other authentic papal historians.”’ Of the popes, Platina, a
Roman Catholic, says: ‘‘ The chair
of Saint Peter was usurped, rather
than possessed, by monsters of wickedness, ambition, and bribery. They
left no wickedness unpractised ;”’ see
the New Englander, April, 1844, pp.
285, 286. To no succession of men
who have ever lived could the appellative, “the man of sin, be applied
with so much propriety as to this succession. Yet they claim to have been

the true “‘ successors” of the apostles,
and there are Protestants that deem
it of essential importance to be able
to show that they have derived the
true “succession” through such men.
q Be revealed. Be made manifest.
There were, at the time when the
apostle wrote, two remarkable things,
(1.) that there was already a tendency
to such an apostasy as he spoke of;
and (2.) there was something which
as yet prevented the appearance or
the rise of the man of sin; ver. 7.
When the hindrance which then existed should be taken out of the way,
he would be manifested ; see Notes on
ver. 7. ¥ The son of perdition. This
is the same appellation which the
Saviour bestowed on Judas ; see it explained in the Notes on John xviii
12. Itmay mean either that he would
be the cause of ruin to others, or that
he would himself be devoted to destruction. It would seem here rather
to be used in the latter sense, though
this is not absolutely certain. The
phrase, whichever interpretation be
adopted, is used to denote one of
eminent wickedness.

4. Who opposeth. That is, he is
distinguished as an opposer of the
great system which God has revealed
for human salvation, and of those who
would serve God in purity in the gospel of his Son. No Protestant will
doubt that this has been the character
of the papacy. The opposition of
the general system to the gospel ; the
persecution of Wickliffe, of John
Huss, of Jerome of Prague, of the
Waldenses and the Reformers; the
Inquisition, the cruelties in the reign
of Mary, and the massacre of St.
Bartholomew in France, are obvious
illustrations of this. § And exalteth
himself above all that ts called God.
That is, whether among the heathens
or the Jews; above a false God, or
the true God. This could be true
only of one who set aside the divine
laws ; who undertook to legislate
where God only has a right to legislate, and whose legislation was contrary to that of God. Any claim of a

or that is worshipped ; so that he,

God, showing himself that he is
ry

as God, sitteth in the temple of | God

dominion over conscience ; or any arrangement to set aside the divine
laws, and to render them nugatory,
would correspond with what is implied in this description. It cannot
be supposed that any one would openly
claim to be superior to God, but the
sense must be, that the enactments
and ordinances of the “man of sin”
would pertain to the province in which
God only can legislate, and that the
ordinances made by him would be such
as to render nugatory the divine laws,
by appointing others in their place.
No one can reasonably doubt that all
that is here affirmed may be found in
the claims of the pope of Rome. The
assumptions of the papacy have related to the following things: (1.) To
authority above all the inferior orders
of the priesthood--above all pastors,
bishops, and primates. (2.) Authority
above all kings and emperors, ‘ deposing some, and advancing others,
obliging them to prostrate themselves
before him, to kiss his toe, to hold his
stirrup, to wait barefooted at his gate,
treading even upon the neck, and
kicking off the imperial crown with
his foot.’--Newton. Thus Gregory
VII. made Henry IV. wait barefooted at his gate. Thus Alexander
III. trod upon the neck of Alexander
I. Thus Celestin kicked off the imperial crown of Henry VI. Thus the
right was claimed, and asserted, of
laying nations under interdict, of deposing kings, and of absolving their
subjects from their oaths of allegiance.
And thus the pope claimed the right
over all unknown lands that might be
discovered by Columbus, and apportioned the New World as he pleased--
in all these things claiming prerogatives which can appertain only to God.
(3.) To authority over the conscience,
in matters which can pertain only to
God himself, and where he only can
legislate. Thus it has been, and is,
one of the claims set up for the pope
that he is infallible. Thus he ‘forbids what God has commanded,” as
the marriage of the clergy, communion
in both Kinds, the use of the Scrip-

tures for the common people.

Thus
he has set aside the second commandment by the appointment of imageworship ; and thus he claims the power
of the remission of sins. Multitudes
of things which Christ allows his
people are forbidden by the papacy,
and many things are enjoined, or
allowed, directly contrary to the divine legislation. {| Or that ts worshipped. ctBacusx. This word means
an object of worship; see Acts xvii.
3, where it is rendered devotions. It
may be applied to the worship of a
heathen divinity, or of the true God.
“Tt may refer to a person, an idol, or
a place. Probably Paul refers here
to the heroes and other subordinate
divinities of the heathen mythology.”
Oldshausen. No one can doubt that
the pope has claimed higher honours,
as the vicegerent of Christ, than was
ever rendered in the ancient “hero
worship.” § So that he, as God.
That is, claiming the honours due to
God. This expression would not imply
that he actually claimed to be the true
God, but only that he sits in the
temple, and manifests himself as if he
were God. He claims such honours
and such reverence as the true God
would if he should appear in human
form. It should be observed here,
however, that there is much reason to
doubt the genuineness of this phrase
--‘as God”--a; @v. Mill supposes
that it was inserted from the context.
It is marked with an asterisk in the
Vulgate, the Coptic, and the Syriac,
and is omitted by many of the fathers ;
see Milland Wetstein. It.is rejected
by Griesbach and Lachmann, and

marked as doubtful by Hahn. It is
defended, however, by Matthaei,
Koppe, Knapp, and Schott. The

sense is not materially affected whether it be regarded as genuine or not.
q Sitteth in the temple of God. That
is, in the Christian church. It is by
no means necessary to understand this
of the temple at Jerusalem, which was
standing at the time this epistle was
written, for (1.) the phrase ‘‘ the temple of God ” is several times used with
reference to the Christian church, 1
Cor. iii, 16, 17; 2 Cor. vi. 16; Eph.
ii, 21; Rev. iii. 12; and (2.) the temple was the proper symbol of the
church, and an apostle trained amidst
the Hebrew institutions would naturally speak of the church as the temple
of God. The temple at Jerusalem
was regarded as the peculiar dwellingplace of God on earth. When the
Christian church was founded, it was
spoken of as the peculiar dwellingplace of God; see the passages referred to above. He dwelt among his
people. He was with them, and
walked with them, and manifested
himself among them--as he had done
in the ancient temple. The usage in
the New Testament would not lead
us to restrict this language to an
edifice, or a “church,” as the word is
now commonly used, but rather to
suppose that it denotes the church as
a society, and the idea is, that the
Antichrist here referred to would present himself in the midst of that
church as claiming the honours due
toGodalone. In the temple at Jerusalem, God himself presided. There
he gave laws to his people; there he
manifested himself as God; and there
he was worshipped. The reign of the
‘‘man of sin’’ would be as tf he should
sit there. In the Christian church he
would usurp the place which God had
occupied in the temple. He would
claim divine attributes and homage.
He would give laws and responses as
God did there. He would be regarded
as the head of all ecclesiastical
power; the source from which all
authority emanated; the same in the
Christian church which God himself
was in the temple. This does not
then refer primarily to the pope as
sitting in any particular church on
any particular occasion, but to his
claiming in the church of Christ
the authority and homage which God
had in the temple at Jerusalem. In
whatever place, whether in a cathedral or elsewhere, this authority
should be exercised, all that the language here conveys would be fulfilled.
No one can fail to see that the authority claimed by the pope of Rome,
meets the full force of the language

used here by the apostle. { Showing
himself that he is God. This does
not necessarily mean that he actually,
in so many words, claimed to be God;
but that he usurped the place of God,
and claimed the prerogatives of God.
If the names of God are given to
him, or are claimed by him; if he receives the honours due to God ; if he
asserts a dominion like that of God,
then all that the language fairly implies will be fulfilled. ‘The following
expressions, applied to the pope of
Rome by Catholic writers, without
any rebuke from the papacy, will show
how entirely applicable this is to the
pretended head of the church. He
has been styled “ Our Lord God the
pope; another God upon earth; king
of kings and lord of lords. The same
is the dominion of God and the pope.
To believe that our Lord God the pope
might not decree as he decreed, is
heresy. ‘The power of the pope is
greater than all created power, and
extends itself to things celestial, terrestrial, and infernal. The pope doeth
whatsoever he listeth, even things unlawful, and is more than God ;” see
the authority for these extraordinary
declarations in bishop Newton on the
Prophecies, xxii. Tow can it be
doubted that the reference here is to
the papacy? Language could not be
plainer, and it is not possible to conceive that anything can ever occur
which would furnish a more manifest
fulfilment af this prophecy. Indeed,
interpreted by the claims of the papacy,it stands among the very clearest
of all the predictions in the Sacred
Scriptures.

5. Remember ye not, that, when J
was yet with you, I told you these
things? The whole subject of the
second advent of the Saviour seems
to have constituted an important part
of the instructions of Paul when at
Thessalonica. He now refers them
to what he had told them respecting
the great apostasy, to show that his
views had not changed, and that he
did not mean to have them understand
that the world would soon come to an
end He had stated these things to
them implying that a considerable
interval must elapse before the Sa-

5 Remember ye not, that, when
I was yet with you, I told you
those things ?

viour would appear.
obscurity of this prophecy arises from
the fact, that the apostle alludes to
things which he had told them when
with them, of which we have now no
knowledge. Hence, what would be
perfectly clear to them, on reading this
letter, is now difficult to be understood.

6, And now ye know what withholdeth. Marg., holdeth. The reference is, to something that then
operated to constrain or hold back the
obvious tendency of things, so that
the ‘‘ man of sin’”’ should not at once
appear, or so that things should not
soon so develope themselves as to give
rise to this antichristian power. There
were causes at work even then, which
would ultimately lead to this; but
there was also something which checked the tendency of things, so that the
revelation or development of the ‘‘man
of sin’’ was put off to a future period.
The obvious meaning of this would be,
that, when the apostle wrote, there
was a tendency to what would occur
under the great apostasy, and that
this would soon develope itself if it
were notrestrained. If thereference
is to the papacy, this would consist in
corruptions already existing in the
church, haying a resemblance to those
which afterwards existed under that
system, or which were the germ of
that system. If there was a tendency
towards the concentration of all power
in an individual in the church,--if
there was an assumption of authority
by one class of ministers above another,
--if there was a denial of the “ parity
of the clergy,” the tendency would
have been to that ultimate assumption
of authority which is found in the
Romish hierarchy. But conjecture
is useless as to what was the precise
form in which this tendency then began to develope itself That the corruptions early began in the church
which terminated in the papacy, and
which led on directly to it, we know ;
und that the apostle was able to fore-

Much of the
6 And now ye know what
1 withholdeth, that he might be
-Yevealed in his time.

1 or, holdeth.

see and predict such a final development, shows that he was under the
influence of inspiration. It is not
known precisely what is referred to
by the phrase ‘“ what withholdeth,”
+o xactéxov. The phrase means properly, something that holds back, or
restrains. The word here is in the

neuter gender, ‘“* What withholdeth.”
In the following verse it is in the
masculine gender, 6 xarixwv,--“ he
that letteth,”’ or withholdeth; and
the reference would seem to be to
some agency or state of things under
the control of an individual, or of
some civil power, that then operated
as a restraint on the natural tendency
of things. Of this, the apostle says,
they had had full information ; but we
can only conjecture what itwas. The
restraining power of anything controlled by an individual, or of any government, or the restraining power of God,
would meet all that the phrase implies.
The most natural interpretation is
that which refers it to civil power,
meaning that there was something in
the form of the existing administration
which would prevent this development
until that restraint should be removed.
The supposition that there was even
then a tendency to concentrate ali
ecclesiastical power at Rome, and
that while the civil authority remained
there it would not suffer ecclesiasticai
power to growto the exorbitant height
which it ultimately reached, will meet
all that is implied in the language.
Q That he might be revealed in his
time. The man ofsin, The meaning
is, that there was then a restraint
operating which would prevent the
development of this antichristian
power until the proper time ; that is,
till the state of the world should be
such that in the divine arrangements
it would be proper to permit it. It
was not to be permitted until the gospel should be extensively preached,
and had had an opportunity of showing
its fair effects on the nations; until it
7 For the mystery of iniquity
doth already * work : only he who
a1 John 4.3.

had become so planted and established
that even the rise of this antichristian
power could not effectually uproot it.
Had the “‘ man of sin’’ been permitted
to rise at once, the consequence might
have been that the new religion would
have been crushed, so that it could
vever have revived again. There was
hen a providential arrangement by
which this growth of wickedness should
be checked and restrained, until the
new religion should take deep root in
the carth, aad its perpetuity should
be secured. Then the great trial was
to be permitted under the “man of
sin.”

1. For the mystery of iniqiity. On
the meaning of the word mystery, see
Notes on Rom. xi. 25; comp. 1 Cor.
li. 7; Eph.i.9; iii.38; Col.i. 26. It
means properly that which zs hidden
or concealed; not necessarily that
which is unintelligible. The “ mystery
ef iniquity’ seems here to refer to
some hidden or concealed depravity,
---some form of sin which was working
secretly and silently, and which had
not yet developed itself. Any secret
sources of iniquity in the church,--
anything that tended to corrupt its
doctrines, and to destroy the simplicity of the faith of the gospel, would
correspond with the meaning of the
word. Doddridge correctly supposes
that this may refer to the pride and
ambition of some ministers, the factious ternper of some Christians, the
imposing of unauthorized severities,
the worship of angels, &c. § Doth
already work. There are elements
of these corruptions already existing
in the church, Bishop Newton maintains that the foundations of popery
were laid in the apostle’s days, and
that the superstructure was raised by
degrees ; and this is entirely in accordance with the statements of the
apostle Paul. In his own time, he
says, there were things which, if not
restrained, would expand and ripen
into that apostasy, He has not told
us particularly to what he refers, but
there are several intimations in his

Ll. THESSALONIANS.

)

(A. D. 5y.

inow letteth, will let, until he be
taken out of the way.

writings, as well as in other parts of
the New Testament, that even in the
apostolic age there existed the elements of those corruptions which were
afterwards developed and imbodied
in the papacy. Even “ then,” says
Bishop Newton, “idolatry was stealing into the church (1 Cor.x. 14), and
a voluntary humility and worshipping
of angels.”’ [Col. ii. 18 ; see, however,
my Note on that passage.] ‘‘ There
existed strife and divisions (1 Cor. iii.
3), an adulterating and handling the
word of God deceitfully (2 Cor. ii.

17; iv. 2), a gain of godliness, teaching of things for filthy lucre’s sake (1
Tim. vi. 5 ; Titus i. 11), a vain observation of festivals (Gal. iv. 10,) a vain
distinction of meats (1 Cor. viii. 8), a
neglecting of the body (Col. ii. 23),
traditions, and commandments, and
doctrines of men (Col. ii. 8, 22);”
comp. 3 John 9, “ Diotrephes, who
loveth to have the pre-eminence.”
These things constituted the elements
of the corruptions which were afterwards developed in the papacy, and
which are imbodied in that system.
An eye that could see all, would even
then have perceived that if there were
norestraint,these incipient corruptions
would grow up into that system, and
would be expanded into all the corrupticns and arrogant claims which
have ever characterized it ; comp. 1
John iv. 3. § Only he who now letteth.
Who now hinders, or restrains--os
xartxwy. Thisis the same word which
is used in ver. 6, and rendered “ withholdeth,” except that it is there in the
neuter gender. There can be no doubt
that there is reference to the same
restraining power, or the same power
under the control of an individual ; but
what that was, is not quite certain.
it was some power which operated as
a check on the growing corruptions
then existing, and which prevented
their full development, but which was
to be removed at no distant period,
and whose removal would give an op.
portunity for these corruptions t
develope themselves. and for the fu!

revelation of the man of sin. Such
a supposition as that the civil power
of Rome was such a restraint, operating to prevent the assumption of
the ecclesiastical claims of supremacy
which afterwards characterized the
papacy, will correspond with all that
is necessarily implied in the language.
{| Will let, until he be taken cut of the
way. This will be an effectual check
on these corruptions, preventing their
full development, until it is removed,
and then the man of sin will appear.
The supposition which will best suit
this language is, that there was then
some civil restraint, preventing the
development of existing corruptions,
but that there would be a removal, or
withdrawing of that restraint; and
that then the tendency of the existing
corruptions would be seen. It is evident, as Oldshausen remarks, that this
resisting or restraining power must be
something out of the church, and distinguished from the antichristian tendency itself; von der Kirche und vom
Antichristenthum. It is necessary,
therefore, to understand this of the
restraints of civil power. Was there,
then, any fact in history which will
accord with this interpretation? The
belief among the primitive Christians
was, that what hindered the rise of
the man of sin was the Roman empire,
and therefore ‘“ they prayed for its
peace and welfare, as knowing that
when the Roman empire should be
dissolved and broken in pieces, the
empire of the man of sin would be
raised on its ruins.’ Bp. Newton.
How this revolution was effected, may
be seen by the statement of Machiavel.
“The emperor of Rome, quitting
Rome to dwell at Constantinople ”
(in the fourth century, under Constantine), ‘“‘the Roman empire began
to decline, but the church of Rome
augmented as fast. Nevertheless, until the coming in of the Lombards, all
Italy being under the dominion of
either emperors or kings, the bishops
assumed no more power than what was
due to their doctrine and manners; in
civil affairs they were subject to the
civil power. But Theodoric, king of
the Goths, fixing his seat at Ravenna,
was that which advanced their inte-

rest, and made them more considerable in Italy, for there being no other
prince left in Rome, the Romans were
forced for protection to pay greater
allegiance to the pope. The Lombards having invaded and reduced
Italy into several cantons, the pope
took the opportunity, and -began to
hold up his head. For being, as it
were, governor and principal of Rome,
the emperor of Constantinople and the
Lombards bare him a respect, so that
the Romans (by mediation of their
pope,) began to treat and confederate
with Longinus [the emperor’s tieutenant], and the Lombards, not as subjects, but as equals and companions ;
which said custom continuing, and the
pope’s entering into alliance sometimes with the Lombards, and sometimes with the Greeks, contracted
great reputation to their dignity.”
(Hist. of Florence, B. 1. p. 6, of tho
English translation.) A more extended quotation on the same subject,
may be seen in Newton on the Prophecies, pp. 407, 408. To any one
acquainted with the decline and fall
of the Roman empire, nothing can be
more manifest than the correspondence
of the facts in history respecting the
rise of the papacy, and the statement
of the apostle Paul here. The simple
facts are these. (1.) There were
early corruptions in the church at
Rome, as there were elsewhere, but
peculiarly there, as Rome was the seat
of philosophy and of power. (2.) There
were great efforts made by the bishop
of Rome to increase his authority,
and there was a steady approximation
to what he subsequently claimed--
that of being universal bishop. (8.)
There was a constant tendency ta
yield to him deference and respect in
all matters. (4.) This was kept in
check as long as Rome was the seat
of the imperial power. Had that
power remained there, it would have
been impossible for the Roman bishop
ever to have obtained the civil and
ecclesiastical eminence which he ultimately did. Rome could not have
had two heads, both claiming and
exercising supreme power ; and there
never could have been a “revelation
of the man of sin.” (5.) Constantine
be revealed, whom the Lord shall

® consume with the spirit > of his
a Da.7.10,11.

8 And then shall that Wicked |

mouth, and shall destroy ¢ with
the brightness of his coming :

b Is.11.45 Re.19.15,21. ¢ He.10.27.

removed the seat of empire to Constantinople ; and this removal or “ taking away” of the only restraint on the
ambitious projects of the Roman
bishops, gave allthe opportunity which
could be desired for the growth of the
papal power. In all history there
cannot, probably, be found a series of
events corresponding more accurately
with a prophetic statement than this ;
and there is every evidence, therefore,
that these are the events to which the
Spirit of inspiration referred.

8. And then shall that Wicked
be revealed. 6 dvouos-- the wicked
one,” referring to the ‘‘ man of sin,”
and called ‘‘ the wicked one” because
of the eminent depravity of the system of which he was to be the head ;
see Notes on ver. 3. YJ Whom the
Lord shall consume. The Lord Jesus; see Notes on Acts i. 24. The
word consume here--avaawces--means
to destroy; see Gal. v. 15; Luke
ix. 54. The word would be applicable to any kind of destruction.
The methods by which this will be
done are immediately specified--and
it is of much importance to understand them, if this refers to the papacy. { With the spirit of his mouth.
What goes out ofhis mouth, or what he
speaks; that is, word, truth, command,
or gospel--all of which he may be regarded as speaking. In Rev. i. 16;
xix. 15, 21, it is said of the Redeemer
that ‘‘a sharp two-edged sword goeth
out of his mouth ;” that is, his word,
doctrine, or command--what he speaks
--is like a sharp sword. It will cut
deep; will lay open the heart ; will
destroy his enemies. Comp. Isa. xi.
4, “ With the breath of his lips shall
he slay the wicked.’’ The reference
in the passage before us is to one of
the methods which would be employed
to “ destroy ’’ the man of sin; and the
sense is, that it would be by what is
spoken by the Redeemer. ‘This may
refer either to what he will say at his
coming, or to his truth -- already
spoken ; to what has gone from his

lips, by whomsoever uttered ; and the
meaning then is, that one of the grand
agencies for destroying this antichristian power is the truth spoken or revealed by the Saviour--that is, his
pure gospel. If this latter be the
true interpretation, it may mean that
the process for his destruction may
have commenced long anterior to the
personal appearing of the Redeemer,
but that the complete destruction of
this power will be accomplished by
the splendour of his Second Advent.
It cannot be denied, however, that the
most obvious interpretation is that
which refers both clauses in the sentence to the same period--that of his
second coming. Still, it is not improper to suppose that it may be implied that his power will be weakened
and diminished by tbe influence of the
gospel, though it may not be wholly
destroyed until the second coming of
the Saviour. § And shall destroy.
xareeynoe. Shall bring to naught ;
cause to cease; put anendto. This
is, in some respects, a stronger word
than that which in the former part of
the verse is rendered consume. It
denotes a more entire destruction than
that, though it does not refer so much
to any positive agency by which it will
be done. Inthe former word, the attention is directed more to the agency
by which the destruction will be effected--to the exertion of some kind
of power to do it; in this word the
attention is directed rather to the
entireness or totality of the destruction. The antichristian domination
will wholly cease, or be entirely destroyed. ‘The words would naturally
harmonize with the idea that there
would be a somewhat gradual process
under the operation of truth toward the destruction of the man of
| sin, but that the complete annihilation
| of his power would be by some more
/Inanifest exhibition of the personal
;glory of the Saviour. J With the
brightness of his coming. This is evi-
\ dently a Hebraism, meaning his splen-

9 Even him, whose cominz is
after the working of Satan, with

all power and signs and lying
wonders,

did or glorious appearing. The Greek |

word, however, rendered “ brightness’’
(i pursla--epiphany)--means merely
an appearing, or appearance. So it
is used in 1 Tim. vi. 4; 2 Tim. i
10; iv. 1. 8; Titus 1i. 13, in all which
places it is rendered appearing, and
refers to the manifestation of the Saviour when he shall come to judge the
world. Itis used nowhere else in the
New Testament. ‘There is no necessary idea of splendour in the word,
and the idea is not, as our translation
would seem to convey, that there
wouldbe such a dazzling light, or such
unsuferable brightness that all would
be consumed before it, but that he
would appear, and that tiis antichristian power would be destroyed by his
appearing ; that is, by himself when
he would return. The agency in
doing it would not be his brightness,
but himself. It would seem to follow
from this, that, however thisenormous
power of wickedness might be weakened by truth, the final triumph over
it would be reserved for the Son of
God himself on his second return to
our world. Yet, if this be so, it need
not lessen our zeal in endeavouring to
diminish the power of these corruptions; to establish and spread the
truth, or to convert the defenders of
these errors to a better faith.

9. Even him, whose coming is after
the working of Satan. Greek, xz’
tvéoresay To Yarava. According to
the energy of Satan ; that is, the energetic or efficient operation of Satan. The word rendered after, it
need not be said to one who looks at
the Greek, does not refer to time, but
is a preposition, meaning according
tos in conformity with; meaning that
the manner of his appearing would be
accompanied by such works as would
show that the agency of Satan was
employed, and such as he only could
produce. It does not mean that the
coming of the Lord Jesus would be
after Satan had worked in this manner, but that the manifestation of that
wicked one would be with such demonstrations of power and wonder as

Satan only could effect. The system
over which he presides is originated
| by Satan, and sustained by those
i things which he alone can perform.
On the word Satan, see Notes on
| Jobi. 6. The idea is, that it would
be under the direction and control of
the great enemy of God, and that the
things on which it would rely for support could be traced to hisagency. In
all the pretendéd miracles to which it
would appeal, there would be nothing
which Satan could not accomplish.
q With all power. With all the
power which Satan can exhibit ;
meaning also, that there would be a
great exertion of power in the case.
It would not be a feeble and imbecile
dominion. The dominion of the papacy has been one of the most powerul on earth. There has been none
which has been more dreaded by the
nations of the earth--and there have
been times when nations trembled,
and kings turned pale on their thrones
at the frown of the pope. { And
signs. This word frequently denotes
real miracles, but not necessarily so.
It may be applied to pretended
miracles as well as real, and is undoubtedly so used here, as it is connected with ‘lying wonders,” and as
it is said that the thing wrought would
be “after the working of Satan.”
There is doubtless reference to such
“ sions and wonders ”’ as the Saviour
mentions in Matt. xxiv. 24; see
Notes on that passage. It is hardly
necessary to remark that the papacy
has always relied for support on its
pretended miracles. Even in our own
age the wonders performed by the
Prince Hohenloe, and by the pretended seamless garment of the Saviour,
have been proclamed as true miracles,
and as furnishing indubitable evidence
of the truth of the Roman Catholic
system. ‘The dissolving of the blood
of St. Januarius, the removal of Pilate’s stairs to Rome, and the transportation to Italy of the ‘house of
our Lady,” are among the miracles to
which there is a constant reference in
the papal communion. In addition
10 And with all deceivableness
@ of unrighteousness in them that

perish ; because they received not
a He.3.13.

to these and to all similar pretensions,
thereis the power claimed of performing
a miracle at the pleasure of the priest
by the change of bread and wine into
the ‘‘ body and blood, the soul and divinity” of the Lord Jesus. In 1756,
there was published in London a book
entitled, ‘*‘ The miraculous power of
the church of Christ, asserted through
each successive century, from the
apostle down to the present time.”
The power of working miracles has
been one of the standing claims of the
Papacy. § Andlying wonders. False
or pretended miracles. ‘They would
be such as would be claimed to be miracles ; such as would excite wonder;
and yet such as were false and delusive.
No Protestant assuredly needs to be
convinced that this is just the character of the pretended miracles of the
Papacy. It would be impossible for
language to describe them more
clearly, in the apprehension of all
Protestants, than is done in this language of the apostle Paul.

10. And with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness. There are two ideas
here. The first is, that there would
be deceit ; and the other is, that it
would be for the purpose of promoting
unrighteousness or iniquity. The iniquitous system would be maintained
by fraudulent methods. No one who
has read Pascal’s Provincial Letters
can ever doubt that this description is
applicable to the system of the Jesuits; and no one familiar with the
acts of the Papacy, as they have always been practised, can doubt that
the whole system is accurately described by this language. The plausible reasoning by which the advocates
of that system have palliated and apologized for sins of various kinds, has
been among its most remarkable features. {[ In them that perish. Among
those who will perish ; that is, among
the abandoned and wicked. The reference is to men of corrupt minds
and lives, over whom this system
would have power; countenancing

lI. THESSALONIANS.

the love > of the truth, that they
might be saved.

11 And for this cause God shall
b 1 Co.16.22.

them in their depravity, and fitting
them still farther for destruction. The
idea is, that these acts would have
especial reference to men who would
be lost at any rate, and who would be
sustained in their wickedness by this
false and delusive system. § Because
they received not the love of the truth.
They prefer this system of error and
delusion to the simple and pure gospel,
by which they might have been saved.

11. And for this cause. Because
they choose error, or their hearts love
that more than they do truth. The
original reason then of their embracing and adhering to the system was
not an arbitrary decree on the part of
God, but that they did not love the
truth. Hence, he gave them up to
this system of error. If a man
strongly prefers error to truth, and
sin to holiness, it is not wrong to allow him freely to evince his own preference. ¥ God shall send them strong
delusion. Gr., ‘energy of deceit ;”
a Hebraism, meaning strong deceit.
The agency of God is here distinctly
recognised, in accordance with the
uniform statements of the Scriptures,
respecting evil; comp. Ex. vii. 13;
Ex Qe exes 205 2 7eexit lO exivers!
Deut. x. 830; Isa. xlv. 7, On the nature of this agency, see Notes on
John xii. 40. It is not necessary here
to suppose that there was any positive
influence on the part of God in causing this delusion to come upon them,
but all the force of the language will
be met, as well as the reasoning of the
apostle, by supposing that God withdrew all restraint, and suffered men
simply to show that they did not love
the truth. God often places men in
circumstances to develope their own
nature, and it cannot be shown to be
wrong that he should do so. If men
have no love of the truth, and no desire to be saved, it is not improper
that they should be allowed to manifest this. How it happened that they
had no “ love of the truth,” is a different question, to which the remarks

send them strong delusion, @ that
they should believe a lie:

12 That ®& they all might be
@ Eze.14.9; Ro.1.24. b De.32.35.

of the apostle do not appertain ; comp.
Notes on Rom. ix. 17, 18; i. 24.
{ That they should believe a lie. This
does not affirm that God wished them
to believe a lie; nor that he would
not have preferred that they should
believe the truth; nor that he exerted any direct agency to cause them
to believe a lie. It means merely
that he left them, because they did
not love the truth, to believe what
was false, and what would end in their
destruction. Can any one doubt that
this constantly occurs in the world?
Men are left to believe impostors ; to
trust to false guides; to rely on unfounded information; to credit those
who live to delude and betray the innocent ; and to follow those who lead
them to ruin. God does not interpose by direct power to preserve
them. Can anyone doubt this? Yet
this is not peculiarly the doctrine of
revelation. The fact pertains just as
much to the infidel as it does to the
believer in Christianity, and he is
just as much bound to explain it as
the Christian is. It belongs to our
world--to us all--and it should not be
charged on Christianity as a doctrine
pertaining peculiarly to that system.
12. That they all might be damned,
The word damned we commonly apply
now exclusively to future punishment,
and it has a harsher signification than
the original word; comp. Notes, 1
Cor. xi. 29. The Greek word--xeivw
--means to judge, determine, decide ;
and then to condemn; Rom. ii. 27;
xiv. 22; James iv. 11; John vii. 51;
Luke xix. 22; Acts xiii. 27. It may
be applied to the judgment of the last
day (John v. 22; viii. 50; Acts xvii.
81; Rom. iii.6; 2 Tim. iv. 1,) but
not necessarily. The word judged or
condemned, would, in this place, ex-

press all that the Greek word neces- |

sarily conveys. Yet there can be no
doubt that the judgment or condemnation which is referred to, is that which
will occur when the Saviour will appear. It does not seem to me to be

damned who believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousnhess.

a necessary interpretation of this to
suppose that it teaches that God
would send a strong delusion that they
should believe a lie, 72 order that all
might be damned who did not believe
the truth; or that he desired that
they should be damned, and sent this
asthe means of securing it ; but the
sense is, that this course of events
would be allowed to occur, so that
(4a--not tis 7d) all who do not love
the truth would be condemned. ‘The
particle here used, and rendered
“that” (iva), in connection with the
phrase “all might be damned’’ is
employed in two general senses, either
as marking the end, purpose, or cause
for, or on account of, which anything
is done; to the end that, or in order
that it may be so and so; or as
marking simply the result, event,
or upshot of an action, so that,
so as that. Robinson, Lex. Ip

| the latter case it denotes merely that

something will really take place,
without indicating that such was the
design of the agent, or that what
brought it about was in order that it
might take place. It is also used,
in the later Greek, so as neither to
mark the purpose, nor to indicate that
the event would occur, but merely
to point out that to which the preceding words refer. Itis not proper,
therefore, to infer that this passage
teaches that all these things would
be brought about in the arrangements of Providence, in order that
they might be damned who came
under their influence. The passage
teaches that such would be the result ; that the connection between
these delusions and the condemnation
of those who were deluded, would be
certain. It cannot be proved from
the Scriptures that God sends on men
strong delusions, in order that they
may be damned. No such construction should be put on a passage of
Scripture if it can be avoided, and it
cannot be shown that it is necessary
here. § Who believed not the truth,
13 But we @ are bound to give
thanks alway to God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen % you to salvation
through sanctification of tne Spirit and belief of the truth;

@ chap.1.3. b Ep.1.4; 1 Th.1.4; 1 Pe.1.2.

14 Whereunto ¢ he called you by
our gospel, to the obtaining of the
glory @ of our Lord Jesus Christ.

15 Therefore, brethren, stand
fast, and hold the traditions which
ye have been taught, whether by
word or our epistle.

¢ 1 Pe.5.10. d@ John 17.22.

The grounds or reasons why they
would be damned are now stated.
One would be that they did not believe
the truth--not that God sent upon
them delusion in order that they
might be damned. That men will be
condemned for not believing the truth,
and that it will be right thus to condemn them, is everywhere the doctrine of the Scriptures, and is equally
the doctrine of common sense; see
Notes on Mark xvi. 16. J But had
pleasure in unrighteousness. This
is the second ground or reason of
their condemnation. If men have
pleasure in sin, it is proper that they
should be punished. There can be
no more just ground of condemnation than that a man loves to do
wrong.

13. But we.are bound to give
thanks alway to God for you; see
Notes on chap. i. 8. J Because God
hath from the beginning chosen you
to salvation. The following important things are affirmed or implied
here: (1.) That God had chosen or
elected them (¢iAero) to salvation.
The doctrine of election, therefore,
is true. (2.) That this was from the
beginning (ax’ apxns); that is, from
eternity ; see Notes on John i. 1;
Eph. i. 4; iii. 9--11. The doctrine
of eternal election is, therefore, true.
(3.) That this was the choice of the
persons to whom Paul referred. The
doctrine of personal election is, therefore, true. (4.) That this is a reason
for thanksgiving. Why should it not
be ¢ Can there be any higher ground
of praise or gratitude than that God
has chosen us to be eternally holy
and happy, and that he has from eternity designed that we should be so?
Whatever, therefore, may be the
feelings with which those who are
not chosen to salvation, regard this
doctrine, it is clear that those who

have evidence that they are chosen
should make it a subject of grateful
praise. They can have no more exalted source of gratitude than that
they are chosen to eternal life.
{ Through sanctification of the Spirit. Being made holy by the divine
Spirit. It is not without respect to
character, but it is a choice to holiness and then to salvation. No one
can have evidence that he is chosen
to salvation except as he has evidence that he is sanctified by the
Spirit; see Notes on Eph. i. 4.
q And belief of the truth. In connection with believing the truth.
No one who is not a believer in the
truth can have evidence that God
has chosen him.

14. Whereunto he called you by
our gospel. He made the gospel as
preached by us the means of calling
you to salvation. That is, God has
chosen you to salvation from eternity, and has made the gospel as
preached by us the means of carrying that eternal purpose into effect.
{ To the obtaining of the glory of
our Lord Jesus Christ. That you
may partake of the same glory as the
Saviour in heaven ; see Notes on John
Xvil. 22, 24.

15. Therefore. In view of the
fact that you are thus chosen from
eternity, and that you are to be raised
up tosuch honour and glory. ¥ Stand
fast. Amidst all the temptations
which surround you; comp. Notes
on Eph. vi. 10--14. 4 And hold the
traditions which ye have been taught.
On the word traditions, see Notes
on Matt. xv. 2. It means properly
things delivered over from one to
another; then anything orally delivered--any precept, doctrine, or law.
It is frequently employed to denote
that which is not written, as contradistinguished from that which is

_16 Now our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and God even our Father, which “hath loved us, and

a John 13.1; Re.3.5.
written (comp. Matt. xv. 2), but not
necessarily or always; for here the
apostle speaks of the “ traditions
which they had been taught by his
epistle ;”? comp. Notes, 1 Cor. xi. 2.
Here 1t means the doctrines or precepts which they had received from
the apostle, whether when he was
with them, or after he left them;
whether communicated by preaching
or by letter. This passage can furnish no authority for holding the
“traditions” which have come down
from ancient times, and which profess to have been derived from the
apostles; for (1.) there is no evidence
that any of those traditions were
given by the apostles; (2.) many of
them are manifestly so trifling, false,
and contrary to the writings of the
apostles, that they could not have
been delivered by them; (3.) if any
of them are genuine, it is impossible
to separate them from those which
are false; (4.) we have all that is
necessary for salvation in the written
word ; and (5.) there is not the least

evidence that the apostle here meant:

to refer to any such thing. He speaks
only of what had been delivered to
them by himself, whether orally or
by letter ; not of what was delivered
from one to another as from him.
There is no intimation here that they
were to hold anything as from him
which they had not received directly
from him, either by his own instructions personally or by letter. With
what propriety, then, can this passage be adduced to prove that we
are to hold the traditions which professedly come to us through a great
number of intermediate persons ?--
Where is the evidence here that the
church was to hold those unwritten
traditions, and transmit them to future times? §J Whether by word.
By preaching, when we were with
you. It does not mean that he had

like other joys.
hath given us everlasting consolation and good hope ° through
grace,

6 1 Pe.1.3.

former letter which he had written

to them.

16. Now our Lord Jesus Christ
himself. This expression is equivalent to this: “I pray our Lord Jesus,
and our Father, to comfort you.” It
is really a prayer offered to the Saviour--a recognition of Christ as the
source of consolation as well as the
Father, and a union of his name
with that of the Father in invoking
important blessings.. It is such language as could be used only by one
who regarded the Lord Jesus as divine. { And God even our Father.
Gr. “And God, and (xa:) our Father ;”
though not incorrectly rendered “even
our Father.” If it should be contended that the use of the word “and”
--‘our Lord Jesus Christ, and God,”’
proves that the Lord Jesus is a different being from God--the use of the
same word “and” would prove that
the ‘‘ Father” is a different being
from God. But the truth is, the
apostle meant to speak of the Father
and the Son as the common source
of the blessing for which he prayed.
Which hath loved us. Referring
particularly tothe Father. The love
which is referred to is that manifested
in redemption, or which is shown us
through Christ; see John iii. 16; 1
John iv. 9. | And hath given us
everlasting consolation. Not temporary comfort, but that which will endure
forever. ‘The joys of religion are not
They soon fade
away ;--they always terminate at
death ; -- they cease when trouble
comes, when sickness invades the
frame, when wealth or friends depart,
when disappointment lowers, when
the senses by age refuse to minister
as they once did to our pleasures.
The comforts of religion depend on
no such contingencies. They live
through all these changes--attend us
in sickness, poverty, bereavement,

sent any oral message to them by 4a| losses, and age; they are with us ip

third person. 4 Or our epistle.

The | death, and they are perpetual and un17 Comfort your hearts,* and
a} Coll.8.

changing beyond the grave. { And

good hope through grace ; see Notes
on Rom. v. 2, 5; Heb. vi. 19.

17. Comfort your hearts ; Notes,
1 Thess. iii. 2; v.11, 14. The Thessalonians were in the midst of trials,
and Paul prayed that they might
have the full consolations of their
religion. § And stablish you. Make
you firm and steadfast ; 1 Thess. iii.
2,18. § In every good word and
work. In every true doctrine, and in
the practice of every virtue.

This chapter is very important in
reference to the rise of that great
antichristian power which has exerted, and which still exerts so baleful
an influence over the Christian world.
Assuming now that it refers to the
Papacy, in accordance with the exposition which has been given, there
are a few important reflections to
which it gives rise.

(1.) The Second Advent of the
Redeemer is an event which is distinctly predicted in the Scriptures.
This is assumed in this chapter; and
though Paul corrects some errors into
which the Thessalonians had fallen,
he does not suggest this as one of
them. Their error was in regard to
the time of his appearing; not the fact.

(2.) The time when he will appear
is not made known to men. The
apostles did not pretend to designate
it, nor did the Saviour himself; Matt.
xxiv. 36; Mark xiii. 32; Actsi. 7.

(3.) The course of reasoning in
this chapter would lead to the expectation that a considerable time
would elapse before the Saviour would
appear. The apostles, therefore, did
not believe that the end of the world
was near, and they did not teach false
doctrine on the subject, as infidels
have often alleged. No one, who attentively and candidly studies this
chapter, it seems to me, can suppose
that Paul believed that the Second
Advent of the Saviour would occur
within a short time, or during the
generation when he lived. He has
described a long series of events which
were to intervene before the Saviour

stablish you in every good word
and work.

would appear--events which, if the
interpretation which has been given
is correct, have been in fact in a pro:
cess of development from that time to
the present, and which, it must have
been foreseen, even then, would require a long period before they would
be completed. There was to be a
great apostasy. There were at that
time subtle causes at work which
would lead to it. They were, however,
then held in check and restrained by
some foreign influence. But the time
would come, when that foreign power
would be withdrawn. Then these
now hidden and restrained corruptions would develope themselves into
this great antichristian power. That
power would sustain itself by a series
of pretended miracles and lying wonders--and, after all this, would be
the second coming of the Son of man.
But this would require time. Sucha
series of events would not be completed in a day, orin a single generation. They would require a succession--perhaps a long succession--of
years, before these developments would
be complete. It is clear, therefore,
that the apostle did not hold that the
Lord Jesus would return in that age,
and that he did not mean to be understood as teaching it; and consequently it should not be said that he
or his fellow-apostles were mistaken
in the statements which they have
recorded respecting the second coming of the Lord Jesus and the end of
the world.

(4.) The apostle Paul was inspired.
He has recorded in this chapter a
distinct prediction of an important
series of events which were to occur
at a future, and most of them at quite
a remote period. They were such that
they could have been foreseen by no
natural sagacity, and no human skill.
There were, indeed, corruptions existing then in the church, but no mere
natural sagacity could have foreseen
that they would grow up into that
enormous system which would overshadow the Christian world, and live
for so many ages.

(5.) If these predictions referred to
the Papacy, we may see how we are
to regard that system of religion.
The simple inquiry, if this interpretation is correct, is, how did the apostle Paul regard that system to which
he referred? Did he consider it to
be the true church? Did he regard
it as achurch at all? The language
which he uses will enable us easily
to answer these questions. He
speaks of it as “‘the apostasy;’’ he
speaks of the head of that system
as ‘the man of sin,’’ “the son of
perdition,” ‘ the wicked one,” and as
“opposing and exalting himself above
all that is called God;’’ he says that
his “‘coming is after the working of
Satan, with lying wonders, and with
all deceivableness of unrighteousness.” Can it be believed then that
he regarded this as a true church of
Jesus Christ? Are these the characteristics of the church as laid
down elsewhere in the Scriptures ?
Wherever it may lead, it seems clear
to me that the apostle did not regard
that system of which he spoke as
having any of the marks of a true
church, and the only question which
can be raised:on this point is, whether
the fair interpretation of the passage demands that it shall be considered as referring to the Papacy.
Protestants believe that it must be so
understood, and Papists have not yet
disproved the reasons which they allege for their belief.

(6.) If this be the fairinterpretation,
then we may see what is the value of
the pretended ‘succession ”’ of the
ministry through that system. If
such a regular ‘“‘ succession’”’ of ministers from the apostles could be made
out, what would it be worth? What
is the value ofa spiritual descent from
Pope Alexander VI.? How would it
increase the proper respect for the
ministerial office, if it could be proved
to be derived in aright line from those
monsters of incest, ambition, covetousness, and blood, who have occupied the Papalthrone? A Protestant
minister should blush and hang his
head if it were charged on him that
he held his office by no better title
than such a derivation. Much less

should he make it a matterof glorying
and an argument to prove that he
only is an authorized minister, that
he has received his office through
such men.

(7.) From this chapter we may see
the tendency of human nature to degeneracy. The elements of that great
and corrupt apostasy existed even in
apostolic times. Those elements grew
regularly up into the system of the
Papacy, and spread blighting and
death over the whole Christian world.
It is the tendency of human nature to
corrupt the best things. The Christian church was put in possession of a
pure, and lovely, and glorious system
of religion. It was a religion adapted to elevateand save the race. There
was not an interest of humanity which
it would not have fostered and promoted ; there was not a source of hu:
man sorrow which it would not have
mitigated or relieved; there were
none of the race whom it would not
have elevated and purified. Its influence, as far as it was seen, was uniformly of the happiest kind. It did
no injury anywhere, but produced only
good, But howsoon was it voluntarily exchanged for the worst form of
superstition and error that has ever
brooded in darkness over mankind!
How soon did the light fade, and how
rapidly did it become more obscure,
until it well nigh-went out altogether!
And with what tenacity did the world
adhere to the system that grew up
under the great apostasy, maintaining
it by learning, and power, and laws,
and dungeons, and racks, and faggots!
What a comment is this on human
nature, thus “loving darkness more
than light,’’ and error rather than
truth !

(8.) The chapter teaches the importance of resisting error at the beginning. These errors had their
foundation in the time of the apostles.
They were then comparatively small,
and perhaps to many they appeared
unimportant; and yet the whole Papal system was just the development
of errors, the germs of which existed
in their days, Had these been crushed, as Paul wished to crush them, the
church might have been saved from
INALLY, brethren, pray for
us, that the word of the Lord

may} have free course, and be glorified, even as 7¢ 7s with you ;
l run.

the corruption, and woes, and persecutions produced by the Papacy. So
error now should always be opposed--
no matter how small or unimportant
it may appear. We have no right to
connive at it; to patronise it; to
smile upon it. The beginnings of
evil are always to be resisted with
firmness ; and if that is done, the triumph of truth will be certain,

(9.) The churchis safe. It has now
passed through every conceivable
form of trial, and still survives, and is
now more vigorous and flourishing
than it ever was before. It has passedthrough fiery times of persecution ;
survived the attempts of emperors
and kings to destroy it, and lived while
the system of error described here by
the apostle Paul has thrown its baleful
shade over almost the whole Christian
world. It cannot reasonably be supposed that it will be called to pass
through such trials again as it has already endured; but whether it does
or not, the past history of the church
is a guarantee that it will survive all
that it is destined to encounter. None
but a religion of divine origin could
have continued to live amidst so many
corruptions, and so many attempts to
destroy it; and in the view of the
past history of that church it is impossible not to come to the conclusion that it has been founded by God
himself,

This chapter is made up of exhortations and directions in regard to
the performance of various Christian
duties.

(1.) The apostle asks their prayers ;
ver. 1, 2. He desires them to pray
particularly that the true religion
might be prospered, and that, in
preaching the gospel, he might be
delivered from the opposition of unreasonable and wicked men.

(2.) He expresses confidence that
God would incline them to do what

was right, and prays that he would '

keep their hearts in his love, and in patient waiting forthe Saviour;ver 3--5.

(3.) He commands them to remove
from their number those who were
disorderly, and especially those who
were idle, and addresses an earnest
exhortation to this class, that they
would be diligently engaged in the
prosecution of the business of their
appropriate callings ; ver. 6--12.

(4.) He exhorts them not to be
weary in doing well; ver. 13.

(5.) He directs that if any one
should not obey the commands given
in this epistle, he should be noted,
and they were to separate themselves
from him. Yet they were not to regard him as an enemy, but to admon.
ish him as a brother; ver. 14, 15.

(6.) The epistle closes with the
usual salutations ; ver. 16--18.

1. Finally, brethren, pray for us
That is, for Paul, Silas, and Timothy,
then engaged in arduous labours at
Corinth. This request for the prayers of Christians is one which Paul
often makes ; see Notes, 1 Thess. v. 25.
q That the word of the Lord may
have free course. That is, the gospel.
The margin is “run.” So also the .
Greek. The idea is, that it might
meet with no obstruction, but that it
might be carried abroad with the rapidity of a racer out of whose way
every hindrance was removed. The
gospel would spread rapidly in the
earth ifall the obstructions which men
have put in its way were removed ;
and that they may be removed should
be one of the constant subjects of
prayer. § And be glorified. Be honoured ; or appear to be glorious. {J As
it is weth you. It is evident from this
that Paul met with some obstructions
in preaching the gospel where he was
then labouring What they were, he
mentions in the next verse. He was
then at Corinth (see the Introduction), and the history in the Acts of
the Apostles informs us of the difficulties which he had to encounter there;
see Acts xviii.

_2 And that we may be delivered from |! unreasonable and

2. And that we may be delivered
from unreasonable and wicked men.
That is, from opposition in their
endeavours to spread the gospel.
Paul encountered such men everywhere, asall do who labour to diffuse
the knowledge of the truth, but it is
probable that there is particular reference here to the opposition which
he encountered when in Corinth.
This opposition arose mainly from the
Jews; see Acts xviii. 5, 6, 12, 138.
The word unreasonable is rendered in
the margin absurd. 'The Greek word
(27x05) means, properly, out of place;
then absurd, unusual, strange; then
improper, unreasonable, wicked. It
is rendered in Luke xxiii. 41, amiss ;
in Acts xxvili. 6, harm. It does not
occur elsewhere in the New Testament. It refers here to men who
acted amiss or improperly ; men who
were not found in the right place, or
who had not the right views of things ;
and probably does not refer so much
to their being positively wicked or
malicious, as to their putting thinys
out of their proper place. They gave
an undue prominence to certain things,
and less importance to others than
they deserved. They had a distorted
vision of the value of objects, and in
tenacious adherence to their own
views, and prosecuting their own objects to the exclusion of all others,
they presented a constant obstruction
to the true gospel. This word would
apply, and probably was designed to
be applied, to Jewish teachers (see
Acts xviii. 5, 6), who gave an undue
prominence to the laws of Moses ;
but it will apply well to all who entertain distorted views of the relative
importance of objects, and who put
things out of their place. Men often
have a hobby. ‘They give more importance to some object than it deserves. They, therefore, undervalue
other objects; press their own with
improper zeal; denounce others who
do not feel the same interest in them
which they do ; withdraw from those
who will not go with them in their

wicked men: for all men have not
faith.

1 absurd.

views ; form separate parties, and thus
throw themselves in the way of all
who are endeavouring to do good in
some other method. It was from men
who thus put themselves out of place,
that the apostle prayedtobe delivered.
And wicked men. Men with bad
aims and purposes. It is not always
true that those who would come under
the appellation of what the apostle
here calls “unreasonable,” are wicked.
They are sometimes well-meaning,
but misguided men. But in this case,
it seems, they were men of bad character, who were at heart opposed to
what was good, as well as inclined to
put things out of their place. {] For
all men have not faith. Of the truth
of this, no one can doubt. The only
question is, as to its bearing on the
case before us. Some suppose it
means, “‘ there are few men whom we
can safely trust;’’ others, that it means
that they have not that ‘“ upright and
candid disposition which would engage
men to receive the testimony of the
apostles’ (Doddridge) ; others, that
“all men do not embrace the Christian
faith, but many oppose it’”’ (Benson) ;
and others, that ‘all men do not believe, but the worthy only.”” Bloomfield. The connection seems to require us to understand it as meaning
that all men are not prepared to embrace the gospel. Hence they set
themselves against it, and from such
men Paul prayed that he might be
delivered; comp. 2 Tim. iii. 8. The
state of mind in which the apostle was
when he wrote this, seems to have
been this: He recollected the readiness with which the Thessalonians had
embraced the gospel, and the firmness
with which they held it, and seems to
suppose that they would imagine the
same thing must be found true everywhere. But he says all men have not
the same faith ; all were not prepared:
cordially and fully to embrace the
gospel. There were unreasonabie
and wicked men whom he had encountered, from whom he prayed that
he might be delivered.
3 But the Lord @ is faithful, who
shall stablish you, and keep ° you
from evil.

4 And we have confidence ¢ in
the Lord touching you, that ye
both do and will do the things

which we command you.
a1 Co.).9. b John 17.15. ¢ 2 Co.7.16.

5 And the Lord direct 7 your
hearts into the love of God, and into
the ! patient waiting for Christ.

6 Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw ¢

yourselves from every brother
@1Ch.29.18. 1 or, patience of Christ. ¢1Ti.6.5.

3. But the Lord is faithful. ---
Though men cannot be trusted, God is
faithful to his promises and his purposes. Hemay always be confided in ;
and when men are unbelieving, perverse, unkind, and disposed to do us
wrong, we may go to him, and we
shall always find in him one in whom
we may confide. This is an exceedingly interesting declaration, and is a
beautiful illustration of the resource
which a truly pious mind will feel that
it has. We often have occasion to
know, to our sorrow, that “all men
have not faith.” We witness their
infidelity. We see how they turn
away from the truth. We see many
who once gave some evidence that
they had “ faith,” abandon it all ; and
we see many in the church who seem
to have no true faith, and who refuse
to lend their aid in promoting the
cause of religion. In such circumstances, the heart is disposed to despond, and to ask whether religion can
be advanced in the midst of so much
indifference and opposition? At such
times, how consoling is it to be able
to turn, as Paul did, to one who is
faithful ; who never fails us; and who
will certainly accomplish his benevolent purposes. Men may be faithless
and false, but God never is. They
may refuse to embrace the gospel, and
set themselves against it, but God will
not abandon his great purposes. Many
who are in the church may forget
their solemn and sacred vows, and may
show no fidelity to the cause of their
Saviour, but God himself will never
abandon that cause. Joa pious mind
wt affords unspeakably more consolation to reflect that a faithful God is
the friend of the cause which we love,
than tt would were all men, in and out
of the church, its friends. § Who
shall stablsh you, and keep you from
evil; see Notes on John xvii. 5 ; comp.

Notes on Eph. vi. 16. The allusion
is to the Evil One, or Satan, and the
meaning is, that God would keep them
from his wiles.

4. And we have confidence in the
Lord. Not primarily in you, for you
have hearts like others, but in the
Lord. It is remarkable that when
Paul expresses the utmost confidence
in Christians that they will live and
act as becomes their profession, his
relianee is not on anything in themselves, but wholly on the faithfulness
of God. He must be a stranger to
the human heart who puts much confidence in it even in its best state; see
Phil 6s ivaei 2 eLime 12s) comp,
Jude 24; Rev.ili. 10 ; Prov. xxviii. 26.

5. And the Lord direct your hearts
into the love of God. So direct your
hearts that you may love God. J And
into the patient waiting for Christ.
Marg., patience of Christ. The marginal reading is in accordance with
the Greek, and seems best to express
the apostle’s meaning. The prayer of
the apostle was, that they might have
the love of God in their hearts, and
“‘ the patience of Christ ;” that is, the
same patience which Christ evinced
in his trials. They were then suffering affliction and persecution. They
needed patience, that they might
endure their trials in a proper manner.
It was natural for the apostle to refer
them to the Saviour, the great example of patience, and to pray that they
might have the same which he had.
That it does not mean that they were
to wait patiently for the appearing
of Christ, as our translation seems to
imply, is quite clear, because the
apostle had just been showing them
that he would not appear until after a
long series of events had occurred.

6. Now we command you, brethren.
The apostle now (vers. 6--12) turns
to an important subiect--the proper

* that walketh disorderly, and not
after the tradition which ye received of us

a@ 1 Co.5.11.13,

method of treating those who were

idle and disorderly inthe church. In
the previous epistle he had adverted
to this subject, but in the mild language of exhortation. When he wrote
that epistle he was aware that there
were some among them who were
disposed to be idle, and he had tenderly exhorted them “to be quiet, and
to mind their own business, and to
work with their own hands ;” 1 Thess.
iv. 11. But it seems the exhortation,
and the example of Paul himself when
there (1 Thess. ii. 9), had not been
effectual in inducing them to be industrious. It became, therefore, necessary to use the strong language
of command, as he does here, and to
require that if they would not work,
thechurch should withdraw from them.
What was the original cause of their
idleness, is not known. ‘There seems
no reason, however, to doubt that it
was much increased by their expectation that the Saviour would soon appear, and that the world would soon
come to an end. If this was to be so,
of what use would it be to labour ?
Why strive to accumulate property
with reference to the wants of a family,
or to a day of sickness, or old age ?
Why should a man build a house that
was soon to be burnt up, or why buy
a farm which he was soon to leave ?
The effect of the expectation of the
speedy appearing of the Lord Jesus
has always been to induce men to
neglect their worldly affairs, and to
lead idle lives. Man, naturally disposed to be idle, wants the stimulus of
hope that he is labouring for the future
welfare of himself, for his family, or
for society, nor will he labour if he
believes that the Saviour is about to
appear. § In the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ; see Notes on 1 Cor. v.
4. § That ye withdraw yourselves ;
Notes on 1 Tim. vi. 5. This is the
true notion of Christian discipline.
It is not primarily that of cutting a
man off, or denouncing him, or excommunicating him; it is that of with-

among you;
7 For yourselves know how
ye ought to follow us: for we behaved not ourselves disorderly

drawing from him. We cease to have
fellowship with him. We do not regard him any longer as a Christian
brother. We separate from him. We
do not seck to affect him in any other
respect; we do not injure his name or
standing as a man, or hold him up to
reprobation; we do not follow him with
denunciation or a spirit of revenge ;
we simply cease to recognise him as a
Christian brother, when he shows that
he is no longer worthy to be regarded
assuch. We do not deliver him over
to the civil arm; we do not inflict
any positive punishment on him; we
leave him unmolested in all his rights
as a citizen, a man, a neighbour, a
husband, a father, and simply say
that he is no longer one of us asa
Christian. How different is this from
excommunication, as it has been commonly understood! How different
from the anathemas fulminated by the
Papacy, and the delivering of the
heretic over tothecivil power! § From
every brother that walketh disorderly ;
comp. Notes, 1 Cor. v. 11--13. A
“disorderly walk’ denotes conduct
that is in any way contrary to the rules
of Christ. The proper idea of the
word used here (éréx7ws), is that of
soldiers who do not keep the ranks ;
who are regardless of order ; and then
who are irregular in any way. The
word would include any violation of
the rules of Christ on any subject.
G And not after the tradition which
ye received of us. According to the
doctrine which we delivered to you;
see Notesonchap.ii.15. This shows
that by the word ‘tradition ”’ the apostle did not mean wnwritten doctrines
handed down from one to another, for
he evidently alludes to what he had
himself taught them, and his directior.
is not that that should be handed
down by them, but that they should
obey it.

7%. For yourselves know how ye
ought to follow us. You know what
you should do in order to imitate us.
q For we behaved not ourselves dis8 Neither did we eat any man’s

bread for nought; but wrought |

@with labour and travail night
and day, that we might not be
chargeable to any of you:

9 Not because we have not)

power, © but to make ourselves an
ensample unto you to follow us.

@ Ac.18.3 ; 20.34. b 1 Co.9.6,

orderly among you; see Notes on 1
Thess. ii. 10.

8. Neither did we eat any mans |

bread for nought. We were not
supported in idleness at the expense
of others. We gave a fair equivalent
for all that we received, and, in fact,
laboured for our own support; see
Notes on 1 Thess. ii. 9.

9. Not because we have not power,
&c.; see Notes on 1 Cor. ix. 6, 12, 14.

10. For even when we were with
you, this we commanded you. It
would seem from this that the evil of
which the apostle here complains had
begun to operate even when he was
with them. There were those who
were disposed to be idle, and who
needed the solemn command of an
apostle to induce them to labour.
{| That if any would not work, neither should he eat. That is, at the
public expense. They should not be

Il. THESSALONIANS.

supported by the church. This was a
maxim among the Jews (see Wetstein, |
in loc.), and the same sentiment may |

be found in Homer, Demosthenes,
and Pythagoras; see Grotius, in loc.
The maxim is founded in obvious justice, and is in accordance with the
great law under which our Creator
has placed us; Gen. iii. 19. That law,
in the circumstances, was benevolent,
and it should be our aim to carry it
out in reference to ourselves and to
others. The law here laid down by the
apostle extends to all who are able
to work for a living, and who will not
do it, and binds us not to contribute
to their support if they will not lapour for it. It should be regarded
as extending (1.) to the members of
a church--who, though poor, should
not be supported by their brethren,
unless they are willing to work in any

10 For even when we were with
you, this we commanded you, that
¢if any would not work, neither
should he eat.

11 For we hear that there are
some which walk among you disorderly, working not atall, but are
busy-bodies. 4

c Ge.3.19. a1 Ti.5 13; 3} Pe.4.15

way they can for their own maintenance. (2.) To those who beg from
door to door, who should never be assisted unless they are willing to dc
all they can do for their own support.
No one can be justified in assisting a
lazy man. Inno possible circumstances are we to contribute to foster indolence. A man might as properly
help to maintain open vice.

11. For we hear. It is not known
in what way this was made known to
Paul, whether by Timothy, or by some
other one. He had no doubt of its
truth, and he seems to have been prepared to believe it the more readily
from what he saw when he was among

them. Which walk disorderly ;

Notes, ver.6. J But are busy-bodies ;

comp. Notes, 1 Tim. v. 13 ; 1 Pet. iv.
15. That is, they meddled_ with the
affairs of others--a thing which they
who have nothing of their own to busy
themselves about will be very likely to
do. The apostle had seen that there
was a tendency to this when he was in
Thessalonica, and hence he had commanded them to “do their own business ;”’ 1 Thess. iv. 11. The injunction, it seems, had availed little, for
there is no class of persons who will
so little heed good counsel as those
who have a propensity to intermeddle
with the affairs of others. One of the
indispensable things to check this is,
that each one should have enough to
do himself; and one of the most pestiferous of all persons is he who has
nothing to do but to look after the affairs of his neighbours. In times of
affliction and want, we should be ready
to lend our aid. At other times, we
should feel that he can manage his
own affairs as well as we can do it
for him ; or if he cannot, it is his busi-

12 Now them that are such we
command and exhort by our Lord
Jesus Christ, that with quietness
they work, % and eat their own
bread.

13 But ye, brethren, ! be not
® weary in well doing.

ness, not ours. ‘The Greek word used |

occurs only here, and in 1Tim.y. 13 ;
comp. Notes on Phil. ii. 4.

12. Now them that are such we
command and exhort by our Lord
Jesus, &c. A more solemn command
and appeal to do what he had before
enjoined on all of them; 1 Thess. iv.
ll ; see Notes on that verse.

13. But ye, brethren, be not weary
in well-doing. Marg., faint not. The
Greek means, properly, to turn out a
coward ; then to be faint-hearted, to
despond. The idea is, that they were
not to be discouraged from doing good
to the truly worthy and deserving by
the idleness and improper conduct of
some who asked their assistance. They
were, indeed, shiftless and worthless.
They would not labour; they spent
their time in intermeddling with the
concerns oftheir neighbours, and they
depended for their support on the
charity of others. The tendency of
this, as all persons feel who have ever
been applied to by such persons for
aid, is, to indispose us to do good to
any. We almost insensibly feel that
all who ask for aid are of the same
character ; or, not being able to discriminate, we close our hands alike
against all, Against this the apostle
would guard us, and he says that
though there may be many such persons, and though we may find it difficult to distinguish the worthy from
the unworthy, we should not become
so disheartened as not to give at all.
Nor should we be weary though the
applications for assistance are frequent.
They are indeed frequent. God designs that they should be. But the
effect should not be to dishearten us,
or to make us weary in well-doing,
but to fill us with gratitude--for it is
a privilege to be permitted to do good.
It is the great distinguishing characteristic of God that he always does

14 And if any man obey not
our word by 2 this epistle, note
that man, and have ¢ no company
with him, that he may be ashamed
a Ep.4 28. { or, faint not. 6 1 Co.15 5

2 or. siynify that man by an epistl
Matt. 18.17; ver. 6

good. It wasthat which marked the
character of the Redeemer, that he
“went about doing good ;’”’ and whenever God gives us the opportunity
and the means of doing good, it should
be to us an occasion of special thanksgiving. A man ought to become
““weary’’ of everything else sooner
than of evincing benevolence; comp.
Notes on Gal. vi. 10.

14. And if any man obey not our
word by this epistle. Marg., or signify
that man by anepistle. Accordingto
the marginal reading this would mean
‘signify, mark out, or designate that
man to me by an epistle.” The difference is merely whether we unite
the words “‘ by the epistle ’ with what
goes before, or what follows. The
Greek would admit of either construction (Winer, p. 93), but it seems to
me that the construction in the text
is the correct one, for (1.) the requirement was to proceed to discipline such
a man by withdrawing from him ; (2.)
in order to do this it was not necessary that the case should be made
known to Paul, for there was no supposable difficulty in it, and the effect
would be only needless delay; (3.)
Paul regarded the right of discipline
as residing in the church itself, and
did not require that cases should be
referred to him to determine; see
Notes on 1 Cor. v. 2--4. (4.) Though
the Greek will admit of either construction, yet it rather favours this ;
see Oldhhausen, inloc. ‘| Note that
man. The word here used, means to
mark; to sign; to note with marks ;
and the idea is, set such a mark upon
him that he shall be shunned ; that
is, withdraw aJl Christian fellowship
from him. 4 And have no company
with him. The Greek word here means,
to mix up together ; then to mingle
together with; to have intercourse
with. The idea is. that they werenot

15 Yet count him not as an, with mine own hand, which is the
enemy, but admonish him as a | token in every epistle: so I write.
brother. 4 18 The 4#grace of our Lord Je-

16 Now the Lord © ot peace | sus Christ be with youall. Amen.
himself give you peace always] The second epistle to the Thes-

by all means. The Lord be with ' salonians was written from
you all. | Athens,
17 The salutation ¢ of Paul), poi600, ¢1Coi6a1. -- d Ro.i6.24
a@ Le.19.17.

to mingle with him as a Christian bro- | discipline as the New Testament rether, or as one of their own number. | quires. ‘There all is kind, and gentle,
They were not to show that they re- | though firm; the offender is a man
garded him as a worthy member of | and a brother still ; he is to be followthe church, or as having a claim to its | ed with tender sympathy and prayer,
privileges. The extent of their discip- | and the hearts and the arms of the
line was, that they were to withdraw | Christian brotherhood are to be open
from him; see Notes on ver. 6, and | to receive him again when he gives
Matt. xviii. 17; comp. 2 John 10, 11. | any evidence of repenting.

15. Yet count him not as anenemy, 16. Now the Lord of peace. The
but admonish him as a brother. This | Lord who alone can impart peace;
shows the true spirit in which discip- | see Notes on Rom. xy. 33 ; 1 Cor. xiv,
line is to be administered in the Chris- | 33 ; Heb. xiii. 20 ; John xiv. 27.
tian church. We are not to deal 17. The salutation of Paul with mine
with aman asan adversary over whom | own hand; Notes, 1 Cor. xvi. 21.
we are to seek to gain a victory, but | § Which is the token in every epistle.
as an erring brother--a brother still, | Gr., sign. Thatis, this signature is a
though he errs. There was necessity | sign or proof of the genuineness of the
for this caution. ‘There is great dan- | epistle; comp. Notes on Gal. vi. 11.
ger that when we undertake the work | 4 So J write. Referring, probably,
of discipline we shall forget that he | to some mark or method which Paul
who is the subject of it is a brother, | had of signing his name, which was
and that we shall regard and treat | well known, and which would easily be
him as an enemy. Such is human ! recognised by them.
nature. We set ourselves in array 18. The grace of our Lord Jesus
against him. We cut him off as one | Christ be with you all; Notes, Rom.
who isunworthy to walk with us. We | xvi. 20.
triumph over him, and consider him at | From the subscription to this epistle,
once as an enemy of the church, and! it purports to have been ‘“ written
as having lost all claim to its sympa- | from Athens.” This is probably in.
thies. We abandon him tothe tender | correct, as there is reason to think
mercies of a cold and unfeeling world, | that it was written from Corinth. See
and let him take his course. Perhaps | the Introduction. At all events, this
we follow him with anathemas, and | subscription is of no authority. See
hold hint up as unworthy the confi- | Notes at the end of the Epistles to
dence ofmankind. Now all thisisen- | the Romans and 1 Corinthians.
tirely unlike the method and aim of

§ 1. Notices of the life of Timothy.

Nearzy all that can now be known of Timothy is to be learned from the
New Testament. He was a native of either Derbe or Lystra, but it is not
certainly known which; Acts xvi. 1. Paul found him there on his visit to
those places,.and does not appear to have been acquainted with him before.
His mother, whose name was Eunice, was a Jewess, and was pious, as was
also his grandmother, Lois; 2 Tim.i. 8. His father was a Greek, but was
evidently not unfriendly to the Jewish religion, for Timothy had been carefully trained in the Scriptures; 2 Tim. iii. 15. Paul came to Derbe and
Lystra, and became acquainted with him, about a. p. 51 or 52, but there is
no method now of ascertaining the exact age of Timothy at that time, though
there is reason to think that he was then ayouth; 1 Tim. iv.12. It would seem,
also, that he was a youth of uncommon hope and promise, and that there had
been some special indications that he would rise to distinction as a religious
man, and would exert an extended influence in favour of religion ; 1. Tim. i.
18. At the time when Paul first met with him, he was a “ disciple,” or a
Christian convert ; but the means which had been used for his conversion are
unknown. His mother had been before converted to the Christian faith
(Acts xvi. 1), and Timothy was well known to the Christians in the neighbouring towns of Lystra and Iconium. The gospel had been preached by
Paul and Barnabas, in Iconium, Derbe, and Lystra, some six or seven years
before it is said that Paul met with Timothy (Acts xvi. 1), and it is not improbable that this youth had been converted in the interval.

Several things appear to have combined to induce the apostle to introduce
him into the ministry, and to make him a travelling companion. His youth ;
his acquaintance with the Holy Scriptures; the “prophecies which went
before on him;”’ his talents; his general reputation in the church, and, it
would seem also, his amiableness of manners, fitting him to be an agreeable
companion. attracted the attention of the apostle, and led him to desire that
he might be a fellow-labourer with him. To satisfy the prejudices of the
Jews, and to prevent any possible objection which might be made against his
analifications for the ministerial office, Paul circumcised him (Acis xvi. 3),

civ INTRODUCTION.

and he was ordained to the office of the ministry by “the laying on of the
nands of the presbytery ;” 1 Tim. iv. 14. When this ordination occurred
is not known, but it is most probable that it was before he went on his
travels with Paul, as it is known that Paul was present on the occasion, and
took a leading part in the transaction; 2 Tim. i.6.

Timothy having joined Paul and Silas, accompanied them on a visit to the
churches of Phrygia and Galatia, in which they delivered them the decrees
to keep which had been ordained at Jerusalem; Acts xvi. 4. seq. Having
done this, they endeavoured to go together into Bythinia, a province of Asia
Minor, on the north-west, but were prevented; and they then went into
Mysia, and to the towns of Troas; Acts xvi. 8. Here Luke appears to have
joined them, and from this place, in obedience to a vision which appeared to
Paul, they went into Macedonia, and preached the gospel first at Philippi,
where they established achurch. In this city Paul and Silas were imprisoned ;
but it is remarkable that nothing is said of Timothy and Luke, and it is not
known whether they shared in the sufferings of the persecution there or not.
“verything, however, renders it probable that Timothy was with them at Philippi, as he is mentioned as having started with them to go on the journey (Acts
xvi. 8, seq.) ; and as we find him at Berea, after the apostle had been released
from prison, and had preached at Thessalonica.and Berea; Acts xvii.14. From
this place Paul was conducted to Athens, but left an injunction for Silas and
‘Timothy to join him there as soon as possible. This was done ;--but when
Timothy had come to Athens, Paul felt it to be important that the church at
Thessalonica should be visited and comforted in its afflictions, and being prevented from doing it himself, he sent Timothy, at great personal inconvenience, back to that church. Having discharged the duty there, he re
joined the apostle at Corinth (Acts xviii. 5), from which place the first epistle
to the Thessalonians was written; see Intro. to 1 Thess. and Notes on 1
Thess. i. 1, and iii. 2. These transactions occurred about a. p. 52.

Paul remained at Corinth a year and a half (Acts xviii. 11), and it is probable that Timothy and Silas continued with him; see 2 Thess. i. 1. From
Corinth he sailed for Syria, accompanied by Priscilla and Aquila, whom he
appears to have left on his way at Ephesus ; Acts xviii. 18, 19,26. Whether
Timothy and Silas accompanied him is not mentioned, but we find Timothy
again with him at Ephesus, after he had been to Cesareaand Antioch, and had
returned to Ephesus; Acts xvili. 22; xix. 1,22. From Ephesus, he sent
Timothy and Erastus to Macedonia (Acts xix. 22), but for what purpose or
how long they remained, is unknown. From 1 Cor. iv. 17, it appears that
Paul expected that on this journey Timothy would stop at Corinth, and
would give the church there instructions adapted to its situation. Paul continued in Ephesus until he was compelled to depart by the tumult caused by
Demetrius, when he left and went to Macedonia; Acts xx. Whether Timothy, during the interval, had returned to Ephesus from Macedonia, is not
expressly mentioned in the history ; but such a supposition is not improbakle
Paul, during the early part of his residence in Ephesus, appears to have laboured quietly (Acts xix. 9, 10); and Timothy was sent away before the disturbances caused by Demetrius; Acts xix.22. Paul designed to follow him
soon, and then to go to Jerusalem, and then to Rome; Acts xix. 21. Pau}
(Acts xx. 31) was in Ephesus in all about three years; and it is not unreasonable to suppose that he remained there after Timothy was sent to Macedonia long enough for him to go and to return to him again. [f so, it is
possible that when he himself went away, he left Timothy there in his place;
comp. 1 Tim. i. 3. It has been the general opinion that the First a istle
to Timothy was written at this time, either when the apostle was on his Ww
to Macedonia, or while in Macedonia. But this opinion has not been i
questioned. The departure of Paul for Macedonia occurred about a. p 68.
or 59. In Acts xx. 4, Timothy is again mentioned as accompanying Panl,

INTRODUCTION, cv

after he had remained in Greece three months, on the route to Syria through
Macedonia. He went with him, in company with many others, into “ Asia.”
Going before Paul, they waited for him at Troas( Acts xx.5),and thence doubtless accompanied him on his way to Jerusalem. It was on this occasion that
Paul delivered his farewell charge to the elders of the church of Ephesus, at
Miletus ; Acts xx. 17, seq. When in Macedonia, Paul wrote the Secoud
Epistle to the Corinthians, and Timothy was ‘then with him, for he unites in
the salutations ; 2 Cor. i. 1. Timothy was also with the apostle on this
journey at Corinth, when from that city he wrote his epistle to the Romans ;
Rom. xvi. 21.

The subsequent events of the life of Timothy are less known. It does not
appear from the Acts of the Apostles, that he was with Paul during his two
years’ imprisonment at Cesarea, nor during his voyage to Rome. It is certain, however, that he was at Rome with the apostle when he wrote the
epistles to the Philippians, to the Colossians, and to Philemon; Phil. i. 1;
Col. i. 1; Philem.i. From Heb. xiii. 23 it appears also, that Timothy had
been with the apostle there, but that when the epistle was written he was
absent on some important embassy, and that Paul was expecting his speedy
return ; see Notes onthat verse. Between the first and second imprisonment of Paul at Rome, no mention is made of Timothy, nor is it known where
he was, or whether he accompanied him in his travels or not. When he was
imprisoned there the second time, he wrote the Second Epistle to Timothy,
in which he desires him to core to Rome, and bring with him several things
which he had left at Troas; 2 Tim. iv. 9--13,21. If Timothy went to Rome,
agreeably to the request of the apostle, it is probable that he was a witness
there of his martyrdom.

In regard to the latter part of the life of Timothy, there is nothing which
can be depended on. It has been the current opinion, derived from tradition,
that he was “bishop” of Ephesus; that he died and was buried there ; and
that his bones were subsequently removed to Constantinople. The belief that
he was “bishop” of Ephesus rests mainly on the “subscription” to the
Second Epistle to Timothy--which is no authority whatever ; see Notes on
that subscription. On the question whether he was an episcopal prelate at
Ephesus, the reader may consult my “ Enquiry into the Organization and
Government of the Apostolic Church,” pp. 88--107. The supposition that
he died at Ephesus, and was subsequently removed to Constantinople, rests
on no certain historical basis.

Timothy was long the companion and the friend of the apostle Paul, and
is often mentioned by him with affectionate interest. Indeed there seems to
have been no one of his fellow-labourers to whom he was so warmly attached ;
see 1 Tim. i. 2, 18; 2 Tim.i.2; ii. 1; 1 Cor. iv. 17, where he calls him
“his own son,” and “his beloved son;”’ 2 Tim. i. 4, where he expresses his
earnest desire to see him, and makes a reference to the tears which Timothy
shed at parting from him ;--1 Cor. xvi. 10. 11, where he bespeaks for him a
kind reception among the Corinthians ;--1 Cor. xvi. 10; Rom. xvi. 21; 1
Thess. iii. 2, and especially ii. 19, 20, where he speaks of his fidelity, of his
usefulness to him in his labours, and of the interest which he took in the

churches which the apostle had established.
§ 2. When and where the Epistle was written.

The subscription at the close of the epistle states that it was written from
Laodicea. But these subscriptions are of no authority, and many of them
are false ; see Notes at the end of 1 Corinthians. There has been much
diversity of opinion in regard to the time when this epistle was written, and
of course in regard to the place where it was composed. All that is certain
from the epistle itself is, that it was addressed to Timothy at Ephesus, and

evi INTRODUCTION.

that it was soon after Paul had left that city to go to Macedonia; 1 Tim.
i. 3. Paul is mentioned in the Acts as having been at Ephesus twice : Acts
xvili. 19--23 ; xix. 1--41. After his first visit there, he went directly to
Jerusalem, and of course it could not have been written at that time. The
only question then is, whether it was written when Paul left the city, having
been driven away by the excitement caused by Demetrius (Acts XX. 1), or
whether he visited Ephesus again on some occasion after his first imprisonment at Rome, and of course after the narrative of Luke in the Acts of the
Apostles closes. If on the former occasion, it was written about the year 5&
or 59; if the latter, about the year 64 or 65. Critics have been divided in
reference to this point, and the question is still unsettled, and it may be impossible to determine it with entire certainty.

Those who have maintained the former opinion, among others, are Theodoret, Benson, Zachariae, Michaelis, Schmidt. Koppe. Planck, Grotius
Lightfoot, Witsius, Lardner, Hug, and Prof. Stuart. The latter opinion,
that it was written subsequently to the period of Paul’s first imprisonment at
Rome, is maintained by Paley, Pearsen, J.’Enfant, Le Clerc, Cave, Mill,
Whitby, Macknight, and others.

An examination of the reasons in favour of each of these opinions in regard to the date of the epistle, may be found in Paley’s Hors Paul.; Macknight ; Hug’s Intro., and Koppe, Proleg.

The theory of Eichhorn, which is peculiar, and which is supported by some
ingenious and plausible, but not conclusive reasoning, may be seen in his
Einleitung in das neve Test. 3 B. 314--352.

In the diversity of opinion which prevails about the time when the epistle
was written, it is impossible to determine the question in such a manner as
to leave no room for doubt. After the most careful examination which 1
have been able to give to the subject, however, it seems to me that the former
Opinion is correct, that it was writen soon after Paul was driven from Ephesus
by the tumult caused by Demetrius, as recorded in Acts xix.; xx. 1. The
reasons for this opinion are briefly these :--

1. This is the only record that occurs in the New Testament of the apostle’s
having gone from Ephesus to Macedonia; see above. Itis natural, therefore,
to suppose that this is referred to in 1 Tim. i. 8, unless there is some insuperable difficulty in the way.

2. There is no certain evidence that Paul visited the church at Ephesus
after bis first imprisonment at Rome. It is certainly possible that he did,
but there is no record of any such visit in the New Testament, nor any historical record of it elsewhere. If there had been such a visit after his release, and if this epistle was written then, it is remarkable that the apostle
does not make any allusion to his imprisonment in this epistle, and that he
does not refer at all to his own escape from this danger of death at Rome;
comp. 2 Tim. iv. 16, 17.

8. The supposition that the epistle was written at the time supposed,
agrees better with the character of the epistle, and with the design for
which Timothy was left at Ephesus, than the others. It is manifest from
the epistle that the church was in some respects in an unsettled condition,
and it would seem also that one part of the duty of Timothy there was to see
that it was placed under a proper organization. This Paul had evidently
proposed to accomplish himself, but it is clear from chap. i. 8, that he left
his work unfinished, and that he gave what he had proposed to do into the
hands of Timothy to be perfected. After the first imprisonment of Paul at
Rome, however, there is every reason to suppose that the church was completely organized, Even when Paul went from Macedonia to Jerusalem
(Acts xx.), there were ‘ elders”’ placed over the church at Ephesus, whom
Paul assembled at Miletus, and to whom he gave his parting charge, and his
final instructions in regard to the church.

INTRODUCTION. evil

4. At the time when Paul wrote this epistle, Timothy was a young man
--a youth; J) Tim. iv. 12. It is true, that if he was somewhere about
twenty years of age when he was introduced into the ministry, as has
been commonly supposed, this language would not be entirely inappropriate,
even after the imprisonment of Paul, but still the language would more properly denote one somewhat younger than Timothy would be at that time.

5. To this may be added the declaration of Paul in 1 Tim. iii. 14, that
he “hoped to come to him shortly.’’ This is an expression which agrees
well with the supposition that he had himself been driven away before he
tad intended to leave; that he had left something unfinished there which
he desired to complete, and that he hoped that affairs would soon be in such
a state that he would be permitted to return. It may be also suggested, as
a circumstance of sorne importance, though not conclusive, that when Paul
met the elders of the church of Ephesus at Miletus, he said that he had no
expectation of ever seeing them again. ‘ And now, behold, I know that ye
all, among whom I have gore pr2aching the kingdom of God, shall see my
face no more ;” Acts xx. 25. I do not think that this is to be understood
as an inspired prediction, affirming with absolute certainty that he never
would see them again, but that he rather expressed his apprehensions that it
would be so from the circumstances which then existed; Acts xx. 22, 23.
Still, this passage shows that when he uttered it he did not expect to visit
Ephesus again, as he manifestly did when he wrote the epistle to Timothy.

These considerations seem so clear that they would leave no doubt on the
mind, were it not for certain things which it seems to many impossible to
reconcile with this supposition. The difficulties are the following :--

1. That before Paul went to Macedonia, he had sent Timothy with
Erastus before him (Acts xix. 22), purposing to follow them at no distant
period, and to pass through Macedonia and Achaia, and then to go to Jerusalem, and afterwards to visit Rome; Acts xix. 21. As he had sent
Timothy before him but so short a time before he left Ephesus, it is asked
how Timothy could be left at Ephesus when Paul went himself to Macedonia? To this objection we may reply, that it is not improbable by any
means that Timothy may have accomplished the object of his journey to
Macedonia, and may have returned to the apostle at Ephesus before he was
driven away. It does not appear, from the narrative, that Timothy was
intrusted with any commission which would require a long time to fulfil it,
nor that Paul expected that he would remain in Macedonia until he himself
came. The purpose for which he sent Timothy and Erastus is not indeed
mentioned, but it seems probable that it was with reference to the collection
which he proposed to take up for the poor saints at Jerusalem ; see Notes
on Acts xix. 21, 22; comp. 1 Cor. xvi. 1--6. If it was the purpose to prepare the churches for such a collection, it could not have required any considerable time, nor was it necessary that Timothy should remain long in a
place; and it was natural also that he should return to the apostle at Ephesus and apprize him of what he had done, and what was the prospect in regard to the collection. It has been clearly shown by Hug (Intro. to the New
Test. § 104, 109), that such a journey could easily have been made during the
time which the apostle remained at Ephesus after he had sent Timothy and
Erastus to Macedonia.

2. The next objection--and one which is regarded by Paley as decisive
against the supposition that the epistle was written on this occasion--is,
that fram the second epistle to the Corinthians (i. 1), it is evident that at
the time in which this epistle is supposed to have been written, Timothy was
with the apostle in Macedonia. ‘The second epistle to the Corinthians was
undoubtedly written during this visit of Paul to Macedonia, and at that time
Timothy was with him; see the Intro. to 2 Cor. § 3. How then can it be
supposed that he was at Ephesus? Or how can this fact be reconciled with

eviii INTRODUCTION,

the supposition that Timothy was left there, and especially with the declaration of Paul to him (1 Tim. iii. 14), that he “ hoped to come to him shortly ?

That Paul expected that Timothy would remain at Ephesus, at least for
some time, is evident from 1 Tim. iii. 15, “But if I tarry long, that thou
mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God;” and
from chap. iv. 13, “ Till [ come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation,
to doctrine.” The only so.ution of this difficulty is, that Timothy had left
Ephesus, and had followed the apostle into Macedonia ; and the only question here is, whether, since the apostle designed that he should remain at
Ephesus, and expected himself to return and meet him there, Timothy would
be likely to leave that place and go to Macedonia, It is certain that the
history in the Acts does not make this record, but that is no material objection--since it cannot be supposed that every occurrence in the travels of the
apostles was recorded. But there are two or three circumstances which
may render the supposition that Timothy, either by the concurrence, or by
the direction of Paul, privately communicated to him, may have left Ephesus sooner than was at first contemplated, and may have rejoined him in
Macedonia. (1.) One is, that the main business which Timothy was appointed to perform at Ephesus--to give a solemn charge to certain persons
there to teach no other doctrine but that which Paul taught (1 Tim. i. 3)--
night have been speedily accomplished. Paul was driven away in haste, and
as he had not the opportunity of doing this himself as he wished, he left
Timothy in charge of it. But this did not require, of necessity, any considerable time. (2.) Another is, that the business of appointing suitable
officers over the church there, might also have been soon accomplished. Jn
fact, the church there is known to have been supplied with proper officers not
long after this, for Paul sent from Miletus for the elders to meet him there
on his way to Jerusalem. This remark is made in accordance with the
opinion that a part of the work which Timothy was expected to perform
there was to constitute proper officers over the church. But there is no
proof that that was a part of his business. It is not specified in what Paul
mentions, in chap. i. 3, as the design for which he was left there, and it is
hardly probable that the apostle would have spent so long a time as he did
in Ephesus--nearly three years (Acts xx. 31)--without having organized the
church with proper officers. Besides, the address of Paul to the elders at
Miletus implies that they had received their appointment before he left
them; see Acts xx. 18--35, particularly ver. 35. The instructions to
Timothy in this epistle about the proper qualifications of the officers of the
church, do not prove that he was then to appoint officers at Ephesus, for
they are general instructions, having no particular reference to the church
there, and designed to guide him in his work through life. There is, therefore, nothing in the duties which Timothy was to perform at Ephesus which
would forbid the supposition that he may have soon followed the apostle into
Macedonia. (3.) It appears that though Paul may have intended, if possible, to visit Ephesus on his way to Jerusalem, in accordance with 1 Tim.
ili. 14, 15; iv. 18, yet, if that had been his intention, he subsequently
changed his mind, and found it necessary to make other arrangements. Thus
it is said (Acts xx. 16), that ‘Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus,
because he would not spend the time in Asia;’’ that is, he had resolved to
sail past Ephesus without visiting it. It would seem probable also, that
this resolution had been formed before he left Macedonia, for it is said that
he “had determined” it (Zxpiv), and if so, there is no improbability in
supposing that he had in some way caused it to be intimated to Timothy
that he wished him to leave Ephesus and join him before he left Macedonia.
(4.) In fact, and in accordance with this supposition, we find Timothy with
Paul when he went on that occasion into “Asia;” Acts xx. 4,5. These
considerations render it probable that the epistle was written to Timothy

INTRODUCTION. cix

soon after Paul left Ephesus to go into Macedonia after the tumult excited
by Demetrius. As Paul was driven away unexpectedly, and when he had not
completed what he designed to do there, nothing is more natural than the
supposition that he would embrace the earliest opportunity to give suitable
instructions to Timothy, that he might know how to complete the work.

8. The occasion and design of the epistle.

This is specified in chap. i.3. Paul had gone into Macedonia, having
been suddenly driven. away from Ephesus, before he had entirely done what
he had designed to do there. He left Timothy there to “charge some that
they teach no other doctrine ;” that is, no other doctrine than that which he
had himself taught when there. It is clear, from this, that there were cer.
tain errors prevailing there which Paul thought it of the highest importance
to have corrected. In regard to those errors, see the Introduction to the
Epistle to the Ephesians, and the Epistle to the Colossians. Some of the
circumstances which gave occasion to this epistle can be gathered from the
history in the Acts of the Apostles; others can be derived from the epistle
itself. From these sources of information we learn the following things in
reference to the state of the church in Ephesus, which made it proper that
Timothy should be left there, and that these instructions should be given
him to regulate his conduct.

(1.) There was much opposition to the apostle Paul from the Jews who
resided there; Acts xix. 8, 9.

(2.) There were in the church teachers who endeavoured to enforce the
maxims of the Jewish law, and to represent that law as binding on Christians ; 1 Tim. 1. 6, 7.

(3.) Some of the Jews residing there were addicted to exorcism, and
endeavoured to make use of Christianity and the name of Jesus to promote
their selfish.ends ; Acts xix.14; comp.1 Tim. i. 4.

(4.) The Jewish teachers laid great stress on genealogies and traditions,
and were much given to debates about various questions connected with the
law; 1 Tim. i. 4--6.

(5.) There were erroneous views prevailing respecting the rights of
women, and the place which they ought to occupy in the church; 1 Tim. il.
8--15.

(6.) The organization of the officers of the church had not been effected
as Paul wished it to be. It is probable that some of the officers had been
appointed, and that some instructions had been given to them in regard to
their duties, but the whole arrangement had not been completed; 1 Tim.
iii., iv.

(7.) There were certain questions in regard to the proper treatment of
widows which had not yet been determined ; 1 Tim. v. par

(8.) The apostle in his preaching had inculcated benevolent principles,
and had asserted the natural equality of all men, and it would seem that certain persons had taken occasion from this to excite a spirit of discontent and
insubordination among those who were servants. The doctrine seems to have
been advanced, that, as all men were equal, and all had been redeemed by
the same blood, therefore those who had been held in bondage were free
from all obligation to serve their masters. There were those evidently who
sought to excite them to insurrection ; to break down the distinctions in
society, and to produce a state of insubordination and disorder; 1 Tim. vi. ;
comp. Eph. vi. 5--10; Col. iii. 22; iv. 2.

Such appears to have been the state of things when the apostle was compelled suddenly to leave Ephesus. He had hitherto directed the affairs of
the church there mainly himself, and had endeavoured to correct the errors
then prevailing, and to establish the church 9n a right foundation. Matters

ex INTRODUCTION.

appear to have been tending to the desired result; religion was acquiring a
strong hold on the members of the church (Acts xix. 18-20); error was
giving way; the community was becoming more and more impressed with
the value of Christianity ; the influence of idolatry was becoming less and
less (Acts xix. 23, seqg.), and the arrangements for the complete organization
of the church were in progress. Such was the promising state of things in
these respects that the apostle hoped to be able to leave Ephesus at no very
distant period, and had actually made arrangements to do it; Acts xix. 21.
But his arrangements were not quite finished, and before they were completed, he was compelled to leave by the tumuit excited by Demetrius. He
left Timothy, therefore, to complete the arrangements, and, in this first
epistle, gave him all the instructions which were necessary to guide him in
that work.

This view of the state of things in Ephesus at the time when the apostle
was constrained to leave it, will enable us to understand the drift of the
epistle, and the reasons why the various topics found in it were introduced.
At the same time, the instructions are of so general a character that they
would be an invaluable guide to Timothy not only at Ephesus, but through
his life; and not only to him, but to all the ministers of the gospel in every
age and land. A more detailed view of these topics will be furnished in the
analysis prefixed to the several chapters of the epistle.

The epistles to Timothy and Titus occupy a very important place in the
New Testament, and without them there would be a manifest and most
material defect in the volume of inspiration. ‘Their canonical authority has
never been questioned by the great body of the church, and there is no doubt
that they are the productions of the apostle Paul. If the various epistles
which he wrote, and the various other books of the New Testament be attentively examined, it will be found that each one is designed to accomplish an
important object, and that if any one were removed a material chasm would
be made. Though the removal of any one of them would not so impair the
volume of the New Testament as to obscure any essential doctrine, or prevent our obtaining the knowledge of the way of salvation from the remainder,
yet it would mar the beauty and symmetry of the truth, and would render
the system of instruction defective and incomplete.

This is true in regard to the epistles to Timothy and Titus, as it is of the
other epistles. They fill a department which nothing else in the New Testament would enable us to supply, and without which instructions to man
respecting redemption would be incomplete. They relate mainly to the office
of the ministry ; and though there are important instructions of the Saviour
himself respecting the office (Matt. x., Mark xvi., and elsewhere), and though
in the address of Paul to the elders of Ephesus (Acts xx.), and in the epistles
to the Corinthians, there are invaluable suggestions respecting it, yet such
is its importance in the organization of the church, that more full and complete instructions seem to be imperiously demanded. Those instructions are
furnished in these epistles. They are as full and complete as we could desire
in regard to the nature of the office, the qualifications for it, and the duties
which grow out of it. They are fitted not only to direct Timothy and Titus
in the work to which they were specifically appointed, but to counsel the
ministry in every age and in every land. It is obvious that the character
and welfare of the church depend greatly, if not entirely, on the character of
the ministry. The office of the ministry is God’s great appointment for the
preservation of pure religion, and for spreading it abroad through the world.
The church adheres to the truth ; is built up in faith; is distinguished for
love, and purity, and zeal, in proportion as the ministry is honoured, and
shows itself qualified for its work. In every age corruption in the church
has commenced in the ministry; and where the gospel has been spread
abroad with zeal, and the church has arisen in her strength and beauty, it

INTRODUCTION. cxi

nas been pre-eminently where God has sent down his Spirit in copious measures on those who have filled the sacred office. So important, then, is this
office to the welfare of the church and the world, that it was desirable that
full instructions should be furnished in the volume of revelation in regard to
its nature and design. Suchinstructions we have in these epistles, and there
is scarcely any portion of the New Testament which the church could not
better afford to part with than the Epistles to Timothy and Titus. Had the
ministry always been such as these epistles contemplate ; had they who have
filled the sacred office always had the character and qualifications here described, we may believe that the church would have been saved from the
strifes that have rent it, and that the pure gospel would long ere this have
been spread through the world.

But it is not to the ministry only that these epistles are of so much value.
They are of scarcely less importance to the church at large. Its vitality ;
its purity ; its freedom from strife ; its zeal and love and triumph in spreading the gospel, depend on the character of the ministry. If the church will
prosper from age to age, the pulpit must be filled with a pious, learned, laborious, and devoted ministry, and one of the first cares of the church should
be that such a ministry should be secured, This great object cannot better
be attained than by keeping the instructions in these epistles steadily before
the minds of the members of the church; and though a large part of them
is particularly adapted to the ministers of the gospel, yet the church itself
can in no better way promote its own purity and prosperity than by a prayerful and attentive study of the epistles to Timothy and Titus

¢
Oo Bo! Bogue te & o's

a bay P+ oy vi ptes ae torre

rarer Neaiabe oe)
sar lisboceneag

= qneiione? iy the gre bu fy Of Dreghyeeh, and |
ina Pheer acy Web proletiqe +) ba ppoelly F
@hjah bis wards. tal (09 wee hee beh of De
threlx aneenived. i ee ard shes acd de eh
--~pipretans 20ip0l, ar 2a) | 25! ope weve Nedng
bo m4? i tol wue) 67 ney ow of Ue eal
Tolmie of the Sow Samtagegy. a+ oe. rain st eg
eed ar chains ae of the wap 2] Gin in tes
ob eval? eras Ue iuea ant eeemey of the ‘South, age wall
ajateen ot they ore bakin ped =---- thes vy
Pete ia eee ie * nt & ‘op owhie lo Tice ote TD, ae
patria oer Ther 0% be Sean Ne Sears nel TO oe ‘
<speat wvild eaahly ag te tepglh ord wind etre Paaselinst best wan
Moet! oy vedanta on, @hule Selur--upicte, Theg ladewainies
ia ay etl =; a evagh alert aes | uiperoons inelepeliane of ih tastes f
aspen § ’ ig Uvepion | Maids. Muck wt, ce on nce ate
in tae errs o¢ PaGl Sa ido aif aye Ephes ye | Asta ax}, on@ dg
in tee 4 eu , Ms, hore we nve eakle 4 Peep}
i Be emportance ih Coe arpesiiaetiee ef Ue Rerk. hab More
“ute Inara sat ty bp Tos terherveny ee umadded. Three meter

oralatvrel (1) fret es.< “on riidy are « Salt afl Ur 260 gs WE Shand ys -

y regire b6 ah ALPE 6) thé chat, Dia pial heii ate, fir ie, the ‘ti

which OW out oF hs i re Dyded “ne an! vw be -S2enh Nimuthy” tied
Aha yore Se wie Lhey wore epeateals gugetated, bag. bo. Fino atl:

miginr® M arc et 1 ih evete tka bbe obey hagny ape ai:

apd wolfere oTlie @mereh dagend griatiy, if te ea db oy. fv chufach

ise \aiaiyy Tho oor of She ginliler be Gop. gra: ootemiane

rep velies of pore Pebgion, and fir apres tor ih gina | “ne the

hnrwd maheree © koa tearls; ie Walle ay Oe Gel) ld Saltaesanee
iad * are tees ih Prepersh GO eo Le Grin oie ‘2 \o0¢reM, =

ohasve | emilied far = #iyrh lh avers bee sur" liom le ina

} scaTAd iz <2" inktve? aud where ide gorgel Nes bean

Bt nore®, bee arin ja ha sine ogth and,

Pp AUL, anapostle of Jesus Christ,

@ by the commandment of God
a Ac.9.15.

This chapter comprisesthe following
subjects :--

(1.) The salutation to Timothy, in
the usual manner in which Paul introduces his epistles ; ver. 1, 2.

(2.) The purpose for which he had
left him at Ephesus; ver. 8, 4. It
was that he might correct the false
instructions of some of the teachers
there, and especially, asit would seem,
in regard to the true use of the law.
They gave andue importance to some
things in the laws of Moses; they gid
not understand the true nature and
design of his laws ; and they mingled
in their instructions much that was
mere fable.

(8.) The true use and design of
the law; ver. 5--11. It was to produce love not vain jangling. It was
not made to fetter the conscience by
vain and troublesome austerities and
ceremonies; it was to restrain and
bind the wicked. ‘The use of the law,
according to these teachers, and according to the prevailing Jewish notions, was to prescribea great number
of formalities, and to secure outward
conformity in a great variety of cumbrous rites and ceremonies. Paul instructs Timothy to teach them that
love, out of a pure heart and a good
conscience, was the elementary principle of religion, and that the “law ”’
was primarily designed to restrain
and control the wicked, and that the
gospel brought to light and enforced
this important truth.

our Saviour, and Lord Jesus Christ
which is our hope.®

2 Unto Timothy *@ my own son
b Co 1.27. ¢ Ac.16.1.

(4.) The mention of the gospel in
this connection, leads Paul to express
his thanks to God that he had been
intrusted with this message of salvation; ver. 12--17. Once he had the
same views as others. But he had
obtained mercy, and he was permitted
to publish that glorious gospel which
had sked such light on the law of God,
and which had revealed a plan of salvation that was worthy of universal
acceptation.

(5.) This solemn duty of preaching
the gospel he commitsnow to Timothy,
ver. 1S--20. He says that he had
been called to the work in accordance
with the prophecies which had been
uttered of him in anticipation of his
future usefulness in the church, andin
the expectation that he would not,
like some others, make shipwreck of
his faith.

1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ;
see Notes on Rom. i. 1. QF By the
commandment of God; Notes, ‘a Cor.
i. 1. § Our Saviour. The name
Saviour is as applicable to God the
Father as to the Lord Jesus Christ,
since God is the great Author of

salvation; see Notes, Luke i. 47;
comp. 1 Tim. iv. 10; Titus ii.
10; Jude 25. § And Lord Jesus

Christ, The apostle Paul had received
his commission directly from him ; see
Notes, Gal. i. 11,12. {| Which is ow
hope; see Notes, Col. i. 27.

2. Unto Timothy. For an account
of Timothy, see Intro. § 1. § My
own son in the faith. Converted to
the Christian faith by my instrumen4 in the faith ; Grace, mercy,
and peace, from God our Father
and Jesus Christ our Lord.

3 As I besought thee to abide

a Tit. 1.4. b Ga.1.3; 1Pe.1 2.

tality, and regarded by me with the af-

fection of a father ; see Notes, 1 Cor.
iv. 15. Paul had no children of his
own, and he adopted Timothy as a
son, and uniformly regarded and treated him as such. He had the same
feeling also toward Titus; Tit.i. 4;
comp. Notes, Gal. iv. 19; 1 Thess. ii.
7,11; and Philem. 10. (J Grace,
mercy, and peace, &c.; see Notes,
Rom. i. 7.

8. As I besought thee to abide still
at Ephesus. It is clear from this,
that Paul and Timothy had been labouring together at Ephesus, and the
language accords with the supposition
that Paul had been compelled to leave
before he had completed what he had
designed to do there. See the Intro.
$2. | When I went into Macedonia.
IIaving been driven away by the excitement caused by Demetrius and his
fellow-craftsmen; Actsxx.1. Seethe
Intro. § 2, 3. § That thou mightest
tharge sume. The word charge here
--rTapayytiAns--seems to mean more
than is commonly implied by the word
as used by us. Ifit had been a single direction or command, it might
have been given by Paul himself before he left, but it seems rather to refer to that continuous instruction which
would convince these various errorists
and lead them to inculcate only the
true doctrine. As they may have been
numerous,--as they may have embraced various forms of error, and as
they might have had plausible grounds
for their belief, this was evidently a
work requiring time, and hence Timothy was left to effect this at leisure.
It would seem that the wrath which
had been excited against Paul had not
affected Timothy, but that he was permitted to remain and labour without
molestation, Itisnot certainly known
who these teachers were, but they appear to have been of Jewish origin,
and to have inculcated the peculiar
sentiments of the Jews respecting the

still at Ephesus, when Iwent¢’ in
to Macedonia, that thou mightest
charge some that they teach no
other doctrine,

¢ Ac.20.1,3.
law. 9 That they teach no other doctrine. Thatis, no other doctrine than

that taught by the apostles. The
Greek word here used is not found in
the classic writers, and does not elsewhere occur in the New Testament,
except in chap. vi. 3 of this epistle,
where it is rendered ‘teach otherwise.” We may learn here what was
the design for which Timothy was
left at Ephesus. (1.) It was for a
temporary purpose, and not as a permanent arrangement. It was to correct certain errors prevailing there
which Paul would have been able
himself soon to correct if he had been
suffered to remain. Paul expected
soon to return to him again, and then
they would proceed unitedly with their
work ; chap. iv. 13; iii. 15. (2.) It
was not that he might be the “ Brshop”’ of Ephesus. There is no evidence that he was “ ordained” there
at all, as the subscription to the second
epistle declares (see Notes on that
subscription), nor were the functions
which he was to perform, those of a
prelatical bishop. He was not to
take the charge of a “ diocese,” or to
ordain ministers of the ‘“‘ second rank,”
or to administer the rite of confirmation, or to perform acts of discipline.
He was left there for a purpose which
is specified, and that is as far as possible from what are now regarded as the
appropriate functions of a prelatical
bishop. Perhaps no claim which has
ever been set up has had less semblance of argument than that which
asserts that Timothy wasthe ‘ Bishop
of Ephesus.” See this clause examined in my “ Inquiry into the Organization and Government of the Apostolic Church,’ pp. 84--107.

4. Neither give heed to fables. That
is, that they should not bestow their
attention on fables, or regard such
trifles as of importance. The “ fables”
here referred to were probably the
idle and puerile superstitions and con-

4 Neither give heed to fables @
and endless genealogies, which mia chap.6.3,4,20. b Ro.13.8,10; Ga.5.14.

nister questions, rather than godly
edifying which is in faith ; so do.
5 Now the end> of the com-

seits of the Jewish Rabbies. The
word rendered fable (uvdcs) means
properly speech or discourse, and then
fable or fiction, or a mystic discourse.
Such things abounded among the
Greeks as well as the Jews, but it is
probable that the latter here are particularly intended. These were composed of frivolous and unfounded stories, which they regarded as of great
importance, and which they seem to
have desired to incorporate with the
teachings of Christianity. Paul, who
had been brought up amidst these
superstitions, saw at once how they
would tend to draw off the mind from
the truth, and would corrupt the true
religion. One of the most successful
arts of the adversary of souls hasbeen
to mingle fable with truth; and when
he cannot overthrow the truth by
direct opposition, to neutralize it by
mingling with it much that is false and
frivolous. {| And endless genealogies.
This also refers to Jewish teaching.
The Hebrews kept careful genealogical records, for this was necessary in
order that the distinction of their
tribes might be kept up. Of course,
in the lapse of centuries these tables
would become very numerous, complicated, and extended--so that they
might without much exaggeration be
called “endless.” The Jews attached
great importance to them, and insisted on their being carefully preserved.
As the Messiah, however, had now
come--as the Jewish polity was to
cease--as the separation between
them and the heathen was no longer
necessary, and the distinction of tribes
was now useless, there was no propriety that these distinctions should be
regarded by Christians. The whole
system was, moreover, contrary to the
genius of Christianity, for it served
to keep up the pride of blood and of
birth. Which minister questions.
Which afford matter for troublesome
and angry debates. It was often difficult- to settle or understand them.
They became complicated and perplexing. Nothing is more difficult

than to unravel an extensive genealogical table. To do this, therefore,
would often give rise to contentions,
and when settled, would give rise still
further to questions about rank and
precedence. { Rather than godly
edifying which is in faith. These inquiries do nothing to promote true religionin thesoul. Theysettle no permanent principle of truth; they determine nothing that is really concerned in the salvation of men. They
might be pursued through life, and
not one soul be converted by them;
they might be settled with the greatest accuracy, and yet not one heart
be made better. Is not this still true
of many controversies and logomachies
in the church? No point of controversy is worth much trouble, which, if
it were settled one way or the other,
would not tend to convert the soul
from sin, or to establish some important principle in promoting true religion. § So do. These words are
supplied by our translators, but they
are necessary to the sense. The
meaning is, that Timothy was to remain at Ephesus, and faithfully perform the duty which he had been left
there to discharge.

5. Now the end of the commandment;
see Notes on Rom.x. 4. In order
that Timothy might fulfil the design
of his appointment, it was necessary
that he should have a correct view of
the design of the law. The teachers
to whom he refers insisted much on
its obligation and importance; and
Paul designs tosay that he did not
intend to teach that the law was of no
consequence, and was not, when properly understood, obligatory. Its
nature and use, however, was not
correctly understood by them, and
hence it was of great importance. for
Timothy to inculcate correct views of
the purpose for which it was given.
The word “commandment” here
some have understood of the gospel
(Doddridge), others of the particular
command which the apostle here gives
to Timothy (Benson, Clarke, and
mandment is charity, out of a pure
heart, * and of a good conscience,
and of faith unfeigned :

6 From which some ! having
swerved, > have turned aside unto,
vain jangling:

Macknight) ; but it seems more naturally to refer to all that God had commanded--his whole law. As the error of these teachers arose from improper views of the nature and design
of law, Paul says that that design
should be understood. It was not to
produce distinctions and angry contentions, and was not to fetter the
minds of Christians with minute and
burdensome observances, but it was
to produce love. §& Is charity. On
the meaning of this word, see Notes
on 1 Cor. xiii. 1. ( Out of a pure
heart. The love which is genuine
must proceed from a holy heart. The
commandment was not designed to
secure merely the outward expressions of love, but that which had its
seat in the heart. { And of a good
conscience. A conscience free from
guilt. Of course there can be no
genuine love to God where the dictates of conscience are constantly
violated, or where a man knows that
he is continually doing wrong. If a
man wishes to have the evidence of
love to God, he must keep a good
conscience. All pretended love, where
a man knows that he is living in sin,
is mere hypocrisy. § And of faith
unfeigned. Undissembled confidence
in God. This does seem to be intended specifically of faith in the Lord
Jesus, but it means that all true love
to God, such as this law would produce, must be based on confidence in
him. How can any one have love to
him who has no confidence in him?
Can we exercise love to a professed
friend in whom we have no confidence ?
Faith, then, is as necessary under the
law as it is under the gospel.

6. From which some having
swerved. Marg., not aiming at.
The word here used -- acroyiw --
means properly, to miss the mark ;

to err; and then, to swerve from;
comp. chap. vi. 21; 2 Tim. ii. 18. It

7 Desiring to be teachers of
the law ; understanding ¢ neither
what they say, nor whereof they
affirm.

@2 Ti.2.22. lor, not aiming at. 6 2 Ti.4.10.
ce Ro.1.23.

does not mean that they had ever
had that from which they are said to
have swerved--for it does not follow
that a man who misses a mark had
ever hit it--but merely that they
failed of the things referred to, and
had turned to vain talk. The word
“which” (#y), in the plural, refers not
to the law, but to the things enumerated--a pure heart, a good conscience, and unfeigned faith. § Have
turned aside unto vain jangling.
Vain talk, empty declamation, discourses without sense. The word
here used does not mean contention
or strife, but that kind of discourse
which is not founded in good sense.
They were discourses on their pretended distinctions in the law; on
their traditions and ceremonies; on
their useless genealogies, and on the
fabulous statements which they had
appended to the law of Moses.

7. Desiring to be teachers of the
law. That is, to have the credit and
reputation of being well versed in
the law of Moses, and qualified to
explain it to others. This was a high
honour among the Jews, and these
teachers laid claim to the same distinction. § Understanding neither
what they say. That is, they do not
understand the true nature and design of that law which they attempt
to explain to others. This was true
of the Jewish teachers, and equally
so of those in the church at Ephesus,
who attempted to explain it. They
appear to have explained the law on
the principles which commonly prevailed among the Jews, and hence
their instructions tended greatly to
corrupt the faith of the gospel. They
made affirmations of what they knew
nothing of, and though they made
confident asservations, yet they often
pertained to things about which they
had no knowledge. One needs only
a slight acquaintance with the man-

8 But we know that the law és
good, ¢ if a man use it lawfully ;

9 Knowing this, that & the law
@ Ro.7.12.

ner of teaching among Jewish Rabbies, or with the things found in their
traditions, to see the accuracy of this
statement of theapostle. A sufficient
illustration of this may be izound in
Allen’s “ Modern Judaism.’

8. But we know that the law is
good. We admit this; it is that
which we all concede. This declaration is evidently made by the apostle
to guard against the supposition that
he was an enemy of the law. Doubtless this charge would be brought
against him, or against any one who
maintained the sentiments which he
had just expressed. By speaking
thus of what those teachers regarded
as so important in the law, it would

be natural for them to declare that |

he was an enemy of the law itself,
and would be glad to see all its
claims abrogated. Paul says that
he designs no such thing. He admitted that the law was good. He
was never disposed for one moment
to call it in question. He only asked

that it should be rightly understood |

and properly explained. Paul was
never disposed to call in question the
excellency and the utility of the law,
however it might bear on him or on
others; comp. Notes on Rom. vil. 12,
and on Acts xxi. 21--26. Jfaman
use it lawfully. Ina proper manner ;
for the purposes for which it was designed. It is intended to occupy a
most important place, but it should
not be perverted. Paul asked only
that it should be used aright, and in
order to this, he proceeds to state
what is its true design.

9. Knowing this. That is, “If
any one knows, or admits this, he has
the proper view of the design of the
law.”’ The apostle does not refer
particularly to himself as knowing or
conceding this, for then he would
have used the plural form of the
participle (see the Greek), but he
means that any one who had just
views of the law would see that that
which he proceeds to specify was its

is not made for a righteous man,
but for the lawless and disobedient,

for the ungodly and for sinners,
b Ga.5.23.

real purpose. § The law ts not made
| for a righteous man.--There has been
| great variety in the interpretation of
this passage. Some suppose that the
law here refers to the ceremonial laws
of Moses ( Clarke, Rosenmiiller, Abbot);
others to the denunciatory part of
the law (Doddridge and Bloomfield);
and others that it means that the
chief purpose of the law was to restrainthe wicked. Itseemsclear, however, that the apostle does not refer
merely to the ceremonial law, for he
specifies that which condemns the
unholy and profane; the murderers of
fathers and mothers; liars and perjured persons. It was not the ceremontal law which condemned these
things, but the moral law. Itcannot
be supposed, moreover, that the
apostle meant to say that the law was
not binding on a righteous man, or
that he was under no obligation to
obey it--for he everywhere teaches
that the moral law is obligatory on
all mankind. To suppose also that a
righteous man is released from the
obligation to obey the law, that is, to
|do right, is an absurdity. Nor does
he seem to mean, as Macknight supposes, that the law was not given for
the purpose of justifying a righteous
man--for this was originally one of its
designs. Had man always obeyed it,
he would have been justified by it.
The meaning seems to be, that the
' purpose of the law was not to fetter
‘and perplex those who were right-
| eous, and who aimed to do their duty
‘and to please God. It was not initended to produce a spirit of serviitude andbondage. As the Jews inter-
| preted it, it did this, and this interpre-
| tation appears to have been adopted
_by the teachers at Ephesus, to whom
| Paul refers. The whole tendency of
their teaching was to bring the soul
| into a state of bondage, and to make
religion a condition, of servitude.
Paul teaches, on the other hand, that
religion was a condition of freedom.
and that the main purpose of the law
for unholy and profane, for
murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers,

was not to fetter the minds of the
righteous by numberless observances
and minute regulations, but that it
was to restrain the wicked from sin.
This is the case with all law. No
good man feels himself fettered and
manacled by wholesome laws, nor does
he feel that the purpose of law is to
reduce him to a state of servitude. It
is only the wicked who have this feeling--and in this sense the law is
made for a man who intends to do
wrong. { For the lawless. To bind
and restrain them. The word here
used means, properly, those who have
no law, and then those who are transgressors--the wicked. It is rendered
transgressors in Matt. xv. 28; Luke
xxli. 37, and wicked, Acts ii. 23;
2 Thess. ii. 8. § And disobedient.
Those who are insubordinate, lawless,
refractory. The word properly means
those who are under no subjection or
authority. It occurs in the New
Testament only here, and Titus i. 6,
10, where it is rendered unruly, and
Heb. ii. 8, where it is translated not
put under; that is, under Christ.
| For the ungodly. Those who have
no religion ; who do. not worship or
honour God. The Greek word occurs
in the following places, in all of which
it is rendered ungodly ; Rom. iv. 5;
vas Ueno Pet? ivelS=2 Pet.
iin Ohl se dudeslb.. Lhe meaning is, that the law is against all who
do not worshipor honour God. § And
for sinners. The word used here is
the common word to denote sinners.
It is general, and includes sins of all
kinds. § For unholy. ‘Those who
are regardless of duty to God or
man.” Robinson, Lex. The word
occurs in the New Testament only
here, and in 2 Tim. iii. 2. It has
particular reference to those who fail
of their duty towards God, and means
those who have no piety; who are
irreligious. “[ And profane. This
does not necessarily mean that they
were profane in the sense that blasphemed the name of God, or were
profane swearers--though the word

10 For whoremongers, for them
that defile themselves with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for

would include that--but it means properly those who are impious, or who
are scoffers; Notes, Heb. xii. 16.
The word occurs only in the following
places, ‘n all of which it is rendered
profane: 1 Tim. i. 9; iv. 7; vi. 20;
2 Tim. ii. 16; Heb. xii. 16. A man
who treats religion with contempt,
mockery, or scorn, would correspond
with the meaning of the word. { For
murderers of fathers. The Greek
properly means a smiter of a father
(Robinson), though here it undoubtedly means a parricide, This was
expressly forbidden by the law of
Moses, and was a crime punishable
by death; Ex. xxi. 15. It is said
to have been acrime which the Roman law did not contemplate as possible, and hence that there was no
enactment against it. It is, indeed,
a crime of the highest order; but
facts have shown that if the Romans
supposed it would never be committed, they did not judge aright of human nature. There is no sin which
man will not commit if unrestrained,
and there is in fact no conceivable
form of crime of which he has not
been guilty. Murderers of mothers. A still more atrocious and
monstrous crime, if possible, than the
former. We can conceive nothing
superior to this in atrocity, and yet it
has been committed. Nero caused
his mother to be murdered, and the
annals of crime disclose the names of
not a few who have imbrued their own
hands in the blood of those who bare
them. This was also expressly forbidden by the law of Moses; Ex. xxi.
15. §] For manslayers. This word
occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It means a homicide --a
murderer, The crime is expressly forbidden by the law; Ex. xx. 13; Gen.

10. For whoremongers; Lev. xix.
29; xx. 5. § For them that defile
themselves with mankind ; Sodom.
ites, See the evidencethat this crime
abounded in ancient times, in the
Notes on Rom. i. 27. It was forbid

perjured persons, and if there be
any other thing that is contrary to
sound @ doctrine ;

11 According to the glorious
a@ 2 Ti.4.3; Tit.1.9.

den by the law of Moses, and was
punishable with death; Ley. xx. 13.
§ For menstealers. The word here
used --avdparedierns -- Occurs nowhere
else in the New Testament. It properly means one who steals another
for the purpose of making him a slave
--a kidnapper. This is the common
way in which men are made slaves.
Some, indeed, are taken in war and
sold as slaves, but the mass of those
who have been reduced to servitude
have become slaves by being kidnapped. Children are stolen from their
parents, or wives from their husbands,
or husbands from their wives, or
parents from their children, or whole
families are stolen together. None
become slaves voluntarily, and consequently the whole process of making
slaves partakes of the nature of theft
of the worst kind. What theft is like
that of stealing a man’s children, or
his wife, or hisfather or mother? The
guilt of manstealing is incurred essentially by those who purchase those who
are thus stolen--as the purchaser of
a stolen horse, knowing it to be so,
participates inthe crime. A measure
of that criminality also adheres to all
who own slaves, and who thus maintain
the system--for it is a system known
to have heen originated by theft.
This crime was expressly forbidden
by the law of God, and was made
punishable with death; Ex. xxi. 16;
Deut. xxiv. 7. Hor liars; Lev.
vi. 2--4; xix. 1l. J For perjured
persons. Those who swear falsely ;
Weyoxixs 12s ving xxx. eAnd,
if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine. To sound
or correct teuching--for so the word
doctrine means. The meaning is, if
there is anything else that is opposed
to the instruction which the law of
God gives.

11. According to the glorious
gospel. The gospel is a system of
divine revelation. It makes known
the will of God. It states what is

gospel of the blessed ® God, which
was © committed to my trust.
12 And I thank Christ Jesus

our Lord, who hath enabled @ me,
6 chap.6.15. c 1Co.9.17. @ 1Co.15.10.

duty, and accords in its great princi-

ples with the law, or is in harmony
with it. The law, in principle, forbids all which the gospel forbids, and
in publishing the requirements of the
gospel, therefore, Paul says that the
law really forbade all which was prohibited in the gospel, and was designed to restrain all who would act contrary to that gospel. There is no contradiction between the law and the
gospel, They forbid the same things,
and in regard to morals and true piety,
the clearer revelations of the gospel
are but carrying out the principles
stated in the law. They who preach
the gospel, then, should not be regarded
as arrayed against the law, and Paul
says that they who preached the gospel
arightreally stated the true principles
of the law. This he evidently intends
should bear against the false teachers
who professed to explain the law of
Moses. He means here that if a
man wished to explain the law, the
best explanation would be found in
that gospel which it was his office to
publish; comp. Rom. iii. 31. 4 Of
the blessed God. Revealed by the
blessed God--the same God who was
the Author of the law. | Which was
committed to my trust. Not to him
alone, but to him in common with
others, He had received it directly
from the Lord; 1 Cor. ix. 17; Notes,
Gal.1.1.

12. And I thank Christ Jesus
our Lord. 'The mention of the gospel (ver. 11), and of the fact that it
was committed to him, leads the

-apostle to express his gratitude to

him who had called him to the work
of preaching it. The Lord Jesus
had called him when he was a bDlasphemer and a persecutor. He had
constrained him to leave his career
of persecution and blasphemy, and
to consecrate himself to the defence
and the propagation of the gospel.
For all this, though it had required
him to give up his favourite projects
for that he counted me faithful,
* putting ® me into the ministry ;

in life, and all the flattering schemes
of ambition, he now felt that praise
was due to the Redeemer. If there
is anything for which a good man
will be thankful, and should be thankful, it is that he has been so directed by
the Spirit and providence of God as
to be put into the ministry. It is indeed a work of toil, and of self-denial,
and demanding many sacrifices of
personal ease andcomfort. Itrequires
aman to give up his splendid prospects
of worldly distinction, and of wealth
and ease. It is often identified with
want, and poverty, and neglect, and
persecution. But it is an office so
honourable, so excellent, so noble, and
ennobling; it is attended with so many
precious comforts here, and is so useful to the world, and it has such promises of blessedness and happiness in
the world to come, that no matter
what a man is required to give up in
order to become a minister of the gospel, he should be thankful to Christ
for putting him into the office. A
minister, when he comes to die, feels
that the highest favour which Heaven
has conferred on him has been in
turning his feet away from the paths
of ambition, and the pursuits of ease
or gain, and leading him to that holy
work to which he has been enabled to
consecrate his life. 9 Who hath enabled me. Who has given me ability
or strength forthis service. The apostle traced to the Lord Jeaus the fact
that he was in the ministry at all, and
all the ability which he had to perform
the duties of that holy office. It is
not necessary here to suppose, as
many have done, that he refers to
miraculous power conferred on him,
but he makes the acknowledgment
which any faithful minister would do,
that all the strength which he has to
perform the duties of his office is derived from Christ ; comp. Notes, John
xv.5;1 Cor. xv. 10. § For that he
counted me faithful. This is equivalent to saying that he reposed confidence in me. It means that there was
something in the character of Paul,

13 Who was before ¢ a blas-

a1 Co.7.25. 6 Co).1.25.
co Ac.8.3; 1Co.15.9.

and in his attachment to the Saviour,

on which reliance could be placed, or
that there was that which gave the
assurance that he would be faithful.
A sovereign, when he sends an ambassador to a foreign court, reposes
confidence in him, and would not commission him unless he had reason to
believe that he would be faithful. Se
it is in reference to all who are called
by the Redeemer into the ministry.
They are his ambassadors to a lost
world. His putting them into the
ministry is an act expressive of great
confidence in them--for he commits
to them great and important interests,
Learn hence, (1.) that no one ought
to regard himself as called to the
ministry who will not be “ faithful”
to his Master ; and (2.) that the office
of the ministry is most honourable
and responsible. Nowhere else are
there so great interests intrusted to
man.

13. Who was before a blasphemer.
This does not mean that Paul before
his conversion was what would now be
regarded as an open blasphemer--that
he was one who abused and reviled
sacred things, or one who was in the
habit of profane swearing. His character appears to have been just the
reverse of this, for he was remarkable
for treating what heregarded as sacred
with the utmost respect; see Notes
on Phil. ili. 4--6. The meaning is,
that he had reviled the name of Christ,
and opposed him and his cause--not
believing that he was the Messiah; and
in thus opposing he had really been
guilty of blasphemy. The true Messiah he had in fact treated with contempt and reproaches, and he now
looked back upon that fact with the
deepest mortification, and with wonder
that one who had been so treated by
him should have been willing to put
him into the ministry. On the meaning of the word blaspheme, see Notes on
Matt.ix. 3; comp. Acts xxvi. 11. Inhis
conduct here referred to, Paul elsewhere says, that he thought at the
timethat he was doing what he ought to

phemer, and a_persecutor, and
injurious ; but I obtained mercy,

do (Acts xxvi. 9); here he says that
he now regarded it as blasphemy.
Learn hence that men may have very
different views of their conduct when
they come to look at it in subsequent
life. What they now regard as harmless, or even as right and proper, may
hereafter overwhelm them with shame
and remorse. ‘The sinner will yet
feel the deepest self-reproaches for
that which now gives us no uneasiness.
{| And a persecutor; Acts ix. 1, seq.;
xxil. 4; xxvi. 11; 1 Cor. xv. 9; Gal.i.
13, 23. (J And injurious. The word
here used (c@picrns), occurs only in
one other place in the New Testament, Rom. i. 30, whereit is rendered
despiteful. The word injurious does
not quite express its force. It does
not mean merely doing injury, but
refers rather to the manner or spirit
in which it is done. It is a word of
intenser signification than either the
word “‘ blasphemer,”’ or “‘ persecutor,”’
and means that what he did was done
with a proud, haughty, insolent spirit.
There was wicked and malicious violence, an arrogance and spirit of tyranny in what hedid, which greatly aggravated the wrong that was done ;
comp. the Greek in Matt. xxii. 6;
Luke xi. 45 ; xvili. 82; Acts xiv. 5;
1 Thess. ii. 2; 2 Cor. xii. 10, for illustrations of the meaning of the word.
Tindal and Coverdale render it here
“tyrant.” ¥ But I obtained mercy,
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief;
comp. Notes on Luke xxiii.34. The
ignorance and unbelief of Paul were
not such excuses for what he did that
they would wholly free him from blame,
nor did he regard them as such--for
what he did was with a violent and
wicked spirit--but they were mitigating circumstances. They served to
modify his guilt, and were among the
reasons why God had mercy on him.
What is said here, therefore, accords
with what the Saviour said in his
prayer for his murderers; ‘‘ Father,
forgive them, for they know not what
they do.” It is undoubtedly true

that persons who sin ignorantly, and !

because 1 did i ignorantly @ in

unbelief.
@ Lu.23.34.

who regard themselves as right in
what they do, are much more likely to
obtain mercy than those who do wrong
designedly.

{Yet we cannot but regard Paul's “ignorance in unbelief” as, initself, a grievous sin,
He had abundant meansof knowing the truth
had he been disposed to inquire with patience
and candour. His great abilities and excellent
education are a farther aggravation of the
crime. It is, therefore, impossible to acquiesce in any solution of this clause which seems
to make criminal ignorance a ground of mercy.
The author, however, intends nothing of this
kind, nor would it be fair to put such construction on his words. Yet, a little more
fullness had been desirable on a subject of this
nature. It is certain, that, independent of
the nature of the ignorance, whether wilful
or otherwise, the character of crime is affected byit. He who should oppose truth, knouwing it to be such, is more guilty than he who
opposes it in ignorance, or under the conviction that it is not truth, but falsehood. Ima
certain sense, too, this ignorance, may be regarded as areason why mercy is bestowed on
such as sin desperately or blasphemously
under it. Rather, it is a reason why they are
not excluded from mercy. It shows why persons so guilty are not beyond its pale. This
is, we think, the true key both to the passage,
and that in Luke xxiii. 34. The ignorance is
not areason why God should bestow mercy
on such persons, rather than on others left to
perish, but a reason why they obtain mercy at
all, who, by their blasphemies, had been sup.
posed to have reached the sin against the
Holy Ghost,

Now consider the passage in this view. The
apostle had just been showing how greata
sinner he had formerly been. His criminality
had been so great that it went near to shutting him out from mercy altogether. Had he
maliciously persecuted and blasphemed Christ,
knowing him to be the Messiah, his had been
the unpardonable sin, and his lot that of judicial, final obduracy. But he had not got that
length. He was saved from that gulph, and
obtained mercy, because, sinning ignorantly
and in unbelief, he was not beyond its range.

That Paul should set himself to excuse his
guilt is altogether impossible He does the
very reverse. He has but eacaped the unpardonable sin. Heischief of sinners. He owes
his salvation to exceeding abundant grace
All long-suttering has been exercised towarde
him. He affirms, that mercy was extended
14 And the grace of our Lord
was exceeding abundant, with faith
and love which is in Christ Jesus.

to him, that, to the end of time, there might
be a proof or pattern of mercy to the guiltiest.
Had he been assigning a reason why he obtained mercy, rather than others left to perish,
doubtless that had been what he nas else where
assigned and deiended, “ God will have mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and he will
have compassion on whom he will have compassion ;” Ro. ix. 15.]

14. And the grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant. That is, in his
conversion under these circumstances
and in the aid which was afterwards
imparted to him inhis work. § With
faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
Accompanied with the exercise of
faith and love ; or producing faith and
love. The grace which was imparted
to him was seen in the faith and love
which it produced ; see Notes, 1 Cor.
xy. 10.

15. This isa faithful saying. Gr.,
“ Faithful is the word,” or doctrine--
6 Aoyos. This verse has somewhat the
character of a parenthesis, and seems
to have been thrown into the midst of
the narrative because the mind of the
apostle was full of the subject. He
had said that he, a great sinner, had
obtained mercy. This naturally led
him to think of the purpose for which
Christ came into the world--to save
sinners--and to think how strikingly
that truth had been illustrated in his
own case,and how that case had shown
that it was worthy the attention ofall.
The word rendered ‘“ saying,’’ means
in this place doctrine, position, or
declaration. The word “ faithful,”
means assuredly true; it was that
which might be depended on, or on
which reliance might be placed. The
meaning is, that the doctrine that
Christ came to save sinners might be
depended on as certainly true; comp.
2EPiM alg Wl Licusiiiiee Oe Seana
worthy of all acceptation. Worthy to
be embraced or believed by all. This
is so, because, (1.) all are sinners and
need a Saviour. All, therefore ought
to welcome a doctrine which shows
them how they may be saved. (2.)

15 This zs a faithful ¢ saying,
and worthy of all acceptation, that
Christ Jesus came ® into the
@2Ti.211; Tit.3.8. b Matt.9.13; Lu.19.10.

Because Christ died for all. If he
had died for only a part of the race,
and could save only a part, it could
not be said with any propriety that
the doctrine was worthy of the acceptance of all. If that were so, what
had it to do with all? How could all
be interested in it or benefited by it ?
If medicine had been provided for
only a part of the patients in a hospital, it could not be said that the announcement of such a fact was worthy
the attention of all. It would be highly worthy the attention of those for
whom it was designed, but there would
be a part who would have nothing to
do with it; and why should they concern themselves about it? But if it
was provided for each one, then each
one would have the highest interest
init. So, ifsalvation has been provided for me, it is a matter claiming
my profoundest attention; and the
same is true of every human being.
If not provided for me, I have nothing
to do with it. It does not concern me
at all.

{See this subject discussed at length in the
supplementary Note on 2 Cor. v. 14.]
(3.) The manner in which the provision of salvation has been made in
the gospel is such as to make it worthy of universal acceptation. It provides for the complete pardon of sin,
and the restoration of the soul to God.
This is done in a way that is honourable to God--maintaining his law and
his justice ; and, at the same time, it
is in a way that is honourable to man.
He is treated afterwards as a friend of
God and an heir of life. He is raised
up from his degradation, and restored
to the favour of his Maker. If man
were himself to suggest a way of salvation, he could think of none that
would be more honourable to God and
to himself; none that would do so
much to maintain the law and to elevate him from all that now degrades
him. What higher honour can be
conferred on man than to have his
salvation sought as an object of intense

world to save sinners; of whom
I am chief.

16 Howbeit for this cause I

and earnest desire by one so great
and glorious as the Son of God? (4.)
It is worthy of all acceptance, from
the nature of the salvation itself. Heaven is offered, with all its everlasting
glories, through the blood of Christ --
and is not this worthy of universal acceptation? Men would accept of a
coronet orcrown ; a splendid mansion,
ora rich estate; a present of jewels
and gold, if freely tendered to them--
but what trifles are these compared
with heaven! If there is anything
that is worthy of universal acceptation, it is heaven--for all will be miserable unless they enterthere. 9 That
Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners. The great and peculiar
doctrine of the gospel. He ‘came
into the world.’”’ He therefore had a
previous existence. He came. He
had, therefore, an object in coming.
It makes his gospel more worthy of
acceptation that he had an intention,
a plan, a wish, in thus coming into the
world. He “came” when he was under no necessity of coming; he came
to save, not to destroy; to reveal
mercy, not to denounce judgment; to
save sinners--the poor, the lost, the
wandering, not to condemn them ; he
came to restore them to the favour of
God, to raise them up from their degradation, and to bring them to heaven. § Of whom lam chief. Gr.,
first. The word is used to denote
eminence --and it means that he occupied the first rank among sinners.
There were none who surpassed him.
This does not mean that he had been
the greatest of sinners in all respects,
but that in some respects he had been
so great a sinner, that on the whole
there were none who had surpassed him.
That to which he particularly refers
was doubtless the part which he had
taken in putting the saints to death ;
but in connection with this, he felt,
undoubtedly, that he had by nature a
heart eminently prone to sin; see
Rom. vii. Except in the matter of
persecuting the saints, the youthful

obtained mercy, that in me first
Jesus Christ might shew forth all

long suffering, for a pattern ® to
@ Ro.15.4.

Saul of Tarsus appears to have been
eminently moral, and his outward conduct was framed in accordance with
the strictest rules ofthe law; Phil. iii.
6; Acts xxvi. 4,5. After his conversion, he never attempted to extenuate
his conduct, or excuse himself. He
was always ready, in all circles, and in
all places, to admit to its fullest extent the fact that he wasasinner. So
deeply convinced was he of the truth
of this, that he bore about with him
the constant impression that he was
eminently unworthy; and hence he
does not say merely that he had been
a sinner of most aggravated character,
but he speaks of it as something that
always pertained to him--“ of whom I
am chief.” We may remark, (1.)
that a true Christian will always be
ready to admit that his past life has
been evil; (2.) that this will become
the abiding and steady conviction of
thesoul; and (3.) that an acknowledgment that we are sinners is not inconsistent with evidence of piety, and
with high attainments in it. The
most eminent Christian has the deepest sense of the depravity of his own
heart and of the evil of his past life.
16. Howbeit for this cause. Thatis,
this was one of the causes, >” this was
a leading reason. We are not to suppose that this was the only one. God
had other ends to answer by his conversion than this, but this was one of the
designs why he was pardoned--that
there might be for all ages a permanent proof that sins of the deepest dye
might be forgiven. It was well to have
one such example at the outset, that
a doubt might never arise about the
possibility of forgiving great transgressors, The questionthus would be settled for ever. § That inme first. Not
first in the order of time, as our translation would seem to imply, but that
in me the first or chief of sinners (és
iuol wowrw) he might show an example.
The idea is, that he sustained the
first rank as a sinner, and that Jesus
Christ designed to show mercy to
them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.

@ Ps.10.16.
him as such, in order that the possibility of pardoning the greatest sin-

ners might be evinced, and that no,

one might afterwards despair of salvation on account of the greatness
of his crimes. § Might show forth
all long-suffering. The highest possible degree of forbearance, in order
that a case might never occur about
which there could be any doubt. It
was shown by his example that the
Lord Jesus could evince any possible
degree of patience, and could have
mercy on the greatest imaginable offenders. { For a pattern. irorirwow.
This word occurs no where else in the
New Testament, except in 2 Tim. i.
13, where it is rendered form. It
properly means a form, sketch, or imperfect delineation. Then it denotes
a pattern or example, and here it
means that the case of Paul was an
example for the encouragement of
sinners in all subsequent times. It
was that to which they might look
when they desired forgiveness and
salvation. It furnished all the illustration and argument which they
would need to show that they might
be forgiven. It settled the question
for ever that the greatest sinners
might be pardoned; for as he was
“the chief of sinners,’ it proved that
a case could not occur which was
beyond the possibility of mercy.
q Which should hereafter believe on
him to life everlasting. All might
learn from the mercy shown to him
that salvation could be obtained. From
this verse we may learn (1.) that no
sinner should despair of mercy. No
one should say that he is so great a
sinner that he cannot be forgiven.
One who regarded himself as the
“chief” of sinners was pardoned,
and pardoned for the very purpose of
illustrating this truth, that any sinner
might be saved. His example stands
as the illustration of this to all ages ;
and were there no other, any sinner
might now come and hope for mercy.
But there are other examples. Sinners of all ranks and descriptions have

17 Now unto the King @ eternal, immortal, invisible, ¢ the
b chap.6.15,16. c John 1.18.

been pardoned. Indeed, there is no
form of depravity of which men can
be guilty, in respect to which there
are not instances where just such offenders have been forgiven. Thepersecutor may reflect that great enemies
of the cross like him have been pardoned; the profane man and the
blasphemer, that many such have
been forgiven; the murderer, the
thief, the sensualist, that many of the
same character have found mercy, and
have been admitted to heaven. (2.)
The fact that great sinners have been
pardoned, is a proof that others of the
same description may be also. The
same mercy that saved them can save
us--for mercy is not exhausted by being frequently exercised. The blood
of atonement which has cleansed so
many can cleanse us--for its efficacy
is not destroyed by being once applied
to the guilty soul. Let no one then
despair of obtaining mercy because he
feels that his sins are too great to be
forgiven. Let him look to the past,
and remember what God has done.
Let him remember the case of Saul
of Tarsus ; let him think of David and
Peter; let him recall the names of
Augustine, and Col. Gardiner, and
the Earl of Rochester, and John
Newton, and John Bunyan-- and
thousands like them, who have found
mercy ; and in their examples let him
see a full proof that God is willing
to save any sinner, no matter how
vile, provided he is pefiitent and beleving.

17. Now unto the king eternal.
This ascription of praise is offered to
God in view of the mercy which he
had shown to so great asinner. It is
the outbreak of that grateful emotion
which swelled his bosom, and which
would not be denied expression, when
Paul recalled his former life and the
mercy of God to his soul. It somewhat interrupts indeed the train of
his remarks, but the heart was so full
that it demanded utterance. It is
Just an instance of the joy and grati-

, tude which fill the soul of a Christian

only wise * God, de honour ® and |

glory for ever and ever. Amen. |
@ Ro.16.27, b1Ch.29.11. echap.4.14. |

when he is led along in a train of re- |
flections which conduct him to the recollections ofhis former sin and danger,
and to the fact that he has obtained |
mercy and has now the hope of heaven. The apostle Paul not unfrequently, in accordance with a mode of
writing that was common among the
Hebrews, interposes an expression of
praise in the midst of his reasonings ;
comp. Rom. i.25; 2 Cor.xi. 31. God
is called King here, as he is often in
the Scriptures, to denote that he rules
over the universe. A literal translation of the passage would be, “‘ To the
King of ages, who is immortal,” &c.
The meaning of this expression--“ the
King of ages” --faciru tay ziwvwy--is,
that he is a king who rules throughout
all ages. This does not mean that
he himself lives for ever, but that his
dominion extends over all ages or
generations. The rule of earthly
monarchs does not extend into successive ages; his does. ‘Their reign
is temporary ; his is enduring, and
continues as one generation after
another passes on, and thus embraces
them all. § Jmmortal. This refers
to God himself, not to his reign. It
means that he does not die, and it is
given to him to distinguish him from
other sovereigns. All other monarchs but God expire--and are just as
liable to die at any moment as any
other men. J Invisible; chap. vi.
16; see Notes on Johni. 18. § The
only wise God. Notes, Rom xvi. 27.
The word ‘“ wise”’ is wanting in many
MSS., and in some editions of the
New Testament. It is omitted by
Griesbach ; marked as doubtful by
Tittman, and rejected in the valuable
edition of Hahn. Erasmus conjectures that it was added against the
Arians, who maintained that the Father only was God, and that as he is
here mentioned as such, the word
wise was interpolated to denote merely
that the attribute of perfect wisdom
belonged only to him. Wetstein regards the reading as genuine, and suspects that in some of the early manu-

18 This charge 1 commit unto
thee, son Timothy, according ¢ to
the prophecies which went before

scripts where it is wanting it was
omitted by the transcriber, because it
was regarded as inelegant for two adjectives to be united in this manner.
It is not easy to determine as to the
genuineness of the reading. The
sense is not materially affected, whichever view be adopted. Itis true that
Jehovah is the only God; it is also
true that he is the only wise God.
The gods of the heathen are “ vanity
and a lie,’ and they are wholly destitute of wisdom; see Ps. cxv. 8--8;
exxxv. 15--18; Isa. xl. 18--20 ; xliv.
10--17. ¥| Behonour. Let there be
all the respect and veneration shown
to him whichis his due. § And glory.
Praise. Let him be praised by all
for ever. {| Amen. So be it ; an expression of strong affirmation; John
iii. 3. Here it is used to denote the
solemn assent ofthe heart to the sentiment conveyed by the words used ;
see Notes on Matt. vi. 13; 1 Cor.
xiv. 16.

18. This charge. This command
or injunction. It does not refer to
any ‘“‘charge,” or ‘cure,’ which he
had as bishop or minister, as the word
is sometimes used now, but to the
commands or injunctions which he
was delivering to him. The command
particularly referred to is that in ver.
8. | According to the prophecies
which went before on thee. The general meaning of this is plain. It is,
that Paul was committing to him an
important trust, and one that required
great wisdom and fidelity ; and that
in doing it he was acting in conformity
with the hopes which had _ been
cherished respecting Timothy, and
with certain expressed anticipations
about his influence in the church.
From early life the hope had been
entertained that he would be a man
to whom important trusts might be
committed ; andit had been predicted
that he would be distinguished as a
friend of religion. These hopes seem
to have been cherished in consequence of the careful training in religion which he had had (2 Tim. ii.
on thee, that thou by them
mightest war a good warfare ;

1; iii. 15), and probably from the
early indications of seriousness, prudence, and piety, which he manifested.
It was natural to entertain such
hopes, and it seems, from this place,
that such hopes had even assumed
the form of predictions. It is not
absolutely necessary to suppose that
these predictions referred to by. the
word prophecies were inspired, forthe
word may be used in a popular sense,
as it isoften now. We speak now familiarly of predicting or foretelling
the future usefulness of a serious,
prudent, studious, and pious youth.
We argue from what he is, to what he
will be, and we do not deem it unsafe
or improper to hazard the prediction
that, if he lives, he will be a man to
whom important interests may be intrusted. As there were, however.
prophets in the Christian church
(Notes, Acts xi.27; 1 Cor. xiv.), and
as it is possible that in some cases
they were inspired to foretell future
events, it cannot be regarded as improper to suppose that some of them
had foretold the future usefulness of
this religiously educated youth.--
Whatever may be meant by the expression, this general observation
may be made, that when a young man
enters on the active duties of life, and
when great interests are intrusted to
him, it is not improper to remind
him of the hopes which had been
cherished of him ; of the anticipations
which had been formed of his future
usefulness ; and of the expressions
which have been used by the pious
and the discerning respecting his future character. This is a kind of reminiscence which will rather increase
his sense of responsibility than flatter
his vanity; and it may be made a
means of exciting him to diligence
and fidelity. A virtuous young man
will not willingly disappoint the longcherished hopes of his friends. He
will be likely to be made more diligent
by the remembrance of all their fond
anticipations of his future success.
| That thou by them. By those pro-

19 Holding 4 faith, and a good
conscience, which some having put
a chap.3.9.

phecies. That is, that being stimulated and excited by those predictions
and hopes, you might be led to fidelity
and usefulness. J Mightest war a
good warfare. The Christian life is
often compared to a warfare or
struggle for victory (comp. Eph. vi.
O=s1jaem le C ormixeencic Cormvea4),
and the services of the Christian ministry especially are likened to those of
a soldier ; 2 Tim. ii. 3, 4; iv. 7. The
meaning here is, that he should contend with earnestness as a Christian
and a minister in that holy service in
which he was engaged, and endeavour
to secure the victory. He “wars a
good warfare” who is engaged in a
righteous cause; who is faithful to
his commander and to his post ; who
is unslumbering in observing the motions of the enemy, and fearless in
courage in meeting them ; who never
forsakes his standard, and who continues thus faithful till the period of
his enlistment has expired. or till
death. Such a soldier the Christian
minister should be.

19. Holding faith. Fidelity to the
cause in which you are enlisted--as
a good soldier should do. This does
not mean, as it seems to me, that
Timothy should hold to the system of
doctrines revealed in the gospel, but
that he should have that fidelity which
a good soldier should have. He
should not betray his trust. He
should adhere to the cause of his
master with unwavering steadfastness.
This would include, of course, a belief
of the truth, but this is not the leading idea in the phrase {J And a
good conscience ; see Notes, Acts
xxili. 1. A good conscience, as well
as fidelity, is necessary in the service
of the Redeemer. A good conscience
is that which is well informed in
regard to what is right, and where
its dictates are honestly followed.
Q Which some having put away. That
is, which good conscience some have
put from them, or in other words,
have not followed its dictates. ‘Ihe

‘truth thus taught is, that men make

away, concerning faith have made
shipwreck :
20 Of whom is Hymeneus and

shipwreck of their faith by not keeping a good conscience. They love sin.
They follow the leadings of passion.
They choose to indulge in carnal propensities. As a matter of course,
they must, if they will do this, reject
and renounce the gospel. Men become infidels because they wish to indulge in sin. No man can be a sensualist, and yet love that gospel which
enjoins purity of life. If men would
keep a good conscience, the way to a
steady belief in the gospel would be
easy. If men will not, they must expect sooner or later to be landed in
infidelity. Concerning faith. In
respect to the whole subject of faith.
They are unfaithful to God, and they
reject the whole system of the gospel.
“ Faith’? is sometimes used to denote
the gospel--as faith is the principal
thing in the gospel. § Have made
shipwreck. There is an entire destruction of faith--as a ship is wholly
ruined that strikes on a rock and sinks.

20. Of whom is Hymeneus and
Alexander. ymeneus is nowhere
else mentioned in the New Testament, except in 2 Tim. ii. 17, where
he is mentioned in connection with
Philetus as a very dangerous man.
An Alexander is mentioned in Acts
xix. 33, which some have supposed to
be the same as the one referred to
here. Itis not certain, however, that
the same person is intended; see
Notes on that verse. In 2 Tim. iv.
14, Alexander the coppersmith is
mentioned as one who had done the
apostle “much evil,” and there can
be little doubt that he is the same
person who is referred to here. One
of the doctrines which Hymeneus
held was, that the ‘resurrection was
past already’’ (2 Tim. ii. 18); but
what doctrine Alexander held is unknown, It is not improbable, as he is
mentioned here in connection with
Hymeneus, that he maintained the
same opinion, and in addition to that
he appears to have been guilty of some
personal injury to the apostle. Both

Alexander ; whom [ have delivered @ unto Satan, that they may
learn not to blaspheme.

also were guilty of blasphemy.
J Whom I have delivered unto Satan.
On the meaning of this expression,
see Notes on 1 Cor. v.5. § That they
may learn not to blaspheme. It cannot
be supposed that Satan would undertake to teach them not to blaspheme.
or that Paul put them under him as an
instructor on that subject. The instructions of Satan tend rather to
teach his followers to blaspheme, and
none in his school fail to be apt scholars. ‘The meaning here is, that Paul
excommunicated them, and not improbably brought upon them, by giving them over to Satan, some physical
maladies, that they might be reformed; comp. Notes on 1 Cor. vy. 5. It
is not entirely clear what is meant by
blaspheme in this place; comp. Notes
on ver. 13. It cannot be supposed
that they were open and bold blasphemers, for such could not have
maintained a place in the church, but
rather that they held doctrines which
the apostle regarded as amounting to
blasphemy; that is, doctrines which
were in fact a reproach on the divine
character. There are many doctrines
held by men which are in fact a reflection on the divine character, and
which amount to the same thing as
blasphemy. A blasphemer openly expresses views of the divine character
which are a reproach to God; an
errorist expresses the same thing in
another way--by teaching as true
about God that which represents him
in a false light, and, to suppose which,
in fact, is a reproach. The spirit
with which this is done in the two
cases may be different ; the thing itself may be the same. Let us be
careful that we hold no views about
Godwhich are reproachful to him, and
which, though we do not express it in
words, may lead us to blaspheme him
in our hearts.

This chapter is occupied mainly in

directions about the mode of conductEXHORT, ! therefore, that, first
of all, supplications, prayers, in-

ing public worship.
been left at Ephesus to complete the
plans which the apostle had commenced in reference to the church
there, but from completing which he
had been unexpectedly prevented (see
the Intro.), and it was important to
state the views which he entertained
on this subject to Timothy. It was
important also that general directions
on these subjects should be given,
which would be useful to the church
at large. ‘The directions in this chapter relate to the following subjects :

I. Public prayer ; ver. 1--8.

(1.) It was to be offered for all
classes of men, without distinction of
rank, sect, party, country, or name,
especially for all that were in authority; ver. 1,2. The reasons for this
were,

(a) That God desired all men to
be saved, and it was acceptable to
him that prayer should be offered
for all; ver. 3, 4.

(6) There is but one God over all
the human race, and all are alike
his children; ver. 5.

(c) There is one and the same Mediator between God and all men;
ver. 5.

(d) The same atonement has been
made for all; ver. 6, 7.

(2.) The way in which prayer should
be offered. It should be with holy
hands, and without the intermingling
of any bad passion ; ver. 8.

II. The duties of women; ver. 9
--165.

(1.) Modesty in their demeanour
and apparel; ver. 9.

(2.) Good works--the chief ornament of women professing piety ;
ver. 10.

(8.) The duty of learning from
others with a gentle and quiet spirit ;
ver. ll.

(4.) The duty of a proper subordination and submission to man; ver. 12.

(5.) The reasons for this subordination and submission are then stated.
They are,

Timothy had

| tercessions, and giving of thanks,
be made for all men ;

1 or, desire.

(a) That Adam was first formed ;
ver. 13.

(b) That the woman had been deceived, and should be willing to
occupy a subordinate place, as
she was first in the transgression
and was the means of leading
him into sin; ver. 14.

(6.) Yet, as if to make a kind remark in favour of woman--to show
that he did not intend to teach that
she was degraded and abandoned of
God--the apostle says that she would
be under the divine protection, and
that in the special sorrow and peril
which had been brought upon her for
her transgression, God would sustain
her if she continued in faith, and
evinced the spirit of a Christian in
her life; ver. 15.

1. I exhort, therefore. Marg., desire. The word exhort, however,
better expresses the sense of the original. The exhortation here is not
addressed particularly to Timothy,
but relates to all who were called to
lead in public prayer; ver. 8. This
exhortation, it may be observed, is inconsistent with the supposition that a
liturgy was then in use, or with the
supposition that there ever would be
a liturgy--since, in that case, the objects to be prayed for would be prescribed. lIlow singular would it be
now for an Episcopal bishop to “ exhort”’ his presbyters to pray “ for the
President of the United States and
for all who are in authority.”” When
the prayer is prescribed, do they not
do this as amatter of course? J First
of all. That is, as the first duty to be
enjoined ; the thing that is to be regarded with primary concern; comp.
Luke xii. 1; 2 Pet. i. 20. It does not
mean that this was to be the first
thing in public worship in the order of
time, but that it was to be regarded
as a duty of primary importance. The
duty of praying for the salvation of the
whole world was not to be regarded

as a subordinate and secondary thing.
{ Supplications. It is not entirely

2 For kings, «and for all that
are in authority: | that we may
@ Ro.13.1, &c.

CHAPTER Il.
lead a quiet and peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty.

1 or, eminent place.

easy to mark the difference in the
meaning of the words used here, and
it is not essential. They all relate to
prayer, and refer only to the different
parts of prayer, or to distinct classes
of thought and desire which come before the mind in pleading for others.
On the difference between the words
supplications and prayers, see Notes
on Heb. v. 7. YJ Intercessions. The
noun used occurs only in this place
and in chap. iv. 5, of this epistle. The
verb, however (evtiyxaw), occurs in
Acts xxv. 4; Rom. viii. 27, 34; xi.2;
Heb. vii. 25. See the meaning explained in the Notes on Rom. viii. 26 ;
Heb. vii. 25. There is one great Intercessor between God and man, who
pleads for our salvation on the ground
of what he himself has done, but we
are permitted to intercede for others,
not on the ground of any merit which
they or we possess, but on the ground
of the merit of the great Advocate
and Intercessor. It isan inestimable
privilege to be permitted to plead for
the salvation’ of our fellow-men.
{| Giving of thanks. That is, in behalf of others. We ought to give
thanks for the mercy of God to ourselves ; it is right and proper also that
we should give thanks for the goodness of God to others. We should
render praise that there is a way of
salvation provided; that no one is excluded from the offer of mercy ; and
that God is using so many means to
call lost sinners to himself. J For all
men. Prayers should be made for all
men--for all need the grace and mercy
of God; thanks should be rendered for
all, for all may be saved. Does not
this direction imply that Christ died
for all mankind? Howcould we give
thanks in their behalf if there were no
mercy for them, and no way had been
provided by which they could be saved?
It may be observed here, that the direction to pray and to give thauks for
all men, showed the large and catholic
nature of Christianity. It was opposed
entirely to the narrow and bigoted
feelings of the Jews, who regarded the

whole Gentile world as excluded from
covenant mercies, and as having no
offer of life. Christianity threw down
all these barriers, and all men are ona
level ; and since Christ has died for
all, there is ample ground for thanksgiving and praise in behalf of the
whole human race.

{See Supplementary Note, 2 Cor. v. 14.j

2. For kings. On the respect due
to rulers, see Notes on Rom. xiii.
1--7. The meaning here is, that
while all men should be the subjects
of prayer, those should be particularly
remembered before the throne of
grace who are in authority. The
reason is, that so much depends on
their character and plans; that the
security of life, liberty, and property,
depends so much onthem. God has
power to influence their hearts, and
to incline them to what is just and
equal; and hence we should pray that
a divine influence may descend upon
them. ‘The salvation of a king is of
itself of no more importance than
that of a peasant or a slave; but the
welfare of thousands may depend on
him, and hence he should be made the
special subject of prayer. {J All that
are in authority. Marg., or, “ eminent place.’ This does not necessarily mean those who hold office, but
refers to any of elevated rank. The
happiness of all who are under their
control depends greatly on them, and
hence we should pray for them that
they may be converted men, and inclined to do that which is right.
§ That we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life. That their hearts may
be so inclined to what is right that
they may protect us in the enjoyment
of religion, and that we may not be
opposed or harassed by persecution
This does not mean that their protection would dispose us to lead quiet
and peaceful lives, but that under their
protection we may be saved from oppression on account of our religion.
Christians are disposed of themselves
to be peaceful and orderly; they ask
of their rulers only that they may not
3 For this 7s good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour.

4 Who ¢ will have all men to
be saved, and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth.

a John 3.15,16; 2 Pe.3.9.

be harassed in the enjoyment of their
rights. ¥ Jn all godliness and honesty. In the practice of all our
duties towards God, and of all the
duties which we owe to men. The
word godliness here denotes piety--
or the duty which we owe to God;
the word honesty refers to our duties
to our fellow-men. The Christian
asks from civil rulers such protection
that he may be enabled quietly to perform both these classes of duties.

3. For this is good and acceptable.
That is, it is good and acceptable to
God that we should pray for all men.
The reason is, that he desires their
salvation, and hence it is agreeable to
him that we should pray for it. If
there were no provision made for their
salvation, or if he was unwilling that
they should be saved, it could not be
agreeable to him that we should offer
prayer for them.

4. Who will have all men to be
saved. ‘That is, it is in accordance
with his nature, his feelings, his desires. The word will cannot be taken
here in the absolute sense, denoting
a decree like that by which he willed
the creation of the world, for then it
would certainly be done. But the
word is often used to denote a desire,
wish, or what is in accordance with
the nature of any one. Thus it may
be said of God that he “ wills” that
his creatures may be happy--because
it is in accordance with his nature,
and because he has made abundant
provision for their happiness--though
it is not true that he wills it in the
sense that he exerts hisabsolute power
to make them happy: God wills that
sickness should be relieved, and sorrow mitigated, and that the oppressed
should go free, because it is agreeable
to his nature; though it is not true
that he wills it in the sense that he
exerts his absolute power to produce
it. A parent wills the welfare of his
child. It is in accordance with his
nature, his feelings, his desires; and
he makes every needful arrangement

forit. If the child is not virtuoas and
happy, it is his own fault. So God
wills that all men should be saved.
It would be in accordance with his
benevolent nature. He has made
ample provision for it. He uses all
proper means to secure their salvation.
He uses no positive means to prevent
it, and if they are not saved it will be
their own fault. For places in the
New Testament where the word here
translated ‘‘will’’ (9£aw), means to
desire or wish, see Luke viii. 20;
xxlil. 8; John xvi. 19; Gal. iv. 20;
Mark xvii. 24; 1:Cor. vii. 7; xi. 3;
xiv. 5; Matt. xv. 28. This passage
cannot mean, as many have supposed,
that God wills that all kinds of men

' should be saved, or that some sinners
| of every rank and class may be saved,

because (1.) the natural and obvious
interpretation of the language is opposed tosuch asense. The language
expresses the desire that ‘all men”’
should be saved, and we should not
depart from the obvious sense of a
passage unless necessity requires it.
(2.) Prayer and thanksgiving (ver. 1)
are directed to be offered, not for some
of all ranks and conditions, but for all
mankind. No exception is made, and
no direction is given that we should
exclude any of the race from the expressions of our sympathy, and from
an interest in our supplications. The
reason given here for that prayer is,
that God desires that all men should
be saved. But how could this be a
reason for praying for all, if it means
that God desired only the salvation of
some of all ranks? (3.) In ver. 5 and
6, the apostle gives reasons showing
that God wished the salvation of al:
men, and those reasons are such as to
prove that the language here is to be
taken in the most unlimited sense.
Those reasons are, (a) that there is
one God over all, and one Mediator
between God and men--showing that
God is the Father of all, and has the
same interest in all; and (0b) that
Christ gave himself a ransom for alJ

& For there is one God,® and one
mediator > between God and men,

the man Christ Jesus ;
@ Ro.3.30. b He.9.15.

--showing that God desired their salvation. This verse proves (1.) that
salvation is provided for all--forif God
wished all men to be saved, he would
undoubtedly make provision for their
salvation; and if he had not made such
provision, it could not be said that he
desired their salvation, since no one
can doubt that he has power to provide for the salvation of all ; (2.) that
salvation should be offered to all men
--for if God desires it, it is right for
his ministers to announce that desire,

and if he desires it, it is not proper for |

them to announce anything contrary
to this; (3.) that men are to blame
if they are not saved. If God did
not wish their salvation, and if he
had made no provision for it, they
could not be to blame if they rejected
the gospel. If God wishes it, and has
made provision for it, and they are not
saved, the sin must be their own--and
it is a great sin, for there is no greater
crime which a man can commit than
to destroy his ‘own soul, and to make
himself the eternal enemy of his Maker. { And to come unto the knowledge of the truth. The truth which
God has revealed; the ‘ truth as it
isin Jesus.” Notes, Eph. iv. 21.

5. For there is one God. This isa
reason for offering prayer for all men,
and for the declaration (ver. 4) that
God desires that all men should be
saved. ‘The reason is founded in the
fact that he is the common Father of
all the race, and that he must have
the same desire for the welfare of all
his children, He has made them of
one blood (Acts xvii. 26), and he must
have the same interest in the happiness of all; comp. Notes, Eph. iv. 6;
Rom. iii. 30. YJ And one Mediator
between God and men; see Notes on
Gal. iii. 19, 20; Heb. ix. 15. This
also is given as a reason why prayer
should be offered for all, and a proof
that God desires their salvation. The
argument is, that there is the same
Mediator between God and all men.
He is not the Mediator between God
6 Who gave himself a ransome
for all, to ! be testified in due
time.

c Mat.20.28. 1 or, @ testimony.

and a part of the human race, but between ‘‘ God and men,”’ implying that
He desired the salvation of the race.
Whatever love there was in giving the
Mediator at all, was love for all the
race; whatever can be argued from
that about the interest which Gou has
in man, is proof of his interest in the
race atlarge. It is proper, therefore,
to pray for all. It may be remarked
here that there is but one Mediator.
There is not one for kings and another
for their subjects; one for the rich
and another for the poor; one for the
master and another for the slave. All
are on the same level, and the servant
may feel that, in the gift of a Mediator, God regarded him with the same
interest that he did his master. It
may be added also that the doctrine
of the Papists that the saints or the
Virgin Mary may act as mediators to
procure blessings for us, is false.
There is but ‘‘one Mediator ;”’ and
but one is necessary. Prayer offered
to the ‘“saints,’’ orto the ‘“ Virgin,’’
is idolatry, and at the same time removes the one great Mediator from
the office which he alone holds, of
making intercession with God. § The
man Christ Jesus. Jesus was truly
and properly a man, having a perfect
human body and soul, and is often
called a man in the New Testament.
But this does not prove that he was
not also divine--any more than his
being called God (John i. 1; xx. 28;
Roniedx, 5-0 leJohnavas 200seHlebier
8), proves that he was not also a man.
The use of the word man here was
probably designed to intimate that
though he was divine, it was in his
human nature that we are to consider
him as discharging the office. Doddridge.

6. Who gave himself a ransom for
all. This also is stated as a reason
why prayer should be offered for all,
and a proof that God desires the salvation of all. The argument is, that as
Christ died for all, it is proper to pray
for all, and that the fact that he died
7 Whereunto I am ordained a
preacher, and an apostle, (I speak
the truth in Christ, and lie not 3) |

for all is proof that God desired the
salvation of all. Whatever proof of
his desire for their salvation can be
derived from this in relation to any of
the race, is proof in relation to all.
On the meaning of the phrase “ he
gave himself a ransom,” see Notes on
Matt. xx. 28; Rom. ili. 25; on the
fact that it was for ‘‘all,” see Notes
on 2 Cor. v. 14.

(See alaothe Supp. Note on the same passage.]

9 To be testified in due time.
Marg., a testimony. The Greek is,
“the testimony in its own times,”
or in proper times-- rs papropioy
xoipois idios. There have been very
different explanations of this phrase.
The common interpretation, and that
which seems to me to be correct, is,
that “the testimony of this will be
furnished in the proper time; that is,
in the proper time it shall be made
known through all the world;” see
Rosenmiiller. Paul affirms it as a
great and important truth that Christ
gave himself a ransom for all mankind--for Jews and Gentiles ; for all
classes and conditions of men alike.
This truth had not always been understood. The Jews had supposed
that salvation was designed exclusively for their nation, and denied that
it could be extended to others, unless
they became Jews. According to
them, salvation was not provided for,
or offered to heathens as such, but
only on condition that they became
Jews. In opposition to this, Paul
says that it was a doctrine of revelation that redemption was to be provided for all men, and that it was intended that the testimony to this
should be afforded at the proper time.
It was not fully made known under
the ancient dispensation, but now the
period had come when it should be
communicated to all; comp. Notes on
Rom. v. 6, and Gal. iv. 4.

7. Whereunto. Gr., “ Unto which ;”’
that is, to the bearing of which testimony I am appointed. | J am ordained. Gr., “Iam placed or constituted ”--iriémy. The word “ordain”

a teacher of the Gentiles in faith
and verity.
8 I will therefore that men

has now acquired a technical signification, meaning to set apart solemnly
to a sacred office by the imposition of
hands; but it has not that meaning
here. It does not refer to the manner in which he was set apart, or to
any act of others in consecrating him
to this work, but merely to the fact
that he had been placed in this office,
or appointed to it. He refers doubtless to the fact that the Lord Jesus
had designated him to this work.
{ A preacher and an apostle; see
Notes on 1 Cor. ix. 1--6; Gal. i. 11,
12. § I speak the truth in Christ,
and lienot. That is, by Christ; or I
solemnly appeal to Christ--a form of
an oath; Notes, Rom. ix. 1. Paul
makes a solemn declaration similar to
this in regard to his call to the apostleship, in Gal. i. 20. For the reasons
why he did it, see Notes on that verse,
It is probable that there were those in
Ephesus who denied that he could be
an apostle, and hence his solemn
declaration affirming it. {| A teacher
of the Gentiles. Specially appointed
to carry the gospel to the Gentiles or
the heathen; see Notes on Rom. xi.
13; Gal. ii.7%. QdLn faith and verity.
These words mean that he was appointed to instruct the Gentiles in
faith and the knowledge of the truth.

8. I will therefore. The Greek
word here (fodAcuas) is different from
the word rendered will--3iaw--in ver,
4. The distinction is, that the word
there used--Séaw--denotes an active
volition or purpose; the word here
used--fobaouai--a mere passive desire,
propensity, willingness. Rob. Lex.
The meaning here is, ‘if is my will’
--expressing his wish in the case, or
giving direction--though using a
milder word than that which is commonly employed to denote an act of
will. | That men pray everywhere.
Not merely in the temple, or in other
sacred places, but in allplaces. The
Jews supposed that there was special!
efficacy in prayers offered at the
temple in Jerusalem; the heathen
also had the same view in regard to

pray everywhere, lifting up holy®
a John 4.21. b He.10.22.

hands, without wrath and doubting.

their temples--for both seemed to
suppose that they came nearer to God
by approaching his sacred abode.
Christianity teaches that God may
be worshipped in any place, and that
we are at all times equally near him ;
see Notes on John iv. 20--24; Acts
xvii. 25. The direction here given
that men should pray, in contradistinction from the duties of women,
specified in the next verse, may be intended to imply that men should conduct the exercises of public worship.
The duties of women pertain to a different sphere ; comp. ver. 11, 12.
q Lifting up holy hands. To lift up
the hands denotes supplication, as it
was a common attitude of prayer to
spread abroad the hands towards
heaven; comp. Ps Ixviii. 31; Ex.
xix. 29, 83; 1 Kings viii. 22; 2
Chron. vi. 12, 13; Isa. i. 15; see also
Horace Odes, III. xxiii. 1 ; Ovid, M.
ix. 701; Livy, v.21; Seneca, Ep. 21.
“ Holy hands’ here, mean hands that
are not defiled by sin, and that have
not been employed for any purpose of
iniquity. The idea is, that when men
approach God they should do it in a
pure and holy manner. { Without
wrath. That is, without the intermingling of any evil passion; with
a ‘calm, peaceful, benevolent mind.
There should be nothing of the spirit
of contention; there should be no
anger towards others ; the supplant
should be at peace with all men. It
is impossible for a man to pray with
comfort, or to suppose that his prayers
will be heard, if he cherishes anger.
The following exquisite and oft-quoted
passage from Jeremy Taylor, is a
more beautiful and striking illustration of the effect of anger in causing
our prayers to return unanswered than
was probably ever penned by any one
else. Nothing could be more true,
beautiful, and graphic. “‘ Anger sets
the house on fire, and all the spirits
are busy upon trouble, and intend propulsion, defence, displeasure, or revenge.. It is a short madness, and an
eternal enemy to discourse and a fair
conversation ; it intends its own ob-

ject with all the earnestness of pereeption or activity of design, and a
quicker motion of a too warm and distempered blood; it isa fever in the
heart, and a calenture in the head,
and a fire in the face, and a sword in
the hand, and a fury all over; and
therefore can never suffer a man to be
in a disposition to pray. For prayer is
the peace of our spirit, the stillness
of our thoughts, the evenness of recollection, the seat of meditation, the
rest of our cares, and the calm of our
tempest ; prayer is the issue of a quiet
mind, of untroubled thoughts; it is
the daughter of charity and the sister
of meekness; and he that prays to
God with an angry, that is, with a
troubled and discomposed spirit, is
like him that retires into a battle to
meditate, and sets up his closet in the
out-quarters of an army, and chooses
a frontier garrison to be wise in.
Anger is a perfect alienation of the
mind from prayer, and therefore is
contrary to that attention which presents our prayers in a right line to
God. For so have I seen a lark rising from his bed of grass, and soaring
upwards, and singing as he rises, and
hopes to get to heaven, and rise above
the clouds; but the poor bird was
beaten back with the loud sighings of
an eastern wind, and his motion made
irregular and inconsistent, descending
more at every breath of the tempest
than it could recover by the libration
and frequent weighing of his wings,
till the little creature was forced to
sit down and pant, and stay till the
storm was over; and then it made a
prosperous flight, and did rise and
sing, as if it had learned music and
motion from an angel.” The Return
of Prayers, Works, vol. i. 638. Ed,
Lond. 1835. 4 And doubting. This
word, as used here, does not mean, as
our translation would seem to imply,
that we are to come before God without any doubts of our own piety, or in
the exercise of perfect faith. The word
used (diaAsyicuss) means, properly,
computation, adjustment of accounts;
then reflection, thought; then reason9 In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest
apparel, with shamefacedness and

sobriety ; not with ! broidered
hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly
array ;

1 or, plaited, 1 Pe.3.3.

ing, opinion ; then debate, contention, ‘ducting public devotion, do it with

strife; Luke ix. 46; Mark ix. 33, 34;
Phil. ii. 14. This is the sense evidently in this place. ‘They were not
to approach God in prayer in the
midst of clamorous disputings and
angry contentions. They were not
to come when the mind was heated
with debate, and irritated by strife
for victory. Prayer was to be offered
inacalm, serious, sober state of mind,
and they who engaged in polemical
strife, or in warm contention of any
kind, are little fitted to unite in the
solemn act of addressing God. How
often are theologians, when assembled
together, so heated by debate, and so
anxious for party victory, that they
are in no suftable state of mind to
pray! How often do even good men,
holding different views on the disputed
points of religious doctrine, suffer
their minds to become so excited, and
their temper so ruffled, that they are
conscious they are in an unfit state of
mind to approach the throne of grace
together! That theological debate
has gone too far; that strife for victory has become too warm, when the
disputants are in such a state of mind
that they cannot unite in prayer ;
when they could not cease their contentions, and with a calm and proper
apirit, bow together before the throne
of grace.

9. In like manner also. That is,
with the same propriety; with the
same regard to what religion demands.
The apostle had stated particularly
the duty of men in public worship
(ver. 8), and he now proceeds to state
the duty of women. All the directions
here evidently refer to the proper
manner of conducting public worship,
and not to private duties; and the object here is to state the way in which
he would have the different sexes appear. He had said that he would
have prayers offered for all men
(ver. 1, seq.), and that in offering
such petitions he would have the men

holy hands, and without any intermingling of passion, and with entire
freedom from the spirit of contention.
In reference to the duty of females in
attendance on public worship, he says
that he would have them appear in
apparel suitable to the place and the
occasion--adorned not after the manner of the world, but with the zeal and
love in the cause of the Redeemer
which became Christians. He would
not have a woman become a public
teacher (ver. 12), but would wish her
ever to occupy the place in society
for which she was designed (ver. 11),
and to which she had shown that she
was adapted; ver. 13, 14. The direction inver. 9--12, therefore, is to be
understood particularly of the proper
deportment of females in the duties of
public worship. At the same time, the
principles laid down are doubtless such
as were intended to apply to them in
the other situations in life, for if modest apparel is appropriate in the
sanctuary, it is appropriate everywhere. If what is here prohibited
in dress is wrong there, it would be
difficult to show that it is right elsewhere. { That women adorn themselves. 'The words ‘“‘I will’’ are to be
understood here as repeated from
ver. 8. The apostle, by the use of
the word adorn (xocusiv), shows that
he is not opposed to ornament or
adorning, provided it be of the right
kind. The world, as God has made
it, is full of beauty, and he has shown
in each flower that he is not opposed
to true ornament. There are multitudes of things which, so far as we
can see, appear to be designed for
mere ornament, or are made merely
because they are beautiful Religion does not forbid true adorning.
It differs from the world only on the
question what zs true ornament, or
what it becomes us, all things considered, to do in the situation in which
we are placed, the character which

on whom devolved the duty of con- 1s we sustain, the duties which we have

we make.
ornaments in heaven which would be
anything but appropriate for the condition of a poor, lost, dying sinner on
earth. { In modest apparel. The
word here rendered modest (xédzqu0s),
properly relates to ornament, or decoration, and means that which is
well-ordered, decorous, becoming. It
does not, properly, mean modest in
the sense of being opposed to that
which is ¢mmodest, or which tends to
excite improper passions and desires,
but that which is becoming or appropriate. The apostle does not positively specify what this would be, but
he mentions some things which are to
be excluded from it, and which, in his
yiew, are inconsistent with the true
adorning of Christian females--“ broidered hair, gold, pearls, costly array.”’
The sense here is, that the apparel of
females should be such as becomes
them, or is appropriate to them.
The word here used (xécuios), shows
that there should be due attention
that it may be truly neat, fit, decorous. There is no religion in a negligent mode of apparel, or in inattention to personal appearance--any
more than there is in wearing gold
and pearls; and a female may as
truly violate the precepts of her religion by neglecting her personal appearance as by excessive attention to
it. The true idea here is, that her
attention to her appearance should
be such that she will be offensive to
no class of persons; such as to show
that her mind is supremely fixed on
higher and more important things,
and such as.to interfere with no duty
which she owes, and no good which
she can do, either by spending her
time needlessly in personal adorning,
or by lavishing that money for dress
which might do good to others, or by
neglecting the proprieties of her
station, and making herself offensive
to others. § With shamefacedness.
With modesty of appearance and
manner--an eminent female virtue,
whether in the sanctuary or at home.
q And sobriety. The word here used
means, properly, sanity ; then sobermindedness, moderation of the desires

to perform, and the profession which] and passions.
It is opposed to all

It may be that there are| that is frivolous, and to all undue ex-

citement of the passions. ‘he idea
is, that in their apparel and deportment they should not entrench on
the strictest decorum. Doddridge.
| Not with broidered hair. Marg.,
platted. Females in the East pay
much moreattention tothe hairthan is
commonly done with us. It is plaited
with great care, andarrangedin various
forms, according to the prevailing fashion, and often ornamented with spangles or with silver wire or tissue in.
terwoven ; see Notes on Isa. lil. 24,
The sense here is, that Christian fe- |
males are not to imitate those of the
world in their careful attention to the
ornaments of the head. It cannot be
supposed that the mere braiding of
the hair is forbidden, but only that
careful attention to the manner of
doing it, and to the ornaments usually
worninit, which characterized worldly
females. | Or gold, or pearls. It
is not to be supposed that all use of
gold or pearls as articles of dress is
here forbidden ; but the idea is, that
the Christian female is not to seek
these asthe adorning which she desires,
or is not to imitate the world in these
personal decorations. It may be a
difficult question to settle how much
ornament is allowable, and when the
true line is passed. But though this
cannot be settled by any exact rules,
since much must depend on age, and
on the relative rank in life, and the
means which one may possess, yet
there is one general rule which is
applicable to all, and which might
regulate all. It is, that the true line
is passed when more is thought of
this external adorning, than of the
ornament of the heart. Any external decoration which occupies the
mind more than the virtues of the
heart, and which engrosses the time
and attention more, we may be certain is wrong. ‘The apparel should be
such as not to attract attention ; such
as becomes our situation; such as
will not be particularly singular ;
such as shall leave the impression
that the heart is not fixed on it. It
is a poor ambition to decorate a dying body with gold and pearls. It
good works.

11 Let the woman “learn in

silence with all subjection.
@ 1 Co.14.34

should not be forgotten that the body
thus adorned will soon need other
habiliments, and will occupy a position where gold and pearls would be
a mockery. When the heart is right ;
when there is true and supreme love
for religion, it is usually not difficult
to regulate the subject of dress.
q Costly array. Expensive dress.
This is forbidden--for it is foolish,
and the money thus employed may
be much more profitably used in doing good. ‘ Costly array’ includes
that which can be ill afforded, and
that which is inconsistent with the
feeling that the principle ornament
is that of the heart.

10. But (which becometh women
professing godliness) with good works.
That is, it is not appropriate for
women who profess to be the followers
of the Saviour, to seek to be distinguished for personal, external decorations. If they are Christians, they
have seen the vanity of these things,
and have fixed the heart on more substantial realities. They are professed followers of Him ‘“‘ who went about
doing good,” and the performance of
good works especially becomes them.
They profess to have fixed the affections on God their Saviour, and to be
living for heaven; and it is not becoming in them to seek such ornaments
as would indicate that the heart is
supremely attached to worldly things.
There is great beauty in this direction. Good works, or deeds of benevolence, eminently become a Christian female. The nature of woman
seems to be adapted to the performance of all deeds demanding kindness, tenderness, and gentleness of
feeling; of all that proceeds from
pity, sympathy, and affection; and
we feel instinctively that while acts
of hardy enterprise and daring in a
good cause peculiarly become a
Christian man, there is something exquisitely appropriate to the female

10 But (which becometh women professing godliness) with

|

12 But £ suffer not a woman to
teach, nor to usurp authority over
the man, but to be in silence.

13 For Adam was first formed,
then Eve.

14 And Adam was not deceived,

character in deeds of humble and unobtrusive sympathy and benevolence.
God seems to have formed her mind
for just such things, and in such things
it occupies its appropriate sphere
rather than in seeking external adorning.

11. Let the woman learn in silence.
Listen attentively to instruction,
without attempting to teach in public;
see Notes on 1 Cor. xiy. 35. YJ With
all subjection. With due subjection
to those who are in authority, and
who are appointed to minister in holy
things ; Notes, 1 Cor. xiv. 34.

12. But I suffer not a woman to
teach; see Notes on 1 Cor. xiv. 34.
q Nor to usurp authority over the
man; Notes, 1 Cor. xi. 8.

13. For Adam was first formed,
then Eve. The apostle, in this verse,
and the following, gives reasons why
a woman should occupy a subordinate
situation, and not usurp authority.
The first is, that she was second in
the act of creation, or was made subsequent to man. The reason here
assigned cannot be understood to be
merely that of priority of existence--
for then it would give every old person authority over a younger one ;
but it must refer to the circumstances
of the case as detailed in the history
of the creation; Gen.i.,ii. Man was
made as the lord of this lower creation and placed in the garden, and
then the woman was made of a rib
taken from his side, and given to him,
not as a lord, but as a companion.
Allthe circumstances combine to show
the subordinate nature of her rank,
and to prove that she was not designed
to exert authority over the man;
comp. Noteson 1 Cor. xi. 8, 9.

14. And Adam was not deceived.
This is the second reason why the woman should occupy a subordinate rank
in all things. It is, that in the most
important situation in which she was
ever placed she had shown that she

but the woman being deceived, was
in the transgression.
15 ‘Notwithstanding she shall be

saved in childbearing, if they continue in faith and charity an
holiness with sobriety.

was not qualified to take the lead.
She had evinced a readiness to yield
to temptation ; a feebleness of resistance; a plianey of character, which
showed that she was not adapted to
the situation of headship, and which
made it proper that she should ever
afterwards occupy a subordinate situation. It is not meant here that
Adam did not sin, nor even that he
was not deceived by the tempter, but
that the woman opposed a feebler resistance to the temptation than he
would have done, and that the temptation as actually applied to her would
have been inefiectual on him. To
tempt and seduce him to fall, there
were needed all the soft persuasions,
the entreaties, andexample of his wife.
Satan understood this, and approached
man not with the specious argument
of the serpent, but through the allurements of his wife. It is undoubtedly
implied here that man in general has
a power of resisting certain kinds of
temptation superior to that possessed
by woman, and hence that the headship properly belongs to him. This
is, undoubtedly, the general truth,
though there may be many exceptions, and many noble cases to the
honour of the female sex, in which
they evince a power of resistance to
temptation superior to man. In many
traits of character, and among them
those which are most lovely, woman
is superior to man; yet it is undoubtedly true that, as a general
thing, temptation will make a stronger
impression on her than on him. When
it is said that ‘Adam was not deceived,” it is not meant that when he
partook actually of the fruit he was
under no deception, but that he was
not deceived by the serpent; he was
not first deceived, or first in the transgression. The woman should remember that sin began with her, and she
should therefore be willing to occupy
an humble and subordinate situation.
q But-the woman being deceived. She
was made to suppose that the fruit
would not injure her, but would inake

her wise, and that God would not fulfil his threatening of death. Sin, from
the beginning, has been a process of
delusion. Every man or woman who
violates the law of God is deceived as
to the happiness which is expected
from the violation, and as to the consequences which will follow it.

15. Notwithstanding she shall be
saved. ‘The promise in this verse is
designed to alleviate the apparent severity of the remarks just made about
the condition of woman, and of the
allusion to the painful facts of her
early history. What the apostle had
just said would carry the mind back
to the period in which woman introduced sin into the world, and by an
obvious and easy association, to the
sentence which had been passed on
her in consequence of her transgression, and to the burden of sorrows
which she was doomed to bear. By
the remark in this verse, however,
Paul shows that it was not his intention to overwhelm her with anguish.
He did not design to harrow up her
feelings by an unkind allusion to a
melancholy fact in her history. It
was necessary for him to state, and for
her to know, that her place was secondary and subordinate, and he
wished this truth ever to be kept in
memory among Christians. It was
not unkind or improper also to state
the reasons for this opinion, and te
show that her own history had demonstrated that she was not designed for
headship. But she was not to be regarded as degraded and abandoned.
She was not to be overwhelmed by the
recollection of what ‘‘ the mother of
all living’? had done. There were
consolations in her case. There was
a special divine interposition which
she might look for, evincing tender
care on the part of God in those deep
sorrows which had come upon her in
consequence of her transgression; and
instead of being crushed and brokenhearted on account of her condition,
she should remember that the everlasting arms of God would sustain her
in her condition of sorrow and pain. |
Paul, then, would speak to her the
language of consolation, and while he

would have her occupy her proper

place, he would have her feel that |
God was her Friend. In regard to
the nature of the consolation referred
to here, there has been a considerable
variety of opinion. Some have held,
that by the expression “she shall be
saved in child-bearing,” the apostle
designs to include all the duties of the

i, TIMOTHY.

maternal relation, meaning that she
should be saved through the faithful
performance of her duties as a mother.
Robinson, Lex. Rosenmiiller regards
the words rendered “ child-bearing ”
(rexvoyovia), aS synonymous with eduwcation, and supposes that the meaning
is, that a woman, by the proper training of her children, can obtain salvation as well as her husband, and that
her appropriate duty is not public
teaching, but the training of her
family. Wetstein supposes that it
means ‘she shall be saved from the
arts of impostors, and from the luxury
and vice of the age, if, instead of wandering about, she remains at home,
cultivates modesty, is subject to her
husband, and engages carefully in the
training of herchildren.”’ ‘This sense
agrees well with the connection.
Calvin supposes that the apostle de~
signs to console the woman by the assurance that, if she bears the trials of
her condition of sorrow with a proper
spirit, abiding in faith and holiness,
she will be saved. She is not to regard herself as cut off from the hope
of heaven. Doddridge, Macknight,
Clarke, and others, suppose that it
refers to the promise in Gen. iii. 15,
and means that the woman shall be
saved through, or by means of bearing a child, to wit, the Messiah; and
that the apostle means to sustain the
woman in her sorrows, and in her
state of subordination and inferiority,
by referring to the honour which has
been put upon her by the fact that a
woman gave birth to the Messiah. It
is supposed also that he means to say
that special honour is thus conferred |

on her over the man, inasmuch as the
Messiah had no human father.

dridge. he objections to this inter-

| in child-birth,
Doad- |

pretation, however, though it is sustained by most respectable names,
seem to me to be insuperable. They
are such as these: (1.) The interpretation is too refined and abstruse. It
is not that which is obvious. It depends for its point on the fact that the
Messiah had no human father, and i
the apostle had intended to refer to
that, and to build an argument on it
it may be doubted whether he would
have done it in so obscure a manner.
But it may reasonably be questioned
whether he would have made that
fact a point on which his argument
would turn. There would be a species
of refinement about suchan argument,
such as we should not look for in the
writings of Paul. (2.) It is not the
obvious meaning of the word “ childbearing.” ‘There is nothing in the
word which requires that it should
have any reference to the birth of the
Messiah. The word is of a general
character, and properly refers to
child-bearing in general. (3.) It is
not true that woman would be
“saved” merely by having given birth
to the Messiah. She will be saved,
as man will be, as a consequence of
his having been born ; but there is no
evidence that the mere fact that woman gave birth to him, and that he
had no human father, did anything to
save Mary herself, or any one else of
hersex. If, therefore,the word refers
to the “ bearing” of the Messiah, or
to the fact that he was born, it would
be no more proper to say that this
was connected with the salvation of
woman than that of man. The true
meaning, it seems to me, has been
suggested by Calvin, and may be seen
by the following remarks. (1.) The
apostle designed to comfort woman, or
to alleviate the sadness of the picture
which he had drawn respecting her
condition. (2.) He had referred, incidentally, as a proof of the subordinate character of her station, to the
first apostasy. This naturally suggested the sentence which was passed
on her, and the condition of sorrow
to which she was doomed, particularly
That was the standing demonstration of her guilt ; that
the condition in which she suffered

was in greatest peril. (3.) Paul assures her, therefore, that though she
must thus suffer, yet that she ought
not to regard herself in her deep sorrows and dangers, though on account
of sin, as necessarily under the divine
displeasure, or as excluded from the
hope ofheaven. The way of salvation
was open to her as well as to men,
and was to be entered in the same
manner. If she had faith and _ holiness, even 77 her condition of sorrow
brought on by guilt, she might as well
hope for eternal life asman. The object of the apostle seems to be to guard
against a possible construction which
might be put on his words, that he did
not regard the woman as in circumstances as favourable for salvation as
those of man, or as if he thought that
salvation for her was more difficult,
or perhaps that she could not be
saved at all. The general sentiments
of the Jews in regard to the salvation
of the female sex, and their exclusion
from the religious privileges which
men enjoy ; the views of the Mohammedans in reference to the inferiority
of the sex; and the prevalent feelings
in the heathen world, degrading the
sex and making their condition, in regard to salvation, far inferior to that
of man, show the propriety of what
the apostle here says, and the fitness
that he should so guard himself that
his language could not possibly be
construed so as to give countenance
to suchasentiment. According to the
interpretation of the passage here
proposed, the apostle does not mean
to teachthat a Christian female would
be certainly saved from death in childbirth--for this would not be true, and
the proper construction of the passage
does not require us to understand him
as affirming this. Religion is not designed to make any immediate and direct change in the laws of our physical being. It does not of itself guard
us from the pestilence ; it does not
arrest the progress of disease ; it does
not save us from death; and, as a
matter of fact, woman, by the highest
degree of piety, is not necessarily
saved from the perils of that condition
4o which she has been subjected in

most; that the situation in which she | consequence of the apostasy.
The
apostle means to show this--that in
all her pain and sorrow ; amidst all
the evidence of apostasy, and all that
reminds her that she was “first”? in
the transgression, she may look up to
God as her Friend and strength, and
may hope for acceptance and salvation. (| If they continue. If woman
continues--it being not uncommon to
change the singular formto the plural,
especially if the subject spoken of
have the character of a noun of multitude. Many have understood this
of children, as teaching that if the
mother were faithful, so that her children continued in faith, she would be
saved. But this is nota necessary or
probable interpretation, The apostle
says nothing of children, and it is not
reasonable to suppose that he would
make the prospect of her salvation
depend on their being pious. This
would be to add a hard condition of
salvation, and one nowhere else suggested in the New Testament. The
object of the apostle evidently is, to
show that woman must continue in
the faithful service of God if she
would be saved--a doctrine everywhere insisted on in the New Testament in reference to all persons. She
must not imitate the example of the
mother of mankind, but she must
faithfully yield obedience to the laws
of God tilldeath. | Faith. Faithin
the Redeemer and in divine truth, or
a life of fidelity in the service of God.
{ Charity. Love to all; comp. Notes
on 1 Cor. xiii. J Holiness. She
must be truly righteous. { With sobriety. All these things must be
united with a becoming soberness or
seriousness of deportment; Notes,
ver. 9. In such a life, woman may
look to a world where she will be for
ever free from all the sadnesses and
sorrows of her condition here; where,
by unequalled pain, she will be no
more reminded of the time when
“her rash hand in evil hour

Forth reaching to the fruit, she plick'd, she

ate ;"’

and when before the throne she shall
be admitted to full equality with all
the redeemed of the Lord. Religion
meets all the sadnesses of her condif Wee vs a true isles If aman
a Ph. 1.1.

tion here ; pours consolation into the
cup of her many woes; speaks kindly
to her in her distresses; utters the
language of forgiveness to her heart
when crushed with the remembrance
of sin--for ‘‘she loves much” (Luke
vii. 837--48) ; and conducts her to immortal glory in that world where all
sorrow shall be unknown.

The object of this chapter is to
give directions respecting the qualifications and duties of the officers of
the Christian church. As it is evident that Timothy was to be partly
employed in the appointment of suitable officers for the church at Ephesus, and as the kinds of officers here
referred to were to be permanent in
the church, it was important that a
full statement should be put on reoord,
under the influence of inspiration, respecting their qualifications and duties.

The chapter embraces the following |

subjects :--

I. The qualifications of a bishop ;
ver. 1--7. The enumeration of his
qualifications is preceded by a general
statement that the office was an honourable one, and that he who aspired
to it sought an employment that was,
in itself, to be regarded as desirable ;
ver. 1. The qualifications specified
for this office, are the following :--

(1.) He must be a man of good
private character; possessing and
illustrating the Christian virtues, or,
as we would say now, an upright man,
and a Christian gentleman ; ver. 2, 3.

(2.) He must be a man who ruled
his own house well, and who thus
showed that he was qualified to preside as the first officer in the church
of God ; ver. 4, 5.

(3.) He must be a man of suitable
age and experience--one who would
aot be likely to fall into the temptations that are laid forthe young; ver.6.

{4.) He must have a fair reputation

unong those who were not Christians |

--as it is intended that the influence
of his ministry shall reach them, and

desire the office of a tishop, * he
desireth a good work.

as it is impossible to do them good
unless he is believed to be a man of
integrity ; ver. 7.

Il. The qualifications of deacons;
ver. 8--10, 12, 13. They must be,

(1.) Men of fair character--serious,
temperate, candid ; ver. 8.

(2.) Men who hold to the doctrines
of the gospel with a pure conscience ;
ver. 9.

(3.) Men who have been proved, and
who have shown that they are qualified
to serve the church ; ver. 10.

(4.) Men whose wives are of such a
character that their example will contribute to the promotion of the eommon cause; ver ll.

(5.) Men not living in polygamy,
and who exercise exemplary family
government ; ver. 12, 13.

III. The reason why Paul gave
these instructions to Timothy; ver,
14,15. It was, that he might know
how he ought to demean himself in
the important station which he was
called to occupy. Paul hoped to be
able to come to him before long, and
to complete the work which he had
commenced at Ephesus, but, in the
mean time, he gave him these written councils, that hemight understand
particularly the duty which was required of him.

IV. The chapter closes with a statement which seems to have been intended to impress the mind of Timothy with the importance of the duties
in which he was engaged ; ver. 15, 16,
The statement is, that the church is
the great defender of the truth in the
world (ver. 15), and that the truth
which the church is to maintain is of
the greatest importance. It relates
to the incarnation of the Son of God,
and to the work which he accomplished on earth--a work which excited
the deepest interest in heaven, and
the true doctrine respecting which it
was of the utmost importance to keep
| up among men ; ver. 16. This reasor.
is further urged in the following chapiter, by showing that the time would
‘come when, under the influence of

Satan, these great doctrines would be
denied, and the truth be corrupted
and perverted.

1. This is a true saying. Gr.,
“ Faithful is the word’--the very
phrase which is used in chap. i. 15;
see Notes on that verse. The idea
here is, that it was worthy of credence ; if was not to be doubted. §f Jf
aman desire. Implying that there
would be those who would wish to be
put into the ministry. The Lord, undoubtedly, by his Spirit, often excites
an earnest and irrepressible desire to
preach the gospel--a desire so strong,
that he in whom it exists can be satisfied in no other calling. In sucha
case, it should be regarded as one evidence of a callto this work. The
apostle, however, by the statements
which follow, intimates that wherever
this desire exists, it is of the utmost
importance to have just views of the
nature of the office, and that there
should be other qualifications for the
ministry than a mere desire to preach
the gospel. He proceeds, therefore, to
state those qualifications, and no one
who ‘ desires’’ the office of the min-
‘stry should conclude that he is called
to it, unless these qualifications substantially arefoundin him. The word
rendered desire here (dpiyw), denotes
properly, to reach or stretch out--and
hence to reach after anything, to long
after, to try to obtain; Heb. xi. 16.
| The office ofa bishop. The Greek
here is a single word--iaisxor7s. The
word ixicx0rn --LEpiscope--whence the

word Episcopal is derived--occurs but.

four times in the New Testament. It
is translated visitation in Luke xix.
44, and in 1 Pet. ii. 12; bishoprick,
Acts. i. 20; and in this place office of
a bishop. The verb from which it is
derived (ixizx.7tw), occurs but twice,
In Heb. xii. 15, it is rendered looking
diligently, and in 1 Pet.v. 2, taking
the oversight. The noun rendered
tishop occurs in Acts xx. 28; Phil. i.
et Le Timea. 25> Titus 1: 7; 1 Pets 11:
25. The verb means, properly, to
look upon, behold; to inspect, to look
after, see to, take care of; and the
noun denotes the office of overseeing,
inspecting, or looking to. It is used
to denote the care of the sick, Xeno.

Oec. 15,9; comp. Passow; and is of
so general a character that it may denote any office of overseeing, or attending to. There is nothing in the
word itself which would limit it to any
class or grade of the ministry, and it
is, in fact, applied to nearly all the
officers of the church in the New
Testament, and, indeed, to Christians
who did not sustain any office. Thus
it is applied (a) to believers in general, directing them to “ look diligently, lest any one should fail of the grace
of God,’ Heb. xii. 15; (6) to the
elders of the churchat Ephesus, ‘over
the which the Holy Ghost hath made
you overseers,’ Acts xx. 28; (c) to
the elders or presbyters of the church
in 1 Pet. v. 2, ‘‘ Feed the flock of God,
taking the oversight thereof; (ad) to
the officers of the church in Philippi,
mentioned in connection with deacons
as the only officers of the church
there, ‘‘ to the saints at Philippi, with
the bishops and deacons,” Phil i. 1;
(e) to Judas, the apostate, Actsi. 20 ;
and (f) to the great Head of the
church, the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
ii. 25, “the Shepherd and Bishop of
your souls.’’ From this use of the
term it follows, (1.) That the word is
never used to designate the peculiarity of the apostolic office, or so as to
have any special applicability to the
apostles. Indeed, the term bishop is
never applied to any of them in the
New Testament; nor is the word in
any of its forms ever used with reference to them, except in the single case
of Judas, Acts i. 20. (2.) It is never
employed inthe New Testament to
designate an order of men superior to
presbyters, regarded as having any
other functions than presbyters, or
being in any sense “ successors ” to the
apostles. It is so used now by the
advocates of prelacy ; but this is a use
wholly unknown to the New Testament. It is so undeniable that the
name is never given inthe New Testament to those who are now called
‘“‘bishops,” that even Episcopalians
concede it. Thus, Dr. Onderdonk
(Tract on Hpiscopacy, p. 12) says,
“ atu that we read in the New Testament concerning ‘ bishops’ is to be
regarded as pertaining to the ‘ middle
2 A bishop @ then must be
a 'Tit.1.6, &c.

oe Sane SE Se Se tS
grade ;’ that is, to those who are now
regarded as ‘priests.’” This is
not strictly correct, as is clear from
the remarks above respecting what is
called the “ middle grade ;” but it 2s
strictly correct, so far as it affirms
that it is never applied to prelates.
(3.) It is used in the New Testament
to denote ministers of the gospel who
had the care or oversight of the
churches, without any regard to grade
orrank. (4.) It has now, as used by
Episcopalians, a sense which is wholly
unauthorised by the New Testament,
and which, indeed, is entirely at variance with the usage there. To apply the term to a pretended superior
order of clergy, as designating their
peculiar office, is wholly to depart
from the use of the word as it occurs
in the Bible. (5.) As it isnever used
in the Scriptures with reference to
prelates, it should be used with reference to the pastors, or other officers
of the church; and to be a pastor, or
overseer of the flock of Christ, should
be regarded as being a scriptural
bishop. | He desiretn a good work.
An honourable office ; an office which
it is right fora man to desire. There
are some stations in life which ought
never to be desired ; it is proper for
any one to desire the office of a bishop who has the proper qualifications;
comp. Notes on Rom. xi. 13.

2. A bishop. A minister of religion, according to the foregoing remarks, who has the charge or oversight of any Christian church. The
reference here is doubtless to one who
had the government of the church intrusted to him (ver. 4,5), and who
was also a preacher of the gospel.
{ Must be blameless. This is a different word (éverianwios) from that
rendered blameless in Luke i. 6; Phil.
il. 15.3 ni. 6 (Guturros) ; comp. however, Notes on Luke i. 6; Phil. iii. 6.
The word here used does not mean
that, as a necessary qualification for
office, a bishop should be perfect; but
that he should be aman against whom
no charge of immorality, or of holding
false doctrine, is alleged. His con-

blameless, the husband of one wife,

duct should be irreprehensible or irreproachable. Undoubtedly it means
that if any charge could be brought
against him implying moral obliquity,
he is not fit for the office. Heshould
be a man of irreproachable character
for truth, honesty, chastity, and general uprightness. ( The husband of
one wife. This need not be understood as requiring that a bishop shvuld
be a married man, as Vigilantius, a
presbyter in the church at Barcelona
in the fourth century, supposed, however desirable in general it may be
that a minister of the gospel should
be married. But, while this interpretation is manifestly to be excluded
as false, there has been much difference of opinion on the question whether
the passage means that a minister
should not have more than one wife
‘at the same time, or whether it prohibits the marriage of a second wife
after the death of the first. On this
question, the Notes of Bloomfield,
Doddridge, and Macknight, may be
consulted. That the former is the
correct opinion, seems to me'to be
evident from the following considerations: (1.) It is the most obvious
meaning of the language, and it would
doubtless be thus understood by those
to whom it was addressed. At atime
when polygamy was not uncommon,
to say that a man should “have but
one wife” would be naturally understood as prohibiting polygamy. (2.)
The marriage of a second wife, after
the death of the first, is nowhere spoken
of in the Scriptures as wrong. The
marriage of a widow to asecond husband is expressely declared to be proper (1 Cor. vii. 39); and it is not
unfair to infer from that permission
that it is equally lawful and proper for
a man to marry the second time.
But if it is lawful for any man, it is
right for a minister of the gospei. No
reason can be assigned against such
marriages in his case, which would
not be equally valid in any other,
Marriage is as honourable for a minister of the gospel as for any other
man (comp. Notes on Heb. xiii. 4);

vigilant, sober, of | good behaviour,
| or, modest.

given to hospitality, apt to teach :

and, as Doddridge has well remarked,
“ Circumstances may be so adjusted
that there may be as much reason for
a second marriage as for the first, and
as little inconvenience of any kind
may attend it.’ (3.) There was a
special propriety in the prohibition,
if understood as prohibiting polygamy.
It is known that it was extensively
practised, and was not regarded as unlawful. Yet one design of the gospel
was to restore the marriage relation
to its primitive condition ; and though
it might not have seemed absolutely
necessary to require of every man who
came into the church to divorce his
wives, if he had more than one, yet,
in order to fix a brand on this irregular
practice, it might have been deemed
desirable to require of the ministers
of the gospel that they should have
but one wife. Thus the practice of
polygamy would gradually come to be
regarded as dishonourable and improper, andthe example and influence of
the ministry would tend to introduce
sorrect views in regard to the nature
of this relation. One thing is clear
from this passage, that the views of
the Papists in regard to the celibacy
of the clergy are directly at variance
with the Bible. The declaration of
Paul in Heb. xiii. 4, is, that ‘ marriage is honourable in all;’’ and here
it is implied that it was proper that
a minister should be married. If it
were not, why did not Paul prohibit it
altogether ?
it was improper that a bishop should
have more than one wife, why did
he not say that it was improper that
he should be married at all ?
not a Romanist say so now? ¥ V2gilant. This word (datos) occurs
only here and in 1 Tim. iii. 11; Titus
ii. 2. It means, properly, sober, temperate, abstinent, especially in respect
to wine; then sober-minded, watchful, circumspect. Robinson. A minister should have a watchful care over
his own conduct. He should be on
his gaurd against sin in any form.
q Sober. ceHdpove. Properly, a man

of a@ sound mind; one who follows |

Instead of saying that |
| has an opportunity of becoming fa-

Would |

|

sound reason, and who is not under
the control of passion. The idea is,
that he should have his desires and
passions well regulated. Perhaps the

| word prudent would come nearer to

the meaning of the apostle than any
single word which we have. { Oy
good behaviour. Marg., modest.
Coverdale rendersit, mannerly. The
most correct rendering, according to
the modern use of language, would be,
that he should be @ gentleman. He
should not be slovenly in his appearance, or rough and boorish in his
manners. He should not do violence
to the usages of refined intercourse,
nor be unfit to appear respectable in
the most refined circles of society.
Inattention to personal neatness, and
to the rules which regulate refined
intercourse, is indicative neither of
talent, learning, nor religion; and
though they are occasionally -- not
often--connected with talent, learning, and religion, yet they are never
the fruit of either, and are always a
disgrace to those who exhibit such
incivility and boorishness, for such
men ought to know better. A minister of the gospel should be a finished
gentleman in his manners, and there
is no excuse for himif heisnot. Tis
religion, if he has any, is adapted to
make him such. He has usually received such an education as ought to
make him such, and in all cases ought
to have had such a training. He is
admitted into the best society, and

miliar with the laws of refined intercourse. He should be an example
and a pattern in all that goes to promote the welfare of mankind, and
there are few things so easily acquired
that are fitted to do this, as refinement
and gentility of manners. No man
can do good, onthe whole, or in the
“long run,” by disregarding the rules
of refined intercourse; and, other
things being equal, the refined, courteous, polite gentleman in the ministry, will always do more good than
he who neglects the rules of good.
breeding. { Given to hospitality

3 Not ! given to wine, no striker, | patient, not a brawler, not cove-

not greedy of filthy lucre; but

lor, not ready to quarrel and offer wrong, as
one in wine.

This is often enjoined on all Christians

as a duty of religion. For the reasons
of this, and the nature of the duty,
see Notes on Rom. xii. 13; Heb. xili.
2. It was a special duty of the ministers of religion, as they were to be
examples of every Christian virtue.
{| Apt to teach. Gr., Didactic ; that
is, capable of instructing, or qualified
for the office of a teacher of religion.
As the principal business of a preacher of the gospel is to teach, or to
communicate to his fellow-men the
knowledge of the truth, the necessity of this qualification is obvious.
No one should be allowed to enter
the ministry who is not qualified to
impart instruction to others on the
doctrines and duties of religion ; and
no one should feel that he ought to
continue in the ministry, who has
not industry, and self-denial, and the
love of study enough to lead him
constantly to endeavour to increase
in knowledge, that he may be qualified to teach others. A man who
would teach a people, must himself
keep in advance of them on the sub-

jects on which he would instruct
them.
3. Not given to wine. Marg.,

“Not ready to quarrel and offer
wrong, as one inwine.”’ The Greek
word (xépayves) occurs in the New
Testament only here and in Titus
i. 7. It means, properly, by wine ;
v7. €., spoken of what takes place by
or over wine, as revelry, drinking
songs, &c. Then it denotes, as it
does here, one who sits by wine;
that is, who is in the habit of drinking it. It cannot be inferred, from
the use of the word here, that wine
was absolutely and entirely prohibited; for the word does not properly
express that idea. It means that
one who is in the habit of drinking
wine, or who is accustomed to sit with
those who indulge in it, should not be
admitted to the ministry. The way
in which the apostle mentions the subject here would lead us fairly to sup-

teous.
a 2 Ti.2.24.

pose that he did not mean to commend

its use in any sense ; that he regarded
its use as dangerous, and that he
would wish the ministers of religion
to avoid it altogether. In regard to
its use at all, except at the communion or as a medicine, it may be remarked, that a minister will do no injury to himself or others by letting it
entirely alone ; he may do injury by
indulging init. No man is under any
obligation of courtesy or Christian
duty to use it; thousands of ministers of the gospel have brought ruin
on themselves, and disgrace on the
ministry, by its use ; comp. Notes on
Matt. xi.9, and 1 Tim. vy. 23. J No
striker. He must be a peaceable, not
aquarrelsomeman. This isconnected
with the caution about the use of wine,
probably, because that is commonly
found to produce a spirit of contention and strife. § Not greedy of filthy
lucre. Not contentious or avaricious.
Gr., Not desirous of base gain. The
desire of this is condemned everywhere in the New Testament ; but it
is especially the duty of a minister of
the gospel to be free from it. He has
a right to a support (see Notes on 1
Cor. ix.); but there is nothing that
more certainly paralyzes the usefulness of a minister of the gospel than
the love of money. ‘There is an instinctive feeling in the human bosom
that such a man ought to be actuated
by a nobler and a purer principle. As
avarice, moreover, is the great sin
of the world--the sin that sways
more hearts, and does mnioreto hinder the progress of the gospel, than
all others combined--it is important
in the highest degree that the minis.
ter of religion should be an example
of what men should be, and that he,
by his whole life, should set his face
against that which is the main obstruction to the progress of that gospel which he is appointed to preach.
{| But patient. Modest, mild, gentle. See the word (Gr.) in Phil. iv.
5; Titus ii. 2; James iii. 17, and 1

4 One that ruleth well ¢ his
own house, having his children in
subjection with all gravity ;

@ Ps.101.2.

Pet. ii. 18, where it is rendered gentle. |
The word means that the minister of
the gospel should be a man of mild
and kind demeanour, such as his
Master was. § Nota brawler; comp.
2 Tim. ii. 24. That is, he should not
be a man given to contention, or apt
to take up a quarrel. The Greek is,
literally, Not disposed to fight. § Not
covetous. Gr., Not a lover of silver;
that is, of money. A man should not
be put into the ministry who is characteristically a loverof money. Such
a one, no matter what his talents may
be, has no proper qualification for
the office, and will do more harm
than good.

4. One that ruleth well his own
house. This implies that a minister
of the gospel would be, and ought to
be, a married man. It is everywhere
in the New Testament supposed that
he would be a man who could be an/|
example in all the relations of life.
The position which he occupies in |
the church has a strong resemblance
to the relation which a father sustains to his household ; and a qualification to govern a family well,
would be an evidence of a qualification to preside properly in the church.
It is probable that, in the early Chris- |
tian church, ministers were not unfrequently taken from those of mature life, and who were, at the time,
at the head of families; and, of
course, such would be men who had
had an opportunity of showing that
they had this qualification for the
office. Though, however, this cannot be insisted on now as a previous
qualification for the office, yet it is
still true that, if he has a family, it zs
a necessary qualification, and that a
man in the ministry should be one
who governs his own house well. A
want of this will always be a hindrance to extensive usefulness. --
q Having his children in subjection
with all gravity. This does not
mean that his children should evince
gravity, whatever may be true on

5 (tor if aman know not how
to rule his own house, how shall
he take care of the church of
God?)

that point ; but it refers to the father.
He should be a grave or serious man
in his family ; a man free from levivy
of character, and from frivolity and
fickleness, in his intercourse with his
children. It does not mean that he
should be severe, stern, morose--
which are traits that are often mistaken for gravity, and which are as
inconsistent with the proper spirit
of a father as frivolity of manner--
but that he should be a serious and
sober-minded man. He should maintain proper dignity (aeuvarns); he
should maintain self-respect, and his
deportment should be such as to inspire others with respect for him.

5. For if aman know not how to
rule. This is a beautiful and striking argument. <A church resembles
a family. It is, indeed, larger, and

| there is a greater variety of disposi-

tions in it than there is in a family.
The authority of a minister of the
gospel in a church is also less absolute than that of a father. But still
there is astrikingresemblance. The
church is made up of an assemblage
of brothers and sisters. ‘They are
banded together for the same purposes, and have a common object to
aim at. They have common feelings
and common wants. They have sympathy, like a family, with each other
in their distresses and afflictions.
The government of the church also is
designed to be paternal. It should
be felt that he who presides over it
has the feelings of a father; that he
loves all the members of the great
family ; that he has no prejudices, no
partialities, no selfish aims to gratify.
Now, if a man cannot govern his own
family well; if he is severe, partial,
neglectful, or tyrannical at home, how
can he be expected to take charge ot
the more numerous ‘household of
faith’’ with proper views and feelings?
Tf, with all the natural and strong ties
of affection which bina a father to his
own children; if, when they are few
comparatively in number, and where
6 Not 1a novice, least being
lifted up with pride he fall in-

1 or, one newly come to the faith. a Pr.16.18.

his eye is constantly upon them, he
is unable to govern them aright, how
can he be expected to preside in a
proper manner over the larger household where he will be bound with
comparatively feebler ties, and where
he will be exposed more to the influence of passion, and where he
will have a much less constant opportunity of supervision? Confucius,
as quoted by Doddridge, has a sentiment strikingly resembling that before
us: “It is imposstble that he who
knows not how to govern and reform
his own family, should rightly govern
and reform a people.’”’ We may remark, also, in this verse, a delicate
and beautiful use of words by the
apostle to prevent the possibility of
misapprehension. While he institutes
a comparison between the government of afamily and that of the church,
he guards against the possibility of its
being supposed that he would countenance arbitrary authority in the
church, even such authority as a father
must of necessity employ in his own
family. Hence he uses different words.
He speaks of the father as “ruling”
over his own family, or presiding over
tt--aporrnvor; he describes the minister of religion as having a tender care
for the church--irimernceras,

6. Not a novice. Marg., one
newly come to the faith. The Greek
word, which occurs nowhere else in
the New Testament, means, properly,
that which is newly planted. Thus
it would mean a plant that was not
strong, or not fitted to bear the severity of storms; that had not as yet
struck its roots deep, and could not
resist the fierceness of a cold blast.
Then the word comes to mean a new
convert; one who has had little opportunity to test his own faith, or to
give evidence to others that he would
be faithful to the trust committed to
nim. The word does not refer so
much to one who is young in years,
as one who is young in faith. Still,
all the reasons which apply against
intreducing a very recent convert into

Ls PEMOLTHY)

to the condemnation of the devil. ®
7 Moreover he must have a

b Jude 6.

the ministry, will apply commonly with

equal force against introducing one
young in years. § Lest being lifted
up with pride. We are not to suppose that this is the only reason
against introducing a recent convert
into the ministry, but it is a suffictent
reason. Te would be likely to be
elated by being intrusted at once with
the highest office in the church, and
by the commendations and flattery
which he might receive. No condition is wholly proof against this; but
he is much less likely to be injured
who has had much experience of the
depravity of his own heart, and whose
mind has been deeply imbued with
the spirit of the gospel. {| He fall
into the condemnation of the devil.
That is, the same kind of condemnation which the devil fell into; to
wit, condemnation on account of
pride. It is here intimated that the
cause of the apostasy of Satan was
pride--a cause which is as likely to
have been the true one as any other.
Who can tell but it may have been
produced by some new honour which
was conferred on him in heaven, and
that his virtue was not found sufficient
for the untried circumstances in which
he was placed? Much of the apostasy
from eminent virtue in this world,
arises from this cause; and possibly
the case of Satan may have been the
most signal instance of this kind which
has occurred in the universe. The
idea of Paul is, that a young convert
should not suddenly be raised to an
exalted station in the church. Who
can doubt the wisdom of this direction? The word rendered lifted up
(cvdwSiis), is from a verb which
means to smoke, to fume, to surround
with smoke ; then to inflate--as a
bladder is with airs and then to be
conceited or proud; that is, to be
like a bladder filled, not with a solid
substance, but with air.

7. Moreover he must have a quod
report of them which are without.
Who are without the church; that
is. of those who are not Christians.

good report of them ¢ which are
without; lest he fall into reproach,
und the snare > of the devil.

8 Likewise must the deacons
@ Ac.22.12; 1 Th.4.12.

¢ be grave, not doubled-tongued,
not ¢given to much wine, not
greedy of filthy lucre ;

b chap.6.9; 2 Ti.2.26.
d@ ver.3; Le.10.9.

c Ac.6.3.

This includes, of course, all classes
of those who are not Christians--
heathens, infidels, Jews, moral men,
and scoffers. The idea is, that he
must have a fair reputation with them
for integrity of character. His life
must be in their view upright. He
must not be addicted to anything
which they regard as inconsistent with
good morals. His deportment must
be such that they shall regard it as
not inconsistent with his profession.
He must be true and just and honest
in his dealings with his fellow-men,
and so live that they cannot say that
he has wronged them. He must not
give occasion for scandal or reproach
in his intercourse with the other sex,
but must be regarded asa man of a
pure life and of a holy walk. The
reason for this injunction is obvious.
It is his business to endeavour to do
such men good, and to persuade them
to become Christians. But no minister of the gospel can possibly do such
men good, unless they regard him as
an upright and honest man. No
matter how he preaches or prays; no
matter how orthodox, learned, or apparently devout he may be, all his
efforts will be in vain unless they regard him as a man of incorruptible
integrity. If they hate religion themselves, they insist justly that since he
has professed it he shall be governed
by its principles; or if they feel its
importance, they will not be influenced
to embrace it by a man that they rezard as hypocritical andimpure. Go
tO a man whom you have defrauded,
or who regards you as having done or
utempted wrong to any other one,
and talk to him about the necessity of
religion, and he will instinctively say
that he does not want areligion which
will not make its professor true, honest,
and pure. It isimpossible, therefore,
for a minister to over-estimate the
importance of having a fair character
in the view of the world, and no man
should be introduced into the ministry,

or sustained in it, who has not a fair
reputation ; comp. Notes on Col. iv.
5; 1 Thess. iv. 12. Q Lest he fall
into reproach. Thatis,in such a way
as to bring dishonour on the ministerial character. His life will be such
as to give men occasion to reproach
the cause of religion. And the
snare of the devil. ‘The snare which
the devil lays to entrap and ruin the
ministers of the gospel and all good
men. ‘The snare to which reference
is here made, is that of blasting the
character and influence of the minister
of the gospel. The ideais, that Satan
lays this snare so to entangle him as
to secure this object, and the means
which he uses is the vigilance and
suspicion of those who are out of the
church. If there is anything of this
kind in the life of a minister whieh
they can make use of, they will be
ready to do it. Hence the necessity
on his part of an upright and blameless life. Satan is constantly aiming
at this thing ; the world is watching
for it, and if the minister has any
propensity which is not in entire accordance with honesty, Satan will take
advantage of it and lead him into the
snare.

8. Likewise must the deacons. On
the meaning of the word deacons, see
Notes on Phil. i. 1. On their appointment, see Notes, Actsvi. 1. The
word here evidently denotes those who
had charge of the temporal affairs of
the church, the poor, &c. No qualifications are mentioned, implying that
they were to be preachers of the gospel. In most respects, except in regard to preaching, their qualifications
were to be the same as those of the
bishops. J Be grave. Serious, soberminded men. In Acts vi. 3, it is said
that they should be men of honest
report. On the meaning of the word
grave, see Notes on ver. 4. They
should be men who by their serious
deportment will inspire respect. 4 Not
double-tongued. ‘The word here used
9 Holding “the mystery ° of
the faith in a pure conscience.

10 And let these also first be,
a Ep.1 9.

--Ddiroyos--does not occur elsewhere |
in the New Testament. It means,
properly, uttering the same thing |
twice (from dis and A‘yw), and then
deceitful, or speaking one thing and
meaning another. They should be
men who can be relied on for the exact
truth of what they say, and for the
exact fulfilment of their promises.
{ Not given to much wine; see ver. 3.
The word much is added here to what
is said (ver. 2) of the qualification of
a bishop. It is not affirmed that it
would be proper for the deacon, any
more than the bishop, to indulge in
the use of wine in small quantities,
but it ¢s affirmed that a man who is
much given to the use of wine ought
not, on any consideration, to be a
deacon. It may be remarked here,
that this qualification was everywhere
regarded as necessary for a minister
of religion. Even the heathen priests,
on entering a temple, did not drink
wine. Bloomfield. The use of wine,
and of strong drinks of all kinds, was
absolutely prohibited to the Jewish
ministers of every rank when they
were about to engage in the service of
God; Lev. x. 9. Why should it then
be any more proper for a Christian
minister to drink wine than for a
Jewish or a heathen priest? Shall a
minister of the gospel be less holy
than they? Shall he have a feebler
sense of the purity of his vocation ?

Shall he be less careful lest he expose }

himself to the possibility of conducting the services of religion in an irreverent and silly manner? Shall he
venture to approach the altar of God
under the influence of intoxicating
drinks, when a sense of propriety restrained the heathen priest, and a
solemn statute of Jehovah restrained
the Jewish priest from doing it?
q Not greedy of filthy lucre; Notes,
ver. 3. The special reason why this
qualification was important in the
deacon was, that he would be intrusted
with the funds of the church, and
might be tempted to appropriate them

proved; then let them use the
office of a deacon, being found

blameless.
b ver. 16.

to his own use instead of the charitable
purposes for which they were designed ;
see this illustrated in the case of Judas,
John xii. 6.

9. Holding the mystery of the faith.
On the word mystery, see Notes on
1 Cor. ii. 7. 1t means that which
had been concealed, or hidden, but
which was now revealed. The word
faith here, is synonymous with the
gospel; and the sense is, that he
‘should hold firmly the great doctrines
of the Christian religion which had
been so long concealed from men, but
which were now revealed. The reason is obvious. Though notapreacher,
yet his influence and example would
be great, and a man who held material
error ought not to be in office. {J Jn
a pure conscience. A mere orthodox
faith was not all that was necessary,
for it was possible that a man might
be professedly firm in the belief of the
truths of revelation, and yet be corrupt
at heart.

10. And let these also be first proved.
That is, tried or tested in regard to
the things which were the proper
qualifications for the office. This
does not mean that they were to be
employed as preachers, but that they
were to undergo a proper trial in regard to their fitness for the office
which they were to fill. They were
not to be put into it without any opportunity of knowing what they were.
It should be ascertained that they
were grave, serious, temperate, trust~
worthy men; men who were sound in
the faith, and who would not dishonour
the office. It is not said here that
there should be a formal trial, as if
they were candidates for this office ;
but the meaning is, that they should
have had an opportunity of making
their character known, ana should have
gained such respect for their piety,
and their other qualifications, that
there would be reason to believe that
they would perform the functions o*
the office well. Thus, in Acts vi. 3,
when deacons were first appointed,

11 Even so must their wives @;

be grave, not slanderers, sober,
faithful in all things.

13 For they that have ! used
the office of a deacon well, ¢ purchase to themselves a good degree,

12 Let the deacons be the hus-, and great boldness in the faith ¢
bands of one wife, ruling © their which is in Christ Jesus.

children and_ their
well.

own houses

a Tit.2.3. 6 ver. 4.

i or. ministered.
¢ Mat.25.21. 1.2.1.

a2 Ti.2

the church was directed to ‘‘ look out | with Titus ii. 3, 4, which bears a stron

seven men of honest report,’ who

might be appointed to the office.

{ Then let them use the office of a|
Let them be appointed to!

deacon.
this office, and fulfil its duties. J Being found blameless. If nothing can
be alleged against their character ;
see Notes on ver. 2.

11. Even so must their wives be
grave. Chrysostom, Theophylact,
Grotius, Bloomfield, and many others,
suppose that by the word wives, here,

esses.
to women in general. The reason assigned for supposing that it does not
refer to the wives of deacons, as such,
is, that nothing is said of the qualifications of the wives of bishops--a
matter of as much importance as that
of the character of the wife of a
deacon ; and that it cannot be supposed that the apostle would specify
the one without some allusion to the
other. But that the common interpretation, which makes it refer to the
wives of deacons, as such, is to be
adhered to, seems to me to be clear.
For (1.) it is the obvious and natural
interpretation. (2.) The word here
used--wives--is never used of itself to
denote deaconesses. (3.) If the apostle had meant deaconesses, it would
have been easy to express it without
ambiguity ; comp. Notes, Rom. xvi. 1.
(4.) What is here mentioned is important, whether the same thing is
mentioned of bishops or not. (5.) In
the qualifications of bishops, the apostle had made a statement respecting
his family, which made any specification about the particular members of
the family unnecessary. Ile was to
be one who presided in a proper manner over his own house, or who had a
well-regulated family ; ver. 4,5. By
a comparison of this passage, also.

resemblance to this, it would seem
that it was supposed that the deacons
would be taken from those who were
advanced in life, and that their wives
would have some superintendence over

‘the younger females of the church.

It was, therefore, especially important
that they should be persons whose influence would be known to be decidedly favourable to piety. No one can
doubt that the character of a woman

| may be such, that it is not desirable
(yuvainas), the apostle means deacon. |
Clarke supposes that it refers

that her husband should be an officer
in the church. A bad woman ought
not to be intrusted with any additional
power or influence. { Grave; Notes,
ver. 4. § Not slanderers; comp.
Titus ii. 38, ‘‘ Not false accusers.”
The Greek word is dieBcaovs --devils.
It is used here in its original and proper sense, to denote a culwmniator,
slanderer, or accuser. It occurs in
the same sense in 2 Tim. iii. 3, and
Titus ii. 3. Elsewhere in the New
Testament, it is uniformly rendered
devil (comp. Notes, Matt. iv. 1), and
is given to Satan, the prince of the
fallen angels (Matt. ix. 34), by way
of eminence, as the accuser; comp.
Notes on Job i. 6-- 11, and Rev. xii.
10. Ilere it means that they should
not be women who were in the habit
of calumniating others, or aspersing
their character. Mingling as they
would with the church, and having
an opportunity to claim acquaintance
with many, it would be in their power,
if they chose, to do great injury to the
character of others. { Sober; Notes,
ver. 2. § Fazthfulin all things. To
their husbands, to their families, to
the church, to the Saviour.

12. Let the deacons be the husbands
of one wife; Notes,ver 2. § Ruling
their children and their own house:
well; Notes, ver. 4, 5.

13. For they that have used the
14 These things write I unto
thee, hoping to come unto thee
shortly :

15 But if I tarry long, that thou
mayest know how thou oughtest

to behave thyself in the house %
of God, which is the church of
the living God, the pillar and 1
ground of the truth,

@ 2 Ti.2.20. 1 or, siay.

office of a deacon well. Marg., ministered. The Greek word is the
same as deacon, meaning ministering,
or serving in this office. The sense
would be well expressed by the phrase,
deaconizing well. The word implies
nothing as to the exact nature of the
office. J Purchase to themselves.
Procure for themselves ; see this word
explained in the Notes on Acts xx.
28. GFA good degree. ‘The word
here used (6a9u0s) occurs nowhcre
else in the New Testament. It means,
properly, a step, as of a stair; and the
fair meaning is that of going up higher,
or taking an additional step of dignity,
honour, or standing. Sofarasthe word
is concerned, it may mean either an advance in office, in dignity, in respectability, or ininfluence. It cannot certainly be inferred that the apostle referred to a higher grade of office; for all
that the word essentially conveys is,
that, by exercising this office well, adeacon would secure additional respectability and influence inthechurch. Still,
it is possible that those who had performed the duties of this office well
were appointed to be preachers. They
may have shown so much piety, prudence, good sense, and ability to preside over the church, that it was
judged proper that they should be advanced to the office of bishops or pastors of the churches. Such a course
would not be unnatural. This is,
however, far from teaching that the
office of a deacon is a subordinate
office, with a view to an ascent to a
higher grade. § And great boldness
in the faith. The word here rendered boldness properly refers to boldness
in speaking; see it explained in the
Notes on Acts iv. 18; 2 Cor. iii. 12;
Phil. i. 20. Butthe word is commonly used to denote boldness of any kind
--openness, frankness, confidence, assurance; John viii. 18, 26; Mark viii.
32; 2 Cor. vii. 4. As it is here connected with faith--“ boldness in the
faith ’--it means, evidently, not so

much public speaking, as a manly
and independent exercise of faith in
Christ. The sense is, that by the
faithful performance of the duties of
the office of a deacon, and by the
kind of experience which a man
would have in that office, he would
establish a character of firmness in
the faith, which would show that he
was a decided Christian. ‘This passage, therefore, cannot be fairly used
to prove that the deacon was a
preacher, or that he belonged to a
grade of ministerial office from which
he was regularly to rise to that of a
presbyter.

14. These things write I unto thee,
hoping to come unto thee shortly.
That is, he hoped to come there to
give instructions personally, or to
finish, himself, the work which he had
commenced in Ephesus, and which
had been interrupted by his being
driven so unexpectedly away. This
verse proves that the apostle Paul did
not regard Timothy as the permanent
diocesan bishop of Ephesus. Would
any Episcopal bishop write this to an.
other bishop? If Timothy were the
permanent prelate of Ephesus, would
Paul have intimated that he expected
soon to come and take the work of
completing the arrangements there
into his own hands? In regard to
his expectation of going soon to Ephesus, see Notes on chap. i.3; comp.
the Introduction to the epistle.

15. But if [tarry long. Paul appears to have been uncertain how long
circumstances would require him to
be absent. Tle expected to return,
but it was possible that his hope ot
returning soon would be disappointed.
q That thou mayest know how thou
oughtest to behave thyself. That is.
that he might have just views about
settling the affairs of the church.
qi Jn the house of God. ‘This does not
mean ina place of public worship, nor

does it refer to propriety of deport-

ment there. It refers rather to the

church as a body of believers, and to
intercourse with them. The church
is called the “house of God,’ because it is that in which he dwells.
Formerly, his peculiar residence was
in the temple at Jerusalem; now that
the temple is destroyed, it is the
church of Christ, among his people.
{| Which is the church of the living
God. This seems to have been added
to impress the mind of Timothy with
the solemn nature of the duty which
he was to perform. What he did pertained to the honour and welfare of

the church of the living God, and.

hence he should feel the importance
of a correct deportment, and of a
right administration of its affairs.
{| The pillar and ground of the truth.
There has been no little diversity of
opinion among critics whether this
phrase is to be taken in connection
with the preceding, meaning that the
church is the pillar and ground of the
truth; or whether it is to be taken
in connection with what follows,
meaning that the principal support of
the truth was the doctrine there referred to--that God was manifest in
the flesh. Bloomfield remarks on
this: ‘ Itis surprising that any who
have any knowledge or experience in
Greek literature could tolerate so
harsh a construction as that which
arises from the latter method.’ The
more natural interpretation certainly
is, to refer it to the former; and this
is supported by the consideration that
it would then fall in with the object
of tne apostle. Jlis design here
seems to be, to impress Timothy with
a deep sense of the importance of correct conduct in relation to the church ;
of the responsibility of those who presided over it ; and of the necessity of
care and caution in the selection of
proper officers. To do this, he reminded him that the truth of God--
that revealed truth which he had given
to save the world--was intrusted to
the church; that it was designed to
preserve it pure, to defend it, and to
transmit it to future times; and that,
therefore, every one to whom the administration of the affairs of the
church was intrusted, should engage
in this duty with a deep conviction of

his responsibility. On the construction of the passage, Bloomfield Rosenmiiller, and Clarke, may be consulted. The word “pillar” means a
column, such as that by which a building is supported, and then any firm
prop or support ; Gal. ii. 9; Rev. iii.
12. If it refers to the church here, it
means that that is the support of the
truth, as a pillar is of a building. It
sustains it amidst the war of elements,
the natural tendency to fall, and the
assaults which may be made on it, and
preserves it when it would otherwise
tumble into ruin. Thus it is with the
church. It is intrusted with the
business of maintaining the truth, of
defending it from the assaults of
error, and of transmitting it to future
times. The truth 7s, in fact, upheld
in the world by the church. The
people of the world feel no interest in defending it, and it is to
the church of Christ that it is owing that it is preserved and transmitted from age to age. The word
rendered ‘ ground ” -- paiwua --
means, properly, a basis, or foundation. ‘the figure here is evidently
taken from architecture, as the use of
the word pillar is. The proper meaning of the one expression would be,
that truth is supported by the church,
as an edifice is by a pillar; of the
other, that the truth rests on the
church, as a house does on its foundation. It is that which makes it fixed,
stable, permanent ; that on which if
securely stands amidst storms and
tempests ; that which renders it firm
when systems of error are swept away
as a house that is built on the sand;
comp. Notes on Matt. vii. 24--27.
The meaning then is, that the stability of the truth on earth is dependent
onthe church. It is owing to thefact
that the church is itself founded on a
rock, that the gates of hell cannot
prevail against it, that no storms of
persecution can overthrow it, that the
truth is preserved from age to age.
Other systems of religion are swept
away; other opinions change; other
forms of doctrine vanish; but the
knowledge of the great system of redemption is preserved on earth unshaken, because the church is pre16 And, without controversy,
great is the mystery “of godli-

@ 1 Co.2.7. 1 manifested.

served, and because its foundations
cannot be moved. This does not refer, I suppose, to creeds and confessions, or to the decisions of synods and
councils ; but to the living spirit of
truth and piety in the church itself.
As certainly as the church continues
to live, so certain it will be that the
truth of God will be perpetuated
among men.

16. And, without controversy. Undeniably, certainly. The object of
the apostle is to say that the truth
which he was about to state admitted
of no dispute. | Great is the mystery. On the meaning of the word
mystery, see Notes on 1 Cor. ii. 7.
The word means that which had been
hidden or concealed. The meaning
here is not that the proposition which
he affirms was mysterious in the sense
that it was unintelligible, or impossible to be understood; but that the
doctrine respecting the incarnation
and the work of the Messiah, which
had been so long kept hidden from the
world, was a subject of the deepest importance. This passage, therefore,
should not be used to prove that there
is anything unintelligible, or anything
that surpasses human comprehension,
in that doctrine, whatever may be the
truth on that point; but that the doctrine which he now proceeds to state,
and which had been so long concealed
from mankind, was of the utmost consequence. {| Of godliness. The
word godliness means, properly, piety,
reverence, or religiousness. It is
used here, however, for the gospel
scheme, to wit, that which the apostle
proceeds to state. This “mystery,”
which had “been hidden from ages
and from generations, and which was
now manifest ’’ (Col. i. 26), was the
great doctrine on which depended religion everywhere, or was that which
constituted the Christian scheme.
4 God. Probably there is no passage
in the New Testament which has excited so much discussion among critics
as this, and none in reference to which
it is so difficult to determine the true

ness: God was manifest ! in the

flesh, » justified in the Spirit, ¢
b John 1.14; 1 John 1.2. c Mat.3.16; John
16.8,9; Ro. 1.43 1 Pe.3e183 | John 5.6.

reading. It is the only one, it is believed, in which the microscope has
been employed to determine the lines
of the letters used in a manuscript ;
and, after all that has been done to
ascertain the exact truth in regard to
it, still the question remains undecided. It is not the object of these
Notes to enter into the examination
of questions of this nature. A full investigation may be found in Wetstein.
The question which has excited so
much controversy is, whether the
original Greek word was @:0:, God,
or whether it was 4, who, or 6, which.
The controversy has turned, to a considerable degree, on the reading in
the Codex Alexandrinus; and a remark or two on the method in which
the manuscripts in the New Testament were written, will show the true
nature of the controversy. Greek
manuscripts were formerly written entirely in capital letters, and without
breaks or intervals between the words,
and without accents; see a full description of the methods of writing
the New Testament, in an article by
Prof. Stuart in Dr. Robinson’s Biblotheca Sacra, No. 2, pp. 254, seq.
The small, cursive Greek letters which
are now used, were not commonly employed in transcribing the New Testament, if at all, until the ninth or tenth
centuries. It was a common thing
to abridge or contract words in the
manuscript. ‘Thus, xe would be used
for rareo, father; xs for xvgns, Lord;
3s for Seo;, God, &c. The words thus
contracted were designated by a faint
line or dash over them. In this
place, therefore, if the original were
eC, standing for Sos, God, and the
line in the @, and the faint line over
it, were obliterated from any cause,
it would easily be mistaken for OC--
é;,--who. To ascertain which of these
is the true reading, has been the great
question ; and it is with reference to
this that the microscope has been resorted to in the examination of the
Alexandrian manuscript. It is now
generally admitted that the faint line

seen of angels, * preached unto
the Gentiles, > believed on ° in

@ Mat.4-11; Lu.2.13; Ep.3.10; 1 Pe.1.12.

over the word has been added by some

later hand, though not improbably by |

one who found that the line was nearly
obliterated, and who meant merely to
restore it, Whether the letter O was
originally written with a line within
it, making the reading God, it is now
said to be impossible to determine, in

consequence of the manuscript at this |

place having become so much worn by
frequent examination. The Vulgate
and the Syriac read it, who, or which.
The Vulgate is, ‘‘ Great is the sacrament of piety which was manifested
in the flesh.” The Syriac, *‘ Great
is the mystery of godliness, that he
was manifested in the flesh.” The
probability in regard to the correct
reading here, as it seems to me, is,
that the word,as originally written,was
$eos--God. At the same time, however, the evidence is not so clear that
it can be properly used in an argument. But the passage is not necessary to prove the doctrine which is
affirmed, on the supposition that that
is the correct reading. The same
truth is abundantly taught elsewhere ;
comp. Matt. i. 23; John i. 14.
{ Was manifest. Marg., Manifested.
The meaning is, appeared in the
flesh. J In the flesh.
ture; see this explained in the
Notes on Rom. i.3. The expression
here looks as though the true reading
of the much-disputed word was God.
It could not have been, it wouldseem
evident, , which, referring to “‘ mystery ;” for how could a mystery ‘be
manifested in the flesh?”’ Nor could

it be ¢;, who, unless that should refer |

to one who was more than a man ; for
how absurd would it be to say that
“a man was manifested, or appeared
in the flesh!’ How else could a
manappear? The phrase here means
that God appeared in human form, or

with human nature; and this is de- |
clared to be the “great’’ truth so,

long concealed from human view, but
now revealed as constituting the fundamental doctrine of the gospel. The

In human na- |
the world, received up into

glory.
b Ac.13.46,48 ; Ro.10.12,18.
d@ Lu.24,51 3 Ac.1.9.

o Coi.1.6.

expressions which follow in this verse
refer to God as thus manifested in the
flesh ; to the Saviour as he appeared
on earth, regarded as a divine and
human being. It was the fact that
he thus appeared and sustained this
character, which made the things
which are immediately specified so remarkable, and so worthy of attention.
q Justified in the Spirit. That is,
the incarnate person above referred
to; the Redeemer, regarded as God
and man. The word Spirit, here, it
is evident, refers to the Holy Spirit;
for (1.) it is not possible to attach
any intelligible idea to the phrase,
“he was justified by his own spirit, or
soul;’’ (2.) as the Holy Spirit performed so important a part in the
work of Christ, it is natural to suppose there would be some allusion
here to him ; and (3.) as the “angels”
are mentioned here as having been
with him, and as the Moly Spirit is
often mentioned in connection with
him, it is natural to suppose that there
would be some allusion to Him here.
The word justified, here, is not used
in the sense in which it is when applied to Christians, but in its more
common signification. It means to
vindicate, and the sense is, that he
was shown to be the Son of God by
the agency of the Holy Ghost; he
was thus vindicated from the charges
alleged against him. The Holy
Spirit furnished the evidence that he
was the Son of God, or justified his
claims. ‘Thus he descended on him
at his baptism, Matt. iii. 16; he
was sent to convince the world of
sin because it did not believe on him,
John xvi. 8,9; the Saviour cast out
devils by him, Matt. xii. 28; the
Spirit was given to him without
measure, John ili. 34, and the Spirit
was sent down in accordance with his
promise, to convert the hearts of men ;
Acts ii. 33. All the manifestations
| of God to him; all the power of workiing miracles by his agency; all the
influences imparted to the man Christ
Jesus, endowing him with such wisdom as man never had before, may be
regarded as an attestation of the Holy
Ghost to the divine mission of the
Lord Jesus, and of course as a vindication from all the charges against
him. In like manner, the descent of
the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost, and his agency in the conversion
of every sinner, prove the same thing,
and furnish the grand argument in vindication of the Redeemer that he was
sent from God. ‘To this the apostle
refers as a part of the glorious truth
of the Christian scheme now revealed
--the ‘‘ mystery of religion; as a
portion of the amazing records, the
memory of which the church was to
preserve as connected with the redemption of the world. § Seen of
angels. They were attendants on his
ministry, and came to him in times of
distress, peril, and want ; comp. Luke
ile O13 3 Xx, 143% xxlv.4 > eHebs I.
6; Matt.iv.11. They felt an interest
in him and his work, and they gladly
came to him in his sorrows and
troubles. The design of the apostle
is to give an impressive view of the
grandeur and glory of that work which
attracted the attention of the heavenly hosts, and which drew them from
the skies that they might proclaim his
advent, sustain him in his temptations,
witness his crucifixion, and watch
over himin the tomb. The work of
Christ, though despised by men, excited the deepest interest in heaven ;
comp. Notes on 1 Pet.i.12. § Preached unto the Gentiles. This is placed
by the apostle among the “great”
things which constituted the “mystery”
of religion. The meaning is, that it
was a glorious truth that salvation
might be, and should be, proclaimed
to all mankind, and that this was a
part of the important truths made
known in the gospel. Elsewhere this
is called, by way of eminence, “ the
mystery of the gospel;’’ that is, the
grand truth which had not been known
until the coming of the Saviour; see
Notes on Eph. vi. 19; Col. i. 26, 27;
iv. 3 Before his coming, a wall of

partition had divided the Jewish and |

Gentile world. The Jews regarded
the rest of mankind as excluded from

the covenanu mercies of God, and li
was one of the principal stumblingblocks in their way, in regard to the
gospel, that it proclaimed that all the
race was on a level, that that middle
wall of partition was broken down, and
that salvation might now be published
to all men ; comp. Acts xxii. 21; Eph.
ii. 14, 15; Rom. iii. 22; x. 11--20.
The Jew had no peculiar advantage
for salvation by being a Jew; the
Gentile was not excluded from the
hope of salvation. The plan of redemption was adapted to man as such
--without regard to his complexion,
country, customs, or laws. The blood
of Christ was shed for all, and wherever a human being could be found,
salvation might be freely offered
him. This zs a glorious truth; and
taken in all its bearings, and in reference to the views which then prevailed, and which have always more or
less prevailed about the distinctions
made among men by caste and rank,
there is scarcely any more glorious
truth connected with the Christian revelation, or one which will exert a
wider influence in promoting the welfare of man. Itis a great privilege
to be permitted to proclaim that all
men, in one respect--and that the
most important--are on a level; that
they are all equally the objects of the
divine compassion ; that Christ died
for one as really as for another ; that
birth, wealth, elevated rank, or beauty
of complexion, contribute nothing to
the salyation of one man; and that
poverty, a darker skin, slavery, or a
mneaner rank, do nothing to exclude
another from the favour of his Maker.
q Believed onin the world. ‘his also
is mentioned among the “great”
things which constitute the mystery
of revealed religion. But why is this
regarded as so remarkable as to be
mentioned thus? In point of importance, how can it be mentioned in
connection with the fact that God was
manifest in the flesh ; that he was vindicated by the Holy Ghost; that he
was an object of intense interest to
angelic hosts, and that his coming had
broken down the walls which had ¢eparated the world, and placed them
now on a level? I answer, perhaps

the tollowing circumstances may have
induced the apostle to place this

among the remarkable things evincing |

the greatness of this truth: (1.) The
strong improbability arising from the
greatness of the ‘‘ mystery,” that the
doctrines respecting the incarnate
Deity would be believed. Such is the

incomprehensible nature of many of |

the truths connected with the incarnation ; so strange does it seem that
God would become incarnate; so
amazing that he should appear in
human flesh and blood, and that the
incarnate Son of God should die, that
it might be regarded as a wonderful
thing that such a doctrine had in fact
obtained credence in the world. But
it was a glorious truth that all the
natural improbabilities in the case had
been overcome, and that men had
accredited the announcement. (2.)
The strong improbability that his message would be believed, arising from
the wickedness of the human heart.
Man, in all his history, had shown a
strong reluctance to believe any message from God, or any truth whatever revealed by him. The Jews had
rejected his prophets and put them to
death (Matt. xxili., Acts vii.) ; and
had at last put his own Son--their
Messiah--to death. Man everywhere
had shown his strong inclination to
unbelief. There is in the human soul
no elementary principle or germ of
faith in God. Every man is an unbeliever by nature--an infidel first ;
a Christian afterwards; an infidel as
he comes into the world; a believer
only as he is made so by grace The
apostle, therefore, regarded it as a
glorious fact that the message respecting the Saviour had been believed
in the world. It overcame such a
strong and universal reluctance to
confide in God, that it showed that
there was more than human powerin
operation to overcome this reluctance.
(3.) The extent to which this had been
done may have been a reason why he
thought it worthy of the place which
he gives it here It had been embraced, not by a few, but by thousands
in all lands where the gospel had been
published ; and it was proof of the
truth of the doctrine, and of the great

power of God, that such high mysteries
as those relating to redemption, and
so much opposed to the natural feelings of the human heart, should have
been embraced by so many. The same
thing occurs now. The gospel makes
its way against the native incredulity
of the world, and every new convert
is an additional demonstration that it
is from God, and a new illustration of
the greatness of this mystery. { Received up into glory. To heaven ;
comp. John xyii. 5; see Notes on Acts
i. 9. This is mentioned as among the
“great” or remarkable things pertaining to ‘‘ godliness,” or the Christian revelation, because it was an
event which had not elsewhere occurred, and was the crowning grandeur of the work of Christ. It was
an event that was fitted to excite the
deepest interest in heaven itself. No
event of more importance has ever
occurred in the universe, of which we
have any knowledge, than the re-ascension of the triumphant Son of God
toglory after having accomplished the
redemption of a world.

In view of the instructions of this
chapter, we may make the following
remarks.

1. The word bishop in the New
Testament never means what is now
commonly understood by it--a Prelate. It does not denote here, or anywhere else inthe New Testament, one
who has charge over a diocese composed of a certain district of country,
embracing a number of churches with
their clergy.

2. There are not ‘‘ three orders’’ of
clergy in the New Testament. The
apostle Paul in this chapter expressly
designates the characteristics of those
who should have charge of the church,
but mentions only two, “ bishops”
and ‘deacons.’ The former are
ministers of the word, having charge
of thespiritual interests of the church;
the other are deacons, of whom there
is no evidence that they were appointed to preach.---There is no ‘ third”
order. There is no allusion to any
one who was to be ‘“‘ superior ’ to the
“bishops” and ‘‘ deacons.” As the
apostle Paul was expressly giving instructions in regard to the organization of the church, such an omission
is unaccountable if he supposed there
was to be an order of “ prelates’”’ in
the church. Why isthere no allusion
to them? Why is there no mention
of their qualifications? If Timothy
was himself a prelate, was he to have
nothing to do in transmitting the
office to others? Were there no peculiar qualifications required in such
an order of men which it would be
proper to mention? Would it uot be
respectful, at least, in Paul to have
made some allusion to such an office,
if Timothy himself held it @

8. There is only one order of preachersin the church. The qualifications
of that order are specified with great
minuteness and particularity, as well
as beauty ; ver. 2--7. Noman really
needs to know more of the qualifications for this office than could be
learned from a prayerful study of this
passage,

4, A man who enters the ministry
ought to have high qualifications ;
ver. 2--7. No man ought, under any
pretence, to be put into the ministry
who has not the qualifications here
specified. Nothing is gained in any
department of human labour, by appointing incompetent persons to fill
it. A farmer gains nothing by employing a man on his farm who has no
proper qualifications for his business ;
a carpenter, a shoemaker, or a blacksmith, gains nothing by employing a
man who knows nothing about his
trade; and a neighbourhood gains
nothing by employing a man as a
teacher of a school who has no qualifications to teach, or who has a bad
character. Such a man would do
more mischief on a farm, or ina workshop, or in a school, than all the good
which he could do would compensate.
And so itisin the ministry. The true
object is not to increase the number
of ministers, 1t is to increase the number of those who are qualijied for their
work, and ifa man has not the quali-

fications laid down by the inspired |

apostle, he had better seek some other
calling.

5. The church is the guardian of
the truth ; ver. 15. It is appointed

it to future ages, The world is dependent on it for any just views of
truth. The church has the power,
and is intrusted with the duty, of preserving on earth a just knowledge of
God and of eternal things ; of the way
of salvation ; of the requirements of
pure morality :--to keep up the knowledge of that truth which tends to
elevate society and to save man. It
is intrusted with the Bible, to preserve uncorrupted, and to transmit to
distant ages and lands. It is bound
to maintain and assert the truth inits
creeds and confessions of faith. And
it is to preserve the truth by the holy
lives of its members, and to show in
their walk what is the appropriate
influence of truth on the soul. Whatever religious truth there is now on
the earth, has been thus preserved and
transmitted, and it still devolves on
the church to bear the truth of God
on to future times, and to diffuse it
abroad to distant lands.

6. The closing verse of this chapter
(ver. 16) gives us a most elevated
view of the plan of salvation, and of
its grandeur and glory. It would be
difficult, if not impossible, to condense
more interesting and sublime thought
into so narrow a compass as this.
The great mystery of the incarnation;
the interest of angelic beings in the
events of redemption; the effect of the
gospel on the heathen world ; the tendency of the Christian religion to
break down every barrier among men,
and to place all the race on a level;
its power in overcoming the unbelief
of mankind; and the re-ascension of
the Son of God to heaven, present
a series of most wonderful facts to
our contemplation. These things are
found in no other system of religion,
and these are worthy of the prefound
attention of every human being. The
manifestation of God in the flesh!
What a thought! It was worthy of
the deepest interest among the angels,
and it claims the attention of men,
for it was for men and not for angels
that he thus appeared in human form ;
comp. Notes on 1 Pet. i. 12.

7. How strange it is that man feels
no more interest in these things!

to preserve it pure, and to transmit | God was manifest in the flesh for his

times some shall depart from the

aspera. the Spirit speaketh ex-| faith, giving heed to seducing spiLN pressly, that ¢in the latter|rits, ® and doctrines of devils;

a Da.11.35; Mat.24.5-12; 2 Pe.2.1.

b Re.16.11.

salvation, but he does not regard it. |
Angels looked upon it with wonder ;
but man, for whom he came, feels
little interest in hisadvent or his work !
The Christian religion has broken
down the barrier among nations, and
has proclaimed that all men may be
saved ; yet the mass of men look on
this with entire unconcern. The
Redeemer ascended to heaven, having
finished his great work; but how
little interest do the mass of mankind
feel in this! He will come again to
judge the world ; but the race moves
on, regardless of this truth; unalarmed
at the prospect of meeting him ; feeling no interest in the assurance that
he has come and died for sinners, and
no apprehension in view of the fact
that he will come again, and that they
must stand at his bar. All heaven
was moved with his first advent, and
will be with his second ; but the earth
regards it with unconcern. Angelic
beings lookupon this with the deepest
auxiety, though they have no personal
interest init; man, though allhis great
interests are concentrated on it, regards it as a fable, disbelieves it all, |
and treats it with contempt and scorn.
Such is the difference between heaven
and earth--angels and men!

There is, in many respects, a strong
resemblance between the first part of
this chapter and 2 Thess. ii. ; comp.
Notes on that chapter. The leading
object of this chapter is to state to
Timothy certain things of which he
was constantly to remind the church ;
and having done this, the apostle gives
him some directions about his personal deportment. The chapter may
be conveniently divided into three
parts:

I. Timothy was to put the church
constantly in remembrance of the
great apostasy which was to occur,
and to. guard them against the doctrines which would be inculcated under that apostasy ; ver. 1--6.

(a) There was to be, in the latter
days, a great departing from the
faith ; ver, 1.

(6) Some of the characteristics of
that apostasy were these; there
would be a giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils ;
ver. 1. Those who taught would
hypocritically speak what they
knew to be falsehood, having
their own consciences seared ;
ver. 2. They would forbid to
marry, and forbid the use of certain articles of food which God
had appointed for man ; ver. 3--5.

II. Timothy wasto warn the churches against trifling and superstitious
views, such as the apostle calls “old
wives’”’ fables ; ver. 7--11.

(a) He was not to allow himself
to be influenced by such fables,
but at once to reject them;
ver. 7.

(6) The bodily exercise which the
friends of such ‘‘ fables” recommended was of no advantage to
the soul, and no stress ought to
be laid on it, as if it were important; ver. 8.

(c) That which was truly profitable, and which ought to be regarded as important, was godliness ; for that had promise of the
present life, and of the life to
come ; ver. 8.

(d) Timothy must expect, in giving
these instructions, to endure labour and to suffer reproach ;
nevertheless, he was faithfully to
inculcate these important truths ;
ver. 10, 11.

III. Various admonitions respecting his personal deportment ; ver. 12
--16.

(a) He was soto live that no one
would despise him or his ministry
because he was young ; ver. 12.

(6) He was to give a constant attention to his duties until the
apostle should himself return to
him ; ver. 13. ,

(c) He was carefully to cultivate
the gift which had been confer-_
red by his education, and by his |
ordination to the work of the
ministry ; ver. 14.

(d) He was to meditate on these
things, and to give himself wholly
to the work, so that his profiting
might appear to all; ver. 15.

(¢) He was to take good heed to
himself, and to the manner and
matter of his teaching, that he
might save himself and those who
heard him ; ver. 16.

1. Now the Spirit. Evidently the
Holy Spirit ; the Spirit of inspiration.
It is not quite certain, from this passage, whether the apostle means to
say that this was a revelation then
made to him, or whether it was a wellunderstood thing as taught by the
Holy Spirit. He himself elsewhere
refers to thissame prophecy, and John
also more than once mentions it;
comp. 2 Thess. ii.; 1 Johnii. 18;
Rev. xx. From 2 Thess. ii. 5, it
would seem that this was a truth
which had before been communicated
to the apostle Paul, and that he had
dwelt on it when he preached the gospel in Thessalonica. There is no improbability, however, in the supposition that so important a subject was
communicated directly by the Holy
Ghost to others of the apostles.--
Q Speaketh expressly. In express
words, pnrws. It was not by mere
hints, and symbols, and shadowy images of the future; it was in an open
and plain manner--in so many words.
The object of this statement seems to
be to call the attention of Timothy to
it in an emphatic manner, and to show
the importance of attending to it.
{ That inthelatter times. Under the
last dispensation, during which the
affairs of the world would close; see
Notes on Heb. i. 2. It does not
mean that this would occur just before
the end of the world, but that it would
take place during that last dispensation, and that the end of the world
would not happen wntil this should
take place ; see Notes on 2 Thess. ii.
B. § Some shall depart from the
faith. The Greek word here --
zrorrnrovres, apostesontat --is that
from which we have derived the word

apostatize, and would be properly so
rendered here. The meaning is, that
they would apostatize from the beliet
of the truths of the gospel. It does
not mean that, as individuals, they
would have been true Christians; but
that there would be a departure from
the great doctrines which constitute
the Christian faith. The ways in
which they would do this are immediately specified, showing what the apostle meant here by departing from
the faith. They would give heed to
seducing spirits, to the doctrines of
devils, &c. The use of the word
“ some,” here--rivss--does not imply
that the number would be small. The
meaning is, that certain persons would
thus depart, or that there would be an
apostasy of the kind here mentioned,
in the last days. From the parallel]
passage in 2 Thess. ii. 3, it would
seem that this was to be an extensive
apostasy. § Giving heed to seducing
spirits. Rather than to the Spirit of
God. It would be a part of their
system to yield to those spirits that
led astray. The spirits here referred
to are any that cause to err, and the
most obvious and natural construction
is to refer it to the agency of fallen
spirits. Though it may apply to false
teachers, yet, if so, it is rather to
them as under the influence of evil
spirits. This may be applied, so far
as the phraseology is concerned, to
any false teathing ; but it is evident
that the apostle had a specific apostasy in view--some great system that
would greatly corrupt the Christian
faith; and the words here should be
interpreted with reference to that.
It is true that men in all ages are
prone to give heed to seducing spirits;
but the thing referred to here is some
grand apostasy, in which the characteristics would be manifested, and the
doctrines held, which the apostle proceeds immediately to specify ; comp. 1
John iv.l. § And doctrines of devils.
Gr., ‘Teachings of demons ’’ -- }-
Sacxarioss Saiwviev. This may either
mean teachings respecting demons, or
teachings by demons. The particular
sense must be determined by the connection. Ambiguity of this kind in
the construction of words, where one

is in the genitive case, is not uncommon; comp. John xy. 9, 10; xxi. 15.
Instances of the construction where
the genitive denotes the object, and
should be translated concerning, occur in Matt. ix. 25, “The gospel of
the kingdom,” 72. @, concerning the
kingdom; Matt. x. 1, ‘Power of unclean spirits,” @. €., over or concerning unclean spirits; so, also, Actsiv.
9; Rom xvi: 16 5°2) Cor.i. 5; Eph.
iii. 1; Rev. ii. 13. Instances of construction where the genitive denotes
the agent, occur in the following
places: Luke i. 69, “‘ A horn of sal
vation,” 7? €.,a horn which produces
or causes salvation; John vi. 28;
Rom. iii. 22; 2 Cor. iv. 10; Eph. iv.
18; Col. ii. 11. Whether the phrase
here means that, in the apostasy,
they would give heed to doctrines
respecting demons, or to doctrines
which demons taught, cannot, it seems
to me, be determined with certainty.
If the previous phrase, however,
means that they would embrace doctrines taught by evil spirits, it can
hardly be supposed that the apostle
would immediately repeat the same
idea in another form; and then the
sense would be, that one characteristic of the time referred to would be
the prevalent teaching respecting demons. They would “ give heed to,”
or embrace, some peculiar views respecting demons. The word here
rendered devils is da:meovia --demons.
This word, among the Greeks, denoted the following things: (1.) A god
or goddess, spoken of the heathen
gods ; comp. in New Testament, Acts
xvii. 18. (2.) A divine being, where
no particular one was specified, the
agent or author of good or evil fortune; of death, fate, d&c. In this
sense it is often used in Homer. (3.)
The souls of men of the golden age,
which dwelt unobserved upon the
earth to regard the actions of men,
and to defend them--tutelary divinities, or geniuses--like that which Socrates regarded as his constant attendant. Xen. Mem. 4. 8.1.5 ; Apol.
Soc. 4. See Passow. (4.) To this
may be added the common use in the
New Testament, where the word denotes a demon in the Jewish sense--

|
a bad spirit, subject to Satan, and
under his control; one of the host of
fallen angels --commonly, but not
very properly rendered devil or devils.
These spirits were supposed to wander
in desolate places, Matt.xil. 43; comp.
Isa. xiii. 21; xxxiv. 14; or they
dwell in the air, Eph. ii. 2, They
were regarded as hostile to mankind,
John viii. 44; as able to utter heathen oracles, Acts xvi. 17; as lurking
in the idols of the heathen, 1 Cor. x.
20; Rev. ix. 20. They are spoken of
as the authors of evil, Jamesii. 19;
comp. Eph. vi. 12, and as having the
power of taking possession of a person,
of producing diseases, or of causing
mania, as in the case of the demoniacs, Luke iv. 33 ; vili. 27 ; Matt. xvii.
18; Mark vii. 29, 30 ; and often elsewhere. Thedoctrine, therefore, which
the apostle predicted would prevail,
might, so far as the word used ts
concerned, be either of the following :
(1.) Accordance with the prevalent
notions of the heathen respecting false
gods; or a falling into idolatry similar to that taught in the Grecian mythology. It can hardly be supposed,
however, that he designed to say that
the common notions of the heathen
would prevail in the Christian church,
or that the worship of the heathen
gods as such would be set up there
(2.) An accordance with the Jewish
viewsrespecting demoniacal possesions
and the power of exorcising them. If
this view should extensively prevail
in the Christian church, it would be
in accordance with the language of
the prediction. (3.) Accordance with
the prevalent heathen notions respecting the departed spirits of the good
andthe great, who were exalted to
the rank of demi-gods, and who,
though invisible, were supposed still
to exert an important influence in
favour of mankind. To these beings,
the heathen rendered extraordinary
homage. They regarded them as
demi-gods. They supposed that they
took a deep interest in human affairs.
They invoked their aid, They set
apart days in honour of them. They
offered sacrifices, and performed rites
and ceremonies to propitiate their
favour. ‘They were regarded as a
sort of mediators or intercessors between manand the superior divinities.
If these things are found anywhere in
the Christian church, they may be
regarded as a fulfilment of this prediction, for they were not of a nature
to be foreseen by any human sagacity.
Now it so happens, that they are in
fact found in the Papal communion,
and in a way that corresponds fairly
to the meaning of the phrase, as it
would have been understood in the
time of the apostle. There is, first,
the worship of theVirgin and of the
saints, or the extraordinary honours
rendered to them--corresponding almost entirely with the reverence paid
by the heathen to the spirits of heroes
or to demi-gods. The saints are supposed to have extraordinary power
with God, and their aid is implored
as intercessors. The Virgin Mary is
invoked as ‘‘the mother of God,” and
as having power still to command her
Son. The Papists do not, indeed,
offer the same homage to the saints
which they do to God, but they ask
their aid ; they offer prayer to them.
The following extracts from the
catechism of Dr. James Butler, approved and recommended by Dr.
Kenrick, “‘ Bishop of Philadelphia,”
expresses the general views of Roman
Catholics on this subject. “Q. How
do Catholics distinguish between the
honour they give to God, and the
honour they give to the saints, when
they pray to God andthe saints? A.
Of God alone they beg grace and
mercy; and of the saints they only
ask the assistance of their prayers ?
Q.Is it lawful to recommend ourselves
to the saints, and ask their prayers
A. Yes; as it is lawful and a very
pious practice to ask the prayers of
our fellow-creatures on earth, and to
pray for them.” In the “ Prayer to
be said before mass,” the following
language occurs: ‘In union with
the holy church and its minister, and
invoking the blessed Virgin Mary,
Mother of God, and all the angels
and saints, we now offer the adorable
sacrifice of the mass,” d&c. In the
General Confession, it is said--* I
confess to Almighty God, to the bles-

rA. D.58.

Michael the archangel, to blessed
John the Baptist, to the holy aposties
Peter and Paul, and to all the saints,
that I have sinned exceedingly.” So
also, the council of Trent declared,
Sess. 25, Concerning the invocation
of the saints, “that it is good and
useful to supplicate them, and to fly
to their prayers, power, and aid ; but
that they who deny that the saints are
to be invoked, or who assert that they
do not pray for men, or that their invocation of them is idolatry, hold an
impious opinion. See also Peter
Den’s Moral Theology, translated by
the Rev. J. F. Berg, pp. 342--356.
Secondly, in the Papal communion
the doctrine of exorcism is still held
--implying a belief that evil spirits or
demons have power over the human
frame--a, doctrine which comes fairly
under the meaning of the phrase
here --“‘ the doctrine respecting demons.” ‘Thus, in Dr. Butler’s Catechism: ‘*‘ Q. What do you mean by
exorcism? A. The rites and prayers
instituted by the church for the casting out devils, or restraining them
from hurting persons, disquieting
places, or abusing any of God’s creatures to our harm. Q,. Has Christ
given his church any such power over
devils? A. Yes, he has; see St.
Matt. x. 1; St. Mark ili. 15; St. Luke
ix. 1. Andthat this power was not
to die with the apostles, nor to cease
after the apostolic age, we learn from
the perpetual practice of the church,
and the experience of all ages.’ The
characteristic here referred to by the
apostle, therefore, is one that applies
precisely to the Roman Catholic
communion, and cannot be applied
with the same fitness to any other
association calling itself Christian on
earth. There can be no doubt, therefore, that the Holy Spirit designed
to designate that apostate church.

2. Speaking lies in hypocrisy.
> Ey Omroxpios Pevdorayar. Or rather,
“by, or through the hypocrisy of
those speaking lies. So it is rendered by Whitby, Benson, Macknight, and others. Our translators
have rendered it as if the word translated “speaking lies ’'--Jpevdordyav--

sed Mary, ever Virgin, to blessed! referred to demons, or, devils,--3a:-

2 Speaking ¢ lies in hypocrisy ; , having their conscience seared with

@ Mat.7.15; Ro 16.18.

woviwvx--in the previous verse. But
there are two objections tothis. One
is, that then, as Koppe observes, the
words would have been inverted--
Yevdoroywy tv dxoxpices. The other
is, that if that construction is adopted, it must be carried through the
sentence, and then all the phrases
“speaking lies,’ ‘‘having their conscience seared,” ‘‘forbidding to marry,” &c., must be referred to demons.
The preposition tv, 7m, may denote
by or through, and is often so used.
If this be the true construction, then
it will mean that those who departed
from the faith did it by or through
the hypocritical teachings of those
who spoke lies, or who knew that
they were inculcating falsehoods ; of
those whose conscience was seared ;
of those who forbade to marry, &c.
The meaning then will be, “In the
last days certain persons will depart
from the faith of the gospel. This
apostasy will essentially consist in
their giving heed to spirits that lead
to error, and in embracing corrupt
and erroneous views on demonology,
or in reference to invisible beings between us and God. This they will
do through the hypocritical teaching
of those who inculcate falsehood ;
whose consciences are seared,’ &c.
The series of characteristics, therefore, which follow, are those of the
teachers, not of the taught; of the
ministers of the church, not of the
great body of the people. The apostle meant to say that this grand apostasy would occur under the influence of a hypocritical, hardened, and
arbitrary ministry, teaching their
own doctrines instead of the divine
commands, and forbidding that which
God had declared to be lawful. In
the clause before us-- speaking lies
in hypocrisy’’--two things are implied, first, that the characteristic
of those referred to would be that
they would “speak lies ;” second,
that this would be done hypocritically. .In regard to the first, there
can be no doubt among Protestants
of its applicability to the Papal com-

a hot iron;

munion. The entire series of doctrines respecting the authority of
the Pope, purgatory, the mass, the
invocation of the saints, the veneration of relics, the seven sacraments,
the authority of tradition, the doctrine of merit, d&c., is regarded as
false. Indeed, the system could not
be better characterized than by saying that it is a system “speaking
les.”” The entire scheme attempts
to palm falsehood upon the world, in
the place of the simple teaching of
the New Testament. The only question is, whether this is done “in hypocrisy,” or hypocritically. In regard to this, it is not necessary to
maintain that there is no sincerity
among the ministers of that communion, or that all are hypocritical in
their belief and their teaching. The
sense is, that this is the general characteristic, or that this is understood
by the leaders or prime movers in
that apostasy. In regard to the ap
plicability of this to the ministers of
the Papal communion, and the ques
tion whether they teach what they
know to be false, we may observe,
(1.) that many of them are men of
eminent learning, and there can be
no reason to doubt that they know
that many of the Catholic legends
are false, and many of the doctrines
of their faith contrary to the Bible.
(2.) Not a few of the things in that
communion must be known by them
to be false, though not known to be
so by the people. Such are all the
pretended miracles wrought by the
relics of the saints; the liquefying
of the blood of St. Januarius, &c.;
see Notes on 2 Thess. ii. 9. As the
working of these tricks depends
wholly on the priesthood, they must
know that they are ‘speaking lies
in hypocrisy.” (3.) The matter of
fact seems to be, that when young
men who have been trained in the
Catholic church, first turn their attention to the ministry, they are sincere. They have not yet been made
acquainted with the “mysteries of
iniquity” in the communion in which

3 Korvidding to marry, and com- | manding to abstain from meats,

they have been trained, and they do
not suspect the deceptions that are
practised there When they pass
through their course of study, however, and become acquainted with
the arts and devices on which the
fabric rests, and with the scandalous
lives of many of the clergy, they are
shocked to find how corrupt and false
the whole system is. But they are
now committed. They have devoted
their lives to this profession. They
are trained now to this system of imposture, and they must continue to
practise and perpetuate the fraud, or
abandon the church, and subject themselves to all the civil and ecclesiastical
disabilities which would now follow if
they were to leave and reveal all its
frauds and impostures. A gentleman
of high authority, and who has had as
good an opportunity as any man living
to make accurate and extensive observations, stated to me, that this was
a common thing in regard to the
Catholic clergy in France and Italy.
No one can reasonably doubt that
the great body of that clergy must
be apprized that much that is relied
on for the support of the system is
mere legend, and that the miracles
which are pretended to be wrought
are mere trick and imposture.--
q Having their conscience seared
with a hot iron. The allusion here
is doubtless to the effect of applying
a hot iron to the skin. The cauterized part becomes rigid and hard,
and is dead to sensibility. So with
the conscience of those referred to.
Tt has the same relation to a conscience that is sensitive and quick in
its decisions, that a cauterized part
of the body has to a thin, delicate, and
sensitive skin, Such a conscience
exists in a mind that will practise
delusion without coucern ; that will
carry on a vast system of fraud without wincing; that will incarcerate,
scourge, or burn the innocent without
compassion; and that will practise
gross enormities, and indulge in sensual gratifications under the mask of
piety. Whilethere are many eminent
exceptions to an application of this

to the Papal communion, yet this description will apply better to the Roman priesthood in the time of Luther
--and in many other periods of the
world--than to any other body of men
that ever lived.

3. Forbidding to marry. That is,
“They will depart from the faith
through the hypocritical teaching--
of those who forbid to marry;” see
Notes on ver. 2. This does not necessarily mean that they would prohibit marriage altogether, but that
it would be a characteristic of their
teaching that marriage would be forbidden, whether of one class of persons
or many. They would commend and
enjoin celibacy and virginity. They
would regard such a state, for certain
persons, as more holy than the married condition, and would consider it
as so holy that they would absolutely
prohibit those who wished to be most
holy from entering into the relation.
It is needless to say how accurately
this applies to the views of the papacy
in regard to the comparative purity
and advantages of a state of celibacy,
and to their absolute prohibition of
the marriage of the clergy. Thetenth
article of the decree of the Council
of Trent, in relation to marriage, will
show the general view of the papacy
on that subject.--‘‘ Whosoever shall
say that the married state is to be
preferred to a state of virginity, or
celibacy, and that it is not better and
more blessed to remain in virginity,
or celibacy, than to be joined in marriage; let him be accursed!” Comp.
Peter Dens’ Moral Theology, pp. 497
--500. ¥J And commanding to abstain
from meats, &c. The word meat in
the Scriptures, commonly denotes
food of all kinds; Matt. iii. 4; vi. 25;
x. 10; xv. 87. This was the meaning of the word when the translation
of the Bible was made. It is now used
by us, almost exclusively, to denote
animal food. The word here used--
Ppava--means, properly, whatever is
eaten, and may refer to animal flesh,
fish, fruit, or vegetables. It is often,
however, in the New Testament, employed particularly to denote the flesh

which God hath created to be received @ with thanksgiving of
a Ec.5.18.

of animals; Heb, ix. 10; xiii. 9; Rom.

xiv. 15, 20: 1 Cor. vili. 8, 13. As it
was animal food particularly which
was forbidden under the Jewish code,
and as the questions on this subject
among Christians would relate to the
same kinds of prohibition, it is probable that the word has the same limited signification here, and should be
- taken as meaning the same thing
that the word meat does with us.
To forbid the use of certain meats,
is here described as one of the characteristics of those who would instruct the church in the time of the
great apostasy. It is not necessary
to suppose that there would be an
entire prohibition, but only a prohibition of certain kinds, and at certain
seasons. That this characteristic is
found in the papacy more than anywhere else in the Christian world, it
is needless to prove. The following
questions and answers from Dr. Butler’s Catechism, will show what is the
sentiment of Raman Catholics on this
subject. ‘Q. Are there any other
commandments besides the Ten Commandments of God? A. There are

the commandments or precepts of the |

church, whichare chieflysix. Q.What
are we obliged to do by the second
commandment of the church? A.
To give part of the year to fast and
abstinence. Q. What do you mean
by fast-days? A. Certain days on
which we are allowed but one meal,
and forbidden flesh meat. Q. What
do you mean by days of abstinence ?
A. Certain days on which we are
forbidden to eat flesh meat ; but are
allowed the usual number of meals.
Q. Is it strictly forbidden by the
church to eat flesh meat on days of
abstinence? A. Yes; and to eat
flesh meat on any day on which it
is forbidden, without necessity and
leave of the church, is very sinful.”
Could there be a more impressive
and striking commentary on what
the apostle says here, that ‘‘in the
latter days some would depart from
the faith, under the hypocritical teach-

them which believe and know the
truth.

ing of those who commanded to abstain
from meats?”’ The authority claimed
by the papacy to issue commands on
this subject, may be seen still further
by the following extract from the same
catechism, showing the gracious permission of the church to the “ faithful.”
“The abstinence on Saturday is dispensed with, for the faithful throughout the United States, for the space
of ten years (from 1833), except when
a fast falls on a Saturday. The use
of flesh meat is allowed at present
by dispensation in the diocess of
Philadelphia, on all the Sundays of
Lent, except Palm Sunday, and once
a day on Monday, Tuesday, and
Thursday in each week, except the
Thursday after Ash Wednesday, and
also excepting Holy-week.’’ Such
is the Roman Catholic religion!
See also Peter Dens’ Moral Theology, pp. 321--330. It is true that
what is said here might apply to the
Essenes, as Koppe supposes, or to
the Judaizing teachers, but it applies
more appropriately and fully to the
Papal communion than to any other
body of men professing Christianity,
and taken in connection with the
other characteristics of the apostasy,
there can be no doubt that the reference is to that. | Which God hath
created. The articles of food which
he has made, and which he has designed for the nourishment of man.
The fact that God had created them
was proof that they were not to be
regarded as evil, and that it was not to
be considered as a religious duty to abstain from them. All that God has
made is good in its place, and what is
adapted to be food for man is not to be
refused or forbidden; comp. Eccl. v.
18. There can be no doubt that in the
apostasy here referred to, those things
would be forbidden, not because they
were injurious or hurtful in their
nature, but because it might be made
a part of a system of religion of selfrighteousness and because there might
be connected with such a prohibition
the belief of special merit.”
4 For every creature of God
is good, and nothing to be refused,
if it be received with thanksgiving:

5 For it is sanctified by the word
of God and prayer.

4, For every creature of God is

good. Gr., all the creatures, or all
that God has created--riy xricua :
that is, as he made it; comp. Gen. i.
10, 12, 18, 31. It does not mean
that every moral agent remains good
as long as he is a creature of God,
but moral agents, men and angels,
were good as they were made at first ;
Gen. 1. 31. Nor does it mean that all
that God has made is good for every
object to which it can be applied. It
is good in its place ; good for the purpose for which he made it. But it
should not be inferred that a thing
which is poisonous in its nature is
good for food, because it is a creation
of God. It is good only in its place,
and for the ends for which he intendedit. Nor should it be inferred that
what God has made is necessarily
good after it has been perverted by
man. As God made it originally, it
might have been used without injury.
Apples and peaches were made good,
and are still useful and proper as articles of food; rye and Indian-corn
are good, and are admirably adapted
to the support of man and beast, but
it does not follow that all that man
can make of them is necessarily good.
He extracts from them a poisonous
liquid, and then saysthat ‘every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused.’’ But is this a fair use of
this passage of Scripture? True, they
are good--they are to be received
with gratitude as he made them, and
as applied to the uses for which he
designed them; but why apply this
passage to prove that a deleterious
beverage, which man has extracted
from what God has made, is good also,
and good for all the purposes to which
it can be applied? As God made
these things, they are good. As man
perverts them, it is no longer proper
to call them the “ creation of God,’’
and they may be injurious in the

6 If thou put the brethren in
remembrance of these things, thou
shalt be a good minister of Jesus
Christ, nourished up @ in the words
of faith and of good doctrine, where-

unto thou hast attained
a Je.15.16; 1 Pe.2.2.

highest degree. This passage, therefore, should not be adduced to vindicate the use of intoxicating drinks.
As employed by the apostle, it had
no such reference, nor does it contain any principle which can properly
receive any such application. {| And
nothing to be refused. Nothing that
God has made, for the purposes for
which he designed it. The necessity
of the case-- the ‘exigency of the
passage ’’--requires this interpretation. It cannot mean that we are not
to refuse poison if offered in our food,
or that we are never to refuse food
that is to us injurious or offensive;
nor can it any more mean that weare
to receive all that may be offered to
us as a beverage. The sense is, that
as God made it, and for the purposes
for which he designed it, it is not to
be held to be evil; or, which is the
same thing, it is not to be prohibited
as if there were merit in abstaining
from it. It is not to be regarded asa
religious duty to abstain from food
which God has appointed for the supportofman. § Jf it be received with
thanksgiving ; see Notes on 1 Cor. x.
31; Eph. v. 20; Phil. iv. 6.

5. For it is sanctified by the word
of God. By the authority or permission of God. It would be profane or
unholy if he had forbidden it; it is
made holy or proper for our use by
his permission, and no command of
man can make it unholy or improper ;

comp. Gen. 1. 29; ix. 83. J And
prayer. If it is partaken of with
prayer. By prayer we are enabled ta

receive it with gratitude, and everything that we eat or drink may thus
be made a means of grace.

6. If thow put the brethren in remembrance of these things. Of the
truths just stated. They are, therefore, proper subjects to preach upon.
It is the duty of the ministry to show
to the people of their charge what is

7 But refuse profane and old
wives’ fables, @ and exercise thyself
rather unto godliness.

8 For bodily exercise profiteth

@ Ti.1.14. 1 or, for a little time.

error and where it may be apprehended, and to caution them to avoid it.
4 Nourished up in the words of faith.
That is, you will be then “a gcod
minister of Jesus Christ, as becomes
one who has been nourished up in the
words of faith, or trained up in the
doctrines of religion.” The apostle
evidently designs to remind Timothy
of the manner in which he had been
trained, and to show him how he might
act in accordance with that. From
one who had been thus educated, it
was reasonable to expect that he
would be a faithful and exemplary
minister of the gospel. § Whereunto
thou hast attained --The word used
here means, properly, to accompany
side by side; to follow closely; to
follow out, trace, or examine. It is
rendered shall follow, in Matt. xvi.
17; having had understanding, in
Luke i. 3; and hast fully known, in
2 Tim. iii. 10. It does not elsewhere
occur in the New Testament. The
meaning here seems to be, that Timothy had followed out the doctrines
in which he had been trained to their
legitimate results ; he had accurately
seen and understood their bearing, as
leading him to embrace the Christian
religion. His early training in the
Scriptures of the Old Testament (2
Tim. i. 5; iii. 15), he had now fully
carried out, by embracing the Lord
Jesus as the Messiah, and by evincing
the proper results of the early teaching which he had received in connection with that religion. If he now
followed the directions of the apostle,
he would be a minister of the Lord
Jesus, worthy of the attainments in
religious knowledge which he had

made, and of the expectations which |

had been formed of him. No young
man should, by neglect, indolence, or
folly, disappoint the reasonable expectations of his friends. Their cherished hopes are a proper ground of
appeal to him, and it may be properly
demanded of every one that he shall

j1 little; but godliness » is profitable
unto all things, having promise ¢
of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come.

b chap.6.6. ¢ Ps.84.11.

carry out to their legitimate results
all the principles of his early training,
and that he shall be in his profession
all that his early advantages make it
reasonable to expect that he will be.

7. But refuse. That is, refuse to
pay attention to them, or reject them.
Do not consider them of sufficient importance to occupy your time. {J ProJane. The word here used doesnot
mean that the fables here referred to
were blasphemous or impious in their
character, but that they had not the
character of true religion ; 2 Tim. ii.
16. § And old wives’. Old women’s
stories ; or such as old women held to
be important. The word is used here,
as it is often with us, in the sense of
silly. Fables. Fictions, or stories
that were not founded on fact. The
heathen religion abounded with fictions of this kind, and the Jewish
teachers were also remarkable for the
number of such fables which they had
introduced into their system. It is
probable that the apostle referred
here particularly to the Jewish fables,
and the counsel which he gives to
Timothy is, to have nothing to do with
them. { And exercise thyself rather
unto godliness. Rather than attempt
to understand those fables. Do not
occupy your time and attention with
them, but rather cultivate piety, and
seek to become more holy.

8. For bodily exercise profiteth
little. Marg., for a little time. The
Greek will admit of either interpre-
| tation, and what is here affirmed is
true in either sense. The bodily ex-
|ercise to which the apostle refers is
of little advantage compared with that
| piety which he recommended Timothy
to cultivate, and whatever advantage
could be derived from it, would be but
'of short duration. ‘ Bodily exercise”
here refers, doubtless, to the mortifications of the body by abstinence and

| penance which the ancient devotees,

and particularly the Essenes, made so
important as a part of their religion.

The apostle does not mean to say that | earthly possessions directly as its re-

bodily exercise is in itself improper,
or that no advantage can be derived
from it in the preservation of health,

but he refers to it solely as a means,

of religion; as supposed to promote
holiness of heart and of life. By
these bodily austerities it was supposed that the corrupt passions would
be subdued, the wanderings of an unholy fancy fettered down, and the
soul brought into conformity to God.

In opposition to this supposition, the |

apostle has here stated a great principle which experience has shown to
be universally correct, that such austerities do little to promote holiness,
but much to promote superstition.
There must be a deeper work on the
soul than any which can be accomplished by the mere mortification of
the body ; see Notes on Col. ii. 23,
and comp. 1 Cor. ix. 25--27. {J But
godliness. Piety or religion. { Js
profitable unto all things. In every
respect. There is not an interest of
man, in reference to this life, or to the
life to come, which it would not promote. It is favourable to health of
body, by promoting temperance, industry, and frugality; to clearness
and vigour of intellect, by giving just
views of truth, and of the relative
value of objects; to peace of conscience, by leading to the faithful
performance of duty; to prosperity in
business, by making a man sober,
honest, prudent, and industrious ; toa
good name, by leading a man to pursue such a course of life as shall deserve it; and to comfort in trial,
calmness in death, and immortal peace
beyond the grave. Religion injures
no one. It does not destroy health ;
it does not enfeeble the intellect; it
does not disturb the conscience; it
does not pander to raging and consuming passions; it does not diminish
the honour of a good name; it furnishes no subject of bitter reflection
on a bed of death. It makes no one
the poorer; it prompts to no crime ;
it engenders no disease. If a man
should do that which would most certainly make him happy, he would be
decidedly and conscientiously religious ; and though piety promises no

ward, and secures no immunity from
sickness, bereavement, and death,yet
there is nothing which so certainly
secures a steady growth of prosperity
in a community as the virtues which
it engenders and sustains, and there
is nothing else that will certainly
meet the ills to which man is subject.
I have no doubt that it is the real
conviction of every man, that if he
ever becomes certainly happy, he will
be a Christian; and I presume that
it is the honest belief of every one
that the true and consistent Christian
is the most happy of men. And yet,
with this conviction, men seek everything else rather than religion, and
in the pursuit of baubles, which they
know cannot confer happiness, they
defer religion--the only certain source
of happiness at any time--to the last
period of life, or reject it altogether.
{| Having promise of the life that now
is. That is, it furnishes the promise
of whatever is really necessary for us
in this life. The promises of the
Scriptures on this subject are abundant, and there is probably not a want
of our nature for which there might
not be found a specific promise in the
Bible; comp. Ps. xxiii. 1 ; lxxxiv. 11;
Phil. iv. 19. Religion promises us
needful food and raiment, Matt. vi.
25--383; Isa. xxxiii. 16; comfort in
affliction, Deut. xxxiii. 27; Job v.
19; Ps. xlvi; Heb. xiii. 5; support
in old age and death, Isa. xlvi. 4; Ps.
xxlii. 4; comp. Isa. xlili. 2; and a
good reputation, an honoured name
when we are dead; Ps. xxxvii. 1--6.
There is nothing which man really
needs in this life, which is not promised by religion ; and if the inquiry
were made, it would be surprising to
many, even with our imperfect religion, how literally these promises
are fulfilled. David, near the close of
a long life, was able to bear this remarkable testimony on this subject :
“J have been young, and nowam old;
yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread;”’
Ps. xxxvii. 25. And now, of the
beggars that come to our doors, to
how few of them can we give a cup of
cold water, feeling that we are giving

9 This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptation.

10 For therefore we both Iabour
and suffer reproach, because we

it to a disciple! How rare is it that
a true Christian becomes a beggar!
Of the inmates of our alms-houses,
how very few give any evidence that
they have religion !

trust in the living God, who is the
Saviour of all men, specially of
those that believe.

he laboured and suffered because he
confided in God, or that this was the
reason of his sufferings, but rather
that this trust in the living God was

They have been {bis support in these labours and trials.

brought there by vice, not by religion. }‘‘ We labour and suffer reproach, fo7'

True piety sends none to the almshouse ; it would have saved the great
mass of those who are there from ever
needing the charity of their fellowmen. {f And of that which is to
come. Kternal life. And it is the
only thing that promises such a life.
Infidelity makes no promise of future
happiness. Its business is to take
away all the comforts which religion
gives, and to leave men to go toa
dark eternity with no promise or hope
cf eternal joy. Vice promises pleasures in the present life, but only to
disappoint its votaries here ; it makes
no promise of happiness in the future
world. There is nothing that furnishes
any certain promises of happiness
hereafter, in this world or the next,
but religion. “God makes no promise
of such happiness to beauty, birth, or
blood ; to the possession of honours or
wealth ; to greatattainmentsin science
and learning, or to the graces of external accomplishment. All these,
whatever flattering hopes of happiness
they may hold out here, have no assurance of future eternal bliss. It is
not by such things that God graduates
the rewards of heaven, and it is only
prety or true religion that furnishes
any assurance of happiness in the
world to come.

9. This is a faithful saying; see
Notes on chap. i. 15.

10. For therefore we both labour
and suffer reproach. In making this
truth known, that all might be saved,
or that salvation was offered to all.
The labour was chiefly experienced
in carrying this intelligence abroad
among the Gentiles; the reproach
arose chiefly from the Jews for doing
it. Y Because we trust in the living
God. ‘This does not mean, as our
translation would seem to imply, that

we have hope in God. Through him
we look for salvation. We believe
that he has made this known to men,
and believing this, we labour earnestly
to make it known, even though it be
attended with reproaches.”’ The
sentiment is, that the belief that God
has revealed a plan of salvation for all
men, and invites al] men to be saved,
will make his friends willing to labour
to make this known, though it be attended with reproaches. {| Who ts
the Saviour of all men. This must
be understood as denoting that he is
the Saviour of all men in some sense
which differs from what is immediately
affirmed--“ especially of those that
believe.” There is something pertaining to them in regard to salvation
which does not pertain to “all men.”
It cannot mean that he brings all men
to heaven, especially those who believe
--for this would be nonsense. And if
he brings all men actually to heaven,
how can it be especially true that he
does this in regard to those who believe? Does it mean that he saves
others without believing? But this
would be contrary to the uniform doctrine of the Scriptures; see Mark
xvi. 16. When, therefore, it is said
that he “is the Saviour of all men,
especially of those who believe,” it
must mean that there is a sense in
which it is true that he may be called
the Saviour of all men, while, at the
same time, it is actually true that
those only are saved who believe.
This may be true in two respects.
(1.) As he is the Preserver of men
(Job vii. 20), for in this sense he may
be said to save them from famine, and
war, and peril--keeping them from

‘day to day; comp. Ps. evii. 28; (2.)

as he has provided salvation for ali
men. He is thus their Saviour--and
11 These things command and
each.
12 Let @ no man despise thy
@ Ti. 2.7,15.

may be called the common Saviour of
all ; that is, he has confined the offer
of salvation to no one class of men ;
he has not limited the atonement to
one division of the human race ; and
he actually saves all who are willing
to be saved by him.

[See supplementary Note 2 Cor. v. 24. This

passage however is not regarded a proof text
now on the extent of the atonement, as the
fair rendering of sor%p is ‘“‘ Preserver.’” Dr.
Wardlaw has accordingly excluded it in his
recent work.]
{ Specially of those that believe. This
is evidently designed to limit the previous remark. If it had been left
there, it might have been inferred
that he would actually save all men.
But the apostle held no such doctrine,
and he here teaches that salvation is
actually limited to those who believe.
This is the speciality or the peculiarity in the salvation of those who actuaily reach heaven, that they are
believers; see Notes on Mark xvi. 16.
All men, therefore, do not enter heaven, unless all men have faith. But
is this so? What evidence is there
that the great mass of mankind die
believing on the Son of God?

ll. These things command and
teach. As important doctrines, and
as embracing the sum of the Christian
system. It follows from this, that a
minister of the gospel is solemnly
bound to teach that there is a sense
in which God is the Saviour of all
men. He is just as much bound to
teach this, as he is that only those
will be saved who believe. It is a
glorious truth--and it is a thing for
which a man should unceasingly give
thanks to God that he may go and
proclaim that He has provided salvation for all, and is willing that all
should come and live.

12. Let no man despise thy youth.
That is, do not act in such a manner
that any shall despise you on account
of your youth. Act as becomes a
minister of the gospel in all things,
and in sucha way that men will re-

youth ; but be thou an example of
the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith,
in purity.

spect you as such, though you are
young. It is clear from this that
Timothy was then a young man, but
his exact age there is no means of
determining. It is implied here, (1.)
that there was danger that, by the
levity and indiscretion to which youth
are so much exposed, the ministry
might be regarded with contempt ;
and (2.) that it was possible that his
deportment should be so grave, serious, and every way appropriate, that
the ministry would not be blamed,
but honoured. The way in which
Timothy was to live so that the ministry would not be despised on account
of his youth, the apostle proceeds immediately to specify. § But be thou
an example of the believers. One of
the constant duties of a minister of
the gospel, no matter what his age.
A minister should so live, that if all
his people should closely follow his
example, their salvation would be
secure, and they would make the
highest possible attainments in piety.
On the meaning of the word rendered
example, see Notes on Phil. iii. 17 ;1
Thess. 1.7. Jn word. In speech,
--that is, your manner of conversation.
This does not refer to his public teaching--in which he could not probably
be an example to them--but to his
usual and familiar conversation. § Jn
conversation. Ingeneral deportment.
See this word explained in the Notes
on Phil. i. 27. § In charity. Love
to the brethren, and to all; see Notes
on] Cor. xili. (J Jn spirit. In the
government of your passions, and in
a mild, meek, forgiving disposition.
{[ Jn faith. At all times, and in all
trials show to believers by your example, how they ought to maintain
unshaken confidence in God. | In
purity. In chasteness of life; see
chap. v. 2. There should be nothing
in your intercourse with the other
sex that would give rise to scandal.
The Papists, with great impropriety,
understand this as enjoining celibacy
--as if there could be no purity in

13 Till I come, give attendance to
reading, to exhortation, to doctrine,

14 Neglect* not the gift that
a2 Ti.1.6.

that holy relation which God appointed in Eden, and which he has declared to ‘“‘ be honourable in all”? (Heb.
xiii. 4), and which he has made so
essential to the wellbeing of mankind.
If the apostle had wished to produce
the highest possible degree of corruption in the church, he would have enjoined the celibacy of the clergy and
the celibacy of an indefinite number
of nuns and monks. There are no
other institutions on the earth which
have done so much to corrupt the
chastity of the race, as those which
have grown out of the doctrine that
celibacy is more honourable than
marriage.

13 Till I come; Notes, chap. iii. 14,
15. § Give attendance to reading.
The word here used may refer either
to public or to private reading ; see
Acts xiii. 15; 2 Cor. iii. 14; comp.
Esdr. ix. 48. The more obvious interpretation here is to refer it to
private reading, or to a careful perusal of those books which would qualify
him for his public work. The then
written portions of the sacred volume
--the Old Testament--are doubtless
specially intended here, but there is
no reason to doubt that there were
included also such other books as
would be useful, to which Timothy
might have access. Even those were
then few in number, but Paul evidently meant that Timothy should, as far
as practicable, become acquainted
with them. The apostle himself, on
more than one occasion, showed that
he had some acquaintance with the
classic writings of Greece ; Acts xvil.
28; Titus i. 12.
see Notes on Rom. xii. 8. { Zo doctrine.
means ; comp. Notes on Rom. xii. 7.

14. Neglect not the gift that ts in thee.
An important question arises here, to

what the word gift refers ;--whether |
to natural endowment; to office; or|

to some supposed virtue which had
been conferred by ordination--some
transmitted influence which made

q To exhortation ; |

To teaching--for so the word |
|is in thee, which was given thee
by prophecy,® with the laying on ¢
of the hands of the presbytery.

b chap.1 18. ¢ Ac.13.3.

him holy as a minister of religion, and
which was to continue to be transmitted by the imposition of apostolic
hands.--The word which is here used,
is rendered gift in every place in which
it occurs in the New Testament. It is
found in the following places, and
with the following significations :--
deliverance from peril, 2 Cor. i. 11;
a gift or quality of the mind, 1 Cor.
vii. 7; gifts of Christian knowledge
or consolation, Rom. i. 11; 1 Cor. i.
7; redemption or salvation through
Christ, Rom. vy. 15, 16; vi. 23; xi.
29; the miraculous endowments conferred by the Holy Spirit, Rom. xii.
6; 1 Cor. xii. 4, 9, 28, 80, 31, and the
special gift or endowment forthe work
of the ministry, 1 Tim. iv. 14; 2 Tim.
i..6; 1_Pet. iv. 10, The. gifi then
referred to here was that by which
Timothy was qualified for the work of
the ministry. It relates to his office
and qualifications--to every thing
that entered into his fitness for the
work. It does not refer exclusively
to any influence that came upon him
in virtue of his ordination, or to any
new grace that was infused into him
by that act, making him either officially or personally more holy than
other men, or than he was before--or
to any efficacy in the mere act of ordination--but it comprised the whole
train of circumstances by which he
had been qualified for the sacred office
and recognised as a minister of religion. All this was regarded as a
gift, a benefit, or a favour--xxpicpa,--
and he was not to neglect or disregard
the responsibilities and advantages
growing out of it. In regard to the
|manner in which this gift or favour
was bestowed, the following things
are specified. (1.) It was the gift of
God; 2 Tim. i. 6. He was to be re-
/ cognised as its source ; and it was not
therefore conferred merely by human
hands. ‘The call to the ministry, the
qualifications for the office, and the
whole arrangement by which one is
endowed for the work, are primarily
to be traced to him as the source. (2.)
It was given to Timothy in accordance with certain predictions which
had existed in regard to him--the expectations of those who had observed
his qualifications for such an office,
and who had expressed the hope that
he would one day be permitted to
serve the Lord in it. (3.) It was
sanctioned by the laying on of the
hands of the presbytery. The call of
God to the work thus recognised by
the church, and the approbation of
the Presbytery expressed by setting
him apart to the office, should be regarded by Timothy as a part of the
“gift” or bevefit (charisma) which
had been conferred on him, and which
he was not to neglect. (4.) An additional circumstance which: might
serve to impress the mind of Timothy
with the value of this endowment, and
the responsibility of this office, was,
that Paul himself had been concerned
in his ordination ; 2 Tim. i. 6. He
who was so much more aged (Philem.
9; comp. 2 Tim. iv. 6, 7) ; he who had
been a father to him, and who had
adopted him and treated him as a son
had been concerned in his ordination ;
and this fact imposed a higher obligation to perform aright the functions
of an office which had been conferred
on him in this manner. We are not
to suppose, therefore, that there was
any mysterious influence--any virus
--conveyed by the act of ordination,
or that that act imparted any additional degree of holiness. The endowment for the ministry ; the previous
anticipations and hopes of friends ;
and the manner in which he had been
inducted into the sacred office, should
all be regarded as a benejit or favour
of a high order, and as a reason why
the gift thus bestowed should not be
neglected--and the same things now
should make a man who isin the ministry deeply feel the solemn obligations
resting on him to cultivate his powers
in the highest degree, and to make
the most of histalents. {Which was
given thee by prophecy. ‘That is, the
prophetic declarations and the hopes
of pious friends in regard to your future usefulness, have been among the
means by which you have been intro-

duced to tue ministry, and should be
areason why you should cultivate
your powers, and perform faithfully
the duties of your office; see Notes
on chap.i. 18. With the laying on
of the hands of the presbytery. It was
common to lay on the hands in imparting a blessing, or in setting apart
to any office; see Matt. xix. 15 ; Mark
vi. 5; Luke iv. 40; xiii. 13; Lev. viii.
14; Num. xxvii. 23; Acts xxvill. 8;
vi. 6 ; vili. 17; xili. 8. Thereference
here is undoubtedly to the act by
whick Timothy was set apart to the
office of the ministry. The word rendered presbytery -- xp:oLurtpsov--0Ccurs only in two other places in the
New Testament-- Luke xxii. 66, where
it is rendered elders; and Acts xxii.
5, where it is rendered “ estate of the
elders.’ It properly means an assembly of aged men; council of elders.
In Luke xxii. 66, and Acts xxii. 5, it
refers to the Jewish sanhedrim ; see
Notes on Matt. v.22. In the passage
before us, it cannot refer to that body
--for they did not ordain men to the
Christian ministry--but to some association, or council, or body of elders
of the Christian church. It is clear
from the passage (1.) that there was
more than one person engaged in thia
service, and taking partin it when Timothy was ordained, and therefore it
could not have been by a prelate or
bishopalone. (2.) That the power conferred, whatever it was, was conferred
by the whole body constituting the
presbytery--since the apostle says
that the ‘ gift’ was imparted, not in
virtue of any particular power or
eminence in any one individual, but
by the ‘laying on of the hands of the
presbytery.” (3.) The statement
here is just such a one as would be
made now respecting a Presbyterian
ordination ; it is not one which would
be made of an Episcopal ordination.
A Presbyterian would choose these
very words in giving an account of an
ordination to the work of the ministry ; an Episcopalian would not. The
former speaks of an ordination by a
presbytery ; the latter of ordination

| by a bishop. The former can use the

account of the apostle Paul here as
applicable to an ordination, without

15 Meditate upon these things :
give thyself wholly to them;
pe thy profiting may appear 1 to

1 or, én all thinas.

explanations, comments, new versions
or criticisms ; the latter cannot. The
passage, therefore, is full proof that,
in one of the most important ordinations mentioned inthe New Testament,
it was performed by an association of
men, and not bya prelate, and therefore, that this was the primitive
mode of ordination. Indeed, there is
not a single instance of ordination to
an office mentioned in the New Testament which was performed by one
man alone. See this passage examined at greater length in my “ Enquiry intothe organization and government of the apostolic church,’’ pp.
208--221.

15. Meditate upon these things.
Upon the train of events by which
you have been led into the ministry,
and upon the responsibilities and
duties of the office. Let your mind
be deeply impressed with these things;
make them the subject of profound
and serious thought. § Give thyself
wholly tothem. Gr.‘ Be inthem”’--a
phrase similar to that of Horace--
totus in illis. The meaning is plain.
Ile was to devote his life wholly to
this work. He wasto have no other
grand aim ofliving. His time, attention, talents, were to be absorbed in
the proper duties of the work. He
was not to make that subordinate and
tributary to any other purpose, nor
was he to allow any other object to
interfere with the appropriate duties
of that office. He was not to live for
money, fame, or pleasure ; not to devote his time to the pursuits of literature or science for their own sakes ;
not to seek the reputation of an elegant or profound scholar ; not to aim
to be distinguished merely as an
accomplished gentleman, or as a
skilful farmer, teacher, or author.
Whatever was done in any of these
departments, was to be wholly consistent with the direction, 2» rodrois
tas--* be in these things ”--be absorbed in the appropriate duties of

16 Take heed @ unto thyself, and
unto the doctrine ; continue inthem:
for in doing this thou shalt both save
> thyself, and them that hear thee.

a Eze.44.21. b Ja.5.20.

the ministerial office. It may be
remarxed here that no man will ever
make much of himself, or accomplish
much in any profession, who does not
make this the rule of his life. He
who has one great purpose of life to
which he patiently and steadily devotes himself, and to which he makes
every thing else bend, will uniformly
rise to high respectability, if not to
eminence. He who does not do this
can expect to accomplish nothing.
{ That thy profiting. Gr. Thy going
forward ; that is, thy advancement,
or progress. A minister of the gospel
ought to make steady improvement
in all that pertains to his office. No
man ought to be satisfied with present
attainments. § To all. Marg. in
all things. The margin is the more
correct rendering, but either of them
makes good sense. It should be apparent to all persons who attend on
the stated preaching of a minster of
the gospel, that he is making steady
advances in knowledge, wisdom, and
piety, and in ald things that pertain
to the proper performance of the
duties of his office. If a man really
makes progress, it will be seen and
appreciated by others ; if he does not,
that will be as well understood by his
hearers.

16. Take heed unto thyself. This
may be understood as relating to
everything of a personal nature that
would qualify him for his work. It
may be applied to personal piety; to
health ; to manners; to habits of liying ; to temper; to the ruling purposes; to the intercourse with others.
In relation to personal religion, a
minister should take heed (1.) that
he has true piety ; and (2.) that he is
advancing in the knowledge and love
of God. In relation to morals, he
should be upright ; to his intercourse
with others, and his personal habits,
he should be correct, consistent, and
gentlemanly, so as to give needless
offence to none. The person of a
minister should be neat and cleanly ;
his manners such as will show the fair
influence of religion on his temper
and deportment ; his style of intercourse such as will be an example to
the old and the young, and such as
will not offend against the proper laws
of courtesy and urbanity. There is
no religion in a filthy person ; in uncouth manners; in an inconvenient
and strange form of apparel ; in bad
grammar, and in slovenly habits--and
to be areal gentleman should be as
much a matter of conscience with a
minister of the gospel as to be a real
Christian. Indeed, under the full
and fair influence of the gospel, the
one always implies the other. Religion refines the manners--it does not
corrupt them ; it makes one courteous,
polite, and kind--it never produces
boorish manners, or habits that give
offence to the well-bred and the refined. | And unto the doctrine.
The kind of teaching which you give,
or to your public instructions. The
meaning is, that he should hold and
teach only the truth. He was to
“take heed”’ to the whole business of
public instruction ; that is, both to
the matter and the manner. The
great object was to get as much truth
as possible before the minds of his
hearers, and in such a way as to produce the deepest impression on them.
q Continue in them. That is, in these
things which have been specified. He
was ever to be found perseveringly
engaged in the performance of these
duties. Qf For so doing thou shalt
both save thyself. By holding of the
truth, and by the faithful performance
of your duties, you will secure the
salvation of the soul. We are not to
suppose that the apostle meant to
teach that this would be the meritorious cause of his salvation, but that
these faithful labours would be regarded as an evidence of piety, and
would be accepted as such. It is
equivalent to saying, that an unfaithful minister of the gospel cannot be
saved ; one who faithfully performs
all the duties of that office with a
right spirit, will be. And them that
hear thee. That is, you will be the
means of their salvation. It is not

necessary to suppose that the apostle
meant to teach that he would save
all that heard him. ‘The declaration
is to be understood in a popular sense,
and itis undoubtedly true that a faithful minister will be the means of saying many sinners. This assurance
furnishes a ground of encouragement
for a minister of the gospel. He may
hope for success, and should look for
success. He has the promise of God
that if he is faithful he shall see the
fruit of his labours, and this result of
his work is a sufficient reward for all
the toils and sacrifices and self-denials
of the ministry. Ifa minister should
be the means of saving but one soul
from the horrors of eternal suffering
and eternal sinning, it would be worth
the most self-denying labours of the
longest life. Yet what minister of the
gospel is there, who is at all faithful
to his trust, who is not made the honoured instrument of the salvation of
many more than one? Few are the
devoted ministers of Christ who are
not permitted to see evidence even
here, that their labour has not been
in vain. Let not, then, the faithful
preacher be discouraged. A single
soul rescued from death will be a
gem in his eternal crown brighter by
far than ever sparkled on the brow of
royalty.

This chapter embraces the following subjects :--

(1.) The proper method of admonition when others err--to wit, an aged
man should be entreated as a father,
younger men as brethren, the aged
women as mothers, and the younger
with the pure feelings which one has
for a sister ; ver. 1, 2.

(2.) Instructions respecting the
proper treatment of widows ; ver. 3
--16.

(a) Those who were true widows
were to be regarded with honour
and respect.

(6) Who sustained this character ;
ver. 4-- 7. ‘Those who had
evinced piety at home in taking charge of those who were
dependent on them, and who
were steady in their devotions.

EBUKE not an elder, put
entreat him as a father;

No one was to be received into
this number who was not of the
age of sixty, who had been married to more than one man, and
who had not given evidence in
all the duties of domestic fidelity and charity, that she was imbued with the spirit of religion ;
ver.-9, 10.

(c) Those who were young were
not to be admitted into this
class; ver. 11--15. The reasons given are, that they would
marry-again, or that they would
be idle, and would be intermeddlers in the affairs of others. It
was better, therefore, that they
should marry, and have charge
of a family of their own; ver.
14, 15.

(d) The duty of the individual
members of the church to sustain helpless and dependent widows, if they had such among
their relations; ver. 16. In
these verses (3--16) it is evident that the apostle had his
eye on a class of widows that
sustained some such relation to
other females as the elders did
to the whole church. They were
aged women to whom was intrusted the superintendence of
the females of the church--probably because from the customs
then prevalent, men had much
less liberty of access to the other
sex,and much less freedom of intercourse was allowable, than now.

(3.) The duty of supporting and
honouring those who ruled in the
church ; ver. 17, 18.

(4.) The suitable guarding of the
rights of the elders in thechurch. No
accusation was to be received, unless
it was sustained by two or three witnesses; ver. 19.

(5.) No one who was guilty was to
be spared. All who sinned were to
be publicly rebuked ; ver. 20

(6.) A solemn charge is given to
Timothy to keep tkese commandments; ver. 2i.

and the younger men as breth-

'ren ;

2 The elder women as mothers :

(7.) The statement of his duty not
to ordain any person rashly or hastily
to the sacred office ; ver. 22.

(8.) To guard his health; ver.

3.

(9.) A declaration respecting sin--
that sometimes it is open beforehand,
and sometimes it is concealed till it
is revealed at the judgment, closes the
chapter ; ver. 24, 25.

The design of this closing statement seems to be, to show Timothy
that he should not judge men by appearances, but that he should evince
great caution in forming his estimate
of their character.

1. Rebuke not an elder. The word
elder here is not used in the sense
in which it often is, to denote an officer
of the church, a presbyter, but in its
proper and usual sense, to denote an
aged man. This is evident, because
the apostle immediately mentions in
contradistinction from the elder, ‘‘the
younger men,” where it cannot be
supposed that he refers to them as
officers. The command to treat the
“elder” as a “ father,” also shows the
same thing. By the direction not to
rebuke, it is not to be supposed that
the minister of the gospel is not to
admonish the aged, or that he is not
to show them their sins when they go
astray, but that he is to do this as he
would toa father. He is not to assume
a harsh, dictatorial, and denunciatory
manner. The precepts of religion
always respect the proprieties of life,
and never allow us to transgress them,
even when the object is to reclaim a
soul from error, and to save one who
is wandering. Besides, when this 7s
the aim, it will always be most certainly accomplished by observing the
respect due to others on account of
office, relation, rank, orage, § But
entreat him asa father. Asyou would
a father. That is, do not harshly
denounce him. Endeavour to persuzde him to lead a more holy life.
One of the things for which the ancients
were remarkable above most of the
moderns, and for which the Orientals
the younger as sisters, with all
purity.

are still distinguished, was respect
for age. Few things are enjoined with
more explicitness and emphasis in the
Bible than this; Lev. xix. 82; Job
xxix; Prov. xx. 20; xxx. 17; comp.
Dan. vii. 9, 10; Rev. i. 14,15. The
apostle would have Timothy, and, for
the same reason, every other minister
of the gospel, a model of this virtue.
q And the younger men as brethren.
That is, treat them as youwould your
own brothers. Do not consider them
as aliens, strangers, or enemies, but
entertain towards them, even when
they go astray, the kindly feelings of
a brother. This refers more particularly to his private intercourse with
them, and to his personal efforts to
reclaim them when they had fallen
into sin. When these efforts were
ineffectual, and they sinned openly, he was to “rebuke them before
all” (ver. 20), that others might
be deterred from following their
example.

2. The elder women as mothers.
Showing still the same respect for
age, and for the proprieties of life.
No son who had proper feelings would
rebuke his own mother with severity.
Let the minister of religion evince the
same feelings if he is called to address
a “mother in Israel’’ who has erred.
{ The younger as sisters. With the
feelings which you have towards a
sister. The tender love which one
has for a beloved sister would always
keep him from using harsh and severe
language. The same mildness, gentleness, and affection should be used
towards a sisterin the church. J With
all purity. Nothing could be mere
characteristic of Paul’s manner than
this injunction ; nothing could show
a deeper acquaintance with human
nature. He knew the danger which
would beset a youthful minister of the
gospel when it was his duty to admonish and entreat a youthful female ; he
knew, too, the scandal to which he
might be exposed if, in the performance of the necessary duties of his
office, there should be the slightest

8 Honour widows that are widows indeed, @
a ver.5,16.

departure from purity and propricty.
He was therefore to guard his heart
with more than common vigilance in
such circumstances, and was to indulge in no word, or look, or action,
which could by any possibility be construed as manifesting an improper
state of feeling. On nothing else do
the fair character and usefulness of a
youthful minister more depend, than
on the observance of this precept.
Nowhere else does he more need the
grace of the Lord Jesus, and the exercise of prudence, and the manifestation of incorruptible integrity, than
in the performance of this duty. A
youthful minister who fails here, can
never recover the perfect purity of
an unsullied reputation, and never
in subsequent life be wholly free
from suspicion ; comp. Notes, Matt.
vy. 28.

3.Honour widows. The particular
attention and respect which are enjoined here, seem to refer to the class
of widows who were supported by the
church, and who were intrusted with
the performance of certain duties
towards the other female members ,
see ver. 9. It is to be remembered that
the intercourse of the sexes was much
more circumscribed in Oriental countries than it is among us; that access
to the female members of the church
would be much less free than it is now,
and that consequently there might
have been a special propriety in intrusting the duty of watching over the
younger among them tothe more aged.
This duty would be naturally intrusted
to those who had not the care of
families. It would also be natural to
commit it, if they were qualified, to
those who had not the means of support. and who, while they were maintained by the church, might be rendering a valuable service to it. It
would seem, therefore, that there
was a class of this description, who
were intrusted with these duties, and
in regard to whose qualifications it
was proper that Timothy should be
instructed. The change of customs

4 But if any widow have children or nephews, let them learn
first to show ! piety at home, and
to requite their parents: for that
is good and acceptable before God.

5 Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in God,
and continueth in supplications and
prayers night and day.

1 or, kindness.

in society has made this class less
necessary, and probably the arrangement was never designed to be permanent, but still it may be a question
whether such an arrangement would
not now be wise and useful in the
church. On this subject, see Notes
on Rom. xvi.l. § That are widows
indeed, Whoare truly widows. We
associate with the word widow, commonly, not only the idea of the loss of
a husband, but many other things that
are the usual accompaniments of
widowhood--a poor and dependent
condition ; care and solicitude ; sadnessandsorrow. This ideais implied
in the use of the word employed here--
y7%pz--which means properly one who
is bereaved, (from the adjective yxpos,
bereaved), and which, as Calvin says,
conveys the idea of one in distressed
circumstances. What Paul regarded
as constituting true widowhood, he
specifies in’ verses 4, 5, 9, 10. He
connects with it the idea that she had
no persons dependent on her; that
she was desolate, and evinced true
trust in God; that she was so aged
that she would not marry again; and
that by her life she had given evidence
of possessing a heart of true benevolence ; ver. 10.

4. But of any widow have children.
Who would be dependent on her care,
and who might themselves contribute
to hersupport. § Ornephews. The
word nephew now commonly means
the son of a brother or sister. Formerly the English word also meant
grandchildren, or descendants of any
description. Webster. The Greek
word here--ixyovz--has the latter
meaning. It denotes those sprung
from or born of ; and then descendants
of any kind--sons, daughters, grandchildren. The Greek word would not,
in fact, properly include nephews and
nieces. It embraces only those in a
direct line. J Let them learn first
to show piety at home. Marg., “ or

kindness.” That is, let the children
and grandchildren learn to do this.
Let them have an opportunity of performing their duty toward their aged
parent or grandparent. Do not receive such a widow among the poor
and dependent females of the church,
to be maintained at public expense,
but let her children support her.
Thus they will have an opportunity of
evincing Christian kindness, and of
requiting her for her care. This the
apostle calls ‘showing piety ’’--sicsCeiv--that is, filial piety ; piety towards a parent by providing for the
wants of that parent in advanced age.
The word is commonly used to denote
piety towards God, but it is also used
to denote proper reverence and respect fora parent. Robinson. J And
to requite their parents. To repay
them, as far as possible, for all their
kindness. This debt can never be
wholly repaid, but still a child should
feel it a matter of sacred obligation
to do as much towards it as possible.
| For that is good and acceptable before God. It is a duty everywhere
enjoined ; comp. Notes on Matt. xv.
5--7; Eph. vi. 1, 2.

5. A widow indeed and desolate.
The word rendered desolate means
solitary, alone. It does not necessarily imply the idea of discomfort
which we attach to the word desolate.
The sense is, that she had no children
or other descendants ; none on whom
she could depend for support. J Z’ruséeth in God. She has no one else to
look to but God. She has no earthly
reliance, and, destitute of husband,
children, and property, she feels her
dependence, and steadily looks to God
for consolation and support. §] And
continuethin supplications and prayers
night and day Continually ; comp.
Notes on chap. ii. 1; see also the description of Anna in Luke ii. 36, 37.
The apostle regards this as one of the
characteristics of those who were
6 But she that liveth ! in pleasure is dead @ while she liveth.

7 And these thingsgive in charge,
that they may be blameless.

8 But if any provide not for his

“widows indeed,’ whom he would
have received into the class to be
maintained by the church, and to
whom the charge of younger members
of the church might be intrusted.

6. But she that liveth in pleasure.
Marg., delicately. The Greek word
(crarardw) occurs nowhere else in
the New Testament, except in James
v. 5, “ Ye have lived in pleasure on
the earth.’’ It properly means to
live in luxury, voluptuously ; to indulge freely in eating and drinking; |
to yield to the indulgence of the appetites. It does not indicate grossly
criminal pleasures ; but the kind of
pleasure connected with luxurious
living, and with pampering the appetites. It is probable that in the time
of the apostle, there were professedly
Christian widows who lived in this
manner--as there are such professing
Christians of all kinds in every age of
the world. (J Js dead while she
liveth. To all the proper purposes of
life she is as if she were dead. There
is great emphasis in this expression,
and nothing could convey more forcibly the idea that true happiness is not
to be found in the pleasure of sense.
There is nothing in them that answers
the purposes of life. They are not
the objects for which life was given,
and as to the great and proper designs
of existence, such persons might as
well be dead.

7. And these things aive in charge.
Announce, or declare these things, to
wit, particularly respecting the duty
of children to their widowed mothers,
and the proper duty of those who are
widows.

8. But if any provide not for his
own. The apostle was speaking
(ver. 4) particularly of the duty of
children towards a widowed mother.

In enforcing that duty, he gives the
subject, as he often does in similar
cases, a general direction, and says
that all ought to provide for those

own, and specially % for those of
his own 2 house, he hath denied
the faith, and is worse than an infidel.
] or, delicutely. @ Re.3.1.
b Is.58.7. 2 or, kindred.

who were dependent on them, and that
if they did not do this, they had a less
impressive sense of the obligations of
duty than even the heathen had. On
the duty here referred to, comp. Notes,
Rom. xii: 17; 2 Cor. viii. 21. The
meaning is, that the person referred
to is to think beforehand (spovos) of
the probable wants of his own family,
and make arrangements to meet them.
God thus provides for our wants;
that is, he sees beforehand what we
shall need, and makes arrangements
for those wants by long preparation.
The food that we eat, and the raiment that we wear, he foresaw that
we should need, and the arrangement for the supply was made years
since, and to meet these wants he has
been carrying forward the plans of his
providence in the seasons; in the
growth of animals; in the formation
of fruit ; inthe bountiful harvest. So,
according to owr measure, we are to
anticipate what will be the probable
wants of our families, and to make
arrangements to meet them. The
words “his own,”’ refer to those who
are naturally dependent on him, whether living in his own immediate
family or not. There may be many
distant relatives naturally dependent
on our aid, besides those who live in
our own house. § And specially for
those of his own house. Marg., kindred. The word house, or household,
better expresses the sense than the
word kindred. The meaning is, those
who live in his own family. They
would naturally have higher claims on
him than those who did not. They
would commonly be his nearer relatives, and the fact, from whatever
cause, that they constituted his own
family, would lay the foundation fora
strong claim upon him. He who neglected his own immediate family
would be more guilty than he who
neglected a more remote relative.
{ He hath denied the faith. By

9 Let not a widow be ! taken

into the number under threescore
1 or, chosen.

years old, having been the wife of
one man,

his conduct, perhaps, not openly. He
may be still a professor of religion and
do this; but he will show that he is
imbued with none of the spirit of
religion, and is a stranger to its real
nature. The meaning is, that he
would, by such an act, have practically
renounced Christianity, since it enjoins this duty on all. We may hence
learn that it is possible to deny the
faith by conduct as well as by words ;
and that a neglect of doing our duty
is as real a denial of Christianity as
if would be openly to renounce it.
Peter denied his Lord in one way,
and thousands do the same thing in
another. He did it in words; they
by neglecting their duty to their families, or their duty in their closets, or
their duty in attempting to send salvation to their fellow-men, or by an
openly irreligious life. A neglect of
any duty is so far a denial of the
faith. § And is worse than an infidel. The word here does not mean
an infidel, technically so called, or one
who openly professes to disbelieve
Christianity, but any one who does
not believe; that is, any one who is
not a sincere Christian. The word,
therefore, would include the heathen,
and it is to them, doubtless, that the
apostle particularly refers. They
acknowledged the obligation to provide for their relatives. This was one
of the great laws of nature written on
their hearts, and a law which they
felt bound to obey. Few things were
inculcated more constantly by heathen
moralists than this duty. Galgacus,
in Tacitus, says, ‘‘ Nature dictates
that to every one, his own children
and relatives should be most dear.”
Cicero says, ‘‘ Every man should take |
care of his own family ’’--suos quisque
debet tueri ; see Rosenmiiller, zn loc.,
and also numerous examples of the |
same kind quoted from Apuleius,
Cicero, Plutarch, Homer, Terence,

Virgil. and Servius, in Priceus, in

loc. The doctrine here is, (1.) that a:
Christian ought not to be inferior to |
an unbeliever in respect to any virtue ;

(2.) that in all that constitutes true
virtue he ought to surpass him ; (3.)
that the duties which are taught by
nature ought to be regarded as the
more sacred and obligatory from the
fact that God has given us a better
religion; and (4.) that a Christian
ought never to give occasion to an
enemy of the gospel to point to a man
of the world and say, “there is one
who surpasses you in any virtue.”

9. Let not a widow be taken into
the number. Marg., chosen. The
margin expresses the sense of the
Greek more accurately, but the meaning is not materially different. Paul
does not here specify into what “number’”’ the widow is to be ‘ taken,’’
or for what purpose she is to be
“chosen,” but he speaks of this as
a thing that was well understood.
There can be no doubt, however, what
he means. In the Acts of the Apostles (chap. vi. 1) we have this account :
“And in those days, when the number
of the disciples was multiplied, there
arose a murmuring of the Grecians
against the Hebrews, because their
widows were neglected in the daily
ministration.” ‘ It appears that from
the first formation of the Christian
church, provision was made out of the
public funds of the society for the indigent widows who belonged to it,;”’
see Paley’s Hore Pauling. on 1 Tim.
No. 11. To this, as to a well-known
practice, Paul here evidently refers.
The manner in which he refers to it
is such as to show that the custom had
an existence. All that was necessary
in the case, was, not to speak of it as
if it were a new arrangement, but to
mention those who ought to be regarded as proper subjects of the
charity. It would seem, also, that it

| was understood that such widows, ac-

cording to their ability, should exer-

| cise a proper watch over the younger
| females of the church.

In this way,
while they were supported by the
church, they might render themselves
useful. {| Under threescore years old.
For such reasons as those mentioned
10 Well reported of for good
works; if she have brought up
children, if she have lodged 4

@ Ac.16.15.

in ver. 11--14. J Having been the
wife of one man. There has been
much diversity of opinion whether this
means that she had never had but one
husband, or whether she had been the
wife of but one man ata time; that
is, whether she had cast off one and
married another ; see Whitby, in loc.
The same difficulty has been felt in
regard to this as on the passage in
chap. iii. 2; see Notes on that verse.
Doddridge, Clarke, and others, suppose that it means, ‘ who had lived
in conjugal fidelity to her husband.”
The reason assigned for this opinion
by Doddridge, is, that the apostle did
not mean to condemn second marriages, since he expressly (ver. 14)
commends it in the younger widows.
The correct interpretation probably
is, to refer it to one who had been
married but once, and who, after her
husband had died, had remained a
widow. ‘The reasons for this opinion
briefly are--(1.) That this is the interpretation most naturally suggested by
the phrase ; (2.) that it agrees better
with the description of the one that
was to be enrolled among the “number ’’--those who were ‘widows indeed ’’--as we should more naturally
apply this term to one who had remained unmarried after the death of
her husband, than to one who had
been married again; (3.) that, while
it was not unlawful or improper in
itself for a widow to marry a second
time, there was a degree of respect
and honour attached to one who did
not do it, which would not be felt for
one who did; comp. Luke li. 36, 37,
“She was a widow of great age, and
had lived with an husband seven years
from her virginity; and she was a
widow of about fourscore and four
years.’’ The same is true now. There
is a higher degree of respect felt for
such a widow than there is for one who
has been married again, though she
may be again a widow. (4.) Among the
heathens, it was regarded as especial-

strangers, if she have washed the
saints’ feet, if she have relieved the
afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good work.

but one man, and such widgws wore

lthe Pudicitte Coronam, or crown

of chastity ;, Val. Max. L. i. ¢. ii.;
comp. Livy, L. x. ¢. 23 ; see Whitby.
(5.) As these persons were not only
to be maintained by the church, but
appear also to have been intrusted
with an office of guardianship over the
younger females, it was of importance
that they should have such a character that no occasion of offence should
be given, even among the heathen;
and, in order to that, Paul gave direction that only those should be thus
enrolled who were in all respects
widows, and who would be regarded,
on account ef their age and their
whole deportment, as ‘‘ widows indeed.’”’ I cannot doubt, therefore,
that he meant to exclude those from
the number here referred to who had
been married the second time.

10. Well reported of for good works.
Of good character or reputation ; see
Notes on chap. iii. 7. {| If she have
brought wp children. Either her own
or others. The idea is, if she has
done this in a proper manner. {| Jf
she have lodged strangers. If she
has been characterized by hospitality
--a virtue greatly commended in the
Scriptures ; comp. Notes on chap. iii.
2. G If she have washed the saints’
feet. Itis not certain whether this is
to be-understood literally, or whether
it merely denotes that she had performed offices of a humble and selfdenying kind,--such as would be
shown by washing the feet of others.
It was one of the rites of hospitality
in the East to wash the feet of the
guest (Gen. xvill. 4), and Paul might
have spoken of this as having been
literally performed. There is not the
slightest evidence that he refers to it
as a religious rite, or ordinance, any
more than he does to the act of bring:
ing up children as a religious rite ;
comp. Notes on John xili. 1--10. J Jj
she have relieved the afflicted, If it
has been her character that she was

ly honourable to have been married to | ready to furnish relief to those who

11 But the younger widows refuse : for when they have begun to
wax wanton against Christ, they
will marry ;

12 Having damnation, because
they have cast off their first
faith.

were in distress. § If she have diligently followed every good work. This
is one of the characteristics of true
piety. A sincere Christian will, like
God, be the friend of all that is good,
and will be ready to promote every
good object according to his ability.
He will not merely be the friend of one
good cause, to the neglect of others,
but he will endeavour to promote
every good object, and though from
peculiar circumstances, and peculiar
dealings of Providence, he may have
been particularly interested in some
one object of charity, yet every good
object will find a response in his heart,
and he will be ready to promote it by
his influence, his property, and his
prayers.

11. But the younger widows refuse.
That is, in respect to the matter under
discussion. Do not admit them into
the class of widows referred to. It
cannot mean that he was to reject
them as members of the church, or
not to treat them with respect and
kindness. {| For when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ.
There is probably a thought conveyed
by these words to most minds which
is by no means in the original, and
which does injustice both to the
apostle andto the “ younger widows”
referred to. In the Greek there is
no idea of wantonness in the sense of
lasciviousness or lewdness; nor was
this, though now a common idea attached to the word, by any megns essential to it when our translation was
made. The word wanton then meant
wandering or roving in ygayety or
sport; moving or flying loosely; playing in the wind; then, wandering from
moral rectitude, licentious, dissolute,
libidinous.--Webster. The Greek
word here used, xeracrnvdlw, occurs
nowhere else in the New Testament.
The word crenuéw--streniao,--however, is used twice, and is in both
cases -translated lived deliciously;
Rev. xviii. 7, 9. The word is derived
from srexves--strenos--( whence stren-

uous), properly meaning rudeness, insolence, pride, and hence, revel. riot,
luaury; or from--orpnv4s--strenes, the
adjective,--strong, stiff’, hard, rough.
The verb then means “ to live strenuously, rudely,” as in English, “to
live hard;”’ also, to live wild, or without restraint; to run riot, to live
luxuriously. The idea of strength is
the essential one, and then of strength
that is not subordinate to law; that
is wild and riotous; see Passow and
Robinson, Lex. The sense here is,
that they would not be subordinate to
the restraints implied in that situation; they would become impatient,
and would marry again. The idea is
not that of wantonness or lewdness,
but it is that of a mind not subdued
by age and by trials, and that would
be impatient under the necessary restraints of the condition which was
contemplated. They could not be depended on with certainty, but they
might be expected again to enter into
the married relation. {J They will
marry. It is clear, from this, that
the apostle did not contemplate any
vows which would prevent their marrying again ; nor does he say that it
would be absolutely wrong for them to
marry, even if they were admitted into
that rank; or as if there were any
vows to restrain them from doing it.
This passage, therefore, can never be
adduced in favour of that practice of
taking the veil in nunneries, and of a
vow of perpetual seclusion from the
world.

12. Having damnation. Or, rather, having condemnation; or incurring guilt. This does not mean of
necessity that they would lose their
souls; see the phrase explained in the
Notes on 1 Cor. x1. 29. The meaning is, that they would contract guilt,
if they had been admitted among this
class of persons, and then married
again. The apostle does not say that
that would be wrong in itself (comp.
Notes on ver. 14), or that they would
be absolutely prohibited from it, but

180 i

18 And withal they learn to be
idle, wandering about from house
to house; and @not only idle, but

a2Th3.1l.

that injury would be done if they were
admitted among those who were
‘‘widows indeed’’--who were supported by the church, and who were
intrusted with a certain degree of
care over the more youthful females
--and then should leave that situation.
It might give occasion for scandal ;
it might break in upon the arrangements; it would show that there was
a relaxing of the faith, and of the
deadness to the world, which they
were supposed to have; and it was
better that they should be married
(ver. 14), without having been thus
admitted. § Because they have cast
off their first faith. This does not
mean that they would lose all their
religion, or wholly fall away, but that
this would show that they had not the
strong faith, the deadness to the world,
the simple dependence on God (ver.
5), and the desire which they had to
be weaned from worldly cares and influences, which they oncehad. When
they became widows, all their earthly
hopes seemed to be blasted. They
were then dead to the world, and felt
their sole dependence on God. But
if, under the influence of these strong
emotions, they were admitted to the
“class of widows’ in the church,
there was no certainty that they would
continue in this state of mind. Time
would do much to modify their grief.
There would be a reviving love of the
world, and under the influence of this
they would be disposed to enter again
into the marriage relation, and thus
show that they had not the strong and
simple faith which they had when the
blow which made them widows fell
heavily upon them.

13. And withal. In addition to the
prospect that they may marry again,
there are other disadvantages which
might follow from such an arrangement, and other evils to be feared,
which it is desirable to avoid. J They
learn to be idle, That is, if supported by the church, and if without the
settled principles which might be ex-

tattlers also, and busy-bodies,
speaking things which they ought
not,

pected in those more aged and experienced, it may be feared that they
will give themselves up to an indolent
life. There would be asecurity in the
age and established habits of those
more advanced in life, which there
could not be in their case. The
apostle does not mean that widows
are naturally disposed to be idle, but
that in the situation referred to there
would be danger of it. {| Wandering
about from house to house. A natural consequence of supposing that
they had nothing to do, and a practice not only profitless, but always attended with mischief. TYattlers
also. Literally, overflowing; then
overflowing withtalk; praters, triflers.
They would learn all the news; become acquainted with the secrets of
families, and of course indulge ik
much idle and improper conversation.
Our word gossippers would accurately
express the meaning here. ‘The noun
does not occur elsewhere in the New
Testament. The verb occurs in John
ili. 10; rendered, prating against.
q And busy-bedies; see Notes on 2
Thess. iii. 11. The word means,
probably, working all round, overdoing, and then an intermeddler.
Persons who have nothing to do of
their own, commonly find employment
by interesting themselves in the
affairs of their neighbours. No one
likes to be wholly idle, and if any one
is not found doing what he ought to
do, he will commonly be found engaged in doing what he ought not.
{ Speaking things which they ought
not. Revealing the concerns of their
neighbours; disclosing secrets ; magnifying trifles, so as to exalt themselves into importance, as if they
were intrusted with the secrets of
others ; inventing stories and tales of
gossip, that they may magnify and
maintain their own consequence in
the community. No persons are
commonly more dangerous to the
peace of a neighbourhood than those
who have nothing to do.

14 I will therefore that the
younger women marry, bear children, guide the house, give none
occasion to the adversary ! to speak
reproachfully.

1 for their railing.

14. I will therefore. I give it as

my opinion; or this is my counsel;
comp. Notes, 1 Cor. vii. 6, 10, 40.
Q That the younger women marry.
The word women is not expressed or
necessarily implied in the original--
vewrépas--and it is evident that the
apostle here had particular reference
to widows, and that the injunction
should be understood as relating to
them. We are not to suppose that
he gives this as an absolute and _ universal command, for it might not always be at the option of the widow to
marry again, and it cannot be doubted
that there may be cases where it
would be unadvisable. But he speaks
of this as a general rule. It is better
for such persons to have domestic
concerns that require their attention,
than it is to be exposed to the evils
of an idle life--We may learn from
this (1.) that second marriages are not
improper or unlawful, but that in some
circumstances they may be preferable
to widowhood ; (2.) that marriage itself is in a high degree honourable.
How different are the views of the inspired apostle Paul about marriage
from those of the Papists! {] Bear
children, guide the house. These
words signify, says Bloomfield, to
“exercise and occupy themselves in
the duties of a wife.”’ It is better to
be employed in the duties growing out
of the cares of a family, than to lead
a life of celibacy. § Give none occasion to the adversary. The enemy of
religion--the heathen or the infidel.
q To speak reproachfully. Marg.
for their railing. That is, on account
of a life which would do no honour to
religion. In the performance of domestic duties, when fully employed,
they would avoid the evils specified in
ver. 13. Every one whu professes religion should so live as to give no occasion.to an infidel or a man of the
world to speak reproachfully of the
cause of the Redeemer.

18]

15 For some are already turned
aside after Satan.

16 If any man or woman that
believeth have widows, let them
relieve them, and let not the
church be charged ; that it may re-

15. For some are already turned
aside after Satan. That is, some
young widows. ‘The meaning is, that
in the respects above mentioned (ver.
13), they had followed the great
Tempter, rather than the Lord Jesus.
This is stated as a reason why they
should not be admitted into the number of the widows who were to be
maintained at the expense of the
church, and to whom the care of the
younger female members was to be
committed.

16. If any man or woman that believeth. Christians are often simply
called believers, because faith is the
leading and most important act of
their religion. {J Have widows.
Widowed mothers, or grandmothers,
or any other widows whose support
would naturally devolve on them.
q Let them relieve them. That is, let
them support them. This was an ob
vious rule of duty ; see Notes on ver.
8. Nothing can be more unreasonable than to leave those who are properly dependent on us to be supported
by others, when we are able to maintain them ourselves. §| That it may
relieve, &c. That it may have the
means of supporting those who are
truly dependent. To require or expect the Church, therefore, to support those whom we ought ourselves
to support, is, in fact, to rob the poor
ani friendless.--In regard to these
directions respecting widows (ver. 3--
18), we may remark in general, ag
the result of the exposition which has
been given, (1.) they were to be poor
widows, who had net the means of
support themselves, (2.) They were,
probably, to be not merely supported,
but to be usefully employed in the
service of the church, particularly in
overseeing the conduct, and imparting instruction to the female members.
(3.) They were to be of such age
and character that there would be
security of stability and correctness
lieve them that are widows indeed.
17 Let @ the elders that rule well

@ 1Th.5,12,13.

of deportment ; such that they would

not be tempted to leave the situation,
or to act so as to give occasion of reproach. (4.) It is by no means certain that this was intended to be a
permanent arrangement. It grew
probably out of the peculiar customs
respecting intercourse between the
sexes in the Oriental world, and
would undoubtedly be proper now in
similar circumstances. But it by no
means follows that this arrangement
is binding on the churches where the
customs of society are different. Yet
(5.) the passage inculcates the general principle that the poor widows
of the church are to be assisted when
they have no relatives on whom they
can naturally depend. No class of
people are more helpless than aged
widows, and for that class God has
always shown a special concern, and
his people should do so likewise.

17. Let the elders that rule well.
Gr., reecBureca, Presbyters. The
apostle had given full instructions
respecting bishops (chap. iii. 1--7) ;
deacons (chap. ili. 8 ---13); widows
(chap. v. 3--16); and he here pro.
ceeds to prescribe the duty of the
church towards those who sustain the
office of elder. The word used--
elder or presbyter--properly refers to
age, and is then used to denote the
officers of the church, probably because the aged were at first intrusted
with the administration of the affairs
of the church. The word was in familiar use among the Jews to denote
the body of men that presided in the
synagogue ; see Notes on Matt. xv.
2; Acts xi. 30; xv. 2. J That rule
well. Presiding well, or well managing the spiritual interests of the
church. The word rendered rule --
xporrarts--is from a verb meaning to
be over; to preside over; to have
che care of. The word is used with
reference to bishops, Titus i. 5, 7; to
an apostle, 1 Pet. v.1; and is sucha
word as would apply to any officers to
whom the management and govern-

be counted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in
the word and doctrine.

ment of the church was intrusted.

On the general subject of the rulers
in the church ; see Notes on 1 Cer.
xii. 28. It is probable that not precisely the same organization was pursued in every place where a church
was established; and where there
was a Jewish synagogue, the Christian
church would be formed substantially
after that model, and in such a church
there would be a bench of presiding
elders ; see, on this subject, Whately’s “Kingdom of Christ delineated,”
pp. 84--86. ‘The language here seems
to have been taken from such an organization. Onthe Jewish synagogue,
see Notes on Matt. iv. 23. 4 Be
counted worthy of double honour. Of
double respect ; that is, of a high degree of respect; of a degree of respect
becoming their age and office ; comp.
1 Thess. v. 12, 13. From the quotation which is made in ver. 18, in relation to this subject, it would seem
probable that the apostle had some
reference also to their support, or to
what was necessary for their maintenance. There is no improbability
in supposing that all the officers of
the church, of whatever grade or rank,
may have had some compensation,
corresponding to the amount of time
which their office required them to
devote to the service of the church.
Nothing would be more reasonable
than that, if their duties in the church
interfered with their regular employments in their secular calling, their
brethren should contribute to their
support ; comp. Notes on 1 Cor. ix.
q Especially they who labour in word
and doctrine. In preaching and instructing the people. From this it
is clear that, while there were ‘“elders’”’ who laboured ‘‘ in the word and
doctrine,” that is, in preaching, there
were also those who did noé labour
“in the word and doctrine,”’ but who
were nevertheless appointed to rule
in the church. Whether, however,
they were regarded as a separate and
distinct class of officers, does not ap-

18 For the scripture saith, ? Thou
shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn: And, ® The labourer is worthy of his reward.

pear from this passage. It may have
been that there was a bench of elders
to whom the general management of
the church was confided, and that a
part of them were engaged in preaching ; a part may have performed the
office of ‘‘teachers’’ (see Notes on
Rom. xii. 7; 1 Cor. xii. 28), and a
part may have been employed in
managing other concerns of the
church, and yet all were regarded as
the xpocrares xpscBUrepoi--or “ elders
presiding over the church.” It cannot, I think, be certainly concluded
from this passage, that the ruling
elders who did not teach or preach
were regarded as a separate class or
order of permanent officers in the
church. There seems to have been
a bench of elders selected on account
of age, piety, prudence, and wisdom,
to whom was intrusted the whole
business of the instruction and government of the church, and they
performed the various parts of the
duty as they had ability. Those
among them who “laboured in the
word and doctrine,’ and who gave up
all their time to the business of their
office, would be worthy of special respect, and of a higher compensation.

18. For the Scripture saith. ‘This
is adduced as a reason why a church
should show all due respect and care
for its ministers. The reason is, that
as God took care to make provision
for the labouring ox, much more
should due attention be paid to those
who labour for the welfare of the
church. Y TYhow shalt not muzzle
the ow; see this passage explained,
and its bearing on such an argument
shown, in the Notes on 1 Cor. ix. 83--
10. § And, The labourer is worthy
of his reward. ‘This expression is
found substantially in Matt. x. 10,
and Luke x. 7. It does not occur
in so many words in the Old Testament, and yet the apostle adduces it
evidently as a quotation from the
Scriptures, and as authority in the
case. It would seem probable, there-

19 Against an elder receive not
an accusation, but ! before two ¢ or
three witnesses.

@ De.25.4. b Lu.10.7. lor, under. ce De.19.15.

fore, that he had seen the Gospel by
Matthew or by Luke, and that he
quoted this as a part of Scripture,
and regarded the Book from which
he made the quotation as of the same
authority as the Old Testament. If
so, then this may be regarded as an
attestation of the apostle to the inspiration of the “ Gospel” in which it
was found.

19. Against an elder. The word
elder here seems to be used in the
sense in which it is in the previous
verse as relating to office, and not in
the sense of an aged man, as in ver.
1. The connection demands this interpretation. § Receive not an accusation. He was not to regard such
a charge as well founded unless sustained by two or three witnesses. It
is clear from this, that Paul supposed
that Timothy would be called on to
hear charges against others who were
in the ministerial office, and to express
his judgment on such cases. There
is no reason, however, to suppose that
he meant that he should hear them
alone, or as a “bishop,” for this direction does not make the supposition
improper that others would be associated with him. It is just such
counsel as would now be given to a

Presbyterian or Congregational mi-

nister, or such as would be given to
an associate justice in a court, on
the supposition that a brother judge
was at any time to be tried by him
and his colleagues. { But before
two or three witnesses. Marg. under. The meaning is, unless supported
by the testimony of two or three persons. Hewas not to regard an accusation againgt a presbyter as proved,
if there was but one witness in the
case, however positive he might be in
his testimony. The reasons for this
direction were probably such as these:
(1.) This was the requirement of the
Jewish law in all cases, which had
thus settled a principle which the
apostle seems to have regarded as
important, if not obligatory, under
20 Them that sin rebuke % before all, that > others also may fear.
a Le.19.17. b De.13.11.

the Christian dispensation ; see Deut.
xvii. 6; xix. 15; comp. Notes on
John viii. 17; 2 Cor. xiii. 1. (2-)
There would be much greater reason
to apprehend that one person might
be deceived in the matter on which
Le bore witness, or might do it from
malignant motives, or might be bribed
to give false testimony, than that two
or three would give such testimony ;
and the arrangement, therefore, furnished important security for the innocent. (8.) There might be reason
to apprehend that evil-minded persons
might be disposed to bring charges
against the ministers of the gospel or other officers of the church,
and it was important, therefore, that
their rights should be guarded with
anxious care. The ministers of religion often give offence to wicked men
by their rebukes of sin (comp. Mark
vi. 17--20); wicked men would rejoice to see an accusation against
them sustained ; the cause of religion
would be liable to suffer much when
its ministers were condemned as guilty
of gross offences, and it is right, therefore, that the evidence in the case
should be as free as possible from all
suspicion that it is caused by malignity, by hatred of religion, or by conspiracy, or by a desire to see religion
disgraced. (4.) The character of a
minister of the gospel is of value, not
only to himself and family, as is the
case with that of other men, but is of
special value to the church, and to
the cause of religion. It is the property of the church. The interests
of religion depend much on it, and it
should not be wantonly assailed ; and
every precaution should be adopted
that Christianity should not be deprived of the advantage which may
be derived in its favour from the piety,
experience. and talents of its public
defenders. At the same time, however, the wicked, though in the ministry, should not be screened from the
punishment which they deserve. The
apostle gave no injunction to attempt
to cover up their faults, or to save

21 I charge ©¢ thee before God,
and the Dan Jesus Christ, and

c2 Tt.

them from a fair trial. He only demanded such security as the nature
of the case required, that the trial
should be fair. Ifa minister of the
gospel has been proved to be guilty
of crime, the honour of religion, as
well as simple justice, requires that
he shall be punished as he deserves.
He sins against great light ; he prostitutes a holy office, and makes use
of the very reputation which his office
gives him, that he may betray the
confidence of others; and such a man
should not escape. There should be
no “ benefit of clergy,” and neither a
black coat, nor bands, nor the lawn
should save a villain.

20. Them that sin. That have been
proved to have committed sin--referring probably to the elders men
tioned in the previous verse, but giving the direction so general a form
that it might be applicable to others.
q Rebuke before all. Before all the
church or congregation. The word
rebuke properly denotes to reprove or
reprehend. It means here that there
should be a public statement of the
nature of the offence, and such a censure as the case demanded. It extends only to spiritual censures.
There is no power given of inflicting
any punishment by fine or imprisonment. The power of the church, in
such cases, is only to express its strong
and decided disapprobation of the
wrong done, and, if the case demands
it, of disowning the offending member
or minister. This direction to “ rebuke an offender before all,” may be
easily reconciled with the direction in
ver. 1, ‘‘ Rebuke not an elder.’’ The
latter refers to the private and pastoral intercourse with an elder, and
to the method in which he should be
treated in such intercourse--to wit,
with the feelings due to a father ; the
direction here refers to the manner in
which an offender should be treated
who has been proved to be guilty,
and where the case has become public. Then there is to be a public
expression of disapprobation. 4 That

the elect 4 angels, that thou observe | one © before another, doing nothing
these things without ! preferring | by partiality.

@ Rei2.7-9. l or prejudiec.

b De.!.17.

others aiso may fear. That they may
be kept from committing the same
offence ; comp. | Pet. ii. 14. The
end of punishment is not the gratification of the private feelings of him
who administers it, but the prevention
of crime.

21. I charge thee before God;
comp. Luke xvi. 28; Acts ii. 20.
The word rendered charge means,
properly, to call to witness ; then to
affirm with solemn attestations ; and
then to admonish solemnly, to urge
upon earnestly. It is a word which
implies that the subject is of great
importance Paul gives this charge
as in the presence of God, of the Redeemer, and of the elect angels, and
wishes to secure that sense of its
solemnity which must arise from the
presence of such holy witnesses.
Y And the Lord Jesus Christ. Asin
the presence of the Lord Jesus ; with
his eye resting upon you. § And
the elect angels. It is not uncommon
in the Scriptures to speak as if we
were in the presence of holy angels,
and of the disembodied spirits of the
good ; comp. Notes on Heb. xii. 1.
No one can prove that the angels,
and that the departed spirits of holy
men, are not witnesses of what we do.
At all events, it is right to urge on
others the performance of duty as if
the eye of a departed father, mother,
or sister were fixed upon us, and as 7
we were encompassed by all the holy
beings of heaven. Sin, too, should
be avoided as if every eye in the universe were upon us. How many
things do we do which we would not;
how many feelings do we cherish
which we would at once banish from
our minds, if we felt that the heavens
above us were as transparent as glass,
and that all the holy beings around
the throne were fixing an intense gaze
apon us! The word “elect” here
seems to imply that there had
been some influence used to keep
them, and some purpose respecting them, which had not existed
in regard to those who had fallen.

Saints are called elect because they
are chosen of God unto salvation
(Notes on Eph. i. 4, 5), and it
would appear that it is a great law
extending through the universe, that
both those who remain in a state of
holiness, and those who are made
holy, are the subjects of purpose and
choice on the part of God. The fact
only is stated; the reasons which
led to the choice, alike in regard to
angels and men, are unknown to us;
comp. Notes on Matt. xi. 25. § That
thou observe these things. Probably
referring to all the things which he
had enjoined in the previous parts of
the epistle. § Without preferring
one before another. Marg., prejudice.
The meaning is, without previous
judgment--xwpis mpoxpizaros--without
any prejudice on account of rank,
wealth, personal friendship, or predilection of any sort. Let there be entire impartiality in all cases. Justice
was beautifully represented by the
ancients as holding a pair of scales
equally balanced. It is as important
that there should beentire impartiality
in the church as in civil transactions,
and though it is not wrong for a minister of the gospel to have his personal friends, yet inthe administration
of the affairs of the church he should
remember that all are brethren, and
all, of whatever rank, colour, sex, or
age, have equal rights. {| Partiality.
Gr., inclination, or proclivity--that
is, without being inclined to favour
one party or person more than another. There should be no purpose
to find one guilty and another innocent ; no inclination of heart towards
one which would lead us to resolve to
find him innocent; and no aversion
from another which would make us
resolve to find him guilty.

22. Lay hands suddenly on no man.
Some have understood this of laying
on hands to heal the sick (Koppe) ,
others of the laying on of hands to
absolve penitents, but the obvious
meaning is to refer it to ordination.
It was usual to jay the hands on the
22 Lay hands @ suddenly on no

23 Drink no longer water, but use

man, neither be partaker ® of other|a little wine ¢ for thy stomach’s

men’s sins: keep thyself pure.
@ Ac.13.3. 6 2 John 11.

heads of those who were ordained toa
sacred office, or appointed to perform
an important duty; Notes, chap. iv.
14; comp. Acts vi. 6; viii. 17. The
idea here is, that Timothy should not
be hasty in an act so important as that
of introducing men to the ministry.
He should take time to give thema
fair trial of their piety; he should
have satisfactory evidence of their
qualifications. He should not at once
introduce a man to the ministry because he gave evidence of piety, or
because he burned with an ardent
zeal, or because he thought himself
qualified for the work. It is clear
from this that the apostle regarded
Timothy as having the right to ordain
to the ministry ; but not that he was
to ordain alone, or as a prelate. The
injunction would be entirely proper
on the supposition that others were to
be associated with him in the act of
ordaining. It is just such as a Presbyterian father in the ministry would
give in a charge to his son now; it is
in fact just the charge which is now
given by Presbyterians and Congregationalists to those who are set apart
to the sacred office, in reference to
ordaining others. { Neither be partakers of other men’s sins. This is
evidently to be interpreted in connection with the injunction “ to lay hands
suddenly on no man.”’ The meaning,
in this connection, is, that Timothy
was not to become a participant in
the sins of another by introducing him
to the sacred office. He was not to
invest one with a holy office who was
a wicked man or a heretic, for this
would be to sanction his wickedness
and error. I{f we ordain a man to the
office of the ministry who is known to
be living in sin, or to cherish dangerous error, we become the patrons of
the sin and of the heresy. We lend
to it the sanction of our approbation ;
and give to it whatever currency it
may acquire from the reputation which
we may have, or which it may acquire
from the influence of the sacred office

sake and thine often infirmities.
c Pr.31.6.

of the ministry. Hence the importance of caution in investing any one
with the ministerial office. But while
Paul meant, doubtless, that this should
be applied particularly to ordination
to the ministry, he has given it a
general character. In mo way are
we to participate in the sins of other
men. Weare not to be engaged with
them in doing wrong ; we are not to
patronize them in a wicked business ;
we are not to be known as their companions or friends; and we are not to
partake of their unlawful gains. We
are not to lend money, or a boat, or
a horse, or a pistol, or a bowie-knife,
for an unlawful business; we are not
to furnish capital for the slave-trade,
or for manufacturing intoxicating
drinks, or for an enterprise that contemplates the violation of the Sabbath
4] Keep thyself pure. Particularly, in
regard to participation in the sins of
others ; generally, in all things--in
heart, in word, in conduct.

23. Drink no longer water.--There
has been much difficulty felt in regard
to the connection which this advice
has with what precedes and what follows. Many have considered the
difficulty to be so great that they have
supposed that this verse has been displaced, and that it should be introduced in some other connection. The
true connection, and the reason for
the introduction of the counsel here,
seems to me to be this: Paul appears
to have been suddenly impressed with
the thought--a thought which is very
likely to come over a man who is
writing on the duties of the ministry
--of the arduous nature of the ministerial office. He was giving counsels
in regard to an office which required
a great amount of labour, care, and
anxiety. The labours enjoined were
such as to demand alJl the time; the
care and anxiety incident to such a
charge would be very likely to prostrate the frame, and to injure the
health. ‘Then he remembered that
Timothy was yet but a youth; he re-

called his feebieness of constitution
and his frequent attacks of illness ; he
recollected the very abstemious habits
which he had prescribed for himself,

and, in this connection, he urges him |

to a careful regard for his health, and
prescribes the use of a small quantity
of wine, mingled with his water, as a
suitable medicine in his case. Thus
considered, this direction is as worthy
to be given by an inspired teacher as
it is to counsel a man to paya proper
regard to his health, and not needlessly to throw away his life ; comp. Matt.
x. 23. The phrase, “drink no longer
water,’ is equivalent to, ‘drink not
water only,;’’ see numerous instances
in Wetstein. The Greek word here
used does not elsewhere occur in the
New Testament. ¥ But use a litile
wine. Mingled with the water--the
common method of drinking wine in
the East; see Robinson’s Bibliotheca
Sacra, i.512,513. § For thy stomach’s
sake. It was not for the pleasure to
be derived from the use of wine, or

because it would produce hilarity or}

excitement, but solely because it was
regarded as necessary for the promotion of health; that is, as a medicine. § And thine often infirmities.
aoSevsias-- Weaknesses or sicknesses.
The word would include all infirmities
of body, but seems to refer here to
some attacks of sickness to which
Timothy was liable, or to some feebleness of constitution ; but beyond this
we have no information in regard to
the nature of his maladies. In view of
this passage, and as a further explanation of it, we may make the following
remarks: (1.) The use of wine, and
of all intoxicating drinks, was solemnly forbidden to the priests under the
Mosaic law, when engaged in the performance of their sacred duties; Lev.
x. 9, 10. The same was the case
among the Egyptian priests. Clarke;
comp. Notes on chap. iii. 3. Itis not
improbable that the same thing would
be regarded as proper among those
who ministered in holy things under
the Christian dispensation, The natural feeling would be, and not improperly, that a Christian minister should
not be less holy than a Jewish priest,
and especially when it is remembered

that the reason of the Jewish law remained the same--“ that ye may put
difference between holy and unholy,
and clean and unclean.” (2.) It is
evident from this passage that Timothy
usually drank water only, or that, in
modern language, he was a “ tee-totaller.” He was, evidently, not in the
habit of drinking wine, or he could
not have been exhorted to doit. (3.)
He must have been a remarkably
, temperate youth to have required the
authority of an apostle to induce him
to drink even a little wine; see Doddridge. There are few young men
so temperate as to require such an
authority to induce them to do it.
(4.) The exhortation extended only
to a very moderate use of wine. It
was not to drink it freely; it was not
to drink it at the tables of the rich
and the great, or in the social circle ;
it was not even to drink it by itself ;
it was to use ‘‘a little,” mingled with
water--for this was the usual method;
jsee Athzeneus, Deipno. lib. ix. x. c. 7.
(5.) It was not as a common drink,
but the exhortation or command extends only to its use as a medicine.
All the use which can be legitimately
made of this injunction-- whatever
conclusion may be drawn from other
precepts--is, that it is proper to use a
small quantity of wine for medicinal
purposes. (6.) There are many ministers of the gospel, now, alas! to
whom under no circumstances could
an apostle apply this exhortation--
‘“‘ Drink no longer water only.’’ They
would ask, with surprise, what he
meant? whether he intended it in
irony, and for banter--for they need
no apostolic command to drink wine.
Or if he should address to them the
exhortation, ‘‘ use a (zttle wine,’”’ they
could regard it only as a reproof for
their usual habit of drinking much.
To many, the exhortation would be
appropriate, if they ought to use wine
at all, only because they are in the
habit of using so much that it would
be proper to restrain them to a much
smaller quantity. (7.) This whole passage is one of great value to the cause
of temperance. Timothy was undoubtedly in the habit of abstaining
wholly from the use of wine. Paul
24 Some men’s sins are 4 open
beforehand, going before to judgment: and some men they follow
after.

a Ga.5.19.

knew this, and he did not reprove him
for it. He manifestly favoured the
general habit, and only asked him to
depart in some small degree from it,
in order that he might restore and
preserve his health. So far, and no
farther, is it right to apply this language in regard to the use of wine;
and the minister who should follow
this injunction would be in no danger
of disgracing his sacred profession by
the debasing and demoralizing sin of
intemperance.

24. Some men’s sins are open beforehand. This declaration, though
it assumes a general form, is to be
taken evidently in connection with the
general subject of introducing men to
the ministry (ver. 22); and ver. 23 is
to be regarded as a parenthesis. The
apostle had given ‘Timothy a charge
(ver. 22) respecting the character of
those whom he should ordain. He
here says, in reference to that, that
the character of some men was manifest. There was no disguise. It was
evident to all what it was, and there
could be no danger of mistake respecting it. Their conduct was apparent
to all. About such men he ought not
to hesitate a moment, and, no matter
what their talents, or learning, or rank
in the community, he ought to have
no participation in introducing them
to the ministry. § Going before to
judgment. ‘Their character is well
understood. There is no need of waiting for the day of judgment to know
what they are. Their deeds so precede their own appearance at the
judgment-bar, that the record and the
verdict can be made up before they
arrive there, and there will be scarcely
need even of the formality of a trial.
The meaning here is, that there could
be no doubt about the character of
such men, and Timothy should not be
accessory to their being introduced
into the office of the ministry. { And
some men they follow after. That is,
their character is not fully understood

25 Likewise also the good works
of some are manifest beforehand ;
and they that are otherwise cannot
be hid.

here. They conceal their plans
They practise deception. They appear different from what they really
are. But the character of such men
will be developed, and they will be
judged according to their works. They
cannot hope to escape with impunity.
Though they have endeavoured to
hide their evil deeds, yet they will
follow after them to the judgment-bar,
and will meet them there. The meaning, in this connection, seems to be,
that there ought to be circumspection
in judging of the qualifications of men
for the office of the ministry. It
ought not to be inferred from favourable appearances at once, or on slight
acquaintance, that they are qualified
for the office--for they may be of the
number of those whose characters,
now concealed or misunderstood, will
be developed only on the final trial.
25. Likewise also the good works
of some are manifest beforehand.
The character of some men is clear,
and accurately understood. There
can be no doubt, from their works,
that they are good men. We need
not wait for the day of judgment to
determine that, but may treat them
here as good men, and introduce them
to offices which only good men can
fill. The idea here is, that their character may be socertain and undoubted
that there need be no hesitation in
setting them apart to the office of the
ministry. And they that are otherwise cannot be hid. That is, they
cannot be ultimately concealed or misunderstood. There are arrangements
in the divine government for bringing
out the character of every man so that
it may be clearly understood. The
expression here refers to good men.
The idea is, that there are some
good men whose character is known
to all. Their deeds spread a glory
around them, so that no one can
mistake what they are. They correspond, in respect to the publicity of
their character with those mentioned

in ver, 24, whose “ sins are open be-’
forehand ;” for the good deeds of the,
one are as manifest as the sins of the|
other. But there are those who are
“ otherwise.”” hey are modest, retiring, unobtrusive, unknown. They
may live in obscurity; may have
slender means for doing good; may be
constitutionally so diffident that they
never appear on the stage of public
action. What they do is concealed
from the world. These correspond in
respect to publicity with those mentioned in ver. 24, ‘“‘ whose deeds follow after them.” Yet, says the
apostle, these cannot always be hid.
There are arrangements for developing every man’s character, and it will
be ultimately known what he is. The
connection here, seems to be this.
As Timothy (ver. 24) was to be on his
guard in introducing men into the
ministry, against those whose character for evil was not developed, but
who might be concealing their plans
and practising secret sins, so he was
to endeavour to search out the modest, the unobtrusive, and those who,
though now unknown, were among the
excellent of the earth, and bring them
forward to a station of usefulness
where their virtues might shine on the
world.

Apart from the reference of this
beautiful passage (ver. 24, 25) to the
ministry, it contains truth important
to all.

(1.) The character of many wicked
men is now clearly known. No one
has any doubtof it. Their deeds have
gone before them, and are recorded in
the books that will be open at the
judgment. They might even now be
judged without the formality of appearing there, and the universe would
acquiesce in the sentence of condemnation.

(2.) The character of many wicked
men is concealed. They hide their

plans. ‘They are practising secret iniquity. ‘They do not mean that the
world shall know what they are.

More than half the real depravity of
the world is thus concealed from human view, and in regard to more than
half the race who are going up to the
judgment there is an entire mistake

as to their real character. If all the
secret wickedness of the earth were
disclosed, no one would haveany doubt
about the doctrine of human depravity.

(3.) There is a process steadily
going forward for bringing out the
real character of men, and showing
what they are. This process consists,
frst, in the arrangements of Providence for developing their character
here. Many a man, who was supposed
to be virtuous, is shown, by some
sudden trial, to have been all along a
villain at heart. Many a minister of
the gospel, a lawyer, a physician, an
officer in a bank, a merchant, whose
character was supposed to stand fair,
has been suffered to fall into open sin,
that he might develope the longcherished secret depravity of his soul.
Secondly, the process will be completed on the final trial. Then nothing will be concealed. Every man
will been seen as he is. All they
whose characters were understood to
be wicked here, will be seen then also
to be wicked, and many who were supposed on earth to have a good character, will be seen there to have
been hollow-hearted and base hypocrites.

(4.) Every man in the last day will
be judged according to his real character. No one, however successful
he may have been here, can hope
to practise a deception on his final
Judge.

(5.) There is a fitness and propriety in the fact that there will bea
final judgment. Indeed, there must
be such a judgment, in order that
God may be just. ‘The characters of
men are not fully developed here.
The process is not completed. Many
are taken away before their schemes
of iniquity are accomplished, and before their real characters are understood. If they were to live long
enough on the earth, their characters
would be ultimately developed here,
but the divine arrangement is, that
man shall not live long here, and the
development, therefore, must be in the
future world.

(6.) The modest, the retiring, the
humble, and those here unknown, will
| yes as many servants 4as are
under the yoke count their
a@ Ep.6.5.

not be overlooked in the last great
day. There is much good, as there is
much evil in the world, that is now
concealed. There are many plans of
benevolence formed which they who
formed them are not permitted to
complete; many desires of benefiting
others are cherished which there are
no means of gratifying ; many a deed
of kindness is performed which is not
blazoned abroad to the world; and
many a wish is entertained for the
progress of virtue, the freedom of the
enslaved, the relief of the oppressed,
and the salvation of the world, which
can find expression only in prayer.
We are not to suppose then that all
that is concealed and unknown in the
world is evil.

(7.) There will be amazing developments in the last great day ; and as
it will then be seen in the revelations
of the secret deeds of evil that human
nature is corrupt, so it will be seen
that there was much more good in the
world than was commonly supposed.
As a large portion of the wickedness
of the earth is concealed, so, from the
necessity of the case, it is true that ne
small portion of the goodness on earth
ishidden. Wickedness conceals itself
from shame, from a desire better to
effect its purposes, from the dread of
punishment; goodness, from its modesty, its retiring nature, and from the
want of an opportunity of acting out
its desires; but whatever may have
been the cause of the concealment, in
all cases all will be made known on
the final trial--to the shame and confusion of the one class ; tothe joy and
triumph of the other.

This chapter embraces the following subjects of counsel and exhortation :--

(1.) The kind of instruction which
was to be given to servants; ver. 1
--5. They were to treat their masters with all proper respect, ver. 1;
if their masters were Christians, they

own masters worthy of all honour,
| that the name of God and Ais doctrine be not blasphemed.

were, on that account, to serve them
with the more fidelity, ver. 2; and
any opposite kind of teaching would
tend only to stir up strife and produce
dissatisfaction and contention, and
could proceed only from a proud and
self-confident heart.

(2.) The advantage of piety and of
a contented mind; ver. 6--8. The
argument for this is, that we brought
nothing into the world, and can carry
nothing out ; that our essential wants
here are food and raiment, and that,
having enough to make uscomfortable,
we should be content.

(3.) The evils of a desire to be
rich (ver. 9, 10)--evils seen in the
temptations to which it leads; the
passions which it fosters, and the
danger to religion itself.

(4.) An exhortation to Timothy, as
a minister of religion, to pursue higher and nobler objects; ver. 11--16.
He was (a) to avoid these worldly
things; he was (b) to pursue nobler
objects. He was to follow after
righteousness, and to fight the good
fight of faith. To do this, he was to
be encouraged by the assurance that
the Great and only Potentate would,
in due time, place the crown on his
head.

(5.) The duty of those who were
rich--for it is supposed that some
Christians will be rich -- either by
inheritance, or by prosperous business;
ver. 17--19. They are (a) not to be
proud ; (0) nor to trust intheir riches
so as to forget their dependence on
God; (c) to do good with their property ; and (d) to make their wealth
the means of securing eternal life.

(6.) A solemn charge to Timothy
to observe these things, and not to be
turned from them by any of the arguments and objections of pretended
science ; ver. 20, 21.

1. Let as many servants. On the
word here rendered servants--dovrAe --
see Notes on Eph. vi. 5. The word is
that which was commonly applied to
a slave, but it is so extensive in its

Ae D. 58}

2 And theythat have believing
masters, let tnem not despise them,
because they -are brethren; but
rather do them service, because

19]

they are ! faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. These things
teach and exhort.

1 or, believing.

signification as to be applicable to any
species of servitude, whether voluntary
or involuntary. If slavery existed in
Ephesus at the time when this epistle
was written, 1t would be applicable to
slaves ; if any other kind of servitude
existed, the word would be equally
applicable to that. There is nothing
in the word itself which essentially
limits it to slavery; examine Matt.
xili. 27; xx. 27; Mark x. 44; Luke
ii. 29; John xv. 15; Acts li. 18; iv.
29; xvi. 17: Rom. i. 1; 2 Cor. ive5;
Jude 1; Rev. i.1; ii. 20; vii.3. The
aildition of the phrase “under the
yoke,’’ however, shows undoubtedly
that it is to be understood here of
slavery. {| As are under the yoke.
On the word yoke, see Notes on Matt.
xi. 29. The phrase here properly
denotes slavery, as it would not be
applied to any other species of servitude; see Lev. xxvi. 13; Dem. 322,
12. Cedyos dovrcrdvns. Rob. Lex. It
sometimes denotes the bondage of the
Mosaic law as being a severe and
oppressive burden ; Acts xv. 10; Gal.
v. 1. It may be remarked here that
the apostle did not regard slavery asa
light or desirable thing. He would
not haye applied this term to the condition of a wife or of achild. § Count
their own masters worthy of all honour. Treat them with all proper
respect. They were to manifest the
right spirit themselves, whatever their
masters did; they were not to do
anything that woulddishonour religion.
The injunction here would seem to
have particular reference to those
whose masters were not Christians.
In the following verse, the apostle
gives particular instructions to those
who had pious masters. The meaning here is, that the slave ought to
show the Christian spirit towards his
master who was not a Christian ; he
ought to conduct himself so that
religion would not be dishonoured ; he
ought-not to give his master occasion
to say that the only effect of the
Christian religion on the mind of a

servant was to make him restless,
discontented, dissatisfied, and disobedient. In the humble and trying
situation in which he confessedly was
--under the yoke of bondage--he ought
to evince patience, kindness, and
respect for his master, and as long as
the relation continued he was to be
obedient. ‘This command, however,
was by no means inconsistent with his
desiring his freedom, and securing it,
if the opportunity presented itself;
see Notes on 1 Cor. vii. 21 ; comp.,
on the passage before us, the Notes on
Eph. vi. 5--8, and 1 Pet. ii. 18. { That
the name of God and his doctrine be
not blasphemed. That religion be not
dishonoured and reproached, and that
there may be no occasion to say that
Christianity tends to produce discontent and to lead to insurrection. If
the effect of religion had been to teach
all who were servants that they should
no longer obey their masters, or that
they should rise upon them and assert
their freedom by violence, or that
their masters were to be treated with
indignity on account of their usurped
rights over others, the effect would
have been obvious. There wouldhave
been a loud and united outcry against
the new religion, and it could have
made no progress in the world. Instead of this, Christianity taught the
necessity of patience, and meekness,
and forbearance in the endurance of all
wrong--whether from private individuals (Matt. v. 39--41;1 Cor. vi.7), or
under the oppressions and exactions of
Nero (Rom. xiii. 1--7), or amidst the
hardships and cruelties of slavery.
These peaceful injunctions, however,
did not demonstrate that Christ approved the act of him “that smote on
the one cheek,’’ or that Paul regarded
the government of Nero as a good government,--and as little do they prove
that Paul or the Saviour approved of
slavery.

2. And they that have believing
masters. Masters who are Christians.
It is clear from this, that Paul supposed that, at that time, and under
those circumstances, a man might
become a Christian who had slaves
under him. How long he might continue to hold his fellow-men in bondage, and yet be a Christian, is, however, quite a different question. Itis
quite clear, from the New Testament,
as well as from facts now, that God
may convert men when pursuing
any kind of wickedness. The effect
of religion, however, in all cases, will
be to lead them to cease to do wrong.
It is by no means improbable that
many of those who had owned slaves,
in accordance with the prevailing
custom in the Roman empire, may
have been converted--for the fact
that a man has been living a life of
sin does not prevent the possibility of
his conversion. There is no evidence
that Paul refers here to any who had
bought slaves after they were converted; nor is there any intimation of
any suchtransactionamong Christians
in the New Testament. Nor is there
any intimation that he regarded it as
right and best that they should continue to hold slaves ; nor that he would
approve their making arrangements
to persevere in this as a permanent
institution. Nor is it to be fairly inferred from this passage that he meant
to teach that they might continue this,
and yet be entitled to all the respect
and confidence due to the Christian
name, or be regarded as maintaining
a good standing inthe church. Whatever may be true on these points,
the passage before us only proves that
Paul considered that a man who was
a slaveholder might be converted, and
be spoken of as a “ believer,’ or a
Christian. Many have been converted
in similar circumstances, as many have
in the practice of all other kinds of
iniquity. What was their duty after
their conversion, was another question ;
and what was the duty of their “ servants’’ or slaves, was another question
still. Itis only this latter question which
the apostle is here considering. § Not
despise them, because they are breihren. Not treat them with any
want of the resnect which is due to
their station. The word here used
sometimes denotes to neglect, or, not

to care for ; Matt. vi. 24; Luke xvi.

13. Here it is not necessary to suppose that it denotes actual contempt,
but only that want of respect which
might possibly spring up in the mind
if not well instructed, or not on its
guard, among those who were servants
or slaves. It was to be apprehended
that the effect of the master and the
slave having both embraced religion,
would be to produce in the mind of the
servant a want of respect and deference for his master. This danger was
to be apprehended from the following
causes :--(1.) Christianity taught that
all men were made of ‘‘one blood,” and
were by nature equal; Acts xvii. 26

It was natural, therefore for the slave
to infer that by nature he was equal
to his master, and it would be easy te
pervert this truth to make him dis-

respectful and insubordinate. (2.)

They were equal to them as Chris-

tians. Christianity taught them that

they were all “ brethren” in the Lord,
and that there was no distinction
before God. It might be natural to
infer from this, that all distinctions in
society were to be abolished, and that,
in all respects, the slave was to regard
himself as on a level with his master.
(3.) Some, who did not well understand the nature of Christianity, or
who might have been disposed to cause
trouble, may have taken advantage of
the undeniable truths about the equality of men by nature and by redemption, to produce discontent on the part
of the slave. They may have endeavoured to embitter the feelings of
the slaves towards their masters who
held them in bondage. The effect, it
is easy to see, may have been to lead
those who were in a state of servitude
to manifest open and marked disrespect. In opposition to this, the apostle
would have Timothy teach that Christianity did not rudely assail the existing institutions of society, and
especially did not teach those who
were in subordinate ranks to be disrespectfulto those above them. 4 But
rather do them service. That is, serve
them with more cheerfulness and
alacrity than they did before the master was converted ; or serve them with
the more cheerfulness because they

3 If any man teach otherwise,
and consent not to wholesome
4words even the words of our

a2 Ti.l.13.

were Christians. The reasons for
this were, because the master was now
more worthy of affectionate regard,
and because the servant might look
for better treatment at his hands;
comp. Notes on Eph. vi. 6. § Because
they are faithful. That is, because
they are believers, or are Christians--
wioroi ; the same word which in the
beginning of the verse is rendered
believing. It does not here mean that
they were “ faithful” to their servants
or their God, but merely that they
were Chr'stians. ¥ And beloved.
Probably, “ beloved of God;” for so
the word is often used. As they are
the friends of God, they who are servants should show them the more respect. ‘The idea is, simply, that one
whom God loves should betreated with
more respect than if he were not thus
beloved; or, a good man deserves
more respect than a wicked man. In
all the relations of life, we should
respect those above us the more in
proportion to the excellency of their
character. {§f Partakers of the benefit.
That is, the benefit which the gospel
imparts--for so the connection requires us to understandit. It cannot
mean, as many have supposed, that
they were ‘‘ partakers of the benefit
of the labours of the servant,” or enjoyed the fruits of their labours,--for
how could this be a reason for their
treating them with the more respect ?
It would be rather a reason for treating them with less respect, because
they were living on the avails of unrequited toil. But the true reason
assigned is, that the master had been,
by the grace of God, permitted to participate in the same benefits of salvation as the servant; he had received,
like him, the pardon of sin, and he
was to be regarded as a fellow-heir of
the grace of life. The expression here
might be rendered, ‘they are partakers of, or are devoted to, the good
eause.”. Rob. Lex. The argument is,
that they were not infidels, or strangers to religion, or those who would

Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according ® to
godliness,

b Ti.l.1.

try to hinder the progress of that which

was dear to the heart of the servant,
but were united with them in that
same good work; they participated in
the blessings of the same salvation,
and they were really endeavouring to
further the interests of religion. There
ought, therefore, to be the more respect shown to them, and the more
cheerful service rendered them.

3. If any man teach otherwise. Any
otherwise than that respect should be
shown to masters; and that a more
cheerful and ready service should be
rendered because they were Christians
It is evidently implied here that some
might be disposed to inculcate such
views of religion as would produce
discontent and a spirit of insubordination among those who were held to
servitude. Who they were is not
known, nor is it known what arguments
they would employto doit. It would
seem probable that the arguments
which would be employed would be
such as these :--that God made all
men equal ; that all had been redeemed
by the same blood; that all true
Christians were fellow-heirs of heaven ; and that it was wrong to hold a
Christian brother in bondage, dc.
From undeniable principles it would
seem that they drew the inference that
slaves ought at once to assert their
freedom; that they should refuse
obedience to their masters ; and that
the tendency of their teaching was,
instead of removing the evil by the
gradual and silent influence of Christian principles, to produce discontent
and insurrection, From some of the
expressions here used by the apostle,
as characteristic of these teachers,
it would seem to be probable that
these persons were Jews. They were
men given to subtle disputations, and
those who doted about questions and
verbal disputes, and who were intent
on gain, supposing that that which
conduced to mere worldly prosperity
was of course religion. ‘These characteristics apply well to Jewisb
4 He is proud, ! knowing “nothing, but 2 doting about questions
ind strifes of words, whereof com-

1 or, @ fool. a1 Co.8.2. 2 or, sick.

Tr DiMoT Ay:

eth envy, strife, railings evil surmisings,
5 Perverse 3 disputings of men
3 or, gallings one of another.

teachers. § And consent not to wholesome words. Words conducing to a
healthful state of the church ; that is,
doctrines tending to produce order
and a due observance of the proprieties
of life ; doctrines leading to contentment, and sober industry, and the
patient endurance of evils. §[ Even
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The doctrines of the Saviour--all of
which tended to a quiet life, and to a
patient endurance of wrongs. {| And
to the doctrine which is according to
godliness. Which tends to produce
piety or religion; that is, the doctrine which would be most favourable
to an easy and rapid propagation of
the gospel. The idea seems to be,
that such a state of insubordination
and discontent as they would produce,
would be unfavourable to the promotion of religion. Who can doubt it ?

4. Hews proud. That is, he is lifted
up with his fancied superior acquaintance with the nature of religion.
The Greek verb means, properly, to
smoke, to fume; and then to be znflated, to be conceited, &c. The idea
is, that he has no proper knowledge of
the nature of the gospel, and yet he
values himself on a fancied superior
acquaintance with its principles.
| Knowing nothing. Marg., a fool.
That is, that he does not understand
the nature of religion as he supposes
he does. His views in regard to the
relation of masters and servants, and
to the bearing of religion on that relation, show that he does not understand the genius of Christianity. The
apostle expresses this in strong language, bysaying that he knows nothing;
see Notes on 1 Cor. viii. 2. § but
doting. Marg., sick, The Greek
word--veciw---means properly to be
sick ; then to languish, to pine after.
The meaning here is, that such persons had a sickly or morbid desire for
debates of this kind. They had nota
sound and healthy state of mind on
the subject of religion. They were
like a sickly man, who has no desire

for solid and healthful food, but for
that which will gratify a diseased
appetite. They desired not sound
doctrine, but controversies about unimportant and unsubstantial matters
--things that bore the same relation
to important doctrines which the
things that a sick man pines after do
to substantial food. {| Questions and
strifes of words. The Jews abounded
much in disputes of this sort, and it
would seem probable that the persons
here referred to were Jewish teachers;
comp. Notes, chap. i. 6, 7, and Acts
xviii. 15. Whereof cometh envy.
The only fruit of which is to produce
envy. That is, the appearance of
superior knowledge ; the boast of being
profoundly acquainted with religion,
and the show of an ability for subtle
argumentation, would produce in a
certain class envy. Envy is uneasiness, pain, mortification, or discontent,
excited by another’s prosperity, or by
his superior knowledge or possessions ;
see Notes on Rom. i. 29. ( Strife
Or contentions with those who will
not readily yield to their opinions.
| Railings. Harsh and abusive language towards those who will not
concede a point--a common effect of
disputes, and more commonly of disputes about small and unimportant
matters, than of those which are of
magnitude. Such railings often attend disputes that arise out of nice
and subtle distinctions. 4 Kut! surmisings. Suspicions that they are
led to hold their views, not by the
love of the truth, but from sordid or
worldly motives. Such suspicions are
very apt to attend an angry debate of
any kind. It might be expected peculiarly to exist on such a question as
the apostle refers to here--the relation of a master and a slave. It is
always very hard to do justice to the
motives of one who seems to us to be
living in sin, or to believe it to be
possible that he acts from right motives.

5. Perverse disputings. Marg

s°

of corrupt minds, and destitute of | godliness:
from such # withdraw

the truth, supposing that gain is | thyself.

gallings one of another. In regard to
the correct reading of this passage,
see Bib. Repository, vol. iii. pp. 61,
62. The word which is here used in
the Received Text -- rapadierpibn --
occurs nowhere else in the New ‘l'estament. It properly means mis-employment ; then idle occupation. (Rob.
Lex.) The verb from which this is
derived means to rub in pteces, to wear
away ; and hence the word here used
refers to what was a mere wearing
away of time. The idea is that of employments that merely consumed time
without any advantage. The notion of
contention or dispute is not necessarily
implied in this passage, but the allusion is to inquiries or discussions that
were of no practical value, but were a
mere consumption of time; comp.
Koppe on the passage. The reading
in the margin is derived from the
common usage of the verb to rub, and
hence our translators attached the
idea of rubbing against each other, or
of galling each other, as by rubbing.
This is not, however, the idea in the
Greek word. The phrase “ idle employments”’ would better suit the
meaning of the Greek than either of
the phrases which our translators have
employed. {| Of men of corrupt minds.
That is, of wicked hearts. {| And
destitute of the truth. Not knowing
the truth ; or not having just views
of truth. They show that they have
no correct acquaintance with the
Christian system. § Supposing that
gain is godliness, That that which
contributes to an increase of property
is of course true religion ; or that it
is proper to infer that any course
which contributes to worldly prosperity
must be sanctioned by religion. They
judge of the consistency of any course
with religion by its tendency to promote outward prosperity. This they
have exalted into a maxim, and this
they make the essential thing in religion. But how could any man do
this? And what connection would
this have with the subject under consideration --the kind of instruction

a2 Ti35,

that was to be given to servants? The
meaning of the maxim seems to be,
that religion must necessarily promote
prosperity by its promoting temperance, and industry, and length of days;
and that since this was the case, it
was fair to infer that anything which
would not do this could not be consistent with religion. They adopted it,
therefore, as a general rule of judging,
and one in entire accordance with the
wishes of their own hearts, that any
course of life that would not do this
must be contrary to the true spirit of
religion. This maxim, it would seem,
they applied to the relation of the
slave and his master, and as the tendency of the system was always to keep
the servant poor and in an humble
condition, they seem to have inferred
that the relation was contrary to
Christianity, and hence to have excited the servant to disaffection. In
their reasoning they were not far out
of the way, for it 7s fair to infer that
a system that tends to produce uniform poverty, and to perpetuate a
degraded condition in society, is contrary to the genius of Christianity.
They were wrong (1.) in making this
a general maxim by which to judge of
everything in religion ; and (2.) in so
applying it as to produce insubordination and discontent in the minds of
servants towards their masters ; and
(3.) in supposing that everything which
produced gain was: consistent with
religion, or that they could infallibly
judge of the moral quality of any course
of life by its contributing to outward
prosperity. Religion will uniformly
lead to that which conduces to prosperity, but it does not follow that every
way of making money is therefore a
part of piety. It is possible, also, that
in some way they hoped for “‘ gain ’’ to
themselves by inculcating those principles. It may be remarked here,
that this is not an uncommon maxim
practically among men--that “ gain
is godliness.’”’ The whole object of
life with them 1s to make money ; the
rule by which they judge of everything is by its tendency to produce
gain; and their whole religion may
be summed up in this, that they live
for gain. Wealth is the real object
of pursuit ; but it is often with them
cloaked under the pretence of piety.
They have no more religion than they
suppose will contribute to this object ;
they judge of the nature and value of
every maxim by its tendency to make
men prosperous in their worldly business; they have as much as they
suppose will promote their pecuniary
interest, and they sacrifice every
principle of religion which they suppose would conflict with their earthly
advancement. -- 4 From such withdraw thyself. That is, have no communion or fellowship with them. Do
not recognise them as religious
teachers ; do not countenance their
views. ‘Timothy was, in no way, to
show that he regarded them as inculcating truth, or to patronize their
doctrines. From such men, as having
any claim to the character of Christians, every man should withdraw
with feelings of unutterable pity and
loathing.--This passage (ver. 1--5)
is often appealed to by the advocates
and apologists for slavery, to prove
that Christianity countenances that
institution, and that no direct attempt
should be made by the ministers of
the gospel, or other Christians, to
show the evil of the institution, and
to promote its abolition, and to prove
that we have no right to interfere in
any way with what pertains to these
“domestic relations.” It is of importance, therefore, in view of the
exposition which has been given of
the words and phrases in the passage,
to sum up the truths which it inculcates. From it, therefore, the following lessons may be derived : (1.)
That those who are slaves, and who
have been converted to Christianity,
should not be indolent or disorderly.
lf their masters are Christians, they
should treat them with respect, and
all the more because they are fellowheirs of the grace oflife. If they are
not Christians, they should yet show
the nature of religion on themselves,
and bear the evils of their condition
with patience--showing how religion

teaches them to endure wrong. In
either case, they are to be quiet, industrious, kind, meek, respectful.
This Christianity everywhere enjoins
while the relation continues, At the
same time, however, it does not forbid
the slave earnestly to desire his freedom, or to use all proper measures to
obtain it; see 1 Cor. vii. 21. (2.)
That the ministers of religion should
not labour to produce a spirit of discontent among slaves, or excite them
to rise upon their masters. This
passage would undoubtedly forbid all
such interference, and all agencies or
embassies sent among slaves themselves to inflame their minds against
their masters, in view of their
wrongs; to put arms into their hands;
or to induce them to form combinations for purposes of insurrection.
It is not so much in the true spirit of
Christianity to go to those who are
wronged, as to those who do the
wrong. The primary message in
such cases is to the latter; and when
it does go to the former, it is to teach
them to be patient under their wrongs,
to evince the Christian spirit there,
and to make use only of those means
which are consistent with the gospel
to free themselves from the evils
under which they suffer. At the
same time, nothing in this passage,
or in any other part of the New Testament, forbids us to go to the master
himself, and to show him the evil of
the system, and to enjoin upon him
to let the oppressed go free. Nothing
in this passage can be reasonably
construed as teaching that an appeal
of the most earnest and urgent kind
may not be made to him; or that
the wrongs of the system may not be
fully set before him, or that any man
or set of men may not lawfully lift up
in his hearing a loud and earnest
voice in favour of the freedom of all.
And in like manner there is nothing
which makes it improper that the
slave himself should be put fully in
possession of that gospel which will
apprize him of his rights as a man,
and as redeemed by the blood of
Jesus. Every human being, whether
held in bondage or not, has a right to
be made acquainted with all the pro-

visions and truths of that gospel, nor
has any man or class of men a right
to withhold such knowledge from him.
No system of things can be right
which contemplates that that gospel
shall be withheld, or under which it
is necessary to withhold it in order
to the perpetuity of the system. (3.)
The passage teaches that it is possible
that a man who is a slaveholder may
become a Christian. But it does
not teach that, though he may become
a Christian while he is a slaveholder,
that it is proper for him to continue
this relation after he becomes such.
It does not teach that a man can be
a Christian and yet go into the business of buying and selling slaves. It
does not teach that a man can be a
Christian and continue to hold others
in bondage, whatever may be true on
that point. It does not teach that he
ought to be considered as maintaining
a “good standing” in the church, if
he continues to be a slaveholder ; and
whatever may be the truth on these
points, this passage should not be
adduced as demonstrating them. It
settles one point only in regard to
these questions--that a case was supposable in which a slave had a Christian master. It settles the duty of
the slave in such a case; it says
nothing about the duty of the master.
(4.) This passage does not teach that
slavery is either a good thing, or a
just thing, a desirable relation in life,
or an institution that God wishes to
be perpetuated on the earth. The
injunctions to slaves to be patient,
meek, industrious, and respectful, no
more demonstrate this, than the command to subjects to be obedient to the
laws proves that God regarded the
government of Nero as such an administration as he wished to be perpetuated on the earth. ‘To exhort a
slave to manifest a Christian spirit
under his oppressions and wrongs, is
not to justify the system that does
him wrong, nor does it prohibit us
from showing to masters that the system is contrary to the gospel, and
that it ought to be abandoned. (5.)
This passage, therefore, furnishes no
real support for slavery. It can no
more be adduced in favour of it than

any exhortation to those who are oppressed, or in any degrading situation
in life, to be patient, proves that the
system which oppresses and degrades
them, is a good one. Nor does the
fact that a man might be converted
who was a slaveholder, and might be
spoken of as a sisrds, or believer,
prove that it would be right and desirable that he should continue that
relation, any more than the fact that
Saul of Tarsus became a Christian
when engaged in persecution, proves
that it would have been right for him
to continue in that business, or than
the conversion of the Ephesians who
“used curious arts” (Acts xix. 19),
proved that it would have been proper
for them to continue in that employment. Men who are doing wrong are
converted in order to turn them from
that course of life, not to justify them
in it.

6. But godiuness. Piety; religion.
The meaning is, that real religion
should be regarded as the greatest
and most valuable acquisition. 9 With
contentment. This word, as now used,
refers to a state of mind; a calm and
satisfied feeling; a freedom from
murmuring and complaining. The
idea is, that “‘ piety, connected with
a contented mind,--or a mind acquiescing in the allotments of life,--
is to be regarded as the real gain.”
Tindal gives substantially the same
interpretation. ‘‘ Godliness is great
riches, if a man be content with that
he hath.’’ -- Coverdale,--‘ Howbeit,
it is of great advantage, who is so
godly, and holdeth him content with
that he hath.’”’ The word which is
used here--airapxeim --means, properly, self-sufficiency, and is used here,
in a good sense, to denote a mind
satisfied with its lot. If there be true
religion, united with its proper accompaniment, peace of mind, it is to
be regarded as the true riches. The
object of the apostle seems to be, to
rebuke those who supposed that property constituted everything that was
worth living for. He tells them,
therefore, that the true gain, the real
riches which we ought to seek, is religion, with a contented mind. This
does more to promote happiness than
6 But godliness “ with contentment is great gain.

7 For we brought nothing into
this world, and it is certain ® we
can carry nothing out.

a Pr.15.16. b Ps.49.17. c Ge.28,20.

wealth can ever do, and this is what
should be regarded as the great object
of life.

7. For we brought nothing into
this world, &c. A sentiment very
similar to this occurs in Job i. 21,--
and it would seem probable that the
apostle had that passage in his eye ;
see Notes on that passage. Numerous expressions of this kind occur in
the classic writers; see Wetstein, 7
loc., and Priceeus, in loc. in the Critici
Sacri. Of the truth of what is here
said, there can be nothing more obvious. It is apparent to all. We
bring no property with us into the
world,--no olothing, no jewels, no
gold,--and it is equally clear that we
can take nothing with us when we
leave the earth. Our coming into the
world introduces no additional property to that which the race before
possessed, and our going from the
world removes none that we may have
helped the race to accumulate. This
is said by the apostle as an obvious
reason why we should be contented if
our actual wants are supplied,--for
this is really all that we need, and all
that the world is toiling for. § We
can carry nothing out; comp. Ps.
xlix. 17. ‘“ For when he [the rich
man] dieth, he shall carry nothing
away; his glory shall not descend
after him.”

8. And having food and raiment.
“Food and raiment, here, seem to be
used to denote supplies for our wants
in general. It is not uncommon to
denote the whole by a part, and, as
these are the principal things which
we really need, and without which
life could not be sustained, the apostle
uses the phrase to denote all that is
really necessary for us. We cannot
suppose that he would forbid a desire
of a comfortable habitation, or of the
means of knowledge, or of couveniences for worshipping God, &e, The
idea is, that having those things which

8 And having food and raiment,
let us be therewith content. ¢
9 But they that will ¢ be rich,
fall into temptation, and a snare,
and ¢nto many foolish and hurtful
d Pr.28.20.

meet the actual necessities of our nature, and save us from distress, we
should not strive after ‘‘ uncertain
riches,’ or make wealth the object
of our anxious pursuit ; comp. Notes
onde hile ld ee

9. But they that will be rich.
Further to enforce the duty of contentment, the apostle refers to some
of the evils which necessarily attend
a desire to be rich. Those evils have
been so great and uniform in all ages,
and are so necessary accompaniments
of that desire, that, even amidst many
inconveniences which may attend the
opposite condition, we should be contented with our lot. Indeed, if we
could see all, it would only be necessary to see the evils which the desire
of wealth produces in the world, to
make us contented with a most lowly
condition of life. Perhaps nothing
more would be necessary to make a
poor man satisfied with his lot, and
grateful for it, than to be acquainted
with the perplexities and cares of a
rich man. There is more emphasis
to be placed on the word will, here,
in the phrase, “ will be rich,” than
might be supposed from our translation. It is not the sign of the future
tense, but implies an actual purpose
or design to become rich--oi Bovrduevos.
The reference is to those in whom
this becomes the object of earnest
desire, and who lay their plans for it.
{| Fall into temptation. That is, they
are tempted to do wicked things in
order to accomplish their purposes.
It is extremely difficult to cherish the
desire to be rich, as the leading purpose of the soul, and to he an honest
man. { And a snare. Birds are
taken in a snare, and wild beasts were
formerly ; see Notes on Job xviii. 8,
9. The net was sprung suddenly
upon them, and they could not escape.
The idea here is, that they who have
this desire become so entangled, that
they cannot easily escape. ‘They be.

lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.
10 For ¢ the love of money is

the root of all evil ; which while
a Ex.23.8.

come involved in the meshes of world-

liness and sin; their movements are
so fettered by cares, and inordinate
desires, and by artificial wants, that
they are no longer freemen. They
become so involved in these things,
that they cannot well break away
from them if they would; comp. Proy.
Xxviiil. 20. § And into many foolish
and hurtful lusts. Desires, such as
the love of wealth creates.
foolish--as being not such as an intelligent and immortal being should
pursue; and they are hurtful --as
being injurious to morals, to health,
andtothesoul. Among those desires,
are the fondness for display; for a
magnificent dwelling, a train of menials, and a splendid equipage ; for
sumptuous living, feasting, the social
glass, company, and riotous dissipation. YJ Which drown men in destruction and perdition. The word
which is here rendered, drown --
CuSiZa--means, to sink in the deep,
or, to cause to sink; and the meaning
here is, that they become submerged
as a ship that sinks. The idea of
drowning is not properly that of the
apostle, but the image is that of a
wreck, where a ship and all that is in
it go down together. The destruction is complete. ‘There is a total
ruin of happiness, of virtue, of reputation, and of the soul. The
ruling desire to be rich leads on a
train of follies which ruins everything here, and hereafter. -- How
many of the human family have thus
been destroyed !

10. For the love of money ts the!
That is, of all kinds ,

root of all evil.
of evil. This is evidently not to be

understood as literally true, for there |

ure evils which cannot, be traced to
the love of money--the evils grow-

ing out of ambition, and intemper- |

ance, and debasing lusts, and of the |
hatred of God and of goodness. The

They are |

‘out of the love of money.”
some coveted after, they have 1
erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves through. witb many

sorrows,
1 been seduced.

Similar
expressions often occur in the classic
writers; see Wetstein, in loc, and
numerous examples quoted by Priceus. Of the truth of this, no one
can doubt. No small part of the
crimes of the world can be traced to
the love of gold. But it deserves to
be remarked here, that the apostle
does not say that “money is the root
of all evil,’’or that it is an evil at all.
It is the “love” of it which is the
source of evil. 4 Which while some
coveted after. That is, some who
were professing Christians. The
apostle is doubtless referring to persons whose history was known to
Timothy, and warning him, and
teaching him to warn others, by their
example. § They have erred from
the faith, Marg., been seduced. The
Greek is, they have been led astray
from ; that is, they have been so deceived as to depart from the faith.
The notion of deception or delusion
is in the word, and the sense is, that,
deceived by the promises held out
by the prospect of wealth, they have
apostatized from the faith. It is not
implied of necessity that they were
ever real Christians They have
been led off from truth and duty, and
from all the hopes and joys which
religion would have imparted. { And
have pierced themselves through with
many sorrows. With such sorrows
as remorse, and painful reflections on
their folly, and the apprehension of
future wrath. ‘Too late they see that
they have thrown away the hopes of
religion for that which is at best unworthy the pursuit of an immortal
mind; which leads them on to a life
of wickedness ; which fails of imparting
what it promised when its pursuit is
successful, and which, in the great
majority of instances, disappoints its
votaries in respect to its attainment.
The word rendered “pierced them-

expression here is evidently a popu-' selves through” -- rspitrréipuy--occurs
lar saying--‘“ all sorts of evils grow nowhere else in the New Testament.
11 But thou, O man ¢of God,
flee these things ; and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love,
patience, meekness.

12 Fight the good fight of

@ De.33.1. b 2 Ti.4.7.

and is a word whose force and emphasis cannot be well expressed in a
translation. It is from z:ipw, perro,
and is made more emphatic by the
addition of the preposition wep, pert.
The word xzipw, petro, means, properly,
to pierce through from one end to
another, and is applied to meat that
is pierced through by the spit when it
is to be roasted (Passow); then it
means to pierce through and through.
The addition of the preposition (-ep:)
to the word, conveys the idea of doing
this all round; of piercing everywhere.
It was not a single thrust which was
made, but they are gashed all round
with penetrating wounds. Such is
the effect on those who cast off religion for the sake of gold. None can
avoid these consequences who do this.
Every man is in the hands of a holy
and just God, and sooner or later he
must feel the effects of his sin and
foily.

11. But thou, O man of God, flee
these things. These allurements of
wealth, and these sad consequences
which the love of gold produces.
q But follow after righteousness, &e.
Make these the grand object of your
pursuit. On the virtues here enumerated, see Notes on Gal. v. 22, 23.

12. Fight the good fight of faith.
The neble corflict in the cause of
religion ; see Notes on Eph. vi. 10--
17; comp. Notes on 1 Cor. ix. 26, 27.
The allusion is to the contests at the
Grecian games. § Lay hold on eternal life. As the crown of victory
that is held out to you. Seize this
as eagerly as the competitors at the
Grecian games laid hold on the prize;
see Notes on 1 Cor. ix.25. | Whereunto thou art also called. That is,
by the Spirit of God, and by the very
nature of your profession. God does
not ‘“‘call”’ his people that they may
become rich; he does not convert
them in order that they may devote
themselves to the business of gain.

faith, lay hold on eternal life,
whereunto thou art also called,
and hast professed ¢ a good profession before many witnesses.
13 I give thee charge 7in the
c¢ He.13.23. d chap.5.21.

They are “called” to a higher and
nobler work. Yet how many professing Christians there are who seem to
live as if God had “called” them to
the special business of making money,
and who devote themselves to it with
a zeal and assiduity that would do
honour to such a calling, if this had
been the grand object which God had
in view in converting them! { And
hast professed a good profession before many witnesses. ‘That is, either
when he embraced the Christian religion, and made a public profession of
it in the presence of the church and
of the world; or when he was solemnly
set apart to the ministry; or as he in
his Christian life had been enabled
publicly to evince his attachment to
the Saviour. I see no reason to doubt
that the apostle may have referred
to the former, and that in early times
a profession of religion may have
been openly made before the church
and the world. Such a method of
admitting members to the church
would have been natural, and would
have been fitted to make a deep impression on others. Itis a good thing
often to remined professors of religion
of the feelings which they had when
they made a profession of religion;
of the fact that the transaction was
witnessed by the world; and of the
promises which they then made to lead
holy lives. One of the best ways of
stimulating ourselves or others to the
faithful performance of duty, is the
remembrance of the vows then made ;
and one of the most effectual methods
of reclaiming a backslider is to bring
to his remembrance that solemn hour
when he publicly gave himself to
God.

13. I give thee charge wn the sight
of God; see Notes on chap. vy. 21.
4] Who quickeneth all things. Who
gives life to all; Notes on Eph. ii. J.
It is not quite clear why the apostle
refers to this attribute of God as en-

sight of God, who quickeneth all,
things, and before Christ Jesus, |
who “before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good ! confession ; ;

14 That thou keep this com-'

mandment without spot, unrebuka John 18.36,37. 1 profession. b Ph.2.15.

able > until the appearing ¢ of ow
Lord Jesus Christ :

15 Which in his times he shall
show who is the blessed 4 and only
Potentate, the ¢ King of kings, and
Lord of lords ;

c 1 Th.5.23. d chap.1.18. é Re.17.14.

forcing the charge which he here
makes. Perhaps he means to say
that God is the source of life, and
that as he had given life to Timothy
--natural and spiritual--he had a
right to require that it should be employed in his service; and that, if, in
obedience to this charge and in the
performance of his duties, he should
be required to lay down his life, he
should bear in remembrance that God
had power to raise him up again.
This is more distinctly urged in 2
Tim. ii. 8--10. § And before Christ
Jesus. As in the presence of Christ,
andstimulated byhisexample. § Who
before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession, Marg., profession. The
same Greek word is used which in ver.
12istranslated profession. The reference is to the fact that the Lord Jesus, when standing at the bar of Pilate who claimed to have power over
his life, did not shrink from an open
avowal of the truth; John xviii. 36,
87. Nothing can be better fitted to
preserve our minds steadfast in the
faith, and to enable us to maintain
our sacred vows in this world when
allured by temptation, or when ridiculed for our religion, than to remember the example of the Lord Jesus.
Let us place him before us as he stood
at the bar of Pilate--threatened with
death in its most appalling form, and
ridiculed for the principles which he
maintained; let us look on him,
friendless and alone, and see with
what seriousness, and sincerity, and
boldness he stated the simple truth
about himself, and we shall have one
of the best securities that we can
have, that we shall not dishonour our
profession, A clear view of the example of Christ our Saviour, in those
circumstances, anda deep conviction
that his eye is upon us to discern
whether we are steadfast as he was,
will do more than all abstract pre- |

| cepts to make us faithful to our chris-

tian calling.

14. That thou keep this commandment. Referring particularly to the
solemn injunction which he had just
given him, to “ fight the good fight of
faith,” but perhaps also including all
that he had enjoined on him. § Without spot. It seems harsh, and is unusual, to apply the epithet, “ without
spot” --daeriros -- to a command
or doctrine, and the passage may be
so construed that this may be understood as referring to Timothy himself--“ That thou keep the commandment so that thou mayest be without
spot and unrebukable.’ See Bloomfield, Crit. Dig., in loc. The word
here rendered ‘‘ without spot,” occurs in the New Testament only here
and in James i. 27; 1 Pet. 1.19; 2
Pet. iii. 14. It means without any
stain or blemish ; pure. If applied
here to Timothy, it means that he
should so keep the command that

_there would be no stain on his moral

character; if to the doctrine, that
that should be kept pure. {| Unrebukable. So that there be no oc
casion for reproach or reproof ; see
Notes on Phil. ii. 15. Until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ ;
see Notes on 1 Thess. ii. 19; iv. 16;
y. 23.

15. Which in his times he shall show.
Which God will reveal at such times
as he shall deem best. It is implied
here that the time is unknown to men ;
see Notes on Acts i. 7. {| Who is
the blessed and only Potentate. God,
who is the ruler over all. The word
used here--duvécern;--means one who
is mighty (Luke i. 22), then a prince
or ruler; comp. Acts vili. 27. It is
applied here to God as the mighty
ruler over the universe. ] The King
of kings. Who claims dominion
over all the kings of the earth. In
Rev. vii 14, the same appellation is
16 Who only hath immortality,
dwelling in the light which ¢ no
man can approach unto; whom ?
no man hath seen nor can see: to
whom ¢ be honour and power everlasting. Amen.

@ Re.1.16,17. b Ex.33.20.
c Jude 20; Re.1.6.

17 Charge them that are rich
in this world, that they be not
high-minded, nor trust 7 in! uncertain riches, but in the living
God, who give thus richly all things
to enjoy ;¢

d Ps.62.10. 1 the uncertainty of.

é Fe.5.18,19

applied to the Lord Jesus, ascribing |
to him universal dominion. J Lord |
of lords. The idea here is, that all
the sovereigns of the earth are under
his sway; that none of them can prevent the accomplishment of his purposes; and that he can direct the
winding up of human affairs when he
pleases.

16. Who only hath imi rtality.

The word here-- é9avacia--properly
means exemption from death, and
seems to mean that God, in his own
nature, enjoys a perfect and certain
exemption from death. Creatures
have immortality only as they derive
it from him, and of course are dependent on him for it. He has it

by his very nature, and it is in his
case underived, and he cannot be deprived ofit. It is one of the essential
attributes of his being, that he will
always exist, and that death cannot
reach him; comp. the expression ir
John v. 26, “ The Father hath life
in himself,’ and the Notes on that
passage. § Dwelling in the light
which noman can approachunto. Gr.,
“Inhabiting inapproachable light.”
The light where he dwells is so brilliant and dazzling that mortal eyes
could not endure it. This is a very
common representation of the dwelling place of God. See examples
quoted in Priczeus, in loc. Heaven is
constantly represented as a placé of
the most pure and brilliant light, needing not the light of the sun, or the
moon, or the stars (Rev. xxi. 23, 24;
xxii. 5), and God is represented as
dwelling in that light, surrounded by
amazing and inapproachable glory ;
comp. Rey. iv. 6; Ezek.i 4; Heb.i. 3.
q Whom no man hath seen nor on
see; Notes on John i. 18. F To
whom be honour and power everlast-

ing. Amen; see Noteson Rom. xi. 36.
i7. Charge them that are rich in

this world, that they be not high-minded. One of the evils to which they
are particularly exposed. The idea
is, that they should not value themselves on account of their wealth, or
look down with pride and arrogance
on their inferiors. They should not
suppose that they are any better men

or any nearer heaven, because they
are wealthy. Property really makes
no distinction in the great things that
pertain to character and salvation,
It does not necessarily make one
wise, or learned, or great, or good.
In all these things, the man who has
not wealth may be vastly the superior
of him who has; and for so slight and
unimportant a distinction as gold can
confer, no man should be proud. Besides, let such a man reflect that his
property is the gift of God; that he
is made rich because God has chosen
toarrange thingsso that he should be;
that it is not primarily owing to any
skill or wisdom which he has; that
his property only increases his re

sponsibility, and that it must all soon
be left, and he be as poor as the
“beggar that les at his gate ;” ana
he willsee ample reason why he should
not be proud. § Nor trust in uncertain riches. Marg., The uncertainty
of. ‘The margin expresses the meaning of the Greek more accurately
than the text, but the sense is not
materially varied. Riches are uncertain because they may soon be
taken away. No dependence can be
placed on them in the emergencies of
life. He who is rich to-day, has no
security that he will be to-morrow ;
and if he shall be rich to-morrow, he
has no certainty that his riches will
meet his necessities then. A man
whose house is in flames, or who is
shipwrecked, or whose child lies
dying, or who is himself in the agonics of death, can derive no advantage

18 That they do good, that
they be rich in good works, ready
to distribute, willing 1 to communicate ;

19 Laying up in store for them-

1 or, sociable.

selves a good foundation against
the time to come, that they may
lay «hold on eternal life.

20 O Timothy, keep that which

iscommitted to thy trust, avoiding
a Ph3.i4.

from the fact that he is richer than |
other men; see Notes on Luke xii.
16--21. ‘That against which Paul
here directs Timothy to caution the
rich, is that to which they are most
exposed. A man who is rich, is very ,
lable to “trust”? in his riches, and
to suppose that he needsnothing more;
comp. Luke xii. 19. He feels that
he is not dependent on his fellow-men,
and he is very likely to feel that he is
not dependent on God. Itis forthis
cause that God has recorded so many
solemn declarations in his word respecting the instability of riches
(comp. Proy. xxiii. 5), and that he is
furnishing so manyinstructive lessons
in his providence, showing how easily
riches may suddenly vanish away.
Q But in the living God. (1.) Heis
able to supply all our wants, and to do
for us what riches cannot do ; and (2.)
he never changes, or leaves those who
put their trust inhim. He is able to
meet our wants if in the flames, or in
a storm at sea, or when a friend dies,
or when we lie down on a bed of death,
or wherever we may be in the eternal
world. § Who giveth us richly all
things to enjoy. The meaning of this
seems to be, that God permits us to
enjoy everything. Everything in the
works of creation and redemption he
has given to man for his happiness,
and he should therefore trust in him.
Jie has not merely given wealth for
the comfort of men, but he has given
everything, and heon whom so many
and so great blessings have been bestowed for his comfort, should trust
in the great Benefactor himself, and
not rely merely on one of his gifts ;
comp. Notes on 1 Cor. iii. 21--23.
18. That they do good. On the.
duty enjoined in this verse, see Notes |
on Gal. vi. 10 ; Heb. xiii. 16. § That
they be rich in good works. ‘ That
their good works may be as abundant
as their riches.” § Ready to distribute. To divide with others; comp.

¥ Willing to communicate.

Acts iv. 84. The meaning is, that
they should be liberal, or bountiful.
Marg.,

or sociable. The translation in the

_textis a more correct rendering of

the Greek. The idea is, that they
should be willing to share their blessings with others, so as to make others
comfortable ; see Notes on Heb. xili.
16; comp. the argument of Paul in 2
Cor. viii. 13--15, and the Notes on
that passage.

19. Laying wp in store for themselves, &c. The meaning of this verse
is, that they were to make such a use
of their property that it would contribute to their eternal welfare. It
might be the means of exalted happiness and honour in heaven, if they
would so use it as not to interfere with
religion in the soul, and so as to do
the most good possible. See the
sentiment in this verse explained at
length in the Notes on Luke xvi. 9.

20. Keep that which is commitied
to thy trust. All that is entrusted to
you, and to which reference has been
particularly made in this epistle. The
honour of the gospel, and the interests of religion, had been specially
committed to him; and he was sacredly to guard this holy trust, and
not suffer it to be wrested from him.
{| Avoiding profane and vain babblings.
Gr., ‘ Profane, empty words.” The
reference is to such controversies and
doctrines as tended only to produce
strife, and were not adapted to promote the edification of the church ;
see Notes onchap.i.4;iv.7. § And
oppositions of science falsely so called.
Religion has nothing to fear from
true science, and the minister of the
gospel is not exhorted to dread that.
Real science, in all its advances, contributes to the support of religion ;
and just in proportion as that is promoted will it be found to sustain the
Bible, and to confirm the claims of
religion to the faith of mankiud. See
profane * and vain babblings, and
oppositions of science falsely so
called :

21 Which some professing have ®
erred concerning the faith. Grace
be with thee. Amen.

this illustrated atlength in Wiseman’s
Lectures on the connection between
science and religion. It is only false
or pretended science that religion has
to dread, and which the friend of
Christianity is to avoid. ‘lhe meaning here is, that Timothy was to
avoid everything which falsely laid
claim to being * knowledge” or “ science.”-- There was much of this in
the world at the time the apostle
wrote ; and this, more perhaps than
anything else, has tended to corrupt
true religion since.

21. Which some professing Evi-

The first to Timothy was written
from Laodicea, which is the
chiefest city of Phrygia Pacatiana.

@ Tit.1.14. b 2 Ti.2.18,

dently some who professed to be true
Christians. ‘They were attracted by
false philosophy, and soon, as a consequence, were led to deny the doctrines of Christianity. This result
has not been uncommon in the world.
4] Have erred concerning the faith ;
see Notes on chap. i. 6, 7; vi. 10.
J Grace be with thee; see Notes
Rom. i. 7.

On the subscription at the close of
this epistle, see Intro., § 2. It is, like
the other subscriptions at the close of
the epistles, of no authority.

§ 1. Time and place of writing the Epistle.

TxeRE has been much diversity of sentiment on the question when this
epistle was written. That it was written at Rome, and when the apostle
was imprisoned there, is the unanimous opinion of all who have written on
the epistle, and indeed is apparent on the face of it; see chap. i. 8, 16; iv.
6. But whether it was written during his first imprisonment there, or during a second imprisonment, is a question, on which critics even now are by
no means agreed. The most respectable names may be found on each side
of this question, though the common opinion has been that it was during a
second imprisonment. Of this opinion are Mosheim, Michaelis, Benson,
Mill, Macknight, Le Clerc, Paley, Stuart, Clarke, and Doddridge. The
reasons for this may be seen at length in Hug’s Introduction, pp. 761--763,
Macknight, and in Paley’s Hore Pauline. Dr. Lardner, Baronius, Witsius, Lightfoot, Hammond, Hug, Hemsen, and others, maintain that it was
written during the first imprisonment, and that it was sent about the same
time as the epistles to the Ephesians, Colossians, Philippians, and Philemon. The reasons for this opinion may be found in Hug’s Introduction,
pp. 556--559, and in Lardner, vol. vi. pp. 388--72. It is not consistent with
the design of these Notes to go at length into an examination of this question, and it is not material in order to an exposition of the epistle.

After considering the reasonings of Lardner and Hug to prove that this
epistle was written during Paul’s first imprisonment at Rome--that is, as
they suppose, during his only imprisonment there, and not long after the
first epistle was written--it seems to me still that there are insuperable difficulties in such a view, and that the evidence is clear that it was during
a second imprisonment. The reasons for this are briefly the following :

(1.) In the epistles to the Philippians and to Philemon, written during his
first imprisonment, Paul confidently looked forward to a release, and to a

ccvl INTRODUCTION.

speedy departure from Rome. In this, he had no such expectation. Thus,
he tells the Philippians (ii. 24), “I trust in the Lord, that I myself shall
come shortly ;”’ see also chap. i. 24. In the epistle to Philemon (ver. 22),
he says, “‘ But withal prepare me also a lodging: for I trust that through
your prayers I shall be given unto you.” In this epistle, however, the
author had no such expectation ; chap. iv. 6, “ For I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith ; henceforth there is
iaid up for me a crown of righteousness.” '

(2.) In chap. iv. 16, the apostle uses the following language: ‘ At my first
answer, no man stood with me, but all forsook me.” It is true that this
may refer to a hearing which he had had before Nero during the same imprisonment at Rome in which this second epistle was written ; but the most
natural interpretation is to suppose that he had had one hearing, and had
been discharged, and that the imprisonment of which he speaks in this epistle
was a second one. ‘his seems to me to be confirmed by what he says in
the next verse : “‘ Notwithstanding, the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the
Gentiles might hear ; and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.”
Here it appears (a) that he had been delivered, on that occasion, from
death--“ I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion,” which is equivalent
to saying that he was discharged ; (b) that after that discharge he was permitted to preach the gospel--‘‘ that by me the preaching might be fully
known ;” (c) that he had been permitted after that to travel and preach--
‘and that all the Gentiles might hear,”’ which is just such an expression as
he would use on the supposition that he had heen discharged, and been permitted to go abroad and preach the gospel extensively, and is not such an
expression as he could have used if he had been imprisoned but once.

(8.) The expression occurring in chap. iv. 20, ‘“‘ Erastus abode at Corinth,”
implies that he had made a second journey to Rome. ‘The word rendered
“abode’’--zweiwev--is such as would be used where two were travelling together, and where one of them chose to remain at a certain place. It implies that, at the time referred to, the two were together, and that one chose
to go on, and the other to remain. But it is capable of very clear proof
that, when Paul was sent to Rome by Festus (Acts xxvi. xxvii.), he did not
stop at Corinth; and if Erastus had been with him then, he would have
passed by that place with him on his way to Rome. Further, when Paul
left Corinth, as related in Acts xx., on his way to Jerusalem, Timothy was
with him, This is the last time that Paul is mentioned as having been at
Corinth before coming to Rome, and there could have been no need of informing Timothy of the fact that Erastus remained there, if this were so,
because that fact would be known to Timothy as well as Paul. Besides,
that departure from Corinth took place some five years before Paul wrote
this second epistle to Timothy ; and what would be the use of his reminding
Timothy of this after so long an interval? It is clear, moreover, that Paul
refers to some recent transaction. He is urging Timothy to use all diligence
to come to him before winter ; that is,as soon as possible ; chap. iv. 21.
But how could it be a reason for this urgency to say that, some five years
before, he had been forsaken by one fellow-labourer, and had been obliged
to leave another one sick on the way ?

(4.) Similar remarks may be made respecting what Paul says in the close
of the same verse (chap. iv. 20): ‘‘ Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.”
Paul, when sent by Festus to Rome, did not stop at Miletus ; for the course
which the ship took on that occasion is minutely described (Acts xxvii.),
and there is every certainty that there can be that it did not put in at that
place. The time, then, to which Paul must refer here, unless he made a
second journey to Rome after he had been once discharged, must have been

INTRODUCTION. ccvii

several ycars before ; certainly as far back as when he took leave of the
elders of the church of Ephesus, as recorded in Acts xx. But this was about
five years before ; and what would have been the pertinency of informing
Timothy that, some five years before, he had left a fellow-labourer sick there,
as a reason why he should then hasten to Rome as soon as possible? It was
evidently a recent occurrence to which the apostle refers here; and the only
natural supposition is, that, not long before his arrival at Rome, he had
parted with both these friends, and now needed, in consequence, especially
the presence of Timothy. Of course, if this be so, Paul must have made
another circuit through these countries, of which the Acts of the Apostles
gives us no account, and which must have been after his first imprisonment
lt is true that Hug suggests that the word rendered “I have left”--
axtruxrey--may be in the third person plural, and may be rendered “ they
have left.” But, who left him there? We are not told; and as “nothing
is suggested in the context which would supply us with a subject of the verb
in the third person plural, we are led naturally to construe it of the first
person singular, and, consequently, to apply it to Paul.”--Prof. Stuart, in
Hua’s Intro.

(5.) With this supposition of a second and recent journey, agrees the passage in 2 Tim. iy. 13, “‘ The cloak which I left at Troas with Carpus, when
thou comest, bring with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments.”
This evidently refers to some recent affair. Can it be believed that these
had been there for some five years, and that Paul had not needed them before? He was two years at Cesarea. Ile had abundant opportunity of
sending for them. An article of wearing apparel, or books to study, or his
own writings, he would be likely to need long before, and it is highly improbable that he should have suffered them to remain during this long period
without sending for them.

(6.) In the epistles which were written during Paul’s first imprisonment,
certain persons are referred to as being then with him, who are in this epistle
mentioned as absent. It is almost beyond a doubt that the epistles to the
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and to Philemon, were written during
Paul's first imprisonment at Rome; see the Introduction to those epistles. In
the epistle to the Colossians (i. 1), Timothy is mentioned as being then with
the apostle. When this was written, of course he was absent. In the same
epistle, Mark is mentioned as with Paul, and unites with him in the salutation to the Colossians (chap. iv. 10) ; when this epistle was written, he was
absent, for Timothy is ordered to bring him with him (chap.iv.11). Demas
was then with him (Col. iv. 14) ; now he was absent, for Paul says, ‘‘ Demas
hath forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is departed unto
Thessalonica ;” chap. iv. 10. These circumstances make it quite clear that
the second epistle to Timothy was not written during the imprisonment at
Rome in which the epistles to the Colossians, to Philemon, d&c., were
written, unless a change had taken place in the circumstances of the apostle,
which we have no reason to suppose occurred. ‘The probability, then, seems
to be strong, that the apostle was imprisoned there a second time, and that
the things referred to in this epistle occurred then.

(7.) To these circumstances should be added the fact, that many of the
Fathers say that Paul was liberated from his first imprisonment, and afterwards travelled extensively in preaching the gospel. This testimony is
borne by Eusebius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, and others; see Calmet’s Dictionary, and Lives of the Apostles, by D. F. Bacon, New Haven, pp. 619--
621.--If the supposition of a second imprisonment at Rome, during which
this epistle was written, is correct, then it was written probably not far from
the-year 65. Lardner, however, who supposes it was written during the first
imprisonment, places its date in May, A. D. 61; Hug, also, in the saine
year.

eeviii INTRODUCTION.

§ 2. The Place where Timothy was when the Epistle was addressed
to him.

There can be little doubt that Timothy was at Ephesus at the time when
this epistle was addressed to him. The evidence for this opinion is thus
stated by Lightfoot and others.--(1.) Paul directs Timothy to salute the
household of Onesiphorus, chap. iv. 19. But it 1s evident, from chap. i. 18,
that Onesiphorus was an Ephesian, and, as the direction is to salute his
“ household,” it may be argued with the more certainty that Timothy was
then at Ephesus, the ordinary residence of the family of Onesiphorus.
(2.) He directs Timothy to take Troas in the way as he came to him at
Rome (chap. iv. 13), which was the way that Paul had gone to Ephesus
(2 Cor. ii, 12; Acts xx. 5), thus showing that this was the usual route of
travel, and was a way which Timothy would naturally take in passing
from Ephesus to Rome. It is true that this does not absolutely prove that
he was at Ephesus,--since, if he had been in any other part of the western
portion of Asia Minor, the direction would have been the same--but it is a
slight circumstance corroborating others. (3.) He warns him to beware of
Alexander (chap. iv. 14), who we know was an Ephesian ;--1 Tim. i. 20;
Acts xix. 838. (4.) In chap. iv. 9, he gives direction to Timothy to come
to him as soon as possible, and then adds (ver. 12), “ Tychicus have I sent
to Ephesus.’’ From this it would seem that one reason why he wished him
then to come was, that he had appointed one to occupy his place there, so
that he could leave without injury to the cause. But it would seem also
probable that Paul was not in the habit of calling away a labourer from an
important station without supplying his place. Thus, in Titus iii. 12, he
says, ‘‘ When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to
come unto me.” It may thence be inferred that Timothy was at Ephesus
at the time when Paul wrote to him, and that he had taken care that his
place should not be left vacant, by the appointment of Tychicus to fill it
when he should leave. (5.) It may be added, that the errors and vices
which Timothy is directed to oppose, are the same which are referred to in
the first epistle, and it may be hence inferred that he was at the same place.

How long Timothy had been in Ephesus is not certainly known, and is
not material to be known in order to a proper understanding of the epistle.
It does not appear, from the Acts, that he was with Paul during the two
years in which he was in Caesarea, nor during his voyage to Rome; yet it
is certain that he was in Rome when Paul wrote to the Philippians, to the
Colossians, and to Philemon, because he is named in the titles to those
epistles. In Heb. xiii. 23, Paul says that Timothy was “set at liberty,”
or, more probably, “sent away” (see Notes on that verse), but to what place
he had gone is not mentioned. Nothing would be more natural, however,
than that he should visit Ephesus again, and it is not improbable that Paul
would leave him there when he again visited Rome.

§ 38. The occasion on which the Epistle was written.

The epistle was evidently written when the apostle was expecting soon to
be put to death ; chap. iv.6--8. The main object of writing it seems to
have been to request Timothy to come to him as speedily as possible ; chap.
iv. 9. But, in doing this, it was natural that Paul should accompany the
request with such counsel as Timothy needed, and such as it was proper for
Paul to give in probably the last letter that he would write to him. The
particular reason why the apostle desired the presence of Timothy seems to
have been, that nearly all the others on whom he might have supposed he
could rely in a time of trial, had left him. Thus he says that Demas had

INTRODUCTION. Coix

forsaken him; Crescens had gone to Galatia; Titus to Dalmatia, and
Tychicus he had himself sent to Ephesus; chap. iv. 10--12. No one remained with him but Luke (chap. iv. 11), and he was, therefore, desirous
that Timothy and Mark should be with him; chap. iv. 11. He did not ask
their presence merely that they might sustain him in his trials, but that they
might aid him in the work of the ministry (chap. iv. 11), for it would seem
that all hope of doing good in Rome was not closed.

If the view of the time when this epistle was written which has been taken
in this introduction, is correct, and if this is the last epistle which was written
by the apostle Paul before his martyrdom, then it occupies a very important
place in sacred canon, and is invested with great interest. It may be regarded as the dying counsels of the most eminent of the apostles to one who
had just entered on the ministerial life. We should read it with the interest
with which we do the last words of the great and the good. Then we feel
that every word which they utter has a weight which demands attention.
We feel that, whatever a man might do at other times, he will not trifle
then.-- We feel that, having little time to express his wishes, he will select
topics that lie nearest his heart, and that he deems most important. There
is no more interesting position in which we can be placed, than when we
sit down at such a man’s feet, and listen to his parting counsels. To a young
minister of the gospel, therefore, this epistle is invaluable; to any and every
Christian, it cannot fail to be a matter of interest to listen to the last words
of the great apostle of the Gentiles, and to ponder his last written testimony
in favour of that religion to the promulgation of which he had devoted his
talents and his life.

7 x
¢ a) * *
7 - aie "7% : ' ’
Ps # Aes ila ramet, ‘
a poe) ea aH iy oR =e? A P eve » A
- 7) iw os ‘ ae hy e': oe Tr tie pf a G
“~ : mh ned ma ak a nal panel TA Ua ol, La en

ig rT on ade ie
> ~“sitey" er d's. ue ee
©. faut Pant wee rt
me = Whe ;

> we

~ “f in 5 nag
: eh '
* bang Tweays mo hey. 95 ayee ovals ng |
wat weteris Dy 4 been & NESS & Mone urdortatsing wf Se) 8

90 down pal’ appear, Theres the Avia Mgt ds ge wlll) and during @ a
pears io whet ter ray Ip Oo oaremnue deep gleqdye oe toy Rice y a
_

} detaln ¢} i fa ee 10 + he wih @tpr-27 inj wrois 16 thie PRY Sp pieced

Ovioni2bs, ceil to Philemon, basta ke-h come’ tthe’ titeerta 7

Op lak lee » Haan) 23,' Pra evr ial Tee pip net’ set Therig’ ee
hey WEI pevleght) mibt weay” (coe | meres), UNt-La wiat ply 5
eo bedi inh be gil ren lore} Rush , root Swe eope tral) ural, howe? A o -
than 4)ai Be rreald UO ‘ein, 4 af GAS bityy) mobaiile tow mat =
rua (ears bin fire wha) ra lio-winis tT : “ee

ba werilen, =
was hpas! iy see, th <
T Whhing tH scat a

> tity Pe maine - Fhaph 7
ahold aocom pany the

he 9Ak preber ie 7
wrad lel “AA
Tits 1’? acer te
fit hewd Gubpwuaes th
Ape boet Desias tad”

~

UL, an apostle of Jesus Christ

The principal design of this chapter is to exhort Timothy to steadfastness and fidelity as a Christian
and a minister ; and to entreat him
to adhere to the truth, and live as
became a Christian, in the midst of
all the temptations by which he was
surrounded, and while so many were
turning away from the Christian
faith. Timothy was young ; he was
exposed, like others, to trials; he
could not be unaware that not a few
had apostatized ; he knew that his
father in Christ was in bonds, and
he was liable to become disheartened, or tobe led astray. In these
circumstances, the apostle seems to
have resolved to place before him
strong reasons to induce him to devote himself steadfastly to the cause
of religion, and not to allow those
things which might tend to alienate
him from Christianity to have any
effect on his mind. After the usual
salutations, therefore (ver. 1, 2), he
proceeds to present these considerations to the mind of Timothy: (1.)
He commences the chapter with
delicate praise of his young friend
--one of the most happy methods
of inducing him to persevere in the
course of life on which he had entered ; ver. 3--5. We naturally
desire to perfect that in which we
already excel ; we feel encouraged
for future efforts in a cause in which
we have already been successful.
The apostle, therefore, reminds Timothy of the manner in which he had
been trained; of the piety of his

by the will of God, according |

to the 4 promise of life which is in

Christ Jesus,
a Ep.3.6.

mother and grandmother, and assures
him of his belief that their efforts to
train him up in the ways of religion
had not been in vain. (2.) He urges
various considerations to induce him
not to turn away from that holy purpose to which he had devoted himself.
The considerations which he urges,
are these: (a) he had been solemnly
consecrated to the work of preaching
the gospel, ver. 6; (6b) God had imparted to him, as to others, a spirit of
love and power, and a sound mind,
ver. 7; (c) the grace of God had
called him to his great work, and he
possessed that gospel by which life
and immortality are brought to light,
ver. 8--11; (d) Paul urges his own
example, and says that, amidst all his
own trials, he had never seen occasion
to be ashamed of the gospel, ver.12--
14 ; and (e) he reminds Timothy that
all his other friends in Asia had turned away from him, specifying two of
them, and urges him, therefore, to
maintain a steadfast attachment to
the principles which he had professed,
ver. 15. (3.) The chapter closes with
the expression of an earnest prayer
that the Lord would bless the family
of Onesiphorus, and with a grateful
mention of his kindness to him, ver.
16--18.

1. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ,
Notes, Rom.i.l. J By the will of
God. Called to be an apostle in accordance with the divine will and purpose ; Notes, Gal.i.l. § According
to the promise of life which isin Christ
Jesus. In accordance with the great
promise of eternal life through the
Saviour; that is, he was called to be
2 To Timothy, my dearly beloved son: * Grace, mercy, and
peace, from God the Father and
Christ Jesus our Lord.

3 I thank God, whom I ® serve
from my forefathers with pure con-

science, ° that without ceasing I
@1Ti. 1.2 b Ac. 23.1. ¢ He.13.18.

an apostle to carry out the great purpose of human salvation ; comp Eph.
iii. 6. God has made a promise of
life to mankind through faith in the

Lord Jesus, and it was withreference ,

to this that he was called to the apostleship.

2. To Timothy, my dearly beloved
son; Notes, 1 Tim. i. 2. § Grace,
mercy, and peace, &c.; see Notes on
Rom. i. 7.

8. I thank God, whom I serve from
my forefathers. Paul reckoned among
his forefathers the patriarchs and the
holy men of former times, as being of
the same nation with himself, though
it may be that he also included his
more immediate ancestors, who, for
anything known to the contrary, may
have been distinguished examples of
piety. His own parents, it iscertain,
took care that he should be trained up
in the ways of religion ; comp. Notes
on Phil. iii. 4, 6; Acts xxvi. 4, 5.
The phrase “from my forefathers,”
probably means, after the example of
my ancestors. He worshipped the
same God; he held substantially the
same truths; he had the same hope
of the resurrection and ofimmortality ;
he trusted to thesame Saviour having
comé, on whom they relied as about
to come. His was not, therefore, a
different religion from theirs; it was
the same religion carried out and
perfected. The religion of the Old
Testament and the Newis essentially
the same ; see Notes on Acts xxiii. 6.
{| With pure conscience; see Notes on
Acts xxiii.1. § That without ceasing;
comp. Notes on Rom. xii. 12; 1 Thess.
v.17. Ihave remembrance of thee
im my prayers night and day; see
Notes, Phil 1. 3, & if

4. Greatly desiring to see thee ; see
chap. iv. 9. 21. It was probably on
account of this earnest desire that
this epistle was written. He wished

Il. TIMOTHY.

have remembrance of thee in my
prayers night and day ;

4 Greatly desiring 4 to see thee,
being mindful of thy tears, that I
may be filled with joy ;

5 When I call to remembrance

the unfeigned faith ¢ that is in thee,
d chap. 4.9521. él Ti. 4.6.

to see him, not only on account of
the warm friendship which he had for
him, but because he would be useful
to him in his present circumstances ;
see Intro.,§ 3. J Being mindful of
thy tzars. Alluding probably to the
tears which he shed at parting from
him. The occasion to which he refers is not mentioned ; but nothing is
more probable than that Timothy
would weep when separated from such
a father and friend. It is not wrong
thus to weep, for religion is not intended to make us stoics or savages.
Q That I may be filled with joy. By
seeing you again. It is easy to imagine what joy it would give Paul,
then a prisoner, and forsaken by
nearly all his friends, and about to
die, to see a friend whom he loved as
he did this young man. Learn hence,
that there may be very pure and
warm friendship between an old and
young man, and that the warmth of
true friendship is not diminished by
the near prospect of death.

5. When I call to remembrance the
unfeigned faith that is in thee ; Notes,
1Tim.i.5. On the faith of Timothy,
see Notes on 1 Tim. iv. 6. Which
dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois.
That is, the same faith dwelt in her;
or, she was a sincere believer in
Christ. It would seem probable,
from this, that she was the first of
the family who had been converted.
In the Acts of the apostles (xvi. 1),
we have an account of the family of
Timothy :--“ Then came he to Derbe
and Lystra; and behold a certain
disciple was there, named Timotheus,
the son of a certain woman which was
a Jewess, and believed; but his father
was a Greek.’’ In this account no
mention is made of the grandmother
Lois, but there is no improbability in
supposing that Paul was better acquainted with the family than Luke,

which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother@ Eunice ; and I am persuaded that in
thee also.

a Ac. 16,1.

There is, at any rate, no contradic-

tion between the two accounts ; but
the one confirms the other, and the
“undesigned coincidence”’ furnishes
an argument for the authenticity of
both. See Paley’s Hore Pauline,
in loc. As the mother of Timothy
was a Hebrew, it is clear that his
grandmother wasalso. Nothing more
is known of her than is here mentioned. § And in thy mother Eunice.
In Acts xvi. 1, it is said that the
mother of Timothy was ‘‘a Jewess,
and believed :” but her name is not
mentioned. This shows that Paul
was acquainted with the family, and
that the statement in the epistle to
Timothy was not forged from the account in the Acts. Here is another
“undesigned coincidence.” In the

history in the Acts, nothing is said of !

the father, except that he was “a
Greek, but it is implied that he
was not a béliever. In the epistle
before us, nothing whatever is said of
him. But the piety of his mother
alone is commended, and it is fairly
implied that his father was not a believer. This is one of those coincidences on which Paley has constructed
his beautiful argument in the Hore
Pauline in favour of the genuineness
of the New Testament.

6. That thou stir up the gift of
God. Gr., That thou kindle up as a
fire. The original word used here
denotes the kindling ofa fire, as by
bellows, &c. Itis not uncommon to

compare piety to a flame or a fire, |

and the image is one that is obvious
when we speak of causing that to
burn more brightly. The idea is,
that Timothy was to use all proper
means to keep the flame of pure religion in the soul burning, and more
particularly his zeal in the great cause
to which he had been set apart. The
agency of man himself is needful to
keep the religion of the heart warm
and glowing. However rich the gifts

6 Wherefore I put thee in remempbrance that thou stir up the
gift of God & which is in thee by
the putting on of my hands.

b1 Ti4.14.

which God has bestowed upon us,
they do not grow of their own accord,
but need to be cultivated by our own
personal care. § Which is in thee
by the putting on of my hands. In
connection with the presbytery ; see
Notes on 1 Tim. iv. 14. This proves
that Paul took part in the ordination
of Timothy; but it does not prove
either that he performed the duty
alone, or that the “ ordaining virtue,”
whatever that was, was imparted by
him only; for (1.) it isexpressly said
(1 Tim. iv. 14), that he was ordained
by the laying on of the hands of the
presbytery, of which Paul was doubtless one ; and (2.) the language here
used, “ bythe putting on of my hands,”
is just such as Paul, or any other one
of the presbytery, would use in referring to the ordination of Timothy,
though they were all regarded as on
a level. It is such an expression as
an aged Presbyterian, or Congregational, or Baptist minister would address to a son whom he had assisted
to ordain. Nothing would be more
natural than to remind him that his
own hands had been laid on him when
he was set apart to the work of the
ministry. It would be in the nature
of a tender, pathetic, and solemn appeal, bringing all that there was in
his own character, age, and relation
to the other, to bear on him, in order
to induce him to be faithful to his
trust. On other occasions, he would
naturally remind him that others had
united with him in the act, and that
he had derived his authority through
the presbytery, just as Paul appeals
to Timothy, 1 Tim. iv. 14. But no

/ one would now think of inferring from

this, that he meant to be understood
as saying that he alone had ordained
him, or that all the authority for
preaching the gospel had been imparted through his hands, and that
those who were associated with him
only expressed “‘ concurrence ;"’ that

7 For God hath not given us| Lord, nor of me his prisoner:

the spirit of fear; # but of power,
b and of love, and of a sound
mind.

8 Be not thou _ therefore

ashamed of the testimony of our
a Ro. 8.15; 1 John 4.18. 6 Lu.24.49.

is, that their presence there was only
an unmeaning ceremony. What was
the ‘ gift of God’ which had been
conferred in this way, Paul specifies
in the next verse. It is “the spirit
of power, and of love, and of a sound
mind.’”’ The meaning is, that these
had been conferred by God, and that
the gift had been recognised by his
ordination. It does not imply that
any mysterious influence had gone
from the hands of the ordainers, 1mparting any holiness to Timothy which
he had not before.

7. For God hath not given us the
spirit of fear. A timorous and servile spirit. This is said in order to
encourage Timothy, who was not improbably modest and diffident. {] But
of power. Power to encounter foes
and dangers ; power to bear up under
trials ; power to triumph in persecutions. That is, itis the nature ofthe
gospel to inspire the mind with holy
courage ; comp. however, Luke xxiv.
49. And of love. Love to God
and to the souls of men. The tendency of this, also, is to ‘cast out
fear’’ (1 Johniv. 18), and to make
themind bold and constant. Nothing
will do more to inspire courage, to
make a man fearless of danger, or
ready to endure privation and persecution, than love. The love of
country, and wife, and children, and
home, makes the most timid bold
when they are assailed; and the love
of Christ and of a dying world nerves
the soul to great enterprises, and sustainsit in the deepest sorrows. { And
of a sound mind. The Greek word
denotes one of sober mind; a man of
prudence and discretion. Thestate referred to here is that in which the mind
is well balanced, and under right influences ; in which it sees things in
their just proportions and relations ;
in which it is not feverish and excited, but when everything is in its

proper place.

but be thou partaker ¢ of the afflictions of the gospel according
to the power of God :

9 Who hath saved @ us, and

called ¢ us with an holy calling,
¢ Cohl.24. @Mat.1.21. ¢ Ro.8.28,30.

It was this state of
mind which Timothy was exhorted
to cultivate; this which Paul regarded as so necessary to the performance of the duties of his office.
It is as needful now for the minister
of religion as it was then.

8. Be not thou therefore ashamed
of the testimony of our, Lord. Do
not be ashamed to bear your testimony to the doctrines taught by the
Lord Jesus; John ili. 11, 32, 33; vii.
7; comp. Acts x. 22; xx. 24; 1 Cor.
i. 6; Rev. xxii. 16. Paul seems to
have apprehended that Timothy was
in some danger of being ashamed of
this gospel, or of shrinking back from
its open ayowal in the trials and persecutions to which he now sawit exposedhim. {J Nor of me his prisoner.
Of the testimony which I have borne
to the truth of the gospel. This passage proves that, when Paul wrote
this epistle, he was in confinement;
comp. Eph. ili. 1; vi. 20; Phil. i, 18,
14, 16; Col. iv. 8, 18; Philem. 9.
Timothy knew that he had been
thrown into prison on account of his
love for the gospel. To avoid that
himself, there might be some danger
that a timid young man might shrink
from an open avowal of his belief in
the same system of truth. J But be
thou partaker of the afflictions of
the gospel. ‘The sufferings to which
the profession of the gospel may expose you; comp. Notes on Col. i. 24.
{| According to the power of God.
That is, according to the power
which God gives to those who are
afflicted on account of the gospel.
The apostle evidently supposes that
they who were subjected to trials on
account of the gospel, might look for
divine strength to uphold them, and
asks him to endure those trials, relying on that strength, and not on his
own.

9. Whohath saved us; Notes Matt

not ¢ according to our works, but in Christ Jesus, before ¢ the world
according to his own purpose | began ;

band grace. which was given us
a Tit.3.5. b De.7.7,8; Ep-1.9,11.

i. 21. He has brought us into astate
in which salvation is so certain, that
Paul could speak of it as if it were
already done. {{ And calledus; Notes,
Rom. viii. 28, 30. F With an holy
calling. A calling which is inits own
nature holy, and which leads to holiness; comp. Notes on Eph. iv. 1;
Phil. iii. 14; Heb. iii. 1. (J Not according to our works; Titus iii. 5 ;
Notes, Eph.ii. 8,9. The ideais, that
our own works haye nothing to do in
inducing God to call us. As, when
we become Christians, he does not
choose us because of our works, so the
eternal purpose in regard to our salvation could not have been formed
because he foresaw that we would
perform such works as would be a
reason why he should choose us. The
whole arrangement was irrespective
of our deserts. § But according to
his own purpose and grace; see Notes
on Rom. ix. 11--18, 16; Eph. i. 4, 5.
q Which was given us in Christ Jesus,
before the world began. That is,
which he intended to give us, for it
was not then actually given. The
thing was so certain in the divine
purposes, that it might be said to be
already done ; comp. Notes, Rom. iy.
i.

10. But is now made manifest.
The purpose to save us was long
concealed in the divine mind, but the
Saviour came that he might make it
known. Who hath abolished death.
That is, he has made it so certain
that death will be abolished, that it
may be spoken of as already done.
Jt is remarkable how often, in this
chapter, Paul speaks of what God
intends to do as so certain, that it
may be spoken of as a thing that is
already done. Inthe meaning of the
expression here, see Notes on 1 Cor.
xv. 54; comp. Notes on Heb. ii. 14.
The meaning is, that, through the
gospel, death will cease to reign, and
over those who are saved there will
be ne such thing as we now understand by dying. And hath brought

10 But is now made manifest
c Ep.i.4.

life and immortality to light through
the gospel. This is one of the great
and glorious achievments of the gospel, and one of the things by which
it is distinguished from every other
system. The word rendered ‘hath
brought to light’’--¢@wrig~w--means to
give light, to shine; then to give light
to, to shine upon; and then to bring
to light, to make known. Rob. Lew.
The sense is, that these things were
before obscure or unknown, and that
they have been disclosed to us by the
gospel. It is, of course, not meant
that there were no intimations of
these truths before, or that nothing
was known of them--for the Old Testament shed some light on them; but
that they are fully disclosed to man
in the gospel. It is there that all
ambiguity and doubt are removed,
and that the evidence is so clearly
stated as to leave no doubt on the subject. The intimations of a future
state, amongthe wisest of the heathen,
were certainly very obscure, and their
hopes very faint. The hope of a
future state is styled by Cicero, Futurorum quoddam augurium secuiorum--a conjecture or surmise of future ages. Tusc. Q.1. Seneca says
it is ‘“‘that which our wise men do
promise, but they donotprove.” Epis.
102. Socrates, even at his death,
said, ‘“‘I hope to go hence to good
men, but of that I am not very confident ; nor doth it become any wise
man to be positive that so it will be.
I must now die, and you shall live;
but which of us is in the better state,
the living or the dead, God only
knows.” Pliny says, ‘Neither soul
nor body has any more sense after
death, than before it was born.”
Cicero begins his discourse on the
subject with a profession that he intended to deliver nothing as fixed and
certain, but only as probable, and as
having some likelihood of truth, And,
having mentioned the different sentiments of philosophers, he concludes,
--<‘ Which of these opinions is true,
by the appearing # of our Saviour
Jesus Christ, who hath abolished
> death, and hath brought life
¢ and immortality to light through
the gospel:

a1 Pe.1.20. b 1 Co.15.54.

some god must tell us; which is most
like to truth, is a great question.”
See Whitby, inloc. Such doubts existed in regard to the immortality of
the soul; but of the resurrection and
future life of the body, they had no
conception whatever ; comp. Acts xvii.
82. With what propriety, then, may
it be said that these doctrines were
brought to light through the gospel !
Man would never have known them
if it had not been for revelation.
The word “‘lzfe,”’ here, refers undoubtedly to life in the future world. The
question was, whether man would
live at all; and that question has
been determined by the gospel. The
word “immortality” means, properly,
incorruption, incapacity of decay;
and may be applied either to the
body or the soul. See it explained
in the Notes on 1 Cor. xv. 42. It is
used in reference to the Jody, in
1 Cor. xv. 42; 53, 54; in Rom. ii. 7,
it is applied to the future state of rewards, without special reference to
the body or soul. Here it seems to
refer to the future state as that in
which there will be no corruption
or decay. Many suppose that the
phrase ‘‘life and immortality,” here,
is used by hendiadys (two things for
one), as meaning immortal or incorruptible life. ‘The gospel thus has
truths not found in any other system,
and contains what man never would
have discovered of himself. As fair
a trial had been made among the
philosophers of Greece and Rome as
could be made, to determine whether
the unaided powers of the human
mind could arrive at these great
truths; and their most distinguished
philosophers confessed that they could
arrive at no certainty on the subject.
In this state of things, the gospel
comes and reveals truths worthy of
all acceptation ; sheds light where
inan had desired it ; solves the great
problems which had for ages perplexed

Il. TIMOTHY.

11 Whereunto I am appointed
a preacher, and an apostle, and a
teacher of the Gentiles.

12 For the which cause I also
suffer these things: nevertheless

¢ John 5.24-29,

the human mind, and discloses to
man all that he could wish--that not
only the soul will live for ever, but
that the body will be raised from the
grave, and that the entire man will
become immortal. How strange it is
that men will not embrace the gospel!
Socrates and Cicero would have hailed its light, and welcomed its truths,
as those which their whole nature
panted to know.

11. Whereunto I am appointed a
preacher. ‘That is, I am appointed
to make these truths known; see
Notes on Eph. iii. 7, 8.

12. For the which cause I also
suffer these things. That is, I suffer on account of my purpose to carry
the gospel to the Gentiles ; see Notes
on Col. i. 24. | Nevertheless Iam
not ashamed; comp. Notes on Rom. i.
16. J For I know whom I have believed. Marg., trusted. The ideais,
that he understood the character of
that Redeemer to whom he had committed his eternal interests, and knew
that he had no reason to be ashamed
of confiding in him. He was able to
keep all that he had intrusted to his
care, and would not suffer him to be
lost; see Isa. xxviii. 16. J And am
persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him.
That is, the soul, with all its immortal
interests. A man has nothing of
higher value to intrust to another
than the interests of his soul, and
there is no other act of confidence
like that in which he intrusts the keeping of that soul to the Son of God.
Learn hence, (1.) that religion consists in committing the soul to the
care of the Lord Jesus; because (a)
we feel that we cannot secure its salvation ourselves; (b) it is by nature
in danger ; (c) if not saved by him, it
will not be saved at all. (2.) That it is
a great and invaluable treasure which
is committed to him, (a) No higher treasure can be committed to an-

I am not ashamed: for I know} that which I have committed
whom I have ! believed, and am | unto him against that day.

persuaded that he is able to keep

a Ro.1.16. 1 or, trusted. 51 Pe.4.19.

other; (6) in connection with that
the whole question of our happiness
on earth and in heaven is intrusted
to him, and all depends on his fidelity. (3.) It is done by the true Christian with the most entire confidence,
so that the mind is at rest. The
grounds of this confidence are (a)
what is said of the mighty power of
the Saviour; (6) his promises that
he will keep all who confide in him
(comp. John x. 27--29; (c) experience--the fact that those who have
trusted in him have found that he is
able to keep them. (4.) This act
ef committing the soul, with all its
interests, to the Saviour, is the true
source of peace in the trials of life.
This is so because, (@) having done
this, we feel that our great interests
are secure. If the soul is safe, why
need we be disturbed by the loss of
health, or property, or other temporal
comforts? Thoseare secondary things.
A man who is shipwrecked, and who
sees his son or daughter safe with him
on the shore, will be little concerned
that a casket of jewels fell overboard
--however valuable it might be. (b)
All those trials will soon pass away,
and he will be safe in heaven. (c)
These very things may further the
great object--the salvation of thesoul.
A man’s great interests may be more
safe when in a prison than when in
a palace ; on a pallet of straw than
on a bed of down; when constrained
to say, ‘‘Give us this day our daily
bread,” than when encompassed with
the wealth of Cresus. { Against
that day. The day of judgment--
called “that day,” without anything
further to designate it, because it is
the great day; ‘the day for which
all others days were made.” It seems
to have been so much the object of
thought and conversation among the
early Christians, that the apostle supposed that he would be understood
by merely referring to it as “that

day;’’ that is, the day which they |

138 Hold fast¢ the form? of
¢ Re.2.25. @ Ro.6.17.

tt wa

were always preaching about, and
talking about, and thinking about.
13. Hold fast the form of sound
words ; see Notes, 1 Tim. 1. 3. On
the Greek wordhere rendered “form,”
see Notes on 1 Tim. i. 16, where it is
rendered pattern. The word means
a form, sketch, or imperfect delineation--an outline. Grotius says that
it here means ‘‘an exemplar, but an
exemplar fixed in the mind--an idea.”’
Calvin says that the command is that
heshould adhere to the doctrine which
he had learned, not only in its substance, but in its form. Archbishop
Tillotson explains this as meaning the
profession of faith which was made by
Christians at baptism. There seems
to be an allusion to some summary
or outline of truth which Paul had
given to Timothy, though there is no
evidence that it was written. Indeed,
there is every presumption that, if it
refers to such a summary, it was not
committed to writting. Ifit had been,
it would have been regarded as inspired, and would have taken its place
in the canon of Scripture. It may be
presumed that almost none of the
sacred writings would have been more
sacredly preserved than such a condensed summary of Christian truth.
But there is no improbability in supposing that Paul, either at his ordination, or on some other occasion, may
have stated the outlines of the Christian religion to Timothy, that he
might have a clear and connected view
of the subject. The passage, therefore, may be used as an argument for
the propriety of some brief summary of
doctrine as a matter of convenience,
though not ashaving binding authority
on the consciences of others, {| Of
sound words; comp. Notes on 1 Tim.
vi. 3. The Greek is the same in both
places. § Which thou hast heard of
me. This proves that he does not
refer to a written creed, since what
he refers to was something which
he had heard. § In faith and love
sound @ words, which thou hast
heard of me, in faith and love
which is in Christ Jesus.

14 That ° good thing which was
committed unto thee, keep by the
Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us.

15 This thou knowest, that all

a1Ti63. 61 71.6.20. ¢ Ac.19.10.

which is in Christ Jesus. Hold
these truths with sincere faith in the
Lord Jesus, and with that love which
is the best evidence of attachment
to him.

14. That good thing which was
committed unto thee; see Notes, 1
Tim. vi. 20. The reference here in
the phrase, ‘‘that good thing committed to thee,’”’ is to the sound Christian doctrine with which he had been
intrusted, and which he was required
to transmit to others. 9 Keep by the
Holy Ghost. By the aid of the Holy
Ghost. One of the best methods of
preserving the knowledge and the love
of truth is to cherish the influences of
the Holy Spirit.

15. This thou knowest, that all they

which are in Asia be turned away |

from me. That is, in that part of
Asia Minor of which Ephesus was
the capital. The name Asia was
often given particularly to that part
of Asia Minor; see Notes on Acts
ii. 9; xvi. 6. This passage proves
that Timothy was somewhere in that
region when this epistle was written
to him, for otherwise he could not
be supposed to “know” what is here
said. When Paul says that “all”
were turned away from him, he must
use the word ina general sense, for
he immediately specifies one who had
been faithful and kind to him. ¥ Of

whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes. |
We know nothing of these individuals |

but what ishere mentioned. It would
seem that they were prominent persons, and those from whom the apostle
had aright to expect other treatment.
“ The ecclesiastical traditions allege
that they were of the seventy disciples,
and in the end became followers of
Simon Magus.
this is little more than conjecture.”
Pict, Bib. It is a sad thing when

We imagine that |

|¢ they which are in Asia be turn
ed 4away from me; of whom are
Phygellus and Hermogenes.

16 The Lord give mercy unto

ithe house of Onesiphorus ; ¢ for

he oft refreshed me, and was not
ashamed of my chain. f

d chap.4.10,16. e chap.4.19. f Ac.28.20.

the only record made of a man--the
only evidence which we have that
he ever lived at all--is, that he turned away from a friend, or forsook the
paths of true religion. And yet there
are many men of whom the only thing
to be remembered of them is, that
they lived to do wrong.

16. The Lord give mercy unto the
house of Onesiphorus. The family
of Onesiphorus--for so the word house
is often used. Ile was himself still
living (ver. 18), but not improbably
then absent from his home; comp.
chap. iv. 19. He was evidently of
Asia, and is the only one who is mentioned from that region who had
showed the apostle kindness in his
trials. He is mentioned only in this
epistle, and nothing more is known
of him. The record is entirely honourable to him, and for his family the
apostle felt a warm interest on accoun’ of the kindness which he had
showed to him in prison. The ecclesiastical traditions also state that he
was one of the seventy disciples, and
was ultimately bishop of Corone.
But there is no evidence of this.
There is much force in the remark of
the Editor of the Pictorial Bible,
that ‘‘the pretended lists of the seventy disciples seem to have been made
out on the principle of including all
the names incidentally mentioned in
the sacred books, and not otherwise
appropriated.” { For he oft refreshed me. That is, showed me kindness,
and ministered to my wants. § And
was not ashamed of my chain. Was
not ashamed to be known as a friend
of one who was a prisoner on account
of religion. Paul was bound with
a chain when a prisoner at Rome;
Philseingl Ss tajeel Ci, Gol¥ ivens,
Bie Philem. 10; Notes, Acts xxviii.

0.

he sought me out very diligently,
and found me.

18 The Lord grant unto him
that he may find mercy of the

17. But when he was in Rome.
What was the employment of Onesiphorus is not known. It may have
been that he was a merchant, and
had occasion to visit Rome on business. At all events, he was at pains
to search out the apostle, and his attention was the more valuable because it cost him trouble to find him.
It is not every one, even among professors of religion, who in a great and
splendid city would be at the trouble
to search out a Christian brother, or
even a minister, who was a prisoner,
and endeavour to relieve his sorrows.
This man, so kind tothe great apostle,
will be among those to whom the
Saviour will say, at the final judgment, ‘‘I was in prison, and ye came
unto me;”’ Matt. xxv. 36.

18. The Lord grant unto him that
he may find mercy of the Lord in that
day. The day of judgment; Notes
on ver. 12. This proves that Onesiphorus was then alive, as Paul
would not offer prayer for him if he
was dead. The Papists, indeed, argue from this in favour of praying
for the dead--assuming from chap. iv.
19, that Onesiphorus was then dead.
But there is no evidence of that.
The passage in chap. iv. 19, would
prove only that he was then absent
from his family. { Andin how many
things he ministered unto me at
Ephesus. This was the home of
Onesiphorus, and his family was still
there; chap. iv. 19. When Paul was
at Ephesus, it would seem that Onesiphorus had showed him great kindness. His affection for him did not
change when he became a prisoner.
True friendship, and especially that
which is based on religion, will live
in all the vicissitudes of fortune,
whether we are in prosperity or adversity; whether in a home of plenty, or in a prison.

This chapter is full of interest, and
may suggest many interesting reflections. We see,

17 But when he was in Rome, ;
Lord in @that day: and in how
many things he > ministered unto
me at Ephesus, thou knowest very
well.

a Mat.25.34-40. b He.6.10.

(1.) A holy man imprisoned and
about to die. He had nearly finished
his course, and had the prospect of
soon departing.

(2.) He was forsaken by his friends,
and left to bear his sorrows alone.
They on whom he might have relied,
had left him ; and to all his outward
sufferings, there was added this, one
of the keenest which his Master endured before him, that his friends forsook him, and left him to bear his
sorrows alone.

(3.) Yet his mind is calm, and his
faith in the gospel is unshaken. He
expresses no regret that he had embraced the gospel; no sorrow that
he had been so zealous in it as to
bring these calamities upon himself.
That gospel he still loves, and his
great solicitude is, that his young
friend may never shrink from avowing it, though it may call him also
to pass through scenes of persecution
and sorrow.

(4.) In the general apostasy, the
turning away of those on whom he
might have relied, it is refreshing
and interesting, to find mention made
of one unshaken friend; ver. 16. He
never swerved in his affections. He
had been kind to him in former years
of comparative honour, and he did not
leave him now in the dark day of adversity. It is always interesting to
find true friendship in this world--
friendship that survives all reverses,
and that is willing to manifest itself
when the great mass turn coldly away.
There zs such a thing as friendship,
and there zs such a thing as religion,
and when they meet and mingle in the
same heart, the one strengthens the
other; and then neither persecution,
nor poverty, nor chains, will prevent
our doing good to him who is in prison
and is about to die; see Notes on
chap. iv. 16.

This chapter is made up of vari
CHAPTER It.
isa therefore, my son, be
# strong in the grace that is in
Christ Jesus.

ous exhortations and encouragements
to duty. The apostle exhorts 'Timothy to be strong in the Christian
graces (ver. 1); to commit the great
trust which he had received to faithful men (ver. 2); to endure hardships
like a good soldier (ver. 3--7), and
refers him (a) to the case of one who

Il. TIMOTHY.

goes to war, whose great business it
is to please him in whose service he
is (ver. 4); (6) to the case of one who
strives for a crown at the games (ver.
5), and (c) to the husbandman who
looks onward for the reward of his
labour; ver. 6. He then, in order to |
encourage him to be patient in enduring the trials to which he would
be exposed, refers him (a) to the
certainty of the truth of that religion
in whose cause he would suffer (ver.
8); (6) to his own case, reminding him
how much he had endured in that
cause (ver. 9, 10); (¢) to the fact that
our sufferings here will be crowned
with certain glory hereafter (ver. 11,
12); and (d) to the assurance that
the Lord Jesus will be faithful to all
his promises to his people; ver. 13.
These things the apostle then exhorts
him to press upon the hearts of others,
that they might not waste their time
in unprofitable pursuits, but might
engage in the same great and arduous
struggle for securing the reward; ver.
14. He then exhorts Timothy to
study to perform his duties in such a
way that he would not be ashamed,
and to avoid the unimportant strifes
which were then raging ; and to enforce this, he refers to a real case with
which Timothy was acquainted--that
of Hymeneus and Philetus, who, by
unprofitable speculations, had been led
to deny a fundamental doctrine of
religion; ver. 15 --18. Yet, Paul says,
he should not be discouraged because
some had been led into dangerous
errors. The foundation of God remained firm. Those that were truly
his were known, and would not apostatize; ver. 19. In illustration of

this, and to show that it was to be

2 And the things that thou
hast heard of me ! among many
witnesses, the same commit © thou
@ Jos.1.7; Ep.6.10. lor, by. 61 Ti.1.18.

expected that all would not honour
religion, the apostle refers to a house
in which there were all sorts of
vessels, some to honour and some to
dishonour, and says that, if any one
would endeavour to free himself from
all that was base and impure, he
would be a vessel meet for the use of
the Master; ver. 20,21. To accomplish this, he gives Timothy various
directions respecting his conduct. He
was to flee from youthful lusts; he
was to follow righteousness, faith,
charity, and peace; he was to avoid
foolish questions; he was to be an example of gentleness and meekness,
and he was patiently to instruct those
that were of a different character ;
ver. 22--26.

1. Thou therefore. In view of
the fact stated in the previous chapter, that many had turned away from
the apostle, and had forsaken the
paths of truth. § Be strong in the
grace which is in Christ Jesus; comp.
Notes on Eph. vi. 10. The meaning
is, Be strong, relying on the grace
which the Lord Jesus only can impart.

2. And the things which thou hast
heard of me among many witnesses.
Marg., by. Before, or in the presence
of, many witnesses. Perhaps he refers to a solemn charge which he gave
him, in the presence of the church,
when he was ordained. It is by no
means improbable that such a charge
was given then to a newly ordained
minister, as it is now. On such an
occasion, the apostle would be likely
to state a summary of Christian doctrine,--(comp. Notes on chap. i. 13),
--and to exhort Timothy to a faithful adherence toit. { The same commit thou to faithful men. In the same
way as those things have been committed to you. The reference is undoubtedly to ordination to the ministerial office. Timothy was to see
that those only were admitted to the
ministry who were qualified to understand the truths of religion, and to

to faithful men, who shall be able
@ to teach others also.
3 Thou therefore endure © hard-

hess, as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ.

a Tit.1.9, b chap.4.5.

communicate them to others. This
is a clear warrant for ministers to set
apart others to the same sacred office.
It does not prove that the people are
not at liberty to choose their own
pastor, but only that those in the
ministry are to set apart others to the
same office with themselves. There
is, doubtless, to be a “succession” of
ministers in the church; but the true
line of the “succession ”’ is to be found
in good men who are qualified to
teach, and who have the spirit of
Christ, and not merely in those who
have been ordained. § Who shall
be able to teach others also. On the
qualifications of ministers, see Notes
on 1 Tim. iii. 2--7.

3. Thou therefore endure hardness,
as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.
Such hardships as a soldier is called
toendure. The apostle supposes that
a minister of the gospel might be called to endure hardships, and that it is
reasonable that he should be as ready
to do it as asoldieris. On the hardships which he endured himself, see
Notes on 2 Cor. xi. 23--29. Soldiers
often endure great privations. Taken
from their homes and friends ; exposed
to cold, or heat, or storms, or fatiguing marches; sustained on coarse fare,
or almost destitute of food, they are
often compelled to endure as much
asthe human framecan bear, and often
indeed, sink under their burdens, and
die. If, for reward or their country’s
sake, they are willing to do this, the
soldier of the cross should be willing
to do it for his Saviour’s sake, and
for the good of the human race.
Hence, let no man seek the office of
the ministry as a place of ease. Let
no one come into it merely to enjoy
himself. Let no one enter it who is
not prepared to lead a soldier’s life,
and to welcome hardship and trial as
his portion. He would make a bad
soldier, who, at his enlistment, should
make it a condition that he should be

4 No man that warreth ¢ entangleth himself with the affairs
of this life; that he may please
him who hath chosen him to bea

soldier.
¢ 1 Co.9.25,26.

permitted to sleep on a bed of down,
and always be well clothed and fed,
and never exposed to peril, or compelled to pursue a wearisome march.
Yet do not some men enter the ministry, making these the conditions ?
And would they enter the ministry
on any other terms ?

4. Noman that warreth entangleth
himself with the affairs of this life.
Having alluded to the soldier, and
stated one thing in which the Christian minister is to resemble him, another point of resemblance is suggested to the mind of the apostle. Neither
the minister nor the soldier is to be
encumbered with the affairs of this
life, and the one should not be more
than the other. ‘This is always a
condition in becoming a soldier. He
gives up his own business during the
time for which he is enlisted, and devotes himself to the service of his
country. The farmer leaves his
plough, and the mechanic his shop,
and the merchant his store, and the
student his books, and the lawyer his
brief ; and neither of them expect to
pursue these things while engaged in
the service of theircountry. It would
be wholly impracticable to carry on
the plans of a campaign, if each one
of these classes should undertake to
prosecute his private business. Sec
this fully illustrated from the Rules
of War among the Romans, by Grotius, 7 loc. Roman soldiers were
not allowed to marry, or to engage in
any husbandry or trade; and they
were forbidden to act as tutors to any
person, or curators to any man’s
estate, or proctors in the cause of
other men, ‘The general principle
was, that they were excluded from
those relations, agencies, and engagements, which it was thought would
divert their minds from that which
was to be the sole object of pursuit.
So with the ministers of the gospel.
It is equally improper for them to
5 And if a man also strive for
masteries, yet is he not crowned,
except he strive lawfully.

5)

“ entangle ’’ themselves with the
business of a farm or plantation ; with
plans of speculation and gain, and
with any purpose of worldly aggrandizement. The minister ofthe gospel
accomplishes the design of his appointment only when he can say in
sincerity, that he “is not entangled
with the affairs of this life ;’’ comp.
Notes, 1 Cor. ix. 25--27. J Thathe
may please him who hath chosen him
to be a soldier. Thatis, him who has
enlisted him, or in whose employ he
is. His great object is to approve
himself to him. It is not to pursue
his own plans, or to have his own
will, or to accumulate property or
fame for himself. is will is absorbed in the will of his commander, and
his purpose is accomplished if he meet
with his approbation. Nowhere else
is it so true that the will of one becomes lost in that of another, as in
the case of the soldier. In an army
itis contemplated that there shall be
but one mind, one heart, one purpose
--that of the commander ; and that
the whole army shall be as obedient
to that as the members of the human
body are to the one will that controls
all. The application of this is obvious. The grand purpose of the
minister of the gospel is to please
Christ. He is to pursue no separate
plans, and to have no separate will,
of his own; and it is contemplated
that the whole corps of Christian ministers and members of the churches
shall be as entirely subordinate to the
will of Christ, as an armyis to the
orders of its chief.

5. And tf a man also strive for
masteries. As in the Grecian games.
See this favourite illustration of Paul
explained in the Notes on 1 Cor. ix.
24, seq. § Yet ts he not crowned,
except he strive lawfully. In conformity with the rules of the games.
See Grotius, in loc. No one could
obtain the prize unless he had complied with all the laws of the games,
and had thus given to those with

Ul. LiMOTRY.

6 The husbandman ! that laboureth must be first partaker of

the fruits.
1 labouring first, must be partaker.

whom he contended, a fair opportunity to succeed. ‘‘ In those contests,
he who transgressed the rules in the
least matter, not only failed of the
prize, even though the apparent victor, but was sometimes disgraced
and punished.’ Pict. Bib. So the
apostle here represents the Christian
minister as engaged in a struggle or
conflict for the crown. Ife says that
he could not hope to win it unless he
should comply with all the laws by
which it is conferred; unless he
should subdue every improper propensity, and make an effort like that
evinced by the combatants at the
Olympic games; comp. Notes on 1
Cor. ix. 26, 27.

6. The husbandman that laboureth
The margin is, “labouring first, must
be partaker.”’ The idea, according
to the translation in the text, is, that
there is a fitness or propriety (de)
that the man who cultivates the earth,
should enjoy the fruits of his labour.
See the same image explained in the
Notes on 1 Cor. ix. 10. But if this
be the meaning here, it is not easy to
see why the apostle introduces it.
According to the marginal reading,
the word “first” is introduced in
connection with the word labour--
“labouring first, must be partaker.”’
That is, it is a great law that the
husbandman must work before he
receives a harvest. This sense will
accord with the purpose of the apostle. It was to remind Timothy that
labour must precede reward ; that if
aman would reap, he must sow; that
he could hope for no fruits, unless he
toiled for them. The point was not
that the husbandman would be the
jirst one who would partake of the
fruits ; but that he must first labour
before he obtained the reward. Thus
understood, this would be an encouragement to Timothy to persevere in
his toils, looking onward to the reward. The Greek will bear this construction, though it is not the most
obvious one.

7 Consider * what I say; and
the ® Lord give thee understanding
in all things.

8 Remember that Jesus Christ,

a1 Ti, 4.15. b Pr.2.6,

7. Consider whai I say; see Notes,
1 Tim. iv. 15. ‘The sense ig, “ Think
of the condition of the soldier, and
the principles on which he is enlisted; think of the aspirant for the
crown in the Grecian games; think
of the farmer, patiently toiling in the
prospect of the distant harvest ; and
then go to your work with a similar
spirit.”” These things are worth attention. When the minister of the
gospel thinks of his hardships, of his
struggles against an evil world, and of
his arduous and constant discouraging
toil, let him think of the soldier, of
the man who struggles for this world’s
honours, and of the patient farmer--
and be content. How patiently do
they bear all, and yet for what inferior rewards! And the Lord give
thee understanding in all things. Enable you to see the force of these considerations, and to apply them to
your own case, Such are often the
discouragements of the ministry ; so
prone is the mind to despondency,
that we need the help of the Lord to
enable us to apply the most obvious
considerations, and to derive support
from the most plain and simple truths
and promises.

8. Remember that Jesus Christ, of
the seed of David, was raised from
the dead. Or rather, perhaps, ‘ Remember Jesus Christ; him who was
raised from the dead.” The idea
seems not to be, as our translators
supposed, that he was to reflect on
the fact that he was raised from the
dead ; but rather that he was to think
of the Saviour himself. ‘ Think of
the Saviour, now raised up from the
dead after all the sorrows of this life,
and let this encourage you to bear
your trials.’’ There is nothing better
fitted to enable us to endure the labours and trials of this life, than to
think of the Saviour. Onthe phrase
‘seed of David,’’ see Notes on Rom.

i.3. According to my gospel. The |
¢ of the seed of David, was raised
from the dead according to my
gospel :
9 Wherein I suffer trouble,
¢ Ro.].3,4.

gospel which I preach; Notes, 2
Thess. ii. 14.

9. Wherein I suffer trouble, as an
evil-doer. Asif I were a violator of
the laws. That is, I am treated as if
I were a criminal. J Even unto
bonds. As if I were one of the worst
kind of malefactors ; Notes, Eph. vi.
20. During the apostle’s first imprisonment at Rome, he was permitted to “ dwell in his own hired house,’’
though guarded by a soldier, and probably chained to him; see Notes on
Acts xxviii. 16, 80. What was his
condition in his second imprisonment,
during which this epistle was written,
we have no means of knowing with
certainty. It is probable, however,
that he was subjected to much more
rigid treatment than he had been in
the first instance. The tradition is,
that he and Peter were together in
the Mamertine prison at Rome; and
the place is still shown in which it is
said that they were confined. The
Mamertine prisons are of great antiquity. According to Livy, they were
constructed by Ancus Martius, and
enlarged by Servius Tullius. The
lower prison is supposed tohave been
once a quarry, and to have been at
onetime occupiedasa granary. These
prisons are on the descent of the
Capitoline Mount, towards the Forum. They consist of two apartments,
one over the other, built with large,
uncemented stones. There is no entrance to either, except by a small
aperture in the roof, and by a small
hole in the upper floor, leading to the
cell below, without any staircase to
either. The upper prison is twentyseven feet long, by twenty wide; the
lower one is elliptical, and measures
twenty feet by ten In the lower one
is a small spring, which is said at
Rome to have arisen at the command
of Peter, to enable him to baptize his
keepers, Processus and Martianus,
with forty-seven companions, whom
as an evil-doer, even unto bonds ;
@but the word of God is not
bound.

10 Therefore I endure all things
for the *elect’s sakes, that they
may also obtain the salvation which
is in Christ Jesus with eternal

glory. ‘
11 Zt zs a faithful saying: For
@ Ep.6.20, b 2 Co.1.6. c Ro.6.5,8.

he converted. No certain reliance
can be placed on any part of this tradition, though in itself there is no
improbability in supposing that these
prisons may have been used for confining Christians, and the apostle
Paul among others. Dr. Burton says
that a more horrible place for the
confinement of a human being can
scarcely be conceived. { But the
word of God is not bound. ‘this is
one of Paul’s happy turns of thought ;
comp. Acts xxvi.29. The meaning is
plain. The gospel was prospered.
That could not be fettered and imprisoned. It circulated with freedom.
even when he who was appointed to
preach it was in chains ; see Phil. i.
13,14. Asthis was the great matter,
his own imprisonment was of comparatively little consequence. What
may befall us is of secondary importance. The grand thing is the triumph
of truth on the earth; and well may
we bear privations and sorrows, ifthe
gospel moves on in triumph.

10. Therefore I endure all things
for the elect’s sakes; see Notes on 2
Cor. i. 6. The sense is, What I suffer is in the cause of the church,
spoken of here, as it is often, as chosen, or elected; Notes on Eph. i. 4.
| That they may also obtain the salvation, &c. Their salvation, though
they were elected, could not be secured without proper efforts. The meaning of the apostle here is, that he was
willing to suffer if he might save
others ; and any one ought to be willing to suffer in order to secure the
salvation of the elect--for it was an
object for which the Redeemer was
willing to lay down his life.

ll. It isafaithful saying, Or,
Yather, that which he was about to

fA. D. 65

if ¢ we be dead with him, we shall
also live with him :

12 If we suffer, we shall also
reign with him: If we deny ¢ him,
he also will deny us :

13 If ¢ we believe not, yet he
abideth faithful: he f cannot deny
himself.

@ Mat. 10.33. e Ro.3.3. S Nue23.19.

say was worthy of entire credence

;and profound attention; see Notes

on 1 Tim. i. 15. The object is to
encourage Timothy to bear trials by
the hope of salvation. J For if we
be dead with him ; see Notes on Rom.
vi. 8. J We shall also live with him.
This was a sort of maxim, or asettled
point, which is often referred to in
the Bible ; see Notes on Rom. vi. 8,
4,5; John xi. 25; 1 Thess. iv. 14.
12. If we suffer, we shall also reign
with him. ‘The meaning is, that the
members will be treated as the Head
is. We become united with him by
faith, and, if we share his treatment
on earth, we shall share his triumphs
in heaven ; see Notes, Rom. viii. 17.
{ Tf we deny him, he also will deny
us; see Notes on Matt. x. 32, 33,
13. If we believe not, yet he abideth
faithful. This cannot mean that, if
we live in sin, he will certainly ‘save
us, as if he had made any promise to
the elect, or formed any purpose that
he would save them, whatever might
be their conduct; for (1.) he had
just said that if we deny him he will
deny us; and (2.) there is no such
promise in the Bible, and no such
purpose has been formed. The promise is, that he that is a believer
shall be saved, and there is no purpose to save any but such as lead holy
lives. ‘The meaning must be, that if
we are unbelieving and unfaithful,
Christ will remain true to his word,
and we cannot hope to be saved. The
object of the apostle evidently is, to
excite ‘Timothy to fidelity in the performance of duty, and to encourage
him to bear trials, by the assurance
that we cannot hope to escape if we
are not faithful to the cause of the
Saviour. This interpretation accords

14 Of these things put ¢ them
in remembrance, charging them before the Lord that they strive ¢ not
about words to no profit, but to the
subverting of the hearers.

a2 Pe.l.13. b Tit.3.9,10.

with the design which he had in view.
| He cannot deny himself. Implying
that it would be a denial of his very
nature to save those who are unfaithful. He is holy; and how can he
save one who is unholy? His very
nature is purity; and how can he
save one who has no purity? Let no
one, then, suppose that, because he is
elected, he is safe, if he lives in sin.
The electing purpose of God, indeed,
makes salvation sure ; but it is only
for those who lead righteous lives.
Nothing would be more dishonourable
for God than to resolve to save a man
that lived habitually in sin ; and if
that were the doctrine of election, it
would deserve all the opprobrium that
has ever been heaped upon it.

14. Of these things put them wn remembrance. These great principles
in regard to the kingdom of Christ.
They would be as useful to others as
they were for Timothy, to whom they
were specially addressed. {| Charging them before the Lord. In the
presence of the Lord, implying that it
was a very important matter; Notes,
1 Pima s.
about words to no profit; see Notes,
1 Tim. i. 6; vi. 4. § But to the subverting of the hearers. Turning them
away from the simplicity of faith. It
is rare, indeed, that a religious controversy does not produce this effect,
and this is commonly the case, where,
as often happens, the matter in dispute is of little importance.

15. Study to show thyself approved
unto God. Give diligence (2 Pet. ii.
10), or make an effort so to discharge
the duties of the ministerial office as
to meet the divine approbation. The
object of the ministry is not to please
men. Such doctrines should be
preached, and such plans formed, and
such a manner of life pursued, as God
will approve. To do this demands
study or care--for there are many

4 That they strive not |
15 Study « to show thyself ap
proved unto God, a workman that
needeth not to be ashamed, rightly ¢ dividing the word of truth.

16 But shun profane and vain

¢2 Pe.1.10. d Mat.13.52.

temptations to the opposite course ;
there are many things the tendency of
which is to lead a minister to seek
popular favour rather than the divine
approval. If any man please God, it
will be as the result of deliberate intention anda carefal life. A workman that needeth not to be ashamed.
A man faithfully performing his duty,
so that when he looks over what he
has done, he may not blush. 7 Rightly
dividing the word of truth. The word
here rendered “rightly dividing,”
occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It means, properly, to cut
straight, to divide right; and the allusion here may be to a steward who
makes a proper distribution to each
one under his care of such things as
his office and their necessities require ; comp. Notes on Matt. xiii. 52.
Some have supposed that there is an
allusion here to the Jewish priest,
cutting or dividing the sacrifice into
proper parts; others, that the allusion is to the Scribes dividing the
law into sections; others, to a carver
distributing food to the guests at a
feast. Robinson (Lewz.) renders it,
“rightly proceeding as to the word of
truth ;” that is, rightfully and skilfuliy teaching the word of truth. The
idea seems to be, that the minister of
the gospel is to make a proper distribution of that word, adapting his
instructions to the circumstances and
wants of his hearers, and giving to
each that which will be fitted to nourish the soul for heaven.

16. But shun profane and vain
babblings, Notes, 1 Tim. vi. 20.
{| For they will increase unto more ungodliness. Their tendency is to alienate the soul from God, and to lead
to impiety. Such kinds of disputation are not merely a waste of time,
they are productive of positive mischief. A man fond of contention in
religious things is seldom one who
babblings ; for they will increase
unto more ungodliness ;

17 And their word will eat as
doth a canker ; ! of whom is Hymenus and Philetus ;

1 gangrene.

has much love for the practical duties of piety, or any very deep sense
of the distinction between right and
wrong. You will not usually look for
him in the place of prayer, nor can
you expect his aid in the conversion
of sinners, nor will you find that he
has any very strict views of religious
obligation.

17. And their word. The word, or
the discourses of those who love vain
and idle disputations. {] Will eat as
doth a canker. Marg., gangrene.
This word -- yey ypeive--occurs nowhere else inthe New Testament. It
is derived from ypaiw, ypaivw, graio or
graino, to devour, corrode, and means
gangrene or mortification--the death
of apart, spreading, unless arrested,
by degrees over the whole body. The
words rendered “ will eat,’’ mean will
have nutriment ; that is, will spread
over and consume the healthful parts.
It will not merely destroy the parts
immediately affected, but will extend
into the surrounding healthy parts
and destroy them also.
erroneous doctrines. They will not
merely eat out the truth in the particular matter to which they refer,
but they will also spread over and
corrupt other truths. The doctrines
of religion are closely connected, and
are dependent on each other--like
the different parts of the human body.
One cannot be corrupted without affecting those adjacent to it, and unless checked, the corruption will
soon spread over the whole. ¥ Of
whom is Hymeneus and Philetus.
In regard to Hymenzeus, see Notes on
1 Tim. i. 20. Of Philetus nothing
more is known. They have gained an
undesirable immortality, destined to
be known to the end of time only as
the advocates of error.

18. Who concerning the truth have
erred. To what extent they had erred is unknown. Paul mentions only

So it is with |

18 Who concerning the truth
have erred, * saying » ‘hat the resurrection is past already; and
overthrow the faith of some.

19 Nevertheless the foundation

a} Ti.6.21, 6 1 Co.15.12.

one point--that pertaining to the resurrection ; but says that this was
like a gangrene. It would certainly,
unless checked, destroy all the other
doctrines of religion. No man can
safely hold a single error, any more
than he can safely have one part of
his body in a state of mortification.
| Saying that the resurrection is past
already. It is not known in what
form they held this opinion. It may
have been, as Augustine supposes,
that they taught that there was no resurrection but that which occurs in
the soul when it is recovered from
the death of sin, and made to live
anew. Orit may be that they held
that those who had died had experienced all the resurrection which they
ever would, by passing into another
state, and receiving at death a spiritual body fitted to their mode of being
in the heavenly world. Whatever
was the form of the opinion, the apostle regarded it as a most dangerous
error, for just views of the resurrection undoubtedly lie at the foundation of correct apprehensions of the
Christian system; comp. Notes on 1
Cor. xv. 12--19. And overthrow
the faith of some. That is, on this
point, and as would appear on all the
correlative subjects of Christian behef; comp. 1 Tim. i. 19, 20.

19. Nevertheless the foundation of
God is sure. Marg., steady. The
meaning is, that though some had
been turned away by the arts of these
errorists, yet the foundation of the
church which God had laid remained
firm; comp. Eph. ii. 20, “ And are
built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone.”’
As long as this foundation remained
firm, there was no reason to be troubled from the few instances of apostasy which had occurred ; comp. Ps.
xi. 3. It is not uncommon to com-

“of God standeth | sure, having |

this seal, The Lord * knoweth
them that are his. And, Let ¢
every one that nameth the nan.e of
Christ depart from iniquity.
a Pr.10.25. 1 or, steady
8 Na.1.7; John10.14,27. c Ps.97.10.

pare the church to a building erected
on a solid foundation ; Eph. 1i. 20, 21;
1 Cor. ili. 9, 10; Matt. xvi. 18.
Y Having this seal. Or rather a
seal with this inscription. The word
seal is sometimes used to denote the
instrument by which an impression is
made, and sometimes the impression
or inscription itself. A seal is used
for security (Matt. xxvii. 66), or as a
mark of genuineness ; Rev. ix. 4. The
seal here is one that was affixed to the
foundation, and seems to refer to
some inscription on the foundationstone which always remained there,
and which denoted the character and
design of the edifice. The allusion is
to the custom, in rearing an edifice,
of inscribing the name of the builder
and the design of the edifice on the
corner-stone. See Rosenmiiller, Alte
undneue Morgenland, No. 405. So
the church of Christ is a building
reared by the hands of God. Its
foundation has been firmly and securely laid, and on that foundation
there is an inscription always remaining which determines the character of:
the edifice. J The Lord knoweth
them that are his. This is one of the
inscriptions on the foundation-stone
of the church, which seems to mark
the character of the building. It always stands there, no matter who
apostatizes. It is at thesame time a
fearful inscription--showing that no
one can deceive God ; that he is intimately acquainted with all who enter that building ; and that in the
multitudes which enter there, the
friends and the foes of God are intimately known. He can separate his
own friends from all others, and his
constant care will be extended to all
who are truly his own, to keep them
from falling. This has the appearance
of being a quotation, but no such passage is found in the Old Testament
in so many words. In Nahum i. 7,

20 But in a great house there
are not only vessels @ of gold and
of silver, but also of wood and of
earth ; and some to honour, and
some to dishonour.

d@ Ro.9.21.

the following words are found : “And
he knoweth them that trust in him ;”’
and it is possible that Paul may have
had that in his eye; but it is not necessary to suppose that he designed it
as a quotation. A phrase somewhat
similar to this is found in Num. xvi.
5, “the Lord will show who are his,”
rendered in the Septuagint, ‘“‘ God
knoweth who are his;’ and Whitby
supposes that this is the passage referred to. But whether Paul had
these passages in view or not, it is
clear that he meant to say that it was
one of the fundamental things in religion, that God knew who were his
own people, and that he would preserve them from the danger of making
shipwreck of their faith. § And, Let
every one that nameth the name of
Christ depart from iniquity. ‘This is
the other seal or inscription which is
made on the foundation which God
has laid. The foundation has two inscriptions --the first implying that
God knows all who are his own people; the other, that all who are his
professed people should depart from
evil. This is not found in so many
words in the Old ‘Testament, and,
like the former, it is not to be regarded as a quotation. The meaning
is, that itis an elementary principle
in the true church, that all who become members of it should lead holy
lives. It was also true that they
would lead holy lives, and amidst all
the defections of errorists, and all
their attempts to draw away others
from the true faith, those might be
known to be the true people of God
who did avoid evil.

20. But in a great house. Still
keeping up the comparison of the
church with a building. The idea is,
that the church is a large edifice, and
that in such a building we are not to
expect entire uniformity in all the
articles which it contains. § Theré
21 If* a man therefore purge
himself from these, he shall be a

vessel unto honour, sanctified, and |

meet for the master’s use, and pre- |
pared ® unto every good work,
a Je.15.19. b chap.3.17.

Il. TIMOTHY.

22 Flee « also youthful lusts:
but ¢ follow righteousness, faith,
charity, peace, with them that call ¢
on the Lord out of a pure heart.

23 But foolish and unlearned

¢ Ee.11.9,10. dHel214. €1 Co.1.2

are not only vessels of gold and of |
silver, &c. You are not to expect to |
find all the articles of furniture alike, |
or all made of the same material.
Variety in the form, and use, and |
material, is necessary in furnishing |
suchahouse. § And some to honvur,
and some to dishonour. Some to
most honourable uses--as drinkingvessels, and vessels to contain costly |
viands, and some for the less honourable purposes connected with cooking,
d&c. The same thing is to be expectedin the church. See this idea illustrated at greater length under another figure in the Notes on 1 Cor.
xii, 14--26 ; comp. Notes, Rom. ix.
21. The application here seems to
be, that in the church it is to be presumed that there will be a great variety of gifts and attainments, and
that we are no more to expect that
all will be alike, than we are that all
the vessels in a large house will be
made of gold.

21. If aman therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel |
unto honour. If a man cleanse or
purify himself; comp. Notes on John
xv. 2. The word “these” refers,
here, to the persons represented by
the vessels of wood and of earth--the
vessels made to dishonour, as mentioned in the previous verse. The
idea is, that if one would preserve
himself from the corrupting influence
of such men, he would be fitted to be
a vessel of honour, or to be employed
jin the most useful and honourable
service in the cause of his Master.
On the word vessel, see Notes on
Acts ix. 15. § And meet for the master’s use. Fit to be employed by the
Lord Jesus in promoting his work on

earth.

‘all that is good and virtuous.

‘on 1 Cor. vi. 18. Paul felt that Tim-

othy, then a.young man, was subject
to the same passions as other young
men ; and hence his repeated cautions
to him to avoid all those things, arising from his youth, which might be

the occasion of scandal ; comp. Notes
VontleDim: ivet 2.5 .vid 2s
‘remembered that this epistle is appli-

It is to be

cable to other ministers, as well as to

| Timothy ; and, to a young man in the

ministry, no counsel could be more
appropriate than to “FLEE from
youthful lusts;’’ not to indulge for a
moment in those corrupt passions to
which youth are subject, but to cultivate the pure and sober virtues which
become the ministerial office. § But
follow righteousness, &c.; comp. Notes
on Heb. xii. 14. The general meaning here is, tuat he was to practise
He
was to practise righteousness, or justice and equity, in all his dealings
with men; faith, or fidelity in his
duties ; charity, or love to all men
(Notes, 1 Cor. xiii.) ; peace, or harmony and concord with all others.
What virtues could be more appropriate for a minister of the gospel ?
q With them that call on the Lord out
of a pure heart. That is, with all
Christians, who are often characterized as those who call on the Lord;
ls Cof-cin 2s comp: Attsrixatd ae En
all his intercourse with them, Timothy was to manifest the virtues above
recommended. But not with them
alone. It would be incumbent on him
to exhibit the same virtues in his in-

| tercourse with all.

23. But foolish and unlearned
questions avoid ; see Notes on ver,
16; comp. Notes on 1 Tim. i. 4, 6;
iv. 7 The word unlearned, here,

Such
On

22. Flee also youthful lusts.
passions as youth are subject to.

the word flee, and the pertinency of.

its use in such a connection, see Notes

means trifling ; that which does not
tend to edification; stupid. The
Greeks and the Hebrews were greatly given to controversies of various

questions @ avoid, knowing that | must not strive; but be gentle un-

they do gender strifes,
24 And the servant of the Lord

@ ver. 16

kinds, and many of the questions discussed pertained to points which
could not be settled, or which, zf settled, were of no importance. Such
has been the character of no small
part of the disputes which have agitated the world. Paul correctly says
that the only effect of such disputes
is to engender harsh contention.
Points of real importance can be discussed with no injury to the temper ;
but men cannot safely dispute about
rifles.

24. And the servant of the Lord.
Referring here primarily to the Christian minister, but applicable to all
Christians ; for all profess to be the
servants of the Lord. Must not
strive. He may calmly inquire after
truth ; he may discuss points of morals, or theology, if he will do it with
a proper spirit; he may “contend
earnestly for the faith once delivered
to the saints” (Jude 3) ; but he may
not do that which is here mentioned
as strife. The Greek word--pzx:oéa--commonly denotes, to fight, to
make war, to contend. In John vi.
52; Acts vil. 26; 2 Tim. ii. 24, it is
rendered strove, and strive ; in James
iv. 2, fight. It is not elsewhere used
in the New Testament. The meaning is, that the servant of Christ
should be a man of peace. He
should not indulge in the feelings
which commonly give rise to contention, and which commonly characterizeit. He should not struggle for mere
victory, even when endeavouring to
maintain truth ; but should do this,
in all cases, with a kind spirit, and a
mild temper; with entire candour ;
with nothing designed to provoke and
irritate an adversary ; and so that,
whatever may be the result of the
discussion, ‘“‘ the bond of peace”’ may,
if possible, be preserved ; comp. Notes,
Rom. xii. 18. § But be gentle unto all
men; Notes, 1 Thess. ii. 7. The
word rendered gentle, does not occur
elyewhere in the New Testament. It
means that the Christian minister is

to all men, apt to teach, ! patient,
25 In meekness > instructing
1 or, forbearing. 6 Ga.6.1.

to be meek and mild towards all, not
disputatious and quarrelsome. 4 Apt
to teach; Notes, 1 Tim. iii. 2. ( Patient. Marg., forbearing. The Greek
word here used does not elsewhere
occur in the New ‘’estament. It
means, patient under evils and injuries. Robinson, Lex. Comp. Notes
on Eph. iv. 2; Col. iii. 13.

25. Inmeekness instructing those that
oppose themselves. That is, those
who embrace error, and array themselves against the truth. We are
not to become angry with such persons, and denounce them at once as
heretics. Weare not to hold them
up to public reproach and scorn; but
we are to set about the business of
patiently instructing them. ‘Their
grand difficulty, it is supposed in this
direction, is, that they are ignorant
of the truth. Our business with
them is, calmly to show them what
the truth is. If they are angry, we
are not to be. If they oppose the
truth, we are still calmly to state it to
them. If they are slow to see it, we
are not to become weary or impatient. Nor, if they do not embrace it
at all, are we to become angry with
them, and denounce them. We nay
pity them, but we need not use hard
words. ‘This is the apostolic precept
about the way of treating those who
are in error ; and can any one fail to
see its beauty and propriety? Let it
be remembered, also, that this is not
only beautiful and proper in itself; it
is the wisest course, if we would
bring others over to our opinions.
You are not likely to convince a man
that you are right, and that he is
wrong, if you first make him angry ;
nor are you very likely to do it, if
you enter into harsh contention. You
then put him on his guard ; you make
him a party, and, from self-respect,
or pride, or anger, he will endeavour
to defend his own opinions, and will
not yield to yours. Meekness and
gentleness are the very best things, if
you wish to convince another that he
those that oppose themselves; if
God peradventure @ will give them
repentance to the acknowledging
» of the truth ;

a Ac.8.22. b Tit.1.l.

is wrong. Win his heart first, and
then modestly and kindly show him
what the truth ts, in as few words,
and with as unassuming a spirit, as
possible, and you have him. ¥ If
God peradventure will give them repentance, &c. Give them such a view
of the error which they have embraced, and such regret for having embraced it, that they shall be willing
to admit the truth. After all our
care in teaching others the truth, our
only dependence is on God for its
success. We cannot beabsolutely certain that they will see their error ; we
cannot rely certainly on any power
which argument willhave; we canonly
hope that God may show them their
error, and enable them to see and
embrace the truth; comp. Acts xi.
18. The word rendered peradventure, here --yxvrore--means, usually,
not even, never; and then, that never,
lest ever--the same as lest perhaps.
It istranslated lest at any tim’, Matt.
ive Geive 205 xine lowe Marky av.
12; Luke xxi. 34; lest, Matt. vii. 6 ;
xiii. 29; xv. 32, e¢ al.; lest haply,
Luke xiv. 12; Acts v. 39. It does
not imply that there was any chance
about what is said, but rather that
there was uncertainty in the mind
of the speaker, and that there was
need of caution lest something should
occur ; or, that anything was done, or
should be done, to prevent something
from happening. It is not used elsewhere in the New Testament in the
sense which our translators, and all
the critics, so far as I have examined,
give to it here--as implying a hope
that God would give them repentance,
&c. But I may be permitted to suggest another interpretation, which
will accord with the uniform meaning
of the word in the New Testament,
and which will refer the matter to
those who had embraced the error,
and not to God. It is this: “In
meekness instructing those that op-

pose themselves (avridiars 9: bvov;) lest-- |

26 And that they may | recover
themselves out of the snare ¢ of the
devil, who are taken 2? captive by
him at his will.

1 awake. 1 Ti.3.7. 2 alive.

whaxori-- God should give them repentance, and they should recover
themselves out of the snare of the
devil,’ &c. » That is, they put themselves in this posture of opposition so
that they shall not be brought to repentance, and recover themselves.
They do it with a precautionary view
that they may not be thus brought to
repentance, and be recovered to God.
They take this position of opposition
to the truth, intending not to be converted; and this is the reason why they
are not converted.

26. And that they muy recover
themselves. Marg., awake. The
word which is rendered recover in the
text, and awake in the margin--
avay7-pworv -- occurs nowhere else in
the New Testament. It properly
means, to become sober again, as from
inebriation ; toawake fromadeep sleep,
and then, to come to aright mind, as
one does who is aroused from a state
of inebriety, or from sleep. The representation in this part of the verse
implies that, while under the influence
of error, they were like a man intoxicated, or like one in deep slumber
From this state they were to be roused.
as one is from sleep, or as a man is
recovered from the stupor and dullness of intoxication. J Out of the
snare of the devil. The snare which
the devil has spread for them, and in
which they have become entangled.
There is a little confusion of metaphor here, since, in the first part ot
the verse, they are represented as
asleep, or intoxicated ; and, here, as
taken in a snare. Yet the general
idea is clear. In one part of the
verse, the influence of error is repre-

| sented as producing sleep, or stupor ;

in the other, as being taken in a
snare, or net ; and, in both, the idea
is, that an effort was to be made that
| they might be rescued from this perilous condition. J Who are taken

captive by him at his will. Marg.,
alivé. The Greek word means, pro:

HIS know also, that ¢in the
a1 Til.4; 2Pe.3.3; 1John2.18; Judel7.18

last days 5 perilous times shall
come,

6 Re.v). viii ix.x1.--xiii. xviii.

perly, to take alive; and then, to
take captive, to win over (Lukev. 10) ;
and then, toensnare, or seduce. Here
it means that they had been ensnared
by the arts of Satan unto (cis) his
will ; that is, they were so influenced
by him, that they complied with his
will. Another interpretation of this
passage should be mentioned here, by
which it is proposed to avoid the incongruousness of the metaphor of
awaking one froma snare. It is adopted by Doddridge, and is suggested
also by Burder, as quoted by Rosenmiller, A. u.n. Morgenland. According to this, the reference is to an artifice of fowlers, to scatter seeds impregnated with some intoxicating
drugs, intended to lay birds asleep,
that they may draw the snare over
them more securely. There can be
no doubt that such arts were practised,
and it is possible that Paul may have
alluded to it. Whatever is the allusion, the general idea is clear. It
is an affecting representation of those
who haye fallen into error. They
are ina deep slumber. They are as
if under the fatal influence of some
stupefying potion. They are like
birds taken alive in this state, and at
the mercy of the fowler. They will
remain in this condition, unless they
shall be roused by the mercy of God ;
and it is the business of the ministers
of religion to carry to them that gospel call, which God is accustomed to
bless in showing them their danger.
That message should be continually
sounded in the ears of the sinner, with
the prayer and the hope that God will
make it the means of arousing him to
seek his salvation.

In the first part of this chapter
(ver. 1--8), Paul reminds Timothy of
the great apostasy which was to be
expected in the church, and states
some of the characteristics of it. In
ver. 9, he says that that apostasy

would not always continue ; but would |

be at some time arrested, and so arrested as to show to all men the folly
of those who were concerned in it,
In ver. 11, 12, he refers Timothy to
his own manner of life in the midst of
persecutions, as an encouragement to
him to bear the trials which might be
expected to occur to him in a similar
manner. ‘ Perilous times” were to
come, and Timothy might be expected to be called to pass through trials
similar to those which Paul himself
had experienced. Jn those times the
remembrance of his example would be
invaluable. In ver. 12, 18, he assures
Timothy that persecutions and trials
were to be expected by all who aimed
to lead holy lives, and that it was as
certainly to be expected that evil
men would become worse and worse.
And in yer. 14--17, he exhorts him
to be steadfast in maintaining the
truth ; and, to encourage him to do
this, reminds him of his early training in the Holy Scriptures, and ofthe
value of those Scriptures. To the
Scriptures he might repair in all

| times of trial, and find support in the

divine promises. What he had learned there was the inspired truth of
God, and was able to make him wise,
and to furnish him abundantly for all
that he was to do or to suffer.

1. This know also. ‘The object of
this reference to the perilous times
which were to occur, was evidently to
show the necessity of using every precaution to preserve the purity of the
church, from the fact that such sad
scenes were to open upon it. The
apostle had dwelt upon this subject
in his first epistle to Timothy (chap.
iv.), but its importance leads him to
advert to it again. Inthe last days
Under the gospel dispensation ; some
time in that period during which the
affairs of the world will be closed up ;
see Notes, 1 Tim. iv. 1, and Heb. 1. 2.
q Perilous times shall come. Times
of danger, of persecution, and of trial.
On the general meaning of this passaze, and the general characteristics
2 For * men shall be lovers of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,

a Ro.1.29-31,
of those times, the reader may consult the Notes on 2 Thess. ii. 1--12,
and 1 Tim. iv. 1--3. There can be
no doubt that in all these passages
the apostle refers to the same events.

2. For men shall be lovers of their
own selves. It shall be one of the
characteristics of those times that
men shall be eminently selfish--evidently under the garb of religion ;
ver.5. The word here used--iaavros--does not elsewhere occur in the
New Testament. It means a lover
of one’s self, selfish. Such a love
of self as to lead us to secure our
salvation, is proper. But this interferes with the rights and happiness
of no other persons. The selfishness
which is condemned, is that regard
to our own interests which interferes

with the rights and comforts of others; |

which makes self the central and
leading object of living; and which
tramples on all that would interfere
with that. As such, it isa base, and
hateful, and narrow passion; but it
has been so common in the world that
no one can doubt the correctness of
the prophecy of the apostle that it
would exist ‘in the last times.”
4 Covetous. Gr., Lovers of silver;
i. e., of money ; Luke vi. 14; Notes,
1 Tim. vi. 20. § Boasters; Notes,
Rom. i. 30. J Proud; Notes, Rom.
i. 30. Y Blasphemers ; see Notes,
Matt. ix. 3. Disobedient to parents; see Notes on Rom.i.380. ¥ Unthankful; see Luke vi. 85. The word
here used occurs in the New Testament only in these two places. Ingratitude has always been regarded
as one of the worst of crimes. It is
said here that it would characterize
that wicked age of which the apostle
speaks, and its prevalence would, as
it always does, indicate a decline of
religion. Religion makes us grateful to every benefactor--to God, and
toman. {| Unholy; Notes, 1 Tim.i. 9,

3. Without natural affection ; see

3 Without natural affection,
truce-breakers, ! false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those
that are good,

4 Traitors, 8 heady, high-mind-

1 or, makebates. b 2 Pe. 2.10, &c.

Notes on Rom. i. 38l. YF Trucebreakers. The same word in Rom.
i. 31, is rendered implacable; see
Notes on that verse. It properly
means without treaty ; that is, those
who are averse to any treaty or compact. It may thus refer to those who
are unwilling to enter into any agreement; that is, either those who are
unwilling to be reconciled to others
when there is a variance--implacable; or those who disregard treaties
|or agreements. In either case, this
marks a very corrupt condition of
society. Nothing would be more indicative of the lowest state of degradation, than that in which all
compacts and agreements were utterly disregarded. § False accusers.
Marg., makebates. The word makebate means one who excites contentions and quarrels. Webster. The
Greek here is 0:éG0r0--devils --the
primitive meaning of which is, calumniator, slanderer, accuser ; comp.
Notes on 1 Tim. ili. 11, where the
word is rendered slanderers. J Incontinent; 1 Cor. vii. 5. Literally,
without strength; that is, without
strength to resist the solicitations of
passion, or who readily yield to it.
q Fierce. The Greek word used
here -- dyjwepos --does not elsewhere
occur in the New Testament. It
means ungentle, harsh, severe, and
is the opposite of gentleness and
mildness. Religion produces gentleness; the want of it makes men
rough, harsh, cruel; comp. Notes on
chap. li. 24. {| Despisers of those
that are good. In Titus i. 8, it is
said of a bishop that he must be “a
lover of good men.” This, in every
condition of life, is a virtue, and
hence the opposite of it is here set
down as one of the characteristics
of that evil age of which the apostle speaks. .

4. Traitors. This word is used jn
‘the New Testament only here and in

ed, * lovers of pleasures more than
lovers of God;

5 Having > a form ot godliness,
a Ph.3.19.

Luke vi. 16, Acts vii. 52. It means

any one who betrays--whether it be
a friend or his country. Treason
has been in all ages regarded as one
of the worst crimes that man can commit. Heady. The same word in
Acts xix. 36, 1s rendered rashly. It
occurs only there and in this place in
the New Testament. It properly
means falling forwards; prone, inclined, ready to do anything; then
precipitate, headlong, rash. It is opposed to that which is deliberate and
calm, and here means that men
would be ready to do anything without deliberation, or concern for the
consequences. They would engage
in enterprises which would only disturb society, or prove their own ruin.
| High-minded. Literally, puffed
up; comp. Notes on 1 Tim. iii. 6,
where the same word is rendered
lifted up with pride. The meaning
is, that they would be inflated with
pride or self-conceit. J Lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God.
That is, of sensual pleasures, or vain
amusements. ‘This has been, and is,
the characteristic of a great part of
the world, and has often distinguished
even many who profess religion. Of
a large portion of mankind it may
be said that this is their characteristic, that they live for pleasure; they
have no serious pursuits; they brook
no restraints which interfere with
their amusements, and they greatly
prefer the pleasures to be found in
the gay assembly, in the ball-room,
or in the place of low dissipation, to
the friendship of their Creator.

5. Having a form of godliness.
That is, they profess religion, or are
in connection with the church. This
shows that the apostle referred to
some great corruption in the church;
and there can be little doubt that he
had his eye on the same great apostasy to which he refers in 2 Thess.
ii, and1 Tim. iv. All these things
to which he refers here haye been
practised and tolerated in that apos-

but denying the power thereof ;
from such turn away.

6 For of this sort are they
b Tit.1.16.

tate church, while no body of men,
at any time, have been more zealous
in maintaining a form of godliness;
that is, in keeping up the forms of
religion. § But denying the power
thereof. Opposing the real power of
religion ; not allowing it to exert any
influence in their lives. It imposes
no restraint on their passions and
carnal propensities, but in all respects,
except in the form of religion, they
live as if they had none. This has
been commonin the world. The most
regular and bigoted adherence to the
forms of religion furnishes no evidence in itself that there is any true
piety at heart, or that true religion
has any actual control over the soul.
It is much easier for men to observe
the forms of religion than it is to
bring the heart under its controlling
influence. { From such turn away.
Have no intercourse with them as
if they were Christians; show no
countenance to their religion; do not
associate with them; comp. 2 John
10, 11; Notes, 2 Cor. vi. 17.

6. For of this sort are they which
creep into houses. Who go slyly and
insidiously into families. They are
not open and manly in endeavouring
to propagate their views, but they endeavour by their address to ingratiate
themselves first with weak women,
and through them to influence men;
comp. Titus i. 11. The word translated ‘creep into,’’ is rendered by
Doddridge, insinuate themselves; by
Bloomfield, wind their way into, in
the manner of serpents; by Bretschneider, decettfully enter; by Robinson
and Passow, go in, enterin. It isnot
certain that the idea of deceit or cunning is contained in this word, yet
the whole complexion of the passage
implies that they made their way by
art and deceitful tricks. § And lead
captive silly women. One of the tricks
always played by the advocates of error, and one of the ways by which
they seek to promote their purposes.
Satan began his work of temptation
which creep Into houses, and
lead captive silly women laden
with sins, led away with divers
lusts,

7 Ever learning, and never able
@ Tit 1.11

to come to the knowledge of th«
truth.

8 Now as Jannes and Jambres
b withstood Moses, so do_ these

also resist the truth : men © of corb Ex.7.1). ¢ 1 Ti.6.5.

with Eve rather than with Adam,
and the advocates of error usually
follow his example. There are always weak-minded women enough in
any community to give an opportunity
of practising these arts, and often the
aims of the impostor and deceiver can
be best secured by appealing to them.
Such women are easily flattered ; they
are charmed by the graceful manners
of religious instructors; they lend a
willing ear to anything that has the
appearance of religion, and their
hearts are open to anything that promises to advance the welfare of the
world. At the same time, they are
just such persons as the propagators
of error can rely on. They have
leisure; they have wealth; they are
busy ; they move about in society, and
by their activity they obtain an influence to which they are by no means
entitled by their piety or talents.
There are, indeed, very many women
in the world who cannot be so easily
led away as men; but it cannot be
denied also that there are those who
are just adapted to the purposes of
such as seek to spread plausible error.
The word rendered silly women,
means properly little women, and then
weak women. ¥ Laden with sins.
With so many sins that they seem to
be burdened withthem. ‘The idea is,
that they are under the influence of
sinful desires and propensities, and
hence are better adapted to the purposes of deceivers. { Led away with
divers lusts. With various kinds of
passions or desires--imiS9vuizs--such
as pride, vanity, the love of novelty,
or a susceptibility to flattery, so as
to make them an easy prey to deceivers.

7. Ever learning. That is, these
“silly women;” for so the Greek demands. The idea is, that they seem
to bedisciples. They put themselves
wholly under the care of these professedly religious teachers, but they

never acquire the true knowledge of
the way of salvation. { And never
able to come to the knowledge of the
truth. They may learn many.things,
but the true nature of religion they
do not learn. ‘There are many such
persons in the world, who, whatever
attention they may pay to religion,
never understand its nature. Many
obtain much speculative acquaintance
with the doctrines of Christianity, but
never become savingly acquainted
with the system; many study the constitutionand government ofthechurch,
but remain strangers to practical
piety; many become familiar with the
various philosophical theories of religion, but never become truly acquainted with what religion is; and many
embrace visionary theories, who never
show that they are influenced by the
spirit of the gospel. Nothing is more
common than for persons to be very
busy and active in religion, and even
to learn many things about it, who
still remain strangers to the saving
power of the gospel.

8. Now as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses. The names of
these two men are not elsewhere
mentioned in the Bible. They are
supposed to have been two of the
magicians who resisted Moses (Ex.
vii. 11, e¢ al.), and who opposed their
miracles to those of Moses and Aaron.
It is not certain where the apostle
obtained their names; but they are
frequently mentioned by the Hebrew
writers, and also by other writers ; so
that there can be no reasonable doubt
that their names were correctly handed down by tradition. Nothing is
more probable than that the names of
the more distinguished magicians who
attempted to imitate the miracles of
Moses, would be preserved by tradition; and though they are not mentioned by Moses himself, and the Jews
have told many ridiculous stories respecting them, yet this should not

rupt minds, ! reprobate concerning
the faith.

1 or, of nogjudgment.

lead us to doubt the truth of the tradi-

tion respecting their names. A full
collection of the Jewish statements
in regard to them may be found in
Wetstein, im loc. They are also
mentioned by Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxx.
7; and by Numenius, the philosopher, as quoted by Eusebius, ix. 8,
and Origen, against Celsus, p. 199.
See Wetstein. By the rabbinical
writers, they are sometimes mentioned as Egyptian magicians who opposed
Moses in Egypt, and sometimes as the
sons of Balaam. The more common
account is, that they were the princes
of the Egyptian magicians. One of
the Jewish rabbins represents them
as having been convinced by the
miracles of Moses, and as having become conyerts to the Hebrew religion.
There is no reason to doubt that
these were in fact the leading men
who opposed Moses in Egypt, by
attempting to work counter-miracles.
The point of the remark of the apostle
here, is, that they resisted Moses by
attempting to imitate his miracles,
thus neutralizing the evidence that
he was sent from God. In like manner, the persons here referred to, opposed the progress of the gospel by
setting up a similar claim to that of
the apostles; by pretending to have
as much authority as they had; and
by thus neutralizing the claims of
the true religion, and leading off
weak-minded persons from the truth.
This is often the most dangerous
kind of opposition that is made to
religion. §] Men of corrupt minds;
comp. Notes, 1 Tim. vi. 5. | feprobate concerning the faith. So
far as the Christian faith is concerned. On the word rendered reprobate, see Notes on Rom. i. 28; 1 Cor.
ix. 27, rendered cast-away; 2 Cor.
xiii. 5. ‘lhe margin here is, ‘‘of no
judgment.”” The meaning is, that
in respect to the Christian faith, or the
doctrines of religion, their views could
not be approved, and they were not to
be regarded as true teachers of religion.

9 But they shall proceed no
further: for their folly shall be

9. But they shall proceed no fur-

ther. There is a certain point beyond which they will not be allowed
to go. Their folly will become manifest, and the world will understand
it. The apostle does not say how
far these false teachers would be
allowed to go, but that they would
not be suffered always to prosper and
prevail. They might be plausible
at first, and lead many astray; they
might, by art and cunning, cover up
the real character of their system;
but there would be a fair development of it, and it would be seen to
be folly. The apostle here may be
understood as declaring a general
truth in regard to error. It often is
so plausible at first, that it seems to
be true. It wins the hearts of many
persons, and leads them astray. It
flatters them personally, or it flatters
them with the hope of a better state
of things in the church and the
world, But the time will always
come when men will see the folly
ofit. Error will advance only to a
certain point, when it will be seen
to be falsehood and folly, and when
the world will arise and cast it off.
In some cases, this point may be
slower in being reached than in
others; but there 7s a point, beyond
which error will not go. At the reformation under Luther, that point
had been reached, when the teachings of the great apostasy were seen
to be ‘‘folly,” and when the awakened intellect of the world would
allow it to ‘‘ proceed no farther,”’ and
aroused itself and threw it off. In
the workings of society, as well as
by the direct appointment of God,
there is a point beyond which error
cannot prevail; and hence there is
a certainty that truth will finally
triumph. § For their fol/y shall be
manifest unto all men. The world
will see and understand what they
are, and what they teach. By smooth
sophistry, and cunning arts, they will
not be able always to deceive mankind. { As their’s also was. That
manifest unto all men, as their’s
also was,
10 But thou hast ! fully known

1 or, been a diligent follower of.

of Jannes and Jambres. That is, it
became manifest to all that they
could not compete with Moses and
Aaron; that their claims to the power
of working miracles were the mere
arts of magicians, and that they had
set up pretensions which they could
not sustain; comp. Ex. viii. 18, 19.
In regard to the tume to which the
apostle referred in this description,
it has already been observed (Notes on
ver. 1), that it was probably to that
great apostasy of the ‘latter days,”
which he has described in 2 Thess. ii.
and 1 Tim. iv. But there seems to
be no reason to doubt that he had his
eye immediately on some persons who
had appeared then, and who had evinced some of the traits which would
characterize the great apostasy, and
whose conduct showed that the great
“falling away” had already commenced. In 2 Thess. ii. 7, he says
that the ‘‘mystery of iniquity” was
already at work, or was even then
manifesting itself; and there can be
no doubt that the apostle saw that
there had then commenced what he
knew would yet grow up into the
great defection from the truth. In
some persons, at that time, who had
the form of godliness, but who denied its power; who made use of
insinuating arts to proselyte the weak
and the credulous; who endeavour to
imitate the true apostles, perhaps by
attempting to workmiracles,as Jannes
and Jambres did, he saw the germ of
what was yet to grow up into so gigantic a system of iniquity as to overshadow the world. Yet he consoled
Timothy with the assurance that there
was a point beyond which the system
of error would not be allowed to go,
but where its folly must be seen, and
where it would be arrested.

10. But thou hast fully known
my doctrine, &. Marg., been a
diligent follower of. The margin is
more in accordance with the usual
meaning of the Greek word, which
means, properly, to accompany side

my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity,
patience,

by side; to follow closely; to trace
out; to examine (Luke i. 3), and to
conform to. The meaning here, however, seems to be, that Timothy had
an opportunity to follow out; 7. @., to
examine closely the manner of life of
the apostle Paul. He had been so
long his companion, that he had had
the fullest opportunity of knowing
how he had lived and taught, and how
hehadborne persecutions. The object
of this reference to his own life and
sufferings is evidently to encourage
Timothy to bear persecutions and
trials in the same manner; comp. ver.
14. He saw, in the events which began already to develope themselves,
that trials must be expected; he
knew that all who would live holy
lives must suffer persecution; and
hence he sought to prepare the mind
of Timothy for the proper endurance
of trials, by a reference to his own
case. The word doctrine, here, refers
to his teaching, or manner of giving
instruction. It does not refer, as the
word now does, to the opizons which
he held; see Notes on 1 ‘Tim. iy.
16. In regard to the opportunities
which Timothy had for knowing the
manner of Paul’s life, see the introduction to the epistle, and Paley,
Hor. Paul., in loc. Timothy had
been the companion of Paul during
a considerable portion of the time
after his conversion. The persecutions referred to here (ver. 11) are
those which occurred in the vicinity
of Timothy’s native place, and which
he would have had a particular opportunity of being acquainted with.
This circumstance, and the fact that
Paul did not refer to other persecutions in more remote places, is one
of the “‘undesigned coincidences,” of
which Paley has made so much in
his incomparable little work --the
Hore Pauline. § Manner of life.
Literally, leading, guidance; then,
the method in which one is led--his
manner of life; comp. Notes, 1 Thess.
ii. 1. 4] Purpose. Plans, or designs.

11 Persecutions, afflictions,
which came unto me at Antioch,

@ at Iconium, ® at Lystra; what per- |

a@ Ac.13.45,50.

q Faith.
fulness. J] Long-suffering. With the
evil passions of others, and their efforts
to injure him. See the word explained in the Notes on 1 Cor. xili. 4.

b Ac.14.5,6,19.

{| Charity; Notes, 1 Cor. xiii. § Pa--

tience. ‘‘ A calm temper, which suffers evils without murmuring or discontent.’ Webster.

11. Persecutions. On the meaning of this word, see Notes on Matt.
v.10. {| Affictions. Trials of other
kinds than those which arose from
persecutions. The apostle met them
everywhere; comp. Notes, Acts xx.
23. YJ Which came unto me at Antioch. The Antioch here referred
to is not the place of that name in
Syria (Notes, Acts xi. 19); but a
city of the same name in Pisidia, in
Asia Minor; Notes, Acts xiii. 14.
Paul there suffered persecution from
the Jews; Acts xiii. 45. J At Iconium ; Notes, Acts xii, 50. On the
persecution there, see Notes on Acts
xiv. 3--6. § At Lystra; Acts xiv. 6.
At this place, Paul was stoned;
Notes, Acts xiv. 19. Timothy was a
native of either Derbe or Lystra, cities
near to each other, and was doubtless
there at the time of this occurrence ;
Acts xvi. 1. § But out of them all
the Lord delivered me. See the
history in the places referred to in
the Acts.

12. Yea, and all that will tive
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution. Paul takes occasion
from the reference to his own persecutions, to say that his case was not
peculiar. It was the common lot of
all who endeavoured to serve their
Redeemer faithfully ; and Timothy
himself, therefore, must not hope to
escape from it, The apostle had a
particular reference, doubtless, to his
own times; but he has put his remark into the most general form, as
applicable to all periods. It is undoubtedly true at all times, and will
ever be, that they who are devoted
Christians--who live as the Saviour

Perhaps fidelity, or faith-

|
secutions I endured: but out of
them all ¢ the Lord delivered me.

12 Yea, and all that will live
o Ps.34.19.

did--and who carry out his principles always, will experience some
form of persecution. The essence of
persecution consists in subjecting a
person to injury or disadvantage on
account of his opinions. It is sornething more than meeting his opinions
by argument, which is always right
and proper; it is inflicting some injury on him; depriving him of some
privilege, or right; subjecting him to
some disadvantage, or placing him in
less favourable circumstances, on account of hissentiments. This may be
either an injury done to his feelings,
his family, his reputation, his property,
his liberty, his influence; it may be by
depriving him of an office which he
held, or preventing him from obtaining one to which he is eligible; it
may be by subjecting him to fine or
imprisonment, to banishment, torture,
or death. If, in any manner, or in
any way, he is subjected to disadvantage on account of his religious
opinions, and deprived of any immunities and rights to which he would
be otherwise entitled, this is persecution. Now, it is doubtless as true
as it ever was, that a man who will
live as the Saviour did, will, like
him, be subjected to some such injury or disadvantage. On account
of his opinions, he may be held up to
ridicule, or treated with neglect, or
excluded from society to which his
attainments and manners would otherwise introduce him, or shunned by
those who might otherwise value his
friendship. These things may be ex-

pected in the best times, and under
'the most favourable circumstances;

and it is known that a large part of
the history of the world, in its relation
to the church, is nothing more than a
history of persecution. It follows
from this, (1.) that they who make a
profession of religion, should come
prepared to be persecuted. It should
be considered as one of the proper
qualifications for membership in the
church, to be willing to bear persecugodly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution.
13 But evil men and seducers

ee ee ee eee
tion, and to resolve not to shrink from
any duty in order to avoid it. (2.)
They who are persecuted for their
opinions, should consider that this
may be one evidence that they have
the spirit of Christ, and are his true
friends. ‘They should remember that,
in this respect, they are treated as
the Master was, and are in the goodly
company of the prophets, apostles,
and martyrs; for they were all persecuted. Yet, (3.) if we are persecuted, we should carefully inquire,
before we avail oureselves of this
consolation, whether we are persecuted because we ‘“‘live godly in Christ
Jesus,” or for some other reason. A
man may embrace some absurd opinion, and call it religion; he may
adopt some mode of dress irresistibly
ludicrous, from the mere love of singularity, and may call it conscienee;
or he may be boorish in his manners,
and uncivil in his deportment, outraging all the laws of social life, and
may call this “‘ deadness to the world ;”’
and for these, and similar things, he
may be contemned, ridiculed, and
despised. But let him not infer,
therefore, that he is to be enrolled
among the martyrs, and that he is
certainly a real Christian. That persecution which will properly furnish
any evidence that we are the friends
of Christ, must be only that which is
“for righteousness sake” (Matt. v.
10), and must be brought upon us in
an honest effort to obey the commands
of Goa. (4.) Let those who have
never been persecuted in any way,
inquire whether it is not an evidence
that they have no religion. If they
had been more faithful, and more like
their Master, would they have always
escaped? And may not their freedom from it prove that they have surrendered the principles of their religion, where they should have stood
firm, though the world were arrayed
against them? It is easy for a professed Christian to avoid persecution,
if he yields every point in which reli-

gion is opposed to the world. But’

If. TIMOTHY.

. shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being @ deceived.
a 2 Th.2.11.

let not a man who will do this, suppose that he has any claim to be numbered among the martyrs, or even entitled to the Christian name.

13. But evil men and seducers
shall wax worse and worse. That
is, it is the character of such men tc
do this; they may be expected to do
it. This is the general law of depravity--that if men are not converted, they are always growing worse,
and sinking deeper into iniquity
Their progress will be certain, though
it may be gradual, since nemo repente
turpissimus. The connection here is
this: that Timothy was not to expect
that he would be exempt from persecution (ver. 12), by any change for
the better in the wicked men referred
to. He was to anticipate in them the
operation of the general law in regard
to bad men and seducers--that they
would grow worse and worse. From
this fact, he was to regard it as certain
that he, as well as others, would be
liable to be persecuted. The word
rendered seducers--yons--occurs noe
where else in the New Testament.
It means, properly, a juggler, or diviner; and then, a deceiver, or impostor. Were it refers to those who,
by seductive arts, lead persons into
error. {| Deceiving. Making others
believe that to be true and right,
which is false and wrong. This was,
of course, done by seductive arts.
{| And being deceived. Under delusion themselves. The advocates of
error are often themselves as really
under deception, as those whom they
impose upon. They are often sincere
in the belief of error, and then they
are under a delusion; or, if they are
insincere, they are equally deluded in
supposing that they can make error
pass for truth before God, or can
deceive the Searcher of hearts. The
worst victims of delusion are those
who attempt to delude others.

(14. But continue thou in the things
which thou hast learned and hast
been assured of. To wit, the truths
of religion. Timothy had been taught

14 But continue «thou in the
things which thou hast learned
and hast been assured of, know-

a chap.1.13.

ing of whom thou hast learned
them;

15 And that from a child thou
hast known the holy Scriptures,

those truths when a child, and he had
been confirmed in them by the instructions of Paul. Amidst the errors
and seductions of false teachers, Paul
now exhorts him to hold fast those
doctrines, whoever might oppose them,
or whatevermight be the consequence;
comp. Notes, chap. i. 13. § Knowing
of whom thou hast learned them. Yo
wit, of his mother (chap. i. 5), and of
Paulisechap. i. 13: he reference
seems to be particularly to the fact
that he had learned these truths first
from the lips of a mother (see ver.
15); and the doctrine taught here
is, that the fact that we have received
the views of truth from a parent’s
lips, is a strong motive for adhering
to them. It is not to be supposed,
indeed, that this is the highest motive,
or that we are always to adhere to
the doctrines which have been taught
us, if, on maturer examination, we
are convinced they are erroneous ;
but that this is a strong reason for
adhering to what we have been taught
in early life. It is 80, because, (1.)a
parent has no motive for deceiving a
child, and it cannot be supposed that
he would teach him what he knew to
be false; (2.) a parent usually has had
much more experience, and much
better opportunities of examining what
is true, than his child has; (3.) there
is a degree of respect which nature
teaches us to be due to the sentiments of a parent. A child should
depart very slowly from the opinions
held by a father or mother; and,
when it zs done, it should be only as
the result of prolonged examination
and prayer. These considerations

should have the greater weight, if a! /

parent has been eminent for piety,
and especially if that parent has been
removed to heaven. A child, standing by the grave of a pious father or
mother, should reflect and pray much,
before he deliberately adopts opinions
which he knows that father or mother
would regard as wrong.

15, And that from a child thou

hast known the holy Scriptures.

That is, the Old Testament ; for the
New Testament was not then written; Notes, John v. 39. Themother
of Timothy was a pious Hebrewess,
and regarded it as one of the duties
of her religion to train her son in the
careful knowledge of the word of God.
This was regarded by the Hebrews as
an important duty of religion, and
there is reason to believe that it was
commonly faithfully performed. The
Jewish writings abound with lessons
on this subject. Rabbi Judah says,
“The boy of five years of age ought
to apply to the study of the sacred
Scriptures.” Rabbi Solomon, on Deut.
xi. 19, says, “When the boy begins
to talk, his father ought to converse
with him in the sacred language,
and to teach him the law; if he does
not do that, he seems to bury him.”
See numerous instances referred to
in Wetstein, in loc. The expression
used by Paul-- from @ child (axé
Bptpovs)--does not make it certain
at precisely what age Timothy was
first instructed in the Scriptures,
though it would denote an early age.
The word used--pigos--denotes, (1.)
a babe unborn, Luke i. 41, 44; (2.)
an infant, babe, suckling. In the
New Testament, it is rendered babe
and babes, Luke i. 41, 44; ii. 12, 16;
1 Pet. ii. 2; infants, Luke viii. 15 ;
and young children, Acts vii. 19. It
does not elsewhere occur, and its current use would make it probable that
Timothy had been taught the Scriptures as soon as he was capable of
learning anything. Dr. Doddridge
correctly renders it here ‘from in-
‘fancy.’ It may be remarked then,
(1.) that it is proper to teach the
Bible to children at as early a period
of life as possible. (2.) That there is
reason to hope that such instruction
will not be forgotten, but will have a
salutary influence on their future lives.
The piety of Timothy is traced by
the apostle to the fact that he had
been early taught to read the Scripwhich @ are able to make thee wise
unto salvation through faith which
is in Christ Jesus.

16 All* Scripture is given by
a John 5.39. b2 Pe.1.21.

tures, and a great proportion of those
who are in the church have been
early made acquainted with the Bible.
(3.) It is proper to teach the Old
Testament to children --since this
was all that Timothy had, and this
was made the means of his salvation. (4.) We may see the utility
of Sabbath-schools. The great, and
almost the sole object of such schools
is to teach the Bible, and from the
view which Paul had of the advantage to Timothy of having been
early made acquainted with the Bible, there can be no doubt that if
Sunday-schools had then been in existence, he would have been their
hearty patron and friend. {| Which
are able to make thee wise unto salvation. So to instruct you in the
way of salvation, that you may find
the path to life. Learn, hence, (1.)
that the plan of salvation may be
learned from the Old Testament.
It is not as clearly revealed there as
it is in the New, but 7t is there; and
if a man had only the Old Testament, he might find the way to be

saved. The Jew, then, has no excuse if he is not saved. (2.) The
Scriptures have power. They are

“cable to make one wise to salvation.”
They are not a cold, tame, dead
thing. There is no book that has so
much power as the Bible; none that
is so efficient in moving the hearts,
and consciences, and intellects of
mankind. There is no book that has
moved so many minds; none that
has produced so deep and permanent
effects on the world. (3.) To find
the way of salvation, is the best kind
of wisdom; and none are wise who
do not make that the great object of
life. § Through faith whch is in
Christ Jesus; Notes, Mark xvi. 16;
Rom. i. 17. Paul knew of no salvation, except through the Lord Jesus.
He says, therefore, that the study of
the Scriptures, valuable as they were,
would not save the soul unless there

I 2UIO'Tr.

inspiration of God, and ¢ ¢s profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in right-

eousness ;
ce Ro.15.4.

was faith in the Redeemer; and it is
implied, also, that the proper effect of
a careful study of the Old Testament,
would be to lead one to put his trust
in the Messiah.

16. All Scripture. This properly
refers to the Old Testament, and
should not be applied to any part of
the New Testament, unless it can be
shown that that part was then written, and was included under the general name of the Scriptures; comp
2 Pet. iii. 15, 16. But it includes
the whole of the Old Testament, and
is the solemn testimony of Paul that
it was all inspired. If now it can be
proved that Paul himself was an inspired man, this settles the question
as to the inspiration of the Old Testament. {[ Is given by inspiration
of God. All this is expressed in the
original by one word--Seorveveres --
theopneustos. This word occurs nowhere else in the New Testament,
It properly means, God-inspired--
from @:;, God, and zviw, to breathe,
to breathe out. The idea of breathing upon, or breathing into the soul, is
that which the word naturally conveys. Thus God breathed into the
nostrils of Adam the breath of life
(Gen. ii. 7), and thus the Saviour
breathed on his disciples, and said,
“receive ye the Holy Ghost; John
xx. 22. The idea seems to have been,
that the life was in the breath, and
that an intelligent spirit was communicated with the breath. The expression was used among the Greeks,
and a similar one was employed by
the Romans. Plutarch ed. R. ix. p.
583.9. rods dveipous rods Seorvevorous.
Phocylid.121. ris 38 Seorvedorov coping
Rayos torlv &pioros. Perhaps, however,
this is not an expression of Phocylides,
but of the pseudo Phocylides. So it
is understood by Bloomfield. Cicero,
pro Arch. 8. poetam--quasit divino
quodam spiritu inflari. The word
does not occur inthe Septuagint, but
is found in Josephus, C. Ap. i. %

17 That the

man of God may
@ Ps.119.98-100.

lor, perfected.

“The Scripture of the prophets who
were taught according to the inspiration of God--xard chy trimvoiny chy ard
rod Seo. In regard to the manner
of inspiration, and to the various
questions which have been started as
to its nature, nothing can be learned
from the use of this word. It asserts
a fact--that the Old Testament was
composed under a divine influence,
which might be represented by breathtag on one, and so imparting life.
But the language must be figurative ;
for God does not breathe, though the
fair inference is, that those Scriptures
are as much the production of God,
or are as much to be traced to him,
as life is; comp. Matt. xxii. 43; 2
Pet. i. 21. The question as to the
degree of inspiration, and whether it
extends to the words of Scripture,
and how far the sacred writers were
left to the exercise of their own faculties, is foreign to the design of these
Notes. All that is necessary to be
held is, that the sacred writers were
kept from error on those subjects
which were matters of their own observation, or which pertained to memory ; and that there were truths
imparted to them directly by the
Spirit of God, which they could never
have arrived at by the unaided exercise of their own minds. Comp. Intro. to Isaiah and Job. {J And is
profitable. It is useful ; it is adapted
to give instruction, to administer reproof, &e. If “all” Scripture is
thus valuable, then we are to esteem
no part of the Old Testament as
worthless. There is no portion of it,
even now, which may not be fitted, in
certain circumstances, to furnish us
valuable lessons, and, consequently,
no part of it which could be spared
from the sacred canon. ‘There is no
part of the human body which is not
useful in its place, and no part of it
which can be spared without sensible
loss, J For doctrine. For teaching
or communicating instruction ; comp.
Notes on 1 Tim. iv. 16. § For reproof. On the meaning of the word
here rendered renroof--?A:v os --see

be perfect, # thoroughly ! furnished
unto all good works.

Notes on Heb. xi. 1. It here means,
probably, for convincing; that is,
convincing a man of his sins, of the
truth and claims of religion, &c. ; see
Notes on John xvi. 8. § For correction. The word here used--iravapdwors
--occurs nowhere else in the New
Testament, It means, properly, a
setting to rights, reparation, restoration, (from ivavopSow, to right up
again, to restore); and here means,
the leading to a correction or amendment of life--a reformation. The
meaning is, that the Scriptures are a
powerful means of reformation, or of
putting men into the proper condition in regard to morals. After all
the means which have been employed
to reform mankind ; all the appeals
which are made to them on the score
of health, happiness, respectability,
property, and long life, the word of
God is still the most powerful and the
most effectual means of recovering
those who have fallen into vice. No
reformation can be permanent which
is not based on the principles of the
word of God. {§ For instruetion in
righteousness. Instruction inregard to
the principles ofjustice, or whatis right.
Man needs not only to be made acquainted with truth, to be convinced
of his error, and to be reformed ; but
he needs to be taught what is right,
or what is required of him, in order
that he may lead a holy life. Every
reformed and regenerated man needs
instruction, and should not be left
merely with the evidence that he is
reformed, or converted. He should
be followed with the principles of the
word of God, to show him how he
may lead an upright life. The Scriptures furnish the rules of holy living
in abundance, and thus they are adapted to the whole work of recovering man, and of guiding him to
heaven.

17. That the man of God may be
perfect. The object 1s not merely
to convince and to convert him; it
is to furnish all the instruction needful for his entire perfection. The
idea here is, not that any one 7¢s absolutely perfect, but that the Scriptures have laid down the way which
leads to perfection, and that, if any
one were perfect, he would find in
the Scriptures all the instruction
which he needed in those circumstances. There is no deficiency in
the Bible for man, in any of the
situations in which he may be placed
in life; and the whole tendency of

the book is to make him who will put |

himself fairly under its instructions,
absolutely perfect.--§ Thoroughly furnishedunto all good works. Marg., perfected. The Greek means, to bring to
an end; to make complete. ‘The
idea is, that whatever good work the
man of God desires to perform, or
however perfect he aims to be, he
will find no deficiency in the Scriptures, but will find there the most
ample instructions that he needs.
Ile can never advance so far, as to
become forsaken of his guide.
can never make such progress, as to
have gone in advance of the volume
of revealed truth, and to be thrown
upon his own resources in a region
which was not thought of by the Author of the Bible. No new phase of
human affairs can appear in which it
will not direct him ; no new plan of
benevolence can be started, for which
he will not find principles there to
guide him ; and he can make no progress in knowledge or holiness, where

he will not feel that his holy counsel-.

lor is in advance of him still, and
that it is capable of conducting him
even yet into higher and purer re-

gions. Let us, then, study and prize
the Bible. It is a holy and a safe
guide. It has conducted millions

along the dark and dangerous way of
life, and has never led one astray.
The human mind, in its investigations
oftruth, has never gone beyond its
teachings ; nor has man ever advanced into a region so bright that its
light has become dim, or where it has
not thrown its beams of glory on still
far distant objects. We are often in
circumstances in which we feel that
we have reached the outer limit of
what man can teach us; but we never
get into such circumstance in regard
to the word of God.

fl. TIMOTHY.

He |

How precious is the book divine,
By inspiration given! :
Bright as a lamp its doctrines shine

To guide our souls to heaven.

it sweetly cneers our drooping hearts
In this dark vale of tears ;

Life, light, and joy, it still imparts,
And quells our rising fears.

This lamp, through all the tedious night
Of life, shall guide our way;

Till we behold the clearer light
Of an eternal day

This chapter comprises the following subjects :

1. A solemn charge to Timothy, to
be faithful in preaching the gospel,
andin the whole work of the ministry,
ver. 1--5. The particular reason
given for this charge was, that the
time was approaching when men would
not endure sound doctrine, but would
turn away from the truth. Hence,
Timothy is exhorted to be faithful in
his work, and to be prepared to endure the trials which, in such circumstances, a faithful minister must be
expected to meet.

2. A statement of Paul that his
own work was nearly done, and that
the hour of his departure drew near ;
ver. 6--8. This statement, also,
seems to be made in order to excite
Timothy to increased fidelity in the
ministry. His teacher, guide, father,
and friend, was about to be withdrawn,
and the great work of preaching was
to be committed to other hands.
Hence, in view of his own departure,
Paul exhorts Timothy to fidelity
when he himself should be removed.

8. An exhortation to Timothy to
come to him as soon as practicable ;
ver. 9--15. Paul was then in bonds,
and was expecting soon to die. He
wasalone. Forvarious reasons, those
who had been with him had left him,
and he needed some companion and
friend. He therefore exhorts Timothy to come to him as soon as possible.

4. Paul refers now to his first trial
before the emperor, and to the fact
that then no one stood by him; ver.
16--19. The reason of his referring
to this seems to be, to induce Timothy to come to him in view of his ans

CHARGE theetherefore before
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
a@t Ti.5.215 6.13. b Re.20.12,13.

ticipated second trial.
says, then stood by him, and he had
confidence that he would continue to
do it ; yet who is there that does not
feel it desirable to have some dear
earthly friend to be with him when he
dies ?

5. The epistle is closed, in the
usual manner, with various salutations, and with the benediction ; ver.
19--22.

1. I charge thee therefore before
God; Notes on 1 Tim. v.21. Who
shall judge the quick and the dead.
That is, the Lord Jesus; for he is to
be the judge of men ; Matt. xxv. 31--
46; 2 Cor. v. 10. The word quick
means living (Notes, Acts x. 42;
Eph. ii. 1); and the idea is, that he
would be alike the judge of all who
were alive when he should come, and
of all who had died ; see Notes on 1
Thess. iv. 16, 17. In view of the
fact that all, whether preachers or
hearers, must give up their account to
the final Judge, Paul charges Timothy to be faithful; and what is there
which will more conduce to fidelity in
the discharge of duty, than the thought
that we must soon give up a solemn
account of the manner in which we
have performed it? {J At his appearing. That is, the judgment shall
then take place. This must refer to
a judgment yet to take place, for the
Lord Jesus has not yet ‘‘ appeared ”
the second time to men; and, if this
beso, then there is to be aresurrection
of the dead. On the meaning of the
word rendered appearing, see Notes
on 2 Thess. ii. 8. It is there rendered brightness; comp. 1 Tim. vi. 14 ;
2 Tim.i.10; Tit. ii. 138. ¥ And his
kingdom. Or, at the setting up of
his kingdom. The idea of his reigning, or setting up his kingdom, is not
unfrequently associated with the idea
of his coming; see Matt. xvi. 28. The
meaning is, that, at his second advent,
the extent and majesty of his kingdom will be fully displayed. It will

The Lord, he

who shall judge® the quick and the
dead at his appearing and his kingdom ;

2 Preach the word; be instant

be seen that he has control over the
elements, over the graves of the dead,
and over all the living. It will be
seen that the earth and the heavens
are under his sway, and that all things

|there acknowledge him as their so-

vereign Lord. In order to meet the
full force of the language used by
Paul here, it is not necessary to suppose that he will set up a visible kingdom on the earth, but only that there
will be an illustrious display of himself as a king, and of the extent and
majesty of the empire over which he
presides: comp. Notes on Rom. xiv.
1 5 Phil. i7..10.

2. Preach the word. The word of
God; the gospel. ‘This was to be the
main business of the life of Timothy,
and Paul solemnly charges him in
view of the certain coming of the Redeemer to judgment, to be faithful in
the performance of it. J Be instant:
see Notes, Rom. xii. 12. ‘The meaning here is, that he should be constant
in this duty. Literally, to stand by, or
to stand fast by; that is, he was to be
pressing or urgent in the performance
ofthis work. He was always to be at
his post, and was to embrace every
opportunity of making known the gospel. What Paul seems to have contemplated was not merely that he
should perform the duty at stated and
regular times; but that he should
press the matter as one who had the
subject much at heart, and never lose
an opportunity of making the gospel
known. (Jn season. sbxaigws. In
good time ; opportunely ; comp. Matt.
xxvi. 16; Luke xxii. 6 ; Mark xiv. 11.
The sense is, when it could be c mveniently done; when all things were
favourable, and when there were no
obstructions or hindrances. It may
include the stated and regular seasons
for public worship, but is not confined
to them. | Out of season. zxaipus.
This word does not elsewhere occur
in the New Testament. It is the opposite of the former, and means that a
in season, out of season ; reprove,”
rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine.

8 For the time will come when
a@ Tit.2.15,

minister is to seek opportunities to
preach the gospel even at such periods as might be inconvenient to himself, or when there might be hindrances and embarrassments, or when
there was no stated appointment for
preaching. He is not to confine himself to the appointed times of worship,
or to preach only when it will be perfectly convenient for himself, but he
is to have such an interest and earnestness in the work, that it will lead
him to do it in the face of embarrassments and discouragements, and
whenever he can find an opportunity.
A man who is greatly intent on an
object will seek every opportunity to
promote it. He will not confine himself to stated times and places, but
will present it everywhere, and at all
times. A man, therefore, who merely
confines himself to the stated seasons
of preaching the gospel, or who merely preaches when it is convenient to
himself, should not consider that he
has come up to the requirement of
the rule laid down by the apostle.
THe should preach in his private conversation, and in the intervals of his
public labours, at the side of the sick
bed, and wherever there is a prospect
of doing good to any one. If his
heart is full of love to the Saviour
and to souls, he cannot help doing
this. Reprove. Or convince ;
Notes, chap. ili. 16. The meaning is
that he was to use such arguments as
would convince men of the truth of
religion, and of their own need of it.
Rebuke. Rebuke offenders ; Titus
ii. 15; see the use of the word in
Matt. viii. 26; xii. 16, (rendered
charged); xvi. 22; xvii. 18; xix.
13 ; xx. 31; Luke iv. 35, 39; xvii.
18; xviii. 15; Jude 9. In the New
Testament the word is used to express
a judgment of what is wrong or contrary to one’s will, and hence to admonish or reprove. It implies our
conviction that there is something
evil, or some fault in him who is re-

they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts
shallthey heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears ;

buked. ‘The word in this verse rendered reprove, does not imply this,
but merely that one may be in error,
and needs to have arguments presented to convince him of the truth. That
word also implies no superior authority in him who does it. He presents
reasons, or argues the case, for the
purpose of convincing. The word
here rendered rebuke, implies authority or superiority, and means merely
that we may say that a thing is wrong,
and administer a rebuke for it, as if
there were no doubt thatit was wrong.
The propriety of the rebuke rests on
our authority for doing it, not on the
arguments which we present. ‘This is
based on the presumption that men
often know that they are doing wrong,
and need no arguments to convince
them of it. The idea is, that the minister is not merely to reason about
sin, and convince men that it is wrong,
but he may solemnly admonish them
not to do it, and warn them of the
consequences. {| Lwxhort. Notes,
Rom. xii.8. ( With all long-suffering.
That is, with a patrent and persevering spirit if you are opposed; see
Notes on chap. ii. 25; comp. Notes,
Rom. ii. 4; comp. Rom. ix. 22 ; 2 Cor.
vi. 6; Gal. v. 22 ; Eph. iv. 2; Col. i.
11; iii. 12; 1 Tim.i.16. J And doctrine. ‘Teaching, or patient instruction.

3. For the time will come, &c.
Probably referring to the time mentioned in chap. iii. 1, seq. | When
they will not endure sound doctrine.
Greek, healthful doctrine ; i. e., doctrine contributing to the health ofthe
soul, or to salvation. At that time
they would seek a kind of instruction
more conformable to their wishes and
feelings. (] But after their own lusts.
They will seek such kind of preaching as will accord with their carnal
desires ; or such as will palliate their
evil propensities, and deal gently
with their vices ; comp. Isa. xxx. 10,
“Speak unto us smooth things ; pro-

4 And they shall turn away
their ears from the truth, and shall
be turned unto fables. @

a1 Ti.1.4. b chap.2.3.

lor, fuljil. Ce 4el25 5.
phesy deceits.”
themselves teachers, having itching
ears. ‘The word rendered heap--
imicwpedJw--does not occur elsewhere
in the New Testament. It means
to heap up upon, to accumulate; and
here to multiply. The word rendered
ttching--xvjIw--also occurs only in
this place inthe New Testament. It
means to rub, to scratch; and then
to tickle, and here to feel an itching
for something pleasing or gratifying.
The image is derived from the desire
which we have when there is an itching sensation, to have it rubbed or
scratched.
these persons have to have some kind

of instruction that would allay their |

restless and uneasy desires, or would
gratify them. In explanation of this

passage we may observe, (1.) that.

there will be always religious teachers
of some kind, and that in proportion
as error and sin abound, they will be
multiplied. The apostle here says,
that by turning away from Timothy,
and from sound instruction, they
would not abandon all religious teachers, but would rather increase and
multiply them. Men often declaim
inuch against a regular ministry, and
call it priest-craft; and yet, if they
were to get rid of such a ministry,
they would by no means escape from
all kinds of religious teachers. The
deeper the darkness, and the more
gross the errors, and the more prevalent the wickedness of men, the
more will a certain kind of religious
teachers abound, and the more it will
cost to support them. Italy and
Spain swarm with priests, and in
every heathen nation they constitute
avery numerous class of the population, The cheapest ministry on the
earth is a well-educated Protestant
clergy, and if society wishes to free
itself from swarms of preachers, and
prophets, and exhorters, it should se-

cure the regular services of an educat- | xvi. 13.

ed and pious ministry. (2.) In such

¥ Shall they heap to

Such anuneasiness would |
5 But watch thou in all things, °
endure afflictions, do the work of
an evangelist, make ! full proof ¢ of
thy ministry.

classes of persons as the apostle here
refers to, there is a restless, uneasy
desire to have some kind of preachers
They have “itching ears.” They
will be ready to run after all kinds of
public instructors. They will be
little pleased with any, and this will
be one reason why they will have so
many. They are fickle, and unsettled,
and never satisfied. A desire to hear
the truth, and to learn the way of salvation, is a good desire. But this
can be better gratified by far under
the patient and intelligent labour ofa
single religious teacher, than by running after many teachers, or than by
frequent changes. How much would
a child learn if he was constantly running from one school to another? (3.)
Such persons would have teachers
according to “ theirown lusts ;’’ that is.
their own tastes, or wishes. They would
have those who would coincide with
their whims ; who would foster every
vagary which might enter their imagination; who would countenance
every wild project for doing good ;
who would be the advocates of the
errors which they held; and who
would be afraid to rebuke their faults.
These are the principles on which
many persons choose their religious
teachers. The tiwe principle should
be, to select those who will faithfully
declare the truth, and who will not
shrink from exposing and denoancing
sin, wherever it may be found.

4, And they shall turn away their
ears from the truth. That is, the
people themselves will turn away
from the truth. It does not mean
that the teachers would turn them
away by the influence of their instructions. § And shall be turned unto
fubles ; Notes, 1 Tim. i. 4.

5. But watch thou in alt things.
Be vigilant against error and against
sin, and faithful in the performance
of duty ; Notes, Matt. xxv. 13 ; 1 Cor.
{| Endure afflictions; Notes,

chap. ii. 8. The Greek word here is
6 For I am now ready to be of- |

Ph.1.23 ; 2 Pe.J.)4.

the same which is there rendered |

“endure hardness.’ § Do the work
of an evangelist. On the word evangelist, see Notes on Acts xxi. 8. The
phrase here means, do the work of
preaching the gospel, or of one appointed to proclaim the glad tidings
of salvation. This is the proper
business of all ministers, whatever
other rank they may maintain. Whetherit was ever regarded as the proper
‘luty of a separate class of men to do
this, see Notes on Eph. iy. ll.
{ Make full proof of thy miisiry. Marg., fulfil; comp. Notes, Rom.
xiv. 5. The word here used denotes,
properly, to bear or bring fully ; then
to persuade fully ; and then to make
fully assured of, to give full proof of.
The meaning here seems to be,
to furnish full evidence of what is the
design of the Christian ministry, and of
what itis adapted to accomplish, by the
faithful performance of all its duties.
Timothy was so to discharge the duties of his office as to furnish a fair
illustration of what the ministry could
do, and thus to show the wisdom of
the Saviour in its institution. This
should be the aim of all the ministers
of the gospel. Each one should resolve, by the blessing of God, that
the ministry, in his hands, shall be
allowed, by a fair trial, to show to
the utmost what it is adapted to do
for the welfare of mankind.

6. For I am now ready to be offered.
tle that he was about to die, is urged
as a reason why Timothy should be
laborious and faithful in the performance of the duties of his office. Ilis
own work was nearly done. He was
soon to be withdrawn from the earth,
and whatever benefit the world might

have derived from his experience or |

active exertions, it was now to be deprived of it. He was about to leave
a work which he much loved, and to
which he had devoted the vigour of
his life, and he was anxious that they
who were to succeed him should carry
on the work with all the energy and
zeal in their power. This expresses

Il. TIMOTHY.

This conviction of the apos- |

fered, and the time of my departure “ is at hand.

the comnion feeling of aged ministers
as death draws near. The word
“ready” in the phrase “ready to be
offered,” conveys an idea which is not
in the original. It implies a willingness to depart, which, whether true or
not, is not the idea conveyed by the
apostle. His statement is merely of
the fact that he was about to die, or
that his work was drawing to a close.
No doubt he was “ready,” in the
sense of being willing and prepared,
but this is not the idea in the Greek.
The single Greek word rendered “I
am ready to be offered ”--orévdopeai--
occurs nowhere else in the New Testament, except in Phil. ii. 17, where
it is translated “if I be offered ;”’ see
it explained in the Notes on that
place. Theallusion here, says Burder (in Rosenmiiller’s A. u. n. Morgenland), is to the custom which prevailed among the heathen generally,
of pouring wine and oil on the head
of a victim when it was about to be
offered in sacrifice. The idea of the
apostle then is, that he was in the
condition of the victim on whose head
;the wine and oil had been already
' poured, and which was just about to
be put to death ; that is, he was about
|to die. Every preparation had been
| made, and he only awaited the blow
| which was to strike him down. The
meaning is not that he was to be a
| verufice; it is that his death was
,about to occur. Nothing more remained to be done but to die. The
victim was all ready, and he was sure
that the blow would soon fall. What
was the ground of his expectation, he
has not told us. Probably there were:
events occurring in Rome which made
it morally certain that though he had
once been acquitted, he could not now
escape. At all events, it is interesting to contemplate an aged and experienced Christian on the borders of
the grave, and to learn what were his
feelings in the prospect of his departure to the eternal world. Happily,
Paul has in more piaces than one
(comp. Phil. i. 28), stated his views
in such circumstances, and we know

71 have fought a good fight,
[ have finished ® my course, I have
kept ¢ the faith :

8 Henceforth there is laid up

for me acrown @ of righteousness,
41 T5612. bAC.20.24,
¢ Pr.23.23; Re.3.10.

that his religion then didnot fail him.

He found it to be in the prospect of
death what he had found it to be
through all his life--the source of unspeakable consolation--and he was
enabled to look calmly onward to the
hour.which should summon him into
the presence of his Judge. J And
the time of my departure is at hand.
Gr., dissolving, or dissolution. So we
speak of the dissolution of the soul
and body. ‘The verb from which the
noun (avéavos), is derived (avardw),
means to loosen again; to undo. It
is applied to the act of unloosing or
casting off the fastenings of a ship,
preparatory to a departure. The
proper idea in the use of the word
would be, that he had been bound to
the present world, like a ship to its
moorings, and that death would be a
release. He would now spread his
sails on the broad ocean of eternity.
The true idea of death is that of
loosening the bands that confine us to
the present world ; of setting us free,
and permitting the soul to go forth,
as with expanded sails, on its eternal
voyage. With such a view of death,
why should a Christian fear to die ?

7. IT have fought a good fight. The
Christian life is often represented as
a conflict, or warfare; see Notes on
1 Tim. vi. 12. That noble conflict
with sin, the world, the flesh, and the
devil, Paul now says he had been
able to maintain. J J have finished
my course. The Christian life, too,
is often represented as a race to be
run; comp. Notes, 1 Cor. ix. 24--26,
q T have kept the fatth. I have steadfastly maintained the faith of the
gospel; or, have lived a life of fidelity to my Master. Probably the expression means that he had kept his
plighted faith to the Redeemer, or
had spent a life in faithfully endeayouring to serve his Lord.

8. Henceforth there is laid up for |

which the Lord, the righteous
judge, shall give me at that day;
and not to me only, but unto all
them ¢ also that love his appearing.
8 @1 Co.9.25;1 Pe. 5.43 Re.2.30.
61 Co.2.9.

me. At the end of myrace, as there
was a crown in reserve for those who
had successfully striven in the Grecian
games; comp. Notes on 1 Cor. ix.
25. The word henceforth--asxd»--
means what remains, or as to the rest;
and the idea is, that that was what
remained of the whole career. The
race had been run; the conflict had
been waged ; and all which was now
necessary to complete the whole transaction, was merely that the crown be
bestowed. {A crown of righteousness. That is, a crown won in the
cause of righteousness, and conferred
as the reward ofhis conflicts and efforts in the cause of holiness. It was
not the crown of ambition; it was
not a garland won in struggles for
earthly distinction ; it was that which
was the appropriate reward of his
efforts to be personally holy, and to
spread the principles of holiness as far
as possible throughthe world. 4 Which
the Lord, the righteous Judge, shalt
give me, The Lord Jesus, appointed
to judge the world, and to dispense
the rewards of eternity. It will be
seen in the last day that the rewards
of heaven are not conferred in an arbitrary manner, but that they are bestowed because they ought to be, or
that God is righteous and just in
doing it. No man will be admitted
to heaven who ought not, under all
the circumstances of the case, to be
admitted there; no one will be excluded who ought to have been saved.
q At that day. That is, the time
when he willcome to judge the world;
Matt. xxv. § And not to me only.
“ Though my life has been spent in
laboriously endeavouring to spread
his religion ; though I have suffered
much, and laboured long; though 1
have struggled hard to win the prize,
and now have it full in view, yet I do
not suppose that it is tobe conferredon
me alone. It is not like the wreath of
9 Do thy diligence to come
shortly unto me:

10 For Demas hath forsaken
me, having loved ¢# this present

eae do baie a i ae
olive, laurel, pine, or parsley (Notes,
i Cor. ix. 25), which could be conferred only on one victor (Notes, 1 Cor.
ix. 24); but here every one may
obtain the crown who strives for it.
‘The struggle is not between me and
a competitor in such a sense that, if
T obtain the crown, he must be excluded ; but it is a crown which he
can obtain as well as J. As many
as run--as many as fight the good
fight--as many as keep the faith--
as many as love his appearing, may
win the crown as well as I.’”’ Such
is religion, and such is the manner
in which its rewards differ from all
others. At the Grecian games, but
one could obtain the prize; 1 Cor. ix.
24, All the rest who contended in
those games, no matter how numerous
they were, or how skilfully they contended, or how much effort they made,
were of course subjected to the mortification of a failure, and to all the illfeeling and envy to which such a
failure might give rise. So it is in
respect to all the prizes which this
world can bestow. Ina lottery, but
one can obtain the highest prize; in a
class in college, but one can secure
the highest honour; in the scramble
for office, no matter how numerous the
competitors may be, or what may be
their merits, but one can obtain it.

All the rest are liable to the disap- |

pointments and mortifications of defeat. Not soin religion. No matter
how numerous the competitors, or how
worthy any one of them may be, or
how pre-eminent above his brethren,
vet all may obtain the prize; all
may be crowned with a diadem of
life, of equal brilliancy. No one is
excluded because another is successful; no one fails of the reward because another obtains it. Who, then,
would not make an effort to win the
immortal crown? 4 Unto all them
aiso that love his appearing. Thatis,
unto all who destre his second coming.
To believe in the second advent ofthe
Lord Jesus to judge the world, and to

ITx TIMOLTHN:

world, and is departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus

unto Dalmatia.
@ 1 John 2.15.

desire his return, became a kind ofa
criterion by which Christians were
known. No others but true Christians were supposed to believe in that,
and no others truly desired it; comp.
Rev. i. 7; xxii. 20. Itissonow. It
is one of the characteristics of a true
Christian that he sincerely desires
the return of his Saviour, and would
welcome his appearing in the clouds
of heaven.

9. Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me. As soon as possible.
Timothy had been Paul’s travelling
companion, and was his intimate
friend. ‘The apostle was now nearly
forsaken, and was about to pass
through severe trials. It is not certainly known for what purpose he
wished him to come to him, but perhaps he desired to give him some
parting counsels; perhaps he wished
him to be near him when he died.
It is evident from this that he did
not regard him as the _ prelatical
“bishop of the church of the Ephesians,’’ or consider that he was so
confined to that place in his labours,
that he was not also to go to other
places if he was called in the providence of God. It is probable that
Timothy would obey such asummons,
and there is no reason to believe that
he ever returned to Ephseus.

10. For Demas hath forsaken me.
Demas is honourably mentioned in
Col. iv. 14; but nothing more is
known of him than what can be gathered from that place and this--
that he was at first a friend and fellow-labourer of Paul, but that, under
the influence of a desire to live, he
afterwards forsook him, even in circumstances where he greatly needed
the presence of a friend. § Having
loved this present world. This does
not mean,-necessarily, that he was
an avaricious man, or that, in itself,
he loved the honours or wealth of
this world ; but it means that he desired to live. Ile was not willing
to stay with Paul, and subject him-

11 Onl
Take Mark,

Luke is with me.| thee ; for he is profitable to me for
and bring him with | the ministry

self to the probabilities of martyrdom ;
and, in order to secure his life, he departed to a place of safety. The
Greek is, ayaemrnous toy vWy aiwyz--haying loved the world that now is; that
is, this world as it is, with allits cares,
and troubles, and comforts ; having
desired to remain in this world, rather
than to goto the other. Thereis, perhaps, a slight censure here in the language of Paul--the censure of grief;
but there is no reason why Demas
should be held up as an example of a
worldly man. That he desired to live
longer; that he was unwilling to remain and risk the loss of life, is indeed
clear. That Paul was pained by his
departure, and that he felt lonely and
sad, is quite apparent ; but I see no evidence that Demas was influenced by
what are commonly called worldly
feelings, or that he was led to this
course by the desire of wealth, or fame,
or pleasure. {| And is departed unto
Thessalonica. Perhaps his native
place. Calmet. {J Crescens. Nothing more is known of Crescens than is
here mentioned. “ He is thought by
Eusebius and others to have preached in Gaul, and to have founded the
church in Vienne, in Dauphiny.”
Calmet. § To Galatia. See Intro.
to the epistle to the Galatians, § 1.
It is not known to what part of Galatia he had gone, or why he went
there. ¥ Titus into Dalmatia. Dalmatia was a part of Illyricum, on the
gulf of Venice, or the Adriatic sea.
On the situation of Illyricum, see
Notes on Rom. xv. 19. Paul does
not mention the reason why Titus had
gone there ; but it is not improbable
that he had gone to preach the gospel,
or to visit the churches which Paul
had planted in that region. The
apostle does not suggest that he was
deserving of blame for having gone,
and it can hardly be supposed that
Titus would have left him at this time
without his concurrence. Perhaps,
when he permitted him to go, he did
oot know how soon events would come
to a crisis with him; and as a letter
vould more readily reach Timothy

at Ephesus, than Titus in Dalmatia,
he requested him to come to him, instead of directing Titus to return.
11. Only Luke ts with me, Luke,
the author of the gospel whicn bears
his name, and of the Acts of the
Apostles. For a considerable part
of the ministry of Paul, he was his
travelling companion (comp. Notes
on Acts xvi. 10), and we know that
he went with him to Rome; Acts
xxvii.l. § Take Mark. John Mark,
Notes, Acts xv. 37. He was the son
of a sister of Barnabas, and had been
the travelling companion of Barnabas
and Paul. There had been a temporary alienation between Paul and
him (Acts xv. 38); but this passage
proves that that had been removed,
and that Paul was reconciled to him.
{| For he is profitable to me for the
ministry. In what way he would
be profitable, he does not say; nor is
it known why Mark was at that time
with Timothy. It may be observed,
however, that this is such language
as Paul might be expected to use of
Mark, after what had occurred, as
recorded in Acts xy. 38. He felt
that he was now about to die. If he
suspected that there was on the part
of Mark any lingering apprehension
that the great apostle was not entirely reconciled to him, or retained
a recollectiom of what had formerly
occurred, nothing would be more
natural than that, at this trying time
of his life, Paul should summon him
to his side, and express towards him
the kindest emotions. It would soothe
any lingering irritation in the mind
of Mark, to receive such a message.
12. And Tychicus, See Acts xx.
4, In Eph. vi. 21, Paul calls him “a
beloved brother, and faithful minister
in the Lord.’’ But it may be asked
why he did not retain him with him,
or why should he have sent him away,
and then call Timothy to him? The
probability is, that he had sent him
before he had seen reason to apprehend that he would be put to death;
and now, feeling the need of a friend to
be with him, hesent to Timothy, rather
12 And Tychicus # have I sent

to Ephesus.
13 The cloak that I left at

@ Tit.3.12.

than to him, because Tychicus had
been employed to perform some service which he could not well leave,
and because Paul wished to give some
some special instructions to Timothy
before he died. § Have I sent to
Ephesus. Why, is not certainly
known; comp. Intro. § 2.

13. The cloak that I left at Troas.
On the situation of Troas, see Notes
on Acts xvi. 8. It was not on the
most direct route from Ephesus to
Rome, but was a route frequently
taken ; comp. the Map in the Notes
on the Acts of the Apostles. See
also the Intro., § 2. In regard to
what the “cloak” here mentioned
was, there has been considerable difference of opinion. The Greek word
used (@:A2vm;,--variously written gaiAovns, Pedrovns, and Perwyns), Occurs nowhere else in the New Testament.
It is supposed to be used for a similar
Greek word (@idans,) to denote a
cloak, or great-coat, with a hood, used
chiefly on journeys, or in the army:
Latin, penula. It is described by
Eschenberg (Man. Class. Lit., p. 209)
as a “ cloak without sleeves, for cold
or rainy weather.”’ See the uses of
it in the quotations made by Wetstein,
in loc. Others, however, have supposed that the word means a travyelling-case for books, &c. So Hesychius
understands it. Bloomfield endeavours to unite the two opinions by
suggesting that it may mean a cloakbag, and that he had left his books
and parchments in it. It is impossible
to settle the precise meaning of the
word here, and it is not material.
The common opinion that it was a
wrapper or travelling-cloak, is the
most probable; and such a garment
would not be undesirable for a prisoner. Itshould be remembered, also, that
winter was approaching (ver. 21), and
such a cloak would be particularly
needed. He had probably passed
through Troas in summer, and, not
needing the cloak, and not choosing

If. TIMOTHY.

Troas with Carpus, when thou
comest, bring with thee, and the
books, but especially the parchments,

to encumber himself with it, had left
it at the house of a friend. On the
meaning of the word, see Wetstein,
Robinson, Lex., and Schleusner, Lex.
Comp., also, Suic. Thess. ii. 1422.
The doubt in regard to what is here
meant, is as old as Chrysostom. He
says (Hom. x. on this epistle), that
the word (@:Asymv) denotes a garment--ro izeriov. But some understood by it a capsula, or bag--yawscoxouoy,” (comp. Notes on John Xii.

6), “in which books, &c. were carried.” § With Carpus. Carpus is
not elsewhere mentioned. He was

evidently a friend of the apostle, and
it would seem probabie that Paul had
made his house his home when he
was in Troas. § And the books. It
is impossible to determine what books
are meant here. They may have
been portions of the Old Testament,
or classic writings, or books written
by other Christians, or by himself.
It is worthy of remark that even Paul
did not travel without books, and that
he found them in some way necessary
for the work of the ministry. {| Especially the parchments. The word
here used (gewGpavas, whence our word
membrane), occurs only in this place
in the New Testament, and means
skin, membrane, orparchment. Dressed skins were among the earliest materials for writing, and were in common use before the art of making
paper from rags was discovered. These
“parchments’”’ seem to have been
something different from “books,”’ and
probably refer to some of his own
writings. They may have contained
notes, memorandums, journals, or unfinished letters. It is, of course, impossible now to determine what they
were. Benson supposes they were
letters which he had received from
the churches; Macknight, that they
were the originals of the letters
which he had written ; Bishop Bull,
that they were a kind of commonplace book, in which he inserted hints

14 Alexander the coppersmith
did me much evil: the Lord ¢ reward him according to his works:

a Ps 28.4.

and extracts of the most remarkable
passages in the authors which he read.
All this, however, is mere conjecture.

14, Alexander the coppersmith.
Or, rather, the brazier--é yaaxeis.
The word is used, however, to denote a worker in any kind of metals.
This is probably the same person who
is mentioned in 1 Tim. i. 20, and perhaps the same as the one mentioned
in Acts xix. 33; see Notes on 1 Tim.
i. 20. § Did me much evil. In what
way this was done, is not mentioned
If this is the same person who is referred to in 1 Tim. i. 20, it is probable
that it was not evil to Paul personally,
so much as embarrassment to the
cause of religion which he advocated ;
comp. 2 Tim. ii. 17,18. § The Lord
reward him according to his works;
comp. Notes, 1 Tim. i. 20. This need
not be regarded as an expression of
private feeling; still less should it be
understood as expressing a desire of
revenge. It is the language of one
who wished that God would treat him
exactly as he ought to be treated,
and might be in accordance with the
highest benevolence of any heart. It
is the aim of every just government
that every one should be treated exactly as he deserves ; and every good
citizen should desire and pray that
exact justice may be done to all. It
is the business of a police officer to
ferret out the guilty, to bring them
to trial, to secure a just sentence;
and any police officer might pray,
with the utmost propriety, that God
would assist him in his endeavours,
and enable him to perform his duty.
This might be done with no malevolent feeling toward any human being,
but with the purest love of country,
and the most earnest desire for the
welfare of all. Jfsuch a police officer,
or if a judge, or a juryman, were
heard thus to pray, who would dare to
accuse him of having a vindictive
spirit, or a malevolent heart ¢

15 Of whom be thou ware also ;
for he hath greatly withstood our
1 words.

lor, preachings,

why should Paul be so charged, when
his prayer amounts to no more than
this? Forit remains yet to be proved
that he refers to any private wrong
which Alexander had done him, or
that he was actuated by any other
desire than that the sacred interests
of truth should be guarded, and equal
Justice done to all. Why is it wrong
to desire or to pray that universal
justice may be done, and that every
man may be treated as, under all
the circumstances of the case, he
ought to be treated? Onthe subject
of the “ Imprecations in the Seriptures,’ the reader may consult an
article in the Bibliotheca Sacra, vol.
1, pp. 9f--110. It should be added
here, that some manuscripts, instead
of axoiwn, “may the Lord reward,”
read it in the future--érodacss, ‘ will
reward.’’ See Wetstein. The future is also found in the Vulgate,
Coptic, and in Augustine, Theodoret,
and Chrysostom. Augustine says (on
the Sermon on the Mount), ‘ He
does not say, may he reward (7eddat) ;
but, he will reward (reddet), which is
a verb of prophecy, not ofimprecation.
The authority, however, is not sufficient
to justify a change in tke present
reading. These variations have doubtless arisen from a belief that the common reading expresses a sentiment
inconsistent with the true spirit of a
Christian, and a desire to find a better, But thereis no reason for desir-

‘ing a change in the text.

15. Of whom be thou ware also.
It would seem from this that Alexander was still a public teacher, and
that his discourses were plausible and
artful. The best and the wisest of
men need to be on their guard against
the efforts of the advocates of error.
q For he hath greatly withstood our
words. Marg., preachings, The
Greek is, words ; but the reference is
doubtless to the public teachings of
Paul. This verse makes it clear that

And | it was no private wrong that Paul re16 At my first answer no man

stood with me, but all 4 men forachap.1.15.

ferred to, but the injury which he was
doing to the cause of truth as a professed public teacher.

16. At my first answer. Gr., apology (axoanyix), plea, or defence.
This evidently refers to some trial
which he had had before the Roman
emperor. He speaks of a first trial of
this kind; but whether it was on
some former occasion, and he had been
released and permitted again to go
abroad, or whether it was a trial which
he had already had during his second
imprisonment, it is not easy to determine. The former is the most natural supposition ; for, if he had had a
trial during his present imprisonment,
it is difficult to see why he was still
held as a prisoner. See this point
examined in the Intro., $1. 4 No
man stuod with me. Paul had many
friends in Rome (ver. 21; comp. Rom.
xvi.) ; but it seems that they did not
wish to appear as such when he was
put on trial for his life. ‘They were
doubtless afraid that they would be
identified with him, and would endanger their own lives. It should be said
that some of the friends of the apostle,
mentioned in Rom. xvi., and who were
there when that epistle was written,
may have died before the apostle arrived there, or, in the trials and persecutions to which they were exposed,
may have left the city. Still, it is
remarkable that those who were there
should have all left him on so trying
an occasion. But to forsake a friend
in the day of calamity is not uncommon, and Paul experienced what thousands before him and since have done.
Thus Job was forsaken by friends and
kindred in the day of his trials; see
ihe ee description in Job xix.

--17:

He hath put my brethren far from me,

And mine acquaintance verily are estranged
from me.

My kinsfolk have failed,

Aud my familar friends have forgotten me.

They that dwell in my house, and my maids,
count me fora stranger,

Iam an alien in their sight.

I called my servant, and he gave me no answer; I entreated him with my mouth.

sook me; J pray God that it may
not be laid ® to their charge.
b Ac.7.60.

My breath is strange to my wife,
Though I entreated for the children’s sake of
mine own body.

Thus the Psalmist was forsaken by
his friends in the time of calamity ;
Ps. xxxv. 12--16; xxxviii. 2; xli. 9;
lv. 12. And thus the Saviour was
forsaken in his trials ; Matt. xxvi. 56;
comp., for illustration, Zech. xiii. 6.
The world is full of instances in which
those who have been overtaken by
overwhelming calamities, have been
forsaken by professed friends, and
have been left to suffer alone. ‘This
has arisen, partly from the circumstance that many sincere friends are
timid, andtheir courage failsthem when
their attachment for another would
expose them to peril ; but more commonly from the circumstance that
there is much professed friendship in
the world whichis false, and that calamity becomes atest of it which it
cannot abide. There is professed
friendship which is caused by wealth
(Prov. xiv. 20; xix. 4); there is that
which is cherished for those in elevated and fashionable circles; there is
that which is formed for beauty of
person, or graceful manners, rather
than for the solid virtues of the heart;
there is that which is created in the
sunshine of life--the affection of those
“‘swallow friends, who retire in the
winter, and return in the spring.”
Comp. the concluding remarks on the
book of Job. Such friendship is always tested by calamity; and when
affliction comes, they who in the days
of prosperity were surrounded by
many flatterers and admirers, are surprised to find how few there were
among them who truly loved them.

“In the wind and tempest of his frown,
ee with a broad and powerful
an,
Puffing at all, winnows the light away};
And what hath mass or matter by itself,
Lies, rich in virtue and unmingled.”’
Troilus and Cressida.

So common has this been--so little
confidence can be placed in professed
friends in time of adversity, that we
are sometimes disposed to believe

17 Notwithstanding the Lord ¢
stood with me, and strengthened me ;

that by me the preaching might be
@ Mat.10.19; Ac.23.1).

that there is more truth than fancy in

the representation of the poet when
he says--

“ And what is friendship but aname,
A charm that lulls to sleep;
A shade that follows wealth or fame,
But leaves the wretch to weep 2”

Yet there is true friendship in the
world. It existed between Damon
and Pythias, and its power and beauty were still more strikingly illustrated in the warm affection of David and
Jonathan. In the trials of David--
though raised from the condition of a
shepherd boy--and though having no
powerful friends at court, the son of
Saul never forsook him, and never
gave him occasion to suspect the sincerity or the depth of his affection.
With what exquisite beauty he sang
of that attachment when Jonathan
was dead !

car me distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan.

Very pleasant hast thou been unto me:

Thy love to me was wonderful,

Passing the love of women.””

2 Sam. i.26.

True friendship, founded on sincere
love, so rare, so difficult to be found,
so little known among the gay and the
great, is one of the richest of Heaven’s
blessings to man, and when enjoyed,
should be regarded as more than a
compensation for all of show, and
splendour, and flattery that wealth
can obtain.

* Though choice of follies fasten on the great,

None clings more obstinate, than fancy fond

That sacred friendship is their easy prey ;

Caught by the wafture of a golden lure,

Or fascination of a high-born smile.

Their smiles, the great, and the coquette,
throw out

For other’s hearts, tenacious of their own,

And we no less of ours, when such the bait,

Ye fortune’s cofferers ? ye powers of wealth!

Can gold gain friendship! Impudence of hope!

As well mere man an angel might beget.

Love, and love only, is the Joan for love.

Lorenzo! pride repress ; nor hope to find

A ee but what has found a friend in

thee.
All like the purchase ; few the price will pay,
And this makes friends such miracles below.

fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear : and I was deliver-

ed out of the mouth © of the lion.
b Ps.22.21.

A friend is worth all hazards we can run.
Poor is the friendless master of a world ;

A world in purchase of a friend is gain.”

Night Thoughts, Night 2.

q I pray God that ct may not be laid
to their charge. ‘That it may not be
reckoned, or imputed to them--acyioScin, On the meaning of this
word, see Notes on Rom. iv. 8, and
Philem. 18. The prayer of the apostle here breathes the very spirit of
Christ ; see Notes on Luke xxiii. 34;
comp. Acts vii. 60.

17. Notwithstanding the Lord stood
with me. Though all men forsook
me, yet Goddid not. This expresses
a universal truth in regard to the
faithfulness of God; see Psalm xxvii.
10; comp. Job v. 17--19; Isa xliii. 1,
2. ¥ That by me the preaching might
be fully known. The word preaching,
here probably means the gospel as
preached by him. Theword rendered
“might be fully known ’’--sAnpoQop nbz
--means might obtain full credence;
that is, might be fully confirmed, so
that others might be agsured of its
truth. The apostle doubtless means
that on his trial, though forsaken by
all men, he was enabled to be so
steadfast in his profession of the
truth, and so calm in the prospect of
death, that all who witnessed his trial
saw that there was a reality in religion, and that the gospel was founded
in truth. He had maintained as a
preacher that the gospel was able to
support the soul in trial, and he was
now able to illustrate its power inhis
own case. He had proclaimed the
gospel as the true system of religion,
and he was now able to bear testimony to it with the prospect of approaching martyrdom. The sentiment of this passage then is, that the
truth of the gospel is made known, or
that men may become fully assured of
it, by the testimony which is borne to
it by its friends in the near prospect
of death. One of the most important
means of establishing the truth of the
gospel in the world has been the testimony borne to it by martyrs, andthe

18 And the Lord 4 shall deliver preserve me unto his heavenly
me from every evil work, and will, kingdom : to whom 6e glory for
a Ps.121.7. ever and ever. Amen.

spirit of unwavering confidence in God

| the Scriptures to compare tyrants
which they have evinced. And now,

iand persecutors with ravenous wild
one of the most important methods of | beasts ; comp. Ps. xxii. 13, 21; Jer.
keeping up the knowledge of the! ii. 30. Nero is called a lion by Senvalue of religion in the world, and of eca, and it was usual among heathen
convincing men of the truth of Chris-, writers to apply the term in various
tianity, is the spirit evinced by its| senses to princes and warriors ; see
friends when they are about to die. Grotius, im loc. The common interMen judge much, and justly, of the, pretation here has been, that this revalue of a system of religion by its fers to Nero, and there is noimprobapower to comfort in~the day of cala- bility in the interpretation. Still, it
mity, and to sustain the soul when is quite as natural to suppose that the
about to enter on an untried state of punishment which had been appointed
being. ‘hat system is of little value for him, or to which he would have
to mankind which leaves us in the been subjected, was to be thrown to
day of trial; that is of inestimable lions, and that in some way, now unworth which will enable us to die; known to us, he had been delivered
with the firm hope of a brighter and fromit. Paul attributes his deliverbetter world. A Christian, having | ance entirely to the Lord--but what
served his God faithfully in life, may, | instrumental agency there may have
therefore, be eminently useful when | been, he does not specify. It seems
he comesto die. § And that all the probable that it was his own defence ;
Gentiles might hear, Paul was at that he was enabled to plead his own
this time in Rome. His trial was! cause with so much ability that he
before a heathen tribunal, and he was| found favour even with the Roman
surrounded by Pagans. Kome, too,| emperor, and was discharged. If it

was then the centre of the world, and
at all times there was a great conflux
of strangers there.
fore, gave him an opportunity of tes-

His trial, there- |

had been through the help of a friend at
| court, itis hardly to be supposed that he
would not have mentioned the name of
| him to whom he owed his deliverance.

tifying to the truth of Christianity) 18. And the Lord shall deliver me
before Gentile rulers, and insuchcir- | from every evil work. He does not
cumstances that the knowledge of his | say from death, for he expected now
sufferings, and of the religion for to die; seever.6. But he was assured
which he suffered, might be conveyed ; that God would keep him from shrinkby the strangers who witnessed it to, ing from death when the hour ap-

the ends of the world. His main object in life was to make the gospel
known to the Gentiles, and he had
thus an opportunity of furthering that
great cause, even on what he supposed
might be the trial which would determine with him the question of life or
death ; comp. Notes on Rom. i. 10.
q And I was delivered out of the
mouth of the lion. This may either
mean that he was delivered from Nero,
compared with a lion, or literally that
he was saved from being thrown to
lions in the amphitheatre, as was common in Rome ; see Notes on 1 Cor.
xv. 32. (3.) It is not uncommon in

proached ; from apostasy, and from
the manifestation of an improper
i spirit when he came to die. {| And
will preserve me wito his heavenly
kingdom. So keep me from evil that
I shall reach his heavenly kingdom ;
see yer. 8. { Jo whom be glory for
ever and ever. Paul was accustomed
to introduce a doxology in his writings
when his heart ‘was full (comp. Rom.
ix. 5), and in no place could it be
more appropriate than here, when he
had the fullest confidence that he was
soon to be brought to heaven. Ifman
is ever disposed to ascribe glory to
God, it is on such an occasion.

19 Salute Prisca and Aquila,

and the household of Onesiphorus.

20 Erastus abode at Corinth:
but Trophimus have [ left at Miletum sick.

21 Do thy diligence to come
before winter. Eubulus greeteth
thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and
Claudia, and all the brethren.

19. Salute Prisca and Aquila.
Prisca, or Priscilla, was the wife of
Aquila, though her name is sometimes mentioned first. In regard to
their history, see Notes, Rom. xvi. 3.
They were at Rome when Paul wrote
his epistle to the Romans, but afterwards went into Asia Minor, which
was the native place of Aquila (Acts
Xvili. 2), and where they probably
died. And the household of Onesiphorus ; Notes, chap. i. 16.

20. Hrastus; see Notes on Rom.
xvi. 238. YJ Abode at Corinth. This
was his home, where he filled an important office ; Notes, Rom. xvi. 23.
It would seem that when Paul went
to Rome, there was some expectation
that he wouldaccompany him, but that
reasons had occurred for his remaining
in Corinth. His doing so is referred
to without blame. § But Trophimus ;
see Acts xx. 4. He was a native of
Asia Minor. § Have I left at Miletum sick. Probably he designed to
accompany him to Rome, as he had
been often with him in his journeys.
On the situation of Miletus, or Miletum, see Notes on Acts xx, 15.

22 The Lord Jesus Christ be
with thy spirit. Grace be with
you. Amen.

The second eptstle unto ‘imotheus, ordained the first bishop of the church of the
Ephesians, was written from
Rome, when Paul was brought

before ! Nero the second time.
1 Cesar Nero, or the Emperor Nero.

21. Do thy diligence; ver. 9. | To

come before winter. Probably because of the dangers of the navigation then, and because the circumstances of the apostle were such as
to demand the presence of a friend.
§ Eubulus, &c. These names are of
common occurrence in the works
of the classic writers, but of the
persons here referred to we know
nothing.

22. The Lord Jesus Christ be with
thy spirit ; see Gal. vi. 18; Rom. xv.
20. The subscription to this epistle
was not added by Paul himself, nor is
there any evidence that it was by an
inspired man, and it is of no authority. There is not the slightest evidence that Timothy was ‘‘ ordained the
first bishop of the church of the Ephesians,’ or that he was a “bishop ”’
there at all. There is no reason to
believe that he was even a pastor
there, in the technical sense; see
Notes on 1 Tim. i. 3. Compare the
remarks on the subscriptions to the
Epistle to the Romans, 1 Corinthians, and especially Titus.

< o‘- q @ “
- i -- - A
an ~ pe oat
y . 7 “ ae ar > ’ pore ¢ aiid
o : <a = > vi pe wTT ary ae 7 ae

Pe ,v Pay --See7, bape Page Fs of

Hs a en ee ee eee ee ee i oe hyo v)-) tea ee
7 apr 44 eo netyoaehs “etal i. he ha ali ws

ws rye , use best « eee pap ental a Baha a Re ae
7 tug a ree ‘the a ‘epee. saben alt ny ‘omen an
Pina lteiien od gp is tinge we" aa be ditaiath
r= 7. tar Se ineant letnadrtinwebert ier aeteer

1?
7 a ey rie prennds y nee
ae ven ras a gi bee et 2
gar tage tly 7 par
ans PU pal) a . 4 J : ware
’ wat wr Fes ; ne by, a nbd ; . ~
‘ ¢ ‘ ' F ' t

“OU, MECHA P84. Sh: onl
ar hear a Ne qierk aid ai dos
eae tae iD hhae mT forte i
+p tha Pratgere wh eitneened t ening fms va hare ay “43,
ik ands af . ww ete EAR f a gas! vata > fan - iieads eh we 7
“ce te 1h iS ine --ee ‘Me psedifeeistice «fo on ane @ .
kter ts ite Mictltes, wad tee Nad ‘apie aberde cane to ee ae
tha gh Mp; ey Of farther dh will peesgpre 200 4 AY pare -t4
greet ray e ys Ov wi Op Ones | 4 fam, Bx beep toe fry oly -
grt Se the Iriel whieh weld: I «ba each bie oly Neat
er. 5 7 78 =! a Sey hug
ef Pattie

i «
reisp

We
om Ad

Lares VS eas

'
24. ft

u vir ti

$1. The History of Titus.

Or Titus nothing more is certainly known than what we find in the
epistles of Paul. It is somewhat remarkable that there is no mention of
him in the Acts of the Apostles, nor does his name occur in the New Testament anywhere, except in the writings of the apostle Paul. From his insidental allusions to him, we learn the following particulars respecting him.

(1.) He was by birth a Gentile. In Gal. ii. 3, he is called a Greek, and it
is certain from that passage that he had not been circumcised, and the probability is, that up to the time of his conversion he had lived as other Gentiles, and had not been converted to the Jewish faith. His father and
mother were, doubtless, both Greeks, and thus he was distinguished from
Timothy, whose mother was a Jewess, but whose father wasa Greek ; Acts
xvi. 3; comp. Notes on Gal. ii. 3. If Titus had been proselyted to the Jewish faith, it is to be presumed that he would have been circumcised.

(2.) He had been converted to Christianity by the instrumentality of
Paul himself. This is clear from the epistle, chap. i. 4, ‘ To Titus, mine
own son, after the common faith ;’’ see Notes on 1 Tim.i. 2. This is language which the apostle would not have used of one who had been converted by the instrumentality of another. But where he lived, and when or how
he was converted, is wholly unknown. As to the time when he was converted, it is known only that this occurred before the fourteenth year after the
conversion of Paul, for at that time Titus, a Christian, was with Paul at
Jerusalem ; Gal. ii. 1. As to the place where he lived, there seems some
reason to suppose that it was in some part of Asia Minor--for the Greeks
abounded there; Paul laboured much there; and there were numerous
converts made there to the Christian faith. Still this is not by any means
certain.

(3.) Titus went with Paul to Jerusalem when he was deputed by the
shurch at Antioch with Barnabas, to lay certain questions before the apostles and elders there in reference to the converts from the Gentiles; Acts
xv; comp. Gal. ii. 1. It is not known why he took Titus with him on that
occasion. and the reasons can be only conjectural; see Notes on Gal. ii. 1.

cclvili INTRODUCTION.

It is possible that he was taken with him to Jerusalem because his was a
case in point in regard to the question which was to come before the apostles and elders there. It is not improbable, from an expression which Paul
uses in describing his visit there--“ neither was Titus compelled to be circumcised ’’--that the case came up for discussion, and that strenuous efforts
were made by the Judaizing portion there (comp. Gal.il. 4), to have him
circumcised. Paul and Barnabas, however, so managed the cause that the
principle was settled that it was not necessary that converts from the heathen
should be circumcised ; Acts xv. 19, 20.

(4.) After the council at Jerusalem, it seems probable that Titus returned with Paul and Barnabas, accompanied by Silas and Judas (Acts xv.
23), and that afterwards he attended the apostle for a considerable time
in his travels andlabours. This appears from a remark in 2 Cor. viii. 23;
“‘ Whether any do inquire of Titus, he is my partner and fellow-helper concerning you.” From this it would seem, that he had been with Paul ; that
he was as yet not well known; and that the fact that he had been seen with
him had led to inquiry who he was, and what was the office which he
sustained. That he was also a companion of Paul, and quite essential to
his comfort in his work, is apparent from the following allusions to him
in the same epistle--2 Cor. vii. 6--‘‘ God, that comforteth those who are
cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus ;” ii.13. ‘I had no rest
in my spirit because I found not Titus my brother ;” vii. 13. “ Yea and
exceeding!y the more joyed we for the joy of Titus ;” comp. 2 Tim. iv. 10;
2 Cor. xi. 18.

(5.) There is reason to believe that Titus spent some time with the
apostle in Ephesus. For the First Epistle to the Corinthians was written
at Ephesus, and was sent by the hand of Titus; Intro. to 1 Cor. $3. 6
It is to be presumed also, that he would on such an occasion send some one
with the epistle in whom he had entire confidence, and who had been so long
with him as to become familiar with his views. For Titus, on this occasion,
was sent not only to bear the epistle, but to endeavour to heal the divisions
and disorders there, and to complete a collection for the poor saints in
Jerusalem which the apostle had himself commenced; comp. Notes on 2
Cor. ii. 13; vii. 6; viii. 6. After thishe met Paul in Macedonia (2 Cor.
vii. 5, 6), but whether he was with him when he went with the collection to
Jerusalem, and during his imprisonment in Cesarea, or on his voyage to
Rome, we have no information.

(6.) We next hear of him as being left by the apostle in the island of
Crete, that he might “set in order the things that were wanting, and ordain elders in every city ;’’ Titus i.5. This is supposed to have occurred
about the year 62, and after the first imprisonment of the apostle at Rome.
It is evidently implied that the apostle had been himself there with him,
and that he had undertaken to accomplish some important object there,
but that something had prevented his completing it, and that he had left
Titus to finish it. This was clearly a temporary arrangement, for there
is no evidence that it was designed that Titus should be a permanent
“bishop” of Crete, or that he remained there long. That he did not design that he should be a permanent bishop of that island, is clear from chap. iii.
12, where the apostle directs him, when he should send Artemas to take his
place, to come to him to Nicopolis. If Titus was a prelatical bishop, the
apostle would not in this summary manner have superseded him, or removed
him from his diocese. ;

‘(7.) He was with Paul in Rome during his second imprisonment there.
He did not, however, remain with him until his trial, but left him and went
into Dalmatia; 2 Tim. iv. 10. For the probable reason why he had gone
there, see Notes on that place. What became of him afterward, we are not
informed. The tradition is, that he returned to Crete, and preached the

INTMODUCTION. cclix

gospel there and in the neighbouring islands, and died at the age of 94
ut this tradition depends on no certain evidence.

§ 2. The island of Crete.

_ As Paul (chap. i. 5) says that he had left Titus in Crete to perform an
important service there, and as the instructions in this epistle doubtless
had some peculiar applicability to the state of things existing there, it is
of importance, in order to acorrect understanding of the epistle, to have
some knowledge of that island, and of the circumstances in which the gospel
was introduced there.

The island of Crete, now Candia, is one of the largest islands in the
Mediterranean, at the south of all the Cyclades. See the Map of Asia
Minor, prefixed to the Acts of the Apostles. Its name is said by some to
have been derived from the Curetes, who are supposed to have been its first
inhabitants ; by others, from the nymph Crete, daughter of Hesperus; and
by others, from Cres, a son of Jupiter and the nymph Idwa. The ancient
authors in general say that Crete was originally peopled from Palestine.
According to Bochart (Lib. 5, c.15), that part of Palestine which lies by
the Mediterranean was called by the Arabs Keritha, and by Syrians Creth ;
and the Hebrews called the inhabitants Crethz, or Crethim, which the LXX.
have rendered Kpyza;--Cretans; Ezek. xxv. 16; Zeph. ii. 5. It would be
easy to pass from Palestine to the island of Crete. Sir Isaac Newton, also,
is of opinion that Crete was peopled from Palestine. He says, ‘“‘ Many of
the Pheenicians and Syrians, in the year before Christ 1045, fled from Zidon,
and from king David, into Asia Minor, Crete, Greece, and Libya, and introduced letters, music, poetry, the Octeterts, metals and their fabrication,
and other arts, sciences, and customs of the Phenicians. Along with these
Pheenicians came a sort of men skilled in religious mysteries, arts, and
sciences of Pheenicia, and settled in several places, under the names of Curetes,
Idei, Dactyli,” &c. According to Pliny, the extent of Crete from east to
west is about 270 miles, but its breadth nowhere exceeds fifty miles. The
carly inhabitants are generally supposed to be the Eteocretes of Ilomer; but
their origin is unknown. Minos, who had expelled his brother Sarpedon
from the throne, first gave laws to the Cretans, and, having conquered the
pirates who infested the Aigean sea, established a powerful navy. In the
Trojan war, Idomeneus, sovereign of Crete, led its forces to war in eighty
vessels--a number little inferior to those commanded by Agamemnon himself. At this period, the island appears to have been inhabited by a mixed
population of Greeks and barbarians. After the Trojan war, the principal
cities formed themselves into several republics, for the most part independent,
while some of them were connected with federal ties. The Cretan code of
laws was supposed by many to have furnished Lycurgus with the model of
nis most salutary regulations. It was founded on the just basis of liberty and
an equality of rights, and its great aim was to promote social harmony and
peace, by enforcing temperance and frugality. In regard to this code, see
Anthon’s Class. Dic., Art. Creta. In the time of Polybius (B. C. 203), the
Cretans had much degenerated from their ancient character; for he charges
them repeatedly with the grossest immorality, and the basest vices. Polyb.
4,47, 53; Id. 6,46. We know, also, with what severity they are reproved
by Paul, in the words of Epimenides; see Notes on chap. i. 12. Crete was
subdued by the Romans, and became a part of a Roman province. ‘The interior of the island is very hilly and woody, and intersected with fertile
valleys. Mount Ida, in the centre of the island, is the principal mountain,
and surpasses all the others in elevation. The island contains no lakes, and
its rivers are mostly mountain torrents, which are dry during the summer
season, ‘The valleys, or sloping plains, in the island are represented as very

cclx INTRODUCTION.

fertile. ‘The greater portion ot the land is not cultivated; but it might pro.
duce sugar-cane, excellent wine, and the best kind of fruit. It has a delightful climate, and is remarkably healthful. The ancients asserted that this
delightful island, the birth-place of Jupiter, was freed, by the indulgence of
the gods, from every noxious animal. No quadrupeds of a ferocious character
belong to it. The wild goat is the only inhabitant of the forest and the lofty
mountains, and sheep overspread the plains, and graze undisturbed by ravenvus enemies. The island now is under Turkish rule, and is divided into three
pachaliks ; but the inhabitants are mostly Greeks, who are kept in a state of
great depression. The native Candians are of the Greek church, and are
allowed the free exercise of their religion. he island is divided into twelve
bishoprics, the bishop of one of which assumes the title of archbishop, and is
appointed by the patriarch of Constantinople. ‘The situation of this island
for commerce can scarcely be surpassed. It is at an almost equal distance
from Asia, Europe, and Africa, and might be made the emporium for the
manufactures and agricultural productions of each; but, from the oppressive
nature of the government, the indolence of the Turks, and the degraded
state of the Greeks, those advantages are not improved, and its condition
partakes of that of the general condition of the Turkish empire.

This island was formerly famous for its hundred cities; it is distinguished
in the ancient fabulous legends for the arrival there of Europa, on a bull,
from Phoenicia; for the laws of Minos; for the labyrinth, the work of
Deedalus; and, above all, as the place where Jupiter was born and was
buried. According to the fables of mythology, he was born in a cavern
near Lyctus, or Cnosus ; was rocked in a golden cradle ; was fed with honey,
and with the milk of the goat Amalthea, while the Curetes danced around
him, clashing their arms, to prevent his cries from being heard by Saturn.
Ile became, according to the legend, the king of Crete, and was buried on
the island. See Anthon, Class. Dic., Art. Jupiter.

§ 8. The introduction of the gospel into Crete.

We have no certain information in regard to the time when the gospel was
first preached in Crete, nor by whom it was done. There are some circumstances mentioned, however, which furnish all the light which we need on this
point, in order to an understanding of the epistle before us. Among the
persons who were in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost, and who were converted there, Cretans are mentioned (Acts ii. 11); and it is highly probable
that, when they returned to their homes, they made the gospel known to
their countrymen. Yet history is wholly silent as to the method by which it
was done, and as to the result on the minds of the inhabitants. As no visit
of any of the apostles to that island is mentioned by Luke in the Acts of the
Apostles, it may be presumed that the gospel there had not produced any
very marked success ; and the early history of Christianity there is to us
unknown.

It is clear from the epistle before us (chap. i. 5), that the apostle Paul
was there on some occasion, and that the gospel, cither when he was there or
before, was attended with success. ‘“ For this cause left I thee in Crete, that
thou shouldst set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in
every city.” Here it is manifest that Paul had been there with Titus; that
he had commenced some arrangements which he had not been able himself
to complete ; and that the gospel had had an effect extensively on the island,
since he was to ordain elders ‘‘ in every city.”

It is not certainly known, however, when Paul was there. There is no
mention in the Acts of the Apostles of his having been there, except when
he was on his way to Rome (Acts xxvii. 7, 8); and this was in such circumstances as to preclude the supposition that that was the time referred

INTRODUCTION. ceelxi

to in this epistle, for (1.) Titus was not then with him; (2.) there is no
reason to suppose that he remained there long enough to preach the gospel
to any extent, or to establish churches. He was sailing to Rome as a
prisoner, and there is no probability that he would be permitted to go at
large and preach for any considerable time. There is, therefore, a moral
certainty that it must have been on some other occasion. ‘It is striking,”
says Neander (History of the Planting of the Christian Church, vol. 1, pp.
400, 401), “that while Luke in the Acts reports so fully and circumstantially the occurrences of the apostle s last voyage to Rome, and mentions
his stay in Crete, he says not a word (contrary to his usual practice in such
cases) of the friendly reception given to him by the Christians there, o1
even of his meeting them at all. Hence we may conclude that no Christian churches existed in that island, though that transient visit would
naturally give rise to the intention of planting the gospel there, which he
ee fulfilled soon after he was set at liberty, when he came into these
parts.”

There is reason to believe that Paul, after his first imprisonment at
Rome, was released, and again visited Asia Minor and Macedonia. See
Intro. to 2 Timothy. On this journey, it is not improbable that he may
have visited Crete, having, as Neander supposes, had his attention called to
this island as a desirable place for preaching the gospel, when on his way to
Rome. “If we may be allowed to suppose,” says Dr. Paley (Hor. Paul.),
“that St. Paul, after his liberation at Rome, sailed into Asia, taking Crete
in his way; that from Asia, and from Ephesus, the capital of that country,
he proceeded into Macedonia, and, crossing the peninsula in his progress,
came into the neighbourhood of Nicopolis, we have a route which falls in with
everything. It executes the intention expressed by the apostle of visiting
Colosse and Philippi, as soon as he should be set at liberty at Rome. It
allows him to leave ‘ Titus at Crete,’ and ‘Timothy at Ephesus, as he went
into Macedonia,’ and to write to both, not long after, from the peninsula of
Greece, and probably from the neighbourhood of Nicopolis, thus bringing
together the dates of these two letters’ (1 Tim. and Titus), ‘and thereby
accounting for that affinity between them, both in subject and language,
which our remarks have pointed out. I confess that the journey which we
have thus traced out for St. Paul is in a great measure hypothetic ; but it
should be observed that it is a species of consistency which seldom belongs
to falsehood, to admit of an hypothesis which includes a great number of
remote and independent circumstances without contradiction.” See Neander,
Ilistory of the Planting of the Churches, i.401. Comp., however, Intro. to
1 Tim., § 2.

Why i left Crete without completing the work which was to be
done, and especially without ordaining the elders himself, is not certainly
known. There is evidently a striking resemblance between the circumstances which induced him to leave Titus there, and those which existed
at Ephesus when he left Timothy there to complete an important work ;
1 Tim. i. 3,4. We know that Paul was driven away from Ephesus before
he had finished the work there which he had purposed to accomplish (Acts
xix., xx. 1); and it is not at all improbable that some such disturbance
took place in Crete. Comp. Koppe, Proleg. p. 194. When he thus left, he
committed to Titus the work which he had designed to accomplish, with
instructions to finish it as soon as possible, and then to come to him at
Nicopolis; chap. iii. 12.

§ 4. The place, time, and occasion of writing the epistle.

There has been much diversity of opinion as to the time and place of writing
this epistle.

celxil INTRODUCTION.

n regard to the place, there can be little doubt that it was at a Niconolis ; for the mite in chap. iii. 12, directs Titus to come to him at that
place. But it is not easy to determine what Nicopolis is meant, for there
were many cities of that name. The person who affixed the subscription
at the end of the epistle, affirms that it was “ Nicopolis of Macedonia ;
but, as has been frequently remarked in these Notes, these subscriptions
are of no authority, The name Nicopolis (meaning, properly, a city of
victory--vixn and xéaus) was given to several places. There was a city of
this name in Thrace, on the river Nessus, now called Nikopi. _ There was
also a city of the same name in Epirus, two in Mesia, another in Armenia,
another in Cilicia, and another in Egypt, in the vicinity of Alexandria. It
is by no means easy to ascertain which of these cities is meant, though, as
Paul was accustomed to travel in Greece and Asia Minor, there seems to be
a probability that one of those cities is intended. The only way of determining this with any degree of probability, is, to ascertain what city was
best known by that name at the time when the epistle was written, or what
city one would be likely to go to, if he were directed to go to Nicopolis,
without any further specification--as if one were directed to go to Philadelphia, London, or Rome. In such a case, he would go to the principal
city of that name, though there might be many other smaller places of that
name also. But even this would not be absolutely certain, for Paul may
have specified to Titus the place where he expected to go before he left him,
so that he would be in no danger of doubt where the place was. But if
we were to allow this consideration to influence us in regard to the place,
there can be little doubt that the city which he meant was Nicopolis in Epirus,
and the common opinion has been that the apostle alludes to this city. This
Nicopolis was situated in Epirus, in Greece, north-west of Corinth and
Athens, on the Ambracian gulf, and near its mouth. See the Map prefixed
to the Acts of the Apostles. On the same gulf, and directly opposite to
Nicopolis, is Actium, the place where Augustus achieved a signal victory
over Mark Antony; andthe city of Nicopolis he built in honour of that victory,
Augustus was anxious to raise this city to the highest rank among the cities
of Greece, and caused games to be celebrated there, with great pomp, every
few years. Ilaving afterwards fallen into decay, the city was restored by
the emperor Julian. Modern travellers describe the remains of Nicopolis
as very extensive ; the site which they now occupy is called Prevesa Vecchia.
See Anthon’s Class. Dic. It should be said, however, that there is no
absolute certainty about the place where the epistle was written. Macknight
and Benson suppose it was at Colosse ; Lardner supposes it was in or near
Macedonia ; Hug, at Ephesus.

If the epistle was written from the Nicopolis referred to, then it was
probably after Paul’s first imprisonment at Rome. If so, it was written
about the year 63 or 64. But there is great diversity of opinion as to the
time. Lardner and Hug place it in the year 56. It is of no material importance to be able to determine the exact time.

The occasion on which it was written is specified by the apostle himself,
with such clearness, that there can be no doubt on that point. Paul had
left Titus in Crete, to “set in order the things which were wanting, and to
ordain elders in every city” (chap. i. 5); and as he had himself, perhaps,
been called to leave suddenly, it was important that Titus should have
more full instructions than he had been able to give him on various points
of duty, or, at any rate, that he should have permanent instructions to which
he could refer. The epistle is occupied, therefore, mainly with such counsels
as were appropriate to a minister of the gospel engaged in the duties which
Titus was left to discharge.

The principal difficulties which it was apprehended Titus would meet with
in the performance of his duties there, and which in fact made his Jabours

INTRODUCTION. eclxiii

there desirable, arose from two sources : (1.) the character of the Cretans
themselves ; and (2.) the influence of Judaizing teachers.

(1.) The character of the Cretans themselves was such as to demand
the vigilance and care of Titus. They were a people characterized for
insincerity, falsehood, and gross living; chap. i.12. There was great danger, therefore, that their religion would be hollow and insincere, apd great
need of caution lest they shouid be corrupted from the simplicity and purity
required in the gospel ; chap. i. 13.

(2.) The influence of Judaizing teachers was to be guarded against. It
is evident from Acts ii. 11, that there were Jews residing there; and it is
probable that it was by those who had gone from that island to Jerusalem to
attend the feast of the Pentecost, and who had been converted on that
occasion, that the gospel was first introduced there. From this epistle, also,
it is clear that one of the great dangers to piety in the churches of Crete,
arose from the efforts of such teachers, and from the plausible arguments
which they would use in favour of the Mosaic law ; see chap. i. 10, 14--16;
ili. 9. ‘lo counteract the effect of their teaching, it was necessary to have
ministers of the gospel appointed in every important place, who should be
qualified for their work. ‘To make these arrangements, was the great design
for which Titus was left there; and to give him full information as to the
kind of ministers which was needed, this epistle was written.

There is a very striking resemblance between this epistle and the first
epistle to Timothy. See Paley’s Hore Pauline. ‘Both letters were addressed to persons left by the writer to preside in their respective churches
during his absence. Both letters are principally occupied in describing the
qualifications to be sought for in those whom they should appoint to offices
in the church ; and the ingredients of this description are, in both letters,
nearly thesame. Timothy and Titus, likewise, are cautioned against the same
prevailing corruptions, and, in particular, against the same misdirection of their
cares and studies.’”’ Paley. This similarity is found, not only in the general
structure of the epistles, but also in particular phrases and expressions ; comp
1 Tim. i. 2, 3, with Titus i. 4, 5; 1-Tim.i. 4, with Titus i. 14, iii. 9; 1 Tim.
iv. 12, with Titus iii. 7, and ii. 15; 1 Tim. iii. 2--4, with Titus i. 6B--8.,

It is evident, from this, that the epistles were written by the same person, and to those who were in substantially the same circumstances. They
are incidental proofs that they are genuine, and were written by the person, and to the persons, whose names appear, and on the occasions which
are said in the epistle to have existed. On the subjects in this introduction,
the reader may consult Macknight’s Introduction to the Epistle; Michaelis’s
Introduction; Benson, Koppe, and especially Paley’s Hora Paulings--a
work which will never be consulted without profit.

7 tie - < c--
ee bay ; dae = r
~ »< tage yy PACLEA rid aa i,
ony ee wy? a ee ot ee A, eth : % =
: ' --- * < - Snir het a ©: "ee rethe | Chal cae p> as 4
ae 8 epee | mio ere al i r wad a =a

2 fe an se Macks be i ; neh e has AT Srey ‘an aes
= ae a A ae py avg i; Aart Ty te ve

Delia mw Uv i ie et, pe

bi bantt ais 1a, 26 OF Pi ee

* stat a S

b q Aisirite a £ "4 on. 2 a
= nee ce a ivi pt @ fies ant wh ‘dupe 7 i
Boe me ot
So) hyiuls aw Yell i » ee pies pel | ay Pals] j Puljng
If a etait. ms tient duggiin dtl sl pris vo
fotad ng » , 1% LS Fret AGB PP avy Ph s ae y ~, it wie : al :
bow; (o@ Sey ge £4. Bie the le pre. wven iit ee ih o hi

re. CAPR wwe Ds sn it, 4 Tho soe Bs, Ji be of ae? qughagial tee

° a 7 7 mathe #0 Bee «©

77:3 te: yoohes! by che apostle’ Himes lt:
balou ae threw © wb dorht 40 Lesh pote Paul head
;, cfiet tie (hinge mili ave wanking, woh 4
mm se 8 - he home Mf, Per Tings,
a aa tsq whantd haye
» wart iuya pointe

: ig hiek>

gy naires: te

AUL, a servant of God, and
an apostle of Jesus Christ,
according to the faith of God’s

This chapter embraces the following points :--

1. The usual inscription and salutation; ver. 1--4. In this Paul declares himself to be the author of the
epistle, and asserts in the strongest
manner his claims to the apostleship.
Me alludes to the great cause in which,
as an apostle, he was engaged--as
acting under the eternal plan of God
for the salvation of the elect, and appointed to communicate the glorious
truths of that system which had been
now revealed-to mankind. The object
of this seems to be to impress the
mind of Titus with his right to give
him instruction.

2. A statement of the object for
which Titus had been left in Crete,
and the general character of the work
which he was to perform there; ver. 5.

3. The qualifications of those who
were to be ordained to the ministry ;
ver. 6--9. The characteristics laid
down are substantially the same as in
1 Tim. iii.

4, Reasong for great caution and
prudence in thus appointing elders
over the churches; ver, 10--13.
Those reasons arose from the character of the Cretans. There were
many deceivers there, and the character of the Cretans was such that
there was great danger that they who
professed to be Christians would be
hypocritical, and if put into the eldership that they would do great injury
to the cause.

5.-A solemn charge to Titus to

elect, and the acknowledging % of
the truth which ® is after godliNess ;

@ 2 Ti,2.25. 6 1 Ti.6.3.

rebuke them faithfully for their prevailing and characteristic vices, and
to avoid giving any countenance to
that for which they were so much
distinguished ; ver. 13--16.

1. Paul, a servant of God, and an
apostle of Jesus Christ; see Notes,
Rom. i. 1; comp. Notes, 1 Cor. ix. 1
--)5. YF According to the faith of
God’s elect ; comp. Notes, Rom. viii.
33) Epi 4 2 lim. i l0s the
meaning of the word rendered here,
“according to’’--xuzra--is, probably,
with reference to ; that is, he was appointed to be an apostle with respect
to the faith of those whom God had
chosen, or, zz order that they might
be led to believe the gospel. God had
chosen them to salvation, but he intended that it should be in connection
with their believing, and, in order to
that, he had appointed Paul to be an
apostle that he might go and make
known to them the gospel. It is the
purpose of God to save his people,
but he does not mean to save themas
infidels, or unbelievers. He intends
that they shall be believers first--and
hence he sends his ministers that
they may become such. {J And the
acknowledging of the truth. Inorder
to secure the acknowledgment or recognition of the truth. ‘The object
of the apostleship, as it is of the
ministry in general, is to secure the
proper acknowledgment of the truth
among men. ¥ Which is after godliness. Which tends to promote piety
towards God. On the word rendered
godliness, see Notes on 1 Tim. 11. 2;
‘iii. 16.--The truth, the acknowledg2! In hope of eternal life, which
God, that “cannot lie, promised
before © the world began ;

8 But ¢ hath in due times manifested his word through preaching, 4 which iscommitted unto me,
according to the commandment of
God our Saviour ;

1 or, For. a1Sa.15.29. b Mat.25.34.

4 To Titus, mine own son @ after
the common faith : Grace, mercy,
and peace, from God the Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ our
Saviour.

5 For this cause i«ft i thee in
Crete, that thou shouldest set in

c2 Ti.1.10; He.6.18. d Ro.10.14,15.
Gi Swill.

ment of which Paul was appointed to
secure, was not scientific, historical,
or political truth : it was that of religion--that which was adapted to lead
men toa holy life, and to prepare them
for a holy heaven.

2. In hope of eternal life. Marg.,
for. Gy.,’Ex’ tawids. This does not
mean that Paul cherished the hope of
eternal life, but that the “ faith of the
elect,’’ which he aimed to secure, was
in order that men might have the hope
of eternal life. The whole system
which he was appointed to preach was
designed to secure to man a wellfounded hope of salvation; comp.
Notes, 2 Tim.i. 10. § Which God,
that cannot lie. On the phrase “ cannot lie,’ see Notes on Heb. vi. 13.
The fact that God cannot lie; that it
is his nature alwaysto speak the truth ;
and that no circumstances can ever
occur in which he will depart from it,
is the foundation of all our hopes of
salvation, { Promised. The only
hope of salvation is in the promise of
God. It is only as we can have evidence that he has assured us that we
may be saved, that we are autherized
to cherish any hope of salvation. That
promise is not made to us as individuals, or by name, but it becomes ours,
(1.) because he has made a general
promise that they who repent and
believe shall be saved; and (2.) because we may have evidence that we
have repented, and do believe the gospel. If this be so, we fairly come
under the promise of salvation, and
may apply it to ourselves. {| Before
the world began. That is,the purpose

be considered as in fact then made ;--
for a purpose in the mind of God,
though it is not as yet made known,

t | away by important duties demanding
is equivalent to a promise; comp. |

Notes on Matt. xxv. 34; 2 Tim. i. 9. ' be determined.

3. But hath in due times. At the
proper time ; the time which he had
intended ; the best time: see Notes
on 1 Tim. ii. 6 ; comp. Notes on Matt.
ii. 2. J Manifested his word through
preaching ; see Notes on 2 Tim. ii
10. The meaning here is, that he
has made known his eternal purpose
through the preaching of the gospel ;
comp. Notes on Rom. x. 14, 15.
{ Which is committed unto me. Not
exclusively, but in common with
others ; see Notes on 2 Tim. i. 11.
¥ According to the commandment of
God our Saviour. Paul always
claimed to be divinely commissioned,
and affirmed that he was engaged in
the work of preaching by the authority
of God ; see Gal.1. 1--11, 12; 1 Cor.
i. 1; Rom. i. 1--4.

4. To Titus; see the Intro. $ 1.
{ Mine own son ; Notes, 1 Tim. i. 2.
| After the common faith, The faith
of all Christians ;--equivalent to saying ‘‘my son in the gospel.’ That,
is, Paul had been the means of converting him by preaching that gospel which was received by all who
were Christians. {| Grace, mercy,
aN peace, &c.; see Notes on Rom,
eevee

5. For this cause left I thee in Crete;
comp. Notes, 1 Tim. i. 8. On the
situation of Crete, see the Intro. § 2,
q That thou shouldest set in order the
things that are wanting. Marg., left
undone. The Greek is, ‘the things
that are left; that is, those which
were left unfinished ; referring, doubtless, to arrangements which had been

| commenced, but which for some cause
was then formed, and the promise may |

had been left incomplete. Whether
this had occurred because he had been
driven away by persecution, or called
his attention elsewhere, cannot now
The word rendered

order @ the things that are ! want-

@ 1 Co.11.34. 1 or, left undone.
b Ac.14.23; 2 Ti.2.2.

‘set in order ’--ixidi0p9cicn--occurs
nowhere else in the New Testament.
It means, properly, to make straight
upon, and then to put further to rights,
to arrange further, Robinson, Lex,
--There were things left unfinished
which he was to complete. One of
these things, and perhaps the principal, was, to appoint elders in the
various cities where the gospel had
been preached. ¥ Andordain. The
word ordain has now acquired a technical signification which it cannot be
shown that it has in the New Testament. It means, in common usage, to
‘invest with a ministerial function or
sacerdotal power ; to introduce, and
establish, and settle in the pastoral
office with the customary forms and
solemnities ” (Webster) ; and it may
be added, with the idea always connected with it, of the imposition of
hands. But the word used here does
not necessarily convey this meaning,
or imply that Titus was to go through
what would now be called an ordination service. It means to set, place,
or constitute ; then, to set over any
thing, as a steward or other officer
(see Matt, xxiv. 45; Luke xii. 42;
Acts vi. 3), though without reference
to any particular mode of investment
with an office ; see the word, ordain,
explained in the Notes on Acts i. 22;
xiv. 23. Titus was to appoint or set
them over the churches, though with
what ceremonyisnowunknown. There
is no reason to suppose that he did
this except as the result of the choice
of the people ; comp. Notes on Acts
vi. 8. ( Eiders. Gr., Presbyters ;
see the word explained in the Notes
on Acts xiy. 23. These elders, or
Presbyters, were also called bishops
(comp. Notes on 1 Tim. iii, 1), for
Paul immediately, in describing their
qualifications, calls them bishops :--
‘‘ordain elders in every city--if any
be blameless--ror a bishop must be
blameless,’ &c. If the elders and
bishops in the times of the apostles

were of different ranks, this direction ,
would be wholly unmeaning. It would '
ing, and ordain % elders in every
city as I had appointed thee:

be the same as if the following direction were given to one who was authorized to appoint officers over an army:
“Appoint captains over each com

pany, who shall be of good character,
and acquainted with military tactics,
For @ brigadier-General must be ot
good character, and acquainted with
the rules of war.’’--That the same rank
is denoted also by the terms Presbyter
and Bishop here, is further apparent
because the qualifications which Paul
states as requisite for the “bishop ”
are not those which pertain to a prelate or a diocesan bishop, but to one
who was a pastor of a church, or an
evangelist. It is clear, from ver. 7,
that those whom Titus was to appoint
were “‘ bishops,’”’ and yet it is absurd
to suppose that the apostle meant
prelatical bishops, for no one can believe that such bishops were to be
appointed in “every city” of the
island. According to all modern
notions of Episcopacy, one such bishop
would have been enough for such an
island as Crete, and indeed it has been
not unfrequently maintained that Titus
himself was in fact the bishop of that
diocese. But if these were not prelates who were to be ordained by
Titus, then it is clear that the term
“bishop” in the New Testament is
given to the Presbyters or elders ;
that is, to all ministers of the gospel.
That usage should never have been
departed from. § In every city. Crete
was anciently celebrated for the number of its cities. In one passage
Tlomer ascribes to the island an hundred cities (Jl. ii. 649), in another
ninety (Od. xix. 174). It may be
presumed that many of these cities
were towns of no very considerable
size, and yet it would seem probable
that each one was large enough to
have a church, and to maintain the
gospel. Paul, doubtless, expected
that Titus would travel over the whole
island, and endeavour to introduce the
gospel in every important place,
{ As Thad appointed thee. As I commanded thee, or gave thee direction
6 If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful
children, not accused of riot, or
unruly.

7 For a bishop # must be blamea 11.3.2, &e.

--deratcunv.--This is a different word
from the one used in the former part
of the verse,--and rendered ordain--
xadicrnus. It does not mean that
Titus was to ordain elders in the same
manner as Paul had ordained him, but
that he was to set them over the cities
as he had directed him to do. He had,
doubtless, given him oral instructions,
when he left him, as to the way in
which it was to be done.

6. Tf any be blameless, the husband
of one wife; Notes, 1 Tim. iii. 2.
{| Having faithful children; Notes, 1
Tim. iii. 4,5. Thatis, having a family
well-governed, and well-trained in religion. The word here--sicra--applied to the children, and rendered
faithful, does not necessarily mean
that they should be truly pious, but it
is descriptive of those who had been
well-trained, and were in due subordination. Ifa man’s family were not
of his character--if his children were
insubordinate, and opposed to religion
--if they were decided infidels or scoffers, it would show that there was such
a deficiency in the head of the family
that he could not be safely intrusted
with the government of the church;
comp. Notes on 1 Tim. iii. 5. It is
probably true, also, that the preachers
at that time would be selected, as far
as practicable, from those whose families were all Christians. There might
be great impropriety in placing a man
over a church, a part of whose family
were Jews or heathens. ¥ Not accused
of riot. That is, whose children were
not accused of riot. This explains

rendered riot--acwria--is translated
excess in Eph. v. 18, and riot in Tit.
i.6; 1 Pet. iv. 4. It does not elsewhere occur in the New Testament,

Luke xv. 13; see it explained in the
Notes on Eph. v.18. The meaning
here is, that they should not be justly
accused of this; this should not be

lA. D. 64.

less, as the steward of God; not
self-willed, not soon angry, not
given to wine, no striker, not given
to filthy lucre;

8 But a lover of hospitality, a

their character. It would, doubtless,
be a good reason now why a man
should not be ordained to the ministry
that he had a dissipated and disorderly
family. §| Or unruly. Insubordinate; ungoverned; see Notes, 1 Tim
i. 9; and ili. 4.

". For a bishop must be blameless;
1 Tim. iii. 2. § As the steward of
God; see Notes, 1 Cor. iv.1,2. A
man, in order to perform the duties of
such an office, should be one against
whom no accusation could lie. 4] Not
self-willed; comp. 2 Pet. ii. 10. The
word--aiSadns---does not elsewhere
occur in the New Testament. It
means, properly, self-complacent; and
then, assuming. arrogant, imperious ;
Rob. Lex.--TVhe gist of the offence--
the very “head and front’’--is that of
being self-complacent; a trait of character which, of necessity, makes a man
imperious, dogmatical, impatient of
contradiction, and unyielding. Such

|a man, evidently, is not fit for the

office of a minister of the gospel. 4 Not
soon angry; see Notes, 1 Tim. ili. 2,
and the margin there. J Not given
to wine; Notes, 1 Tim. iii. 38. § No

| striker; Notes, 1 Tim. iii. 8. J Not
given to filthy lucre.

Ingle Tims itis
“Not greedy of filthy lucre.’ The
same Greek word is used.

8. But alover of hospitality; Notes,
1 Tim. iii. 2. § A lover of good men;
Marg., ‘or things.” The Greek
(QiAdyaSos) means, a lover of good,
and may apply to any thing that is
good. It may refer to good men, as

‘ Included under the general term good;
what is meant by faithful. The word

and there is no more essential qualification of a bishop than this. A man
who sustains the office of a minister of
the gospel, should love every good

; object, and be ever ready to promote
though the word riotows is found in |

it; and he should love every good
man, no matter in what denomination
or country he may be found--no matter what his complexion, and no matter what his rank in life; comp. Notes

holy, temperate;

9 Holding fast the faithful word,
2as he hath been taught, that he
may be able by sound doctrine both
to exhort and to convince the gain-

sayers.

lor, things. @2Th.2.15. 2 or, in teaching.
on Phil. iv. 8. f Sober; Notes, 1
Tim. i. 2. { Just. Upright in his

dealings with all. A minister can do
little good who is not; comp. Notes on
Phil. iv. 8. Holy. Pious, or devout. Faithful in all his duties to
God; Notes, 1 Tim. ii. 8. [ Zemperate. eyxpatj. Having power or control over all his passions. We apply
the term, now, with reference to abstinence from intoxicating liquors. In
the Scriptures, it includes not only
that, but also much more. It implies
control over all our passions and appetites. See it explained in the Notes
on Acts xxiv. 25; comp. 1 Cor. vii. 9;
rbies Hijau Cru pws

9. Holding fast the faithful word.
That is, the true doctrines of the gospel. This means that he is to hold
this fast, in opposition to one who
would wrest it away, and in opposition
to all false teachers, and to all systems of false philosophy. He must be
a man who is firm in his belief of the
doctrines of the Christian faith, and
aman who can be relied on to maintain and defend those doctrines in all
circumstances; comp. Notes, 2 Thess.
ii. 15. { As he hath been taught.
Marg., in teaching. Gr. ‘‘ According
to the teaching.” The sense is, ac-

cording to that doctrine as taught by '

the inspired teachers of religion. It
does not mean as he had individually
been taught; but he was to hold the
faith as it was delivered by those whom
the Saviour had appointed to make it
known to mankind. The phrase ‘‘the
doctrine,” or ‘‘the teaching,” had a
sort of technical meaning, denoting
the gospel as that which had been
communicated to mankind, not by
human reason, but by teaching. J That
he may be able by sound doctrine. By
sound teaching, or instruction; Notes,
1 Tim. i. 10; iv. 16. He was not to
dictate, or to denounce; but to seek to

lover of good ! men, sober, just, |
10 For there are many unruly
and vain talkers 8 and deceivers,
specially they of the circumcision:

11 Whose mouths must be
stopped; who subvert © whole

houses, teaching things which
b Ja.1.26. ¢ Mat.23.14.

convince by the statement of the
truth; see Notes, 2 Tim. li. 25.--
{| Both to exhort and to convince.
To persuade them, or to bring them
over to your views by kind exhortation, and by the instruction which
shall convince. The former method
is to be used where men know the
truth, but need encouragement to follow it; the latter, where they are ignorant, or are opposed to it. Both
exhortation and argument are to be
used by the ministers of religion.
{| The gainsayers. Opposers. Literally, those who speak against ; that is,

| against the truth; Notes, Rom. x. 21.

10. For there are many unruly and
vain talkers and deceivers. There are
many persons who are indisposed to
submit to authority (see the word
unruly in ver. 6); many who are vain
talkers--who are more given to talk
than to the duties of practical religion
(see the character of “ Talkative,” in
the Pilgrim’s Progress); and many who
live to deceive others under the mask
of religion. They make great pretensions to piety; they are fluent in argument, and they urge their views in a
plausible manner. § Specially they
of the circumcision. Jews, spoken of
here as ‘‘of the circumcision” particularly, because they urged the necessity of circumcision in order that men
might be saved; Notes, Acts xv. l.
This proves that there were not a few
Jews in the island of Crete.

11. Whose mouths must be stopped.
The word here rendered stopped--
toi rouiCeiv--occurs nowhere else inthe
New Testament. It means, properly,

'to check, or curb, as with a bridle; to

restrain, or bridle in; and then, to put
to silence. It is, of course, implied
here that this was to be done in a proper way, and in accordance with the
spirit of the gospel. The apostle
gives Timothy no czvil power to do it,

they ought not, for filthy lucre’s| prophet of their own, said, The

sake.

Cretians are alwaystiars, evil beasts,

12 One 4 of themselves, even a, slow bellies.

@ Ac.17.28.

aor does he direct him to call in the
aid of the civilarm. All the agency
which he specifies as proper for this,
is that of argument and exhortation.
These are the proper means of silencing the advocates of error; and the
history of the church shows that the
ministers of religion can be safely intrusted with no other ; comp. Ps. xxx.
8,9. § Who subvert whole houses.
Whole families ; comp. Matt. xxii. 14;
2 Tim. iii. 6. Thatis, they turn them
aside from the faith. § Teaching thinis
which they ought not, for filthy lucre’s
sake. For gain. That is, they inculcate such doctrines as will make theinselves popular, and as will give them
access to the confidence of the people.
They make it their first object to acquire influence as ministers of religion, and then abuse that in order to
obtain money from the people. This
they would doubtless do under many
pretences; such as that it was needful
for the support of the gospel, or for the
relief of the poor, or perhaps for the
assistance of distant Christians in
persecution. Religion is the most
powerful principle that ever governs
the mind; and if a man has the control of that, it is no difficult thing to
induce men to give up their worldly
possessions. In all ages, there have
been impostors who have taken advantage of the powerful principle of religion to obtain money from their deluded followers. No people can be too
vigilant in regard to pretended religious teachers; and while it is undoubtedly their duty to contribute
liberally for the support of the gospel,
and the promotion of every good cause,
it is no less their duty to examine
with care every proposed object of
benevolence, and to watch with an
eagle eye those who have the disbursement of the charities of the
church. It is very rare that ministers
ought to have much to do with disposing of the funds given for benevolent purposes; and when they do, they
should in aJl cases be associated with

their lay brethren; see Paley’s Hore
Pauline, chap. iv., No. 1, 3, note;
comp 1 Cor. xvi. 8. On the phrase
“filthy lucre,’’ see Notes, 1 Tim. iii. 3.

12. One of themselves. That is, one
of the Cretans. The quotation here
shows that Paul had his eye not only
on the Jewish teachers there, but on
the native Cretans. The meaning is,
that, alike in reference to Jewish
teachers and native-born Cretans,
there was need of the utmost vigilance
in the selection of persons for the
ministry. They all had well-known
traits of character, which made it
proper that no one should be introduced into the ministry without extreme caution. It would seem, also,
from the reasoning of Paul here, that
the trait of character here referred to
pertained not only to the native Cretans, but also to the character of the
Jews residing there; for he evidently
means that the caution should extend
to all who dwelt on the island. 4 Even
a prophet of their own. Or, a poet;
for the word prophet--sreoonrns--iike
the Latin word vates, was often applied to poets, because they were supposed to be inspired of the muses, or
to write under the influence of inspiration. So Virgil, Ecl. 9.382: Et me
fecere poetam Pierides . .. me quoque
dicunt vatem pastores. Varro, Ling.
Lat. 6.3: Vates poeta dicti sunt. The
term prophet was also given by the
Greeks to one who was regarded as the
interpreter of the gods, or who explained the obscure responses of the
oracles. As such an interpreter--as
one who thus saw future events, he
was called a prophet; and as the poets
claimed much of this kind of knovyledge, the name was given to them. It
was also given to one who was regarded
as eminently endowed with wisdom,
or who had that kind of sagacity by
which the results of present conduct
might be foreseen, as if he was under
the influence of a kind of inspiration.
The word might have been applied to
the person here referred to-- Epime-

nides--in this latter sense, because he |
was eminently endowed with wisdom.
He was one of the seven wise men of |
Greece. He was a contemporary of}
Solon, and was born at Pheestus, in
the island of Crete, B.C. 659, and is
said to have reached the age of 157 |
years. Many marvellous tales are |
told of him (see Anthon, Class. Dic.)
which are commonly supposed to be
fabulous, and which are to be traced
to the invention of the Cretans. The
event in his life which is best known
is, that he visited Athens, at the request of the inhabitants, to prepare
the way by sacrifices for the introduction of the laws of Solon. He was
supposed to have intercourse with the
gods, and it was presumed that a pe- |
culiar sacredness would attend the religious services in which he officiated.
On this account, also, as well as because he was a poet, the name prophet
may have been given him. Feuds and.
animosities prevailed at Athens, which
it was supposed such aman might allay,
and thus prepare them for the reception of the lawsof Solon. The Athenians wished to reward him with |
wealth and public honours ; but he refused to accept of any remuneration,
and only demanded a branch of the
sacred olive tree, and a decree of perpetual friendship between Athens and
his native city. After his death, divine
honours were paid to him by the Cretans. He wrote a poem on the Argonautic expedition, and other poems,
which are now entirely lost. The
quotation here is supposed to be made
from a treatise on oracles and responses, which is also lost. The Cretians
are always liars. This character of
the Cretans is abundantly sustained |
by the examples adduced by Wetstein.
To be a Cretan, became synonymous
with being a liar, in the same way as
to be a Corinthian, became synonymous with living a licentious life ;
comp. Intro. to 1 Cor.,§1. Thus the
scholiast Says, Teapot tors TO xeonricey
ix) cov Wevder9ai--to act the Cretan, ts |

a proverb for to lie. The particular
reason why they had this character |
abroad, rather than other people, is
anknown. Bishop Warburton supposes that they acquired it by claiming
to have among them the tomb of Jupiter, and by maintaining that all the
gods, like Jupiter, were only mortals
who had been raised to divine honours.
Thus the Greeks maintained that they
always proclaimed a falsehood by asserting this opinion. But their reputation for falsehood seems to have
arisen from some deeper cause than
this, and to have pertained to their
general moral character. They were
only more eminent in what was common among the ancient heathen, and
what is almost universal among the
heathen now; comp. Notes on Eph.
iv. 25. QJ Evil beasts. In their char
acter, beasts or brutes of a ferocious
or malignant kind. This would imply
that there was a great want of civilization, and that their want of refinement was accompanied with what commonly exists in that condition--the
unrestrained indulgence of wild and
ferocious passions. See examples of
the same manner of speaking of barbarous and malicious men in Wetstein. § Slow bellies. Mere gormandizers. Two vices seem here to
be attributed to them, which indeed
commonly go together--gluttony and
sloth. An industrious man will not be
likely to be a gormandizer, and a gor-

| mandizer will not often be an indus-

trious man. ‘The mind of the poet, in
this, seems to have conceived of them
first as an indolent, worthless people ;
and then immediately to have recurred
to the cause--that they were a race of
gluttons, a people whose only concern
was the stomach ; comp. Phil. iui. 19.
On the connection between gluttony
and sloth, see the examples in Wetstein. Seldom have more undesira-

le, and, in some respects, incongruous qualities, been grouped together
in describing any people, They were
false to a proverb, which was, indeed,
consistent enough with their being
ferocious--though ferocious and wild
nations are sometimes faithful to their
word ; but they were at the same time
ferocious and lazy, fierce and gluttonous--qualities which are not often
found together. In some respects,
| therefore, they surpassed the common
| depravity of human nature, and blended
‘in themselves ignoble properties which,
13 This witness is true. Wherefore rebuke them @ sharply ; that
they may be sound in the faith.

14 Not giving heed to Jewish!

a27Ti.4.2.

'
|

MApiGe

fables, & and commaudiments of men
that turn from the truth.
15 Unto ¢ the pure all things arc
pure: but unto them that are defiled
b1Ti.1.4. ¢ Ro.14.14,20.

among the worst people, are usually
found existing alone. ‘To mingle apparently contradictory qualities of
wickedness in the same individual or
people, is the height of depravity ; as
to blend in the same mind apparently
inconsistent traits of virtuous character, or those which exist commonly,
in their highest perfection, only alone,
is the highest virtue.

13. This witness is true. That is,
this testimony long before borne by
one of their own number, was true
when the apostle wrote to Titus. The
fact that this was the general character of the people, was a reason why he
should be on his guard in introducing
men into the ministry, and in the arrangement of affairs pertaining to the
church. That it was true, see proofs
in Wetstein. § Wherefore rebuke
them. Notes, 2 Tim. iv. 2. § Sharply.
anroriums --cuttingly, severely --from
arortuyw, to cut of. ‘The word is used
here in the sense of severity, meaning
that the reproof should be such as
would be understood, and would show
them plainly the wickedness of such
traits of character. He was not to
be mealy-mouthed, but he was to call
things by their right names, and not
to spare their faults. When men
know that they are doing wrong, we
shoud tell them so in few words; if
they do not know it, it is necessary to
teach them, in order to convince them
of their error. § That they may be
sound in the faith. That they may
not allow the prevailing vices to corrupt their views of religion.

14. Not giving heed to Jewish fables,
d&c.; see Notes, 1 Tim. i. 4. J And
commandments of men that turn from
the truth; Notes, Matt. xv. 3--5.

15. Unto the pure all things are
pure; see Notes on Rom. xiv. 14, 20.
There is probably an allusion here to
the distinctions made in respect to
meats and drinks among the Jews.
Some articles of food were regarded
as “clean,” or allowed to be eaten,

and some as “unclean,” or forbidden.
Paulsaysthat those distinctions ceased
under the Christian dispensation, and
that to those who had a conscience
not easily troubled by nice and delicate questions about ceremonial observances, all kinds of food might be
regarded as lawful and proper ; comp,
Notesse 12 Timaeiva 450 62 eli gaseman
habitually maintains a good conscience
in the sight of God, it will be accepted
of him whether he do or do not abstain from certain kinds of food;
comp. Notes on Col. ii. 16. This
passage, therefore, should not be interpreted as proving that all things
are right and lawful for a Christian,
or that whatever he may choose to do
will be regarded as pure, but as primarily referring to distinctions in
food, and meaning that there was no
sanctity in eating one kind of food,
and no sin in another, but that the
mind was equally pure whatever was
eaten. The phrase has a proverbial
cast, though I know not that it was soe
used. The principle of the declaration is, that a pure mind--a truly
pious mind--will not regard the distinctions of food and drink; of festivals, rites, ceremonies, and days, as
necessary to be observed in order to
promote its purity. The conscience
is not to be burdened and enslaved by
these things, but is to be controlled
only by the moral laws which God has
ordained. But there may be a somewhat higher application of the words
--that every ordinance of religion,
every command of God, every event
that occurs in divine Providence,
tends to promote the holiness of one
who is of pure heart. He can see a
sanctifying tendency in everything,
and can derive from all that is commanded, and all that occurs, the
means of making the heart more holy.
While a depraved mind will turn every
such thing to a pernicious use, and
make it the means of augmenting its
malignity and corruption, to the pure

and unbelieving zs nothing pure ;
but even their mind and conscience
is defiled.

16 They profess ¢ that they know |

God; but in works they deny him,
‘being abominable, and disobedient,
‘and unto every good work ! reprobate.

lor, void of judgment.

mind it willbe the means of increasing |

its confidence in God, and of making
itself more holy. To such a mind
everything may become a means of
grace. But unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure.
Everything is made the means of increasing their depravity. No matter
what ordinances of religion they observe; what distinctions of meats, or
drinks, or days they regard, and what
events of Providence occur, all are
the occasion of augmented depravity.
Such distinctions in food they make
the means of fostering their pride and
producing self-righteousness; the mercies of God they abuse to pamper
their own lusts, and the afflictive
events of divine Providence they make
the occasion of murmuring and rebellion. Naturally corrupt at heart,
no ordinances of religion, and no
events of Providence, make them any
better, but all tend to deepen their
depravity. A sentiment similar to
this is found-in the classic writers.
Thus Seneca, Epis. 98. Malus animus omnia in malum vertit, etiam
que specie optimi venerunt. So
again (de Beneficiis v. 12), Quemadmodum stomachus morbo vitiatus, et
colliques bilem, quoscunque acceperit
cibos mutat --ita animus cecus, quicquid illi commiseris, id onus suum et
perniciem facit. {| But even their
mind and conscience is defiled. It is
not a mere external defilement--a
thing which they so much dread--but
a much worse kind of pollution, that
which extends to the soul and the
conscience. Everything which they
do tends to corrupt the inner man
more and more, and to make them
really more polluted and abominable
in the sight of God. The wicked,
while they remain impenitent, are
constantly becoming worse and worse.
They make everything the means of
increasing their depravity, and even
those things which seem to pertain
oply to outward observances are made

the occasion of the deeper corruption
of the heart.

16. They profess that they know
God. That is, the Jewish teachers
particularly, who are referred to in
ver. 14. All those persons were pro-
| fessors of religion, and claimed that
they had a peculiar knowledge of
God. {j But in works they deny him.
Their conduct is such as to show that
they have no real acquaintance with
him. Being abominable. In their
conduct. The word here used --
B3eXux70]--occurs nowhere else in the
New Testament. 1t means that which
is detestable, or to be held in abhorrence. { And disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate. Marg.,
void of judgment. On the word here
used--adoxiuos--see Notes on Rom. i.
28; 2 Cor. xiii. 5. It means here
that in reference to everything that
was good, their conduct was such that
it could not be approved, or deserved
disapprobation. It was for this
reason ; from the character of the
people of the island of Crete, and of
those who claimed to be teachers
there enforcing the obligation of the
Mosaic law, that it was so important
for Titus to exercise special care in
introducing men into the ministry,
and in completing the arrangements
contemplated in the organization of
the churches there. Yet is this character confined to them? Are there
none now who profess that they know
God, but in works deny him; whose
conduct is such that it ought to be
abhorred ; who are disobedient to the
plain commands of God, and whose
character in respect to all that pertains to true piety is to be disapproved by the truly pious, and will
be by God at the last day? Alas,
taking the church at large, there are
many such, and the fact that there
are such persons is the grand hindrance to the triumphs of religion on
theearth. ‘“ The way to heavenis blocked up by dead professors of religion.”

{
|
|
|
UT speak thou the things which
become sound doctrine:

Me DUS

2 That the aged ® men be! go.
ber, grave, temperate, sound in faith
in charity, in patience.

a Pr.16.31. 1 or, vigilant.

In the previous chapter. the apostle had directed Titus what to do in
the organization of churches in the
various cities of Crete, and had put
him on his guard in doing it, by
showing the character of the people
he had to deal with. In this chapter
he gives him various instructions as
to his own method of teaching, showing what kind of doctrines he should
inculcate, and what kind of instructions he should give to the various
classes of his hearers. He was, in
general, to speak only such things as
became sound doctrine; ver. 1. In
particular he was to instruct aged
men to be sober, grave, and temperate--acting in a manner that became
their time of life, ver. 2; the aged
women to be a proper example to the
younger females, and to exercise a
proper care over them, ver. 3--5 ;
the young men to be sober-minded,
ver.6; Titus himself, who evidently
came under the class of young men,
was to be an example to them in all
things, ver. 7, 8; and servants were to
be instructed to perform their duty to
their masters with fidelity, ver. 9, 10.
The duty of giving these instructions
is then enforced by a reference to the
nature and design of the gospel ; ver.
11--15. That grace which brings
salvation has appeared to all mankind, and its design is to make all
holy who embrace it, and to teach
all to live for a higher and a better
world,

1. But speak thou. In thine own
ministry. In the previous chapter
he had given him instructions as to
the kind of persons who were to be
put into the sacred office. Here he
gives him special instructions in regard to his own preaching. § The
things which become sound doctrine.
To wit, those which he proceeds immediately to specify. On the phrase
sound doctrine, see Notes, 1 ‘Tim. i.
10; comp. 2 Tim. iv. 3.

"2. That the aged men. All aged

men--for there is no reason to suppose that the apostle refers particularly to those who were in office, or
who were technically elders, or Presbyters. If he had, he wouldhave used the
common word--zpe0hsrspes--Presbyter
(see Matt. xv. 2; xvi. 21; xxi. 23;
DOA BH Ty eae Be AMM AG ILS hn
19; Titusi.5; James vy. 14; 1 Pet.
y. 1), instead of the unusual word--
axpiobiens --an old or aged man--a
word which occurs nowhere else in
the New Testament except in Luke
i. 18, * For Lam an old man,” and
Philem. 9, “being such an one as
Paul the aged.” It isin no instance
applied to an office. Besides, the instructions which Titus was to give to
such men was not that which peculiarly pertained to elders as officers in
the church, but to all old men. The
idea is, that he was to adapt his instructions to the peculiar character of
different classes of his hearers. ‘The
aged needed special instructions, and
so did the young. ¥ Be sober. Marg.,
vigilant. See the word explained in
the Notes on 1 Tim. iii. 2, where it is
rendered vigilant. In 1 Tim. iii. 11,
the same word is rendered sober--
{ Grave. Serious; see Notes on 1
Tim. ill. 8; comp. Notes on Phil. iv.
8, where the same word is rendered
honest. § Temperate. cadpovas. Rather, prudent, or sober-minded. See
it explained in the Notes, 1 Tim. iii,
2, where it is rendered sober. Alsu
Titus i.8. | Soundin faith; Notes,
1 Tim. i. 10; Titusi.13. J In charaty. In love; Notes, 1 Cor. xiii.
The meaning is, that an old man
should evince love for all, especially
for those who are good. He should
have overcome, at his time of life, all
the fiery, impetuous, envious, wrathful
passions of his early years, and his
mind should be subdued into sweet
benevolence to all mankind. J Jn
patience. In the infirmities of old age
--in the trials resulting from the loss
of the friends of their early years--in

3 The aged women likewise,
that they be in behaviour as becometh ! holiness, not 2 false accusers, not given to much wine,

teachers of good things ;
1 or, holy women. 2 or, make-bates,

CHAPTER Il.
4 That they may teach the
* young women to be 3 sober, to
love their husbands, to Jove their
children,

5 To be discreet, chaste, keep-

a1 Ti.5 14 3 or, wise.

their loneliness in the world, they
should show that the effect of ali God's
dealings with them has been to produce patience. The aged should submit to the trials of their advanced
years, also, with resignation--for they
will soon be over. A few more sighs,
and they will sigh no more ;a little
longer bearing up under their infirmities, and they will renew their youth
before the throne of God.

3. The aged women likewise. Not
only those who may have the office of
deaconesses, but all aged females.
§ That they be in behaviour as becometh holiness. Marg , holy women.
The Greek word is not found elsewhere in the New Testament. It
means appropriate to a sacred place
or person, or becoming to religion
Their conduct should be such as the
gospelrequires. {[ Not false accusers.
--Marg., make-bates. Gr, d:nBorov--
the word commonly applied to the
devil--as the accuser. See it explain
ed in the Notes on 1 Tim. iii. 11,
where it is rendered slanderers. 4 Not
given to much wine. Notes, 1 Tim.
3. YJ Teachers of good things. That
is instructing the younger--whether
their own children, or whether they
sustain the office of deaconness, and
are appointed to give instruction to
younger females; comp. Notes on 1
Tim. v. 2--6.

4. That they may teach the young
women to be sober. Marg., wise--a
word similar to that which in ver. 2
is rendered temperate, and in 1 Tim.
iii. 2, sober. The meaning is, that
they should instruct them to have
their desires and passions well regulated, or under proper control. § To
love their husbands, Q.rdvdpovs. This
word occurs nowhere else in the New
Testament. In Eph. v. 25, Paul directs husbands to love their wives,
and in ver. 33, the wife to reverence
her husband, and here he says that it
shouldbe one of the first duties en-

joined on the wife that she should love
her husband, All happiness in the marriage relation is based on mutual love.
When that departs, happiness departs,
No wealth or splendour in a dwelling
--no gorgeousness of equipage or apparel --no magnificence of entertainment or sweetness of music--and no
forms of courtesy and politeness, can
be a compensation for the want of affection. Mutual love between a husband and wife will diffuse comfort
through the obscurest cottage of poverty ; the want of it cannot be supplied byallthat can be furnished inthe
palaces of the great. J To love their
children. Nature prompts to this,
and yet there are those so depraved
that they have no inaternal affection ;
Notes, Rom.i.3l. Religion re-produces natural affection when sin has
weakened or destroyed it, and it is
the design of Christianity to recover
and invigorate all the lost or weakened sensibilities of our nature.

5. To be discreet. The same word
rendered, in ver. 2, temperate, and
explained in ver. 4. § Chaste. Pure
--in heart, and in life. ( Keepers at
home. That is, characteristically attentive to their domestic concerns, or
to their duties in their families. A
similar injunction is found in the precepts of the Pythagoreans--ray yap
yivasa dsi oixoupsry xxl tvdov wivey, See
Creuzer’s Symbolik, iii. 120. This
does not mean, of course, that they
are never to go abroad, but they are
not to neglect their domestic affairs ;
they are not to be better known abroad than at home; they are not to
omit their own duties and become
‘“‘busy-bodies’’’ in the concerns of
others. Religion is the patron ofthe
domestic virtues, and regards the appropriate duties in a family as those
most intimately connected with its
own progress in the world. It looks
benignly on all which makes home a
place of contentment, intelligence,
ers at home, yood, obedient to their
own husbands, that the word of
God be not blasphemed.

6 Young men likewise exhort to
be sober ! minded :

and peace. It does not flourish when
domestic duties are neglected ;--and
whatever may be done abroad, or
whatever self-denial and zeal in the
cause of religion may be evinced there,
or whatever call there may be for the
labours of Christians there, or however much good may be actually done
abroad, religion has gained nothing,
on the whole, if, in order to secure
these things, the duties of a wife and
mother at home have been disregarded. Our first duty is at home, and all
other duties will be well performed
just in proportion as that is. Good.
In all respects, and in all relations.
To a wife, a mother, a sister, there
can be no higher characteristic ascribed, than to say that she is good.
What other trait of mind will enable
her better to perform her appropriate
duties of life? What other will make
her more like her Saviour? {J Obedient to their own husbands. Notes,
Eph. v. 22--24; Col.iii. 18. (That
the word of God be not blasphemed.
That the gospel may not be injuriously spoken of (Notes, Matt. ix. 3), on
account of the inconsistent lives of
those who profess to be influenced by
it. The idea is, that religion ought
to produce the virtues here spoken of,
and that when it does not, it will be
reproached as being of no value.

6. Young men likewise exhort to be
sober-minded. Marg., discreet. On
the meaning of the Greek word used
here (cw@poveiv), see Notes on ver.
2 and 4. The idea is, that they
should be entreated to be prudent,
discreet, serious in their deportment ;
to get the mastery over their passions
and appetites ; to control the propensities to which youth are subject ;
and that there should be such selfgovernment, under the influence of,
religion, as to avoid excess in everything. A well-governed mind, superior to the indulgence of those passions
to which the young are prone, will express the meaning of the word here.

7 In all things showing thysel!
@ a pattern of good works: in doctrine showing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity,
1 or, discreet. a 1 Ti.4.12,

They should be ‘‘ steady in their behaviour, superior to sensual temptations, and constant in the exercise of
every part of self-government.” Doddridge. The reasons for this are
obvious : (1.) The hopes of the church
depend much on them. (2.) A young
man who cannot govern himself, gives
little promise of being useful or happy.
(3.) Indulgence in the propensities to
which young men are prone, will,
sooner or later, bring ruin to the body
and the soul. (4.) They are just at
the period of life when they are exposed to peculiar temptations, and
when they need to exercise a peculiar
guardianship over their own conduct.
(5.) Like others, they may soon die ;
and they should be habitually in such
a frame of mind, as to be prepared to
stand before God. A young man who
feels that he may be soon in the eternal world, cannot but be sensible of
the propriety of having a serious mind,
and of living and acting as in the immediate presence of his Maker and
Judge.

7. In all things showing thyself a
pattern of good works. Not merely
teaching others, but showing them by
example how they ought to live. On
the word rendered pattern (réroy,
type), see Notes on Heb. ix. 5; 1 Cor.
x.6; Phil. iii. 17. ¥ Ln doctrine. In
your manner of teaching; Notes, 1
Tim. iv. 16. { Showing uncorruptness. The word here used does not
occur elsewhere in the New Testament. It means, here, the same as
purity--that which is not erroneous,
and which does not tend to corrupt or
vitiate the morals of others, or to endanger their salvation. Everything in
his teaching was to be such as to
make men purer and better. J Gravity. See this word explained in the
Notes on 1 Tim. ii. 2, where itis rendered honesty ; comp. Notes on 1 Tim.
ili. 4, where it is rendered gravity.
It does not elsewhere occur; see
the use of the adjective, however, in

8 Sound @ speech that cannot
be condemned ; that he that is of
the contrary part may be ashamed,
having no evil thing to say of

you.
a} £i.6.3.

PhiltiveSiel Dims iit) 8.) 1 Ditus

ii. 2. The word properly means venerableness ; then, whatever will insure
respect, in character, opinions, deportment. The sense here is, that
the manner in which a preacher delivers his message, should be such as
to command respect. He should evince
good sense, undoubted piety, an acquaintance with his subject, simplicity,
seriousness, and earnestness, in his
manner. { Sincerity. See this word
(2@9apcia) explained in the Notes on
Eph. vi. 24. It is rendered immortality in Rom. ii. 7; 2 Tim. i. 10; incorruption, in 1 Cor. xv. 42, 50, 53,
64; and sincerity, Eph. vi. 24, and in
the place before us. It does not elsewhere occur in the New Testament.
It means incorruption, incapacity of
decay ; and, therefore, would be here
synonymous with purity. It should

be said, however, that it is wanting |

in many MSS., and is rejected in the
later editions of the New Testament
by Wetstein, Tittman, and Hahn.

8. Sound speech. Notes, 1 Tim. i:
10. He was to use language that
would be spiritually healthful (iyi) ;
that is, true, pure, uncorrupted.--
This word, and its correlatives, is
used in this sense, in the New Testament, only by the apostle Paul. It
is commonly applied to the body,
meaning that which is healthful, or
whole; see Luke y. 81; vi. 10; vii.
OERX VAC LAtGe Xitel OO eXVe ros
Mark iii. 5; v 84; John vy. 4, 6, 9,

Lael ormyil e23ewA cts eiv. 110)3 231

John 2. For Pauwl’s use of the word,

see 1 Tim. i. 10; vi.3; 2 Tim. i. 13;/
It;

LVGO Lita dee OeelSts tie LV 2se8:
does not elsewhere occur. {J Zhat
cannot be condemned. Such as cannot be shown to be weak, or unsound;
such that no one could find fault with
it, or such as an adversary could not
take hold of and blame. This direction would imply purity and seriousness of language, solidity of argument,

9 Exhort servants © to be obedient unto their own masters, and to
| please them well in all things ; not
|! answering again ;

10 Not purloining, but showing

6 Ep.6.5,&c. 1 or, gainsaying.

and truth in the doctrines which he
maintained. § That he that is of the
contrary part may be ashamed, &c.
Ashamed that he has opposed such
views.

9. Exhort servants to be obedient to
their own masters. See this explained
in the Notes on Eph. vi. 5, seq., and
1 Tim. vi. 1--4. ( And to please
them well in all things. That is, so
far as they lawfully may, or in those
things which are not contrary to the
will of God; comp. Eph. vi. 6. It
should be an object with one who is a
servant, to meet the approbation of
his master, as long as this relation
continues. ‘This rule would not, however, go to the extent to require him
to please his master in doing anything
that is contrary to the law of God, or
that is morally wrong. { Not answering again. Marg., gainsaying. Not
contradicting, or not disobeying. They
were to do what the master required,
if it did not interfere with the rights
of conscience, without attempting to
argue the matter--without disputing
with the master--and without advancing their own opinions. Where this
relation exists, no one can doubt that
this is a proper frame of mind fora
servant. It may be observed, however, that all that is here said would
be equally appropriate, whether the
servitude was voluntary or involuntary. Aman who becomes voluntarily
a servant, binds himself to obey his
master cheerfully and quietly, without
gainsaying, and without attempting to
‘reason the matter with him, or propounding his own opinions, even though
they may be much wiser than those of
his employer. He makes a contract
to obey his master, not to reason with
him, or to instruct him.

10. Not purloining. Not to appropriate to themselves what belongs
to their masters. The word purloin
means, literally, to take or carry
away for one’s self; and would be apall good fidelity ; that ¢ they may
adorn the doctrine of God our
Saviour in all things.

11 For the grace ° of God that

@ Mat.5.16. 6 Ro.5.15.

| bringeth salvation ! hath appeared
to all men,

12 Teaching us, that, denying

/¢ ungodliness and worldly lusts, 4

1, or, to all men hath appeared.

¢ Ro.8.13. d1 Pe.2.11.

plied to an approbation to one’s self

of what pertained to a common stock,
or what belonged to one in whose employ we are--as the embezzlement of
public funds. Here it means that the
servant was not to apply to his own
use what belonged to his master ; that
is, was not to pilfer--a vice to which,
as all know, servants, and especially
slaves, are particularly exposed ; see
the word explained in the Notes on
Acts vy. 2. J But showing all good
jidelity. In labouring, and in taking
care of the property intrusted to them. |
q{ That they may adorn the doctrine |
of God our Saviour in all things.
That they may show the fair influence
of religion on them, in all respects,
making them industrious, henest, kind,
and obedient. They were to show
that the effect of the religion which
they professed was to make them better
fitted to discharge the duties of their
station in life, however humble; or
that its influence on them was desirable in every respect. In this way,
they might hope also that the minds of
their masters might be reached, and
that they might be brought to respect
and love the gospel. Learn hence,
(1.) that one in the most humble walk
of life may so live as to be an ornament to religion, as well as one favoured with more advantages. (2.)
That servants may do much good, by
so living as to show to all around |
them that there is a reality in the
gospel, and to lead others to love it.
(3.) If: in this situation of life, it is a
duty so to live as to adorn religion, it |
cannot be less so in more elevated
situations. A master should feel the:
obligation not to be surpassed in religious character by his servant.
11. For the grace of God.
favour of God, shown to the undeserving; see Notes on Rom. i. 7.
q That bringeth salvation. Marg.,
to all men, hath appeared. That is,
in the margin, ‘‘the grace which

The |

brings salvation to all men has been
revealed.’ The marginal reading is
most in accordance with the Greek,
though it will bear either construction.
If that which is in the text be adopted,
it means that the plan of salvation has
‘been revealed to all classes of men;
that is, that it is announced or revealed to all the race that they may
be saved ; comp. Notes on Col. i. 23.
If the other rendering be adopted, it
means that that plan was fitted to secure the salvation of all men; that
none were excluded from the offer;
that provision had been made for all.
and all might come and be saved.
Whichever interpretation be adopted,
the sense here will not be essentially
varied. It is, that the gospel was
adapted to man as man, and therefore might include servants as well as
masters ; subjects, as well as kings;
the poor, as well as the rich; the ignorant, as well as the learned; see
Notes on 1 Tim. ii. 1,2; Acts xvii.
26.

12. Teaching us. That is, the
“grace of God’’ so teaches us; or that
system of religion which is a manifestation of the grace of God, inculcates the great and important duties
which Paul proceeds to state. ¥ That
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts.
‘That by denying ourselves of these,
or refusing to practise them, we should
lead a holy life”’” The word wngodlimess here means all that would be included under the word impiety ; that
is, all failure in the performance of
our proper duties towards God; see
Notes, Rom. i. 18. The phrase
“‘ worldly lusts” refers to all improper
desires pertaining to this life--the
desire of wealth, pleasure, honour,
sensual indulgence. It refers to such
passions as the men of this world are
prone to, and would include all those
things which cannot be indulged in
| with a proper reference to the world
to come. The gross passions would

we should livesoberly, righteously,
and godly, in this present world ;
@ Lu.1.75.

be of course included, and all those
more refined pleasures also which
constitute the characteristic and peculiar enjoyments of those who do not
live anto God. ¥ We should live
soberly. See the word soberly (cw@povus )
explained in the Notes on ver. 2, 4.
It means that we should exercise a
due restraint on our passions and
propensities. ¥ Righteously. Justly----
dixziws. This refers to the proper
performance of our duties to our fellow-men ; and it means that religion
teaches us to perform those duties
with fidelity, according to all our relations in life; to all our promises and
contracts; to our fellow-citizens and
neighbours ; to the poor, and needy,
and ignorant, and oppressed; and to
all those who are providentially placed
in our way who need our kind offices.
Justice to them would lead us to act
as we would wish that they would towards us. ¥ And godly. Piously;
that is, in the faithful performance of
our duties to God. We have here,
then, an epitome of all that religion
requires: (1.) Our duty to ourselves
--included in the word “ soberly” and
requiring a suitable control over our
evil propensities and passions; (2.)
our duty to our fellow-men in all the
relations we sustain in life; and (3.)
our duty to God--evinced in what will
be properly regarded as a pious life.
He that does these things, meets all
the responsibilities of his condition and
relations; and the Christian system,
requiring the faithful performance of
these duties, shows how admirably it
is adapted to man. In this present
world. That is. as long as we shall
continue in it. These are the duties
which we owe in the present life.

13. Looking for. Expecting ; waiting for. That is, in the faithful performance of our duties to ourselves,
to our fellow-creatures, and to God,
we are patiently to wait for the coming of our Lord. (1.) We are to believe that he will return; (2.) we are
to be in a posture of expectation, not
knowing when he will come; and (3.)

13 Looking ° for that blessed

hope, and the glorious appearing
62 Pe.3.12.

we are to be ready for him whenever
he shall come; see Notes on Matt.
xxiv. 42--44; 1 Thess. v. 4; Phil. iii.
20. § That blessed hope. The fulfilment of that hope so full of blessedness tous. § The glorious appearing.
Notes, 2 Thess. ii. 8; comp. 1 Tim.
viel4s) 2) Timi. 103: iveds 8c 4 Of
the great God. There can be little
doubt, ifany, that by “the great God”
here, the apostle referred to the Lord
Jesus, for it is not a doctrine of the
New Testament that God himself as
such, or in contradistinction from his
incarnate Son, will appear at the last
day. It is said, indeed, that the
Saviour will come ‘‘in the glory of
his Father, with his angels’ (Matt.
xvi. 27), but that God as such will
appear is not taught in the Bible.
The doctrine there is, that God will
be manifest in his Son; that the divine approach to our world be through
him to judge the race; and that though
he will be accompanied with the appropriate symbols of the divinity, yet
it will be the Son of God who will be
visible. No one, accustomed to Paul’s
views, can well doubt that when he
used this language he had his eye
throughout on the Son of God, and
that he expected no other manifestation than what would be made through
him. Inno place in the New Testament is the phrase iwiPdveray ro Seov
--‘‘the manifestation or appearing of
God’’--applied to any other one than
Christ. It is true that this is spoken
of here as the “appearing of the glory
--*rs d0éns--of the great God,’ but
the idea is that of such a manifestation as became God, or would appropriately display his glory. It is
known to most persons who have attended to religious controversies, that
this passage has given rise to much
discussion. ‘The ancients,in general,
interpreted it as meaning ‘“‘ The glorious appearing of our great God and
Saviour Jesus Christ.” This sense
has been vindicated by the labours of
Beza, Whitby, Bull, Matthezi, and
Middleton (on the Greek article),
@ of the great God and our Saviour
Jesus Christ ;
14 Who gave ® himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all ¢
a Re.1.7. b Ep.5.2. c Ps.130.8.

iniquity, and purify 4uato himself a peculiar ¢ people, zealous J
of good works.
15 These things speak, and
ad He.9.14. ¢ De.7.6;1Pe.2.9. f Ep.2.10.

and is the common interpretation of
those who claim to be orthodox ; see
Bloomfield, Rec. Syn., and Notes, 7
loc. He contends that the meaning
is, “the glorious appearance of that
Gsezat Brine who is our Gop and
Saviour.” The arguments for this
opinion are well summed up by Bloomfield. Without going into a critical
examination of this passage, which
would not be in accordance with the
design of these Notes, it may be remarked in general, (1.) that no plain
reader of the New Testament, accustomed to the common language there,
would have any doubt that the apostle
referred here to the coming of the
Lord Jesus (2.) That the ‘“‘ coming”
of God, as such, is not spoken of in
this manner in the New Testament.
(8.) That the expectation of Christians was directed to the advent of the
ascended Saviour, not to the appearing of God as such. (4.) That this is
just such language as one would use
who believed that the Lord Jesus is
divine, or that the name God might
properly be applied to him. (5.) That
it would naturally and obviously convey the idea that he was divine, to
one who had no theory to defend. (6.)
That if the apostle did not mean this,
he used such language as was fitted
to lead meninto error. And (7.) that
the fair construction of the Greek
here, according to the application of
the most rigid rules, abundantly sustains the interpretation which the
plain reader of the New Testament
would affix to it. The names above
referred to are abundant proof that

no violation is done to the rules of |

the Greek language by this interpretation, but rather that the fair construction of the original demands it.
If this be so, then this furnishes an
important proof of the divinity of
Christ.

14. Who yave himself for us. See
Notes, Eph. v. 2, § That he might
redeem us from all iniquity. The

word here rendered redeem--avrpow--
lutroéd, occurs only here and in Luke
xxiv. 21; 1 Pet, i. 18, The noun,
however--avze-v, lutron, occurs in
Matt. xx. 28; and Mark x. 45; where
it is rendered ransom; see it explained in the Notes on Matt, xx. 28. It
is here said that the object of his giving
himself was to save his people from all
iniquity; see this explained in the
Notes on Matt. i.21. § And purify
unto himself. (1.) Purify them, or
makethem holy. This is the first and
leading object; see Notes, Heb. ix. 14.
(2.) Unto himself; that is, they are no
longer to be regarded as their own,
but as redeemed for his own service,
and for the promotion of his glory ;--
Notes, 1 Cor. vi. 19, 20. § A peculiar people. 1 Pet. ii. 9. The word
here used (spsodcios) occurs nowhere
else in the New Testament. It
means, properly, having abundance;
and then one’s own, what is special,
or peculiar (Rob. Lex.), and here
means that they were to be regarded
as belonging to the Lord Jesus. It
does not mean, as the word would seem
to imply--and as is undoubtedly true
--that they are to be a peculiar people
in the sense that they are to be unlike
others, or to have views and principles
peculiar to themselves; but that they
belong to the Saviour in contradistinction from belonging to themselves
--‘‘ peculiar’ or his own in the sense
that a man’seproperty is his own, and
does not belong to others. This passage, therefore, should not be used to
prove that Christians should be wnlike others in their manner of living,
but that they belong to Christ as his
redeemed people. From that it may
indeed be inferred that they should be
unlike others, but that is not the direct
teaching of the passage. Zealous of
good works. As the result of their
redemption ; that is, this is one object
of their having been redeemed; Notes,
Eph. ii. 10.

15. These things speak and exhort

exhort ; and rebuke with all avthority. Let 4no man despise thee.
UT them in mind to be subject ° to principalities and
al Tid.12. b Ro.l3.1.

Notes, 1 Tim. vi. 2. § And rebuke
with all authority. Notes, 1 Tim. v.
1, 20; 2 Tim. iv. 2. The word authority here means command --imitayn;
1 Cor. vii. 6, 25 ; 2 Cor. viii. 8; 1 Tim.
i. 1; Tit. i. 8. The sense here is, he
was to do it decidedly, without ambiguity, without compromise, and without keeping any thing back. He was
to state these things not as being
advice or counsel, but as the requirement of God. § Let no man despise
thee. That is, conduct yourself, as you
may easily do, so as to command universal respect as a minister of God ;
see Notes on 1 Tim. iv. 12.

This chapter comprises the following subjects :---

(1.) Titus was to instruct his hearers to be subject to lawful authority,
and in general to manifest meekness
and gentleness towards all classes of
men; ver. 1, 2.

(2.) A reason is assigned why they
should do this; ver. 3--8. They who
were Christians were once, indeed,
like others, disobedient and unholy ;
they were regardless of law, and gave
free indulgence to their evil propensities, but they had been redeemed for
a better purpose, and it was the design
of God in redeeming them, that they
should manifest every kind of virtue.

(3.) Titus was to avoid foolish
questions, and contentions, and strifes
about the law ; ver. 9.

(4.. He who was a heretic was to
be rejected after suitable admonitions; ver. 10, 11.

(5.) Paul directs Titus to come to
him at Nicopolis, and to bring Zenas
and Apollos with him; ver. 12--14.

(6.) He closes with the customary
salutations ; ver. 15.

1. Put them in mind to be subject,
&ec.. See the duty here enjoined,
explained in the Notes on Rom. xiii,
1,seq. § Principalities and powers.

powers, to obey magistrates, to be
ready to every good work,

2 To speak evil of no man, to
be no brawlers, but gentle, showing

all ¢ meekness unto all men.
c Ep.4.2.

See these words explained in the
Notes on Rom. viii. 88. The word
here rendered powers (i%ouciais), is
not, indeed, the same as that which
is found there (dudéues), but the same
idea is conveyed; comp. Notes on Eph.
i. 21. § To obey magistrates. That
is, to obey them in all that was not
contrary to the word of God; Notes,
Rom. xiii. 1, seq; Acts iv. 19, 20.
{| To be ready to every good work.
To be prepared for (troiuovs); prompt
to perform all that is good; Notes,
Phil. iv. 8. A Christian should be
always ready to do good as far as he
is able. le should not need to be
urged, or coaxed, or persuaded, but
should be so ready always to do good
that he will count it a privilege to
have the opportunity to do it.
2. To speak evil of no man.
“to blaspheme (Brachnpeiv, comp.
Notes on Matt. ix.3) noone.” Doddridge renders it, “calumniate no
one.” The idea is, that we are not
to slander, revile, or defame any one.
We are not to say anything to any
one, or of any one, which will do him
injury. We are never to utter anything which we know to be false about
him or to give such a colouring to his
words or conduct as to do him wrong
in any way. We should always so
speak to him and of him in such a way
that he will have no reason to complain that he is an injured man. It
may be necessary, when we are called
to state what we know of his character, to say things which are not at all
in his favoar, or things which he has
said or done that were wrong ; but (1.)
we should never do this for the purpose
of doing him injury, or so as to find
a pleasure in it; and (2.) where it
is necessary to make the statement,
it should be so as to do him no injustice. We should give no improper
colouring. We should exaggerate no
circumstances. We should never attempt to express ourselves about his

Gr.,
3 For we @ ourselves also were
sometime foolish, disobedient, dea 1 Co.6.11; 1Pe.4.3.

motives, or charge on him bad motives
--for we know not what his motives
were. We should state every palliat-

ing circumstance of which we have!

knowledge, and do entire justice to it.
We should not make the bad traits of
his character prominent, and pass over
all that is good. In a word, we should
show that we would rather find him to
be a good man than a bad man--even
uf the result should be that we had
been mistaken in our opinions. It
is better that we should have been
mistaken, than that he should be a
bad man. {| To be no brawlers.
See Notes, 1 Tim. iii. 8. The same
Greek word occurs in both places.
It is not elsewhere found in the New
Testament. {| But gentle. The word
here used is rendered moderation in
Phil. iv. 5, patient in 1 Tim. iii. 3,
and elsewhere gentle; see Notes on
1 Tim, iii. 3, § Showing all meekness unto all men. In the reception
of injuries; see Notes on Matt. v. 5;
Eph. iv. 2.

3. For we ourselves. We who are
Christians. There is no reason for
supposing, as Benson does, that this
is to be understood as confined to
Paul himself. There are some things
mentioned here which were not probably true of him before his conversion, and the connection does not require us to suppose that he referred
particularly to himself. He is stating
a reason why those to whom Titus
was appointed to preach should be
urged to lead holy lives, and especially
to manifest a spirit of order, peace,
kindness, and due subordination to
law. In enforcing this, he says, that
those who were now Christians had
formerly been wicked, disorderly, and
sensual, but that under the influence
of the gospel, they had been induced
to lead better lives. The same gospel
which had been effectual in their case,
might be in others. ‘To others it
would be an encouragement to show
that there were cases in which the
gospel had been thus efficacious, and
they who were appointed to preach it

ceived, serving divers lusts and,
pleasures, living in malice and envy,
hateful, and hating one another.

might refer to their own example as
a reason why others should be persuaded to lead holy lives. In preaching to others, also, they were not to
be proud or arrogant. They were to
remember that they were formerly in
the same condition with those whom
they addressed, and whom they exhorted to reformation. They were
not to forget that what they had that
was superior to others they owed to
the grace of God, and not to any native goodness. He will exhort the
wicked to repentance most effectually
who remembers that his own former
life was wicked; he will evince. most
of the proper spirit in doing it who
has the deepest sense of the errors
and folly of his own past ways.
{ Foolish. See this word explained
in the Notes on Luke xxiv. 25, where
it is rendered fools; comp. Rom. i,
14, where it is rendered wnwise, and
Gal. ili. 1, 3; 1 Tim. vi. 9, where it is
rendered foolish. {| Disobedient. To
law, to parents, to civil authority, to
God. This is the natural character
of the human heart; see Luke i. 17;
Ronieigs0e 2 Cimy Wiel iba eG,
where the same word occurs. ¥ Deceived. By the great enemy, by false
teachers, by our own hearts, and by
the flattery of others. Itis a characteristic of man by nature that he sees
nothing in its true light, but walks
along amidst constant, though changing and very beautiful illusions; comp.
Matte xsiven, On leew toate slice
Eee Th Raw iINere Selo) anv WS
where the same word occurs; see also
Rev. xx. 8, 8, 10, where the same
word is applied to that great deceiver
who has led the world astray. Every
one who is converted feels, and is
ready to confess, that before conversion he was deceived as to the comparative value of things, as to the enjoyment which he expected to find in
scenes of pleasure and riot, and often
in what seemed to him well-formed
plans. § Serving divers lusts and
pleasures. Indulging in the varioes

‘corrupt passions and propensities of

4 But after that the kindness
and !love of God our Saviour toward man appeared,

5 Not * by works of righteous-

lor, pity.

ness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us,
by the washing of regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost ;

a Ep.2.4,8,9.

the soul. We were so under their influence that it might be said we were
their servants, or were slaves to them
evatvoyres); that is, we implicitly
obeyed them; see Notes, Rom. vi.
16, 17. (Living in malice. Gr.,
tn evil--iy xaxig ; that is, in all kinds
of evil; see Notes on Rom. i. 29,
where the word is rendered malictousness. (And envy. Displeasure
at the happiness and prosperity of
others ; Notes, Rom. i. 29. {| Hateful. orvynroi. This word does not
elsewhere occur in the New Testament. It means that our conduct
was such as to be worthy of the hatred
of others. Of whom, before his conversion, 1s not this true? 4 And
hating one another. There was no
brotherly love ; no true affection for
others. ‘There was ill-will felt in the
heart, and it was evinced in the life.
This is an apt description of the state
of the heathen world before the gospel
shines on it, and it may be regarded
as the characteristic of all men before
conversion. ‘They have no true love
for one another, such as they ought to
cherish, and they are liable constantly
to give indulgence to feelings which
evince hatred. In contentions, and
strifes, and litigations, and wars, this
feeling is constantly breaking out.
All this is suggested here as a reason
why Christians should now be gentle
and mild toward those who are evil.
Let us remember what we were, and
we shall not be disposed to treat
others harshly. When a Christian is
tempted to unkind thoughts or words
towards others, nothing is more appropriate for him than to reflect on
his own past life.

4, But after that. Gr, when--éee. |

The meaning is, that ‘‘ when the love
of God was manifested in the plan of

salvation, he saved us from this state |

by our being washed and purified.”

The .idea is not, that “the love of

God appeared” after we had sinned

in this way, but that when his mercy
was thus displayed we were converted
from our sins, and made pure in his
sight. | The kindness. xpnoratns
--the goodness, or the benignity. The
word is rendered goodness and good
ins Rom. ii..4.; iii. 125 xi., 22, thrice ;
kindness, 2 Cor. vi. 6; Eph. ii. 7;
Col. iii. 12; Titus iii. 4; and gentleness, Gal. vy. 22. The act of redeeming us was one of great kindness, or
goodness. § And love of God. Marg.,
pity. The Greek word is QiAavdporia2
--philanthropy--the love of man. The
plan of salvation was founded on love
to man, and was the highest expression of that love; Notes on John ili.
16. The Greek of this verse is,
«« When the kindness and love of God
our Saviour to man was manifested, he
saved us’’ (ver. 5), to wit, frora those
sins of which we had before been guilty.

5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done. ‘The plan
was not based on our own good works,
nor are our own good works now
the cause of our salvation. If men
could have been saved by their own
good works, there would have been no
need of salvation by the Redeemer ;
if our own deeds were now the basis
of our title to eternal life, the work
of Christ would be equally unnecessary. It is a great and fundamental
principle of the gospel that the good
works of men come in for no share in
the justification of the soul. They are
in no sense a consideration on account
of which God pardons a man, and receives him to favour. The only basis
of justification is the merit of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and in the matter
of justification before God, all the
race is on a level ; see Notes on Eph.
ii. 8,9. YJ But according to his mercy.
(1.) It had its origin in mercy ; (2.) it
is by mere mercy or compassion, and
not by justice; (3.) it is an expression of great mercy, and (4.) it is now
in fact conferred only by mercy.
Whatever we have done or can do,
when we come to receive salvation
from the hand of God, there is no
other element which enters into it
but mercy. It is not because our
deeds deserve it; it is not because
we have by repentance and faith
wrought ourselves into such a state
of mind that we can claim it; but,
after all our tears, and sighs, and
prayers, and good deeds, it is a mere
favour. Even then God might justly
withhold it if he chose, and no blame
would be attached to him if he should
suffer us to sink down toruin. § He
saved us. That is, he began that
salvation in us which is to be completed in heaven. A man who is already renewed and pardoned may be
spoken of as saved--for (1.) the work
of salvation is begun, and (2.) when
begun it will certainly be completed ;
see Notes on Phil. i. 6. QF By the
washing of regeneration. In order to
a correct understanding of this important passage, it is necessary to ascertain whether the phrase here used
refers to baptism, and whether anything different is intended by it from
what is meant by the succeeding
phrase--“renewing ofthe Holy Ghost.”
-- The word rendered washing (Aourpay
--loutron)- occurs in the New Testament only in this place and in Eph.
v. 26, where also it is rendered washing--‘ That he might sanctify and
cleanse it [the church] with the washing of water by the word.”’ ‘The word
properly means a bath; then water
for bathing ; then the act of bathing,
washing, ablution. Passow and Robinson. It is used by Homer to denote a warm or cold bath; then a
washing away, and is thus applied to
the drink-offerings in sacrifice, which
were supposed to purify or wash away
sin. Passow. The word here does
not mean laver, or the vessel for
washing in, which would be expressed
by Acura, loutér, and this word cannot
be properly applied to the baptismal
font. The word in itself would naturally be understood as referring to
baptism (comp. Notes on Acts xxii.
16), which was regarded as the emblem of washing away sins, or of
cleansing frorn them.

I say it was’

the emblem, not the means of purify.
ing the soul from sin. If this be the
allusion, and it seems probable, then
the phrase “‘ washing of regeneration”
would mean ‘“‘that outward washing
or baptism which is the emblem of regeneration,” and which is appointed
as one of the ordinances connected
with salvation; see Notes, Mark xvi.
16, “He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.” It is not affirmed in this phrase that baptism is
the means of regeneration; or that
grace is necessarily conveyed by it;
and still less that baptism 7s regeneration, for no one of these is a necessary
interpretation of the passage, and
should not be assumed to be the true
one. The full force of the language
will be met by the supposition that it
means that baptism is the emblem or
symbol of regeneration, and, if this is
the case, no one has a right to assume
that the other zs certainly the meaning. And that this 7s the meaning is
further clear, because it is nowhere
taught in the New Testament that
baptism 7s regeneration, or that it is
the means of regeneration. The word
rendered regeneration (radrmyytyicia--
palingenesia) occurs in the New Testament only here and in Matt. xix. 28,--
“in the regeneration when the Son of
man,’ &c. It means, properly, a new
birth, reproduction, or renewal. It
would properly be applied to one who
should be begotten again in this sense,
that a new life was commenced in
him in some way corresponding to
his being made to live at first. To
the proper idea of the word, it is essential that there should be connected
the notion of the commencement of
life in the man, so that he may be
said to live anew; and as religion is
in the Scriptures represented as life,
it is properly applied to the beginning
of that kind of life by which man may
be said to live anew. This word, occurring only here and in Matt. xix.
28, and there indubitably not referrin g
to baptism, should not be here understood as referring to that, or be applied to that, for (1.) that is not the
proper meaning of the word; (2.)
there is no Scripture usage to sanction it ; (8.) the connection here dues

6 Which he shed on us ! abundantly through Jesus Christ our
Saviour:

1 or, richly.

7 That being justified 4 by his
grace, we should be made heirs ac-

cording to the hope of eternal life.
@ Ro.3.24.

not demand it; (4.) the correlatives
of the word (see John iii. 3, 5, 6, 8;
1 Pet. i. 3,) are applied only to that
great moral change which is produced
by the Holy Ghost, and (5.) it is a
dangerous use of the word. Its use
in this sense leaves the impression
that the only change needful for man
is that which is produced by being
regularly baptized. On almost no
point has so much injury been done
in the church as by the application of
the word regeneration to baptism. It
affects the beginning of religion in
the soul, and if a mistake is made
there, it is one which must pervade
all the views of piety. § And renewtng of the Holy Ghost. This is an
important clause, added by Paul apparently to save from the possibility
of falling into error. If the former
expression, “‘ the washing of regeneration,” had been left to stand by itself,
it might have been supposed possibly
that all the regeneration which would
be needed would be that which would
accompany -baptism. But he avoids
the possibility of this error, by saying
that the ‘‘renewing of the Holy Ghost”
is an indispensable part of that by
which we are saved. It is necessary
that this should exist in addition to
that which is the mere emblem of it
--the washing of regeneration--for
without this the former would be unmeaning and unavailing. It is important to observe that the apostle
by no means says that this always
follows from the former, nor does he
affrm that it ever follows from it --
whatever may be the truth on that
point--but he asserts that this is that
on which our salvation depends.--
The word rendered renewing (évaxalvwois --anakainosis) occurs only
here and in Rom. xii. 2, where it is
also rendered renewing ; comp. Note |
on that place The verb (avaxawow--
anakainoo) occurs in 2 Cor. iv. 15,
and Col. iii. 19, in both which places |
it is rendered renewed, and the corresponding word, davaxxuvilw -- ana- |

kainidzo, in Heb. vi. 6. The noun
properly means making new again ;
a renewing ; a renovation ; comp. H.
Planck in Bib. Repos. i. 677. Itisa
word which is found only in the writings of Paul, and in ecclesiasticai
Greek writers. It would be properly
applied to such a change as the Holy
Spirit produces in the soul, making
one a new man; that is, a man new,
so far as religion is concerned--new
in his views, feelings, desires, hopes,
plans, and purposes. He is so far
different from what he was before,
that it may be said heenters on a new
life; see Notes on Eph. iv. 238, 24.
The “renewing of the Holy Ghost” of
course means that which the Holy
Ghost produces, recognizing the fact,
everywhere taught in the Scriptures,
that the Holy Spirit is the Author of
the new creation. It cannot mean,
as Koppe supposes, the renewing of
the mind itself, or producing a holy
spirit in the soul.

6. Which he shed on us. Gr,
“Which he poured out on us’? --
tZivesy; see Notes on Acts ii. 17.
The same Greek word is used there
as here. It occurs also in the same
sensein Actsii. 18, 33. J Abundantly. Marg., as in Gr., richly. The
meaning is, that the Holy Spirit had
been imparted in copious measure in
order to convert them from their
former wickedness. There is no particular allusion here to the day of
Pentecost, but the sense is, that the
Holy Spirit had been imparted richly
to all who were converted, at any
time or place, from the error of their
ways. What the apostle says here is
true of all who become Christians,
and can be applied to all who become
believersin any age orland. Through
Jesus Christ our Saviour ; see Notes,
Acts ii. 33.

7. That being justified by his grace.
Not by our own works, but by his fayour or mercy; see Notes, Rom. iii.
24. YJ We should be made heirs ;

| gee Notes, Rom. viii. 15, 17. (| Ac8 This is a faithful saying,

9 But © avoid foolish questions,

and these things I will that thou; and genealogies, and contentions,

affirm constantly, that they which

and strivings about the law; for

have believed in God might be | they are unprofitable and vain.

careful 4 to maintain good works.
These things are good and profitable unto men.

a ver.1,14.

our being adopted with the family of
God, and being made heirs. He has
received us as his children, and permits us to hope that we shall live with
him for ever.

8. This is a faithful saying ; see
Notes on 1 Tim.i. 15. The reference
here is to what he had been just saying, meaning that the doctrine which
he had stated about the method of
salvation was in the highest degree important, and entirely worthy of belief.
q And these things I will that thou
afirm constantly. Make them the
constant subject of your preaching.
q That they which have believed in
God might be careful to maintain
good works. This shows that Paul
supposed that the doctrines of the
gospel were fitted to lead men to holy
living ; comp. ver. 1,and Notes, Phil.
iv. 8. The ‘good works” here refer not merely to acts of benevolence
and charity, but to all that is upright
and good--to an honest and holy life.
{ These things are good and profitable unto men. That is, these doctrines which he had stated were not
mere matters of speculation, but they
were fitted to promote human happiness, and they should be constantly
taught.

9. But avoid foolish questions and
genealogies; see Notes on 1 Tim. i.
4; 2 Tim. ii. 16, 23. § And contentions, and strivings about the law.
Such as the Jews started about various matters connected with the law--
about meats and drinks, d&c.; Notes
on 1 Tim. i. 4; comp. Notes on Acts
xviii. 15. J For they are unprofitable
and vain.--They disturb and embitter
the feelings ; they lead to the indulg-

ence of a bad spirit; they are often!

10 A man that is an heretic,
after the first and second admoni
tion ¢ reject ;

b 2 Ti.2.23. c Mat.18.17.

difficult to be settled, and are of no
practical importance if they could be
determined. The same thing might
be said of multitudes of things about
which men dispute so earnestly now.

10. A man that is an heretic. The
word heretic is now commonly applied
to one who holds some fundamenta.
error of doctrine, ‘‘a person who holds
and teaches opinions repugnant to the
established faith, or that which is
made the standard of orthodoxy.”
Webster. The Greek word here used
(aipsrixds--hatreticos) occurs nowhere
else in the New Testament. Tho
corresponding noun (aipeo1s--hairesis)
occurs in the following places: Acts
v. 17; xv. 5; xxiv. 5 ; xxvi.5 ; xxviii.
22, where it is rendered sect ; and
Acts xxv. 14; 1 Cor. xi. 19; Gal. y.
20; 2 Pet. ii. 1, where it is rendered
heresy, and heresies ; see Notes on
Acts xxiv. 14. The true notion ot
the word is that of one who is a promoter of a sect or party. The man
who makes divisions in a church, instead of aiming to promote unity, is
the one who is intended. Such a
man may form sects and parties on
some points of doctrine on which he
differs from others, oron some custom,
religious rite, or peculiar practice ;
he may make some unimportant matter a ground of distinction from his
brethren, and may refuse to have fellowship with them, and endeavour to
get up a new organization. Such a
man, according to the Scripture usage, is a heretic, and not merely one
who holds a different doctrine from
that which is regarded as orthodoxy,
The spirit of the doctrine here is the
same as in Rom. xvi. 17, and the
same class of persons is referred to.
“Mark them which cause divisions
and offences contrary to the doctrine
which ye have received; and avoid

11 Knowing that he that issuch is subverted, and sinneth, being
_% condemned of himself.

a@ Acts xiii 46.

them.” See Notes on that passage.
The word here used is defined by
Robinson, (Lew.), “‘ one who creates
dissensions, introduces errors, a factious person.” It is not found in
classic Greek, but often in ecclesiastical writers; see Suicer’s Thesau.--
After the first and second admonttion. Comp. Matt. xviii 15--17. That
is, do not do it hastily and rashly.
Give him an opportunity to explain
himself, and to repent and abandon
his course. No man is to be cut off
without giving him a proper opportunity to vindicate his conduct, and to
repent if he has done wrong. Ifafter
the first and second admonition a man
who is undoubtedly doing wrong, will
not repent, then he is to be cut off.
The apostle does not say in what way
this admonition is to be given, or
whether it should be public or private.
The language which he uses would
justify either, and the method which
is to be adopted is doubtless to be
determined by circumstances. The
thing which is to be reached is, that
his fault is to be fairly set before his
mind. J Reject. xapairov. This word
is rendered excuse in Luke xiv. 18,
19; refuse, Acts xxv. 11; 1 Tim. iv.
7; v.11; Heb. xii. 25 ; avoid, 2 Tim.
ii. 23, and entreated, Heb. xii. 19. Its
prevailing meaning, as used in connections like the one before us, is to reject in relation to an office ; that is, to
decline appointing one to an office.
It probably had a primary reference
to that here, and meant that a man
who was given to making dissensions,
or who was a factious person, should
not be admitted to an office in
the church.
would also include this,--that he
should not be admitted to the church.
He is neither to be owned as a member, nor admitted to office; comp.
Matt. xviii. 17. “Let him be unto
thee asa heathen man and a publican.” Inregard to this passage, then,
we may observe, (1.) that the utmost
limit which this allows is mere exclusion. It does not allow us to follow
the offender with injury.

The general direction |

|

not authorize us to oppose one on account of his mere private opinions.
The essential idea is that of a factious,
division-making man; a man who
aims to form sects and parties, whether
on account of opinions, or from any
other cause. (3.) It does not make
it right to deliver such a man over to
the “secular arm,” or to harm him in
body, soul, property, or reputation.
It gives no power to torture him on
the rack, or with thumb-screws, or to
bind him to the stake. It authorizes
us not to recognize him as a Christian
brother, or to admit him to an office
in the church--but beyond this it gives
us no right to go. He has a right to
his own opinion still, so far as we are
concerned, and we are not to molest
him in the enjoyment of that right.
(4.) It demands that, when a man is
undoubtedly a heretic in the sense
here explained, there should be the
utmost kindness towards him, in order
if possible to reclaim him. We should
not begin by attacking and denouncing his opinions; or by formally arraigning him; or by blazoning his
name as a heretic; but he is to be
dealt with in all Christian kindness
and brotherly fidelity. He is to be
admonished more than once by those
who have the right to admonish him ;
and then, and then only, if he does
not repent, he is to be simply avoided.
That is to be an end of the matter so
far as we are concerned. The power
of the church there ceases. It has
no power to deliver him over to any one
else for persecution or punishment, or
in any way to meddle with him. He
may live where he pleases; pursue
his own plans; entertain his own
opinions or company, provided he
does not interfere with us ; and though

| we havearight to examine the opinions

(2.) It does |

which he may entertain, yet our work
with him is done. If these plain
principles had been observed, what
scenes of bloody and cruel persecution in the church would have been
avoided !

11. Knowing that he that is such is
subverted. Literally, 7s turned out, or,

12 When I shall send Artemas gently, that nothing be wanting
unto thee, or Tychicus, be dili- | unto them.

gent to come unto me to Nicopolis:
for I have determined there to
winter.

13 Bring Zenas the lawyer, and
Apollos, on their journey dili-

14 And let ours also learn to
1 maintain good @ works for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.

1 or, profess honest trades. a ver. 8.

ts changed, i. e., for the worse. He
has gone from the right way, and therefore he should be rejected. {| And
sinneth, being condemned of himself.
His own conscience condemns him.
He will approve the sentence, for he
knows that he is wrong; and his selfcondemnation will be punishment sufficient. His own course, in attempting a division or schism in the church,
shows him that it is right that he
should be separated from the communion of Christians. He that attempts to rend the church, without a
good reason, should himself be separated from it.

12. When I shall send Artemas unto
thee. This person is not elsewhere
mentioned in the New Testament,
and nothing more is known of him.
q Or Tychicus. Notes, Acts xx. 4.
q Be diligent. Notes, 2 Tim. iv. 9.
4 To come unto me to Nicopolis. It
was at this place, probably, that this
epistle was written. In regard to its
situation, see Intro. § 4. § For J
have determined there to winter. Why
Paul designed to spend the winter
there, or what he purposed to do
there, are questions on which no light
can now be thrown. ‘There is no evidence that he organized a church
there, though it may be presumed
that he preached the gospel, and that
he did not do it without success. His
requesting Titus to leave his important post and to come to him, looks as
if his aid were needed in the work of
the ministry there, and asif Paul supposed there was a promising field of
labour there.

13. Bring Zenas the lawyer.--This
person is not elsewhere mentioned in
the New Testament, and nothing more
is known of him. He belonged doubtless to that class of persons so often
mentioned in the New Testament as
lawyers ; that is, who were regarded

as qualified to expound the Jewish
laws; see Notes, Matt. xxii. 35. It
does not mean that he practised law,
in the modern sense of that phrase.
He had doubtless been converted to
the Christian faith, and it is not improbable that there were Jews at Nicopolis, and that Paul supposed he
might be particularly useful among
them. § And Apollos. Notes, Acts
xviii. 24. He was also well-skilled in
the laws of Moses, being “‘ mighty in
the Scriptures” (Acts xviii. 24), and
he and Zenas appear to have been
travelling together. It would seem
that they had been already on a
journey, probably in preaching the
gospel, and Paul supposed that they
would be in Crete, and that Titus
could aid them. { Diligently. 2 Tim.
iv. 9; Gr. Speedily; i. e., facilitate
their journey as much as possible
{| That nothing be wanting unto them.
Nothing necessary for their journey.
Paul desired that they might meet
with hospitable treatment from Christians in Crete, and might not be embarrassed for the want of that which
was needful for their journey. It
would seem most probable that they
had been sent by Paul on a visit to
the churches.

14. And let ours. Our friends;
that is, those who were Christians.
Paul had just directed Titus to aid
Zenas and Apollos himself, and he
here adds that he wished that others
who were Christians would be characterized by good works of all kinds
{ To maintain good works, Marg.
profess honest trades. The Greek
willadmit of the interpretation in the
margin, or will include that, but there
is no reason why the direction should
be supposed to have any peculiar re.
ference to an honest mode of livelihood,
or why it should be confined to that.
It rather means, that they should be

15 All that are with me salute
thee. Greet them that love us in
the faith. Grace be with you all,
Amen.

distinguished for good works, including benevolent deeds, acts of charity,
honest toil, and whatever would enter
into the conception of an upright life;
see Notes onver. 8. § For necessary
uses. Such as are required by their
duty to their families, and by the demands of charity; see ver. 8. % That
they be not unfruitful--That 1t may
be seen that their religion is not barren
and worthless, but that it produces a
happy effect on themselves and on
society ; comp. Notes on John xv. 16;
Eph. iv. 28.

15. All that are with me salute thee.
Notes, Rom. xvi. 3. Paul, at the
close of his epistles, usually mentions
the names of those who sent affectionate salutations. Here it would
seem to be implied that Titus knew
who were with Paul, and also that he
himself had been travelling with him.
He evidently refers not to those who
were residing in the place where he
was, but to those who had gone with
him from Crete as his companions.--
¥ Greet them that love us in the faith.
In the faith of the gospel, or as
Christians. No names are here mentioned; comp. 1 Thess. v. 26; Col.
iv. 15. Grace be with you all.
Notes, Rom. i. 7; xvi. 20.

The subscription, ‘It was written
to Titus,” d&c., is, like the other subscriptions at the close of the epistles,
of no authority whatever; see the
close of the Notes on 1 Cor. In this
subscription there are probably two
errors: (1.) In the statement that
Titus was “ordained the first bishop
of the church of the Cretians ;” for
(a) there is no evidence that there
was a church there called “the church

It was written to Titus, ordained
the first bishop of the church
of the Cretians, from Nicopolis
of Macedonia.

of the Cretians,” as there were doubtless many churches on the island; (6)
there is no evidence that Titus was
the first bishop of the church there,
or that he was the first one there to
whom might be properly applied the
term bishop in the scriptural sense.
Indeed, there is positive evidence
that he was not the first, for Paul
was there with him, and Titus was
‘left’ there to complete what he had
begun. (c) There is no evidence that
Titus was “bishop” there at all in the
prelatical sense of the term, or even
that he was a settled pastor; see
Notes on ver. 1, 5. (2.) That the
epistle was written “from Nicopolis
of Macedonia;” for (a) there is no
certain evidence that it was written
at Nicopolis at all, though this is
probable; (6) there is no reason to believe that the Nicopolis referred to
was in Macedonia; see Intro. $ 4.
These subscriptions are so utterly
destitute of authority, and are so full
of mistakes, that it is high time they
were omitted in the editions of the
Bible. ‘They are no part of the inspired writings, but are of the nature
of “notes and comments,” and are
constantly doing something, perhaps
much, to perpetuate error. The
opinion that Timothy and Titus were
prelatical bishops, the one of Ephesus
and the other of Crete, depends far
more on these worthless subscriptions
than on any thing in the epistles themselves. Indeed, there is no evidence
of it in the epistles ; and, if these subscriptions were removed, no man
from the New Testament would ever
suppose that they sustained this office
at all.

- Pt thelial
* = > pm ag » te
J _ 4 _a) hay #7,
oped | Weep ha 4 Oty mate
a ‘ ¥ je | ta _-- os pine as 4 - .
es Thi cata, Dick cee tac ha Pn, thle a, te
re - ina Wend £23 sa ods sree? db -) aa My «a
» oe ~ ae ees ons peice wn Malouines bests -- nied Chad oo
ns ee Oe he titre site ee ee Bi dase Ng, bt, ag
“< Peat: _ chan they 5 pannd bAaen Himes tty va flew ws: a, by “2p
ot Bis net hihi ite hd bniek wap ae at td | aii “y 44 nt * ys
ae tdi udbde | nee we Sh par anf vhs Ho F pin A; ash P
4% wih 2 er ~ eietin i A

<“ 3 said Bilayer nal eat lp ies Py
AY esi ep ere +: ty Ss

a peak thet pe el
aioe s
Pontos k ae ee
% ipehat ole hy mere Wine yeacnlil

exeecnrae nek tte Paccar
Sale A dL er

AVS Right 5 5. pat /iate
« Cea ptralbe’ eh Ay yr he we ae : 1 7) YT: rat re
he-sraiee (0 i> inaend MERE lines bawe Weak te Sat non Ww
Pedder bad (31 ib este) SAP aH VHF PMhonre hy) As ie i, eg
1 be {Res me ‘ay Baie Poa i Nl se Pe We) bastante toy : ep
he erg beet S Poe B Beast HY Mec AaS HAT NN Foie 18 %e
Uap dn SUEY Pett Bw owe of bbedhaie peniite “fal BOWE hd Ph fe) =
4 “ ; a t uf Lol fei t Mey AMS EP Pott rte a

ces

dai se dis

we iWser ate ‘alten in rl
sa ite Dhol, bug Bard),
(bu (hrectioa siioid :
Neve any pecitiiun, Fe
Live bibs cet,
= be» confined 66 tat.

read merle

m, thas 4 oy al puld Le

§ 1. The History of Philemon.

Or Philemon, to whom this epistle was addressed, almost nothing more
is known than can be ascertained from the epistle itself. It is short, and
of a private character; but it is a bright and beautiful gem in the volume of
inspiration.

From Col. iv. 9, it may be inferred that the person to whom it was addressed was an inhabitant of Colosse, since Onesimus, concerning whom this
epistle was written, is there mentioned as ‘‘one of them.” See Notes on
that verse; comp. the ingenious remarks of Paley, Hor. Paul., on Colossians,
No. 1V. He is said by Calmet and Michaelis to have been wealthy ; but this
cannot be determined with certainty, though it isnot improbable. The only
circumstances which seem to indicate this, are, that Onesimus had been his
“servant,” from which it has been inferred that he was an owner of slaves ;
and that he appears to have been accustomed to show hospitality to strangers,
or, as Michaelis expresses it, ‘‘travelling Christians ;’’ see ver. 22 of the
epistle. But these ciremmstances are not sufficient to determine that he
was a man of property. There is no evidence, as we shall see, that he wasa
slave-holder; and Christians in moderate circumstances were accustomed to
show hospitality to their brethren. Besides, it is not said in ver. 22 that he
was accustomed to show general hospitality; but Paul merely asks him to
provide for him a lodging. It is probable that he had been accustomed to
remain with him when he was in Colosse.

It is quite clear that he had been converted under the ministry of the apostle
himself. This appears from what is said in ver. 19: “I do not say to thee
how thou owest unto me even thine own self.” This cannot be understood
otherwise than as implying that he had been converted under his preaching,
unless the apostle, on some former occasion, had been the means of saving
his life, of which there is no evidence. Indeed, it is manifest, from the
general tone of the epistle, that Philemon had been converted by the labours
of the author. It is just such a letter as it would be natural and proper to
write on such a supposition ; it is not one which the apostle would have been
likely to write to any one who did not sustain such a relation to him. But

ecxeli INTRODUCTION.

where and when he was converted, is unknown. It is possible that Paul may
have met with him at Ephesus; but it is much more probable that he had
himself been at Colosse, and that Philemon was one of his converts there.
See Intro. to the epistle to the Colossians.

It is evident from the epistle that Paul regarded him as a sincere Christian; as a man of strict integrity; as one who could be depended on to do
right. Thus (ver. 5--7), he says that he had heard of his “love and faith
toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all saints;’”’ thus he confidently asks him
to provide for him a lodging when he should come (ver. 22); and thus he expresses the assured belief that he would do what was right towards one who
had been his servant, who, having been formerly unfaithful, was now converted, and, in the estimation of the apostle, was worthy of the confidence
and affection of his former master.

In regard to his rank in the Christian church, nothing whatever is known.
Paul calls him (ver. 1) his “fellow-labourer ;”’ but this appellation is so
general, that it determines nothtng in regard to the manner in which he
co-operated with him in promoting religion. It is aterm which might be
applied to any active Christian, whether a preacher, an elder, a deacon,
or a private member of the church. It would seem clear, however, that
he was not a travelling preacher, for he had a home in Colosse (ver. 2, 22);
and the presumption is, that he was an active and benevolent member of
the church, who did not sustain any office. There are many private members of the churches, to whom all that is said of Philemon in the epistle
would apply. Yet there have been various conjectures in regard to the
office which he held. Hoffmann (Intro. ad Lection. Ep. ad Colossenses,
§ 18) supposes that he was bishop of Colosse; Michaelis supposes that he
was a deacon in the church; but of either of these, there is no evidence
whatever.

Nothing is known of his age, his profession, or of the time and circumstances of his death. Neither is it certainly known what effect this epistle
had on him, or whether he again received Onesimus under his roof. It may
be presumed, however, that such a letter, addressed to sweh a man, would
not fail of its object.

§ 2. The Occasion on which the Epistle was written.

This can be learned only from the epistle itself, and there the circumstances are so marked as to make a mistake impossible.

(1.) Philemon had had a servant of the name of Onesimus. Of the
character of this servant, before Paul became acquainted with him, nothing
more is known than that he had been “unprofitable”’ to Philemon (ver. 11),
and that he had probably done him some wrong, either by taking his property, or by the fact that he had escaped from him; ver. 18. It is not
necessary to suppose that he was a slave; for all that is implied of necessity in the word which is employed to designate his condition in ver. 16
(dacs), and all that is stated of him in the epistle, would be met by the
supposition that he was bound to Philemon, either by his parents or
guardians, or that he had bound himself to render voluntary service; see
Notes on ver. 16.

(2.) For some cause, this servant had fled from his master, and had gone
to Rome. The cause of his escaping is unknown. It may be that he had
purloined the property of his master, and dreaded detection; or that he had,
by his base conduct in some other way, exposed himself to punishment; or
that he merely desired freedom from oppression; or that he disregarded the
bonds into which he himself, or his parents or guardians, had entered, and
had therefore escaped. Nothing can be inferred about his condition, or his
relation to Philemon, from the fact that he ran away. It is perhaps quite

INTRODUCTION. CCXCili

as common for apprentices to run away, as it is for slaves; and they who
enter into voluntary bonds to render service to another, do not always
regard them. :

(3.) In some way, when at Rome, this servant had found out the apostle
Paul, and had been converted by his instrumentality. Paul says (ver. 10)
that he had “begotten him in his bonds” --iv ois decwois wov; which seems
to imply that Onesimus had come to him, and not that Paul had searched
him out. It does not appear that Paul, when a prisoner at Rome, was
allowed to go at large (comp. Acts xxviii. 30), though he was permitted
to receive all who came to him. Why Onesimus came to the apostle, is
not known. It may have been because he was in want, and Paul was the
only one in Rome whom he had ever seen; or it may have been because
his mind had become distressed on account of sin, and he sought him out
to obtain spiritual counsel. Conjecture on these points is useless, where
there is not even a hint that can serve as a clew to find out the truth.

(4.) From some cause, equally unknown, Onesimus, when converted,
was desirous of returning to his former master. It is commonly assumed
that his returning again was at the instigation of the apostle, and that
this furnishes an instance of his belief that runaway slaves should be sent
back to their masters. But, besides that there is no certain evidence that
he ever was a slave, there is as little proof that he returned at the instigation of Paul, or that his return was not wholly voluntary on his part.
For the only expression which the apostle uses on this subject (ver. 12),
“whom I have sent again” --avir:u~a--does not necessarily imply that he
even proposed it to him, still less that he commandedit. It is a word of
such general import, that it would be employed on the supposition that
Onesimus desired to return, and that Paul, who had a strong wish to retain
him, to aid him in the same way that Philemon himself would do if he were
with him (comp. ver. 13), had, on the whole, concluded to part with him,
and to send him again, with a letter, to his friend Philemon. It is just such
language as he would have used of Timothy, Titus, or Epaphroditus, if employed on an important embassy at the request of the apostle; comp. Luke
vii. 6, 10, 19; xx. 18; Acts x.5 ; xv. 22; 1 €or. iv. 17; 2 Cor.ix. 3; Eph. vi.
22; Phil. ii. 19, 23. 25, 28; 1 Thess. iii. 2,5; Titus ili. 12, for a similar use
of the word send (ziuew). There is nothing in the statement which forbids
us to suppose that Onesimus was himself disposed to return to Philemon,
and that Paul “sent” him at his own request. To this, Onesimus might
have been inclined from many causes. He may have repented that he left
his master, and had forsaken the comforts which he had enjoyed under his
roof. It is no uncommon thing for a runaway apprentice, or servant, when
he has seen and felt the misery of being among strangers and in want, to
wish himself well back again in the house of his master. Or he may have
felt that he had wronged his master in some way (comp. Notes on ver. 18),
and, being now converted, was desirous of repairing the wrong. Or he may
have had friends and kindred in Colosse whom he was desirous of seeing
again. Since any one of these, or of many other supposable causes, may
have induced him to desire to return to his master, it should not be asswmed
that Paul sent him against his will, and thence be inferred that he was in
favour of sending back runaway slaves to their masters against their will.
There are many points to be proved, which cannot be proved, to make that a
legitimate inference ; see Notes on ver. 12.

(5.) Whatever were the reasons why Onesimus desired to return to
Philemon, it is clear that he was apprehensive of some trouble if he went
back. What those reasons were, it is impossible now to determine with absolute certainty, but it is not difficult to conjecture what they may have been,
and any of the following will account for his apprehensions--either (a) that
he had done his master wrong by the mere act of leaving him, depriving him

cCxciv INTRODUCTION.

of valuable services which he was bound to render ; or (b) that he may have
felt that the mere act of running away had injured the character of his
master, for such an act always implies that there is something in the dealings
of a master which makes it desirable to leave him; or (c) that he had in some
way injured him in respect to property, by taking that which did not belong
to him, ver. 18; or (d) that he owed his master, and he may have inferred
from his leaving him that he meant to defraud him, ver. 18; or (¢) that the
laws of Phrygia were such that Onesimus apprehended that if he returned,
even penitent, it would be judged by his master necessary to punish him, in
orderto deter others from committing a similar offence. The laws of Phrygia,
it is said, allowed the master to punish a slave without applying to a magistrate. See Macknight. It should be said also that the Phrygians were a
severe people (Curtius, Lib. v.c. 1), and it is not improbable that, from the
customs there, Onesimus may have apprehended harsh treatment if he returned.--It is not proper to assume that any one of these was certainly the
reason why he feared to return, for this cannot be absolutely determined.
We should not take it for granted that he had defrauded his master--for
that is not necessarily implied in what is said in ver. 18, and we should
not impute crimes to men without proof; nor should we take it for granted
that he feared to be punished as a runaway slave--for that cannot be
proved; but some one or more of these reasons doubtless operated to make
him apprehensive that if he returned he would meet with, at least, a cold
reception.

(6.) To induce his master to receive him kindly again, was the main
object of this courteous and kind epistle. For a view of the arguments
on which he urges this, see the Analysis of the epistle. The arguments
are such, that we should suppose they could not be resisted, and we may
presume, without impropriety, that they had the desired effect on the
mind of Philemon--but of that we have no certain evidence,

§ 3. The Time and Place of writing the Epistle.

There can be no doubt that this ietter was written from Rome about
the time when the epistle to the Colossians was written; comp. Intro. to
that epistle. The circumstances which conduct to this conclusion are
such as the following: (1,) Paul at the time when it was written was a
prisoner; ver. 1. ‘‘ Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ ;”’ ver. 10. ‘‘ Whom
I have begotten in my bonds;” comp. ver. 23. ‘‘ Epaphras, my fellowprisoner in Christ Jesus.” (2.) It was written when he had hopes of obtaining his liberty, or when he had such a prospect of it that he could ask
Philemon, with confidence, to “prepare him a lodging ;” ver. 22. (8.)
Timothy was with him at the time when it was written (ver. 1), and we
know that Paul desired him to come to him to Rome when he was a prisoner there as soon as possible; 2 Tim. iv. 9. ‘Do thy diligence to
come shortly unto me.’ (4.) We know that Onesimus was actually sent
by Paul to Colosse while he was a prisoner at Rome, and it would be
morally certain that, under the circumstances of the case, he would send
the letter to his master at that time. No other instance is mentioned in
which he sent him to Colosse, and the evidence is as certain as the nature
of the case admits, that that was the time when the epistle was written ;
see Col. iv. 9. (5.) The same persons are mentioned in the salutations
in the two epistles, at least they are so far the same as to make it probable
that the epistles were written at the same time, for it is not very probable
that the same persons would in another place, and on another occasion,
have been with the apostle. Thus Aristarchus, Mark, Epaphras, Luke,
and Demas, join in the salutations both to the church at Colosse and to
Philemon. Probably at no other time in the life of Paul were all these

INTRODUCTION. CCxXCY

persons with him, than when he was a prisoner at Rome. These considerations
make it clear that the epistle was written while Paul was a prisoner at Rome

and at about the same time with the epistle to the Colossians. If so, it was
about A. D. 62.

$4. The Character of this Epistle.

This letter is almost wholly of a private character, and yet there is
scarcely any portion of the New Testament of equal length which is of more
value. It is exquisitely beautiful and delicate. It is a model of courtesy
and politeness. It presents the character of the author in a most amiable
light, and shows what true religion will produce in causing genuine refinement of thought and language. It is gentle and persuasive, and yet the argument is one that we should suppose would have been, and probably was,
irresistible. It is very easy to conceive that the task which the apostle
undertook to perform was one which it would be difficult to accomplish--
that of reconciling an offended master to a runaway servant. And yet it is
done with so much kindness, persuasiveness, gentleness, and true affection,
that, as the letter was read, it is easy to imagine that all the hostility of the
master was disarmed, and we can almost see him desiring to embrace him
who bore it, not now asa servant, but as a Christian brother ; ver. 16. “ Itis
impossible,” says Doddridge, “to read over this admirable epistle without
being touched with the delicacy of sentiment, and the masterly address, that
appear in every part of it. We see here, in a most striking light, how perfectly consistent true politeness is,--not only with all the warmth and sincerity of a friend, but even with the dignity of the Christian and the Apostle. And if this letter were to be considered in no other view than as a
mere human composition, it must be allowed to be a master-piece in its
kind. As an illustration of this remark, it may not be improper to compare
it with an epistle of Pliny, that seems to have been written on a similar
occasion (Lib, ix. Let. 21) ; which, though penned by one that was reckoned
to excel in the epistolary style, though it has undoubtedly many beauties,
yet must be acknowledged by every impartial reader vastly inferior to this
animated composition of the apostle.” As a specimen of the courtesy and
politeness which the Christian ought to practise at all times, as well as
furnishing many valuable lessons on Christian duty (see the Remarks at the
close), it deserves a place in the volume of inspiration; and a material chasm
would be produced in the instructions which are needful for us, if it were
withdrawn from the sacred canon.

an ae te vere ssalaaa
* ’ ; ee yas re ; sali ae Yobiats
iy Te LR NeR TT eee hla Fon wie
woltiw ag” ara Saebiemead) | J
' te Vel aareans

mies A Stott
POs: roma aa | ki oad
weg uf Hewes. yr whe = ve aed s ; ah cd ie te ~ .
Yiieon ait conidicans, to * épatd bio A iotaite poet $3)
Wap whe-wittr Mim EL Ge Lace when} ore eiten [oory 1 pel
SAL= Ge 4? fF eal Avie tai to @ries i abt 2 Barn “hen i] se |
joerg ites Se 5 a ‘Re bi¢ Vigesiog 16

38 or aa q j¢@ s
7 ’ pow boat neruui War eaminly art

a ‘ee* L
‘> Cpt a 4 Segoe mae, end jt wena it

© eee tae
74ers
ly Digues

Analysis of the Epistle. |

The epistle embraces the following
subjects :--

I. The salutation ; ver. 1--3.

II. A mention of the excellent account which the apostle had heard
of Philemon, and the occasion which
he had for thankfulness on his behalf;
ver. 4--7.

(a) He always remembered him in

his prayers ; ver. 4.

(b) He had heard of his faith and
love, and of his kindness towards those who bore the Christian name; ver. 5.

(c) He desired that his goodness
in making others, in common
with him, partakers of the expression of his faith, might be
even more effectual in securing
the proper acknowledgment of it
wherever it mightbe known ; ver. 6.

(d) He says that he had great joy
and consolation from the happiness which he had conferred on
Christians who needed his aid;
ver. 7.

III. The main subject of the epistle--the desire that he would receive
his servant Onesimus again, and the
arguments to persuade him to do it ;
ver, 8--21.

(1.) He places it on the ground
of entreaty, not of command.. He
might, in virtue of his apostolic office, enjoin many things on him, and
possibly this, yet he chooses to place
it wholly on other grounds, and to
make it a matter of personal friend-'
ship ; ver. 8.

(2.) Particular reasons why he
should do it :-- |

(a) For love’s sake--love to Paul;
--now an old man, and in prison
on account of their common re-

ligion ; ver. 9. j

(6) Paul regarded Onesimus as
his own son, and asked that he
might be received and treated as
such ; ver. 10.

(c) He assures Philemon that,
whatever he might have been
formerly, he would now find
him to be profitable to himself;
ver. 11:

(d) He assures him that Onesimus
was especially dear to him, and
that he would have been very
useful to him in his circumstances,
but that he did not think it proper to retain him with him without the consent of Philemon.
Onesimus, therefore, was not
sent back as a worthless vagabond, and Philemon, in receiving
him, might be sure that he was
receiving one who Paul believed
was fitted to be eminently useful ;
ver. 12--14.

(e) He suggests to Philemon that
probably it was so arranged by
divine Providence, that Onesimus should depart in order that
he might receive him again in
afar more tender and endearing
relation, not as a servant, but as
a Christian brother ; ver. 15, 16

({) He appeals to the personal
friendship of Philemon, and asks
that if he regarded him as a participator with him in the hopes
of the gospel, or as a feilowlabourer in a common cause, he
would receive him as he would
himself; ver. 17.

(g) He says that he would him.
self become security for Onesimus if he owed Philemon anything, or had in any way wrong
ed him ; ver. 18, 19.

(h) He concludes the argument
by referring to the happiness
pA a prisoner * of Jesus
Christ, and Timothy our bro-

ther, unto Philemon our dearly be-

loved, and fellow-labourer,’

a Ep.3.1. b Ph.2.25.

which it would give him if Philemon would receive his former
servant again; and with the
expression of his conviction that
he would do more than he asked
in the matter, and then asks
that, while he showed favour to
Onesimus, he wouldalso preparea
lodging for him, for he hoped soon
to be with him; ver. 20--22.
Perhaps by this last suggestion
he hoped also to do much to favour the cause of Onesimus--
for Philemon could hardly turn
him away when he expected that
Paul himself would soon be with
him. Such an argument would
be likely to be effectual in the
case. We do not like to deny
the request which a friend makes
in a letter, if we expect soon
to see the writer himself. It
would be much more easy to do it
if we had no expectations of seeing him very soon.

IV. The epistle closes with affectionate salutations from certain persons who were with Paul, and who
were probably well known to Philemon,
and with the customary benediction ;
ver. 23--25.

1, Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
A prisoner at Rome in the cause of
Jesus Christ; Notes, Eph. iii. 1;
2 Tim. 1. & § And Timothy our
brother. Timothy, it seems, had
come to him agreeably to his request;
2 Tim. iv. 9. Paul not unfrequently
joins his name with his own in his
epistles ; 2 Cor. i. 1; Phil. i. 1; Col.
len iihesse lae-no hess islam AG
Timothy was of that region of country,
and as he had accompanied Paul in
his travels, he was doubtless acquainted with Philemon. {| Unto Philemon
our dearly beloved, and fellow-labourer. See Intro.§ 1. The word rendered fellow-labourer (cvvep yds), does
not determine what office he held. if

[A. D. 6a

2 And to our beloved Apphia,
'and Archippus ¢ our fellow-soldier,
and to the church % in thy house:

38 Grace ¢ to you, and peace, from

¢ Co.4.17 ad Ro 16.5. e Ep.1.2.

*he held any, or in what respects he
was a fellow-labourer with Paul. It
means a co-worker, or helper, and
doubtless here means that he was a
helper or fellow-worker in the great
cause to which Paul had devoted his
life, but whether as a preacher, or
deacon, or a private Christian, cannot be ascertained. It is commonly,
in the New Testament, applied to
ministers of the gospel, though by no
means exclusively, and in several instances it cannot be determined whether it denotes ministers of the gospel,
or those who furthered the cause of
religion, and co-operated with the apostle in some other way than preaching. See the following places, which
are the only ones where it occurs in
the New Testament; Rom. xvi. 3. 9,
OE Vee ore iil. Oe) 2 Cor, 1.34) vali.
Qo EDIe lay vo elves On Cole lym ie:
T?/Ehess, iis -2 > hilenm 1. 243
John 8.

2. And to our beloved Apphia.
This was a female (Gr. éyarnzn),
and was probably the wife of Philemon. {J And Archippus our fellowsoldier. See Notes, Col. iv. 17. It has
been supposed that he was a son of
Philemon, and this would appear not
to be improbable, as he was one of his
family. On the term “ fellow-soldier,”
see Notes, Phil. 11. 25. It is applied
here to one who was a minister of the
gospel, and who is spoken of in connection with Paul as enlisted under
the banners of the Captain of salvation, and waging a warfare with the
wickedness of the world ; comp. Notes,
|2 Tim. ii. 38,4. That Archippus was
a minister of the gospel, is clear from
Col. iv. 17. § And to the church in
thy house. Either the church that
commonly met in his house, or more
probably that was composed of his own
family; comp. Notes, Rom. xvi. 5.

3. Grace to you, and peace, &c. See
' Notes on Rom. i. 7.

God our Father and the Loi dJesus
Christ.

4 I thank « my God, making
mention of thee always in my
prayers,

a Ep.1.16.

4, I thank my God. That is, for |

what I hear of you. {| Making men-

tion of thee alwaysin my prayers. See |

a similar declaration respecting the
church at Ephesus, Eph. i. 16. It
would appear from this that Paul, in
his private devotions, was in the habit
of mentioning churches and individuals by name. It would seem, also,
that though he was a prisoner, yet he
somehow found opportunity for secret
devotion. And it would appear further, that, though encompassed with
many cares and sorrows, and about to
be put on trial for his life, he did not
forget toremembera Christian brother
though far distant from him, and to
bear him on hisheart before the throne
of grace. To remember with affectionate concern these churches and
individuals, as he did, Paul must have
been a man of much prayer.

5. Hearing of thy love and faith.
Either by Onesimus, who, after his
conversion, would be disposed to state
all that he knew that was favourable
of Philemon, or hearing it by some
other persons who had come from
Colosse to Rome. The faith which
is mentioned here refers to the Lord
Jesus; the love, to the saints. The
order in the Greek is indeed the same
as in our version, but it is not unusual
by synthesis, or uniting two or more
things together, to arrange words in
that manner. Thus Matt. xii. 22,

“The blind and dumb both spake and |

saw;” that is, the blind saw, and the
dumb spake. The meaning is, that he
had strong faith in the Lord Jesus,
and ardent love towards all who were
Christians. See a similar declaration
in Col. i. 4.

6. That the communication of thy |
faith. That is, this was a subject of |

prayer on the part of the apostle, that
the “communication of his faith”
might receive from all the proper
acknowledgment of the good which he
did in the Christian cause. The phrase

5 Hearing of thy love and faith,
which thou hast toward the Lord
Jesus, and toward all saints;

6 That © the communication of

thy faith may become effectual ¢ by
b Ph.1.9-11. o Ja.2.14,17.

translated “communication of thy
faith,’ means the making of thy faith
common to others; that is, enabling
others to partake of the fruits of it, to
wit, by good deeds. On the meaning
of the word here rendered ‘‘ communication”’ (xavwvie, koinonia), see Notes
on Eph. iii. 9; comp. Phil. ii. 1; ui.
10. Calvin has well expressed the
sense of this passage. ‘It is to be
observed that the apostle here does
not proceed in the commendation of
Philemon, but rather expresses what
he desires for him from the Lord.
These words are connected with those
in which he says that he remembered
him in his prayers. What, therefore,
did he desire for Philemon? That his
faith, expressing itself by good fruits,
might be shown to be true and not
vain. For he calls that the communication of his faith when it does not
remain inoperative within, but bears
itself forth to benefit men by its proper effects. For although faith has its
proper seat in the heart, yet it communicates itself to men by good
works.” The meaning is, that he
desired that Philemon would so make
common the proper fruits of faith by
his good deeds towards others, that all
might acknowledge it to be genuine
and efficacious. 4 May become effectual. Gr., ‘‘May be energetic”’ (évepyas);
may become operative, active, effective. § By the acknowledging. That
is, so as to secure from others the proper recognition of the existence of
faith in your heart. In other words,
so that others may see that you are
truly pious, and understand to what
extent you have faith. Of every
good thing which is in you. Of every
good principle, and of every benevolent trait, which is in your character.
That is, the proper outward expression of his faith in Christ, by doing
good to others, would be a development of the benevolence which existed
in his heart. { In Christ Jesus. Or
the acknowledging of every # good
thing which is in you in Christ
Jesus.

7 For we have great joy and consolation in thy love, because the
bowels of the saints are refreshed °

by thee, brother.
a Ph.4.8 3 2 Pe.1.5-8.

“towards (sis) Christ Jesus.’ ‘The
goodness in his heart had respect to
the Lord Jesus as its proper object,
but would be made manifest by his
kindness to men. The truth which is
taught in this passage, therefore, is,
that when faith exists in the heart, it
is very desirable that it should impart
its proper fruits towards others in such
a way that all may see that it is operative, and may recognize its power ; or
in other words, it is desirable that
when true religion exists it should be
fairly developed, that its possessor may
be acknowledged to be under its influence. We should wish that he may
have all the credit and honour which
the goodnegs of his heart is entitled to.
Paul supposed that a case had now
occurred in which an opportunity was
furnished to Philemon to show the
world how much he was governed by
the faith of the gospel.

7. For we have great joy and consolation in thy love. In thy love towards Christians. The word here
rendered joy (x#p), properly means
grace. A large number of manuscripts, however, instead of this word,
have yapxy, Charan, joy. See Wetstein. This reading has been adopted
by Griesbach, Tittman, and Hahn.
{ Because the bowels of the saints are
refreshed by thee, brother. For your
kindness to them. The word bowels
here probably means minds, hearts,
for it is used in the Scriptures to denote the affections. The sense is, that
the kindness which he had shown to
Christians had done much to make
them happy. On the word refreshed,
see 2 Cor. vil. 13; 2 Tim. i. 16.

8. Wherefore, though I might be
much bold in Christ. “Though I might
have much boldness as an apostle of
Christ. He means that he was invested with authority by the Lord
Jesus, and would have a right, as an

8 Wherefore, though ¢ I might
be much bold in Christ to enjoin
thee that which is convenient,

9 Yet for love’s sake I rather
beseech thee, being such an one as

| Paul the aged, and now also a pri-

soner of Jesus Christ.

b 2 Co.7.13; 2 Ti.1.16. CU Ehi2.6.

apostle, to enjoin what ought to be
done in the case which he is about to
lay before him; comp. 1 Thess. ii. 6,
7. ¥ To enjoin thee that which is convenient. To command what is proper
tobe done. The word convenient here
(ro ayqxov), means that which would be
fit or proper in the case ; comp. Notes,
Eph. vy. 4. The apostle implies here
that what he was about to ask, was
proper to be done in the circumstances, but he does not put it on that
ground, but rather asks it as a personal favour. It is usually not best
to conunand a thing to be done if we
can as well secure it by asking it asa
favour ; comp. Dan. i. 8, 11, 12.

9. Yet forlove’s sake. For the love
which you bear me, and for the common cause. ¥ J rather beseech thee.
Rather than command thee. {| Being
such an oneas Paul the aged. rpechurns
--an old man. We have no means of
ascertaining the exact age of Paul at
this time, and I do not recollect that
he ever alludes to his age, though he
often does to his infirmities, in any
place except here. Doddridge supposes that at the time when Stephen was
stoned, when he is called ‘a young
man” (veavies, Acts vii. 58), he was
twenty-four years of age, in which case
he would now have been about fiftythree. Chrysostom supposes that he
may have been thirty-five years old at
the time of his conversion, which would
have made him about sixty-three at
this time. The difficult of determining with any degree of accuracy the
age of the apostle at this time, arises
from the indefinite nature of the word
used by Luke, Acts vii. 58, and rendered a young man. That word, like
the corresponding word veavioxos, neaniskos, was applied to men in the vigour
of manhood up to the age of forty
years. Robinson, Lex. Phavorinus
says aman is called vravicxos, neaniskos,

10 I beseech thee for my son!
Onesimus, ¢ whom I have begotten
+ in my bonds:

: a Co.4 9. 51 Co.4.15.

a young man, till he is twenty-eight ; |
and sp:c’rns, presbytés, from fortynine till he is fifty-six. Varro says
that a man is young (juvenis,) till he
is forty-five, andaged at sixty. Whitby.
These periods of time, however, are
very indefinite, but it will accord well
with the usual meaning of the words
to suppose that Paul was in the neighbourhood of thirty when he was converted, and that he was now not far
from sixty. We are to remember also,
that the constitution of Paul may have
been much broken by his labours, his
perils, and his trials. Not advanced
probably to the usual limit of human
life, he may have had all the characteristics of a very aged man; comp.
the Note of Benson. The argument
here is, that we feel that it is proper,
as far as we can, to grant the request
of an old man. Paul thus felt that it
was reasonable to suppose that Philemon would not refuse to gratify the
wishes of an aged servant of Christ,
who had spent the vigour of his life in
the service of their common Master.
It should be a very strong case when
we refuse to gratify the wishes of an
aged Christian in any thing, especially
if he has rendered important services
to the church and the world. {| And
now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
In the cause of Jesus Christ; or a
prisoner for endeavouring to make him
known to the world; comp. Notes on
Bpbein. Ws "iv, iyi. 20 5"Coljiv. 10.
The argument here is, that it might
be presumed that Philemon would not
refuse the request of one who was suffering in prison on account of their
common religion. For sucha prisoner
we should be ready to do all that we
can to mitigate the sorrows of his confinement, and to make his condition
comfortable.

10. I beseech thee for my son Onestmus. That is, my son in the gospel ;
one to whom I sustain the relation of
a spiritual father; comp. Notes on 1
Tim. i. 2. The address and tact of
Paul here are worthy of particular
observation. Any other mode of bring-

11 Which < in time past was to
thee unprofitable, but now profitable to thee and to me:

¢ | Pe.2.10.

ing the case before the mind of Philemon might have repelled him. If he
had simply said, “I beseech thee for
Onesimus;’’ or, “I beseech thee for
thy servant Onesimus,”’ he would at
once have reverted to his former conduct, and remembered all his ingratitude and disobedience. But the phrase
“my son,’’ makes the way easy for the
mention of his name, for he had already
found the way to his heart before his
eye lighted on his name, by the mention of the relation which he sustained
to himself. Who could refuse to such
a man as Paul--a laborious servant of
Christ--an aged man, exhausted with
his many sufferings and toils--and a
prisoner--a request which he made for
one whom he regarded as his son? It
may be added, that the delicate address of the apostle in introducing the
subject, is better seen in the original
than inourtranslation. Intheoriginal,
the name Onesimus isreserved to come
in last in the sentence. The order of
the Greek is this: “I entreat thee
concerning a son of mine, whom I have
begotten in my bonds --Onesimus.”’
Here the name is not suggested, until
he had mentioned that he sustained to
him the relation of a son, and also till
he had added that his conversion was
the fruit of his labours while he was
a prisoner. Then, when the name
of Onesimus ts mentioned, it would
occur to Philemon not primarily as the
name of an ungrateful and disobedient
servant, but as the interesting case of
one converted by the labours of his
own friend in prison. Was there ever
more delicacy evineed in preparing the
way for disarming one of prejudice,
and carrying an appeal to his heart ?
q Whom I have begotten in my bonds.
Who has been converted by my efforts
while I have been a prisoner. On the
phrase ‘‘whom I have begotten,” see
1 Cor, iv. 15. Nothing is said of the
way in which he had become acquainted with Onesimus, or why he had
put himself under the teaching of
Paul; see the Intro. § 2. (3.)

11. Which in time past was to thee
12 Whom I have sent again:

13 Whom I would have retained

thou therefore receive him, that is,| with me, that 4 in thy stead he

mine own bowels:

unprofitable. Either because he was
indolent; because he had wronged
him (comp. Notes on ver. 18), or because he had run away from him. It
is possible that there may be an allusion here to the meaning of the name
Onesimus, which denotes profitable
(from svhnus, fut. sviow, to be useful, to
be profitable, to help), and that Paul
means to say that he had hitherto not
well answered to the meaning of his
own name, but that now he would be
found to do so. ¥ But now profitable
to thee. The Greek here is ctxypucroy,
euchreston, but the meaning is about
the same as that of the word Onesimus.
It denotes very useful. In 2 Tim. ii. 21,
it is rendered meet for use; in 2 Tim.
iv. 11, and here, profitable. It does
not elsewhere occur in the New Testament. { And to me. Paul had
doubtless found him useful to him as
a Christian brother in his bonds, and
it is easy to conceive that, in his circumstances, he would greatly desire
to retain him with him.

12. Whom I have sent again. That
is, to Philemon. This was, doubtless,
at his own request, for (1.) there is
not the slightest evidence that he
compelled him, or even urged him to
go. The language is just such as
would have been used on the supposition either that he requested him to
go and bear a letter to Colosse, or
that Onesimus desired to go, and that
Paul sent him agreeably to his: request; comp. Phil. ii. 25. ‘“ Yet I
suppose it necessary to send to you
Epaphroditus my brother, and companion in labour,” &ec.; Col. iv. 7, 8.
“¢ All my state shall Tychicus declare
unto you, who is a beloved brother,
and a faithful minister and fellowservant in the Lord: whom I have
sent unto you for the same purpose,
that he might know your estate,” d&c.
But Epaphroditus and Tychicus were
not sent against their own will--nor
is there any more reason to think
that Onesimus was; see Intro. $ 2. (4.)
(2.) Paul had no power to send Onesi-
‘mus back to his master unless he chose

a) Co.16.)7; Ph.2.30.

to go. He had no civil authority ;
he had no guard to accompany him;
he could intrust him to no sheriff to
convey him from place to place, and
he had no means of controlling him,
if he chose to go to any other place
than Colosse. He could indeed have
sent him away from himself; he could
have told him to go to Colosse, but
there his power ended. Onesimus
then could have gone where he pleased.
But there is no evidence that Paul
even told him to go to Colosse against
his own inclination, or that he would
have sent him away at all unless he
had himself requested it. (3.) There
may have been many reasons why
Onesimus desired to return to Colosse,
and no one can prove that he did not
express that desire to Paul, and that
his ‘‘ sending” him was not in consequence of such a request. He may
have had friends and relatives there;
or, being now converted, he may have
been sensible that he had wronged his
former master, and that he ought to
return and repair the wrong; or he
may have been poor, and a stranger
in Rome, and may have been greatly
disappointed in what he had expected
to find there when he left Philemon,
and may have desired to return to the
comparative comforts of his former
condition. (4.) It may be added,
therefore, (a) that this passage should
not be adduced to prove that we ought
to send back run-away slaves to their
former masters against their own consent; or to justify the laws which require magistrates to do it; or to show
that they whe have escaped should be
arrested and forcibly detained ; or to
justifyany sort of influence over a runaway slave to induce him to return to
his former master. 'Yhere is not the
least evidence that any of these things
occurred in the case before us, and if
this instance is-ever appealed to, it
should be to justify what Paul did--
AND NOTHING ELSE. (b) The passage
shows that it is right to aid a servant
of any kind to return to his master of
he desires it. It is right to give him

might have ministered unto me in
the bonds of the gospel :
14 But without thy mind would

a “letter,” and to plead earnestly for
his favourable reception if he has in
any way wronged his master--for
Paul did this. On the same principle
it would be right to give him pecuniary
assistance to enable him to return--
for there may be cases where one who
has fled from servitude might wish to
return. There may be instances
where one has had a kind master,
with whom he would feel that on the
whole he could be more happy than
in his present circumstances, Such
cases, however, are exceedingly rare.
Or there may be instances where one
may have relatives that are in the
neighbourhood or in the family of his
former master, and the desire to be
with them may be so strong that on
the whole he would choose to be a
servant as he was before, rather than
to remain as he is now. In all such
cases it is right to render aid--for the
example of the apostle Paul goes to
sustain this. But it goes no further.
So far as appears, he neither advised
Onesimus to return, nor did he compel him ; nor did he say one word to
tfluence him to do it;--nor did he
mean or expect that he would be a
slave when he should have been received again by his master; see Notes
on ver. 16. J Thou, therefore, receive
him, that is, mine own bowels. There
is great delicacy also in this expression. If he had merely said “receive
him,” Philemon might have thought
only of him as he formerly was.
Paul, therefore, adds, “that is, mine
own bowels’? --‘ one whom I so tenderly love that he seems to carry my
heart with him wherever he goes.”’--
Doddridge.

13. Whom I would have retained
with me, that in thy stead. ‘ That he
might render me the service which I
know you would if you were here.”
The Greek is, “for thee’ (itp cov) ;
that is, what he should do for Paul
might be regarded as done by Philemon himself. (| He might have ministered unto me. He might have ren-

I do nothing; that thy benefit
should not be as it were of necessity, but willingly.«

a 2Co.9.7.

dered me assistance (d:axovm) ; to wit,
in sucha way as one who was in bonds
would need.

14. But without thy mind would I
do nothing. Nothing in the matter
referred to. He would not retain
Onesimus in his service, much as he
needed his assistance, without the
cordial consent of Philemon. He
would not give him occasion for
hard feeling or complaint, as 7f Paul
had induced him to leave his master,
or as if he persuaded him to remain
with him when he wished to return--
or as tf he kept him away from him
when he owed him or had wronged
him. All that is said here is entirely
consistent with the supposition that
Onesimus was disposed to return to
his master, and with the supposition
that Paul did not compel or urge him
to doit. For it is probable that 7
Onesimus had proposed to return, it
would have been easy for Paul to
have retained him with him. He
might have represented his own want
ofafriend. He might have appealed
to his gratitude on account of his
efforts for his conversion. He might
have shown him that he was under
no moral obligation to go back. He
might have refused to give him this
letter, and might have so represented
to him the dangers of the way, and
the probability of a harsh reception,
as effectually to have dissuaded him
from such a purpose. But, in that
case, it is clear that this might have
caused hard feeling in the bosom of
Philemon, and rather than do that he
preferred to let him return to his
master, and to plead for him that he
might have a kind reception. It is,
therefore, by no means necessary to
suppose that Paul felt that Onesimus
was under obligation to return, or
that he was disposed to compel him,
or that Onesimus was not inclined to
return voluntarily; but all the cir
cumstances of the case are met by the
supposition that, if Paul retained him,
Philemon might conceive that he had
15 For © perhaps he therefore
departed for a season, that thou
shouldest receive him for ever;

16 Not now as a servant, but
a Ge.45.5-8. b Mat.23.8; 1 ‘Ti.6.2.

injured him. Suppose, as seems to
have been the case, that Onesimus
“owed” Philemon (ver. 18), and then
suppose that Paul had chosen to retain him with himself, and had dissuaded him from returning to him,
would not Philemon have had reason
to complain of it? There was, therefore, on every account, great propriety
in his saying that he did not wish to
use any influence over him to retain
him with him when he purposed to
return to Colosse,and that he felt that
it would be wrong for him to keep
him, much as he needed him, without
the consent of Philemon. Nor is it
necessary, by what is said here, to
suppose that Onesimus was @ slave,
and that Paul believed that Philemon
had a right to him and to hi services
as such. All that he says here would
be met by the supposition that he was
a hired servant, and would be in fact
equally proper even on the supposition that he was an apprentice. In
either case, he would feel that he
gave just ground of complaint on the
part of Philemon if, when Onesimus
desired to return, he used any influence to dissuade him from it, and to
retain him with himself. It would
have been a violation of the rule requiring us to do to others as we would
wish them to do unto us, and Paul
therefore felt unwilling, much as he
needed the services of Onesimus, to
make use of any influence to retain
him with him without the consent of
his master. That thy benefit. The
favour which I might receive from
thee by having the services of Onesimus. If Onesimus should remain
with him and assist him, he would feel
that the benefit which would be conferred by his services would be in fact
bestowed by Philemon, for he had a
right to the service of Onesimus, and,
while Paul enjoyed it, he would be
deprived of it. The word rendered
benefit here--dya9iv--means good,
and the sense is, “the good which you

above a servant, a brother & beloved,
specially to me, but how much more
unto thee, both in the flesh, ¢ and

in the Lord 2
c Co.3.22.

would do me ;”’ to wit, by the service
of Onesimus. § Should not be as wt
were of necessity. As it would be if
Paul should -detain Onesimus with
him without affording Philemon an
opportunity of expressing his assent.
Paul would even then have felt that
he was in fact receiving a “ good” at
the expense of Philemon, but it would
not be a voluntary favour on his part.
{ But willingly. As it would be if he
had given his consent that Onesimus
should remain with him.

15. For perhaps he therefore departed for a season. Perhaps on this
account, or for this reason--oa rovro
--he left you for alittle time. Greek,
“ for an hour’--apig cpav: ‘The meaning is, that it was possible that this
was permitted in the Providence of
God in order that Onesimus might be
brought under the influence of the
gospel, and be far more serviceable tc
Philemon as a Christian, than he
could have been in his former relation
to him. What appeared to Philemon,
therefore, to be a calamity, and what
seemed to him to be wrong on the
part of Onesimus, might have been
permitted to occur in order that he
might receive a higher benefit. Such
things are not uncommon in human
affairs. | That thou shouldest receive
him for ever. That is, in the higher
relation of a Christian friend and
brother ; that he might be united to
thee in eternal affection; that he
might not only be with thee in a far
more endearing relation during the
present life than he was before, but
in the bonds of love in a world that
shall never end.

16. Not now as a servant. The
adverb rendered “not now” (odxér),
means no more, no further, no longer.
It implies that he had been before in
this condition, but was not to be now;
comp. Matt. xix. 6, “They are no
more twain.” They were once so,
but they are not to be regarded as
such now; Matt. xxii. 46, “ Neither

durst any man, from that day forth,
ask him any more questions.” They
once did it, but now they did not dare
to do it; Luke xv. 19, “ And am no
more worthy to be called thy son,”
though I once was ; John vi. 66, ‘And

walked no more with him,” though |

they once did; see also John xi. 54;
xiv. 19; xvii. 11; Acts viii. 39; Gal.
iv. 7; Eph. ii. 19. This passage then
proves that he had been before a servant--dovr0s--doulos. But still, it is
not certain what kind of a servant he
was. The word does not necessarily
mean slave, nor can it be proved from
this passage, or from any other part
of the epistle, that he was at any time
a slave ; see Notes on Eph. vi. 5, and
1 Tim. vi. 1. The word denotes servant of any kind, and it should never
be assumed that those to whomit was
applied were slaves. It is true that
slavery existed in the heathen nations
when the gospel was first preached,
and it is doubtless true that many
slaves were converted (comp. Notes
on 1 Cor. vii. 21), but the mere use of
the word does not necessarily prove
that he to whom it is applied was a
slave. If Onesimus was a slave, there
is reason to think that he was of a
most respectable character (comp.
Notes on Col. iv. 9), and indeed all
that is impiied in the use of the term
here, and all that is said of him, would
be met by the supposition that he was
a voluntary servant, and that he had
been in fact intrusted with important
business by Philemon. It would seem
from ver. 18 (‘‘or oweth thee ought”),
that he was in a condition which made
it possible for him to hold property,
or at least to be intrusted. § But
above a servant, a brother beloved.
A Christian brother; comp. Notes, 1
Tim. vi. 2. He was especially dear
to Paul himself as a Christian, and he
trusted that he would be so to Philemon. | Specially tome. That is, I
feel a special or particular interest in
him, and affection for him. ‘This he
felt not only on account of the traits
of character which he had evinced
since his conversion, but because he
had been converted under his instrumentality when he was a prisoner.
A convert made in such circumstances

would be particularly dear to one.
{ But how much more unto thee. Why,
it may be asked, would he then be
particularly dear to Philemon? I
answer, because (1.) of the former relation which he sustained to him--a
member of his own family, and bound
to him by strong ties ; (2.) because he
would receive him as a penitent, and
would have joy in his returning from
the error of his ways; (3.) because he
might expect him to remain long with
him and be of advantage to him as a
Christian brother; and (4.) because
he had voluntarily returned, and
thus shown that he felt a strong attachment to his former master. {| Jn
the flesh. This phrase is properly
used in reference to any relation
which may exist pertaining to the
present world, as contradistinguished
from that which is formed primarily
by religion, and which would be expressed by the subjoined phrase, “in
the Lord.” It might, in itself, refer
to any natural relation of blood, or to
any formed in business, or to any constituted by mere friendship, or te
family alliance, or to any relation
having its origin in voluntary or involuntary servitude. It is not necessary to suppose, in order to meet the
full force of the expression, either that
Onesimus had been a slave, or that he
would continue to be regarded as such.
Whatever relation of the kind, referred to above, may have existed between him and Philemon, would be
appropriately denoted by this phrase.
The new and more interesting relation
which they were now to sustain to
each other, which was formed by religion, is expressed by the phrase “in
the Lord.” In both these, Paul hoped
that Onesimus would manifest the
appropriate spirit of a Christian, and
be worthy of his entire confidence.
q In the Lord. AsaChristian. He
will be greatly endeared to your heart
as a consistent and worthy follower
of the Lord Jesus.--On this important verse then, in relation to the use
which is so often made of this epistle
by the advocates of slavery, to show
that Paul sanctioned it, and that it is
a duty to send back those who have
escaped from their masters that they
may again be held in bondage, we may
remark, (1.) there is no certain evidence that Onesimus was ever a slave
at al]. All the proof that he was, is
to be found in the word d0#%0s--doulos
--in this verse. But, as we have
seen, the mere use of this word by no
means proves that. All that is necessarily implied by it is that he was
in some way the servant of Philemon
--whether hired or bought cannot be
shown. (2.) At all events, even supposing that he had been a slave, Paul
did not mean that he should return
as such, or to be regarded as such.
He meant, whatever may have been
his former relation, and whatever subsequent relation he may have sustained, that he should be regarded as a
beloved Christian brother; that the
leading coneeption in regard to him
should be that he was a fellow-heir of
salvation, a member of the same redeemed church, a candidate for the
same heaven. (3.) Paul did not send
him back in order that he might be a
slave, or with a view that the shackles
of servitude should be riveted on
him. There is not the slightest evidence that he forced him to return,
or that he advised him to do it, or
even that he expressed a wish that he
would; and when he did send him, it
was not as a slave, but as a beloved
brother in the Lord. It cannot be
shown that the motive for sending
him back was in the slightest degree
that he should bea slave. No such
thing is intimated, nor is any such
thing necessary to be supposed in order
to a fair interpretation of the passage.
(4.) It is clear that, even 7f Onesimus had been a slave before, it would
have been contrary to the wishes of

Paul that Philemon should now hold |

him as such. Paul wished him to
regard him “not as a servant,”’ but
as a ‘beloved brother.” If Philemon
complied with his wishes, Onesimus
was never afterwards regarded or
treated as a slave. If he did so regard or treat him, it was contrary to
the expressed intention of the apostle, and. it is certain that he could
never have shown this letter in justification of it. It cannot fail to
strike any one that if Philemon fol-

lowed the spirit of this epistle, he
would not consider Onesimus to be a
slave, but if he sustained the relation
of a servant at all, it would be as a
voluntary member of his household,
where, in all respects, he would be
regarded and treated, not as a “chattel,” or a “thing,” but as a Christian
brother, (5.) This passage, therefore,
may be regarded as full proof that it
is not right to send a slave back,
against his will, to his former master,
to be a slave. It is right to help one
if he wishes to go back; to give him a
letter to his master, as Paul did to
Onesimus; to furnish him money to
help him on his journey if he desires
to return; and to commend him as a
Christian brother, if he is such; but
beyond that, the example of the apostle Paul does not go. It is perfectly
clear that he would not have sent him
back to be regarded and treated as
a slave, but being able to commend
him as a Christian, he was willing to
do it, and he expected that he would
be treated, not as a slave, but as a
Christian. The case before us does
not go at all to prove that Paul] would
have ever sent him back to bea chattel
orathing. If, with his own consent,
and by his own wish, we can send a
slave back to his master, to be treated
as a Christian and as a man, the example of Paul may show that it would
be right to do it, but it does not go
beyond that. (6.) In confirmation of
this, and asa guide in duty now, it
may be observed, that Paul had been
educated as a Hebrew; that he was
thoroughly imbued with the doctrines
of the Old Testament, and that one
of the elementary principles of that
system of religion was, that a runaway slave was in no circumstances
| to be returned by force to his former
master. ‘“ Thow shalt not deliver
unto his master the servant that is
escaped from his master unto thee;”
Deut. xxiii. 15. It cannot be supposed that, trained as he was in the principles of the Hebrew religion--of
which this was a positive and unrepealed Jaw, and imbued with the benevolent spirit of the gospel--a system
so hostile to oppression, the apostle
Paul would have constrained a slave

17 If thou count me therefore a
partner, *reeeive him as myself.
a@ 2 Co.8.23.

who had escaped from bondage to
return to servitude against his will.
(7.) It may be added, that if the
principles here acted on by Paul were
carried out, slavery would speedily
cease in the world. Very soon would
it come to an endif masters were to
regard those whom they hold, “‘not as
slaves,” but as beloved Christian brothers; not as chattels and things, but
as the redeemed children of God.
Thus regarding them, they would no
longer feel that they might chain
them, and task them, and sell them
as property. They would feel that
as Christians and as men, they were
on a level with themselves, and that
they who were made in the image
of God, and who had been redeemed
with the blood of his Son, ought to be

17. If thow count me therefore a
partner. The word rendered partner
(xsvoves), means a partaker, a companion. The idea in the word is that
of having something in common (xaués)
with any one--as common principles;
common attachments; a common interest in an enterprise; common
hopes. It may be applied to those
who hold the same principles of religion, and who have the same hope of
heaven, the same views of things, &c.
Here the meaning is, that if Philemon
regarded Paul as sharing with him in
the principles and hopes of religion,
or as a brother in the gospel so that
he would receive him, he ought to
veceive Onesimus in the same way.
He was actuated by the same principles, and had the same hopes, and
had a claim to be received as a Christian brother. His receiving Onesimus would be interpreted by Paul as
proof that he regarded him as a partaker of the hopes of the gospel, and
as a companion and friend. For a
plea in behalf of another, strongly resembling this, see Horace, Epis. Lib.
1, Ep. 9.

18. Jf he hath wronged thee.
Either by escaping from you, or by

18 If he hath wronged thee, or
oweth thee ought, put that on mine
account,

failing to perform what he had agreed
to, or by unfaithfulness when he was
with you as a servant, or by taking
your property when he went away.
Any of these methods would meet
all that is said here, and it is impossible to determine in which of them
he had done Philemon wrong. It
may be observed, however, that the
apostle evinces much delicacy in this
matter. He does not say that he
had wronged him, but he makes a
supposition that he might have done
it. Doubtless Philemon would suppose that he had done it, even if he
had done no more than to escape from
him, and, whatever Paul’s views of
that might be, he says that even if it
were so, he would wish him to set that
over to his account. Ile took the
blame on himself, and asked Philemon not to remember it against Onesimus. § Or oweth thee ought. It
appears from this, that Onesimus,
whatever may have been his former
condition, was capable of holding property, and of contracting debts. It
is possible that he might have bor-

-rowed money of Philemon, or he may

have been regarded as a tenant, and
may not have paid the rent of his farm,
or the apostle may mean that he had
owed him service which he had not
performed. Conjecture is useless as
to the way in which the debt had been
contracted. { Put that on mine account. Reckon, orimpute that tome
--tyol tAAoye. This word occurs nowhere else in the New Testament,
except in Rom. v. 13, where it is rendered imputed. See Notes on that
passage. It means to reckon; to put
to one’s account, to wit, what properly belongs to him, or what he assumes.
It never implies that that is to be
charged on one which does not properly belong to him, either as his
own act, or as that which he has assumed. In this case, it would have
been manifestly unjust for Philemon
to charge the wrong which Onesimus had done, or what he owed him,
191 Paul have written ¢¢ with mine
own hand, I will repay zt: albeit I

to the apostle Paul without his congent; and it cannot be inferred from
what Paul says here that it would
have been right to to so. The steps
in the case were these: (1.) Onesimus, not Paul, had done the wrong.
(2.) Paul was not guilty of it, or
blameworthy for it, and never in any
way, or by any process, could be made
to be, or conceived to be. It would
be true for ever that Onesimus and
not he had done the wrong. (3.)
Paul assumed the debt and the wrong
to himself. He was willing, by putting
himself in the place of Onesimus, to
bear the consequences, and to have
Onesimus treated as if he had not
done it. When he had voluntarily
assumed it, it was right to treat him
as if he had done so ; that is, to hold
nim responsible. A man may assume
a debt if he pleases, and then he may
be held answerable for it. (4.) If he
had not assumed this himself, it never
could have been right for Philemon
to charge itonhim. No possible supposition could make it right No
agency which he had in the conversion
of Onesimus; no friendship which he
had for him; no favour which he had
shown him, could make it right. The
consent, the concurrence on the part
of Paul was absolutely necessary in
order that he should be in any way responsible for what Onesimus had done.
(5.) The same principle prevails in
imputation everywhere. (a) What
we have done is chargeable upon us.
(b) If we have not done a thing, or
have not assumed it by a voluntary
act, it is not right to charge it upon
us. (¢c) God reckons things as they
are. ‘The Saviour voluntarily assumed
the place of man, and God reckoned,
or considered it so. He did not hold
him guilty or blameworthy in the case;
but as he had voluntarily taken the
place of the sinner, he was treated as
if he had been a sinner. God, in
like manner, does not charge on man
crimes of which he is not guilty. He
does not hold him to be blameworthy,
or ill-deserving for the sin of Adam,
or any other sin but his own. He

do not say to thee how thou owest
unto meeven thine own self besides.

reckons things as they are. Adam
sinned, and he alone was held to be
blameworthy or ill-deserving for the
act. By a divine constitution (comp.
Notes, Rom. v. 12, seg.), he had appointed that if he sinned, the consequences or results should pass over
and terminate on his posterity--as
the consequences of the sin of the
drunkard pass over and terminate on
his sons, and God reckons this to be
so--and treats the race accordingly.
He never reckons those to be guilty
who are not guilty; or those to be
ill-deserving who are not ill-deserving ; nor does he punish one for what
another has done. When Paul, therefore, voluntarily assumed a debt or
an obligation, what he did should not
be urged as an argument to prove that
it would be right for God to charge
on all the posterity of Adam the sin
of their first father, or to hold them
guilty for an offence committed ages
beforethey hadanexistence. Thecase
should be adduced to demonstrate one
point only--that when a man assumes
a debt, or voluntarily takes a wrong
done upon himself, it is right to hold
him responsible for it.

[See the subject of imputation discussed in
the supplementary Notes, Ro. v, 12, 19; 2 Cor.
v. 19, 21; Gal. iii. 13.]

19. I Paul have written it with
mine own hand. It has been inferred from this, that Paul wrote this
entire epistle with his own hand,
though this was contrary to his usual
practice ; comp. Notes on Rom. xvi.
22; 1 Cor. xvi. 21; Gal. vi. 11. He
undoubtedly meant to refer to this
as a mark of special favour towards
Philemon, and as furnishing security
that he would certainly be bound for
what he had promised. ¥ J will repay it. I will be security for it. It
is not probable that Paul supposed
that Philemon would rigidly exact
it from him, but if he did, he would fee)
himself bound to pay it. 4 Albeit
I do not say to thee how thou owest
unto me even thine own self besides.
Paul had doubtless been the means

_ 20 Yea, brother, let me have
joy of thee in the Lord; refresh «
my bowels in the Lord.

21 Having confidence 6 in thy
obedience I wrote unto thee, knowing that thou wilt also do more
than I say.

@ Ver.7.

52 Co. 7.16.

of the conversion of Philemon, and |
whatever hope he cherished of eter- |
nal life, was to be traced to his instrumentality, Paul says that this |
was equivalent to his owing himself |
to him, His very life--his eternal
welfare--was to be traced to his labours. What he asked now of him
was a small matter compared with
this, and he seems to have supposed
--what was probably true--that for
this consideration, Philemon would
not think of exacting of him what he
had voluntarily obligated himself to
obey.

20. Yea, brother, let me have joy
of thee in the Lord, “By showing
me this favour in receiving my friend
and brother as I request.’ The
phrase “‘in the Lord,” here seers to
mean that, if this request was grant-

ed, he would recognise the hand of |

the Lord init, and would receive it
as afavour from him. { Refresh my
bowels in the Lord. The bowels, in
the Scriptures, are uniformly spoken
of as the seat of the affections--mean-

22 But withal prepare me also
a lodging : for I¢ trust that through
4 your prayers I shall be given
unto you.

23 There salute thee Epaphras,
¢ my fellow-prisoner in Christ Je-

c Ph. 2.24.

d@ 2 Co.1.11. é Col.1.7.

21. Having confidence in thy obedience. That you would comply with
all my expressed desires. § J wrote
unto thee. ‘I have written to you;”
to wit, in this epistle. { Knowing
that thou wilt also do more than I
say. In all the respects which he had
mentioned -- in receiving Onesimus,
and in his kind treatment of him. He
had asked a great favour of him, but
he knew that he would go even beyond what he had asked.

22. But withal. Or, at the same
time--"Au«. While you are granting
this favour, do me also another by
preparing a lodging for me. | Prepare me also a lodging. Philemon
had been accustomed to show kind-
{ness to the saints (ver. 5), and not
improbably Paul had before shared
his hospitality. The word rendered
lodging (viz), means, properly,
guest-right, hospitality, entertainment; and then, a place for a guest ;
comp. Acts xxviii. 23. | For Itrust.
Paul had some hope of being released
--an event which probably occurred ;
see Notes on Phil. i. 25; ii. 23, 24;

ing commonly the upper viscera, embracing the heart and the lungs ;
comp. Notes on Isa. xvi. 11. The
reason is, that in any deep emotion
this part of our frame is peculiarly
affected, or we feel it there. Comp.
Robinson’s Lex. onthe word cradyxvey
See this illustrated at length in Sir
Charles Bell’s ‘‘ Anatomy of Expression,’ p. 85, seq. Ed. London, 1844.
The idea here is, that Paul had such
a tender affection for Onesimus as to
give him great concern and uneasiness. The word rendered “ refresh”’
--éavaravrov--means to give rest to, to
give repose, to free from sorrow or
care; and the sense is, that by receiying Onesimus, Philemon would cause
the deep and anxious feelings of Paul
to cease, and he would be calm and
happy ; comp. Notes on ver. 7.

'comp. Intro.to2 Timothy. { Through
‘your prayers; Notes, 2 Cor. i. 11.
_ He expected release in answer to the
| petitions of those who loved him, and
| the cause in which he was engaged ;
comp. Notes on Acts xii. 5. J J shall
be given unto you. I shall be permitted to return to you, as a favour--
eapidnooeds. Paul had no doubt thas
| Philemon would so regard it, and he
had no apprehension that his abiding with him would be considered as
a burden.

23. There salute thee Epaphras.
The same persons who are here
mentioned as greeting Philemon, are
mentioned in the close of the epistle
to the Colossians--furnishing a high
degree of evidence that Philemon re-
;sided at Colosse. Epaphras was a
24 Marcus, @ Aristarchus, ° Demas, ° Lucas, my fellow-labourers.
25 The @ grace of our Lord

@ Ac.12,12,95. b Ac.19.29.
Ceri ay ys d 2 Ti.4.22.

member of the church there; Notes
on Col. iv.12. § My fellow-prisoner
in Christ Jesus. In the cause of
Christ ; Notes, ver. 1. The circumstance of his being a prisoner is not
mentioned in the parallel place in
the epistle to the Colossians, but nothing is more probable.

24. Marcus, Aiistarchus, Demas,
and Lucas; see Notes on the Epistle
to the Colossians, iv. 10, 14.

25. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, &c. Notes, 2 ‘Vim. iv. 22.

The subscription to the epistle is
of no authority, but in this case is undoubtedly correct. Compare the Remarks at the close of 1 Corinthians,
and Titus.

Having now passed through with
the exposition of this epistle, it may
be proper to copy, for comparison
with it, one of the most beautiful
specimens of epistolary composition
to be found in profane literature, an
epistle of Pliny, written on a similar
occasion, and haying a strong resemblance to this. As a matter of taste,
it is of importance to show that the
sacred writers do not fall behind the
most favourable specimens of literary
composition to be found in uninspired
writings. The epistle of Pliny was
directed to his friend Sabinianus, in
behalf of his manumitted slave who
had offended him, and who was consequently cast out of his favour. It is
in the following words :

C. Plinius Sabiniano, S.

Libertus tuus, cui succensere te
dixeras, venit ad me, advolutusque
pedibus meis, tanquam tuis, hesit:
flevit multam, multtim rogavit, multum etiam tacuit: in summa, fecit
mihi fidem peenitentiz Veré credo
emendatum, quia deliquisse sentit.
Irasceris scio ; et irasceris merito, id
quoque scio: sed tunc preecipua mansuetudinis laus, cum ire causa justissima cst. Amasti hominem; et

Jesus Christ de with your spirit.
Amen.

Written from Rome to Phile-

mon, by Onesimus a servant.

spero amabis: interim sufficit ut
exorari te sinas. Licebit rursus
irasci, si meruerit; quod exoratus
excusatils facies.

Remitte aliquid adolescentie ipsius ; remitte lachrymis ; remitte indulgentiz tus ; ne torseris illum, ne
torseris etiam te. Torqueris enim
cum tam lenis irasceris. Vereor, ne
videar non rogare, sed cogere, si
precibus ejus meas junxero. Jungam
tamen tanto plenius et effusius quanto
ipsum acrius severiusque corripui,
destricté minatus, nunquam me postea

rogaturum. Hoc illi, quem terreri
oportebat; tibi non idem. Nam
fortasse iterum rogabo, impetrabo

iterum : sit modo tale, ut rogare me,
ut prestare te, deceat. Vale. Epistolar. Lib. ix. Ep. 21.

‘Caius Pliny to Sabinianus, health :

“Thy freed man, with whom thou
didst say thou wert incensed, came
to me, and having thrown himself at
my feet, grasped them as if they had
been thine. He wept much; pleaded
much ; and yet pleaded more by his
silence. In short, he fully convinced
me that he was a penitent. I do
sincerely believe that he is reformed,
because he perceives that he haa
done wrong. I know that thou art
incensed against him; and I know
also that thou art justly so; but then
clemency has its chief praise when
there is the greatest cause for anger.
Thou hast loved the man; and I
hope that thou wilt love him again. In
the meantime, it may suffice that
thou dost suffer thyself to be entreated for him. It will be right for thee
again to be offended if he deserves it:
because, having allowed thyself to be
entreated, you will do it with greater
propriety.

‘Forgive something for his youth ;
forgive on account of his tears ; forgive on account of thine own kindness: do not torment him; do not
torment thyself--for thou wilt be tor«
mented when thou, who art of 59

gentle adisposition, dost suffer thyself
to be angry. I fear, if I should unite
my prayers to his, that I should seem
not to ask, but to compel. Yet I
will write them, and the more largely
and earnestly, too, as I have sharply
and severely reproved him; solemnly
threatening him, should he offend
again, never more to intercede for
him. This I said to him, because it
was necessary to alarm him; but I
will not say the same to thee. For
perhaps I may again entreat thee,
and again obtain, if now that shall be
done which it is fit that I should ask
and you concede. Farewell.”

Those who compare these two
epistles, much as they may admire
that of Pliny as aliterary composition
and as adapted to secure the end
which he had in view, will coincide
with the remark of Doddridge, that it
is much inferior to the letter of Paul.
There is less courtesy--though there
is much ; there is less that is touching
and tender--though there is much
force in the pleading ; and there is
much less that is affecting in the
manner of the appeal than in the
epistle of the apostle.

The epistle to Philemon, though
the shortest that Paul wrote, and
though pertaining to a private matter
in which the church at large could
not be expected to have any direct
interest, is nevertheless a most interesting portion of the New Testament, and furnishes some invaluable
lessons for the church.

I. It is a model of courtesy. It
shows that the apostle was a man of
refined sensibility, and had a delicate
perception of what was due in friendship, and what was required by true
politeness. There .are turns of
thought in this epistle which no one
would employ who was not thoroughly
under the influence of true courtesy
of feeling, and who had not an exquisite sense of what was proper in
intercourse with a Christian gentleman.

II. The epistle shows that he had
creat tact in argument, and great
skill in selecting just such things as
would-be adapted to secure the end
in view. It would be hardly possible

to accumulate, even in a letter of
fiction, more circumstances which
would be fitted to accomplish the
object which he contemplated, than
he has introduced into this short letter, or to arrange them in a way
better fitted to secure the desired
result. Uf we remember the state of
mind in which it is reasonable to suppose Philemon was in regard to this
runaway servant, and the little probability that a man in his circumstances would receive him with kindness again, it is impossible not to admire the address with which Paul approaches him. It is not difficult to
imagine in what state ofmind Philemon
may have been, or the obstacles which
it was necessary to surmount in order
to induce him to receive Onesimus
again--and especially to receive him
as a@ Christian brother. If, as has
been commonly supposed, Onesimus
had been a slave ; if he had run away
from him; if he had been formerly intractable and disobedient ; if he had
wronged him by taking property with
him that did not belong to him, or if
he had owed him, and had run off
without paying him, it is not difficult
for any one to imagine how great was
the difficulty to be overcome in his
mind before the object of Paul could
be accomplished. ‘This will be felt to
be especially so if we bear in remembrance the repugnance necessarily felt
by a slayeholder to receive one who
has been a slave as an equal in any
respect, or to regard and treat such
an one as a Christian brother on the
same leyel with himself. Or if we
suppose that Onesimus had been a
voluntary servant in the employ of
Philemon, and had failed to render
the service which he had contracted
to perform, or had embezzled property, or had gone off in debt, greatly
irritating the mind of his master, the

| difficulty to be overcome before he re-

ceived him again would be little less.
In either case, it would be necessary
to soothe his irritated feelings, and to
inspire confidence in one who hitherto
had evinced little claim to it, and to
persuade him now to receive one who
had shown that he was not to be trusted, as a Christian brother. If the
epistle be examined with reference to
either of these suppositions, it will be
found to be composed with the most
finished tact and art.

III. This epistle has been frequently
appealed to by the friends and advocates of slavery as furnishing a
support or apology for that institution.
Indeed, it would seem to be regarded
by the advocates of that system as so
clear on the point, that all that they
need to do is to name it as settling the
whole matter in debate. The points
which it is supposed by the advocates
of that system to prove are two: first,
that slavery is right--since it is assumed that Onesimus was a slave, and
that Paul does not intimate to Philemon that the relation was contrary to
the spirit of Christianity ; and second,
that it is our duty to send back a runaway slave to his master--since it is
assumed that Paul did this in the case
of Onesimus.--It cannot be denied
that this view of the matter would be
sustained by most of the commentaries
on the epistle, but it is time to inquire whether such an exposition is
the true one, and whether this epistle
really gives countenance to slavery in
respect to these points. In order to
this, it is important to know exactly
what was the state of the case in reference to these points--for in interpreting the New Testament it should
not be assumed that anything is in favour of slavery, nor should anything be
admitted to be in favour of it without
applying the most rigid principles of
interpretation--any more than in the
case of profaneness, adultery, or any
other sin As the result of the examination of the epistle, we are now
prepared to inquire what countenance
the epistle gives to slavery in these
respects, and whether it can be fairly
appealed to either in justification of
the system, or in showing that it is a
duty to return a runaway slave against
his consent tohis former master. To
make out these points from the epistle, it would be necessary to demonstrate that Onesimus was certainly a
slave; that Paul so treats the subject
as to show that he approved of the
institution ; that he sent back Onesimus against his own will; that he

returned him because he supposed
he had done wrong by escaping from
servitude ; and that he meant that
he should continue to be regarded
as a slave, and held asa slave, after
his return to Philemon. Now, in
regard to these points, I would maka
the following remarks in view of the
exposition which has been given of
the epistle :---

(1.) There is no positive evidence
that Onesimus was a slave at all;
see Notes on ver. 16. Even if it
should be admitted to be probable
that he was, it would be necessary,
in order that this epistle should be
adduced in favour of slavery, that
that fact should be made out without
any ground of doubt, or the argument is worthless. It is clear that
the epistle, under any circumstances,
can be adduced in favour of slavery
only so far as it is certain that Onesimus was a slave. But that is not
certain. It cannot be made to be
certain. It should not be taken for
granted. Either of the suppositions
that he was bound to service till he
was of age by a parent or guardian,
or that he had voluntarily bound himself to service for wages, will meet
all that is necessarily implied in the
episile.

(2.) There is not the least evidence
that Paul used any force or even perguasion to induce him to return to his
master. It cannot be proved from
the epistle that he even advised him
to return. It is certain that he did
not compel him to do it--for Paul had
no power to do this, and no guard or
civil officer accompanied Onesimus to
secure him if he had chosen to escape.
Every one of the circumstances mentioned in the epistle will be met by
the supposition that Onesimus desired
to return, but that there were circumstances which made him apprehensive
that if he did, he would not be kindly
received, and that, at his request,
Paul wrote the epistle to induce Philemon to receive him kindly. Nothing
more can be proved; nothing more
is necessary to be belicved, in order
to a fair interpretation of the epistle.
Nothing is more natural than the
supposition that when Onesimus was

return to Philemon if he had in any
way done him wrong. But to make
it proper to adduce this epistle to
show that it is a duty to return a
runaway slave to his master, even on
the supposition that Onesimus was a
slave, it is necessary to prove either
that Paul advised him to return, or
that he compelled him to do it against
his will. No one doubts that it would
be right to help one who had escaped
from slavery,if, on any proper account,
he should wish to go back to his former master: if he felt that he had
wronged him, or if he had a wife and
children in the neighbourhood, or if
he was satisfied that he could be more
happy in his service than he could be
elsewhere. To this point, and this
only, this epistle goes.

(3.) There is no“evidence that Paul
meant thatOnesimus should return as
a slave, or with a view to be retained
and treated asa slave. Even supposing he had been so formerly, there is
not the slightest intimation in the
epistle that when he sent him back
to his master, he meant that he
should throw himself into the chains of
bondage again. Noris there theslightest evidence that if he had supposed
that this would be the result, he would
have even consented that he should
return to his master. No man can
take this epistle and prove from it
that Paul would have sent him at all,
if he had supposed that the effect
would be that he would be reduced to
slavery, andheldin bondage. If such
had been his expectation, he would
never have written such a letter as
this. The expression of such a desire would have found a place in the
epistle ; or, at least, the epistle would
not have been so framed as almost
of necessity to lead toa different result.

(4.) There is very satisfactory evidence, besides this, that he did not
mean that Onesimus should be regarded and treated by Philemon as
a slave. It would be impossible for
Philemon to comply with the wishes
breathed forth in this letter, and
meet exactly the desires of Paul in

the case, and yet retain him as a

iruly converted, he would desire to}
slave, or regard him as property--as
a ‘‘chattel”’--as a“thing.” For (a)
if he had been formerly a slave; if
this is the fair meaning of the word
devAes--doulos--then this is expressly declared. Thus, in ver. 16, he is
commanded to receive him “nor now
as a@ servant”--odxiti ws dovAoy. If he
had been a slave before, he did not
wish that he should be received as
such now, or regarded as such any
longer. How could Philemon comply
with the wish of the apostle, and yet
regard Onesimus as a slave? The
very attempt to do it would be directly
in the face of the expressed desire of
Paul, and every moment he held him
as such he would be disregarding his
wishes. (6) He desired him to receive and treat him, in all respects,
as a Christian brother--as one redeemed--as a man :--‘ Above a servant, a brother beloved.” How could
he do this, and yet regard and treat
him as a slave? Js it treating one as
a Christian brother to hold him as
property; to deprive him of freedom ;
to consider him an article of merchandise; to exact his labour without
compensation? Would the man himself
who makes another a slave suppose
that he was treated as a Christian
brother, if he were reduced to that
condition? Would he feel that his son
was so regarded if he was made a
slave? There are no ways of reconciling these things. It is ¢mpossible
for a master to regard his slave as, in
the proper and full sense of the phrase,
“<a Christian brother.’ He may, indeed, esteem him highly as a Christian; he may treat him with kindness ;
he may show him many favours ; but
--he regards him also aS HIS SLAVE ;
and this fact makes a difference wide
“as from the centre thrice to the
utmost pole”’ in his feelings towards
him and other Christians. He is noé
on a level with them as a Christian.
The notion of his being his slave
mingles with all his feelings towards
him, and gives a colouring to all his
views of him. He cannot but feel, if
he himself is under the influence of
religion, that that slave, if he were
treated in all respects as a Christian,
would be as free as himself; would
have a right to his time, and skill,
and liberty ; would be permitted to
form his own plans, and to enjoy the
avails of his own labour; and would
be secure from the possibility of being sold. (c) Suppose now that Paul,
after ashort interval, had actually
come to the residence of Philemon,
as he expected to (ver. 22), and had
found him regarding and treating
Onesimus as a slave ; would he have
felt that Philemon had complied with
his wishes? Did he ask this of him?
Did he not request just the contrary?
ver. 16. Would it not be natural for
him to say to him that he had nor
received him as he wished him to?
And how would Philemon reply to
this?

(5.) The principles laid down in
this epistle would lead to the universal abolition of slavery. If all those
who are now slaves were to become
Christians, and their masters were to
treat them ‘not as slaves, but as
brethren beloved,” the period would
not be far distant when slavery would
cease. This probably will be admitted by all. But a state of things
which would be destroyed by the

widest prevalence of Christianity, is |

not right at any time. Christianity,

in its highest influences, interferes |

with nothing that is good, and would
annihilate nothing which is not wrong.
That which is true, and best for the

welfare of man, will survive when the |
true religion spreads all over the.

world; and to say, as is commonly
admitted even by the advocates of

slavery, that Christianity will ulti.
mately destroy the system, is to say
that it is now wrong--for C hristianity destroys nothing which is in itself
right, and which is desirable for the
highest good of man. It will destroy
intemperance, and idolatry, and superstition, and war-- because they are
evil and wrong---and only because
they are so; and for the same reason,
and that only, will it abolish slavery,
When a man, therefore, admits that
the gospel will ultimately destroy
slavery, he at the same time admits
that it is now an evil anda sin. The
gospel is adapted and designed to
put an end to the system. It did
annihilate it in the Roman empire,
and its tendency everywhere is to

secure its final abolition. The system, therefore, is evil. It is opposed
to the spirit of religion. It is de-

structive of the welfare of society. It
is a violation of human rights. It is
contrary to the will of God. The

gospel everywhere teaches us to regard the slave ‘‘no longer as a slave,
but as a brother ;”’ and when this is
secured, the system must speedily
come to anend. For this, and for all
its other anticipated influences, we
should labour and pray that the gospel may be diffused as speedily as possible all over the world; that it may
raise man everywhere from his degradation, and invest every human being
with the dignity of a freeman; that
it ‘may undo the heavy burden, break
every yoke, and bid the oppressed go
free.” Isa. lviii. 6