The Character of a Methodist
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1742
Author: John Wesley
---
1. SINCE the name first came abroad into the world, many
have been at a loss to know what a Methodist is; what are
the principles and the practice of those who are commonly
called by that name; and what the distinguishing marks of
this sect, “which is everywhere spoken against.”
2. And it being generally believed, that I was able to give
the clearest account of these things, (as having been one of
the first to whom that name was given, and the person by
whom the rest were supposed to be directed,) I have been
called upon, in all manner of ways, and with the utmost
earnestness, so to do. I yield at last to the continued
importunity both of friends and enemies; and do now give
the clearest account I can, in the presence of the Lord and
Judge of heaven and earth, of the principles and practice
whereby those who are called Methodists are distinguished
from other men.
3. I say those who are called Methodists; for, let it be
well observed, that this is not a name which they take to
themselves, but one fixed upon them by way of reproach,
without their approbation or consent. It was first given to
three or four young men at Oxford, by a student of Christ
Church; either in allusion to the ancient sect of Physicians
so called, from their teaching, that almost all diseases might
be cured by a specific method of diet and exercise, or from
their observing a more regular method of study and behaviour
than was usual with those of their age and station.
4. I should rejoice (so little ambitious am I to be at the head
of any sect or party) if the very name might never be mentioned
more, but be buried in eternal oblivion. But if that cannot be,
at least let those who will use it, know the meaning of the word
they use. Let us not always be fighting in the dark. Come,
and let us look one another in the face. And perhaps some of
you who hate what I am called, may love what I am by the grace
of God; or rather, what “I follow after, if that I may apprehend
that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.”
ThE
1. THE distinguishing marks of a Methodist are not his
opinions of any sort. His assenting to this or that scheme
of religion, his embracing any particular set of notions, his
espousing the judgment of one man or of another, are all
quite wide of the point. Whosoever, therefore, imagines that
a Methodist is a man of such or such an opinion, is grossly
ignorant of the whole affair; he mistakes the truth totally.
We believe, indeed, that “all Scripture is given by the
inspiration of God; ” and herein we are distinguished from
Jews, Turks, and Infidels. We believe the written word of
God to be the only and sufficient rule both of Christian faith.
and practice; and herein we are fundamentally distinguished
from those of the Romish Church. We believe Christ to be
the eternal, supreme God; and herein we are distinguished
from the Socinians and Arians. But as to all opinions which
do not strike at the root of Christianity, we think and let
think. So that whatsoever they are, whether right or wrong,
they are no distinguishing marks of a Methodist.
2. Neither are words or phrases of any sort. We do not
place our religion, or any part of it, in being attached to any
peculiar mode of speaking, any quaint or uncommon set of
expressions. The most obvious, easy, common words, wherein
our meaning can be conveyed, we prefer before others, both
on ordinary occasions, and when we speak of the things of
God. We never, therefore, willingly or designedly, deviate
from the most usual way of speaking; unless when we express
scripture truths in scripture words, which, we presume, no
Christian will condemn. Neither do we affect to use any
particular expressions of Scripture more frequently than
others, unless they are such as are more frequently used by
the inspired writers themselves. So that it is as gross an
error, to place the marks of a Methodist in his words, as in
opinions of any sort.
3. Nor do we desire to be distinguished by actions, customs,
or usages, of an indifferent nature. Our religion does not lie in
doing what God has not enjoined, or abstaining from what he
hath not forbidden. It does not lie in the form of our apparel,
in the posture of our body, or the covering of our heads; nor
yet in abstaining from marriage, or from meats and drinks,
which are all good if received with thanksgiving. Therefore,
neither will any man, who knows whereof he affirms, fix the
mark of a Methodist here,--in any actions or customs purely
indifferent, undetermined by the word of God.
4. Nor, lastly, is he distinguished by laying the whole stress
of religion on any single part of it. If you say, “Yes, he is;
for he thinks “we are saved by faith alone:’” I answer, You
do not understand the terms. By salvation he means holiness
of heart and life. And this he affirms to spring from true faith
alone. Can even a nominal Christian deny it? Is this placing
a part of religion for the whole? “Do we then make void the
law through faith? God forbid! Yea, we establish the law.”
We do not place the whole of religion (as too many do, God
knoweth) either in doing no harm, or in doing good, or in using
the ordinances of God. No, not in all of them together;
wherein we know by experience a man may labour many
years, and at the end have no religion at all, no more than
he had at the beginning. Much less in any one of these; or,
it may be, in a scrap of one of them: Like her who fancies
herself a virtuous woman, only because she is not a prostitute;
or him who dreams he is an honest man, merely because he
does not rob or steal. May the Lord God of my fathers
preserve me from such a poor, starved religion as this I Were
this the mark of a Methodist, I would sooner choose to be a
sincere Jew, Turk, or Pagan.
5. “What then is the mark? Who is a Methodist, according
to your own account?” I answer: A Methodist is one who has
“the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost
given unto him; ” one who “loves the Lord his God with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind, and
with all his strength.” God is the joy of his heart, and the
desire of his soul; which is constantly crying out, “Whom
have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire beside thee! My God and my all! Thou art
the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever !”
6. He is therefore happy in God, yea, always happy, as
having in him “a well of water springing up into everlasting
life,” and overflowing his soul with peace and joy. “Perfect
love” having now “cast out fear,” he “rejoices evermore.” He
“rejoices in the Lord always,” even “in God his Saviour,” and
in the Father, “through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom he
hath now received the atonement.” “Having” found “redemp
tion through his blood, the forgiveness of his sins,” he cannot
but rejoice, whenever he looks back on the horrible pit out of
which he is delivered; when he sees “all his transgressions blot
ted out as a cloud, and his iniquities as a thick cloud.” He can
not but rejoice, whenever he lookson the state wherein he now is;
“being justified freely, and having peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ.” For “he that believeth, hath the witness”
of this “in himself,” being now the son of God by faith. “Be
cause he is a son, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
his heart, crying, Abba, Father!” And “the Spirit itself beareth
witness with his spirit, that he is a child of God.” He rejoiceth
also, whenever he looks forward, “in hope of the glory that shall
be revealed; ” yea, this his joy is full, and all his bones cry out,
“Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who, according to his abundant mercy, hath begotten me
again to a living hope--of an inheritance incorruptible, unde
filed, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for me!”
7. And he who hath this hope, thus “full of immortality, in
everything giveth thanks; ” as knowing that this (whatsoever it
is) “is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning him.” From
him, therefore, he cheerfully receives all, saying, “Good is the
will of the Lord;” and whether the Lord giveth or taketh away,"
equally “blessing the nameof the Lord.” For he hath “learned,
in whatsoever state he is, therewith to be content.” He knoweth
“both how to be abased and how to abound. Everywhere and
in all things he is instructed both to be full and to be hungry,
both to abound and suffer need.” Whether in ease or pain,
whether in sickness or health, whether in life or death, he giveth
thanks from the ground of his heart to Him who orders it for
good; knowing that as “every good gift cometh from above,”
so none but good can come from the Father of Lights, into
whose hand he has wholly committed his body and soul, as into
the hands of a faithful Creator. He is therefore “careful”
(anxiously or uneasily) “for nothing;” as having “cast all his
care on Him that careth for him,” and “in all things” rest
ing on him, after “making his request known to him with
thanksgiving.”
8. For indeed he “prays without ceasing.” It is given him
“always to pray, and not to faint.” Not that he is always in
the house of prayer; though he neglects no opportunity of
being there. Neither is he always on his knees, although he
often is, or on his face, before the Lord his God. Nor yet is
he always crying aloud to God, or calling upon him in words:
For many times “the Spirit maketh intercession for him with
groans that cannot be uttered.” But at all times the language
of his heart is this: “Thou brightness of the eternal glory,
unto thee is my heart, though without a voice, and my silence
speaketh unto thee.” And this is true prayer, and this alone.
But his heart is ever lifted up to God, at all times and in all
places. In this he is never hindered, much less interrupted,
by any person or thing. In retirement or company, in leisure,
business, or conversation, his heart is ever with the Lord.
Whether he lie down or rise up, God is in all his thoughts;
he walks with God continually, having the loving eye of his
mind still fixed upon him, and everywhere “seeing Him that
is invisible.”-
- .9. And while he thus always exercises his love to God, by
praying without ceasing, rejoicing evermore, and in everything
giving thanks, this commandment is written in his heart, “That
he who loveth God, love his brother also.” And he accordingly
loves his neighbour as himself; he loves every man as his own
soul. His heart is full of love to all mankind, to every child of
“the Father of the spirits of all flesh.” That a man is not
personally known to him, is no bar to his love; no, nor that he
is known to be such as he approves not, that he repays hatred
for his good-will. For he “loves his enemies; ” yea, and the
enemies of God, “the evil and the unthankful.” And if it be
not in his power to “do good to them that hate him,” yet he
ceases not to pray for them, though they continue to spurn
his love, and still “despitefully use him and persecute him.”
10. For he is “pure in heart.” The love of God has puri
fied his heart from all revengeful passions, from envy, malice,
and wrath, from every unkind temper or malign affection. It
hath cleansed him from pride and haughtiness of spirit,
whereof alone cometh contention. And he hath now “put on
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
longsuffering:” So that he “forbears and forgives, if he had
a quarrel against any; even as God in Christ hath forgiven
him.” And indeed all possible ground for contention, on his
part, is utterly cut off. For none can take from him what
he desires; seeing he “loves not the world, nor” any of
“the things of the world; ” being now “crucified to the
world, and the world crucified to him; ” being dead to all
that is in the world, both to “the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eye, and the pride of life.” For “all his desire is
unto God, and to the remembrance of his name.”
11. Agreeable to this his one desire, is the one design of his
life, namely, “not to do his own will, but the will of Him that
sent him.” His one intention at all times and in all things is,
not to please himself, but Him whom his soul loveth. He has a
single eye. And because “his eye is single, his whole body is
full of light.” Indeed, where the loving eye of the soul is con
tinually fixed upon God, there can be no darkness at all, “but
the whole is light; as when the bright shining of a candle doth
enlighten the house.” God then reigns alone. All that is in
the soul is holiness to the Lord. There is not a motion in his
heart, but is according to his will. Every thought that arises
points to Him, and is in obedience to the law of Christ.
12. And the tree is known by its fruits. For as he loves
God, so he keeps his commandments; not only some, or most
of them, but all, from the least to the greatest. He is not con
tent to “keep the whole law, and offend in one point; ” but
has, in all points, “a conscience void of offence towards God
and towards man.” Whatever God has forbidden, he avoids;
whatever God hath enjoined, he doeth; and that whether it be
little or great, hard or easy, joyous or grievous to the flesh. He
“runs the way of God’s commandments,” now he hath set his
heart at liberty. It is his glory so to do; it is his daily crown
of rejoicing, “to do the will of God on earth, as it is done in
heaven; ” knowing it is the highest privilege of “the angels
of God, of those that excel in strength, to fulfil his command
ments, and hearken to the voice of his word.”
13. All the commandments of God he accordingly keeps, and
that with all his might. For his obedience is in proportion to
his love, the source from whence it flows. And therefore, loving
God with all his heart, he serves him with all his strength. He
continually presents his soul and body a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable toGod; entirely and without reserve devoting him
self, all he has, and all he is, to his glory. All the talents he
has received, he constantly employs according to his Master’s
will; every power and faculty of his soul, every member of
his body. Once he “ yielded” them “unto sin” and the
devil, “as instruments of unrighteousness;” but now, “being
alive from the dead, he yields” them all “as instruments of
righteousness unto God.”
14. By consequence, whatsoever he doeth, it is all to the
glory of God. In all his employments of every kind, he not
only aims at this, (which is implied in having a single eye,)
but actually attains it. His business and refreshments, as
well as his prayers, all serve this great end. Whether he sit
in his house or walk by the way, whether he lie down or rise
up, he is promoting, in all he speaks or does, the one business
of his life; whether he put on his apparel, or labour, or eat
and drink, or divert himself from too wasting labour, it all
tends to advance the glory of God, by peace and good-will
among men. His one invariable rule is this, “Whatsoeverye
do, in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God and the Father by him.”
15. Nor do the customs of the world at all hinder his “run
ning the race that is set before him.” He knows that vice
does not lose its nature, though it becomes ever so fashionable;
and remembers, that “every man is to give an account of him
self to God.” He cannot, therefore, “follow ’’ even “a multi
tude to do evil.” He cannot “fare sumptuously every day,”
or “make provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof.”
He cannot “lay up treasures upon earth,” any more than he
can take fire into his bosom. He cannot “adorn himself,”
on any pretence, “with gold or costly apparel.” He cannot join
in or countenance any diversion which has the least tendency
to vice of any kind. He cannot “speak evil” of his neigh
bour, any more than he can lie either for God or man. He
cannot utter an unkind word of any one; for love keeps the
door of his lips. He cannot speak “idle words;” “no corrupt
communication” ever “comes out of his mouth,” as is all
that “which is” not “good to the use of edifying,” not “fit to
minister grace to the hearers.” But “whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are’
justly “ of good report,” he thinks, and speaks, and acts,
“adorning the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in all things.”
16. Lastly. As he has time, he “does good unto all men;”
unto neighbours and strangers, friends and enemies: And that -
in every possible kind; not only to their bodies, by “feeding
the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting those that are sick or
in prison;” but much more does he labour to do good to their
souls, as of the ability which God giveth; to awaken those that
sleep in death; to bring those who are awakened to the atoning
blood, that, “being justified by faith, they may have peace
with God;” and to provoke those who have peace with God to
abound more in love and in good works. And he is willing to
“spend and be spent herein,” even “to be offered up on the
sacrifice and service of their faith,” so they may “all come
unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.”
17. These are the principles and practices of our sect; these
are the marks of a true Methodist. By these alone do those
who are in derision so called, desire to be distinguished from
other men. If any man say, “Why, these are only the com
t. mon fundamental principles of Christianity I’’ thou hast
“ said; so I mean; this is the very truth; I know they are no
other; and I would to God both thou and all men knew, that
I, and all who follow my judgment, do vehemently refuse to be
distinguished from other men, by any but the common prin
ciples of Christianity, -the plain, old Christianity that I teach,
renouncing and detesting all other marks of distinction. And
whosoever is what I preach, (let him be called what he will,
for names change not the nature of things,) he is a Christian,
not in name only, but in heart and in life. He is inwardly and
"/outwardly conformed to the will of God, as revealed in the
written word. He thinks, speaks, and lives, according to the
method laid down in the revelation of Jesus Christ. His soul
is renewed after the image of God, in righteousness and in all
true holiness. And having the mind that was in Christ, he
so walks as Christ also walked.- -
18. By these marks, by these fruits of a living faith, do wela.
bour to distinguish ourselves from the unbelieving world, from
all those whose minds or lives are not according to the Gospel
of Christ. But from real Christians, of whatsoever denomina
tion they be, we earnestly desire not to be distinguished at all ,
not from any who sincerely follow after what they know they
have not yet attained. No.: “Whosoever doeth the will of my
Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister,
and mother.” And I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies
of God, that we be in no wise divided among ourselves. Is thy
heart right, as my heart is with thine? I ask no farther ques
tion. If it be, give me thy hand. For opinions, or terms, let
us not destroy the work of God. Dost thou love and serve
God? It is enough. I give thee the right hand of fellow
ship. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mer
cies; let us strive together for the faith of the Gospel; walking
worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called; with all lowli
ness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another
in love, endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace; remembering, there is one body, and one
Spirit, even as we are called with one hope of our calling;
“one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of