A Compassionate Address to the Inhabitants of Ireland
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. BEFoRE I left London (two or three months ago) a
general panic prevailed there. Some vehemently affirmed,
and others potently believed, that the nation was in a most
desperate state; that it was upon the very brink of ruin, past
all hopes of recovery. Soon after, I found that the same
panic had spread throughout the city of Bristol. I traced it
likewise wherever I went, in Gloucestershire, Worcestershire,
Staffordshire, Cheshire, and Lancashire. When I crossed
the Channel, I was surprised to find it had got before me to
Ireland; and that it was not only spread through Dublin
first, and thence to every part of Leinster, but had found its
way into Munster too, into Cork, Bandon, and Limerick: In
all which places people were terrifying themselves and their
neighbours, just as they did in London.
2. “How is it possible,” say they, “that we should contend
with so many enemies together? If General Washington
has (as Mr. Franklin of Limerick computes) sixty-five
thousand men; if the powerful fleet and numerous armies of
France are added to these; if Spain, in consequence of the
family compact, declares war at the same time; and if
Portugal join in confederacy with them, what will become of
us? Add to these the enemies of our own household, ready
to start up on every side; and when France invades us from
without, and these from within, what can follow but ruin and
destruction ?”
3. I would fain speak a word of comfort to my poor neigh
bours, that they may not be frightened to death. Perhaps,
my friends, things are not in altogether so desperate a situa
tion as you imagine. When I was at Cork last week, I con
versed largely with some persons who were just landed from
Philadelphia. I could thoroughly depend upon the account
they gave, as they had had full means of information, and.
had no possible interest to serve by misrepresenting anything.
The substance of their account was this: “In December,
General Washington had seventeen or eighteen thousand men
in his army. From that time thirty, forty, sometimes fifty
of them died in a day by a pestilential fever; and in two
months’ time, upwards of fifteen hundred deserted to General
Howe. So that many were inclined to believe he had not
when we came away much more than five thousand effective
men left.” Never fright yourselves, therefore, about General
Washington’s huge army, that melted away like snow in.
harvest. The English forces meantime are in perfect health,
(about sixteen thousand,) and have plenty of all things.
4. “But there are twenty or thirty thousand recruits to:
join him in a month or two; and what will General Howe do
then?” Just as he does now; he will regard any number of
them as much as he would so many sparrows. For what
could fifty thousand raw men do, that had never seen the face
of an enemy? especially when, by the tenure of their service,
they were only to stay in the army mine months? (The circum
stance concerning which General Washington so earnestly
expostulated with the Congress.) Will these dead-doing men,
do you think, be in haste to cut off all the old, weather-beaten
Englishmen? Otherwise they will not have made an end of
them, before the time comes for their returning home!
5. “But I do not believe the American army is in this
condition.” If you do not, I cannot help it. And you have
no more right to be angry at me for believing it, than I at
you for not believing it. Let each of us then, without
resentment or bitterness, permit the other to think for himself.
6. “O, but the French will swallow us up.” They will as
soon swallow up the sea. Pray, which way is it they are to
come at us, unless they can fly through the air? It is
certain our fleet, notwithstanding the shameless lies told to
the contrary, is now everyway in a better condition than it
ever was since England was a nation. And while we are
indisputably masters at sea, what can the French do but
gnash their teeth at us? “Nay, but Spain will join them.”
That is by no means clear. They have not forgot the
Havannah yet. But, if they do, we are well able to deal
with them both; full as able as we were the last war.
7. “Yea, but Portugal too will declare against us.” I do
not believe one word of it. The Portuguese (to say nothing
about their gratitude) are not such arrant fools; they under
stand their own interest better; they need no one to inform
them, that if the English were only to stand neuter, the
Spaniards would eat them up at a mouthful. They well know
the present war will not last always; and, in the end, either
England will prevail, or not. If it does not, if Spain prevail
over England, England cannot defend Portugal. If England
prevail over Spain, she will not. She will doubtless leave His
Most Faithful Majesty to receive the reward he has so justly
deserved from the fleet and army of his neighbour.
8. “But do not you know the French squadron is sailed
to assist them, with four thousand soldiers on board?” I really
do not, nor you neither; nor any man in Ireland. That they
are sailed, I know; but not whether to Africa, or Asia, or
America. But have they four thousand soldiers on board?
And is that all? I heard they were twelve thousand. But
in how many transports did they embark? We could not
hear of one. Where then were the soldiers to be put? in the
hold of the men-of-war, or on the shrouds? This story is
not well devised; it manifestly confutes itself. But suppose
twelve thousand are sailed, are they sure to land? Do they
command the winds and seas? And, if they do, are they sure
the English fleet will not speak with them by the way? If
they escape these, are they sure of landing without opposi
tion ? Is it certain that all our soldiers will stand meantime
with their fingers in their mouth? How great then is the
odds against the French ever joining the American army |
Although, if they did, there is no doubt but General Howe
would give a good account of them all.
9. “Why, to say the truth, we are not so much afraid of
Portugal or Spain, yea, or of France itself, as we are of those
intestine vipers, who are always ready to tear out their mother’s
bowels. And how should we defend ourselves against these, if
they made a general insurrection?” This is worth considering.
It is certain, it is undoubtedly plain, it is beyond all contradic
tion, if they gave a large dose of laudanum to all His Majesty’s
liege subjects; if every man, woman, and child in the four pro
vinces fell fast asleep all at once; if they all continued to sleep
till the insurgents had brought their matters to bear in every
city and town in the kingdom; if then the conspirators came all
in the same hour, and cut off their heads at a stroke; the nation
certainly, without all doubt, would be in a very fearful condi
tion | But till this is the case, you need no more be afraid
of ten thousand White Boys, than of ten thousand crows.
10. There is no need at present that an handful of men
should oppose themselves to a multitude. Blessed be God,
there are still within the kingdom some thousands of regular
troops, of horse as well as foot, who are ready to march
wherever they shall be wanted; over and above the inde
pendent companies at Birr, at Mountmellick, at Bandon, and
at Cork; at which city alone no less than six of these
companies are formed already; which it is supposed, when
they shall be completed, will contain at least two thousand
men. And as they exercise themselves every day, they are
already expert in the whole military exercise. So that were
any so mad as to attempt making an insurrection, it would
be crushed in its very infancy.
11. “But is there not another ground of fear? Is there
not ‘a God that judgeth the earth?’ And have not England
and Ireland (to speak in the language of Scripture) “filled
up the measure of their iniquity?’” I answer, (1.) I allow
that wickedness of various kinds has overspread the land like
a flood. It would be easy to enlarge upon this melancholy
truth; it cannot be denied that,
The rich, the poor, the high, the low,
Have wander'd from his mild command:
The floods of wickedness o'erflow,
And deluge all the guilty land:
People and Priest lie drown'd in sin,
And Tophet yawns to take them in.
But yet, (2.) I totally deny that either England or Ireland
have yet “filled up the measure of their iniquities.” “Why,
what have they not done? What abomination can be
named or conceived which they have not committed?” I
will tell you: They have not done what was done of old,
before God delivered up the Jews to destruction. They have
not “shed the blood of the just in the midst of Jerusalem.”
Neither in London, Dublin, nor any other of our cities, has
there been any instance of the kind. To which of our
Governors in either England or Ireland can those words of
our Lord be applied ? “Behold, I send unto you Prophets;
and some of them ye will kill; and some of them ye will
scourge, and persecute from city to city. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee!” (Matt. xxiii. 34, &c.) Now, neither
England nor Ireland has done this, at least during the
present century. Therefore, it cannot be affirmed that they
have “filled up the measure of their iniquities.” Conse
quently we have no reason to believe that our Lord will yet
say, “Behold, your house is left unto you desolate 1”
12. I have another reason to believe that God will yet have
compassion upon a sinful land: What was it which he said
of old time to Abraham interceding for guilty Sodom? “I
will not destroy the city, if there be fifty, twenty, yea, ten
righteous men found in it.” And are there not ten, twenty,
fifty righteous men to be found in our Sodom? Dare you
affirm, or have you reason to believe, that there are only
twenty hundred? And will God “destroy the righteous
with the wicked! Shall not the Judge of all the earth do
right?” Besides, will not all these righteous men wrestle
with God for their people and nation? And does he not
hear the prayer?
Let Moses in the spirit groan,
And God cries out, Let me alone !
Let me alone, that all my wrath
May rise the wicked to consume :
While Justice hears thy praying faith
It cannot seal the sinner's doom.
My Son is in my servant's prayer,
And Jesus forces me to spare.
13. I add but one reason more, why we may rationally
hope that these kingdoms, sinful as they are, will not yet be
given up to destruction. Religion, true, scriptural religion,
the love of God and our neighbour, inviting men to avoid
evil and to do good, to practise justice, mercy, and truth, is
not decreasing thereim; no, it is continually increasing in
every part of the kingdom; as an impartial inquirer cannot
but observe, whether he turn east, west, north, or south.
Now, I know no instance in all history, from the earliest
ages to this day, of the Governor of the world delivering up
a kingdom to destruction, while religion was increasing in it.
I believe no such instance can be found. And indeed it
seems to be totally inconsistent with his wisdom and good
ness, and with the rules whereby He hath governed all
nations from the beginning of the world. Fear him there
fore with a filial fear; and you need fear nothing but him.
In this sense also, one thing is needful,--the making God
your friend. And when we have “a conscience void of
offence towards God and towards man,” we may say with
boldness, “The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob
is our refuge: Therefore will we not fear, though the earth
be moved, and though the hills be carried into the depth of
the sea. The flood thereof shall make glad the city of God,
the holy place of the tabernacle of the Most High.”