A Farther Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion, Part I
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1745
Author: John Wesley
---
IN a former treatise I declared, in the plainest manner I
could, both my principles and practice; and answered some of
the most important, as well as the most common, objections
to each. But I have not yet delivered my own soul. I believe
it is still incumbent upon me to answer other objections, par
ticularly such as have been urged by those who are esteemed
religious or reasonable men.
These partly relate to the doctrines I teach, partly to my
manner of teaching them, and partly to the effects which are sup
posed to follow from teaching these doctrines in this manner.
I. 1. I will briefly mention what those doctrines are, before
I consider the objections against them. Now, all I teach
respects either the nature and condition of justification, the
nature and condition of salvation, the nature of justifying
and saving faith, or the Author of faith and salvation.
2. First: The nature of justification. It sometimes means
our acquittal at the last day. (Matt. xii. 37.) But this is alto
gether out of the present question; that justification whereof
our Articles and Homilies speak, meaning present forgiveness,
pardon of sins, and, consequently, acceptance with God; who
therein “declares his righteousness” (or mercy, by or) “for
the remission of the sins that are past;” saying, “I will be
merciful to thy unrighteousness, and thine iniquities I will
remember no more.” (Rom. iii. 25; Heb. viii. 12.)
I believe the condition of this is faith : (Rom. iv. 5, &c.:) I
mean, not only, that without faith we cannot be justified; but,
also, that as soon as any one has true faith, in that moment he
is justified. Good works follow this faith, but cannot go before it: (Luke
vi. 43.) Much less can sanctification, which implies a con
timued course of good works, springing from holiness of heart.
But it is allowed, that entire sanctification goes before our
justification at the last day. (Heb. xii. 14.)
It is allowed, also, that repentance, and “fruits meet for
repentance,” go before faith. (Mark i. 15; Matthew iii. 8.)
Repentance absolutely must go before faith; fruits meet for
it, if there be opportunity. By repentance, I mean conviction
of sin, producing real desires and sincere resolutions of amend
ment; and by “fruits meet for repentance,” forgiving our bro
ther; (Matt. vi. 14, 15;) ceasing from evil, doing good; (Luke
iii. 3, 4, 9, &c.;) using the ordinances of God, and in general
obeying him according to the measure of grace which we have
received. (Matt. vii. 7; xxv. 29.) But these I cannot as yet
term good works; because they do not spring from faith and
the love of God.
3. By salvation I mean, not barely, according to the vulgar
notion, deliverance from hell, or going to heaven; but a
present deliverance from sin, a restoration of the soul to its
primitive health, its original purity; a recovery of the divine
nature; the renewal of our souls after the image of God, in
righteousness and true holiness, in justice, mercy, and truth.
This implies all holy and heavenly tempers, and, by conse
quence, all holiness of conversation.
Now, if by salvation we mean a present salvation from sin,
we cannot say, holiness is the condition of it; for it is the
thing itself. Salvation, in this sense, and holiness, are
synonymous terms. We must therefore say, “We are saved
by faith.” Faith is the sole condition of this salvation. For
without faith we cannot be thus saved. But whosoever
believeth is saved already.
Without faith we cannot be thus saved; for we cannot
rightly serve God unless we love him. And we cannot love
him unless we know him; neither can we know God unless by
faith. Therefore, salvation by faith is only, in other words,
the love of God by the knowledge of God; or, the recovery of
the image of God, by a true, spiritual acquaintance with him.
4. Faith, in general, is a divine, supernatural exeyxos * of
things not seen, not discoverable by our bodily senses, as being
either past, future, or spiritual. Justifying faith implies, not
only a divine exeyxos, that God “was in Christ, reconciling
the world unto himself,” but a sure trust and confidence that
Christ died for my sins, that he loved me, and gave himself for
me. And the moment a penitent sinner believes this, God
pardons and absolves him.
And as soon as his pardon or justification is witnessed to
him by the Holy Ghost, he is saved. He loves God and all
mankind. He has “the mind that was in Christ,” and power
to “walk as he also walked.” From that time (unless he
make shipwreck of the faith) salvation gradually increases in
his soul. For “so is the kingdom of God, as if a man should
cast seed into the ground; and it springeth up, first the blade,
then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.”
5. The first sowing of this seed I cannot conceive to be
other than instantaneous; whether I consider experience, or
the word of God, or the very nature of the thing;--however,
I contend not for a circumstance, but the substance: If you
can attain it another way, do. Only see that you do attain it;
for if you fall short, you perish everlastingly.
This beginning of that vast, inward change, is usually termed,
the new birth. Baptism is the outward sign of this inward
grace, which is supposed by our Church to be given with and
through that sign to all infants, and to those of riper years, if
they repent and believe the gospel. But how extremely idle are
the common disputes on this head ! I tell a sinner, “You must
be born again.” “No,” say you: “He was born again in bap
tism. Therefore he cannot be born again now.” Alas, what
trifling is this! What, if he was then a child of God? He is
now manifestly achild of the devil; for the works of his fatherhe
doeth. Therefore, do not play upon words. He must go through
an entire change of heart. In one not yet baptized, you yourself
would call that change, the new birth. In him, call it what you
will; but remember, meantime, that if either he or you die
* Evidence, or conviction.
without it, your baptism will be so far from profiting you,
that it will greatly increase your damnation.
6. The author of faith and salvation is God alone. It is
he that works in us both to will and to do. He is the sole
Giver of every good gift, and the sole Author of every good
work. There is no more of power than of merit in man;
but as all merit is in the Son of God, in what he has done
and suffered for us, so all power is in the Spirit of God. And
therefore every man, in order to believe unto salvation, must
receive the Holy Ghost. This is essentially necessary to every
Christian, not in order to his working miracles, but in order
to faith, peace, joy, and love,--the ordinary fruits of the Spirit.
Although no man on earth can explain the particular
manner wherein the Spirit of God works on the soul, yet
whosoever has these fruits, cannot but know and feel that
God has wrought them in his heart.
Sometimes He acts more particularly on the understanding,
opening or enlightening it, (as the Scripture speaks,) and re
vealing, unveiling, discovering to us “the deep things of God.”
Sometimes He acts on the wills and affections of men;
withdrawing them from evil, inclining them to good, inspiring
(breathing, as it were) good thoughts into them : So it has
frequently been expressed, by an easy, natural metaphor,
strictly analogous to r", Trvevua, spiritus, and the words
used in most modern tongues also, to denote the third person
in the ever-blessed Trinity. But however it be expressed,
it is certain all true faith, and the whole work of salvation,
every good thought, word, and work, is altogether by the
operation of the Spirit of God.
II. 1. I come now to consider the principal objections
which have lately been made against these doctrines.
I know nothing material which has been objected as to the
nature of justification; but many persons seem to be very
confused in their thoughts concerning it, and speak as if they
had never heard of any justification antecedent to that of
the last day. To clear up this, there needs only a closer
inspection of our Articles and Homilies; wherein justifica
tion is always taken for the present remission of our sins.
But many are the objections which have been warmly urged
against the condition of justification, faith alone; particularly
in two treatises, the former entitled, “The Notions of the
Methodists fully disproved; ” the second, “The Notions of the
Methodists farther disproved: ” In both of which it is vehe
mently affirmed, (1.) That this is not a scriptural doctrine;
(2.) That it is not the doctrine of the Church of England.
It will not be needful to name the former of these any more;
seeing there is neither one text produced therein to prove this
doctrine unscriptural, nor one sentence from the Articles or
Homilies to prove it contrary to the doctrine of the Church.
But so much of the latter as relates to the merits of the cause,
I will endeavour to consider calmly. As to what is personal,
I leave it as it is. “God be merciful to me, a sinner!”
2. To prove this doctrine unscriptural,--That faith alone
is the condition of justification,--you allege, that “sanctifi
cation, according to Scripture, must go before it: ”To evince
which, you quote the following texts, which I leave as I find
them : “Go, disciple all nations,--teaching them to observe
all things, whatsoever I have commanded you.” (Matt. xxviii.
19, 20) “He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.”
(Mark xvi. 16.) “Preach repentance and remission of sins.”
(Luke xxiv. 47.) “Repent, and be baptized every one of
you, for the remission of sins.” (Acts ii. 38.) “Repent and
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out.” (iii. 19.)
“By one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are
sanctified.” (Heb. x. 14.) You add, “St. Paul taught ‘re
pentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ; (Acts xx. 21;) and calls “repentance from dead
works, and faith toward God, first principles. (Heb. vi. 1.)”
You subjoin : “But ‘ye are washed, says he, “but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified. By ‘washed, is meant their
baptism; and by their baptism is meant, first, their sanctifi
cation, and then their justification.” This is a flat begging
the question; you take for granted the very point which you
ought to prove. “St. Peter also,” you say, “affirms that
‘baptism doth save us, or justify us.” Again you beg the
question; you take for granted what I utterly deny, viz., that
save and justify are here synonymous terms. Till this is
proved, you can draw no inference at all; for you have no
foundation whereon to build.
I conceive these and all the scriptures which can be quoted
to prove sanctification antecedent to justification, (if they do
not relate to our final justification,) prove only, (what I have
never denied,) that repentance, or conviction of sin, and
fruits meet for repentance, precede that faith whereby we are
justified: But by no means, that the love of God, or any
branch of true holiness, must or can precede faith.
3. It is objected, Secondly, that justification by faith alone
is not the doctrine of the Church of England.
“You believe,” says the writer above-mentioned, “that no
good work can be previous to justification, nor, consequently,
a condition of it. But, God be praised, our Church has
nowhere delivered such abominable doctrine.” (Page 14.)
“The Clergy contend for inward holiness, as previous to
the first justification;--this is the doctrine they universally
inculcate, and which you cannot oppose without contradict
ing the doctrine of our Church.” (Page 26.)
“All your strongest persuasives to the love of God will
not blanch over the deformity of that doctrine, that men
may be justified by faith alone;--unless you publicly recant
this horrid doctrine, your faith is vain.” (Page 27.)
“If you will vouchsafe to purge out this venomous part of
your principles, in which the wide, essential, fundamental,
irreconcilable difference, as you very justly term it, mainly
consists, then there will be found, so far, no disagreement be
tween you and the Clergy of the Church of England.” (Ibid.)
4. In order to be clearly and fully satisfied what the doctrine
of the Church of England is, (as it stands opposite to the doc
trine of the Antinomians, on the one hand, and to that of justi
fication by works, on the other,) Iwill simply set down what oc
curs on this head, either in her Liturgy, Articles, or Homilies:--
“Spare thou them, O God, which confess their faults:
Restore thou them that are penitent, according to thy pro
mises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesu our Lord.”
“He pardoneth and absolveth all them that truly repent,
and unfeignedly believe his holy gospel.”
“Almighty God, who dost forgive the sins of them that are
Penitent, create and makein us new and contrite hearts; that we,
worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our wretched
ness, may obtain of thee perfect remission and forgiveness,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.” (Collect for Ash-Wednesday.)
“Almighty God--hath promised forgiveness of sins to all
them that with hearty repentance and true faith turn unta
him.” (Communion Office.)
“Our Lord Jesus Christ hath left power to absolve all sinners
who truly repent and believe in him.” (Visitation of the Sick.)
“Give him unfeigned repentance and steadfast faith, that
his sins may be blotted out.” (Ibid.)
“He is a merciful receiver of all true penitent sinners, and
is ready to pardon us, if we come unto him with faithful
repentance.” (Commination Office.)
Infants, indeed, our Church supposes to be justified in
baptism, although they cannot then either believe or repent.
But she expressly requires both repentance and faith in those
who come to be baptized when they are of riper years.
As earnestly, therefore, as our Church inculcates justifi
cation by faith alone, she nevertheless supposes repentance to
be previous to faith, and fruits meet for repentance; yea,
and universal holiness to be previous to final justification, as
evidently appears from the following words:--
“Let us beseech him--that the rest of our life may be
pure and holy, so that at the last we may come to his eternal
joy.” (Absolution.)
“May we seriously apply our hearts to that holy and hea
venly wisdom here, which may in the end bring us to life
everlasting.” (Visitation of the Sick.)
“Raise us from the death of sin unto the life of righteous
ness,--that at the last day we may be found acceptable in thy
sight.” (Burial Office.)
“If we from henceforth walk in his ways, -seeking always
his glory, Christ will set us on his right hand.” (Commina
tion Office.)
5. We come next to the Articles of our Church: The
former part of the Ninth runs thus:
“Original sin--is the fault and corruption of the nature of
every man,--whereby man is very far gone from original
righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil, so
that the flesh lusteth always contrary to the spirit; and
therefore in every person born into this world, it deserveth
God’s wrath and damnation.”
“The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, that
he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength
and good works to faith and calling upon God. Wherefore
we have no power to do good works, pleasant and acceptable
to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us,
that we may have a good-will, and working with us when we
have that good-will.”
“We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our
own works or deservings. Wherefore that we are justified by
faith only, is a most wholesome doctrine, and very full of com
fort, as most largely is expressed in the Homily of Justification.”
I believe this Article relates to the meritorious cause of jus
tification, rather than to the condition of it. On this, therefore,
I do not build anything concerning it, but on those that follow.
“Albeit, that good works, which are the fruits of faith and
follow after justification, cannot put away our sins; yet are
they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring
out necessarily of a true and lively faith : Insomuch that by
them a lively faith may be as evidently known as a tree may
be known by the fruit.”
We are taught here, (1.) That good works in general
follow after justification. (2.) That they spring out of a
true and lively faith, that faith whereby we are justified.
(3.) That true, justifying faith may be as evidently known by
them as a tree discerned by the fruit.
Does it not follow, that the supposing any good work to go
before justification is full as absurd as the supposing an apple,
or any other fruit, to grow before the tree?
But let us hear the Church, speaking yet more plainly:--
AltTICLE XIII.-OF WORKS DONE BEFORE JUSTIFICATION.
“Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration
of his Spirit,” (that is, before justification, as the title expresses
it.) “are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not
of faith in Jesu Christ. Yea, rather, for that they are not
done as God hath willed and commanded them to be done, we
-doubt not they have the nature of sin.”
Now, if all works done before justification have the nature of
sin, (both because they spring not of faith in Christ, and because
they are not done as God hath willed and commanded them
to be done,) what becomes of sanctification previous to justi
fication? It is utterly excluded; seeing whatever is previous
to justification is not good or holy, but evil and sinful.
Although, therefore, our Church does frequently assert that
we ought to repent, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance, if
ever we would attain to that faith whereby alone we are justified;
yet she never asserts (and here the hinge of the question turns)
that these are good works, so long as they are previous to justi
fication. Nay, she expressly asserts the direct contrary, viz.,
that they have all the nature of sin. So that this “horrid,
scandalous, wicked, abominable, venomous, blasphemous doc
trine,” is nevertheless the doctrine of the Church of England.
6. It remains to consider what occurs in the Homilies, first
with regard to the meritorious cause of our justification, agree
able to the eleventh; and then with regard to the condition
of it, agreeable to the twelfth and thirteenth Articles:--
“These things must go together in our justification;--upon
God’s part, his great mercy and grace; upon Christ's part,
the satisfaction of God’s justice; and upon our part, true and
lively faith in the merits of Jesus Christ.” (Homily on Salva
tion. Part I.)
“So that the grace of God doth not shut out the justice
(or righteousness) of God in our justification; but only shutteth
out the righteousness of man,--as to deserving our justification.
“And therefore St. Paul declareth nothing on the behalf of
man, concerning his justification, but only a true faith.
“And yet that faith doth not shut out repentance, hope,
love, to be joined with faith (that is, afterwards; see below) in
every man that is justified: Neither doth faith shut out the
righteousness of our good works, necessarily to be done after
wards. But it excludeth them so that we may not do them to
this intent,--to be made just (or, to be justified) by doing them.
“That we are justified by faith alone, is spoken to take away
clearly all merit of our works, and wholly to ascribe the merit
and deserving of our justification unto Christ only.” (Ibid.
Part II.)
“The true meaning of this saying, ‘We be justified by
faith only, is this, “We be justified by the merits of Christ
only, and not of our own works.’” (Ibid. Part III.)
7. Thus far touching the meritorious cause of our justifica
tion; referred to in the Eleventh Article. The Twelfth and
Thirteenth are a summary of what now follows, with regard
to the condition of it:--
“Of justifying, true faith, three things are specially to be
noted: First, that it bringeth forth good works: Secondly,
that without it can no good works be done: Thirdly, what good
works it doth bring forth.” (Sermon on Faith. Part I.)
“Without faith can no good work be done, accepted and
pleasant unto God. For ‘as a branch cannot bear fruit of
itself,” saith our Saviour Christ, ‘except it abide in the vine,
so cannot you, except you abide in me.’ Faith giveth life to
the soul; and they be as much dead to God that lack faith, as
they be to the world whose bodies lack souls. Without faith
all that is done of us is but dead before God. Even as a picture
is but a dead representation of the thing itself, so be the works
of all unfaithful (unbelieving) persons before God. They be
but shadows of lively and good things, and not good things
indeed. For true faith doth give life to the works, and without
faith no work is good before God.” (Ibid. Part III.)
“We must set no good works before faith, nor think that
before faith a man may do any good works. For such works
are as the course of an horse that runneth out of the way,
which taketh great labour, but to no purpose.” (Ibid.)
“Without faith we have no virtues, but only the shadows
of them. All the life of them that lack the true faith is sin.”
(Ibid.)
“As men first have life, and after be nourished, so must our
faith go before, and after be nourished with, good works. And
life may be without nourishment, but nourishment cannot be
without life.” (Homily of Works annexed to Faith. Part I.)
“I can show a man that by faith without works lived and
came to heaven. But without faith never man had life. The
thief on the cross only believed, and the most merciful God
justified him. Truth it is, if he had lived and not regarded
faith and the works thereof, he should have lost his salvation
again. But this I say, faith by itself saved him. But works
by themselves never justified any man.
“Good works go not before in him which shall afterwards
be justified. But good works do follow after when a man is
first justified.” (Homily on Fasting. Part I.)
8. From the whole tenor then of her Liturgy, Articles, and
Homilies, the doctrine of the Church of England appears to
be this:
(1.) That no good work, properly so called, can go before
justification. (2.) That no degree of true sanctification can be previous toit.
(3.) That as the meritorious cause of justification is the life
and death of Christ, so the condition of it is faith, faith alone.
And,
(4.) That both inward and outward holiness are consequent
on this faith, and are the ordinary, stated condition of final
justification. 9. And what more can you desire, who have hitherto opposed
justification by faith alone, merely upon a principle of conscience;
because you was zealous for holiness and good works? Do I
not effectually secure these from contempt at the same time that
I defend the doctrines of the Church? I not only allow, but
vehemently contend, that none shall ever enter into glory who is
not holy on earth, as well in heart, as “in all manner of conver
sation.” I cry aloud, “Let all that have believed, be careful to
maintain good works; ” and, “Let every one that nameth the
name of Christ, depart from all iniquity.” I exhort even those
who are conscious they do not believe: “Cease to do evil, learn
to do well: The kingdom of heaven is at hand; ” therefore,
“repent, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance.” Are not
these directions the very same in substance which you yourself
would give to persons so circumstanced? What means then this
endless strife of words? Or what doth your arguing prove P
10. Many of those who are perhaps as zealous of goodworks as
you, think I have allowed you too much. Nay, my brethren, but
how can we help allowing it, if weallow the Scriptures to be from
God? For is it not written, and do not you yourselves believe,
“Without holiness no man shall see the Lord?” And how then,
without fighting about words, can we deny that holiness is a con
dition of final acceptance? And as to the first acceptance or
pardon, does not all experience, as well as Scripture, prove that
no man ever yet truly believed the gospel who did not first
repent? that none was ever yet truly “convinced of righteous
ness,” who was not first “convinced of sin?” Repentance, there
fore, in this sense, we cannot deny to be necessarily previous to
faith. Is it not equally undeniable, that the running back into
known, wilful sin, (suppose it were drunkennessor uncleanness,)
stifles that repentance or conviction? And can that repentance
come to any good issue in his soul, who resolves not to forgive
his brother; or who obstinately refrains from what God con
vinces him is right, whether it be prayer or hearing his word?
Would you scruple yourself to tell one of these, “Why, if
you will thus drink away all conviction, how should you ever
truly know your want of Christ; or, consequently, believe in
him ? If you will not forgive your brother his trespasses,
neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses.
If you will not ask, how can you expect to receive? If you
will not hear, how can “faith come by hearing?’ It is plain
you ‘grieve the Spirit of God;’ you will not have him to reign
over you. Take care that he does not utterly depart from you.
For ‘unto him that hath shall be given; but from him that
hath not,’ that is, uses it not, “shall be taken away, even that
which he hath.’” Would you scruple, on a proper occasion,
to say this? You could not scruple it if you believe the
Bible. But in saying this, you allow all which I have said,
viz., that previous to justifying faith, there must be repentance,
and, if opportunity permit, “fruits meet for repentance.”
11. And yet I allow you this, that although both repent
ance and the fruits thereof are in some sense necessary be
fore justification, yet neither the one nor the other is neces
sary in the same sense, or in the same degree, with faith.
Not in the same degree; for in whatever moment a man
believes (in the Christian sense of the word) he is justified,
his sins are blotted out, “his faith is counted to him for right
eousness.” But it is not so at whatever moment he repents,
or brings forth any or all the fruits of repentance. Faith
alone, therefore, justifies; which repentance alone does not,
much less any outward work. And, consequently, none of these
are necessary to justification, in the same degree with faith.
Nor in the same sense. For none of these has so direct,
immediate a relation to justification as faith. This is proxi
mately necessary thereto; repentance, remotely, as it is neces
sary to the increase or continuance of faith. And even in this
sense these are only necessary on supposition,--if there be time
and opportunity for them; for in many instances there is not;
but God cuts short his work, and faith prevents the fruits of
repentance. So that the general proposition is not overthrown,
but clearly established by these concessions; and we conclude
still, both on the authority of Scripture and the Church, that
faith alone is the proximate condition of justification.
III. l. Iwasonceinclined to believe that none would openly
object against what I had anywhere said of the nature of salva
tion. How greatly, then was I surprised some months ago,
when I was shown a kind of circular letter, which one of those
whom “the Holy Ghost hath made overseers” of his Church,”
I was informed, had sent to all the Clergy of his diocese !
Past of it ran (nearly, if not exactly) thus:--
“There is great indiscretion in preaching up a sort of
religion, as the true and only Christianity, which, in their
own account of it, consists in an enthusiastic ardour, to be
understood or attained by very few, and not to be practised
without breaking in upon the common duties of life.”
O, my Lord, what manner of words are these ! Supposing
candour and love out of the question, are they the words of
truth? I dare stake my life upon it, there is not one true
clause in all this paragraph.
The propositions contained therein are these :
(1.) That the religion I preach consists in enthusiastic ardour.
(2.) That it can be attained by very few.
(3.) That it can be understood by very few.
(4.) That it cannot be practised without breaking in upon
the common duties of life.
(5.) And that all this may be proved by my own account of it.
I earnestly entreat your Grace to review my own account
of it, as it stands in any of my former writings; or to consider
the short account which is given in this; and if you can thence
make good any one of those propositions, I do hereby pro
mise, before God and the world, that I will never preach more.
At present I do not well understand what your Grace means
by “an enthusiastic ardour.” Surely you do not mean the
love of God! No, not though a poor, pardoned sinner should
carry it so far as to love the Lord his God with all his heart,
and with all his soul, and with all his strength ! But this
alone is the ardour which I preach up as the foundation of the
true and only Christianity. I pray God so to fill your whole
heart therewith, that you may praise him for ever and ever.
But why should your Grace believe that the love of God can
be attained by very few ; or, that it can be understood by very
* The (then) Archbishop of York.
few 7 All who attain it understand it well. And did not He
who is loving to every man design that every man should
attain true love? “O that all would know, in this their day,
the things that make for their peace l’’
And cannot the love both of God and our neighbour be
practised, without breaking in upon the common duties of
life? Nay, can any of the common duties of life be rightly
practised without them? I apprehend not. I apprehend I
am then laying the true, the only foundation for all those
duties, when I preach, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and thy neighbour as thyself.”
2. With this letter was sent (I believe to every Clergyman in
the diocese) the pamphlet, entitled, “Observations on the Con
duct and Behaviour of a certain Sect, usually distinguished by
the name of Methodists.” It has been generally supposed to be
wrote by a person who is every way my superior. Perhaps one
reason why he did not inscribe his name was, that his greatness
might not make me afraid; and that I might have liberty to
stand as it were on even ground, while I answer for myself.
In considering, therefore, such parts of these “Observations”
as fall in my way, I will take that method which I believe the
author desires, using no ceremony at all; but speaking as to
an equal, that it may the more easily be discerned where the
truth lies.
The first query relating to doctrine is this:--
“Whether motions in religion may not be heightened to such
extremes, as to lead some into a disregard of religion itself,
through despair of attaining such exalted heights: And whe
ther others who have imbibed those notions may not be led by
them into a disregard and disesteem of the common duties and
offices of life; to such a degree, at least, as is inconsistent with
that attention to them, and that diligence in them, which Provi
dence has made necessary to the well-being of private families
and public societies, and which Christianity does not only
require in all stations, and in all conditions, but declares at
the same time, that the performance even of the lowest offices
in life, as unto God, (whose providence has placed people in
their several stations,) is truly a serving of Christ, and will
not fail of its reward in the next world.”
You have interwoven so many particulars in this general
question, that I must divide and answer them one by one.
Query 1. Whether notions in religion may not be heightened
to such extremes, as to lead some into a disregard of religion
itself.
Answer. They may. But that I have so heightened them,
it lies upon you to prove.
Q. 2. Whether others may not be led into a disregard of
religion, through despair of attaining such exalted heights.
A. What heights? the loving God with all our heart? I
believe this is the most exalted height in man or angel. But
I have not heard that any have been led into a disregard of
religion through despair of attaining this.
Q. 3. Whether others who have imbibed these notions may
not be led by them into a disregard and disesteem of the com
mon duties and offices of life.
A. My notions are, True religion is the loving God with all
our heart, and our neighbour as ourselves; and in that love
abstaining from all evil, and doing all possible good to all men.
Now, it is not possible, in the nature of things, that any should
be led by these notions into either a disregard or disesteem
of the common duties and offices of life.
Q. 4. But may they not be led by them into such a degree,
at least, of disregard for the common duties of life as is incon
sistent with that attention to them, and diligence in them,
which Providence has made necessary?
A. No; quite the reverse. They lead men to discharge
all those duties with the strictest diligence and closest atten
tion.
Q. 5. Does not Christianity require this attention and dili
gence in all stations and in all conditions?
A. Yes.
Q. 6. Does it not declare that the performance even of the
lowest offices of life, as unto God, is truly “a serving of Christ;”
and will not fail of its reward in the next world?
A. It does. But whom are you confuting? Not me; for
this is the doctrine I preach continually.
3. Query the Second:--“Whether the enemy of Christi
anity may not find his account in carrying Christianity, which
was designed for a rule to all stations and all conditions, to such
heights as make it practicable by a very few, in comparison,
or rather, by none.”
I answer, (1.) The height to which we carry Christianity (as
was but now observed) is this: “Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbour as thyself.”
(2.) The enemy of Christianity cannot find his account in our
carrying it to this height. (3.) You will not say, on reflection,
that Christianity, even in this height, is practicable by very
few, or rather, by none: You yourself will confess this is a rule
(as God designed it should) for all stations and all conditions.
Query the Third:--“Whether, in particular, the carrying
the doctrine of justification by faith alone to such a height as
not to allow that a sincere and carefulobservance of moral duties
is so much as a condition of our acceptance with God, and of our
being justified in his sight: Whether this, Isay, does not natu
rally lead people to a disregard of those duties, and a lowesteem of
them; or, rather, tothink them no part of the Christian religion.”
I trust justification by faith alone has been so explained
above, as to secure not only a high esteem but also a careful
and sincere observance of all moral duties.
4. Query the Fourth :--“Whether a due and regular
attendance on the public offices of religion, paid by good men
in a serious and composed way, does not answer the true ends
of devotion, and is not a better evidence of the co-operation
of the Holy Spirit, than those sudden agonies, roarings,
screamings, tremblings, droppings down, ravings, and mad
nesses, into which their hearers have been cast.”
I must answer this query likewise part by part.
Query 1. Whether a due and regular attendance on the
public offices of religion, paid in a serious and composed
way, by good (that is, well-meaning) men, does not answer
the true ends of devotion.
Answer. I suppose, by devotion, you mean public worship;
by the true ends of it, the love of God and man; and by a due
and regular attendance on the public offices of religion, paid in a
serious and composed way, the going as often as we have oppor
tunity to our parish church, and to the sacrament there adminis
tered. If so, the question is, whether this attendance on those
offices does not produce the love of God and man. I answer,
Sometimes it does; and sometimes it does not. I myself thus
attended them for many years; and yet am conscious to myself
that during that whole time I had no more of the love of God
than a stone. And I know many hundreds, perhaps thousands,
of serious persons, who are ready to testify the same thing.
Q. 2. But is not this a better evidence of the co-operation
of the Holy Spirit, than those sudden agonies?
A. All these persons, as well as I, can testify also that this
is no evidence at all of the co-operation of the Holy Spirit.
For some years I attended these public offices, because I
would not be punished for non-attendance. And many of
these attended them, because their parents did before them,
or because they would not lose their character: Many more,
because they confounded the means with the end, and fancied
this opus operatum would bring them to heaven. How many
thousands are now under this strong delusion | Beware, you
bring not their blood on your own head !
Q. 3. However, does not this attendance better answer
those ends, than those roarings, screamings? &c.
A. I suppose you mean, better than an attendance on
that preaching, which has often been accompanied with these.
I answer, (1.) There is no manner of need to set the one in
opposition to the other; seeing we continually exhort all who
attend on our preaching to attend the offices of the Church.
And they do pay a more regular attendance there than ever
they did before. (2.) Their attending the Church did not, in
fact, answer those ends at all till they attended this preaching
also. (3.) It is the preaching of remission of sins through
Jesus Christ, which alone answers the true ends of devotion.
And this will always be accompanied with the co-operation of
the Holy Spirit; though not always with sudden agonies,
roarings, screamings, tremblings, or droppings down. Indeed,
if God is pleased at any time to permit any of these, I cannot
hinder it. Neither can this hinder the work of his Spirit in
the soul; which may be carried on either with or without
them. But, (4.) I cannot apprehend it to be any reasonable
proof, that “this is not the work of God,” that a convinced
sinner should “fall into an extreme agony, both of body and
soul; ” (Journal III., p.26;) that another should “roar for the
disquietness of her heart; ” (p. 40;) that others should scream
or “cry with a loud and bitter cry, ‘What must we do to be
saved?’” (p. 50;) that others should “exceedingly tremble and
quake; ” (p. 58;) and others, in a deep sense of the majesty
of God, “should fall prostrate upon the ground.” (P. 59.)
Indeed, by picking out one single word from a sentence, and
then putting together what you had gleaned in sixty or seventy
pages, you have drawn a terrible group for them who look no
farther than those two lines in the “Observations.” But the
bare addition of half a line to each word, just as it stands in
the place from which you quoted it, reconciles all both to
Scripture and reason; and the spectre-form vanishes away.
You have taken into your account ravings and madnesses too.
As instances of the former, you refer to the case of John Hay
don, (p. 44,) and of Thomas Maxfield. (P. 50.) I wish you
would calmly consider his reasoning on that head, who is not
prejudiced in my favour: “What influence sudden and sharp
awakenings may have upon the body, I pretend not to explain.
But I make no question, Satan, so far as he gets power, may
exert himself on such occasions, partly to hinder the good
work in the persons who are thus touched with the sharp
arrows of conviction, and partly to disparage the work of God,
as if it tended to lead people to distraction.”
For instances of madness you refer to pages 88,90, 91, 92,
93. The words in page 88 are these:--
“I could not but be under some concern, with regard to one
or two persons, who were tormented in an unaccountable man
ner, and seemed to be indeed lunatic as well as ‘sore vexed.’
Soon after I was sent for to one of these, who was so strangely
‘torn of the devil,” that I almost wondered her relations did
not say, Much religion ‘hath made thee mad. We prayed
God to bruise Satan under her feet. Immediately ‘we had
the petition we asked of him. She cried out vehemently,
‘He is gone ! he is gone !’ and was filled with the Spirit of
‘love, and of a sound mind.’ I have seen her many times since
strong in the Lord. When I asked, abruptly, ‘What do you
desire now 2° she answered, “Heaven.” I asked, ‘What is in
your heart?” She replied, ‘God.” I asked, “But how is your
heart when anything provokes you?” She said, ‘By the grace
of God, I am not provoked at anything. All the things of this
world pass by me as shadows.’” Are these the words of one
that is beside herself? Let any man of reason judge!
Your next instance (p. 90) stands thus:
“About noon I came to Usk, where I preached to a small
company of poor people, on, ‘The Scn of man is come to save
that which is lost.’ One grey-headed man wept and trembled
exceedingly; and another who was there, (I have since heard,)
as well as two or three who were at the Devauden, are gone quite
distracted; that is, (my express words, that immediately follow,
specify what it was which some accounted distraction,) “they
mourn and refuse to be comforted, until they have redemption
through his blood.’”
If you think the case mentioned pp. 92, 93, to be another
instance of madness, I contend not. It was because I did not
understand that uncommon case that I prefaced it with this
reflection: “The fact I nakedly relate, and leave every man to
his own judgment upon it.” Only be pleased to observe, that
this madness, if such it was, is no more chargeable upon me
than upon you. For the subject of it had no relation to, or
commerce with, me; nor had I ever seen her before that hour.
5. Query the Fifth:--“Whether those exalted strains in
religion, and an imagination of being already in a state of per
fection, are not apt to lead men to spiritual pride, and to a con
tempt of their fellow Christians; while they consider them as
only going on in what they call the low and imperfect way,
(that is, as growing in grace and goodness only by degrees,)
even though it appear by the lives of those who are considered
by them as in that low and imperfect way, that they are
persons who are gradually working out their salvation by their
own honest endeavours, and through the ordinary assistances
of God’s grace; with an humble reliance upon the merits of
Christ for the pardon of their sins, and the acceptance of
their sincere though imperfect services.”
I must divide this query too; but first permit me to ask,
What do you mean by “those exalted strains in religion?”
I have said again and again, I know of no more exalted strain
than, “I will love thee, O Lord my God:” Especially accord
ing to the propriety of David’s expression, Tris Tort-s: Ex
intimis visceribus diligam te, Domine.” This premised, let
us go on step by step.
Query 1. Whether the preaching of “loving God from our
inmost bowels,” is not apt to lead men to spiritual pride, and
to a contempt of their fellow Christians.
Answer. No : But, so far as it takes place, it will humble
them to the dust.
Q. 2. Whether an imagination of being already in a state
of perfection is not apt to lead men into spiritual pride.
* I will love thee from my inmost bowels.
A. (1) If it be a false imagination, it is spiritual pride. (2.)
But true Christian perfection is no other than humble love.
Q. 3. Do not men who imagine they have attained this despise
others, as only going on in what they account the low and imper
fect way, that is, as growing in grace and goodness by degrees?
A. (1.) Men who only imagine they have attained this may
probably despise those that are going on in any way. (2.) But
the growing in grace and goodness by degrees is no mark of a
low and imperfect way. Those who are fathers in Christ grow
in grace by degrees, as well as the new-born babes.
Q. 4. Do they not despise those who are working out their
salvation with an humble reliance upon the merits of Christ
for the pardon of their sins, and the acceptance of their sincere
though imperfect services?
A. (1.) They who really love God despise no man. But,
(2.) They grieve to hear many talk of thus relying on Christ,
who, though perhaps they are grave, honest, moral men, yet
by their own words appear not to love God at all; whose souls
cleave to the dust; who love the world; who have no part of
the mind that was in Christ.
6. Query the Sixth --“Whether the same exalted strains
and notions do not tend toweaken the natural and civil relations
among men, by leading the inferiors, into whose heads those
notions are infused, to a disesteem of their superiors; while
they consider them as in a much lower dispensation than
themselves; though those superiors are otherwise sober and
good men, and regular attendants on the ordinances of religion.”
I havementioned beforewhat those exalted notions are. These
do not tend to weaken either thenatural or civil relations among
men; or to lead inferiors to a disesteem of their superiors, even
where those superiors are neither good nor sober men.
Query the Seventh --“Whether a gradual improvement in
grace and goodness is not a better foundation of comfort, and of
an assurance of a gospel new-birth, than that which is founded
on the doctrine of a sudden and instantaneous change; which,
if there be any such thing, is not easily distinguished from
fancy and imagination; the workings whereof we may well sup
pose to be more strong and powerful, while the person considers
himself in the state of one who is admitted as a candidate for
such a change, and is taught in due time to expect it.”
Let us go one step at a time.
Query 1. Whether a gradual improvement in grace and
goodness is not a good foundation of comfort.
Answer. Doubtless it is, if by grace and goodness be meant
the knowledge and love of God through Christ.
Q. 2. Whether it be not a good foundation of an assurance
of a gospel new-birth.
A. If we daily grow in this knowledge and love, it is a
good proof that we are born of the Spirit. But this does in
mowise supersede the previous witness of God's Spirit with
ours, that we are the children of God. And this is properly
the foundation of the assurance of faith.
Q. 3. Whether this improvement is not a better foundation of
comfort, and ofanassuranceofagospel new-birth, than that which
is founded on the doctrine of a sudden and instantaneous change.
A. A better foundation than that. That 1 What? To what
substantive does this refer? According to the rulesofgrammar,
(for all the substantives are in the genitive case, and, conse
quently, to be considered as only parts of that which governs
them,) you must mean a better foundation than that foundation
which is founded on this doctrine. As soon as I understand
the question, I will endeavour to answer it.
Q. 4. Can that sudden and instantaneous change be easily
distinguished from fancy and imagination?
A. Just as easily as light from darkness; seeing it brings
with it a peace that passeth all understanding, a joy unspeak
able, full of glory, the love of God and all mankind filling the
heart, and power over all sin.
Q. 5. May we not well suppose the workings of imagination
to be more strong and powerful in one who is taught to
expect such a change?
A. Perhaps we may; but still the tree is known by its
fruits. And such fruits as those above-mentioned imagination
was never yet strong enough to produce, nor any power, save
that of the Almighty.
7. There is only one clause in the Eighth Query which
falls under our present inquiry.
“They make it their principal employ, wherever they go,
to instil into people a few favourite tenets of their own; and
this with such diligence and zeal as if the whole of Christianity
depended upon them, and all efforts toward the true Christian
life, without a belief of those tenets, were vain and ineffectual.”
I plead guilty to this charge. I do make it my principal,
may, my whole employ, and that wherever I go, to instil into the
people a few favourite tenets;--only, be it observed, they are
not my own, but His that sent me. And it is undoubtedly true
that this I do, (though deeply conscious of my want both of
zeal and diligence,) as if the whole of Christianity depended
upon them, and all efforts without them were void and vain.
I frequently sum them all up in one: “In Christ Jesus.”
(that is, according to his gospel) “neither circumcision availeth
anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith which worketh by love.”
But many times I instil them one by one, under these or the
like expressions: “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself;” as
thy own soul; as Christ loved us. “God is love; and he that
dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him. Love work
eth no ill to his neighbour; therefore love is the fulfilling of the
law. While we have time, let us do good unto all men; espe
cially unto them that are of the household of faith. Whatsoever
ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them.”
These are my favourite tenets, and have been for many years.
O that I could instil them into every soul throughout the land!
Ought they not to be instilled with such diligence and zeal,
as if the whole of Christianity depended upon them? For
who can deny, that all efforts toward a Christian life, without
more than a bare belief, without a thorough experience and
practice of these, are utterly vain and ineffectual?
8. Part of your Ninth query is to the same effect:--
“A few young heads set up their own schemes as the great
standard of Christianity; and indulge their own notions to such
a degree, as to perplex, unhinge, terrify, and distract the minds
of multitudes of people, who have lived from their infancy under
a gospel ministry, and in the regular exercise of a gospel wor
ship. And all this, by persuading them that they neither are
anor can be true Christians, but by adhering to their doctrines.”
What do you mean by their own schemes, their own notions,
their doctrines? Are they not yours too? Are they not the
schemes, the notisms, the doctrines of Jesus Christ; the
great fundamental truths of his gospel? Can you deny one
of them without denying the Bible? It is hard for you to
kick against the pricks!
“They persuade,” you say, “multitudes of people, that.
they cannot be true Christians but by adhering to their doc
trines.” Why, who says they can? Whosoever he be, I will
prove him to be an infidel. Do you say that any man can
be a true Christian without loving God and his neighbour?
Surely you have not so learned Christ ! It is your doctrine
as well as mine, and St. Paul’s: “Though I speak with the
tongues of men and angels; though I have all knowledge, and
all faith; though I give all my goods to feed the poor, yea,
my body to be burned, and have not love, I am nothing.”
Whatever public worship, therefore, people may have at
tended, or whatever ministry they have lived under from their
infancy, they must at all hazards be convinced of this, or they
perish for ever; yea, though that conviction at first unhinge
them ever so much; though it should in a manner distract them
for a season. For it is better they should be perplexed and ter
rified now, than that they should sleep on and awake in hell.
9. In the Tenth, Twelfth, and Thirteenth queries I am not
concerned. But you include me also when you say, in the
Eleventh, “They absolutely deny that recreations of any kind,
considered as such, are or can be innocent.”
I cannot find any such assertion of mine either in the place
you refer to, or any other. But what kinds of recreation are
innocent it is easy to determine by that plain rule: “Whether
ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God.”
I am now to take my leave of you for the present. But first
I would earnestly entreat you to acquaint yourself what ourdoc
trines are, before you make any fartherobservations upon them.
Surely, touching the nature of salvation we agree, -that “pure
religion and undefiled is this, to visit the fatherless and widows
in their affliction,”--to do all possible good, from a principle of
love to God and man; “and to keep ourselves unspotted from
the world,”--inwardly and outwardly to abstain from all evil.
10. With regard to the condition of salvation, it may be re
membered that I allow, not only faith, but likewise holiness or
universal obedience, to be the ordinary condition of final salva
tion; and that when I say, Faith alone is the condition of pre
sent salvation, what I would assert is this: (1) That without
faith no man can be saved from his sins; can be either inwardly
or outwardly holy. And, (2.) That at what time soever faith is
given, holiness commences in the soul. For that instant “the
love of God” (which is the source of holiness) “is shed
abroad in the heart.”
But it is objected by the author of “The Notions of the
Methodists disproved,” “St.James says, “Can faithsave him?”
I answer, Such a faithasis without works cannot “bring a man
to heaven.” But this is quite beside the present question.
You object, (2) “St. Paul says that “faith made perfect by
love, St. James, that “faith made perfect by works, is the
condition of salvation.” You mean final salvation. I say so
too: But this also is beside the question.-
You object, (3) “That the belief of the gospel is called the
obedience of faith.” (Rom. i. 5.) And, (4.) that what Isaiah
terms believing, St. Paul terms obeying. Suppose I grant
you both the one and the other, what will you infer?
You object, (5.) That in one scripture our Lord is styled,
“The Saviour of them that believe;” and in another, “The
Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him.” (6.)
That to the Galatians St. Paul writes, “Neither circumcision
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith which worketh
by love;” and to the Corinthians, “Circumcision is nothing,
and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping the command
ments of God.” And hence you conclude, “There are several
texts of Scripture wherein unbelief and disobedience are
equivalently used.” Very true; but can you conclude from
thence that we are not “saved by faith alone?”
11. You proceed to answer some texts which I had quoted.
The first is Ephesians ii. 8: “By grace ye are saved through
faith.” “But,” say you, “faith does not mean here that grace
especially so called, but includes also obedience.” But how do
you prove this? That circumstance you had forgot; and so
run off with a comment upon the context; to which I have no
other objection, than that it is nothing at all to the question.
Indeed, some time after, you add, “It is plain then that
good works are always, in St. Paul’s judgment, joined with
faith;” (so undoubtedly they are; that is, as an effect is always
joined with its cause;) “and therefore we are not saved by
faith alone.” I cannot possibly allow the consequence.
You afterwards cite two more texts, and add, “You see,
mere faith cannot be a condition of justification.” You are
out of your way. We are no more talking now of justification
than of final salvation.
In considering Acts xvi. 31. “Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shalt be saved,” you say again, “Here the word.
believe does not signify faith only. Faith necessarily produces
charity and repentance; therefore, these are expressed by the
word believe; ” that is, faith necessarily produces holiness;.
therefore holiness is a condition of holiness. I want farther
proof. That “Paul and Silas spake unto him the word of
the Lord,” and that his faith did “in the same hour” work
by love, I take to be no proof at all.
You then undertake to show, that confessing our sins is a
condition of justification, and that a confidence in the love of
God is not a condition. Some of your words are: “This,
good Sir, give me leave to say, is the greatest nonsense and
contradiction possible. It is impossible you can understand
this jargon yourself; and therefore you labour in vain to make
it intelligible to others. You soar aloft on eagles’ wings, and
leave the poor people to gape and stare after you.”
This is very pretty, and very lively. But it is nothing to,
the purpose. For we are not now speaking of justification;
neither have I said one word of the condition of justification
in the whole tract to which you here refer.
“In the next place,” say you, “if we are saved” (finally
you mean) “only by a confidence in the love of God.” Here
I must stop you again; you are now running beside the
question, on the other hand. The sole position which I here
advance is this: True believers are saved from inward and out
ward sin by faith. By faith alone the love of God and all man
kind is shed abroad in their hearts, bringing with it the mind'
that was in Christ, and producing all holiness of conversation.
IV. 1. I am now to consider what has been lately objected.
with regard to the mature of saving faith.
The author last mentioned “cannot understand how those
texts of St. John are at all to the purpose: ” “Behold, what
manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the sons of God; ” (1 John iii. 1;) and, “We
love him, because he first loved us.” (iv. 19.) I answer, (1.)
These texts were not produced in the “Appeal” by way of
proof, but of illustration only. But, (2.) I apprehend they may
be produced as a proof, both that Christian faith implies a con
fidence in the love of God, and that such a confidence has a
direct tendency to salvation, to holiness both of heart and life
“Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed
upon us, that we should be called the sons of God!” Are not
these words an expression of Christian faith, as direct an one
as can well be conceived? And I appeal to every man, whe
ther they do not express the strongest confidence of the love of
God. Your own comment puts this beyond dispute: “Let us
consider attentively, and with grateful hearts, the great love and
mercy of God in calling us to be his sons, and bestowing on us
the privileges belonging to such.” Do you not perceive that
you have given up the cause ? You have yourself taught us
that these words imply a “sense of the great love and mercy of
God, in bestowing upon us the privileges belonging to his sons.”
The Apostle adds, “Beloved, now are we the sons of God;
and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: But we know
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall
see him as he is.”
I suppose no one will say, either that these words are not
expressive of Christian faith; or that they do not imply the
strongest confidence in the love of God. It follows, “And
every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself even
as he is pure.”
Hence it appears that this faith is a saving faith, that there
is the closest connexion between this faith and holiness.
This text, therefore, is directly to the purpose, in respect of
both the propositions to be proved.
The other is, “We love him, because he first loved us.”
And here also, for fear I should fail in the proof, you have
drawn it up ready to my hands:--
“God sent his only Son to redeem us from sin, by purchas
ing for us grace and salvation. By which grace we, through
faith and repentance, have our sins pardoned; and therefore
we are bound to return the tribute of our love and gratitude,
and to obey him faithfully as long as we live.”
Now, that we have our sins pardoned, if we do not know
they are pardoned, cannot bind us either to love or obedience.
But if we do know it, and by that very knowledge or confidence
in the pardoning love of God are both bound and enabled to
love and obey him, this is the whole of what I contend for.
2. You afterwards object against some othertexts which I had
cited to illustrate the nature of saving faith. My words were,
“Hear believing Job declaring his faith: ‘I know that my
Redeemer liveth.’” I here affirm two things: (1.) That Job
was then a believer. (2.) That he declared his faith in these
words. And all I affirm, you allow. Your own words are,
“God was pleased to bestow upon him a strong assurance of
his favour; to inspire him with a prophecy of the resurrection,
and that he should have a share in it.”
I went on, “Hear Thomas (when having seen he believed)
crying out, ‘My Lord and my God.” Hereon you comment
thus: “The meaning of which is, that St. Thomas makes a
confession both of his faith and repentance.” I agree with
you. But you add, “In St. Thomas’s confession there is not
implied an assurance of pardon.” You cannot agree with
yourself in this; but immediately subjoin, “If it did imply
such an assurance, he might well have it, since he had an
immediate revelation of it from God himself.”
Yet a little before you endeavoured to prove that one who
was not a whit behind the very chief Apostles had not such
an assurance; where, in order to show that faith does not
imply this, you said, “St. Paul methinks has fully determined
this point, ‘I know nothing by myself,’ says he; ‘yet am I
not hereby justified.’” (1 Cor. iv. 4.) “And if an Apostle,
so illuminated, does not think himself justified,” then I grant,
he has fully determined the point. But before you absolutely
fix upon that conclusion, be pleased to remember your own
comment that follows, on those other words of St. Paul :
“The life I now live, I live by faith in the Son of God, who
loved me and gave himself for me.” Your words are, “And,
no question, a person endowed with such extraordinary gifts
might arrive at a very eminent degree of assurance.” So he
did arrive at a very eminent degree of assurance, though he
did not think himself justified !
I can scarce think you have read over that chapter to the
Colossians; else, surely, you would not assert that those words
on which the stress lies (viz., “Who hath delivered us from the
power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of
his dear Son: In whom we have redemption through his blood,
eventheforgiveness of sins,”)“do not relate to Pauland Timothy
who wrote the Epistle, but to the Colossians, to whom they
wrote.” I need be at no pains to answer this; for presently
after your own words are, “He hath made us,” meaning the
Colossians, as well as himself, “meet to be inheritors.”
3. You may easily observe that I quoted the Council of
Trent by memory, not having the book then by me. I own,
and thank you for correcting, my mistake: But in correct
ing one you make another; for the decrees of the Sixth
Session were not published on the thirteenth of January;
but the Session itself began on that day.
I cannot help reciting your next words, although they are
not exactly to the present question:
“The words of the Twelfth Canon of the Council of Trent
are,--
“‘If any man shall say that justifying faith is nothing else
but a confidence in the divine mercy, remitting sins for
Christ's sake, and that this confidence is that alone by which
we are justified, let him be accursed.’” You add,--
“This, Sir, I am sure is true doctrine, and perfectly agree
able to the doctrine of our Church. And so you are not only
anathematized by the Council of Trent, but also condemned
by our own Church.”
“Our Church holds no such scandalous and disgraceful
opinion.” According to our Church, no man can have “the
true faith who has not a loving heart. Therefore, faith is
not a confidence that any man’s sins are actually forgiven,
and he reconciled to God.” (What have the premises to do
with the conclusion?)
4. To decide this, let our Church speak for herself
whether she does not suppose and teach, that every parti
cular believer knows that his sins are forgiven, and he him
self is reconciled to God.
First, then, our Church supposes and teaches every parti
cular believer to say concerning himself, “In my baptism I
was made a member of Christ, a child of God, and an inher
itor of the kingdom of heaven. And I thank God who hath
called me to that state of salvation. And I pray to God that
I may continue in the same to my life's end.”
Now, does this person know what he says to be true? If
not, it is the grossest hypocrisy. But if he does, then he
knows that he in particular is reconciled to God.
The next words I shall quote may be a comment on these:
May God write them in our hearts |
“A true Christian man is not afraid to die, who is the very
member of Christ, the temple of the Holy Ghost, the son of
God, and the very inheritor of the everlasting kingdom of
heaven. But plainly contrary, he not only puts away the fear
of death, but wishes, desires, and longs heartily for it.” (Ser
mon against the Fear of Death. Part I.)
Can this be, unless he has a sure confidence that he in
particular is reconciled to God?
“Men commonly fear death, First, because of leaving their
worldly goods and pleasures: Secondly, for fear of the pains
of death: And, Thirdly, for fear of perpetual damnation.
But none of these causes trouble good men, because they
stay themselves by true faith, perfect charity, and sure hope
of endless joy and bliss everlasting.” (Ibid. Part II.)
“All these therefore have great cause to be full of joy, and
not to fear death nor everlasting damnation. For death can
not deprive them of Jesus Christ; death cannot take him
from us, nor us from him. Death not only cannot harm us, but
also shall profit us, and join us to God more perfectly. And
thereof a Christian heart may be surely certified. ‘It is God,”
saith St. Paul, ‘which hath given us an earnest of his Spirit.”
As long as we be in the body we are in a strange country
But we have a desire rather to be at home with God.” (Ibid.)
He that runneth may read in all these words the confidence
which our Church supposes every particular believer to have,
that he himself is reconciled to God.
To proceed: “The only instrument of salvation required
on our parts is faith; that is, a sure trust and confidence that
God both hath and will forgive our sins, that he hath ac
cepted us again into his favour, for the merits of Christ's
death and passion.” (Second Sermon on the Passion.)
“But here we must take heed that we do not halt with God
through an unconstant, wavering faith. Peter, coming to
Christ upon the water, because he fainted in faith, was in
danger of drowning. So we, if we begin to waver or doubt, it
is to be feared lest we should sink as Peter did,--not into the
water, but into the bottomless pit of hell-fire. Therefore I say
unto yeu, that we must apprehend the merits of Christ's death
by faith, and that with a strong and steadfast faith; nothing
deubting but that Christ by his own oblation hath taken away
eur sins, and hath restored us again to God's favour.” (Ibid.)
5. it it be still said that the Church speaks only cf men in
sereral, but net of the confidence of this or that particular
person; even this last poor subterfuge is utterly cut off by
the following words:--
“Thou, O man, hast received the body of Christ which was
once broken, and his blood which was shed for the remission of thy
sin. Thou hastreceived his body to have within thee the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for to endow thee with grace,
and to comfort thee with their presence. Thou hastreceived his
body to endow thee with everlasting righteousness, and to
assure thee of everlasting bliss.” (Sermon on the Resurrection.)
I shall add but one passage more, from the first part of the
“Sermon on the Sacrament:”--
“Have a sure and constant faith, not only that the death of
Christ is available for all the world, but that he hath made a
full and sufficient sacrifice for thee, a perfect cleansing of thy
sins, so that thou mayest say with the Apostle, ‘He loved
thee, and gave himself for thee. For this is to make Christ
thine own, and to apply his merits unto thyself.”
Let every reasonable man now judge for himself, what is
the sense of our Church as to the nature of saving faith.
Does it not abundantly appear that the Church of England
supposes every particular believer to have a sure confidence
that his sins are forgiven, and he himself reconciled to God?
Yea, and how can the absolute necessity of this faith, this
unwavering confidence, be more strongly or peremptorily
asserted, than it is in those words: “If we begin to waver
or doubt, it is to be feared lest we sink as Peter did,--not
into the water, but into the bottomless pit of hell-fire?”
6. I would willingly dismiss this writer here. I had said
in the “Earnest Appeal,” (what I am daily more and more
confirmed in,) that this faith is usually given in a moment.
This you greatly dislike. Your argument against it, if put
into form, will run thus:--
“They who first apprehended the meaning of the words
delivered, then gave their assent to them, then had confidence
in the promises to which they assented, and, lastly, loved
God, did not receive faith in a moment.
“But the believers mentioned in the Acts first apprehended
the meaning of the words, then gave their assent, then had
confidence in the promises, and, lastly, loved God: Therefore,
“The believers mentioned in the Acts did not receive faith
in a moment.”
I deny the major. They might first apprehend, then assent,
then confide, then love, and yet receive faith in a moment;
in that moment wherein their general confidence became
particular, so that each could say, “My Lord and my God!”
One paragraph more I will be at the pains to transcribe:
“You insinuate that the sacraments are only requisite to the
well-being of a visible Church: Whereas the Church declares
that the due administration of them is an essential property
thereof. I suppose you hinted this to satisfy your loving dis
ciples, the Quakers.”
This is flat and plain. Here is a fact positively averred; and
a reason also assigned for it. Now, do you take yourself to
be a man of candour, I had almost said, of common honesty?
My very words in the place referred to, are, “A visible Church
is a company of faithful people. This is the essence of it.
And the properties thereof are, that the pure word of God be
preached therein, and the sacraments duly administered.”
7. Before I take my leave I cannot but recommend to you
that advice of a wise and good man,--
“Be calm in arguing; for fierceness makes
Error a fault, and truth discourtesy.”
I am grieved at your extreme warmth : You are in a thorough
ill-humour from the very beginning of your book to the end.
This cannot hurt me; but it may yourself. And it does not
at all help your cause. If you denounce against me all the
curses from Genesis to the Revelation, they will not amount
to one argument. I am willing (so far as I know myself) to
be reproved either by you or any other. But whatever you
do, let it be done in love, in patience, in meekness of wisdom.
V. 1. With regard to the Author of faith and salvation,
abundance of objections have been made; it being a current
opinion, that Christians are not now to receive the Holy Ghost.
Accordingly, whenever we speak of the Spirit of God, of
his operations on the souls of men, of his revealing unto us the
things of God, or inspiring us with good desires or tempers;
whenever we mention the feeling his mighty power “work
ing in us” according to his good pleasure; the general answer
we have to expect is, “This is rank enthusiasm. So it was
with the Apostles and first Christians. But only enthusiasts
pretend to this now.”
Thus all the Scriptures, abundance of which might be pro
duced, are set aside at one stroke. And whoever cites them, as
belonging to all Christians, is set down for an enthusiast.
The first tract I have seen wrote expressly on this head, is
remarkably entitled, “The Operations of the Holy Spirit im
perceptible; and how Men may know when they are under the
Guidance and Influence of the Spirit.”
You begin: “As we have some among us who pretend to
a more than ordinary guidance by the Spirit,” (indeed I do
not; I pretend to no other guidance than is ordinarily given to
all Christians,) “it may not be improper to discourse on the
operations of God’s Holy Spirit.
“To this end be thou pleased, O gracious Fountain of
Truth, to assist me with thy heavenly direction, in speaking of
thee.”
Alas, Sir, what need have you to speak any more? You have
already granted all I desire, viz., that we may all now enjoy, and
know that we do enjoy, the heavenly direction of God’s Spirit.
However, you go on, and observe that the extraordinary gifts
of the Holy Ghost were granted to the first Christians only, but
his ordinary graces to all Christians in all ages; both which you
then attempt to enumerate; only suspending your discourse a
little, when “some conceited enthusiasts” come in your way.
2. You next inquire, “after what manner these graces are
raised in our souls;” and answer, “How to distinguish these
heavenly motions from the natural operations of our minds, we
have no light to discover; the Scriptures declaring, that the
operations of the Holy Spirit are not subject to any sensible
feelings or perceptions. For what communication can there
be between feelings which are properties peculiar to matter,
and the suggestions of the Spirit? All reasonable Christians
believe that he works his graces in us in an imperceptible
manner; and that there is no sensible difference between his
and the natural operations of our minds.”
I conceive this to be the strength of your cause. To support
that conclusion, that the operations of the Spirit are impercep
tible, you here allege, (1) “That all reasonable Christians
believe this.” So you say; but I want proof. (2.) “That
there can be no communications” (Ifear you mistook the word)
“between the suggestions of the Spirit, and feelings which are
properties peculiar to matter.” How ! Are the feelings now in
question “properties peculiar to matter?” the feeling of peace,
joy, love, or any feelings at all? I can no more understand the
philosophy than the divinity of this. (3.) “That the Scriptures
declare the operations of the Spirit are not subject to any sensi
ble feelings.” You are here disproving, as you suppose, a propo
sition of mine. But are you sure you understand it? By feel
ing, I mean, being inwardly conscious of. By the operations of
the Spirit, I do not mean the manner in which he operates, but
the graces which he operates in a Christian. Now, be pleased
to produce those scriptures which declare that a Christian
cannot feel or perceive these operations.
3. Are you not convinced, Sir, that you have laid to my
charge things which I know not? I do not gravely tell you
(as much an enthusiast as you over and over affirm me to be)
that I sensibly feel (in your sense) the motions of the Holy
Spirit. Much less do I make this, any more than “convulsions,
agonies, howlings, roarings, and violent contortions of the
body,” either “certain signs of men’s being in a state of sal
vation,” or “necessary in order thereunto.” You might with
equal justice and truth inform the world, and the worshipful
the magistrates of Newcastle, that I make seeing the wind, or
feeling the light, necessary to salvation.
Neither do I confound the extraordinary with the ordinary
operations of the Spirit. And as to your last inquiry, “What
is the best proof of our being led by the Spirit P” I have no
exception to that just and scriptural answer which you your
self have given,-“A thorough change and renovation of mind
and heart, and the leading a new and holy life.”
4. That I confound the extraordinary with the ordinary
operations of the Spirit, and therefore am an enthusiast, is also
strongly urged, in a charge delivered to his Clergy, and lately
published, by the Lord Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry.
An extract of the former part of this I subjoin, in his Lord
ship’s words:
“I cannot think it improper to obviate the contagion of those
enthusiastical pretensions, that have lately betrayed whole mul
titudes either into presumption or melancholy. Enthusiasm,
indeed, when detected, is apt to create infidelity; and infidelity
is so shocking a thing, that many rather run into the other
extreme, and take refuge in enthusiasm. But infidelity and
enthusiasm seem now to act in concert against our established
religion. As infidelity has been sufficiently opposed, I shall
now lay before you the weakness of those enthusiastical pre
tensions.” (Pp. 1, 2.)
“Now, to confute effectually, and strike at the root of,
those enthusiastical pretensions,
“First, I shall show that it is necessary to lay down some
method for distinguishing real from pretended inspiration.”
(Pp. 3, 5.)
“Many expressions occur in the New Testament concerning
the operations of the Holy Spirit. But men of an enthusias
tical temper have confounded passages of a quite different
nature, and have jumbled together those that relate to the
extraordinary operations of the Spirit, with those that relate
only to his ordinary influences. It is therefore necessary to
use some method for separating those passages relating to the
operations of the Spirit, that have been so misapplied to the
service of enthusiastical pretenders.” (Pp. 5-7.)
“I proceed therefore to show,
“Secondly, that a distinction is to be made between those
passages of Scripture about the blessed Spirit that peculiarly
belong to the primitive Church, and those that relate to
Christians in all ages.” (P. 7.)
“The exigences of the apostolical age required the miracu
lous gifts of the Spirit. But these soon ceased. When there
fore we meet in the Scripture with an account of those extra
ordinary gifts, and likewise with an account of his ordinary
operations, we must distinguish the one from the other. And
that, not only for our own satisfaction, but as a means to
stop the growth of enthusiasm.” (Pp. 8-10.)
“And such a distinction ought to be made by the best
methods of interpreting the Scriptures; which most certainly
are an attentive consideration of the occasion and scope of
those passages, in concurrence with the general sense of the
primitive Church.” (P. 11.)
“I propose, Thirdly, to specify some of the chief passages
of Scripture that are misapplied by modern enthusiasts, and
to show that they are to be interpreted chiefly, if not only, of
the apostolical Church; and that they very little, if at all, relate
to the present state of Christians.” (P. 12.)
“I begin,” says your Lordship, “with the original promise
of the Spirit, as made by our Lord a little before he left the
world.”
I must take the liberty to stop your Lordship on the
threshold. I deny that this is the original promise of the
Spirit. I expect his assistance, in virtue of many promises
some hundred years prior to this.
If you say, “However, this is the original or first promise
of the Spirit in the New Testament:” No, my Lord; those
words were spoken long before: “He shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost, and with fire.”
Will you reply?--“Well, but this is the original promise
made by our Lord.” I answer, Not so, neither; for it was before
this Jesus himself stood and cried, “If any man thirst, let him
come unto me and drink: He that believeth on me, as the
Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water. And this he spake of the Spirit, which they should
receive who believed on him.” (Ov eple}\}\ov Aap gavew ot tria
Tevovres eus avtov.) If I mistake not, this may more justly be
termed, our Lord’s original promise of the Spirit. And who
will assert that this is to be “interpreted chiefly, if not only,
of the apostolical Church 7”
5. Your Lordship proceeds: “It occurs in the fourteenth
and sixteenth chapters of St. John’s Gospel; in which he uses
these words.” In what verses, my Lord?" Why is not this
specified ? unless to furnish your Lordship with an opportu
nity of doing the verythings whereof you before complained,--
of “confounding passages of a quite contrary nature, and jum
bling together those that relate to the extraordinary operations
of the Spirit, with those that relate to his ordinary influences?”
You cite the words thus: “‘When the Spirit of truth is come,
he will guide you into all truth, and he will show you things
to come.’ These are nearly the words that occur. (xvi. 13.)
“And again: ‘The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever
I have said unto you.” These words occur in the fourteenth
chapter, at the twenty-sixth verse.”
But, my Lord, I want the original promise still; the origi
mal, I mean, of those made in this very discourse. Indeed your
margin tells us where it is, (xiv. 16,) but the words appear not.
Taken together with the context, they run thus:
“If ye love me, keep my commandments.
* I take it for granted, that the citation of texts in the margin, which is totally
wrong, is a blunder of the printer's.
“And I will pray the Father, and he will give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever:
“Even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive,
because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him.” (xiv. 15-17.)
My Lord, suffer me to inquire why you slipped over this
text. Was it not (I appeal to the Searcher of your heart 1)
because you was conscious to yourself that it would neces
sarily drive you to that unhappy dilemma, either to assert
that for ever, ets Tov atova, meant only sixty or seventy years;
or to allow that the text must be interpreted of the ordinary
operations of the Spirit, in all future ages of the Church 9
And indeed that the promise in this text belongs to all
Christians, evidently appears, not only from your Lordship’s
own concession, and from the text itself, (for who can deny
that this Comforter, or Paraclete, is now given to all them
that believe?) but also from the preceding, as well as follow
ing, words. The preceding are, “If ye love me, keep my
commandments. And I will pray the Father.” None, surely,
can doubt but these belong to all Christians in all ages. The
following words are, “Even the Spirit of truth, whom the
world cannot receive.” True, the world cannot; but all
Christians can and will receive him for ever.
6. The second promise of the Comforter, made in this
chapter, together with its context, stands thus:--
“Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that
thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?
“Jesus answered, and said unto him, If any man love me,
he will keep my word. And my Father will love him, and
we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.
“He that loveth me not, keepeth not my word: And the
word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father’s which sent me.
“These things have I spoken unto you, being yet with you.
“But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things,
and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have
said unto you.” (Verses 22-26.)
Now, how does your Lordship prove that this promise
belongs only to the primitive Church P Why, (1) you say, “It
is very clear from the bare recital of the words.” I apprehend
not. But this is the very question, which is not to be begged,
but proved. (2) You say, “The Spirit's ‘bringing all things
to their remembrance, whatsoever he had said unto them, can
not possibly be applied to any other persons but the Apostles.”
Cannot be applied ! This is a flat begging the question again,
which I cannot give up without better reasons. (3) “The gifts
of prophecy and of being “guided into all truth, and taught all
things, can be applied only to the Apostles, and those of that
age who were immediately inspired.” Here your Lordship, in
order the more plausibly to beg the question again, “jumbles
together the extraordinary with the ordinary operations of the
Spirit.” The gift of prophecy, we know, is one of his extra
ordinary operations; but there is not a word of it in this text;
nor, therefore, ought it to be “confounded with his ordinary
operations,” such as the being “guided into all truth,” (all
that is necessary to salvation,) and taught all (necessary) things,
in a due use of the means he hath ordained. (Verse 26.)
In the same manner, namely, in a serious and constant use
of proper means, I believe the assistance of the Holy Ghost is
given to all Christians, to “bring all things needful to their
remembrance,” whatsoever Christ hath spoken to them in his
word. So that I see no occasion to grant, without some kind
of proof, (especially considering the occasion of this, and the
scope of the preceding verses,) that even “this promise cannot
possibly be applied to any other persons but the Apostles.”
7. In the same discourse of our Lord we have a third pro
mise of the Comforter: The whole clause runs thus:
“If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you;
but if I go, I will send him unto you.
“And when he is come, he will reprove,” or convince, “the
world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment:
“Of sin, because they believe not on me;
“Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see
me no more;
“Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.
“I have yet many things to say unto you; but ye cannot
bear them now: But when he shall come, the Spirit of truth,
he will guide you into all truth; and he will show you things
to come.” (xvi. 7-13.)
There is only one sentence here which has not already
been considered, “He will show you things to come.”
And this, it is granted, relates to the gift of prophecy, one
of the extraordinary operations of the Spirit.
The general conclusion which your Lordship draws is
expressed in these words: “Consequently, all pretensions to
the Spirit, in the proper sense of the words of this promise,
(that is, of these several texts of St. John,) are vain and
insignificant, as they are claimed by modern enthusiasts.”
And in the end of the same paragraph you add, “None but
the ordinary operations of the Spirit are to be now
expected, since those that are of a miraculous (or extraordinary)
kind are not pretended to, even by modern enthusiasts.”
My Lord, this is surprising. I read it over and over before
I could credit my own eyes. I verily believe, this one clause,
with unprejudiced persons, will be an answer to the whole book.
You have been vehemently crying out all along against those
enthusiastical pretenders; nay, the very design of your book, as
you openly declare, was “to stop the growth of their enthusi
asm; who have had the assurance” (as you positively affirm,
page 6) “to claim to themselves the extraordinary operations
of the Holy Spirit.” And here you as positively affirm that
those extraordinary operations “are not pretended to ” by
them at all !
8. Yet your Lordship proceeds: “The next passage of Scrip
ture I shall mention, as peculiarly belonging to the primitive
times, though misapplied to the present state of Christians by
modern enthusiasts, is what relates to the “testimony of the
Spirit, and ‘praying by the Spirit, in the eighth chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans.” (Page 16.)
I believe it incumbent upon methoroughly to weigh the force
of your Lordship's reasoning on this head. You begin: “After
St. Paul had treated of that spiritual principle in Christians,
which enables them “to mortify the deeds of the body, he says,
“If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.”
This makes the distinction of a true Christian, particularly in
opposition to the Jews.” I apprehend it is just here that your
Lordship turns out of the way, when you say, “particularly in
opposition to the Jews.” Such a particular opposition I cannot
allow, till some stronger proof is produced, than St. Paul’s occa
sionally mentioning, six verses before, “the imperfection of
the Jewish law.”
Yet your Lordship's mind is so full of this, that after repeat
ing the fourteenth and fifteenth verses, “As many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God: For ye have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received
the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father !” you
add, “In the former part of this verse, the Apostle shows again
the imperfection of the Jewish law.” This also calls for proof;
otherwise it will not be allowed, that he here speaks of the Jew
ish law at all; not, though we grant that “the Jews were sub
ject to the fear of death, and lived, in consequence of it, in a
state of bondage.” For are not all unbelievers, as well as the
Jews, more or less, in the same fear and bondage?
Your Lordship goes on : “In the latter part of the verse he
shows the superiority of the Christian law to that of the
Jews.” (P. 18.) Where is the proof, my Lord? How does it
appear that he is speaking either of the Christian or Jewish
law in those words, “Ye have received the Spirit of adop
tion, whereby we cry, Abba, Father?” However, you infer,
“Christians them are the adopted sons of God, in contradistinc
tion to the Jews, as the former had the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
which none of the latter had at that time; and the body of the
Jews never had.” No, nor the body of the Christians neither:
So that, if this be a proof against the Jews, it is the very same
against the Christians.
I must observe farther on the preceding words, (1.) That
your Lordship begins here, to take the word Christians in a new
and peculiar sense, for the whole body of the then Christian
Church. (2) That it is a bad inference: “As (or because) they
had the gifts of the Holy Ghost, therefore they were the sons of
God.” On the one hand, if they were the children of God, it
was not because they had those gifts. On the other, a man may
have all those gifts, and yet be a child of the devil.
9. I conceive, not only that your Lordship has proved nothing
hitherto, not one point that has any relation to the question, but
that, strictly speaking, you have not attempted to prove any
thing, having taken for granted whatever came in your way. In
the same manner you proceed, “The Apostle goes on, ‘The
Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God.” This passage, as it is connected with the pre
ceding one, relates to the general adoption of Christians, or their
becoming the sons of God instead of the Jews.”--“This pas
sage relates”--How is that proved? by its connexion with the
preceding? In mowise, unless it be good arguing to prove
ignotum per ignotius.” It has not yet been proved, that the
preceding passage itself has any relation to this matter.
* An unknown proposition by one that is less known.--EDIT.
Your Lordship adds, “But what was the ground of this pre
ference that was given to Christians? It was plainly the mira
culous gifts of the Spirit, which they had, and which the Jews
had not.” This preference given to Christians was just before
expressed by their becoming the sons of God instead of the
Jews. Were the gifts of the Spirit then the ground of this pre
ference, the ground of their becoming the sons of God? What
an assertion is this ! And how little is it mended, though I al
low that “these miraculous gifts of the Spirit were a testimony
that God acknowledged the Christians to be his people, and not
the Jews;” since the Christians, who worked miracles, did it,
not “by the works of the law,” but by “the hearing of faith !”
Your Lordship concludes, “From these passages of St.
Paul, compared together, it clearly follows, that the fore-men
tioned testimony of the Spirit was the public testimony of
miraculous gifts; and, consequently, the witness of the Spirit
that we are the children of God, cannot possibly be applied to
the private testimony of the Spirit given to our own con
sciences, as is pretended by modern enthusiasts.” (P. 20.)
If your conclusion, my Lord, will stand without the pre
mises, it may; but that it has no manner of connexion with
them, I trust does partly, and will more fully, appear, when we
view the whole passage to which you refer; and I believe that
passage, with very little comment, will prove, in direct oppo
sition to that conclusion, that the testimony of the Spirit,
there mentioned, is not the public testimony of miraculous
gifts, but must be applied to the private testimony of the
Spirit, given to our own consciences.
10. St. Paul begins the eighth chapter of his Epistle to the
Romans, with the great privilege of every Christian believer,
(whether Jew or Gentile before,) “There is now no con
demnation for them that are in Christ Jesus,” engrafted into
him by faith, “who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
For” now every one of them may truly say, “The law,” or
power, “of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,” given unto me
for his sake, “hath made me free from the law,” or power,
“of sin and death. For that which the law could not do, in
that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son,
in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin,” did, when he “ con
demned,” crucified, put to death, destroyed, “sin in the flesh;
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For they that
are after the flesh, mind the things of the flesh; but they that
are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit.” (Verses 1-5.)
Is it not evident, that the Apostle is here describing a true.
Christian, a holy believer?--in opposition, not particularly to
a Jew, much less to the Jewish law, but to every unholy man,
to all, whether Jews or Gentiles, “who walk after the flesh?”
He goes on:
“For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually
minded is life and peace. Because the carnal mind is enmity
against God: For it is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be. So then they that are in the flesh cannot.
please God.” (Verses 6-8.)
The opposition between a holy and unlıoly man is still glar
ing and undeniable. But can any man discern the least glim
mering of opposition between the Christian and the Jewish law?
The Apostle goes on: “But ye are not in the flesh, but in
the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but
the Spirit is life because of righteousness. But if the Spirit of
Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that.
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal
bodies by his Spirit which dwelleth in you. Therefore, bre
thren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh.
For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: But if ye through
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
sons of God.” (Verses 9-14.)
Is there one word here, is there any the least intimation, of
miraculous gifts, or of the Jewish law?
It follows, “For ye have not received the Spirit of bondage
again to fear; ” such as all sinners have, when they are at
first stirred up to seek God, and begin to serve him from a
slavish fear of punishment; “but ye have received the Spirit.
of adoption,” of free love, “whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
The Spirit itself,” which God “hath sent forth into our
hearts, crying, Abba, Father, beareth witness with our spirit,
that we are the children of God.” (Verses 15, 16.)
I am now willing to leave it, without farther comment, to
the judgment of every impartial reader, whether it does not.
appear from the whole scope and tenor of the text and con
text taken together, that this passage does not refer to the
Jewish law, nor to the public testimony of miracles; neither
of which can be dragged in without putting the utmost force
on the natural meaning of the words. And if so, it will fol
low, that this “witness of the Spirit” is the private testimony
given to our own consciences; which, consequently, all sober
Christians may claim, without any danger of enthusiasm.
11. “But I go on,” says your Lordship, “to the considera
tion of the other passages in the same chapter, relating to our
praying by the Spirit, namely, at verses 26 and 27, which run
thus: “Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: For
we know not what we should pray for as we ought : But the
Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered. And He that searcheth the hearts knoweth
what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh interces
sion for the saints according to the will of God.’” (P. 21.)
Here is a circumstance highly needful to be observed, be
fore we enter upon this question. Your Lordship undertakes
to fix the meaning of an expression used by St. Paul, in the
fourteenth chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians. And
in order thereto, you laboriously explain part of the eighth
chapterof the Romans. My Lord, how is this? Will it be said,
“Why, this is often alleged to prove the wrong sense of that
scripture?” I conceive, this will not salve the matter at all.
Your Lordship had before laid down a particular method, as
the only sure one whereby to distinguish what scriptures
belong to all Christians, and what do not. This method is, the
considering the occasion and scope of those passages, by com
paring the text and context together. You then propose, by
the use of this method, to show, that several texts have been
misapplied by enthusiasts. One of these is the fifteenth verse
of the fourteenth chapter of the first Epistle to the Corin
thians. And to show, that enthusiasts have misapplied this,
you comment on the eighth chapter to the Romans !
However, let us weigh the comment itself. The material
part of it begins thus: “Now he adds another proof of the
truth of Christianity: “Likewise the Spirit helpeth our
infirmities,” or our distresses, for aoréevetats signifies both.”
(P. 22.) I doubt that: I require authority for it. “And then
he mentions, in what instances he does so, viz., in prayers to
God about afflictions.”--In nothing else, my Lord? Did he
“help their infirmities” in no other instance than this?
“‘We know not,’ says he, “what we should pray for as we
ought.” That is, whether it be best for us to bear afflictions, or
to be delivered from them. But the Spirit, or the gift of the
Spirit, instructs us how to pray in a manner agreeable to the
will of God.” “The Spirit, or the gift of the Spirit !” What
marvellous reasoning is this? If these “are often put for each
other,” what then? How is that evinced to be the case here?
12. “The Apostle goes on, ‘The Spirit itself maketh inter
cession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.’ That
is, the spiritual or inspired person prayed in that capacity for
the whole assembly.” (P. 23.) “That is !” Nay, that is again
the very point to be proved, else we get not one step farther.
“The Apostle goes on thus, (verse 27,) “And he that search
eth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, that is,
of the spiritual or inspired person, ‘because he maketh interces
sion for the saints, according to the will of God.” That is, God
knows the intention of the spiritual person, who has the gift of
prayer, which he uses for the benefit of the whole assembly; he,
I say, leaves it entirely to God, whether it be best that they
should suffer afflictions, or be delivered from them.” (Pp. 24,25.)
My Lord, this is more astonishing than all the rest ! I
was expecting all along, in reading the preceding pages, (and
so, I suppose, was every thinking reader,) when your Lord
ship would mention, that the person miraculously inspired for
that intent, and praying, kata 6eov,” either for the support
or deliverance of the people, should have the very petition
which he asked of him. Whereas you intended no such
thing ! but shut up the whole with that lame and impotent
conclusion, “He leaves it to God whether it be best they
should suffer afflictions, or be delivered from them.”
Had he then that miraculous gift of God, that he might do
what any common Christian mighthave done without it? Why,
any person in the congregation might have prayed thus; nay,
could not pray otherwise, if he had the ordinary grace of God:
“Leaving it to God, whether he should suffer afflictions still, or
be delivered from them.” Was it only in the apostolical age,
that “the Spirit instructed Christians thus to pray?” Cannot
a man pray thus, either for himself or others, unless he has the
* According to [the will of] God.--EDIT.
miraculous gift of prayer l--So, according to your Lordship's
judgment, “to pray in such a manner, as in the event to leave
the continuance of our sufferings, or our deliverance from
them, with a due submission, to the good pleasure of God,”
is one of those extraordinary operations of the Spirit, which
none now pretend to but modern enthusiasts
I beseech your Lordship to consider. Can you coolly
maintain, that the praying with a due submission to the will
of God, even in heavy affliction, is a miraculous gift, an
extraordinary operation of the Holy Ghost? Is this peculiar
to the primitive times? Is it what none but enthusiasts now
pretend to? If not, then your Lordship’s own account of pray
ing by the Spirit indisputably proves, that this is one of the
ordinary privileges of all Christians to the end of the world.
13. “I go on,” your Lordship adds, “to another passage of
Scripture, that has been entirely misapplied by modern enthu
siasts: “And my speech and mypreaching were notwith enticing
words of man’s wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit
and of power; that your faith should not stand in the wisdom
of men, but in the power of God.” (1 Cor. ii. 4, 5.)
“It is only necessary to evince, that by “the demonstration
of the Spirit and of power’ is meant the demonstration of the
truth of Christianity, that arises from the prophecies of the Old
Testament, and the miracles of Christ and his Apostles.” (Pp.
27, 29.) Yes, it is necessary farther to evince, that these words
bave no other meaning. But, First, how will you evince that
they bear this? In order thereto, your Lordship argues thus:
“The former seems to be the demonstration of the Spirit,
with regard to the prophetical testimonies of Him.--And the
demonstration of power must signify the power of God, exerted
in miracles.” (P. 30.) “Must!” Why so? That 8vvauls often
signifies miraculous power, is allowed,--but what follows? that
it must mean so in this place? That still remains to be proved.
Indeed your Lordship says, this “appears from the following
verse, in which is assigned the reason for using this method of
proving Christianity to be true, namely, “That your faith should
not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. By
the power of God, therefore, must necessarily be understood the
miracles performed by Christ and his Apostles.” By the illa
tive particle, “therefore,” this proposition should be an infer
ence from some other: But what other I cannot yet discern. So
that, for the present, I can only look upon it as a fresh
instance of begging the question.
“He goes on in the seventh, tenth, and following verses,
to explain this ‘demonstration of the Spirit and of power.’”
But he does not say one syllable therein, either of the ancient
prophecies, or of miracles. Nor will it be easily proved, that
he speaks either of one or the other, from the beginning of
the chapter to the end.
After transcribing the thirteenth verse, “Which things
also we speak, not in the words which man’s wisdom teacheth,
but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spiritual
things with spiritual,” your Lordship adds, “From which last
passage it appears, that the words which the Holy Ghost is
said to teach, must be the prophetical revelations of the Old
Testament, which were discovered to the Apostles by the same
Spirit.” I cannot apprehend how this appears. I cannot as yet
see any connexion at all between the premises and the conclusion.
Upon the whole, I desire any calm and serious man to read
over this whole chapter; and then he will easily judge what is
the natural meaning of the words in question; and whether
(although it be allowed, that they were peculiarly fulfilled in
the Apostles, yet) they do not manifestly belong, in a lower
sense, to every true Minister of Christ. For what can be more
undeniable than this, that our preaching also is vain, unless it
be attended with the power of that Spirit who alone pierceth
the heart? and that your hearing is vain, unless the same power
be present to heal your soul, and to give you a faith which
“standeth not in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God?”
14. “Another passage that,” your Lordship thinks, “has
been misapplied by enthusiasts, but was really peculiar to the
times of the Apostles, is 1 John ii. 20, 27: ‘Ye have an unction
from the Holy One, and ye know all things.--But theanointing
which ye have received of him abideth in you : And ye need
not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teacheth
you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie. And even as
it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.’ Here the Apostle
arms the true Christians against seducers, by an argument
drawn from ‘the unction from the Holy One,” that was in, or
rather, among them; that is, from the immediate inspiration
of some of their Teachers.” (Pp. 35, 37.)
Here it rests upon your Lordship to prove, as well as affirm,
oF REASON AND RELIGION. 9I
(1.) That ev should be translated among : (2.) That this
“unction from the Holy One” means the inspiration of
some of their Teachers.
The latter your Lordship attempts to prove thus:--
“The inspired Teachers of old were set apart for that office,
by an extraordinary effusion of the Holy Ghost: Therefore,
“‘The unction from the Holy One here means such an
effusion.” (P. 38.) I deny the consequence; so the question
is still to be proved.
Your Lordship's second argument is drawn from the twenty
sixth verse of the fourteenth chapter of St. John's Gospel.
Proposed in form, it will stand thus:--
“If those words, “He shall teach you all things, relate
only to a miraculous gift of the Holy Ghost, then these words,
‘The same anointing teacheth you of all things, relate to the
same miraculous gift :
“But those words relate only to a miraculous gift :
“Therefore these relate to the same.”
I conceive, it will not be very easy to make good the conse
quence in the first proposition. But I deny the minor also:
The contradictory whereto, I trust, has appeared to be true.
I grant indeed, that these words were more eminently
fulfilled in the age of the Apostles: But this is altogether
consistent with their belonging, in a lower sense, to all
Christians in all ages; seeing they have all need of “an
unction from the Holy One,” a supernatural assistance from
the Holy Ghost, that they may know, in the due use of all
proper means, all things needful for their souls' health.
Therefore it is no enthusiasm, to teach that “the unction
from the Holy One” belongs to all Christians in all ages.
15. There is one topic of your Lordship's yet untouched;
that is, authority; one you have very frequently made use of,
and wherein, probably, the generality of readers suppose your
Lordship's great strength lies. And indeed when your Lord
ship first mentioned (p. 11) “the general sense of the primi
tive Church,” I presumed you would have produced so nume
rous authorities, that I should not easily be able to consult
them all. But I soon found my mistake; your Lordship
naming only Chrysostom, Jerome, Origen, and Athanasius.
However, though these four can no more betermed the primi
tive Church, than the Church universal, yet I consent to abide
by their suffrage. Nay, I will go a step farther still: If any
two of these affirm, that those seven texts belong only to the
apostolic age, and not to the Christians of succeeding times,
I will give up the whole cause.
But let it be observed, if they should affirm that these pri
marily belong to the Christians of the apostolic age, that does
not prove the point, because they may, in a secondary sense,
belong to others notwithstanding: Nor does any of them
speak home to the question, unless he maintain, in express
terms, that these texts refer only to the miraculous gifts of
the Spirit, and not at all to the state of ordinary Christians.
16. Concerning those three texts, John xiv. 16, 26, and
John xvi. 13, “I could easily add,” says your Lordship, “the
authorities of Chrysostom and the other ancient commen
tators.” (P. 15.) St. Chrysostom’s authority I will consider
now, and that of the others when they are produced.
It is granted, that he interprets not only John xvi. 13, but
also both the passages in the fourteenth chapter, as primarily
belonging to the Apostles. Yet part of his comment on the
twenty-sixth verse is as follows:
“Such is that grace,” of the Comforter, “that if it finds sad
ness, it takes it away; if evil desire, it consumes it. It casts out
fear, and suffers him that receives it to be a man no longer, but
translates him, as it were, into heaven. Hence “none of them
counted anything his own, but continued in prayer, with glad
ness and singleness of heart. For this chiefly is their need of
the Holy Ghost; for the fruit of the Spirit is joy, peace, faith,
meekness. Indeed spiritual men often grieve; but that grief
is sweeter than joy: For whatever is of the Spirit is the great
est gain, as whatever is of the world is the greatest loss. Let
us therefore in keeping the commandments,” according to our
Lord’s exhortation, verse 15, “secure the unconquerable assist
ance of the Spirit, and we shall be nothing inferior to angels.”
St. Chrysostom here, after he had shown that the promise of
the Comforter primarily belonged to the Apostles, (and who
ever questioned it?) undemiably teaches, that, in a secondary
sense, it belongs to all Christians; to all spiritual men, all who
keep the commandments. I appeal, therefore, to all mankind,
whether his authority, touching the promiseof our Lord in these
texts, does not overthrow the proposition it was cited to prove?
Although your Lordship names no other author here, yet
you say, “The assigned sense of these passages was confirmed
by the authority of Origen.” (P. 42.) It is needful, therefore, to
add what occursin his Works with regard to the presentquestion.
He occasionally mentions this promise of our Lord, in four
several places. But it is in one only that he speaks perti
nently to the point in hand, (vol. ii., p. 403, Edit. Bened.)
where his words are these :--
“‘When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you
into all truth, and he will teach you all things.’ The sum of
all good things consists in this, that a man be found worthy
to receive the grace of the Holy Ghost. Otherwise, nothing
will be accounted perfectin him who hath not the Holy Spirit.”
Do these words confirm that “sense of those passages
which your Lordship had assigned ?” Rather do they not
utterly overturn it, and prove (as above) that although this
promise of our Lord primarily belongs to the Apostles, yet,
in the secondary sense, it belongs (according to Origen’s
judgment) to all Christians in all ages?
17. The fourth text mentioned as belonging to the first
Christians only, is Romans viii. 15, 16; and it is said, page
26, “This interpretation is confirmed by the authority of the
most eminent fathers.” The reader is particularly referred to
Origen and Jerome in locum. But here seems to be a mistake
of the name. Jerome in locum should mean, Jerome upon the
place, upon Romans viii. 15, 16. But I cannot perceive that
there is one word upon that place, in all St. Jerome's Works.
Nor indeed has Origen commented upon it any more than
Jerome. But he occasionally mentions it in these words:--
“He is a babe who is fed with milk; but if he seeks the
things that are above, without doubt he will be of the number
of those who “receive not the spirit of bondage again unto
fear, but the Spirit of adoption, through whom they cry,
‘Abba, Father.’” (Vol. i., p. 79.)
Again: “The fulness of time is come; when they who are
willing receive the adoption, as Paul teaches in these words,
‘Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again unto fear;
but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father!’ And it is written in the Gospel according to
St. John, ‘To as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the sons of God, even to then that believe
in his name.’” (Vol. i., pp. 231, 232.)
Yet again: “Every one that is born of God, and doth not
commit sin, by his very actions saith, “Our Father which art
in heaven; ‘the Spirit itself bearing witness with their
spirit, that they are the children of God.’” (Ibid.)
According to Origen, therefore, this testimony of the Spirit
is not any public testimony by miracles, peculiar to the first
times, but an inward testimony, belonging in common to all
that are born of God; and consequently the authority of
Origen does not “confirm that interpretation” neither, but
absolutely destroys it.
18. The last authority your Lordship appeals to on this
text is, “that of the great John Chrysostom, who reckons the
testimony of the Spirit of adoption by which we cry, ‘Abba,
Father, among the miraculous gifts of the Spirit.” “I rather
choose” (your Lordship adds, p. 26) “to refer you to the
words of St. Chrysostom, than to transcribe them here, as
having almost translated them in the present account of the
testimony of the Spirit.”
However, I believe it will not be labour lost to transcribe
a few of those words.
It is in his comment on the fourteenth verse, that he first
mentions St. Paul’s comparison between a Jew and a Chris
tian. How fairly your Lordship has represented this, let
every reader judge:-
“‘As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons
of God.”--Whereas the same title had been given of old to
the Jews also, he shows in the sequel, how great a difference
there is between that honour and this. For though, says he,
the titles are the same, yet the things are not. And he plainly
proves it, by comparing both what they had received, and what
they looked for. And first he shows what they had received,
viz., a ‘spirit of bondage. Therefore he adds, “Ye have not
received the spirit of bondage again unto fear; but ye have
received the Spirit of adoption.’ What means the spirit of
fear?-Observe their whole life, and you will know clearly. For
punishments were at their heels, and much fear was on every
side, and before their face. But with us it is not so. For our
mind and conscience are cleansed, so that we do all things well,
not for fear of present punishment, but through our love of
God, and an habit of virtue. They therefore, though they were
called sons, yet were as slaves; but we, being made free, have
received the adoption, and look not for a land of milk and
honey, but for heaven.
“He brings also another proof, that we have the Spirit of
adoption, by which, says he, we cry, ‘Abba, Father. This
is the first word we utter ueta tas 6avuaatas obvas exceivas,
scal Tov £evov cat Trapabokov Xoxevuatov voluov; after those
amazing throes, (or birth-pangs,) and that strange and won
derful manner of bringing forth.
“He brings yet another proof of the superiority of those who
had this Spirit of adoption: ‘The Spirit itself beareth witness
with our spirit that we are the children of God.' I prove this,
says he, not only from the voice itself, but also from the cause
whence that voice proceeds: For the Spirit suggests the words
while we thus speak, which he hath elsewhere expressed more
plainly, ‘God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts, crying, Abba, Father!’ But what is, ‘The Spirit
beareth witness with our spirit?” He means, the Paraclete by
the gift given unto us.” (But that this was an extraordinary
gift, we have no intimation at all, neither before nor after.)
“And when ‘the Spirit beareth witness, what doubt is left? If
a man or an angel spake, some might doubt; but when the
Most High beareth witness to us, who can doubt any longer?”
Now let any reasonable man judge how far your Lordship
has “translated the words of St. Chrysostom; and whether
he reckons the testimony of the Spirit among the miraculous
gifts of the Holy Ghost,” or among those ordinary gifts of
the Spirit of Christ which if a man have not he is none of his.
19. The fifth text your Lordship quotes, as describing a
miraculous gift of the Spirit, is 1 Cor. xiv. 15: To prove
which, you comment on the eighth chapter to the Romans,
particularly the twenty-sixth verse; and here again it is said,
that “the interpretation assigned is confirmed by several of
the most eminent fathers, more especially the great John
Chrysostom, as well as by Origen and Jerome upon the place.”
I cannot find St. Jerome to have writ one line upon the place.
And it is obvious, that St. Chrysostom supposes the whole con
text from the seventeenth to the twenty-fifth verse, torelate to all
Christians in all ages. How this can be said to “confirm the
interpretation assigned,” I cannot conjecture. Nay, it is remark
able, that he expounds the former part of the twenty-sixth verse
as describing the ordinary privilege of all Christians. Thus far,
therefore, he does not confirm but overthrow, the “interpre
tation before assigned.” But in the middle of the verse he
breaks off, and expounds the latter part, as describing one of
the miraculous gifts.
Yet I must do the justice to this venerable man to observe,
he does not suppose that a miraculous gift was given, only that
the inspired might do what any ordinary Christian might have
done without it; (this interpretation, even of the latter part
of the verse, he does in nowise confirm;) but that he might
ask, in every particular circumstance, the determinate thing
which it was the will of God to give.
20. The third father by whom it is said this interpretation
is confirmed, is Origen. The first passage of his, which
relates to Rom. viii. 26, runs thus:
“Paul, perceiving how far he was, after all these things, from
knowing to pray for what he ought, as he ought, says, “We
know not what we should pray for as we ought. But he adds,
whence, what is wanting may be had by one who indeed does
not know, but labours to be found worthy of having the defect.
supplied. For he says, “Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our
infirmities. For we know not what we should pray for as we
ought. But the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us, with
groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searcheth
the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit; because
he maketh intercession for the saints, according to the will of
God.” The Spirit which crieth, ‘Abba, Father, in the hearts
of the saints, knowing well our groanings in this tabernacle,
“maketh intercession for us to God, with groanings which
cannot be uttered.’ To the same effect is that Scripture: ‘I
will pray with the Spirit, I will pray with the understanding
also.” (1 Cor. xiv. 15. For our understanding (or mind,
o vows) cannot pray, if the Spirit do not pray before it, and
the understanding, as it were, listen to it.” (Vol. i., p. 199.)
Again: “I would know how the saints cry to God without a
voice. The Apostle shows, ‘God hath sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father !’ and he adds,
“The Spirit itself maketh intercession for us, with groanings
which cannot be uttered.’ And again, “He that searcheth the
hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh
intercession for the saints, according to the will of God.” Thus,
therefore, the Spirit making intercession for us with God, the
cry of the saints is heard without a voice.” (Vol. ii., p. 146.)
Once more in his Homily on Joshua :
“Jesus our Lord doth not forsake us; but although when
we would pray, “we know not what to pray for as we ought,’
yet ‘the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groan
ings which cannot be uttered. Now the Lord is that Spirit: ”
The Spirit assists our prayers, and offers them to God with
groanings which we cannot express in words.” (Vol. ii., p. 419.)
I believe all rational men will observe from hence, that
Origen is so far from confirming, that he quite overturns,
your Lordship’s interpretation of the sixteenth as well as the
twenty-sixth verse of this chapter; seeing, in his judgment,
both that testimony of the Spirit and this prayer belong to
all Christians in all ages.
21. The sixth scripture which your Lordship has undertaken
to show “relates only to the apostolical times,” is 1 Cor. ii. 4, 5.
And “this interpretation also,” it is said, “is confirmed by the
authority of Chrysostom, Origen, and other ancient writers.”
(P. 33.) With those other “ancient writers” I have no con
cern yet. St. Chrysostom so far confirms this interpretation, as
to explain that whole phrase “the demonstration of the Spirit
and of power,” of “the power of the Spirit shown by miracles.”
But he says not one word of any “proof of the Christian religion
arising from the types and prophecies of the Old Testament.”
Origen has these words:--
“Our word has a certain peculiar demonstration, more
divine than the Grecian logical demonstration. This the
Apostle terms, ‘the demonstration of the Spirit and of
power;” of the Spirit, because of the prophecies, sufficient to
convince any one, especially of the things that relate to
Christ; of power, because of the miraculous powers, some
footsteps of which still remain.” (Vol. i., p. 321.)
Hence we may doubtless infer, that Origen judged this text
to relate, in its primary sense, to the Apostles; but can we
thence infer, that he did not judge it to belong, in a lower
sense, to all true Ministers of Christ?
Let us hear him speaking for himself in the same treatise:
“‘And my speech and my preaching were not with entic
ing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit
and of power; that your faith should not stand in the wisdom
of men, but in the power of God.” Those who hear the word
preached with power are themselves filled with power,” (N.B.
not the power of working miracles,) “which they demon
strate both in their disposition, and in their life, and in their
striving for the truth unto death. But some, although they
profess to believe, have not this power of God in them, but
are empty thereof.” (P. 377.)
(Did Origen, then, believe that the power mentioned in this
text belonged only to the apostolical age?)
“See the force of the word, conquering believers by a per
suasiveness attended with the power of God! I speak this to
show the meaning of him that said, “And my speech and my
preaching were not with the enticing words of man’s wisdom,
but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your
faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power
of God.” This divine saying means, that what is spoken is
not sufficient of itself (although it be true, and most worthy to
be believed) to pierce a man’s soul, if there be not also a
certain power from God given to the speaker, and grace bloom
upon what is spoken; and this grace cannot be but from God.”
After observing that this is the very passage which your
Lordship mentions at the close of the other, but does not cite,
I desire every unprejudiced person to judge, whether Origen
does not clearly determine that the power spoken of in this
text, is in some measure given to all true Ministers in all ages.
22. The last scripture which your Lordship affirms “to be
peculiar to the times of the Apostles,” is that in the First
Epistle of St. John, concerning the “unction of the Holy One.”
To confirm this interpretation, we are referred to the au
thority of “Origen and Chrysostom, on the parallel passages
in St. John's Gospel.” (P. 42.)
But it has appeared, that both these fathers suppose those
passages to belong to all Christians; and, consequently, their
authority (if these are parallel passages) stands full against
this interpretation.
Your Lordship subjoins, “I shall here only add that of the
great Athanasius, who, in his epistle to Serapion, interprets
the ‘unction from the Holy One, not mercly of divine grace,
but of the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit.”
Nay, it is enough, if he interprets it at all of ordinary
grace, such as is common to all Christians.
And this your Lordship allows he does. But I cannot allow
that he interprets it of any thing else. I cannot perceive that
he interprets it at all “of the extraordinary gifts of the Holy
Spirit.”
His words are, “The Holy Spirit is called, and is, the unction
and the seal. For John writes, ‘The anointing which ye have
received of him, abideth in you; and ye need not that any man
should teach you, but as his anointing, his Spirit, “teacheth you
of all things' Again : It is written in the Prophet Isaiah,
“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed
me.’ And Paul writes thus: “In whom also ye were sealed.’
And again: ‘Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye
are sealed unto the day of redemption.” This anointing is the
breath of the Son; so that he who hath the Spirit may say, ‘We
are the sweet smelling savour of Christ. Because we are par
takers of the Holy Spirit, we have the Son; and having the Son,
we have ‘the Spirit crying in our hearts, Abba, Father.’”
And so in his Oration against the Arians:--
“‘He sendeth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying,
Abba, Father.” His Son in us, invoking the Father, makes him
to be called our Father. Certainly God cannot be called their
Father, who have not the Son in their hearts.”
Is it not easy to be observed here, (1.) That Athanasius makes
“that testimony of the Spirit” common to all the children of
God: (2.) That he joins “the anointing of the Holy One,” with
that seal of the Spirit wherewith all that persevere are “sealed
to the day of redemption:” And, (3.) That he does not, through
out this passage, speak of the extraordinary gifts at all?
Therefore, upon the whole, the sense of the primitive Church,
so far as it can be gathered from the authors above cited, is,
that “although some of the scriptures primarily refer to those
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit which were given to the Apos
tles, and a few other persons in the apostolical age; yet they
refer also, in a secondary sense, to those ordinary operations
of the Holy Spirit which all the children of God do and will
experience, even to the end of the world.”
23. What I mean by the ordinary operations of the Holy
Ghost, I sum up in the words of a modern writer:--
“Sanctification being opposed to our corruption, and answer
ing fully to the latitude thereof, whatsoever of holiness and per
fection is wanting in our nature must be supplied by the Spirit
of God. Wherefore, being by nature we are totally void of
all saving truth, and under an impossibility of knowing the will
of God, this ‘Spirit searcheth all things, yea, even the deep
things of God,” and revealeth them unto the sons of men, so
that thereby the darkness of their understanding is expelled,
and they are enlightenéd with the knowledge of God. The
same Spirit which revealeth the object of faith generally to the
universal Church, doth also illuminate the understanding of
such as believe, that they may receive the truth. For ‘faith
is the gift of God, not only in the object, but also in the act.
And this gift is a gift of the Holy Ghost working within us.--
And as the increase of perfection, so the original of faith, is from
the Spirit of God, by an internal illumination of the soul.”
“The second part of the office of the Holy Ghost, is the
renewing of man in all the parts and faculties of his soul. For
our natural corruption consisting in an aversation of our wills,
and a depravation of our affections, an inclination of them to
the will of God is wrought within us by the Spirit of God.
“The third part of this office is, to lead, direct, and govern
usin our actions and conversations. “If we live in the Spirit,”
quickened by his renovation, we must also ‘walk in the Spirit,”
following his direction, led by his manuduction. We are also
animated and acted by the Spirit of God, who giveth ‘both to
will and to do: And ‘as many as are’ thus ‘led by the Spirit of
God, are the sons of God.” (Rom. viii. 14.) Moreover, that
this direction may prove more effectual, we are guided in our
prayers by the same Spirit; according to the promise, ‘I will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and supplication.” (Zech. xii. 10.)
Whereas then ‘this is the confidence which we have in him,
that if we ask anything according to his will, he heareth us;”
and whereas ‘we know not what we should pray for as we ought,
the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered;’ and “he that searcheth the hearts knoweth
what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession
for the saints, according to the will of God.” (Rom. viii.27.) From
which intercession,” (made for all true Christians,) “he hath the
name of the Paraclete given him by Christ, who said, ‘I will pray
the Father, and he will give you another Paraclete.” (John xiv.
16,26.)‘For if any man sin, we have a Paraclete with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous,” saith St. John; ‘who maketh inter
cession for us,” saith St. Paul. (Rom. viii. 34.) And we have
‘another Paraclete,” saith our Saviour; (John xiv. 16;) ‘which
also maketh intercession for us,” saith St. Paul. (Rom. viii.
27.) A Paraclete, then, in the notion of the Scriptures, is an
intercessor.
“It is also the office of the Holy Ghost, to “assure us of the
adoption of sons,’ to create in us a sense of the paternal love of
God towards us, to give us an earnest of our everlasting inherit
ance. ‘The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the
Holy Ghost which is given untous.’ ‘For as many as are led
by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.” “And because
we are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts, crying, Abba, Father.’ ‘For we have not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear; but we have received the Spirit
of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father; the Spirit itself
bearing witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.”
(Verses 15, 16.)
“As, therefore, we are born again by the Spirit, and receive
from him our regeneration, so we are also by the same Spirit
- assured of our adoption.” Because, being ‘sons, we are also
heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, by the same
‘Spirit we have the pledge, or rather the ‘earnest, of our inherit
ance.” For ‘he which establishethus in Christ, and hath anointed
us, is God; who hath also sealed us, and hath given us the
earnest of his Spirit in our hearts:’ So that “we are sealed with
that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inherit
ance. The Spirit of God, as given unto us in this life, is to be
looked upon as an earnest, being part of that reward which is
promised, and, upon performance of the covenant which God
hath made with us, certainly to be received.”
Your Lordship observed, that “the interpretation of those
passages which relate to the ‘unction from the Holy One,”
depends on the sense of those other passages of Holy Scripture,
particularly those in St. John’s Gospel.” Now, if so, then these
words fix the sense of six out of the seven texts in question; and
every one of them, in the judgment of this writer, describes the
ordinary gifts bestowed on all Christians.
It now rests with your Lordship to take your choice; either
to condemn or to acquit both. Either your Lordship must con
demn Bishop Pearson for an enthusiast; (a man no ways inferior
to Bishop Chrysostom;) or you must acquit me: for I have
hisexpress authority on my side, concerning every text which I
affirm to belong to all Christians.
24. But I have greater authority than his, and such as I rever
ence only less than that of the oracles of God; I mean, that
of our own Church. I shall close this head by setting down
what occurs in her authentic records, concerning either our
“receiving the Holy Ghost,” or his ordinary operations in all
true Christians.
In her Daily Service she teaches us all to beseech God “to
grant us his Holy Spirit, that those things may please him
which we do at this present, and that the rest of our life may
be pure and holy;” to pray for our Sovereign Lord the King,
that God would “replenish him with the grace of his Holy
Spirit;” for all the Royal Family, that they may be “endued
with his Holy Spirit, and enriched with his heavenly grace;”
for all the Clergy and people, that he would “send down upon
them the healthful Spirit of his grace;” for “the Catholic
Church, that it may be guided and governed by his good
Spirit;” and for all therein who at any time “make their com
mon supplication unto him,” that “the fellowship” or communi
cation “of the Holy Ghost may be with them all evermore.”
Her Collects are full of petitions to the same effect: “Grant
that we may daily be renewed by thy Holy Spirit.” (Collect for
Christmas-Day.) “Grant that in all our sufferings here, for
the testimony of thy truth, we may by faith behold the glory
that shall be revealed, and, “being filled with the Holy Ghost,”
may love and bless our persecutors.” (St. Stephen’s Day.)
“Send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most
excellent gift of charity.” (Quinquagesima Sunday.) “O.
Lord, from whom all good things do come, grant to us, thy
humble servants, that by thy holy inspiration we may think
those things that are good, and by thy merciful guidance may
perform the same.” (Fifth Sunday after Easter.) “We
beseech thee, leave us not comfortless, but send us the Holy
Ghost to comfort us.” (Sunday after Ascension Day.) “Grant
us by the same Spirit to have a right judgment in all things, and
evermore to rejoice in his holy comfort.” (Whit-Sunday.)
(N.B. The Church here teaches all Christians to claim the
Comforter, in virtue of the promise made, John xiv.) “Grant
us, Lord, we beseech thee, the Spirit, to think and do always
such things as be rightful.” (Ninth Sunday after Trinity.)
“O God, forasmuch as without thee we are not able to please
thee; mercifully grant that thy Holy Spirit may in all things
direct and rule our hearts.” (Nineteenth Sunday after Trinity.)
“Cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of thy
Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily
magnify thy holy name.” (Communion Office.)
“Give thy Holy Spirit to this infant, (or this person,) that
he may be born again.-Give thy Holy Spirit to these persons,”
(N.B. already baptized,) “that they may continue thy servants.
“Almighty God, who hast vouchsafed to regenerate these
persons by water and the Holy Ghost; strengthen them with
the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily increase in them the
manifold gifts of thy grace.” (Office of Confirmation.)
From these passages it may sufficiently appear, for what
purposes every Christian, according to the doctrine of the
Church of England, does now “receive the IIoly Ghost.” But
this will be still more clear from those that follow ; wherein
the reader may likewise observe a plain, rational sense of God’s
revealing himself to us, of the inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
and of a believer's feeling in himself “the mighty working”
of the Spirit of Christ:--
25. “God gave them of old grace to be his children, as he
doth us now. But now, by the coming of our Saviour Christ,
we have received more abundantly the Spirit of God in our
hearts.” (Homily on Faith, Part II.)
“He died to destroy the rule of the devil in us; and he rose
again to send down his Holy Spirit, to ‘rule in our hearts.”
(Homily on the Resurrection.)
“We have the Holy Spirit in our hearts, as a seal and
pledge of our everlasting inheritance.” (Ibid.)
“The Holy Ghost sat upon each of them, like as it had been
cloven tongues of fire; to teach, that it is he which giveth elo
quence and utterance in preaching the gospel; which engen
dereth a burning zeal towards God’s word, and giveth all men
a tongue, yea, a fiery tongue.” (N.B. Whatever occurs in
any of the Journals, of God’s “giving me utterance,” or
“enabling me to speak with power,” cannot therefore be
quoted as enthusiasm, without wounding the Church through
my side.) “So that if any man be a dumb Christian, not
professing his faith openly, he giveth men occasion to doubt
lest he have not the grace of the Holy Ghost within him.”
(Homily on Whit-Sunday, Part I.)
“It is the office of the Holy Ghost to sanctify; which the
more it is hid from our understanding,” (that is, the more par
ticular manner of his working) “the more it ought to move all
men to wonder at the secret and mighty workings of God’s
Holy Spirit which is within us. For it is the Holy Ghost
that doth quicken the minds of men, stirring up godly motions
in their hearts. Neither doth he think it sufficient inwardly
to work the new birth of man, unless he do also dwell and
abide in him. ‘Know ye not,” saith St. Paul, ‘that ye are the
temple of God, and that his Spirit dwelleth in you? Know ye
not that your bodies are the temple of the Holy Ghost, which
is in you?” Again he saith, ‘Ye are not in the flesh, but in
the Spirit. For why? ‘The Spirit of God dwelleth in you.’
To this agreeth St. John : ‘The anointing which ye have re
ceived’ (he meaneth the Holy Ghost) ‘abidethin you.’ (1 John
ii. 27.) And St. Peter saith the same: ‘The Spirit of glory and
of God resteth upon you. O what comfort is this to the heart
of a true Christian, to think that the Holy Ghost dwelleth in
him ! “If God be with us,’ as the Apostle saith, “who can be
against us?” He giveth patience and joyfulness of heart, in
temptation and affliction, and is therefore worthily called ‘the
Comforter.” (John xiv. 16.) He doth instruct the hearts of the
simple in the knowledge of God and his word; therefore he
is justly termed ‘the Spirit of truth.’ (xvi. 13.) And where the
Holy Ghost doth instruct and teach, there is no delay at all in
learning.” (Ibid.)
From this passage I learn, First, that every true Christian
now “receives the Holy Ghost,” as the Paraclete or Comfor
ter promised by our Lord, John xiv. 16: Secondly, that every
Christian receives him as “the Spirit of truth,” (promised
John xvi.) to “teach him all things:” And, Thirdly, that “the
anointing,” mentioned in the first Epistle of St. John, “abides
in every Christian.”
26. “In reading of God’s word, he profiteth most that is
most inspired with the Holy Ghost.” (Homily on reading the
Scripture, Part I.)-
“Human and worldly wisdom is not needful to the under
standing of Scripture, but the revelation of the Holy Ghost,
who inspireth the true meaning unto them that with humility
and diligence search for it.” (Ibid. Part II.)
“Make him know and feel that there is no other name
under heaven given unto men, whereby we can be saved.
“If we feel our conscience at peace with God, through
remission of our sin,--all is of God.” Homily on Rogation,
Week, Part III.)
“If you feel such a faith in you, rejoice in it, and let it be
daily increasing by well-working.” (Homily on Faith, Part III.)
“The faithful may feel wrought tranquillity of conscience,
the increase of faith and hope, with many other graces of God.”
(Homily on the Sacrament, Part I.)
“Godly men feel inwardly God's Holy Spirit, inflaming
their hearts with love.” (Homily on certain places of Scrip
ture, Part I.)
“God give us grace to know these things, and to feel them
in our hearts | This knowledge and feeling is not of ourselves.
Let us therefore meekly call upon the bountiful Spirit, the
Holy Ghost, to inspire us with his presence, that we may be
able to hear the goodness of God to our salvation. For without
his lively inspiration, can we not so much as speak the name
of the Mediator. “No man can say that Jesus is the Lord,
but by the Holy Ghost; much less should we be able to
believe and know these great mysteries that be opened to us
by Christ. “But we have received, saith St. Paul, ‘not the
spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God;’ for this
purpose, ‘that we may know the things which are freely given
to us of God.” In the power of the Holy Ghost resteth all
ability to know God, and to please him. It is he that purifieth
the mind by his secret working. He enlighteneth the heart,
to conceive worthy thoughts of Almighty God. He sitteth
in the tongue of man, to stir him to speak his honour. He
only ministereth spiritual strength to the powers of the soul
and body. And if we have any gift whereby we may profit
our neighbour, all is wrought by this one and the self-same
Spirit.” (Homily for Rogation Week, Part III.)
27. Every proposition which I have anywhere advanced
concerning those operations of the Holy Ghost, which, I
believe, are common to all Christians in all ages, is here
clearly maintained by our own Church.
Under a full sense of this, I could not well understand, for
many years, how it was, that on the mentioning any of thesegreat
truths,even among men of education, the cryimmediately arose,
“An enthusiast! An enthusiast !” But I now plainly perceive
this is only an old fallacy in a new shape. To object enthu
siasm to any person or doctrine is but a decent method of beg
£ing thequestion. It generally spares the objector the trouble of
reasoning, and is a shorter and easier way of carrying his cause.
For instance, I assert that “till a man “receives the Holy
Ghost, he is without God in the world; that he cannot know
the things of God, unless God reveal them unto him by the
Spirit; no, nor have even one holy or heavenly temper, without
the inspiration of the Holy One.” Now, should one who is
conscious to himself that he has experienced none of these
things, attempt to confute these propositions, either from Scrip
ture or antiquity, it might prove a difficult task. What then
shall he do? Why, cry out, “Enthusiasm ! Enthusiasm !”
and the work is done.
But what does he mean by enthusiasm 2 Perhaps nothing
at all: Few have any distinct idea of its meaning. Perhaps
“something very bad,” or, “something I never experienced and
do not understand.” Shall I tell you then what that “terrible
something” is ? I believe, thinking men mean by enthusiasm,
a sort of religious madness; a false imagination of being
inspired by God: And by an enthusiast, one that fancics himself
under the influence of the Holy Ghost, when, in fact, he is not.
Let him prove me guilty of this who can. I will tell you
once more the whole of my belief on these heads: And if any
man will show me (by arguments, not hard names) what is
wrong, I will thank God and him.
28. Every good gift is from God, and is given to man by the
Holy Ghost. By nature there is in us no good thing; and
there can be none, but so far as it is wrought in us by that good
Spirit. Have we any true knowledge of what is good? This
is not the result of our matural understanding. “The natural
man discerneth not the things of the Spirit of God:” So that
we never can discern them, until God “reveals them unto us by
his Spirit.” Reveals, that is, unveils, uncovers; gives us to
know what we did not know before. Have we love? It “is
shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given
unto us.” He inspires, breathes, infuses into our soul, what of
ourselves we could not have. Does our spirit rejoice in God
our Saviour? It is “joy in,” or by, “the Holy Ghost.” Have
we true inward peace? It is “the peace of God,” wrought in
us by the same Spirit. Faith, peace, joy, love, are all his fruits.
And as we are figuratively said to see the light of faith; so, by
a like figure of speech, we are said to feel this peace and joy and
love; that is, we have an inward experience of them, which we
cannot find any fitter word to express.
The reasons why, in speaking of these things, I use those
terms, (inspiration particularly,) are, (1.) Because they are
scriptural: (2.) Because they are used by our Church : (3.)
Because I know none better. The word, “influence of the Holy
Ghost,” which I suppose you use, is both a far stronger and a
less natural term than inspiration. It is far stronger; even as
far as “flowing into the soul” is a stronger expression than
“breathing upon it;”--and less natural, as breathing bears a
near relation to spirit; to which flowing in has only a distant
relation.
But you thought I had meant “immediate inspiration.” So
I do, or I mean nothing at all. Not indeed such inspiration as
is sine mediis. But all inspiration, though by means, is imme
diate. Suppose, for instance, you are employed in private
prayer, and God pours his love into your heart. God then acts
immediately on your soul; and the love of him which you then
experience, is as immediately breathed into you by the Holy
Ghost, as if you had lived seventeen hundred years ago.
Change the term: Say, God then assists you to love him.
Well, and is not this immediate assistance 2 Say, His Spirit
concurs with yours. You gain no ground. It is immediate con
currence, or none at all. God, a Spirit, acts upon your spirit.
Make it out any otherwise if you can.
I cannot conceive how that harmless word immediate came
to be such a bugbear in the world: “Why, I thought you meant
such inspiration as the Apostles had; and such a receiving the
Holy Ghost as that was at the day of Pentecost.” I do, in
part: Indeed I do not mean, that Christians now receive the
Holy Ghost in order to work miracles; but they do doubtless
now “receive,” yea, are “filled with, the Holy Ghost,” in
order to be filled with the fruits of that blessed Spirit. And he
inspires into all true believers now, a degree of the same peace
and joy and love which the Apostles felt in themselves on that
day, when they were first “filled with the Holy Ghost.”
29. I have now considered the most material objections I
know, which have been lately made against the great doctrines
I teach. I have produced, so far as in me lay, the strength of
those objections, and then answered them, I hope, in the spirit
of meekness. And now I trust it appears, that these doctrines.
are no other than the doctrines of Jesus Christ; that they are
all evidently contained in the word of God, by which alone I
desire to stand or fall; and that they are fundamentally the
same with the doctrines of the Church of England, of which I
do, and ever did, profess myself a member.
But there remains one objection, which, though relating
to the head of doctrine, yet is independent on all that went
before. And that is, “You cannot agree in your doctrines
among yourselves. One holds one thing, and one another.
Mr. Whitefield anathematizes Mr. Wesley; and Mr. Wesley
anathematizes Mr. Whitefield. And yet each pretends to be
led by the Holy Ghost, by the infallible Spirit of God! Every
reasonable man must conclude from hence, that neither one
nor the other is led by the Spirit.”
I need not say, how continually this has been urged, both in
common conversation and from the press: (I am grieved to
add, and from the pulpit too; for, if the argument were good,
it would overturn the Bible:) Nor, how great stress has been
continually laid upon it. Whoever proposes it, proposes it as
demonstration, and generally claps his wings, as being quite
assured, it will admit of no answer.
And indeed I am in doubt, whether it does admit (I am sure
it does not require) any other answer, than that coarse one of
the countryman to the Romish champion, “Bellarmine, thou
liest.” For cvery proposition contained herein is grossly,
shamelessly false. (1.) “You cannot agree in your doctrines
among yourselves.”--Who told you so? All our fundamental
doctrines I have recited above. And in every one of these we
do and have agreed for several years. In these we hold one and
the same thing. In smaller points, each of us thinks, and lets
think. (2) “Mr. Whitefield anathematizes Mr. Wesley.”
Another shameless untruth. Let any one read what Mr.
Whitefield wrote, even in the heat of controversy, and he will
be convinced of the contrary. (3) “And Mr. Wesley anathe
matizes Mr. Whitefield.” This is equally false and scandalous.
I reverence Mr. Whitefield, both as a child of God, and a true
Minister of Jesus Christ. (4.) “And yet each pretends to be
led by the Holy Ghost, by the infallible Spirit of God.” Not
in our private opinions; nor does either of us pretend to be any
farther led by the Spirit of God, than every Christian must
pretend to be, unless he will deny the Bible. For only “as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons of God.”
Therefore, if you do not pretend to be led by him too, yea, if
it be not so in fact, “you are none of his.”
And now, what is become of your demonstration? Leave it
to the carmen and porters, its just proprietors; to the zealous
apple-women, that cry after me in the street, “This is he that
rails at the Whole Dutiful of Man.” But let every one that pre
tends to learning or reason be ashamed to mention it any more.
30. The first inference easily deduced from what has been
said, is, that we are not false prophets. In one sense of the
word, we are no prophets at all; for we do not foretel things to
come. But in another, (wherein every Minister is a prophet,)
we are; for we do speak in the name of God. Now, a false pro
phet (in this sense of the word) is one who declares as the will
of God what is not so. But we declare (as has been shown at
large) nothing else as the will of God, but what is evidently con
tained in his written word, as explained by our own Church.
Therefore, unless you can prove the Bible to be a false book,
you cannot possibly prove us to be false prophets.
The text which is generally cited on this occasion is Matthew
vii. 15. But how unhappily chosen In the preceding chap
ters, our Lord had been describing that “righteousness which
exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,” and
without which we cannot “enter into the kingdom of heaven.”
Even the life of God in the soul; holiness of heart, producing
all holiness of conversation. In this, he closes that rule which
sums up the whole, with those solemn words, “Enter ye in at
the strait gate; ” (such indeed is that of universal holiness;)
“for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to
destruction.” The gate of hell is wide as the whole earth; the
way of unholiness is broad as the great deep. “And many
there be which go in thereat; ” yea, and excuse themselves in
so doing, “because strait is the gate and narrow is the way that
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.” It follows,
“Beware of false prophets;” of those who speak as from God
what God hath not spoken; those who show you any other
way to life, than that which I have now shown. So that the
false prophets here spoken of are those who point out any other
way to heaven than this; who teach men to find a wider gate,
a broader way, than that described in the foregoing chapters.
But it has been abundantly shown that we do not. Therefore
(whatever we are beside) we are not false prophets.
Neither are we (as has been frequently and vehemently
affirmed) “deceivers of the people.” If we teach “the truth as
it is in Jesus,” if “we speak as the oracles of God,” it follows,
that we do not deceive those that hear, though they should
believe whatever we speak. “Let God be true, and every
man a liar; ” every man that contradicts his truth. But he
will “be justified in his saying, and clear when he is judged.”
31. One thing more I infer, that we are not enthusiasts.
This accusation has been considered at large; and the main
arguments hitherto brought to support it have been weighed
in the balance and found wanting: Particularly this, “that
none but enthusiasts suppose either that promise of the Com
forter, (John xiv. 16, 26; xvi. 13) or the witness of the
Spirit, (Rom. viii. 15, 16) or that unutterable prayer, (Rom.
viii. 26, 27,) or the ‘unction from the Holy One, (1 John
ii. 20, 27,) to belong in common to all Christians.” O my
Lord, how deeply have you condemned the generation of
God’s children | Whom have you represented as rank,
dreaming enthusiasts, as either deluded or designing men ?
Not only Bishop Pearson, a man hitherto accounted both
sound in heart, and of good understanding; but likewise
Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, Bishop Latimer, Bishop
Hooper; and all the vcncrable compilers of our Liturgy and
Homilies; all the members of both the Houses of Convocation,
by whom they were revised and approved; yea, King Edward,
and all his Lords and Commons together, by whose authority
they were established; and, with these modern enthusiasts,
Origen, Chrysostom, and Athanasius are comprehended in the
same censure !
I grant, a Deist might rank both us and them in the
number of religious madmen; nay, ought so to do, on his sup
position that the Gospel is but a “cunningly-devised fable.”
And on this ground some of them have done so in fact. One
of them was asking me, some years since, “What! are you
one of the knight-errants? How, I pray, got this Quixotism
into your head? You want nothing; you have a good pro
vision for life; and are in a fair way of preferment. And
must you leave all, to fight windmills; to convert savages in
America?” I could only reply, “Sir, if the Bible is a lie, I
am as very a madman as you can conceive. But if it be true,
I am in my senses; I am neither a madman nor enthusiast.
‘For there is no man who hath left father, or mother, or
wife, or house, or land, for the gospel’s sake; but he shall
receive an hundred fold, in this world, with persecutions, and
in the world to come, eternal life.’”
Nominal, outside Christians too, men of form, may pass the
same judgment. For we give up all our pretensions to what
they account happiness, for what they (with the Deists) believe
to be a mere dream. We expect, therefore, to pass for enthu
siasts with these also: “But wisdom is justified of ’’ all “her
children.”
32. I cannot conclude this head without one obvious
remark: Suppose we really were enthusiasts; suppose our doc
trines were false, and unsupported either by reason, Scripture,
or authority; then why hath not some one, “who is a wise man,
and endued with knowledge among you,” attempted at least
to show us our fault “in love and meekness of wisdom ?”
Brethren, “if ye have bitter zeal in your hearts, your wisdom
descendeth not from above. The wisdom that is from above,
is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy” or
pity. Does this spirit appear in one single tract of all those
which have been published against us? Is there one writer that
has reproved us in love? Bring it to a single point. “Love
hopeth all things.” If you had loved usin any degree, you would
have hoped that God would some time give us the knowledge
of his truth. But where shall we find even this slender instance
of love? Has not every one who has wrote at all (I do not
remember so much as one exception) treated us as incorrigible?
Brethren, how is this? Why do ye labour to teach us an evil
lesson against yourselves? O may God never suffer others to
deal with you as ye have dealt with us!
VI. 1. Before I enter upon the consideration of those objec
tions which have been made to the manner of our preaching,
I believe it may be satisfactory to some readers, if I relate how
I began to preach in this manner:
I was ordained Deacon in 1725, and Priest in the year fol
lowing. But it was many years after this before I was convinced
of the great truths above recited. During all that time I was
utterly ignorant of the nature and condition of justification.
Sometimes I confounded it with sanctification; (particularly
when I was in Georgia;) at other times I had some confused
notion about the forgiveness of sins; but then I took it for
granted the time of this must be either the hour of death, or
the day of judgment,
I was equally ignorant of the nature of saving faith; appre
hending it to mean no more than a “firm assent to all the
propositions contained in the Old and New Testaments.”
2. As soon as, by the great blessing of God, I had a clearer
view of these things, I began to declare them to others also.
“I believed, and therefore I spake.” Wherever I was now
desired to preach, salvation by faith was my only theme. My
constant subjects were, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shalt be saved.” “Him hath God exalted to be a Prince
and a Saviour, to give repentance and remission of sins.” These
Iexplained and enforced with all my might, both in every church
where I was asked to preach, and occasionally in the religious
societies of London and Westminster; to some or other of
which I was continually pressed to go by the stewards or other
members of them.
Things were in this posture, when I was told I must preach
no more in this, and this, and another church; the reason was
usually added without reserve, “Because you preach such doc
trines.” So much the more those who could not hear me there
flocked together when I was at any of the societies; where I
spoke, more or less, though with much inconvenience, to as
many as the room I was in would contain.
3. But after a time, finding those rooms could not contain a
tenth part of the people that were earnest to hear, I determined
to do the same thing in England, which I had often done in a
warmer climate; namely, when the house would not contain the
congregation, to preach in the open air. This I accordingly
did, first at Bristol, where the society rooms were exceeding
small, and at Kingswood, where we had no room at all; after
wards, in or near London.
And I cannot say I have ever seen a more awful sight, than,
when on Rose-Green, or the top of Hannam-Mount, some
thousands of people were calmly joined together in solemn
waiting upon God, while
They stood, and under open air adored
The God who made both air, earth, heaven, and sky.
And, whether they were listening to his word with attention still
as night, or were lifting up their voice in praise as the sound
of many waters, many a time have I been constrained to say
in my heart, “How dreadful is this place! This” also “is no
other than the house of God! This is the gate of heaven!”
Be pleased to observe: (1.) That I was forbidden, as by a
general consent, to preach in any church, (though not by any
judicial sentence,) “for preaching such doctrine.” This was
the open, avowed cause; there was at that time no other, either
real or pretended, except that the people crowded so. (2.) That
I had no desire or design to preach in the open air, till after
this prohibition. (3.) That when I did, as it was no matter of
choice, so neither of premeditation. There was no scheme at
all previously formed, which was to be supported thereby; nor
had I any other end in view than this,--to save as many souls
as I could. (4.) Field-preaching was therefore a sudden expe
dient, a thing submitted to, rather than chosen; and therefore
submitted to, because I thought preaching even thus, better
than not preaching at all: First, in regard to my own soul,
because, “a dispensation of the gospel being committed to me,”
I did not dare “not to preach the gospel:” Secondly, in regard
to the souls of others, whom I everywhere saw “seeking death
in the error of their life.”
4. But the author of the “Observations,” and of “The
Case of the Methodists briefly stated, more particularly in the
point of Field-Preaching,” thinks field-preaching worse than
not preaching at all, “because it is illegal.”
Your argument, in form, runs thus:--
“That preaching which is contrary to the laws of the land is
worse than not preaching at all:
“But field-preaching is contrary to the laws of the land:
“Therefore, it is worse than not preaching at all.”
The first proposition is not self-evident, nor, indeed, univer
sally true: For the preaching of all the primitive Christians
was contrary to the whole tenor of the Roman law; the wor
ship of the devil-gods being established by the strongest laws
then in being. Nor is it ever true, but on supposition that the
preaching in question is an indifferent thing.
But waving this, I deny the second proposition; I deny that
field-preaching is contrary to the laws of our land.
To prove which, you begin thus: “It does not appear that
any of the Preachers among the Methodists have qualified
themselves, and the places of their assembling, according to the
Act of Toleration.”
I answer, (1.) That Act grants toleration to those who dis
sent from the Established Church: But we do not dissent from
it: Therefore, we cannot make use of that Act. (2.) That Act
exempts Dissenters from penalties consequent on their breach
of preceding laws: But we are not conscious of breaking any
law at all: Therefore, we need not make use of it.
In the next section you say, “They have broken through all
these provisions, in open defiance of government; and have
met, not only in houses, but in the fields, notwithstanding the
statute (22 Car. II, c. 1) which forbids this by name.”
I answer, (1.) We do nothing in defiance of government:
We reverence Magistrates, as the Ministers of God. (2.)
Although we have met in the fields, yet we do not conceive that
statute at all affects us; not only because that Act points
wholly at Dissenters; whereas we are members of the Estab
lished Church; but also because (they are your own words)
“it was evidently intended to suppress and prevent sedition;”
whereas, no sedition, nor any the least approach thereto, can
with any colour be laid to our charge.
In your third section you affirm that the Act of Toleration
itself cannot secure us in field-preaching from the penalties of
former laws. We have no desire it should; as not apprehend
ing ourselves to be condemned by any former law whatever.
Nor does what you add, “that the Act of Toleration forbids
any assembly of persons dissenting from the Church of Eng
land, to meet with the doors locked,” affect us at all; because
we do not dissent from it.
5. In “The Case of the Methodists briefly stated,” your first
observation is, “The Act of Toleration leaves them liable to the
penalties of several statutes made against unlawful assemblies.”
I suppose then these several statutes specify what those
unlawful assemblies are ; and whether unlawful, as being con
demned by previous laws, or made unlawful by those statutes.
And it still remains to be proved, that our assemblies are
unlawful, in one or other of these senses.
You next observe, that “the Dissenters of all denominations
qualify themselves according to the Act of Toleration; other
wise, they are liable to the penalties of all the laws recited in
this Act.”
I answer, as before, all this strikes wide. It relates wholly
to “persons dissenting from the Church.” But we are not the
men: We do not dissent from the Church: Whoever affirms
it, we put him to the proof.
You go on : “One of those laws so recited (viz., 22 Car.
II., c. 1) is that which forbids field-preaching by name; and
was evidently intended, not only to suppress, but also to
prevent, sedition: As the title of the Act declares, and as the
preamble expresses it, “to provide farther and more speedy
remedies against it.”
Was this then, in your own judgment, the evident intention
of that Act, viz., to provide remedies against sedition? Does the
very title of the Act declare this, and the preamble also express
it? With what justice then, with what ingenuity or candour,
with what shadow of truth or reason, can any man cite this Act
against us; whom you yourself no more suspect of a design to
raise sedition, (I appeal to your own conscience in the sight of
God,) than of a design to blow up the city of London?
6. Hitherto, therefore, it hath not been made to appear that
field-preaching is contrary to any law in being. However, “it
is dangerous.” This you strongly insist on. “It may be
attended with mischievous consequences. It may give advan
tages to the enemies of the established government. It is big
with mischief.” (Observations, Sect. i. & ii.)
With what mischief? Why, “evil-minded men, by meeting
together in the fields, under pretence of religion, may raise riots
and tumults; or, by meeting secretly, may carry on private
cabals against the state.” (Case of the Methodists, p. 2.)
“And if the Methodists themselves are a harmless and loyal
people, it is nothing to the point in hand. For disloyal and
seditious persons may use such an opportunity of getting toge
ther, in order to execute any private design. Mr. Whitefield
says, thirty, fifty, or eighty thousand have attended his preach
ing at once. Now, (1.) He cannot know one tenth part of such
a congregation: (2.) All people may come and carry on what
designs they will: Therefore, (3.) This is a great opportunity
put into the hands of seditious persons to raise disturbances.
“With what safety to the public these field-preachings may
be continued, let the world judge.” (Ibid. pp. 2-4.)
May I speak without offence? I cannot think you are in
earnest. You do not mean what you say. Do you believe Mr.
Whitefield had eighty thousand hearers at once? No more
than you believe he had eighty millions. Is not all this talk
of danger mere finesse, thrown in purely ad movendam invi
diam ** You know governments generally are suspicious;
*To excite ill-will.-EDIT.
especially in the time of war; and therefore apply, as you sup
pose, to their weak side; in hopes, if possible, to deliver over
these heretics to the secular arm. However, I will answer as if
you spoke from your heart: For I am in earnest, if you are not.
(1.) “The Preacher cannot know a tenth part of his congre
gation.” Let us come to the present state of things. The
largest congregations that now attend the preaching of any
Methodist, are those (God be merciful to me!) that attend
mine. And cannot I know a tenth part of one of these congre
gations, either at Bristol, Kingswood, Newcastle, or London?
As strange as it may seem, I generally know two-thirds of the
congregation in every place, even on Sunday evening, and nine
in ten of those who attend at most other times. (2.) “All
people may come and carry on what designs they will.” Not so.
All field-preaching is now in the open day. And were only ten
persons to come to such an assembly with arms, it would soon
be inquired, with what design they came. This is therefore,
(3.) No “great opportunity put into the hands of seditious
persons to raise disturbances.” And if ever any disturbance.
has been raised, it was quite of another kind. :
The public, then, is entirely safe, if it be in no other danger
than arises from field-preaching.
7. There is one other sentence belonging to this head, in the
eighth section of the “Observations.” “Thereligious societies,”
you say, “in London and Westminster, for many years past,
have received no discouragements, but, on the contrary, have
been countenanced and encouraged both by the Bishops and
Clergy.” How is this? Have they then “qualified themselves
and places of their assembling, according to the Act of Tolera
tion?” Have they “embraced the protection which that Act
might give them, in case they complied with the conditions.
of it?” If not, are they not all “liable to the penalties of
the several statutes made before that time against unlawful
assemblies?”
How can they escape? Have they “qualified themselves for
holding these separate assemblies, according to the tenor of that
Act?” Have, then, “the several members thereof taken the
oaths to the government?” And are the “doors of the places
wherein they meet always open at the time of such meetings?”
I presume you know they are not; and that neither “the per
sons nor places are so qualified as that Act directs.”
How then come “the Bishops and Clergy to countenance
and encourage” unlawful assemblies? If it be said, “They
meet in a private, inoffensive way;” that is nothing to the
point in hand. If those meetings are unlawful in themselves,
all their inoffensiveness will not make them lawful. “O, but
they behave with modesty and decency.” Very well; but the
law ! What is that to the law There can be no solid defence
but this: They are not Dissenters from the Church; therefore
they cannot use, and they do not need, the Act of Toleration.
And their meetings are not seditious; therefore the statute
against seditious meetings does not affect them.
The application is obvious. If our meetings are illegal, so
are theirs also. But if this plea be good (as doubtless it is) in
the one case, it is good in the other also.
8. You propose another objection to our manner of preach
ing, in the second part of the “Observations.” The substance
of it I will repeat, and answer as briefly as I can :--
“They run up and down from place to place, and from
county to county;” that is, they preach in several places.
This is undoubtedly true. “They draw after them confused
multitudes of people;” that is, many come to hear them.
This is true also. “But they would do well to remember,
God is not the author of confusion or of tumult, but of peace.”
I trust we do: Nor is there any confusion or tumult at all in
our largest congregations; unless at some rare times, when the
sons of Belial mix therewith, on purpose to disturb the peace
able worshippers of God.
“But our Church has provided against this preaching up
and down, in the ordination of a Priest, by expressly limiting
the exercise of the powers then conferred upon him, to the con
gregation where he shall be lawfully appointed thereunto.”
I answer, (1.) Your argument proves too much. If it be
allowed just as you proposed it, it proves that no Priest has
authority, either to preach or minister the sacraments, in any
other than his own congregation.
(2.) Had the powers conferred been so limited when I was
ordained Priest, my ordination would have signified just
nothing. For I was not appointed to any congregation at all;
but was ordained as a member of that “College of Divines,”
(so our statutes express it,) “founded to overturn all heresies,
and defend the Catholic faith.”
(3.) For many years after I was ordained Priest, this limita
tion was never heard of. I heard not one syllable of it, by way
of objection, to my preaching up and down in Oxford or Lon
don, or the parts adjacent; in Gloucestershire, or Worcester
shire; in Lancashire, Yorkshire, or Lincolnshire. Nor did the
strictest disciplinarian scruple suffering me to exercise those
powers wherever I came.
(4.) And in fact, is it not universally allowed, that every
Priest, as such, has a power, in virtue of his ordination, either
to preach or to administer the sacraments, in any congregation,
wherever the Rector or Curate desires his assistance? Does
not every one then see through this thin pretence?
9. “The Bishops and Universities indeed have power to
grant licenses to Itinerants. But the Church has provided in
that case; they are not to preach in any church (Canon 50) till
they show their license.”
The Church has well provided in that case. But what has
that case to do with the case of common Clergymen? Only
so much as to show how grossly this Canon has been abused,
at Islington in particular; where the Churchwardens were
instructed to hinder, by main force, the Priest whom the
Vicar himself had appointed, from preaching, and to quote this
Canon; which, as you plainly show, belongs to quite another
thing.
In the note you add, “Mr. Wesley being asked, by what
authority he preached, replied, “By the authority of Jesus
Christ conveyed to me by the (now) Archbishop of Canterbury,
when he laid his hands upon me and said, Take thou authority
to preach the gospel. In this reply he thought fit, for a plain
reason, to leave out this latter part of the commission; for that
would have shown his reader the restraint and limitation under
which the exercise of the power is granted.” Nay, I did not
print the latter part of the words, for a plainer reason, because
I did not speak them. And I did not speak them then, because
they did not come into my mind. Though probably, if they had,
I should not have spoken them; it being my only concern, to
answer the question proposed, in as few words as I could.
But before those words, which you suppose to imply such a
restraint as would condemn all the Bishops and Clergy in the
nation, were those, spoken without any restraint or limitation
at all, which I apprehend to convey an indelible character:
“Receive the Holy Ghost, for the office and work of a Priest
in the Church of God, now committed unto thee, by the impo
sition of our hands. Whose sins thou dost forgive, they are
forgiven; and whose sins thou dost retain, they are retained.
And be thou a faithful dispenser of the word of God, and of
his holy sacraments, in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”
You proceed: “In the same Journal he declares, that he
looks upon all the world as his parish, and explains his mean
ing as follows: ‘In whatever part of it I am, I judge it meet,
right, and my bounden duty, to declare, unto all that are
willing to hear, the glad tidings of salvation. This is the work
which I know God hath called me to;’” namely, “by the
laying on of the hands of the presbytery,” which directs me
how to obey that general command, “While we have time,
let us do good unto all men.”
10. You object farther, “that the Methodists do not observe
the Rubric before the Communion Service; which directs, so
many as desire to partake of the holy communion, to signify
their names to the Curate the day before.” What Curate
desires they should? Whenever any Minister will give but one
week's notice of this, I undertake, all that have any relation
to me shall signify their names within the time appointed.
You object also, that they break through the twenty-eighth
Canon, which requires, “That if strangers come often to any
church from other parishes, they should be remitted to their
own churches, there to receive the communion with their
neighbours.”
But what, if there be no communion there? Then this
Canon does not touch the case; nor does any one break it, by
coming to another church purely because there is no commu
nion at his own.
As to your next advice, “To have a greater regard to the
rules and orders of the Church,” I cannot; for I now regard
them next to the word of God. And as to your last, “To
renounce communion with the Church,” I dare not. Nay,
but let them thrust us out. We will not leave the ship; if
you cast us out of it, then our Lord will take us up.
11. To the same head may be referred the objection some
time urged, by a friendly and candid man, viz., “That it was
unlawful to use extemporary prayer, because there was a Canon
against it.”
It was not quite clear to me, that the Canon he cited was
against extemporary prayer. But supposing it were, my plain
answer would be, “That Canon I dare not obey; because
the law of man binds only so far as it is consistent with the
word of God.”
The same person objected my not obeying the Bishops and
Governors of the Church. I answer, I both do and will obey
them, in whatsoever I can with a clear conscience. So that
there is no just ground for that charge,--that I despise either
the rules or the Governors of the Church. I obey them in
all things where I do not apprehend there is some particular
law of God to the contrary. Even in that case, I show all
the deference I can : I endeavour to act as inoffensively as
possible; and am ready to submit to any penalty which can by
law be inflicted upon me. Would to God every Minister and
member of the Church were herein altogether as I am !
VII. 1. I have considered the chief objections that have
lately been urged against the doctrines I teach. The main
arguments brought against this manner of teaching have been
considered also. It remains, to examine the most current
objections, concerning the effects of this teaching.
Many affirm, “that it does abundance of hurt; that it has
had very bad effects; insomuch that if any good at all has
been done, yet it bears no proportion to the evil.”
But, to come to particulars: “First, then, you are disturb
ers of the public peace.”
What, do we either teach or raise sedition? Do we speak
evil of the ruler of our people? Or do we stir them up
against any of those that are put in authority under him?
Do we directly or indirectly promote faction, mutiny, or
rebellion? I have not found any man in his senses yet, that
would affirm this.
“But it is plain, peace is broke, and disturbances do arise,
in consequence of your preaching.” I grant it. But what
would you infer? Have you never read the Bible? Have you
not read, that the Prince of Peace himself was, in this sense, a
disturber of the public peace? “When he came into Jerusalem
all the city was moved,” (Matt. xxi. 10,) eaeugèn, shaken as
with an earthquake. And the disturbance rose higher and higher,
till “the whole multitude” cried out together, “Away with
him, away with him; crucify him, crucify him !” and Pilate
gave sentence it should be done. Such another disturber of the
public peace was that Stephen, even from the time he began
“disputing with the Libertines and Cyrenians,” till the people
“stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord, and
cast him out of the city, and stomed him.” Such disturbers
of the peace were all those ringleaders of the sect of the
Nazarenes, (commonly called Apostles,) who, wherever they
came, “turned the world upside down: ” And above all the
rest, that Paul of Tarsus, who occasioned so much disturb
ance at Damascus, (Acts ix.) at Antioch of Pisidia, (xiii.,) at
Iconium, (xiv.) at Lystra, (xiv. 19,) at Philippi, (xvi.) at Thes
salonica, (xvii.) and particularly at Ephesus. The consequence
of his preaching there was, that “the whole city was filled with
confusion.” And “they all ran together with one accord, some
crying one thing, some another; ” inasmuch “as the greater
part of them knew not wherefore they were come together.”
2. And can we expect it to be any otherwise now? Although
what we preach is the gospel of peace, yet if you will violently
and illegally hinder our preaching, must not this create disturb
ance? But observe, the disturbance begins on your part. All
is peace, till you raise that disturbance. And then you very
modestly impute it to us, and lay your own riot at our door !
But of all this, our Lord hath told us before: “Think not
that I am come to send peace upon earth; ” that this will be
the immediate effect, wherever my gospel is preached with
power. “I am not come to send peace, but a sword; ” this
(so far as the wisdom of God permits, by whom “the hairs of
your head are all numbered”) will be the first consequence
of my coming, whenever my word turns sinners “from dark
ness to light, from the power of Satan unto God.”
I would wish all you who see this scripture fulfilled, by dis
turbance following the preaching the gospel, to remember the
behaviour of that wise magistrate at Ephesus on the like
occasion. He did not lay the disturbance to the Preacher's
charge, but “beckoned to the multitude, and said, Ye men of
Ephesus, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.
For ye have brought these men, who are neither robbers of
temples, nor yet blasphemers of your goddess; ” not con
victed of any such notorious crime, as can at all excuse this
lawless violence. “But if Demetrius hath a matter against
any, the law is open, and there are deputies,” (or proconsuls,
capable of hearing and deciding the cause,) “let them im
plead one another. But if ye inquire anything concerning
other things, it shall be determined in a lawful assembly.”
3. “But you create divisions in private families.” Acciden
tally, we do. For instance: Suppose an entire family to have
the form but not the power of godliness; or to have neither
the form nor the power; in either case, they may in some
sort agree together. But suppose, when these hear the plain
word of God, one or two of them are convinced, “This is the
truth; and I have been all this time in the broad way that
leadeth to destruction: ” These then will begin to mourn after
God, while the rest remain as they were. Will they not there
fore of consequence divide, and form themselves into separate
parties? Must it not be so, in the very nature of things?
And how exactly does this agree with the words of our Lord?
“Suppose ye that I am come to send peace upon earth? I
tell you, Nay; but rather division: For from henceforth there
shall be five divided in one house, three against two, and two
against three. The father shall be divided against the son, and
the son against the father; the mother against the daughter,
and the daughter against the mother; the mother-in-law
against the daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law against
the mother-in-law.” (Luke xii. 51-53.) “And the foes of a
man shall be they of his own household.” (Matt. x. 36.)
Thus it was from the very beginning. For is it to be sup
posed that a heathen parent would long endure a Christian
child, or that a heathen husband would agree with a Chris
tian wife? unless either the believing wife could gain her
husband; or the unbelieving husband prevailed on the wife to
renounce her way of worshipping God; at least, unless she
would obey him in going no more to those societies, or con
venticles, (etaptat) as they termed the Christian assemblies?
4. Do you think, now, I have an eye to your case? Doubt
less I have ; for I do not fight as one that beateth the air.
“Why have not I a right to hinder my own wife or child from
going to a conventicle? And is it not the duty of wives to
obey their husbands, and of children to obey their parents?”
Only set the case seventeen hundred years back, and your own
conscience gives you the answer. What would St. Paul have
said to one whose husband forbade her to follow this way any
more? What directions would our Saviour have given to him
whose father enjoined him not to hear the gospel? His words
are extant still: “He that loveth father or mother more than
me, is not worthy of me. And he that loveth son or daughter
more than me, is not worthy of me.” (Matt. x. 37.) Nay
more, “If any man cometh to me, and hateth not,” in compari
son of me, “his father, and mother, and wife, and children, yea,
and his own life, he cannot be my disciple.” (Luke xiv. 26.)
“O, but this is not a parallel case! For they were Heathens;
but I am a Christian.” A Christian | Are you so? Do you
understand the word? Do vou know what a Christian is?
If you are a Christian, you have the mind that was in Christ;
and you so walk as he also walked. You are holy as he is
holy, both in heart and in all manner of conversation. Have
you then that mind that was in Christ? And do you walk
as Christ walked ? Are you nwardly and outwardly holy?
I fear, not even outwardly. No; you live in known sin.
Alas! How then are you a Christian? What, a railer a
Christian? a common swearer a Christian? a Sabbath
breaker a Christian? a drunkard or whoremonger a Christian?
Thou art a Heathen barefaced; the wrath of God is on thy
head, and the curse of God upon thy back. Thy damnation
slumbereth not. By reason of such Christians it is that the
holy name of Christ is blasphemed. Such as thou they are
that cause the very savages in the Indian woods to cry out,
“Christian much drunk; Christian beat men; Christian
tell lies; devil Christian | Me no Christian.”
And so thou wilt direct thy wife and children in the way
of salvation | Woe unto thee, thou devil Christian | Woe
unto thee, thou blind leader of the blind! What wilt thou
make them? two-fold more the children of hell than thyself?
Be ashamed. Blush, if thou canst blush. Hide thy face. Lay
thee in the dust. Out of the deep cry unto God, if haply he
may hear thy voice. Instantly smite upon thy breast. Who
knoweth but God may take thee out of the belly of hell?
5. But you are not one of these. You fear God, and labour
to have a conscience void of offence. And it is from a principle
of conscience that you restrain your wife and children from kear
ing false doctrine.--But how do you know it is false doctrine?
Have you heard for yourself? Or, if you have not heard, have
you carefully read what we have occasionally answered for our
selves? A man of conscience cannot condemn anyone unheard.
This is not common humanity. Norwill he refrain from hearing
what may be the truth, for no better reason than fearof hisrepu
tation. Pray observe, I do not say, every man, or any man, is
obliged in conscience to hear us: But I do say, every man in
England who condemns us is obliged to hear us first. This is
only common justice, such as is not denied to a thief or a mur
derer. Take your choice therefore: Either hear us, or condemn
us not; either speak nothing at all, or hear before you speak.
But suppose you have both read and heard more than you
like: Did you read and hear fairly ? Was not you loaden
with prejudice P Did you not read or hear, expecting no
good; perhaps, desiring to find fault? If so, what wonder
you judge as you do ! What a poor mock-trial is this ! You
had decided the cause in your own breast before you heard
one word of the evidence. And still do you talk of acting
out of conscience? yea, a conscience void of offence?
We will put the case farther yet. Suppose your censure
was just, and this was actually false doctrine. Still every
one must give an account of himself to God; and you cannot
force the conscience of any one. You cannot compel another
to see as you see; you ought not to attempt it. Reason and
persuasion are the only weapons you ought to use, even
toward your own wife and children. Nay, and it is impossible
to starve them into conviction, or to beat even truth into
their head. You may destroy them in this way, but cannot
convert them. Remember what our own poet has said:
By force beasts act, and are by force restrain’d;
The human mind by gentle means is gain'd.
Thou canst not take what I refuse to yield;
Nor reap the harvest, though thou spoil'st the field.
6. Every reasonable man is convinced of this. And perhaps
you do not concern yourself so much about the doctrine, but the
mischief that is done: “How many poor families are starved,
ruined, brought to beggary!” By what? Not by contributing
a penny a week, (the usual contribution in our societies,) and
letting that alone when they please, when there is any shadow
of reason to suppose they cannot afford it. You will not say
any are brought to beggary by this. Not by gifts to me; for I
receive none; save (sometimes) the food I eat. And public
collections are nothing to me. That it may evidently appear
they are not, when any such collection is made, to clothe the
poor, or for any other determinate purpose, the money is both
received and expended before many witnesses, without ever
going through my hands at all. And then, likewise, all possi
ble regard is had to the circumstances of those who contribute
anything. And they are told over and over, “If there be a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath.”
But where are all these families that have been brought to
beggary? How is it that none of them is forthcoming? Are
they all out of town Then, indeed, I am in no danger of
clearing myself from their indictment. It is the easiest thing of
a thousand, for one at Newcastle to say that I have beggared
him and all his kindred. If one of the long-bearded men on
Tyne-Bridge were to say so just now, I could not readily con
fute him. But why will you not bring a few of these to tell me
so to my face? I have not found one that would do this yet.
They pray you would have them excused.
I remember a man coming to me with a doleful countenance,
putting himself into many lamentable postures, gaping as wide
as he could, and pointing to his mouth, as though he would say
he could not speak. I inquired of his companion, what was the
matter; and was informed, he had fallen into the hands of the
Turks, who had used him in a barbarous manner, and cut out
his tongue by the roots. I believed him. But when the man
had had a cheerful cup, he could find his tongue as well as ano
ther. I reflected, How is it that I could so readily believe that
tale? The answer was easy: “Because it was told of a
Turk.” My friend, take knowledge of your own case. If you
had not first took me for a Turk, or something equally bad,
you could not so readily have believed that tale.
7. “But can it be, that there is no ground at all for a report
which is in every one's mouth?” I will simply tell you all the
ground which I can conceive. I believe many of those who
attend on my ministry have less of this world’s goods than they
had before, or, at least, might have had if they did not attend
it. This fact I allow; and it may be easily accounted for in
one or other of the following ways:
First. Ifrequently preach on such texts as these: “Having
food and raiment, let us be content therewith.” “They who
desire to be rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition.” “Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth,
where the rust and moth doth corrupt, and where thieves.
break through and steal. But lay up for yourselves treasures
in heaven, where neither rust nor moth doth corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through and steal.”
Now, should any of those who are labouring by all possible
means “to lay up treasure upon earth,” feel these words, they
would not “enlarge their desires as hell,” but be “content with
such things as they had.” They then probably might not heap
up so much for their heirs as otherwise they would have done.
These would therefore have less than if they had not heard
me; because they would grasp at less.
Secondly. Wherever the gospel takes effect, “the foes of a
man will be those of his own household.” By this means then
some who hear and receive it with joy will be poorer than they
were before. Their domestic foes will, in many cases, hinder,
embroil, and disturb the course of their affairs. And their
relations, who assisted them before, or promised at least so to
do, will probably withdraw or deny that assistance, unless they
will be advised by them: Perhaps their nearest relations; it
being no new thing for parents to disown their children, if
“after the way which they call heresy, these worship the God
of their fathers.” Hence, therefore, some haveless of this world’s
goods than they had in times past, either because they earn less,
or because they receive less from them on whom they depend.
Thirdly. It is written, that “those who received not the
mark of the beast, either on their foreheads, or in their right
hands,” either openly or secretly, were not permitted “to buy
or sell any more.” Now, whatever the mystery contained herein
may be, I apprehend the plain mark of the beast is wickedness;
inward and outward unholiness; whatever is secretly or openly
contrary to justice, mercy, or truth. And certain it is, the time
is well nigh come when those who have not this mark can nei
ther buy nor sell, can scarce follow any profession so as to gain
a subsistence thereby. Therefore, many of those who attend
on my ministry are, by this means, poorer than before. They
will not receive the mark of the beast, either on their forehead
or in their hand; or if they had received it before, they rid
themselves of it as soon as possible. Some cannot follow their
former way of life at all; (as pawnbrokers, smugglers, buyers
or sellers of uncustomed goods;)--others cannot follow it as
they did before; for they cannot oppress, cheat, or defraud
their neighbour; they cannot lie, or say what they do not
mean; they must now speak the truth from their heart. On
all these accounts, they have less of this world’s goods; because
they gain less than they did before.
Fourthly. “All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution;” if in no other way, yet at least in this, that
“men will by revilings persecute them, and say all manner of
evil against them falsely, for his sake.” One unavoidable effect
of this will be, that men whose subsistence depends on their
daily labour will be often in want, for few will care to employ
those of so bad a character; and even those who did employ
them before, perhaps for many years, will employ them no
amore; so that hereby some may indeed be brought to beggary.
8. What, does this touch you? Are you one of those “who
will have nothing to do with those scandalous wretches?” Per
haps you will say, “And who can blame me for it? May I not
employ whom I please?” We will weigh this:--You employed
A.B. for several years. By your own account, he was an hon
est, diligent man. You had no objection to him but his follow
ing “this way.” For this reason you turn him off. In a short
time, having spent his little all, and having no supply, he wants
bread. So does his family too, as well as himself. Before he
can get into other business to procure it, through want of con
venient food to eat, and raiment to put on, he sickens and dies.
This is not an imaginary scene. I have known the case,
though too late to remedy it.
“And what then?” What then you are a murderer! “O
earth, cover not thou his blood!” No; it doth not. “The cry
thereof hath entered into the ears of the Lord God of Sabaoth.”
And God requireth it at your hands; and will require it in an
hour when you think not. For you have as effectually mur
dered that man, as if you had stabbed him to the heart.
It is not I then who ruin and starve that family: It is you;
you who call yourself a Protestant! you who cry out against
the persecuting spirit of the Papists! Ye fools, and blind!
What are ye better than they? Why, Edmund Bonner would
have starved the heretics in prison; whereas you starve them
in their own houses!
And all this time you talk of liberty of conscience! Yes,
liberty for such a conscience as your own! a conscience past
feeling; (for sure it had some once;) a conscience “seared with
a hot iron l’ Liberty to serve the devil, according to your poor,
hardened conscience, you allow; but not liberty to serve
God |
Nay, and what marvel? Whosoever thou art that readest
this, and feelest in thy heart a real desire to serve God, I warn
thee, expect no liberty for thy conscience from him that hath
no conscience at all. All ungodly, unthankful, unholy men;
all villains, of whatever denomination, will have liberty indeed
all the world over, as long as their master is “god of this
world:” But expect not liberty to worship God in spirit and in
truth, to practise pure and undefiled religion, (unless the Lord
should work a new thing in the earth,) from any but those who
themselves love and serve God.
9. “However, it is plain you make men idle: And this tends
to beggar their families.” This objection having been continu
ally urged for some years, I will trace it from the foundation.
Two or three years after my return from America, one Cap
tain Robert Williams, of Bristol, made affidavit before the then
Mayor of the city, that “it was a common report in Georgia,
Mr. Wesley took people off from their work and made them
idle by preaching so much.”
The fact stood thus: At my first coming to Savannah, the
generality of the people rose at seven or eight in the morning.
And that part of them, who were accustomed to work, usually
worked till six in the evening. A few of them sometimes worked
till seven; which is the time of sunset there at Midsummer.
I immediately began reading Prayers, and expounding the
Second Lesson, both in the morning and evening. The Morn
ing Service began at five, and ended at or before six : The
Evening Service began at seven.
Now, supposing all the grown persons in the town had been
present every morning and evening, would this have made them
idle? Would they hereby have had less, or considerably more,
time for working?
10. The same rule I follow now, both at London, Bristol,
and Newcastle-upon-Tyne; concluding the service at every
place, winter and summer, before six in the morning; and not
ordinarily beginning to preach till near seven in the evening.
Now, do you who make this objection work longer, through
out the year, than from six to six? Do you desire that the
generality of people should? or can you count them idle that
work so long?
Some few are indeed accustomed to work longer. These I
advise not to come on week-days; and it is apparent, that they
take this advice, unless on some rare and extraordinary occasion.
But I hope none of you who turn them out of their employ
ment have the confidence to talk of my making them idle !
Do you (as the homely phrase is) cry wh-- first? I admire
your cunning, but not your modesty.
So far am I from either causing or encouraging idleness, that
an idle person, known to be such, is not suffered to remain in
any of our societies; we drive him out, as we would a thief or a
murderer. “To show all possible diligence,” (as well as frugal
ity) is one of our standing rules; and one, concerning the
observance of which we continually make the strictest inquiry.
11. “But you drive them out of their senses. You make
them mad.” Nay, then they are idle with a vengeance. This
objection, therefore, being of the utmost importance, deserves
our deepest consideration.
And, First, I grant, it is my earnest desire to drive all the
world into what you probably call madness; (I mean, inward
religion;) to make them just as mad as Paul when he was so
accounted by Festus.
The counting all things on earth but dung and dross, so we
may win Christ; the trampling under foot all the pleasures of
the world; the seeking no treasure but in heaven; the having
no desire of the praise of men, a gocd character, a fair reputa
tion; the being exceeding glad when men revile us, and perse
cute us, and say all manner of evil against us falsely; the giving
God thanks, when our father and mother forsake us, when we
have neither food to eat, nor raiment to put on, nor a friend but
what shoots out bitter words, nor a place where to lay our head:
This is utter distraction in your account; but in God’s it is
sober, rational religion; the genuine fruit, not of a distempered
brain, not of a sickly imagination, but of the power of God in
the heart, of victorious love, “and of a sound mind.”
12. I grant, Secondly, it is my endeavour to drive all I can,
into what you may term another species of madness, which
is usually preparatory to this, and which I term repentance or
conviction.
I cannot describe this better than a writer of our own has
donc: I will therefore transcribe his words:--
“When men feel in themselves the heavy burden of sin, see
damnation to be the reward of it, and behold with the eye of
their mind the horror of hell; they tremble, they quake, and
are inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of heart, and cannot
but accuse themselves, and open their grief unto Almighty
God, and call unto him for mercy. This being done seriously,
their mind is so occupied, partly with sorrow and heaviness,
partly with an earnest desire to be delivered from this danger
of hell and damnation, that all desire of meat and drink is
laid apart, and loathsomeness (or loathing) of all worldly
things and pleasure cometh in place. So that nothing then
liketh them, more than to weep, to lament, to mourn, and
both with words and behaviour of body to show themselves
weary of life.”
Now, what, if your wife, or daughter, or acquaintance, after
hearing one of these field-preachers, should come and tell you,
that they saw damnation before them, and beheld with the
eye of their mind the horror of hell? What, if they should
“tremble and quake,” and be so taken up “partly with
sorrow and heaviness, partly with an earnest desire to be
delivered from this danger of hell and damnation, as to weep,
to lament, to mourn, and both with words and behaviour to
show themselves weary of life; ” would you scruple to say,
that they were stark mad; that these fellows had driven them
out of their senses; and that whatever writer it was that talked
at this rate, he was fitter for Bedlam than any other place?
You have overshot yourself now to some purpose. These
are the very words of our own Church. You may read them,
if you are so inclined, in the first part of the “Homily on
Fasting.” And consequently, what you have peremptorily
determined to be mere lunacy and distraction, is that
“repentance unto life,” which, in the judgment both of the
Church and of St. Paul, is “never to be repented of.”
13. I grant, Thirdly, that extraordinary circumstances have
attended this conviction in some instances. A particular
account of these I have frequently given. While the word of
God was preached, some persons have dropped down as dead;
some have been, as it were, in strong convulsions; some
roared aloud, though not with an articulate voice; and others
spoke the anguish of their souls.
This, I suppose, you believe to be perfect madness. But it is
easily accounted for, either on principles of reason or Scripture.
First. On principles of reason. For, how easy is it to sup
pose, that a strong, lively, and sudden apprehension of the
heinousness of sin, the wrath of God, and the bitter pains of
eternal death, should affect the body as well as the soul, during
the present laws of vital union, should interrupt or disturb the
ordinary circulations, and put mature out of its course ! Yea,
we may question, whether, while this union subsists, it be pos
sible for the mind to be affected, in so violent a degree, without
some or other of those bodily symptoms following.
It is likewise easy to account for these things, on principles
of Scripture. For when we take a view of them in this light,
we are to add, to the consideration of natural causes, the
agency of those spirits who still excel in strength, and, as far
as they have leave from God, will not fail to torment whom
they cannot destroy; to tear those that are coming to Christ.
It is also remarkable, that there is plain Scripture precedent
of every symptom which has lately appeared. So that we
cannot allow even the conviction attended with these to be
madness, without giving up both reason and Scripture.
14. I grant, Fourthly, that touches of extravagance, border
ing on madness, may sometimes attend severe conviction.
And this also is easy to be accounted for, by the present laws
of the animal economy. For we know, fear or grief, from a
temporal cause, may occasion a fever, and thereby a delirium.
It is not strange, then, that some, while under strong impres
sions of grief or fear, from a sense of the wrath of God, should
for a season forget almost all things else, and scarce be able to
answer a common question; that some should fancy they see
the flames of hell, or the devil and his angels, around them; or
that others, for a space, should be “afraid,” like Cain, “whoso
ever meeteth me will slay me.” All these, and whateverless.com
moneffects may sometimes accompany this conviction, are easily
known from thematural distemperof madness, were it only by this
one circumstance,--that whenever the person convinced tastes
the pardoning love of God, they all vanish away in a moment.
Lastly. I have seen one instance (I pray God I may see no
more such !) of real, lasting madness.
Two or three years since, I took one with me to Bristol, who
was under deep convictions; but of as sound an understanding
in all respects, as ever he had been in his life. I went a short
journey, and, when I came to Bristol again, found him really
distracted. I inquired particularly, at what time and place,
and in what manner, this disorder began. And I believe
there are at least threescore witnesses alive, and ready to testify
what follows: When I went from Bristol, he contracted an
acquaintance with some persons, who were not of the same
judgment with me. He was soon prejudiced against me:
Quickly after, when our society were met together in Kings
wood house, he began a vehement invective both against my
person and doctrines. In the midst of this, he was struck
raving mad. And so he continued till his friends put him into
Bedlam; and probably laid his madness too to my charge.
15. I fear there may also be some instances of real madness,
proceeding from a different cause.
Suppose, for instance, a person hearing me, is strongly con
vinced that a liar cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.
He comes home, and relates this to his parents or friends, and
appears to be very uneasy. These good Christians are dis
turbed at this, and afraid he is running mad too. They are
resolved, he shall never hear any of those fellows more; and
keep to it, in spite of all his intreaties. They will not suffer
him, when at home, to be alone, for fear he should read or
pray. And perhaps in a while they will constrain him, at least
by repeated importunities, to do again the very thing for
which he was convinced the wrath of God cometh upon the
children of disobedience.
What is the event of this? Sometimes the Spirit of God is
quenched, and departs from him. Now you have carried the
point. The man is easy as ever, and sins on without any
remorse. But in other instances, where those convictions
sink deep, and the arrows of the Almighty stick fast in the
soul, you will drive the person into real, settled madness,
before you can quench the Spirit of God. I am afraid there
have been several instances of this. You have forced the man’s
conscience, till he is stark mad. But then, pray do not impute
that madness to me. Had you left him to my direction, or
rather to the direction of the Spirit of God, he would have
been filled with love and a sound mind. But you have taken
the matter out of God’s hand; and now you have brought
it to a fair conclusion |
16. How frequent this case maybe, I know not. But doubt
less most of those who make this objection, of our driving men
mad, have never met with such an instance in their lives. The
common cry is occasioned, either by those who are convinced of
sin, or those who are inwardly converted to God; mere madness
both, (as was observed before,) to those who are without God in
the world. Yet I do not deny, but you may have seen one in
Bedlam, who said he had followed me. But observe, a mad
man's saying this, is no proof of the fact; nay, and if he really
had, it should be farther considered, that his being in Bedlam
is no sure proof of his being mad. Witness the well-known
case of Mr. Periam; and I doubt more such are to be found.
Yea, it is well if some have not been sent thither, for no other
reason, but because they followed me; their kind relations
either concluding that they must be distracted, before they
could do this; or, perhaps, hoping that Bedlam would make
them mad, if it did not find them so.
17. And it must be owned, a confinement of such a sort is as
fit to cause as to cure distraction: For what scene of distress is
to be compared to it?--To be separated at once from all who
are near and dear to you; to be cut off from all reasonable con
versation; to be secluded from all business, from all reading,
from every innocent entertainment of the mind, which is left to
prey wholly upon itself, and day and night to pore over your
misfortunes; to be shut up day by day in a gloomy cell, with
only the walls to employ your heavy eyes, in the midst either of
melancholy silence, or horrid cries, groans and laughter inter
mixed; to be forced by the main strength of those
Who laugh at human nature and compassion,
to take drenches of nauseous, perhaps torturing, medicines,
which you know you have no need of now, but know not how
soon you may, possibly by the operation of these very drugs
on a weak and tender constitution: Here is distress It is an
astonishing thing, a signal proof of the power of God, if any
creature who has his senses when the confinement begins, does
not lose them before it is at an end |
How must it heighten the distress, if such a poor wretch,
being deeply convinced of sin, and growing worse and worse, (as
he probably will, seeing there is no medicine here for his sick
ness, no such Physician as his case requires,) be soon placed
among the incurables! Can imagination itself paint such a hell
upon earth? where even “hope never comes, that comes to
all!”--For, what remedy? If a man of sense and humanity
should happen to visit that house of woe, would he give the
hearing to a madman’s tale? Or if he did, would he credit it?
“Do we not know,” might he say, “how well any of these will
talk in their lucid intervals P” So that a thousand to one he
would concern himself no more about it, but leave the weary to
wait for rest in the grave
18. I have now answered most of the current objections, par
ticularly such as have appeared of weight to religious or reason
able men. I have endeavoured to show, (1.) That the doctrines
I teach are no other than the great truths of the gospel: (2.)
That though I teach them, not as I would, but as I can, yet it
is in a manner not contrary to law: And, (3.) That the effects of
thus preaching the gospel have not been such as was weakly or
wickedly reported; those reports being mere artifices of the
devil to hinder the work of God. Whosoever therefore ye are,
who look for God to “revive his work in the midst of the years,”
cry aloud, that he may finish it nevertheless, may “cut it short
in righteousness.” Cry to Messiah the Prince, that he may
soon end the transgression, that he may lift up his standard
upon earth, sending by whom he will send, and working his
own work, when he pleaseth, and as he pleaseth, till “all the
kindreds of the people worship before him,” and the earth “be
full of the knowledge of the glory of the Lord!”
December 22, 1744.
Behold the servant of the Lord!
I wait thy guiding eye to feel,
To hear and keep thine every word,
To prove and do thy perfect will:
Joyful from all my works to cease,
Glad to fulfil all righteousness.
Me if thy grace vouchsafe to use,
Meanest of all thy creatures me,
The deed, the time, the manner choose;
Let all my fruit be found of thee;
Let all my works in thee be wrought,
By thee to full perfection brought.
My every weak, though good design,
O'errule, or change, as seems thee meets
Jesus, let all the work be thine :
Thy work, O Lord, is all complete,
And pleasing in thy Father's sight;
Thou only hast done all things right.
Here then to thee thine own I leave,
Mould as thou wilt the passive clay;
Butlet me all thy stamp receive,
But let me all thy words obey;
Serve with a single heart and eye,