Advice to a Soldier
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. ARE you to die? Must you leave this world, and
carry nothing of it away with you? Naked as you came out
of your mother's womb, naked shall you return. And are you
never to come back into this world? Have you no more
place under the sun ? When you leave these houscs and
fields, this flesh and blood, do you part with them for ever?
Are you sure of this? Must all men die? Can none at all
escape death ? Do rich men likewise die, and leave their
riches for others? Do princes also fall and die like one of
their people? Can you then escape it? You do not think
so. You know death is as sure as if you felt it already; as
if you was now gasping for life, sweating and trembling in
those last pangs, till the soul started off from the quivering
lips into the boundless ocean of eternity.
2. And are you to be judged? How is this to be? Why,
the Son of God shall come in his glory, and all his holy angels
with him; “and then shall he sit upon the throne of his
glory. And before Him shall be gathered all nations; and he
shall separate them from one another, as a shepherd divideth
his sheep from the goats. Behold, he cometh with clouds !
And every eye shall see Him which is, and which was, and
which is to come, the Almighty And I saw” (wilt thou also
say) “a great white throne, and Him that sat thereon, from
whose face the earth and the heavens fled away; and there was
found no place for them. And I saw the dead, small and
great, stand before God; and they were judged, every man
according to his works.” And shalt thou also be judged
according to thy works? all thy works, whether they be good
or evil? Yea, and for every idle word which thou shalt speak,
thou shalt give an account in the day of judgment. But this
is not all: The Lord, the Judge, searcheth the heart, and
trieth the reins. He understands all thy thoughts; and for
all these likewise he shall bring thee intojudgment. Supposest
thou it is enough to be outwardly good? What! though thy
inward parts are very wickedness? And are they not? Is
not thy soul fallen short of the glory (the glorious image) of
God? Look into thy breast. Art thou not a fallen spirit?
Dost thou not know and feel how very far thou art gone
from original righteousness? Desperately full thou art of
all evil, and naked of all good? Is there not in thee an
earthly, sensual, devilish mind? a mind that is enmity
against God? It is plain there is. For thou dost not love
God. Thou dost not delight in him. He is not the desire of
thy eyes, or the joy of thy heart. Thou lovest the creature
more than the Creator. Thou art a lover of pleasure more than
a lover of God. O how wilt thou stand in the judgment?
3. Are you then to go to heaven or hell? It must be
either to one or the other. I pray God you may not go
to hell! For who can dwell with everlasting burnings?
Who can bear the fierceness of that flame, without even a
drop of water to cool his tongue? yea, and that without end;
for as the worm dieth not, so the fire is not quenched. No ;
whoever is once cast into that lake of fire, shall be tormented
day and night for ever and ever. O eternity eternity :
Who can tell the length of eternity? I warn thee now,
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that thou come not
into that place of torment !
4. But, alas! Is not hell now begun in thy soul? Does
thy conscience never awake? Hast thou no remorse at any
time? no sense of guilt? no dread of the wrath of God?
Why, these (if thou art not saved from them in this life) are
the worm that never dieth. And what else is thy carnal
mind? thy enmity against God? thy foolish and hurtful lusts,
thy inordinate affections? What are pride, envy, malice,
revenge? Are they not vipers gnawing thy heart? May
they not well be called, the dogs of hell? Canst thou be out
of hell, while these are in thy soul? while they are tearing it
in pieces, and there is none to help thee? Indeed they are
not fully let loose upon thee: And while thou seest the light
of the sun, the things of the world that surround thee, or the
pleasures of sense, divert thy thoughts from them. But when
thou canst eat and drink no more, when the earth, with the
works thereof, is burned up, when the sun is fallen from
heaven, and thou art shut up in utter darkness, what a state
wilt thou be in then Mayest thou never try ! Seek thou
a better habitation, a house of God, eternal in the heavens.
5. There the wicked cease from troubling, there the weary
are at rest. For God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow
nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain, but ever
lasting joy upon their heads. But this joy our ears have
not yet heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man
to conceive. Yet a little of it the children of God can
conceive, from what they already enjoy. For the kingdom
of heaven is within them. God has given them eternal life;
the life which is hid with Christ in God. They have heaven
upon earth; “righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost.” Their souls are renewed in the image of God.
They love God. They are happy in him; and they love
their neighbour (that is, every man) as themselves, as their
own souls. Being justified by faith, they have peace with
God, yea, a peace which passeth all understanding. And
they rejoice in him, knowing their sins are blotted out; that
they are accepted in the Beloved; and that they are going
to “an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth
not away.”
6. Will you reply to all this: “But I am a soldier, and
have therefore nothing to do with these things?” Hold !
Have soldiers nothing to do with death? How so? Do
soldiers never die? Can you fright death away? No, my
friend; he will not regard all your big words and looks, nor
all the weapons of your warfare. You can neither conquer
nor escape him. Your profession may excuse you from
many other things; but there is no excusing yourself from
death. Are you less sure of this than other men are ?
No; there is one lot for all. Are you farther from it than
they? Nay, rather nearer; you live in the very jaws of
death. Why, then, a soldier (if there be any difference) has
more to do with death than other men. It is not far from
every one of us; but to him it is just at the door.
7. Or, do you fancy a soldier has nothing to do with
judgment? Will you say, then, (as poor Captain Uratz did,
when he was asked, a few minutes before his death, if he had
made his peace with God,) “I hope God will deal with me
like a gentleman?” But God said unto him, “Thou fool!
I will deal with thee as with all mankind. There is no
respect of persons with me. I reward every man according
to his works.” Thou also shalt receive of the righteous
Judge according to the things which thou hast done in the
body. Death levels all; it mingles in one dust the gentle
man, soldier, clown, and beggar; it makes all these distinc
tions void. When life ends, so do they. Holy or unholy, is
the one question then. Lo! the books are opened, that all
the dead may be judged according to the things that are
written therein. O may thy name be found written in the
book of life
8. For, have soldiers nothing to do with hell? Why,
then, is it so often in thy mouth ? Dost thou think God
does not hear the prayer? And how often hast thou prayed
him to damn thy soul? Is his ear waxed heavy, that it
cannot hear? I fear thou wilt find it otherwise. Was not
he a soldier, too, (and a terrible one,) to whom God said of
old, “Hell from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee
at thy coming?” And what marvel? For sin is the high
road to hell. And have soldiers nothing to do with sin?
Alas ! how many of you wallow therein, yea, and glory in
your shame ! How do you labour to work out your own
damnation | O, poor work, for poor wages ! The wages of
sin is death; the wages of cursing, of swearing, of taking the
name of God in vain, of Sabbath-breaking, drunkenness,
revenge, of fornication, adultery, and all uncleanness. Now,
art thou clear of these? Does not thy own heart smite
thee? Art thou not condemned already? What voice is
that which sounds in thine ears? Is it not the voice of
God? “Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord.
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a sinner as this?” It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God!
Be very sure that thou art stronger than he, before thou
fliest in his face! Do not defy God, unless thou canst over
come him. But canst thou indeed? O no; do not try.
Do not dare him to do his worst. Why should he destroy
both thy body and soul in hell? Why shouldest thou be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power?
9. But if there were no other hell, thou hast hell enough
within thee. An awakened conscience is hell. Pride, envy,
wrath, hatred, malice, revenge; what are these but hell upon
earth? And how often art thou tormented in these flames !
--flames of lust, envy, or proud wrath ! Are not these to
thy soul, when blown up to the height, as it were a lake of
fire, burning with brimstone? Flee away, before the great
gulf is fixed; escape, escape for thy life! If thou hast not
strength, cry to God, and thou shalt receive power from on
high; and He whose name is rightly called Jesus shall save
thee from thy sins.
10. And why should he not? Has a soldier nothing to
do with heaven? God forbid that you should think so !
Heaven was designed for you also. God so loved your soul,
that he gave his only-begotten Son, that you, believing in
him, might not perish, but have everlasting life. Receive,
then, the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world ! This, this is the time to make it sure; this
short, uncertain day of life. Have you then an hour to
spare? No; not a moment. Arise, and call upon thy God.
Call upon the Lamb, who taketh away the sins of the world,
to take away thy sins. Surely he hath borne thy griefs, and
carried thy sorrows | He was wounded for thy transgres
sions, and bruised for thy iniquities. He hath paid the
ransom for thy soul. Believe in him, and thou shalt be
saved. Art thou a sinner? He came not to call the
righteous, but sinners, to repentance. Art thou a lost,
undone sinner? He came to seek and to save that which
was lost. May He that gave himself for thee, give thee ears
to hear, and a heart to understand, his love | So shalt thou
also say, “The life I now live, I live by faith in the Son of
God.” So shall the love of God be shed abroad in thy
heart, and thou shalt rejoice with joy unspeakable. Thou
shalt have the mind that was in Christ, and shalt so walk as
he also walked; till, having fought the good fight, and
finished thy course, thou receive the crown that fadeth not
away !