A Seasonable Address to the Inhabitants of Great Britain
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
UNHAPPY, very unhappy for us, we are a kingdom divided
against itself; and, without a miracle, fall we must ! What
a fall will there then be, when such “distress is upon the
land, aud wrath upon the people !” And is this a little thing,
brethren? Is it what any of us either desire or promote?
God forbid! A kingdom divided against itself is an evil, of all
others, the most dreadful; inasmuch as an innumerable train
of evils necessarily follow; no inconsiderable part of which
are the sword, fire, plunder, and famine. This our forefathers
unhappily felt, and to our inexpressible sorrow we may feel.
And is this an unlikely thing? Is it altogether impro
bable? Surely no ! But that small cloud which arose some
few years since, has, to discerning minds, been gathering
blackness, and spreading itself well-nigh over the whole land.
And is it any marvel if, by and by, it should burst upon us,
as it has done upon America? Let him that has wisdom
understand this.
Then who that has any understanding, any bowels of mercy
and compassion, would not do the utmost, that either human
or divine prudence can suggest, to prevent it? For who
knows, when the sword is once drawn, where it may stop?
Who can command it to be put up into its scabbard, and it will
obey him? Such power is not in man; it is only in Him
Who rides upon the stormy sky,
And calms the roaring seas.
Again: If the sword should be drawn, upon whom may it
light? This we know not. But supposing it should be on
yourself, or a beloved wife, an aged parent, a tender child, a
dear relative, what recompence can be found for such a loss?
What, O ! what would the whole world then be, if it might
be gained? Alas! what a poor trifle ! But, suppose you
escape with your life, and the lives of those that are near and
dear to you, there is yet another dreadful evil to fear, and
which has been the case; plunder, lawless plunder, may
deprive you of your little all. Now, who can insure another?
Who can exempt himself in the time of general distress, from
such an evil? Alas ! brethren, “we must let this alone for
ever. We are of yesterday, and know nothing” of to-morrow.
What then must we do to save (not to destroy) our kingdom,
and to save (not to destroy) our American brethren? Do,
my brethren | Why, what would we do, if either our own or
our neighbour's house were on fire? We should bring, if in
our senses, no combustible matter to increase the flame, but
water and a helping hand to extinguish it. This we should
certainly do, and our labour would not be in vain. Now,
apply this to America and Great Britain. The former is like
an house on fire; the devouring flames of an unnatural civil
war are already kindled, and some hundreds of lives have
fallen a prey to its insatiable violence. And how long before
this may be our case here, God only knows!
Stop here then, my brethren, and survey the desolation.
Behold the weeping and disconsolate widow refusing to be
comforted | Her beloved husband is fallen l is fallen l and
is no more ! See the affectionate parent hanging down his
head like the bulrush | Hear the broken language of his
heart | “My son I my son I would God I had died in thy
place I O my son I my son 1’’ This is far from the flight of
imagination, or the colouring of fancy. It is the real and
actual condition of many amongst that unhappy people, and
..a part only of their manifold distress. In a word, they and
we appear to be a people infatuated like the Jews of old, and
ripening for destruction; and no marvel if, while we are
biting and devouring one another, some stronger beasts of
prey step in and divide the spoil! Here stop then, and drop
a tear for the slain of our people, through the fire of conten
tion that is kindled amongst them ' And if on your recovery
from the horrors of so terrible a conflagration, you should
begin to inquire into its cause, a spectator begs leave to inform
you, that it was occasioned through the unhappy contention
of brethren, (which, as Solomon observes, “only cometh of
pride,”) and begs your kind assistance to extinguish the flames,
lest they and their whole substance should be consumed
together | The great danger of which, as well as the cause of
this unparalleled and fatal strife, I would beg leave to present
to your view in a piece of fine painting, done by an abler master:
“See | Here are some thousands of our brave countrymen
gathered together on this plain; they are followed by the most
tender and feeling emotions of wives, children, and an innu
merable multitude of their thoughtful, humane, and sympa
thizing countrymen. Then turn your eyes and behold a
superior number at a little distance, of their brethren, “flesh
of their flesh, and bone of their bone, who only a few years
since emigrated to the dreary wilds of America. These also are
followed with the most tender feelings of wives, children, and
countrymen. See, they advance towards each other, well
prepared with every instrument of death ! But what are they
going to do? To shoot each other through the head or heart;
to stab and butcher each other, and hasten (it is to be feared)
one another into the everlasting burnings. Why so? What
harm have they done to one another? Why, none at all.
Most of them are entire strangers to each other. But a
matter is in dispute relative to the mode of taxation. So these
countrymen, children of the same parents, are to murder each
other with all possible haste, to prove who is in the right.
Now, what an argument is this I What a method of proof!
What an amazing way of deciding controversies ! But so it
is; and O what horrors attend on it ! At what a price is
the decision made | By the blood and wounds of thousands;
the burning cities, ravaging and laying waste the country.”
Now, who that seriously considers this awful contest, can
help lamenting the astonishing want of wisdom in our
brethren to decide the matter without bloodshed? What,
are there no wise men amongst us? none that are able to
judge between brethren? But brother goeth to war against
brother; and that in the very sight of the Heathen. Surely
this is a sore evil amongst us. O how are the mighty fallent
How is wisdom perished from the wise ! What a flood of
folly and madness has broke in upon us!
But do you farther ask me, Who was first in the transgres
sion? Who began the dreadful strife? I must beg your pardon
for not touching this subject now. Excuse my saying any
thing of the second cause, as I mean only to inquire into the
first. I fear doing harm, and this is far from my design.
Another great reason for my avoiding any reflections of this
sort, on this delicate subject, is, that it has been already done
by some of the most able hands, and to very little purpose.
Argument seems lost in clamour, in confusion of passion and
party rage; and the satanic dust of prejudice seems to have put
out the eyes of our understanding. But thus much I might
venture to say,-the case is rendered very complicated, and
must in general remain unintelligible, unless to those who
thoroughly understand the constitution of each party, and
then have wisdom enough to weigh it in an unprejudiced
balance.
To be plain, the present melancholy dispute either is, or is
not, founded in a constitutional right on the one part, and
a constitutional opposition on the other. So far is certain.
Therefore, till the entire nature of both constitutions is well
and fully understood, it is utterly impossible to decide
thereon. I speak as to the matter of the dispute only; the
manner of it is another point. Now, how many understand,
or ever properly consider, either the one or the other? I
fear but few. How deplorable then is it, that almost every
one is sufficient for it, and accordingly passes sentence. An
outcry is raised. The Americans should or should not be
taxed; and many have drawn their swords, and are well
migh ready to cut their antagonists’ throats | But this is
not our wisdom; it is far from it. It is indeed fighting
uncertainly, and scattering firebrands, arrows, and death.
But go no farther. Stop here, and calmly reflect on the above
argument. Settle it in your heart, that unless you properly
understand the merits of the cause, you talk at random;
you argue uncertainly, and worse than to no purpose.
But if any man has this wisdom, and this well-poised
balance, let him stand forth in defence of his country, and
be assured his labour will not be in vain.
Here we must lament, that, instead of its being a matter of
great and general concern, it is more a party affair; and to our
shame may it be said, that such a spirit has so unhappily
influenced almost all sorts of people, that some are breathing
out slaughter against one party, and some against another.
Now, while this is the case, is it any marvel that we should
perish together? While we are contending who set the
building on fire, and looking with rage and vengeance on the
suspected party, instead of bringing the assuaging water of
heartfelt grief and pious concern, with the helping hand of
wisdom, moderation, and love, it is more than certain the
flames will spread and endanger the whole building.
If these things, therefore, are so, let us cease contending
with each other. Let us avoid unkind and bitter reflection on
one another; seeing it can do no real service to the cause we
would defend, but, in all probability, much harm. Let us
bring no combustible matter of this sort to increase the fire.
But as the flames are actually spreading, and may soon reach
from them to us, let us do our utmost to extinguish them.
Ye salt of the earth, exert the seasoning, preserving quality
which you are favoured with. Bring your contentious brethren
in your loving arms of faith and prayer, and lay them at your
Father's feet, praying him “to forgive them, as they know not
what they do.” Look upwards for help, to Him “who doeth
whatsoever pleases him in the armies of heaven, and amongst
the sons of men;” knowing it is He alone that “can quench
the violence of fire, still the raging of the sea, and the
madness of the people.” Much, brethren, depends on you,
though “the world account your life madness, and your end
to be without honour;” for you are the true “salt of the
carth;” you alone preserve it from general putrefaction; and
you, under God, are the great means of saving a divided
kingdom, “a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers;”
and had not the Lord “left you as a small remnant,” we
should long since “have been as Sodom and Gomorrah!”
But do not you, for your Master’s sake, lose your favour in
that unhallowed fire of contention, which the people who know
not God are now burning in. The old serpent may herein
deceive us, as he has too often done already. As an angel of
light he is most likely to succeed, and, under the specious
show of doing our country service, betray us, in treating our
opponents, into a spirit and temper not from above. And how
many may unhappily be influenced and led away with our
error, God only knows | But this seems to be the design of
the adversary of God and man; and if he can set the Christian
world together by the ears, he has gained his point. But
again, brethren, we may be deceived respecting the cause itself.
Our veneration and respect for the cause we would espouse
may betray us into a maze of error, imprudence, false zeal, and
bitterness of temper; which must prove highly injurious to
the public good. What has been, you know, may be again.
And as the great Governor of the world has often permitted,
particularly upon his own people, a judicial blindness, hardness
of heart, and an amazing infatuation, which terminated in their
ruin; so it is not improbable but the great and spreading
defection and intemperate zeal on the one hand, and the deter
mined purpose of maintaining the authority and dignity of
Government by fire and sword on the other, is more judicial
than we are aware of And that this is the case, I fear, is
more than probable. It has been so in this kingdom, as well
as the kingdom of Israel, in the matter of David and his son
Absalom; and it will be so while iniquity beareth rule. If this
be so, take heed what you do. Do nothing hastily or rashly.
But, rather, before you touch this awfully delicate subject, and
enter the lists, examine and weigh well the thoughts of your
heart, and the springs of motion. And with David pray,
“Search me, O God, and prove the ground of my heart,” &c.
Beg to be directed. If you cannot act from a full persuasion
that this is required at your hands, and if you cannot see the
divine cloud go before you, desist in time. “Let the dead
bury their dead;” but let not those who were designed to
save the earth destroy it. Let not Christians engage in the
controversy in the spirit and temper of the world, and bite
and devour one another, lest they should be consumed with
the world. But rather let them wish, with an eminent
Prophet, (an admirable way of showing our love to our country,
and doing it the most effectual service 1) “O that my head
were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!”
and with Christ himself, the Inspirer of the Prophets, “when
he beheld the rebellious “city, weep over it!”
But, it may be, you are of a different complexion. You
“fear not the Lord, neither regard the operation of his
hands.” Your case, I fear, is too similar to his, who of old
said, “Who is the Lord, that I should obey him?” But He
is, though you know him not, the God of your life, your
health, your strength, and all your mercies. It is “through
him you live, move, and have your being; ” and is therefore
altogether worthy of all you have and all you are. “Acquaint
yourself with him, and be at peace; and thereby good shall
come unto thee,” Till this is the case, it is morally impossible
that you should be a true patriot, a real lover of your country.
You may indeed assume the sounding title; but it is an
empty name. You may in word mightily contend for your
country’s good; but, while you are a slave to sin, you are an
enemy to God, and your country too. But let the time past
suffice. Be henceforth, not only in word, but in deed and in
truth, a patriot. Put away the accursed thing, the evil that
is found in you; so shall you love your country as your own
soul, and prevent the fearful end of both.-
That we may do this, and that it may please infinite Wisdom
to succeed our attempts, I would beg leave to pass from the
Second to the First cause. Here I would fix my foot, as on
a sure and solid foundation that will stand for ever. The
holy Scriptures give us ample accounts of the fall and rise
of the greatest monarchies. It is simply this: They rose
by virtue; but they fell by vice. “Righteousness” alone
“exalteth a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people.”
And this ever will be the case, till the end of all things. So
much in general is certain; but wherein we have well-nigh
filled up “the measure of our iniquity,” and may therefore
expect their fate, is another point. But it is certain that
iniquity of every kind, and amongst all ranks and orders of
men, has and does abound; and as we are punished with
the sword, it is not improbable but one principal sin of our
nation is, the blood that we have shed in Asia, Africa, and
America. Here I would beg your serious attention, while I
observe, that however extensively pursued, and of long
continuance, the African trade may be, it is nevertheless
iniquitous from first to last. It is the price of blood It is a
trade of blood, and has stained our land with blood | And is
the East-India trader a jot better? I fear not. They seem
very nearly allied. For though here is no leading into
* -
captivity, as in the former; yet the refined iniquity practised
there, of fomenting war amongst the natives, and seizing the
chief of the plunder, has been as conspicuous to the serious and
attentive. What millions have fallen by these means, as well
as by artificial famine! O earth, cover not thou their blood!
It will speak to heaven and to the inhabitants of the earth
to the latest posterity. O ye Governors of this great nation,
would to God that ye had seen this, and timely done your
utmost to separate those tares from the wheat of fair and
honest trade What peace therefore can we expect, while
these evils continue? “There can be no peace, saith the
Lord.” While “the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto
me from the ground,” “what hast thou to do with peace?”
“Shall I not visit for these things? Shall not my soul be
avenged on such a nation as this?” Yes, my brethren, we have
much reason to fear and tremble, as upon the brink of fate.
But there is (if aught can be worse) a sorer evil, namely,
an astonishing contempt and neglect of truly sacred things;
especially the solemn worship of Almighty God: And herein
our Nobility and Gentry almost universally distinguish them
selves. This is indeed a sore evil; one of the grossest affronts
that can be offered to the great Governor of the world. And
I am bold to say, that as he hath spoken to this nation as he
hath not to any other nation upon earth of late years, and
that in an uncommon way and manner, but as in general we
have stopped our ears, and utterly despised His call; the day
will come when the candlestick will be removed, and the
kingdom of God given to another people that will attend the
call, and bring forth fruit. And when the divine glory, in
this respect, begins to depart, the natural glory will soon
follow. Probably that day is not far off, unless we repent.
We seem indeed to have been at our meridian height of
power, greatness, &c.; (not of holiness unto the Lord;) and
it is to be feared that the glory has begun to depart, which, like
the sun when he begins to decline, will continue its declension,
finally disappear, and leave us in total darkness, unless a divine
interposition prevent. For we seem judicially given up to
pursue those measures that will effectually accomplish it. Now,
as what God hath joined together (especially such powerful
people as we and the Americans now are) for the mutual support,
comfort, and defence of each other, should not be put asunder
by any means whatsoever, as it would undoubtedly frustrate
His gracious design in this well-compacted body; so, if one
powerful member should rise up against the whole body, or the
whole body against one such member, and disunite from it;
this schism must, in the nature of things, occasion such a weak
ness and deformity in the whole body, as is only to be known
by an unhappy experience. The disunion of the ten tribes is
a melancholy proof of it. And as Judah vexed Ephraim, and
Ephraim Judah, so will it be with us. The counsel therefore
to separate cannot be from God. It has no foundation in the
nature and fitness of things beneficial, either to them or us,
and must in the end prove like the counsel of Ahithophel.
Yefriends of America, turn your eyes therefore, for amoment,
from those you suspect to be the only authors of the present
evil, and think seriously of a more secret but certain cause,
namely, the universality and enormity of every species of wick
edness that is found in our land; and then marvel not that the
£reat Governor of the world hath withheld that restraint which
he is ever wont to hold amongst the Governors of a wise and
good people. For we may be assured of this, that, were those
in authority under the temptation of despotism and oppression,
(and would to God, it never was the case!) if we as a people,
by our transgressions, had not to a great and certain degree
provoked the eyes of his glory, “I,” saith the Lord, “would
put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips.”
Ye friends of Government also, draw near, and turn your eyes
from those you suspect to be the only authors of the present
evil; look in this glass, and see the ugly monster, universal sin,
that subtle, unsuspected serpent that has inflamed our blood,
and brought on the malignant fever of contention on our body.
Here gaze, till its loathsome and hideous deformity makes you
loathe her. Then you will not marvel, that when the divine
restraint is withheld, we are capable of anything; even that
which is the most likely to end in our present and eternal ruin!
And should not ye, O ye Americans, ye unhappy sufferers by
this dreadful fire, look into the same glass, and not marvel at a
divine permission of your afflictions; but in a becoming spirit
and disposition ask, “Wherefore dost thou contend with me?
Why hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy?
Why hast thou set me as a mark against thee?” Surely them
will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people !
But is our universal impiety the first and principal cause of
our misery and wretchedness in general, and of the present
distress in particular? Then let no individual attempt to
clear himself from the dreadful charge of being accessary to
it. Let no one presume to look on himself as unconcerned
and innocent. Let no one “wipe his mouth and say, What
harm have I done?” but rather let him know that his sin in
particular has added to the general account, and not a little
contributed to the fierceness of the divine contention. I say
“divine contention;” and such doubtless it is, though in
general we conceive it merely human. But the latter is the
effect only of the former, and should never be forgotten. It
demands our first and most serious attention, being the first
and principal means of restoring the wished for peace, and
greatly desired reconciliation. For this is no other than to
make God himself our friend; and, “if He be for us, who can
be against us?” Let us do this therefore without delay. Let
every one remember his own sin, and not his neighbour's.
Let us follow the example of the Ninevites. Let us “break
off our sins by repentance.” Let us “observe such a fast as
God hath chosen.” (And, O, what need of a national fast
at this juncture !) “Let the Priests, the Ministers of the
Lord, weep between the porch and the altar; and let them
say, Spare” (not destroy) “thy people, O Lord;” and “give
not thine heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should rule
over them, and say, Where is their God? Then will the
Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people.” But
should this spirit of universal humiliation fail, and conse
quently the divine favour upon our land, let not the seed of
Abraham faint, neither let them be dismayed. Their humi
liation and intercession shall be remembered. It cannot be
forgotten; and, if Sodom is not spared for their sake, they
themselves shall nevertheless be spared, “as a man spareth his
own son that serveth him : God will make a difference between
him that serveth him, and him that serveth him not.”
Strong is his arm, and shall fulfil
His great decree and sov’reign will.
“Fear not,” therefore, ye “little flock,” if the overflowing
scourge should come. But “enter ye into the rock, and hide
ye for a little moment in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and
for the glory of his majesty, until the indignation be overpast.
For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: The earth also
shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain ''”