God's Eyes Are over All the Earth
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
MANY years ago, as my eldest brother was walking in the
back street of Hackney, a gentleman accosted him, and
said, “Sir, I am old, and I would willingly inform you of a
remarkable scene of Providence, that it may be remembered
when I am gone hence:-I was walking here some time since,
(as I frequently do,) early in a morning, when a chariot
stopped at a little distance from me, and a young lady,
stepping out, ran by me with all her might. A gentleman
quickly followed her, caught her, and brought her back;
when I just heard her say, ‘What, my dear, will you serve
me so?’ Immediately that door over against us opened,
and he thrust her in before him. I mused upon it all day
and all night, and was very uneasy. In the morning, a
gardener which I employed coming in, I asked him, “Do
you know such a house in Hackney?’ He answered, ‘Sir,
I am going to trim the trees in the garden next to it; and I
will make any inquiries which you desire, and bring you
back the best account I can. The account he gave me the
next morning was this:--When I went to work, I saw over
a low hedge a gardener trimming the trees in the other
garden; and I asked him, ‘Pray, who lives in that house?”
On his answering, ‘A mad Doctor; I asked, “Has he many
patients?” He said, ‘I do not know, though I dine in the
house; for he never suffers any to see them.’ I said, ‘I
will give you a pot of beer, if you can find the name of a
young lady that came in a day or two ago. He answered,
‘I cannot promise; but I will do my best when I go in to
dinner. When I saw him again, he said, ‘No patient in
the house dares speak to any one; and I could get no pen,
ink, and paper; but I got a pin and a card, on which a
young woman has pricked her name: Here it is.’ I took
the card, and knew the name. The next day I went to her
father, and asked, ‘Sir, where is your daughter?” He said,
‘She is lately married to a very worthy man, and is gone
with her husband into the country.’ I then told him the
story, and we went together to the Lord Chief Justice.
Early in the morning we went to the Doctor's house, and
knocked at the door. He looked through a little grate, and
bade us go on our way; we had no business with him. I
answered, ‘Here is the Lord Chief Justice's warrant, and his
tip-staff. Open the door, or we shall break it open. He
then opened it, and I asked, ‘Where is the young lady that
was brought in hither three days ago?” He answered,
‘There is no such person in my house; you may search it
from top to bottom. We did so; but could not find any
trace of her. Coming down the stairs, I said, ‘Is there no
one under these stairs?’ The Doctor answered, “There is a
poor creature; but she is so outrageous, that we are obliged
to shut her up in the dark. On his opening the door, she
put out her head. My friend sighed, and said, ‘I know
nothing of this poor thing. She answered, ‘What, Sir, am
I so altered in three days, that you do not know your own
daughter?” He immediately knew her voice, and took her
home. Her husband was very glad to refund her fortune.”