Some Remarks on Mr. Hill's Farrago Double Distilled
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. IT is far from my design to give a particular answer to
everything contained in Mr. Hill’s late treatise. I intend
only to offer to the impartial reader a few cursory remarks,
which may partly explain and partly confirm what I have
already said upon the subject.
2. “Poor Mr. Wesley,” says Mr. Hill, opening his cause
with native eloquence, “has published various tracts, out of
which Mr. Hill collects above an hundred gross contradictions.
At this Mr. W.’s temper is much ruffled; ” (I believe not;
I am not sensible of it;) “he primes, cocks, and fires at
Calvinism; and there is smoke and fire in plenty. But if
you can bear the stench, (which indeed is very nauseous,)
there is no danger of being wounded. He calls this last
cannon, or pop-gun, “Remarks’ on my Review. Men of
sense say, it is quite unfit for duty; men of grace compas
sionate the caster of it; men of pleasantry laugh heartily at
it; but some good old women speak highly of it.” (Pages
3--5.) I give this passage at some length, as a genuine
specimen of Mr. Hill's manner of writing.
3. But as Mr. Hill did not “choose to prefix his name, it
argued no great proof of Mr. W.’s politeness, to address him
in the personal manner he has done.” Which of us began?
Was it not Mr. Hill? Did not he address me in a personal
manner first? And some, beside the old women, are of
opinion, he did not do it in the politest manner in the world.
4. “Mr. W. would have us know, that his piece is written
in much love. But what love? Love to his own incon
sistencies; love of scolding, love of abuse. Let the reader
find out any other sort of love through the whole performance.”
In order to judge whether I wrote in love or no, let any one
read the words he has picked out of fifty-four pages, just as
they stand connected with others in each page; it will then
appear they are not contrary either to love or meekness.
5. But Mr. W. says, Mr. Hill “is unworthy the name
either of the gentleman or the Christian; and is amazed that
Mr. Hill should lay claim to either of those titles.” (Page 6.)
Not so. It is my belief that Mr. Hill is both a gentleman
and a Christian; though I still think, in his treatment of
Mr. Fletcher and me, he has acted beneath his character.
Yet it is very likely, “a friend of yours” (not mine) “might
say, I wrote in much wrath.” (Page 7.) I wrote then in
just as much wrath as I do now; though your friend might
think otherwise.
6. Nay, but Mr. W. “gives all the Calvinist Ministers
the most scurrilous, Billingsgate language, while he is
trumpeting forth his own praises, in Mr. F.’s ‘Second Check
to Antinomianism.’” (Page 8.) - A small mistake. I do not
give Billingsgate language to any one: I have not so learned
Christ. Every one of those Hymns, out of which Mr. Hill
culls the harshest expressions, are not mine, but my brother’s.
Neither do I trumpet forth my own praises. Mr. Hill's
imagining I do, arises from an innocent mistake. He con
tinually takes for granted that I read over and correct all
Mr. F.’s books before they go to the press. So far from it,
that the “Fourth Check to Antinomianism” I have not read
over to this day. But Mr. W. “thinks himself to be the
greatest Minister in the world.” Exceedingly far from it. I
know many now in England, at whose feet I desire to be
found in the day of the Lord Jesus.
7. To that question, “Why does a man fall upon me, because
another gave him a good beating?” Mr. Hill answers, “If your
trumpet had not given the alarm, we should not have prepared
ourselves for the battle.” (Page 53.) Nay, truly, not mine, but
Mr. Shirley’s. I was sitting quietly in my study, on the other
side of St. George's channel, when his trumpet gave the alarm.
Yet I say again, I am not now sorry for these disputes, though
I was sorry. You say, truly, “Mr. W.’s temper has been
manifested” hereby. (Page 56.) Let all candid men judge
between us, whether Mr. F. and I, on the one hand, or Mr. Hill
on the other, has shown more “meekness and lowliness;” and
*
%
;
;
which of us has expressed the greatest heat, and the most
cordial contempt of his opponent.
Mr. H. adds: “Hereby Mr. Charles Wesley's Calvinism
is exposed by Mr. John.” Then that is exposed which
never existed; for he never was a Calvinist yet. And
“hereby,” Mr. H. says, “the ‘Christian Library’ is given
up as nothing.” Mere finesse ! Every one sees my meaning,
but those that will not see it: It is nothing to your purpose;
it proves nothing of what it is brought to prove. In the
same sense I set the word nothing over against the citations
from Mr. Baxter and Goodwin.
8. If Mr. Hill says he always was a Calvinist, I have no
right to contradict him. But I am sure he was of a widely
different temper from that he has shown in his late writings.
I allow much to his belief, that, in exposing me to the
utmost of his power, he is doing God service. Yet I must
needs say, if I were writing against a Turk or a Pagan, I
durst not use him as Mr. Hill does me. And if I really am
(which will one day appear) employing all my time, and
labour, and talents (such as they are) for this single end, that
the kingdom of Christ may be set up on earth; then He
whom I serve in the gospel of his Son, will not commend him
for his present work.
9. But what makes Mr. Hill so warm against me? I still
believe it is for this chiefly,--because I am an Arminian, an
election-doubter. For, says he, the “good old Preacher
places all election-doubters” (that is, those who are not clear
in the belief of absolute predestination) “among the numerous
hosts of the Diabolonians. One of these being brought
before the Judge, the Judge tells him he must die.” (Review,
page 35.) That is, plainly, he must die eternally for this
damnable sin. I beg Mr. Hill to explain himself on this
head. Does he still subscribe to the sentence of this “good
old Preacher?” Are all election-doubters to be placed
among the Diabolonians? Is the sentence irreversibly passed,
that they must all die eternally? I must insist on Mr. Hill’s
answering this question : If not, silence gives consent.
10. Mr. H. farther affirms: “The only cement of Christian
union is the love of God. And the foundation of that love
must be laid, in believing the truths of God;” (that is, you
must believe particular redemption, or it is impossible you
should love God;) for, to use “the words of Dr. Owen, in his
-
4.18 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
‘Display of Arminianism,’” (see what truths Mr. H. means,)
“‘an agreement without truth is no peace, but a covenant
with death, and a conspiracy against the kingdom of Christ.’”
(Page 39.) Here again I beg an explicit answer. Will Mr.
H. affirm this in cool blood P If he will, there needs no more
to account for his enmity both to me and the Minutes.
“Nay, but the foundation is struck at by those wretched
Minutes.” (Page 52.) True, the foundation of Calvinism.
So I observed before. I know it well. If the Minutes stand,
Calvinism falls. But Mr. Hill says, “The doctrines of election
and perseverance are very little, indeed scarcely at all, dwelt
on in the ‘Review.’” Now, I think they are very much
dwelt on therein, and desire any that have eyes to judge.
11. We come now to the main question: Is the “Farrago”
true or false? I aver it to be totally false; except in one
single article, out of an hundred and one. I mean, Mr. H.
has not proved that I contradict myself, except in that single
instance. To come to particulars:--
“1. There was an ever- “There never was such a
lasting covenant between the covenant.”
Father and Son, concerning
man’s redemption.”
The former proposition is taken from the “Christian
Library;” on which Mr. H. says again, “Mr. W. affirms that
the Christian Library is “all true, all agreeable to the word of
God.’” I answered before, “I do not. My words are: ‘I
have endeavoured to extract such a collection of English
divinity, as I believe is all true, all agreeable to the oracles of
God.” (Christian Library, preface, p. 4.) I did believe, and
do believe, every tract therein to be true and agreeable to the
oracles of God. But I do not roundly affirm this of every
sentence contained in the fifty volumes. I could not possibly
affirm it, for two reasons: (1.) I was obliged to prepare most
of those tracts for the press, just as I could snatch time in
travelling; not transcribing them, (none expected it of me,)
but only marking the lines with my pen, and altering a few
words here and there, as I had mentioned in the preface.
(2.) As it was not in my power to attend to the press, that
care necessarily devolved on others; through whose inattention
an hundred passages were left in, which I had scratched out.
It is probable too, that I myself might overlook some
sentences which were not suitable to my own principles. It
is certain the correctors of the press did this in not a few
instances. The plain inference is, if there are an hundred
passages in the ‘Christian Library’ which contradict any or
all of my doctrines, these are no proofs that I contradict
myself. Be it observed once for all, therefore, citations from
the ‘Christian Library’ prove nothing but the carelessness of
the correctors.” (Remarks, page 381.)
12. Yet Mr. Hill, as if he had never seen a word of this,
or had solidly refuted it, gravely tells us again, “If Mr. W.
may be credited, the ‘Farrago’ is all true; part of it being
taken out of his own ‘Christian Library, in the preface of
which he tells us that the contents are ‘all true, all agreeable
to the oracles of God.” Therefore, every single word of it is
his own, either by birth or adoption.” (Farrago, p. 12.) No ;
I never adopted, I could not adopt, “every single word” of
the “Christian Library.” It was impossible I should have
such a thought, for the reasons above mentioned.
But “there is very great evasion,” says Mr. H., “in
Mr. W.’s saying that though he believes “every tract to be
true, yet he will not be answerable for “every sentence
or expression in the Christian Library;” whereas the matter
by no means rests upon a few sentences or expressions, but
upon whole treatises, which are diametrically opposite to
Mr. W.’s present tenets; particularly the treatises of Dr.
Sibbs, Dr. Preston, Bishop Beveridge, and Dr. Owen on
indwelling sin.” (Page 16.)
13. Just before, Mr. H. affirmed, “Every single word in
the ‘Christian Library’ is his own.” Beaten out of this
hold, he retreats to another; but it is as untenable as the
former: “The matter,” he says, “does not rest on a few
sentences; whole treatises are diametrically opposite to his
present tenets.” He instances in the works of Dr. Sibbs,
Preston, Beveridge, and a treatise of Dr. Owen’s.
I join issue with him on this point. Here I pin him down.
The works of Dr. Preston and Sibbs are in the ninth and
tenth volumes of the Library; that treatise of Dr. Owen's in
the seventeenth; that of Bishop Beveridge in the forty
seventh. Take which of them you please; suppose the last,
Bishop Beveridge’s “Thoughts upon Religion.” Is this whole
treatise “ diametrically opposite to my present tenets?” The
“Resolutions” take up the greatest part of the book; every
sentence of which exactly agrees with my present judgment;
as do at least nine parts in ten of the preceding “Thoughts,”
on which those Resolutions are formed. Now, what could
possibly induce a person of Mr. Hill’s character, a man of a good
understanding, and of a generous temper, a well-bred gentle
man, and a serious Christian, to violate all the rules of justice
and truth, which at other times he so earnestly defends, by
positively, deliberately, roundly asserting so entire a falsehood,
merely to blacken one who loves his person, who esteems his
character, and is ready to serve him in anything within his
power? What, but so violent an attachment to his opinion,
as, while that is in danger, suspends all his faculties, so that
he neither can feel, nor think, nor speak like himself?
14. In the ninth and tenth volumes are two treatises of
Dr. Preston's,--“The Breastplate of Faith and Love,” and
“The New Covenant.” Is either of these “diametrically
opposite to my present tenets?” . By no means. If a few
sentences here and there (and this I only suppose, not grant)
were carelessly left in, though I had scratched them out,
which seem (perhaps only seem) to contradict them, these
are not the whole tracts; the general tenor of which I still
heartily subscribe to.
The tenth volume likewise contains two sermons of Dr.
Sibbs’s, and his tract upon Solomon’s Song. Are any of
these “diametrically opposite to my present tenets?” No
more than those of Dr. Preston’s. I as willingly as ever
subscribe to these also.
Is Dr. Owen’s tract, “Of the Remainder of Indwelling Sin
in Believers,” “diametrically opposite to my present tenets?”
So far from it, that a few years since I published a sermon on
the very same subject. I hope there is no room to charge
me with “quirk, quibble, artifice, evasion,” on this head;
(though I believe as much as on any other;) I use only plain,
manly reasoning; and such logic I am not ashamed to avow
before the whole learned world.
15. But “I will go farther still,” says Mr. H. : “Let Mr.
W. only bring me twenty lines together, out of the writings
of those four eminent Divines, as they stand in the ‘Chris
tian Library;’ and I will engage to prove that he has twenty
times contradicted them in some of his other publications.”
(Page 19.) Agreed: I bring him the following twenty lines
with which Dr. Preston begins his treatise called “The New
Covenant:”--
“These words of God to Abraham contain a precept of
sincerity, or perfect walking with God: ‘Walk before me,
and be thou perfect:’ And also the motive thereunto, God’s
all-sufficiency: “I am God all-sufficient. As if he should
say, ‘If there were any defect in me, if thou didst need or
couldest desire anything that were not to be had in me, and
thou mightest have it elsewhere, perhaps thy heart might be
imperfect in walking towards me. Thou mightest then step
out from me, to take in advantages elsewhere. But seeing I
am all-sufficient; since I have enough in me to fulfil all thy
desires; since I am every way an adequate object, so that all
thy soul can wish for thou mayest have in me; why then
shouldest thou not consecrate thyself to me? Why then
shouldest thou be uneven in thy ways, serving me sometimes,
and sometimes the creature? For there is nothing in the
creature, but thou may est find in me.’ ‘I am all-sufficient;
therefore, walk before me, and be thou perfect!’” (Christian
Library, Vol. X., page 47.)
Here are exactly twenty lines, neither more nor less,
“as they stand in the ‘Christian Library.’” Now, fulfil
your engagement; prove that I “have twenty times contra
dicted them in some other of my publications.” If you
cannot, acknowledge you have done me wrong. In the heat
of your resentment, you have undertaken what you are not
able to perform; you have spoken rashly and unadvisedly;
you have gone much too far, far beyond the bounds of
wisdom as well as of love.
16. Nay, but “I will go one step farther yet: I defy Mr.
Wesley to bring me twenty lines out of the above tracts, by
Preston, Sibbs, Owen, and Beveridge, which he now believes.”
Is it possible, that Mr. Hill should believe himself, while he
is talking at this rate? Or does he expect that any one else
should believe him, unless he be drunk with passion or
prejudice? Was ever anything so wild? But I accept of
this challenge, and that with more seriousness than it deserves.
I will go no farther than the twenty lines cited above: All
these I “now believe.” And I believe, as I said before, not
only the whole treatise from which those words are taken,
but the tenor of the whole “Christian Library.”
Meantime, it has been acknowledged again and again,
422 REMARKs on MR. Hill's
that several sentences stand therein which I had put out, in
my usual manner, by drawing my pen through them. Be it
observed, therefore, once more, that those passages prove
nothing but the carelessness of the correctors; consequently,
all the pains bestowed to collect them together, whether by
Mr. Hill or his coadjutors, is absolutely lost labour, and
never can prove that I contradict myself.
17. The case is nearly the same with regard to those other
tracts which I published many years ago,-Mr. Baxter's
Aphorisms on Justification, and John Goodwin’s tract on
the same subject. I have lately read them both over with all
the attention I am capable of; and I still believe they contain
the true Scripture doctrine concerning justification by faith:
But it does not follow, that I am accountable for every
sentence contained in either of those treatises.
“But does Mr. Wesley believe the doctrine therein con
tained, or does he not?” I do; and John Goodwin believed
the doctrine contained in the sermon on “The Lord our
Righteousness;” the sum of which is, “We are justified,
sanctified, and glorified, for the sake of what Christ has done
and suffered for us.” Nothing he asserts is inconsistent with
this; though it may be inconsistent with passages left in the
“Christian Library.” When therefore I write “Nothing”
against those passages, or the extracts from Goodwin, that con
tradict them, this does not prove, (as Mr. Hill archly says,)
that “I have nothing to say,” but that all those passages and
extracts put together are nothing to the purpose. For, were
it true, that John Goodwin and Richard Baxter contradicted
all those passages, it is nothing to the point in hand; it
never can prove, that I, John Wesley, contradict myself.
18. But to return to the everlasting covenant: “Mr.
Wesley himself, in his Annotations on Gen. i. 1, calls the
Elohim, a “covenant God.’” True, in covenant with man.
But I say not one word of any covenant between the Father
and the Son. But “in his note on Isaiah lv. 4, speaking of
the covenant made between God and David, he says, “This
David is Christ.’” Undoubtedly I do; but what is this
brought to prove? My words are, “I have appointed, and
will in due time give him--the David last-mentioned, even
Christ--a witness--to declare the will of God concerning the
duty and salvation of men, to bear witness to the truth, to
confirm God’s promises, and, among others, those which respect
the calling of the Gentiles; to be a witness to both parties of
that covenant made between God and man.” (Page 209.)
Yea, of the “covenant made between God and man l” Of a
covenant between the Father and the Son here is not a word.
“The only possible conclusion to be drawn from this
defence of Mr. Wesley’s is, that he became a commentator
on the Bible before he could read the Bible.” That is pity!
If he could not read it when he was threescore years old, I
doubt he never will. See the candour, the good-nature, of
Mr. Hill ! Is this Attic salt, or wormwood ?
What conclusion can be possibly drawn in favour of Mr.
Hill? The most favourable I can draw is this, that he never
read the book which he quotes; that he took the word of
some of his friends. But how shall we excuse them? I hope
they trusted their memories, not their eyes. But what
recompence can he make to me for publishing so gross a
falsehood, which, nevertheless, those who read his tract, and
not mine, will take to be as true as the gospel?
Of Election and Perseverance.
19. In entering upon this head, I observed, “Mr. Sellon
has clearly showed, that the Seventeenth Article does not
assert absolute predestination. Therefore, in denying this, I
neither contradict that article nor myself.” (Remarks, p. 382.)
It lies therefore upon Mr. Hill to answer Mr. Sellon before
he witticizes upon me. Let him do this, and he talks to the
purpose; otherwise, all the pretty, lively things, he says about
Dr. Baroe, Bishop Wilkins, Dr. Clark, and George Bell, are
utterly thrown away.
As to George Bell, Mr. Richard says, Mr. M d “justly
censures the enthusiasm and credulity of Mr. John, in paying
so much attention to Bell’s ridiculous reveries; in calling him
a sensible man, and entreating him to continue in his society,
on account of the great good he did. However, Bell refused
to remain in connexion with him, because of his double
dealings and unfaithful proceedings; for he sometimes was full
of Bell’s praises; at other times, he would warn the people
against him. He also gives a particular narration of what he
rightly calls the ‘comet enthusiasm.” Mr. John preached more
than ten times about the comet, which he supposed was to
appear in 1758, to burn up all the produce of the earth, and
lastly to execute its grand commission on the globe itsclf,
causing the stars to fall from heaven.” (Farrago, p. 37.)
What an heap of dirt is here raked together ! I must not
let it pass quite unnoticed. (1.) He “justly censures the enthu
siasm and credulity of Mr. Wesley in paying so much atten
tion to Bell’s ridiculous reveries.” Nay, so very little, that I
checked them strongly, as soon as ever they came to my know
ledge; particularly his whim about the end of the world, which
I earnestly opposed, both in private and public. (2) “Bragging
of the many miraculous cures he had wrought.” I bragged
of--that is, simply related, the case of Mary Special, and no
other; in the close of which I said, “Here are three plain
facts,--She was ill; she is well; she became so in a moment.
Which of these can with any modesty be denied?” I still
ask the same question. (3.) That I ever called him “a
sensible man,” is altogether false. A man of faith and love I
then knew him to be; but I never thought him a man of
sense. (4.) That I “entreated him to continue in the society,”
is likewise totally false. (5.) Nor did I ever tell him, on that
or any other occasion, of “the great good” he did. I know
he was an instrument in God’s hands of convincing and
converting many sinners. But though I speak this now to
all the world, I never spoke it to himself. (6.) Neither did
he ever refuse, what never was asked, “to remain in connexion
with me.” (7.) Least of all did he refuse it because of my
“double-dealings or unfaithful proceedings.” He never
mentioned to me any such thing, nor had he any pretence so
to do. (8.) Nay, but you “was at some times full of Bell's
praises.” Very moderately full. “At other times,” that is,
after he ran mad, “you warned the people against him.” I
warned them not to regard his prophecies, particularly with
regard to the 28th of February. (Journal, Vol. III., p. 130.)
20. “He also gives us a particular narration of what he
rightly calls the comet-enthusiasm. Mr. John preached more
than ten times about the comet he supposed was to appear in
1758, and to consume the globe.” This is a foolish slander,
as it is so easily confuted. A tract was published at that
very time, entitled, “Serious Thoughts occasioned by the
Earthquake at Lisbon.” The thing which I then accidentally
mentioned in preaching (twice or thrice; it may be, four times)
is there set down at large, much more at large than ever I
mentioned it in any sermon. The words are these :--
“Dr. Halley fixes the return of the comet, which appeared
in 1682, in the year 1758.” Observe, Dr. Halley does this,
not I. On which he adds: “But may the great, good God
avert such a shock or contact of such great bodies, moving
with such forces, (which, however, is by no means impossi
ble,) lest this most beautiful order of things be entirely
destroyed, and reduced into its ancient chaos.” (Serious
Thoughts, Vol. XI., pp. 8, 9.)
“But what, if God should not avert this contact? what
would the consequence be?” That consequence I afterwards
describe: “Burning up all the produce of the earth, and then
the globe itself.” But do I affirm, or suppose, that it actually
will do this? I suppose, nay, affirm, at the bottom of the same
page, the direct contrary: “What security is there against all
this, on the infidel hypothesis? But on the Christian there is
abundant security; for the prophecies are not yet fulfilled.”
21. So much for the comet-enthusiasm. We return now
to the point of unconditional election: “One would imagine,”
says Mr. Hill, “by Mr. W.’s quoting the Thirty-first Article,
in contradiction to the Seventeenth, that he thought the
Reformers as inconsistent as himself.” (Farrago, p. 54.) I
did not quote the Thirty-first in contradiction to the Seven
teenth, but in explication of it. The latter, the Thirty-first,
can bear but one meaning; therefore it fixes the sense of the
former. “Nay, this Article speaks nothing of the extent of
Christ’s death, but of its all-sufficiency.” (Pages 54, 55.)
Nothing of the extent / Why, it speaks of nothing else; its
all-sufficiency is out of the question. The words are: “The
offering of Christ once made, is that perfect redemption,
propitiation, and satisfaction, for all the sins of the whole
world, both original and actual.” It is here affirmed, the
death of Christ is a perfect satisfaction for all the sins of the
whole world. It would be sufficient for a thousand worlds.
But of this the Article says nothing.
But “even Bishop Burnet allows our Reformers to have
been zealous Calvinists.” He does not allow them all to
be such; he knew and you know the contrary. You cannot
but know, that Bishop Ridley, Hooper, and Latimer, to
name no more, were firm Universalists.
22. But the contradictions ! Where are the contradic
tions? “Why, sometimes you deny election; yet another
time you say, -
“From all eternity with love
Unchangeable thou hast me view’d.’” +
I answered, “I believe this is true, on the supposition of
faith foreseen, not otherwise.”
Here is therefore no contradiction, unless on that
supposition, which I do uot allow.
But sometimes “you deny the perseverance of the saints.
Yet in one place you say, ‘I do not deny that those eminently
styled the elect shall persevere.’” R mean those that are
perfected in love. So I was inclined to think for many years:
But for ten or twelve years I have been fully convinced, that
even these may make “shipwreck of the faith.”
23. But “several of Mr. Hill’s quotations are from Mr.
Charles Wesley's Hymns, for which Mr. John says he will
not be answerable.”
I will now explain myself on this head. Though there are
some expressions in my brother's Hymns which I do not
use, as being very liable to be misconstrued; yet I am fully
satisfied, that, in the whole tenor of them, they thoroughly
agree with mine, and with the Bible. (2) That there is no
jot of Calvinism therein; that not one hymn, not one verse
of an hymn, maintains either unconditional election, or
infallible perseverance. Therefore, I can readily answer Mr.
H.’s question, “How can Mr. W. answer it to his own
conscience, to write prefaces and recommendations to Hymns
which he does not believe?” There is the mistake. I do
believe them; although still I will not be answerable for
every expression which may occur therein. But as to those
expressions which you quote in proof of final perseverance,
they prove thus much, and no more, that the persons who
use them have at that time “the full assurance of hope.”
Hitherto, then, Mr. Hill has brought no proof that I
contradict myself.
Of Imputed Righteousness.
24. “Blessed be God, we are not among those who are so
dark in their conceptions and expressions. “We no more
deny,” says Mr. W., ‘the phrase of imputed righteousness,
than the thing.’” (Page 23.) It is true: For I continually
* Page 21.
affirm, to them that believe, faith is imputed for righteous
ness. And I do not contradict this, in still denying that
phrase, “the imputed righteousness of Christ,” to be in the
Bible; or in beseeching both Mr. Hervey and you, “not to
dispute for that particular phrase.”
But “since Mr. W. blesses God for enlightening him to
receive the doctrine, and to adopt the phrase of ‘imputed
righteousness; how came he to think that clear conceptions
of the doctrine were so unnecessary, and the phrase itself so
useless, after having so deeply lamented the dark conceptions
of those who rejected the term and the thing?”
It was neither this term, “the imputed righteousness of
Christ,” nor the thing which Antinomians mean thereby,
the rejection of which I supposed to argue any darkness of
conception. But those I think dark in their conceptions,
who reject either the Scripture phrase, “faith imputed for
righteousness,” or the thing it means.
25. However, to prove his point, Mr. Hill goes on :
“This doctrine” (of the “The use of the term” (the
“imputed righteousness of “imputed righteousness of
Christ”) “I have constantly Christ”) “is not scriptural;
believed and taught for near it is not necessary; it has
eight-and-twenty years.” done immense hurt.”e
“‘It has done immense hurt, says Mr. W.; ‘but here is
no contradiction.’ Whether there be or not, there is a plain
concession from Mr. W. himself, that he has been preaching
a doctrine for eight-and-twenty years together, which has
done immense hurt.”
Let this (one instance out of an hundred) be a specimen
of Mr. Hill's fairness ! The whole strength of the argument
depends on the artful jumbling of two sentences together,
and inserting two or three little words into the latter of them.
My words are: “We no more deny the phrase” (of “imputed
righteousness”) “than the thing.” (Remarks, p. 383.)
“This doctrine I have believed and taught for near eight
and-twenty years.” (Ibid.)
These distinct sentences Mr. Hill is pleased to thrust
together into one, and to mend thus:
“This doctrine (of the imputed righteousness of Christ) I
have constantly believed and taught for near eight-and
twenty years.”
And here, says Mr. H., is a “plain concession from Mr.
W. himself, that he has been preaching a doctrine for
twenty-eight years together, which has done immense hurt.”
No, the doctrine which I believe has done immense hurt,
is that of the imputed righteousness of Christ in the
Antinomian sense. The doctrine which I have constantly
held and preached is, that faith is imputed for righteousness.
And when I have either in that sermon or elsewhere said,
that “the righteousness of Christ is imputed to every
believer,” I mean, every believer is justified for the sake of
what Christ has done and suffered. Yet still I think, “there
is no use in contending for that particular phrase.” And I
say still, “I dare not insist upon it, because I cannot find it
in the Bible.”
To contradict this, Mr. H. cites these words: “‘This...is
fully consistent with our being justified, through the
imputation of Christ's righteousness.” Mr. W.’s notes on
Romans iv. 9.” Mr. H. adds: “These two, taken together,
produce the following conclusion, that it is perfectly consist
ent to say, that we are justified by that which cannot be
found in the Bible.” (Farrago, p. 24.)
That note runs thus: “‘Faith was imputed to Abraham
for righteousness.’ This is fully consistent with our being
justified through the imputation of the righteousness of Christ:
That is, our being pardoned, and accepted of God, for the
sake of what Christ has done and suffered. For though this,
and this alone, be the meritorious cause of our acceptance
with God, yet faith may be said to be ‘imputed to us for
righteousness,’ as it is the sole condition of our acceptance.”
Now, is there any shadow of contradiction in this? or of our
being justified by that which cannot be found in the Bible?
26. “Mr. W. frequently puts the expression, “imputed
righteousness,’ in the mouth of a whole congregation. Yet
he says, “I dare not require any to use it.’” Hence Mr.
Hill deduces these two conclusions:--
(1) “That Mr. W. gives out such doctrines as he dares
not require any others to believe.” (Page 25.)
By what logic is this deduced? We are not speaking of
doctrines at all, but simply of a particular expression. And
that expression is not “imputed righteousness,” but “the
imputed righteousness of Christ.”
(2.) “That a whole congregation may have words in their
mouths, and yet be all silent.”
Well inferred again! But did I say, “A whole congrega
tion had those words in their mouths?” I did not either say
or suppose it; any more than that they were all silent.
“Will Mr. W. be ingenuous enough to tell me, whether
he did not write this when he was last in a certain country,
which abounds with crassa ingenia?”* I will. I did not
write this in the fogs of Ireland, but in the clear air of
Yorkshire.
27. The two next propositions Mr. Hill quotes, are,
“They to whom the righteousness of Christ is imputed,” (I
mean, who truly believe,) “are made righteous by the Spirit
of Christ; are renewed in the image of God, in righteousness
and true holiness.”
“The nice, metaphysical doctrine of imputed righteous
ness” (if it is not carefully guarded) “leads not to repent
ance, but to licentiousness. I have known a thousand
instances of this.”
And where is the contradiction between these propositions?
“It is just this,” says Mr. Hill, “that the doctrine of imputed
righteousness makes those who believe it both holy and
unholy.” (Page 26.)
Unfold the propositions a little more, and then let any man
judge.
The First means just this: They whom God justifies, for
the sake of what Christ has done and suffered, (whether they
ever heard of that phrase, “imputing the righteousness of
Christ,” or not,) are sanctified by his Spirit; are renewed in
the image of God, in righteousness and true holiness.
The Second means: I have known very many who so rested
in the doctrine of the righteousness of Christ imputed to
them, that they were quite satisfied without any holiness at all.
Now, where is the contradiction?
But my inserting in my own sentence those explanatory
words, “I mean, who truly believe,” Mr. H. calls an interpola
tion; and supposes I “mean to make a distinction between
faith in Christ, and faith in the righteousness of Christ.” I
mean just what I have said again and again, particularly in
the note above cited. And this is the very thing which John
Goodwin means, as he declares over and over.
Mr. W. “winds up this point of imputed righteousness
with a resolution which astonishes me, that “he will never
* Persons of dull understandings.-EDIT.
more use the phrase, the imputed righteousness of Christ,
unless it occur to him in a hymn, or steal upon him unawares.’”
This is my resolution. I repeat once more what I said in the
“Remarks:” “The thing, that we are justified merely for
the sake of what Christ has done and suffered, I have con
stantly and earnestly maintained above four-and-thirty years.
And I have frequently used the phrase, hoping thereby to
please others ‘for their good to edification. But it has had a
contrary effect, since so many improve it into an objection.
Therefore I will use it no more.” (I mean, the phrase
imputed righteousness; that phrase, the imputed righteousness
of Christ, I never did use.) “I will endeavour to use only
such phrases as are strictly scriptural. And I will advise all
my brethren, all who are in connexion with me throughout
the three kingdoms, to lay aside that ambiguous, unscriptural
phrase, (the imputed righteousness of Christ,) which is so
liable to be misinterpreted, and speak in all instances, this in
particular, as the oracles of God.”
Of a two-fold Justification.
My words cited as contradicting this, run thus:
28. “In the afternoon I was informed how many wise and
learned men, who cannot in terms deny it, (because our
Articles and Homilies are not yet repealed,) explain justifica
tion by faith: They say, Justification is two-fold, the First
in this life, the Second at the last day, &c. In opposition
to this, I maintain, that the justification spoken of by St.
Paul to the Romans, and in our Articles, is not two-fold; it
is one, and no more.” (Remarks, page 388.) True. And
where do I contradict this? Where do I say, the justifica
tion spoken of by St. Paul to the Romans, and in our
Articles, is any more than one? The question between
them and me concerned this justification, and this only,
which I affirmed to be but one. They averred, “But there
is a second justification at the last day; therefore justification
is not one only.” Without entering into that question, I
replied, “The justification whereof St. Paul and our Articles
speak, is one only.” And so I say still; and yet I do not
deny that there is another justification (of which our Lord
speaks) at the last day.
I do not therefore condemn the distinction of a two-fold
justification, in saying, That spoken of in our Articles is but
one. And this is the thing which I affirmed, in “flat opposi
tion to those men.”
29. But “how is it possible to encounter such a man as
this, without watching him through every line? And there
fore I wish my readers would closely compare the “Remarks’
with the “Review’ itself;” (I desire no more. Whoever
does this, will easily discern on which side the truth lies;)
“as it is impracticable to point out half the little arts of this
kind which Mr. W. has stooped to.” That is, in civil terms,
“Sir, you are a knave.” Sir, I crave your mercy. I stoop to
mo art, but that of plain, sound reasoning. By this art, and
by this alone, I am able to untwist truth from falsehood, how
skilfully soever they are woven together. I dare use no
other; for (whether you know it or no) I fear God. And by
his grace, in simplicity and godly sincerity I have my
conversation in the world.
“But how agrees this with what Mr. W. tells us, that he
has never contradicted himself with regard to justification,
since the year 1738?” (Farrago, p. 39.) Perfectly well.
“How long has he held that justification is fourfold?” I
have said nothing about it yet. “And how will he reconcile
this with its being twofold, and with his preceding affirmation,
that it is one and no more?” When time is, this mystery
too may be cleared up.
Of a Justified State.
30. Mr. W. says, “The state of a justified person is inex
pressibly great and glorious.” (Page 34.)
“Yet he asks elsewhere, “Does not talking of a justified or
sanctified state, tend to mislead men ?” He answers: ‘It
frequently does mislead men;’” namely, when it is spoken of
in an unguarded manner. “‘But where is the contradiction?’
Whatever may be the contradiction, this is clearly the con
clusion,-that Mr. W., by his own confession, is a misleader
of men.”
It is not quite clear yet. You have first to prove that I use
the phrase “in an unguarded manner.” I confess, when it is
so used, it tends to mislead men; but I do not confess that I
use it so.
Are Works a Condition of Justification?
31. “Mr. W. says, “No good works can be previous to
justification.’ And yet in the same page he asserts, ‘Who
ever desires to find favour with God should cease from evil,
and learn to do well.’”
I answered: “Does not the Bible say so? Who can deny
it? “Nay, but Mr. W. asks, If this be not in order to find
favour, what does he do them for?’ And I ask it again. Let
Mr. Hill, or any one else, give me an answer. So if there is
any contradiction here, it is not I contradict myself, but
Isaiah and our Lord that contradict St. Paul.” (Remarks,
pages 389, 390.)
Mr. Hill replies: “Then a man may do works in order to
find favour, and yet such works cannot be called good.” You
may call them so, if you please; but be not angry with me,
if I do not. I still believe, no good works can be done before
justification. Yet I believe, (and that without the least self
contradiction,) that final salvation is “by works as a condi
tion.” And let any one read over the twenty-fifth chapter of
St. Matthew, and deny it if he can.
Is Justification by Faith articulus stantis vel cadentis
Ecclesiae?
32. In the beginning of the year 1738, I believed it
was so. Soon after I found reason to doubt. Since that
time I have not varied. “Nay, but in the year 1763
you say, ‘This is the name whereby he shall be called, The
Lord our Righteousness. A truth this, of which may be
affirmed, (what Luther affirms of a truth nearly connected
with it, justification by faith,) it is articulus stantis vel
cadentis Ecclesiae.* It is certainly the pillar and ground
of that faith of which alone cometh salvation.’” (Farrago,
page 15.)
I answered: “It is certain, here is a seeming contradiction;
but it is not a real one; for these two opposite propositions do
not speak of the same thing. The latter speaks of justification
by faith; the former, of trusting in the righteousness or merits
* A doctrine without which there can be no Christian Church.
of Christ. (Justification by faith is only mentioned inci.
dentally in a parenthesis.) Now, although Mr. Law denied
justification by faith, he might trust in the merits of Christ.
It is this, and this only, that I affirm (whatever Luther does)
to be articulus stantis vel cadentis Ecclesiae.” (Remarks,
page 391.)
But Mr. Hill thinks, “justification by faith, and by
trusting in the merits of Christ, are all one.” (Farrago, page
16.) Be they or not, I still think, “ some may doubt of
justification by faith, and yet not perish everlastingly.”
Does Mr. Hill judge that such an one cannot be saved? that
all Mystics (as well as Mr. Law) go to hell?
Both Adam’s Sun and Christ’s Righteousness are imputed.
They are; the question is only, In what sense?
Of Merit.*
33. In the Minutes I say, “We are rewarded according to
our works, yea, because of our works. (Genesis xxii. 16, 17.)
How differs this from for the sake of our works? And how
differs this from secundum merita operum, or ‘as our works
deserve?” Can you split this hair? I doubt I cannot.” I
say so still. Let Mr. Hill, if he can.
“And yet I still maintain,” (so I added in the
“Remarks;” so I firmly believe,) “there is no merit, taking
the word strictly, but in the blood of Christ; that salvation
is not by the merit of works; and that there is nothing we
are, or have, or do, which can, strictly speaking, deserve the
least thing at God’s hand.
“And all this is no more than to say, Take the word merit
in a strict sense, and I utterly renounce it; take it in a looser
sense, and though I never use it, (I mean, I never ascribe it
to any man,) yet I do not condemn it. Therefore, with
regard to the word merit, I do not contradict myself at all.”
“You never use the word l’” says Mr. H.: “What have
we then been disputing about?” (Farrago, p. 36.) Why,
about a straw; namely, whether there be a sense in which
others may use that word without blame.
- * Page 35.
But can Mr. Hill, or any one living, suppose me to mean,
I do not use the word in the present question?
What Mr. H. adds, is a mere play upon words: “Does
Mr. W., by this looser merit, mean a merit that does not
merit?” Yes; by terming a work meritorious in this
improper sense, I do not mean, that it merits or deserves a
reward in the proper sense of the word. Instances of the
word taken in this improper sense occur all over the Bible.
“This is shamefully evasive.” No more than it is Greek.
It is a plain, rational, solid distinction; and it holds with
regard to numberless words in all languages, which may be
taken cither in a proper or improper sense.
When I say, “I do not grant that works are meritorious,
even when accompanied by faith,” I take that word in a
proper sense. But others take it in an improper, as nearly
equivalent with rewardable. Here, therefore, I no more
contradict Mr. Fletcher than I do myself. Least of all do I
plead, as Mr. H. roundly affirms, “for justification by the
merit of my own good works.” (Page 52.)
Of Marriage.
34. “Mr. W. says, his thoughts on a single life are just the
same they have been these thirty years.” (I mean, with regard
to the advantages which attend that state in general.) “Why
then did he marry?” (Page 39.) I answered short, “For
reasons best known to himself.” As much as to say, I judge
it extremely impertinent for any but a superior to ask me the
question. So the harmless raillery which Mr. H. pleases
himself with upon this occasion may stand just as it is.
Concerning Dress.
35. “Mr. W. advises his followers to ‘wear nothing of a
glaring colour, nothing made in the height of the fashion,’ in
order to “increase their reward, and brighten their crown in
heaven.’
“Nevertheless, in his ‘Letter to a Quaker, he says, “To
make it a point of conscience to differ from others, as to the
shape and colour of their apparel, is mere superstition.’
“Yet he says, “So I advise; but I do not make it a point
of conscience.’ It follows, that we are to increase our
reward, and brighten our crown in heaven, by doing that
which is mere superstition, and without acting from a point
of conscience.” (Page 40.)
I shall say more on this head than I otherwise would, in
order to show every impartial reader, by one instance in a
thousand, the manner wherein Mr. H. continually distorts
and murders my words.
In my “Advice to the People called Methodists,” I say,
“I would not advise you to imitate the people called
Quakers, in those particularities of dress which can answer
no end but to distinguish you from all other people; but I
advise you to imitate them in plainness. (1.) Let your
apparel be cheap, not expensive. (2.) Let it be grave, not
gay or showy; not in the point of the fashion.
“Would you have a farther rule? Then take one you
may always carry in your bosom : Do everything with a
single eye; and this will direct you in every circumstance.
Let a single intention to please God prescribe both what
clothing you shall buy, and the manner wherein it shall be
made, and how you shall put on and wear it. In other
words, let all you do in this respect, be so done, that you
may offer it to God, a sacrifice acceptable through Jesus
Christ; so that, consequently, it may increase your reward,
and brighten your crown in heaven.”
Now, is there anything ridiculous in all this? I
would appeal even to a rational Deist, whether it be not,
upon the Christian scheme, all agreeable to the highest
reason ?
36. “But it is inconsistent with what you said elsewhere:
“To make it a point of conscience to differ from others, as
the Quakers do, in the shape or colour of their apparel, is
mere superstition.’”
Not inconsistent at all. It is mere superstition to make
wearing a broad-brimmed hat, or a coat with four buttons,
(the very thing I referred to in the preceding page,) a point
of conscience; that is, a thing necessary to salvation.
“Why then,” says Mr. H., “we are to increase our
reward, and brighten our crown in heaven, by doing what is
‘mere superstition, and without acting from a ‘point of
conscience l’”
Was ever such twisting of words? Has he not great
reason to cry out, “O rare Logica Wesleiensis / Qui bene
distinguit bene docet !”* I bless God, I can distinguish
reason from sophistry; unkind, unjust, ungenteel sophistry,
used purely for this good end,--to asperse, to blacken a
fellow-Christian, because he is not a Calvinist !
No, Sir; what I call “superstition, and no point of
conscience,” is wearing a Quaker hat or coat; which is
widely different from the plainness of dress that I recom
mend to the people called Methodists.
My logic, therefore, stands unimpeached; I wish your
candour did so too.
I would engage to answer every objection of Mr. H.’s, as
fairly and fully as this. But I cannot spare so much time;
I am called to other employment.
And I should really think Mr. H. might spend his time
better than in throwing dirt at his quiet neighbours.
Of Tea.
37. “Mr. W. published a tract against drinking tea, and
told the tea-drinkers he would set them an example in that
piece of self-denial.” (Farrago, p. 41.)
“I did set them an example for twelve years. Then, at
the close of a consumption, by Dr. Fothergill’s direction, I
used it again.” (Remarks, p. 393.)
“Why then did Mr. W. re-publish this tract, making the
world believe it brought a paralytic disorder upon him?”
Before I was twenty years old, it made my hand shake, so
that I could hardly write. “Is it not strange then, that Dr.
Fothergill should advise Mr. W. to use what had before
thrown him into the palsy ?” I did not say so. I never
had the palsy yet; though my hand shook, which is a
“paralytic disorder.” But be it strange or not, so Dr. F.
advised; if you believe not me, you may inquire of himself.
The low wit that follows, I do not meddle with ; I leave it
with the gentle reader.
* O rare Wesleyan Logic teacher.--EDIT.
He who is clear in making distinctions is an able
Of Baptism.
38. “Mr. W. says, “As there is no clear proof for dip
ping in Scripture, so there is very probable proof to the
contrary.’
“Why then did you at Savannah baptize all children by
immersion, unless the parents certified they were weak?”
(Farrago, p. 42.)
I answered: “Not because I had any scruple, but in
obedience to the Rubric.”
Mr. H., according to custom, repeats the objection, without
taking the least notice of the answer.
As to the story of half drowning Mrs. L. S., let her aver
it to my face, and I shall say more. Only observe, Mr.
Toplady is not “my friend.” He is all your own; your
friend, ally, and fellow soldier:--
Ut non
Compositus melius cum Bitho Bacchius ! *
You are in truth, duo fulmina belli.t. It is not strange
if their thunder should quite drown the sound of my “poor
pop-guns.”
39. “But what surpasses everything else is, that Mr. W.
cannot even speak of his contradictions, without contradicting
himself afresh. For he absolutely denies, not only that he
ever was unsettled in his principles, but that he was ever
accused of being so, either by friends or foes.” (Pages 39, 40.)
Either by friends or foes / I will rest the whole cause upon
this. If this be true, I am out of my wits. If it be false,
what is Mr. Hill? An honest, upright, sensible man; but
a little too warm, and therefore not seeing so clearly in this
as in other things.
My words are: “My friends have oftener accused me of
being too stiff in my opinions, than too flexible. My enemies
have accused me of both, and of everything besides.” (Remarks,
p. 402.) Is this “denying that ever I was accused of incon
sistency either by friends or foes.”
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“Not half so justly match'd engage
Bithus and Bacchius on the stage.”-EDIT.
+ Two thunderbolts of war.-EDIT.
4.38 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
I do still deny, that Mr. Delamotte spoke to me “of my
wavering, unsettled disposition.” (Farrago, p. 43.) But “he
spoke to you,” says Mr. Hill, “of something else.” It is
very likely he might.
40. Mr. W. is equally self-inconsistent “with regard to
the Mystics. These, he tells us, he had once in great vene
ration,” (I had, two or three and forty years ago) “as the
best explainers of the gospel of Christ. Yet afterwards he
declares, he looks upon them as one great Antichrist.” (Page
14.) I did look upon them as such thirty years ago. But
in my “Remarks” I say, “I retract this. It is far too strong.
But observe, I never contradicted it till now.”
But how does this agree with Mr. W.'s saying, “I never
was in the way of Mysticism at all?”
Perfectly well: I admired the Mystic writers. But I never
was in their way; leaving off the outward means.
“But why did Mr. W. let the expression stand, ‘Solomon
is the chief of the Mystics?’” Perhaps because I thought it
an harmless one, and capable of a good meaning. But I
Dbserve again: Mr. H. takes it for granted, that I have the
Xorrection of Mr. Fletcher’s books. This is a mistake: Of
some I have; of others I have not.
41. Now comes the capital instance of self-inconsistency:
“In 1770, Mr. W. esteems the Minutes the standard of
orthodoxy. In 1771, he signs a paper, owning them to be
unguarded. In 1772, he tells us, he does not know but it
would have been better, not to have signed that paper at all !”
(Page 13.) Suppose all this true, what will it prove? Only
that I made a concession which was made an ill use of.
But “Mr. F.’s defence makes poor Mr. W. appear more
and more inconsistent. Mr. W. declares the Minutes to be
unguarded:” (That is, “not enough guarded” against cavil
lers:) “Mr. F. defends them, and strives to reconcile them
with the Declaration. But then comes Mr. W., and tells us,
he does not know, but it had been better not to have signed it
at all.” And what then? Why, “hereby he intimates, that he
has fixed a different sense upon the Minutes from that which
they originally bore.” No such thing; he intimates this and
no more, that by that well-intended concession, he had given
occasion, to those who sought occasion, of offence against him.
So all this laboured charge vanishes into air; and no more
proves inconsistency than high-treason.
42. We come now to the main point, perfection; the
objections to which spread almost throughout the book.
But the question is not, whether the doctrine be true or
false; but whether I contradict myself concerning it.
As to what occurs in the fourth and fifth pages, it may
therefore suffice to say, I do believe (as you observe) that
real Christians (meaning those that are “perfected in love”)
are freed from evil or sinful thoughts. And where do I
contradict this?
“You say, I cannot prove the facts alleged against some
professors of perfection. Indeed I can.” (Page 10.) If
you could, that would not prove that I contradict myself on
this head.
“But one at Worcester writes, ‘I can send you an account
of two or three shocking instances of bad behaviour among
the professors of perfection here.’” Perhaps so. But will
that prove my inconsistency?
43. Awhile since, Mr. Ma--d related to me the whole story
of Samuel Wi-n. I know not that I ever heard of it before,
but only some imperfect fragments of it. The other story, of
“a Preacher of perfection who said, the Holy Ghost visibly
descended on all true converts,” may be true for aught I
know; but I question much, whether that madman was a
Preacher. It may likewise be true, that several wild expres
sions were uttered at West-street chapel. Yet I think, all
these put together will not prove, that I contradict myself.
However, I am glad to read, “If I publish another edition
of the Review, these instances shall all be omitted; and
personal vilifications shall be left to the sole pen of Mr. W.”
Then you will reduce your Farrago to a page, and your
Review to a penny pamphlet. But still “personal vilification”
will not suit my pen. I have better employment for it.
44. You say, “Let us now proceed to Mr. W.’s assertions
on sinless perfection.” (Page 26.)
As I observed before, I am not now to dispute whether
they are right or wrong. I keep therefore to that single
point, Do I herein contradict myself, or not?
When I said, “If some of our hymns contradict others,” I
did not allow they do. I meant only, if it were so, this would
not prove that I contradict myself. “But still it proves, the
people must sing contradictions.” Observe, that is, if--.
In your account of perfection, blot out “no wandering
thoughts.” None in the body are exempt from these. This
we have declared over and over; particularly in the sermon
wrote upon that subject.
If in the sermon on Ephesians ii. 8, (not xi. 5, as your
blunderer prints it,) the words which I had struck out in the
preceding edition, are inserted again, what will this prove?
Only that the printer, in my absence, printed, not from the
last, but from an uncorrected, copy. However, you are
hereby excused from unfairness, as to that quotation. But
what excuse have you in the other instance, with regard to
Enoch and Elijah? On which I asked, “Why is Mr. Hill so
careful to name the first edition? Because in the second the
mistake is corrected. Did he know this? And could he
avail himself of a mistake which he knew was removed before
he wrote?” (Remarks, p. 395.)
It is now plain he could ! Nay, instead of owning his
unfairness, he endeavours to turn the blame upon me ! “You
are as inconsistent in your censures as in your doctrines:
You blame me for quoting the last edition of your Sermon ;
whereas you call me to account for quoting the first edition of
your Notes, concerning Enoch and Elijah; each of whom you
have proved, by a peculiar rule of Foundery-logic, to be both
in heaven and out of heaven.” So, without any remorse,
nay, being so totally unconcerned as even to break jests on
the occasion, you again “avail yourself of a mistake which
you knew was removed before you wrote.”
45. But Mr. Wesley “hath both struck out some words, and
put in others, into the sermon.” This is a common complaint
with Mr. Hill, on which therefore it is needful to explain.
I generally abridge what I answer; which cannot be done
without striking out all unessential words. And I generally
put into quotations from my own writings, such words as I
judge will prevent mistakes.
Now to the contradictions:
“‘If we say we have no sin’ now remaining,” (I mean,
after we are justified,) “‘we deceive ourselves.’”
I believe this; and yet I believe,
“Sin shall not always in our flesh remain.”
Again:
“Many infirmities do remain.”
This I believe; and I believe also,
“‘He that is born of God,” (and “keepeth himself,'
1 John v. 18,) * sinneth not by infirmities, whether in act,
word, or thought.”
I believe likewise, that in those perfected in love,
“No wrinkle of infirmity,
No spot of sin remains.”
My brother, at the bottom of the page, expressly says, “No
sinful infirmity.” So whether this be scriptural or not, here
is no contradiction.
I have spoken so largely already concerning sins of surprise
and infirmity, that it is quite needless to add any more. I
need only refer to the “Remarks,” at the 399th and following
pages.
46. But to go on:
“I wrestle not now.”
This is an expression of my brother's, which I do not
subscribe to.
“We wrestle not with flesh and blood.”
“This he allows to be his own.” (Page 31.)
Indeed I do not; although, it is true, “the perpetual war
which I speak of in the note on Eph. vi. 13, is a war with
principalities and powers, but not with flesh and blood.”
“But either way, Mr. John is stuck fast in the mire. For in
his “Remarks,’ he contradicts his brother; in his Annotations,
he contradicts himself; and in his Hymn, he contradicts both
bis brother and himself.”
Mr. John is not quite stuck fast yet; for this is a mistake
from beginning to end. (1) I do not contradict my brother
in my “Remarks.” In saying, “I do not subscribe to that
expression,” I mean, I do not make it my own; I do not
undertake to defend it. Yet neither do I enter the lists
against it; it is capable of a sound meaning. (2.) I do not
contradict myself in the note; let him prove it that can.
(3.) I contradict nobody in the hymn; for it is not mine.
Again: “I never said,
While one evil thought can rise,
I am not born again.”
My brother said so once; but he took the words in too high
a sense.” I add, and in a sense not warranted by the Bible.
And yet I believe, that “real Christians, I mean those
perfected in love, are freed from evil or sinful thoughts.”
“But is not a babe in Christ born again? Is he not a real
Christian?” He is doubtless born again; and in some sense
he is a real Christian; but not in the sense above defined.
47. We come now to the additional contradictions whiêh
Mr. Hill undertakes to find in my writings. They are already
dwindled into one; and I hope to show quickly, this one is
none at all. It stands thus:--
“Most express are the words of St. John : “We know,
that whosoever is born of God sinneth not.’”
“Indeed, it is said, This means only, he doth not commit
sin wilfully or habitually.”
(Observe. I do not deny the text to mean this; but I
deny that it means this only.)
As a contradiction to this, Mr. Hill places these words in
the opposite column:--
“The Apostle John declares, ‘Whosoever is born of God
sinneth not,’ (1.) By any habitual sin; nor, (2.) By any wilful
sin.” True; but do I say, the Apostle means this only?
Otherwise, here is no contradiction. So, although you have
got the gallows ready, you have not turned off old Mordecai
yet. As you so frequently give me that appellation, I for
once accept of your favour.
48. “Before I quit this subject,” (of perfection,) “I cannot
help expressing my astonishment, that Mr. Wesley should
deny that his tenets on that point exactly harmonize with
those of the Popish Church; since all the decrees and books
that have been published by the Roman Clergy prove this
matter beyond a doubt.”
I believe you have been told so. But you should not
assert it, unless from personal knowledge. “Alexander Ross
says so.” What is Alexander Ross? See with your own
eyes. “Mr. Hervey too gives an account of Lindenus and
Andradius.” Second-hand evidence still. Have you seen
them yourself? Otherwise, you ought not to allow their
testimony. As to that “most excellent and evangelical
work,” as you term it, the Eleven Letters ascribed to Mr.
Hervey, Mr. Sellon has abundantly shown, that they are
most excellently virulent, scurrilous, and abusive; and full as
far from the evangelical spirit, as the Koran of Mahomet.
“But Bishop Cowper”--I object to him, beside his being
a hot, bitter Calvinist, that he is a dull, heavy, shallow writer.
And let him be what he may, all you cite from him is but
second-hand authority. “Nay, I refer to the Bishop's own
words.” But still, you have only the words at second-hand.
In order to know the tenets of the Church of Rome, you must
read the Romish authors themselves. Nay, it does not suffice
to read their own private authors. They will disown anything
we charge them with, unless we can prove it by recurring to
their public and authentic records. Such are the “Canones et
Decreta Concilii Tridentini.” Such the “Catechismus ad
Parochos.” Till you have read these at least, you should
never undertake to determine what is, or what is not, Popery.
49. “But as I am now on the subject of Popery, I must
make a few animadversions on what Mr. Wesley affirms, ‘I
always thought the tenets of the Church of Rome were nearer
by half to Mr. Hill's tenets, than to Mr. Wesley’s.” (Page 33.)
Nay, give the honour of this to its true author: Mr. Hill
goes to consult a Popish Friar at Paris, a Benedictine Monk,
one Father Walsh, concerning the Minutes of the Conference.
Father Walsh (Mr. Hill says; and I see no reason to scruple
his authority here) assures him that the Minutes contain false
doctrine; and that the tenets of the Church of Rome are
nearer by half to his (Mr. Hill's) tenets than they are to Mr.
Wesley's. (So Mr. Hill himself informs the world, in the
Paris Conversation, of famous memory, which I really think
he would never have published, unless, as the vulgar say, the
devil had owed him a shame.) I add, “Truly, I always
thought so.” But I am the more confirmed therein, by the
authority of so competent a judge; especially when his judg
ment is publicly delivered by so unexceptionable a witness.
50. Nay, but “you know, the principles of the Pope and
of John Calvin are quite opposite to each other.” I do not
know that they are opposite at all in this point. Many Popes
have been either Dominicans or Benedictines: And many of
the Benedictines, with all the Dominicans, are as firm
Predestinarians as Calvin himself. Whether the present
Pope is a Dominican, I cannot tell: If he is, he is far nearer
your tenets than mine.
Let us make the trial with regard to your ten propositions:--
(1) “You deny election.” “So does the Pope of
Rome.” I know not that.
Probably he holds it.
(2.) “You deny persever- “So does the Pope of
ance.” Rome.” That is much to be
doubted.
(3) “You deny imputed
righteousness.”
Perhaps the Pope of Rome
does; but I assert it continu
ally.
(4) “You hold free-will.”
“So does the Pope of
Rome.” No; not as I do ;
(unless he is a Predestina
rian: Otherwise,) he ascribes
it to nature, I to grace.
(5) “You hold that works
If you mean good works, I
are a condition of justifica
do not.
tion.”
(6) “You hold a twofold
justification; one now, another
at the last day.”
“So does the Pope of
Rome.” And so do all Pro
testants, if they believe the
Bible.
(7) “You hold the doctrine
I do not. Neither does the
of merit.”
Pope, if Father Walsh says
true.
(8) “You hold sinless per
“So does the Pope.” I
fection.”
deny that. How do you
prove it?
(9.) “You hold, that sins
I hold no such thing; and
are only infirmities.”
you know it well.
(10) “You distinguish
Not so; I abhor the dis
between venial and mortal
tinction.
sins.”
Now, let every man of understanding judge, whether
Father Walsh did not speak the very truth.
51. “This pamphlet was finished, when I was told, that
Mr. W. had lately a very remarkable dream, which awakened
him out of a sound sleep. This dream he communicated to
his society. It was in substance as follows:--A big, rough
inan came to him, and gave him a violent blow upon the arm
with a red-hot iron.
“Now, the interpretation thereof I conceive to be as
follows:--
“(1.) The big, rough man is Mr. Hill: (2.) The bar of
iron” (red-hot 1) “is Logica Wesleiensis: (3.) The blow
denotes the shock which Mr. John will receive by the said
pamphlet: (4.) His being awakened out of a sound sleep,
signifies there is yet hope, that he will, some time or other,
come to the right use of his spiritual faculties.” (Page 61.)
Pretty, and well devised ! And though it is true I never
had any such dream since I was born, yet I am obliged to
the inventor of it; and that on many accounts.
I am obliged to him, (1.) For sending against me only a
big, rough man; it might have been a lion or a bear:
(2.) For directing the bar of iron only to my arm; it might
have been my poor skull: (3.) For letting the big man give
me only one blow; had he repeated it, I had been slain
outright: And, (4.) For hoping I shall, some time or other,
come to the right use of my spiritual faculties.
52. Perhaps Mr. Hill may expect that I should make him
some return for the favour of his heroic poem: But
Certes I have, for many days,
Sent my poetic herd to graze.
And had I not, I should have been utterly unable to present
him with a parallel. Yet, upon reflection, I believe I can;
although I own it is rather of the lyric than the heroic kind.
And because possibly he may be inclined to write notes on
this too, I will tell him the origin of it. One Sunday,
immediately after sermon, my father's clerk said, with an
audible voice, “Let us sing to the praise and glory of God,
an hymn of mine own composing.” It was short and sweet,
and ran thus:
King William is come home, come home !
King William home is come !
Therefore let us together sing
The hymn that's call'd Te D'um !
53. Before I conclude, I beg leave, in my turn, to give
you a few advices:
And, (1.) Be calm. Do not venture into the field again
till you are master of your temper. You know, “the wrath
of man worketh not the righteousness,” neither promotes the
truth, “ of God.”
(2.) Be good-natured. Passion is not commendable; but
ill-nature still less. Even irrational anger is more excusable
than bitterness, less offensive to God and man.
(3.) Be courteous. Show good manners, as well as good
nature, to your opponent, of whatever kind. “But he is
rude.” You need not be so too. If you regard not him,
reverence yourself.
Absolutely contrary to this is the crying out at every turn,
“Quirk I Sophistry ! Evasion l’” In controversy these
exclamations go for nothing. This is neither better nor
worse than calling names.
(4.) Be merciful. When you have gained an advantage
over your opponent, do not press it to the uttermost.
Remember the honest Quaker’s advice to his friend a few
years ago: “Art thou not content to lay John Wesley upon
his back, but thou wilt tread his guts out?”
(5.) In writing, do not consider yourself as a man of
fortune, or take any liberty with others on that account.
These distinctions weigh little more in the literary world,
than in the world of spirits. Men of sense simply consider
what is written; not whether the writer be a lord or a
cobbler.
Lastly. Remember, “for every idle word men shall speak,
they shall give an account in the day of judgment l”
Remember, “by thy words shalt thou be justified; or by thy
words shalt thou be condemned !”
BR1sToL,
March 14, 1773.