Some Observations on Liberty
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. It was with great expectation that I read Dr. Price's
“Observations on the Nature of Civil Liberty, the Principles
of Government, and the Justice and Policy of the War with
America; ” and I was not disappointed. As the author is
a person of uncommon abilities, so he has exerted them to
the uttermost in the tract before us, which is certainly a
master-piece of its kind. He has said all that can be said
upon the subject, and has digested it in the most accurate
manner; and candour requires us to believe that he has wrote
with an upright intention, with a real design to subserve
the interest of mankind in general, as well as the subjects
of the British empire. But as the Doctor is a friend to
liberty, so he can “think and let think.” He does not
desire that we should implicitly submit to the judgment,
either of him or any other fallible man; and will not there
fore be displeased at a few further observations on the same
subject. That subject is,
2. The liberty which is now claimed by the confederate
colonies in America. In order to understand this much
controverted question, I would set aside everything not
essential to it. I do not therefore now inquire, whether this
or that measure be consistent with good policy; or, whether it
is likely to be attended with good or ill success: I only want
to know, is their claim right or wrong? Is it just or unjust?
3. What is it they claim? You answer, “Liberty.” Nay,
is it not independency? You reply: “That is all one; they
do claim it, and they have a right to it.”
To independency? That is the very question. To liberty
they have an undoubted right; and they enjoy that right. (I
mean, they did, till the late unhappy commotions.) They
enjoyed their liberty in as full a manner as I do, or any
reasonable man can desire.
“What kind of liberty do they enjoy?” Here you puzzle
the cause, by talking of physical and moral liberty. What
you speak of both is exactly true, and beautifully expressed:
But both physical and moral liberty are beside the present
question; and the introducing them can answer no other end
than to bewilder and confuse the reader. Therefore, to beg
the reader “to keep these in his view,” is only begging him
to look off the point in hand. You desire him, in order to
understand this, to attend to something else! “Nay, I beg
him to look straight forward; to mind this one thing; to fix
his eye on that liberty, and that only, which is concerned in
the present question: And all the liberty to which this
question relates, is either religious or civil liberty.”
4. “Religious liberty is, a liberty to choose our own
religion; to worship God according to our own conscience.
Every man living, as a man, has a right to this, as he is a
rational creature. The Creator gave him this right when he
endowed him with understanding; and every man must judge
for himself, because every man must give an account of himself
to God. Consequently, this is an unalienable right; it is
inseparable from humanity; and God did never give authority
to any man, or number of men, to deprive any child of man
thereof, under any colour or pretence whatever.”*
Now, who can deny that the colonies enjoy this liberty to
the fulness of their wishes 2
5. Civil liberty is a liberty to dispose of our lives, persons,
and fortunes, according to our own choice, and the laws of
our country.
I add, according to the laws of our country: For, although,
if we violate these, we are liable to fines, imprisonment, or
death; yet if, in other cases, we enjoy our life, liberty, and
goods, undisturbed, we are free, to all reasonable intents and
purposes.
Now, all this liberty the confederate colonies did enjoy,
till part of them enslaved the rest of their countrymen; and
all the loyal colonies do enjoy it at the present hour. None
takes away their lives, or freedom, or goods; they enjoy
them all quiet and undisturbed.
“But the King and Parliament can take them all away.”
But they do not; and, till it is done, they are freemen. The
supreme power of my country can take away either my
religious or civil liberty; but, till they do, I am free in both
respects: I am free now, whatever I may be by and by. Will
any man face me down, I have no money now, because it
may be taken from me to-morrow?
6. But the truth is, what they claim is not liberty; it is
independency. They claim to be independent of England;
no longer to own the English supremacy.
A while ago, they vehemently denied this; for matters were
not then ripe: And I was severely censured for supposing
they intended any such thing. But now the mask is thrown
off: They frankly avow it; and Englishmen applaud them
for so doing !
Nay, you will prove, that not only the colonies, but all
* See a tract, entitled, “Thoughts upon Liberty.”
mankind, have a right to it; yea, that independency is of
the very essence of liberty; and that all who are not
independent are slaves.
Nay, if all who are not independent are slaves, then there
is no free nation in Europe; then all in every nation are
slaves, except the supreme powers. All in France, for
instance, except the King; all in Holland, except the
Senate; yea, and these too; King and Senate both are
slaves, if (as you say) they are dependent upon the people.
So, if the people depend on their governors, and their
governors on them, they are all slaves together.
Mere play with words. This is not what all the world means
by liberty and slavery; therefore, to say, “If the Parliament
taxes you without your consent, you are a slave,” is mere
quibbling. Whoever talks thus, should say honestly, “Reader,
I give you warning, I affix a new sense, not the common one,
to these words, liberty and slavery.” Take the words in this
sense, and you may prove there are slaves enough in England,
as well as America; but if we take them in the old, common
sense, both the Americans and we are free men.
7. But you say, “The Parliament has already deprived
them of one great branch of liberty, by enacting, that, in the
cases there specified, they shall be tried in England.”
I answer, How grievously did they abuse that liberty before
it was taken away ! Let any fair man consider the case:
How often have we heard of their quiet and peaceable
submission to pay the duties by law established ! And what
a merit has been made of this by all their advocates! But it
was a merit that never belonged to them; for the duties
were not paid. All this time they did not, in fact, pay one
half, no, not a quarter, of those duties. They continually
defrauded the King of the far greater part of them, without
shame or fear. Indeed, what should they fear? They did
not deign to do it privately, like their fellows in England;
no, they acted openly in the face of the sun. Ship-loads of
tea, for instance, were brought into Boston harbour, and
landed at noon-day, without paying any duty at all. Who
should hinder it? If a custom-house officer hindered, was it
not at the peril of his life? And if, at any time, a seizure
was made, and the cause came to be tried by a Boston jury,
what would follow It was no more than, “Ask your
fellow, whether you are a thief.”
8. Permit me to mention one eminent instance: The
famous Mr. John Hancock, some time since, brought into
Boston a ship-load of smuggled tea, at noon-day. Just then
came in the ships from London, laden with the same com
modity, which, by the removal of the former tax, they were
now enabled to sell cheaper than him. What could he now
do pro patria 2 as Mr. Evans says; in plain English, not to
lose by his cargo? All Europe knows what was done:
“Some persons in disguise,” Dr. Price tells us, “buried the
English tea in the sea.” It was not so commonly known
who employed them, or paid them for their labour: To be
sure, good Mr. Hancock knew no more of it than the child
unborn |
9. Now, I desire to know of any reasonable man, what
could the English Government do? No officer could seize
the smuggled goods; or, if he did, no jury would condemn
the smuggler. There was therefore no possibility that the
King should have his right, without taking some such step as
was taken. There was not any alternative, but either to give
up the customs altogether, (as the evil was increasing more
and more,) or to try the offenders here; so that still they
had as much liberty as their notorious offences allowed.
With what justice, then, can this be urged as a violation of
their liberty “O!” cries the man in yon stone doublet,
“Bondage 1 slavery ! Help, Englishmen? I am deprived
of my liberty!” Certainly you are; but first you deprived
the man of his purse.
“What I Do you compare Mr. H. to a felon?” I do, in
this respect: I compare every smuggler to a felon; a private
smuggler to a sneaking felon, a pick-pocket; a noon-day
smuggler, to a bold felon, a robber on the highway. And if
a person of this undeniable character is made President of a
Congress, I leave every man of sense to determine what is to
be expected from them.
10. To return: As the colonies are free, with regard to
their persons, so they are with regard to their goods. It is
no objection that they pay out of them a tax, to which they
did not previously consent. I am free; I use my money as
I please, although I pay taxes out of it, which were fixed by
law before I was born, and, consequently, without my
consent; and indeed those taxes are so moderate, that neither
they nor I have reason to complain.
“But if the Parliament tax you moderately now, it is
Possible they may, hereafter, tax you immoderately.” It is
possible, but not probable; they never have done it yet:
When they do, then complain.
We are not talking of what may be, but what is; and it
cannot be denied, they are free (which is the present
question) in all the three particulars which Judge Blackstone
includes in civil liberty.
11. But liberty will not content either them or you. You
now openly plead for independency, and aver that the colonies
ought to be independent on England, to assert their own
supremacy, (1.) Because they are half as many as the
Fnglish. (2.) Because in a century they will be twice as many.
The argument runs thus: If the Americans are half as
many as the English, then they have a right to be independ
ent. But they are half as many; therefore, they have a
right to be independent.
I deny the consequence in the first proposition: Number
does not prove a right to independency. I deny the second
proposition too: They are not half as many; even though
you swell the number of the Americans as much as you
diminish the number of the English.
I have been surprised lately, to observe many taking so
much pains to extenuate the numbers of the inhabitants of
England. For what end is this done? Is it to make us
more respectable to our neighbours? or merely to weaken
the hands of the King and ministry? I say the King and
the ministry; for I lay no stress on their pompous professions
of love and loyalty to the King: Just such professions did
their predecessors make to King Charles, till they brought
him to the block.
12. “But are they not half as many? Do not the
confederated provinces contain three millions of souls?” I
believe not. I believe they contain about two millions. But,
allowing they did, I make no doubt but the English (beside
three millions of Scots and Irish) are ten millions at this day.
“How can that be, when there are only six hundred
thousand in London?” Believe it who can, I cannot
believe there are so few as fifteen hundred thousand in
London and its environs, allowing only two miles every way
from the walls of the city.
“But we know there were no more than six hundred
thousand, when the computation was made in the late reign;
allowing that there were, at an average, five in each house.”
They who make this allowance, probably fix their computa
tion at their own fire-side. They do not walk through every
tart of the town, up to the garrets, and down to the cellars.
I do; and by what I have seen with my own eyes, frequently
fifteen, eighteen, or twenty in one house, I cannot believe
there are fewer, at an average, than ten under one roof; and
the same I believe of Bristol, Birmingham, Sheffield, and
most other trading towns. Besides, how many thousand
houses have been added to London within these thirty or
forty years?
13. “But the people of England are continually decreas
ing.” So it has been confidently affirmed; but it is a total
mistake. I know the contrary, having an opportunity of
seeing ten times more of England, every year, than most
men in the nation. All our manufacturing towns, as
Birmingham, Sheffield, Manchester, Liverpool, increase daily.
So do very many villages all over the kingdom, even in the
mountains of Derbyshire. And, in the mean time, exceeding
few, either towns or villages, decrease.
And it is no wonder the people should increase, considering
the amazing increase of trade which has been lately, not in
London only, but much more in Bristol, Birmingham,
Sheffield, Leeds, Manchester, and indeed all parts of the
kingdom, which I have had the opportunity of observing.
There was a considerable decay of trade before; but the tide
is turned, and it now pours in abundantly. So greatly were
our American friends mistaken, who hoped, by shutting up
their ports, to ruin most of the manufacturers in England,
and so starve us into compliance with their demands.
“However, in a century, the Americans will be twice as
many as the English.” That admits of a doubt; but when
they are, then let them avail themselves of it.
14. “Nay, not only the Americans, but all men, have a right
to be self-governed and independent.” You mean, they had a
right thereto, before any civil societies were formed. But when
was that time, when no civil societies were formed? I doubt
hardly since the flood; and, wherever such societies exist, no
man is independent. Whoever is born in any civilized country,
is, so long as he continues therein, whether he chooses it or no,
subject to the laws and to the supreme governors of that country.
Whoever is born in England, France, or Holland, is subject
to their respective Governors; and “must needs be subject
to the power, as to the ordinance of God, not only for wrath,
but for conscience sake.” He has no right at all to be
independent, or governed only by himself; but is in duty
bound to be governed by the powers that be, according to the
laws of the country. And he that is thus governed, not by
himself, but the laws, is, in the general sense of mankind, a
free man; not that there ever existed any original compact
between them and those Governors. But the want of this
does not make him a slave, nor is any impeachment to his
liberty; and yet this free man is, by virtue of those laws,
liable to be deprived, in some cases of his goods; in others,
of his personal freedom, or even of his life. And all this
time he enjoys such a measure of liberty, as the condition of
civilized nations allows; but no independency: That chimera
is not found; no, not in the wilds of Africa or America.
Although, therefore, these subtle metaphysical pleas for
universal independency appear beautiful in speculation, yet
it never was, neither can be, reduced to practice. It is in
vain to attempt it:
Sensus moresque repugnant,
Atque ipsa utilitas, justi prope mater et aqui.*
15. Let us, however, give a fair hearing to these pleas, as
they are urged by this masterly writer; and it may be worth
while to trace the matter to the foundation, surveying it part
by part:
“Any will, distinct from that of the majority of a community,
which claims a power of making laws for it, produces servitude.
This lays the line between liberty and slavery.” (Page 5.)
I must beg leave to stop you on the threshold. All this
I totally deny; and require solid, rational proof of these
assertions; for they are by no means self-evident.
“From what has been said, it is obvious, that all civil
government, as far as it is free, is the creature of the people.
It originates with them; it is conducted by their direction.
In every free state, every man is his own legislator; all taxes
are free gifts; all laws are established by common consent.
If laws are not made by common consent, a Government by
them is slavery.” (Page 7.)
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“Sense, morals, 'gainst such laws unite,
And public good, true source of right.”-ED1T.
Here is a group of strong assertions. But how are they
supported? “O ! they are inferred from what has been
said.” But what has been said, has as yet nothing to
support it. If, then, these assertions stand at all, they stand
by themselves. Let us try if they cau. “All civil govern
ment, as far as it is free, is a creature of the people.” It is,
if we allow your definition of freedom; that is, if we allow
you to beg the question.
16. But before we can move a step further, I must beg
you to define another of your terms. This is the more
necessary, as it occurs again and again; and indeed the whole
question turns upon it. What do you mean by the people?
“All the members of a state?” So you express it, page 8.
“All the individuals that compose it?” So you speak in the
next page. Will you rather say with Judge Blackstone,
“Every free agent?” or with Montesquieu, “Every one that
has a will of his own 7” Fix upon which of these definitions
you please, and then we may proceed.
If my argument has an odd appearance, yet let mone think
I am in jest. I am in great earnest. So I have need to be;
for I am pleading the cause of my King and country; yea,
of every country under heaven, where there is any regular
Government. I am pleading against those principles that
naturally tend to anarchy and confusion; that directly tend
to unhinge all government, and overturn it from the found
ation. But they are principles which are incumbered with
such difficulties as the wisest man living cannot remove.
17. This premised, I ask, Who are the people that have a
right to make and unmake their Governors? Are they “all
the members of a state?” So you affirmed but now. Are
they “all the individuals that compose it?” So you said
quickly after. Will you rather say, “The people are every
free agent?” or, “Every one that has a will of his own?”
Take which you will of these four definitions, and it necessa
rily includes all men, women, and children. Now, stand to
your word. Have all men, women, and children, in a state,
a right to make and unmake their Governors? They are all
free agents, except infants; and even these have a will of
their own. They all are “members of the state;” they are,
all and every one, “the individuals that compose it.” And
had ever the people, as above defined by yourself, a right to
make and unmake their Governors?
18. Setting Mr. Evans's witticisms aside, I seriously desire
him, or Doctor Price, or any zealous assertor of the king
making right of our sovereign lords the people, to point out
a single instance of their exerting this right in any age or
nation. I except only the case of Thomas Aniello, (vulgarly
called Massanello,) in the last century. Do not tell me,
“There are many;” but point them out. I aver, I know of
none. And I believe it will puzzle any one living to name a
second instance, either in ancient or modern history.
19. And by what right, (setting the Scriptures aside, on
which you do not choose to rest the point,) by what right do
you exclude women, any more than men, from choosing their
own Governors? Are they not free agents, as well as men?
I ask a serious question, and demand a serious answer. Have
they not “a will of their own?” Are they not “members
of the state?” Are they not part of “the individuals that
compose it?” With what consistency, them, can any who
assert the people, in the above sense, to be the origin of
power, deny them the right of choosing their Governors, and
“giving their suffrages by their representatives?”
“But do you desire or advise that they should do this?”
Nay, I am out of the question. I do not ascribe these rights
to the people; therefore, the difficulty affects not me; but,
do you get over it how you can, without giving up your
principle.
20. I ask a second question: By what right do you exclude
men who have not lived one-and-twenty years from that
“unalienable privilege of human nature,” choosing their own
Governors? Is not a man a free agent, though he has lived
only twenty years, and ten or eleven months? Can you
deny, that men from eighteen to twenty-one are “members
of the state?” Can any one doubt, whether they are a part of
“the individuals that compose it?” Why then are not these
permitted to “choose their Governors, and to give their
suffrages by their representatives?” Let any who say these
rights are inseparable from the people, get over this difficulty,
if they can; not by breaking an insipid jest on the occasion,
but by giving a plain, sober, rational answer.
If it be said, “O, women and striplings have not wisdom
enough to choose their own Governors;” I answer, Whether
they have or no, both the one and the other have all the
rights which are “inseparable from human nature.” Either,
therefore, this right is not inseparable from human nature,
or both women and striplings are partakers of it.
21. I ask a third question: By what authority do you
exclude a vast majority of adults from choosing their own
Governors, and giving their votes by their representatives,
merely because they have not such an income; because they
have not forty shillings a year? What, if they have not?
Have they not the rights which, you say, belong to man as
man? And are they not included in the people? Have
they not a will of their own 7 Are they not free agents?
Who then can, with either justice or equity, debar them
from the exercise of their natural rights?
“O, but the laws of the land debar them from it.” Did
they make those laws themselves? Did they consent to
them, either in person or by their representatives, before they
were enacted? “No; they were enacted by their forefathers
long before they were born.” Then, what are they to them?
You have assured us, that if men may give away their own
liberty, they cannot give away the liberty of others, of their
children or descendants. Nay, you have told us, that no
man has a right to give away his own liberty; that it is
unalienable from the nature of every child of man. Never,
therefore, patronize those iniquitous laws. No; if you are a
lover of liberty, an enemy to slavery and oppression, exhort
them to shake off this servile yoke.
22. To set this whole matter in another light, I beg leave
to repeat the sum of a small tract lately published.* Have
not the people, in every age and nation, the right to dispose
of the supreme power; of investing therewith whom they
please, and upon what conditions they see good? Conse
quently, if those conditions are not observed, they have a
right to take it away. To prove this, it is argued, “All men
living are naturally equal; none is above another; and all
are naturally free masters of their own actions; therefore, no
man can have any power over another, but by his own
consent; therefore, the power which any Governors enjoy,
must be originally derived from the people, and presupposes
an original compact between them and their first Governors.”
23. But, who are the people? Are they every man,
woman, and child? Why not? Is it not one fundamental
* Thoughts on the Origin of Power.
principle, that “all persons living are naturally equal; that
all human creatures are naturally free; masters of their own
actions; that none can have any power over them, but by
their own consent?” Why, then, should not every man,
woman, and child, have a voice in placing their Governors, in
fixing the measure of their power, and the conditions on which
it is intrusted? And why should not every one have a voice
in displacing them too? Surely they that gave the power
have a right to take it away. By what argument do you
prove, that women are not naturally as free as men? And if
they are, why have they not as good a right to choose their
Governors? Who can have any power over free, rational
creatures, but by their own consent? And are they not free
by nature as well as we? Are they not rational creatures?
24. But suppose we exclude women from using their
natural right, by might overcoming right, what pretence have
we for excluding men like ourselves, barely because they
have not lived one-and-twenty years? “Why, they have
not wisdom or experience to judge of the qualifications neces
sary for Governors.” I answer, (1.) Who has? how many of
the voters in Great Britain? one in twenty? one in an
hundred? If you exclude all who have not this wisdom, you
will leave few behind. But, (2.) Wisdom and experience are
nothing to the purpose. You have put the matter upon
another issue. Are they men? That is enough. Are they
human creatures? Then they have a right to choose their
own Governors; an indefeasible right; a right inherent,
inseparable from human nature. “But in England they are
excluded by law.” Did they consent to the making of that
law? If not, by your original supposition, it can have no
power over them. I therefore utterly deny that we can,
consistently with that supposition, exclude either women or
minors from choosing their own Governors.
25. But, suppose we exclude these by main force; are all
that remain, all men of full age, the people? Are all males,
then, that have lived one-and-twenty years, allowed to choose
their own Governors? Not in England, unless they are
freeholders, and have forty shillings a year. Worse and
worse! After depriving half the human species of their
natural right for want of a beard; after having deprived
myriads more for want of a stiff beard, for not having lived
one-and-twenty years; you rob others, many hundred thou
sands, of their birthright for want of money ! Yet not alto
gether on this account neither; if so, it might be more tolerable.
But here is an Englishman who has money enough to buy
the estates of fifty freeholders, and yet he must not be
numbered among the people, because he has not two or three
acres of land How is this? By what right do you exclude a
man from being one of the people, because he has not forty
shillings a year; yea, or not a groat? Is he not a man, whether
he be rich or poor? Has he not a soul and a body? Has he
not the nature of a man; consequently, all the rights of a man,
all that flow from human nature; and, among the rest, that
of not being controlled by any but by his own consent?
“But he that has not a freehold is excluded by law.” By
a law of his own making? Did he consent to the making
of it? If he did not, what is that law to him ? No man,
you aver, has any power over another, but by his own
consent: Of consequence, a law made without his consent is,
with regard to him, null and void. You cannot say other
wise, without destroying the supposition, that “none can be
governed but by his own consent.”
26. See now to what your argument comes. You affirm,
all power is derived from the people; and presently exclude
one half of the people from having any part or lot in the
matter. At another stroke, suppose England to contain eight
millions of people, you exclude one or two millions more. At
a third, suppose two millions left, you exclude three-fourths
of these; and the poor pittance that remains, by I know not
what figure of speech, you call the people of England !
27. Hitherto we have endeavoured to view this point in
the mere light of reason; and, even by this, it appears,
that this supposition, which has been palmed upon us as
undeniable, is not only false, not only contrary to reason, but
contradictory to itself; the very men who are most positive
that the people are the source of power, being brought into
an inextricable difficulty, by that single question, “Who are
the people?” reduced to a necessity of either giving up the
point, or owning that by the people, they mean scarce a tenth
part of them.
28. But we need not rest the matter entirely on reasoning.
Let us appeal to matter of fact; and, because we cannot have
so clear a prospect of what is at a distance, let us only take a
view of what has been in our own country. I ask, then, When
did the people of England (suppose you mean by that word
only half a million of them) choose their own Governors?
Did they choose (to go no further) William the Conqueror?
Did they choose King Stephen or King John? As to those
who regularly succeeded their fathers, the people are out of
the question. Did they choose Henry the Fourth, Edward
the Fourth, or Henry the Seventh? Who will be so hardy
as to affirm it? Did the people of England, or but fifty
thousand of them, choose Queen Mary, or Queen Elizabeth,
or King James the First? Perhaps you will say, “If the
people did not give King Charles the supreme power, at least
they took it away.” No; the people of England no more
took away his power, than they cut off his head. “Yes; the
Parliament did, and they are the people.” No; the Parlia
ment did not : The House of Commons is not the Parliament,
any more than it is the nation. Neither were those who then
sat the House of Commons; no, nor one quarter of them.
But, suppose they had been the whole House of Commons,
yea, or the whole Parliament, by what rule of logic will you
prove that seven or eight hundred persons are the people of
England? “Why, they are the delegates of the people; they
are chosen by them.” No, not by one half, not by a quarter,
not by a tenth part of them: So that the people, in the only
proper sense of the word, were innocent of the whole affair.
29. “But you will allow, the people gave the supreme
power to King Charles the Second at the Restoration.” I will
allow no such thing, unless, by the people, you mean General
Monk and ten thousand soldiers. “However, you will not
deny that the people gave the power to King William at the
Revolution.” I will; the Convention were not the people,
neither elected by them: So that still we have not a single
instance, in above seven hundred years, of the people of England’s
conveying the supreme power either to one or more persons.
30. So much both for reason and matter of fact. But one
single consideration will bring the question to a short issue.
It is allowed, no man can dispose of another's life, but by his
own consent: I add, No, nor with his consent; for no man
has a right to dispose of his own life: The Creator of man
has the sole right to take the life which he gave. Now, it is
an indisputable truth, Nihil dat quod non habet,-“None
gives what he has not.” It follows, that no man can give to
another a right which he never had himself; a right which
only the Governor of the world has, even the wiser Heathens
being judges; but which no man upon the face of the earth
either has or can have. No man, therefore, can give the
power of the sword, any such power as gives a right to take
away life: Wherever it is, it must descend from God alone,
the sole disposer of life and death.
31. The supposition, then, that the people are the origin
of power, or that “all government is the creature of the
people,” though Mr. Locke himself should attempt to defend
it, is utterly indefensible. It is absolutely overturned by
the very principle on which it is supposed to stand, namely,
that “a right of choosing his Governors belongs to every
partaker of human nature.” If this be so, then it belongs
to every individual of the human species; consequently, not
to freeholders alone, but to all men; not to men only, but
to women also; not only to adult men and women, to those
who have lived one-and-twenty years, but to those that
have lived eighteen or twenty, as well as those who have
lived threescore. But none did ever maintain this, nor
probably ever will; therefore, this boasted principle falls to
the ground, and the whole superstructure with it. So
common sense brings us back to the grand truth, “There is
no power but of God.”
32. I may now venture to “pronounce, that the principles
on which you have argued, are incompatible with practice,”
even the universal practice of mankind, as well as with sound
reason; and it is no wonder “that they are not approved by
our Governors,” considering their natural tendency, which is,
to unhinge all Government, and to plunge every nation into
total anarchy.
This, in truth, is the tendency of the whole book; a few
passages of which I shall now recite, begging leave to make
a few remarks upon them. But I must ask the reader’s
pardon, if I frequently say the same thing more than once;
for, otherwise, I could not follow the author.
33. “All the members of a state” (which necessarily
include all the men, women, and children) “may intrust the
powers of legislation with any number of delegates, subject to
such restrictions as they think necessary.” (Page 8.) This
is “incompatible with practice:” It never was done from
the beginning of the world; it never can; it is flatly
impossible in the nature of the thing. “And thus, all the
individuals that compose a great state partake of the powers
of legislation and government.” All the individuals | Mere
Quixotism ! Where does that state exist? Not under the
canopy of heaven. “In this case, a state is still free,” (but
this case has no being,) “if the representatives are chosen by
the umbiassed voices of the majority.” Hold ! this is quite
another case; you now shuffle in a new term: The majority
we were not talking of, but all the members of a state. The
majority are not all the individuals that compose it; and
pray, how came the minority to be deprived of those rights,
which you say are “unalienable from human nature?”--
“But we disguise slavery, keeping up the form of liberty,
when the reality is lost.” It is not lost; I now enjoy all the
real liberty I can desire, civil as well as religious. The
liberty you talk of was never found; it never existed yet.
But what does all this lead to, but to stir up all the inhabit
ants of Great Britain against the Government?
34. To inflame them still more, you go on: “Liberty is more
or less complete, according as the people have more or less share
in the Government.” This is altogether contrary to matter of
fact: The greater share the people have in the Government,
the less liberty, either civil or religious, does the nation in
general enjoy. Accordingly, there is most liberty of all, civil
and religious, under a limited monarchy; there is usually less
under an aristocracy, and least of all under a democracy.
What sentences then are these: “To be guided by one's own
will, is freedom; to be guided by the will of another, is slavery?”
(Page 11.) This is the very quintessence of republicanism;
but it is a little too barefaced; for, if this is true, how free are
all the devils in hell, seeing they are all guided by their own
will ! And what slaves are all the angels in heaven, since
they are all guided by the will of another ! See another
stroke: “The people have power to model Government as
they please.” (Page 12.) What an admirable lesson, to
confirm the people in their loyalty to the Government ! Yet
again: “Government is a trust, and all its powers a delega
tion.” (Page 15.) It is a trust, but not from the people:
“There is no power but of God.” It is a delegation, namely,
from God; for “rulers are God’s ministers,” or delegates.
35. How irreconcilable with this are your principles !
Concerning our Governors in England, you teach, “A Parlia
ment forfeits its authority by accepting bribes.” If it does,
I doubt all the Parliaments in this century, having accepted
them more or less, have thereby forfeited their authority,
and, consequently, were no Parliaments at all : It follows,
that the Acts which they enacted were no laws; and what a
floodgate would this open You teach further: “If Parlia
ments contradict their trust,” (of which the people are to
judge,) “they dissolve themselves.” And certainly, a Parlia
ment dissolved is no Parliament at all. And seeing “a state
that submits to such a breach is enslaved,” what should the
people do? Knock them on the head, to be sure. And who
can doubt, but they have an unalienable power so to do,
seeing “Government was instituted for the people's sake,
and theirs is the only real omnipotence.” (Page 16.)
36. And, lest your meaning should not yet be plain enough,
you conclude this article thus: “These reflections should be
constantly present to every mind in this country. There is
nothing that requires to be more watched than power; there
is nothing that ought to be opposed with a more determined
resolution than its encroachments. The people of this king
dom were once warmed with such sentiments as these.”
Exactly such, in the glorious days of Watt the Tyler, and of
Oliver Cromwell. “Often have they fought and bled in the
cause of liberty; but that time seems to be going.” Glory
be to God, it is not going, but gone. O may it never return ?
“The fair inheritance of liberty, left us by our ancestors, we
are not unwilling to resign.” We are totally unwilling to
resign either our civil or religious liberty; and both of these
we enjoy in a far greater measure than ever our ancestors did.
Nay, they did not enjoy either one or the other, from the
time of William the Conqueror till the Revolution. “Should
any events arise,” (and you give very broad intimations that
they have arisen already,) “which should render the same
opposition necessary that took place in the time of King
Charles the First,”--the same opposition which made the
land a field of blood, set every man’s sword against his brother,
overturned the whole constitution, and cut off, first, the
flower of the nation, and then the King himself,-“I am
afraid all that is valuable to us would be lost : The terror of
the standing army would deaden all zeal,” for these noble
exploits, “and produce a general servitude.” (Page 18.)
37. What a natural tendency has all this, to instil into
the good people of England the most determined rancour
and bitterness against their Governors, against the King and
Parliament! And what a natural tendency has all that
follows to instil the same both into the English and the
Americans ! On these passages also, I shall beg leave to
subjoin a few short observations:
“A country that is subject to the legislature of another
country, in which it has no voice, and over which it has no
control, is in slavery.” This is palpably false. Take one
instance out of many: Pennsylvania was subject (till now) to
the legislature of England, in which it had no voice, and over
which it had no control; yet it never was in slavery; it never
wanted either civil or religious liberty; nay, perhaps it
was more free in both respects than any other country in the
universe. “In a country thus subjugated to another,” (a
very improper, as well as invidious word,) “there is little or
nothing to check rapacity.” If you mean the rapacity of the
English Government, the insinuation is cruelly false; it never
existed; no such rapacity was ever exercised. “And the
most flagrant injustice and cruelty may be practised without
remorse or pity.” (Page 20.) This is purely calculated to
inflame; for no such injustice or cruelty was ever practised,
nor was ever likely to be, either in this or any other province
of America. That which follows is a curious sentiment
indeed; I know not that ever I met with it before: “The
government of one country over another” (suppose of England
over North-America, or over the West Indian islands)
“cannot be supported but by a military force. This is a
state of oppression no country could submit to, an hour,
without an armed force to compel them.” (Page 23.) Was
ever anything more palpably false ! The English Govern
ment, both in the islands and North-America, is the
government of one country over another; but it has needed
no armed force to support it for above these hundred years:
And this Government which you would persuade them is
oppressive, all the colonies did not only submit to, but rejoice
in, without any armed force to compel them. They knew,
and felt, they were not oppressed; but enjoyed all the
liberty, civil and religious, which they could desire.
38. We come now to more matter entirely new : “No
country can lawfully surrender their liberty, by giving up
the power of legislating for themselves, to any extraneous
jurisdiction; such a cession, being inconsistent with the
unalienable rights of human nature, would either not bind at
all, or bind only the individuals that made it.” (Page 25.)
This is a home thrust. If this be so, all the English claim
either to Ireland, Scotland, or America, falls at once. But
can we admit this without any proof? Ought assertions to
pass for arguments? If they will, here are more of the same
kind: “No one generation can give up this for another.”
That is, the English settlers in America could not “give up
their power of legislating for themselves.” True, they could
not give up what they never had. But they never had, either
before or after they left England, any such power of making
laws for themselves as exempted them from the King and
Parliament; they never pretended to any such power till now;
they never advanced any such claim; nay, when this was laid
to their charge, they vehemently denied it, as an absolute
slander. But you go further still: “When this power”
(of independency) “is lost, the people have always a right to
resume it.” Comfortable doctrine indeed! perfectly well
calculated for the support of civil government!
39. To the same good end, you observe: “Without an
equal representation of all that are governed, government
becomes complete tyranny.” (Page 27.) Now, you had told
us before, “There is not such an equal representation in
England:” It follows, “The English Government is complete
tyranny!” We have, however, the comfort to know that
it never was any better since the Parliament subsisted. For
who can say that there ever was an equal representation
since the conquest? We know further, that we have only
neighbour's fare; for we cannot find there is any nation in
Europe, no, nor in the habitable world, where the Govern
ment is not as complete tyranny as our own; we find none
wherein there is “an equal representation of all that are
governed.” But will any man affirm, in cool blood, that
the English Government is “complete tyranny?” We have
certainly enjoyed more complete liberty since the Revolution,
than England ever enjoyed before; and the English Govern
ment, unequal as the representation is, has been admired by
all impartial foreigners.
40. “But the sword is now to determine our rights: Detested
be the measures which have brought us to this.” (Page 33.)
I once thought those measures had been originally concerted
in our own kingdom; but I am now persuaded they were not.
I allow that the Americans were strongly exhorted by letters
from England, “never to yield or lay down their arms till
they had their own terms, which the Government would be
constrained to give them in a short time:” But those mea
sures were concerted long before this; long before either the
Tea Act or the Stamp Act existed; only they were not
digested into form,-that was reserved for the good Congress.
Forty years ago, when my brother was in Boston, it was the
general language there, “We must shake off the yoke; we
never shall be a free people till we shake off the English
yoke.” These, you see, were even then for “trying the
question,” just as you are now; “not by charters,” but by
what you call, “the general principles of liberty.” And the
late Acts of Parliament were not the cause of what they have
since done, but barely the occasion they laid hold on.
41. But “a late Act declares that this kingdom has power
to make statutes to bind the colonies in all cases whatever !
Dreadful power indeed! I defy any one to express slavery in
stronger terms.” (Page 34.) In all cases whatever ! What
is there peculiar in this? Certainly, in all cases, or in none.
And has not every supreme Governor this power? This the
English Parliament always had, and always exercised, from
the first settlement of the American colonies. But it was not
explicitly declared, because it was never controverted. The
dreadfulness of it was never thought of for above an hundred
years; nor is it easy to discern where that dreadfulness lies.
Wherein does it consist? The Parliament has power to make
statutes, which bind Englishmen likewise, in all cases what
ever. And what then? Why, you say, “I defy any one to
express slavery in stronger terms.” I think I can “express
slavery in stronger terms.” Let the world judge between us.
Slavery is a state wherein neither a man’s goods, nor liberty,
nor life, are at his own disposal. Such is the state of a thou
sand, of ten thousand, Negroes in the American colonies.
And are their masters in the same state with them? in just
the same slavery with the Negroes? Have they no more
disposal of their own goods, or liberty, or lives? Does any
one beat or imprison them at pleasure; or take away their
wives, or children, or lives; or sell them like cows or horses?
This is slavery; and will you face us down that the Americans
are in such slavery as this? You answer, Yes, with regard
to their goods; for the English Parliament “leaves them.
110 opSERVATIONS ON LIBERTY.
nothing that they can call their own.” (Page 35.) Amazing !
Have they not houses, and lands, and money, and goods of
every kind, which they call their own? And did they not
enjoy, a few years since, complete liberty, both civil and
religious, instead of being bound to hard labour, smarting
under the lash, groaning in a dungeon, perhaps murdered,
or stabbed, or roasted alive, at their masters' pleasure?
42. But, “did not their charters promise them all the
enjoyment of all the rights of Englishmen?” (Page 40.)
They did; and they have accordingly enjoyed all the rights
of Englishmen from the beginning. “And allow them to
tax themselves?” Never so as to exempt them from being
taxed by Parliament. It is evident from the Acts of Parlia
ment now in being, that this was never granted, and never
claimed till now : On the contrary, the English Government
has ever claimed the right of taxing them, even in virtue of
those very charters. But you ask, “Can there be an English
man who would not sooner lose his heart’s blood, than yield to
such claims?” (Page 47.) A decent question for a subject of
England to ask Just of a piece with your assertions, that
“our constitution is almost lost;” that the claims of the Crown
have “stabbed our liberty;” and that “a free Government
loses its nature, the moment it becomes liable to be commanded
by any superior power.” (Page 49.) From the moment it
Becomes liable / This is not the case with the colonies; they
do not become liable to be commanded by the King and
Parliament; they always were so, from their first institution.
43. “The fundamental principle of our Government is, the
right of the people to grant their own money.” No.; if you
understand the word people, according to your own definition,
for all the individuals that compose the state, this is not the
fundamental principle of our Government, nor any principle
of it at all. It is not the principle even of the Government
of Holland, nor of any Government in Europe. “It was an
attempt to encroach upon this right in a trifling instance, that
produced the civil war in the reign of King Charles the First.”
Ono' it was the actual encroaching, not on this right only, but
on the feligious as well as civil rights of the subject; and that,
not in one trifling instance only, but in a thousand instances of
the highest importance. “Therefore, this is a war undertaken,
not only against our own constitution, but on purpose to destroy
other similar constitutions in America, and to substitute in their
room a military force.” (Page 50.) Is it possible that a man
of sense should believe this? Did the King and Parliament
undertake this war, on purpose to overturn a castle in the air,
to destroy a constitution that never existed ? Or is this said
purely ad movendam invidiam, “to inflame the minds of the
people?” I would rather impute it to the power of preju
dice; as also the following wonderful sentence: “How horrid,
to sheathe our swords in the bowels of our brethren, for no
other end than to make them acknowledge our supremacy l’”
Yes, for this end,--to make them lay down their arms, which
they have taken up against their lawful Sovereign; to make
them restore what they have illegally and violently taken
from their fellow-subjects; to make them repair the cruel
wrongs they have done them, as far as the nature of the thing
will aduit, and to make them allow to all that civil and
religious liberty whereof they have at present deprived them.
These are the ends for which our Government has very
unwillingly undertaken this war, after having tried all the
rmethods they could devise to secure them without violence.
44. Having considered the justice, you come now to consider
the policy, of this war. “In the last reigns, the colonies,
foregoing every advantage which they might derive from
trading with foreign nations, consented to send only to us,
whatever it was for our interest to receive from them; and
to receive only from us, whatever it was for our interest to
send them.” (Page 67.) They consented to do this / No !
they only pretended to do it; it was a mere copy of their
countenance. They never did, in fact, abstain from trading
with other nations, Holland and France in particular. They
never did, at least for forty years past, conform to the Act of
Navigation. They did not send only to us what we wanted,
or receive only from us what they wanted. What I did
they not “allow us to regulate their trade in any manner
which we thought best?” (Page 68.) No such thing.
They only allowed us to make laws to regulate their trade.
But they observed them as they thought best; sometimes a
little, sometimes not at all. “They fought our battles with
us.” Certainly we fought theirs: And we have sad reason
to remember it; for had Canada remained in the hands of
the French, they would have been quiet subjects still.
45. “But what calamities must follow” from this impolitic
war ! See “the empire dismembered.” (Page 73.) If it be,
that is not the consequence of the war, but rather the cause of
it. “The blood of thousands shed” (it is not yet; perhaps it
never may) “in an unrighteous quarrel.” Doubtless unrigh
teous on their part, who revolt from their lawful Sovereign;
and therefore whatever blood is shed will lie at their door.
“Our strength exhausted.” No, not yet; as they that try
may find to their cost. “Our merchants breaking.” But far
more before the war than since. “Our manufacturers starv
ing.” I pray, where? I cannot find them: Not in London,
in Bristol, in Birmingham, in Manchester, in Liverpool, Leeds,
or Sheffield; nor anywhere else, that I know; and I am well
acquainted with most of the manufacturing towns in England.
“The funds tottering.” Then the stocks must sink very
low: But that is not the case. “And the miseries of a
public bankruptcy impending.” Just as they have done these
hundred years. Fifty years ago I used to be much alarmed
at things of this kind. When I heard a doleful prophecy
of ruin impending on the nation, I really imagined something
would follow. Nay, nothing in the world: These predictions
are mere brutum fulmen; thunder without lightning.
46. Now for a little more of this fine painting ! But,
remember 1 it is not drawn from the life. “A nation once
the protector of liberty in distant countries, endeavouring to
reduce its own brethren to servitude.” Say, to lay down the
arms which they have taken up against their King and coun
try. “Insisting upon such a supremacy over them as would
leave them nothing they could call their own.” (Page 89.)
Yes; the supremacy insisted on would leave them all the
liberty, civil and religious, which they have had from their
first settlement. You next compare them to the brave
Corsicans, taking arms against the Genoese. But the Cor
sicans were not colonies from Genoa: Therefore, there is
nothing similar in the case. Neither in that you next quote,
the case of Holland. You say, Yes: “The United Provinces
of Holland were once subject to the Spaniards; but, being
provoked by the violation of their charters, they were driven
to that resistance which we and all the world have ever
since admired.” (Page 90.) Provoked by the violation of their
charters / yea, by the total subversion both of their religious
and civil liberties; the taking away their goods, imprisoning
their persons, and shedding their blood like water, without the
least colour of right, yea, without the very form of law; inso
much that the Spanish Governor, the Duke of Alva, made
his open boast, that “in five years he had caused upwards of
eighteen thousand persons to fall by the hands of the common
hangman.” I pray, what has this to do with America?
Add to this that the Hollanders were not colonies from
Spain, but an independent people, who had the same right
to govern Spain, as the Spaniards to govern Holland.
47. As another parallel case, you bring the war of the Romans
with the allied states of Italy. But neither is this case parallel
at all; for those states were not colonies of Rome, (although
some colonies were scattered up and down among them,) but
original, independent states, before Rome itself had a being.
Were it then true that “every Briton must approve the conduct
of those allies,” (page 91,) it would not follow, that they must
approve the conduct of the Americans; or that “we ought to
declare our applause, and say, We admire your spirit; it is the
spirit that has more than once saved us.” We cannot applaud
the spirit of those who usurp an illegal authority over their
countrymen; who rob them of their substance, who outrage
their persons, who leave them neither civil nor religious liberty;
and who, to crown all, take up arms against their King and
mother-country, and prohibit all intercourse with them.
48. See an argument of a different kind: “The laws and
religion of France were established in Canada, on purpose to
bring up thence an army of French Papists.” (Page 94.)
What proof have you, what tittle or shadow of proof, for this
strange assertion, that the laws and religion which they had
before in Canada were established on purpose to bring an
army thence? It is manifest to every impartial man, that
this was done for a nobler purpose. Every nation, you allow,
has a natural liberty to enjoy their own laws, and their own
religions: So have the French in Canada; and we have no
right to deprive them of this liberty. Our Parliament never
desired, never intended, to deprive them of this; (so far were
they from any intention of depriving their own countrymen
of it!) and on purpose to deliver them from any apprehension
of so grievous an evil, they generously and nobly gave them
a legal security, that it should not be taken from them. And
is this (one of the best things our Parliament ever did)
improved into an accusation against them? “But our laws
and religion are better than theirs.” Unquestionably they
are; but this gives us no right to impose the one or the
other, even on a conquered nation. What if we had conquered
France, ought we not still to have allowed them their own
laws and religion? Yea, if the Russians had conquered
Constantinople, or the whole Ottoman empire, ought they
not to have allowed to all they conquered, both their own
religion and their own laws; nay, and to have given them,
not a precarious toleration, but a legal security for both?
49. “But the wild Indians, and their own slaves, have
been instigated to attack them.” I doubt the fact. What
proof is there of this, either with regard to the Indians or
the Negroes? “And attempts have been made to gain the
assistance of a large body of Russians.” Another hearty
assertion, which many will swallow, without ever asking for
proof: In truth, had any such attempts been made, they
would not have proved ineffectual. Very small pay will
induce a body of Russians to go wherever they hope for good
plunder. It might just as well have been said, “Attempts
were made to procure a large body of Tartars.”
50. Now for a little more encouragement to your good
friends and allies in America: “The utmost force we can
employ does not exceed thirty thousand men to conquer half a
million of determined men, fighting for that sacred blessing
of liberty, without which man is a beast, and government a
curse.” (Page 95.) I am not sure that our utmost force is
either thirty, or forty, or fifty, thousand men. But are you
sure, that “half a million, at least, are determined to fight”
against them? Yes: For “a quarter of the inhabitants of
every country are fighting men; and the colonies consist of
two millions.” Here are several points which are not quite
clear. I doubt, (1.) Whether those colonies contain two
millions. I doubt, (2.) Whether a quarter of the inhabitants
of any country are fighting men: We usually reckon a sixth
part. I doubt, (3.) Whether a quarter of the American
fighting men, are determined to fight in so bad a cause; to
fight, not for liberty, which they have long enjoyed, but for
independency. Will you affirm, that “without this, man is
a beast, and government a curse?” Then, show me where
man is not a beast, and where government is not a curse.
51. But you give them more encouragement still: “In the
Netherlands, a few states thus circumstanced withstood the
whole force of the Spanish monarchy; and, at last, emancipated
themselves from its tyranny.” (Ibid.) Thus circumstanced :
No; they were in wholly different circumstances; they were
cruelly and wantonly oppressed; they were robbed both of
civil and religious liberty; they were slaughtered all the day
long; and, during the contest, which was really for liberty,
they were assisted by the German Princes, by England, and
by France itself. But “what can thirty thousand men do,
when they are to be fed from hence?” (Page 96.) Do you
think they will stand with their finger in their eye? If they
cannot find food at land, (which would be strange,) the seas
and rivers are open. “Their maritime towns they are resolved
to burn themselves.” They will think twice, before they
execute that resolution. “As to their trade, the loss of it
will do them unspeakable good.” Will it indeed? Then let
them acknowledge their benefactors. “They rejoice particu
larly in the last restraining Act: This will furnish them with
a reason for confiscating the estates of all the friends of our
Government among them.” (Page 97.) A reason / All the
friends of our Government are infinitely obliged to you for
suggesting this to them, who are full ready to improve any hint
of the kind; and it will be no wonder if they soon use these
enemies of their country as the Irish did the Protestants in 1641.
52. “One consideration more. From one end of America
to the other, they are fasting and praying: But what are
we doing? Ridiculing them as fanatics, and scoffing at
religion.” This certainly is the case with many; but God
forbid it should be the case with all ! There are thousands
in England (I believe full as many, if not many more than in
America) who are daily wrestling with God in prayer for a
blessing upon their King and country; and many join fasting
therewith; which, if it were publicly enjoined, would be no
scandal to our nation. Are they “animated by piety?”
So are we; although “not unto us be the praise.” “But
can we declare, in the face of the sun, that we are not
aggressors in this war?” We can. “And that we mean
not, by it, to acquire dominion or empire, or to gratify
resentment?” (Page 99.) I humbly believe, both the King
and his Ministers can declare this before God: “But solely
to gain reparation for injury,” from men who have already
plundered very many of His Majesty’s loyal subjects, and
killed no small number of them.
53. You now proceed to answer objections; and mention,
as the First, “Are they not our subjects?” You answer:
“They are not your subjects; they are your fellow-subjects.”
Are they indeed? Do you affirm this? Then you give up
the whole question; then their independency, which you have
so vehemently maintained, falls to the ground at once.
A Second objection, you say, is this: “But we are taxed;
why should not they?” You answer: “You are taxed
by yourselves; they insist on the same privilege.” I reply,
They are now taxed by themselves, in the very same sense
that nine-tenths of us are. We have not only no vote in
the Parliament, but none in electing the members: Yet Mr.
Evans says, “We are virtually represented:” And if we
are, so are the Americans. You add: “They help you to
pay your taxes, by giving you a monopoly of their trade.”
They consented, as you observed before, to do this; but they
have not done it for many years: They have, in fact, traded
to Holland, to France, to Spain, and everywhere they could.
And how have they helped us, by purchasing our manufac
tures? Take one instance out of a thousand: They have
taken large quantities of our earthenware, for which they
regularly required three years’ credit. These they sold to
the Spaniards, at a very advanced price, and for ready
money only. And did they not hereby help themselves, at
least, as much as they helped us? And what have we lost
by losing their custom? We have gained forty, fifty, or
sixty per cent. The Spaniards now come directly to Bristol;
and pay down ready money, pieces of eight, for all the
earthenware that can possibly be procured.
54. A Third objection, you say, is this: “They will not
obey the Parliament and the laws.” You answer: “Say,
They will not obey your Parliament and your laws; because
they have no voice in your Parliament, no share in making
your laws.” (Page 100.) So, now the mask quite falls off
again. A page or two ago, you said, “They are your fellow
subjects.” Now, you frankly declare, they owe no subjection
to our Government, and attempt to prove it! To that proof
I reply: Millions in England have no more voice in the
Parliament than they ; yet that does not exempt them from
subjection to the Government and the laws. But “they
may have a voice in it if they will.” No; they cannot, any
more than the Americans. “Then they so far want liberty.”
I answer, (1.) Whether they do or no, they must needs be
subject; and that not only for wrath, for fear of punishment,
but for conscience sake. (2.) They do not want liberty; they
have all the liberty they can desire, civil as well as religious.
“Nay, I have no other motion of slavery, but being bound
by a law to which I do not consent.” If you have not, look
at that man chained to the oar: He is a slave; he cannot at
all dispose of his own person. Look at that Negro sweating
beneath his load: He is a slave; he has neither goods nor
liberty left. Look at that wretch in the Inquisition: Then
you will have a far other notion of slavery.
55. You next advance a wonderful argument to convince us
that all the Americans are slaves: “All your freehold land is
represented; but not a foot of theirs; “nay,’ says an eminent
man, “there is not a blade of grass in England but is
represented.’” This much-admired and frequently-quoted
assertion is altogether new ! I really thought, not the grass,
or corn, or trees, but the men of England, were represented
in Parliament. I cannot comprehend, that Parliament-men
represent the grass, any more than the stones or clay of the
kingdom. No blade of grass but is represented 1 Pretty
words ! But what do they mean? Here is Mr. Burke;
pray, what does he represent? “Why, the city of Bristol.”
What, the buildings so called; or the ground whereon they
stand? Nay, the inhabitants of it: The ground, the houses,
the stones, the grass, are not represented. Who till now
ever entertained so wild a thought? But let them stand
together, the independency of our colonies, and the repre
sentation of every blade of grass |
56. You conclude: “Peace may be obtained upon the
easy, the constitutional, and therefore the indispensable,
terms of an exemption from parliamentary taxation, and an
admission of the sacredness of their charters.” (Page 107.)
Are not you betraying your cause ? You have been all
along pleading, in the most explicit manner, for their exemp
tion, not only from parliamentary taxation, but legislation
also. And, if your arguments prove anything, they certainly
prove this, that the colonies have an unalienable right, not
only to tax, but to make laws for themselves; so that the
allowing them the former is nothing, unless we allow the
latter also; that is, in plain terms, unless we allow them to
be independent on the English Government.
As to your other term of peace, there is unquestionably
such a thing as the forfeiting of a charter: Whether the
colonies have forfeited theirs or not, I leave others to deter
mine. Whether they have or have not, there can be no
reason for making the least doubt but, upon their laying down
their arms, the Government will still permit them to enjoy
both their civil and religious liberty in as ample a manner as
ever their ancestors did, and as the English do at this day.
57. I add a few words more: Two or three years ago, by
means of incendiary papers, spread throughout the nation,
the minds of the people were inflamed to an amazing degree;
but the greater part of the flame is now gone out. The
natural tendency, or rather the avowed design, of this
pamphlet, is, to kindle it again; if it be possible, to blow up
into a flame the sparks that yet remain; to make the minds
of His Majesty’s subjects, both at home and abroad, evil
affected toward his Government; discontented in the midst
of plenty, out of humour with God and man; to persuade
them, in spite of all sense and reason, that they are absolute
slaves, while they are actually possessed of the greatest civil
and religious liberty that the condition of human life allows.
Let all who are real lovers of their country use every lawful
means to put out, or, at least, prevent the increase of, that
flame which, otherwise, may consume our people and nation.
Let us earnestly exhort all our countrymen to improve the
innumerable blessings they enjoy; in particular, that invalu
able blessing of liberty, civil as well as religious, which we
now enjoy in a far more ample measure than any of our
forefathers did. Let us labour to improve our religious
liberty, by practising pure religion and undefiled; by
worshipping God in spirit and in truth; and taking his
“word for a lantern to our feet, and a light in all our paths.”
Let us improve our civil liberty, the full freedom we enjoy,
both as to our lives, goods, and persons, by devoting all we
have, and all we are, to his honourable service. Then may
we hope that he will continue to us all these blessings, with
the crown of all, a thankful heart. Then shall we say, in all
the changing scenes of life, -
“Father, how wide thy glories shine,
Lord of the universe and mine !
Thy goodness watches o'er the whole,
As all the world were but one soul ;
Yet counts my every sacred hair,
As I remain'd thy single care !”