A Second Dialogue between an Antinomian and His Friend
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
FRIEND.--WELL met ! You have had time to consider.
What think you of our last conference?
ANTINoMIAN.--I think, “the giving of scandalous names
has no warrant from Scripture.” (Mr. Cudworth's Dialogue,
p. 2.)
Friend.--Scandalous names 1
Ant.--Yes; you called me Antinomian. But “our Saviour
bids me not return railing for railing.” (Ibid.)
Friend.--St. Peter does, and that is all one. But how is that
a scandalous name? I think it is properly your own; for it
means, “one that speaks against the law.” And this you did
at that time very largely. But pray what would you have
me call you?
Ant.--“A Preacher of God’s righteousness.” (Ibid.,
page 1.)
Friend.--What do you call me then?
Ant.--“A Preacher of inherent righteousness.” (Ibid.)
Friend.--That is, in opposition to God’s righteousness. So
you mean, a Preacher of such righteousness as is inconsistent
with that righteousness of God which is by faith.
Ant.--True: For, “I plainly perceive you know but one
sort of righteousness, that is, the righteousness of inherent
qualities, dispositions, and works. And this is the reason why
the language of the Holy Ghost seems foolishness unto you;
even because the natural man receiveth not the things of the
Spirit of God.” (Ibid., pages 11, 12.)
Friend.--Are you absolutely sure that this is the reason
why I do not think or speak as you do?
Ant.--The thing itself speaks: “Thou hast forgotten the
Lord, and hast trusted in falsehood. Therefore, saith the
Lord, I will discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame
may appear.” (Ibid., page 1.)
Friend.--Peremptory enough ! But you will “not return
railing for railing!” so, out of mere tenderness and respect,
you pronounce me a “natural man,” and one who “ hath
forgotten the Lord,” and hath “trusted in falsehood l’”
Ant.--And so you are, if you do not believe in Christ.
Pray let me ask you one question: Do you believe that “Christ
hath appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself?”
Friend.--I do.
Ant.--But in what sense?
Friend.--I believe he made, by that one oblation of him
self, once offered, a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice,
oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.
And yet he hath not “dome all which was necessary for the”
absolute, infallible, inevitable “ salvation of the whole world.”
If he had, the whole world would be saved; whereas, “he
that believeth not shall be damned.”
Ant.--But is it not said, “‘He was wounded for our trans
gressions, and with his stripes we are healed?’ And is he
not ‘the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the
world?’” (Page 4.)
Friend.--Yes. But this does not prove that he “put an
end to our sins before they had a beginning !” (Ibid.)
Ant.--O ignorance ! Did not our sins begin in Adam?
Friend.--Original sin did. But Christ will not put an
end to this before the end of the world. And, as to actual,
if I now feel anger at you in my heart, and it breaks out in
reproachful words; to say Christ put an end to this sin
before it began, is a glaring absurdity.
Ant.--But I say, “God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.
He hath made him sin for us, who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him.” And St.
Peter says, “Who his own self bare our sins in his body on
the tree.”
Friend.--To what purpose do you heap these texts together?
to prove that Christ “put an end to our sins” before they
had a beginning? If not, spare your labour; for they are
quite foreign to the present question.
Ant.--However, that is not foreign to the present ques
tion, which you said the other day; viz., that “Christ has
only redeemed us from the punishment due to our past
transgressions.” (Ibid.)
Friend.--I neither said so, northought so. You either care
lessly or wilfully misrepresent my words. On your quoting
that text, “Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the
law,” I replied in these terms: “What is this to the pur
pose? This tells me that Christ hath redeemed us (all that
believe) from the curse or punishment justly due to our past
transgressions of God's law. But it speaks not a word of
redeeming us from the law, any more than from love or
heaven.” (First Dialogue, page 271.)
Ant.--Past transgressions ! “Then who must redeem us
from those which are to come, since there remains no more
sacrifice for sin?” (Cudworth’s Dialogue.)
Friend.--The same Jesus Christ, by the same merit of that
one sacrifice, then applied to the conscience when we believe,
as you yourself have often asserted. But whatever punish
ment he redeems us from, that punishment supposes sin to
precede; which must exist first, before there is any possibility
of its being either punished or pardoned.
Ant.--You have a strange way of talking. You say, “We
are forgiven for the sake of the blood of Christ.” (Ibid., page 5.)
Friend.--And do not you?
Ant.--No ; I say, “We have forgiveness in his blood, and
not merely for the sake of it.”
Friend.--You are perfectly welcome so to say.
Ant.--Well, enough of this. Let me ask you another
question. Do you affirm, that salvation is “conditional?”
(Ibid.)
Friend.--I affirm, “He that believeth shall be saved, and
he that believeth not shall be damned.” And can you or
any other deny this? If not, why do you fight about a word?
especially after I have told you, “Find me a better, and I
will lay this aside.”
Ant.--“Then this faith leaves you just in the same state
it found you; that is, still having the condition to perform.”
(Ibid., page 5.)
Friend.--Not so; for faith itself is that condition.
Ant.--Nay, “faith is only necessary in order to receive
forgiveness or salvation; not to procure it by way of condi
tion.” (Ibid.)
Friend.--Enough, enough. You grant all that I desire.
If you allow that “faith is necessary in order to receive
forgiveness or salvation,” this is the whole of what I mean
by terming it a condition. A procuring or meritorious
cause is quite another thing.
Ant.--But you say that “faith is not true faith, unless it
be furnished with love.” (Ibid., page 6.)
Friend.--Furnished with love! Where did you pick up
that awkward phrase? I never used it in my life. But I
say, you have not true faith, unless your faith “worketh by
iove;” and that though “I have all faith, so that I could
even remove mountains, yet if I have no love I am nothing.”
Ant.--Will you answer me one question more? Is not a
believer free from the law P
Friend.--He is free from the Jewish ceremonial law; that
is, he does not, and need not, observe it. And he is free
from the curse of the moral law; but he is not free from
observing it. He still walks according to this rule, and so
much the more, because God has written it in his heart.
Ant.--But St. Paul says, “Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believeth.” (Ibid., page 8.)
Friend.--He is so. He put an end to the Mosaic dispen
sation, and established a better covenant, in virtue whereof
“faith is counted for righteousness to every one that believeth.”
Ant.--But still “as many as are of the works of the law
are under the curse,” (Gal. iii. 10,) are they not?
Friend.--They are; as many as still “seek to be justified
by the works of the law;” that is, by any works antecedent
to, or independent on, faith in Christ.
Ant.--“But does not the Apostle say farther, ‘Ye are
become dead to the law?’ (Rom. vii. 4.)” (Ibid.)
Friend.--You are so, as to its condemning power, if you
truly believe in Christ. For “there is no condemnation to
them which are in Christ Jesus.” But not as to its directing
power; for you “walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.” You “love him, and keep his commandments.”
Ant.--That is not all. I maintain, “a believer is entirely
free from the law.” (Ibid.)
Friend.--By what scripture do you prove that?
Ant.--By Gal. iv. 4, 5: “God sent forth his Son, made
under the law, to redeem them that were under the law.”
Friend.--The plain meaning of this I mentioned before:
“‘God sent forth his Son, made under the law,’ (the Jewish
dispensation,) ‘to redeem them that were under the law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons; ’ might ‘serve
God without fear, in righteousness and holiness, with a free,
loving, child-like spirit.” (First Dialogue, page 270.)
Ant.--So you say, “Christ was made only under the
Jewish dispensation, to redeem the Jews from that dispen
sation.” (Cudworth's Dialogue, pages 8, 9.)
Friend.--I do not say so. By inserting “only” you quite
pervert my words. You cannot deny, that Christ “was
made under the Jewish dispensation.” But I never affirmed,
He was “made under it only to redeem the Jews from
that dispensation.”
Ant.--Was he made “under the moral law” at all?
Friend.--No doubt he was. For the Jewish dispensation
included the moral, as well as ceremonial, law.
Ant.--Then the case is plain. “If he was under the
moral law, we are redeemed from the moral law.” (Ibid.)
Friend.--That does not follow. “He redeemed them that
were under” this, as well as the ceremonial, “law.” But from
what did he redeem them? Not “from the law;” but “from
guilt, and sin, and hell.” In other words, He redeemed
them from the “condem nation of this law,” not from “obedi
ence to it.” In this respect they are still, “not without law
to God, but under the law to Christ.” (1 Cor. ix. 21.)
Ant.--“‘Under the law to Christ !” No. The Greek
word is swowo; Xpis?, in a law to Christ; that is, the law of
love and liberty.” (Ibid.)
Friend.--Very true. This is the exact thing I mean.
You have spoken the very thought of my heart.
Ant.--It may be so. But “a believer is free from the law
of commandments,” call it moral, or what you please.
Friend.--Do you mean only, that he obeys the law of Christ,
by free choice, and not by constraint? that he keeps the com
mandments of God, out of love, not fear? If so, you may tri
umph without an opponent. But if you mean, he is free from
obeying that law, then your liberty is a liberty to disobey God.
Ant.--God forbid. It is “a liberty to walk in the Spirit,
and not fulfil the lust (or desire) of the flesh.” (Ibid., page 8.)
Friend.--Why, this is the thing I am contending for. The
very thing I daily assert is this, that Christian liberty is a
liberty to obey God, and not to commit sin.
Ant.--But how do you understand those words of St.
Paul, that Christ “blotted out the hand-writing of ordi.
nances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and
took it out of the way?” (Col. ii. 14.)
Friend.--I understand them of the Jewish ordinances; as
it is plain St. Paul himself did, by the inference he immediately
draws: “Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink,”
(the ordinances touching these being now “taken out of the
way,”) “ or in respect of an holy-day,” (once observed,) “ or of
the new moon, or of the’’ (Jewish) “Sabbaths.” (Verse 16.)
Ant.--But how could the “hand-writing” of these “ordi
nances” be said to be “against us,” or to be “contrary to us?”
Friend.--I will not insist on the criticism of those who render
the words, “over against us,” as alluding to that “hand-writing
on the wall” which appeared “over against King Belshazzar.”
The words of St. Peter suffice, which will bear no dispute, who,
speaking of these same ordinances, calls them “a yoke which
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear.” (Acts xv. 5, 10.)
Ant.--You must then understand those words of our
Lord, of the moral law alone: “Think not that I am come
to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven
and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in nowise pass from
the law, till all be fulfilled.” (Matt. v. 17, 18.) But I say,
our Lord has fulfilled every jot and tittle of this law too.
Friend.--I grant he has. But do you infer from thence,
“therefore he has destroyed the law?” Our Lord’s arguing
is the very reverse of yours. He mentions his coming to
“fulfil the law,” as an evident proof that he did not come to
“destroy” or “take it away.”
But suppose you could get over the former verse, what can
you do with the following?--“Verily I say unto you, One jot
or one tittle shall in nowise pass from the law, till heaven and
earth pass;” or, which comes to the same thing, “till all be
fulfilled.” The former evasion will do you no service with
regard to this clause. For the word “all” in this does not
refer to the law, but to heaven and earth and “all things”
therein: The original sentence running thus: Ews ay wravia
ysvara. Nor indeed is the word 'yevnrx well rendered by
the ambiguous word “fulfilled,” which would easily induce an
English reader to suppose it was the same word that was ren
dered so just before; it should rather be translated accom
plished, finished, or done; as they will be in the great and
terrible day of the Lord, when the “earth and the heaven shall
flee from his face, and there shall be no place found for them.”
Ant.--But why did you say, my account of sanctification
was crude and indigested? (First Dialogue, page 273.)
Friend.--Let me. hear it again. If it be better digested
than it was, I shall rejoice.
Ant.--“Our minds are either defiled and impure, or pure
and holy. The question is, Which way is a defiled and impure
mind to be made a good one? You say, “By love, meekness,
gentleness.’ I say, By believing in Christ. By this, my
conscience becomes purged and clean, as though I had not
committed sin. And such a purged conscience bears forth the
fruit of love, meekness, gentleness, &c. It is therefore absurd
to say, We are made good by goodness, meek by meekness,
or gentle by gentleness. We are only denominated so from
these fruits of the Spirit.” (Cudworth’s Dialogue, page 10.)
Friend.--You have mended the matter a little, and not
much.
For, 1. “The question,” say you, “is, Which way is a
defiled and impure mind to be made a good one?” Nothing
less. The present question between you and me is this, and
no other, Has a believer any goodness in him at all? any love,
meekness, or gentleness? 2. “You say, An impure mind is
made good by goodness, &c. I say, By believing in Christ.”
This is mere playing upon words. If the question stood thus,
“Which way is an evil mind made good P” you are conscious
I should make the very same reply,-“By believing in Jesus
Christ.” 3. “By this my conscience becomes purged and clean,
as though I had not committed sin.” Here you run away
from the question, notwithstanding that express caution,
“Observe, we are not speaking of justification, but sanctifica
tion.” (First Dialogue, page 275.) 4. “And such a purged
conscience bears forth the fruit of love, meekness, gentle
ness,” &c. You here give up the cause. You grant all I
desire, viz., that “there are these dispositions in all
believers.” It avails nothing therefore to add, “But we are
not made good by goodness, or gentle by gentleness. We
are only denominated good or gentle from these fruits of the
Spirit; ” since a believer can neither be made nor denomi
nated so, without having goodness or gentleness in him.
Ant.--Then how dare you affirm, that a believer in Christ
“is not really holy?”
Friend.--You have forgotten yourself. I affirm that he is.
If you affirm so too, our dispute is at an end. For if he is
really holy, then he is inwardly or inherently holy. And if
you grant this, you may express it as you please. I have no
leisure for strife of words.
Ant.--But why will not you cut off all occasion of such
strife, by speaking as I do?
Friend.--I cannot in conscience speak in the way that you
do; and that for several plain reasons: (Even setting aside
that main consideration, whether the things you speak be
right or wrong:)
1. Because it is a confused way of speaking; so that
unless a man has both a clear apprehension, and a large
measure of patience, he will hardly find out any consistent
meaning in what you say.
2. Because it is an insincere way of speaking. For you
seem to mean what you do not.
3. Because it is an unscriptural way of speaking: The
Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament speaking,
frequently and expressly, both of holiness, of good works, of
the law and the commandments of God, as expressly and
frequently to the full, as of believing in Jesus Christ.
4. Because by experience I find, it is a dangerous way of
speaking, and that, both to the speaker and to the hearers:
To the speaker, as it has a peculiar tendency to puff him up,
to engénder pride; to make him exalt himself, (under
pretence of exalting the grace of God,) and despise others:
To the hearers, as it keeps many who are before our eyes
from ever awaking out of the sleep of death; as it throws
others again into that fatal slumber, who were just beginning
to awake; as it stops many in the midst of their Christian
course, and turns others clear out of the way; yea, and
plunges not a few into all the wretchedness of unclean living.
In consideration of this, I the more earnestly desire, when I
speak on this head in particular, to “speak as the oracles of
God;” to express scriptural sense in scriptural words; in every
phrase I use, to keep as close as I can to “the law and the
testimony;” being convinced there are no words so fit to
express the deep things of God, as those which “holy men of
old spake” when “they were moved by the Spirit of God.”
LoNDoN,
August 24, 1745.