A Letter to the Rev. Mr. Fleury
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 9 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. In June, 1769, I spent two or three days at Waterford.
As soon as my back was turned, you valiantly attacked me, I
suppose both morning and afternoon. Hearing, when I was
there, two or three weeks ago, that you designed me the same
favour, I waited upon you at the Cathedral, on Sunday, April
28. You was as good as your word: You drew the sword,
and, in effect, threw away the scabbard. You made a furious
attack on a large body of people, of whom you knew just
nothing. Blind and bold, you laid about you without fear or
wit, without any regard either to truth, justice, or mercy. And
thus you entertained, both morning and evening, a large con
gregation who came to hear “the words of eternal life.”
2. Not having leisure myself, I desired Mr. Bourke to wait
upon you the next morning. He proposed our writing to each
other. You said, “No; if anything can be said against my
Sermons, I expect it shall be printed: Let it be done in a
public, not a private way.” I did not desire this; I had much
rather it had been done privately. But since you will have it
so, I submit.
3. Your text was, “I know this, that after my departure
shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away disciples after them.” (Acts xx. 29, 30.)
Having shown that St. Paul foresaw these false teachers, you
undertake to show, (1.) The mischiefs which they occasioned.
(2.) The character of them, and how nearly this concerns a set
of men called Methodists. (First Sermon, pp. 1-4.)
4. Against these false teachers, you observe, St. Paul warned
the Corinthians, Galatians, Colossians, and Hebrews. (Pages
5-8.) Very true; but what is this to the point? O, much
more than some are aware of. This insinuation was, all along,
just as if you had said, “I beseech you, my dear hearers, mark
the titles he gives to these grievous wolves, false apostles,
deceitful workers, and apply them to the Methodist Teachers.
There I give them a deadly thrust.”
5. “These are well styled by Christ, ‘ravening wolves;”
by St. Paul, “grievous wolves, from the mischiefs they do,
rending the Church of Christ, and perverting the true sense of
the gospel, for their own private ends. They ever did,
and to this day do, pretend to extraordinary inspiration.”
(Page 8.)
Round assertions! Let us consider them one by one: (1.)
“These are styled by Christ ‘ravening wolves; by St. Paul,
“grievous wolves.’” True; but how does it appear that
these names are applicable to the Methodists? Why, they
* rend the Church of Christ.” What is the Church of Christ?
According to our Article, a Church is “a company of faithful
people,” of true believers, who have “the mind that was in
Christ,” and “walk as Christ walked.” Who then are the
Church of Christ in Waterford? Point them out, Sir, if you
know them; and then be pleased to show how the Methodists
rend this Church of Christ. You may as justly say they
rend the walls or the steeple of the cathedral church. “How
ever, they pervert the true sense of the gospel, for their own
private ends.” Wherein do they pervert the true sense of the
gospel? I have published Notes both on the Gospels and the
other Scriptures. But wherein do those Notes pervert the
sense? None has yet attempted to show. But for what
private ends should I pervert it? For ease or honour? Then
I should be sadly disappointed. Or for money? This is the
silliest tale of all. You may easily know, if you are willing
to know it, that I did not leave Waterford without being
some pounds lighter than I was when I came thither.
6. “But they pretend to extraordinary inspiration.” They
do not: They expressly disclaim it. I have declared an hun
dred times, I suppose ten times in print, that I pretend to no
other inspiration than that which is common to all real Chris
tians, without which no one can be a Christian at all. “They
denounce hell and damnation to all that reject their pretences.”
(Page 9.) This is another charge; but it is as groundless as
the former; it is without all shadow of truth. You may as
well say, The Methodists denounce hell and damnation to all
that reject Mahometanism. As groundless, as senselessly,
shamelessly false, is the assertion following: “To reject their
ecstasies and fanatic pretences to revelation is cried up as a
crime of the blackest dye.” It cannot be, that we should
count it a crime to reject what we do not pretend to at all.
But I pretend to no ecstasies of any kind, nor to any other
kind of revelation than you yourself, yea, and every Christian
enjoys, unless he is “without God in the world.”
7. “These grievous wolves pretended to greater mortifica
tion and self-denial than the Apostles themselves.” (Page 11.)
This discovery is spick and span new : I never heard of it
before. But pray, Sir, where did you find it? I think, not in
the canonical Scriptures. I doubt you had it from some
apocryphal writer. “Thus also do the modern false teachers.”
I know not any that do. Indeed I have read of some such
among the Mahometan Dervises, and among the Indian Brah
mins. But I doubt whether any of these outlandish crea
tures have been yet imported into Great Britain or Ireland.
8. “They pretend to know the mind of Christ better than
his Apostles.” (Page 12.) Certainly the Methodists do not:
This is another sad mistake, not to say slander. “However,
better than their successors do.” That is another question.
If you rank yourself among their successors, as undoubtedly
you do, I will not deny that some of these poor, despised
people, though not acting in a public character, do know the
mind of Christ, that is, the meaning of the Scripture, better
than you do yet. But, perhaps, when ten years more are
gone over your head, you may know it as well as they.
9. You conclude this Sermon, “Let us not be led away by
those who represent the comfortable religion of Christ as a
path covered over with thorns.” (Page 14.) This cap does
not fit me. I appeal to all that have heard me at Waterford,
or elsewhere, whether I represent religion as an uncomfortable
thing. No, Sir; both in preaching and writing I representit
as far more comfortable than you do, or are able to do. “But
you represent us as lovers of pleasure more than lovers of
God.” If any do this, I doubt they touch a sore spot; I am
afraid the shoe pinches. “They affirm pleasure in general to
be unlawful, grounding it on, ‘They that are in the flesh
cannot please God.’” (Page 15.) Wrong, top and bottom.
Did we hold the conclusion, we should never infer it from
such premises. But we do not hold it: We no more affirm
pleasure in general to be unlawful, than eating and drinking.
This is another invention of your own brain, which never
entered into our thoughts. It is really curious when you add,
“This is bringing men “after the principles of the world, and
not after Christ.” What, the affirming that pleasure is un
lawful? Is this “after the principles of the world?” Was
ever text so unhappily applied?
10. So much for your first Sermon; wherein, though you
do not seem to want good-will, yet you are marvellously bar
ren of invention; having only retailed two or three old, thread
bare objections, which have been answered twenty times over.
You begin the second, “I shall now consider some of their
many absurd doctrines: The first of which is, “the pretending
to be divinely inspired.” (Second Sermon, p. 1.) An odd
doctrine enough. “And called in an extraordinary manner
to preach the word of God.” (Pages 2-4.)
This is all harping upon the same string, the grand objection
of Lay-Preachers. We have it again and again, ten, twenty
times over. I shall answer it once for all. Not by anything
new,--that is utterly needless; but barely by repeating the
answer which convinced a serious Clergyman many years
ago:
“TULLAMORE, May 4, 1748.
“REvEREND SIR,
“I HAVE at present neither leisure nor inclination to enter
into a formal controversy; but you will give me leave just to
offer a few loose hints relating to the subject of our last night's
conversation :
“l. Seeing life and health are things of so great import
ance, it is, without question, highly expedient that Physicians
should have all possible advantages of learning and education.
“2. That trial should be made of them by competent
judges, before they practise publicly.
“3. That, after such trial, they be authorized to practise
by those who are empowered to convey that authority.
“4. And that, while they are preserving the lives of others,
they should have what is sufficient to sustain their own. .
“5. But supposing a gentleman bred at the University in
Dublin, with all the advantages of education, after he has
undergone all the usual trials, and then been regularly autho
rized to practise:
“6. Suppose, I say, this Physician settles at for some
years, and yet makes no cures at all; but, after trying his
skill on five hundred persons, cannot show that he has healed
one; many of his patients dying under his hands, and the
rest remaining just as they were before he came :
“7. Will you condemn a man who, having some little skill
in physic, and a tender compassion for those who are sick or
dying all around him, cures many of those, without fee or
reward, whom the Doctor could not cure?
“8. At least, did not, (which is the same thing as to the
case in hand,) were it only for this reason,--because he did
not go to them, and they would not come to him?
“9. Will you condemn him because he has not learning,
or has not had an University education?
“What then? He cures those whom the man of learning
and education cannot cure.
“10. Will you object, that he is no Physician, nor has any
authority to practise?
“I cannot come into your opinion. I think, Medicus est
qui medetur; ‘he is a Physician who heals;” and that every
man has authority to save the life of a dying man.
“But if you only mean, he has no authority to take fees,
I contend not : For he takes none at all.
“11. Nay, and I am afraid it will hold, on the other hand,
Medicus non est qui non medetur; I am afraid, if we use
propriety of speech, “he is no Physician who works no cure.’
“12. ‘O, but he has taken his degree of Doctor of Physic,
and therefore has authority.’
“Authority to do what? “Why, to heal all the sick that will
employ him. But (to wave the case of those who will not
employ him; and would you have eventheir lives thrown away?)
he does not heal those that do employ him. He that was sick
before, is sick still; or else he is gone hence, and is no more seen.
“Therefore his authority is not worth a rush; for it serves
not the end for which it was given.
“13. And surely he has not authority to kill them, by
hindering another from saving their lives!
“14. If he either attempts or desires to hinder him, if he
condemns or dislikes him for it, it is plain to all thinking men,
he regards his own fees more than the lives of his patients.
“II. Now to apply. 1. Seeing life everlasting, and holi
mess or health of soul, are things of so great importance, it is
highly expedient that Ministers, being Physicians of the
soul, should have all advantage of education and learning.
“2. That full trial should be made of them in all respects,
and that by the most competent judges, before they enter on
the public exercise of their office, the saving souls from death:
“3. That, after such trial, they be authorized to exercise
that office by those who are empowered to convey that
authority. (I believe Bishops are empowered to do this, and
have been so from the apostolic age.)
“4. And that those whose souls they save ought, meantime,
to provide them what is needful for the body.
“5. But suppose a gentleman bred at the University of
Dublin, with all the advantages of education, after he has
undergone the usual trials, and been regularly authorized to
save souls from death:
“6. Suppose, I say, this Minister settles at -for some
years, and yet saves no souls at all; saves no sinners from
their sins; but after he has preached all this time to five or
six hundred persons, cannot show that he has converted one
from the error of his ways; many of his parishioners dying
as they lived, and the rest remaining just as they were before
he came :
“7. Will you condemn a man who, having compassion on
dying souls, and some knowledge of the gospel of Christ,
without any temporal reward, saves many from their sins
whom the Minister could not save?
.“8. At least, did not : Nor ever was likely to do it; for he
did not go to them, and they would not come to him.
“9. Will you condemn such a Preacher, because he has
not learning, or has not had an University education?
“What then? He saves those sinners from their sins
whom the man of learning and education cannot save.
“A peasant being brought before the College of Physicians
at Paris, a learned Doctor accosted him, ‘What, friend, do you
pretend to prescribe to people that have agues? Dost thou
know what an ague is?’
“He replied, ‘Yes, Sir. An ague is, what I can cure and
you cannot.’
“10. Will you object, “But he is no Minister, nor has any
authority to save souls?’
“I must beg leave to dissent from you in this. I think he is
a true evangelical Minister, Atakovos, servant of Christ and his
Church, who ovro Buakovet, “so ministers’ as to save souls from
death, to reclaim sinners from their sins; and that every Chris
tian, if he is able to do it, has authority to save a dying soul.
“But if you only mean, he has no authority to take tithes,
I grant it. He takes none. As he has freely received, so he
freely gives.
“11. But, to carry the matter a little farther, I am afraid
it will hold, on the other hand, with regard to the soul as
well as the body, Medicus non est qui non medetur. I am
afraid reasonable men will be inclined to think, “he that
saves no souls is no Minister of Christ.’
“12. ‘O but he is ordained, and therefore has authority.’
“Authority to do what? “To save all the souls that will
put themselves under his care.’ True; but (to wave the case
of them that will not; and would you desire that even those
should perish 7) he does not, in fact, save them that are under
his care: Therefore, what end does his authority serve? He
that was a drunkard, is a drunkard still. The same is true
of the Sabbath-breaker, the thief, the common swearer. This
is the best of the case; for many have died in their iniquity,
and their blood will God require at the watchman’s hand.
“13. For surely he has no authority to murder souls;
either by his neglect, by his smooth, if not false, doctrine, or
by hindering another from plucking them out of the fire and
bringing them to life everlasting.
“14. If he either attempts or desires to hinder him, if he
condemns or is displeased with him for it, how great reason
is there to fear, that he regards his own profit more than the
salvation of souls l’’
11. “But why do you not prove your mission by miracles?”
This likewise you repeat over and over. But I have not leisure
to answer the same stale objection an hundred times. I there
fore give this also the same answer which I gave many years
ago :
12. “What is it you would have us prove by miracles? that
the doctrines we preach are true? This is not the way to
prove that: We prove the doctrines we preach by Scripture
and reason. Is it, (1.) That A. B. was for many years without
God in the world, a common swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, a
drunkard? Or, (2.) That he is not so now? Or, (3.) That
he continued so till he heard us preach, and from that time
was another man? Not so; the proper way to prove these
facts, is by the testimony of competent witnesses. And these
witnesses are ready, whenever required, to give full evidence
of them. Or would you have it proved by miracles, (4.)
That this was not done by our own power or holiness? that
God only is able to raise the dead, those who are dead in
trespasses and sins? Nay, “if you hear not Moses, and the
Prophets, and the Apostles, on this head, neither will you
believe ‘though one rose from the dead. It is therefore
utterly unreasonable and absurd, to require or expect the
proof of miracles, in questions of such a kind as are always
decided by proofs of quite another nature.” (Farther Appeal
to Men of Reason and Religion, Vol. VIII. p. 233.)
If you will take the trouble of reading that little Tract,
you will find more upon the same head.
13. If you say, “But those who lay claim to extraordinary
inspiration and revelation ought to prove that claim by mira
cles,” we allow it: But this is not our case. We lay claim
to no such thing. The Apostles did lay claim to extraordinary
inspiration, and accordingly proved their claim by miracles.
And their blessed Master claimed to be Lord of all, the eternal
Son of God. Well therefore might he be expected to “do the
works which no other man did; ” especially as he came to put
an end to that dispensation which all men knew to be of God.
See then how idly and impertinently you require the Methodists
to work miracles “because Christ and his Apostles did l”
14. You proceed: “They pretend to be as free from sin as
Jesus Christ.” (Page 6.) You bring three proofs of this: (1.)
“Mr. Wesley, in his answer to a Divine of our Church, says,
“Jesus Christ stands as our regeneration, to help us to the same
holy undefiled nature which he himself had. And if this very
life and identical nature is not propagated and derived on us,
he is not our Saviour.’” (Page 7.) When I heard you read
these words, I listened and studied, and could not imagine
where you got them. I knew they were not mine: I use no
such queer language; but did not then recollect, that they
are Mr. Law’s words, in his answer to Dr. Trapp, an extract
from which I have published. But be they whose they will,
they by no means imply that we are to be “as righteous as
Christ was,” but that we are to be (which St. Peter likewise
affirms) “partakers of the Divine nature.” (2.) “A Preacher
of yours declared he was as free from sin as Christ ever was.”
I did not hear him declare it: Pray did you? . If not, how
do you know he declared it at all? Nay, but “another
declared he believed it was impossible for one whom he
named to sin, for the Spirit of God dwelt in him bodily.”
(Page 8.) Pray, Sir, did you hear this yourself? Else the
testimony is nothing worth. Hearsay evidence will not be
admitted by any Court in the kingdom.
What you say of that good man Mr. Whitefield, now with
God, I leave with Mr. H--'s remark: “I admire your pru
dence, though not your generosity; for it is much safer to
cudgel a dead man than a living one.”
15. You next descant upon “the disorders which the spirit
of enthusiasm created in the last age.” Very likely it might;
but, blessed be God, that is nothing at all to us. For he
hath given us, not the spirit of enthusiasm, but of love and of a
sound mind. In the following page you quaintly compare
your hearers to sheep, and yourself and friends to the dogs in
the fable; and seem much afraid, lest the silly sheep should
be “persuaded to give you up to these ravening wolves.”
Nay, should you not rather be ranked with the sheep than
the dogs? For your teeth are not so sharp as razors.
16. “Another fundamental error of the Methodists is, the
asserting that laymen may preach; yea, the most ignorant
and illiterate of them, provided they have the inward call of
the Spirit.” (Page 11.)
The former part of this objection we had before. The latter
is a total mistake. They do not allow the “most ignorant”
men to preach, whatever “inward call” they pretend to.
Among them none are allowed to be stated Preachers, but
such as, (1.) Are truly alive to God; such as experience the
“faith that worketh by love; ” such as love God and all man
kind. (2.) Such as have a competent knowledge of the word of
God, and of the work of God in the souls of men. (3.) Such
as have given proof that they are called of God, by con
verting sinners from the error of their ways. And to show
whether they have these qualifications or no, they are a year,
sometimes more, upon trial. Now, I pray, what is the common
examination, either for Deacon’s or Priest's Orders, to this?
17. “But no ambassador can act without a commission from
his King: Consequently, no Preacher without a commission
from God.” (Page 11.) This is a tender point; but you con
strain me to speak. I ask then, Is he commissioned from God
to preach the gospel, who does not know the gospel? who
knows little more of the Bible than of the Koran P I fear
not. But if so, what are many of our brethren? Sent of
man, but not of God!
“However, these laymen are not sent of God to preach;
for does not St. Paul say, ‘No man taketh this honour to
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron P’”
(Page 13.) Another text most unhappily applied; for Aaron
did not preach at all. But if these men are not sent of God,
how comes God to confirm their word, by convincing and con
verting sinners? He confirms the word of his messenger, but
of none else. Therefore, if God owns their word, it is plain
that God has sent them.
“But the earth opened and swallowed up those intruders
into the priestly office, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.” (Page
14.) Such an intruder are you, if you convert no sinners to
God. Take heed lest a deeper pit swallow you up !
18. “But the Church of Rome has sent out Preachers among
us, such as Thomas Heath, a Jesuit; and Faithful Commin, a
Dominican Friar.” (Pages 16, 17.) And what do you infer
from hence? that my brother, who was thought a Student of
Christ Church in Oxford, was really a Jesuit? and that while I
passed for a Fellow of Lincoln College, I was in fact a Domini
can Friar? Even to hint at such absurdities as these is an
insult on common sense.
19. We have now done with the argumentative part of your
Sermons, and come to the exhortation: “Mark them that cause
divisions and offences among you; for they serve not the Lord,
but their own bellies.” (Page 18.) Who “serve their own
bellies?” the Methodists, or ? Alas, how terribly might
this be retorted ! “And by fair speeches deceive the hearts of
the simple.” Deceive them into what? into the knowledge and
love of God! the loving their neighbour as themselves ! the
walking in justice, mercy, and truth ! the doing to all as they
would be done to ! Felices errore suo l? Would to God all
the people of Waterford, rich and poor, yea, all the men, women,
and children in the three kingdoms, may be thus deceived !
20. “Do not credit those who tell you that we must judge
of our regeneration by sensible impulses, impressions, ardors,
and ecstasies.” (Page 19.) Who tells them so? Not I: Not
Mr. Bourke: Not any in connexion with me. Sir, you your
self either do or ought to know the contrary. Whether there
fore these are, or are not, “signs of the Spirit,” (page 20,) see
you to it; it is nothing to me; any more than whether the
Spirit does or does not “show itself in groanings and sighings,
in fits and starts.” I never affirmed it did: And when you
represent me as so doing, you are a sinner against God, and
me, and your own soul.
21. If you should see good to write anything more about the
Methodists, I beg you would first learn who and what they are.
Be so kind as at least to read over my “Journals,” and the
“Appeals to Men of Reason and Religion.” Then you will
no longer “run” thus “uncertainly,” or “fight as one that
beateth the air.” But I would rather hope you will not fight
at all. For, whom would you fight with ? If you will fight,
it must be with your friends; for such we really are. We wish
all the same happiness to you which we wish to our own souls.
We desire no worse for you, than that you may “present”
yourself “a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God; ” that
you may watch over the souls committed to your charge, as he
“that must give account; ” and that, in the end, you may
receive “the crown which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will
give to all that love his appearing !” So prays,
Reverend Sir,
Your affectionate Brother,
May 18, 1771.