Some Remarks on Mr. Hill's Review
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. M.R. HILL has an immense advantage over me: He
abounds in time, and I in business. I cannot therefore
undertake to write page for page; I have not leisure, if I had
inclination. And indeed it is not needful: For a full con
futation of whatsoever is cited from the Eleven Letters
commonly ascribed to Mr. Hervey, I need only refer to Mr.
Sellon; who has not only answered every shadow of an argu
ment contained in that poor piece of low invective, but even
the reproaches; which indeed he could not pass over, without
passing over great part of the book. If Mr. H. is afraid to
read that answer, I am sorry for it. And for whatever he
advances on particular redemption, or any of the points
connected therewith, I refer everyone who is not afraid of the
light, to those three tracts of Mr. Sellon,--“The Arguments
against General Redemption answered,” “God’s Sovereignty
vindicated against Elisha Coles,” and “The Church of
England vindicated from the Charge of Calvinism.” I
believe, if Mr. Hill had given this last a fair reading, he would
know the Seventeenth Article is nothing to his purpose.
2. With regard to his objections to Mr. Fletcher, I refer
all candid men to his own writings; his Letters, entitled,
“A First, Second, and Third Check to Antinomianism;” the
rather, because there are very few of his arguments which
Mr. H. even attempts to answer. It is true, he promises “a
full and particular answer to Mr. F.'s ‘Second Check to
Antinomianism.’” But it will puzzle anyone to find where
that answer is, except in the title-page. And if anything
more is needful to be done, Mr. F. is still able to answer for
himself. But if he does, I would recommend to his
consideration the advice formerly given by a wise man to his
friend: “See that you humble not yourself to that man; it
would hurt both him and the cause of God.” It is pity but
he had considered it sooner, and he might have escaped some
keen reflections. But he did not; he imagined, when he
spoke or wrote in the simplicity of his heart, that his
opponents would have received his words in the same spirit
wherein they were spoken. No such matter; they turn
them all into poison; he not only loses his sweet words, but
they are turned into bitterness, are interpreted as mere sneer
and sarcasm | A good lesson for me ! I had designed to
have transcribed Mr. F.'s character of Mr. H., and to have
added a little thereto, in hope of softening his spirit: But I
see it is in vain; as well might one hope to soften
Inexorable Pluto, king of shades !
Since he is capable of putting such a construction, even upon
Mr. F.’s gentleness and mildness; since he ascribes even to
him “a pen dipped in gall,” what will he not ascribe to me?
I have done, therefore, with humbling myself to these men,
to Mr. H. and his associates. I have humbled myself to them
for these thirty years; but will do it no more. I have done
with attempting to soften their spirits; it is all lost labour.
Upon men of an ingenuous temper I have been able to fix an
obligation. Bishop Gibson, Dr. Church, and even Dr. Taylor,
were obliged to me for not pushing my advantage. But it is
not so with these: Whatever mercy you show, you are to
expect no mercy from them. Mercy did I say? Alas! I
expect no justice; no more than I have found already. As
they have wrested and distorted my words from the beginning,
so I expect they will do to the end. Mr. H.’s performance
is a specimen. Such mercy, such justice, I am to expect
3. And does Mr. H. complain of the unhappy spirit in
which Mr. F. writes? Many writers have done marvellously;
but thou excellest them all ! For forty or fifty years I have
been a little acquainted with controversial writers; some of
the Romish persuasion, some of our own Church, some Dis
senters of various denominations: And I have found many
among them as angry as him; but one so bitter I have not
found: Or one only, the author of those “excellent Letters,”
as Mr. H. styles them; which he particularly “admires,”
(that is his word,) and the “whole spirit” of which he has
drank in. This is his peculiar character, his distinguishing
grace: As a writer, his name is Wormwood. Accordingly, he
charges Mr. F. with a “severe, acrimonious spirit,” with
“sneer, sarcasm, and banter,” yea, with “notorious falsehoods,
calumny, and gross perversions.” (Page 2.) Nay, “I accuse
you,” says he, “of the grossest perversions and misrepresenta
tions that ever proceeded from any author's pen.” In the
same spirit he is represented as “a slanderer of God’s people
and Ministers, descending to the meanest quibbles, with a
bitter, railing, acrimonious spirit;” (page 21;) and, page 27,
to go no farther, as “using stratagem and ungenerous
artifices:” Although “I have treated you,” says Mr. H.,
“with all the politeness of a gentleman, and the humility of a
Christian.” Amazing! And has he not treated me so too?
At present, take but one or two instances: “Forgeries have
long passed for no crime with Mr. Wesley.” (Page 27.) “He
administers falsehoods and damnable heresies, rank poison,
hemlock, and ratsbane. We cannot allow him any other title
than that of an empiric or quack-doctor.” (Page 29.) Which
shall we admire most here,--the gentleman or the Christian?
4. There is something extremely odd in this whole affair.
A man falls upon another, and gives him a good beating; who,
in order to be revenged, does not grapple with him, (perhaps
sensible that he is above his match,) but, giving him two or
three kicks, falls upon a third man that was standing by.
“O,” says he, “but I know that fellow well; he is the second
of him that beat me.”--“If he is, dispatch your business with
the former first, and then turn to him.” However, if Mr. H. is
resolved to fall upon me, I must defend myself as well as I can.
5. From the spirit and manner wherein he writes, let us
now proceed to the matter. But that is so various, and
scattered up and down for an hundred and fifty pages, without
much order or connexion, that it is difficult to know where
to begin. However, all tends to one point; the good design
of the writer is, to blacken. With this laudable view, he
observes the old rule, “Throw dirt enough, and some will
stick:” Knowing that the mud may be thrown in a trice;
but it will take time and pains to scrape it off. Indeed, he
takes true pains to fasten it on; to represent Mr. W. as a
knave and a fool; a man of no conscience, and no under
standing. It is true, the latter is insisted on most at large:
By an hundred instances Mr. H. has made it plain to all the
world, that Mr. W. never had three grains of common sense;
that he is the veriest weathercock that ever was; that he has
not wit enough to be fixed in anything, but is “tossed to
and fro continually;” “that he is to this very moment so
absolutely unsettled with regard to every fundamental doc
trine of the gospel, that no two disputants in the Schools
can be more opposite to each other than he is to himself.”
6. But some may naturally ask, “What is the matter?
What makes Mr. H. so warm? What has Mr. W. done,
that this gentleman, this Christian, ita gladiatorio animo ad
eum affectat viam P* that he falls upon him thus outrageously,
dagger out of sheath, without either rhyme or reason?”
“O, the matter is plain. Beside that he is Mr. F.'s friend,
he is an Arminian; and nothing is bad enough for an
Arminian.” “An Arminian | What is that?” “I cannot
tell exactly; but to be sure it is all that is bad. For a Popish
friar, a Benedictine monk, bears witness, (and Mr. H. avers
* This accommodated quotation from Terence is thus rendered by Colman :
“Growing desperate, and making towards him
With a determined gladiatorial air.”--EDIT.
the same,) that the tenets of the Church of Rome are nearer
by half to Calvinism than to Arminianism; nearer by half to
Mr. H.’s tenets than to Mr. W.’s.” “Truly, I always thought
so. But still I ask, What is an Arminian?” “Why, in
other words, an election-doubter.” And the “good old
Preacher,” says Mr. H., “places all election-doubters” (that
is, those who are not clear in the belief of absolute predestina
tion) “among the numerous host of the Diabolonians. One
of these being brought before the Judge, the Judge tells him,
“To question election is to overthrow a great doctrine of the
gospel: Therefore he, the election-doubter, must die.’”
(Page 37.) That is, plainly, he must die eternally for this
damnable sin. The very same thing Mr. H. affirms else
where: “The only cement of Christian union is the love of
God; and the foundation of that love must be laid in believing
the truths of God;” (that is, you must believe particular
redemption, or it is impossible you should love God;) for, to
use “the words of Dr. Owen, in his ‘Display of Arminianism,’”
(see the truths which Mr. H. means,) “‘an agreement without
truth is no peace, but a covenant with death, and a conspiracy
against the kingdom of Christ.’” (Page 39.)
7. I am sorry Mr. H. should think so. But so long as he
remains in that sentiment, what peace am I or Mr. F., or
indeed any Arminian, to expect from him? since any agree
ment with us would be “a covenant with death, and a
conspiracy against the kingdom of Christ.” I therefore give
up all hope of peace with him, and with all that are thus
minded. For I do not believe what he terms “the truths of
God,” the doctrine of absolute predestination. I never did
believe it, nor the doctrines connected with it, no, not for an
hour. In this, at least, I have been consistent with myself.
I have never varied an hair's breadth; I cannot while I
believe the Bible, while I believe either the Old or New
Testament. What I do believe, and always have believed in
this matter, I will declare with all simplicity.
“(1.) I believe no decree of reprobation. I do not believe
the Father of spirits ever
Consign'd one unborn soul to hell,
Or damn'd him from his mother's womb.
“(2.) I believe no decree of preterition, which is only
reprobation whitewashed. I do not believe God ever sent
one man into the world, to whom he had decreed never to
give that grace whereby alone he could escape damnation.
“(3.) I do not believe (what is only preterition or reproba
tion in other words) any such absolute election, as implies
that all but the absolutely elect shall inevitably be damned.
“(4.) I do not believe the doctrine of irresistible grace, or
of infallible perseverance; because both the one and the other
implies that election which cannot stand without preterition
or reprobation.-
“(5.) I do not believe salvation by works. Yet if any man
can prove (what I judge none ever did, or ever will) that there
is no medium between this and absolute predestination; I
will rather subscribe to this than to that, as far less absurd of
the two.”
8. Hinc ille lachrymae. Here is the source of Mr. H.’s
implacable hatred to me. And hence arises his vehement
displeasure at those “Minutes,” which Mr. Sh and he
style “dreadful heresy.” The appellation is just, suppose
(as Mr. H. asserts) all election-doubters are Diabolonians;
suppose no man who is “not clear in the belief of absolute
predestination” can love either God or his neighbour. For
it is certain, the doctrine of the Minutes and of the decrees
cannot stand together. If the doctrine of the decrees stands,
then that of the Minutes must fall; for we willingly allow,
that the one is incompatible with the other. If the doctrine
of the Minutes stands, then that of the decrees must fall.
For it is manifest, this, particularly the last article, strikes at
the very root of Calvinism. Of what consequence is it, then,
to one who is persuaded, the belief of Calvinism is essential
to salvation, to expose those Minutes to the uttermost, as well
as any that dares to defend them?
9. In order to this good end, Mr. H. publishes “A Review
of all the Doctrines taught by Mr. John Wesley.” But is it
possible for any man to do this without reading all the writings
that I have published? It is not possible in the nature of
things; he cannot give an account of what he never read.
And has Mr. H. read all that I have published? I believe
he will not affirm it. So any man of understanding may
judge, before he opens his book, what manner of review it is
likely to contain However, it must be owned that he and
his faithful allies have been at the pains of looking into many
of my writings. I say many; for I apprehend there are many
more, which they have not so much as looked into; nor does
it appear that they have seriously looked through any, so as
to observe the scope and tenor of them. However, from those
which he or they have, after a fashion, reviewed, abundance of
objections are extracted. It is true, none of them (one only
excepted) are new, and there is hardly one that has not been
answered again and again. Yet since they are proposed in a
new form, they may seem to demand a new answer.
10. The grand objection is, that I am inconsistent with
myself. This, therefore, I shall particularly consider. The
others, which flutter up and down the whole work, I can but
just touch upon. Mr. H. opens the charge thus: “Saying and
unsaying is nothing new with Mr. W., who has only shown
himself consistent, by a regular series of inconsistencies.” (Page
3.) “How full are you of contradictions to yourself! how full
of contrary purposes! How often do you chide with yourself!
How oft do you fight with yourself!” (Title-page.) “Mr. W.
seems well contented you should settle his creed. If you can,
you will do in a few months what he himself has not been able
to effect in near forty years.” “On this fluctuating ocean he
has been tossed for so many years together.” (Page 20.) “All
his Journals and Tracts are replete with proofs of his having
been tossed from one system to another, and from one opinion
to another, from the time of his ordniation to this present
moment.” (Page 143.) “The most ignorant collier can
immediately see his inconsistency with himself.” (Page 145.)
He sums up the whole charge in the lively words of Mr.
Cudworth, graced with the name of Mr. Hervey: “Contradic
tion, didst thou ever know so trusty a friend, so faithful a
devotee? Many people are ready enough to contradict
others; but it seems all one to this gentleman whether it be
another or himself, so he may but contradict.”
11. To prove this indictment, (urged home enough, though
there is not one tittle of truth in it,) Mr. H. has cited no less
than a hundred and one witnesses.* Before I enter upon the
examination of these, I beg leave to transcribe what I wrote
some time since to Dr. Rutherforth: “You frequently charge
me with evasion; and others have brought the same charge.
The plain case is this: I have wrote on various heads; and
* The very number of propositions extracted out of Quesnel's writings, and
condemned as dreadful heresies in the bull Unigénitus ! Exemplum placet ! See
how good wits jump! Mr. H., Father Walsh, and the Pope of Rome!
always as clearly as I could. Yet many have misunderstood
my words, and raised abundance of objections. I answered
them by explaining myself, showing what I did not mean,
and what I did. One and another of the objectors stretched
his throat, and cried out, “Evasion, evasion l’ And what
does all this outcry amount to? Why, exactly thus much:
They imagined they had tied me so fast, that it was
impossible for me to escape. But presently the cobwebs
were swept away, and I was quite at liberty. And I bless
God I can unravel truth and falsehood, although artfully
twisted together. Of such evasion I am not ashamed. Let
them be ashamed who constrain me to use it.”
12. Mr. H.’s numerous proofs of my contradicting myself
may be ranged under twenty-four heads. I shall examine
these one by one, in what appears to me to be the most
natural order:- I
1. “There was an everlast- “There never was any such
ing covenant between God the covenant between God the
Father and God the Son con- Father and God the Son.”
cerning man's redemption.” (Page 128.)
The latter of these I believe, and always did, since I could
read my Bible.
But Mr. H. brings a passage out of the Christian Library,
to contradict this. On which he parades as follows: “If the
Christian Library be, as Mr. W. affirms, ‘all true, all agree
able to the word of God,” then what are we to think of his
other works? They must be an adulteration of man’s devis
ing.” (Page 128.) “The same may be said of the Minutes:
If these be truly orthodox, upwards of forty volumes of the
Library must be throughly heterodox. And then there is
great reason to lament, that so many poor people's pockets
should be fleeced for what can do their souls no good.”
Peremptory enough ! But let us examine the matter more
closely: “Mr. W. affirms, that the Christian Library is “all
true, all agreeable to-the word of God.’” I do not; and I
am glad I have this public opportunity of explaining myself
concerning it. My words are, “I have made, as I was able,
an attempt of this kind. I have endeavoured to extract such
a collection of English divinity, as, I believe, is all true, all
agreeable to the oracles of God.” (Preface, p. 4.) I did
bclieve, and I do believe, every tract therein to be true, and
agreeable to the oracles of God. But I do not roundly affirm
this, (as Mr. H. asserts,) of every sentence contained in the
fifty volumes. I could not possibly affirm it, for two reasons:
(1.) I was obliged to prepare most of those tracts for the press,
just as I could snatch time in travelling, not transcribing
them; (none expected it of me;) but only marking the lines
with my pen, and altering or adding a few words here and there,
as I had mentioned in the preface. (2.) As it was not in my
power to attend the press, that care necessarily devolved on
others; through whose inattention a hundred passages were
left in, which I had scratched out; yet not so many as to make
up “forty volumes,” no, nor forty pages. It is probable too, I
myself might overlook some sentences which were not suitable
to my own principles. It is certain, the correctors of the
press did this, in not a few instances. I shall be much obliged
to Mr. H. and his friends, if they will point out all those
instances; and I will print them as an index expurgatorius
to the work, which will make it doubly valuable.
The plain inference is, If there are a hundred passages in
the “Christian Library” which contradict any or all of my
doctrines, these are no proof that I contradict myself. Be
it observed once for all, therefore, citations from the
“Christian Library” prove nothing but the carelessness of
the correctors.
For election and perseverance. Against election and persever
ance. (Page 101.)
2. Mr. Sellon has clearly showed, that the Seventeenth
Article does not assert absolute predestination. Therefore,
in denying this, I neither contradict that Article, nor myself.
3. “I believe there is a But I never thought a babe
state attainable in this life, in Christ was in that state,
from which a man cannot though he is a true believer.
finally fall.”
4. “Saved beyond the dread of falling.” That
So says my brother. is nothing to me.
The note adds: “Mr. W. drew lots, whether or no he
should preach against the Seventeenth Article.”
That paltry story is untrue; though Mr. H. potently
believes it. So all the witticisms built upon it fall to the
ground at once. I never preached against the Seventeenth
Article, nor had the least thought of doing it. But did Mr.
Hill never preach against the Thirty-first Article, which
explicitly asserts universal redemption?
5. “I do not deny that those
I mean, those that are
eminently styled the elect
“perfected in love,” (1 John
shall infallibly persevere.”
iv. 17,) and those only. So
here is no contradiction.
6. “The love divine
So my brother speaks.
Which made us thine,
But his words cannot prove
Shall keep us thine for ever.”
that I contradict myself.
7. “From all eternity with love
I believe this is true on the
Unchangeable thou hast me view'd.”
supposition of faith foreseen,
not otherwise.
8. “Never again will he take him away.
**
They are my brother’s
words, not mine.
9. “Jesus, the lover of his own,
So are these.
Will love me to the end.”
10. “Christ is in the elect
world of his Church.”
This
is cited from the
“Christian Library.”
So it
goes for nothing.
The nine witnesses, therefore, examined on this head,
prove just nothing at all. So that hitherto there is not the
least proof that I contradict myself.
For imputed righteousness.
Against imputed righteous
77 ess.
11. “We no more deny the
phrase (of imputed righteous
ness) than the thing.”
“Do not dispute for that
particular phrase.” Here is
no contradiction: I do not
deny it; yet I dare not
dispute for it.
12. “This doctrine I have
believed and taught for near
eight-and-twenty years.”
“The use of that term has
done immense hurt.”
It has ; but here
is no
contradiction.
13. This is a citation from the “Christian Library.”
So
it goes for nothing.
14. “I continually affirm,
that the righteousness of
Christ (in the sense there
explained) is imputed to every
believer.”
“Where is the use of
contending so strenuously for
those expressions?” I ask
it again. But where is the
contradiction?
15. This is another citation from the “Christian Library.”
So it proves nothing.
16. “The wedding-garment
The wedding-garment is ho
is Christ’s righteousness, first
liness. This does not exclude,
imputed, and then implanted.”
but presupposes, the other.
17. “This is consistent
“John Goodwin contradicts
with our being justified
this.” Perhaps so; but John
through the imputation of
Goodwin is not John Wesley.
Christ's righteousness.”
Whatever, therefore, he says,
(observe it once for all,) does
not prove that I contradict myself. I am no way engaged to
defend every expression of either John Goodwin, or Richard
Baxter's Aphorisms. The sense of both I generally approve,
the language many times I do not.
But I observe here, and in fifty other instances, Mr. H.
mentions no page. Now, in controversy, he that names no
page has no right to any answer.
18. “I frequently put this
expression into the mouth of
a whole congregation; that
is, I sing an hymn wherein it
occurs.”
“I dare not require any to
use it.” True; but here is
no contradiction. I do not
require any to use it. Every
one in the congregation may
use or let it alone.
Here comes in a thundering note: “Although most of these
extracts from Mr. Wesley's sermon on Jeremiah xxiii. 6,
have a very evangelical appearance, yet all their excellency
vanisheth away, when we are told in the same sermon, that the
righteousness he contends for is not the divine righteousness
of Christ, but his human righteousness. When we consider
the express words of the text, ‘The Lord our Righteousness,”
one might wonder (if anything is to be wondered at that
Mr. Wesley affirms) how he could possibly fall into an error,
which at once not only destroys the meritorious efficacy
of the Redeemer’s righteousness, but undermines the virtue
of his atoning blood.” This is home; Mr. Hill has broke
my head sadly. But he will soon give me a plaster: “How
ever, if Mr. Wesley will acknowledge, that by Christ’s
human righteousness, he means that mediatorial righteous
ness which was wrought by God in the human nature, I
entirely acquiesce with him on the point.” This is truly
marvellous! Why, what could Mr. Wesley mean beside?
So this error proves to be no error at all ! And “all
the excellency” which “vanisheth away,” appears again in
statu quo !
But we are not come to the end of the note yet; it contains
another dreadful objection: “Mr. Wesley is unwilling” (truly
I am) “to be ranked among the Diabolonians, and therefore,
with more prudence than candour, has left the whole passage
concerning the election-doubters out of the ‘Holy War.”
And if Mr. Hill had omitted it too, it would have been no
more an impeachment of his prudence, than it was of my
candour, to omit, in all the tracts I abridged, whatever I dis
approved of. This was what I professed at my setting out:
“I have endeavoured” (these are my very words) “to preserve
a consistency throughout, that no part might contradict any
other. But in order to this, I have been obliged to omit the
far greatest part of several authors. And in a design of this
nature, I apprehend myself to be at full liberty so to do.”
(Preface, p. 5.) The “abridged Bunyan” is not therefore
“the counterfeit Bunyan.” This is a flourish of Mr. Hill's pen.
19. This instance sets nothing against nothing, the
“Christian Library” against John Goodwin.
20. “This is an emblem of “John Goodwin contradicts
the righteousness of the saints, this.” So he may; but I am
both of their justification and not John Goodwin. So we
sanctification.” have examined twenty wit
nesses; and not one of all
these proves that I contradict
myself.
21. “I would address my
self to you who are so ready
to condemn all that use these
expressions as Antinomians.”
“On Mr. Hervey's using
one of them, Mr. Wesley says,
‘Why are you at such pains
to increase the number of
Antinomians?’”
But I do not condemn him as an Antinomian : Therefore,
here is no contradiction.
Whether it is or no, it is
wide of the mark; for this is
none of the expressions in
question.
Yes; but it is none of the
expressions in question: So
it is no contradiction.
22. Again: “Is not this,
that Christ has satisfied the de
mands of the law,the very quin
tessence of Antinomianism?”
23. Again: “To say, ‘The
claims of the law are all an
swered,” is not this Antino
mianism without a mask?”
C. c.
So I think. Yet I do not
condemn all that use them as
Antinomians: So here is no
contradiction still.
25. “It is by faith we build
on this foundation, the im
puted righteousness of Christ.”
24. Once more: “There
are many expressions in this
Dialogue which directly lead
to Antinomianism.”
“If faith in the imputed
righteousness of Christ is a
fundamental principle, what
becomes of all those who
think nothing about imputed
righteousness?”
Here is no contradiction.
Suppose I build my faith on this
foundation, the imputed righteousness of Christ, it does not
follow it is so fundamental a principle, that all who think
nothing about it will be damned.
26. “But is not a believer
Goodwin; that is, nothing.
clothed with the righteousness
of Christ? Undoubtedly heis.”
27. “The mantle of Christ's
righteousness.” (Christian Li
Goodwin again: Nothing
against nothing.
brary.)
28. “Christian Library.”
29. “The sole cause of our
acceptance with God is the
righteousness and the death of
Christ, who fulfilled God’s
law, and died in our stead.”
Nothing.
“I cannot prove, that it was
requisite for Christ to fulfil
the moral law in order to his
purchasing redemption for us.
By his sufferings alone the
law was satisfied.”
Undoubtedly it was.
Therefore, although I believe Christ
fulfilled God's law, yet I do not affirm he did this to purchase
redemption for us. This was done by his dying in our stead.
30. “Verses
of Charles Let him answer.
Wesley.”
31, 32, 33. “Title to Life.”
John Goodwin: Nothing.
“Christian Library.” No
thing.
34. “The righteousness of
Ditto.
Christ is imputed to every one
that believes.”
Here follows another thundering note: “When Mr. Wesley
preached this sermon, he told the congregation, ‘It was the
same doctrine which Mr. Romaine, Mr. Madan, and Mr.
Whitefield preached.” So it was; Mr. Whitefield did, Mr.
Romaine and Mr. Madan do, preach the doctrine contained in
that sermon; namely, that “we are justified, sanctified, and
glorified, merely for the sake of what Christ has done and
suffered for us.” But did I say, this was all the doctrine which
they preached ? No; and no man in his senses could under
stand me so. I did not therefore “impose on the credulity of
my hearers, by making them believe” any more than was
strictly true. But “did they ever hold the tenets pleaded for
in the books published by Mr. Wesley?” Whether they did
or no is out of the present question; they did, and do, hold
the doctrine contained in that sermon, “Mr. Wesley knows,
they from their hearts subscribe to Mr. Hervey’s Eleven
Letters.” I hope not; from any that do, I expect no more
mercy than from a mad dog. “But if he had constantly
preached that doctrine, how came so many to testify their
surprise at that discourse?” Because God set it home upon
their hearts. Hence it appeared new, though they had heard
it over and over. “How came they to press the printing of it,
in order to stop the mouths of gainsayers?” Because they
judged it would affect others as it affected them; though I
never thought it would. “Lastly: If Mr. Wesley had con
stantly maintained this doctrine, why must poor John Bunyan
be embowelled, to make him look like Mr. Wesley?” No.;
his Calvinism is omitted, to make him like the authors going
before him; “to preserve a consistency throughout the work;”
which still is not done as I could wish. However, those that
are fond of his bowels may put them in again, and swallow
them as they would the trail of a woodcock.
35. “They to whom the “The nice, metaphysical doc.
righteousness of Christ is trine of imputed righteousness,
imputed (I mean, who truly instead of furthering men in
believe) are made righteous holiness, makes them satisfied
by the Spirit of Christ.” without any holiness at all.”
I have known a thousand instances of this. And yet “they
who truly believe in Christ are made righteous by his Spirit.”
Where is the contradiction between these propositions?
36. “Christian Library.” Nothing.
37. “Christ is now the Baxter's Aphorisms go for
righteousness of all that truly nothing. Richard Baxter is
believe.” not John Wesley.
38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. Nothing.
Nothing against
44. “To all believers, the Goodwin : Nothing.
righteousness of Christ is
imputed.”
We have now examined four-and-forty witnesses; but still
have no proof that I contradict myself, either with regard to
the covenant, election, and perseverance, or the imputed righte
ousness of Christ. With regard to this, the thing, that we are
justified merely for the sake of what Christ has done and suf
fered, I have constantly and earnestly maintained above four
and-thirty years. And I have frequently used the phrase,
hoping thereby to please others “for their good to edification.”
But it has had a contrary effect, since so many improve it into
an objection. Therefore, I will use it no more, unless it occur
in an hymn, or steal upon me unawares; I will endeavour to
use only such phrases as are strictly scriptural. And I will
advise all my brethren, all who are in connexion with me
throughout the three kingdoms, to lay aside that ambiguous,
unscriptural phrase, which issoliable to be misinterpreted, and to
speak in all instances, this in particular, “as the oracles of God.”
“Suffering the penalty is not Suffering the penalty is all the
all the law requires.” law requires. (Page 132.)
45. “So says the ‘Christian So says John Goodwin.
Library.”
But this does not prove that I contradict myself.
St. Paul speaks of the law as St. Paul does not speak of the
a person. law as a person. (P. 138.)
46. “The law is here spoken “This way of speaking of
of as a person, to which, as to the law as a person injured,
an husband, life and death are and to be satisfied, seems
ascribed.” hardly defensible.”
There is no contradiction here. I do affirm, St. Paul speaks
of the law “as a person to which, as an husband, life and
death are ascribed.” But I deny, that he speaks of it “as a
person injured, and to be satisfied.”
For a twofold justification. Against a twofold justification.
47. “Mr. F. affirms, justi- “The justification spoken
fication is twofold.” of by St. Paul to the Romans,
and in our Articles, is one and
no more.” (Page 133.)
Most true. tion. (Matt. xii. 37.) And yet our Lord speaks of another justifica
Now, I think one and one make two.
For a justified state.
48. “The state of a justified
person is inexpressibly great
and glorious.”
Against a justified state.
(Page 139.)
“Does not talking of a
justified or sanctified state
tend to mislead men?” It
frequently does. But where
is the contradiction?
They who are once justified
are justified for ever.
49. “Christian Library.”
They who are justified may
become total apostates.
Nothing.
Works are a condition of jus
tification. (Page 134.)
50. “Salvation (that is,
glory) is not by the merit of
works, but by works as a
condition.”
This proposition does not
speak of justification: So it
is nothing to the purpose.
Works are not a condition of
justification.
I believe no good works
can be previous to justifica
tion; nor, consequently, a
condition of it.
51. “If a man could be
holy before he was justified,
it would set his justification
aside.”
“Whoever desires to find
favour with God, should
“cease from evil, and learn to
do well.’ Whoever repents,
should do “works meet for
repentance.’ And if this is
not in order to find favour,
what does he do them for?”
52. “Thou canst do no
thing but sin till thou art
justified.”
53. “We allow that God
justifies the ungodly, him that
to that hour is full of all evil,
void of all good; and him that
worketh not, that till that mo
ment worketh no goodness.”
All this I believe still.
“But Mr. W. says, Whoever
desires to find favour with God should “cease from evil and
learn to do well,’” &c. Does not the Bible say so? Who
can deny it? “Nay, but Mr. W. asks, “If this be not in
order to find favour, what does he do them for?’” And I
ask it again. Let Mr. H., or any one else, give me an answer.
So, if there is any contradiction here, it is not I contradict
myself, but Isaiah and our Lord that contradict St. Paul.
Against justification by the For justification by the act of
act of believing. believing.
54. “But do not you put “The faith which is said to
faith in the room of Christ be imputed to Abraham for
and his righteousness? No;
righteousness, is faith pro
I take particular care to put
perly taken; and not the
each of these in its proper
righteousness of Christ ap
place.” prehended by faith.”
This is putting “each of these in its proper place.” The
righteousness of Christ is the meritorious cause of our
justification: That is its proper place. Faith in Him that
gave himself for us is the condition of justification: That is
its proper place.
I am justified through the righteousness of Christ, as the
price; through faith, as the condition. I do not say, neither
does Goodwin, Faith is that for which we were accepted; but
we both say, Faith is that through which we are accepted.
We are justified, we are accepted of God, for the sake of
Christ, through faith. Now, certainly, there is no contra
diction in this, unless a contradiction to Mr. H.’s notions.
55. “Although we have “That which is the condi
faith, hope, and love, yet we tion of justification is not the
must renounce the merit of righteousness of Christ.”
all, as far too weak to deserve Most true; otherwise we
our justification; for which confound the condition with
we must trust only to the
the meritorious cause spoken
merits of Christ.”
of in the opposite column.
Justification by faith alone is
articulus stantis vel cadentis
ecclesiae.* All who do not
hold it must perish ever
lastingly.
Justification by faith alone is
not articulus stantis vel ca
dentis ecclesiae. Some may
doubt of it, yea, deny it, and
yet not perish everlastingly.
(Page 127.)
* A doctrine without which there can be no Christian Church.
56. “Of this may be affirm
ed, (what Luther affirms of
justification by faith,) that it
is articulus stantis vel cadentis
ecclesiae, the pillar of that
faith of which alone cometh
salvation; that faith which
unless a man keep whole and
undefiled, without doubt he
“A pious Churchman who
has not clear conceptions of
justification by faith may be
saved; yea, a Mystic, (Mr.
Law, for instance,) who denies
justification by faith. If so,
the doctrine of justification
by faith is not articulus stan
tis vel cadentis ecclesiae.”
shall perish everlastingly.”
It is certain here is a seeming contradiction; but it is not
a real one.
For these two opposite propositions do not speak
of the same thing.
The latter speaks of justification by faith;
the former, of trusting in the righteousness or merits of
Christ; justification by faith is only mentioned incidentally
in a parenthesis. Now, although Mr. Law denied justification
by faith, he might trust in the merits of Christ. It is this,
and this only, that I affirm, (whatever Luther does,) to be
articulus stantis vel cadentis ecclesiae.
Mr. W. is a Calvinist in the Mr. W. has leaned too much
point of justification.
toward Calvinism in this
Apoint.
57. “I think on justifica
tion just as I have done these
seven-and-twenty years, and
just as Calvin does.”
“We have leaned too
much toward Calvinism.”
(Page 141.)
But not in this point; not
as to justification by faith.
We still agree with him, that the merits of Christ are the
cause, faith the condition, of justification.
58. “I have occasionally
Goodwin. Nothing.
used those expressions, ‘im
puted righteousness, the
‘righteousness of Christ, and
the like. But I never used
them in any other sense than
that wherein Calvin does.”
59. “Mr. W. does approve
the expression, ‘Why me?’”
My brother uses it in an
hymn.
“Mr. W. does not approve the
expression, ‘Why me?’”
“Mr. F.says, Mr. W. doubts
concerning it.” (Page 140.)
This proof halts on both feet. “But why did not Mr.
W. strike out of Mr. F.'s manuscript the honourable expres
sions concerning himself?” Because he thought them a
proper counterbalance to the contumelious expressions of
Mr. H.
Our sin is imputed to Christ,
and Christ’s righteousness
to us.
60, 61, 62. “Christian Li
brary.”
Our sin is not imputed to
Christ, nor Christ’s righte
ousness to us. (Page 130.)
Nothing.
Both Adam’s sin and Christ’s
righteousness are imputed.
Neither Adam’s sin nor Christ's
righteousness is imputed.
(Page 131.)
63. Nothing against no
thing.
In what sense I believe the “Christian Library” to be all
true, I have declared above.
Mr. W. holds free-will.
Mr. W. wonders how any man
can hold free-will.
“Mr. W. denies it.”
64. “Mr.
F. holds free
Will.”
This may prove that Mr. W. contradicts Mr. F., but it can
never prove that he contradicts himself.
But, indeed, both
Mr. F. and Mr. W. absolutely deny natural free-will.
We
both steadily assert that the will of man is by nature free
only to evil. Yet we both believe that every man has a
measure of free-will restored to him by grace.
For the doctrine of merit.
65. “We are rewarded ac
cording to our works, yea, be
cause of our works. How does
this differ from, ‘for the sake
of our works?’ And how differs
this from secundum merita
Against the doctrine of merit.
“And yet I still maintain,
there is no merit, taking the
word strictly, but in the blood
of Christ; that salvation is
not by the merit of works; and
that there is nothing we are, or
operum, or, “as our works de
serve?” Can you split this
hair? I doubt I cannot.”--
have, or do, which can, strictly
speaking, deserve the least
thing at God’s hand.”
I say so still. Let Mr. H.,
if he can.
And all this is no more than to say, Take the word merit
in a strict sense, and I utterly renounce it; take it in a
looser sense, and though I never use it, yet I do not
condemn it.
Therefore, with regard to the word merit, I do
not contradict myself at all.
For a single life.
66. “Mr. W. says, his
thoughts on a single life are
just the same they have been
these thirty years.”
67. “He advises that we
should pray against mar
riage.”
Against a single life.
“Why, then, did Mr. W.
marry?” For reasons best
known to himself. (Page 136.)
“I advise single persons to
pray, that they may prize the
advantages they enjoy.”
Be this right or wrong, still here is no contradiction.
For gay apparel.
68. “To make it a point
of conscience to differ from
others (as the Quakers do) in
the shape or colour of their
apparel, is mere superstition.”
Against gay apparel.
“Let a single intention to
please God prescribe both
what clothing you should buy,
and the manner wherein it
shall be made.” (Ibid.) This
I stand to.
So I advise; but I do not
“Wear nothi g of a glaring
“make it a point of con
colour, or made in the very
science.” So here is no height of the fashion.”
contradiction still.
Against tea. For tea.
69. “Mr. W. published a
I did set them an example
tract against drinking tea,
and told the tea-drinkers, he
for twelve years. Then, at
the close of a consumption,
would set them an example in
by Dr. Fothergill's direction,
that piece of self-denial.”
I used it again.
But must not a man be sadly in want of argument who
stoops so low as this?
For baptism by sprinkling.
70. “As there is no clear
proof of dipping in Scripture,
so there is very probable
proof to the contrary.”
71. “Christ nowhere, as
far as I can find, requires
dipping, but only baptizing;
which word signifies to pour
on, or sprinkle, as well as to
dip.”
Against baptism by sprink
ling.
“When Mr. W. baptized
Mrs. L. S., he held her so long
under water, that her friends
screamed out, thinking she
had been drowned.”
When ? Where ? I never
heard of it before.
“Why then did you at Sa
vannah baptize all children by
immersion, unless the parents
certified they were weak?”
Not because I had any
scruple, but in obedience to
the Rubric. So here is no
self-inconsistency.
Mr. W. never adopted Mr.
Mr. W. highly approved of
Law’s scheme.
Mr. Law.
These propositions are not contradictory.
I might highly
approve of him, and yet not adopt his scheme.
How will
Mr. H. prove that I did? or that I contradict myself on this
head? Why thus:--
72. “I had been eight years
at Oxford before I read any
of Mr. Law’s writings. And
when I did, I was so far from
making them my creed, that
I had objections to almost
every page.” (Page 135.)
True; but neither does this
prove that I adopted his
scheme.
“To instruct a person in
the nature of Christianity, I
fixed an hour a day, to read
with her in Mr. Law’s treatise
on ‘Christian Perfection.’”
I did so. And an excellent
book it is, though liable to
many objections.
“Another little company of
us met: We sung, read a
little of Mr. Law, and then
conversed.”
73. “I believe the Mystic
writers to be one great Anti
christ.”
74. “Mr. F. affirms, Solo
mon is the chief of Mystics;
and Mr. W. acquiesces in the
affirmation.”
I retract this. It is far too
strong. But observe, I never
contradicted it till now !
I do not. I affirm no such
thing. Therefore all Mr. H.
builds upon this is only a
castle in the air.
Enoch and Elijah are in
Enoch and Elijah are not in
heaven.
heaven.
75. “Enoch and Elijah en
“Enoch and Elijah are not
tered at once into the highest
in heaven, but only in para
degree of glory.” dise.” (Page 138.)
“Notes on the New Testament, John iii. 13, first edition.”
But why is Mr. H. so careful to name the first edition?
Because in the second the mistake is corrected. Did he
know this? And could he avail himself of a mistake which
he knew was removed before he wrote |
For sinless perfection. Against sinless perfection.
Upon this head Mr. H. employs his whole strength. I
will therefore the more carefully weigh what he advances;
only premising, before I descend to particulars, two general
observations:
(1.) Out of the twenty-five passages cited for perfection,
seventeen are taken from my brother’s Hymns. These,
therefore, strike wide. Whatever they prove, they cannot
prove that I contradict myself.
(2.) Out of the twenty-five cited against perfection, four
teen are cited from the sermon on “Sin in Believers.” Do I
mean, in such believers as are “perfected in love?” Mr. H.
himself knows I do not. Why then every one of these four
teen arguments is an abuse both upon me and his readers.
It is the most egregious trifling that can be conceived. I
affirm, “Those perfected in love are saved from inward sin.”
To prove I contradict myself herein, fourteen passages are
alleged, wherein I affirm, “We are not saved from inward
sin, till we are ‘perfected in love.’”
(3.) The same fallacy is used in every instance, when some
of my words are set in opposition to others. The sum is, -
weak believers, babes in Christ, are not, adult believers are,
saved from inward sin. And I still aver, there is no contra
diction in this, if I know what a contradiction means.
Now to the proofs:--
76. “The Son hath made
them who are thus ‘born of
“They are sensible of pride
remaining in their hearts.”
God’ free from pride.”
They? Who? Not those who are thus “born of God,”
who are “perfected in love.”
77. “From the iniquity of pride,
And self, I shall be free.”
That is, when I am “perfected
in love.”
78. “They are freed from
wanderings in prayer.”
“God’s children are daily
sensible of pride and self
will.” That is, till they are
“perfected in love.”
Is this spoken of all be
lievers? Mr. H. knows it
is not.
79. “Christians are saved
from all sin, from all unrighte
ousness.”
80. “They (adult Chris
tians) are freed from all evil
thoughts and evil tempers.”
81. “They (fathers in Christ)
are freed from evil thoughts.”
True, adult Christians.
“The (infant) children of
God have in them sin of every
kind.”
“The evil nature opposes
the Spirit even in believers,”
--till they arefathers in Christ.
82. “Christ was free from
sinful thoughts. So are they
likewise,”--adult believers.
83. “I believe some would
say, ‘We trust we do keep
the whole law of love.’”
“This doctrine (that all be
lievers are thus free) is wholly
new.”
“Believers are conscious of
not fulfilling the whole law of
love;” not till they are “per
fected in love.”
The reader will please to remember all along, the question
is not whether the doctrine be right or wrong, (that has been
elsewhere considered,) but whether I contradict myself.
Upwards of fourscore witnesses have been already examined
on this head; but no contradiction is proved yet.
84. “Some do love God with “They (weak believers) do
all their heart and strength.” not love God with all their
heart and strength.”
85. “From that hour, indwelling sin,
Thou hast no place in me.”Believers are not delivered
from the being of sin till that
hour.
86. “A sinless life we live.” “Christian Library :” NO
thing.
87. “While one evil thought can rise, My brother said so once:
I am not born again.” I never did.
In the note annexed there are many mistakes: (1) “The
author of this hymn did not allow any one to be a believer,
even in the lowest sense, while he found the least stirring of
sin.” He did; but he took the word “born again” in too
high a sense. (2.) Yet “he supposes the most advanced
believers are deeply sensible of their impurity.” He does not;
neither he nor I suppose any such thing. (3.) “He tells us in
his note on Eph. vi. 13, ‘The war is perpetual.’” True: The
war with “principalities and powers;” but not that “with
flesh and blood.” (4.) So you cannot reply: “Mr. W. speaks
of believers of different stature.” Indeed I can; and the
forgetting this is the main cause of Mr. H.’s stumbling at
every step. (5) “The position, that any believers are totally
free from sin, is diametrically opposite to Calvinism.” This
is no mistake. Therefore most Calvinists hate it with a perfect
hatred. (6.) “Many of the grossest of these contradictions
were published nearly at the same time; and probably Mr. W.
was the same day correcting the press, both for and against
sinless perfection.” An ingenious thought ! but as to the truth
or even probability of it, I cannot say much. (7.) “These
Hymns contain the joint sentiments of Mr. John and Mr.
Charles Wesley.” Not always; so that if some of them
contradict others, it does not prove that I contradict myself.
88. “Christ in a pure and sinless “There are still two con
heart.” trary principles in believers,
nature and grace.” True,
till they are perfect in love.
89. “Quite expel the carnal mind.” “That there is no sin in
a (weak) believer, no carnal
mind, is contrary to the word
of God.”
90. “From every evil motion freed.” “How naturally do men
think, Sin has no motion;
therefore it has no being !”
But how does this prove that I contradict myself?
91. “All the struggle then is o'er.” These are two of my
92. “I wrestle not now.” brother’s expressions, which
I do not subscribe to.
93. “God is thine: Disdain to fear
The enemy within.” “Let us watch and pray
against the enemy within.”
Are these lines cited as implying the enemy was not within 2
Most unhappily. They mean, the enemy which is within.
For the very next words, which Mr. H. himself cited but the
page before, are,
God shall in thy flesh appear,
And make an end of sin.
94. “We wrestle not with
“We wrestle both with
flesh and blood when * we
flesh and blood, and with
are grown up in Christ.
principalities,” while we are
babes in Christ.
No contradiction yet.
95. “Sin shall not in our flesh remain.”
“Still he (the babe in
Christ) feels the remains of
the old man.”
96. “I cannot rest if sin in me
“Sin remains in them
remains.”
still;”--in all weak believers.
97, 98, 99. My brother's.
100. “Do not the best of
“We groan, being burdened
men say, ‘We groan, being
with numberless infirmities,
burdened with the workings of
temptations, and sins.”--This
inbred corruption?’” This
is wrong. It is not the mean
is not the meaning of the
ing of the text. I will put it
text: The whole context
out, if I live to print another
shows the cause of that
edition. So just one shot in
groaning was, their longing
a hundred has hit the mark.
to be with Christ.
. 101. “Nor does he that is
“Many infirmities remain,
born of God sin by infirmi
whereby we are daily subject
ties; for his infirmities have
to what are called “sins of
no concurrence of his will;
infirmity.’ And they are in
and without this, they are not
some sense sins; as being
properly sins.”--That is, they
(involuntary) transgressions
are not voluntary transgres
of the perfect law.”
sions of a known law.
I see no contradiction here; but if there was, it ought not to
have been mentioned. It could not by any generous writer;
since Mr. Hill himself testifies, it was expunged before he
mentioned it! But suppose it stood as at first, I flatly deny
that it is any contradiction at all. These infirmities may be
in some sense sins; and yet not properly so; that is, sins in
an improper, but not in the proper, sense of the word.
13. But “Mr. W. has not yet determined, whether sins of
surprise bring the soul under condemnation or not. However,
it were to be wished, that sins of surprise and sins of infirmity
too were to be declared mortal at the next Conference; since
several persons who pretend to reverence Mr. W., not only
fall into outrageous passions, but cozen and overreach their
neighbours; and call these things little, innocent infirmities.
Reader, weigh well those words of Mr. W., “We cannot say,
either that men are or are not condemned for sins of surprise.”
And yet immediately before, he calls them transgressions, as
here he calls them sins. Strange divinity this, for one who,
for near forty years past, has professed to believe and teach
that “sin is the transgression of the law,’ and that ‘the.
wages of sin is death.’” He then brings three instances of
sins of surprise, (over and above cozening and overreaching,)
drunkenness, fornication, and flying into a passion and
knocking a man down; and concludes, “Mr. W. had better
sleep quietly, than rise from his own pillow in order to lull
his hearers asleep upon the pillow of false security, by speak
ing in so slight a manner of sin, and making the breach of
God’s holy law a mere nothing.” (Page 111.)
14. This is a charge indeed! And it is perfectly new : I
believe it was never advanced before. It will not, therefore,
be improper to give it a thorough examination. It is
founded on some passages in the sermon on Romans viii. 1 :
“There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.” In order to give a clear view of the doctrine therein
delivered, I must extract the sum of the Sermon.
I show, (1.) Who are “those that are in Christ Jesus;”--
“Those who are joined to the Lord in one spirit, who dwell
in Christ and Christ in them. And ‘whosoever abideth in
Him sinneth not, walketh not after the flesh,’ that is, corrupt
nature. These abstain from every design, and word, and
work, to which the corruption of nature leads.” (Vol. V.,
p. 88.) “They “walk after the Spirit’ both in their hearts
and lives. By him they are led into every holy desire, into
every divine and heavenly temper, till every thought of their
heart is ‘holiness to the Lord.”
“They are also led by Him into all holiness of conversation.
They exercise themselves day and night, to do only the things
which please God: In all their outward behaviour, to follow him
‘who left us an example that we might tread in his steps; in
all their intercourse with their neighbour, to walk in justice,
mercy, and truth; and whatsoever they do in every circumstance
of life to ‘do all to the glory of God.’” (Ibid., p. 89.)
Is here any room for “cozening and overreaching; ” for
“flying into outrageous passions?” Does this give any
countenance for “knocking men down?” for “drunkenness
or fornication ?”
But let us go on to the Second head: “To whom is there
no condemnation? To believers in Christ, who thus ‘walk
after the Spirit, there is no condemnation for their past
sins.” (Ibid.) “Neither for present, for now transgressing
the commandments of God; for they do not transgress them.
This is a proof of their love of God, that they keep his com
mandments.” (Ibid., p. 90.) “They are not condemned,
(3.) for inward sin, so long as they do not yield thereto; so
long as they maintain a continual war with all sin, with pride,
anger, desire, so that the flesh hath no dominion over them,
but they still ‘walk after the Spirit.’” (Ibid., p. 91.) Is any
encouragement given here to cozeners or whoremongers?
It follows, “They are not condemned for sins of infirmity,
as they are usually called. Perhaps it were advisable rather
to call them infirmities, that we may not seem to give any
countenance to sin, or to extenuate it in any degree, by thus
coupling it with infirmity. But, if we must use such an
ambiguous and dangerous expression, by sins of infirmity I
would mean, such involuntary failings as the saying a thing
we believe true, though in fact it prove to be false; or the
hurting our neighbour without knowing or designing it,
perhaps when we designed to do him good.” (Ibid., p. 92.)
What pretence has Mr. H. from these words to flourish
away upon my “strange divinity;” and to represent me as
giving men a handle to term gross sins innocent infirmities?
But now comes the main point: “It is more difficult to
determine concerning those which are usually styled sins of
surprise: As when one who commonly in his patience possesses
his soul, on a sudden or violent temptation, speaks or acts in a
manner not consistent with the royal law of love.” (For instance:
You have the gout. A careless man treads on your foot. You
violently push him away, and, it may be, cry out, “Get away!
Get you out of my sight!”) “Perhaps it is not easy to fix a
general rule concerning transgressions of this nature. We can
not say either that men are, or that they are not, condemned
for sins of surprise in general.” (Pages 152, 153.)
“Reader,” says Mr. H., “let me beg thee to weigh well
the foregoing words.” I say so too. I go on : “But it
seems, whenever a believer is overtaken in a fault, there is
more or less condemnation, as there is more or less concur
rence of his will. Therefore, some sins of surprise bring
much guilt and condemnation. For in some instances our
being surprised may be owing to some culpable neglect, or
to a sleepiness of soul, which might have been prevented or
shaken off before the temptation came. The falling even
by surprise, in such an instance, exposes the sinner to
condemnation, both from God and his own conscience.
“On the other hand, there may be sudden assaults, which
he hardly could foresee, by which he may be borne down,
suppose into a degree of anger, or thinking evil of another,
with scarce any concurrence of the will. Now, in such a
case, the jealous God would undoubtedly show him that he
had done foolishly. He would be convinced of having
swerved from the perfect law, and consequently grieved with
a godly sorrow, and lovingly ashamed before God. Yet need
he not come into condemnation. In the midst of that sorrow
and shame, he can still say, ‘The Lord is my strength and
my song; he is also become my salvation.’” (Page 154.)
Now, what can any impartial person think of Mr. H.’s
eloquence on this head? What a representation has he
given of my doctrine, with regard to infirmities and sins of
surprise? Was ever anything more unjust? Was ever
anything more cruel? Do I here “lull my readers asleep on
the pillow of false security?” Do I “speak in a light
manner of sin?” or “make the breach of God's holy law a
mere nothing?” What excuse can be made for pouring out
all this flood of calumny? Can anything be termed
“bearing false witness against our neighbour,” if this is not?
Am I indeed a loose casuist? Do any of my writings give
countenance to sin? Not so: God knows, Mr. Hill knows,
Mr. Romaine, who corrected this tract, knows it well. So
does Mr. Madan; yea, so do all who read what I write,
unless they wilfully shut their eyes.
15. “Thus have I at length,” says Mr. H., “brought this
extraordinary farrago to a conclusion. Not because I could
not have found many more inconsistencics.” (Page 142.)
Yes, another hundred, such as these. But see a group of
them at once: “His extract from Bishop Beveridge is flatly
contradicted in his edition of ‘John Goodwin. Again:
Goodwin is flatly contradicted by his sermon on ‘The Lord
our Righteousness.’ This sermon is contradicted in his
‘Preservative against Unsettled Notions in Religion. This
Preservative is itself contradicted by his ‘Abstract from Dr.
Preston. This Abstract is itself contradicted by his edition
of ‘Baxter's Aphorisms.’ And these are again flatly contra
dicted by his ‘Extract from Bishop Beveridge.’ And this is
again flatly contradicted by his own ‘Thoughts on Imputed
Righteousness.’ Thus the wheel runs round !” Thus Mr.
H.’s head runs round with more haste than good speed. (If
this curious paragraph be not rather, as I suspect, supplied
by another hand; even as Sternhold’s Psalms are now and
then eked out by N. N., or William Wisdom.) He forgets
that generals prove nothing; and that he has sadly failed in
his particular charges; just an hundred, out of an hundred
and one, having proved void. So that now I have full right
to say, Whence arises this charge of inconsistency and self
contradiction? Merely from straining, winding to and fro,
and distorting a few innocent words. For wherein have I
contradicted myself, taking words in their unforced, natural
construction, in any one respect, with regard to justification,
since the year 1738?
16. But Mr. H.’s head is so full of my self-inconsistency,
that he still blunders on: “Mr. W.’s wavering disposition is
not an affair of yesterday. Mr. Delamotte spake to him on
this head more than thirty years ago.” (Page 143.) He
never spake to me on this head at all. Ask him. He is still
alive. “He has been tossed from one system to another,
from the time of his ordination to the present moment.”
Nothing can be more false; as not only my “Journals,” but
all my writings, testify. “And he himself cannot but
acknowledge that both his friends and foes have accused him
of his unsettled principles in religion.” Here is artifice
Would any man living, who does not know the fact, suppose
that a gentleman would face a man down, in so peremptory a
manner, unless the thing were absolutely true? And yet it
is quite the reverse. “He himself cannot but acknowledge l”
I acknowledge no such thing. My friends have oftener
accused me of being too stiff in my opinions, than too flexible.
My enemies have accused me of both; and of everything
besides. The truth is, from the year 1725, I saw more and
more of the nature of inward religion, chiefly by reading the
writings of Mr. Law, and a few other mystic writers. Yet I
never was “in the way of Mysticism” at all; this is another
mistake. Although I did not clearly see that we “are saved by
faith” till the year 1738, I then published the sermon on “Sal
vation by Faith,” every sentence of which I subscribe to now.
17. But he “was too scrupulous about using the word
condition.” (Page 143.) I was so, till I was convinced by
Dr. Church, that it was a very innocent word; and one that
none of the Reformers, English or foreign, objected to. All
this time I leaned towards Calvinism, though more in
expression than sentiment. “And now he fairly gives up
the necessity of a clear belief of justification by faith
alone!” That is, I say, A man may be saved, who is not
clear in his judgment concerning it. I do; I dare not
“rank Mr. Law, and all his admirers, among the hosts of
Diabolonians.” Nay, more: “I have proved that he makes
'man's righteousness the procuring cause of his acceptance
with God; and his salvation, from first to last, to depend
upon the intrinsic merit of his own unassisted works.” (Page
144.) I think Mr. H. “is now got to his ne plus ultra,”
unless he has a mind to prove that Mr. W. is an horse.
18. “I expect you will tell me that I have exposed Mr.
W., particularly in the foregoing contrast. That Mr. W. is
exposed, I allow; but that I have exposed him, I deny.”
Who was it then? Why, “out of his own mouth all that I
have brought against him proceeds.”
Not so: All that I have wrote, except one sentence out of
an hundred and one, is well consistent with itself, provided
the words be taken in their plain, natural sense, and one
part of them in connexion with the other. But whoever will
use Mr. H.’s art of twisting and torturing words, may make
them say anything, and extract Pelagianism, Arianism, or
anything he pleases, out of anything that can be spoken. By
this art, he that cries out against Mr. F.’s art has found, that
is, created, above an hundred contradictions in my works,
and “could find abundance more.” Ay, five hundred; under
his forming hand contradictions spring up as quick as mush
rooms. And he that reads only (as is the manner of a thou
sand readers) the running title at the top of each page,--
For election, Against election,
For sinless perfection, Against sinless perfection,
For imputed righteousness, Against imputed righteous
ness, -
and so on, will readily say, “What a heap of contradictions--
flat, palpable contradictions--is here!” Here! Where? “Why,
at the top of every page.” True; and there lies the strength
of the cause. The propositions themselves are plain enough;
but neither Mr. H. nor any man living can prove them.
19. But, if so, if all this laboured contrast be only the
work of a creative imagination, what has Mr. H., the cat’s
paw of a party, been doing all this time? Has he not been
abundantly “doing evil, that good might come,” that the
dear decree of reprobation might stand? Has he not been
“saying all manner of evil falsely;” pouring out slander like
water, a first, a second, a third time, against one that never
willingly offended him? And what recompence can he make
(be his opinions right or wrong) for having so deeply injured
me, without any regard either to mercy or truth? If he (not
I myself) has indeed exposed me in so unjust and inhuman a
manner, what amends can he make, as a Christian and a
gentleman, to God, to me, or to the world? Can he gather
up the foul, poisonous water which he has so abundantly
poured out? If he still insists he has done me no wrong, he
has only spoken “the truth in love;” if he is resolved at all
hazards to fight it out, I will meet him on his own ground.
Waving all things else, I fix on this point: “Is that scurrilous
hotch-potch, which he calls a ‘Farrago, true or false?” Will
he defend or retract it? An hundred and one propositions
are produced as mine, which are affirmed to contradict other
propositions of mine. Do I in these hundred and one
instances contradict myself, or do I not? Observe: The
question is, whether I contradict myself; not whether I con
tradict somebody else; be it Mr. Baxter, Goodwin, Fletcher,
the “Christian Library,” or even my own brother: These are
not myself. “Nay, but you have published them.” If I
publish them ten times over, still they are not myself. I
insist upon it, that no man’s words but my own can ever prove
that I contradict myself. Now, if Mr. H. scorns to yield, let him
fall to work, and prove by my own words, that I contradict
myself (that is the present question) in these hundred instances.
If he can prove this, I am a blunderer; I must plead Guilty to
the charge. If he cannot, he is one of the most cruel and
inhuman slanderers that ever set pen to paper.
20. I bless God, that the words cited from the sermon on
“A Catholic Spirit” do quite “come to myself,” not indeed
as I am painted by Mr. Hill, but as I really am. From the
year 1738, I have not been “unsettled as to any fundamental
doctrine of the gospel.” No, not in one; I am as clear of
this charge, as of that wonderful one advanced in the note,
page 146: “Though this Sermon be entitled ‘Catholic Spirit,'
yet it inculcates an attendance upon one only congregation;
in other words, Hear me, and those I send out, and no one
else.” Mr. Hill himself knows better; he knows I advise all
of the Church to hear the parish Minister. I do not advise
even Dissenters of any kind, not to hear their own Teachers.
But I advise all, Do not “heap to yourselves Preachers,
having itching ears.” Do not run hither and thither to hear
every new thing, else you will be established in nothing.
“However, it is by stratagems of this sort, that he holds so
many souls in his shackles, and prevents them from coming
to the knowledge of all the glorious truths of the gospel.”
Observe, gospel is with Mr. Hill the same as Calvinism.
So where he says, “There is no gospel,” he means no predes
tination. By the same figure of speech, some of his admirers
used to say, “There is no honey in the book.” Here lies the
core; this is the wrong, for which the bigots of this gospel
will never forgive me. And all those are such, who “rank
all election-doubters among Diabolonians.” Such is Mr.
Hill, a bigot in grain, while he sets his hand to that gentle
sentence. Nay, further, says he, “I cannot help informing
my readers,” (no, if he did, he must burst,) “that in the
life of Mr. Philip Henry, published in his ‘Christian Library,’
he has artfully left out Mr. Henry's Confession of Faith.”
Artfully / No; honestly; according to the open profession
in the preface cited before.
21. Yet Mr. Hill, this Mr. Hill, says to Mr. Fletcher, “Suf
fer not bitter words and calumnious expressions to disguise
themselves under the appearance of plainness.” (Page 147.)
Bitter words! Can Mr. Hill imagine there is any harm in
these? Mr. Hill that cites the judicious Mr. Toplady! that
admires the famous “Eleven Letters,” which are bitterness
double distilled ! which overflow with little else but calum
nious expressions from the beginning to the end I Mr. Hill
that himself wrote the “Review,” and the “Farrago!” And
does he complain of Mr. Fletcher's bitterness? Why, he
may be a little bitter; but not Mr. Fletcher. Altering the
person alters the thing! “If it was your bull that gored
mine,” says the judge in the fable, “that is another case !”
22. Two objections to my personal conduct, I have now
briefly to consider: First, “Mr. Wesley embraced Mr. Shirley
as a friend at the Conference, and then directly went out to
give the signal for war.” (Page 150.) This is partly true.
It is true, that, although I was not ignorant of his having
deeply injured me, yet I freely forgave him at the Conference,
and again “embraced him as a friend.” But it is not true,
that I “directly went out to give the signal for war.” “Nay,
why else did you consent to the publishing of Mr. Fletcher's
Letters?” Because I judged it would be an effectual means
of undoing the mischief which Mr. Shirley had done: Not
that I am now sorry (though I was) for what he has done, for
his publication of that bitter Circular Letter: For 1 now
clearly discern the hand of God throughout that whole affair.
Both my brother and I still indulged the fond hope of living
in peace with our warm Calvinist brethren; but we now give
it up; our eyes are open; we see what we have to expect.
We look for neither mercy nor justice at their hands; if we
find any, it will be clear gains.
23. The Second objection is, “Mr. Wesley acknowledged
the unguarded manner in which the Minutes were drawn up;
and yet immediately after defended them.” I answer, How
did I “acknowledge the unguarded manner?” The plain
case was this: I seek peace, and would do anything for it,
which I can with a safe conscience. On this principle it was,
that when Mr. Shirley read over his Declaration, (I say his; for
it was he drew it up, not I,) and asked, if we agreed thereto,
I was heartily desirous to agree with him as far as possible.
In order to this, after altering some words, I asked our
brethren, if they were willing to sign it. One immediately
said, “The Minutes are not unguarded; they are guarded
enough.” I said, “They are guarded enough for you; but
not for those who seek occasion against us.” And observe,
it is only in this sense, that I subscribed to that expression.
But I will not affirm, that my love of peace did not carry me
a little too far. I know not but it would have been better,
not to have signed the paper at all.
24. So much for the Minutes. Perhaps it may be expected,
that I should also take some notice of what Mr. Hill says
concerning perfection. All his arguments indeed, and ten
times more, I have answered over and over. But if it is
required, I will answer once more; only premising, by that
perfection, to which St. Paul directs Mr. Hill and me to go
on, (Heb. vi. 1) I understand meither more nor less, than
what St. John terms “perfect love;” (1 John iv. 18;) and our
Lord, “loving the Lord our God with all our heart, and mind,
and soul, and strength.” If you choose to call this “sinful
perfection,” (rather than sinless,) you have my free leave.
Mr. Hill’s main argument against this is, that “it is
Popish doctrine.” How does this appear? O, “Luther
says so.” (Page 25.) This will not do; it is only second
hand evidence. “It crept into the Church first in the fifth
century, and has been since almost generally received in the
Church of Rome.” (Page 49.) How is this proved? either
that the doctrine of perfect love crept first into the Church in
the fifth century? or, that it has been since almost generally
received in the Church of Rome? Why, “we may very
readily perceive this, by the following extract from Bishop
Cowper.” I answer, (1.) This is but second-hand evidence
still. (2.) It is wide of the mark. For this whole extract
says not a word about the Church of Rome. It contains only
a few citations from St. Augustine and St. Bernard, foreign
to the present question; and one from St. Ambrose, if it be
possible, more foreign still. None of these touch either of
the points in question: “This doctrine crept into the Church
in the fifth century;” or, “It has been (ever) since almost
generally received in the Church of Rome.”
Here I must beg leave to put Mr. Hill in mind of one
stated rule in controversy: We are to take no authorities at
second-hand, but always recur to the originals. Consequently,
words of St. Bernard, or twenty Saints more, copied from
Bishop Cowper, prove just nothing. Before we can urge the
authority of St. Bernard or Ambrose, we must consult the
authors themselves, and tell our readers what edition we use,
with the page where the words are found; otherwise they
cannot form a judgment either of the fairness of the quota
tion, or of the sense and weight of it.
Hitherto, then, we have not one tittle of proof, that this
is a Popish doctrine; that it ever was, or is now, “almost
generally received in the Church of Rome;” (although, if it
had, this would be no conclusive argument against it, as
neither is it conclusive against the doctrine of the blessed
Trinity;) I do not know that it ever was: But this I know;
it has been solemnly condemned by the Church of Rome. It
has been condemned by the Pope and his whole conclave,
even in this present century. In the famous bull Unigenitus,
(so called from the first words, Unigenitus Dei filius,') they
utterly condemn the uninterrupted act (of faith and love,
which some then talked of, of continually rejoicing, praying,
and giving thanks) as dreadful heresy Now, in what public
act of the Church of Rome is the doctrine of perfection
maintained? Till this is produced, I pray let us hear no
more, that perfection is a Popish doctrine.
25. However, “the distinction between sins and innocent
infirmities is derived from the Romish Church.” (Page 56.)
How does this appear? Thus: “Two of her devoted cham
pions, Lindenus and Andradius, distinguish between infirmi
ties and sins.” Lindenus and Andradius / Who are they?
From what country did they come? I do not know the men.
One of them, for aught I know, might serve as an interpreter
at the Council of Trent? What then? Was he an autho
rized interpreter of the doctrines of the Church? Nay, and
how do you know that they did speak of “little, trifling
faults,” or of “minute and trivial sins?” Did you ever read
them? Pray, what edition of their works do you use? and
in what page do these words occur? Till we know this, that
there may be an opportunity of examining the books, (though
I fear scarce worth examining,) it is doing too much honour
to such quotations, to take any notice of them at all.
26. Well, now for the buskins ! Now, spirat tragicum
satis '+ “And this is the doctrine which is preached to
more than thirty thousand souls, of which Mr. W. has the
charge. Then I am sure it is high time, that not only the
Calvinist Ministers, but all that wish well to the interest of
Protestantism,” (so Mr. S. said before,) “should, in a body,
protest against such licentious tenets.” “Blow ye the
trumpet in Sion l’” Gird on your armour ! Make ye your
selves ready for battle ! Again the trumpet sounds:--A
* The only-begotten Son of God.-ED 1 T.
+ This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Francis :
“It breathes the spirit of the tragic scene.”--ED1T.
crusadel An holy war! Down with the heretics! But hold !
What spirit are you of ? Are you followers of peace? Then
“bring forth your strong reasons; speak the truth in love,”
and we are ready to meet you. But really all this talk of my
licentious doctrine is a mere copy of Mr. H.’s countenance.
He knows, and all in England know, (whoever have heard
my name,) that it is not too loose, but too strict, doctrine I
am constantly accused of. Therefore, all this bluster, about
my superseding the law, has not only no truth, but no colour,
no plausibility. And when Mr. H. calls so gravely for Dr.
Crisp to “sweep away all my Antinomian rubbish,” shall we
laugh or weep?
Cuivis facilis rigidi censura cachinni.*
Rather let us drop a tear on human infirmity.
27. So much for the First grand argument against perfec
tion, that it is “generally received in the Church of Rome.”
The Second is: “It was generally received among the
ranting Anabaptists in Germany.” (Page 49.) What author
of note testifies this? I allow no second-hand authority;
but desire to know what German historian of credit has
recorded it; and in what page of his works. When this is
ascertained, then we may observe, it proves just nothing.
A Third argument against perfection is, that “it was main
tained by many wild Ranters in London.” Wild enough !
although no stress is to be laid on Mr. H.’s informations
concerning them; some of which are altogether false, and
the rest imperfect enough. But suppose they were all true,
what would follow? Many hearers abusing the doctrines I
teach, no more prove that those doctrines are false, than the
German Ranters proved that Luther's were so.
28. Is it another argument, that “the monstrous doctrine
of perfection turns some of its deluded votaries into monsters?
This may be proved from the cases of Bell and Harris; the
former of whom prophesied that the world would be at an
end the last of February; the latter was seized with raving
madness, and died blaspheming in a most dreadful manner.”
(Page 44.)
It would be strange if George Bell were not brought upon
the stage, as he has been an hundred times over. As for
* This quotation from Juvenal is thus rendered by Mr. Madan :
“The censure of a severe laugh is easy to any one.”-ED1 r.
poor Benjamin Harris, I believe, as a punishment for his
pride and uncharitableness, God permitted him to be struck
in an instant with diabolical madness. But it did not con
tinue to his death; he did not die blaspheming. I saw him
myself quiet and composed; and be calmly delivered up his
soul to God.
See another instance: “A friend of mine lately informed
me that an eminent Preacher of perfection told him, that he
had not sinned for some years, and that the Holy Ghost
had descended and sat on him and many others in a visible
manner, as he did upon the Apostles on the day of Pentecost.”
Please to name the man; otherwise an hundred such tales
will weigh nothing with men of sense and candour.
Behold a Fourth: “Last year I myself conversed with a
gentlewoman of such high perfection, that she said, no man
could teach her anything, and went to no place of worship
for years together: However, she was a scold, and beat her
maid.” Perhaps so. And what is that to me? If she is a
member of our society, tell me her name; and she will be in
it no longer. This is our glorying. It must be, that many
members of our society will, from time to time, grow weary
of well-doing; yea, that some will fall into sin. But as soon
as this appears, they have no more place among us. We
regard no man’s person, high or low, rich or poor. A
disorderly walker cannot continue with us.
Again: “One told God in prayer, that she was perfect, as
God himself was perfect. Another prayed, ‘Grant, O Lord,
that all here present may be perfect, as I am perfect.’”
(Page 45.) Till you name the men, this, too, must go for
nothing. But suppose it all true, what will it prove? Only
that there are madmen in the world.
“I could also tell him of a woman, who was so perfect,
that she tried to sin, and could not.” Pray name her.
“Mr. W. must also well remember a certain perfect married
lady, who was got with child by a perfect Preacher.” I do
not remember any such thing. I never heard of it before.
29. But “I hate,” says Mr. H., “the law of retaliation;”--
truly one would not have thought it;--“ and would not have
mentioned these things, but that you set me the example,”
that is, but by way of retaliation. “Should you doubt the
truth of these instances, I will lead you to the fountain-head
of my intelligence.” That will not do. In order to be even
~
*
*
:
k
with Mr. F., you have told seven shocking stories. Several
of these I know to be false; I doubt if any, but that of George
Bell, be true. And now you offer to lead Mr. F. to the
fountain-head of your intelligence 1 Probably to one or two
renegade Methodists, who court the world by slandering their
brethren | “But Mr. W. adopts this way.” No, never. In
my Letter to Mr. Hervey, I occasionally name two famous
men; but I do not slander them. In my Journals, I name
several others. This is above board; but Mr. H. stabs in the
dark. He gives us no names, no places of abode; but casts
arrows and firebrands abroad; and, let them light where
they may, on guilty or guiltless, of that he takes no care.
30. It remains only, to consider the queries which Mr. H.
addresses directly to me:--
(1.) “Did not you, in administering the sacrament, a few
years ago, to a perfect society in West-Street chapel, leave
out the Confession ?”
Yes, and many times since. When I am straitened for
time, (as I generally am there on a Monday,) I begin the
Communion-service at, “We do not presume to come to this
thy table.” One Monday, Mr. Madan desired to stay.
Here, I suppose, is “the fountain-head of this intelligence.”
(2.) “Did not one of the enthusiasts then say, he had
heard a voice telling him, he was all holiness to the Lord?”
Possibly so; but I remember nothing of it.
(3.) “Did not a second declare the same thing?”
Not that I remember.
(4) “Did not George Bell say, he should never die?”
He often did, if not then.
(5) “Did not one present confirm it?”
Not unlikely ; but I do not remember it.
(6.) “Did not another perfect brother say, he believed the
millennium was near; for there had been more Constables
sworn in that year than heretofore?”
Are you sure he was a perfect brother; that is, one that
professed so to be As for me, I can say nothing about it;
for I neither remember the man nor the words.
“This I have put down verbatim from the mouth of a
judicious friend then present; but from that time he has
been heartily sick of sinless perfection.” Say of “perfect
love.”
Is it only from that time that Mr. Madan has been sick
of it? Was he not sick of it before? And did he then, or
at any time since, say one word to me of any of these
things? No; but he treasured them up for ten years; and
then tells Mr. Hill, that he might tell them to all the world.
(7) “Do not you know a Clergvman, once closely connected
with you, who refused a great witness for perfection the
sacrament, because he had been detected in bed with a perfect
sister?” No; I never heard of it before. Surely Mr. M d
is not fallen so low, as to invent such a tale as this !
I need not say anything to your last anecdote, since you
(for once 1) put a candid construction upon my words. If
I did speak them, which I can neither affirm nor deny,
undoubtedly my meaning was, (as yourself observe,) “Though
I have been holding forth the imputed righteousness of
Christ to a mixed congregation, yet I think it right to
caution you of the society how you abuse that doctrine,
which to some, who turn it into licentiousness, is a smooth
doctrine, of which you ought to beware.” (Page 61.) But
your friend, it seems, who gave you this account, did not put
so candid a construction on my words.
You say, “He was so struck, as hardly to refrain from
speaking to you in the chapel. And from that hour he gave
up all connexions with you.” That is, he sought a pretence;
and he found one !
And now, what does all this amount to? Several persons,
who professed high things, degenerated into pride and
enthusiasm, and then talked like lunatics, about the time
that they renounced connexion with me for mildly reproving
them. And is this any objection against the existence of
that love which they professed, nay, and I verily believe,
once enjoyed? though they were afterward “moved from
their steadfastness.” Surely no more than a justified person’s
running mad, is an objection against justification. Every
doctrine must stand or fall by the Bible. If the perfection
I teach agree with this, it will stand, in spite of all the
enthusiasts in the world; if not, it cannot stand.
31. I now look back on a train of incidents that have
occurred for many months last past, and adore a wise and
gracious Providence, ordering all things well ! When the
Circular Letter was first dispersed throughout Great Britain
and Ireland, I did not conceive the immense good which God
was about to bring out of that evil. But no sooner did Mr.
F.’s first Letters appear, than the scene began to open. And
the design of Providence opened more and more, when Mr.
S.’s Narrative, and Mr. H.’s Letters, constrained him to
write and publish his Second and Third Check to Antino
mianism. It was then indisputably clear, that neither my
brother nor I had borne a sufficient testimony to the truth.
For many years, from a well-meant, but ill-judged, tender
ness, we had suffered the reprobation Preachers (vulgarly
called Gospel Preachers) to spread their poison, almost
without opposition. But at length they have awakened us
out of sleep; Mr. H. has answered for all his brethren, roundly
declaring, that “any agreement with election-doubters is a
covenant with death.” It is well: We are now forewarned
and fore-armed. We look for neither peace nor truce with
any who do not openly and expressly renounce this diabolical
sentiment. But since God is on our side, we will not fear
what man can do unto us. We never before saw our way
clear, to do any more than act on the defensive. But since
the Circular Letter has sounded the alarm, has called forth
all their hosts to war; and since Mr. H. has answered the
call, drawing the sword, and throwing away the scabbard;
what remains, but to own the hand of God, and make a
virtue of necessity? I will no more desire any Arminian, so
called, to remain only on the defensive. Rather chase the
fiend, Reprobation, to his own hell, and every doctrine con
nected with it. Let none pity or spare one limb of either
speculative or practical Antinomianism; or of any doctrine
that naturally tends thereto, however veiled under the specious
name of free grace;--only remembering, that however we
are treated by men, who have a dispensation from the vulgar
rules of justice and mercy, we are not to fight them at their
own weapons, to return railing for railing. Those who plead
the cause of the God of love, are to imitate Him they serve;
and, however provoked, to use no other weapons than those
of truth and love, of Scripture and reason.
32. Having now answered the queries you proposed, suffer
me, Sir, to propose one to you; the same which a gentleman
of your own opinion proposed to me some years since: “Sir,
how is it that as soon as a man comes to the knowledge of the
truth, it spoils his temper?” That it does so, I had observed
over and over, as well as Mr. J. had. But how can we
account for it? Has the truth (so Mr. J. termed what many
love to term the doctrine of free grace) a natural tendency to
spoil the temper? to inspire pride, haughtiness, supercilious
ness? to make a man “wiser in his own eyes, than seven
men that can render a reason ?” Does it naturally turn a
man into a cynic, a bear, a Toplady? Does it at once set
him free from all the restraints of good nature, decency, and
good manners? Cannot a man hold distinguishing grace, as
it is called, but he must distinguish himself for passion,
sourness, bitterness? Must a man, as soon as he looks upon
himself to be an absolute favourite of Heaven, look upon all
that oppose him as Diabolonians, as predestinated dogs of
hell? Truly, the melancholy instance now before us would
almost induce us to think so. For who was of a more amiable
temper than Mr. Hill, a few years ago? When I first
conversed with him in London, I thought I had seldom seen
a man of fortune who appeared to be of a more humble,
modest, gentle, friendly disposition. And yet this same Mr.
H., when he has once been grounded in “the knowledge of
the truth,” is of a temper as totally different from this, as
light is from darkness | He is now haughty, supercilious,
disdaining his opponents as unworthy to be set with the dogs
of his flock | He is violent, impetuous, bitter of spirit ! in a
word, the author of the Review !
O Sir, what a commendation is this of your doctrine !
Look at Mr. H., the Arminian the loving, amiable, generous,
friendly man. Look at Mr. H., the Calvinist! Is it the
same person? this spiteful, morose, touchy man? Alas,
what has “the knowledge of the truth” done? What a
deplorable change has it made | Sir, I love you still; though
I cannot esteem you as I did once. Let me entreat you, if
not for the honour of God, yet for the honour of your cause,
avoid, for the time to come, all anger, all spite, all sourness
and bitterness; all contemptuous usage of your opponents,
not inferior to you, unless in fortune. “O put on again
bowels of mercies, kindness, gentleness, long-suffering;
endeavouring to hold,” even with them that differ from you
in opinion, the “unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace l”
BRIsToL,
September 9, 1772.