A Farther Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion, Part II
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1745
Author: John Wesley
---
I. 1. It is not my present design to touch on any particular
opinions, whether they are right or wrong; nor on any of those
smaller points of practice, which are variously held by men of
different persuasions; but, First, to point out some things
which, on common principles, are condemned by men of every
denomination, and yet found in all; and, Secondly, some
wherein those of each denomination are more particularly
inconsistent with their own principles.
And, First, it is my design, abstracting from opinions of
every kind, as well as from disputable points of practice, to
mention such of those things as occur to my mind, which are
on common principles condemned, and notwithstanding
found, more or less, among men of every denomination.
2. But before I enter on this unpleasing task, I beseech
you, brethren, by the mercies of God, by whatever love you
bear to God, to your country, to your own souls, do not con
sider who speaks, but what is spoken. If it be possible, for
one hour lay prejudice aside; give what is advanced a fair
hearing. Consider simply on each head, Is this true, or is it
false? Is it reasonable, or is it not? If you ask, “But in
whose judgment?” I answer, In your own; I appeal to the
light of your own mind. Is there not a faithful witness in your
own breast? By this you must stand or fall. You cannot be
, judged by another man’s conscience. Judge for yourself by
the best light you have ; and the merciful God teach me and
thee whatsoever we know not
Now, as I speak chiefly to those who believe the Scriptures,
the method I propose is this: First, to observe what account
is given therein of the Jews, the ancient Church of God, inas
much as all these things were written for our instruction, who
say, We are now the visible Church of the God of Israel:
Secondly, to appeal to all who profess to be members thereof,
to every one who is called a Christian, how far, in each instance,
the parallel holds; and how much we are better than they.
3. First. I am to observe what account the Scriptures give of
the Jews, the ancient Church of God. I mean, with regard to
their moral character; their tempers and outward behaviour.
No sooner were they brought out of Egypt, than we find
them “murmuring against God;” (Exod. xiv. 12;) again,
when he had just brought them through the Rea Sea “with
a mighty hand and stretched out arm;” (xv. 24;) and yet
again, quickly after, in the wilderness of Zin : “Your mur
murings,” saith Moses, “are not against us, but against the
Lord.” (xvi. 8.) Nay, even while he was “giving them bread
from heaven,” they were still “murmuring and tempting
God;” (xvii. 2, 3;) and their amazing language at that very
season was, “Is the Lord among us or not?” (xvii. 7.)
The same spirit they showed, during the whole forty years
that he “bore their manners in the wilderness: ” A solemn
testimony whereof, “Moses spake in the ears of all the con
gregation of Israel,” when God was about to take him away
from their head. “They have corrupted themselves,” saith
he; “their spot was not of his children; they are a perverse
and crooked generation. The Lord led Jacob about; he
instructed him; he kept him as the apple of his eye.” (Deut.
xxxii. 5, 10.) “He made him ride on the high places of the
earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields; then he
forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock
of his salvation.” (Verses 13, 15.)
In like manner God complains long after this: “Hear, O
heavens, and give ear, O earth ! I have nourished and brought
up children, and they have rebelled against me. The ox know
eth his owner, and the ass his master's crib; but Israel doth not
know, my people doth not consider. Ah sinful nation, a people
laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are cor
rupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the
Holy One of Israel.” (Isaiah i. 2-4.) “Can a maid forget
her ornaments, or a bride her attire? Yet my people have
forgotten me days without number.” (Jer. ii. 32.)
4. And “as they did not like to retain God in their know
ledge,” so they had small regard to the ordinances of God:
“Even from the days of your fathers,” saith God by his Pro
phets, “ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not
kept them.” (Mal. iii. 7.) “Ye have said, It is vain to serve
God; and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinances?”
(Verse 14.) “Thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but
thou hast been weary of me, O Israel: Thou hast not brought
me thy burnt-offerings, neither hast thou honoured mewith thy
sacrifices.” (Isaiah xliii. 22, 23.) And so the Prophet himself
confesses: “Thou meetest those that remember thee in thy
ways;--but there is none that calleth upon thy name, that
stirreth up himself to take hold of thee.” (Isaiah lxiv. 5, 7.)
5. But they called upon his name by vain oaths, by perjury
and blasphemy. So Jeremiah: “Because of swearing the land
mourneth.” (xxiii. 10.) “And though they say, The Lord
liveth, surely they swear falsely.” (v. 2.) So Hosea: “They
have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a covenant.” So
Ezekiel: “They say, The Lord seeth us not, the Lord hath for
saken the earth.” So Isaiah: “Their tongue and their doings
are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory.” (iii. 8.)
“They say, Let him make speed and hasten his work, that we
may see it; and let the counsel of the Holy One draw nigh and
come, that we may know it.” (v. 19.) And so Malachi: “Ye
have wearied the Lord with your words; ye say, Every one that
doeth evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth
in them; or, Where is the God of judgment?” (ii. 17.)
6. And as they “despised his holy things,” so they “pro
faned his Sabbaths.” (Ezekiel xxii. 8.) Yea, when God sent
unto them, saying, “Take heed unto yourselves, and bear no
burden on the Sabbath-day, neither do ye any work, but
hallow ye the Sabbath-day, as I commanded your fathers:--
Yet they obeyed not, neither inclined their ear, but made
their neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor receive
instruction.” (Jer xvii. 21-23.)
Neither did they honour their parents, or those whom God,
from time to time, appointed to be rulers over them: “In thee”
(in Jerusalem, saith the Prophet) “they have set light by father
and mother.” (Ezekiel xxii. 7.) And from the very day when
God brought them up out of the land of Egypt, their mur
murings, chiding, rebellion, and disobedience, against those
whom he had chosen to go before them, make the most
considerable part of their history. So that had not Moses
“stood in the gap,” he had even then destroyed them from
the face of the earth.
7. How much more did they afterwards provoke God, by
drunkenness, sloth, and luxury ! “They have erred through
wine,” saith the Prophet Isaiah, “ and through strong drink
they are out of the way: ” (xxviii. 7 :) Which occasioned those
vehement and repeated warnings against that reigning sin:
“Woe to the drunkards of Ephraim, them that are overcome
with wine!” (Verse 1.) “The drunkards of Ephraim shall be
trodden under foot.” (Verse 3.) “Woe unto them that rise up
early that they may follow strong drink; that continue until
night, till wine inflame them !--But they regard not the work
of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands.”
(v. 11, 12.) “Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine,
and men of strength to mingle strong drink l’’ (Verse 22.)
“Woe to them that are at ease in Zion; that lie upon beds
of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat
the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of
the stall; that chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to
themselves instruments of music; that drink wine in bowls, and
anoint themselves with the chief ointments: But they are not
grieved for the affliction of Joseph.” (Amos vi. 1, 4-6.)
“Behold,” saith Ezekiel to Jerusalem, “this was the iniquity
of thy sister Sodom, fulness of bread and abundance of idle
ness was in her and in her daughters.” (xvi. 49.)
8. From sloth and fulness of bread, lewdness naturally fol
lowed. It was even while Moses was with them, that “the
people begantocommit whoredom with the daughters of Moab.”
Yea, of the daughters of Zion Isaiah complains: “They walk
with stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes.” (iii. 16.) And of
his people in general God complains by Jeremiah: “When I
had fed them to the full, they assembled themselves by troops
in the harlots’ houses. They were as fed horses in the morning:
Every one neighed after his neighbour's wife.” (v. 7, 8.)
“They be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.”
(ix. 2.) “The land is full of adulterers.” (xxiii. 10.)
Yea, and some of them were given up to unnatural lusts:
Thus we read: “The men of Gibeah beset the house,” wherein
the stranger was, “and beat at the door, and spake to the mas
ter of the house, saying, Bring forth the man that came into
thine house, that we may know him.” (Judges xix. 22.) “And
there were also,” long after, “Sodomites in the land,” in the
days of Rehoboam, and of the following kings: “The very
show of whose countenance witnessed against them, and they
declared their sin as Sodom, they hid it not.” (Isaiah iii. 9.)
9. This was accompanied with injustice in all its forms.
Thus all the Prophets testify against them: “The Lord
looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness,
but behold a cry.” (Isaiah v. 7.) “Thou hast taken usury
and increase; thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbour by
extortion.--Behold, I have smitten my hand at thy dishonest
gain which thou hast made.” (Ezekiel xxii. 12, 13.) “The
balances of deceit are in Jacob’s hand; he loveth to oppress.”
(Hosea xii. 7.) “Are there not yet the scant measure that
is abominable, the wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful
weights?” (Micah vi. 10, 11.) “He that departeth from evil
maketh himself a prey. And the Lord saw it, and it dis
pleased him, that there was no judgment.” (Isaiah lix. 15.)
“The wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than
he. They take up all of them with the angle, they catch them
in their net, and gather them in their drag.” (Hab. i. 13, 15.)
“They covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses,
and take them away.” (Micah ii. 2.) They “pull off the robe
with the garment from them that pass by securely.” (Verse
8.) “They have dealt by oppression with the stranger; they
have vexed the fatherless and the widow.” (Ezekiel xxii. 7.)
“The people of the land have used oppression, and exercised
robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy: Yea, they have
oppressed the stranger wrongfully.” (Verse 29.) “Their
works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their
hands.” (Isaiah lix. 6.) “Judgment is turned away backward,
and justice standeth afar off; for truth is fallen in the street,
and equity cannot enter.” (Verse 14.)
10. Truth indeed was fallen, as well as justice: “Every
mouth,” saith Isaiah, “speaketh folly.” (ix. 17.) “This is a
rebellious people, lying children.” (xxx. 9.) Their “lips have
spoken lies and muttered perverseness. None calleth for justice,
nor any pleadeth for truth: They trust in vanity, and speak lies.”
(lix. 3, 4.) This occasioned that caution of Jeremiah: “Take
ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any
brother; for every brother will utterly supplant, and every
neighbour will walk with slanders. And they will deceive
every one his neighbour, and will not speak the truth; they
have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves
to commit iniquity.” (ix. 4, 5.)
11. And even those who abstained from these gross outward
sins were still inwardly corrupt and abominable: “The whole
head was sick, and the whole heart was faint; yea, from the sole
of the foot even unto the head there was no soundness, but
wounds, and bruiscs, and putrifying sores.” (Isaiah i. 5, 6.)
“All these nations.” saith God, “are uncircumcised; and all
the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.” (Jer. ix. 26.)
“Their heart is divided.” (Hosea x. 2.) “They have set up
their idols in their heart; they are all estranged from me
through their idols.” (Ezekiel xiv. 3, 5.)
Their soul still “clave unto the dust.” They “laid up trea
sures upon earth.” “From the least of them,” saith Jeremiah,
“even unto the greatest, every one is given to covetousness.”
(vi. 13.) “They panted after the dust of the earth.” (Amos
ii. 7.) “They laded themselves with thick clay.” (Hab. ii.6.)
“They joined house to house, and laid field to field, until
there was no place.” (Isaiah v. 8) Yea, they “enlarged their
desires as hell:” They were “as death, and could not be
satisfied.” (Hab. ii. 5.)
12. And not only for their covetousness, but for their pride
of heart, were they an abomination to the Lord: “The pride
of Israel,” saith Hosea, “doth testify to his face.” (vii. 10.)
“Hear ye, give ear,” saith Jeremiah, “be not proud.-Give
glory to the Lord your God.” (xiii. 15, 16.) But they would not
be reproved; they were still “wise in their own eyes, and pru
dent in their own sight;” (Isaiah v. 21;) and continually say
ing to their neighbour, “Stand by thyself, come not near to
me; for I am holier than thou !” (Isaiah lxv. 5.)
They added hypocrisy to their pride: “This people,” saith
God himself, “draw near me with their mouth, and with their
lips do honour me, but have removed their hearts far from me.”
(Isai. xxix. 13.) “They have not cried unto me with their heart,
when they howled upon their beds.” (Hosea vii. 14) “They
return, but not to the Most High; they are like a deceitful bow.”
(Verse 16.) “They did but flatter him with their mouth, and
dissemble with him in their tongue.” (Psalm lxxviii. 36.) So
that herein they only “profaned the holiness of the Lord.”
“And this have yedone again,” saith Malachi, “covering the altar
of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, inso
much that he regardeth not the offering any more.” (ii. 11, 13.)
13. This God continually declared to those formal worship
pers, that their outside religion was but vain: “To what purpose
is the multitude of your sacrifices, saith the Lord? I am full
of the burnt-offerings of rams, and I delight not in the blood of
bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats. Bring no more vain obla
tions: Incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and
sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with; it is
iniquity, even the solemn meeting.--When you spread forth
your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make
many prayers, I will not hear.” (Isaiah i. 11, 13, 15.) “He
that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a
lamb, as if he cut off a dog's neck.” (lxvi. 3.) “When they
fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer an oblation,
I will not accept.” (Jer. xiv. 12.) “Go ye, serve your idols, if
ye will not hearken unto me; but pollute ye my holy name no
more with your gifts.” (Ezekiel xx. 39.)
14. Yet all this time were they utterly careless and secure;
nay, confident of being in the favour of God: They were at
ease; they “put far away the evil day.” (Amos vi. 1, 3.)
Even when God had “poured his anger upon Israel, it set him
on fire round about, yet he knew it not; it burned him, yet he
laid it not to heart.” (Isaiah xlii. 25.) “A deceived heart had
turned him aside, that he could not say, Is there not a lie in my
right hand?” (xliv. 20.) So far from it, that at this very time
they said, “We are innocent, we have not sinned.” (Jer. ii.
35, 37.) “We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us.”
(viii. 8.) “The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord,
are we.” (vii. 4.)
15. Thus it was that they hardened themselves in their wick
edness: “They are impudent children,” saith God, “and stiff
hearted.” (Ezekiel ii. 4.) “Were they ashamed when they had
committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed,
neither could they blush.” (Jer. vi. 15.) “I have spread out
my hand all the day to a rebellious people, that provoketh me to
anger continually to my face.” (Isai. lxv. 2, 3.) “They will not
hearken unto me, saith the Lord; for all the house of Israel are
impudent and hard-hearted.” (Ezekiel iii. 7.) “Since the
day that their fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt
unto this day, I have sent unto them all my servants the
Prophets, rising up early and sending them: Yet they hearkened
not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck;
they did worse than their fathers.” (Jer. vii. 25, 26.)
They were equally hardened against mercies and judgments:
When He “gave them rain, both the former and the latter in
his season;” when “He reserved unto them the appointed
weeks of the harvest,” filling their hearts with food and glad
ness, still none of this “revolting and rebellious people said,
Let us now fear the Lord our God; ” (Jer. v. 23, 24;) nor yet
did “they turn unto him when he smote them.” (Isaiah ix. 13.)
“In that day did the Lord call to weeping and to mourning:
And behold joy and gladness, eating flesh and drinking wine;
let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall die.” (Isaiah xxii.
12, 13.) Although “he consumed them, yet they refused to
receive instruction; thcy made their faces harder than a rock.--
Nonerepented him, but everyone turned to his course, as a horse
rusheth into the battle.” (Jer. v. 3; viii. 6.) “I have given you
want of bread in all your places, yet have ye not returned unto
me, saith the Lord. I have also withholden the rain from
you when there were yet three months unto the harvest. I
have smitten you with blasting and mildew : Your gardens and
your vineyards, the palmer worm devoured. I have sent among
you the pestilence after the manner of Egypt; your young men
have I slain with the sword. I have overthrown some of you,
as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a
firebrand plucked out of the burning; yet have ye not re
.turned unto me, saith the Lord.” (Amos iv. 6-11.)
16. In consequence of their resolution not to return, they
would not endure sound doctrine, or those that spake it: They
“ said to the Seers, See not; and to the Prophets, Prophesy
not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, cause
the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.” (Isaiah xxx.
10, 11.) “But they hated him that rebuked in the gate,
and they abhorred him that spake uprightly.” (Amos v. 10.)
Accordingly, “Thy people,” saith God to Ezekiel, “still are
talking against thee by the walls, and in the doors of the
houses.” (xxxiii. 30.) “And Amaziah the Priest sent to
Jeroboam, king of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired against
thce in the midst of the house of Israel; the land is not able
to bear all his words. Also Amaziah said unto Amos, Go,
flee thee away into the land of Judah, and prophesy there.
But prophesy not again any more at Bethel; for it is the king's
chapel,and it is the king's court.” (Amos vii. 10, 12, 13.) From
the same spirit it was that they said of Jeremiah, “Come, and
let us devise devices against him.--Come, and let us smite him
with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.”
(Jer. xviii. 18.) Hence it was that he was constrained to cry
out, “O Lord, I am in derision daily; every one mocketh me.
Since I spake, the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto
me, and a derision daily: For I heard the defaming of many:
Fear on every side: Report, say they, and we will report it.
All my familiars watched for my halting; saying, Perad
venture he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him,
and we shall take our revenge on him.” (xx. 7, 8, 10.) And
elsewhere, “Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me
a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth !
I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent to me on
usury; yet every one of them doth curse me.” (xv. 10.)
17. But “if a man walking in the spirit of falsehood do lie,”
saith the Prophet Micah, “saying, I will prophesy unto thee of
wine and strong drink, he shall even be the Prophet of this
people.” (ii. 11.) And God gave them Pastors after their own
hearts; such were those sons of Eli, “sons of Belial, who knew
not the Lord; ” (1 Sam. ii. 12;) rapacious, covetous, violent
men; (verses 14-16;) by reason of whom “men abhorred the
offering of the Lord; ” (verse 17;) who not only “made them
selves vile,” (iii. 13,) but also “made the Lord’s people to
transgress,” (ii. 24.) while they “made themselves fat with the
chiefest of all the offerings of Israel.” (Verse 29.) Such were
those of whom Isaiah says, “The Priest and the Prophet have
erred through strong drink; they are swallowed up of wine.”
(xxviii. 7.) “Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we
will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to-morrow shall be as
this day, and much more abundant.” (lvi.12.) Therefore, saith
he, “The Lord hath poured out upon youthe spiritof deep sleep,
and hath closed your eyes: The Prophets and the Seers hath he
covered; and the vision of all is become unto you as the words
of a book that is sealed.” (xxix. 10, 11.) Such also were those
of whom he saith, “His watchmen are blind, they are all igno
rant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping,
lying down, loving to slumber. Greedy dogs, which can never
have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand.
They all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from
his quarter.” (lvi. 10, 11.)
Little better were those of whom the Prophets that followed
have left us so dreadful an account: “Both Prophet and
Priest are profane; yea, in my house have I found their
wickedness, saith the Lord. And from the Prophets of Jeru
salem is profaneness gone forth into all the land.” (Jer. xxiii.
11, 15) “Her Priests have violated my law, and have pro
faned my holy things: They have put no difference between
the holy and the profane, and I am profaned among them.”
(Ezekiel xxii. 26.) “If I be a father, where is mine honour?
and if I be a master, where is my fear? saith the Lord of Hosts
unto you, O Priests, that despise my name!” (Malachii. 6)
Yea, some of them were fallen into the grossest sins:
“The company of Priests,” saith Hosea, “commit lewdness:
There is the whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is defiled.” (vi. 9,
10.) “I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem,” saith
God by Jeremiah, “an horrible thing: They commit adultery,
and walk in lies.” (xxiii. 14.)
18. And those who were clear of this, were deeply covetous;
“Who is there among you that would shut the doors for
nought? Neither do ye kindle fire on my altar for nought.
have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of Hosts.” (Malachi i.
10.) “The Priests of Zion teach for hire, and the Prophets
thereof divine for money. Yet will they lean upon the Lord,
and say, Is not the Lord among us?” (Micah iii. 11.) “Thus
saith the Lord, The Prophets bite with their teeth, and cry,
Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even
prepare war against him.” (iii. 5.) Therefore, “the word of the
Lord came unto Ezekiel, saying, Prophesy against the shep
herds of Israel, and say, Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that
do feed themselves! Should not the shepherds feed the flocks?
Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool; but ye feed not
the flock. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have
ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that
which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was
driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but
with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them. And they were
scattered, because there was no shepherd; and they became
meat to all the beasts of the field. Yea, my flock was scattered
upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek
after them.” (Ezekiel xxxiv. 1-6.)
19. To the same effect do the other Prophets declare: “Ye
are departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble:
Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before
all the people.” (Malachi ii. 8, 9.) “From the Prophet even
unto the Priest, every one dealeth falsely. They have healed
also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying,
Peace, peace; when there is no peace.” (Jer. vi. 13, 14.)
“They prophesy lies in my name.” (xiv. 14.) “They say
still unto them that despise me, The Lord had said, Ye shall
have peace; and they say unto every man that walketh after
the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you.”
(xxiii. 17.) “The Prophets of Jerusalem strengthen the hands
of the evil-doers, that none doth return from his wickedness.”
(Verse 14.) “They have seduced my people; and one built
up a wall, and, lo, others daubed it with untempered mortar.”
(Ezekiel xiii. 10.) “With lies they have made the hearts of
the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened
the hands of the wicked, that he shall not return from his
wicked way, by promising him life.” (Verse 22.) “Many Pas
tors have destroyed my vineyard; they have trodden my portion
under foot; they have made my pleasant portion a desolate
wilderness.” (Jer. xii. 10.) “There is a conspiracy of her
Prophets in the midst of her, like a roaring lion ravening the
prey; they have devoured souls.” (Ezekiel xxii. 25.) “Thus
saith the Lord, Feed the flock of the slaughter; whose pos
sessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: And they
that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord; for I am rich: And
their own shepherds pity them not.” (Zechariah xi, 4, 5.)
II. 1. Such is the general account which the Scriptures
give of the Jews, the ancient Church of God. And since all
these things were “written for our instruction,” who are now
the visible Church of the God of Israel, I shall, in the next
place, appeal to all who profess this, to every one who calls
himself a Christian, how far in each instance the parallel
holds, and how much we are better than they.
And, first, Were they discontented? Did they repine at the
providence of God? Did they say, “Is the Lord among us or
not?” when they were in imminent danger, or pressing want.
and saw no way to escape. And which of us can say, “I
am clear from this sin: I have washed my hands and my
heart in innocency?” Have not we who “judge others, done
the same things; ” murmured and repined times without
number; yea, and that when we were not in pressing want,
nor distressed with imminent danger? Are we not in general,
(our own writers being the judges,) have we not ever been
from the earliest ages, a “repining, murmuring, discontented
people;” never long satisfied either with God or man? Surely
in this we have great need to humble ourselves before God;
for we are in nowise better than they.
But “Jeshurun forsook God which made him, and lightly
esteemed the Rock of his salvation.” And did not England too?
Ask ye of the generations of old, inquire from the rising of the
sun to the going down thereof, whether there was ever a people
called by his name, which had less of “God in all their
thoughts;” who, in the whole tenor of their behaviour, showed
so light an “esteem for the Rock of their salvation.”
Could there ever be stronger cause for God to cry out,
“Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth !” For hath he not
“nourished and brought us up” as his children? And yet,
how have we “rebelled against ’’ him | If Israel of old “did
not know God,” if his ancient people “did not consider,”
was this peculiar to them ? Are not we also under the very
same condemnation? Do we, as a people, know God? Do
we consider him as God? Do we tremble at the presence of
his power? Do we revere his excellent majesty? Do we
remember, at all times, “God is here ! He is now reading
my heart; He spieth out all my ways; there is not a word
in my tongue but He knoweth it altogether?” Is this the
character of us English Christians; the mark whereby we are
known from the Heathen? Do we thus know God; thus
consider his power, his love, his all-seeing eye? Rather, are
we not likewise a “sinful nation, who have forgotten him days
without number; a people laden with iniquity, continually
forsaking the Lord, and provoking the Holy One of Israel?”
2. There is indeed a wide difference in this respect between
the Jews and us: They happened (if I may so speak) to forget
God, because other things came in their way; but we design to
forget him; we do it of set purpose, because we do not like to
1emember him. From the accounts given by Jeremiah, we
have reason to believe that when that people were most deeply
corrupted, yet the greatest men in the nation, the Ministers
of State, the Nobles and Princes of Judah, talked of God some
times; perhaps, as frequently as upon any other subject. But
is it so among us? Rather, is it not a point of good-breeding
to put God far away, out of our sight? Is he talked of at all
among the great,-the Nobles or Ministers of State in England?
among any persons of rank or figure in the world? Do they
allow God any place in their conversation? From day to day,
from year to year, do you discourse one hour of the wonders
He doeth for the children of men? If one at a Gentleman
or a Nobleman’s table was to begin a discourse of the wisdom,
greatness, or power of God, would it not occasion, at least, as
much astonishment, as if he had begun to talk blasphemy?
And if the unbred man persisted therein, would it not put all
the company in confusion? And what do you sincerely believe
the more favourable part would say of him when he was gone,
but that, “He is a little touched in his head l’’ or, “Poor
man he has not seen the world?”
You know this is the naked truth. But how terrible is the
thought to every serious mind! Into what a state is this
Christian nation fallen 1 nay, the men of eminence, of fortune,
of education! Would not a thinking foreigner, who should
be present at such an interview, be apt to conclude, that the
men of quality in England were Atheists? that they did not
believe there was any God at all; or, at best, but an Epicurean
god, who sat at ease upon the circle of the heavens, and did
not concern himself about us worms of the earth? Nay, but
He understands every thought now rising in your heart. And
how long can you put him out of your sight? Only till this
veil of flesh is rent in sunder; for your pomp will not then
follow you. Will not your body be mingled with common
dust, and your soul stand naked before God? O that you
would now “acquaint yourself with God,” that you may then
be clothed with glory and immortality
3. Did God complain of the Jews, “Even from the days of
your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have
not kept them?” And how justly may He make the same com
plaint of us; for how exceeding small a proportion do we find of
those in any place who call themselves Christians, that make a
conscience of attending them ! Does one-third of the inhabi
tants in any one parish throughout this great city constantly
attend public prayer, and the ministry of his word, as of con
science towards God? Does one-tenth of those who acknow
ledge it is an institution of Christ duly attend the Lord's
supper? Does a fiftieth part of the nominal members of the
Church of England observe the fasts of the Church, or so
much as the forty days of Lent, and all Fridays in the year?
Who of these, then, can cast the first stone at the Jews for
neglecting the ordinances of God?
Nay, how many thousands are found among us who have
never partook of the supper of the Lord! How many thou
sands are there that live and die in this unrepented disobedi
ence | What multitudes, even in this Christian city, do not
attend any public worship at all; no, nor spend a single hour
from one year to another, in privately pouring out their hearts
before God! Whether God “meeteth him that remembereth
him in his ways,” or not, is no concern of theirs: So the
man eats and drinks, and “dies as a beast dieth : ”
Drops into the dark, and disappears.
It was not, therefore, of the children of Israel alone that the
messenger of God might say, “There is none” (comparatively)
“that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth himself up to take
hold of thee.”
4. Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time,
“Because of swearing, the land mourneth.” But if this might
be said of the land of Canaan, how much more of this land
In what city or town, in what market or exchange, in what
street or place of public resort, is not the holy “name whereby
we are called ” taken in vain, day by day? From the noble
to the peasant, who fails to call upon God, in this, if in no
other, way? Whither can you turn, where can you go,
without hearing some praying to God for damnation, either
on his neighbour or himself? cursing those, without either fear
or remorse, whom Christ hath bought to inherit a blessing !
Are you one of these stupid, senseless, shameless wretches,
that call so earnestly for damnation on your own soul? What,
if God should take you at your word? Are you “able to dwell
with everlasting burnings?” If you are, yet why should you
be in haste to be in the “lake of fire burning with brimstone?”
God help you! or you will be there soon enough, and long
enough; for that “fire is not quenched !” But the “smoke
thereof ascendeth up, day and night, for ever and ever.”
And what is that important affair, concerning which you was
but now appealing to God? Was you “calling God to record
upon your soul,” touching your everlasting salvation? No;
but touching the beauty of your horse, the swiftness of your
dog, or the goodness of your drink. How is this? What
notion have you of God? What do you take him to be?
Idcirco stolidam prebet tibi vellere barbam
Jupiter **
What stupidity, what infatuation is this ! thus without either
pleasure, or profit, or praise, to set at nought Him that hath
“all power both in heaven and earth!” wantonly to “provoke
the eyes of his glory !”
Are you a man of letters who are sunk so low 7 I will not
then send you to the inspired writers, (so called;--perhaps you
disdain to receive instruction by them,) but the old, blind Hea
then. Could you only fix in your mind the idea he had of
God, (though it is not strictly just, unless we refer it to God.
made man,) you would never thus affront him more:
H, trai kvavenoriver oppval vevoe Kpovia"
Außporial 5' apa Xaltai erepôwaravro avakros
Kpatos ar’ affavatoio ueyay 3’ exeAièew OAvurov't
Shall not the very Heathen then “rise up in judgment
against this generation, and condemn it?” Yea, and not
only the learned Heathens of Greece and Rome, but the
savages of America; for I never remember to have heard a
wild Indian name the name of Sootaleicatee, (Him that sitteth
in heaven,) without either laying his hand upon his breast, or
casting his eyes down to the ground. And you are a Christian |
O how do you cause the very name of Christianity to be
blasphemed among the Heathen
5. But is it light swearing only, (inexcusable as that is,)
because of which our “land mourneth?” May it not also be
said of us, “Though they say, The Lord liveth, surely they
* Thinkest thou that God is mocked ?
+ Jove spake, and nodded with his sable brow,
And huge Olympus to his centre shook.
oF REASON AND RELIGION. 15]
swear falsely?” yea, to such a degree, that there is hardly the
like in any nation under heaven; that almost every corner of
the land is filled with wilful, deliberate perjury.
I speak not now of the perjuries which every common swearer
cannot but run into day by day: (And indeed common “swear
ing notoriously contributes to the growth of perjury; for oaths
are little minded when common use has sullied them, and every
minute’s repetition has made them cheap and vulgar:”) Nor of
those which are continually committed and often detected in
our open Courts of Justice. Only with regard to the latter I
must remark, that they are a natural consequence of that
monstrous, shocking manner wherein oaths are usually admin
istered therein; without any decency or seriousness at all; much
less with that awful solemnity which a rational Heathen would
expect in an immediate appeal to the great God of heaven.
I had once designed to consider all the oaths which are cus
tomarily taken by any set of men among us. But I soon
found this was a work too weighty for me; so almost in inft
nitum are oaths multiplied in England: I suppose, to a degree
which is not known in any other nation in Europe.
What I now propose is, to instance only in a few, (but those
notof small importance,) and to show how amazingly little regard
is had to what is solemnly promised or affirmed before God.
6. This is done in part to my hands by a late author. So far
as he goes, I shall little more than transcribe his words:--
“When a Justice of Peace is sworn into the commission, he
makes oath,-‘that he shall do equal right to the poor and to
the rich, after his cunning, wit, and power, and after the laws
and customs of the realm and statutes thereof made, in all arti
cles in the King’s commission to him directed.” What those
articlesare, you will find in thefirst Assignavimus of the commis
sion: ‘We have assigned you and every one of you, jointly and
severally, to keep, and cause to be kept, all ordinances and
statutes made for the quiet rule and government of our people,
in all and every the articles thereof, according to the force, form,
and effect of the same, and to chastise and punish all persons.
offending against any of them, according to the form of those
statutes and ordinances.’ So that he is solemnly sworn to the
execution of all such statutes as the legislative power of the
nation has thought fit to throw upon his care. Such are all
those (among others) made against drunkenness, tippling, pro
fane swearing, blasphemy, lewd and disorderly practices, and
profanation of the Lord's day. And it is hard to imagine how
a Justice of Peace can think himself more concerned to suppress
riots or private quarrels, than he is to levy twelve-pence on a
profane swearer, five shillings on a drunkard, ten shillings on
the public-house that suffers tippling, or any other penalty which
the law exacts on vice and immorality. The same oath binds
him both to one and the other, laying an equal obligation on
his conscience. Howa Magistrate who neglects topunish excess,
profaneness, and impiety, can excuse himself from the guilt of
perjury, I do not pretend to know. If he reasons fairly, he will
find himself as much forsworn, as an evidence who being upon
his oath to declare the whole truth, nevertheless conceals the
most considerable part of it. And his perjury is so much the
more infamous, as the ill example and effects of it will be mis
chievous.” (Mr. Disney's First Essay, Page 30.)
7. The same author (in the preface to his Second Essay)
goes on :
“You, gentlemen of the Grand Juries, take a solemn oath,
that “you will diligently inquire, and true presentment make, of
all such articles, matters, and things as shall be given you in
charge: As also, that you will (not only present no person for
envy, hatred, or malice, but) not leave any unpresented, for fear,
favour, or affection.” Now, are not the laws against immorality
and profaneness given you in charge, as well as those against
riots, felony, and treason P Are not presentment and indict
ment one method expressly appointed by the statutes, for the
punishment of drunkenness and tippling? Are not houses of
bawdry and gaming punishable in the same courts, and, conse
quently, presentable by you? Is not the proclamation for the
punishing of vice, profaneness, and immorality always read
before you as soon as you are sworn? And does not the Judge
of Assize, or Chairman of the Bench, in the charge given imme
diately after the reading it, either recite to you the particular
laws against such offences, or refer you for them to that procla
mation? It is plain from all this, that you are bound upon your
oaths to present all vice and immorality, as well as other crimes,
that fall within your knowledge, because they are expressly given
you in charge. And this you are to do, not only when evidence
isoffered before you by the information of others, but with regard
to all such offences as you or any of you are able, of your own
personal knowledge, to present; all which you have sworn to do
impartially, without fear, favour, or affection.”
I leave it now with all reasonable men to consider, how few
Grand Jurors perform this; and, consequently, what multi
tudes of them, throughout the nation, fall under the guilt of
wilful perjury !
8. The author proceeds: “I shall next address myself to you
that are Constables. And to you I must needs say, that if you
know your duty, it is no thanks to us that are Justices. For the
oath we usually give you is so short, and in such general terms,
that it leaves with you no manner of instruction in the par
ticulars of the office to which you are sworn. But that which
ought to be given you, recites part of your duty in the following
words:--
“You shall do your best endeavour, that rogues, vagabonds,
and night-walkers be apprehended; and that the statutes made
for their punishment be duly put in execution. You shall have
a watchful eye to such as shall keep any house or place where
any unlawful game is used; as also to such as shall frequent
such places, or shall use any unlawful game there or elsewhere.
You shall present all and every the offences contrary to the sta
tutes made to restrain the tippling in inns, alehouses, and other
victualling houses, and for repressing of drunkenness. You
shall once in the year, during your office, present all Popish
recusants. You shall well and duly execute all precepts and
warrants to you directed. And you shall well and duly, accord
ing to your knowledge, power, and ability, do and execute all
other things belonging to the office of a Constable, so long as
you shall continue therein.” (Page 8.)
“Upon this, I would observe, first, that actors of plays are
expressed by name within the statute, to be taken up for vaga
bonds, and punished accordingly; and that though a statute of
Queen Elizabeth’s excepts such companies as have a license
under the hand and seal of a Nobleman, yet a later statute in
the reign of King James the First has taken away that protec
tion from them, by declaring, that ‘from thenceforth no autho
rity to be given by any Peer of the realm shall be available to
free or discharge them from the pains and punishments of that
former statute. Every Constable, therefore, in those parishes
where any of these strolling players come, is bound by his oath,
to seize upon, correct, and send them packing without delay.
“The next part of your oath obliges you to keep a watchful
eye on such houses as keep, and such persons as use, unlawful
gaming. The statute directs you weekly, or at least monthly,
to search within your liberties all houses or places suspected of
this offence, and, upon discovering, to bring them to punish
ment. Upon this article, I would observe, (1.) That the law
makes some allowance for artificers, husbandmen, apprentices,
labourers, and servants, to play in Christmas, but at no other
time of the year; and, (2.) That all sports and pastimes what
soever are made unlawful upon the Lord’s day, by a statute of
King Charles II. You are therefore bound upon oath, to bring
to punishment such as are guilty of profaning that day by any
sports or pastimes whatsoever.
“The following parts of your oath are, (1.) That you shall
present all and every the offences of tippling and drunkenness
that come to your knowledge. (2.) That you shall once in the
year present all Popish recusants; nay, and by the statute on
which your oath is grounded, you are obliged once a year to
present in Session all those within your parishes who (not being
Dissenters) come not once in a month, at least, to church.
And, (3.) That you shall well and duly execute all precepts and
warrants to you directed. I believe no Constable will pre
tend to be ignorant of this. How is it then, that when we send
out warrants, to levy on offenders for swearing, drunkenness,
and the like, those warrants are so ill obeyed? Are you not
sworn to execute these as well as any other, and that duly too,
according to the tenor of your precept 7 Your precept tells
you, You shall demand such a sum; and if the offender will
not pay, you shall levy it by distress of his goods; and if no
distress can be taken, you are then only to set him in the
stocks; otherwise you have no authority so to do; nor is the
setting him in the stocks, when you might have distrained,
any execution of your precept.
“The last part of your oath is in general terms: That you
shall well and duly, according to your knowledge, power, and
ability, do and execute all other things belonging to the office
of a Constable. I shall instance in some things which certainly
belong to your office, because you, and none else, can do them.
(1.) A Constable may, without a warrant, apprehend any per
sons, and carry them before a Justice, who are driving carts,
horses, or cattle on the Lord’s day. (2.) Such as he shall find
at sports and pastimes on that day. (3.) Such as he shall find
tippling in public houses. (4.) Shopkeepers selling, or exposing
goods to sale, on the Lord’s day. And, Lastly, such as he shall
find drunk or blaspheming, or profanely swearing or cursing.
“Thus I have shown you, in part, what belongs to your
office: It is well, if, according to the tenor of your oath, you
duly, according to your knowledge and ability, do and execute
all these things. But remember, that, if you do not, if you
neglect any of them, you are forsworn.”
Now let all men judge, how many Constables in England
are clear of wilful perjury !
9. “I will now,” he goes on, “address myself to Church
wardens. Your oath is, ‘that you shall well and truly execute
the office of a Churchwarden, for the ensuing year; and, to
the best of your skill and knowledge, present such persons
and things as are presentable by the ecclesiastical laws of this
realm.’ I shall set down only a few of these.
“The statute of King James I. obliges you to present, once
a year, all monthly absenters from church.
“The ninetieth Canon enjoins you, first to admonish, and
then, if they reform not, to present, all your parishioners who
do not duly resort to church on Sundays, and there continue
the whole time of divine service. On this article observe, (1.)
That a person’s being absent from church, is ground sufficient
for you to proceed. (2.) That you are not only to present
those who do not come to church, but also those that
behave irreverently or indecently there, either walking about
or talking; all who do not abide there, orderly and soberly,
the whole time of service and sermon, and all that loiter away
any part of that time in the churchyard or in the fields.
“The one hundred and twelfth Canon enjoins you, within
forty days after Easter, to exhibit to the Bishop, or his Chan
cellor, the names of all above the age of sixteen, within your
parish, that did not receive the communion.
“Other statutes oblige you to present drunkenness, tippling,
and public houses suffering persons to tipple in them.
“And the one hundred and ninth Canon binds you to pre
sent all manner of vice, profaneness, and debauchery, requiring
you faithfully to present all and every the offenders in adul
tery, whoredom, drunkenness, profane swearing, or any other
uncleanness and wickedness of life. It is therefore a part of
that office to which you are solemnly sworn, to present, not only
all drunkenness and tippling, but profane swearing, lewdness,
and whatsoever else is contrary to Christian piety. So that
if you know any of your parishioners, be his quality or cir
cumstances what they will, that is guilty of any of these, you
are obliged to present him at the next visitation, or you are
yourselves guilty of perjury. And the twenty-sixth Canon
expresses such an abhorrence of a Churchwarden's neglect in
this matter, that it forbids the Minister, in any wise, to admit
you to the holy communion, ‘who, as the words of the Canon
are, ‘having taken your oaths to present all such offences in
your several parishes, shall, notwithstanding your said oaths,
either in neglecting or refusing to present, wittingly and will
ingly, desperately and irreligiously, incur the horrid guilt of
perjury.’”
And who is clear? I appeal to every Minister of a parish,
from one end of England to the other, how many Church
wardens have you known, in twenty, thirty, forty years, who
did not thus “desperately and irreligiously incur the horrid
guilt of perjury?”
10. I proceed to perjuries of another kind. The oath
taken by all Captains of ships, every time they return from a
trading voyage, runs in these terms:
“I do swear, that the entry above written, now tendered
and subscribed by me, is a just report of the name of my ship,
its burden, bulk, property, number and country of mariners,
the present Master and voyage; and that it doth farther contain
a true account of my lading, with the particular marks, num
bers, quantity, quality, and consignment of all the goods and
merchandises in my said ship, to the best of my knowledge;
and that I have not broke bulk, or delivered any goods out
of my said ship, since her loading in. So help me God.”
These words are so clear, express, and unambiguous, that
they require no explanation. But who takes this plain oath,
without being knowingly and deliberately forsworn ? Does one
Captain in fifty? Does one in five hundred? May we not
go farther yet? Are there five Captains of vessels now in
London, who have not, at one time or another, by this very
oath, which they knew to be false when they took it, incurred
the guilt of wilful perjury?
11. The oath which all Officers of His Majesty's Customs
take, at their admission into the office, runs thus:
“I do swear to be true and faithful in the execution, to the
best of my knowledge and power, of the trust committed to my
charge and inspection, in the service of His Majesty’s Customs;
and that I will not take or receive any reward or gratuity,
directly or indirectly, other than my salary, or what is or shall
be allowed me from the Crown, or the regular fees established
by law, for any service done or to be done in the execution of
my employment in the Customs, on any account whatsoever.
So help me God.”
On this it may be observed, (1.) That there are regular fees,
“established by law,” for some of these officers: (2.) That the
rest do hereby engage not to take or receive “any reward or
gratuity, directly or indirectly,” other than their salary or
allowance from the Crown, “on any account whatsoever.”
How do the former keep this solemn engagement? they
whose fees are “established by law?” Do they take those
established fees, and no more? Do they not “receive any
farther gratuity,” not “on any account whatsoever?” If they
do, they are undeniably guilty of wilful perjury.
And do the latter take no fees at all? Do they receive “no
reward or gratuity, for any service done, or to be done, in the
execution of their employment?” Do they not take any
money, “directly or indirectly, on any account whatsoever?”
Every time they do receive either more or less, they also are
flatly forsworn.
Yet who scruples either the one or the other? either the
taking a larger fee than the law appoints; or the taking any fee,
large or small, which is offered, even where the law appoints
none at all?
What innumerable perjuries, then, are here committed, over
and over, day by day! and without any remorse; without any
shame; without any fear either of God or man |
12. I will produce but one instance more. The oath of one
who votes for a Member of Parliament is this:--
“I do swear, I have not received or had, by myself, or of
any person whatsoever in trust for me, or for my use and benefit,
directly or indirectly, any sum or sums of money, office, place,
or employment, gift, or reward, or any promise or security for
any money, office, employment, or gift, in order to give my vote
at this election, and that I have not before been polled at this
election. So help me God.”
158 a rarTHER APPEAL TO MEN
We may observe here, (1.) That this oath is taken once in
seven years (if required) by all the freeholders, in every county
throughout England and Wales, as well as by all the freemen
in every city and borough-town: And, (2.) That hereby every
voter swears, in words liable to no evasion, that he has not
received, directly or indirectly, any gift or reward, or promise of
any.
But, to pass over those godless and shameless wretches who
frequently vote twice at one election, how few are there who
can take this oath with a conscience void of offence who have
not received, directly or indirectly, any gift, or promise of any |
No! have not you? If you have received nothing else, have
not you received meat or drink? And did you pay for the meat
or drink you received ? If not, that was a gift; and, conse
quently, you are as really perjured as the man that has received
an hundred pounds.
What a melancholy prospect is then before us! Here are
almost all the common people of any substance throughout the
land, both in the city and country, calling God to record to a
known, wilful falsehood |
13. I shall conclude this head in the weighty words of the
author before cited:--
“Most of these, I am afraid, look upon their oaths as things
of course, and little to be regarded. But can there be anything
in the world more sacred than an oath ? Is it not a solemn
appeal to God for your sincerity? And is not that very appeal
an acknowledgment, that he will surely punish falsehood? Nay,
farther, is it not a calling down the vengeance of God upon
yourselves, if you are false? Do you not, by laying your hand
upon the Gospel, declare that you hope for no salvation by
Christ, if you perform not what you then promise, or if what
you then affirm is not true? And do not the words, ‘So help
me God,” sufficiently prove, that the intention of your oath is
so; and that if you swear false, you are to expect no mercy
from God, either in this world or the next? And do you not
personally and expressly give your consent to this heavy curse,
by kissing the book? How, then, dare any of you to venture
to play with so awful an engagement? Is it that you think the
oath of a Grand-Juryman or parish-officer” (of a Captain, an
Officer of the Customs, or a voter in elections) “is not as sacred
and binding as that of an evidence at the bar? What is it can
make the difference? Both of them are equally appeals to
God, and imprecations of his vengeance upon wilful perjury.”
14. If there be, then, a God that is not mocked, what a
weight of sin lies on this nation and sin of no common dye;
for perjury has always been accounted one of the deepest
stain. And how will any one attempt to excuse this? by
adding blasphemy thereto? So indeed some have done;
saying, like those of old, “Tush, thou God carest not for it.
The Lord seeth.” (that is, regardeth) “us not. The Lord
hath forsaken the earth.” He has left second causes to take
their course, and man “in the hand of his own counsel.”
How many are they who now speak thus ! according to
whose minute philosophy the particular providence of God is
utterly exploded; the hairs of our head are no longer numbered;
and not only a sparrow, but a city, an empire, may fall to the
ground, without the will or care of our heavenly Father. You
allow, then, only a general Providence. I do not understand
the term. Be so kind as to let me know what you mean by a
“general Providence, contradistinguished from a particular
one.” I doubt you are at a loss for an answer; unless you mean
some huge, unwieldy thing, (I suppose, resembling the primum
snobile in the Ptolemaic system,) which continually whirls the
whole universe round, without affecting one thing more than
another. I doubt this hypothesis will demand more proof than
you are at present able to produce; beside that, it is attended
with a thousand difficulties, such as you cannot readily solve.
It may be, therefore, your wisest way for once to think with the
vulgar, to acquiesce in the plainscriptural account. This informs
us, that although God dwelleth in heaven, yet he still “ruleth
over all;” that his providence extends to every individual in the
whole system of beings which he hath made; that all natural
causes of every kind depend wholly upon his will; and he
increases, lessens, suspends, or destroys their efficacy, according
to his own good pleasure; that he uses preternatural causes at
his will,--the ministry of good or of evil angels; and that he
hath never yet precluded himself from exerting his own
immediate power, from speaking life or death into any of his
creatures, from looking a world into being or into nothing.
“Thinkest thou then, O man, that thou shalt escape the
judgment of” this great God? O, no longer “treasure up unto
thyself wrath against the day of wrath!” Thou canst not recal
what is past; but now “keep thyself pure,” even were it at
the price of all that thou hast; and acknowledge the goodness.
of God, in that he did not long since cut thee off, and send
thee to thy own place.-
15. The Jews of old were charged by God with profaning
his Sabbath also. And do we Christians come behind them
herein? (I speak of those who acknowledge the obligation.)
Do we call “the Sabbath a delight, holy of the Lord,
honourable; not doing our own ways, not finding our own
pleasure, nor speaking our own words?” Do our “man-servant
and maid-servant” rest thereon, and “the stranger that is
within our gates?” Is no business, but what is really neces
sary, done within our house? You know in your own conscience,
and God knoweth, that the very reverse of this is true.
But setting aside these things, which are done, as it were,
by stealth, whether by mean or honourable men; how many
are they, in every city, as well as in this, who profane the
Sabbath with a high hand? How many in this, that openly
defy both God and the King, that break the laws, both divine
and human, by working at their trade, delivering their goods,
receiving their pay, or following their ordinary business, in
one branch or another, and “wiping their mouths and saying,
I do no evil.” How many buy and sell on the day of the
Lord, even in the open streets of this city ? How many open
or (with some modesty) half open their shops? even when
they have not the pretence of perishable goods; without any
pretence at all; money is their god, and gain their godliness.
But what are all these droves in the skirts of the town, that
well-nigh cover the face of the earth? till they drop one after
another into the numerous receptacles prepared for them in
every corner. What are these to gain by profaning the day
of the Lord? Nothing at all. They “drink in iniquity like
water.” Nay, many of them pay for their sin; perhaps great
part of what should sustain their family the ensuing week. I
know not what is “finding our own pleasure, or doing our own
ways,” if this is not. What then shall we plead in your excuse?
that “many others do it as well as you?” Nay, number is so
far from extenuating your fault, that it aggravates it above
measure. For this is open war against God. And a whole
army of you joins together, and with one consent, in the face
of the sun, “runs upon the thick bosses of his buckler.”
16. It is oncementioned in the Prophets, “In thee” (Jeru
salem) “they have set light by father and mother.” But fre
quent mention is made of their setting light by their civil
parents, of their murmurings and rebellions against their
governors. Yet surely our boasting against them is excluded,
even in this respect. For do not all our histories witness
such a series of mutinies, seditions, factions, and rebellions,
as are scarce to be paralleled in any other kingdom since the
world began? And has not the wild, turbulent, ungovernable
spirit of our countrymen been continually acknowledged and
lamented (as abundance of their writings testify to this day) by
the cool, rational part of the nation? Terrible effects whereof
have been seen and felt, more or less, in every generation.
But did this spirit exist only in times past? Blessed be
God, it is now restrained, it does not break out; but the
traces thereof are still easy to be found. For, whence
springs this continual “speaking evil of dignities 7 ° of all
who are at the helm of public affairs? Whence this “speak
ing evil of the ruler of our people,” so common among all
orders of men? I do not include those whose province it is
to inspect all the public administrations. But is not almost
every private gentleman in the land, every Clergyman, every
tradesman, yea, every man or woman that has a tongue, a
politician, a settler of the state? Is not every carman and
porter abundantly more knowing than the King, Lords, and
Commons together? able to tell you all their foibles, to point
out their faults and mistakes, and how they ought to proceed,
if they will save the nation? Now all this has a natural,
undeniable tendency to mutiny and rebellion. O what need
have we, above any nation upon earth, of His continual care
and protection, who alone is able to “rule the raging of the
sea, and still the madness of the people!”
17. But to proceed: Were there “drunkards in Ephraim,
mighty to drink wine, men of strength to mingle strong
drink?” And are there not in England? Are they not the
growth of every county, city, and town therein P These do not
indeed, or not often, “rise up early, that they may follow
strong drink; ” and so “continue till night, till wine inflame
them.” They have found a readier way; namely, to begin
at night, and continue following their wine or strong drink
till the morning. And what numbers are there of these
throughout the land 1 lost to reason and humanity, as well as
to religion; so that no wonder “they regard not the works of
the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands.”
Nor indeed have our drunkards need to continue from morn
ing “to night, until wine inflame them; ” seeing they have
found a far more compendious method of casting aside all sensc.
and reason, and disencumbering themselves of all remains
either of conscience or understanding So that whatever work
of darkness is speedily to be done, and that without any danger
of being interrupted, either by fear, compassion, or remorse, they
may be in a few moments, by one draught, as effectually quali
fied for it, as if they could swallow a legion of devils. Or, (if
that be all their concern,) they may, at a moderate expense,
destroy their own body as well as soul, and plunge through
this liquid fire into that “prepared for the devil and his angels.”
Friend! stop. You have the form of a man still ; and per
haps some remains of understanding. O may the merciful God
lay hold of that Unto him all things are possible. Think a
little for once. What is it you are doing? Why should you
destroy yourself? I could not use the worst enemy I have in
the world as you use yourself. Why should you murder your
self inch by inch? Why should you burn yourself alive? O
spare your own body at least, if you have no pity for your soul!
But have you a soul then? Do you really believe it? What,
a soul that must live for ever! O spare thy soul! Do not
destroy thy own soul with an everlasting destruction | 1t was
made for God. Do not give it into the hands of that old mur
derer of men! Thou canst not stupify it long. When it leaves
the body, it will awake and sleep no more. Yet a little while,
and it launches out into the great deep, to live, and think, and
feel for ever. And what will cheer thy spirit there, if thou hast
not a drop of water to cool thy tongue? But the die is not
yet cast: Now cry to God, and iniquity shall not be thy ruin.
18. Of old time there were also those that “were at ease in
Zion, that lay upon beds of ivory, and stretched themselves
upon their couches, that ate the lambs out of the flock, and
calves out of the stall.” But how inelegant were these ancient
epicures !“Lambs out of the flock, and calves out of the stall!”
Were these the best dainties they could procure? How have
we improved since Jeroboam’s time! Who can number the
varieties of our tables? or the arts we have “to enlarge the
pleasure of tasting?” And what are their couches, or beds
of ivory, to the furniture of our apartments? or their “chains,
and bracelets, and mantles, and changeable suits of apparel,”
to the ornaments of our persons? What comparison is there
between their diversions and ours? Look at Solomon in all his
glory, and yet may we not question, whether he was not an
utter stranger to the pleasures of the chase ? And, notwith
standing his forty thousand horses, did he ever see a race in
his life? He “made gardens, and orchards, and pools of
water; he planted vineyards, and built houses; ” but had he
one theatre among them all? No. This is the glory of later
times. Or had he any conception of a ball, an assembly, a
masquerade, or a ridotto ? And who imagines that all his
instruments of music, put together, were any more to be com
pared to ours, than his or his father’s rumbling Hebrew verses,
To the soft sing-song of Italian lays.
In all these points, our pre-eminence over the Jews is much
every way.-
Yea, and over our own ancestors, as well as theirs. But is
this our glory, or our shame? Were Edward III. or IIenry V.
to come among us now, what would they think of the change
in their people? Would they applaud the elegant variety at
the old Baron’s table? or the costly delicacy of his furniture
and apparel ? Would they listen to these instruments of music,
or find pleasure in those diversions? Would they rejoice to
see the Nobles and Gentry of the land lying “at ease, stretch
ing themselves on beds” of down? too delicate to use their
own limbs, even in the streets of the city; to bear the touch of
the people, the blowing of the wind, or the shining of the sun
O how would their hearts burn within them | What indigna
tion, sorrow, shame must they feel, to see the ancient hardiness
lost, the British temperance, patience, and scorn of superflu
ities, the rough, indefatigable industry, exchanged for softness,
“idleness, and fulness of bread!” Well for them, that they
were gathered unto their fathers before this exchange was made!
19. To prove at large, that the luxury and sensuality, the
sloth and indolence, the softness and idleness, the effeminacy
and false delicacy of our nation are without a parallel, would
be but lost labour. I fear, we may say, the lewdness too; for
if the Jews, as the Prophet speaks, “assembled themselves by
troops in the harlots’ houses,” so do the English, and much
more abundantly. Indeed, where is male chastity to be
found? among the Nobility, among the Gentry, among the
tradesmen, or among the common people of England? How
few lay any claim to it at all ! How few desire so much as
the reputation of it ! Would you yourself account it an
honour or a reproach, to be ranked among those of whom it is
said, “These are they which are not defiled with women: For
they are virgins?” And how numerous are they now, even
among such as are accounted men of honour and probity, “who
are as fed horses, everyone neighing after his neighbour's wife!”
But as if this were not enough, is not the sin of Sodom,
too, more common among us than ever it was in Jerusalem?
Are not our streets beset with those monsters of uncleanness,
who “burn in their lust one toward another,” whom God
hath “given up to a reprobate mind, to do those things which
are not convenient?” O Lord, thy compassions fail not:
Therefore we are not consumed.
20. Neither do we yield to them in injustice, any more than
uncleanness. How frequent are open robberies among us! Is
not “the act of violence ’’ even “in our streets?” And what
laws are sufficient to prevent it? Does not theft of various kinds
abound in all parts of the land, even though death be the
punishment of it? And are there not among us, who “take
usury and increase,” who “greedily gain of their neighbour by
extortion?” yea, whole trades which subsist by such extortion
as was not named either among the Jews or Heathens? “Is
there not ” yet “the scant measure, the wicked balances, and
the bag of deceitful weights?” beside the thousand nameless
ways of over-reaching and defrauding, the craft and mystery of
every trade and profession. It were an endless task to descend
to particulars, to point out in every circumstance, how not only
sharpers and gamesters, (those public nuisances, those scandals
to the English nation,) but high and low, rich and poor, men of
character, and men of none, in every station of public or private
life, “have corrupted themselves,” and generally applaud them
selves, and count it policy and wisdom so to do; so that if gain
be at hand, they care not though “justice stand afar off; ” so
that “he which departeth from evil,” which cometh not into
their secret, still “maketh himself a prey;” and “the wicked”
still “devoureth the man that is more righteous than he.”
And what redress? Suppose a great man to oppress the
needy; suppose the rich grinds the face of the poor; what
remedy against such oppression can he find in this Christian
country? If the one is rich and the other poor, doth not
justice stand afar off? And is not the poor under the utmost
improbability (if not impossibility) of obtaining it? Perhaps
the hazard is greater among us, than either among Jews,
Turks, or Heathens.
For example: Suppose a great man, with or without form
of law, does wrong to his poor neighbour. What will he do?
sue his lordship at common law P have the cause tried at the
next Sessions or Assizes? Alas! your own neighbours, those
who know the whole case, will tell you, “You are out of your
senses.” “But twelve good men and true will do me justice.”
Very well; but where will you find them;--men unbiassed,
incapable of corruption, superior both to fear and favour, to
every view, whether of gain or loss? But this is not all;
they must not only be good and true, but wise and under
standing men. Else how easy is it for a skilful Pleader to
throw a mist before their eyes? even supposing too the Judge
to be quite impartial, and proof against all corruption. And
should all these circumstances concur, (of which I fear there
are not many precedents) supposing a verdict is given in your
favour, still you have gained nothing. The suit is removed
into a higher court, and you have all your work to begin
again. Here you have to struggle with all the same difficul
ties as before, and perhaps many new ones too. However, if
you have money enough, you may succeed; but if that fails,
your cause is gone. Without money, you can have no more
law; poverty alone utterly shuts out justice.
But “cannot an honest Attorney procure me justice?” An
honest Attorney ! Where will you find one? Of those who
are called exceeding honest Attorneys, who is there that
makes any scruple,--
(1) To promote and encourage needless suits, if not unjust
Ones too :
(2.) To defend a bad cause, knowing it so to be,--
By making a demur, and then withdrawing it;
By pleading some false plea, to the plaintiff’s declaration;
By putting in an evasive answer to his bill;
By protracting the suit, if possible, till the plaintiff is ruined:
(3.) To carry a cause not amounting to ten shillings into
Westminster-Hall, by laying it in his declaration as above forty:
(4.) To delay his own client's suit knowingly and wilfully,
in order to gain more thereby:
(5.) To draw himself the pleadings or conveyances of his
client, instead of giving them to be drawn by able Counsel:
(6) To charge his client with the fees which should have
been given to such Counsel, although they were not given:
(7.) To charge for drawing fair copies, where none were
drawn :
(8.) To charge fees for expedition given to clerks, when not
one farthing has been given them:
(9.) To send his clerk a journey (longer or shorter) to do
business with or for different persons; and to charge the horse
hire and expense of that journey to every person severally:
(10.) To send his clerk to Westminster, on the business of
ten (it may be) or twenty persons, and to charge each of these
twenty for his attendance, as if he had been sent on account
of one only :
(11.) To charge his own attendance in like manner: And,
(12.) To fill up his bill with attendances, fees, and term
fees, though his client is no whit forwarder in his cause ?
This is he that is called an honest Attorney ! How much
homester is a pickpocket!
But there is a Magistrate whose peculiar office it is to redress
the injured and oppressed. Go, then, and make trial of this
remedy; go, and tell your case to the Lord Chancellor. Hold;
you must go on regularly; you must tell him your case in form
of law, or not at all. You must therefore file a bill in Chancery,
and retain a Lawyer belonging to that court. “But you have
already spent all you have; you have no money.” Then I fear
you will have no justice. You stumble at the threshold. If
you have either lost or spent all, your cause is nought; it will
not cven come to a hearing. So, if the oppressor has secured
all that you had, he is as safe as if you was under the earth.
1. Now, what an amazing thing is this ! The very greatness
of the villany makes it beyond redress! But suppose he that
is oppressed has some substance left, and can go through all
the Courts of Justice, what parallel can we find among Jews,
Turks, or Heathens, for either the delays or the expense attend
ing it? With regard to the former, how monstrous is it, that in
a suit relating to that inheritance which is to furnish you and
your family with food and raiment, you must wait month after
month, perhaps year after year, before it is determined whether
it be yours or not ! And what are you to eat or to wear in the
mean time? Of that the Court takes no cognizance! Is not
this very delay (suppose there were no other grievance attend
ing the English course of law) wrong beyond all expression?
contrary to all sense, reason, justice, and equity? A capital
cause is tried in one day, and finally decided at once. And “is
the life less than meat; or the body of less concern than rai
ment?” What a shameless mockery of justice, then, is this
putting off pecuniary causes from term to term, yea, from
year to year!
With regard to the latter: A man has wronged me of a hun
dred pounds. I appeal to a Judge for the recovery of it. How
astonishing is it that this Judge himself cannot give me what is
my right, and whatevidently appears so to be, unless I first give,
perhaps, one half of the sum to men I neversaw beforein my life!
22. I have hitherto supposed that all causes, when they are
decided, are decided according to justice and equity. But is it
so P Ye learned in the law, is no unjust sentence given in your
Courts? Have not the same causes been decided quite opposite
ways? one way this term, just the contrary the next? Perhaps
one way in the morning, (this I remember an instance of) and
another way in the afternoon. How is this? Is there no justice
left on earth; no regard for right or wrong? Or have causes
been puzzled so long, that you know not now what is either
wrong or right; what is agreeable to law, or contrary to it?
I have heard some of you frankly declare, that it is in many
cases next to impossible to know what is law, and what is not.
So are your folios of law multiplied upon you, that no human
brain is able to contain them; no, nor any consistent scheme
or abstract of them all.
But is it really owing to ignorance of the law (this is the
most favourable supposition) that so few of you scruple taking
fees on either side of almost any cause that can be conceived;
and that you generally plead in the manner you do on any side
of any cause; rambling to and fro in a way so abhorrent from
common sense, and so utterly foreign to the question? I have
been amazed at hearing the pleadings of some eminent Coun
sel; and when it has fallen out that the Pleader on the other
side understood only the common rules of logic, he has made
those eminent men appear either such egregious knaves, if they
could help it, or such egregious blockheads, if they could not,
that one would have believed they would show their face there
no more. Meantime, if there be a God that judgeth righteously,
what horrid insults upon him are these ! “Shall I not visit
for these things, saith the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged
on such a nation as this?”
23. There is one instance more of (I know not what to term
it) injustice, oppression, sacrilege, which hath long cried aloud
in the ears of God. For among men, who doth hear? I mean
the management of many of those who are entrusted with our
public charitics. By the pious munificence of our forefathers
we have abundance of these of various kinds: But is it not
glaringly true, (to touch only on a few generals,) that the
managers of many of them either (1.) do not apply the bene
faction to that use for which it was designed by the benefactor;
or (2.) do not apply it with such care and frugality as in such
a case are indispensably required; or (3.) do not apply the
whole of the benefaction to any charitable use at all; but
secrete part thereof, from time to time, for the use of themselves
and their families; or, lastly by plain barefaced oppression,
exclude those from having any part in such benefaction, who
dare (though with all possible tenderness and respect) set
before them the things that they have done?
Yet Brutus is an honourable man:
So are they all: All honourable men 1
And some of them had in esteem for religion; accounted pat
terns both of honesty and piety But God “seeth not as man
seeth.” He “shall repay them to their face;” perhaps even
in the present world. For that scripture is often still fulfilled:
“This is the curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole
earth. I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of Hosts, and it
shall enter into the house of the thief,” (such he is, and no
better, in the eyes of God, no whit honester than a highway
man,) “and it shall remain in the midst of the house, and shall
consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof.”
24. And is not truth, as well as “justice, fallen in our
streets?” For who “speaketh the truth from his heart?” Who
is there that makes a conscience of speaking the thing as it is,
whenever he speaks at all? Who scruples the telling of offi
cious lies? the varying from truth, in order to do good? How
strange does that saying of the ancient fathers sound in modern
ears “I would not tell a lie, no, not to save the souls of the
whole world.” Yet is this strictly agreeable to the word of
Sod; to that of St. Paul in particular, If any say, “Let us
do evil that good may come, their damnation is just.”
But how many of us do this evil without ever considering
whether good will come or no; speaking what we do not
mean, merely out of custom, because it is fashionable so to
do ! What an immense quantity of falsehood does this
ungodly fashion occasion day by day! for hath it not overrun
every part of the nation? How is all our language swoln with
compliment; so that a well-bred person is not expected to
speak as he thinks; we do not look for it at his hands ! Nay,
who would thank him for it? how few would suffer it ! It
was said of old, even by a warrior and a King, “He that
telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight:” But are we not of
another mind? Do not we rather say, “He that telleth not
lies shall not tarry in my sight?” Indeed the trial seldom
comes; for both speakers and hearers are agreed that form
and ceremony, flattery and compliment, should take place,
and truth be banished from all that know the world.
And if the rich and great have so small regard to truth, as
to lie even for lying sake, what wonder can it be that men of
lower rank will do the same thing for gain? what wonder
that it should obtain, as by common consent, in all kinds of
buying and selling? Is it not an adjudged case, that it is no
harm to tell lies in the way of trade; to say that is the lowest
price which is not the lowest; or that you will not take what
you do take immediately? Insomuch that it is a proverb
even among the Turks, when asked to abate of their price,
“What I do you take me to be a Christian?” So that never
was that caution more seasonable than it is at this day:
“Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not
in any brother: For every brother will utterly supplant, and
they will deceive every one his neighbour.”
25. And as for those few who abstain from outward sins, is
their heart right with God? May he not say of us also, as of
the Jews, “This people is uncircumcised in heart?” Are not
you? Do you then “love the Lord your God with all your
heart, and with all your strength?” Is he your God and your
all, the desire of your eyes, the joy of your very heart?
Rather, do you not “set up your idols in your heart?” Is not
your belly your God, or your diversion, or your fair reputation,
or your friend, or wife, or child? That is, plainly, do not
you delight in some of these earthly goods, more than in the
God of heaven? Nay, perhaps you are one of those grovel
ling souls that “pant after the dust of the earth !” Indeed,
who does not? Who does not get as much as he can 2 Who
of those that are not accounted covetous, yet does not gather
all the money he can fairly, and perhaps much more? For
are they those only whom the world rank among misers that
use every art to increase their fortune; toiling early and late,
spending all their strength in “loading themselves with thick
clay?” How long? Until the very hour when God calleth
them; when he saith unto each of them, “Thou fool! this
night shall thy soul be required of thee! And whose shall
those things be which thou hast prepared ?”
26. And yet doth not our pride, even the pride of those whose
soul “cleaves to the dust, testify against us?” Are they not
“wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own conceit?”
Have not writers of our own remarked, that there is not upon
earth a more self-conceited nation than the English; more opi
niated both of their own national and personal wisdom, and
courage, and strength? And indeed, if we may judge by the in
habitants of London, this is evident to a demonstration; for are
not the very meanest of them able to instruct both the King and
all his Counsellors? What cobbler in London is not wiser than
the principal Secretary of State? What coffee-house disputer is
not an abler Divine than his Grace of Canterbury? And how
deep a contempt of others is joined with this high opinion of our
selves ! I know not whether the people of all other nations are
greater masters of dissimulation; but there does not appear in
any nation whateversuch a proneness to despise their neighbour;
to despise, not foreigners only, (near two thousand years ago they
remarked, Britannos hospitibus feros,”) but their own country
men; and that very often for such surprising reasons as nothing
but undeniable fact could make credible. How often does the
gentleman in his coach despise those dirty fellows that go a-foot;
and these, on the other hand, despise full as much those lazy
fellows that loll in their coaches ! No wonder then that those
who have “the form of godliness” should despise them that have
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Francis :
-“Britons of inhospitable strain.”-EDIT.
it not; that the saint of the world so frequently says to the
gross sinner, in effect, if not in terms, “Stand by thyself;
come not near unto me; for I am holier than thou !”
27. Yet what kind of holiness is this? May not God
justly declare of us also, “This people draw near me with
their mouth, but they have removed their hearts far from me:
They do but flatter me with their mouth, and dissemble with
me in their tongue?” Is it not so with you? When you
speak to God, do your lips and your heart go together? Do
you not often utter words by which you mean just nothing?
Do not you say and unsay; or say one thing to God, and
another to man? For instance, you say to God, “Vouchsafe,
O Lord, to keep me this day without sin: ” But you say to
man, “This cannot be done; it is all folly and madness to
expect it.” You ask of God that you “may perfectly love him,
and worthily magnify his holy name: ” But you tell man,
“There is no perfect love upon earth; it is only a madman’s
dream.” You pray God to “cleanse the thoughts of your heart,
by the inspiration of his Holy Spirit:” But you assure your
neighbour there is no such thing as inspiration now, and that
none pretend to it but enthusiasts. What gross hypocrisy is
this! Surely you think there is no “knowledge in the Most
High. O be not deceived ! God is not mocked. But
whatsoever ye sow, that also shall ye reap !”
28. Such at present is the religion of this Christian nation |
So do we honour Him by whose name we are called ! And yet
was there ever a nation more careless and secure, more unap
prehensive of the wrath of God? How can a man more effectu
ally expose himself to the ridicule of those who are esteemed
men of understanding, than by showing any concern, as if the
judgments of God were hanging over our heads? Surely then,
“a deceived heart hath turned us aside, that we cannot say, Is
there not a lie in my fight hand?” Surely this our confidence
is not of God; it is rather a judicial infatuation, a stupid insen
sibility, a deep sleep, the forerunner of heavy vengeance.
Ruin behind it stalks, and empty desolation.
Surely never was any people more fitted for destruction
“Impudent children are they, and stiff-hearted. Are they
ashamed when they have committed abomination;” when they
have openly profaned the day of the Lord; when they have
committed lewdness; or when they have uttered such curses
and blasphemies as are not heard of among the Heathens?
Nay, “they are not at all ashamed, neither can they blush.”
And though God send unto them all his servants, rising up
early and sending them, yet “will they not hear; they harden
their neck; they do worse than their fathers.”
What, then, can “God do more for his vineyard which he
hath not done?” He hath long tried us with mercies,
“giving rain and fruitful seasons, filling us with the flour of
wheat.” But still “this revolting and rebellious people say
not, Let us now fear the Lord our God.” Nay, they gave him
no thanks for all his mercies; they did not even acknowledge
them to be his gift. They did not see the hand of God in any
of these things; they could account for them another way. O
ye unwise, when will ye understand? Know ye not yet, there
is a God that ruleth the world? What did ye see with your
eyes? Was the “race to the swift, or the battle to the
strong?” Have ye forgotten Dettingen already? Does not
England know that God was there? Or suppose your con
tinuance in peace, or success in war, be the mere result of
your own wisdom and strength; do ye command the sun and
the clouds also ? Can ye pour out or “stay the bottles of
heaven?” But let it all be nature, chance, anything,-so
God may have no hand in governing the earth !
29. Will his judgments bring us to a better mind? Do we
“hear the rod, and Him that has appointed it?” Let us observe:
What fruit do we find in those who are “even consumed by
means of his heavy hand?” Let any one that desires to be
clearly satisfied herein visit the hospitals of this city. Let
him judge for himself how the patients there receive God’s
fatherly visitation; especially there, because mercy also is
mixed with judgment; so that it is evident “the Lord loveth
whom he chasteneth.” Go then into any ward, either of men
or women; look narrowly from one end to the other: Are they
humbling themselves under the hand of God? Are they trem
bling under a sense of his anger? Are they praising him for
his love? Are they exhorting one another not to faint when
they are rebuked of him ? How do nine in ten of them spend
the time, that important time, from morning to evening?
Why, in such a manner, that you would not easily learn, from
thence, whether they were Christians, Pagans, or Mahometans.
Is there any deeper distress than this to be found? Is there
a greater affliction than the loss of health? Perhaps there is,
--the loss of liberty, especially as it is sometimes circum
stanced. You may easily be convinced of this, by going into
either Ludgate or Newgate. What a scene appears as soon
as you enter ! The very place strikes horror into your soul.
How dark and dreary ! How unhealthy and unclean How
void of all that might minister comfort ! But this is little,
compared to the circumstances that attend the being confined
in this shadow of death. See that poor wretch, who was
formerly in want of nothing, and encompassed with friends
and acquaintance, now cut off, perhaps, by an unexpected
stroke, from all the cheerful ways of men; ruined, forsaken
of all, and delivered into the hands of such masters, and such
companions! I know not, if, to one of a thinking, sensible
turn of mind, there could be anything like it on this side hell.
What effect then has this heavy visitation of God on those
who lie under it for any time? There is perhaps an excep
tion here and there; but, in general, they are abandoned to
all wickedness, utterly divested of all fear of God, and all
reverence to man; insomuch, that they commonly go out of
that school completely fitted for any kind or degree of villany,
perfectly brutal and devilish, thoroughly furnished for every
evil word and work.
30. Are our countrymen more effectually reclaimed when
danger and distress are joined ? If so, the army, especially
in time of war, raust be the most religious part of the nation.
But is it so indeed? Do the soldiery walk as those who see
themselves on the brink of eternity? redeeming every oppor
tunity of glorifying God, and doing good to men, because
they know not the hour in which their Lord will require their
souls of them P So far from it, that a soldier's religion is a
by-word, even with those who have no religion at all; that
vice and profaneness in every shape reign among them with
out control; and that the whole tenor of their behaviour
speaks, “Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.”
Have those who are exposed to still more danger, the Eng
lish sea-forces, more religion than those at land? It is said
they were once remarkable for this; and it is certain Sir
Francis Drake feared God, as did most of his Commanders,
and, we have reason to believe, his mariners and sailors too.
But what shall we say of the navy that now is, more particu
larly of the ships of war? Is religion there,--either the power
or the form? Is not almost every single man-of-war a mere
floating hell? Where is there to be found more consummate
wickedness, a more full, daring contempt of God, and all his
laws,--except in the bottomless pit? But here description
fails; and the goodness of God endureth yet daily But
“shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord? Shall not
my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?” O that the
prospect of national judgments may suffice that we may
remember ourselves, and turn unto the Lord our God, before
his long-suffering mercy is at an end, and he pours out the
vials of his wrath upon us!
But how small ground have we as yet to hope for this! for,
who will now “suffer the word of exhortation ?” How few
will “endure sound doctrine,” and the honest, close applica
tion of it! Do they not “say unto the Seers, See not; and
unto the Prophets, Prophesy smooth things?” And if a man
will do thus, if he will “sew pillows to all arm-holes,” and
“cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before them, if
he will prophesy of wine and strong drink, he shall even be
the Prophet of this people.”
31. I am sensible how nice a subject this is, and how
extremely difficult it is so to speak, as neither to say too little
nor too much, neither more nor less than the cause of God
requires. I know also, that it is absolutely impossible so to
speak as not to give offence. But whosoever is offended, I
dare not to be silent; neither may I refrain from plainness of
speech; only I will endeavour to use all the tenderness I can
consistently with that plainness.
In tender love then I ask, Are there none among us, (I
speak to you, my brethren, who are Priests and Prophets
of the Lord, set apart to “minister in holy things, and to
declare the word of the Lord,”)--Are there none among us
who commit lewdness, as did those by whom “Israel was
defiled ?” Hath not the Lord seen an horrible thing in some
of the Prophets of this land also, even, that “they commit
adultery, and” (to conceal it) “walk in lies!” God forbid
that I should affirm this! I only propose (not maintain) the
question. If there be such a wretch, I pray God to strike
him to the heart, and to say, “Thou art the man!”
Are there none of you, like them, “mighty to drink wine,
men of strength to mingle strong drink?” Yea, are there none
that “err through strong drink, that are swallowed up of
wine?” Are there not found those who say, “I will fetch
wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant?”
Alas, my brother, is this the voice of a “Minister of
Christ, a steward of the mysteries of God?” Suppose you
find at any time trouble and heaviness, “is there no help for
you in your God?” Is not the God whom you serve able to
deliver you from any plague or trouble? Is the being “drunk
with wine” a better relief than the being “filled with his
Spirit?” Do you not understand this? Do you “not know
the Lord?” Take heed you do not destroy both your own
soul and them that hear you ! O beware ! If you know not
his love, fear his power! Make haste to flee from the wrath to
come, lest he smite you with a curse great as your sin, and
sweep you away from the face of the earth.
32. Can such as you be said to honour or fear God, any more
than those spoken of by Malachi? May not God complain,
“These priests have violated my law and profaned my holy
things?” yea, whensoever you presume with those unhallowed
hands to touch the mysteries of God; whensoever you utter his
name or his word with those unhallowed lips ! But is it on
this account only that God may say, “Both Prophet and Priest
are profane?” May he not add, “They have put no difference
between the holy and profane; therefore I am profaned among
them?” For is it not so? Do you put a difference between
the holy and profane; him that feareth God, and him that
feareth him not? Do you put an effectual difference between
them, even in the most solemn office of our religion? At the
table of the Lord, do you take care to “separate the precious
from the vile?” to “receive all those who ” (as you may rea
sonably believe) “draw near with penitent hearts and lively
faith,” and utterly to reject those who testify against them
selves, that they are without hope and without God in the world?
Nay, who dares repel one of the greatest men in his parish
from the Lord’s table; even though he be a drunkard or a
common swearer; yea, though he openly deny the Lord that
bought him? Mr. Stonehouse did this once. But what was
the event? The gentleman brought an action against him,
for the terror of all such insolent fellows in succeeding times.
33. O my brethren, is it not for want of your making this
difference, as well as for many other abominations, that, with
regard to some among us, (how many God knoweth,) that
scripture is now also fulfilled: “His watchmen are blind, they
are ignorant, they are shepherds that cannot understand:--
The Lord hath poured out upon them the spirit of deep sleep,
and hath closed their eyes; the Prophets and the Seers hath
he covered: and the vision of all is become unto you as the
words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that
is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee; and he saith, I
cannot; for it is sealed?”
If you ask, what those other abominations are; I will speak
in love, and in the spirit of meekness. There are found among
us covetous men, men who “mind earthly things,” who “seek
themselves,” and not Christ crucified, who “love the world, and
the things of the world; ” men in whom these words are still
fulfilled: “Who is there among you that would shut the door
for nought? Neither do ye kindle fire on my altar for nought.
I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of Hosts.” Yea,
are there not those, at this day, (O that I might be found to
fear where no fear is !) who “make themselves fat with the
chiefest of all the offerings of Israel?” Are there not those
who now “enlarge their desire as hell; who are as death, and
cannot be satisfied?” who, though they want neither food to
eat nor raiment to put on, yet seek more and more preferment?
who are continually studying to “join house to house, and to lay
field to field;” to grow rich in the service of that Master who
himself “had not where to lay his head?” Is it not to these that
those dreadful words belong, enough to cause the ears of him
that heareth to tingle: “They are greedy dogs, which never
can have enough; they all look to their own way,” (not the
way of their Lord,) “every one for his gain, from his quarter?”
Is it strange, if among these there should be some who are
cruel, oppressive men; inasmuch as covetousness knows no
mercy, nor can a lover of money be a lover of his neighbour?
Have not some been known even to “grind the face of the
poor?” to strip, rather than clothe, the naked? some, who,
while they cried out, “as the horse-leech, Give, give,” would
take, if it was not given; like those of old, who said, “Thou
shalt give it me now, and if not, I will take it by force;” or
those spoken of by Micah, “The Prophets bite with their teeth,
and cry, Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they
even prepare war against him.” Very great is the sin of
these men before the Lord. If there be ten such now in the
land, may God smite them this day with terror and astonish
ment, that they may have no rest in their bones till their sin
is done away !
34. Are you as watchful and zealous to gain souls, as those
are to gain the gold that perisheth? Do you know by experi
ence what that meaneth, “The zeal of thine house hath eaten
me up?” Or are you one of those watchmen who do not watch
at all, who neither know nor care when the sword cometh? of
whom the Prophet saith, “They are dumb dogs that cannot
bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber?”
Can it be supposed that such shepherds will “feed the flock?”
will “give to every one his portion of meat in due season P”
Will these “warn every man, and exhort every man, that they
may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus?” Will they
take care to “know all their flock by name, not forgetting the
men-servants and women-servants?” Will they inquire into
the state of every soul committed to their charge; and watch
over each with all tenderness and longsuffering, “as they that
must give account?” marking how they either fall or rise; how
these wax “weary and faint in their mind; ” and those “grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ?” Who can do this, unless his whole heart be in the
work; unless he desire nothing but to “spend and be spent for
them; and count not his life dear unto himself, so he may
present them blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus?”
Can any shepherd do this, (and if he do not, he will never
“give an account with joy,”) who imagines he has little more
to do than to preach once or twice a week; that this is the main
point, the chief part of the office, which he hath taken upon
himself before God? What gross ignorance is this What a
total mistake of the truth! What a miserable blunder touching
the whole nature of his office It is, indeed, a very great thing
to speak in the name of God; it might make him that is the
stoutest of heart tremble, if he considered that every time he
speaks to others, his own soul is at stake. But great, inexpressi
bly great, as this is, it is perhaps the least part of our work.
To “seek and save that which is lost; ” to bring souls from
Satan to God; to instruct the ignorant; to reclaim the wicked;
to convince the gainsayer; to direct their feet into the way of
peace, and then keep them therein; to follow them step by step,
lest they turn out of the way, and advise them in their doubts
and temptations; to lift up them that fall; to refresh them that
are faint; and to comfort the weak-hearted; to administer
various helps, as the variety of occasions require, according
to their several necessities: These are parts of our office;
all this we have undertaken at the peril of our own soul.
A sense of this made that holy man of old cry out, “I
marvel if any ruler in the Church shall be saved; ” and a
greater than him say, in the fulness of his heart, “Who is
sufficient for these things?”
35. But who is not sufficient for these things, for the taking
care of a parish, though it contain twenty thousand souls, if
this implies no more than the taking care to preach there
once or twice a week; and to procure one to read Prayers on
the other days, and do what is called the parish duty ? Is any
trade in the nation so easy as this? Is not any man sufficient
for it, without any more talents, either of nature or grace,
than a small degree of common understanding? But Q |
what manner of shepherds are those who look no farther into
the nature of their office, who sink no deeper into the import
ance of it, than this ! Were they not such as these concerning
whom “the word of the Lord came unto Ezekiel, saying, Wo
be to the shepherds that feed themselves | should not the
shepherds feed the flock? Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you
with the wool; but ye feed not the flock. The diseased have
ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was
sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither
have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither
have ye sought that which was lost.--And they were scattered,
because there was no shepherd, and they became meat to all
the beasts of the field. Yea, my flock was scattered upon all
the face of the earth, and none did search or seek after them.”
I conjure you, brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus, the
great Shepherd of the sheep, who hath bought them and us
with his own blood, apply this each to his own soul. Let every
man look unto God, and say, “Lord, is it I? Am I one of
these idle, careless, indolent shepherds, that feed myself, not the
fock? Am I one that cannot bark, slothful, sleeping, lying
down, loving to slumber? one of those who have not strength
ened that which was diseased, neither healed that which was
sick? “Search me, O Lord, and prove me; try out my reins
:and my heart. Look well if there be any way of wickedness
in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.’
36. “Have I not, at least, “healed the hurt of thy people
slightly?’ Have I not said, “Peace, peace, when there was no
peace?’”--How many are they also that do this? who do not
study to speak what is true, especially to the rich and great, so
much as what is pleasing? who flatter honourable sinners, in
stead of telling them plain, “How can ye escape the damnation
of hell?” O, what an account have you to make, if there be a
God that judgeth the earth? Will he not require at your hands
the blood of all these souls, of whom “ye are the betrayers and
murderers?” Well spake the Prophets of your fathers, in whose
steps ye now tread: “They have seduced my people; and one
built up a wall, and another daubed it with untempered mortar.
They strengthen the hands of the evil-doers, that none doth
return from his wickedness. They prophesy lies in my name,
saith the Lord. They say unto them that despise me, Ye
shall have peace; and unto them that walk after the imagi
nation of their own heart, No evil shall come upon you.”
How great will your damnation be, who destroy souls,
instead of saving them ! Where will you appear, or how will
you stand, “in that great and terrible day of the Lord?” How
will ye lift up your head, when the Lord “descends from
heaven in flaming fire, to take vengeance on his adversaries;”
more especially on those who have so betrayed his cause, and
done Satan’s work under the banner of Christ? With what
voice wilt thou say, “Behold me, Lord, and the sheep whom
thou hadst given me, whom I gave to the devil, and told them
they were in the way to heaven, till they dropped into hell!”
Were they not just such shepherds of souls as you are, con
cerning whom God spake by Jeremiah,-‘‘Many Pastors have
destroyed my vineyard; they have trodden my portion under
foot; they have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilder
mess?” by Ezekiel,--“There is a conspiracy of her Prophets;
like a roaring lion ravening the prey, they have devoured souls?”
and by Zechariah,-“Thus saith the Lord, Feed the flock of
the slaughter, whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves
not guilty; and they that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord,
for I am rich; and their own shepherds pity them not?”
37. Is not this the real ground, the principal reason, of the
present contempt of the Clergy? And long since was it assigned
as such by Him who cannot lie. The same men of old, who
“made the Lord’s people to transgress,” thereby “made
themselves vile.” They were despised, both as the natural
effect, and the judicial punishment, of their wickedness.
And the same cause the Prophet observes to have produced
the same effect, many hundred years after this: “Ye are
departed out of the way, saith the Lord; ye have caused many
to stumble; therefore have I also made you contemptible and
base before all the people.”
I have now, brethren, “delivered mine own soul; ” and in
so doing, I have (as I proposed at first) “used great plainness
of speech,” as not studying “to please men, but the Lord.”
The event I leave to Him in whose name I have spoken, and
who hath the hearts of all men in his hand.
I “have brought you heavy tidings this day,” and yet I
cannot but be persuaded, that some of you will not “count
me your enemy, because I tell you the truth.” O that all of
us may taste the good word which we declare ! may receive
that knowledge of salvation which we are commanded to
preach unto every creature, through the remission of sins!
My heart's desire is, that all of us to whom “is committed
the ministry of reconciliation” may ourselves be reconciled to
God, through the blood of the everlasting covenant; that he
may be henceforth unto us a God, and we may be unto him a
people; that we may all know, as well as preach, the Lord,
“from the least unto the greatest;” even by that token, “I am
merciful tothy unrighteousness; thysins Iremember no more!”
III. 1. I have hitherto spoken more immediately to those
who profess themselves members of the Church of England.
But inasmuch as I am a debtor also to those who do not, my
design is now, to apply to them also; and briefly to show,
wherein (I fear) they are severally inconsistent with their own
principles.
I begin with those who are at the smallest distance from us,
whether they are termed Presbyterians or Independents: Of
whom in general I cannot but have a widely different opinion,
from that I entertained some years ago; as having since then
conversed with many among them, “in whom the root of the
matter is’ undeniably found; and who labour “to keep a con
science void of offence, both toward God and toward men.” I
cannot, therefore, doubt, but every serious man, of either
one or the other denomination, does utterly condemn all that
inward as well as outward unholiness which has been above
described.
But do you, as a people, avoid what you condemn? Are
mo whoremongers or adulterers found among you; no children
disobedient to their parents; no servants that are slothful or
careless, that answer again, that do not “honour their masters
as is meet in the Lord?” Are there none among you that
censure or “speak evil of the ruler of their people?” Are
there no drunkards, no gluttons, no luxurious men, no regular
epicures, none “whose belly is their God,” who, as their for
tune permits, “fare sumptuously every day?” Have you no
dishonest dealers, no unfair traders, no usurers, or extortion
ers? Have you no liars, either for gain, or for good man
ners, so called ? Are you clear of ceremony and compli
ment? Alas, you are sensible, in most (if not all) these
respects, you have now small pre-eminence over us.
How much more sensible must you be of this, if you do
not rest on the surface, but inquire into the bottom of reli
gion, the religion of the heart | For, what inward unholiness,
what evil tempers, are among us, which have not a place
among you also ? You likewise bewail that ignorance of God,
ithat want of faith and of the love of God and man, that in
'ward idolatry of various kinds, that pride, ambition, and
vanity, which rule in the hearts even of those who still have
“the form of godliness.” You lament before God the deep
covetousness that “eats so many souls as doth a gangrene;”
and perhaps are sometimes ready to cry out, “Help, Lord,
for there is scarce one godly man left l” Lay to thine hand;
“for the faithful are minished from the children of men l’’
2. And yet you retain “the truth that is after godliness,”
at least as to the substance of it. You own what is laid down
in Scripture, both touching the nature and condition of justi
fication and salvation. And with regard to the author of faith
and salvation, you have always avowed, even in the face of your
enemies, that “it is God which worketh in us, both to will
and to do, of his good pleasure; ” that it is his Spirit alone
who “teacheth us all things,” all we know of “the deep things
of God; ” that every true believer has “an unction from the
Holy One to lead him into all” necessary “truth; ” that,
“because we are sons, God sendeth forth the Spirit of his Son
into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father; ” and that “this Spirit
beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God.”
How is it then, my brethren; (so I can call you now,
although I could not have done it heretofore;) how is it, that
the generality of you also are fallen from your steadfastness?
In the times of persecution ye stood as a rock, though “all
the waves and storms went over you.” But who can bear ease
and fulness of bread? How are you changed, since these came
upon you ! Do not many of you now (practically, I mean) put
something else in the room of “faith that worketh by love?”
Do not some of you suppose, that gravity and composedness
of behaviour are the main parts of Christianity? especially,
provided you neither swear, nor take the name of God in vain.
Do not others imagine, that to abstain from idle songs, and
those fashionable diversions commonly used by persons of
their fortune, is almost the whole of religion? To which, if they
add family prayer, and a strict observation of the Sabbath,
then doubtless all is well. Nay, my brethren, this is well so
far as it goes; but how little a way does it go toward Chris
tianity All these things, you cannot but see, are merely
external; whereas Christianity is an inward thing, without
which the most beautiful outward form is lighter than vanity.
Do not others of you rest in convictions or good desires?
Alas, what do these avail? A man may be convinced he is
sick, yea, deeply convinced, and yet never recover. He may
desire food, yea, with earnest desire; and nevertheless perish
with hunger. And thus I may be convinced I am a sinner;
but this will not justify me before God. And I may desire sal
vation, (perhaps by fits and starts, for many years,) and yet be
lost for ever. Come close then to the point, and keep to your
principles. Have you received the Holy Ghost; the Spirit
which is of God, and is bestowed by him on all believers, “that
we may know the things which are freely given to us of God?”
The time is short. Do you experience now that “unction from
the Holy One,” without which you confess outward religion,
whether negative or positive, is nothing? Nay, and inward con
viction of our wants is nothing, unless those wants are in fact
supplied. Good desires also are nothing, unless we actually
attain what we are stirred up to desire. For still, “if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ,” whatever he desires, “he is none
of his.” O my brother, beware you stop not short! Beware you
never account yourself a Christian, no, not in the lowest degree,
till God “hath sent forth the Spirit of Christ into your heart;”
and that “Spirit bear witness with your spirit, that you are a
child of God.”
3. One step farther from us, are you who are called
(though not by your own choice) Anabaptists. The smallness
of your number, compared to that of either the Presbyteri
ans, or those of the Church, makes it easier for you to have
an exact knowledge of the behaviour of all your members,
and to put away from among you every one that “walketh
not according to the doctrine you have received.”
But is this done? Do all your members adorn the gospel?
Are they all “holy as He which hath called us is holy?” I
fear not. I have known some instances to the contrary; and
doubtless you know many more. There are unholy, out
wardly unholy men in your congregations also; men that
profane either the name or the day of the Lord; that do not
honour their natural or civil parents; that know not how to
possess their bodies in sanctification and honour; that are in
temperate, either in meat or drink, gluttonous, sensual, luxu
rious; that variously offend against justice, mercy, or truth,
in their intercourse with their neighbour, and do not walk by
that royal law, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.”
But how is this consistent with your leading principle,--
“That no man ought to be admitted to baptism, till he has
that repentance whereby we forsake sin, and living faith in
God through Christ?”
For if no man ought to be admitted into a church or con
gregation, who has not actual faith and repentance; then
neither ought any who has them not, to continue in any con
gregation: And, consequently, an open sinner cannot remain
amongyou, unless you practically renounceyour main principle.
4. I refer it to your own serious consideration, whether one
reason why unholy men are still suffered to remain among
you may not be this,--That many of you have unawares put
opinion in the room of faith and repentance? But how fatal
a mistake is this ! Supposing your opinion to be true, yet a.
true opinion concerning repentance is wholly different from
the thing itself; and you may have a true opinion concerning
faith all your life, and yet die an unbeliever.
Supposing therefore the opinion of particular redemption
true, yet how little does it avail toward salvation l Nay, were
we to suppose that none can be saved who do not hold it, it
does not follow that all will be saved who do: So that if the
one proved a man to be in ever so bad a state, the other would
not prove him to be in a good one; and, consequently, whoso
ever leans on this opinion, leans on the staff of a broken reed.
Would to God that ye would mind this one thing, to
“make your own calling and election sure!” that every one .
of you (leaving the rest of the world to Him that made it)
would himself “repent and believe the gospel !” Not repent
alone, (for then you know only the baptism of John,) but
believe, and be “baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire.”
Are you still a stranger to that inward baptism wherewith all
true believers are baptized? May the Lord constrain you to
cry out, “How am I straitened till it be accomplished!” even
till the love of God inflame your heart, and consume all your
vile affections ! Be not content with anything less than this!
It is this loving faith alone which opens our way into “the
general Church of the first-born, whose names are written in
heaven l’’ which giveth us to “enter within the veil, where
Jesus our fore-runner is gone before us!”
5. There is a still wider difference in some points between
us and the people usually termed Quakers. But not in these
points. You, as well as we, condemn “all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men; ” all those works of the devil which
were recited above, and all those tempers from which they spring.
You agree, that we are all to be taught of God, and to be
“led by his Spirit; ” that the Spirit alone reveals all truth, and
inspires all holiness; that by his inspiration men attain perfect
love, the love which “purifies them as he is pure;” and that,
through this knowledge and love of God, they have power to
“do always such things as please him;” to worship God, a Spi
rit, according to his own will, that is, “in spirit and in truth.”
Hence you infer, thatformal worship is not acceptable to God,
but that alone that springs from God in the heart. You infer
also, that they who are led by him will use great “plainness of
speech,” and great plainness of dress, seeking no “outward
adorning,” but only “the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit.”
I will look no farther now, than simply to inquire whether
you are consistent with these principles.
To begin with the latter: “He that is led by the Spirit
will use great plainness of speech.”
You would have said, “will use the plain language.” But
that term leads you into a grand mistake. That term, the plain
language, naturally leads you to think of one particular way of
speaking; as if “plainness of speech” implied no more than
the use of that particular form.
Alas, my brethren know ye not, that yourancestors designed
this only as a specimen of plain language? And is it possible
that you should mistake the sample for the whole bale of cloth?
Consult the light God has given you, and you must see that
“plainness of speech” does not lie in a single point, but im
plies an open, undisguised sincerity, a child-like simplicity in
all we speak.
I do not desire you to refrain from saying thou or thee. I
would not spend ten words about it. But I desire you, when
ever you speak at all, to speak the truth, and nothing but the
truth. I desire your words may always be the picture of your
heart. This is truly plain language.
Either do not pretend to plain speech at all, or be uniformly
plain. Are you so? I pray, consider. Do you never compli
ment? I do not suppose you say, “Sir, your very humble ser
vant;” but do you say no civil things? Do you never flatter?
Do you not commend any man or woman to their face? Per
haps farther than you do behind their back. Is this plainness
of speech? Do you never dissemble? Do you speak to all per
sons, high or low, rich or poor, just what you think, neither
more nor less, and in the shortest and clearest manner you
can P If not, what a mere jest is your plain language! You
carry your condemnation in your own breast.
6. You hold also, that “he which is led by the Spirit will
use great plainness of dress, seeking no “outward adorning,”
but only the ‘ornament of a meek and quiet spirit;” and that,
in particular, “he will leave ‘gold and costly apparel” to those
who know not God.”
Now, I appeal to every serious, reasonable man among you,
--Do your people act consistently with this principle? Do not
many of your women wear gold upon their very feet; and many
of your men use “ ornaments of gold?” Are you a stranger to
these things? Have you not seen with your eyes (such trifles
as will scarce bear the naming) their canes and snuff-boxes glit
ter, even in your solemn assembly, while ye were waiting toge
ther upon God? Surely, they are not yet so lost to modesty,
as to pretend that they do not use them by way of ornament.
If they do not, if it be only out of necessity, a plain oaken
stick will supply the place of the one, and a piece of horn or
tin will unexceptionably answer all the reasonable ends of the
other.-
To speak freely, (and do not count me your enemy for this,)
you cannot but observe, upon cool reflection, that you retain
just so much of your ancient practice, as leaves your present
without excuse; as makes the inconsistency, between the one
and the other, glaring and undeniable. For instance: This
woman is too strict a Quaker to lay out a shilling in a necklace.
Very well; but she is not too strict to lay out fourscore guineas
in a repeating watch. Another would not for the world wear
any lace; no, not an edging round her cap: But she will wear
point, and sees no harm in it at all, though it should be of
twelve times the price. In one kind of apron or handkerchief
she dares not lay out twenty shillings; but in another sort lays
out twenty pounds. And what multitudes of you are very
jealous, as to the colour and form of your apparel, (the least
important of all the circumstances that relate to it,) while in
the most important, the expense, they are without any concern
at all! They will not put on a scarlet or crimson stuff, but
the richest velvet, so it be black or grave. They will not touch a
coloured riband; but will cover themselves with a stiff silk from
head to foot. They cannot bear purple; but make no scruple
at all of being clothed in fine linen; yea, to such a degree,
that the linen of the Quakers is grown almost into a proverb.
Surely you cannot be ignorant, that the sinfulness of fine
apparel lies chiefly in the expensiveness: In that it is robbing
God and the poor; it is defrauding the fatherless and widow;
it is wasting the food of the hungry, and withholding his
raiment from the naked to consume it on our own lusts.
7. Let it not be said that this affects only a few among you,
and those of the younger and lighter sort. Yes, it does your
whole body: For why do you, who are older and graver, suffer
such things? Why do ye not vehemently reprove them; and
if they repent not, in spite of all worldly considerations, expel
them out of your society? In conniving at their sin, you make
it your own; you, especially, who are Preachers. Do you say,
“They cannot bear it; they will not hear?” Alas! into what
state, then, are ye fallen | But whether they will bear it or
not, what is that to thee? Thou art to “speak, whether they
will hear, or whether they will forbear.” To say the very truth,
I am afraid you rather strengthen their hands in their wicked
ness. For you not only do not testify against it in the con
gregation,” but even sit at their table and reprove them not.
Why, then, thou also art one of “the dumb dogs that cannot
bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.”
I fix this charge upon every Preacher, in particular, who saw
a young woman, daughter to one of the Quakers in London,
going to be married in apparel suitable to her diamond buckle,
which cost a hundred guineas. Could you see this, and not call
heaven and earth to witness against it? Then I witness against
thee, in the name of the Lord, thou art a blind leader of the
blind; thou “strainest a gnat, and swallowest a camel !”
Verily, the sin both of teachers and hearers is herein exceed
ing great. And the little attempts towards plainness of apparel,
which are still observable among you, (I mean, in the colour
and form of your clothes, and the manner of putting them on,)
only testify against you, that you were once what you know in
your hearts you are not now.
8. I come now to your main principle: “We are all to be
“taught of God, to be inspired and “led by his Spirit: And
then we shall ‘worship him, not with dead form, but ‘in
spirit and in truth.”
These are deep and weighty words; but many hold fast the
words, and are utterly ignorant of their meaning. Is not this
* You say you do testify against it in the congregation. Against what?
“Against gay and gaudy apparel.” I grant it. But this is not the thing I speak
of You quite mistake my mark. Do you testify against the costliness of their
apparel, however plain and grave it may be? against the price of the velvet, the
linen, the silk, or raiment of whatever kind? If you do this frequently and explicitly,
you are clear. If not, own and amend the fault.
It is easy to discern how your people fell into this snare of the devil. You were
at first a poor, despised, afflicted people. Then what some of you had to spare was
little enough to relieve the needy members of your own society. In a few years
you increased in goods, and were able to relieve more than your own poor. But
you did not bestow all that you had to spare from them on the poor belonging to
other societies. It remained either to lay it up, or to expend it in superfluities.
Some chose one way, and some the other.
Lay this deeply to heart, ye who are now a poor, despised, afflicted people.
Hitherto ye are not able to relieve your own poor. But if ever your substance
increase, see that ye be not straitened in your own bowels, that ye fall not into the
same snare of the devil. Before any of you either lay up treasures on earth, or
indulge needless expense of any kind, I pray the Lord God to scatter you to the
corners of the earth, and blot out your name from under heaven
an exceeding common case? Are you not conscious abundance
of your friends have done so? with whom the being “taught of
God” and “led by his Spirit” are mere words of course, that
mean just nothing. And their crude and indigested accounts
of the things they did not understand have raised that deep
prejudice against these great truths which we find in the gene
rality of men.
Do some of you ask, “But dost thou acknowledge the inward
principle?” I do, my friends: And I would to God every one
of you acknowledged it as much. I say, all religion is either
empty show, or perfection by inspiration; in other words, the
obedient love of God, by the supernatural knowledge of God;
yea, all that which “is not of faith is sin;” all which does not
spring from this loving knowledge of God; which knowledge
cannot begin or subsist one moment without immediate inspi
ration; not only all public worship, and all private prayer, but
every thought in common life, and word, and work. What
think you of this? Do you not stagger? Dare you carry the in
ward principle so far? Do you acknowledge it to be the very
truth? But, alas! what is the acknowledging it? Dost thou
experience this principle in thyself? What saith thy heart?
Does God dwell therein? And doth it now echo to the voice of
God? Hast thou the continual inspiration of his Spirit, filling
thy heart with his love, as with a well of water, springing up
into everlasting life?
9. Art thou acquainted with the “leading of his Spirit,” not
by notion only, but by living experience? I fear very many of
you talk of this, who do not so much as know what it means.
How does the Spirit of God lead his children to this or that
particular action? Do you imagine it is by blind impulse only?
by moving you to do it, you know not why? Not so. He leads
us by our eye, at least, as much as by the hand; and by light
as well as by heat. He shows us the way wherein we should
go, as well as incites us to walk therein. For example: Here
is a man ready to perish with hunger. How am I “led by the
Spirit” to relieve him? First, by His convincing me it is the
will of God I should; and Secondly, by His filling my heart
with love toward him. Both this light and this heat are the
gift of God; are wrought in me by the same Spirit, who leads
me, by this conviction as well as love, to go and feed that man.
This is the plain, rational account of the ordinary leading of
the Spirit; but how far from that which some have given I
Art thou thus led by the Spirit to every good word and
work, till God hath thereby made thy faith perfect? Dost thou
know what faith is? It is a loving, obedient sight of a pre
sent and reconciled God. Now, where this is, there is no dead
form; neither can be, so long as it continues. But all that is
said or done is full of God, full of spirit, and life, and power.
10. But perhaps, as much as you talk of them, you do not
know the difference between form and spirit; or between
worshipping God in a formal way, and worshipping him “in
spirit and in truth.”
The Lord is that Spirit. The seeing and feeling and lov
ing him is spiritual life. And whatever is said or done in the
sight or love of God, that is full of spirit and life. All beside
this is form, mere dead form; whether it be in our public
addresses to God, or in our private; or in our worldly
business, or in our daily conversation.
But if so, how poor and mean and narrow have your views
and conceptions been You was afraid of formality in public
worship: And reason good. But was you afraid of it nowhere
else? Did not you consider that formality in common life is
also an abomination to the Lord; and that it can have no
place in anything we say or do, but so far as we forget God?
O watch against it in every place, every moment, that you
may every moment see and love God; and, consequently, at all
times and in all places, worship him “in spirit and in truth !”
My brethren, permit me to add a few words in tender love
to your souls. Do not you lean too much on the spirit and
power which you believe rested upon your forefathers? Sup
pose it did Will that avail you, if you do not drink into the
same spirit? And how evident is this,--that, whatever you
once were, ye are now “shorn of your strength !” Ye are
weak and become like other men. The Lord is well migh
departed from you. Where is now the spirit, the life, the
power? Be not offended with my plain dealing, when I beseech
you who are able to weigh things calmly, to open your eyes,
and see multitudes, even in the Church, pursuing, yea, and
attaining, the substance of spiritual life, and leaving unto you
the shadow. Nay, a still greater evil is before you: For, if ye
find not some effectual means to prevent it, your rising gene
ration will utterly cast off the shadow as well as the substance.
11. There is an abundantly greater difference still, according
to your own account, between us who profess ourselves mem
bers of the Church of England, and you who are members of
the Church of Rome. But notwithstanding this, do you not
agree with us in condemning the vices above recited; pro
faneness, drunkenness, whoredom, adultery, theft, disobedi
ence to parents, and such like? And how unhappily do you
agree with us in practising the very vices which you condemn !
And yet you acknowledge, (nay, and frequently contend
for this with a peculiar earnestness,) that every Christian is
called to be “zealous of good works,” as well as to “deny
himself and take up his cross daily.” How, then, do you
depart from your own principles, when you are gluttons, drunk
ards, or epicures? when you live at your ease, in all the ele
gance and voluptuousness of a plentiful fortune? How will you
reconcile the being adorned with gold, arrayed in purple and
fine linen, and faring sumptuously every day, with the “deny
ing yourself and taking up your cross daily?” Surely, while
you indulge the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eye, and
the pride of life, the excellent rules of self-denial that abound
in your own writers leave you of all men most inexcusable.
12. Neither can this self-indulgence be reconciled with the
being “zealous of good works.” For by this needless and
continual expense, you disable yourself from doing good.
You bind your own hands. You make it impossible for you
to do that good which otherwise you might. So that you
injure the poor in the same proportion as you poison your
own soul. You might have clothed the naked; but what was
due to them was thrown away on your costly apparel. You
might have fed the hungry, entertained the stranger, relieved
them that were sick or in prison; but the superfluities of
your own table swallowed up that whereby they should have
been profited. And so this wasting of thy Lord’s goods is an
instance of complicated wickedness; since hereby thy poor
brother perisheth, for whom Christ died.
I will not recommend to you either the writings or examples
of those whom you account heretics: (Although some of these,
if you could view them with impartial eyes, might “provoke
you to jealousy: ”) But O that God would write in your hearts
the rules of self-denial and love laid down by Thomas à Kempis!
or that you would follow, both in this and in good works, that
burning and shining light of your own Church, the Marquis de
Renty | Then would all who knew and loved the Lord rejoice
to acknowledge you as the “Church of the living God; ” when
ye were zealous of every good word and work, and abstained
from all appearance of evil; when it was hereby shown that you
were filled with the Holy Ghost, and delivered from all unholy
tempers; when ye were all “unblamable and unrebukable,
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; a chosen generation,
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, showing
forth” to all Jews, infidels, and heretics, by your active, patient,
spotless love of God and man, “the praises of Him who had
called you out of darkness into his marvellous light.”
13. “Men and brethren, children of the seed of Abraham,”
suffer me to speak a few words to you also; you who do not
allow that Messiah the Prince is already come and cut off.
However, you so far hear Moses and the Prophets as to allow,
(1.) That “it is the inspiration of the Holy One which giveth
man understanding,” and that all the true children of God
“are taught of God.” (2.) That the substance both of the
Law and the Prophets is contained in that one word, “Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy strength, and thy neighbour as
thyself.” And, (3.) That the sure fruit of love is obedience,
“ceasing from evil, and doing good.”
And do you walk by this rule 7 Have you yourselves that
“inspiration of the Holy One?” Are you taught of God?
Hath he opened your understanding? Have you the inward
knowledge of the Most High? I fear not. Perhaps you
know little more, even of the meaning of the words, than a
Mahometan.
Let us go a little farther. Do you “love the Lord your
God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your
strength?” Can you say, “Whom have I in heaven but thee?
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee?” Do
you desire God at all? Do you desire to have anything to do
with him, till you can keep the world no longer? Are you not
content, so you enjoy the good things of earth, to let God stand
afar off? only calling upon him now and then, when you can
not do without him. Why then you do not love God at all,
though you will sometimes condescend to use him. You love
the world. This possesses your heart. This, therefore, is your
god. You renounce the God of your fathers, the God of Israel;
you are still uncircumcised in heart. Your own conscience
bears witness, you in this no more hear Moses and the
Prophets, than you do Jesus of Nazareth.
14. From Moses and the Prophets it has been shown, that
your forefathers were a “faithless and stubborn generation; a
generation which set not their hearts aright, and whose spirit
cleaved not steadfastly unto God.” And this you acknowledge
yourselves. If you are asked, “How is it that the promise
is not fulfilled ? Seeing ‘the sceptre is long since “departed
from Judah,” why is not Shiloh come 7” your usual answer
is, “Because of the sins of our fathers God hath delayed his
coming.” Have you then reformed from the sins of your
fathers? Are you turned unto the Lord your God? Nay,
do ye not tread in the same steps? Bating that single point
of outward idolatry, what abomination did they ever commit,
which you have not committed also, which the generality of
you do not commit still according to your power? If there
fore the coming of the Messiah was hindered by the sins of
your forefathers, then, by the same rule, your continuance
therein will hinder his coming to the end of the world.
“Brethren, my heart's desire and prayer to God” is, that he
would “gather the outcasts of Israel.” And I doubt not, but,
when the fulness of the Gentiles is come in, then “all Israel
shall be saved.” But, mean time, is there not great cause that
ye should say with Daniel, “O Lord, righteousness belongeth
unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day, to the
men of Judah, and unto all Israel. O Lord, we have sinned,
we have rebelled against thee, neither have we obeyed the voice
of the Lord our God. Yet, O our God, incline thine ear, and
hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations; for we do
not present oursupplications before thee for our righteousnesses,
but for thy great mercies. O Lord, hear! O Lord, forgive 1
O Lord, hearken and do ! Defer not, for thine own sake;
for thy city and thy people that are called by thy name.”
15. I cannot conclude without addressing myself to you also,
who donot admit either the Jewish or Christian Revelation. But
still you desire to be happy. You own the essential difference
between vice and virtue; and acknowledge, (as did all the wiser
Greeks and Romans) that vice cannot consist with happiness.
You allow likewise that gratitude and benevolence, self-know
ledge and modesty, mildness, temperance, patience, and genero
sity, are justly numbered among virtues; and that ingratitude
and malice, envy and ill-nature, pride, insolence, and vanity,
gluttony and luxury, covetousness and discontent, are vices of
the highest kind.
Now, let us calmly inquire how far your life is consistent
with your principles.
You seek happiness. But you find it not. You come no
nearer it with all your labours. You are not happier than you
was a year ago. Nay, I doubt you are more unhappy. Why
is this, but because you look for happiness there, where you
own it cannot be found? Indeed, what is there on earth which
can long satisfy a man of understanding? His soul is too
large for the world he lives in. He wants more room.
AEstuat infelix angusto limite mundi,
Ut brevibus clausus Gyaris, parváque Seripho."
He has already travelled through all which is called pleasure;
diversions and entertainments of every kind. But among these
he can find no enjoyment of any depth; they are empty, shal
low, superficial things: They pleased for a while; but the gloss.
is gone, and now they are dull and tasteless. And what has
he next? Only the same things again; for this world affords
nothing more. It can supply him with no change. Go, feed
again; but it is upon one dish still. Thus
Occidit miseros crambe repetita.t
Yet what remedy under the sun?
16. The sounder judgment, the stronger understanding you
have, the sooner are you sated with the world; and the more
deeply convinced, all that cometh is vanity, foolish, insipid,
nauseous. You see the foibles of men in so much clearer a
light, and have the keener sense of the emptiness of life.
Here you are, a poor, unsatisfied inhabitant of an unquiet
world; turning your weary eyes on this side and on that side;
seeking rest, but finding none. You seem to be out of your
place: Neither the persons nor things that surround you are
such as you want. You have a confused idea of something
better than all this; but you know not where to find it. You
* Frets at the narrow limits of the world,
As in a prison pent.
+ They are surfeited with the dull repetition.
are always gasping for something which you cannot attain, no,
not if you range to the uttermost parts of the earth.
But this is not all. You are not only negatively unhappy,
as finding nothing whereon to stay the weight of your soul;
but positively so, because you are unholy: You are miserable,
because you are vicious. Are you not vicious? Are you then
full of gratitude to Him who giveth you life, and breath, and
all things? Not so; you rather spurn his gifts, and murmur at
Him that gave them. How often has your heart said, God did
not use you well? How often have you questioned either his
wisdom or goodness? Was this well done? What kind of
gratitude is this? It is the best you are master of Then take
knowledge of yourself. Black ingratitude is rooted in your
inmost frame. You can no more love God, than you can see
him; or than you can be happy without that love.
Neither (how much soever you may pique yourself upon it)
are you a lover of mankind. Can love and malice consist?
benevolence and envy? O do not put out your own eyes! And
are not these horrid tempers in you? Do not you envy one
man, and bear malice or ill-will to another? I know you call
these dispositions by softer names; but names change not the
nature of things. You are pained that one should enjoy what
you cannot enjoy yourself. Call this what you please, it is rank
envy. You are grieved that a second enjoys even what you have
yourself; you rejoice in seeing a third unhappy. Do not flatter
yourself; this is malice, venomous malice, and nothing else.
And how could you ever think of being happy, with malice and
envy in your heart? Just as well might you expect to be at
ease, while you held burning coals in your bosom.
17. I entreat you to reflect, whether there are not other
inhabitants in your breast, which leave no room for happiness
there. May you not discover, through a thousand disguises,
pride? too high an opinion of yourself? vanity, thirst of praise,
even (who would believe it?) of the applause of knaves and
fools? unevenness or sourness of temper? proneness to anger
or revenge? peevishness, fretfulness, or pining discontent? Nay,
perhaps even covetousness.--And did you ever think happiness
could dwell with these? Awake out of that senseless dream.
Think not of reconciling things incompatible. All these tem
pers are essential misery: So long as any of these are har
boured in your breast, you must be a stranger to inward peace.
What avails it you if there be no other hell? Whenever these
fiends are let loose upon you, you will be constrained to own,
Hell is where'er I am : Myself am hell.
And can the Supreme Being love those tempers, which you
yourself abhor in all but yourself? If not, they imply guilt
as well as misery. Doubtless they do. Only inquire of your
own heart. How often in the mid-career of your vice have you
felt a secret reproof, which you knew not how to bear, and
therefore stifled as soon as possible !
18. And did not even this point at an hereafter; a future
state of existence? The more reasonable among you have no
doubt of this; you do not imagine the whole man dies together;
r though you hardly suppose the soul, once disengaged, will
dwell again in a house of clay. But how will your soul subsist
without it? How are you qualified for a separate state? Sup
pose this earthly covering, this vehicle of organized matter,
whereby you hold commerce with the material world, were now
to drop off! Now, what would you do in the regions of immor
tality? You cannot eat or drink there. You cannot indulge
either the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eye, or the pride
of life. You love only worldly things; and they are gone, fled
as smoke, driven away for ever. Here is no possibility of sen
sual enjoyments; and you have a relish for nothing else. O
what a separation is this, from all that you hold dear! What
a breach is made, never to be healed !
But beside this, you are unholy, full of evil tempers; for
you did not put off these with the body; you did not leave
pride, revenge, malice, envy, discontent, behind you, when
you left the world. And now you are no longer cheered
by the light of the sun, nor diverted by the flux of various
objects; but those dogs of hell are let loose to prey upon your
soul, with their whole unrebated strength. Nor is there any
hope that your spirit will now ever be restored to its original
purity; not even that poor hope of a purging fire, so elegantly
described by the heathen poet, some ages before the notion was
wevived among the doctrines of the Romish Church.
Aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos; aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut eruritur igni.
Donec longa dies, perfecto temporis orbe,
Coneretam eremit labem, purumque reliquit
AEthereum sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem."
19. What a great gulf then is fixed between you and happi
ness, both in this world and that which is to come! Well may
you shudder at the thought ! more especially when you are
about to enter on that untried state of existence. For what a
prospect is this, when you stand on the verge of life, ready to
launch out into etermity! What can you then think? You
see nothing before you. All is dark and dreary. On the very
best supposition, how well may you address your parting soul
in the words of dying Adrian:
Poor, little, pretty, fluttering thing,
Must we no longer live together?
And dost thou prune thy trembling wing,
To take thy flight thou know'st not whither?'
Thy pleasing vein, thy humorous folly
Is all neglected, all forgot;
And pensive, wavering, melancholy,
Thou hop'st and fear'st thou know'st not what.
“Thou know'st not what l” Here is the sting, suppose there
were no other. To be “thou know'st not what !” not for a
month, or a year, but through the countless ages of eternity
What a tormenting uncertainty must this be What racking
unwillingness must it occasion, to exchange even this known
vale of tears for the unknown valley of the shadow of death !
And is there no cure for this? Indeed there is an effectual
cure; even the knowledge and love of God. There is a know
ledge of God which unveils etermity, and a love of God which
endears it. That knowledge makes the great abyss visible;
and all uncertainty vanishes away. That love makes it amiable
to the soul, so that fear has no more place | But the moment
God says, by the welcome angel of death, “Come thou up
hither l’” she
Claps the glad wing, and towers away,
And mingles with the blaze of day.
20. See ye not what advantage every way a Christian has
* Some to the piercing winds are stretch'd abroad;
Some plunged beneath the watery gulf: The fire
In some burns out the deep-imprinted stain,
Till the long course of slowly-rolling years
Has purged out every spot, and pure remains
The ethereal spirit, and simple heavenly fire.
over you? Probably the reason you saw it not before was,
because you knew none but nominal Christians; men who
professed to believe more, (in their way of believing,) but had
no more of the knowledge or love of God than yourselves:
So that with regard to real, inward religion, you stood upon
even ground. And perhaps in many branches of outward
.religion the advantage was on your side.
May the Lord, the God of the Christians, either reform
these wretches, or take them away from the earth, that lay
this grand stumbling-block in the way of those who desire to
know the will of God!
O ye who desire to know his will, regard them not! If it
be possible, blot them out of your remembrance.
They neither can nor will do you any good. O, suffer them
not to do you harm ! Be not prejudiced against Christianity
‘by those who know nothing at all of it: Nay, they condemn
it, all real substantial Christianity; they speak evil of the
thing they know not; they have a kind of cant word for the
whole religion of the heart; they call it enthusiasm.
I will briefly lay before you the ground of the matter, and
appeal to you yourselves for the reasonableness of it.
21. What a miserable drudgery is the service of God, unless
I love the God whom I serve | But I cannot love one whom
I know not. How then can I love God till I know him?
And how is it possible I should know God, unless he make
.himself known unto me? By analogy or proportion? Very
good. But where is that proportion to be found? What
proportion does a creature bear to its Creator? What is
.the proportion between finite and infinite?
I grant, the existence of the creatures demonstratively shows
the existence of their Creator. The whole creation speaks
that there is a God. But that is not the point in question.
I know there is a God. Thus far is clear. But who will show
·me what that God is? The more I reflect the more convinced
I am, that it is not possible for any or all the creatures to
take off the veil which is on my heart, that I might discern
this unknown God; to draw the curtain back which now hangs
between, that I may see Him which is invisible.
This veil of flesh now hides him from my sight; and who is
able to make it transparent? so that I may perceive, through
this glass, God always before me, till I see him “face to face.”
I want to know this great God who filleth heaven and earth;
who is above, beneath, and on every side, in all places of his
dominion; who just now besets me behind and before, and
lays his hand upon me; and yet I am no more acquainted with
him, than with one of the inhabitants of Jupiter or Saturn.
O my friend, how will you get one step farther, unless
God reveal himself to your soul?
22. And why should this seem a thing incredible to you;
that God, a Spirit, and the Father of the spirits of all flesh,
should discoverhimself to yourspirit, which is itself “the breath
of God,” divinae particula aurae; any more than that material
things should discover themselves to your material eye? Is
it any more repugnant to reason, that spirit should influence
spirit, than that matter should influence matter? Nay, is
not the former the more intelligible of the two? For there is
the utmost difficulty in conceiving how matter should influence
matter at all; how that which is totally passive should act.
Neither can we rationally account either for gravitation, attrac
tion, or any natural motion whatsoever, but by supposing in all
the finger of God, who alone conquers that vis inertiae which is
essential to every particle of matter, and worketh all in all.
Now, if God should everopen the eyes of your understanding,
must not the love of God be the immediate consequence? Do
you imagine you can see God without loving him? Is it possi
ble in the nature of things? Si virtus conspiceretur oculis,
(said the old Heathen,) mirabiles amores excitaret sui.” How
much more if you see Him who is the original fountain, the great
archetype of all virtue, will that sight raise in you a love that is
wonderful, such as the gay and busy world know not of !
23. What benevolence also, what tender love to the whole
of human kind, will you drink in, together with the love of
God, from the unexhausted source of love! And how easy
is it to conceive that more and more of his image will be then
transfused into your soul; that from disinterested love, all.
other divine tempers will, as it were naturally, spring:
Mildness, gentleness, patience, temperance, justice, sincerity,
contempt of the world; yea, whatsoever things are venerable:
and lovely, whatsoever are justly of good report!
• This quotation from Cicero is thus translated by Addison --“If virtue.
could be made the object of sight, she would (as Plato says) excite in us a won
derful love.”--EDIT.
And when you thus love God and all mankind, and are
transformed into his likeness, then the commandments of God
will not be grievous; you will no more complain that they
destroy the comforts of life: So far from it, that they will be
the very joy of your heart; ways of pleasantness, paths of
peace! You will experience here that solid happiness which
you had elsewhere sought in vain. Without servile fear or
anxious care, so long as you continue on earth, you will gladly
do the will of God here as the angels do it in heaven; and
when the time is come that you should depart hence, when
God says, “Arise, and come away,” you will pass with joy
unspeakable out of the body, into all the fulness of God.
Now, does not your own heart condemn you if you call this
religion enthusiasm? O leave that to those blind zealots who
tack together a set of opinions and an outside worship, and
call this poor, dull, lifeless thing by the sacred name of Chris
tianity | Well might you account such Christianity as this a
mere piece of empty pageantry, fit indeed to keep the vulgar
in awe, but beneath the regard of a man of understanding.
But in how different a light does it now appear ! If there
be such a religion as I have sketched out, must not every
reasonable man see there is nothing on earth to be desired in
comparison of it? But if any man desire this, let him ask
of God; he giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not.
24. May you not ask, quite consistently with your principles,
in some manner resembling this?
“O thou Being of beings, thou cause of all, thou seest my
heart; thou understandest all my thoughts: But how small
a part of thy ways do I understand l I know not what is
above, beneath, on every side; I know not my own soul.
Only this I know, I am not what I ought to be. I see and
approve the virtue which I have not. I do not, love thee,
neither am I thankful. I commend the love of mankind;
but I feel it not. Thou hast seen hatred, malice, envy in my
heart; thou hast seen anger, murmuring, discontent. These
uneasy passions harrow up my soul. I cannot rest while I
am under this yoke; nor am I able to shake it off; I am
unhappy, and that thou knowest.
“Have compassion upon me, thou whose years do not fail! on
me who have but a short time to live. I rise up, and am cut
down as a flower. I flee as it were a shadow. Yet a little
while and I return to dust, and have no more place under
the sun.
“Yet I know thou hast made my soul to live for ever; but
I know not where, and I am unwilling to try. I tremble, I
am afraid to go thither, whence I shall not return. I stand
quivering on the edge of the gulf; for clouds and darkness
rest upon it. O God! must I go always ‘creeping with
terrors, and plunge into eternity with a peradventure l’
“O thou Lover of men, is there no help in thee? I have
heard (what indeed my heart cannot conceive) that thou
revealest thyself to those that seek thee, and pourest thy love
into their hearts; and that they who know and love thee,
walk through the shadow of death and fear no evil. O that
this were so! that there was such an unspeakable gift given
to the children of men I for then might I hope for it. O
God, if there be, give it unto me ! Speak, that I may see
thee! Make thyself known unto me also in the manner that
thou knowest ! In anywise, let me know thee, and love thee,
that I may be formed after thy likeness | That I may be
love, as thou art love; that I may now be happy in thee; and,
when thou wilt, fall into the abyss of thy love, and enjoy thee