A Calm Address to the Inhabitants of England
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. AbouT a year and a half ago, being exceedingly
pained at what I saw or heard continually, I wrote a little
tract entitled, “A Calm Address to our American Colonies;”
but the ports being just then shut up by the Americans, I
could not send it abroad, as I designed. However, it was
not lost; within a few months, fifty, or perhaps an hundred
thousand copies, in newspapers and otherwise, were dispersed
throughout Great Britain and Ireland. The effect exceeded
my most sanguine hopes. The eyes of many people were
opened; they saw things in a quite different light. They
perceived, and that with the utmost clearness, how they had
been hoodwinked before. They found, they had been led
unawares into all the wilds of political enthusiasm, as far
distant from truth and common sense, as from the real love
of their country.
2. I am encouraged hereby to address myself 3nce more,
not indeed to my countrymen afar off, but to you who remain
in your native land, who are inhabitants of old England. I
have no private views in doing this. I attend no great man’s
table. I have nothing to ask, either of the King, or any of
his Ministers. You may easily believe this; for if I had
sought wealth or preferment half a century ago, I should
hardly think it worth while to seek it now, when I have one
foot in the grave. But I have a view to contribute all that in
me lies to the public welfare and tranquillity. A flame was
studiously kindled some time since, which threatened to
involve the whole nation. By the blessing of God, it is greatly
checked; it does not spread, or blaze as formerly. But it is
not quite put out. I wish to quench the remains of that
evil fire.
3. My view is, as far as is possible, to lessen, if not
remove, the misunderstandings under which many honest,
well-meaning men are labouring to this day; misunderstand
ings which have caused much animosity, nay, much bitterness
and rancour in their minds against those who equally “strive to
have a conscience void of offence towards God and towards
man.” I would fain have all these duly sensible of the blessings
which they enjoy; that they may be thankful to the Giver of
every blessing, and may love one another as He has loved us.
4. Surely every man of candour and humanity must wish
well to such an attempt; in the prosecution of which I will
first endeavour to set down, in as plain and artless a manner
as I can, according to the best light I have, the real state of
those affairs which have occasioned these misunderstandings;
and then add two or three short reflections, which I con
ceive naturally deducible therefrom.
5. And, First, I will set down, in as plain and artless a
manner as I can, according to the best light I have, the real
state of those affairs which have occasioned these misunder
standings. I have perhaps had some means of information
which many others have not had. Over and above those
accounts which have been published, I have had abundance
of letters from persons in America, on whose judgment,
veracity, and impartiality I could safely depend; especially from
the provinces of New-York, Virginia, Maryland, and Penn
sylvania. I have likewise had the opportunity of conversing
freely and largely with many that came from those provinces,
and of comparing together the accounts of those who were
attached to one or the other party. And I shall endeavour to
deliver the plain facts, without speculations concerning them.
6. In the year 1737, my brother took ship, in order to
return from Georgia to England. But a violent storm drove
him up to New-England; and he was for some time detained
at Boston. Even then he was surprised to hear the most
serious people, and men of consequence, almost continually
crying out, “We must be independent; we shall never be
well, till we shake off the English yoke.” This sounded
exceeding strange to him; as he could not form any imagi
nation, that they could be happier under any government,
than the mild one which they then enjoyed.
A gentleman who spent some time at Boston in the year
1739, informed me that he had frequently heard the very
same conversation there; although at that time the people
only spake what they had long and eagerly desired; but, it
seems, without any formed design, or having concerted any
measures upon the head.
7. Almost from their settlement in the country, but more
especially from this time, the people of this as well as the
other provinces, multiplied exceedingly. This was the
natural effect of the unparalleled lenity of the Government
they were under, and the perfect liberty they enjoyed, civil as
well as religious. Through the same causes, from the small
ness of their taxes, and the large bounties continually received
from their mother country, (which also protected them from
all their enemies,) their wealth increased as fast as their
numbers. And, together with their number and their wealth,
the spirit of independency increased also. At the same time,
it could not be but their shipping would increase in the same
proportion with their trade, which was now extended not
only through America, and not only through Great Britain
and Ireland, but also (notwithstanding the Act of Naviga
tion) through almost every part of Europe.
8. Much more wealth was accumulated in the numerous
seaport towns, by defrauding His Majesty of his customs.
This was continually done, not only by stealth, but frequently
with an high hand. Whole ship-loads of uncustomed goods
were imported, particularly at Boston, and that at noon-day.
And it is notorious, that one of the greatest dealers in this
kind was the celebrated Mr. Hancock. It is true, this now
and then met with some check from His Majesty's officers;
but it was so little, it scarce deserves the naming. However,
little as it was, they bore it not without huge indignation,
and strong marks of resentment. And whenever a matter of
this kind came before an American jury, (which could not
but frequently be the case,) it was easy to foresee the event.
The officer was sure to have his labour for his pains; for
they were too good patriots to condemn their countrymen I
By this means the customs of North-America, which ought
to have brought in so considerable a sum as would have gone
far toward defraying the expense of the government, were
reduced to a very small pittance.
9. In consideration of this, the English Government a few
years ago thought it equitable to lay a small duty upon the
stamps in America, in order, if not to bear themselves harm
less, yet to lessen their burden. Immediately a cry arose, as
if all America was just going to be swallowed up. It was
echoed across the Atlantic Ocean, from America to England.
The patriots (so they styled themselves) in England eagerly
joined the cry, and spared no labour and no expense to pro
pagate it throughout the nation. Do you suppose they did this
out of stark love and kindness to the poor, ruined Americans?
No such matter. They understood the case too well; they
knew they cried before they were hurt. But they laid hold
on this as a fair occasion to throw an aspersion on those that
were in power, being very willing, and supposing themselves
very worthy, to supply their place. However, the Ministry
finding the clamour increasing, and the storm spreading on
both sides the ocean, were persuaded to give way to the
torrent. They did so; and the Stamp Act was repealed.
10. The American leaders now apprehending that they
had a sufficient number of fast friends in England, began to
entertain higher designs; the New-England men in particular.
They had no longer anything to fear from Canada, which the
English had conquered for them. And they had nothing to
fear from England, when they judged their allies were
growing stronger and stronger. They therefore paved the
way for the execution of their favourite scheme; first, by
diligently cultivating the republican motions which they had
received from their forefathers; and then by speaking and
writing in the most contemptuous and reproachful manner of
the English Government.
11. Soon after, it being thought reasonable, that every
part of the British empire should furnish its share of the
general expense, the English Parliament laid a small duty on
the tea imported into America. Again a violent outcry
arose, and was studiously propagated through all the provinces
It was no less diligently spread throughout England. And
as they judged the time was now come to advance a little
further, the leading men, both at home and abroad, began
more and more confidently to assert, “that the English had
no right to tax the American colonies.” The assertors of
this new position in England strongly exhorted those in
America to withstand what they were pleased to call this
“illegal, unconstitutional oppression.” Thus encouraged,
the Bostonians, under the auspices of Mr. Hancock, (whose
interest was particularly at stake,) scorning to do any thing
secretly, paraded the town at noon-day with colours flying,
and bravely threw the English tea into the sea. This was
the first plain overt act of rebellion, not of a few, but of the
town of Boston. Reparation of the wrong was demanded;
but it was not obtained. Till it should be obtained, the
Parliament ordered Boston harbour to be shut up.
12. But things were not yet ripe for an open rupture:
Therefore the Americans still gave the Government good
words. They professed their loyalty, their great regard for
the King, and their desire of obeying all his legal commands.
But all this time they were using all possible art and diligence
to blacken, first the Ministry, after a time the Parliament
too, and then the King himself. Of this I had a clear and
particular account from a friend in Pennsylvania, who then
observed a storm rising in the north, and moving on toward
the southern colonies. And it moved on apace. A new
supreme power, called a Congress, appeared. It openly
assumed the reins of government, exercised all the rights of
sovereignty, burst all the bands, and totally disclaimed the
authority both of King and Parliament.
13. But still the Americans talked of allegiance, and said
they desired nothing but the liberty of Englishmen. Many
in England cordially believed them; I myself for one. And
many more (though they saw deeper; perhaps were in the
secret) affected to believe them, defended them with all their
might, and pleaded their cause, in public and private, as
honest, upright men, who only withstood oppression, and
desired nothing but what was their legal right.
14. While we were warmly debating these things in Eng
land, the Americans, believing matters were mow in a proper
forwardness, wholly threw off the mask, openly took up arms,
seized upon His Majesty’s stores and ships, and avowed them
selves to be sovereign states, independent on Britain or any
other. And herein they were still vehemently encouraged
by their numerous friends in England. Some of these (and
they were persons of no mean account) wrote them letters,
(which were carefully sent by the Congress through all the
provinces,) nearly in these words: “Make no concessions;
give up nothing. Stand your ground. Be resolute, and, you
may depend upon it, in less than a year and an half, there
will be such commotions in England, that the Government
will be glad to be reconciled to you upon your own terms.”
15. One might have imagined, for some time, that this was
a true prophecy. Many warm men at home laboured to
embarrass the Government in all its measures. They spoke
all manner of evil of the Ministry. They made the keenest
reflections on the Parliament; and, when they had whetted
themselves and one another, they spared not the King
himself. Meanwhile, they were so wonderfully tender of the
Americans, that they would not in anywise term them rebels,
though they were in open arms against their lawful Sovereign.
And all this time, whatsoever was undertaken against them
went on heavily. The King's troops were either detained in
the harbours, or stopped in their passage by contrary winds.
Some of the transports, and abundance of other ships, fell
into the hands of the Americans. Their privateers swarmed
on every side, both in the American and European seas.
They were plentifully furnished with provisions, from the
resources they had within themselves, and with all sorts of
arms and ammunition, by our good allies, the Dutch and
French. In the mean while, the few English troops that.
were in America were closely shut up in Boston, by a.
numerous army holding them in on every side, and gaping to.
swallow them up. And these within the town were in want
of all things, while those without abounded with all things.
This they gloried in, as a manifest proof that God was on.
their side. As they now were confident of success, the talk
of liberty was over: Independency was the word; this was
avowed without any disguise or reserve. And, indeed, liberty
was come to an end; it had no longer any being in the
confederate colonies. If any one dared to speak a little in
favour of the King, or in disfavour of the Congress, he was
soon taught to know his lords and masters, whose little
finger was heavier than the loins of Kings.
16. At length the King published a Proclamation for a
General Fast in England, that we might “humble ourselves
before God, and implore his blessing and assistance.” Some of
the patrons of independency mocked at this, and endeavoured
to turn it into ridicule. A company of them met at an inn in
Bristol on the fast-day, and had a plentiful entertainment.
Others stormed and raved at this hypocrisy, as they were pleased
to term it. However, there is all reason to believe that God
was well pleased with it. We now openly acknowledged him,
and he openly acknowledged us. From this very time, the tide.
turned. The King’s forces (which many said was impossible)
made good their landing at the place proposed, and that
without any loss at all. They took possession of Long
Island, and with next to no opposition. They took the island
and city of New-York, with all its boasted fortifications.
They drove the rebels out of their almost inaccessible posts,
though defended by strong intrenchments. They took Fort
Washington and Fort-Lee, which an handful of men might
have defended against a numerous army. At all these places
they took warlike stores in abundance, beside some thousands
of prisoners. They took possession of Rhode-Island, and
everywhere drove the rebels before them like a flock of sheep.
17. Where are now the two or three hundred thousand men,
that we were told would pour down upon us? But what, if they
did? What would a million do, if they ran away as soon as
the English appeared? Whatever they do, they will not fight.
I believe they cannot; for the hand of God is upon them. But
they can rob, and plunder, and destroy, and turn a well-peopled
and fruitful land into a wilderness. They can burn houses,
and drive men, women, and children into the wild woods, in
the depth of winter. Yea, they can burn whole towns, with
out any regard for the sick or aged, that necessarily perished
in the flame. But did not God regard them? Did not their
dying cries enter into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth ?
18. Such is the present state of affairs in America. Let
us now take a view of the whole: Twelve provinces, upon
various pretences, (all which have been confuted over and
over,) have declared themselves independent states, openly
renounced their allegiance to their lawful Sovereign, taken up
arms against him, and prosecuted the war in an unheard-of
manner. At first prosperity seemed to attend them in all
their undertakings. But since we sought help from God,
there has been a manifest blast upon them. Their armies are
scattered; their forts and strongholds lost; their provinces
taken one after another. Meantime, are they humbled? No;
they roar like a wild bull in a net. They tear up the ground
with fierceness and rage; repentance is hid from their eyes.
They revenge themselves--upon women and children; they
burn-all behind them / O American virtue ! Are these
the men who are proposed as a pattern to all Europe?
19. Brethren | Countrymen | What are the reflections that
now naturally arise in your breasts? Do you not immediately
observe, that after this huge outcry for liberty, which has
echoed through America, there is not the very shadow of liberty
left in the confederate provinces? There is no liberty of the
press. A man may more safely print against the Church in
Italy or Spain, than publish a tittle against the Congress in
New-England or Pennsylvania. There is no religious liberty.
What Minister is permitted to follow his own conscience in
the execution of his office? to put man in mind to be “subject
to principalities and powers?” to “fear God and honour the
King?” Who is suffered (whatever his conscience may dictate)
to “pray for the King, and all that are in authority?”
There is no civil liberty. No man hath any security, either
for his goods, or for his person; but is daily liable to have
his goods spoiled or taken away, without either law or form
of law, and to suffer the most cruel outrage as to his person,
such as many would account worse than death. And there
is no legal method wherein he can obtain redress for whatever
loss or outrage he has sustained.
20. Do not you observe, wherever these bawlers for liberty
govern, there is the vilest slavery? No man there can say
that his goods are his own. They are absolutely at the dis
posal of the mob, or the Congress. No man can say that his
tongue is his own. If he say a word for the King, what will
follow * No man can say that his body is his own. He may
be imprisoned whenever our lords the Congress please. They
are as absolute as the Emperor of Morocco: Their will is the
sole law. No man can say his life is his own. Those who
have the disposal of his substance, who have the disposal of
his liberty, have the disposal of his life also. And of this they
have given recent proofs. It is true, they do not themselves
cut throats; they do not soil their own fingers; but their
friends the mob are always ready. Thus is real liberty, in all
its branches, given up for that poor shadow, independency! a
phantom which does not, in fact, exist in any civilized nation
under heaven It never did, and never will, being wholly
inconsistent with the very idea of government. And to what
a condition are these poor colonies brought, by quitting the
substance for the shadow ! “Do you ask,” says a gentleman
who writes from Philadelphia, “what is the present state of
these provinces? You may see it upon Ezekiel's roll; such
is the condition of this country: “It is written within and
without, lamentation, and mourning, and woe.’”
21. And do not you observe, on the other hand, the perfect
liberty which we enjoy? Not, indeed, derived from our fore
fathers, as some writers idly talk. No; our forefathers never
enjoyed it, either before or after William the Conqueror, and
least of all in the time of the long Parliament, or under
Oliver Cromwell. They had then little more liberty, civil or
religious, than is now enjoyed in the confederate provinces.
Never talk of the liberty of our forefathers: English liberty
commenced at the Revolution. And how entire is it at this
day! Every man says what he will, writes what he will,
prints what he will. Every man worships God, if he worships
bim at all, as he is persuaded in his own mind. Every man
enjoys his own property; nor can the King himself take a
shilling of it, but according to law. Every man enjoys the
freedom of his person, unless the law of the land authorize
his confinement. Above all, every man’s life is secured, as
well from the King, as from his fellow-subjects. So that it
is impossible to conceive a fuller liberty than we enjoy, both
as to religion, life, body, and goods.
22. Do not you see then the abundant cause we have to
be thankful to God, who having “made the whole nation of
men, determined the times before appointed, and the bounds
of their habitation,” in that he hath cast our lot in a fair
ground, under the mildest government upon earth? Are
not we of all men without sense, if, instead of thankfulness,
we give way to murmuring and discontent, and finding fault
with we know not what? In all reason, we should be
perpetually praising God for this as well as for a thousand
other benefits, and endeavouring to make him a suitable
return, by devoting our lives to his service.
23. And as long as we fear God, shall we not “honour
the King?” looking upon him with a love mixed with
reverence? Should we not remember him before God in
prayer, that his throne may be established in righteousness?
that he, and all which are in authority under him, may duly
administer justice, to the punishment of wickedness and vice,
and the maintenance of true religion and virtue? And is it
not our part carefully to abstain from speaking evil of the
ruler of our people; and to study to “lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty?”
Hitherto I have addressed myself to my countrymen in
general. But I would add a word to you in particular, who
bear a religious character; whether you are members of the
established Church, or Dissenters of any denomination.
One might reasonably expect, that all of you would be
cheerfully “subject to the higher powers;” seeing you are
agreed “there is no power,” whether supreme or subordinate,
“but of God.” Nay, one would expect that you would be
continually reminding all you had any intercourse with, that
they “must needs be subject, not” only “for wrath, but”
also “for conscience’ sake.” How is it, then, that any of
you espouse the cause of those that are in open rebellion
against their lawful Sovereign that, if you do not plead
expressly for them, you at least extenuate their crime; perhaps
even scruple to call them rebels, and speak of them with
tenderness, rather than resentment? How is it that
any of you who fear God “are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities?” to “speak evil of the ruler of your people,” as
well as of those that are put in authority under him? Do you
believe that “Michael the archangel durst not bring a railing
accusation against Satan?” And dare you bring or retail an
hundred railing accusations against your lawful Governors?
Now, at least, humble yourselves before God, and act more
suitably to your character. Wherever you are, far from
countenancing, repress the base clamours of the vulgar;
remembering those awful words: “If any man among you.
seemeth to be religious,” (rather, be ever so religious,) “and
bridleth not his tongue, that man’s religion is vain.”
Are not you who dissent from the established Church, in
whatever kind or degree, particularly concerned to observe
this “for wrath” as well as “for conscience sake?” Do
you imagine, there are no High Churchmen left? Did they
all die with Dr. Sacheverel? Alas, how little do you know
of mankind I Were the present restraint taken off, you
would see them swarming on every side, and gnashing upon
you with their teeth. There would hardly need a nod from
that sacred person whom you revile, or at least lightly
esteem. Were he to stand neuter, in what a condition would
you be within one twelve months If other Bonners and
Gardiners did not arise, other Lauds and Sheldons would,
who would either rule over you with a rod of iron, or drive
you out of the land. Know the blessings you enjoy. Let
common sense restrain you, if neither religion nor gratitude
can. “Beware of the wrath of a patient man.” Dare not
again to open your lips against your Sovereign:--Lest he fall
upon you? No; but lest he cease to defend you. Then
farewell to the liberty you now enjoy.
Permit me to add a few more words to you, a small part of
whom dissent from, but the far greater part remain in, the
Church; you who are vulgarly called Methodists. Do any
of you blaspheme God or the King? None of you, I trust,
who are in connexion with me. I would no more continue
in fellowship with those who continued in such a practice, than
with whoremongers, or sabbath-breakers, or thieves, or drunk
ards, or common swearers. But there are not a few who go
under that name, though they have no connexion with us;
yea, though they cordially hate us as dreadful heretics, for
believing that “God willeth all men to be saved;” who hate the
King and all his Ministers only less than they do an Arminian;
and who speak all manner of evil of them in private, if not in
public too.” But suffer me to ask, Is this well done? Is it
gratitude 7 Is it prudence? In the name of wonder, what
could His Majesty have done for you which he has not done?
What would you have? Can you tell? What can you desire
more than you have already? Have you not full liberty of
conscience in every respect, without any shadow of restraint?
In what other nation under the sun is such religious liberty
to be found? Have you not full liberty, with regard to your
life, to your person, and to your goods? In what other country
upon earth is such civil liberty to be found? If you are not
thankful to God and the King for these blessings, you are
utterly unworthy of them. Is it prudence to speak in so bitter
and contemptuous a manner of such Governors as God has
given you? What, if by the bitterness of your spirit, the
acrimony of your language, and the inflammatory libels which
you spread abroad, you could carry your point, unhinge the
present Government, and set up another in its stead what
would you gain thereby? Would another Government allow
you more liberty than you now enjoy? Could they give you
a more unbounded liberty of conscience? It is impossible !
Would they give you a larger measure of civil liberty? They
could not if they would. And certainly they would not give
you the liberty of railing at your Governors, and stirring up
your fellow-subjects against them. If you did this, you
* But many of them are of a better mind.
would not only lose your goods, but probably your life also.
On the other hand, what if the present Government should
continue in spite of all your disloyal practices! have you any
assurance, have you any reason to believe, that our Governors
will always be so patient? Nay, undoubtedly, when things
of greater moment are settled, they will find a time for you.
Your present behaviour will then be remembered; perhaps
not altogether to your advantage. It is not the ignorance
but the wisdom of your Governors which occasions their
present silence. And if you go on thus, be assured, sooner
or later, you will meet with your reward. There is no need
that the King should do anything: He needs only not to
restrain; that is enough: There are those on every side who
are now ready to swallow you up. You will then wish you
had been wise in time, when your wisdom comes too late;
when the King of kings “laughs at your calamity, and
mocks while your fear cometh.”