Thoughts Concerning Gospel Ministers
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. How frequently do we hear this expression from the
mouths of rich and poor, learned and unlearned 1 Many
lament that they have not a Gospel Minister in their church,
and therefore are constrained to seek one at the meeting.
Many rejoice that they have a Gospel Minister, and that
there are many such in their neighbourhood. Meantime,
they generally speak with much displeasure, if not contempt,
of those who they say are not Gospel Ministers.
2. But it is to be feared, few of these understand what
they say. Few understand what that expression means.
Most that use it have only crude, confused notions concerning
Gospel Ministers. And hence many inconveniences arise;
yea, much hurt to the souls of men. They contract prejudices
in favour of very worthless men, who are indeed blind leaders
of the blind; not knowing what the real gospel is, and
therefore incapable of preaching it to others. Meantime,
from the same cause, they contract prejudices against other
Ministers, who, in reality, both live and preach the gospel;
and therefore are well able to instruct them in all those
truths that accompany salvation.
3. But what then is the meaning of the expression? Who
is a Gospel Minister? Let us consider this important question
calmly, in the fear and in the presence of God.
Not every one that preaches the eternal decrees; (although
many suppose this is the very thing;) that talks much of the
sovereignty of God, of free, distinguishing grace, of dear
electing love, of irresistible grace, and of the infallible perse
verance of the saints. A man may speak of all these by the
hour together; yea, with all his heart, and with all his voice;
and yet have no right at all to the title of a Gospel Minister.
Not every one that talks largely and earnestly on those
precious subjects,--the righteousness and blood of Christ.
Let a man descant upon these in ever so lively a manner, let
him describe his sufferings ever so pathetically; if he stops
there, if he does not show man’s duty, as well as Christ’s
sufferings; if he does not apply all to the consciences of the
hearers; he will never lead them to life, either here or here
after, and therefore is no Gospel Minister.
Not every one who deals in the promises only, without
ever showing the terrors of the law; that slides over “the
wrath of God revealed from heaven against all ungodliness
and unrighteousness,” and endeavours to heal those that
never were wounded. These promise-mongers are no Gospel
Ministers.
Not every one (very nearly allied to the former) who bends
all his strength to coax sinners to Christ. Such soft, tender
expressions, as “My dear hearers, My dear lambs,” though
repeated a thousand times, do not prove a Gospel Minister.
Lastly. Not every one that preaches justification by
faith; he that goes no farther than this, that does not insist
upon sanctification also, upon all the fruits of faith, upon
universal holiness, does not declare the whole counsel of God,
and consequently is not a Gospel Minister.
4. Who then is such? Who is a Gospel Minister, in the
full, scriptural sense of the word? He, and he alone, of
whatever denomination, that does declare the whole counsel
of God; that does preach the whole gospel, even justification
and sanctification, preparatory to glory. He that does not
put asunder what God has joined, but publishes alike, “Christ
dying for us, and Christ living in us.” He that constantly
applies all this to the hearts of the hearers, being willing
to spend and be spent for them; having himself the mind
which was in Christ, and steadily walking as Christ also
walked; he, and he alone, can with propriety be termed a
Gospel Minister.
5. Let it be particularly observed, if the gospel be “glad
tidings of great salvation which shall be unto all people,” then
those only are, in the full sense, Gospel Ministers who proclaim
the “great salvation;” that is, salvation from all (both inward
and outward) sin, into “all the mind that was in Christ
Jesus;” and likewise proclaim offers of this salvation to every
child of man. This honourable title is therefore vilely prosti
tuted, when it is given to any but those who testify “that
God willeth all men to be saved,” and “to be perfect as their
Father which is in heaven is perfect.”