A Blow at the Root
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. “WITHoUT holiness no man shall see the Lord,” shall
see the face of God in glory. Nothing under heaven can be
more sure than this; “for the mouth of the Lord hath
spoken it. And though heaven and earth pass away, yet his
word shall not pass away.” As well therefore might God
fall from heaven, as his word fall to the ground. No, it
cannot be; none shall live with God, but he that now lives
to God; none shall enjoy the glory of God in heaven, but he
that bears the image of God on earth; none that is not saved
from sin here can be saved from hell hereafter; none can see
the kingdom of God above, unless the kingdom of God be in
him below. Whosoever will reign with Christ in heaven,
must have Christ reigning in him on earth. He must have
“that mind in him which was in Christ,” enabling him “to
walk as Christ also walked.”
2. And yet as sure as this is, and as clearly as it is taught
in every part of the Holy Scripture, there is scarce one
among all the truths of God, which is less received by men.
It was indeed acknowledged in some degree, even among the
wiser Heathens. Some among them allowed, that nothing
would please God, but the sancti recessus mentis, et incoctum
generoso pectus honesto; “a virtuous, holy mind, and an heart
deep-dyed with generous honesty.” But though they could
not deny, yet how easily and effectually did they evade this!
They fancied something else would do as well; that some
rites or ceremonies, some external forms, or glorious actions,
would supply the place of inward holiness. So the famous
Roman entitles to future happiness, not only the good and
virtuous, but all
Ob patriam pugnando vulnera passos,
Quique pii vates, et Phaebo digna locuti;
Inventas aut qui vitam excoluere per artes.*
So, to fight for their country, to write good verses, or to
invent useful arts, was abundantly sufficient, in the judgment
of the wisest Heathens, to give men a place in heaven |
3. But this would not pass with modern Romans. They
despised such gross imaginations. But though they did not
allow these, they found out another way to get to heaven
without holiness. In the room of them they substituted
penances, pilgrimages, praying to saints and angels; and,
above all these, masses for the dead, absolution by a Priest,
and extreme unction. And these satisfy the Romanists full as
well as lustrations did the Heathens. Thousands of them
make no manner of doubt, but, by a diligent use of these,
without any holiness at all, they shall see the Lord in glory.
4. However, Protestants will not be satisfied thus; they
know this hope is no better than a spider's web. They are
convinced, that whoever leans on this, leans on the staff of a
broken reed. What then can they do? How shall they
hope to see God, without holiness? Why, by doing no harm,
doing good, going to the church and sacrament. And many
thousands sit down content with this, believing they are in
the high road to heaven.
5. Yet many cannot rest here. They look upon this as the
very Popery of Protestantism. They well know, that although
none can be a real Christian, without carefully abstaining from
all evil, using every means of grace at every opportunity, and
doing all possible good to all men; yet a man may go thus far,
may do all this, and be but an Heathen still. They know this
religion is too superficial; it is but as it were skin-deep. There
fore, it is not Christianity; for that lies in the heart; it is wor
shipping God in spirit and in truth; it is no other than “the
* The following is Pitt's translation of these lines from Virgil:--
“Patriots who perish'd for their country's right,
Or nobly triumph'd in the field of fight:
There holy priests and sacred poets stood,
Who sung with all the raptures of a god;
Worthies who life by useful arts refined,
With those who leave a deathless name behind,
Friends of the world, and fathers of mankind.”-EDIT.
/
kingdom of God within us;” it is the life of God in the soul
of man; it is the mind which was in Christ Jesus; it is
“righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.”
6. Besides, they see that, be this religion shallower or deeper,
it does not stand on the right foundation; since “other
foundation” for true religion “can no man lay, than that
which is laid, even Christ Jesus;” since no one can have the
mind which was in Christ, till he is justified by his blood, till
he is forgiven and reconciled to God through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ. And none can be justified, they are
well assured, but by faith, even faith alone; seeing “to him”
only “that believeth on God who justifieth the ungodly, his
faith is counted to him for righteousness.”
7. What evasion now? What way could Satan take to make
all this light of none effect? What could be done when that
grand truth, “By grace ye are saved through faith,” was more
and more generally received? What, indeed, but to persuade
the very men who had received it, to “turn the grace of God
into lasciviousness?” To this end Simon Magus appeared
again, and taught, “that Christ had done, as well as suffered,
all; that his righteousness being imputed to us, we need
none of our own; that seeing there was so much righteousness
and holiness in Him, there needs none in us; that to think
we have any, or to desire or seek any, is to renounce Christ;
that from the beginning to the end of salvation, all is in
Christ, nothing in man; and that those who teach otherwise
are legal Preachers, and know nothing of the gospel.”
8. This is indeed “a blow at the root,” the root of all
holiness, all true religion. Hereby Christ is “stabbed in the
house of his friends,” of those who make the largest professions
of loving and honouring him; the whole design of his death,
namely, “to destroy the works of the devil,” being over
thrown at a stroke. For wherever this doctrine is cordially
received, it leaves no place for holiness. It demolishes it
from top to bottom; it destroys both root and branch. It
effectually tears up all desire of it, all endeavour after it.
It forbids all such exhortations as might excite those desires,
or awaken those endeavours. Nay, it makes men afraid of
personal holiness, afraid of cherishing any thought of it, or
motion toward it, lest they should deny the faith, and reject
Christ and his righteousness: So that, instead of being
“zealous of good works,” they are a stink in their nostrils.
And they are infinitely more afraid of “the works of God,”
than of “the works of the devil.”
9. Here is wisdom | though not the wisdom of the saints,
but wisdom from beneath. Here is the masterpiece of
Satan': Farther than this he cannot go. Men are holy,
without a grain of holiness in them holy in Christ, however
unholy in themselves; they are in Christ, without one jot of
the mind that was in Christ; in Christ, though their nature
is whole in them. They are “complete in him,” though
they are, in themselves, as proud, as vain, as covetous, as
passionate as ever. It is enough : They may be unrighteous
still, seeing Christ has “fulfilled all righteousness.”
10. “O ye simple ones, how long will ye love simplicity?”
How long will ye “seek death in the error of your life?”
“Know ye not,” whoever teacheth you otherwise, “that
the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God?”
“Be not deceived; ” although there are many lie in wait to
deceive, and that under the fair pretence of exalting Christ;
--a pretence which the more easily steals upon you, because
“to you he is precious.” But as the Lord liveth, “neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor
sodomites, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.”
“Such” indeed “were some of you. But ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified,” as well as “justified, in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.” You are really
changed; you are not only accounted, but actually “made,
righteous.” “The law”--the inward power--“of the Spirit
of life in Christ Jesus hath made” you “free”--really, actually
free--“from the law” or power “of sin and death.” This is
liberty, true gospel liberty, experienced by every believer:
Not freedom from the law of God, or the works of God, but
from the law of sin and the works of the devil. See that ye
“stand fast in” this real, not imaginary “liberty, wherewith
Christ hath made you free.” And take heed ye “be not
entangled again,” by means of these vain boasters, “in the
yoke of ’’ that vile “bondage to sin,” from which ye are now
clean escaped. I testify unto you, that if you still continue
in sin, Christ shall profit you nothing; that Christ is no
Saviour to you, unless he saves you from your sins; and that
unless it purify your heart, faith shall profit you nothing. O
when will ye understand, that to oppose either inward or out
ward holiness, under colour of exalting Christ, is directly to
act the part of Judas, to “betray the Son of man with a kiss?”
Repent, repent! lest he cut you in sunder with the two-edged
sword that cometh out of his mouth ! It is you yourselves
that, by opposing the very end of his coming into the world,
are crucifying the Son of God afresh, and putting him to an
open shame. It is you that, by expecting to see the Lord
without holiness, through the righteousness of Christ, “make
the blood of the covenant an unholy thing,” keeping those
unholy that so trust in it. O beware ! for evil is before you.
If those who name not the name of Christ, and die in their
sins, shall be punished seven-fold, surely you who thus make
Christ a minister of sin, shall be punished seventy-and-seven
fold. What; make Christ destroy his own kingdom? make
Christ a factor for Satan? set Christ against holiness? talk of
Christ as saving his people in their sins? It is no better than
to say, He saves them from the guilt, and not from the power,
of sin. Will you make the righteousness of Christ such a cover
for the unrighteousness of man? So that by this means, “the
unrighteous” of every kind “shall inherit the kingdom of God!”
Stop! Consider! What are you doing? You did run well: Who
hath bewitched you? Who hath corrupted you from the sim
plicity of Christ, from the purity of the gospel? You did know,
“He that believeth is born of God: And whosoever is born
of God sinneth not;” but while “he keepeth himself, that
wicked one toucheth him not.” O come back to the true,
the pure, the old gospel ! that which ye received in the begin
ning. Come back to Christ, who died to make you an holy
people, “zealous of good works.” “Remember from whence
you are fallen, and repent, and do the first works.” Your
“Father worketh hitherto:” Doye work; else your faith is vain.
For “wilt thou know, O vain,” O empty “man, that faith
without works is dead?” Wilt thou know that “though I have
all faith, so as to remove mountains, and have not love, I am
nothing?” Wilt thou know, that all the blood and righteous
ness of Christ, unless “that mind be in thee which was in
Him,” and thou likewise “walk as Christ walked,” will only
increase thy damnation? “If any man teach otherwise, and
consent not to wholesome words, and to the doctrine which is
according to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but
doting about strife of words, whereof come railings, evil sur
misings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and des
titute of the truth.” Be no longer afraid of the strongest
exhortations either to inward or outward holiness. Hereby
God the Father is glorified, and God the Son truly exalted.
Do not stupidly and senselessly call this legal,--a silly, unmean
ing word. Be not afraid of being “under the law of God,” but
of being under “the law of sin.” Love the strictest preaching
best; that which most searches the heart, and shows you wherein
you are unlike Christ; and that which presses you most to love
him with all your heart, and serve him with all your strength.
11. Suffer me to warn you of another silly, unmeaning
word: Do not say, “I can do nothing.” If so, then you know
nothing of Christ; then you have no faith: For if you have,
if you believe, then you “can do all things through Christ
who strengtheneth you.” You can love him and keep his
commandments; and to you his “commandments are not
grievous.” Grievous to them that believe / Far from it. They
are the joy of your heart. Show then your love to Christ by
keeping his commandments, by walking in all his ordinances
blameless. Honour Christ by obeying him with all your
might, by serving him with all your strength. Glorify Christ
by imitating Christ in all things, by walking as he walked.
Keep to Christ by keeping in all his ways. Trust in Christ,
to live and reign in your heart. Have confidence in Christ
that he will fulfil in you all his great and precious promises,
that he will work in you all the good pleasure of his goodness,
and all the work of faith with power. Cleave to Christ, till
his blood have cleansed you from all pride, all anger, all
evil desire. Let Christ do all. Let him that has done all
for you, do all in you. Exalt Christ as a Prince to give
repentance; a Saviour both to give remission of sins, and to
create in you a new heart, to renew a right spirit within you.
This is the gospel, the pure, genuine gospel; glad tidings of
great salvation. Not the new, but the old, the everlasting
gospel, the gospel not of Simon Magus, but of Jesus Christ.
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ give you,
“according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith; that, being rooted and grounded in
love, ye may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the
length, and breadth, and depth, and height; and to know
that love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that ye may be
filled with all the fulness of God!”