Thoughts upon God's Sovereignty
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
GoD reveals himself under a two-fold character; as a
Creator, and as Governor. . These are no way inconsistent
with each other; but they are totally different.
As a Creator, he has acted, in all things, according to his
own sovereign will. Justice has not, cannot have, any place
here; for nothing is due to what has no being. Here,
therefore, he may, in the most absolute sense, do what, he
will with his own. Accordingly, he created the heavens and
the earth, and all things that are therein, in every conceivable
respect, “according to his own good pleasure.” 1. He
began his creation at what time, or rather, at what part of
eternity, it seemed him good. Had it pleased him, it might
have been millions of years sooner, or millions of ages later.
2. He determined, by his sovereign will, the duration of the
universe; whether it should last seven thousand, or seven
hundred thousand, or numberless millions of years. 3. By
the same, he appointed the place of the universe, in the
immensity of space. 4. Of his sovereign will he determined
the number of the stars, of all the component parts of the
universe, and the magnitude of every atom, of every fixed
star, every planet, and every comet. 5. As Sovereign, he
created the earth, with all the furniture of it, whether
animate or inanimate; and gave to each such a nature, with
such properties. 6. Of his own good pleasure, he made such
a creature as man, an embodied spirit, and, in consequence
of his spiritual nature, endued with understanding, will, and
liberty. 7. He hath determined the times for every nation
to come into being, with the bounds of their habitation.
8. He has allotted the time, the place, the circumstances, for
the birth of each individual:--
If of parents I came
That honour'd thy name,
'Twas thy goodness appointed it so.
9. He has given to each a body, as it pleased him, weak or
strong, healthy or sickly. This implies, 10. That he gives
them various degrees of understanding, and of knowledge,
diversified by numberless circumstances. It is hard to say
how far this extends; what an amazing difference there is, as
to the means of improvement, between one born and brought
up in a pious English family, and one born and bred among
the Hottentots. Only we are sure the difference cannot be
so great, as to necessitate one to be good, or the other to be
evil; to force one into everlasting glory, or the other into
everlasting burnings. This cannot be, because it would
suppose the character of God as a Creator, to interfere with
God as a Governor; wherein he does not, cannot possibly,
act according to his own mere sovereign will; but, as he has
expressly told us, according to the invariable rules both of
justice and mercy.
Whether therefore we can account for it or no, (which
indeed we cannot in a thousand cases,) we must absolutely
maintain, that God is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. But he cannot reward the sun for shining,
because the sun is not a free agent. Neither could he
reward us, for letting our light shine before men, if we acted
as necessarily as the sun. All reward, as well as all punish
ment, pre-supposes free-agency; and whatever creature is
incapable of choice, is incapable of either one or the other.
Whenever, therefore, God acts as a Governor, as a
rewarder, or punisher, he no longer acts as a mere Sovereign,
by his own sole will and pleasure; but as an impartial Judge,
guided in all things by invariable justice.
THouGHTs UPoN God’s soverEIGNTY. 363
Yet it is true, that, in some cases, mercy rejoices over
justice; although severity never does. God may reward
more, but he will never punish more, than strict justice
requires. It may be allowed that God acts as Sovereign in
convincing some souls of sin; arresting them in their mid
career, by his resistless power. It seems also, that, at the
moment of our conversion, he acts irresistibly. There may
likewise be many irresistible touches during the course of
our Christian warfare; with regard to which every believer
Tinay Sa
y say, “In the time of my distress
Thou hast my succour been,
In my utter helplessness
Restraining me from sin.”
But still, as St. Paul might have been either obedient or
“disobedient to the heavenly vision,” so every individual
may, after all that God has done, either improve his grace,
or make it of none effect.
Whatever, therefore, it hath pleased God to do, of his
sovereign pleasure, as Creator of heaven and earth; and
whatever his mercy may do on particular occasions, over and
above what justice requires; the general rule stands firm as
the pillars of heaven: “The Judge of all the earth will do
right. He will judge the world in righteousness,” and every
man therein, according to the strictest justice. He will
punish no man for doing anything which he could not
possibly avoid; neither for omitting anything which he could
not possibly do. Every punishment supposes the offender
might have avoided the offence for which he is punished:
Otherwise, to punish him would be palpably unjust, and
inconsistent with the character of God our Governor.
Let then these two ideas of God the Creator, the sovereign
Creator, and God the Governor, the just Governor, be always
kept apart. Let us distinguish them from each other, with
the utmost care. So shall we give God the full glory of his
sovereign grace, without impeaching his inviolable justice.