A Specimen of the Divinity and Philosophy of Jacob Behmen
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 9 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
IN the late edition of his Works before the second volume,
we have the following advertisement:
“As he and Mr. Law were raised up by God, and highly
qualified as instructers of mankind in divine wisdom, sc
all who are followers of Christ in simplicity of heart, and seek
only the salvation of their souls, will find in their writings
everything relating to their essential happiness. And all the
efforts of human wisdom to depreciate them, can be but like
sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.”
Mr. Law’s writings are entirely out of the present question:
We are only concerned with those of Jacob Behmen; a speci
men of which I beg to lay before those who really seek the
salvation of their souls:--
“AN ExPLANATION oR THE LoRD’s PRAYER.
“ Unser water tim himmel :
“Our Father in heaven :
“41. Un is God’s eternal will to nature; ser comprehends
in it the four forms of nature.
“42. Va is the matrix upon the cross; ter is Mercury in
the centre of nature. And they are the two mothers in the
eternal will. The one severs itself into fire, the other into
the light of meekness and into water. For va is the mother
of the light which affords substantiality, and ter is the mother
of the fire's tincture.
“43. Im is the heart: For the syllable im goes forth from
the heart, and soundeth through the lips.
“44. Him means the creation of the soul; mel is the
angelical soul itself: Which the heart on the cross in the
centre between the two mothers has comprehended, and with
the word him framed it to a creature, viz., into mel: For him
is the habitation of mel.
“Dein nahme werde geheiliget:
“Thy name be hallowed:
“45. When we say dein, we understand how the poor
soul swims in the water of this world.
“46. In the syllable nah it inclines inward; and in the
syllable me it comprehends the heavenly substantiality.
“47. When we say wer, the whole creature goes along in
the will: For wer has the whole centre; and with the syllable
de, it lays itself down in obedience to the meekness, and will
not kindle the wer in the fire.
“48. And when we say ge, the soul goes into the hea
venly substantiality; and then hei is the powerful entering
upon the cross into the number three. With the syllable li
the soul's will has comprehended the Holy Ghost. Get :
There the soul will go forth with the Holy Ghost.
“Dein reich komme:
“Thy kingdom come:
“49. Dein: Then the soul gives itself into the will of God.
“50. Reich: Here it gives itself into the virtue of the
angelical world.
“51. In the syllable kom, it goes into the virtue; and,
with the syllable me, it goes into the kingdom as a sprout:
For the me makes the lips be open.
“Dein wille geschehe, wie im himmel:
“Thy will be done, as in heaven:
“Also auch aufferden :
“So also upon earth:
“52. Dein : Here the will casts itself into God’s will.
“53. Wil is its desire to will the same with the Holy
Ghost. Le: With this syllable it takes in the will with the
spirit into the centre.-
“54. Ge: With this syllable it goes into the will. Sche:
With this syllable it worketh the work of God. He : In this
syllable it bows itself as a child.
“55. Wie: There it goes again into the voice of God; im,
is the heart of God. Him is again the creating of the
creatures: mel is the soul willing the will of God.
“56. Al : There it drives on that will, with the syllable
so, out of its centre into the outward principle. Auch :
There it affords all it has in itself out into the outward.
“57. Auff. With this syllable it apprehends the same
again, and desires its substance should not be dissipated.
“58. Er: With this syllable it brings its substance into
the spirit of this world, and there the will shall work wonders.
Den : With this syllable it shows that it must not be done in
the fire of the anger: For this syllable does not break up the
centre. They should be done in meek love, and yet taken
out of the er.
“Gicb uns unser taglich brodt heute:
“Give us our daily bread to-day:
“60. Gieb : There the will sticketh in the heart, and
presses outward, and the mouth catches it.
“61. Uns: With this syllable the soul desires food for all
its fellow-members.
“62. Un: With this syllable the soul goes into the
internal wisdom, wherein, before the creation in the seed, it
was discerned in the eternal will. Ser: With this syllable
it takes the original of nature in the will, where one form in
the original penetrates, fills, and preserves the other. And
that is the bond of the soul, whereby it eternally subsists.
And that the will of the soul desires; else it would be
dissolved.
“63. This is the true “doctorship of the Holy Ghost.”
The outward is but foppery.
“64. Tag : With this syllable the heavenly number is
understood, as wherein the spirit on the cross in the holy
matrix comprehends the genitive in the multiplication.
Lich : In this syllable the soul quickens and strengthens
itself with the heavenly number, which springs up out of the
Divine Majesty infinitely; and herein the soul is acknow
ledged for an angel.”
Whoever desires it, may read the rest of this explanation
at his leisure. I will only add the conclusion of it:--
“Amen :
“95. A is the first letter, and presses forth out of the
heart, and has no nature; but we clearly understand herein,
the seeking, longing, or attracting of the eternal will, with
out nature, wherein nature is generated, which has been from
eternity.
“96. Now, as the A is generated out of the heart, that is,
out of the eternal will, so out of A afterwards comes the
whole alphabet with four-and-twenty numbers; for the A
begins to number, and comprises the whole number in the
syllable men.” (Behmen's Works, Vol. II., p. 165, &c.)
Now, here I fix my foot. Upon this ground I join issue
with every admirer of Jacob Behmen in England.
I appeal to every candid man, every man of piety and
common sense, whether this explanation deserves those
violent encomiums contained in the Advertisement.
I ask any person of understanding, First, whether any
man in his senses, from the beginning of the world, ever
thought of explaining any treatise, divine or human, syllable
by syllable. Did a more absurd imagination ever enter into
a madman's brain? Is it possible by this means to make
sense of any text from Genesis to the Revelation? Must
there not be a very high degree of lunacy before any such
design could be formed ? I ask, Secondly, If any scripture
could be thus explained, if any meaning could be extracted
from the several syllables, must it not be from the syllables
of the original, not of a translation, whether German or
English? I ask, Thirdly, whether this explanation be any
explanation at all; whether it gives the meaning of any one
petition; nay, whether it does not reduce the divine Prayer,
all the parts of which are accurately connected together, into
an unconnected, incoherent jumble of no one can tell what!
I ask, Fourthly, whether we may not pronounce, with the
utmost certainty, of one who thus distorts, mangles, and
murders the word of God, that the light which is in him is
darkness; that he is illuminated from beneath, rather than
from above; and that he ought to be styled a demonosopher,
rather than a theosopher !