Thoughts on the Consecration of Churches and Burial Grounds
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. It has been a custom for some ages, in Roman Catholic
countries, to have a particular form of consecration for all
churches and chapels: And not for these only, but for every
thing pertaining to them; such as fonts, chalices, bells, sacer
dotal vestments, and churchyards in particular. And all
these customs universally prevailed in England, as long as it
was under the Papal power.
2. From the time of our Reformation from Popery, most
of these customs fell into disuse. Unconsecrated bells
were rung without scruple, and unconsecrated vestments
worn. But some of them remained still ; the consecration of
churches and churchyards in particular; and many scrupled
the performing divine service in an unconsecrated church,
and could not consent that their bodies should be buried in
unconsecrated ground.
3. Accordingly, the consecrating of churches and church
yards has been practised in England ever since. But it is
a thing purely indifferent, being neither forbidden nor
established by law. The case is different in Ireland. While
the Earl of Strafford was Lord Lieutenant of that kingdom,
a law was made for the consecration, not only of churches,
but of churchyards also. And a form of consecration for
both was inserted in the Common Prayer-Book, which is
used at this day; much resembling that which Archbishop
Laud used in the consecration of St. Katherine Creed's
church, in London.
4. But such a law has never passed in England, much less
been inserted in our Common Prayer-Book. However, such
consecration has been generally practised, though not autho
rized by the legislature. “Is it then illegal?” That word is
capable of a twofold meaning. It may mean, either, without
any law in its favour, or, against law. I do not conceive it to
be illegal in the latter sense. Perhaps it is in the former: I
do not know any law that enjoins or even permits it.
5. And certainly, as it is not enjoined by the law of the
land, so it is not enjoined by the law of God. Where do we
find one word in the New Testament enjoining any such
thing? Neither do I remember any precedent of it in the
purest ages of the Church. It seems to have entered, and
gradually spread itself, with the other innovations and super
stitions of the Church of Rome. “Do you think it, then, a
superstitious practice?” Perhaps it is not, if it be practised
as a thing indifferent. But if it be done as a necessary
thing, then it is flatly superstitious.
6. For this reason I never wished that any Bishop should
consecrate any chapel or burial-ground of mine. Indeed, I
should not dare to suffer it; as I am clearly persuaded the
thing is wrong in itself, being not authorized either by any law
of God, or by any law of the land. In consequence of which,
I conceive, that either the clerk or the sexton may as well
consecrate the church or the churchyard, as the Bishop.
7. With regard to the latter, the churchyard, I know not
who could answer that plain question: “You say, this is
consecrated ground, so many feet broad, and so many long.
But pray how deep is the consecrated ground?”--“Deep !
What does that signify?” O, a great deal: For if my grave
be dug too deep, I may happen to get out of the consecrated
ground: And who can tell what unhappy consequences may
follow from this?
8. I take the whole of this practice to be a mere relic
of Romish superstition. And I wonder that any sensible
Protestant should think it right to countenance it; much
more, that any reasonable man should plead for the necessity
of it ! Surely, it is high time now that we should be guided,
not by custom, but by Scripture and reason.
DUMFRIEs,
May 14, 1788.