A Plain Account of the People Called Methodists
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1748
Author: John Wesley
---
1. SoME time since, you desired an account of the whole
economy of the people commonly called Methodists. And you
received a true, (as far as it went,) but not a full, account. To
supply what I think was wanting in that, I send you this ac
count, that you may know, not only their practice on every head,
but likewise the reasons whereon it is grounded, the occasion of
every step they have taken, and the advantages reaped thereby.
2. But I must premise, that as they had not the least ex
pectation, at first, of anything like what has since followed,
so they had no previous design or plan at all; but every thing
arose just as the occasion offered. They saw or felt some im
pending or pressing evil, or some good end necessary to be
pursued. And many times they fell unawares on the very
thing which secured the good, or removed the evil. At other
times, they consulted on the most probable means, following
only common sense and Scripture: Though they generally
found, in looking back, something in Christian antiquity like
wise, very nearly parallel thereto.
I. 1. About ten years ago, my brother and I were desired to
preach in many parts of London. We had no view therein, but,
so far as we were able, (and we knew God could work by whom
soever it pleased him,) to convince those who would hear what
true Christianity was, and to persuade them to embrace it.
2. The points we chiefly insisted upon were four: First, that
orthodoxy, or right opinions, is, at best, but a very slender part
of religion, if it can be allowed to be any part of it at all; that
neither does religion consist in negatives, in bare harmlessness
of any kind; nor merely in externals, in doing good, or using
the means of grace, in works of piety (so called) or of charity;
that it is nothing short of, or different from, “the mind that
was in Christ; ” the image of God stamped upon the heart;
inward righteousness, attended with the peace of God; and
“joy in the Holy Ghost.” Secondly, that the only way under
heaven to this religion is, to “repent and believe the gospel; ”
or, (as the Apostle words it,) “repentance towards God, and
faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.” Thirdly, that by this faith,
“he that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth
the ungodly, is justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption which is in Jesus Christ.” And, Lastly, that
“being justified by faith,” we taste of the heaven to which
we are going; we are holy and happy; we tread down sin
and fear, and “sit in heavenly places with Christ Jesus.”
3. Many of those who heard this began to cry out that we
brought “strange things to their ears;” that this was doctrine
which they never heard before, or at least never regarded.
They “searched the Scriptures, whether these things were so,”
and acknowledged “the truth as it is in Jesus.” Their hearts
also were influenced as well as their understandings, and they
determined to follow “Jesus Christ, and him crucified.”
4. Immediately they were surrounded with difficulties;--
all the world rose up against them; neighbours, strangers,
acquaintance, relations, friends, began to cry out amain, “Be
not righteous overmuch; why shouldest thou destroy thyself?”
Let not “much religion make thee mad.”
5. One, and another, and another came to us, asking, what
they should do, being distressed on every side; as every one
strove to weaken, and none to strengthen, their hands in God.
We advised them, “Strengthen you one another. Talk together
as often as you can. And pray earnestly with and for one
another, that you may ‘endure to the end, and be saved.’”
Against this advice we presumed there could be no objection;
as being grounded on the plainest reason, and on so many scrip
^e 2. 2. '
>
{
tures both of the Old Testament and New, that it would be
tedious to recite them.
6. They said, “But we want you likewise to talk with us
often, to direct and quicken us in our way, to give us the
advices which you well know we need, and to pray with us, as
well as for us.” I asked, Which of you desire this? Let
me know your names and places of abode. They did so.
But I soon found they were too many for me to talk with
severally so often as they wanted it. So I told them, “If
you will all of you come together every Thursday, in the
evening, I will gladly spend some time with you in prayer,
and give you the best advice I can.”
7. Thus arose, without any previous design on either side,
what was afterwards called a Society; a very innocent name,
and very common in London, for any number of people asso
ciating themselves together. The thing proposed in their
associating themselves together was obvious to every one. They
wanted to “flee from the wrath to come,” and to assist each
other in so doing. They therefore united themselves “in
order to pray together, to receive the word of exhortation,
and to watch over one another in love, that they might help
each other to work out their salvation.”
8. There is one only condition previously required in those
who desire admission into this society,--“a desire to flee
from the wrath to come, to be saved from their sins.”*
They now likewise agreed, that as many of them as had an
opportunity would meet together every Friday, and spend the
dinner hour in crying to God, both for each other, and for
all mankind.
9. It quickly appeared, that their thus uniting together
answered the end proposed therein. In a few months, the
far greater part of those who had begun to “fear God, and
work righteousness,” but were not united together, grew faint
in their minds, and fell back into what they were before.
Meanwhile the far greater part of those who were thus united
together continued “striving to enter in at the strait gate,”
and to “lay hold on eternal life.”
10. Upon reflection, I could not but observe, This is the very
thing which was from the beginning of Christianity. In the
* See the Rules of the United Societies.
earliest times, those whom God had sent forth “preached the
gospel to every creature.” And the ou akpoatat, “the body of
hearers,” were mostly either Jews or Heathens. But as soon
as any of these were so convinced of the truth, as to forsake
sin and seek the gospel salvation, they immediately joined
them together, took an account of their names, advised them
to watch over each other, and met these karmyovuevot," cate
chumens,” (as they were then called,) apart from the great con
gregation, that they might instruct, rebuke, exhort, and pray
with them, and for them, according to their several necessities.
11. But it was not long before an objection was made to this,
which had not once entered into my thought:--“Is not this
making a schism? Is not the joining these people together,
gathering Churches out of Churches?”
It was easily answered, If you mean only gathering people
out of buildings called churches, it is. But if you mean, divid
ing Christians from Christians, and so destroying Christian
fellowship, it is not. For, (1.) These were not Christians
before they were thus joined. Most of them were barefaced
Heathens. (2.) Neither are they Christians, from whom you sup
pose them to be divided. You will not look me in the face and
say they are. What! drunken Christians! cursing and swearing
Christians! lying Christians! cheating Christians! If these are
Christians at all, they are devil Christians, as the poor Mala
barians term them. (3.) Neither are they divided any more
than they were before, even from these wretched devil Chris
tians. They are as ready as ever to assist them, and to perform
every office of real kindness towards them. (4.) If it be said,
“But there are some true Christians in the parish, and you
destroy the Christian fellowship between these and them;” I
answer, That which never existed, cannot be destroyed. But
the fellowship you speak of never existed. Therefore it can- O
not be destroyed. Which of those true Christians had any - 2.
such fellowship with these? Who watched over them in love? | e *
Who marked their growth in grace? Who advised and ex- %-
horted them from time to time? Who prayed with them and t
for them, as they had need? This, and this alone, is Christian - .
fellowship: But, alas! where is it to be found? Look east or
west, north or south; name what parish you please: Is this
Christian fellowship there? Rather, are not the bulk of the
parishioners a mere rope of sand? What Christian connexion
is there between them? What intercourse in spiritual things?
What watching over each other's souls? What bearing of one
another's burdens? What a mere jest is it then, to talk so
gravely of destroying what never was ! The real truth is just
the reverse of this: We introduce Christian fellowship where
it was utterly destroyed. And the fruits of it have been peace,
joy, love, and zeal for every good word and work.
II. 1. But as much as we endeavoured to watch over each
X4. %, other, we soon found some who did not live the gospel. I do
not know that any hypocrites were crept in; for indeed there
• *, was no temptation: But several grew cold, and gave way to the
2, 4. ** sins which had long easily beset them. We quickly perceived
*_* there were many ill consequences of suffering these to remain
‘... among us. It was dangerous to others; inasmuch as all sin is
2 of an infectious nature. It brought such a scandal on their
brethren as exposed them to what was not properly the
reproach of Christ. It laid a stumbling-block in the way of
others, and caused the truth to be evil spoken of.
2. We groaned under these inconveniences long, before a
remedy could be found. The people were scattered so wide in
all parts of the town, from Wapping to Westminster, that I
could not easily see what the behaviour of each person in his
own neighbourhood was: So that several disorderly walkers
did much hurt before I was apprized of it.
3. At length, while we were thinking of quite another thing,
we struck upon a method for which we have cause to bless God
ever since. I was talking with several of the society in Bristol
concerning the means of paying the debts there, when one stood
up and said, “Let every member of the society give a penny a
week till all are paid.” Another answered, “But many of them
are poor, and cannot afford to do it.” “Then,” said he, “put
eleven of the poorest with me; and if they can give anything,
well: I will call on them weekly; and if they can give nothing,
I will give for them as well as for myself. And each of you
call on eleven of your neighbours weekly; receive what they
give, and make up what is wanting.” It was done. In a while,
some of these informed me, they found such and such an one
did not live as he ought. It struck me immediately, “This is
the thing; the very thing we have wanted so long.” I called
together all the Leaders of the classes, (so we used to term
them and their companies,) and desired, that each would make
a particular inquiry into the behaviour of those whom he saw
weekly. They did so. Many disorderly walkers were detected.
Some turned from the evil of their ways. Some were put
away from us. Many saw it with fear, and rejoiced unto God
with reverence.- -
4. As soon as possible, the same method was used in
London and all other places. Evil men were detected, and
reproved. They were borne with for a season. If they forsook
their sins, we received them gladly; if they obstinately per
sisted therein, it was openly declared that they were not of
us. The rest mourned and prayed for them, and yet rejoiced,
that, as far as in us lay, the scandal was rolled away from the
society.
5. It is the business of a Leader,
(1.) To see each person in his class, once a week at the least,
in order to inquire how their souls prosper; to advise, reprove,
comfort, or exhort, as occasion may require; to receive what
they are willing to give, toward the relief of the poor.
(2) To meet the Minister and the Stewards of the society,
in order to inform the Minister of any that are sick, or of any
that are disorderly and will not be reproved; to pay to the
Stewards what they have received of their several classes in
the week preceding.
6. At first they visited each person at his own house; but
this was soon found not so expedient. And that on many
accounts: (1.) It took up more time than most of the Leaders
had to spare. (2.) Many persons lived with masters, mis
tresses, or relations, who would not suffer them to be thus
visited. (3.) At the houses of those who were not so averse,
they often had no opportunity of speaking to them but in
company. And this did not at all answer the end proposed,--.
of exhorting, comforting, or reproving. (4.) It frequently hap
pened that one affirmed what another denied. And this could
not be cleared up without seeing them together. (5.) Little
misunderstandings and quarrels of various kinds frequently
arose among relations or neighbours; effectually to remove
which, it was needful to see them all face to face. Upon all
these considerations it was agreed, that those of each class
should meet alltogether. And by this means, a more full in
quiry was made into the behaviour of every person. Those who
could not be visited at home, or no otherwise than in company,
had the same advantage with others. Advice or reproof was
given as need required, quarrels made up, misunderstandings
removed : And after an hour or two spent in this labour of
love, they concluded with prayer and thanksgiving.
7. It can scarce be conceived what advantages have been
reaped from this little prudential regulation. Many now
happily experienced that Christian fellowship of which they
had not so much as an idea before. They began to “bear one
another’s burdens,” and naturally to “care for each other.”
As they had daily a more intimate acquaintance with, so they
had a more endeared affection for, each other. And “speaking
the truth in love, they grew up into Him in all things, who is
the Head, even Christ; from whom the whole body, fitly
joined together, and compacted by that which every joint
supplied, according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, increased unto the edifying itself in love.”
8. But notwithstanding all these advantages, many were
at first extremely averse to meeting thus. Some, viewing it
in a wrong point of light, not as a privilege, (indeed an invalu
able one,) but rather a restraint, disliked it on that account,
because they did not love to be restrained in anything. Some
were ashamed to speak before company. Others honestly
said, “I do not know why; but I do not like it.”
9. Some objected, “There were no such meetings when I
came into the society first: And why should there now P I
do not understand these things, and this changing one thing
after another continually.” It was easily answered: It is pity
but they had been at first. But we knew not then either the
need or the benefit of them. Why we use them, you will
readily understand, if you read over the rules of the society.
That with regard to these little prudential helps we are conti
nually changing one thing after another, is not a weakness or
fault, as you imagine, but a peculiar advantage which we enjoy.
By this means we declare them all to be merely prudential, not
essential, not of divine institution. We prevent, so far as in us
lies, their growing formal or dead. We arc always open to
instruction; willing to be wiser every day than we were before,
and to change whatever we can change for the better.
10. Another objection was, “There is no scripture for this,
for classes and I know not what.” I answer, (1.) There is no
scripture against it. You cannot show one text that forbids
them. (2.) There is much scripture for it, even all those texts
which enjoin the substance of those various duties whereof this
is only an indifferent circumstance, to be determined by reason
and experience. (3.) You seem not to have observed, that
the Scripture, in most points, gives only general rules; and
leaves the particular circumstances to be adjusted by the
common sense of mankind. The Scripture, for instance, gives
that general rule, “Let all things be done decently and in
order.” But common sense is to determine, on particular
occasions, what order and decency require. So, in another
instance, the Scripture lays it down as a general, standing
direction: “Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do
all to the glory of God.” But it is common prudence which
is to make the application of this, in a thousand particular cases.
ll. “But these,” said another, “are all man’s inventions.”
This is but the same objection in another form. And the
same answer will suffice for any reasonable person. These
are man’s inventions. And what then? That is, they are
methods which men have found, by reason and common
sense, for the more effectually applying several Scripture
rules, couched in general terms, to particular occasions.
12. They spoke far more plausibly than these, who said,
“The thing is well enough in itself. But the Leaders are
insufficient for the work: They have neither gifts nor graces
for such an employment.” I answer, (1.) Yet such Leaders
as they are, it is plain God has blessed their labour. (2.) If
any of these is remarkably wanting in gifts or grace, he is soon
taken notice of and removed. (3.) If you know any such,
tell it to me, not to others, and I will endeavour to exchange
him for a better. (4.) It may be hoped they will all be better
than they are, both by experience and observation, and by the
advices given them by the Minister every Tuesday night, and
the prayers (then in particular) offered up for them.
III. 1. About this time, I was informed that several persons
in Kingswood frequently met together at the school; and, when
they could spare the time, spent the greater part of the night in
prayer, and praise, and thanksgiving. Some advised me to put
an end to this; but, upon weighing the thing thoroughly, and
comparing it with the practice of the ancient Christians, I could
see no cause to forbid it. Rather, I believed it might be made
of more general use. So I sent them word, I designed to
watch with them on the Friday nearest the full moon, that we
might have light thither and back again. I gave public notice
Wo ://
* ,
of this the Sunday before, and, withal, that I intended to
preach; desiring they, and they only, would meet me there,
who could do it without prejudice to their business or families.
On Friday abundance of people came. I began preaching
between eight and nine; and we continued till a little beyond
the noon of night, singing, praying, and praising God.
2. This we have continued to do once a month ever since,
in Bristol, London, and Newcastle, as well as Kingswood;
and exceeding great are the blessings we have found therein:
It has generally been an extremely solemn season; when the
word of God sunk deep into the heart, even of those who till
then knew him not. If it be said, “This was only owing to
the novelty of the thing, (the circumstance which still draws
such multitudes together at those seasons,) or perhaps to the
awful silence of the night:” I am not careful to answer in
this matter. Be it so: However, the impression then made
on many souls has never since been effaced. Now, allowing
that God did make use either of the novelty or any other in
different circumstance, in order to bring sinners to repentance,
yet they are brought. And herein let us rejoice together.
3. Nay, may I not put the case farther yet? If I can pro
bably conjecture, that, either by the novelty of this ancient
custom, or by any other indifferent circumstance, it is in my
power to “save a soul from death, and hide a multitude of
sins,” am I clear before God if I do it not, if I do not snatch
that brand out of the burning?
IV. 1. As the society increased, I found it required still
greater care to separate the precious from the vile. In order
to this, I determined, at least once in three months, to talk
with every member myself, and to inquire at their own mouths,
2, as well as of their Leaders and neighbours, whether they grew
in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. At
these seasons I likewise particularly inquire whether there be
any misunderstanding or difference among them; that every
hinderance of peace and brotherly love may be taken out of
the way.
2. To each of those of whose seriousness and good conversa
tion I found no reason to doubt, I gave a testimony under my
own hand, by writing their name on a ticket prepared for that
purpose; every ticket implying as strong a recommendation of
the person *o whom it was given as if I had wrote at length, “I
believe the bearer hereof to be one that fears God and works
righteousness.”
3. Those who bore these tickets, (these avu/8oNa or tes
serae, as the ancients termed them, being of just the same
force with the ervatoxal avatarukat, commendatory letters
mentioned by the Apostle,) wherever they came, were acknow
ledged by their brethren, and received with all cheerfulness.
These were likewise of use in other respects. By these it
was easily distinguished, when the society were to meet apart,
who were members of it, and who not. These also supplied
us with a quiet and inoffensive method of removing any dis
orderly member. He has no new ticket at the quarterly visi
tation; (for so often the tickets are changed;) and hereby it
is immediately known that he is no longer of the community.
TV. The thing which I was greatly afraid of all this time,
and which I resolved to use every possible method of pre
venting, was, a narrowness of spirit, a party zeal, a being
straitened in our own bowels; that miserable bigotry which
makes many so unready to believe that there is any work of
God but among themselves. I thought it might be a help
against this, frequently to read, to all who were willing to
hear, the accounts I received from time to time of the work
which God is carrying on in the earth, both in our own and
other countries, not among us alone, but among those of
various opinions and denominations. For this I allotted one
evening in every month; and I find no cause to repent my
labour. It is generally a time of strong consolation to those
who love God, and all mankind for his sake; as well as of
breaking down the partition-walls which either the craft of
the devil or the folly of men has built up; and of encourag
ing every child of God to say, (O when shall it once be!)
“Whosoever doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven,
the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.”
VI. 1. By the blessing of God upon their endeavours to
help one another, many found the pearl of great price. Being
justified by faith, they had “peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ.” These felt a more tender affection than
before, to those who were partakers of like precious faith; and
hence arose such a confidence in each other, that they poured
out their souls into each other's bosom. Indeed they had
great need so to do; for the war was not over, as they had
supposed; but they had still to wrestle both with flesh and
blood, and with principalities and powers: So that temptations
were on every side; and often temptations of such a kind, as
they knew not how to speak in a class; in which persons of
every sort, young and old, men and women, met together.
2. These, therefore, wanted some means of closer union;
they wanted to pour out their hearts without reserve, particu
larly with regard to the sin which did still easily beset them,
and the temptations which were most apt to prevail over
them. And they were the more desirous of this, when they
observed it was the express advice of an inspired writer:
“Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for
another, that ye may be healed.”
3. In compliance with their desire, I divided them into
smaller companies; putting the married or single men, and
married or single women, together. The chief rules of these
bands (that is, little companies; so that old English word
signifies) run thus:
“In order to ‘confess our faults one to another,’ and pray
one for another that we may be healed, we intend, (1.) To
meet once a week, at the least. (2.) To come punctually at
the hour appointed. (3.) To begin with singing or prayer.
(4.) To speak each of us in order, freely and plainly, the true
state of our soul, with the faults we have committed in
thought, word, or deed, and the temptations we have felt since
our last meeting. (5.) To desire some person among us
(thence called a Leader) to speak his own state first, and then
to ask the rest, in order, as many and as searching questions
as may be, concerning their state, sins, and temptations.”
4. That their design in meeting might be the more effec
tually answered, I desired all the men-bands to meet me to
gether every Wednesday evening, and the women on Sunday,
that they might receive such particular instructions and ex
hortations as, from time to time, might appear to be most need
ful for them; that such prayers might be offered up to God,
as their necessities should require; and praise returned to the
Giver of every good gift, for whatever mercies they had received.
5. In order to increase in them a grateful sense of all his
mercies, I desired that, one evening in a quarter, all the men in
band, on a second, all the women, would meet; and on a third,
both men and women together; that we might together “eat
bread,” as the ancient Christians did, “with gladness and
singleness of heart.” At these love-feasts (so we termed them,
retaining the name, as well as the thing, which was in use from
the beginning) our food is only a little plain cake and water.
But we seldom return from them without being fed, not only
with the “meat which perisheth,” but with “that which
endureth to everlasting life.”
6. Great and many are the advantages which have ever since
flowed from this closer union of the believers with each other.
They prayed for one another, that they might be healed of the
faults they had confessed; and it was so. The chains were
broken, the hands were burst in sunder, and sin had no more
dominion over them. Many were delivered from the tempta
tions out of which, till then, they found no way to escape.
They were built up in our most holy faith. They rejoiced in
the Lord more abundantly. They were strengthened in love,
and more effectually provoked to abound in every good work.
7. But it was soon objected to the bands, (as to the classes
before,) “These were not at first. There is no Scripture for
them. These are man’s works, man’s building, man’s inven
tion.” I reply, as before, these are also prudential helps,
grounded on reason and experience, in order to apply the
general rules given in Scripture according to particular cir
cumstances.
8. An objection much more boldly and frequently urged, is,
that “all these bands are mere Popery.” I hope I need not
pass a harder censure on those (most of them at least) who
affirm this, than that they talk of they know not what; they
betray in themselves the most gross and shameful ignorance.
Do not they yet know, that the only Popish confession is, the
confession made by a single person to a Priest?--and this itself
is in nowise condemned by our Church; nay, she recommends
it in some cases. Whereas, that we practise is, the confession
of several persons conjointly, not to a Priest, but to each
other. Consequently, it has no analogy at all to Popish con
fession. But the truth is, this is a stale objection, which many
people make against anything they do not like. It is all Popery
out of hand.
VII. 1. And yet while most of these who were thus inti
mately joined together, went on daily from faith to faith; some
fell from the faith, either all at once, by falling into known,
wilful sin; or gradually, and almost insensibly, by giving way
in what they called little things; by sins of omission, by yield
ing to heart-sins, or by not watching unto prayer. The exhort
ations and prayers used among the believers did no longer
profit these. They wanted advice and instructions suited to
their case; which as soon as I observed, I separated them
from the rest, and desired them to meet me apart on Saturday
evenings.
2. At this hour, all the hymns, exhortations, and prayers
are adapted to their circumstances; being wholly suited to those
who did see God, but have now lost sight of the light of his
countenance; and who mourn after him, and refuse to be
comforted till they know he has healed their backsliding.
3. By applying both the threats and promises of God to
these real, not nominal, penitents, and by crying to God in their
behalf, we endeavoured to bring them back to the great “Shep
herd and Bishop of their souls;” not by any of the fopperies of
the Roman Church, although, in some measure, countenanced
by antiquity. In prescribing hair-shirts, and bodily austerities,
we durst not follow even the ancient Church; although we had
unawares, both in dividing ot. Two rol, the believers, from the
rest of the society, and in separating the penitents from them,
and appointing a peculiar service for them.
VIII. 1. Many of these soon recovered the ground they
had lost. Yea, they rose higher than before; being more
watchful than ever, and more meek and lowly, as well as
stronger in the faith that worketh by love. They now outran
the greater part of their brethren, continually walking in the
light of God, and having fellowship with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ.
2. I saw it might be useful to give some advices to all those
who continued in the light of God’s countenance, which the
rest of their brethren did not want, and probably could not
receive. So I desired a small number of such as appeared to be
in this state, to spend an hour with me every Monday morning.
My design was, not only to direct them how to press after per
fection; to exercise their every grace, and improve every talent
they had received; and to incite them to love one another more,
and to watch more carefully over each other; but also to have
a select company, to whom I might unbosom myself on all occa
sions, without reserve; and whom I could propose to all their
brethren as a pattern of love, of holiness, and of good works.
3. They had no need of being incumbered with many
rules; having the best rule of all in their hearts. No pecu
liar directions were therefore given to them, excepting only
these three:
First. Let nothing spoken in this society be spoken again.
(Hereby we had the more full confidence in each other.)
Secondly. Every member agrees to submit to his Minister
in all indifferent things.
Thirdly. Every member will bring, once a week, all he can
spare toward a common stock.
4. Every one here has an equal liberty of speaking, there
being none greater or less than another. I could say freely to
these, when they were met together, “Ye may all prophesy one
by one,” (taking that word in its lowest sense,) “that all may
learn, and all may be comforted.” And I often found the
advantage of such a free conversation, and that “in the multi
tude of counsellors there is safety.” Any who is inclined so to
do is likewise encouraged to pour out his soul to God. And
here especially we have found, that “the effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous man availeth much.”
IX. 1. This is the plainest and clearest account I can give
of the people commonly called Methodists. It remains only to
give you a short account of those who serve their brethren in
love. These are Leaders of classes and bands, (spoken of
before,) Assistants, Stewards, Visitors of the sick, and School
masters.
2. In the third part of the “Appeal,” I have mentioned how
we were led to accept of Lay-Assistants. Their office is, in the
absence of the Minister,
(1.) To expound every morning and evening. (2.) To meet
the united society, the bands, the select society, and the peni
tents, once a week. (3.) To visit the classes once a quarter.
(4.) To hear and decide all differences. (5.) To put the disor
derly back on trial, and to receive on trial for the bands or
society. (6.) To see that the Stewards, the Leaders, and the
Schoolmasters faithfully discharge their several offices. (7.)
To meet the Leaders of the bands and classes weekly, and the
Stewards, and to overlook their accounts.
X. 1. But, long before this, I felt the weight of a far dif
ferent care, namely, care of temporal things. The quarterly
subscriptions amounted, at a mean computation, to above three
hundred pounds a year. This was to be laid out, partly in
repairs, partly in other necessary expenses, and partly in paying
debts. The weekly contributions fell little short of eight
pounds a week; which was to be distributed as every one had
need. And I was expected to take thought for all these things:
But it was a burden I was not able to bear; so I chose out first.
one, then four, and after a time, seven, as prudent men as I
knew, and desired them to take charge of these things upon
themselves, that I might have no incumbrance of this kind.
2. The business of these Stewards is,
To manage the temporal things of the society. To receive
the subscriptions and contributions. To expend what is need
ful from time to time. To send relief to the poor. To keep an
exact account of all receipts and expenses. To inform the
Minister if any of the rules of the society are not punctually
observed. To tell the Preachers in love, if they think anything
amiss, either in their doctrine or life.
3. The rules of the Stewards are,
(1.) Be frugal. Save everything that can be saved honestly.
(2.) Spend no more than you receive. Contract no debts.
(3.) Have no long accounts. Pay everything within the week.
(4) Give none that asks relief, either an ill word or an ill look.
Do not hurt them, if you cannot help. (5) Expect no thanks
from man.
4. They met together at six every Thursday morning; con
sulted on the business which came before them; sent relief to
the sick, as every one had need; and gave the remainder of what
had been contributed each week to those who appeared to be in
the most pressing want. So that all was concluded within the
week; what was brought on Tuesday being constantly expended
on Thursday. I soon had the pleasure to find, that all these
temporal things were done with the utmost faithfulness and
exactness; so that my cares of this kind were at an end. I had
only to revise the accounts, to tell them if I thought anything
might be amended, and to consult how deficiencies might be
supplied from time to time; for these were frequent and large,
(so far were we from abundance,) the income by no means
answering the expenses. But that we might not faint, some
times we had unforeseen helps in times of the greatest perplex
ity. At other times we borrowed larger or smaller sums: Of
which the greatest part has since been repaid. But I owe some
hundred pounds to this day. So much have I gained by preach
ing the gospel !
XI. 1. But it was not long before the Stewards found a great
difficulty with regard to the sick. Some were ready to perish
before they knew of their illness; and when they did know, it
was not in their power (being persons generally employed in
trade) to visit them so often as they desired.
2. When I was apprized of this, I laid the case at large
before the whole society; showed how impossible it was for the
Stewards to attend all that were sick in all parts of the town;
desired the Leaders of classes would more carefully inquire, and
more constantly inform them, who were sick; and asked, “Who
among you is willing, as well as able, to supply this lack of
service?”
3. The next morning many willingly offered themselves. I
chose six-and-forty of them, whom I judged to be of the most
tender, loving spirit; divided the town into twenty-three parts,
and desired two of them to visit the sick in each division.
4. It is the business of a Visitor of the sick,
To see every sick person within his district thrice a week.
To inquire into the state of their souls, and to advise them as
occasion may require. To inquire into their disorders, and pro
cure advice for them. To relieve them, if they are in want.
To do any thing for them, which he (or she) can do. To bring
in his accounts weekly to the Stewards.”
Upon reflection, I saw how exactly, in this also, we had
copied after the primitive Church. What were the ancient
Deacons? What was Phebe the Deaconess, but such a Visitor
of the sick?
5. I did not think it needful to give them any particular
rules beside these that follow :
(1.) Be plain and open in dealing with souls. (2.) Be mild,
tender, patient. (3.) Be cleanly in all you do for the sick.
(4.) Be not nice.
6. We have ever since had great reason to praise God for his
continued blessing on this undertaking. Many lives have been
saved, many sicknesses healed, much pain and want prevented
or removed. Many heavy hearts have been made glad, many
mourners comforted: And the Visitors have found, from Him
whom they serve, a present reward for all their labour.
XII. 1. But I was still in pain for many of the poor that
were sick; there was so great expense, and so little profit. And
* The Leaders now do this.
first, I resolved to try, whether they might not receive more
benefit in the hospitals. Upon the trial, we found there was
indeed less expense, but no more good done, than before. I
then asked the advice of several Physicians for them; but still
it profited not. I saw the poor people pining away, and several
families ruined, and that without remedy.
2. At length I thought of a kind of desperate expedient. “I
will prepare, and give them physic myself.” For six or seven
and twenty years, I had made anatomy and physic the diversion
of my leisure hours; though I never properly studied them,
unless for a few months when I was going to America, where
I imagined I might be of some service to those who had no
regular Physician among them. I applied to it again. I took
into my assistance an Apothecary, and an experienced Surgeon;
resolving, at the same time, not to go out of my depth, but to
leave all difficult and complicated cases to such Physicians as
the patients should choose.
3. I gave notice of this to the society; telling them, that all
who were ill of chronical distempers (for I did not care to ven
ture upon acute) might, if they pleased, come to me at such a
time, and I would give them the best advice I could, and the
best medicines I had.
4. Many came : (And so every Friday since :) Among the
rest was one William Kirkman, a weaver, near Old Nichol
street. I asked him, “What complaint have you?” “O Sir,”
said he, “a cough, a very sore cough. I can get no rest day
nor night.”
I asked, “How long have you had it?” He replied, “About
threescore years: It began when I was eleven years old.” I
was nothing glad that this man should come first, fearing our
not curing him might discourage others. However, I looked
up to God, and said, “Take this three or four times a day. If
it does you no good, it will do you no harm.” He took it two
or three days. His cough was cured, and has not returned to
this day.
5. Now, let candid men judge, does humility require me to
deny a notorious fact? If not, which is vanity? to say, I by
my own skill restored this man to health; or to say, God did it
by his own almighty power? By what figure of speech this is
called boasting, I know not. But I will put no name to such a
fact as this. I leave that to the Rev. Dr. Middleton.
6. In five months, medicines were occasionally given to above
five hundred persons. Several of these I never saw before; for
I did not regard whether they were of the society or not. In
that time seventy-one of these, regularly taking their medi
cines, and following the regimen prescribed, (which three in
four would not do,) were entirely cured of distempers long
thought to be incurable. The whole expense of medicines during
this time, was nearly forty pounds. We continued this ever
since, and, by the blessing of God, with more and more success.
XIII. 1. But I had for some years observed many who,
although not sick, were not able to provide for themselves, and
had none who took care to provide for them: These were chiefly
feeble, aged widows. I consulted with the Stewards, how they
might be relieved. They all agreed, if we could keep them
in one house, it would not only be far less expensive to us, but
also far more comfortable for them. Indeed we had no money
to begin; but we believed He would provide “who defendeth
the cause of the widow:” So we took a lease of two little
houses near; we fitted them up, so as to be warm and clean.
We took in as many widows as we had room for, and provided
them with things needful for the body; toward the expense of
which I set aside, first, the weekly contributions of the bands,
and then all that was collected at the Lord’s Supper. It is
true, this does not suffice: So that we are considerably in debt,
on this account also. But we are persuaded, it will not always
be so; seeing “the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof.”
2. In this (commonly called The Poor House) we have now
nine widows, one blind woman, two poor children, two upper
servants, a maid and a man. I might add, four or five Preachers;
for I myself, as well as the other Preachers who are in town,
diet with the poor, on the same food, and at the same table;
and we rejoice herein, as a comfortable earnest of our eating
bread together in our Father's kingdom.
3. I have blessed God for this house ever since it began; but
lately much more than ever. I honour these widows; for they
“are widows indeed.” So that it is not in vain, that, without
any design of so doing, we have copied after another of the insti
tutions of the Apostolic age. I can now say to all the world,
“Come and see how these Christians love one another !”*
XIV. 1. Another thing which had given me frequent con
* This has been since dropped for want of support.
>~. c.
cern was, the case of abundance of children. Some their parents
could not afford to put to school: So they remained like “a wild
ass’s colt.” Others were sent to school, and learned, at least, to
read and write; but they learned all kind of vice at the same
time: So that it had been better for them to have been without
their knowledge, than to have bought it at so dear a price.
2. At length I determined to have them taught in my own
house, that they might have an opportunity of learning to read,
write, and cast accounts, (if no more,) without being under
almost a necessity of learning Heathenism at the same time:
And after several unsuccessful trials, I found two such School
masters as I wanted; men of honesty and of sufficient know
ledge, who had talents for, and their hearts in, the work.
3. They have now under their care near sixty children: The
parents of some pay for their schooling; but the greater part,
being very poor, do not; so that the expense is chiefly defrayed
by voluntary contributions. We have of late clothed them too,
as many as wanted. The rules of the school are these that
follow:--*
First. No child is admitted under six years of age. Secondly.
All the children are to be present at the morning sermon.
Thirdly. They are at school from six to twelve, and from one
to five. Fourthly. They have no play-days. Fifthly. No
child is to speak in school, but to the masters. Sixthly. The
child who misses two days in one week, without leave, is
excluded the school.
4. We appointed two Stewards for the school also. The busi
ness of these is, to receive the school subscriptions, and expend
what is needful; to talk with each of the masters weekly; to
pray with and exhort the children twice a-week; to inquire
diligently, whether they grow in grace and in learning, and
whether the rules are punctually observed; every Tuesday
morning, in conjunction with the masters, to exclude those
children that do not observe the rules; every Wednesday morn
ing to meet with and exhort their parents, to train them up at
home in the ways of God.
5. A happy change was soon observed in the children, both
with regard to their tempers and behaviour. They learned read
ing, writing, and arithmetic swiftly; and at the same time they
* This also has been dropped for some time. 1772.
were diligently instructed in the sound principles of religion,
and earnestly exhorted to fear God, and work out their own
salvation.
XV. 1. A year or two ago, I observed among many a dis
tress of another kind. They frequently wanted, perhaps in
order to carry on their business, a present supply of money.
They scrupled to make use of a pawnbroker; but where to
borrow it they knew not. I resolved to try if we could not find
a remedy for this also. I went, in a few days, from one end
of the town to the other, and exhorted those who had this
world’s goods, to assist their needy brethren. Fifty pounds
were contributed. This was immediately lodged in the hands
of two Stewards; who attended every Tuesday morning, in
order to lend to those who wanted any small sum, not exceed
ing twenty shillings, to be repaid within three months.”
2. It is almost incredible, but it manifestly appears from
their accounts, that, with this inconsiderable sum, two hundred
and fifty have been assisted, within the space of one year.
Will not God put it into the heart of some lover of mankind to
increase this little stock? If this is not “lending unto the
Lord,” what is? O confer not with flesh and blood, but
immediately
Join hands with God, to make a poor man live!
3. I think, Sir, now you know all that I know of this peo
ple. You see the nature, occasion, and design of whatever is
practised among them. And, I trust, you may be pretty well
able to answer any questions which may be asked concerning
them; particularly by those who inquire concerning my
revenue, and what I do with it all.
4. Some have supposed this was no greater than that of the
Bishop of London. But others computed that I received eight
hundred a-year from Yorkshire only. Now, if so, it cannot be
so little as ten thousand pounds a-year which I receive out
of all England
5. Accordingly, a gentleman in Cornwall (the Rector of
Redruth) extends the calculation pretty considerably. “Let me
see,” said he: “Two millions of Methodists; and each of these
paying two-pence a week.” If so, I must have eight hundred
and sixty thousand pounds, with some odd shillings and pence,
a-year.
* We now (1772) lend any sum not exceeding five pounds.
6. A tolerable competence | But be it more or less, it is
nothing at all to me. All that is contributed or collected in
every place is both received and expended by others; nor have
I so much as the “beholding thereof with my eyes.” And so it
will be, till I turn Turk or Pagan. For I look upon all this
revenue, be it what it may, as sacred to God and the poor; out
of which, if I want anything, I am relieved, even as another
poor man. So were originally all ecclesiastical revenues, as
every man of learning knows: And the Bishops and Priests
used them only as such. If any use them otherwise now, God
help them !
7. I doubt not, but if I err in this, or any other point, you
will pray God to show me his truth. To have “a conscience
void of offence toward God and toward man” is the desire of,
Reverend and dear Sir,
Your affectionate brother and servant,