The Question: What Is an Arminian? Answered
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. To say, “This man is an Arminian,” has the same effect
on many hearers, as to say, “This is a mad dog.” It puts
them into a fright at once: They run away from him with all
speed and diligence; and will hardly stop, unless it be to
throw a stone at the dreadful and mischievous animal.
2. The more unintelligible the word is, the better it
answers the purpose. Those on whom it is fixed know not
what to do: Not understanding what it means, they cannot
tell what defence to make, or how to clear themselves from
the charge. And it is not easy to remove the prejudice which
others have imbibed, who know no more of it, than that it is
“something very bad,” if not “all that is bad!”.
3. To clear the meaning, therefore, of this ambiguous term,
may be of use to many: To those who so freely pin this name
upon others, that they may not say what they do not under
stand; to those that hear them, that they may be no longer
abused by men saying they know not what; and to those
upon whom the name is fixed, that they may know how to
answer for themselves.
4. It may be necessary to observe, First, that many con
found Arminians with Arians. But this is entirely a different
thing; the one has no resemblance to the other. An Arian
is one who denies the Godhead of Christ; we scarce need say,
the supreme, eternal Godhead; because there can be no God
but the supreme, eternal God, unless we will make two Gods,
a great God and a little one. Now, none have ever more
firmly believed, or more strongly asserted, the Godhead of
whAT Is AN ARMINIAN ? 359
Christ, than many of the (so called) Arminians have done;
yea, and do at this day. Arminianism therefore (whatever
it be) is totally different from Arianism.
5. The rise of the word was this: JAMEs HARMENs, in
Latin, Jacobus Arminius, was first one of the Ministers of
Amsterdam, and afterwards Professor of Divinity at Leyden.
He was educated at Geneva; but in the year 1591 began to
doubt of the principles which he had till then received. And
being more and more convinced that they were wrong, when
he was vested with the Professorship, he publicly taught
what he believed the truth, till, in the year 1609, he died in
peace. But a few years after his death, some zealous men.
with the Prince of Orange at their head, furiously assaulted
all that held what were called his opinions; and having pro
cured them to be solemnly condemned, in the famous Synod
of Dort, (not so numerous or learned, but full as impartial, as
the Council or Synod of Trent,) some were put to death,
some banished, some imprisoned for life, all turned out of
their employments, and made incapable of holding any office,
either in Church or State.
6. The errors charged upon these (usually termed Armi
nians) by their opponents, are five: (1) That they deny
original sin; (2.) That they deny justification by faith;
(3.) That they deny absolute predestination; (4.) That they
deny the grace of God to be irresistible; and, (5) That they
affirm, a believer may fall from grace.
With regard to the two first of these charges, they plead,
Not Guilty. They are entirely false. No man that ever
lived, not John Calvin himself, ever asserted either original
sin, or justification by faith, in more strong, more clear and
express terms, than Arminius has done. These two points,
therefore, are to be set out of the question: In these both
parties agree. In this respect, there is not a hair's breadth
difference between Mr. Wesley and Mr. Whitefield.
7. But there is an undeniable difference between the
Calvinists and Arminians, with regard to the three other
questions. Here they divide; the former believe absolute,
the latter only conditional, predestination. The Calvinists
hold, (1.) God has absolutely decreed, from all eternity, to
save such and such persons, and no others; and that Christ
died for these, and none else. The Arminians hold, God has
decreed, from all eternity, touching all that have the written
word, “He that believeth shall be saved: He that believeth
not, shall be condemned:” And in order to this, “Christ
died for all, all that were dead in trespasses and sins;” that
is, for every child of Adam, since “in Adam all died.”
8. The Calvinists hold, Secondly, that the saving grace of
God is absolutely irresistible; that no man is any more able to
resist it, than to resist the stroke of lightning. The Arminians
hold, that although there may be some moments wherein the
grace of God acts irresistibly, yet, in general, any man may
resist, and that to his eternal ruin, the grace whereby it was
the will of God he should have been eternally saved.
9. The Calvinists hold, Thirdly, that a true believer in
Christ cannot possibly fall from grace. The Arminians hold,
that a true believer may “make shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience;” that he may fall, not only foully, but finally, so
as to perish for ever.
10. Indeed, the two latter points, irresistible grace and
infallible perseverance, are the natural consequence of the
former, of the unconditional decree. For if God has eternally
and absolutely decreed to save such and such persons, it
follows, both that they cannot resist his saving grace, (else
they might miss of salvation,) and that they cannot finally
fall from that grace which they cannot resist. So that, in
effect, the three questions come into one, “Is predestination
absolute or conditional?” The Arminians believe, it is
conditional; the Calvinists, that it is absolute.
11. Away, then, with all ambiguity Away with all
expressions which only puzzle the cause! Let honest men
speak out, and not play with hard words which they do
not understand. And how can any man know what Arminius
held, who has never read one page of his writings? Let
no man bawl against Arminians, till he knows what the term
means; and then he will know that Arminians and Calvinists
are just upon a level. And Arminians have as much
right to be angry at Calvinists, as Calvinists have to be
angry at Arminians. John Calvin was a pious, learned,
sensible man; and so was James Harmens. Many Cal
vinists are pious, learned, sensible men; and so are many
Arminians. Only the former hold absolute predestination;
the latter, conditional.
12. One word more: Is it not the duty of every Arminian
Preacher, First, never, in public or in private, to use the word
THoUGHTs UPoN God’s sovKREIGNTY. 36]
Calvinist as a term of reproach; seeing it is neither better
nor worse than calling names?--a practice no more
consistent with good sense or good manners, than it is with
Christianity. Secondly. To do all that in him lies to prevent
his hearers from doing it, by showing them the sin and folly
of it? And is it not equally the duty of every Calvinist
Preacher, First, never in public or in private, in preaching
or in conversation, to use the word Arminian as a term of
reproach? Secondly. To do all that in him lies to prevent
his hearers from doing it, by showing them the sin and folly
thereof; and that the more earnestly and diligently, if they
have been accustomed so to do? perhaps encouraged therein
by his own example !