An Answer to Mr. Rowland Hill's Imposture Detected
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
IN a tract just published by Mr. Rowland Hill, there are
several assertions which are not true; and the whole
pamphlet is wrote in an unchristian and ungentlemanlike
manner. I shall first set down the assertions in order, and
then proceed to the manner.
I. 1. “Throughout the whole of Paul's Epistles, he can
scarcely write a single line without mentioning Christ.” (Page
3.) I just opened on the fifteenth chapter of the First Epistle
to the Corinthians. In the last thirty verses of this chapter,
how often does he mention Christ? In every single line?
2. “In that wretched harangue, which he calls a sermon,
he makes himself the only subject of his own panegyrics.”
(Page 4.)
Being aware of this charge, I have said, “I am, in one
respect, an improper person to give this information; as it
will oblige me frequently to speak of myself, which may have
the appearance of ostentation. But, with regard to this, I
can only cast myself upon the candour of my hearers; being
persuaded they will put the most favourable construction upon
what is not a matter of choice, but of necessity. For there
is no other person, if I decline the task, who can supply my
place, who has a perfect knowledge of the work in question,
from the beginning of it to this day.” (Sermons, Vol. VII.,
p. 420.)
I give an account of the rise of this work at Oxford, from
1725 to 1735, pages 421, 422; at London and elsewhere,
pages 422,423. In all this there is not a line of panegyric
upon myself, but a naked recital of facts. Nor is there any
panegyric on any one in the following pages, but a plain
account of the Methodist doctrines.
It may be observed, (if it is worth observing,) that I
preached in the open air in October, 1735. Mr. Whitefield
was not then ordained.
3. “Not a single line tending to vindicate, or illustrate,
any one fundamental doctrine of the gospel appears
throughout the whole.” (Imposture Detected, p. 4.) Yes:
“Thou shalt love the Lord thy God,” is one fundamental
doctrine of the gospel: “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself,” is another. And both these are vindicated and
illustrated for several pages together.
4. “His sacrilegious hand violates the ashes of the dead,
traduces the character of Mr. Whitefield, insinuates that he
was the first who preached in the open air; with the greatest
bitterness of speech, traduces the dead, as a Dissenter from
the Church.” (Page 16.)
My words are: “A good man, who met with us at Oxford,
while he was absent from us, conversed much with Dissenters,
and contracted a strong prejudice against the Church; and
not long after he totally separated from us;” (Ibid., page
429;) from my brother and me. This is every word I say
about Mr. Whitefield. And is this “violating the ashes of
the dead?” Is this “traducing his character?” Certainly
not traducing him as “a Dissenter from the Church,” much
less “with the greatest bitterness of speech.” Where is the
bitterness? And this is the whole ground for pouring out
such a flood of abuse, obloquy, and calumny | But Mr. Hill
goes on : “With ungodly craft he claws up the ashes of the
dead. He says Mr. Whitefield, by conversing with the
Dissenters,” (I mean chiefly the Presbyterians in New
England,) “contracted a strong prejudice against the
Church.” (Imposture Detected, p. 18.) I say so still. And
how will Mr. Hill disprove it? Why, “he manifested his
strong attachment to the Church, by erecting Tottenham
Court chapel, for the celebration of the Church Service; yea,
and reading the Liturgy himself.” Nay, if this proved his
strong attachment to the Church, it will equally prove mine;
for I have read the Liturgy as often as he, and I am now
erecting a chapel (hinc ille lachrymae /* for the celebration
of the Church Service.
5. “He cast lots for his creed.” (Page 8.) Never in my
life. That paltry story is untrue. They who tell it cast no
honour upon him who published a private letter, wrote in
confidence of friendship.
6. “He gives up the righteousness of Christ.” (Page 9.)
No more than I give up his Godhead. But I renounce both
the phrase and thing, as it is explained by Antinomian writers.
7. “He gives up the atonement of Christ. The atonement
and the righteousness of Christ he considers as mere words.”
(Page 10.) Nothing can be more false. It is not concerning
these I advise,
Projicere ampullas, et sesquipedalia verba.f
“But a man cannot fear God, and work righteousness
evangelically, without living faith.” Most certainly. And
who denies this? I have proved it an hundred times.
8. “He renounced the grand Protestant doctrine of justifica
* Hence proceed those tears.-ED1T.
+ This line from Horace's Art of Poetry is thus translated by Roscommon:
“Forget their swelling and gigantic words.”--EDIT.
tion by faith alone, in those horrid Minutes.” I never
renounced it yet, and I trust never shall. The “horrid
Minutes.” Mr. Fletcher has so effectually vindicated, that I
wonder Mr. Hill should mention them any more.
9. “After all possible candour and forbearance had been
shown to him,” (By whom? by Mr. Toplady, Mr. Richard
Hill, or Mr. Rowland, who has excelled them all?) “this
interloper” (a pretty word, but what does it mean?) “has
totally renounced the gospel of Christ.” (Page 11.) Totally
false; unless by the gospel be meant Antinomian Calvinism.
10. “In his last year’s Minutes, he speaks of the doc
trines of grace” (Calvinism) “with as much venom as ever.”
Just as much. Let the reader judge. The words occur
page ll:
“Q. 26. Calvinism has been the greatest hinderance of the
work of God. What makes men swallow it so greedily?
“A. Because it is so pleasing to flesh and blood; the
doctrine of final perseverance in particular.
“Q. 27. What can be done to stop its progress?
“A. (1.) Let all our Preachers carefully read our tracts,
and Mr. Fletcher’s and Sellon’s.
“(2.) Let them preach universal redemption frequently and
explicitly; but in love and gentleness; taking care never to
return railing for railing. Let the Calvinists have all this on
their side.”
Ecce signum. /*
11. “He is most marvellously curious in forbidding his
Preachers to say, My Lady.”
Were ever words so distorted and misrepresented ! The
words in the Minutes are:
“Do not imitate them (the Calvinists of Trevecka in
particular) in screaming, allegorizing, calling themselves
ordained, boasting themselves of their learning, the College,
or My Lady.” (Page 12.)
Is this “forbidding them to say, My Lady?” No more
than forbidding them to make a bow.
12. “A vast number of sluts had taken possession of the
preaching-houses,” (No; the preaching-houses were not in
question,) “and female servants, by courtesy called maids,”
(civil and kind ! But neither were servants in question,) “are
* “Behold the token "-EDIT.
filthy slovens in their persons, dress, and manoeuvres.” (See,
Mr. Hill understands French !) “So Mr. John gives the
public to understand.” (No, not Mr. John, but Mr. Hill.
He goes on:) “And how is this mighty grievance to be
redressed? ‘Why, says this Solomon in a cassock,” (Is not
that witty?) “‘sluts are to be kept out, by not letting them
in.’” (Imposture Detected, p. 12.) And is all this wit bestowed
upon three poor lines? The words are just these:--
“Q. Complaint is made that sluts spoil our houses. How
then can we prevent this?
“A. Let no known slut live in any of them.” (Minutes.)
What a colour does Mr. Hill put upon this ! But,
meantime, where is conscience? Where is honour?
13. “He denies the doctrines of the Church of England;”
(page 13;) that is, absolute predestination. Mr. Sellon has
abundantly proved, that this is no doctrine of the Church of
England. When Mr. Hill has answered his arguments, I will
give him some more. The objections against lay Preachers
(which come ill from Mr. Hill) I have largely answered in
the “Third Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion.” But
I know not that any lay Preachers in connexion with me,
either baptize children, or administer the Lord’s supper. I
never entreated anything of Bishop Erasmus, who had
abundant unexceptionable credentials as to his episcopal
character. Nor did he “ever reject any overture” made by
me. (Page 14.) Herein Mr. Hill has been misinformed. I
deny the fact; let him produce his evidence. The perfection
I hold is so far from being contrary to the doctrine of our
Church, that it is exactly the same which every Clergyman
prays for every Sunday: “Cleanse the thoughts of our
hearts by the inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, that we may
perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy name.”
I mean neither more nor less than this. In doctrine,
therefore, I do not dissent from the Church of England.
14. However, “he renounces the discipline of the Church.”
(Page 15.) This objection too I have answered at large, in
my Letters to Dr. Church,-another kind of opponent than
Mr. Rowland Hill; a gentleman, a scholar, and a Christian;
and as such he both spoke and wrote.
15. “He falsely says, Almost all who were educated at
Trevecka, except those that were ordained, and some of them
too, disclaimed the Church, nay, and spoke of it upon all
occasions with exquisite bitterness and contempt.” This is a
terrible truth. If Lady Huntingdon requires it, I can
procure affidavits, both concerning the time and place.
16. “He professes he stands in no need of Christ's
righteousness.” (Page 23.) I never professed any such
thing. The very sermon referred to, the fifth in the first
volume, proves the contrary. But I flatly deny that sense of
imputed righteousness which Mr. Hill contends for.
17. “He expressly maintains the merit of good works, in
order to justification.” (Page 24.) Neither expressly nor
implicitly. I hope Mr. Hill has not read Mr. Fletcher's
Checks, nor my sermons on the subject. If he has not, he
has a poor excuse for this assertion: If he has, he can have
no excuse at all.
18. “He contradicts himself concerning Enoch and Elijah.
See his Notés, the former edition.” (Page 28.) Wisely
directed ! for Mr. Hill knew the mistake was corrected in
the next edition.
19. “He is ever raising malicious accusations against the
lives and doctrines of all Calvinists, whether Churchmen or
Dissenters, throughout all the kingdom.” (Page 29.)
Thousands of Calvinists know the contrary, both Church
men and Dissenters.
20. “He exerts all his art to irritate the civil powers
against all the people of God.” (Page 30.) “He says, the
Dissenters revile and lightly esteem the sacred person of the
King.” I answer, (1.) Are the Dissenters, are the Calvin
ists, “all the people of God?” (2.) If you think they
are, do all these defend the American rebels? Who
affirms it? I hope not a quarter, not a tenth part, of them.
(3.) Do I say, all the Dissenters revile the King? I
neither say so, nor think so. Those that do, are guilty of
what you impute to me. They “irritate the civil powers”
against themselves.
21. “He says he will no more continue in fellowship with
Calvinists than with thieves, drunkards, or common swearers.”
No; I say I will have no fellowship with those who rail at
their governors, (be they Calvinists or Arminians,) who speak
all manner of evil of them in private, if not in public too.
“Such is the character he gives of the Calvinistic Method
ists.” (Page 31.) I do not; no more than of the Arminians.
But I know there have been such among them: If they are
wiser now, I am glad. In the mean time let him wear the
cap whom it fits, be it Mr. Wilkes or Mr. Hill himself.
22. “This apostate miscreant” (civil!) “invites the King
and his ministers to fall upon”--whom ? those who “rail at
their governors, who speak all manner of evil of them, in
private, if not in public too.” I am glad they cry out, though
before they are hurt; and I hope they will cease to speak
evil of dignities, before those who bear not the sword in vain
fall upon them, not for their opinion, but their evil practices.
23. “He says, Calvinists and all Dissenters are rebels.”
(Page 32.) I never said or thought so. “But a few years
ago, he himself thought the Americans were in the right.”
I did; for then I thought that they sought nothing but
legal liberty: But as soon as I was convinced they sought
independency, I knew they were in the wrong. Mr. Evans's
low and scurrilous tracts have been confuted over and over.
24. “He trumpets himself forth as the greatest man that
has ever lived since Constantine the Great.” (Page 37.) This
too is in italics; it might have been in capitals; but it is an
utter falsehood. Mr. Hill might as well have said, “He trum
pets himself forth as the King of Great Britain.” The passage
to which I suppose he alludes, and the only one he can allude to,
is this: “When has true religion, since the time of Constantine
the Great, made so large a progress within so small a space?”
(Sermons, Vol. VII., p. 425.) Is this “trumpeting myself forth
as the greatest man that has ever lived since” then 7
25. “All his disciples are commanded not to read what is
wrote against him.” (Imposture Detected, page 38.) No; it
is the Tabernacle disciples are commanded not to read Mr.
Fletcher. And reason good; for there is no resisting the force
of his arguments. Thousands, if they read them with any
candour, would see that “God willeth all men to be saved.”
26. Mr. Hill concludes: “I should have been glad to have
addressed him in the softest and most tender style. But
those are weapons he turns to ridicule.” (Page 39.) When?
Show me a single instance. Indeed I never was tried.
What Calvinist ever addressed me in a soft and tender style?
And which of them did I turn to ridicule? I am utterly
guiltless in this matter.
II. 1. I have now done with the merits of the cause, having
refuted the charge in every article. And as to the manner,
let any man of candour judge, whether I have not spoken the
truth in love. I proceed now to take some notice of the
manner wherein Mr. Hill speaks: To illustrate which, I need
only present a few of his flowers to the impartial reader.
2. “All the divinity we find in this wretched harangue
which he calls a sermon, are a few bungling scraps of the
religion of nature, namely, love to God and love to man,
which an Heathen might have preached as well as Mr.
John; ” (polite ) “and probably in a much better manner.
Erase half a dozen lines, and I defy any one to discover
whether the lying apostle of the Foundery be a Jew, a
Papist, a Pagan, or a Turk.” (Page 4.)
“Else I should have treated his trumpery with the silence
and contempt it deserves. But to see Mr. Whitefield scratched
out of his grave by the claws of this designing wolf.” (there is
a metaphor for you!) “is enough to make the very stones cry
out, or (which would be a greater miracle still) redden even
a Wesley's forehead with a blush.” (Page 5.) I think it
would be a greater miracle still to make a wolf blush.
“The dictatorial Mr. John lyingly maintains argument
enough for the gaping dupes whom he leads by the nose.”
(Page 6.)
“He and his lay lubbers go forth to poison the minds of
men.” (Page 11.) Are not then the lay lubbers and the
gaping dupes just fit for each other?
But who are these lay lubbers? They are “Wesley's
ragged legion of preaching tinkers, scavengers, draymen, and
chimney-sweepers.” (Page 21.)
3. “No man would do this, unless he were as unprincipled
as a rook, and as silly as a jackdaw.”
y“His own people say, ‘He is a very poor preacher;’ and
that most of his laymen, raw and ignorant as they are,
preach much more to the purpose. Indeed, the old gentleman
has lost his teeth. But should he not then cease mumbling
with his gums?” (Page 25.)
“Why do they not keep the shatter-brained old gentleman
locked up in a garret?” (Page 36)
4. “I doubt not but for profit' sake he would profess
himself a stanch Calvinist.” (Page 16.)
“The Rev. Mr. John, Mr. Whitefield’s quondam under
strapper.” (Ibid.) How sadly then did he mistake, when he
so often subscribed himself, “Your dutiful, your obliged and
affectionate, son l’’
“Mark the venom that now distils from his graceless pen.”
“The venomous quill of this gray-headed enemy to all
righteousness.” (Pages 17, 19.)
5. “The wretch thought himself safe, but the crafty
slanderer is taken in his own net.” (Page 20.)
“This truly Socinian, truly heathen, truly infernal, passage
is found in that heretic's sermon.” (Page 23.)
“The most rancorous pretences that ever actuated the
prostituted pen of a venal profligate.” (Page 30.)
“With him devils and Dissenters are terms synonymous.
If so, what a devil must he bel” (Ibid.)
“The sole merit of the disappointed Orlando Furioso.”
(how pretty and quaint that is !) “is, seeking to enkindle a
flame of ecclesiastical and civil discord:” (No; to put it out;
which, I bless God, is done already, to a great degree:)
“And his sole perfection consists in perfect hatred of all
goodness and all good men.” (Page 31.)
Now, let all the world judge between Mr. Hill and me. I
do not say all the religious world; but all that have the
smallest portion of common sense and common humanity.
Setting every thing else aside, suppose him to be my superior
in rank, fortune, learning, and understanding: Is this treat
ment for a young man to give to an old one, who, at least, is
no fool, and who, before Mr. Hill was born, was in a more
honourable employ than he is ever likely to be? What can
inspire this young hero with such a spirit, and fill his mouth
with such language? Is it any credit to his person, or to his
cause ? What can men think either of one or the other? If
he does not reverence me, or common decency, should he not
reverence himself? Why should he place himself on a level
with “the ragged legion of tinkers, scavengers, draymen,
chimney-sweepers?” Nay, there are many of these who
would be ashamed to let such language come out of their
mouth. If he writes any more, let him resume the scholar,
the gentleman, and the Christian. Let him remember Him
who “left us an example, that we might tread in his steps:
In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, perad
venture God may bring them to the knowledge of the truth.”
LoNDoN,
June 28, 1777.