A Collection of Forms of Prayer for Every Day in the Week
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
ALMIGHTY God, Fathcr of all mercies, I, thy unworthy
servant, desire to present myself, with all humility, before
thee, to offer my morning sacrifice of love and thanksgiving.
Glory be to thee, O most adorable Father, who, after thou
hadst finished the work of creation, enteredst into thy eternal
rest. Glory be to thee, O holy Jesus, who having through
the eternal Spirit, offered thyself a full, perfect, and sufficient
sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, didst rise again the
third day from the dead, and hadst all power given thee both
in heaven and on earth. Glory be to thee, O blessed Spirit,
who, proceeding from the Father and the Son, didst come
down in fiery tongues on the Apostles on the first day of the
week, and didst enable them to preach the glad tidings of
salvation to a sinful world, and hast ever since been moving
on the faces of men's souls, as thou didst once on the face of
the great deep, bringing them out of that dark chaos in which
they were involved. Glory be to thee, O holy, undivided
Trinity, for jointly concurring in the great work of our
redemption, and restoring us again to the glorious liberty of
the sons of God. Glory be to thee, who, in compassion to
human weakness, hast appointed a solemn day for the remem
brance of thy inestimable benefits. O let me ever esteem it
my privilege and happiness to have a day set apart for the
concerns of my soul, a day free from distractions, disengaged
from the world, wherein I have nothing to do but to praise
and love thee. O let it ever be to me a day sacred to divine
love, a day of heavenly rest and refreshment.
Let thy Holy Spirit, who, on the first day of the week,
descended in miraculous gifts on thy Apostles, descend on me
thy unworthy servant, that I may be always “in the spirit
on the Lord's day.” Let his blessed inspiration prevent and
assist me in all the duties of this thy sacred day, that my
wandering thoughts may all be fixed on thee, my tumultuous
affections composed, and my flat and cold desires quickened
into fervent longings and thirstings after thee. O let me
join in the prayers and praises of thy Church with ardent
and heavenly affection, hear thy word with earnest attention
and a fixed resolution to obey it. And when I approach thy
altar, pour into my heart humility, faith, hope, love, and all
those holy dispositions which become the solemn remem
brance of a crucified Saviour. Let me employ this whole
day to the ends for which it was ordained, in works of
necessity and mercy, in prayer, praise, and meditation; and
“let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my
heart, by always acceptable in thy sight.”
I know, O Lord, that thou hast commanded me, and there
fore it is my duty, to love thee with all my heart, and with all
my strength. I know thou art infinitely holy and overflowing
in all perfection; and therefore it is my duty so to love thee.
. I know thou hast created me, and that I have neither
being nor blessing but what is the effect of thy power and
goodness.
I know thou art the end for which I was created, and that
I can expect no happiness but in thee.
I know that in love to me, being lost in sin, thou didst
send thy only Son, and that he, being the Lord of glory, did
humble himself to the death upon the cross, that I might be
raised to glory.
I know thou hast provided me with all necessary helps for
carrying me through this life to that eternal glory, and this
out of the excess of thy pure mercy to me, unworthy of all
mercies.
I know thou hast promised to be thyself my “exceeding
great reward;” though it is thou alone who thyself “workest
in me, both to will and to do of thy good pleasure.”
Upon these, and many other titles, I confess it is my duty
to love thee, my God, with all my heart. Give thy strength
unto thy servant, that thy love may fill my heart, and be the
motive of all the use I make of my understanding, my
affections, my senses, my health, my time, and whatever
other talents I have received from thee. Let this, O God,
rule my heart without a rival; let it dispose all my thoughts,
words, and works; and thus only can I fulfil my duty and
thy command, of loving thee “with all my heart, and mind,
and soul, and strength.”
O thou infinite Goodness, confirm thy past mercies to me,
by enabling me, for what remains of my life, to be more
faithful than I have hitherto been to this thy great command.
For the time I have yet to sojourn upon earth, O let me
fulfil this great duty. Permit me not to be in any delusion
here; let me not trust in words, or sighs, or tears, but love
thee even as thou hast commanded. Let me feel, and then
I shall know, what it is to love thee with all my heart.
O merciful God, whatsoever thou deniest me, deny me
not this love. Save me from the idolatry of “loving the
world, or any of the things of the world.” Let me never
love any creature, but for thy sake, and in subordination to
thy love. Take thou the full possession of my heart; raise
there thy throne, and command there as thou dost in heaven.
Being created by thee, let me live to thee; being created for
thee, let me ever act for thy glory; being redeemed by thee,
let me render unto thee what is thine, and let my spirit ever
cleave to thee alone.
Iet the prayers and sacrifices of thy holy Church, offered
unto thee this day, be graciously accepted. “Clothe thy
Priests with righteousness, and pardon all thy people who are
not prepared according to the preparation of the sanctuary.”
Prosper all those who are sincerely engaged in propagating
or promoting thy faith and love ( )*: “Give thy Son the
Heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the
earth for his possession;” that from the rising up of the sun
unto the going down of the same, thy name may be great
among the Gentiles. Enable us of this nation, and especially
those whom thou hast set over us in Church and State,
in our several stations, to serve thee in all holiness, and to
“know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge.”
Continue to us the means of grace, and grant we may never
provoke thee, by our non-improvement, to deprive us of
them. Pour down thy blessing upon our Universities, that
they may ever promote true religion and sound learning.
Show mercy, O Lord, to my father and mother, my brothers.
and sisters, to all my friends, ( )* relations, and enemies,
* (-) Here mention the particular persons you would pray for.
and to all that are in affliction. Let thy fatherly hand be
over them, and thy Holy Spirit ever with them; that,
submitting themselves entirely to thy will, and directing all
their thoughts, words, and works to thy glory, they, and
those that are already dead in the Lord, may at length enjoy
thee, in the glories of thy kingdom, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, who liveth and reigneth with thee and the Holy Ghost,
one God, blessed for ever.
Ceneral Questions which a serious Christian may propose to
himself before he begins his Evening Devotions.
1. WITH what degree of attention and fervour did I use
my morning prayers, public or private?
2. Have I done anything without a present, or at least a
previous, perception of its direct or remote tendency to the
glory of God?
3. Did I in the morning consider what particular virtue I
was to exercise, and what business I had to do, in the day?
4. Have I been zealous to undertake, and active in doing,
what good I could?
5. Have I interested myself any farther in the affairs of
others than charity required?
6. Have I, before I visited or was visited, considered how
I might thereby give or receive improvement?
7. Have I mentioned any failing or fault of any man, when
it was not necessary for the good of another?
8. Have I unnecessarily grieved any one by word or deed?
9. Have I before or in every action considered how it
might be a means of improving in the virtue of the day?
Particular Questions relative to the Love of God.
1. HAVE I set apart some of this day to think upon his
perfections and mercies?
2. Have I laboured to make this day a day of heavenly
rest, sacred to divine love?
3. Have I employed those parts of it in works of necessity
and mercy, which were not employed in prayer, reading, and
meditation?
O MY Father, my God, I am in thy hand; and may I
rejoice above all things in being so. Do with me what
seemeth good in thy sight; only let me love thee with all my
mind, soul, and strength.
I magnify thee for granting me to be born in thy Church,
and of religious parents; for washing me in thy baptism, and
instructing me in thy doctrine of truth and holiness; for
sustaining me by thy gracious providence, and guiding me
by thy blessed Spirit; for admitting me, with the rest of my
Christian brethren, to wait on thee at thy public worship;
and for so often feeding my soul with thy most precious body
and blood, those pledges of love, and sure conveyances of
strength and comfort. O be gracious unto all of us, whom
thou hast this day (or at any time) admitted to thy holy table.
Strengthen our hearts in thy ways against all our tempta
tions, and make us “more than conquerors” in thy love.
O my Father, my God, deliver me, I beseech thee, from
all violent passions: I know how greatly obstructive these
are both of the knowledge and love of thee. O let none of
them find a way into my heart, but let me ever possess my
soul in meekness. O my God, I desire to fear them more
than death; let me not serve these cruel tyrants, but do
thou reign in my breast; let me be ever thy servant, and
love thee with all my heart.
Deliver me, O God, from too intense an application to even
necessary business. I know how this dissipates my thoughts
from the one end of all my business, and impairs ta' lively
perception I would ever retain of thee standing at my right
hand. I know the narrowness of my heart, and that an
eager attention to earthly things leaves it no room for the
things of heaven. O teach me to go through all my employ
ments with so truly disengaged a heart, that I may still see
thee in all things, and see thee therein as continually looking
upon me, and searching my reins; and that I may never impair
that liberty of spirit which is necessary for the love of thee.
Deliver me, O God, from a slothful mind, from all luke
warmness, and all dejection of spirit. I know these cannot
but deaden my love to thee; mercifully free my heart from
them, and give me a lively, zealous, active, and cheerful
spirit; that I may vigorously perform whatever thou com
mandest, thankfully suffer whatever thou choosest for me,
and be ever ardent to obey in all things thy holy love.
Deliver me, O God, from all idolatrous love of any creature.
I know infinite numbers have been lost to thee, by loving those
creatures for their own sake, which thou permittest, nay, even
commandest, to love subordinately to thee. Preserve me, I
beseech thee, from all such blind affection; be thou a guard
to all my desires, that they fix on no creature any farther than
the love of it tends to build me up in the love of thee. Thou
requirest me to love thee with all my heart: Undertake for
me, I beseech thee, and be thou my security, that I may
never open my heart to anything, but out of love to thee.
Above all, deliver me, O my God, from all idolatrous self
love. I know, O God, (blessed be thy infinite mercy for
giving me this knowledge,) that this is the root of all evil.
I know thou madest me, not to do my own will, but thine.
I know, the very corruption of the devil is, the having a will
contrary to thine. Obe thou my helper against this most
dangerous of all idols, that I may both discern all its subtle
ties, and withstand all its force. Othou who hast commanded
me to renounce myself, give me strength, and I will obey
thy command. My choice and desire is, to love myself, as
all other creatures, in and for thee. O let thy almighty arm
so stablish, strengthen, and settle me, that thou mayest ever
be the ground and pillar of all my love.
By this love of thee, my God, may my soul be fixed against
its natural inconstancy; by this may it be reduced to an
entire indifference as to all things else, and simply desire
what is pleasing in thy sight. May this holy flame ever
warm my breast, that I may serve thee with all my might;
and let it consume in my heart all selfish desires, that I may
in all things regard, not myself, but thee.
O my God, let thy glorious name be duly honoured and loved
by all the creatures which thou hast made. Let thy infinite
goodness and greatness be ever adored by all angels and men.
May thy Church, the Catholic seminary of divine love, be pro
tected from all the powers of darkness. O vouchsafe to all who
call themselves by thy name one short glimpse of thy goodness.
May they once taste and see how gracious thou art, that all
things else may be tasteless to them; that their desires may be
always flying up towards thee, that they may render thee love,
and praise, and obedience, pure and cheerful, constant and
zealous, universal and uniform, like that the holy angels
render thee in heaven.
Send forth thy blessed Spirit into the midst of these sinful
nations, and make us a holy people: Stir up the heart of our
Sovereign, of the Royal Family, of the Clergy, the Nobility,
and of all whom thou hast set over us, that they may be
happy instruments in thy hand of promoting this good work.
Be gracious to the Universities, to the Gentry and Commons
of this land: And comfort all that are in affliction; let the
trial of their faith work patience in them, and perfect them
in hope and love ( ).
Bless my father, &c., my friends and relations, and all that
belong to this family; all that have been instrumental to my
good, by their assistance, advice, example, or writing; and
all that do not pray for themselves.
Change the hearts of mine enemies, and give me grace to
forgive them, even as thou for Christ's sake forgivest us.
O thou Shepherd of Israel, vouchsafe to receive me this
night and ever into thy protection; accept my poor services,
and pardon the sinfulness of these and all my holy duties. O
let it be thy good pleasure shortly to put a period to sin and
misery, to infirmity and death, to complete the number of
thine elect, and to hasten thy kingdom; that we, and all that
wait for thy salvation, may eternally love and praise thee, O
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,
throughout all ages, world without end. “Our Father,” &c.
General Questions, which may be used every Morning.
DID I think of God first and last?
Have I examined myself how I behaved since last night's
rctirement?
Am I resolved to do all the good I can this day, and to be
diligent in the business of my calling?
O God, who art the giver of all good gifts, I thy unworthy
servant entirely desire to praise thy name for all the expressions
of thy bounty towards me. Blessed be thy love for giving thy
Son to die for our sins, for the means of grace, and for the
hope of glory. Blessed be thy love for all the temporal benefits
which thou hast with a liberal hand poured out upon me; for
my health and strength, food and raiment, and all other
necessaries with which thou hast provided thy sinful servant.
I also bless thee that, after all my refusals of thy grace, thou
still hast patience with me, hast preserved me this night, (--)*
and given me yet another day to renew and perfect my repent
ance. Pardon, good Lord, all my former sins, and make me
every day more zealous and diligent to improve every oppor
tunity of building up my soul in thy faith, and love, and
obedience. Make thyself always present to my mind, and
let thy love fill and rule my soul, in all those places, and
companies, and employments to which thou callest me this
day. In all my passage through this world, suffer not my
heart to be set upon it; but always fix my single eye and my
undivided affections on “the prize of my high calling.” This
one thing let me do; let me so press toward this, as to make
all things else minister unto it; and be careful so to use
them, as thereby to fit my soul for that pure bliss which
thou hast prepared for those that love thee.
O thou, who art good and doest good, who extendest thy
lovingkindness to all mankind, the work of thine hands, thine
image, capable of knowing and loving thee eternally: Suffer
me to exclude none, O Lord, from my charity, who are the
objects of thy mercy; but let me treat all my neighbours with
that tender love which is due to thy servants and to thy
children. Thou hast required this mark of my love to thee:
O let no temptation expose me to ingratitude, or make me
forfeit thy lovingkindness, which is better than life itself.
But grant that I may assist all my brethren with my prayers,
where I cannot reach them with actual services. Make me
zealous to embrace all occasions that may administer to their
happiness, by assisting the needy, protecting the oppressed,
instructing the ignorant, confirming the wavering, exhorting
the good, and reproving the wicked. Let me look upon the
failings of my neighbour as if they were my own; that I may
be grieved for them, that I may never reveal them but when
charity requires, and then with tenderness and compassion.
Let thy love to me, O blessed Saviour, be the pattern of my
love to him. Thou thoughtest nothing too dear to part with,
* (--) Here you may mention any particular mercy received.
to rescue me from etermal misery: O let me think nothing
too dear to part with to set forward the everlasting good of
my fellow Christians. They are members of thy body; there
fore I will cherish them. Thou hast redeemed them with an
inestimable price; assisted by thy Holy Spirit, therefore, I
will endeavour to recover them from a state of destruction;
that thus adorning thy holy gospel, by doing good according
to my power, I may at last be received into the endearments
of thy eternal love, and sing everlasting praise unto the Lamb
that was slain and sitteth on the throne for ever.
Extend, I humbly beseech thee, thy mercy to all men, and
let them become thy faithful servants. Let all Christians
live up to the holy religion they profess; especially these
sinful nations. Be entreated for us, good Lord; be glorified
by our reformation, and not by our destruction. “Turn
thou us, and so shall we be turned:” O be favourable to thy
people; give us grace to put a period to our provocations,
and do thou put a period to our punishment. Defend our
Church from schism, heresy, and sacrilege, and the King
from all treasons and conspiracies. Bless all Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, with apostolical graces, exemplary lives, and
sound doctrine. Grant to the Council wisdom from above,
to all Magistrates integrity and zeal, to the Universities
quietness and industry, and to the Gentry and Commons
pious and peaceable and loyal hearts.
Preserve my parents, my brothers and sisters, my friends
and relations, and all mankind, in their souls and bodies
(--). Forgive mine cnemies, and in thy due time make
them kindly affected towards me. Have mercy on all who
are “afflicted in mind, body, or estate; give them patience
under their sufferings, and a happy issue out of all their
afflictions.” O grant that we, with those who are already
dead in thy faith and fear, may together partake of a joyful
resurrection, through Him who liveth and reigneth with thee
and the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end.
Particular Questions relating to the Love of our Neighbour.
1. HAvE I thought anything but my conscience too dear
to part with, to please or serve my neighbour?
2. Have I rejoiced or grieved with him?
3. Have I received his infirmities with pity, not with
anger?
4. Have I contradicted any one, either where I had no
good end in view, or where there was no probability of
convincing?
5. Have I let him I thought in the wrong (in a trifle)
have the last word?
Most great and glorious Lord God, I desire to prostrate
myself before thy divine Majesty, under a deep sense of my
unworthiness; and with sorrow, and shame, and confusion
of face, to confess I have, by my manifold transgressions,
deserved thy severest visitations. “Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and am no more worthy to be called thy
son:” O let thy paternal bowels yearn upon me, and for
Jesus Christ's sake graciously receive me. Accept my imper
fect repentance, and send thy Spirit of adoption into my
heart, that I may again be owned by thee, call thee Father,
and share in the blessings of thy children.
Adored be thy goodness for all the benefits thou hast
already from time to time bestowed on me; for the good things
of this life, and the hope of eternal happiness. Particularly,
I offer to thee my humblest thanks for thy preservation of
me this day ( ). If I have escaped any sin, it is the
effect of thy restraining grace; if I have avoided any danger,
it was thy hand directed me. To thy holy name be ascribed
the honour and glory. O let the sense of all thy blessings
have this effect upon me,--to make me daily more diligent in
devoting myself, all I am, and all I have, to thy glory.
O my God, fill my soul with so entire a love of thee, that
I may love nothing but for thy sake, and in subordination to
thy love. Give me grace to study thy knowledge daily, that
the more I know thee, the more I may love thee. Create in
me a zealous obedience to all thy commands, a cheerful patience
under all thy chastisements, and a thankful resignation to all
thy disposals. May I ever have awful thoughts of thee;
never mention thy venerable name, unless on just, solemn, and
devout occasions; nor even then without acts of adoration.
O let it be the one business of my life to glorify thee, by every
thought of my heart, by every word of my tongue, by every
work of my hand; by professing thy truth, even to the death,
if it should plcase thee to call me to it; and by engaging all
men, as far as in me lies, to glorify and love thee.
Let thy unwearied and tender love to me, make my love
unwearied and tender to my neighbour, zealous to pray for,
and to procure and promote, his health and safety, ease and
happiness; and active to comfort, succour, and relieve all
whom thy love and their own necessities recommend to my
charity. Make me peaceful and reconcilable; easy to forgive,
and glad to return good for evil. Make me like thyself, all
kindness and benignity, all goodness and gentleness, all meek
mess and longsuffering. And, O thou Lover of souls, raise in
me a compassionate zeal to save the life, the eternal life, of
souls; and by affectionate and seasonable advice, exhortations,
and reproof, to reclaim the wicked, and win them to thy love.
Be pleased, O Lord, to take me, with my father and
mother, brethren and sisters, my friends and relations, and
my enemies, into thy almighty protection this night. Refresh
me with such comfortable rest that I may rise more fit for
thy service. Let me lie down with holy thoughts of thee,
and when I awake let me be still present with thee.
Show mercy to the whole world, O Father of all; let the
gospel of thy Son run and be glorified throughout all the
earth. Let it be made known to all infidels, and obeyed by
all Christians. Be merciful to this Church and nation; give
unto thy Bishops a discerning spirit, that they may make
choice of fit persons to serve in thy sacred ministry; and enable
all who are ordained to any holy function, diligently to feed
the flocks committed to their charge, instructing them in
saving knowledge, guiding them by their examples, praying
for and blessing them, exercising spiritual discipline in thy
Church, and duly administering thy holy sacraments. Multiply
thy blessings on our Sovereign, on the Royal Family, and on
the Nobles, Magistrates, Gentry, and Commons of this land;
that they may all, according to the several talents they have
received, be faithful instruments of thy glory. Give to
our Schools and Universities, zeal, prudence, and holiness.
Visit in mercy all the children of affliction, ( ) relieve
their necessities, lighten their burdens; give them a cheerful
submission to thy gracious will, and at length bring them
and us, with those that already rest from their labours, into
the joy of our Lord; to whom with thee, O Father, and thee,
O Holy Ghost, be all praise, now and for ever.
O ETERNAL and merciful Father, I give thee humble
thanks (increase my thankfulness, I beseech thee) for all the
blessings, spiritual and temporal, which, in the riches of thy
mercy, thou hast poured down upon me. Lord, let me not
live but to love thee, and to glorify thy name. Particularly
I give thee most unfeigned thanks for preserving me from
my birth to this moment, and for bringing me safe to the
beginning of this day, ( ) in which, and in all the days
of my life, I besecch thee that all my thoughts, words, and
works may tend to thy glory. Heal, O Father of mercies,
all my infirmities, (-) strengthen me against all my
follies; forgive me all my sins, ( ) and let them not cry
louder in thine ears for vengeance, than my prayers for
mercy and forgiveness.
Oblessed Lord, enable me to fulfil thy commands, and com
mand what thou wilt. Othou Saviour of all that trust in thee,
do with me what seemeth best in thine own eyes; only give
me the mind which was in thee; let me learn of thee to be
meek and lowly. Pour into me the whole spirit of humility;
fill, I beseech thee, every part of my soul with it, and make
it the constant, ruling habit of my mind, that all my other
tempers may arise from it; that I may have no thoughts, no
desires, no designs, but such as are the true fruit of a lowly
spirit. Grant that I may think of myself as I ought to
think, that I may “know myself, even as I am known.”
Hercin may I exercise myself continually, when I lie down
and when I rise up, that I may always appear poor, and little,
and mean, and base, and vile in mine own eyes. O convince
me that “I have neither learned wisdom, nor have the know
ledge of the holy.” Give me a lively sense that I am nothing,
that I have nothing, and that I can do nothing. Enable me
to feel that I am all ignorance and error, weakness and
uncleanness, sin and misery; that I am not worthy of the
air I breathe, the earth I tread upon, or the sun that shines
upon me. And let me be fully content when all other men
think of me as I do of myself. O save me from either
desiring or seeking the honour that cometh of men. Convince
me that the words of praise, “when smoother than oil,” then
especially “are very swords.” Give me to dread them more
than the “poison of asps,” or “the pestilence that walketh
in darkness.” And when these cords of pride, these snares
of death, do overtake me, suffer me not to take any pleasure
in them, but enable me instantly to flee unto thee, O Lord,
and to complain unto my God. Let all my bones cry out,
“Thou art worthy to be praised; so shall I be safe from
mine enemies.”
Bless, O gracious Father, all the nations, whom thou hast
placed upon the earth, with the knowledge of thee, the only
true God: But especially bless thy holy Catholic Church,
and fill it with truth and grace; where it is corrupt, purge
it; where it is in error, rectify it; where it is right, confirm
it; where it is divided and rent asunder, heal the breaches
thereof, O thou Holy One of Israel. Replenish all whom
thou hast called to any office therein with truth of doctrine
and innocency of life. Let their prayers be as precious
incense in thy sight, that their cries and tears for the city of
their God may not be in vain.
O Lord, hear the King in the day of his trouble; let thy
name, O God, defend him. Grant him his heart's desire,
and fulfil all his mind. Set his heart firm upon thee, and
upon other things only as they are in and for thee. O
defend him and his royal relations from thy holy heaven,
even with the saving strength of thy right hand.
Have mercy upon this kingdom, and forgive the sins of
this people; turn thee unto us, bless us, and cause thy face
to shine on our desolations. Inspire the Nobles and Magis
trates with prudent zeal, the Gentry and Commons with
humble loyalty. Pour down thy blessings on all seminaries
of true religion and learning, that they may remember and
answer the end of their institution. Comfort all the sons
and daughters of affliction, especially those who suffer for
righteousness' sake. Bless my father and mother, my
brethren and sisters, my friends and relations, and all that
belong to this family. Forgive all who are mine enemies,
and so reconcile them to me and thyself, that we all, together
with those that now sleep in thee, may awake to life ever
lasting, through thy merits and intercession, O blessed
Jesus; to whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
ascribed, by all creatures, “all honour, and might, and
wisdom, and glory, and blessing.”
Particular Questions relating to Humility.
1. HAve I laboured to conform all my thoughts, words,
and actions to these fundamental maxims: “I am nothing, I
have nothing, I can do nothing?”
2. Have I set apart some time this day to think upon my
infirmities, follies, and sins?
3. Have I ascribed to myself any part of any good which
God did by my hand?
4. Have I said or done anything with a view to the praise
of men P
5. Have I desired the praise of men?
6. Have I taken pleasure in it?
7. Have I commended myself, or others, to their faces,
unless for God’s sake, and then with fear and trembling?
8. Have I despised any one's advice?
9. Have I, when I thought so, said, “I am in the wrong?”
10. Have I received contempt for things indifferent, with
meekness? for doing my duty, with joy?
11. Have I omitted justifying myself where the glory of
God was not concerned? Have I submitted to be thought
in the wrong?
12. Have I, when contemned, First, prayed God it might
not discourage or puff me up; Secondly, that it might not be
imputed to the contemner; Thirdly, that it might heal my
pride?
13. Have I, , without some particular good in view,
mentioned the contempt I had met with ?
I DESIRE to offer unto thee, O Lord, my evening sacrifice,
--the sacrifice of a contrite spirit. “Have mercy upon me, O
God, after thy great goodness, and after the multitude of thy
mercies do away mine offences.” Let thy unspeakable mercy
free me from the sins I have committed, and deliver me from
the punishment I have deserved ( ). O save me from
every work of darkness, and cleanse me “from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit,” that, for the time to come, I may, with a
pure heart and mind, follow thee, the only true God.
O Lamb of God, who, both by thy example and precept,
didst instruct us to be meek and humble, give me grace
throughout my whole life, in every thought, and word, and
work, to imitate thy meekness and humility. O mortify in me
the whole body of pride; grant me to feel that I am nothing
and have nothing, and that I deserve nothing but shame and
contempt, but misery and punishment. Grant, O Lord, that
I may look for nothing, claim nothing; and that I may go
through all the scenes of life, not seeking my own glory, but
looking wholly unto thee, and acting wholly for thee. Let
me never speak any word that may tend to my own praise,
unless the good of my neighbour require it; and even then
let me beware, lest, to heal another, I wound my own soul.
Let my ears and my heart be ever shut to the praise that
cometh of men, and let me “refuse to hear the voice of the
charmer, charm he never so sweetly.” Give me a dread of
applause, in whatsoever form, and from whatsoever tongue, it
cometh. I know that “many stronger men have been slain by
it,” and that it “leadeth to the chambers of death.” O deliver
my soul from this snare of hell; neither let me spread it for
the feet of others. Whosoever perish thereby, be their blood
upon their own head, and let not my hand be upon them.
O thou Giver of every good and perfect gift, if at any time
thou pleasest to work by my hand, teach me to discern what
is my own from what is another's, and to render unto thee
the things that are thine. As all the good that is done on
earth thou doest it thyself, let me ever return to thee all the
glory. Let me, as a pure crystal, transmit all the light thou
pourest upon me; but never claim as my own what is thy
sole property.
O thou who wert despised and rejected of men, when I am
slighted by my friends, disdained by my superiors, overborne
or ridiculed by my equals, or contemptuously treated by my
inferiors, let me cry out with thy holy martyr,” “It is now
that I begin to be a disciple of Christ.” Then let me
thankfully accept, and faithfully use, the happy occasion of
improving in thy meek and lowly spirit. If for thy sake
“men cast out my name as evil,” let me “rejoice and be
exceeding glad.” If for my own infirmities, yet let me
acknowledge thy goodness, in giving me this medicine to heal
my pride and vanity, and beg thy mercy for those physicians
of my soul by whose hands it is administered to me.
* Tornati.”
“Make me to remember thee on my bed, and think upon
thee when I am waking.” Thou hast preserved me from all
the dangers of the day past; thou hast been my support
from my youth up until now; “under the shadow of thy
wings” let me pass this night in comfort and peace.
O thou Creator and Preserver of all mankind, have mercy
upon all conditions of men; purge thy holy catholic Church
from all heresy, schism, and superstition. Bless our
Sovereign in his person, in his actions, in his relations, and
in his people. May it please thee “to endue his Council,
and all the Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understand
ing;” the Magistrates, with equity, courage, and prudence;
the Gentry, with industry and temperance; and all the
Commons of this land, with increase of grace, and a holy,
humble, thankful spirit.
O pour upon our whole Church, and especially upon the
Clergy thereof, the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant to
our Universities peace and piety; and to all that labour
under affliction, constant patience and timely deliverance.
Bless all my kindred, especially my father and mother, my
brothers and sisters, and all my friends and benefactors
( ). Turn the hearts of my enemies; ( ) forgive
them and me all our sins, and grant that we, and all the
members of thy holy Church, may find mercy in the dreadful
day of judgment, through the mediation and satisfaction of
thy blessed Son Jesus Christ; to whom, with thee and the
Holy Ghost the Comforter, be all honour, praise, and
thanksgiving, in all the Churches of the saints for ever.
O Thou who dwellest in the light which no man can
approach, in whose presence there is no night, in the light of
whose countenance there is perpetual day; I, thy sinful
servant, whom thou hast preserved this night, who live by
thy power this day, bless and glorify thee for the defence of
thy almighty providence, ( ) and humbly pray thee, that
this, and all my days, may be wholly devoted to thy service.
Send thy Holy Spirit to be the guide of all my ways, and
the sanctifier of my soul and body. Save, defend, and build
me up in thy fear and love; give unto me the light of thy
countenance, peace from heaven, and the salvation of my
soul in the day of the Lord Jesus.
O thou who art “the Way, the Truth, and the Life,” thou
hast said no man can follow thee, unless he renounce himself.
I know, O Saviour, that thou hast laid nothing upon us but
what the design of thy love made necessary for us. Thou
sawest our disease, our idolatrous self-love, whereby we fell
away from God, to be as gods ourselves, to please ourselves,
and to do our own will. Lo, I come ! May I ever renounce
my own, and do thy blessed will in all things
I know, O God, thou didst empty thyself of thy eternal
glory, and tookest upon thee “the form of a servant.” Thou
who madest all men to serve and please thee, didst not please
thyself, but wast the servant of all. Thou, O Lord of the hosts
of heaven and earth, didst yield thy cheeks to be smitten,
thy back to be scourged, and thy hands and feet to be nailed
to an accursed tree. Thus didst thou, our great Master,
renounce thyself; and can we think much of renouncing our
vile selves? My Lord and my God, let me not presume to
be above my Master | Let it be the one desire of my heart,
to be as my Master; to do, not my own will, but the will of
Him that sent me.
O thou whose whole life did cry aloud, “Father, not mine,
but thy will be done,” give me grace to walk after thy
pattern; to tread in thy steps. Give me grace to “take up
my cross daily,” to inure myself to bear hardship. Let me
exercise myself unto godliness betimes, before the rains
descend and the floods beat upon me. Let me now practise
what is not pleasing to flesh and blood, what is not agreeable
to my senses, appetites, and passions, that I may not here
after renounce thee, for fear of suffering for thee, but may
stand firm in the “day of my visitation.”
O thou who didst not please thyself, although for thy
“pleasure all things are and were created,” let some portion
of thy Spirit descend on me, that I may “deny myself and
follow thee.” Strengthen my soul, that I may be temperate
in all things; that I may never use any of thy creatures but
in order to some end thou commandest me to pursue, and in
that measure and manner which most conduces to it. Let
me never gratify any desire which has not thee for its ulti
mate object. Let me ever abstain from all pleasures which
do not prepare me for taking pleasure in thee; as knowing
that all such war against the soul, and tend to alienate it from
thee. O save me from ever indulging either “the desire of
the flesh, the desire of the eye, or the pride of life.” Set a
watch, O Lord, over my senses and appetites, my passions
and understanding, that I may resolutely deny them every
gratification which has no tendency to thy glory. O train me
up in this good way, “that when I am old I may not depart
from it;” that I may be at length of a truly mortified heart,
“crucified unto the world, and the world crucified unto me.”
Hear also my prayers for all mankind, and guide their feet
into the way of peace; for thy holy Catholic Church,-let
her live by thy Spirit, and reign in thy glory. Remember
that branch of it which thou hast planted in these kingdoms;
especially the stewards of thy holy mysteries; give them such
zeal, and diligence, and wisdom, that they may save both
themselves and those that hear them.
Preserve, O great King of heaven and earth, all Christian
Princes, especially our Sovereign and his family. Grant that
his Council, and all that are in authority under him, may
truly and indifferently administer justice. And to all thy
people give thy heavenly grace, that they may faithfully serve
thee all the days of their life. Bless the Universities with
prudence, unity, and holiness. However the way of truth be
evil spoken of, may they walk in it even to the end. Who
ever forget or blaspheme their high calling, may they ever
remember that they are a “chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people;” and, accord
ingly, “show forth the praise of Him who hath called them
out of darkness into his marvellous light.”
With a propitious eye, O gracious Lord, behold all my
enemies, and all that are in affliction; give them patience
under their sufferings, and grant that they, and all the
members of thy Church, may find rest, “where the wicked
cease from troubling,” and mercy in the great day of trial.
In particular I commend to thy mercy, my father and
mother, my brethren and sisters, my friends and relations
(--). Lord, thou best knowest all their wants; O suit thy
blessings to their several necessities.
Let these my prayers, O Lord, find access to the throne
of grace, through the Son of thy love, Jesus Christ the
righteous; to whom, with thee, O Father, in the unity of the
Spirit, be all love and obedience now and for ever!
Particular Questions relating to Mortification.
1. HAve I done anything merely because it was pleasing?
2. Have I not only not done what passion solicited me to,
but done just the contrary?
3. Have I received the inconveniences I could not avoid
as means of mortification chosen for me by God?
4. Have I contrived pretences to avoid self-denial? In
particular,
5. Have I thought any occasion of denying myself too
small to be embraced ?
6. Have I submitted my will to the will of every one that
opposed it, except where the glory of God was concerned?
7. Have I set apart some time for endeavouring after a
lively sense of the sufferings of Christ and my own sins? for
deprecating God’s judgment, and thinking how to amend?
O ALMIGHTY Lord of heaven and earth, I desire with
fear and shame to cast myself down before thee, humbly
confessing my manifold sins and unsufferable wickedness. I
confess, O great God, that I have sinned grievously against
thee by thought, word, and deed, particularly this day. Thy
words and thy laws, O God, are holy, and thy judgments are
terrible ! But I have broken all thy righteous laws, and
incurred thy severest judgments; and where shall I appear
when thou art angry?
But, O Lord my Judge, thou art also my Redeemer! I
have sinned, but thou, O blessed Jesus, art my Advocate!
“Enter not into judgment with me,” lest I die; but spare
me, gracious Lord, “spare thy servant, whom thou hast
redeemed with thy most precious blood.” O reserve not evil
in store for me against the day of vengeance, but let thy
mercy be magnified upon me. Deliver me from the power of
sin, and preserve me from the punishment of it.
Thou whose mercy is without measure, whose goodness is
unspeakable, despise not thy returning servant, who earnestly
begs for pardon and reconciliation. Grant me the forgive
ness of what is past, and a perfect repentance of all my sins;
that for the time to come I may with a pure spirit do thy
will, O God, walking humbly with thee, conversing charitably
with men, possessing my soul in resignation and holiness,
and my body in sanctification and honour.
“My Lord and my God,” I know that unless I am planted
together with thee in the likeness of thy death, I cannot in
the likeness of thy resurrection. O strengthen me, that by
“denying myself and taking up my cross daily,” I may
crucify the old man, and utterly destroy the whole body of
sin. Give me grace to “mortify all my members which are
upon earth,” all my works and affections which are according
to corrupt nature. Let me be dead unto sin, unto every
transgression of thy law, which is holy, merciful, and perfect.
Let me be dead unto the world, and all that is in the world,
“the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eye, and the pride
of life.” Let me be dead unto pleasure, so far as it tendeth
not to thee and to those pleasures which are at thy right hand
for evermore. Let me be dead unto my own will, and alive
only unto thine. I am not my own; thou hast “bought me
with a price,” with the price of thine own blood. And thou
didst therefore die for all, “that we should not henceforth
live unto ourselves, but unto Him that died for us.” Arm
thou me with this mind; circumcise my heart, and make me
a new creature. Let me no longer live to the desires of men,
but to the will of God. Let thy Holy Spirit enable me to
say with thy blessed Apostle, “I am crucified with Christ:
Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.”
O thou Great Shepherd of souls, bring home unto thy fold
all that are gone astray. Preserve thy Church from all
heresy and schism, from all that persecute or oppose the
truth; and give unto thy Ministers wisdom and holiness, and
the powerful aid of thy blessed Spirit. Advance the just
interests, and preserve the persons, of all Christian Princes,
especially our Sovereign: Give to him and his Royal Family,
and to all his subjects, in their several stations, particularly
those that are in authority among them, grace to do thy will
in this world, and eternal glory in the world to come.
Bless, O Lord, all our nurseries of piety and schools of
learning, that they may devote all their studies to thy glory.
Have mercy on all that are in affliction; remember the poor
and needy, the widow and fatherless, the friendless and
oppressed; heal the sick and languishing, give them a
sanctified use of thy rod, and when thou seest it expedient
for them, receive them into the number of thy departed
saints, and with them into thine everlasting kingdom.
O my God, I praise thee for thy continual preservation of
me, for thy fatherly protection over me this day; ( ) for
all the comforts with which thou surroundest me, spiritual
and temporal; particularly for leave now to pray unto thee.
O accept the poor services, pardon the sinfulness of this and
all my holy duties, and bless me, my friends and relations,
my benefactors and mine enemies, (this night and ever,)
with the blessings of thy children.
These my prayers, O most merciful Father, vouchsafe to
hear, through the mediation of Jesus Christ our Redeemer;
who with thee and the Holy Ghost is worshipped and glorified,
in all Churches of the saints, one God blessed for ever !
O ETERNAL God, my Sovereign Lord, I acknowledge all I
am, all I have, is thine. Ogive me such a sense of thy
infinite goodness, that I may return to thee all possible love
and obedience.
I humbly and heartily thank thee for all the favours thou
hast bestowed upon me; for creating me after thine own
image, for thy daily preserving me by thy good providence,
for redeeming me by the death of thy blessed Son, and for
the assistance of thy Holy Spirit; for causing me to be born
in a Christian country, for blessing me with plentiful means
of salvation, with religious parents and friends, and frequent
returns of thy ever blessed sacrament. I also thank thee for
all thy temporal blessings; for the preservation of me this
night; ( ) for my health, strength, food, raiment, and all
the comforts and necessaries of life. O may I always delight
to “praise thy holy name,” and, above all thy benefits, love
thee my great Benefactor.
And, O Father of mercies, shut not up thy bowels of
compassion towards me, a vile and miserable sinner; despise
not the work of thine own hands, the purchase of thy Son's
blood. For his sake I most humbly implore forgiveness of all
my sins. “Lo, I come now, to do thy will alone;” and am
resolved, by thy assistance, to have no longer any choice of
my own, but with singleness of heart to obey thy good
pleasure: “Father, not my will, but thine be done,” in all
my thoughts, words, and actions.
O thou all-sufficient God of angels and men, who art above
all, and through all, and in all; from whom, by whom, and
in whom are all things; “in whom we live, move, and have
our being;” may my will be as entirely and continually
derived from thine, as my being and happiness are !
Ibelieve, Osovereign Goodness, O mighty Wisdom, that thou
dost sweetly order and govern all things, even the most minute,
even the most noxious, to thy glory, and the good of those that
love thee. I believe, O Father of the families of heaven and
earth, that thou so disposest all events, as may best magnify
thy goodness to all thy children, especially those whose eyes
wait upon thee. I most humbly beseech thee, teach me to
adore all thy ways, though I cannot comprehend them; teach
me to be glad that thou art King, and to give thee thanks
for all things that befal me; seeing thou hast chosen that for
me, and hast thereby “set to thy seal that they are good.”
And for that which is to come, give me thy grace to do in all
things what pleaseth thee; and then, with an absolute submis
sion to thy wisdom, to leave the issues of them in thy hand.
O Lord Jesu, I give thee my body, my soul, my substance,
my fame, my friends, my liberty, my life: Dispose of me, and
all that is mine, as it seemeth best unto thee. I am not mine,
but thine; Claim me as thy right, keep me as thy charge, love
me as thy child ! Fight for me when I am assaulted, heal
me when I am wounded, and revive me when I am destroyed.
O help me with thy grace, that whatsoever I shall do or
suffer this day may tend to thy glory. Keep me in love to
thee, and to all men. Do thou direct my paths, and teach
me to set thee always before me. Let not the things of this
life, or my manifold concerns therein, alienate any part of
my affections from thee; nor let me ever pursue or regard
them, but for thee, and in obedience to thy will.
Extend, O Lord, thy pity to the whole race of mankind;
enlighten the Gentiles with thy truth, and bring into thy flock
thy ancient people the Jews. Be gracious to the holy catholic
Church; and grant she may always preserve that doctrine and
discipline which thou hast delivered to her. Grant that all of
this nation, especially our Governors and the Clergy, may,
“whatsoever they do, do all to thy glory.” Bless all nurseries of
true religion and useful learning, and let them not neglect the
end of their institution. Be merciful to all that are in distress,
(--) that struggle with pain, poverty, or reproach; be thou a
guide to them that travel by land or by water; give a strong
and quiet spirit to those who are condemned to death, liberty
to prisoners and captives, and ease and cheerfulness to every
sad heart. O give spiritual strength and comfort to scrupu
lous consciences, and to them that are afflicted by evil spirits.
Pity idiots and lunatics, and give life and salvation to all to
whom thou hast given no understanding. Give to all that
are in error the light of thy truth; bring all sinners to
repentance, (-) and give to all heretics humility and grace
to make amends to thy Church, by the public acknowledg
ment of an holy faith. Bless all my friends and relations,
acquaintance and enemies; (--) unite us all to one another
by mutual love, and to thyself by constant holiness; that we,
together with all those who are gone before us in thy faith
and fear, may find a merciful acceptance in the last day,
through the merits of thy blessed Son; to whom with thee
and the Holy Ghost be all glory, world without end |
Particular Questions relating to Resignation and Meekness.
1. HAvE I endeavoured to will what God wills, and that
only?
2. Have I received everything that has befallen me without
my choice, as the choice of infinite wisdom and goodness for
me, with thanks?
3. Have I (after doing what he requires of me to do
concerning them) left all future things absolutely to God's
disposal; that is, have I laboured to be wholly indifferent to
whichsoever way he shall ordain for me?
4. Have I resumed my claim to my body, soul, friends,
fame, or fortune, which I have made over to God; or repented
of my gift, when God accepted any of them at my hands?
5. Have I endeavoured to be cheerful, mild, and courteous
in whatever I said or did?
6. Have I said anything with a stern look, accent, or
gesture? particularly with regard to religion?
My Lord and my God, thou seest my heart, and my
desires are not hid from thee. I am encouraged by my happy
experience of thy goodness, (particularly this day past,) to
present myself before thee, notwithstanding I know myself
unworthy of the least favour from thee. I am ashamed when
I think how long I have lived a stranger, yea, an enemy to
thee, taking upon me to dispose of myself, and to please
myself in the main course of my life. But I now unfeignedly
desire to return unto thee, and, renouncing all interest and
propriety in myself, to give myself up entirely to thee; I
would be thine, and only thine for ever. But I know I am
nothing, and can do nothing of myself; and if ever I am
thine, I must be wholly indebted to thee for it. O my God,
my Saviour, my Sanctifier, turn not away thy face from a
poor soul that seeks thee; but as thou hast kindled in me
these desires, so confirm, increase, and satisfy them. Reject
not that poor gift which I would make of myself unto thee,
but teach me so to make it, that it may be acceptable in thy
sight. Lord, hear me, help me, and show mercy unto me,
for Jesus Christ’s sake.
To thee, O God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, my Creator,
Redeemer, and Sanctifier, I give up myself entirely: May I
no longer serve myself, but thee, all the days of my life.
I give thee my understanding: May it be my only care to
know thee, thy perfections, thy works, and thy will. Let all
things else be as dung and dross unto me, for the excellency
of this knowledge. And let me silence all reasonings against
whatsoever thou teachest me, who canst neither deceive, nor
be deceived.
I give thee my will: May I have no will of my own;
whatsoever thou willest may I will, and that only. May I
will thy glory in all things, as thou dost, and make that my
end in everything; may I ever say with the Psalmist,
“Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire beside thee.” May I delight to do thy
will, O God, and rejoice to suffer it. Whatever threatens
me, let me say, “It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth
him good;” and whatever befalls me, let me give thanks,
since it is thy will concerning me.
I give thee my affections: Do thou dispose of them all; be
thou my love, my fear, my joy; and may nothing have any
share in them, but with respect to thee and for thy sake. What
thou lovest, may I love; what thou hatest, may I hate; and
that in such measures as thou art pleased to prescribe me.
I give thee my body: May I glorify thee with it, and
preserve it holy, fit for thee, O God, to dwell in. May I
aneither indulge it, nor use too much rigour towards it; but
keep it, as far as in me lies, healthy, vigorous, and active, and
fit to do thee all manner of service which thou shalt call for.
I give thee all my worldly goods: May I prize them and
use them only for thee: May I faithfully restore to thee, in
the poor, all thou hast intrusted me with, above the necessaries
of life; and be content to part with them too, whenever
thou, my Lord, shalt require them at my hands.
I give thee my credit and reputation: May I never value
it, but only in respect of thee; nor endeavour to maintain it,
but as it may do thee service and advance thy honour in the
world.
I give thee myself and my all: Let me look upon myself
to be nothing, and to have nothing, out of thee. Be thou
the sole disposer and governor of myself and all ; be thou
my portion and my all.
O my God and my all, when hereafter I shall be tempted
to break this solemn engagement, when I shall be pressed to
conform to the world, and to the company and customs that
surround me; may my answer be, “I am not my own; I
am not for myself, nor for the world, but for my God. I
will give unto God the things which are God’s. God be
merciful to me a sinner.”
Have mercy, O Father of the spirits of all flesh, on all man
kind. Convert all Jews, Turks, and Heathens, to thy truth.
Bless the catholic Church; heal its breaches, and establish it
in truth and peace. Preserve and defend all Christian Princes,
especially our Sovereign and his family. Be merciful to this
nation; bless the Clergy with soundness of doctrine and
purity of life, the Council with wisdom, the Magistrates with
integrity and zeal, and the people with loyalty. Bless the
Universities with learning and holiness, that they may afford
a constant supply of men fit and able to do thee service.
Shower down thy graces on all my relations, on all my
friends, and all that belong to this family. Comfort and
relieve those that labour under any affliction of body or mind,
especially those who suffer for the testimony of a good con
science. Visit them, O gracious Lord, in all their distresses.
Thou knowest, thou seest, them under all. O stay their souls
upon thee; give them to rejoice that they are counted worthy
to suffer for thy name's sake, and constantly to look unto
the author and finisher of their faith. Supply abundantly to
all their souls who are in prison, the want of thy holy
ordinances, and in thy good time, deliver them, and be
merciful unto them, as thou usest to be unto them that love
thy name. Those that love or do good to me, reward seven
fold into their bosom; (--) those that hate me (-) convert
and forgive; and grant us all, together with thy whole
Church, an entrance into thine everlasting kingdom, through
Jesus Christ; to whom with thee and the blessed Spirit,
three Persons and one God, be ascribed all majesty,
dominion, and power, now and for evermore. Amen.
ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, I bless thee from my heart,
that of thy infinite goodness thou hast preserved me this
night past, and hast, with the impregnable defence of thy
providence, protected me from the power and malice of the
devil. Withdraw not, I humbly entreat thee, thy protection
from me, but mercifully this day watch over me with the eyes
of thy mercy. Direct my soul and body according to the
rule of thy will, and fill my heart with thy Holy Spirit, that
I may pass this day, and all the rest of my days, to thy glory.
O Saviour of the world, God of Gods, light of light, thou
that art the brightness of thy Father's glory, the express image
of his person; thou that hast destroyed the power of the devil,
that hast overcome death, “that sittest at the right hand of
the Father;” thou wilt speedily come down in thy Father's
glory to judge all men according to their works: Be thou my
light and my peace; destroy the power of the devil in me,
and make me a new creature. Othou who didst cast seven.
devils out of Mary Magdalene, cast out of my heart all
corrupt affections. Othou who didst raise Lazarus from the
dead, raise me from the death of sin. Thou who didst cleanse.
the lepers, heal the sick, and give sight to the blind, heal the
diseases of my soul; open my eyes, and fix them singly on
the prize of my high calling, and cleanse my heart from every
desire but that of advancing thy glory.
O Jesus, poor and abject, unknown and despised, have mercy
upon me, and let me not be ashamed to follow thee. O Jesus,
hated, calumniated, and persecuted, have mercy upon me, and
let me not be ashamed to come after thee. O Jesus, betrayed
:and sold at a vile price, have mercy upon me, and make me
content to be as my Master. O Jesus, blasphemed, accused,
and wrongfully condemned, have mercy upon me, and teach
me to endure the contradiction of sinners. O Jesus, clothed
with a habit of reproach and shame, have mercy upon me,
and let me not seek my own glory. O Jesus, insulted, mocked,
and spit upon, have mercy upon me, and let me run with
patience the race set before me. O Jesus, dragged to the
pillar, scourged, and bathed in blood, have mercy upon me,
and let me not faint in the fiery trial. O Jesus, crowned with
thorns, and hailed in derision; O Jesus, burdened with our
sins, and the curses of the people; O Jesus, affronted, outraged,
buffeted, overwhelmed with injuries, griefs, and humiliations;
O Jesus, hanging on the accursed tree, bowing the head,
giving up the ghost, have mercy upon me, and conform my
whole soul to thy holy, humble, suffering Spirit. O thou
who for the love of me hast undergone such an infinity of
sufferings and humiliations, let me be wholly “emptied of
myself,” that I may rejoice to take up my cross daily and
follow thee. Enable me, too, to endure the pain and
despise the shame; and, if it be thy will, to resist even
unto blood |
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, I, miserable sinner,
humbly acknowledge that I am altogether unworthy to pray
for myself. But since thou hast commanded me to make
prayers and intercessions for all men, in obedience to thy
command, and confidence of thy unlimited goodness, I
commend to thy mercy the wants and necessities of all man
kind. Lord, let it be thy good pleasure to restore to thy
Church catholic, primitive peace and purity; to show mercy
to these sinful nations, and give us grace at length to break
off our sins by repentance; defend our Church from all the
assaults of schism, heresy, and sacrilege; and bless all Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons with apostolical graccs. O let it be thy
good pleasure to defend the King from all his enemies,
spiritual and temporal; to bless all his royal relations; to
grant to the Council wisdom, to the Magistrates zeal and
prudence, to the Gentry and Commons piety and loyalty I
Lord, let it be thy good pleasure to give thy grace to the
Universities; to bless those whom I have wronged, ( )
and to forgive those who have wronged me; ( ) to
comfort the disconsolate, to give health and patience to all
that are sick and afflicted. ( )
Vouchsafe to bless my father and mother with the fear of
thy name, that they may be holy in all manner of conver
sation. Let them remember how short their time is, and be
careful to improve every moment of it. O thou who hast
kept them from their youth up until now, forsake them not
now they are grayheaded, but perfect them in every good
word and work, and be thou their guide unto death. Bless
my brethren and sisters, whom thou hast graciously taught
the gospel of thy Christ; give them further degrees of illumi
nation, that they may serve thee with a perfect heart and
willing mind. Bless my friends and benefactors, and all
who have commended themselves to my prayers ( ).
Lord, thou best knowest all our conditions, all our desires,
all our wants. O do thou suit thy grace and blessings to
our several necessities.
Hear, O merciful Father, my supplications, for the sake
of thy Son Jesus; and bring us, with all those who have
pleased thee from the beginning of the world, into the glories
of thy Son’s kingdom: To whom with thee and the Holy
Ghost, be all praise for ever and ever !
“Our Father,” &c.
Questions relating to Mortification :-See before the Prayers
for Wednesday Evening.
O GoD the Father, who canst not be thought to have made
me only to destroy me, have mercy upon me.
O God the Son, who, knowing thy Father’s will, didst
come into the world to save me, have mercy upon me.
O God the Holy Ghost, who to the same end hast so often
since breathed holy thoughts into me, have mercy upon me.
O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, whom in three
Persons I adore as one God, have mercy upon me.
Lord, carest thou not that I perish? thou that wouldest
have all men to be saved? thou that wouldest have none to
perish? And wilt thou now show thine anger against a
worm, a leaf 7 against a vapour that vanisheth before thee? O
remember how short my time is, and deliver not my soul into
the power of hell. For, alas, what profit is there in my blood?
Or, who shall give thee thanks in that pit? No; let me live
in thy sight: Let me live, O my God, and my soul shall praise
thee. Forget me as I have been disobedient, provoking thee
to anger; and regard me as I am distressed, crying out to
thee for help. Look not upon me as I am a sinner; but
consider me as I am thy creature. A sinner I am, I confess, a
sinner of no ordinary stain: Butlet not this hinder thee, O my
God; for upon such sinners thou gettest the greatest glory.
O remember for whose sake it was that thou camest from
the bosom of thy Father, and wast content to be born of thine
own handmaid. Remember for whom it was that thy tender
body was torn and scourged and crucified. Was it not for
the sins of the whole world? And shall I be so injurious to
thy glory, as to think thou hast excepted me? Or can I
think, thou diedst only for sinners of a lower kind, and leftest
such as me without remedy? What had become then of him
who filled Jerusalem with blood? what of her, who lived in
a trade of sin? Nay, what had become of thine own
disciple, who with oaths and curses thrice denied thee?
O, how easy is it for thee to forgive! for it is thy nature.
How proper is it for thee to save 1 for it is thy name. How
suitable is it to thy coming into the world ! for it is thy
business. And when I consider that I am the chief of
sinners, may I not urge thee farther, and say, Shall the chief
of thy business be left undone? Far be that from thee!
Have mercy upon me!
I ask not of thee the things of this world, give them to
whom thou pleasest, so thou givest me mercy. O say unto my
soul, “Be of good cheer; thy sins are forgiven thee.” Othat
I might never sin against thee more! And whereinsoever my
conscience accuses me most, be thou most merciful unto me.
Save me, O God, as a brand snatched out of the fire.
Receive me, O my Saviour, as a sheep that is gone astray,
but would now return to the great Shepherd and Bishop of
my soul.
Father, accept my imperfect repentance, compassionate my
infirmities, forgive my wickedness, purify my uncleanness,
strengthen my weakness, fix my unstableness, and let thy
good Spirit watch over me for ever, and thy love ever rule in
my heart, through the merits and sufferings and love of thy
Son, in whom thou art always well pleased.
Give thy grace, O holy Jesus, to all the world; and let all
who are redeemed by thy blood, acknowledge thee to be the
Lord. Let all Christians, especially those of this nation,
keep themselves unspotted from the world. Let all Gover
nors, and especially our Sovereign, rule with wisdom and
justice; and let the Clergy be exemplary in their lives, and
discreet and diligent in their labours. Let our Universities
enjoy freedom from violence and faction, and excel in true
religion and sound learning. Be a help at hand to all that
are afflicted, and assist them to trust in thee. Raise up
friends for the widow and fatherless, the friendless and
oppressed. Give patience to all that are sick, comfort to all
troubled consciences, strength to all that are tempted. Be
gracious to my relations, ( ) to all that are endeared to me
by their kindnesses or acquaintance, to all who remember
me in their prayers, or desire to be remembered in mine
( ), Sanctify, O merciful Lord, the friendship which
thou hast granted me with these thy servants ( ). O
let our prayers be heard for each other, while our hearts are
united in thy fear and love, and graciously unite them
therein more and more. Strengthen the hearts of us thy
servants against all our corruptions and temptations; enable
us to consecrate ourselves faithfully and entirely to thy
service. Grant that we may “provoke each other to love”
and serve thee, and grow up together before thee in thy fear
and love, to thy heavenly kingdom. And by thy infinite
mercies, vouchsafe to bring us, with those that are dead in
thee, to rejoice together before thee, through the merits of our
Lord Jesus Christ; to whom, with thee and the Holy Ghost,
the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord
of lords, be honour and power everlasting.
O GoD, thon great Creator and Sovereign Lord of heaven
and earth, thou Father of angels and men, thou Giver of life
and Protector of all thy creatures, mercifully accept this my
morning sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, which I desire to
offer, with all humility, to thy divine Majesty. “Thou art
praised, O Lord, by all thy works,” and magnified by every
thing which thou hast created. The sum rejoiceth to run his
course, that he may set forth thy praise who madest him. Nor
do the moon and stars refrain to manifest thy glory, even
amidst the silent night. The earth breathes forth each day
perfumes, as incense to thee, her sacred King, who hast crowned
her with herbs and trees, and beautified her with hills and
dales. The deep uttereth his voice, and lifteth up his hands
on high to thee, the great Creator, the universal King, the
everlasting God. The floods clap their hands, and the hills
are joyful together before thee; the fruitful vales rejoice and
sing thy praise. Thou feedest the innumerable multitude of
animals which thou hast created: “These all wait upon thee,
and thou givest them their meat in due season.” Thou
madest light for our comfort, and broughtest forth darkness
out of thy treasures to overshadow the earth, that the living
creatures of it might take their rest. “The fire and hail, snow
and vapour, wind and storm, fulfil thy word,” and manifest
thy glory. Inanimate things declare thee, O Lord of life; and
irrational animals demonstrate their wise Creator. Amidst
this universal jubilee of nature, suffer not, I beseech thee,
the sons of men to be silent; but let the noblest work of thy
creation pay thee the noblest sacrifice of praise. O pour thy
grace into my heart, that I may worthily magnify thy great
and glorious name. Thou hast made me and sent me into
the world to do thy work. O assist me to fulfil the end of
my creation, and to show forth thy praise with all diligence,
by giving myself up to thy service. “Prosper the work of
my hands upon me,” O Lord; O prosper thou whatever I
shall undertake this day, that it may tend to thy glory, the
good of my neighbour, and the salvation of my own soul.
Preserve me from all those snares and temptations which
continually solicit me to offend thee. Guide me by thy Holy
Spirit in all those places whither thy providence shall lead
me this day; and suffer not my communications with the
world to dissipate my thoughts, to make me inadvertent to
thy presence, or lukewarm in thy service; but let me always
walk as in thy sight, and as one who knows this life to be the
seed-time of an eternal harvest Keep me, I beseech thee,
undefiled, unblamable, and unreprovable unto the end; and
grant that I may so diligently perform thy will, in that
station wherein thou hast been pleased to place me, that I
may make my calling and election sure, through Jesus
Christ, our blessed Lord and Saviour.
Hear also, O Lord, my prayers for the whole race of
mankind, and guide their feet into the way of peace. Reform
the corruptions of thy catholic Church, heal her divisions,
and restore to her her ancient discipline; give to the Clergy
thereof, whether they be Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, grace,
as good shepherds, to feed the flocks committed to their charge.
Bless King George and all the Royal Family, and all that
are put in authority under him. Let them exceed others as
much in goodness as greatness, and be signal instruments of
thy glory. Grant that in the Universities, and in all other
places set apart for thy service, whatsoever is praiseworthy
may for ever flourish. Keep, O Lord, all the Nobility,
Gentry, and Commons of this land, in constant communion
with thy holy catholic Church, in humble obedience to the
King, and in Christian charity one towards another.
In a particular manner, I beseech thee to be gracious to my
father and mother, my brethren and sisters, and all my friends
and relations. Pardon all their sins, and heal all their infirm
ities. Give them that share of the blessings of this life,
which thou knowest to be most expedient for them; and thy
grace so to use them here, that they may enjoy thee eternally.
With a propitious eye, O gracious Comforter, behold all
that are in affliction; let the sighings of the prisoners, the
groans of the sick, the prayers of the oppressed, the desire of
the poor and needy, come before thee. (--) Give unto my
enemies ( ) grace and pardon, charity to me and love to
thee; remove the cloud from their eyes, the stony from their
hearts, that they may know and feel what it is to love their
neighbour as themselves. And may it please thee to enable
me to love all mine enemies, to bless them that now curse me.
to do good to them that hate me, and to pray for those who
despitefully use me and persecute me. Be pleased, O Lord,
of thy goodness, shortly to accomplish the number of thine
elect, and to hasten thy kingdom; that we, with all thy whole
Church, may have our perfect consummation of bliss, through
Jesus Christ our Lord; by whom, and with whom, in the
unity of the Holy Ghost, all honour and glory be unto thee,
O Father Almighty, now and for ever.
Particular Questions relating to Thankfulness.
1. HAvE I allotted some time for thanking God for the
blessings of the past week?
2. Have I, in order to be the more sensible of them,
seriously and deliberately considered the several circumstances
that attended them?
3. Have I considered each of them as an obligation to
greater love, and, consequently, to stricter holiness?
O Most great and glorious God, who art mighty in thy
power, and wonderful in thy doings towards the sons of men,
accept, I beseech thee, my unfeigned thanks and praise for
my creation, preservation, and all the other blessings which,
in the riches of thy mercy, thou hast from time to time poured
down upon me. “Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the
foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of
thine hand.” Thou createdst the sun and moon, the day and
might, and makest the outgoings of the morning and evening
to praise thee. Thou “formedst man of the dust of the
ground, and breathedst into him the breath of life.” In thine
own image madest thou him, capable of knowing and loving
thee eternally. His nature was perfect, thy will was his law,
and thy blessed self his portion. Neither after he had left
his first estate didst thou utterly withdraw thy mercy from
him; but, in every succeeding generation, didst save, deliver,
assist, and protect him. Thou hast instructed us by thy laws,
and enlightened us by thy statutes; thou hast redeemed us
by the blood of thy Son, and sanctifiest us by the grace of
thy Holy Spirit. For these and all thy other mercies, how
can I ever sufficiently love thee, or worthily magnify thy
great and glorious name? All the powers of my soul are too
few to conceive the thanks that are due to thee, even for
vouchsafing me the honour of now appearing before thee and
conversing with thee. But thou hast declared thou wilt
accept the sacrifice of thanksgiving in return for all thy
goodness. For ever therefore will I bless thee, will I adore
thy power, and magnify thy goodness: “My tongue shall
sing of thy righteousness, and be telling of thy salvation
from day to day.” I will give thanks unto thee for ever and
ever; I will praise my God while I have my being. O that
I had the heart of the seraphim, that I might burn with love
like theirs. But though I am upon earth, yet will I praise,
as I can, the King of heaven; though I am a feeble, mortal
creature, yet will I join my song with those that excel in
strength, with the immortal host of angels, and archangels,
thrones, dominions, and powers, while they laud and magnify
thy glorious name, and sing with incessant shouts of
praise,--
“Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts | Heaven and
earth are full of his glory ! Glory be to thee, O Lord most
high. Amen. Hallelujah.”
Accept, O merciful Father, my most humble thanks for thy
preservation of me this day ( ). O continue thy loving
kindness towards me, and take me into thy protection this
night. Let thy holy angels watch over me to defend me
from the attempts of evil men and evil spirits. Let me rest
in peace, and not sleep in sin; and grant that I may rise
more fit for thy service.
O thou whose kingdom ruleth over all, rule in the hearts
of all the men whom thou hast made; reform the corruptions,
and heal the breaches, of thy holy Church, and establish her
in truth and peace. Be gracious unto all Priests and Deacons,
and give them rightly to divide the word of truth. Forgive
the sins of this nation, and turn our hearts, that iniquity may
not be our ruin. Bless King George, and all the Royal
Family, with all those blessings which thou seest to be most
expedient for them; and give to his Council, and to the
TNobility and Magistracy, grace truly to serve thee in their
several stations. Bless our Universities, that they may be the
great bulwarks of thy faith and love, against all the assaults
of vice and infidelity. May the Gentry and Commons of
this realm live in constant communion with thy Church, in
obedience to the King, and in love one towards another.
Be gracious to all who are near and dear to me. Thou
knowest their names, and art acquainted with their wants. Of
thy goodness be pleased to proportion thy blessings to their
necessities. Pardon my enemies, and give them repentance
and charity, and me grace to overcome evil with good. Have
compassion on all who are distressed in mind, body, or estate,
and give them steady patience, and timely deliverance.
Now, to God the Father, who first loved us, and made us
accepted in the Beloved; to God the Son, who loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood; to God the Holy
Ghost, who sheddeth the love of God abroad in our hearts, be
all love and all glory in time and to all eternity. Amen.