Thoughts upon Dissipation
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. PERHAPs nothing can be more seasonable at the present
time than to bestow a few thoughts on this. It is a fashion
able subject, very frequently spoken of, especially in good
company. An ingenious writer has lately given us an essay
upon the subject. When it fell into my hands a few days
since, I was filled with a pleasing expectation of seeing it
thoroughly explained. But my expectation was not answered;
for although many just and lively things are said there, yet
in above twenty pages I could find no definition of dissipa
tion, either bad or good.
252. But “the love of dissipation,” says the author, “is the
reigning evil of the present day.” Allowing it is; I ask,
What do you mean by dissipation? Sometimes you use the
word pleasure as an equivalent term. But what pleasure do
you mean; the pleasures of sense, or of the imagination in
general; or any particular pleasure of one or the other? At
other times you seem to make dissipation the same with
luxury; at least with a high degree of it. Sometimes, again,
you use the love of amusement as the same with the love
of dissipation. But the question recurs, What amusement do
you mean; for there are numberless sorts. So that still,
after talking about them so long, we have only a vague,
indeterminate notion of a dissipated age, a dissipated nation,
or a dissipated man; without having any clear or distinct
idea what the word dissipation means.
3. Those who are content with slight and superficial views
of things, may rest in the general account, that a dissipated
age is one wherein the bulk of mankind, especially those of
any rank or fashion, spend the main of their time in eating
and drinking, and diversions, and the other pleasures of sense
and imagination. And that we live in a dissipated age, in
this meaning of the word, is as plain as that the sun shines
at noon-day. Most of those that are commonly termed
innocent amusements fall under this head,--the pleasures of
imagination. Whenever, therefore, a general fondness of
these prevails, that is a dissipated age. A dissipated nation
is one where the people in general are vehemently attached
to the pleasures of sense and imagination. The smaller
vulgar in England are at present passionately fond of the
lowest pleasures both of sense and fancy; while the great
vulgar are equally engrossed by those they account a higher
kind. Meantime they are all equally dissipated, although in
different ways; and so indeed is every man and woman that
is passionately attached to external pleasure.
4. But without dwelling any longer on the surface of
things, let us search the matter to the bottom, and inquire,
wherein lies the original ground of human dissipation. Let
this be once pointed out, and it will place the whole question
in the clearest light.
5. Man is an immortal spirit, created in the image and for
the enjoyment of God. This is the one, the only end of his
being; he exists for no other purpose. God is the centre of
all spirits; and while they cleave to Him, they are wise, holy,
and happy; but in the same proportion as they are separated
from Him, they are foolish, unholy, and unhappy. This
disunion from God is the very essence of human dissipation;
which is no other than the scattering the thoughts and
affections of the creature from the Creator. Wherefore
fondness for sensual enjoyments of any kind; love of silly,
irrational pleasures; love of trifling amusements; luxury,
vanity, and a thousand foolish desires and tempers, are not
so properly dissipation itself, as they are the fruits of it, the
natural effects of being unhinged from the Creator, the
Father, the centre of all intelligent spirits.
6. It is this against which the Apostle guards in his advice
to the Christians at Corinth: “This I speak, that ye may
attend upon the Lord without distraction.” It might as
well be rendered, without dissipation, without having your
thoughts any way scattered from God. The having our
thoughts and affections centred in God, this is Christian
simplicity; the having them in any degree ancentred from
God, this is dissipation. And it little differs in the real
nature of things and in the eye of God, the Judge of all,
whether a man be kept in a state of dissipation from God, by
crowns and empires, and thousands of gold and silver, or
by cards, and dancing, and drinking, and dressing, and
mistressing, and masquerades, and picking straws.
7. Dissipation is then, in the very root of it, separation
from God; in other words, Atheism, or the being without
God in the world. It is the negative branch of ungodliness.
And, in this true sense of the word, certainly, England is the
most dissipated nation that is to be found under heaven.
And whether our thoughts and affections are dissipated,
scattered from God, by women, or food, or dress, or one or
ten thousand pretty trifles, that dissipation (innocent as it
may seem) is equally subversive of all real virtue and all real
happiness. It carries its own punishment: Though we are
loaded with blessings, it often makes our very existence a
burden; and, by an unaccountable anxiety, gives a foretaste
of what it is to be “punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord!”
March 26, 1783.