An Account of the Brothers' Steps
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
LAST summer [1780] I received a letter from a friend,
wherein were these words:-
“I THINK it would be worth your while to take a view of
those wonderful marks of the Lord's hatred to duelling,
called The Brothers’ Steps. They are in the fields, about a
third of a mile northward from Montague-House; and the
awful tradition concerning them is, that two brothers quar
relled about a worthless woman, and, according to the
fashion of those days, fought with sword and pistol. The
prints of their feet are about the depth of three inches, and
Account of THE BROTHERs’ sTEPs. 499
nothing will vegetate so much as to disfigure them. The
number is only eighty-three; but probably some are at
present filled up; for I think there were formerly more in
the centre, where each unhappy combatant wounded the
other to death: And a bank on which the first who fell
died, retains the form of his agonizing couch, by the curse of
barrenness, while grass flourishes all about it. Mr. George
Hall, who was the Librarian of Lincoln’s-Inn, first showed
me those steps twenty-eight years ago, whem, I think, they
were not quite so deep as now. He remembered them about
thirty years, and the man who first showed them him, about
thirty more, which goes back to the year 1692; but 1
suppose they originated in King Charles the Second’s reign.
My mother well remembered their being ploughed up, and
corn sown, to deface them, about fifty years ago: But all
was labour in vain; for the prints returned in a while to
their pristine form; as probably will those that are now
filled up. Indeed I think an account of them in your
Magazine would be a pious memorial of their lasting reality.
“These hints are only offered as a small token of my
good-will to yourself and the work, by
“Your son and brother in the gospel,
This account appeared to me so very extraordinary, that I
knew not what to think of it. I knew Mr. Walsh to be a
person of good understanding and real piety; and he testified
what he had seen with his own eyes: But still I wanted more
witnesses, till, awhile ago, being at Mr. Cary’s in Copthall
Buildings, I occasionally mentioned The Brothers' Footsteps;
and asked the company if they had heard anything of them.
“Sir,” said Mr. Cary, “sixteen years ago, I saw and counted
them myself.” Another added, “And I saw them four years
ago.” I could then no longer doubt but they had been ; and
a week or two after I went with Mr. Cary and another
person to seek them.
We sought for near half an hour in vain. We could find
no steps at all within a quarter of a mile, no, nor half a mile,
north of Montague-House. We were almost out of hope,
when an honest man, who was at work, directed us to thc
next ground, adjoining to a pond. There we found what we
sought for, about three-quarters of a mile north of Montague
House, and about five hundred yards east of Tottenham
Court Road. The steps answer Mr. Walsh's description.
They are of the size of a large human foot, about three.
inches deep, and lie nearly from north-east to south-west.
We counted only seventy-six; but we were not exact in
counting. The place where one or both the brothers are:
supposed to have fallen, is still bare of grass. The labourer
showed us also the bank, where (the tradition is) the wretched
woman sat to see the combat.
What shall we say to these things? Why, to Atheists, or
Infidels of any kind, I would not say one word about them.
For “if they hear not Moses and the Prophets,” they will
not regard anything of this kind. But to men of candour,
who believe the Bible to be of God, I would say, Is not this
an astonishing instance, held forth to all the inhabitants of
London, of the justice and power of God? Does not the
curse he has denounced upon this ground bear some little
resemblance to that of our Lord on the barren figtree,
“Henceforth let no fruit grow upon thce for ever?” I see
no reason or pretence for any rational man to doubt of the
truth of the story; since it has been confirmed by these open,
visible tokens for more than a hundred years successively.