A Letter to the Bishop of London
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1747
Author: John Wesley
---
MY LoRD,
1. WHEN abundance of persons have for several years laid to
my charge things that I knew not, I have generally thought
it my duty to pass it over in silence, to be “as one that heard
not.” But the case is different when a person of your Lord
ship’s character calls me forth to answer for myself. Silence
now might be interpreted contempt. It might appear like a sul
len disregard, a withholding honour from him towhom honour
is due, were it only on account of his high office in the Church,
more especially when I apprehend so eminent a person as this
to be under considerable mistakes concerning me. Were I
now to be silent, were I not to do what was in my power
for the removal of those mistakes, I could not “have a con
science void of offence,” either “towards God or towards man.”
2. But I am sensible how difficult it is to speak in such a
manner as I ought, and as I desire to do. When your
Lordship published those queries, under the title of “Obser
vations,” I did not lie under the same difficulty; because, as
your name was not inscribed, I had “the liberty to stand, as
it were, on even ground.” But I must now always re
member to whom I speak. And may the God “whom I
serve in the gospel of his Son,” enable me to do it with deep
seriousness of spirit, with modesty and humility; and, at the
same time, with the utmost plainness of speech; seeing we
must “both stand before the judgment-seat of Christ.”
3. In this, then, I entreat your Lordship to bear with me;
and in particular, when I speak of myself, (how tender a
point 1) just as freely as I would of another man. Let not
this be termed boasting. Is there not a cause? Can I re
frain from speaking, and be guiltless? And if I speak at all,
ought I not to speak (what appears to me to be) the whole
truth? Does not your Lordship desire that I should do this?
I will then, God being my helper. And you will bear with
me in my folly, (if such it is) with my speaking in the sim
plicity of my heart.
4. Your Lordship begins, “There is another species of
enemies, who give shameful disturbance to the parochial
Clergy, and use very unwarrantable methods to prejudice
their people against them, and to seduce their flocks from
them; the Methodists and Moravians, who agree in annoying
the established ministry, and in drawing over to themselves
the lowest and most ignorant of the people, by pretences to
greater sanctity.” (Charge, p. 4.)
But have no endeavours been used to show them their
error? Yes; your Lordship remarks, “Endeavours have not
been wanting. But though these endeavours have caused
some abatement in the pomp and grandeur with which these
people for some time acted,” (truly, one would not have ex
pected it from them !) “yet they do not seem to have made
any impression upon their leaders.” (Ibid. p. 6.)
Your Lordship adds, “Their innovations in points of dis
cipline I do not intend to enter into at present. But to in
quire what the doctrines are which they spread.” (Ibid.
p. 7.) “Doctrines big with pernicious influences upon prac
tice.” (Ibid. p. 8.)
Six of these your Lordship mentions, after having pre
mised, “It is not at all needful, to the end of guarding
against them, to charge the particular tenets upon the particular
persons among them.” (Ibid. p. 7.) Indeed, my Lord, it is
needful in the highest degree. For if the Minister who is to
guard his people, either against Peter Böhler, Mr. Whitefield,
or me, does not know what our particular tenets are, he must
needs “run as uncertainly, and fight as one that beateth the air.”
I will fairly own which of these belong to me. The in
direct practices which your Lordship charges upon me may
then be considered; together with the consequences of these
doctrines, and your Lordship's instructions to the Clergy.
5. “The First that I shall take notice of,” says your
Lordship, “is the Antinomian doctrine.” (Ibid. p. 8.) The
Second, “that Christ has done all, and left nothing for us to
do, but to believe.” (Ibid. p. 9.) These belong not to me.
I am unconcerned therein. I have earnestly opposed, but did
never teach or embrace, them.
“There is another notion,” your Lordship says, “which we
find propagated throughout the writings of those people, and
that is, the making inward, secret, and sudden impulses the
guides of their actions, resolutions, and designs.” (Ibid. p. 14.)
Mr. Church urged the same objection before: “Instead of
making the word of God the rule of his actions, he follows
only his secret impulse.” I beg leave to return the same
answer. “In the whole compass of language there is not a
proposition which less belongs to me than this. I have de
clared again and again, that I make the word of God “ the
rule’ of all my actions; and that I no more follow any
‘secret impulse’ instead thereof, than I follow Mahomet or
Confucius.” (Answer to Mr. Church, page 406.)
6. Before I proceed, suffer me to observe, here are three
grievous errors charged on the Moravians, Mr. Whitefield, and
me, conjointly, in none of which I am any more concerned
than in the doctrine of the metempsychosis ! But it was
“not needful to charge particular tenets on particular
484 lETTER. To
persons.” Just as needful, my Lord, as it is not to put a
stumbling-block in the way of our brethren; not to lay them
under an almost insuperable temptation of condemning the
innocent with the guilty. I beseech your Lordship to
answer in your own conscience before God, whether you did
not foresee how many of your hearers would charge these
tenets upon me; nay, whether you did not design they
should. If so, my Lord, is this Christianity? Is it
humanity? Let me speak plain. Is it honest Heathenism?
7. I am not one jot more concerned in instantaneous justifi
cation, as your Lordship explains it, viz., “A sudden, instanta
neous justification, by which the person receives from God a
certain seal of his salvation, or an absolute assurance of being
saved at last.” (Charge, p. 11.) “Such an instantaneous work
ing of the Holy Spirit as finishes the business of salvation once
for all.” (Ibid.) I neither teach nor believe it; and am there
fore clear of all the consequences that may arise therefrom. I
believe “a gradual improvement in grace and goodness,” I mean,
in the knowledge and love of God, is a good “testimony of our
present sincerity towards God; ” although I dare not say, It is
“the only true ground of humble assurance,” or the only
foundation on which a Christian builds his “hopes of accept
ance and salvation.” For I think, “other foundation” of these
“can no man lay, than that which is laid, even Jesus Christ.”
8. To the charge of holding “sinless perfection,” as your
Lordship states it, I might likewise plead, Not guilty; seeing
one ingredient thereof, in your Lordship’s account, is “freedom
from temptation.” (Ibid. p. 17.) Whereas I believe, “there
is no such perfection in this life as implies an entire deliverance
from manifold temptations.” But I will not decline the
charge. I will repeat once more my coolest thoughts upon
this head; and that in the very terms which I did several
years ago, as I presume your Lordship cannot be ignorant :
“What, it may be asked, do you mean by ‘one that is per
fect, or, “one that is as his Master?' We mean one in whom
is ‘the mind which was in Christ,’ and who so “walketh as He
walked; a man that ‘hath clean hands and a pure heart; or
that is “cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; one
“in whom there is no occasion of stumbling, and who, accord
ingly, ‘doth not commit sin. To declare this a little more
particularly : We understand by that scriptural expression, “a
perfect man, one in whom God hath fulfilled his faithful word:
“From all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse
you. I will also save you from all your uncleanness. We
understand hereby, one whom God hath sanctified through
out, even in ‘body, soul, and spirit; one who “walketh in the
light, as He is in the light, in whom ‘is no darkness at all;’
the blood of Jesus Christ his Son having “cleansed him from
all sin.”- •
“This man can now testify to all mankind, ‘I am crucified
with Christ; nevertheless I live; yet I live not, but Christ
liveth in me.’ He ‘is holy, as God who called him is holy,”
both in life, and ‘in all manner of conversation. He ‘loveth
the Lord his God with all his heart, and serveth him with all
his strength.’ He ‘loveth his neighbour” (every man) “as
himself; yea, “as Christ loved us;’ them in particular that
‘ despitefully use him and persecute him, because “they know
not the Son, neither the Father. Indeed, his soul is all love,
filled with “bowels of mercies, kindness, meekness, gentleness,
long-suffering. And his life agreeth thereto, full of ‘the work
of faith, the patience of hope, the labour of love.’ And ‘what
soever he doeth, either in word or deed,” he doeth ‘it all in the
name, in the love and power, ‘of the Lord Jesus.” In a word,
he doeth the will of God “on earth, as it is done in heaven.’
“This is to be ‘a perfect man, to be “sanctified throughout,
created anew in Jesus Christ; even ‘to have a heart so all
flaming with the love of God,' (to use Archbishop Usher's
words,) “as continually to offer up every thought, word, and
work, as a spiritual sacrifice, acceptable unto God through
Christ.’ In every thought of our hearts, in every word of our
tongues, in every work of our hands, “to show forth his praise
who hath called us out of darkness into his marvellous light.”
O that both we, and all who seek the Lord Jesus in sincerity,
may thus ‘be made perfect in one !’”
9. I conjure you, my Lord, by the mercies of God, if these
are not the words of truth and soberness, point me out wherein
I have erred from the truth; show me clearly wherein I have
spoken either beyond or contrary to the word of God. But
might I not humbly entreat, that your Lordship, in doing this,
would abstain from such expressions as these: “If they will but
put themselves under their direction and discipline,--after their
course of discipline is once over,” (ibid. p. 15,) as not suitable
either to the weight of the subject, or the dignity of your Lord
ship's character. And might I not expect something more than
these loose assertions, that this is “a delusion altogether
groundless; a notion contrary to the whole tenor both of the
Old and New Testament; ” that “the Scriptures forbid all
thought of it, as vain, arrogant, and presumptuous;” that they
“represent all mankind, without distinction, as subject to sin
and corruption” (subject to sin and corruption l strong words!)
“during their continuance in this world; and require no more
than an honest desire and endeavour to find ourselves less and
less in a state of imperfection.” (Ibid. pp. 15, 16.)
Is it not from your Lordship's entirely mistaking the ques
tion, not at all apprehending what perfection I teach, that you
go on to guard against the same imaginary consequences, as
your Lordship did in the “Observations?” Surely, my Lord,
you never gave yourself the trouble to read the answer given in
the “Farther Appeal,” to every objection which you now urge
afresh; seeing you do not now appear to know any more of
my sentiments than if you had never proposed one question,
nor received one answer, upon the subject!
10. If your Lordship designed to show my real sentiments
concerning the last doctrine which you mention, as one would
imagine by your adding, “These are his own words,” (ibid.
p. 18,) should you not have cited all my own words? at least
all the words of that paragraph, and not have mangled it as
Mr. Church did before?
It runs thus: “Saturday, 28. I showed at large, in order to
answer those who taught that none but they who are full of
faith and the Holy Ghost ought ever to communicate, (1.) That
the Lord's supper was ordained by God to be a means of con
veying to men either preventing, or justifying, or sanctifying
grace, according to their several necessities. (2.) That the per
sons for whom it was ordained are all those who know and feel
that they want the grace of God, either to restrain them from
sin, or to ‘show their sins forgiven, or to ‘renew their souls’
in the image of God. (3.) That inasmuch as we come to his
table, not to give him anything, but to receive whatsoever he
sees best for us, there is no previous preparation indispensably
necessary, but a desire to receive whatsoever he pleases to give.
And, (4.) That no fitness is required at the time of communi
cating, but a sense of our state, of our utter sinfulness and help
lessness; every one who knows he is fit for hell, being just
fit to come to Christ, in this, as well as all other ways of his
appointment.” (Vol. I. p. 280.)
In the Second Letter to Mr. Church, p. 434, I explain myself
farther on this head: “I am sorry to find you still affirm, that,
with regard to the Lord's supper also, I ‘advance many injudi
cious, false, and dangerous things. Such as, (1.) That a man
ought to communicate without a sure trust in God’s mercy
through Christ.’ (Page 117.) You mark these as my words;
but I know them not. (2.) ‘That there is no previous prepa
ration indispensably necessary, but a desire to receive whatso
ever God pleases to give. But I include abundantly more in
that desire, than you seem to apprehend, even a willingness
to know and do the whole will of God. (3.) ‘That no fitness
is required at the time of communicating,’ (I recite the whole
sentence,) “but a sense of our state, of our utter sinfulness
and helplessness; every one who knows he is fit for hell, being
just fit to come to Christ, in this, as well as in all other ways
of his appointment.” But neither can this sense of our utter
sinfulness and helplessness subsist without earnest desires of
universal holiness.”
And now, what can I say? Had your Lordship never seen
this? That is hardly to be imagined. But if you had, how
was it possible your Lordship should thus explicitly and
solemnly charge me, in the presence of God and all my
brethren, (only the person so charged was not present,) with
“meaning by those words to set aside self-examination, and
repentance for sins past, and resolutions of living better for
the time to come, as things no way necessary to make a worthy
communicant?” (Charge, p. 18.)
If an evidence at the bar should swerve from truth, an
equitable judge may place the thing in a true light. But if
the judge himself shall bear false witness, where then can we
find a remedy?
Actual preparation was here entirely out of the question. It
might be absolutely and indispensably necessary, for anything
I had either said or meant to the contrary: For it was not at
all in my thoughts. And the habitual preparation which I had
in terms declared to be indispensably necessary was, “a willing
mess to know and to do the whole will of God,” and “earnest
desires of universal holiness.” Does your Lordship think, this
is “meant to set aside all repentance for sins past, and reso
lutions of living better for the time to come?”
11. Your Lordship next falls with all your might upon that
strange assertion, as you term it, “We come to his table, not
to give him anything, but to receive whatsoever he sees best for
us.” “Whereas,” says your Lordship, “in the exhortation at
the time of receiving, the people are told that they must give
most humble and hearty thanks,--and immediately after re
ceiving, both Minister and people join in offering and present
ing themselves before God.” (Ibid. pp. 20, 21.) O God! in
what manner are the most sacred things here treated! the most
venerable mysteries of our religion | What quibbling, what
playing upon words, is here! Not to give him anything. “Yes,
to give him thanks.” O my Lord, are these the words of a
Father of the Church !
12. Your Lordship goes on : “To the foregoing account of
these modern principles and doctrines, it may not be improper
to subjoin a few observations upon the indirect practices of
the same people in gaining proselytes.” (Ibid. pp. 23, 24.)
“I. They persuade the people, that the established worship,
with a regular attendance upon it, is not sufficient to answer
the ends of devotion.”
Your Lordship mentioned this likewise in the Observations.
In your fourth query it stood thus: “Whether a due and
regular attendance on the public offices of religion, paid in a
serious and composed way, does not answer the true ends of
devotion.” Suffer me to repeat part of the answer then given:--
“I suppose by ‘devotion’ you mean public worship; by the
‘true ends’ of it, the love of God and man; and by “a due and
regular attendance on the public offices of religion, paid in a
serious and composed way, the going as often as we can to our
parish church, and to the sacrament there administered. If so,
the question is, Whether this attendance on those offices does
not produce the love of God and man. I answer, Sometimes it
does, and sometimes it does not. I myself thus attended them
for many years; and yet am conscious to myself, that, during
that whole time, I had no more of the love of God than a stone.
And I know many hundreds, perhaps thousands, of serious per
sons who are ready to testify the same thing.”
I subjoined, (1) “We continually exhort all who attend on
our preaching, to attend the offices of the Church. And they
do pay a more regular attendance there than ever they did
before. (2.) Their attending the Church did not, in fact, answer
those ends at all till they attended this preaching also. (3.) It
is the preaching remission of sins through Jesus Christ which
alone answers the true ends of devotion.”-
II. 13. “They censure the Clergy,” says your Lordship,
“as less zealous than themselves in the several branches of the
ministerial function. For this they are undeservedly reproached
by these noisy itinerant leaders.” (Charge, pp. 24, 25.)
My Lord, I am not conscious to myself of this. I do not
willingly compare myself with any man; much less do I re
proach my brethren of the Clergy, whether they deserve it or
not. But it is needless to add any more on this head than
what was said above a year ago:--
“I must explain myself a little on that practice which you
so often term “abusing the Clergy.” I have many times great
sorrow and heaviness in my heart on account of these my
brethren. And this sometimes constrains me to speak to them,
in the only way which is now in my power; and sometimes
(though rarely) to speak of them; of a few, not all in general.
In either case, I take an especial care, (1.) To speak nothing
but the truth. (2.) To speak this with all plainness; and, (3.)
With love, and in the spirit of meekness. Now, if you will call
this abusing, railing, or reviling, you must. But still I dare
not refrain from it. I must thus rail, thus abuse sinners of
all sorts and degrees, unless I will perish with them.” (Second
Letter to Mr. Church, pp. 479, 480.)-
III. 14. “They value themselves upon extraordinary strict
nesses and severities in life, and such as are beyond what the
rules of Christianity require. They captivate the people by such
professions and appearances of uncommon sanctity. But that
which can never fail of a general respect is, a quiet and ex
emplary life, free from the many follies and indiscretions which
those restless and vagrant Teachers are apt to fall into.”
(Charge, p. 25.)
By “extraordinary strictnesses and severities,” I presume
your Lordship means, the abstaining from wine and animal
food; which, it is sure, Christianity does not require. But if
you do, I fear your Lordship is not throughly informed of the
matter of fact. I began to do this about twelve years ago, when
I had no thought of “annoying parochial Ministers,” or of
“captivating” any “people” thereby, unless it were the Chica
saw or Choctaw Indians. But I resumed the use of them both,
about two years after, for the sake of some who thought I made
it a point of conscience; telling them, “I will eat flesh while
the world standeth,” rather than “make my brother to offend.”
Dr. Cheyne advised me to leave them off again, assuring me,
“Till you do, you will never be free from fevers.” And since
I have taken his advice, I have been free (blessed be God!)
from all bodily disorders.” Would to God I knew any method
of being equally free from all “follies and indiscretions!” But
this I never expect to attain till my spirit returns to God.
15. But in how strange a manner does your Lordship repre
sent this! What a construction do you put upon it! “Appear
ances of an uncommon sanctity, in order to captivate the people.
Pretensions to more exalted degrees of strictness, to make their
way into weak minds and fickle heads.” (Ibid. p. 25.) “Pre
tencestogreater sanctity, whereby they draw over to themselves
the most ignorant of the people.” (Ibid. p. 4.) If these are
“appearances of uncommon sanctity,” (which, indeed, might
bear a dispute,) how does your Lordship know that they are
only appearances? that they do not spring from the heart?
Suppose these were “exalted degrees of strictness,” is your
Lordship absolutely assured that we practise them only “to
make our way into weak minds and fickle heads?” Where is
the proof that these “pretences to greater sanctity,” (as your
Lordship is pleased to phrase them,) are mere pretences, and
have nothing of reality or sincerity in them?
My Lord, this is an accusation of the highest nature. If we
are guilty, we are not so much as moral Heathens. We are
monsters, not only unworthy of the Christian name, but unfit for
human society. It tears up all pretences to the love of God
and man; to justice, mercy, or truth. But how is it proved?
Or does your Lordship read the heart, and so pass sentence with
out any proof at all? O my Lord, ought an accusation of the
lowest kind to be thus received, even against the lowest of the
people? How much less can this be reconciled with the apos
tolical advice to the Bishop of Ephesus: “Against a Presbyter
receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses;”
and those face to face. When it is thus proved, “them that
sin, rebuke before all.” Your Lordship doubtless remembers
* I continued this about two years.
the words that follow : (How worthy to be written in your
heart!) “I charge thee, before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things
without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality.” (1 Timothy v. 19-21.)
IV. 16. “They mislead the people into an opinion of the
high merit of punctual attendances on their performances, to
the neglect of the business of their stations.” (Ibid. p. 26.)
My Lord, this is not so. You yourself, in this very Charge,
have cleared us from one part of this accusation. You have
borne us witness, (ibid. p. 10,) that we disclaim all merit,
even in (really) good works; how much more in such works
as we continually declare are not good, but very evil such
as the attending sermons, or any public offices whatever, “to
the neglect of the business of our station.”
When your Lordship urged this before, in the “Observa
tions,” I openly declared my belief, “that true religion cannot
lead into a disregard or disesteem of the common duties and
offices of life; that, on the contrary, it leads men to discharge
all those duties with the strictest and closest attention; that
Christianity requires this attention and diligence, in all stations,
and in all conditions; that the performance of the lowest offices
of life, as unto God, is truly a serving of Christ; and that this
is the doctrine I preach continually; ” (Farther Appeal, Part
I. p. 60;) a fact whereof any man may easily be informed.
Now, if, after all this, your Lordship will repeat the charge,
as if I had not once opened my mouth concerning it, I cannot
help it. I can say no more. I commend my cause to God.
17. Having considered what your Lordship has advanced
concerning dangerous doctrines and indirect practices, I now
come to the instructions your Lordship gives to the Clergy of
your diocese.
How awful a thing is this 1 The very occasion carries in it
a solemnity not to be expressed. Here is an angel of the Church.
of Christ, one of the stars in God’s right hand, calling together
all the subordinate Pastors, for whom he is to give an account
to God; and directing them (in the name and by the authority
of “the great Shepherd of the sheep, Jesus Christ, the First
Begotten from the dead, the Prince of the kings of the earth”)
how to “make full proof of their ministry,” that they may be
“pure from the blood of all men; ” how to “take heed unto
themselves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost
hath made them overseers; ” how to “feed the flock of God,
which he hath purchased with his own blood l’’ To this end
they are all assembled together. And what is the substance
of all his instructions?--“Reverend brethren, I charge you
all, lift up your voice like a trumpet; and warn and arm and
fortify all mankind against a people called Methodists 1”
True it is, your Lordship gives them several advices; but
all in order to this end. You direct them to “inculcate the
excellency of our Liturgy, as a wise, grave, and serious
service; ” to “show their people, that a diligent attendance
on their business is a serving of God; ” “punctually to per
form both the public offices of the Church, and all other
pastoral duties; ” and to “engage the esteem of their
parishioners by a constant regularity of life.” But all these
your Lordship recommends eo nomine, as means to that great
end, the arming and fortifying their people against the
Moravians or Methodists, and their doctrines.
Is it possible ! Could your Lordship discern no other
enemies of the gospel of Christ? Are there no other heretics
or schismatics on earth, or even within the four seas? Are
there no Papists, no Deists in the land? Or are their errors
of less importance? Or are their numbers in England less
considerable, or less likely to increase? Does it appear, then,
that they have lost their zeal for making proselytes? Or are
all the people so guarded against them already, that their
labour is in vain? Can your Lordship answer these few
plain questions, to the satisfaction of your own conscience?
Have the Methodists (so called) already monopolized all
the sins, as well as errors, in the nation? Is Methodism the
only sin, or the only fatal or spreading sin, to be found
within the Bills of Mortality? Have two thousand (or more)
“ambassadors of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of
God” no other business than to guard, warn, arm, and fortify
their people against this O my Lord, if this engrosses
their time and strength, (as it must, if they follow your
Lordship's instructions,) they will not give an account with
joy, either of themselves or of their flock, in that day !
18. Your Lordship seems in some measure sensible of this,
when you very gently condemn their opinion, who think the
Methodists “might better be disregarded and despised, than
taken notice of and opposed, if it were not for the disturbance
they give to the parochial Ministers, and their unwarrantable
endeavours to seduce the people from their lawful Pastors.”
(Charge, p. 22.) The same complaint with which your Lord
ship opened your Charge: “They give shameful disturbances
to the parochial Clergy; they annoy the established ministry,
using very unwarrantable methods, first, to prejudice their
people against them, and then to seduce their flocks from
them.” (Ibid. page 4.)
Whether we seduce them or no, (which will be presently con
sidered,) I am sorry your Lordship should give any countenance
to that low, senseless, and now generally exploded slander, that
we do it for a maintenance. This your Lordship insinuates, by
applying to us those words of Bishop Sanderson: “And all
this to serve their own belly, to make a prey of the poor deluded
proselytes; for by this means the people fall unto them, and
thereout suck they no small advantage.” (Ibid. p. 15.) Your
Lordship cannot but know, that my Fellowship, and my bro
ther's Studentship, afford us more than sufficient for life and
godliness; especially for that manner of life which we choose,
whether out of ostentation or in sincerity.
19. But do we willingly “annoy the established ministry,” or
“give disturbance to the parochial Clergy?” My Lord, we do
not. We trust, herein, to have a conscience void of offence.
Nor do we designedly “prejudice their people against them.”
In this also our heart condemneth us not. But you “seduce
their flocks from them.” No, not even from those who feed
themselves, not the flock. All who hear us, attend the service
of the Church, at least as much as they did before. And for
this very thing are we reproached as bigots to the Church by
those of most other denominations.
Give me leave, my Lord, to say, you have mistook and mis
represented this whole affair from the top to the bottom. And
I am the more concerned to take notice of this, because so many
have fallen into the same mistake. It is indeed, and has been
from the beginning, the Tpotov Wrevôos, “the capital blunder,”
of our bitterest adversaries; though how they can advance it,
I see not, without “loving,” if not “making, a lie.” It is not
our care, endeavour, or desire, to proselyte any from one man
to another; or from one Church, (so called,) from one congre
gation or society, to another; (we would not move a finger to
do this, to make ten thousand such proselytes;) but from
darkness to light, from Belial to Christ, from the power of
Satan to God. Our one aim is, to proselyte sinners to repent
ance; the servants of the devil, to serve the living and true
God. If this be not done, in fact, we will stand condemned:
not as well-meaning fools, but as devils incarnate. But if it
be, if the instances glare in the face of the sun, if they increase
daily, maugre all the power of earth and hell; then, my Lord,
neither you nor any man beside (let me use great plainness of
speech) can “oppose” and “fortify people against us,” with
out being found even “to fight against God.”
20. I would fain set this point in a clearer light. Here are,
in and near Moorfields, ten thousand poor souls for whom
Christ died, rushing headlong into hell. Is Dr. Bulkely, the
parochial Minister, both willing and able to stop them? If
so, let it be done, and I have no place in these parts. I go
and call other sinners to repentance. But if, after all he has
done, and all he can do, they are still in the broad way to
destruction, let me see if God will put a word even in my
mouth. True, I am a poor worm that of myself can do nothing.
But if God sends by whomsoever he will send, his word shall
not return empty. All the messenger of God asks is, Aos Trov
aro; (no help of man ) cat ym cuvmao." The arm of the
Lord is revealed. The lion roars, having the prey plucked out
of his teeth. And “there is joy in the presence of the angels
of God, over” more than “one sinner that repenteth.”
21. Is this any annoyance to the parochial Minister? Then
what manner of spirit is he of? Does he look on this part of
his flock as lost, because they are found of the great Shepherd?
My Lord, great is my boldness toward you. You speak of the
consequences of our doctrines. You seem well pleased with the
success of your endeavours against them, because, you say, they
“have pernicious consequences, are big with pernicious influ
ences upon practice, dangerous to religion and the souls of men.”
(Ibid. pp. 8, 22.) In answer to all this, I appeal to plain fact. I
say once more, “What have been the consequences (Iwould not
speak, but I dare not refrain) of the doctrines I have preached
for nine years last past? By the fruits shall ye know those of
whom I speak; even the cloud of witnesses, who at this hour
experience the gospel which I preach to be the power of God
* Give me a point on which to stand, and I will move the world.--EDIT.
unto salvation. The habitual drunkard that was, is now tem
perate in all things; the whoremonger now flees fornication;
he that stole, steals no more, but works with his hands; he
that cursed or swore, perhaps at every sentence, has now
learned to serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with
reverence; those formerly enslaved to various habits of sin are
now brought to uniform habits of holiness. These are demon
strable facts; I can name the men, with their places of abode.
One of them was an avowed Atheist for many years; some were
Jews; aconsiderable number Papists; the greatest part of them
as much strangers to the form, as to the power, of godliness.”
My Lord, can you deny these facts? I will make whatever
proof of them you shall require. But if the facts be allowed,
who can deny the doctrines to be, in substance, the gospel of
Christ? “For is there any other name under heaven given to
men, whereby they may thus be saved?” or is there any other
word that thus “commendeth itself to every man’s conscience
in the sight of God?”
22. But I must draw to a conclusion. Your Lordship has,
without doubt, had some success in opposing this doctrine.
Very many have, by your Lordship’s unwearied endeavours,
been deterred from hearing at all; and have thereby probably
escaped the being seduced into holiness, have lived and died
in their sins. My Lord, the time is short. I am past the noon
of life, and my remaining years flee away as a shadow. Your
Lordship is old and full of days, having past the usual age of
man. It cannot, therefore, be long before we shall both drop
this house of earth, and stand naked before God: No, nor
before we shall see the great white throne coming down from
heaven, and Him that sitteth thereon. On his left hand shall
be those who are shortly to dwell in everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels. In that number will be all who
died in their sins; and, among the rest, those whom you pre
served from repentance. Will you then rejoice in your success?
The Lord God grant it may not be said in that hour, “These
have perished in their iniquity; but their blood I require at
thy hands !” I am
Your Lordship's dutiful son and servant,
LoNDoN