Rules of the Band Societies
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1738
Author: John Wesley
---
THE design of our meeting is, to obey that command of God,
“Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another,
that ye may be healed.”
To this end, we intend,--
1. To meet once a week, at the least.
2. To come punctually at the hour appointed, without some
extraordinary reason.
3. To begin (those of us who are present) exactly at the
hour, with singing or prayer.
4. To speak each of us in order, freely and plainly, the true
state of our souls, with the faults we have committed in
thought, word, or deed, and the temptations we have felt, since
our last meeting.
5. To end every meeting with prayer, suited to the state of
each person present.
6. To desire some person among us to speak his own state
first, and then to ask the rest, in order, as many and as search
ing questions as may be, concerning their state, sins, and
temptations.
Some of the questions proposed to every one before he is
admitted among us may be to this effect:--
v/ 1. Have you the forgiveness of your sins?
2. Have you peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ?
3. Have you the witness of God’s Spirit with your spirit,
that you are a child of God?
v. 4. Is the love of God shed abroad in your heart?
5. Has no sin, inward or outward, dominion over you?
v. 6. Do you desire to be told of your faults?
7. Do you desire to be told of all your faults, and that plain
and home?-
v-8. Do you desire that every one of us should tell you, from
time to time, whatsoever is in his heart concerning you?
9. Consider ! Do you desire we should tell you whatsoever
we think, whatsoever we fear, whatsoever we hear, concerning
you?
10. Do you desire that, in doing this, we should come as
close as possible, that we should cut to the quick, and search
your heart to the bottom?
11. Is it your desire and design to be on this, and all other
occasions, entirely open, so as to speak everything that is in
your heart without exception, without disguise, and without
reserve?
Any of the preceding questions may be asked as often as
occasion offers; the four following at every meeting:--
1. What known sins have you committed since our last
meeting?
2. What temptations have you met with?
3. How were you delivered?
4. What have you thought, said, or done, of which you
doubt whether it be sin or not?
You are supposed to have the faith that “overcometh the
world.” To you, therefore, it is not grievous, -
I. Carefully to abstain from doing evil; in particular, -
1. Neither to buy nor sell anything at all on the Lord’s day.
2. To taste no spirituous liquor, no dram of any kind, unless
prescribed by a Physician.
3. To be at a word both in buying and selling.
4. To pawn nothing, no, not to save life.
5. Not to mention the fault of any behind his back, and to
stop those short that do.
6. To wear no needless ornaments, such as rings, ear-rings,
necklaces, lace, ruffles.
7. To use no needless self-indulgence, such as taking snuff
or tobacco, unless prescribed by a Physician.
II. Zealously to maintain good works; in particular,--
1. To give alms of such things as you possess, and that to
the uttermost of your power.
2. To reprove all that sin in your sight, and that in love and
meekness of wisdom. .
3. To be patterns of diligence and frugality, of self-denial,
and taking up the cross daily.
III. Constantly to attend on all the ordinances of God; in
particular, -
1. To be at church and at the Lord's table every week, and
at every public meeting of the Bands.
2. To attend the ministry of the word every morning, unless
distance, business, or sickness prevent.
3. To use private prayer every day; and family prayer, if
you are at the head of a family.
4. To read the Scriptures, and meditate therein, at every
vacant hour. And,--
5. To observe, as days of fasting or abstinence, all Fridays