A Letter to the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Gloucester
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 9 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
My Lord,
YoUR Lordship well observes, “To employ buffoonery in the
service of religion is to violate the majesty of truth, and to
deprive it of a fair hearing. To examine, men must be serious.”
* Such as escaped my notice; or such as may be placed to the account of human
infirmity.
(Preface, p. 11.) I will endeavour to be so in all the following
pages; and the rather, not only because I am writing to a
person who is so far, and in so many respects, my superior,
but also because of the importance of the subject: For is the
question only, What I am? a madman, or a man in his senses?
a knave, or an honest man? No; this is only brought in by
way of illustration. The question is, of the office and opera
tion of the Holy Spirit; with which the doctrine of the new
birth, and indeed the whole of real religion, is connected.
On a subject of so deep concern, I desire to be serious as
death. But, at the same time, your Lordship will permit me
to use great plainness. And this I am the more emboldened
to do, because by naming my name, your Lordship, as it were,
condescends to meet me on even ground.
I shall consider, First, what your Lordship advances con
cerning me: and, Then, what is advanced concerning the
operations of the Holy Spirit.
I. First. Concerning me. It is true I am here dealing in
crambe repetita,” reciting objections which have been urged
and answered a hundred times. But as your Lordship is pleased
to repeat them again, I am obliged to repeat the answers.
Your Lordship begins: “If the false prophet pretend to
some extraordinary measure of the Spirit, we are directed to
try that spirit by James iii. 17.” (Page 117.) I answer, 1. (as
I have done many times before,) I do not pretend to any
extraordinary measure of the Spirit. I pretend to no other
measure of it than may be claimed by every Christian Minis
ter. 2. Where are we directed to “try Prophets” by this
text? How does it appear that it was given for any such
purpose? It is certain we may try Christians hereby, whether
they are real or pretended ones; but I know not that either
St. James, or any other inspired writer, gives us the least
hint of trying Prophets thereby.
Your Lordship adds, “In this rule or direction for the trial
of spirits, the marks are to be applied only negatively. The
man in whom they are not found hath not the “wisdom from
above.’ But we are not to conclude, that he has it in whom any
or all of them are found.” (Page 118.) We are not to conclude
that he is a Prophet, for the Apostle says nothing about Pro
phets; but may we not conclude, the man in whom all these are
* Thus translated from Juvenal by Gifford:--
“The selfsame subject, in the selfsame words.”--EDIT.
found has “the wisdom from above?” Surely we may; for
these are the essential parts of that wisdom; and can he have
all the parts and not have the whole?
Is not this enough to show, that the Apostle is here giving
“a set of marks,” not “to detect impostor-prophets,” but
impostor-Christians? those that impose either upon themselves
or others, as if they were Christians when they are not?
In what follows, I shall simply consider the argument,
without directly addressing your Lordship.
“Apply these marks to the features of modern fanatics,
especially Mr. John Wesley. He has laid claim to almost
every apostolic gift, in as full and ample a manner as they
were possessed of old.” (Page 119.)
The miraculous gifts bestowed upon the Apostles are
enumerated in two places: First, Mark xvi. 17, 18: “In my
name they shall cast out devils; they shall speak with new
tongues; they shall take up serpents; if they drink any
deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on
the sick, and they shall recover.” Second, 1 Cor. xii. 8-10:
“To one is given the word of wisdom; to another the word
of knowledge; to another faith; to another the gifts of heal
ing; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy;
to another the discernment of spirits; to another tongues; to
another the interpretation of tongues.”
Do I lay claim to almost every one of these “in as full and
ample a manner as they were possessed of old?”
Five of them are enumerated in the former catalogue; to
three of which--speaking with new tongues, taking up ser
pents, drinking deadly things--it is not even pretended I lay
any claim at all. In the latter, nine are enumerated. And
as to seven of these, none has yet seen good to call me in
question;-miraculous wisdom, or knowledge, or faith, pro
phecy, discernment of spirits, strange tongues, and the inter
pretation of tongues. What becomes then of the assertion,
that I lay “claim to almost every one of them in the most
full and ample manner?”
Do I lay claim to any one of them? To prove that I do,
my own words are produced, extracted from an account of the
occurrences of about sixteen years.
I shall set them down naked and unadorned: 1. “May 13,
1740. The devil stirred up his servants to make all the noise
they could.” 2. “May 3, 1741. I explained, to a vast mul
titude of people, ‘What doth the Lord require of thee, but to
do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?”
The devil’s children fought valiantly for their master, that his
kingdom should not be destroyed. And many stones fell on my
right hand and my left.” 3. “April 1, 1740. Some or other
of the children of Belial had laboured to disturb us several
nights before. Now all the street was filled with people, shout
ing, cursing, swearing, and ready to swallow the ground with
rage.” (Page 120.)4. “June 27, 1747. I found only one person
among them who knew the love of God, before my brother
came. No wonder the devil was so still; ‘for his goods were in
peace.’” 5. “April 29, 1752. I preached at Durham to a quiet,
stupid congregation.” (Page 121.) 6. “May 9, 1740. I was a
little surprised at some who were buffeted of Satan in an un
usual manner, by such a spirit of laughter as they could in
nowise resist. I could scarce have believed the account they
gave me, had I not known the same thing ten or eleven years
ago, when both my brother and I were seized in the same man
ner.” (If any man call this hysterics, I am not concerned:
I think and let think.) 7. “May 21, 1740. In the evening
such a spirit of laughter was among us, that many were much
offended. But the attention of all was soon fixed on poor
L S ,whom we all knew to be no dissembler. One so
violently and variously torn of the evil one did I never see be
fore. Sometimes she laughed till almost strangled; then broke
out into cursing and blaspheming. At last she faintly called
on Christ to help her; and the violence of her pangs ceased.”
(Let any who please impute this likewise to hysterics: Only
permit me to think otherwise.) 8. “May 17, 1740. I found
more and more undeniable proofs, that we have need to
watch and pray every moment. Outward trials, indeed, were
now removed: But so much the more did inward trials abound;
and “if one member suffered, all the members suffered with
it.” So strange a sympathy did I never observe before;
whatever considerable temptation fell on any one, unaccount
ably spreading itself to the rest, so that exceeding few were
able to escape it.” (Pages 122, 123.)
I know not what these eight quotations prove, but that I
believe the devil still variously tempts and troubles good men;
while he “works with energy in the children of disobedience.”
Certainly they do not prove that I lay claim to any of the pre
ccding gifts. Let us see whether any more is proved by the
ten next quotations: 1. “So many living witnesses hath
God given, that his hand is still stretched out to heal,”
(namely, the souls of sinners, as the whole paragraph fixes
the sense,) “ and that signs and wonders are even now
wrought” (page 124) (namely, in the conversion of the
greatest sinners). 2. “Among the poor colliers of Placey, Jo.
Lane, then nine or ten years old, was one of the first that found
peace with God.” (Ibid.) 3. “Mrs. Nowers said her little
son appeared to have a continual fear of God, and an awful
sense of his presence. A few days since, she said, he broke
out into prayers aloud, and said, ‘I shall go to heaven soon.’”
This child, when he began to have the fear of God, was, as
his parents said, just three years old. 4. I did receive that
“account of the young woman of Manchester from her own
mouth.” But I pass no judgment on it, good or bad; nor,
5. On “the trance,” (page 126) as her mother called it, of
S.T., neither denying nor affirming the truth of it. 6. “You
deny that God does work these effects; at least, that he works
them in this manner: I affirm both. I have seen very many
persons changed in a moment, from the spirit of fear, horror,
despair, to the spirit of love, joy, and praise. In several of
them this change was wrought in a dream, or during a strong
representation to their mind of Christ, either on the cross, or
in glory.” (Page 127.)
“But here the symptoms of grace and of perdition are inter
woven and confounded with one another.” (Page 128.) No.
Though light followed darkness, yet they were not interwoven,
much less confounded with each other. 7. “But some imputed
the work to the force of imagination, or even to the delusion of
the devil.” (Ibid.) They did so; which made me say, 8. “I
fear we have grieved the Spirit of the jealous God, by question
ing his work.” (Ibid.) 9. “Yet he says himself, ‘These symp
toms I can no more impute to any natural cause, than to the
Spirit of God. I make no doubt, it was Satan tearing them, as
they were coming to Christ.’” (Page 129.) But these symp
toms, and the work mentioned before, are wholly different things.
The work spoken of is the conversion of sinners to God; these
symptoms are cries and bodily pain. The very next instance
makes this plain. 10. “I visited a poor old woman. Her
trials had been uncommon; inexpressible agonies of mind,
joined with all sorts of bodily pain; not, it seemed, from any
natural cause, but the direct operation of Satan.” (Page 130.)
Neither do any of those quotations prove that I lay claim
to any miraculous gift.
“Such was the evangelic state of things when Mr. Wesley
first entered on this ministry; who, seeing himself surrounded
with subjects so harmoniously disposed, thus triumphantly
exults.” To illustrate this, let us add the date: “Such was
the evangelic state of things, August 9, 1750; ” (on that day,
I preached that sermon;) “when Mr. Wesley first entered on
this ministry.” Nay, that was in the year 1738. So I
triumphed, because I saw what would be twelve years after.
Let us see what the ten next quotations prove. 1. “In
applying these words, ‘I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance, my soul was so enlarged, that me
thought I could have cried out, (in another sense than poor
vain Archimedes,) ‘Give me where to stand, and I will shake
the earth.’” (Page 130.) I meant neither more nor less
(though I will not justify the use of so strong an expression)
than, I was so deeply penetrated with a sense of the love of
God to sinners, that it seemed, if I could have declared it to
all the world, they could not but be moved thereby.
“Here then was a scene well prepared for a good actor,
and excellently fitted up for the part he was to play.” (Page
131.) But how came so good an actor to begin playing the
part twelve years before the scene was fitted up?
“He sets out with declaring his mission. 2. ‘I cried
aloud, All things are ready : come ye to the marriage. I
then delivered my message.’” And does not every Minister
do the same whenever he preaches?
But how is this? “He sets out with declaring his mis
sion.” Nay, but this was ten years after my setting out.
3. “My heart was not wholly resigned. Yet I know he
heard my voice.” (Page 132.) 4. “The longer I spoke, the
more strength I had; till at twelve, I was as one refreshed with
wine.” (Page 133.) 5. “I explained the nature of inward reli
gion, words flowing upon me faster than I could speak.” (Ibid.)
6. “I intended to have given an exhortation to the society.
But as soon as we met, the Spirit of supplication fell upon us,
(on the congregation as well as me,) so that I could hardly do
anything but pray and give thanks.” (Ibid.) I believe every
true Christian may experience all that is contained in these
three instances. 7. “The Spirit of prayer was so poured upon
us all, that we could only speak to God.” (Ibid.) 8. “Many
were seated on a wall, which, in the middle of the sermon, fell
down; but not one was hurt at all. Nor was there any inter
ruption, either of my speaking, or of the attention of the hear
ers.” (Page 134.) 9. “The mob had just broke open the doors,
and while they burst in at one door, we walked out at the other.
Nor did one man take any notice of us, though we were within
five yards of each other.” (Page 135.) The fact was just so.
I do not attempt to account for it; because I cannot. 10.
“The next miracle was on his friends.” They were no friends
of mine. I had seen few of them before in my life. Neither
do I say or think it was any miracle at all, that they were all
“silent while I spake; ” or that “the moment I had done,
the chain fell off, and they all began talking at once.”
Do any or all of these quotations prove, that I “lay claim
to almost every miraculous gift?”
Will the eight following quotations prove any more?
1. “Some heard perfectly well on the side of the opposite hill,
which was sevenscore yards from the place whereIstood.” (Ibid.)
I believe they did, as it was a calm day, and the hill rose gra
dually like a theatre. 2. “What I here aver is the naked fact.
Let every one account for it as he sees good. My horse was
exceeding lame; and my head ached much. I thought, Can
not God heal man or beast by means or without 7 Immedi
ately my weariness and headache ceased, and my horse’s lame
ness in the same instant.” (Page 136.) It was so; and I
believe thousands of serious Christians have found as plain
answers to prayer as this. 3. William Kirkman’s case proves
only, that God does what pleases him; not that I make myself
either “a great saint or a great Physician.” (Page 137.) 4.
“R.A. was freed at once, without any human means, from a
distemper naturally incurable.” (Page 138.) He was; but it
was before I knew him. So, what is that to me? 5. “I found
Mr. Lunell in a violent fever. He revived the moment he
saw me, and began to recover from that time. Perhaps for this
also was I sent.” (Ibid.) I mean, Perhaps this was one end
for which the providence of God brought me thither at that
time. 6. “In the evening, I called upon Ann Calcut. She
had been speechless for some time. But almost as soon as we
began to pray, God restored her speech. And from that hour
the fever left her.” 7. “I visited several ill of the spotted
fever, which had been extremely mortal. But God had said,
* Hitherto shalt thou come.’ I believe there was not one with
whom we were, but he recovered.” (Page 139.) 8. “Mr.
Meyrick had been speechless and senseless for some time. A
few of us joined in prayer. Before we had done, his sense and
his speech returned. Others may account for this by natural
causes. I believe this is the power of God.” (Ibid.)
But what does all this prove? Not that I claim any gift above
other men; but only that I believe God now hears and answers
prayer, even beyond the ordinary course of nature: Otherwise,
the Clerk was in the right, who, in order to prevent the fana
ticism of his Rector, told him, “Sir, you should not pray for
fair weather yet; for the moon does not change till Saturday.”
While the two accounts (pp. 143, 146) which are next
recited lay before me, a venerable old Clergyman calling upon
me, I asked him, “Sir, would you advise me to publish these
strange relations, or not?” He answered, “Are you sure of
the facts?” I replied, “As sure as that I am alive.”
“Then,” said he, “publish them in God’s name, and be not
careful about the event.”
The short of the case is this: Two young women were tor
mented of the devil in an uncommon manner. Several
serious persons desired my brother and me to pray with them.
We, with many others, did; and they were delivered. But
where, meantime, were the “exorcisms in form, according to
the Roman fashion ?” I never used them : I never saw
them: I know nothing about them.
“Such were the blessings which Mr. W. distributed among
his friends. For his enemies he had in store the judgments
of Heaven.” (Page 144.) Did I then ever distribute, or
profess to distribute, these? Do I claim any such power?
This is the present question. Let us calmly consider the
eight quotations brought to prove it.
1. “I preached at Darlaston, late a den of lions. But the
fiercest of them God has called away, by a train of surprising
strokes.” (Ibid.) But not by me: I was not there. 2. “I preached
at R., late a place of furious riot and persecution; but quiet
and calm, since the bitter Rector is gone to give an account of
himself to God.” (Page 145.) 3. “Hence we rode to T-n,
where the Minister was slowly recovering from a violent fit of
the palsy, with which he was struck immediately after he had
been preaching a virulent sermon against the Methodists.”
(Page 145.) 4. “The case of Mr. W n was dreadful
indeed, and too notorious to be denied.” (Ibid.) 5. “One of
the chief of those who came to make the disturbance on the
first instant hanged himself.” (Page 146.) 6. “I was quite
surprised when I heard Mr. R. preach; that soft, smooth,
tuneful voice, which he so often employed to blaspheme the
work of God, was lost, without hope of recovery.” (Ibid.)
7. “Mr. C. spoke so much in favour of the rioters, that they
were all discharged. A few days after, walking over the same
field, he dropped down, and spoke no more.” (Page 147.)
And what is the utmost that can be inferred from all these
passages? That I believe these things to have been judg
ments. What if I did? To believe these things to have been
judgments is one thing; to claim a power of inflicting judg
ments is another. If, indeed, I believe things to be judg
ments which are not, I am to blame. But still this is not
“claiming any miraculous gift.”
But “you cite one who forbid your speaking to some dying
criminals, to answer for their souls at the judgment-seat of
Christ.” (Ibid.) I do; but, be this right or wrong, it is not
“claiming a power to inflict judgments.”
“Yes, it is: For these judgments are fulminated with the
air of one who had the divine vengeance at his disposal.”
(Page 147.) I think not: And I believe all impartial men
will be of the same mind.
“These are some of the extraordinary gifts which Mr. W.
claims.” (Page 149.) I claim no extraordinary gift at all;
nor has anything to the contrary been proved yet, so much as
in a single instance.
“We come now to the application of this sovereign test,
James iii. 17.” But let us see that we understand it first. I
beg leave to consider the whole: “Who is a wise and know
ing man among you? Let him show his wisdom,” as well as
his faith, “by his works,” not by words only. “But if ye
have bitter zeal and strife in your heart, do not glory and lie
against the truth; ” as if any such zeal, anything contrary to
love, could consist with true wisdom. “This wisdom de
scendeth not from above; but is earthly, sensual, devilish :
For where bitter zeal and strife are, there is confusion and
every evil work. But the wisdom which is from above,”
which every one that hath is a real Christian, and he only,
--“is first pure,” free from all that is earthly, sensual, devil
ish: “then peaceable,” benign, loving, making peace;
“gentle,” soft, mild, yielding, not morose, or sour; “easy to
be entreated,” to be persuaded or convinced, not stubborn,
self-willed, or self-conceited; “full of mercy,” of tenderness
and compassion; “and good fruits,” both in the heart and
life. Two of these are immediately specified; “without par
tiality,” loving and doing good to all, without respect of per
sons; “and without hypocrisy,” sincere, frank, open.
I desire to be tried by this test. I try myself by it con
tinually: Not, indeed, whether I am a Prophet, (for it has
nothing to do with this,) but whether I am a Christian.
I. The present question then is, (not what is Mr. Law, or
what are the Moravians, but) what is John Wesley? And,
(1.) Is he pure or not? “Not pure; for he separates rea
son from grace.” (Page 156.) A wonderful proof! But I
deny the fact. I never did separate reason from grace. “Yes,
you do; for your own words are, ‘The points we chiefly in
sisted on were four: (1.) That orthodoxy, or right opinion, is
at best but a very slender part of religion; if it can be
allowed to be any part of it at all.’” (Page 157.)
After premising that it is our bounden duty to labour after
a right judgment in all things, as a wrong judgment naturally
leads to wrong practice, I say again, right opinion is at best
but a very slender part of religion, (which properly and di
rectly consists in right tempers, words, and actions,) and fre
quently it is no part of religion. For it may be where there
is no religion at all; in men of the most abandoned lives;
yea, in the devil himself.
And yet this does not prove that I “separate reason from
grace; ” that I “discard reason from the service of religion.”
I do continually “employ it to distinguish between right and
wrong opinions.” I never affirmed “this distinction to be of
little consequence,” or denied “the gospel to be a reasonable
service.” (Page 158.)
But “the Apostle Paul considered right opinions as a full
third part, at least, of religion. For he says, “The fruit of the
Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth. By
goodness is meant the conduct of particulars to the whole,
and consists in habits of social virtue; and this refers to
Christian practice. By righteousness is meant the conduct
of the whole to particulars, and consists in the gentle use of
church authority; and this refers to Christian discipline. By
truth is meant the conduct of the whole, and of particulars
to one another, and consists in orthodoxy or right opinion;
and this refers to Christian doctrine.” (Page 159.)
My objections to this account are, First, It contradicts St.
Paul; Secondly, It contradicts itself.
First. It contradicts St. Paul. It fixes a meaning upon
his words, foreign both to the text and context. The plain
sense of the text, taken in connexion with the context, is no
other than this: (Eph. v. 9:) “The fruit of the Spirit”
(rather, “of the light,” which Bengelius proves to be the
true reading, opposite to “the unfruitful works of darkness,”
mentioned verse 11) “is,” consists, “in all goodness, kind
ness, tender-heartedness,” (iv. 32,)--opposite to “bitterness,
wrath, anger, clamour, evil-speaking; ” (verse 31;) “in all
righteousness,” rendering unto all their dues,--opposite to
“stealing; ” (verse 28;) “ and in all truth,” veracity, sin
cerity,-opposite to “lying.” (Verse 25.)
Secondly. That interpretation contradicts itself; and that
in every article. For, 1. If by “goodness” be meant “the
conduct of particulars to the whole,” then it does not consist
in habits of social virtue. For social virtue regulates the
conduct of particulars, not so properly to the whole as to
each other. 2. If by “righteousness” be meant “the con
duct of the whole to particulars,” then it cannot consist in
the gentleness of Church authority; unless Church Govern
ors are the whole Church, or the Parliament the whole nation.
3. If by “truth” be meant “the conduct of the whole, and
of particulars to one another,” then it cannot possibly con
sist in orthodoxy or right opinion. For opinion, right or
wrong, is not conduct: They differ toto genere. If, then, it
be orthodoxy, it is not “the conduct of the governors and
governed toward each other.” If it be their conduct toward
each other, it is not orthodoxy.
Although, therefore, it be allowed that right opinions are
a great help, and wrong opinions a great hinderance, to reli
gion, yet, till stronger proof be brought against it, that pro
position remains unshaken, “Right opinions are a slender
part of religion, if any part of it at all.” (Page 160.)
“(As to the affair of Abbé Paris, whoever will read over with
calmness and impartiality but one volume of Monsieur Mont
geron, will then be a competent judge. Meantime I would just
observe, that if these miracles were real, they strike at the
root of the whole Papal authority; as having been wrought in
direct opposition to the famous Bull Unigenitus.)” (Page 161.)
Yet I do not say, “Errors in faith have little to do with
religion; ” or that they are “no let or impediment to the
Holy Spirit.” (Page 162.) But still it is true, that “God,
generally speaking, begins his work at the heart.” (Ibid.)
Men usually feel desires to please God, before they know how
to please him. Their heart says, “What must I do to be
saved?” before they understand the way of salvation.
But see “the character he gives his own saints ‘The
more I converse with this people, the more I am amazed.
That God hath wrought a great work is manifest, by saving
many sinners from their sins. And yet the main of them are
not able to give a rational account of the plainest principles
of religion.’” They were not able then, as there had not
been time to instruct them. But the case is far different now.
Again: Did I “give this character,” even then, of the
people called Methodists, in general? No, but of the people
of a particular town in Ireland, where nine in ten of the in
habitants are Romanists.
“Nor is the observation confined to the people. He had
made a proselyte of Mr. D., Vicar of B. And, to show he
was no discredit to his master, he gives him this character:
‘He seemed to stagger at nothing, though as yet his under
standing is not opened.’” (Page 162.)
Mr. D. was never a proselyte of mine; nor did I ever see
him before or since. I endeavoured to show him that we
are justified by faith. And he did not object; though nei
ther did he understand.
“But in the first propagation of religion, God began with
the understanding, and rational conviction won the heart.”
(Page 163.) Frequently, but not always. The jailor's heart
was touched first, then he understood what he must do to
be saved. In this respect then there is nothing new in the
present work of God. So the lively story from Moliere is
just nothing to the purpose.
In drawing the parallel between the work God has wrought
in England and in America, I do not so much as “insinuate
that the understanding has nothing to do in the work.”
(Page 165.) Whoever is engaged therein will find full em
ployment for all the understanding which God has given him.
“On the whole, therefore, we conclude, that wisdom which
divests the Christian faith of its truth, and the test of it, reason,
and resolves all religion into spiritual mysticism and ecstatic
raptures, cannot be the wisdom from above, whose character
istic is purity.” (Page 166.)
Perhaps so, but I do not “divest faith either of truth or rea
son:” much less do I resolve all into “spiritual mysticism and
ecstatic raptures.” Therefore suppose purity here meant sound
doctrine, (which it no more means than it does a sound consti
tution,) still it touches not me, who, for anything that has yet
been said, may teach the soundest doctrine in the world.
(2.) “Our next business is to apply the other marks to these
pretending sectaries. The First of these, purity, respects the
nature of the “wisdom from above,” or, in other words, the doc
trine taught.” (Page 167.) Not in the least. It has no more
to do with “doctrine,” than the whole text has with “Pro
phets.” “All the rest concern the manner of teaching.”
Neither can this be allowed. They no farther concern either
teaching or teachers, than they concern all mankind.
But to proceed: “Methodism signifies only the manner of
preaching; not either an old or a new religion; it is the manner
in which Mr. W. and his followers attempt to propagate the
plain old religion.” (Page 168.) And is not this sound doctrine?
Is this “spiritual mysticism and ecstatic raptures?”
“Of all men, Mr. W. should best know the meaning of the
term; since it was not a nick-name imposed on the sect by its
enemies, but an appellation of honour bestowed upon it by
themselves.” In answer to this, I need only transcribe what
was published twenty years ago:
“Since the name first came abroad into the world, many
have been at a loss to know what a Methodist is; what are the
principles and practice of those who are commonly called by
that name; and what are the distinguishing marks of the sect,
which “is everywhere spoken against.”
“And it being generally believed that I was able to give the
clearest account of these things, (as having been one of the first
to whom the name was given, and the person by whom the rest
were supposed to be directed,) I have been called upon, in all
manner of ways, and with the utmost earnestness, so to do. I
yield at last to the continued importunity both of friends and
enemies; and do now give the clearest accornt I can, in the
presence of the Lord, the Judge of heaven and earth, of the
principles and practice whereby those who are called Metho
dists are distinguished from other men.
“I say, those who are called Methodists; for, let it be well
observed, that this is not a name which they take upon them
selves, but one fixed on them by way of reproach, without their
approbation or consent. It was first given to three or four young
men at Oxford, by a Student of Christ's Church; either in allu
sion to the ancient sect of Physicians, (so called from their
teaching that almost all diseases might be cured by a specific
method of diet and exercise,) or from their observing a more
regular method of study and behaviour than was usual with
those of their age and station.” (Preface to “the Character of
a Methodist.”)
I need only add, that this nick-name was imposed upon us
before “this manner of preaching” had a being; yea, at a
time when I thought it as lawful to cut a throat, as to preach
out of a church.
“Why then will Mr. W. so grossly misrepresent his adver
saries, as to say, that, when they speak against Methodism, they
speak against the plain, old doctrine of the Church of Eng
land?” (Tract, p. 169.) This is no misrepresentation. Many
of our adversaries, all over the kingdom, speak against us, eo
nomine,” for preaching these doctrines, justification by faith in
particular.
However, a “fanatic manner of preaching, though it were the
doctrine of an Apostle, may do more harm to society at least,
than reviving old heresies, or inventing new. It tends to bewilder
the imaginations of some, to inflame the passions of others,
and to spread disorder and confusion through the whole com
munity.” (Page 169.) I would gladly have the term defined.
What is a “fanatic manner of preaching?” Is it field-preach
ing? But this has no such effect, even among the wildest of
men. This has not “bewildered the imagination” even of
the Kingswood colliers, or “inflamed their passions.” It has
not spread disorder or confusion among them, but just the
contrary. From the time it was heard in that chaos,
Confusion heard the voice, and wild uproar
Stood ruled, and order from disorder sprung.
“But St. James, who delivers the test for the trial of these
men's pretensions,” (the same mistake still,) “unquestionably
* On this account.--EIDT.
thought a fanatic spirit did more mischief in the mode of
teaching, than in the matter taught; since of six marks, one
only concerns doctrine, all the rest the manner of the Teacher.”
(Page 170.) Nay, all six concern doctrine, as much as one.
The truth is, they have nothing to do either with doctrine or
manner.
“From St. Paul’s words, ‘Be instantin season, out of season,’
he infers more than they will bear; and misapplies them into
the bargain.” (Page 171.) When and where? I do not remem
ber applying them at all.
“When seasonable times are appointed for holy offices, to
fly to unseasonable is factious.” (Page 172.) But it is not
clear, that five in the morning, and seven in the evening, (our
usual times,) are unseasonable.
2. We come now directly to the second article. “‘The wis
dom from above is peaceable. But the propagation of Method
ism has occasioned many and great violations of peace. In order
to know where the blame hereof lies, let us inquire the temper
which ‘makes for peace. For we may be assured the fault
lies not there, where such a temper is found.” (Page 173.) Thus
far we are quite agreed. “Now, the temper which makes for
peace is prudence.” This is one of the tempers which make
for peace; others are kindness, meekness, patience. “This
our Lord recommended by his own example.” (Pages 174
--177.) “But this Mr. W. calls, ‘the mystery of iniquity,
and the offspring of hell.’” (Page 178.) No, not this; not
the prudence which our Lord recommends. I call that so, and
that only, which the world, the men who know not God, style
Christian prudence. By this I mean subtlety, craft, dissimula
tion; study to please man rather than God; the art of trim
ming between God and the world, of serving God and mam
mon. Will any serious man defend this? And this only do I
condemn.
But you “say, ‘Good sort of men, as they are called, are
‘the bane of all religion.” (Pages 179, 180.) And I think
so. By this “good sort of men,” I mean, persons who have a
iking to, but no sense of, religion; no real fear or love of God;
no truly Christian tempers. “These steal away the little zeal
he has, that is, persuade him to be peaceable.” No ; persuade
me to be like themselves,--without love either to God or man
“Again, speaking of one, he says, “Indulging himself in
o
-
harmless company,’” (vulgarly so called,) “he first made ship
wreck of his zeal, then of his faith. In this I think he is right.
The zeal and faith of a fanatic are such exact tallies, that nei
ther can exist alone. They came into the world together, to
disturb society and dishonour religion.”
By zeal, I mean the flame of love, or fervent love to God
and man; by faith, the substance or confidence of things hoped
for, the evidence of things not seen. Is this the zeal and faith
of a fanatic? Then St. Paul was the greatest fanatic on earth.
Did these come into the world to “disturb society and dis
honour religion?”
“On the whole, we find Mr. W., by his own confession,
entirely destitute of prudence. Therefore it must be ascribed
to the want of this, if his preaching be attended with tumult
and disorder.” (Page 181.) By his own confession ? Surely
no. This I confess, and this only: What is falsely called pru
dence, I abhor; but true prudence I love and admire.
However, “You set at nought the discipline of the Church,
by invading the province of the parochial Minister:” (Page
182:) Nay, if ever I preach at all, it must be in the province of
some parochial Minister. “By assembling in undue places,
and at unfit times.” I know of no times unfit for those who
assemble. And I believe Hannam Mount and Rose Green
were the most proper places under heaven for preaching to the
colliers in Kingswood. “By scurrilous invectives against the
Governors and Pastors of the National Church.” This is an
entire mistake. I dare not make any “scurrilous invectives”
against any man. “Insolencies of this nature provoke warm.
men to tumult.” But these insolencies do not exist. So that
whatever tumult either warm or cool men raise, I am not.
chargeable therewith.
“To know the true character of Methodism.” The present
point is, to know the true character of John Wesley. Now, in
order to know this, we need not inquire what others were before
he was born. All therefore that follows, of old Precisians,
Puritans, and Independents, may stand just as it is. (Pages
184-186.)
But “Mr. W. wanted to be persecuted.” (Page 187.) As
this is averred over and over, I will explain myself upon it,
once for all. I never desired or wanted to be persecuted.
Lives there who loves his pain?
I love and desire to “live peaceably with all men.” “But
persecution would not come at his call.” However, it came
uncalled; and, more than once or twice, it was not “mock
persecution.” It was not only the huzzas of the mob; showers
of stones are something more than huzzas. And whosoever
saw the mob either at Walsal or Cork, (to instance in no more,)
saw that they were not “in jest,” but in great earnest, eagerly
athirst, not for sport, (as you suppose,) but for blood.
But though I do not desire persecution, I expect it. I must,
if I believe St. Paul: “All that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution;” (2 Tim. iii. 12;) either sooner or
later, more or less, according to the wise providence of God.
But I believe, “all these things work together for good to them
that love God.” And from a conviction of this, they may even
rejoice when they are “persecuted for righteousness' sake.”
Yet, as I seldom “complain of ill treatment,” so I am never
“dissatisfied with good.” (Page 188.) But I often wonder at
it: And I once expressed my wonder nearly in the words of
the old Athenian: “What have we done, that the world
should be so civil to us?”
You conclude the head: “As he who persecutes is but the
tool of him that invites persecution,” (I know not who does)
“the crime finally comes home to him who set the rioter at
work.” (Page 191.) And is this all the proof that I am not
peaceable? Then let all men judge if the charge is made good.
3. “The next mark of the celestial wisdom is, it is ‘gentle,
and easy to be entreated;’ compliant and even obsequious to all
men.” And how does it appear that...I am wanting in this?
Why, he is “a severe condemner of his fellow-citizens, and a
severe exactor of conformity to his own observances.” Now, the
proof: (1) “He tells us this in the very appellation he assumes.”
(Page 192.) Nay, I never assumed it at all. (2.) But “you say,
‘Useless conversation is an abomination to the Lord.’ And
what is this, but to withstand St. Paul to the face?” Why, did
St. Paul join in or condemn useless conversation? I rather
think he reproves it. He condemns as oatpos Aoyos, “putrid,
stinking conversation,” all that is not good, all that is not “to
the use of edifying,” and meet to “ministergracetothehearers.”
(Eph. iv. 29.) (3.) Mr. Wesley “resolved never to laugh, nor to
speak a tittle of worldly things;” (page 198;)--“thoughothers
may, nay, must.” Pray add that, with the reason of my so
resolving, namely, that I expected to die in a few days. If I
expected it now, probably, I should resume the resolution.
But, be it as it may, this proves nothing against my being
both gentle, and easy to be entreated. (4) “He says, Mr.
G- was a clumsy, overgrown, hardfaced man.” (Page 194.)
So he was. And this was the best of him. I spare him much
in saying no more. But he is gone; let his ashes rest. (5)
“I heard a most miserable sermon, full of dull, senseless, im
probable lies.” It was so, from the beginning to the end. I
have seldom heard the like. (6.) “‘The persecution at
St. Ives’” (which ended before I came; what I saw I do not
term persecution) “‘was owing to the indefatigable labours
of Mr. H. and Mr. S., gentlemen worthy to be had in ever
lasting remembrance.’ Here he tells us, it is his purpose to
gibbet up the names of his two great persecutors to everlast
ing infamy.” (Page 195.) These gentlemen had occasioned
several innocent people to be turned out of their livelihood;
and others to be outraged in the most shocking manner, and
beat only not to death. My purpose is, by setting down their
names, to make others afraid so to offend. Yet I say still,
God forbid that I should rail, either at a Turk, infidel, or
heretic. But I will bring to light the actions of such Chris
tians, to be a warning to others. And all this I judge to be
perfectly consistent with “the spirit of meekness.” (Page 196.)
4. “The Fourth mark is, ‘full of mercy and good fruits.”
Let us inquire into the “mercy and good fruits’ of Mr. W.”
(Page 198.)
(1.) And, First: “He has no mercy on his opposers. They
pass with him under no other title, than that of the devil’s ser
vants, and the devil’s children.” (Ibid.) This is far from true.
Many have opposed and do oppose me still, whom I believe to
be children and servants of God. “We have seen him dis
patching the principal of these children of the devil, without
mercy, to their father.” (Page 199.) No, not one. This has
been affirmed over and over, but never proved yet. I fling
about no exterminating judgments of God; I call down no fire
from heaven. “But it would be for the credit of these new
saints, to distinguish between rage and zeal.” That is easily
done. Rage is furious fire from hell; zeal is loving fire from
heaven. (2.) “If what has been said above does not suffice,
turn again to Mr. W.’s Journals: ‘Mr. S., while he was speak
ing to the society against my brother and me, was struck raving
mad.’” (Page 200.) He was so, before a hundred witnesses;
though I was the last to believe it. “But, it seems, God is at
length entreated for him, and has restored him to a sound
mind.” And is my relating this fact an instance of “dooming
men to perdition?” (3.) “John Haydon cried aloud, ‘Let the
world see the just judgment of God.” (Page 201.) He did.
But let John Haydon look to that. It was he said so, not I.
(4.) “I was informed of an awful providence. A poor wretch, who
was here the last week, cursing and blaspheming, and labour
ing with all his might to hinder the word of God, had after
wards boasted, he would come again on Sunday, and no man
should stop his mouth then. But on Friday God laid his hand
upon him, and on Sunday he was buried.” (Page 202.) And
was not this an awful providence? But yet I do not doom
evenhim to perdition. (5.) “I saw a poor man, once joined
with us, who wanted nothing in this world. A day or two
before, he hanged himself, but was cut down before he was
dead. He has been crying out ever since, God had left him,
because he had left the children of God.” This was his asser
tion, not mine. I neither affirm nor deny it. (6.) The true
account of Lucy Godshall is this: “I buried the body of Lucy
Godshall. After pressing toward the mark for more than two
years, since she had known the pardoning love of God, she was
for some time weary, and faint in her mind, till I put her out
of the Bands. God blessed this greatly to her soul, so that, in
a short time, she was admitted again. Soon after, being at home,
she felt the love of God in an unusual manner poured into her
heart. She fell down upon her knees, and delivered up her
soul and body into the hands of God. In the instant, the use
of all her limbs was taken away, and she was in a burning fever.
For three days, she mightily praised God, and rejoiced in him
all the day long. She then cried out, ‘Now Satan hath desired
to have me, that he may sift me as wheat.’ Immediately dark
ness and heaviness fell upon her, which continued till Satur
day, the 4th instant. On Sunday the light shone again upon
her heart. About ten in the evening, one said to her, “Jesus
is ready to receive your soul. She said, ‘Amen Amen l’
closed her eyes, and died.” (Vol. I. p. 397.) Is this brought as
a proof of my inexorableness, or of my dooming men to
perdition? (7) “I found Nicholas Palmer in great weakness of body,
and heaviness of spirit. We wrestled with God in his behalf;
and our labour was not in vain. His soul was comforted; and
a few hours after he quietly fell asleep.” A strange proof this
likewise, either of inexorableness, or of “dooming men to per
dition 1’’ Therefore this charge too stands totally unsupported.
Here is no proof of my unmercifulness yet.
“Good fruits come next to be considered, which Mr.
Wesley's idea of true religion does not promise. He saith,”
(I will repeat the words a little at large, that their true sense
may more clearly appear,) “‘In explaining those words, The
kingdom of God, or true religion, is not meats and drinks, I
was led to show, that religion does not properly consist in
harmlessness, using the means of grace, and doing good, that
is, helping our neighbours, chiefly by giving alms; but that a
man might both be harmless, use the means of grace, and do
muchgood, and yet have no truereligion at all.’” (Tract, p. 203.)
He may so. Yet whoever has true religion, must be “zealous
of good works.” And zeal for all good works is, according
to my idea, an essential ingredient of true religion.
“Spiritual cures are all the good fruits he pretends to.”
(Pages 204, 205.) Not quite all, says William Kirkman, with
some others. “A few of his spiritual cures we will set in a fair
light: ‘The first time I preached at Swalwell,” (chiefly to col
liers, and workers in the iron work,) “‘none seemed to be con
vinced, only stunned.’” I mean amazed at what they heard,
though they were the first principles of religion. “But he
brings them to their senses with a vengeance.” No, not them.
These were different persons. Are they lumped together, in
order to set things in a fair light? The whole paragraph runs
thus: “I carefully examined those who had lately cried out in
the congregation. Some of these, I found, could give no account
at all, how or wherefore they had done so; only that of a sud
den they dropped down, they knew not how; and what they
afterward said or did they knew not. Others could just remem
ber, they were in fear, but could not tell what they were in fear
of Several said they were afraid of the devil; and this was all
they knew. But a few gave a more intelligible account of the
piercing sense they then had of their sins, both inward and out
ward, which were set in array against them round about; of the
dreadthey werein of the wrath of God, and the punishment they
had deserved, into which they seemed to be justfalling, without
any way to escape. One of them told me, ‘I was as if I was just
falling down from the highest place I had ever seen. I thought
the devil was pushing me off, and that God had forsaken me.’
Another said, ‘I felt the very fire of hell already kindled in
my breast; and all my body was in as much pain, as if I had
been in a burning fiery furnace. What wisdom is this which
rebuketh these, that they should hold their peace? Nay, let
such an one cry after Jesus of Nazareth, till he saith, ‘Thy
faith hath made thee whole.’” (Journal, Vol. I. p. 407.)
Now follow the proofs of my driving men mad: (1) “Ano
ther of Dr. Monro's patients came to ask my advice. I found
no reason to believe she had been any otherwise mad, than
every one that is deeply convinced of sin.” (Tract, p. 208.)
Let this prove all that it can prove. (2) “A middle-aged
woman was really distracted.” Yes, before I ever saw her, or
she me. (3.) “I could not but be under some concern with
regard to one or two persons, who were tormented in an un
accountable manner, and seemed to be indeed lunatic, as well
as sore vexed.” True; for a time. But the deliverance of
one of them is related in the very next paragraph. (4.) “Two
or three are gone quite distracted; that is, they mourn
and refuse to be comforted till they have redemption.” (Page
209.) (5.) “I desired one to visit Mrs. G. in Bedlam, put in
by her husband, as a madwoman.” But she never was mad
in any degree, as he himself afterwards acknowledged.
(6) “One was so deeply convinced of her ungodliness, that she
cried out day and night, ‘Lord, save, or I perish !’ All the
neighbours agreed she was stark mad.” But I did not make
her so. For this was before she ever saw my face. Now, let
every one judge, whether here is yet a single proof that I
drive men mad.
“The time when this spiritual madness was at its height,
he calls a glorious time.” (Page 210.) I call that a glorious
time when rhany notorious sinners are converted to God;
(whether with any outward symptoms or none, for those are
no way essential;) and when many are in the triumph of
faith, greatly rejoicing in God their Saviour.
“But though Mr. Wesley does so well in turning fools into
madmen, yet his craftmaster is certainly one Mr. Wheatley,
of whom he gives this extraordinary account:” (Page 211 :)
“A poor woman (on Wednesday, September 17, 1740)
said, it was four years (namely, in September, 1786, above a
year before I left Georgia) since her son, by hearing a sermon
of Mr. Wheatley's, fell into great uneasiness. She thought
he was ill, and would have sent for a Physician. But he
said, ‘No, no; send for Mr. Wheatley. He was sent for, and
came; and after asking a few questions, told her, ‘The boy is
mad. Get a coach, and carry him to Dr. Monro. Use my
name. I have sent several such to him.’ Who this Mr.
Wheatley is, I know not.” He was Lecturer at Spitalfields
Church. The event was, after the Apothecary had half mur
dered him, he was discharged, and the lad soon recovered his
strength. His senses he never had lost. The supposing this.
was a blunder from the beginning.
“These are the exploits which Mr. Wesley calls blessings
from God.” (Page 212.) Certainly I do, both repentance
and faith. “And which therefore we may call the good fruits
of his ministry.” May God increase them an hundred fold !
“What the Apostle calls ‘good fruits, namely, doing much
good, Mr. Wesley tells us belongs not to true religion.” I
never told any man so yet. I tell all men just the contrary.
I may then safely leave all mankind to judge, whether a
single article of the charge against me has yet been made
good. So much for the first charge, that I am a madman.
Now for the second, that I am a knave.
5. The proof is short: “Every enthusiast is a knave; but
he is an enthusiast; therefore he is a knave.” I deny both
the first and second proposition. Nay, the first is proved
thus: “Enthusiasm must always be accompanied with craft
and knavery.” (Page 213.) It is often so, but not always;
for there may be honest enthusiasts. Therefore the whole
account of that odd combination which follows is ingenious,
but proves nothing. (Pages 214-218.)
Yet I must touch upon one or two parts of it. “An en
thusiast thinks he is dispensed with in breaking, nay, that he
is authorized to break, the common laws of morality.” Does
every enthusiast? Then I am none; for I never thought any
such thing. I believe no man living is authorized to break,
or dispensed with in breaking, any law of morality. I know,
whoever (habitually) breaks one of the least of these, “shall
be called least in the kingdom of heaven.”
“Can any but an enthusiast believe, that he may use guile
to promote the glory of God?” Yes, ten thousand that are
no enthusiasts firmly believe this. How few do we find that
do not believe it! that do not plead for officious lies! How
few will subscribe to St. Augustine's declaration, (to which I
assent with my whole heart) “I would not tell a wilful lie,
to save the souls of the whole world !”
But to return: “‘The wisdom from above is without par
tiality and without hypocrisy.” Partiality consists in dispens
ing an unequal measure in our transactions with others;
hypocrisy, in attempting to cover that unequal measure by
prevarication and false pretences.”
The former of these definitions is not clear; the latter nei
ther clear nor adequate to the defined.
Butlet this pass. My partiality is now the point. What
are the proofs of it? (1.) “His followers are always the chil
dren of God, his opposers the children of the devil.” (Page
220.) Neither so, nor so. I never affirmed either one or
the other universally. That some of the former are children
of God, and some of the latter children of the devil, I believe.
But what will this prove?
“His followers are directed by inward feelings, the
impulses of an inflamed fancy;” (no more than they are
directed by the Alcoran;) “his opposers, by the Scripture.”
What, while they are cursing, swearing, blaspheming; beat
ing and maiming men that have done them no wrong; and
treating women in a manner too shocking to be repeated?
(2.) The next proof is very extraordinary. My words are, “I
was with two persons, who, I doubt, are properly enthusiasts:
For, first, they think to attain the end without the means,
which is enthusiasm properly so called. Again, they think
themselves inspired of God, and are not. But false imagin
ary inspiration is enthusiasm. That theirs is only imaginary
inspiration appears hence,--it contradicts the law and the
testimony.” (Page 221.)
Now, by what art of man can this be made a proof of my
partiality? Why thus: “These are wise words. But what
do they amount to? Only to this; that these two persons
would not take out their patents of inspiration from his
office.” But what proof is there of this round assertion?
Truly, none at all.
Full as extraordinary is the third proof of my partiality.
* Miss Gr told Mrs. Sp--, Mr. Wesley was a Papist.
Upon this Miss Gr-- is anathematized. And we are told
that, in consequence, she had lately been raving mad, and, as
such, was tied down in her bed. Yet all these circumstances
of madness have befallen his favourite saints, whom he has
vindicated from the opprobrium.” (Page 222.)
The passage in my Journal stands thus: “Mrs. Spa-told
me, two or three nights since, ‘Miss Gr-- met me, and said,
I assure you, Mr. Wesley is a Papist. Perhaps I need ob
serve no more upon this, than that Miss Gr-- had lately been
raving mad, in consequence of a fever;” (not of an ama
thema, which never had any being;) “that, as such, she was
tied down in her bed; and as soon as she was suffered to go
abroad, went to Mr. Whitefield, to inquire of him whether
she was not a Papist. But he quickly perceived she was only
a lunatic; the nature of her disorder soon betraying itself.”
Certainly then my allowing her to be mad is no proof of my
partiality. I will allow every one to be so who is attended
with “all these circumstances of madness.”
(4.) “He pronounces sentence of enthusiasm upon another,
and tells us wherefore, without any disguise: ‘Here I took leave
of a poor, mad, original enthusiast, who had been scattering
lies in every quarter.’” It was the famous John Adams, since
confined at Box, whose capital lie, the source of the rest, was,
that he was a prophet, greater than Moses, or any of the
Apostles. And is the pronouncing him a madman a proof of
my partiality?
(5) “I had much conversation with Mr. Simpson, an ori
ginal enthusiast. I desired him in the evening to give an ex
hortation. He did so, and spoke many good things, in a
manner peculiar to himself: ”--without order or connexion,
head or tail; and in a language very near as mystical as that
of Jacob Behmen. “When he had done, I summed up what he
had said, methodizing and explaining it. O what a pity it is,
this well-meaning man should ever speak without an inter
preter!” (Page 223.)
Let this passage likewise stand as it is, and who can guess
how it is to prove my partiality? But by a sleight-of-hand the
thing is done. “How differently does Mr. Wesley treat these
two enthusiasts ! The first is accused of spreading lies of his
master.” (No, he never was any disciple of mine.) “On which
lfr. W. took his leave of him;--a gentle expression, to signify
the thrusting him out, head and shoulders, from the society of
saints.” It signifies neither more nor less than that I went out
of the room and left him. “The other’s enthusiasm is made
to consist only in want of method.” No. His enthusiasm did
not consist in this. It was the cause of it. But he was quite
another man than John Adams; and, I believe, a right
honest man.
(6) “I was both surprised and grieved at a genuine
instance of enthusiasm. I. B., who had received a sense of
the love of God a few days before, came riding through the
town, hallooing and shouting, and driving all the people
before him, telling them God had told him he should be a
King, and should tread all his enemies under his feet. I
sent him home immediately to his work; and advised him to
cry day and night to God that he might be lowly in heart,
lest Satan should again “get an advantage over him.’”
What this proves, or is intended to prove, I cannot tell.
Certainly, neither this, nor any of the preceding passages,
prove the point now in question,--my partiality. So this
likewise is wholly unproved still.
“We shall end, where every fanatic leader ends, with his
hypocrisy.” (Page 227.) Five arguments are brought in proof
of this. I shall take them in their order. (1.) “After having
heaped up miracles one upon another, he sneaks away under
the protection of a puny wonder: “About five I began near
the Keelman’s Hospital, many thousands standing round.
The wind was high just before, but scarce a breath was felt all
the time we assembled before God. I praise God for this also.
Is it enthusiasm to see God in every benefit we receive?” It
is not; the enthusiasm consists in believing those benefits to
be conferred through a change in the established course of
nature. But here he insinuates, that he meant no more by
his miracles, than the seeing God in every benefit we receive.”
(Pages 228,229.) That sudden and total ceasing of the wind
I impute to the particular providence of God. This I mean
by seeing God therein. But this I knew many would count
enthusiasm. In guarding against it, I had an eye to that
single incident, and no other. Nor did I insinuate anything
more than I expressed in as plain a manner as I could.
A little digression follows: “A friend of his advises, not to
establish the power of working miracles, as the great cri
terion of a divine mission; seeing the agreement of doctrines
with Scripture is the only infallible rule.” (Page 230.)
“But Christ himself establishes the power of working mira
cles, as the great criterion of a divine mission.” (Page 231.)
True, of a mission to be the Saviour of the world; to put a
period to the Jewish, and introduce the Christian, dispensa
tion. And whoever pretends to such a mission will stand in
need of such credentials.
(2) “He shifts and doubles no less” (neither less nor
more) “as to the ecstasies of his saints. Sometimes they are
of God, sometimes of the devil; but he is constant in this,--
that natural causes have no hand in them.” This is not
true: In what are here termed ecstasies, strong joy or grief,
attended with various bodily symptoms, I have openly
affirmed, again and again, that natural causes have a part:
Nor did I ever shift or double on the head. I have steadily
and uniformly maintained, that, if the mind be affected to
such a degree, the body must be affected by the laws of the
vital union. The mind I believe was, in many of those cases,
affected by the Spirit of God, in others by the devil, and in
some by both; and, in consequence of this, the body was
affected also. (3) “Mr. W. says, “I fear we have grieved
the Spirit of the jealous God by questioning his work, and by
blaspheming it, by imputing it to nature, or even to the
devil.’” (Pages 232,233.) True; by imputing the conviction
and conversion of sinners, which is the work of God alone,
(because of these unusual circumstances attending it,) either
to nature or to the devil. This is flat and plain. No prevari
cation yet. Let us attend to the next proof of it: “Innume
rable cautions were given me, not to regard visions or dreams,
or to fancy people had remission of sins because of their cries,
or tears, or outward professions. The sum of my answer
was, You deny that God does now work these effects; at least
that he works them in this manner. I affirm both. I have
seen very many persons changed in a moment from a spirit
of fear, horror, despair, to a spirit of love, joy, peace. What
I have to say touching visions and dreams is this: I know
several persons in whom this great change was wrought in a
dream, or during a strong representation to the eye of their
mind of Christ, either on the cross, or in glory. This is the
fact; let any judge of it as they please. And that such a
change was then wrought, appears (not from their shedding
tears only, or falling into fits, or crying out; these are not the
fruits, as you seem to suppose, whereby I judge, but) from the
whole tenor of their life; till then many ways wicked, from
that time holy, and just, and good.” “Nay, he is so convinced
of its being the work of God, that the horrid blasphemies which
ensued, he ascribes to the abundance of joy which God had
given to a poor mad woman.” (Page 234.) Do I ascribe those
blasphemies to her joy in God? No; but to her pride. My
words are, “I met with one, who, having been lifted up with
the abundance of joy which God had given her, had fallen into
such blasphemies and vain imaginations as are not common to
men. In the afternoon I found another instance, nearly, I fear,
of the same kind; one who set her private revelations, so called,
on the self-same foot with the written word.” (Page 235.)
But how is this to prove prevarication? “Why, on a sud
den, he directly revokes all he had advanced. He says, “I told
them they were not to judge of the spirit whereby any one
spoke, either by appearances, or by common report, or by their
own inward feelings; no, nor by any dreams, visions, or revela
tions, supposed to be made to the soul, any more than by their
tears, or any involuntary effects wrought upon their bodies.
I warned them that all these things were in themselves of a
doubtful, disputable nature: They might be from God, or they
might not; and were therefore not simply to be relied on,
any more than simply to be condemned; but to be tried by a
farther rule, to be brought to the only certain test, the law
and the testimony.” Now, is not this a formal recantation of
what he had said just above?” (Page 235.) Nothing less, as
I will show in two minutes, to every calm, impartial man.
What I say now, I have said any time this thirty years; I have
never varied therefrom for an hour: “Everything disputable
is to be brought to the only certain test, ‘the law and the
testimony.” “But did not you talk just now of visions and
dreams?” Yes; but not as of a test of any thing; only as a
channel through which God is sometimes pleased to convey
“love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, fidelity,
meekness, temperance,” the indisputable fruit of his Spirit:
And these, we may observe, wherever they exist, must be in
wardly felt. Now, where is the prevarication, where the formal
recantation? They are vanished into air.
But here is more proof: “At length he gives up all these
divine agitations to the devil: ‘I inquired, says he, ‘into the
case of those who had lately cried out aloud during the preach
ing. I found this had come upon every one of them in a moment,
without any previous notice. In that moment they dropped
down, lost all their strength, and were seized with violent pain.
Some said they felt as if a sword were running through them;
others, as if their whole body was tearing in pieces. These
symptoms I can no more impute to any natural cause, than to.
the Spirit of God. I make no doubt but it was Satan tearing
them as they were coming to Christ.” (Page 236.)
“Now, these were the very symptoms which he had before
ascribed to the Spirit of God.” (Page 237.) Never in my life
Indeed some of them I never met with before. Those outward
symptoms which I had met with before, bodily agitations in
particular, I did not ascribe to the Spirit of God, but to the
natural union of the soul and body. And those symptoms
which I now ascribe to the devil, I never ascribed to any other
cause. The Second proof of my prevarication or hypocrisy is
therefore just as conclusive as the First.
3. Now for the Third: “Mr. W. before spoke contemptu
ously of orthodoxy, to take in the Sectaries. But when he would
take off Churchmen, then orthodoxy is the unum necessa
rium.”* Did I ever say so? No more than, in the other
extreme, speak contemptuously of it. “Yes, you say, ‘I de
scribed the plain, old religion of the Church of England, which
is now almost everywhere spoken against under the new name
of Methodism.” Very well; and what shadow of prevarication
is here? May I not still declare the plain, old religion of the
Church of England, and yet very consistently aver, that right
opinion is a very slender part of it?
4. The next passage, I am sorry to say, is neither related
with seriousness nor truth: “We have seen him inviting perse
cution.” Never; though I “rejoiced,” in the instance alleged,
at having an opportunity of calling a multitude of the most
abandoned sinners to repentance.
What is peculiarly unfair, is, the lame, false account is
palmed upon me, by “So he himself tells the story.” I must
therefore tell the story once more, in as few words as I can:
“Sunday, August 7, 1737. I repelled Mrs. W. from the
communion. Tuesday, 9. I was required by Mr. Bailiff Parker
to appear at the next court. Thursday, 11. Mr. Causton, her
uncle, said to me, ‘Give your reasons for repelling her before
the whole congregation.” I answered: “Sir, if you insist upon
it, I will. But I heard no more of it. Afterward he said, (but
not to me,) ‘Mr. W. had repelled Sophy out of revenge,
because he had made proposals of marriage to her, which she
* The one thing needful.--EDIT.
rejected. Tuesday, 16. Mrs. W. made affidavit of it. Thurs
day, September 1. A Grand Jury, prepared by Mr. Causton,
found, that ‘John Wesley had broken the laws of the realm,
by speaking and writing to Mrs. W. against her husband’s con
sent, and by repelling her from the communion.’
“Friday, 2, was the third court-day at which I appeared,
since my being required so to do by Mr. Parker. I moved for
an immediate hearing, but was put off till the next court-day.
On the next court-day I appeared again, as also at the two
courts following; but could not be heard. Thursday, Novem
ber 3, I appeared in court again; and yet again on Tuesday,
November 22, on which day Mr. C. desired to speak with me,
and read me an affidavit, in which it was affirmed, that I
‘ abused Mr. C. in his own house, calling him liar, villain,
and so on.’ It was likewise repeated, that I had been repri
manded at the last court, by Mr. C., as an enemy to, and hin
derer of, the public peace.
“My friends agreed with me, that the time we looked for
was now come. And the next morning, calling on Mr. C., I
told him, I designed to set out for England immediately.
“Friday, December 2. I proposed to set out for Carolina
about noon. But about ten, the Magistrates sent for me, and
told me, I must not go out of the province; for I had not
answered the allegations laid against me. I replied, ‘I have
appeared at six or seven courts, in order to answer them. But
I was not suffered so to do. After a few more words, I said,
‘You use me very ill. And so you do the Trustees. You
know your business, and I know mine.’
“In the afternoon, they published an order, forbidding any
to assist me in going out of the province. But I knew I had
no more business there. So as soon as Evening Prayer was over,
the tide then serving, I took boat at the Bluff, for Carolina.”
This is the plain account of the matter. I need only add a
remark or two on the pleasantry of my censurer. “He had
recourse, as usual, to his revelations. “I consulted my friends,
whether God did not call me to England.” (Page 242.) Not
by revelations; these were out of the question; but by clear,
strong reasons. “The Magistrate soon quickened his pace, by
declaring him an enemy to the public peace.” No; that sense
less assertion of Mr. C. made me go neither sooner nor later.
‘The reader has seen him long languish for persecution.”
What, before November, 1737? I never languished for it,
either before or since. But I submit to what pleases God.
“To hide his poltroonery in a bravado, he gave public notice of
his apostolical intention.” (Page 243.) Kind and civil I
may be excused from taking notice of what follows. It is
equally serious and genteel.
“Had his longings for persecution been without hypocrisy.”
The same mistake throughout. I never longed or professed to
long for it at all. But if I had professed it ever since I returned
from Georgia, what was done before I returned could not prove
that profession to be hypocrisy. So all this ribaldry serves no
end; only to throw much dirt, if haply some may stick.
Meantime, how many untruths are here in one page |
(1.) “He made the path doubly perplexed for his followers.
(2.) He left them to answer for his crimes. (3.) He longed
for persecution. (4.) He went as far as Georgia for it. (5.) The
truth of his mission was questioned by the Magistrate, and
(6.) decried by the people, (7.) for his false morals. (8.) The
gospel was wounded through the sides of its pretended Mission
ary. (9.) The first Christian Preachers offered up themselves.”
So did I. “Instead of this, our paltry mimic.” (Page 244.)
Bona verbal Surely a writer should reverence himself, how
much soever he despises his opponent. So, upon the whole,
this proof of my hypocrisy is as lame as the three former.
5. “We have seen above, how he sets all prudence at defi
ance.” None but false prudence. “But he uses a different
language when his rivals are to be restrained.” No; always
the same, both with regard to false prudence and true.
“But take the affair from the beginning. He began to sus
pect rivals in the year thirty-nine; for he says, “Remembering
how many that came after me were preferred before me.” The
very next words show in what sense. They “had attained
unto the law of righteousness; ” I had not. But what has this
to do with rivals 7
However, go on : “At this time, December 8, 1739, his
opening the Bible afforded him but small relief. He sunk so
far in his despondency, as to doubt if God would not lay him
aside, and send other labourers into his harvest.” But this was
another time. It was June 22; and the occasion of the doubt
is expressly mentioned: “I preached, but had no life or spirit
in me, and was much in doubt,” on that account. Not on
-account of Mr. Whitefield. He did not “now begin to set up
for himself.” We were in full union; nor was there the least
shadow of rivalry or contention between us. I still sincerely
“praise God for his wisdom in giving different talents to differ
ent Preachers;” (page 250;) and particularly for his giving
Mr. Whitefield the talents which I have not.
6. What farther proof of hypocrisy? Why, “he had given
innumerable flirts of contempt in his Journals against human
learning.” (Pages 252, 253.) Where? I do not know. Let
the passages be cited; else, let me speak for it ever so much, it
will prove nothing. “At last he was forced to have recourse
to what he had so much scorned, I mean, prudence.” (Page
255.) All a mistake. I hope never to have recourse to false
prudence; and true prudence I never scorned.
“He might have met Mr. Whitefield half way; but he was
too formidable a rival. With a less formidable one he pur
sues this way. “I laboured, says he, ‘to convince Mr. Gr--,’”
(my assistant, not rival,) “‘that he had not done well, in
confuting, as he termed it, the sermon I preached the Sunday
before. I asked, Will you meet me half way?” (The words
following put my meaning beyond all dispute:) “I will never
publicly preach against you. Will not you against me?” Here
we see a fair invitation to Mr. Gr-- to play the hypocrite with
him.” (Ibid.) Not in the least. Each might simply deliver
his own sentiments without preaching against the other. “We
conclude that Mr. Wesley, amidst his warmest exclamations
against all prudence, had still a succedaneum, which indeed he
calls prudence; but its true name is craft.” (Page 257.)
Craft is an essential part of worldly prudence. This I detest
and abhor. And let him prove it upon me that can. But it
must be by better arguments than the foregoing. Truly Chris
tian prudence, such as was recommended by our Lord, and
practised by him and his Apostles, I reverence, and desire to
learn, being convinced of its abundant usefulness.
I know nothing material in the argument which I have left
untouched. And I must now refer it to all the world, whether,
for all that has been brought to the contrary, I may not still
have a measure of the “wisdom from above, which is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.”
I have spoke abundantly more concerning myself than I
intended or expected. Yet I must beg leave to add a few
words more. How far I am from being an enemy to prudence,
I hope appears already. It remains to inquire, whether I am
an enemy to reason or natural religion.
“As to the first, he frankly tells us, the father of lies was
the father of reasonings also. For he says, “I observed more
and more the advantage Satan had gained over us. Many
were thrown into idle reasonings.’” (Page 289.) Yes, and
they were hurt thereby. But reason is good, though idle rea
sonings are evil. Nor does it follow that I am an enemy to the
one, because I condemn the other.
“However, you are an enemy to natural religion. For you
say, “A Frenchman gave us a full account of the Chicasaws.
They do nothing but eat, and drink, and smoke, from morning
till night, and almost from night till morning. For they rise at
any hour of the night when they awake, and, after eating and
drinking as much as they can, go to sleep again. Hence we
could not but remark what is the religion of nature, properly so
called, or that religion which flows from natural reason, unas
sisted by Revelation.’” (Page 290.) I believe this dispute
may be cut short by only defining the term. What does your
Lordship mean by natural religion ? a system of principles?
But I mean by it, in this placc, men’s natural manners.
These certainly “flow from their natural passions and appe
tites,” with that degree of reason which they have. And this,
in other instances, is not contemptible; though it is not
sufficient to teach them true religion.
II. I proceed to consider, in the Second place, what is
advanced concerning the operations of the Holy Spirit.
“Our blessed Redeemer promised to send among his follow
ers the Holy Ghost, called ‘the Spirit of Truth’ and ‘the
Comforter, which should co-operate with man, in establishing
his faith, and in perfecting his obedience; or, in other words,
should sanctify him to redemption.” (Page 2.)
Accordingly, “the sanctification and redemption of the
world, man cannot frustrate nor render ineffectual. For it is
not in his power to make that to be undone, which is once done
and perfected.” (Page 337.)
I do not comprehend. Is all the world sanctified? Is not
to be sanctified the same as to be made holy? Is all the world
holy? And can no man frustrate his own sanctification?
“The Holy Ghost establishes our faith, and perfects our
obedience, by enlightening the understanding, and rectifying
the will.” (Page 3.)
“In the former respect, 1. He gave the gift of tongues at
the day of Pentecost.
“Indeed, enthusiasts, in their ecstasies, have talked very
fluently in languages they had a very imperfect knowledge of
in their sober intervals.” I can no more believe this on the
credit of Lord Shaftesbury and a Polish exorcist, than I can
believe the tale of an hundred people talking without tongues,
on the credit of Dr. Middleton.
“The other gifts of the Spirit St. Paul reckons up thus:
“To one is given the word of wisdom; to another the word of
knowledge; to another the gifts of healing; to another working
of miracles; to another prophecy; to another the discerning of
spirits.’” (Page 23.) But why are the other three left out?--
Faith, diverskinds of tongues, and the interpretation of tongues.
I believe the “word of wisdom” means, light to explain the
manifold wisdom of God in the grand scheme of gospel salvation;
the “word of knowledge,” a power of explaining the Old Testa
ment types and prophecies. “Faith” may mean an extraordi
mary trust in God, under the most difficult and dangerous cir
cumstances; “the gifts of healing,” a miraculous power of
curing diseases; “the discerning of spirits,” a supernatural dis
cernment, whether men were upright or not; whether they
were qualified for offices in the Church; and whether they who
professed to speak by inspiration, really did so or not.
But “the richest of the fruits of the Spirit is the inspiration
of Scripture.” (Page 30.) Herein the promise, that “the Com
forter” should “abide with us for ever,” is eminently fulfilled.
For though his ordinary influence occasionally assists the faith
ful of all ages, yet his constant abode and supreme illumination
is in the Scriptures of the New Testament. I mean, “he is
there only as the Illuminator of the understanding.” (Page 39.)
But does this agree with the following words?--“Nature is
not able to keep a mean: But grace is able; for ‘the Spirit
helpeth our infirmities. We must apply to the Guide of truth,
to prevent our being ‘carried about with divers and strange
doctrines.’” (Page 340.) Is he not, then, everywhere, to illu
minate the understanding, as well as to rectify the will? And
indeed, do we not need the one as continually as the other?
“But how did he inspire the Scripture? He so directed
the writers, that no considerable error should fall from them.”
(Page 45.) Nay, will not the allowing there is any error in
Scripture, shake the authority of the whole?
Again: What is the difference between the immediate and
the virtual influence of the Holy Spirit? I know, Milton
speaks of “virtual or immediate touch.” But most incline to
think, virtual touch is no touch at all.
“Were the style of the New Testament utterly rude and
barbarous, and abounding with every fault that can possibly
deform a language; this is so far from proving such language
not divinely inspired, that it is one certain mark of this ori
ginal.” (Page 55.)
A vehement paradox this! But it is not proved yet, and
probably never will.
“The labours of those who have attempted to defend the
purity of Scripture Greek have been very idly employed.”
(Page 66.)
Others think they have been very wisely employed,and
that they have abundantly proved their point.
Having now “considered the operations of the Holy Spirit,
as the Guide of truth, who clears and enlightens the under
standing, I proceed to consider him as the Comforter, who
purifies and supports the will.” (Page 89.)
“Sacred antiquity is full in its accounts of the sudden and
entire change made by the Holy Spirit in the dispositions and
manners of those whom it had enlightened; instantaneously
effacing their evil habits, and familiarizing them to the per
formance of every good action.” (Page 90.)
“No natural cause could effect this. Neither fanaticism nor
superstition, nor both of them, will account for so sudden and
lasting a conversion.” (Ibid.)
“Superstition never effects any considerable change in the
manners. Its utmost force is just enough to make us exact in
the ceremonious offices of religion, or to cause some acts of
penitence, as death approaches.” (Page 91.)
“Fanaticism, indeed, acts with greater violence, and, by
influencing the will, frequently forces the manners from their
bent, and sometimes effaces the strongest impressions of cus
tom and nature. But this fervour, though violent, is rarely
lasting; never so long as to establish the new system into an
habit. So that when its rage subsides, as it very soon does,
(but where it drives into downright madness,) the bias on the
will keeps abating, till all the former habitudes recover their
relaxed tone.” (Page 92.)
Never were reflections more just than these. And whoever
applies them to the matters of fact, which daily occur all over
England, and particularly in London, will easily discern, that
the changes now wrought cannot be accounted for by natural
causes: Not by superstition; for the manners are changed;
the whole life and conversation: Not by fanaticism; for these
changes are so lasting, “as to establish the new system into a
habit:” Not by mere reason; for they are sudden; therefore
they can only be wrought by the Holy Spirit.
As to Savanarola’s being a fanatic, or assuming the person
of a Prophet, I cannot take a Popish historian’s word. And
what a man says on the rack proves nothing; no more than his
dying silent. Probably this might arise from shame, and con
sciousness of having accused himself falsely under the torture.
“But how does the Spirit, as Comforter, abide with us for
ever? He abides with the Church for ever, as well personally
in his office of Comforter, as virtually in his office of Enlight
ener.” (Page 96.)
Does he not then abide with the Church personally in both
these respects? What is meant by abiding virtually # And
what is the difference between abiding virtually, and abiding
personally?
“The question will be, Does he still exercise his office in the
same extraordinary manner as in the Apostles' days?”
(Page 97.)
I know none that affirms it. “St Paul has determined this
question. ‘Charity, says he, “never faileth: But whether
there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues,
they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish
away.” (1 Cor. xiii. 8, &c.)”
“The common opinion is, that this respects another life, as he
enforceshis argument by this observation: “Now we see through
a glass darkly; but then face to face: Now we know in part;
but then shall we know, even as also we are known.” (Page 99.)
“But the Apostle means, charity is to accompany the
Church in all its stages; whereas prophecy and all the rest
are only bestowed during its infant state, to support it against
the delusions and powers of darkness.” (Page 100.)
“The Corinthians abounded in these gifts, but were wanting
in charity. And this the Apostle here exposes, by proving
charity to be superior to them all, both in its qualities and dura
tion. The three first verses declare that the other gifts are use
less without charity. The next four specify the qualities of
charity; the remaining six declare its continuance: “Charity
never faileth: But whether there be prophecies, they shall fail;
whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be
knowledge, it shall vanish away. In the next verse he gives
the reason: ‘For we know in part, and we prophesy in part;
but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away: 'That is, when that Christian life, the
lines of which are marked out by the gospel, shall arrive to its
full vigour and maturity, then the temporary aids, given to sub
due prejudice, and to support the weak, shall, like scaffolding,
be removed. In other words, when that Christian life, wherein
the Apostles and first Christians were but infants, shall arrive
to its full vigour and maturity in their successors, then miracles
shall cease.” (Page 102.) But I fear that time is not yet come.
I doubt, none that are now alive enjoy more of the vigour and
maturity of the Christian life than the very first Christians did.
“To show that the loss of these will not be regretted when
the Church has advanced from a state of infancy to manhood,”
(alas the day ! Were the Apostles but infants to us?) “he
illustrates the case by an elegant similitude: ‘When I was a
child, I spake as a child;--but when I became a man, I put
away childish things.’ His next remark, concerning the defects
of human knowledge, is only an occasional answer to an objec
tion. And the last verse shows that the superior duration of
charity refers to the present life only: “Now abideth faith,
hope, charity, these three: But the greatest of these is charity.’
That is, you may perhaps object, Faith and hope will likewise
remain in the Church, when prophecy, tongues, and knowledge
are ceased: They will so; but still charity is the greatest,
because of its excellent qualities.” (Page 107.)
The last verse shows Is not this begging the question?
How forced is all this ! The plain natural meaning of the pas
sage is, love (the absolute necessity and the nature of which is
shown in the foregoing verses) has another commendation,-it
“never faileth; ” it accompanies and adorns us to eternity.
“But whether there be prophecies, they shall fail,” when all
things are fulfilled, and God is all in all: “Whether there be
tongues, they shall cease.” One language shall prevail among
all the inhabitants of heaven, while the low, imperfect languages
of earth are forgotten. The “knowledge,” likewise, we now so
eagerly pursue, shall then “vanish away.” As star-light is lost
in that of the mid-day sun, so our present knowledge in the light
of eternity. “For we know in part, and we prophesy in part.”
We have here but short, narrow, imperfect conceptions, even of
the things round about us, and much more of the deep things
of God. And even the prophecies which men deliver from God
are far from taking in the whole of future events. “But when
that which is perfect is come,” at death, and in the last day,
“that which is in part shall be done away.” Both that low,
imperfect, glimmering light, which is all the knowledge we can
now attain to; and these slow and unsatisfactory methods of
attaining, as well as of imparting it to others. “When I was a
child, I talked as a child, I understood as a child, I reasoned as
a child.” As if he had said, In our present state, we are mere
infants, compared to what we shall be hereafter. “But when I
became a man, I put away childish things;” and a proportion
able change shall we all find, when we launch into eternity.
Now we see even the things which surround us by means of a
glass or mirror, in a dim, faint, obscure manner, so that every
thing is a kind of riddle to us; but then we shall see, not a
faint reflection, but the objects themselves, face to face, directly
and distinctly. “Now I know but in part.” Even when God
reveals things to me, great part of them is still kept under the
veil. “But then shall I know even as I also am known; ” in
a clear, full, comprehensive manner, in some measure like God,
who penetrates the centre of every object, and sees, at one
glance, through my soul and all things. “And now,” during
the present life, “abide these three, faith, hope, love; but the
greatest of these,” in its duration, as well as the excellence of its
nature, “is love.” Faith, hope, love, are the sum of perfection
on earth; love alone is the sum of perfection in heaven.
“It appears, then, that the miraculous powers of the Church
were to cease upon its perfect establishment.” (Page 107.)
Nothing like it appears from this scripture. But supposing it
did, is Christianity perfectly established yet? even nominal
Christianity? Mr. Brerewood took large pains to be fully
informed; and, according to his account, five parts in six of
the known world are Mahometans or Pagans to this day. If so,
Christianity is yet far from being perfectly established, either
in Europe, Asia, Africa, or America.
“Having now established the fact,” (wonderfully estab
lished!) “we may inquire into the fitness of it. There were two
causes of the extraordinary operations of the Holy Spirit,--one
to manifest his mission, (and this was done once for all,) the
other to comfort and instruct the Church.” (Page 110.)
“At his first descent on the Apostles, he found their minds
rude and uninformed, strangers to all heavenly knowledge, and
utterly averse to the gospel. He illuminated their minds with
all necessary truth. For a rule of faith not being yet com
posed,” (No! Had they not “the Law and the Prophets?”)
“some extraordinary infusion of his virtue was still necessary.
But when this rule was perfected, part of this office was trans
ferred upon the sacred Canon; and his enlightening grace was
not to be expected in such abundant measure, as to make the
recipients infallible guides.” (Page 112.)
Certainly it was not. If this is all that is intended, no one
will gainsay.
“Yet modern fanatics pretend to as high a degree of divine
communications, as if no such rule were in being;” (I do not;)
“or, at least, as if that rule needed the further assistance of the
Holy Spirit to explain his own meaning.” This is quite ano
ther thing. I do firmly believe, (and what serious man does
not?) omnis scriptura legi debet eo Spiritu quo scripta est:
“We need the same Spirit to understand the Scripture, which
enabled the holy men of old to write it.”
“Again, the whole strength of human prejudices was then
set in opposition to the gospel, to overcome the obstinacy and
violence of which, nothing less than the power of the Holy One
was sufficient. At present, whatever prejudices may remain, it
draws the other way.” (Page 113.) What, toward holiness?
toward temperance and chastity? toward justice, mercy, and
truth? Quite the reverse. And to overcome the obstinacy and
violence of the heart-prejudices which still lie against these, the
power of the Holy One is as necessary now, as ever it was from
the beginning of the world.
“A further reason for the ceasing of miracles is, the peace
and security of the Church. The profession of the Christian
faith is now attended with ease and honour.” The profession,
true; but not the thing itself, as “all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus” experience.
“But if miracles are not ceased, why do you not prove your
mission thereby?” As your Lordship has frequently spoke to
this effect, I will now give a clear answer. And I purposely do
it in the same words which I published many years since:
“l. I have in some measure explained myself on the head
of miracles, in the Third Part of the ‘Farther Appeal. But
since you repeat the demand, (though without taking any notice
of the arguments there advanced,) I will endeavour once more
to give you a distinct, full, and determinate answer. And,
First, I acknowledge that I have seen with my eyes, and heard
with my ears, several things, which, to the best of my judg
ment, cannot be accounted for by the ordinary course of natural
causes, and which, I therefore believe, ought to be ‘ascribed to
the extraordinary interposition of God.” If any man choose to
style these miracles, I reclaim not. I have diligently inquired
into the facts. I have weighed the preceding and following cir
cumstances. I have strove to account for them in a natural way;
but could not, without doing violence to my reason. Not to go
far back, I am clearly persuaded that the sudden deliverance of
John Haydon was one instance of this kind; and my own
recovery, on May the 10th, another. I cannot account for
either of these in a natural way. Therefore I believe they
were both supernatural.
“I must, Secondly, observe, that the truth of these facts is
supported by the same kind of proof as that of all other facts
is wont to be, namely, the testimony of competent witnesses;
and that the testimony here is in as high a degree as any
reasonable man can desire. Those witnesses were many in num
ber: They could not be deceived themselves; for the facts in
question they saw with their own eyes, and heard with their own
ears. Nor is it credible, that so many of them would combine
together with a view of deceiving others; the greater part being
men who feared God, as appeared by the general tenor of their
lives. Thus, in the case of John Haydon: This thing was
not contrived and executed in a corner, and in the presence of
his own family only, or three or four persons prepared for the
purpose. No; it was in an open street in the city of Bristol,
at one or two in the afternoon; and, the doors being open from
the beginning, not only many of the neighbours from every
side, but several others, (indeed, whosoever desired it,) went in,
till the house could contain no more. Nor yet does the account
of my own illness and recovery depend, as you suppose, on my
bare word. There were many witnesses both of my disorder
on Friday and Saturday, and my lying down most part of Sun
day; (a thing they were well satisfied could not be the effect of
a slight indisposition;) and all who saw me that evening, plainly
discerned (what I could not wholly conceal)that I was in pain;
about two hundred of whom were present when I was seized
with the cough, which cut me short, so that I could speak
no more; till I cried aloud, ‘Lord, increase my faith ! Lord,
confirm the word of thy grace!' The same persons saw and
heard, that at the instant I changed my posture, and broke
out into thanksgiving; that quickly after, I stood upright,
(which I could not before,) and showed no sign either of
sickness or pain.
“Yet I must desire you well to observe,Thirdly, that my will,
or choice, or desire, had no place either in this, or any case of
this kind, that has ever fallen under my notice. Five minutes
before, I had no thought of this. I expected nothing less. I
was willing to wait for a gradual recovery, in the ordinary use of
outward means. I did not look for any other cure, till the
moment before I found it. And it is my belief, that the case
was always the same with regard to the most real and undoubted
miracles. I believe God never interposed his miraculous power,
but according to his own sovereign will; not according to the
will of man; neither of him by whom he wrought, nor of any
other man whatsoever. The wisdom as well as the power are
his; nor can I find that ever, from the beginning of the world,
He lodged this power in any mere man, to be used whenever
that man saw good. Suppose, therefore, there was a man now
upon earth, who did work real and undoubted miracles, I
would ask, By whose power doth he work these, and at whose
pleasure? his own, or God's? Not his own, but God’s. But
if so, then your demand is made, not on man, but on God. I
cannot say it is modest, thus to challenge God; or well suiting
the relation of a creature to his Creator.
“2. However, I cannot but think there have been already so
many interpositions of divine power, as will shortly leave you
without excuse, if you either deny or despise them. We desire
no favour, but the justice that diligent inquiry may be made
concerning them. We are ready to name the persons on whom
the power was shown which belongeth to none but God; (not
one or two, or ten or twelve only;) to point out their places of
abode; and we engage they shall answer every pertinent ques
tion fairly and directly; and, if required, shall give all their
answers upon oath, before any who are empowered to receive
them. It is our particular request, that the circumstances
which went before, which accompanied, and which followed
after, the facts under consideration, may be throughly examined,
and punctually noted down. Let but this be done, (and is it
not highly needful it should ? at least by those who would
form an exact judgment,) and we have no fear that any rea
sonable man should scruple to say, ‘This hath God wrought.”
“As there have been already so many instances of this
kind, far beyond what we dared to ask or think, I cannot take
upon me to say, whether or no it will please God to add to
their number. I have not herein ‘known the mind of the
Lord, neither am I ‘ his counsellor. He may, or he may
not; I cannot affirm or deny. I have no light, and I have
no desire either way. “It is the Lord, let him do what
seemeth him good.’ I desire only to be as clay in his hand.
“3. But what, if there were now to be wrought ever so
many ‘real and undoubted miracles?’ (I suppose you mean,
by undoubted, such as, being sufficiently attested, ought not
to be doubted of) ‘Why, this, you say, “would put the
controversy on a short foot, and be an effectual proof of the
truth of your pretences. By no means. As common as
this assertion is, there is none upon earth more false. Suppose
a Teacher was now, on this very day, to work real and un
doubted miracles; this would extremely little shorten the con
troversy between him and the greatest part of his opposers:
For all this would not force them to believe; but many would
still stand just where they did before; seeing men may harden
their hearts against miracles, as well as against arguments.
“So men have done from the beginning of the world, even
against such signal, glorious miracles, against suchinterpositions
of the power of God, as may not be again till the consummation
of all things. Permit me to remind you only of a few instances,
and to observe, that the argument holds a fortiori; for who will
ever be empowered of God again to work such miracles as these
were? Did Pharaoh look on all that Moses and Aaron wrought,
as an effectual proof of the truth of their pretences P even
when the ‘Lord made the sea to be dry land, and the waters
were divided; when the children of Israel went into the
midst of the sea, and the waters were a wall on the right and
on the left?’ (Exod. xiv. 21, 22.) Nay,
The wounded dragon raged in vain;
And, fierce the utmost plagues to brave,
Madly he dared the parting main,
And sunk beneath the o'erwhelming wave.
Was all this an effectual proof of the truth of their pretences
to the Israelites themselves? It was not; they were still
‘disobedient at the sea, even at the Red Sea.” Was the giving
them day by day bread from heaven, an effectual proof to
those “two hundred and fifty of the princes of the assembly,
famous in the congregation, men of renown, who said, with
Dathan and Abiram, Wilt thou put out the eyes of these men?
we will not come up; ” (Numb. xvi. 14;) nay, “when the
ground clave asunder that was under them, and the earth
opened her mouth and swallowed them up?’ (Verse 32.)
Neither was this an effectual proof to those who saw it with
their eyes, and heard the cries of those who went down into
the pit; but, the very next day, they ‘murmured against Moses
and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the
Lord!” (Verse 41.) Was not the case generally the same with
regard to the Prophets that followed? several of whom ‘stopped
the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire,’ and did
many other mighty works; yet their own people received them
not; yet ‘they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they
were slain with the sword, they were destitute, afflicted, tor
mented !’--utterly contrary to the commonly received sup
position, “that the working real, undoubted miracles, must
bring all controversy to an end, and convince every gainsayer.’
“Let us come nearer yet. How stood the case between
our Lord himself and his opposers? Did he not work real
and undoubted miracles? And what was the effect? Still,
‘when he came to his own, his own received him not.’
Still “he was despised and rejected of men. Still it was a
challenge not to be answered, ‘Have any of the Rulers or of
the Pharisees believed on him?” After this, how can you
imagine, that whoever works miracles must convince all men
of the truth of his pretences?
“I would just remind you of only one instance more: ‘There
sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a
cripple from his mother’s womb, who had never walked.
The same heard Paul speak; who steadfastly beholding him,
and perceiving he had faith to be healed, said with a loud
voice, Stand upright on thy feet. And he leaped and walked.”
Here was so undoubted a miracle, that the people ‘lifted up
their voices, saying, The Gods are come down in the likeness
of men.” But how long were even these convinced of the
truth of his pretences? Only till ‘there came thither certain
Jews from Antioch and Iconium;’ and then they ‘stoned
him” (as they supposed) ‘to death !” (Acts xiv. 7, &c.) So
certain it is, that no miracles whatever, that were ever yet
wrought in the world, were effectual to prove the most
glaring truth to those who hardened their hearts against it.
“4. And it will equally hold in every age and nation. ‘If
they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be’
convinced of what they desire not to believe, ‘though one
rose from the dead. Without a miracle, without one rising
from the dead, eav ris 6exy to 6eAmua avrov Troueuv, “if any
man be willing to do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God: ” But if he is not ‘willing to do his
will,” he will never want an excuse, a plausible reason for re
jecting it; yea, though ever so many miracles were wrought
to confirm it. For, let ever so much light come into the
world, it will have no effect (such is the wise and just will of
God) on those who ‘love darkness rather than light. It
will not convince those who do not simply desire to do ‘the
will of their Father which is in heaven; those ‘who mind
earthly things, who, if they do not continue in any gross
outward sin, yet love pleasure and ease, yet seek profit or
power, preferment or reputation. Nothing will ever be an
effectual proof to these of the holy and acceptable will of God,
unless first their proud hearts be humbled, their stubborn
wills bowed down, and their desires brought, at least in some
degree, into obedience to the law of Christ.
“Hence, although it should please God to work anew all the
wonders that ever were wrought on earth, still these men, how
ever wise and prudent they may be in things relating to the
present world, would fight against God and all his messengers,
and that in spite of these miracles. Meanwhile, God will reveal
his truth unto babes, unto those who are meek and lowly, whose
lesires are in heaven, who want to “know nothing save Jesus
Christ and him crucified. These need no outward miracles
to show them his will; they have a plain rule,--the written
word: And ‘the anointing which they have received of Him
abideth in them, and teacheth them of all things.” (1 John
ii. 27.) Through this they are enabled to bring all doctrines
‘to the law and the testimony: And whatsoever is agreeable
to this they receive, without waiting to see it attested by
miracles: As, on the other hand, whatsoever is contrary to
this they reject; nor can any miracles move them to receive it.
“5. Yet I do not know that God hath any where precluded
himself from thus exerting his sovereign power, from working
miracles in any kind or degree, in any age to the end of the
world. I do not recollect any scripture wherein we are taught
that miracles were to be confined within the limits either of
the apostolic or the Cyprianic age; or of any period of time,
longer or shorter, even till the restitution of all things. I
have not observed, either in the Old Testament or the New,
any intimation at all of this kind. St. Paul indeed says once,
concerning two of the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, (so I
think that text is usually understood,) “Whether there be
prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they
shall cease.” But he does not say, either that these or any
other miracles shall cease till faith and hope shall cease also;
till they shall all be swallowed up in the vision of God, and
love be all in all.
“I presume you will allow there is one kind of miracles
(loosely speaking) which are not ceased; namely, repara
alrevôovs, ‘lying wonders, diabolical miracles, wrought by
the power of evil spirits. Nor can you easily conceive that
these will cease, as long as the father of lies is the prince of
this world. And why should you think that the God of
truth is less active than him, or that he will not have his
miracles also? only not as man wills, neither when he wills;
but according to his own excellent wisdom and goodness.
“6. But even if it were supposed that God does now work
beyond the operation of merely natural causes, yet what im
presion would this make upon you, in the disposition of mind.
you are now in 7 Suppose the trial was repeated, and made
again to-morrow. One informs you the next day, ‘While a
Clergyman was preaching yesterday, where I was, a man
came who had been long ill of an incurable distemper. Prayer.
was made for him; and he was restored to perfect health.”
“Suppose now that this was a real fact, perhaps you would
scarce have patience to hear the account of it; but would cut
it short in the midst, with, “Do you tell this as something super
natural? Then miracles are not ceased. But if you should
venture to ask, ‘Where was this; and who was the person who
prayed?” and it was answered, “At the Foundery, near Moor
fields; the person who prayed was Mr. Wesley; what a damp
comes at once ! What a weight falls on your mind at the first
setting out! It is well if you have any heart or desire to move
one step farther, or, if you should, what a strong additional
propensity do you now feel to deny the fact! And is there not a
ready excuse for so doing? ‘O! they who tell the story are his
own people; most of whom, we may be sure, will say anything
for him, and the rest will believe anything.” But if you at length
allowed the fact, might you not find means to account for it
by natural causes? ‘Great crowds, violent heats, with obstruc
tions and irregularities of the blood and spirits, will do won
ders. If you could not but allow it was more than natural,
might not some plausible reason be found for ranking it among
the lying wonders, for ascribing it to the devil rather than
God? And if, after all, you was convinced it was the finger
of God, must you not still bring every doctrine advanced
‘to the law and the testimony, the only sure and infallible
test of all? What then is the use of this continual demand,
“Show us a sign, and we will believe?” What will you believe?
I hope no more than is written in the book of God: And thus
far you might venture to believe, even without a miracle.
“7. Let us consider this point a little farther: What is
it you would have us prove by miracles? the doctrines we
preach? We prove these by Scripture and reason; and, if
need be, by antiquity. What else is it then we are to prove
by miracles? At length we have a distinct reply: ‘Wise and
sober men will not otherwise be convinced, (that is, unless
you prove it by miracles,) that God is, by the means of such
Teachers and such doctrines, working a great and extraordi
nary work in the earth.”
“So then the determinate point which you, in their name, call
upon us to prove by miracles, is this,--that God is, by these
Teachers, working a great and extraordinary work in the earth
“What I mean by a great and extraordinary work is, the
bringing multitudes of gross, notorious sinners, in a short
space, to the fear, and love, and service of God, to an entire
change of heart and life.
“Now, then, let us take a nearer view of the proposition,
and see which part of it we are to prove by miracles:
“Is it, (1.) That A.B. was for many years without God in the
world, a common swearer, a drunkard, or a Sabbath-breaker?
“Or, (2.) That he is not so now 7
“Or, (3.) That he continued so till he heard this man
preach, and from that time was another man?
“Not so. The proper way to prove these facts is, by the
testimony of competent witnesses. And these witnesses are
ready, whenever required, to give full evidence of them.
“Or, would you have us prove by miracles,
“(4.) That this was not done by our own power or holi
mess? that God only is able to raise the dead, to quicken those
who are dead in trespasses and sins?
“Surely no. Whosoever believes the Scriptures will want
no new proof of this.
“Where then is the wisdom of those men who demand mira
cles in proof of such a proposition? One branch of which,
“that such sinners are reformed by means of these Teachers,’
being a plain fact, can only be proved by testimony, as all
other facts are; and the other, ‘that this is a work of God,
and a great and more than ordinary work, needs no proof, as
carrying its own evidence to every thinking man.
“8. To sum up this: No truly wise or sober man can possibly
desire or expect miracles, to prove, either, (1.) That these doc
trines are true;--this must be decided by Scripture and reason:
Or, (2.) That these facts are true;--this can only be proved by
testimony: Or, (3.) That to change sinners from darkness to
light, is the work of God alone; only using what instruments he
pleases;--this is glaringly self-evident:-Or, (4.) That such a
change wrought in so many notorious sinners, within so short a
time, is a great and extraordinary work of God. What then is
it remains to be proved by miracles? Perhaps you will say, it
is this: ‘That God has called, or sent, you to do this. Nay, this
is implied in the Third of the foregoing propositions. If God
has actually used us therein, if his work hath in fact prospered
in our hands, then he hath called or sent us to do this. Ientreat
reasonable men to weigh this thoroughly, whether the fact does
not plainly prove the call; whether He who thus enables us to
save souls alive, does not commission us so to do; whether by
giving us the power to pluck these brands out of the burning,
He does not authorize us to exert it. O that it were possible
for you to consider calmly, whether the success of the gospel
of Jesus Christ, even as it is preached by us, the least of his
servants, be not itself a miracle, never to be forgotten l one
which cannot be denied, as being visible at this day, not in
one, but an hundred places; one which cannot be accounted
for by the ordinary course of any natural causes whatsoever;
one which cannot be ascribed, with any colour of reason, to
diabolical agency; and, lastly, one which will bear the infal
lible test,--the trial of the written word.” (Second Letter to
Dr. Church, Vol. VIII. pages 460-468.)
“But ‘why do you talk of the success of the gospel in
England, which was a Christian country before you was
born?’ Was it indeed? Is it so at this day? I would
explain myself a little on this head also.
“And, (1.) None can deny that the people of England, in
general, are called Christians. They are called so, a few only
excepted, by others, as well as by themselves. But I presume
no man will say, the name makes the thing; that men are Chris
tians, barely because they are called so. It must be allowed,
(2.) That the people of England, generally speaking, have been
christened or baptized: But neither can we infer, “These were
once baptized; therefore, they are Christians now.’ It is allowed,
(3.) That many of those who were once baptized, and are
called Christians to this day, hearthe word of God, attend public
prayers, and partake of the Lord’s supper. But neither does this
prove that they are Christians. For, notwithstanding this, some
of them live in open sin; and others (though not conscious to
themselves of hypocrisy, yet) are utter strangers to the religion
of the heart; are full of pride, vanity, covetousness, ambition; of
hatred, anger, malice, or envy; and, consequently, are no more
spiritualChristiansthan the open drunkard or common swearer.
“Now, these being removed, where are the Christians from
whom we may properly term England a Christian country?
the men who have ‘the mind which was in Christ,’ and who
“walk as he also walked?” whose inmost soul is renewed after
the image of God; and who are outwardly holy, as He who
hath called them is holy? There are doubtless a few such to
be found. ' To deny this would be ‘want of candour. But
how few ! How thinly scattered up and down | And as for
a Christian visible Church, or a body of Christians visibly
united together, where is this to be seen ?
Ye different sects, who all declare,
Lo! here is Christ, or, Christ is there;
Your stronger proofs divinely give,
And show me where the Christians live!
“And what use is it of, what good end does it serve, to term
England a Christian country? Although, it is true, most of
the natives are called Christians, have been baptized, frequent
the ordinances; and although here and there a real Christian
is to be found, “as a light shining in a dark place;’ does it do
any honour to our great Master, among those who are not
called by his name? Does it recommend Christianity to the
Jews, the Mahometans, or the avowed Heathens? Surely no
one can conceive it does. It only makes Christianity stink in
their nostrils. Does it answer any good end, with regard to
those who are called by this worthy name? I fear not; but
rather, an exceeding bad one. For does it not keep multitudes
easy in their heathen practice? Does it not make, or keep,
still greater numbers satisfied with their heathen tempers?
Does it not directly tend to make both the one and the other
imagine, that they are what indeed they are not; that they
are Christians, while they are utterly without Christ, and with
out God in the world? To close this point: If men are not
Christians till they are renewed after the image of Christ, and
if the people of England, in general, are not thus renewed,
why do we term them so? ‘The god of this world hath’
long ‘blinded their hearts. Let us do nothing to increase
their blindness; but rather to recover them from that strong
delusion, that they may no longer believe a lie.
“Let us labour to convince all mankind, that to be a real
Christian is, to love the Lord our God with all our heart, and
to serve him with all our strength; to love our neighbour as
ourselves, and therefore to do unto every man as we would he
should do unto us.” (Second Letter to Dr. Church, Vol. VIII.
pages 470-472.)
To change one of these Heathens into a real Christian, and
to continue him such, all the ordinary operations of the Holy
Spirit are absolutely necessary.
“But what are they?” I sum them up (as I did in the
“Farther Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion”) in the words
of as learned and orthodox a Divine as ever England bred:
“Sanctification being opposed to our corruption, and
answering fully to the latitude thereof, whatsoever holiness
and perfection is wanting in our nature must be supplied by
the Spirit of God. Wherefore, we being by nature totally
void of all saving truth, and under an impossibility of know
ing the will of God; this ‘Spirit searcheth all things, yea,
even the deep things of God, and revealeth them unto the
sons of men; so that thereby the darkness of their under
standing is expelled, and they are enlightened with the know
ledge of God. The same Spirit which revealeth the object
of faith, generally, to the universal Church, doth also illumi
nate the understanding of such as believe; that they may
receive the truth. For faith is the gift of God, not only in
the object, but also in the act. And this gift is a gift of the
Holy Ghost working within us. And as the increase of per
fection, so the original of faith, is from the Spirit of God, by
an internal illumination of the soul.
“The second part of the office of the Holy Ghost is the
renewing of man in all the parts and faculties of his soul. For
our natural corruption consisting in an aversation of our wills
and a depravation of our affections, an inclination of them to
the will of God is wrought within us by the Spirit of God.
“The third part of his office is to lead, direct, and govern
us in our actions and conversations. “If we live in the Spi
rit, quickened by his renovation, we must also ‘walk in the
spirit, following his direction, led by his manuduction. We
are also animated and acted by the Spirit of God, who
giveth ‘both to will and to do.’
“And “as many as are thus led by the Spirit of God, are the
sons of God.” (Rom. viii. 14.) Moreover, that this direction
may prove more effectual, we are guided in our prayers by the
same Spirit, according to the promise, ‘I will pour upon the
house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
Spirit of grace and supplication.” (Zech. xii. 10.) Whereas
then, “this is the confidence we have in Him, that, if we ask
anything according to his will, he heareth us;’ and whereas,
“we know not what we should pray for as we ought, the Spi
rit itself maketh intercession for us withgroaning that can
not be uttered.’ (Rom. viii. 26, 27.) “And He that search
eth the heart knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because
he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of
God.” From which intercession, (made for all true Chris
tians,) he hath the name of the Paraclete given him by
Christ; who said, ‘I will pray the Father, and He will give
you another Paraclete.” (John xiv. 16, 26.) For, “if any man
sin, we have a Paraclete with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous,” saith St. John. “Who maketh intercession for us,’
saith St. Paul. (Rom. viii. 34.) And we have ‘another Para
clete,” saith our Saviour, (John xiv. 16; Rom. viii. 27) ‘which
also maketh intercession for us,” saith St. Paul. A Paraclete
then, in the notion of the Scriptures, is an Intercessor.
“It is also the office of the Holy Ghost to assure us of the
adoption of sons, to create in us a sense of the paternal love
of God toward us, to give us an earnest of our everlasting
inheritance. ‘The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts
by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. For as many as
are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. And
because we are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father. For we have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but we have
received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father; the Spirit itself bearing witness with our spirit, that
we are the children of God.” As, therefore, we are born
again by the Spirit, and receive from him our regeneration,
so we are also by the same Spirit assured of our adoption.
Because, being ‘sons, we are also heirs, heirs of God, and
joint heirs with Christ, by the same Spirit we have the
pledge, or rather the earnest, of our inheritance. ‘For he
which establisheth us in Christ, and hath anointed us, is
God; who hath also sealed us, and hath given us the earnest
of his Spirit in our hearts; so that we are sealed with that
Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inherit
ance.’ The Spirit of God, as given to us in this life, is to be
looked upon as an earnest, being part of that reward which is
promised, and, upon performance of the covenant which God
hath made with us, certainly to be received.”
It now rests with your Lordship to take your choice, either
to condemn or to acquit both ; either your Lordship must
condemn Bishop Pearson for an enthusiast, or you must
acquit me: For I have his express authority on my side, con
cerning every text which I affirm to belong to all Christians.
But I have greater authority than his, and such as I rever
ence only less than the oracles of God; I mean that of our own
Church. I shall close this head by setting down what occurs
in her authentic records, concerning either our receiving the
Holy Ghost, or his ordinary operations in all true Christians.
In her Daily Service she teacheth us all to “beseech God to
grant us his Holy Spirit, that those things may please him
which we do at this present, and that the rest of our life may
be pure and holy;” to pray for our sovereign Lord the King,
that God would “replenish him with the grace of his Holy
Spirit;” for all the Royal Family, that “they may be endued
with his Holy Spirit, and enriched with his heavenly grace;”
for all the Clergy and People, that he would “send down upon
them the healthful Spirit of his grace,” for the Catholic
Church, that “it may be guided and governed by his good Spi
rit;”and for all therein, who, at any time, make their common
supplications unto him, that “the fellowship ’ or communi
cation “of the Holy Ghost may be with them all evermore.”
Her Collects are full of petitions to the same effect: “Grant
that we may daily be renewed by thy Holy Spirit.” (Collect for
Christmas Day.) “Grant that in all our sufferings here, for
the testimony of thy truth, we may by faith behold the glory
that shall be revealed, and, being filled with the Holy Ghost,
may love and bless our persecutors.” (St. Stephen’s Day.)
“Send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most
excellent gift of charity.” (Quinquagesima Sunday.) “O
Lord, from whom all good things do come, grant to us thy
humble servants, that by thy holy inspiration we may think
those things that are good, and by thy merciful guidance may
perform the same.” (Fifth Sunday after Easter.) “We beseech
thee, leave us not comfortless, but send to us the Holy Ghost
to comfort us.” (Sunday after Ascension Day.) “Grant us by
the same Spirit to have a right judgment in all things, and
evermore to rejoice in his holy comfort.” (Whit-unday.)
“Grant us, Lord, we beseech thee, the Spirit to think and
do always such things as be rightful.” (Ninth Sunday after
Trinity.) “O God, forasmuch as without thee we are not
able to please thee, mercifully grant that thy Holy Spirit may
in all things direct and rule our hearts.” (Nineteenth Sun
day after Trinity.) “Cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by
the inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love
thee, and worthily magnify thy holy name.” (Communion
Office.)
“Give thy Holy Spirit to this infant, (or this person,) that
he may be born again. Give thy Holy Spirit to these per
sons,” (N. B. already baptized,) “that they may continue
thy servants.”
“Almighty God, who hast vouchsafed to regenerate these
persons by water and the Holy Ghost, strengthen them with
the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily increase in them the
manifold gifts of thy grace.” (Office of Confirmation.)
From these passages it may sufficiently appear for what pur
poses every Christian, according to the doctrine of the Church
of England, does now receive the Holy Ghost. But this will
be still more clear from those that follow; wherein we may
likewise observe a plain rational sense of God’s “revealing”
himself to us, of the “inspiration” of the Holy Ghost, and
of a believer's “feeling” in himself the “mighty working” of
the Spirit of Christ.
“God gave them of old, grace to be his children, as he doth
us now. But, now by the coming of our Saviour Christ, we
have received more abundantly the Spirit of God in our
hearts.” (Homily on Faith. Part II.)
“He died to destroy the rule of the devil in us, and he rose
again to send down his Holy Spirit to rule in our hearts.”
(Homil on the Resurrection.)
“We have the Holy Spirit in our hearts, as a seal and
pledge of our everlasting inheritance.” (Ibid.)
“The Holy Ghost sat upon each of them, like as it had been
cloven tongues of fire, to teach that it is he that giveth elo
quence and utterance in preaching the gospel, which engen
dereth a burning zeal towards God’s word, and giveth all men
a tongue, yea, a fiery tongue.” (N. B.--Whatever occurs, in
any of the Journals, of God’s “giving me utterance,” or “ena
bling me to speak with power,” cannot therefore be quoted as
enthusiasm, without wounding the Church through my side.)
“So that if any man be a dumb Christian, not professing his
faith openly, he giveth men occasion to doubtlest he have not
the grace of the Holy Ghost within him.” (Homily on Whit.
sunday. Part I.)
“It is the office of the Holy Ghost to sanctify; which the
more it is hid from our understanding,” (that is, the particular
manner of his working,) “the more it ought to move all men
to wonder at the secret and mighty workings of God’s Holy
Spirit, which is within us. For it is the Holy Ghost that doth
quicken the minds of men, stirring up godly motions in their
Thearts. Neither does he think it sufficient inwardly to work
the new birth of men, unless he does also dwell and abide in
them. ‘Know ye not,” saith St. Paul, “that ye are the tem
ples of God, and that his Spirit dwelleth in you? Know ye
not that your bodies are the temples of the Holy Ghost, which
is within you?” Again he saith, ‘Ye are not in the flesh, but
in the Spirit. For why? ‘The Spirit of God dwelleth in
you. To this agreeth St. John: ‘The anointing which ye
have received’ (he meaneth the Holy Ghost) ‘abideth in
you. (1 John ii. 27.) And St. Peter saith the same: ‘The
Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you. O what com
fort is this to the heart of a true Christian, to think that
the Holy Ghost dwelleth in him ‘If God be with us,’ as
the Apostle saith, “who can be against us?” He giveth
patience and joyfulness of heart in temptation and affliction,
and is therefore worthily called ‘the Comforter.” (John xiv.
16.) He doth instruct the hearts of the simple in the know
ledge of God and his word; therefore he is justly termed,
“the Spirit of Truth. (John xvi. 13.) And (N. B.) where
the Holy Ghost doth instruct and teach, there is no delay at
all in learning.” (Ibid.)
From this passage I learn, (1.) That every true Christian
now “receives the Holy Ghost,” as the Paraclete or Comforter
promised by our Lord. (John xiv. 16.) (2.) That every
Christian receives him, as “the Spirit of Truth,” (promised
John xvi. 13) to “teach him all things.” And, (3.) That
the anointing, mentioned in the First Epistle of St. John,
“abides in every Christian.”
“In reading of God’s word, he profiteth most who is most
inspired with the Holy Ghost.” (Homily on reading the
Scripture. Part I.)
“Human and worldly reason is not needful to the under
standing the Scripture; but the ‘revelation of the Holy
Ghost, who inspireth the true meaning unto them who, with
humility and diligence, search for it.” (Ibid. Part II.)
“Make him know and feel, that there is no other name
given under heaven unto men whereby we can be saved.”
“If we feel our conscience at peace with God, through
remission of our sins, all is of God.” (Homily on Rogation
Week. Part III.)
“If you feel such a faith in you, rejoice in it, and let
it be daily increasing by well working.” (Homily on Faith.
Part III.)
“The faithful may feel wrought, tranquillity of conscience,
the increase of faith and hope, with many other graces of God.”
(Homily on the Sacrament. Part I.)
“Godly men feel inwardly God’s Holy Spirit inflaming
their hearts with love.” (Homily on certain places of Scrip
ture. Part I.)
“God give us grace to know these things, and feel them in
our hearts I This knowledge and feeling is not of ourselves.
Let us therefore meekly call upon the bountiful Spirit, the
Holy Ghost, to inspire us with his presence, that we may be
able to hear the goodness of God to our salvation. For with
out his lively inspiration we cannot so much as speak the name
of the Mediator: “No man can say, Jesus is the Lord, but
by the Holy Ghost. Much less should we be able to believe
and know these great mysteries that be opened to us by Christ.
“But we have received, saith St. Paul, ‘not the Spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is of God;’ for this purpose, ‘that
we may know the things which are freely given to us of God.”
In the power of the Holy Ghost resteth all ability to know
God, and to please him. It is He that purifieth the mind by
his secret working. He enlighteneth the heart to conceive
worthy thoughts of Almighty God. He sitteth on the tongue
of man, to stir him to speak his honour. He only ministereth
spiritual strength to the powers of the soul and body. And if
we have any gift whereby we may profit our neighbour, all is
wrought by this one and selfsame Spirit.” (Homily for Roga
tion Week. Part III.)
Every proposition which I have anywhere advanced con
cerning those operations of the Holy Ghost, which I believe
are common to all Christians in all ages, is here clearly main
tained by our own Church.
Being fully convinced of this, I could not well understand,
for many years, how it was that on the mentioning any of these
great truths, even among men of education, the cry immedi
ately arose, “An enthusiast, an enthusiast !” But I now
plainly perceive, this is only an old fallacy in a new shape.
To object enthusiasm to any person or doctrine, is but a de
cent method of begging the question. It generally spares the
objector the trouble of reasoning, and is a shorter and easier
way of carrying his cause.
For instance: I assert, that “till a man “receives the Holy
Ghost, he is without God in the world; that he cannot
know the things of God, unless God reveal them unto him
by his Spirit; no, nor have even one holy or heavenly temper,
without the inspiration of the Holy One.” Now, should one
who is conscious to himself that he has experienced none of
these things, attempt to confute these propositions either
from Scripture or antiquity, it might prove a difficult task.
What then shall he do? Why, cry out, “Enthusiasm |
Fanaticism l’’ and the work is done.
“But is it not mere enthusiasm or famaticism to talk of
the new birth ?” So one might imagine, from the manner
in which your Lordship talks of it: “The Spirit did not
stop till it had manifested itself in the last effort of its
power,-the new birth. The new birth began in storms and
tempests, in cries and ecstasies, in tumults and confusions.
Persons who had no sense of religion, that is, no ecstatic
feelings, or pains of the new birth. What can be the issue
of the new birth, attended with those infernal throes? Why
would he elicit sense from these Gentiles, when they were
finally to be deprived of it in ecstasies and new births? All
these circumstances Mr. W. has declared to be constant symp
toms of the new birth.” (Pages 123, 126, 180, 170,225,222.)
So the new birth is, throughout the whole tract, the stand
ing topic of ridicule.
“No, not the new birth itself, but your enthusiastic,
ridiculous account of it.” What is then my account of the
new birth? I gave it some years ago in these words:--
“It is that great change which God works in the soul when
he brings it into life; when he raises it from the death of sin
to the life of righteousness. It is the change wrought in the
whole soul by the almighty Spirit of God, when it is ‘created
anew in Christ Jesus, when it is ‘renewed after the image
of God in righteousness and true holiness;’ when the love
of the world is changed into the love of God, pride into
humility, passion into meekness, hatred, envy, malice, into a
sincere, tender, disinterested love to all mankind. In a
word, it is that change whereby the ‘earthly, sensual, devil
ish’ mind is turned into the mind which was in Christ
Jesus.” (Vol. VI. p. 71.)
This is my account of the new birth. What is there
ridiculous or enthusiastic in it?
“But what do you mean by those tempests, and cries, and
pains, and infernal throes attending the new birth?” I will
tell you as plainly as I can, in the very same words I used to
Dr. Church, after premising that some experience much,
some very little, of these pains and throes:
“‘When men feel in themselves the heavy burden of sin,
see damnation to be the reward of it, behold with the eye of
their mind the horror of hell, they tremble, they quake, and
are inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of heart, and cannot
but accuse themselves, and open their grief unto Almighty
God, and call unto him for mercy. This being done
seriously, their mind is so occupied, partly with sorrow and
heaviness, partly with an earnest desire to be delivered from
this danger of hell and damnation, that all desire of meat and
drink is laid apart, and loathing of worldly things and
pleasures comes in place, so that nothing then liketh them
more than to weep, to lament, to mourn, and both with
words and behaviour of body to show themselves weary of
life.”
“Now permit me to ask, What, if, before you had observed
that these were the very words of our own Church, one of
your acquaintance or parishioners had come and told you that,
ever since he heard a sermon at the Foundery, he saw damna
tion before him, and beheld with the eye of his mind the hor
ror of hell? What, if he had trembled and quaked, and
been so taken up partly with sorrow and heaviness, partly
with an earnest desire to be delivered from the danger of hell
and damnation, as to weep, to lament, to mourn, and both
with words and behaviour to show himself weary of life?
Would you have scrupled to say, ‘Here is another deplorable
instance of the Methodists driving men to distraction?’”
(Second Letter to Dr. Church, Vol. VIII. p. 472.)
I have now finished, as my time permits, what I had to
say, either concerning myself, or on the operations of the
Holy Spirit. In doing this, I have used great plainness of
speech, and yet, I hope, without rudeness. If anything of
that kind has slipped from me, I am ready to retract it. I
desire, on the one hand, to “accept no man's person; ” and
yet, on the other, to give “honour to whom honour is due.”
If your Lordship should think it worth your while to spend
any more words upon me, may I presume to request one
thing of your Lordship,-to be more serious? It cannot
injure your Lordship’s character or your cause. Truth is
great, and will prevail.
Wishing your Lordship all temporal and spiritual blessings,
I am,
My Lord,
Your Lordship's dutiful son and servant,