A Short Account of the Life and Death of the Reverend John Fletcher
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
No man in England has had so long an acquaint
ance with Mr. Fletcher as myself. Our acquaintance
began almost as soon as his arrival in London, about
the year 1752, before he entered into Holy Orders, or,
I believe, had any such intention; and it continued
uninterrupted between thirty and forty years, even till
it pleased God to take him to himself. Nor was ours
a slight or ordinary acquaintance; but we were of one
heart and of one soul. We had no secrets between
us for many years; we did not purposely, hide
anything from each other. From time to time he
consulted me, and I him, on the most important
occasions; and he constantly professed, not only much
esteem, but, what I valued far more, much affection.
He told me in one of his letters,--I doubt not from
his heart,
Tecum vivere amem; tecum obeam lubens.
“With thee I gladly would both live and die.”
I therefore think myself obliged by the strongest
ties to pay this small tribute to his memory. But
you may easily observe, that, in doing this, I am little
more than a compiler; for I owe a great, if not the
greatest, part of the ensuing Tract to a few friends,
who have been at no small pains in furnishing me
with materials; and, above all, to my dear friend,
(such she has been almost from her childhood,) Mrs.
Fletcher. I could easily have altered both hers and
their language, while I retained their sentiments; but
I was conscious I could not alter it for the better;
and I would not alter for altering' sake; but judged
it fairest to give you most of their accounts, very
nearly in their own words.
Amsterdam,
September 12, 1786.
1. JoHN WILLIAM DE LA FLECHERE (this was properly
his name) was born at Nyon, in Switzerland, a town about
fifteen miles north of Geneva, on September the twelfth, in
the year 1729. His father was an Officer in the French
service, till he left the army in order to marry; but after a
time he returned to the army, and was a Colonel in the
Militia of his own country.
2. In his early childhood he had much of the fear of God,
and great tenderness of conscience. One day, having offended
his father, who threatened to correct him, he did not dare to
come into his presence, but retired into the garden; and
when he saw him coming toward him, he ran away with all
speed. But he was presently struck with deep remorse, and
said to himself, “What I do I run away from my father?
Perhaps I shall live to have a son that will run away from
me.” And it was several years before the impression which
he then received was worn off.
3. Another instance of his tenderness of conscience occurred
when he was about seven years of age : He was one day
reproved by the nursery-maid, saying, “You are a naughty
boy. Do you not know, that the devil is to take away all
naughty children?” He was no sooner in bed, than he began
to reflect very deeply upon her words: He thought, “I am a
naughty boy; and how do I know but God may let the devil
take me away this night?” He then got up and wrestled
with God in prayer for a considerable time; and he would
not go to bed again till he believed God had forgiven him.
4. The following accounts Mr. Fletcher himself gave to
Mr. Samuel Webb, of London, then residing at Madeley:--
“When I was a lad, I had a design to get some fruit out
of my father's garden: The door being locked, I could not
get in, but by climbing over the wall. This was very high;
but with some difficulty I got to the top of it. As I was
walking upon it, my foot slipped, and I fell down to the
bottom. But just where I fell a large quantity of fresh
made mortar was laid. I fell exactly upon it. This broke
my fall, or it might have cost me my life.
5. “Once, as I was swimming by myself in a deep water,
one end of a strong riband which bound my hair, getting
loose I know not how, and twisting about my leg, tied me as
it were neck and heels. I strove with all my strength to
disengage myself; but it was to no purpose. No person
being within call, I gave myself up for lost. But when I
had given over struggling, the riband loosed of itself.
6. “Another instance of the tender care which God had
over me was as follows:--One evening I and four young
gentlemen, in high spirits, made a solemn agreement with
each other to swim the next day to a rocky island, five miles
distant from the shore. But this foolish adventure was
within a very little of costing us all our lives. I and another
indeed did with great difficulty and hazard swim to the
island; but when we came thither, the rock was so steep and
smooth, that we could not possibly climb up. After swim
ming round several times, and making many ineffectual
efforts, we thought we must perish there; but at length one
of us found a place, where he made a shift to crawl up. He
then helped his companion after him. The others swam
about half-way. A boat then took them up, when they were
just sinking. Another boat, which we had ordered to follow
us, afterwards came and took us home.”
7. A still more remarkable deliverance it is of which he
gave an account in the year 1760: “Some years since, I
lived at a place very near the river Rhine. In that part, it
is broader than the Thames at London Bridge, and extremely
rapid. But, having been long practised in swimming, I made
no scruple of going into it at any time; only I was always
careful to keep near the shore, that the stream might not
carry me away. Once, however, being less careful than usual,
I was unawares drawn into the mid channel. The water
there was extremely rough, and poured along like a galloping
horse. I endeavoured to swim against it, but in vain, till I
was hurried far from home. When I was almost spent, I
rested upon my back, and then looked about for a landing
place, finding I must either land or sink. With much difficulty
I got near the shore; but the rocks were so ragged and sharp,
that I saw, if I attempted to land there, I should be torn in
pieces; so I was constrained to turn again to the mid stream.
At last, despairing of life, I was cheered by the sight of a fine
smooth creek, into which I was swiftly carried by a violent
stream. A building stood directly across it, which I did not
then know to be a powder-mill. The last thing I can remem
ber was, the striking of my breast against one of the piles
whereon it stood. I then lost my senses, and knew nothing
more, till I rose on the other side of the mill. When I came
to myself, I was in a calm, safe place, perfectly well, without
any soreness or weariness at all. Nothing was amiss but the
distance of my clothes, the stream having driven me five miles
from the place where I left them. Many persons gladly
welcomed me on shore; one gentleman in particular, who
said, ‘I looked when you went under the mill, and again
when you rose on the other side; and the time of your being
immerged among the piles, was exactly twenty minutes.’”
But some will say, “Why, this was a miracle !” Undoubt
edly it was. It was not a natural event; but a work wrought
above the power of nature, probably by the ministry of angels.
8. When he was yet very young, his father sent him to
the University of Geneva. After he had gone through the
usual course of study, it was the desire of his parents that he
should be a Clergyman. But it was his own desire and
resolution to be an Officer in the army. Not being able to
gain their consent to this, he, without their consent, went
away to Lisbon. Here he gathered a company of his own
countrymen, accepted of a Captain’s commission, and engaged
to serve the King of Portugal, on board a man-of-war, which
was just then getting ready with all speed in order to sail to
Brazil. He then wrote to his parents, begging them to send
him a considerable sum of money. Of this he expected to
make a vast advantage. But they refused him roughly:
Unmoved by this, he determined to go without it, as soon as
the ship sailed. But in the morning, the maid, waiting on
him at breakfast, let the tea-kettle fall, and so scalded his leg
that he kept his bed for a considerable time after. During
that time, the ship sailed for Brazil. But it was observed,
that the ship was heard of no more.
9. But how is this reconcilable with the account which has
been given of his piety when he was a child? Very easily:
It only shows, that his piety declined while he was at the
University. (And this is too often the case of other youths
in our own Universities.) But it pleased God at or before
his journey to England to lift up his head again.
10. His desire of being an Officer in the army continued
after he returned from Lisbon. And when he was informed,
that his uncle, then a Colonel in the Dutch service, had
procured a commission for him, he joyfully set out for
Flanders. But just at that time the peace was concluded;
and his uncle dying quickly after, his hopes were blasted, and
he gave up all thoughts of going into the army; and, being
disengaged from all business, he thought it would not be
amiss to spend a little time in England.
11. Coming to the Custom-House in London, with some
other young gentlemen, none of whom could speak any
English, they were treated with the utmost surliness and ill
manners by some brutish Custom-House Officers. These not
only took out and jumbled together all the things that were in
their portmanteaus, but took away their letters of recommend
ation; telling them, “All letters must be sent by the post.”
They are such saucy and ill-mannered wretches as these that
bring up an evil report on our nation. Britons might well
be styled, hospitibus feri,” if they were all like these vermin.
12. From hence they went to an inn; but here they were
under another difficulty. As they spoke no English, they could
not tell how to exchange their foreign into English money;
till Mr. Fletcher, going to the door, heard a well-dressed Jew
talking French. He told him the difficulty they were under,
with regard to the exchange of money. The Jew replied,
“Give me your money, and I will get it changed in five
minutes.” Mr. Fletcher without delay gave him his purse, in
which were ninety pounds. As soon as he came back to his
company, he told them what he had done. They all cried
out with one voice, “Then your money is gone. You need
never expect to see a crown or a doit of it any more. Men
are constantly waiting about the doors of these inns, on
* Rude and inhospitable to foreigners.-EDIT.
purpose to take in young strangers.” Seeing no remedy, no
way to help himself, he could only commend his cause to
God. And that was enough;--before they had done break
fast, in came the Jew, and brought him the whole money.
13. Inquiring for a person who was proper to perfect him
in the English tongue, (the rudiments of which he had begun
to learn before he left Geneva,) he was recommended to
Mr. Burchell, who then kept a boarding-school at South
Nimms in Hertfordshire. And when Mr. Burchell removed
to Hatfield, he chose to remove with him. All the time he
was both at South Nimms and at Hatfield, he was of a
serious and reserved behaviour; very different from that of
the other young gentlemen who were his fellow-students.
Here he diligently studied both the English language, and all
the branches of polite literature. Meantime his easy and
genteel behaviour, together with his eminent sweetness of
temper, gained him the esteem as well as the affection of all
that conversed with him. He frequently visited some of the
first families in Hatfield, who were all fond of his conversa
tion; so lively and ingenious at the same time, evidencing
both the gentleman and the scholar. All this time he had
the fear of God deeply rooted in his heart. But he had none
to take him by the hand, and lead him forward in the ways
of God. He stayed with Mr. Burchell about eighteen
months, who loved him as his own son.
14. Afterwards, one Mr. Dechamps, a French Minister, to
whom he had been recommended, procured him the place of
tutor to the two sons of Thomas Hill, Esq., at Tern-Hall, in
Shropshire. In the year 1752, he removed into Mr. Hill's
family, and entered upon the important province of instructing
the young gentlemen. He still feared God, but had not yet
an experimental sense of his love. Nor was he convinced of
his own fallen state, till one Sunday evening, a servant came
in to make up his fire while he was writing some music, who,
looking at him with serious concern, said, “Sir, I am sorry
to see you so employed on the Lord’s day.” At first his
pride was alarmed, and his resentment moved, at being
reproved by a servant. But upon reflection, he felt the reproof
was just. He immediately put away his music, and from
that very hour became a strict observer of the Lord's day.
15. I have heard two very different accounts of the manner
wherein he had the first notice of the people called Methodists.
But I think it reasonable to prefer to any other, that which
I received from his own mouth. This was as follows:
When Mr. Hill went up to London to attend the Parlia
ment, he took his family and Mr. Fletcher with him. While
they stopped at St. Alban’s, he walked out into the town,
and did not return till they were set out for London. A
horse being left for him, he rode after, and overtook them in
the evening. Mr. Hill asking him why he stayed behind, he
said, “As I was walking, I met with a poor old woman who
talked so sweetly of Jesus Christ, that I knew not how the
time passed away.” “I shall wonder,” said Mrs. H., “if
our tutor does not turn Methodist by and by.” “Methodist,
Madam,” said he, “pray what is that?” She replied,
“Why, the Methodists are a people that do nothing but pray;
they are praying all day and all night.” “Are they?” said
he, “then, by the help of God, I will find them out, if they
be above ground.” He did find them out not long after,
and was admitted into the Society. And from this time,
whenever he was in town, he met in Mr. Richard Edwards’s
class. This he found so profitable to his soul, that he lost
no opportunity of meeting. And he retained a peculiar
regard for Mr. Edwards till the day of his death.
1. It will be most satisfactory to the serious reader, to give
an account of this in his own words. They run thus: “The
12th of January, in the year 1755, I received the sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, though my heart was as hard as a stone.
The following day, I felt the tyranny of sin more than ever,
and an uncommon coldness in all religious duties. I felt the
burden of my corruptions heavier than ever; there was no
rest in my flesh. I called upon the Lord, but with such
heaviness as made me fear it was lost labour. Many a time
did I take up the Bible to seek comfort; but not being able
to read, I shut it again. The thoughts which engrossed my
mind were these: “I am undone. I have wandered from
God more than ever. I have trampled under foot the frequent
convictions which God has wrought in my heart. Instead of
going straight to Christ, I have wasted my time in fighting
against sin by the sole use of the means of grace; as if the
means would do me good without the blessing of God. I
never had faith; and without faith it is impossible to please
God: Therefore all my thoughts, words, and works, however
specious before men, are utterly sinful before God. And if I
am not changed before I go hence, I am lost to all eternity.’
2. “When I saw that all my endeavours availed nothing
against my conquering sin, I almost gave up all hope, and
resolved to sin on and go to hell. Yet I had a strange
thought, ‘If I do go to hell, I will praise God there. And
since I cannot be a monument of his mercy in heaven, I will
be a monument of his justice in hell. But I soon recovered
my ground. I thought, ‘Christ died for all; therefore he died
for me. He died to pluck such sinners as I am out of the
devil's teeth. And as I sincerely desire to be his, he will
surely take me to himself. He will surely let me know before
I die, that he has died for me. If He leaves mc for awhile
in this dreadful state, it is only to show me the depth he draws
me out of.” But then I thought, ‘Perhaps he will do it only
at my dying hour. And must I sin on till then ? How can
I endure this?’ But I thought again, ‘My Saviour was
above three-and-thirty years on earth. Let me wait for him
as many years, and then I may have some excuse for my
impatience. Does God owe me anything? Is he bound to
time or place? Do I deserve anything at his hands but
damnation?’ Yet anger was always one of the sins which I
could not overcome. I went on sinning and repenting, and
sinning again; but still calling on God’s mercy through Christ.
3. “I was now beat out of all my strong holds. I felt my
helplessness, and lay at the feet of Christ. I cried, ‘Save
me, Lord, as a brand plucked out of the fire! Give me
justifying faith; for the devil will surely reign over me, till
thou takest me into thy hand. I shall only be an instrument
in his hand to work wickedness, till thou stretch out thy
almighty hand, and save thy lost creature by free, unmerited
grace.’ I seldom went to private prayer, but this thought came
into my mind, “This may be the happy hour, when thou
wilt prevail with God!’ But still I was disappointed. I
cried to God; but my heart did not go with my lips. I
prayed, but often could hardly keep awake. When overcome
with heaviness, I went to bed, beseeching God to spare me
till the next day, that I might renew my wrestling with him,
till I should prevail.
4. “On Sunday, the 19th, in the evening, I heard an
excellent sermon on these words, “Being justified by faith,
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.’
I heard it attentively, but my heart was not moved. I was
only still more convinced, that I was an unbeliever, and that
till I had faith, I should never have peace. The hymn after
sermon suited the subject; but I could not join in singing it.
So I sat mourning, while others rejoiced. I went home, still
resolving to wrestle with the Lord, like Jacob, till I should
become a prevailing Israel.
5. “I begged of God, the following day, to show me the
wickedness of my heart. I besought him to increase my
convictions; for I was afraid I did not mourn enough for my
sins. But I found relief in Mr. Wesley's Journal, where I
learned, that we should not build on what we feel, but go to
Christ with all our sins, and all our hardness of heart. On
the 21st, I wrote down part of what filled my heart; namely,
a confession of my sins, misery, and helplessness, together with
a resolution to seek Christ even unto death. In the evening,
I read the Scriptures, and found a sort of pleasure in seeing
a picture of my own wickedness exactly drawn in the third of
the Romans, and that of my present condition in the seventh.
I often wished to be acquainted with somebody who had been
in my condition; and resolved to seek for onc to whom I
might unbosom my whole soul. On Thursday, Satan beset
me hard : I sinned, and grievously too. And now I almost
gave up all hope; I was on the brink of despair; and never
theless continued to fall into sin, as often as I had temptation.
But I must observe, that though I frequently thought hell
would be my portion, yet I never was much afraid of it:
Whether this was owing to a secret hope, or to hardness of
heart, I know not. But I was continually crying out, ‘What
stupidity ! I see myself hanging over hell, as it were by a
single thread ' And yet I am not afraid, but sin on 1 O
what is man without the grace of God! A very devil in
wickedness, though inferior to him in power !” In the evening
I went to a sincere friend, and told him something of my
state. He endeavoured to administer comfort; but it was not
suited to my state. When we parted, he gave me some
advice which was better suited to my condition. ‘God,” said
he, ‘is merciful; God loves you; and if he denies you
anything, it is for your good. You deserve nothing at his
hands; but wait patiently for him, and never give up your
hope, I went home, resolved to follow his advice, though I
should stay till death.
6. “I proposed to receive the Lord's Supper on the follow
ing Sunday. I therefore returned to my room, and looked
out a sacramental hymn. I learned it by heart, and prayed
it over many times, intending to repeat it at the table. Then
I went to bed with rather more hope and peace than I had
felt for some time. But Satan waked, though I slept. I
dreamed I had committed a grievous and abominable sin. I
awaked amazed and confounded, but fell upon my knees and
prayed with more faith than usual; and afterwards went
about my business with an uncommon cheerfulness. It was
not long before I was tempted by my besetting sin; but I
found it had no power. My soul was not even ruffled. I
took no notice of this at first. But having withstood the
temptation again and again, I perceived it was the Lord’s
doing. Afterwards it was suggested, ‘It is presumption for
such a sinner to hope for so great a mercy. I prayed, that
I might not be in a delusion; and the more I prayed, the
more clearly I saw it was real. For though sin stirred all the
day long, I always overcame it in the name of the Lord.
7. “In the evening I read the experiences of some of God's
children, and found mine agreed with theirs. Hereby my
faith was strengthened, and my hope considerably increased:
I intreated the Lord to deal with his servant according to his
mercy, and take all the glory to himself. I prayed earnestly,
and was persuaded I should have peace with God and
dominion over sin; not doubting but the full assurance also
would be given in God’s good time. I continued calling on
him for an increase of faith; (for still I had some fear of
being in a delusion;) and having continued my supplication
till near one in the morning, I opened my Bible on those
words: “Cast thy burden on the Lord, and he shall sustain
thee. He will not suffer the righteous to be moved. Filled
with joy, I fell upon my knees, to beg of God that I might
always cast my burden upon him. My hope was now
greatly increased; and I thought I saw myself conqueror
over sin, hell, and all manner of affliction.
8. “With this comfortable promise I shut up my Bible,
being now perfectly satisfied. As I shut it, I cast my cyes
on that word, ‘Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, I will
do it.’ So, having asked grace of God to serve him till
death, I went cheerfully to bed.”
9. So far we have Mr. Fletcher's own account, under his
own hand. From this time he “had the witness in himself;”
he knew that he had “redemption through the blood of
Christ, even the forgiveness of sins.” But he still continued
pleading with the Lord, to take a fuller possession of his
heart; till, one day, as he was in earnest prayer, lying pros
trate on his face before God, he saw, as it were, our blessed
Lord, hanging and bleeding on the cross: And, at the same
time, those words were spoken with power to his heart:
Seized by the rage of sinful men,
I see him bound, and bruised, and slain.
'Tis done ! The Martyr dies !
IIis life to ransom ours is given;
And, lo ! the fiercest fire of heaven
Consumes the sacrifice :
He suffers both from men and God |
He bears the universal load
Of guilt and misery !
He suffers to reverse our doom;
And, lo ! my Lord is here become
The bread of life to me !
10. I believe this was in January, 1754, in the second
year after he removed to Tern. Now all his bonds were
broken; he breathed a purer air, and was able to say with
confidence, “The life I now live, I live by faith in the Son
of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.” By means
of this faith, sin was under his feet. Knowing in whom he
had believed, he could continually triumph in the Lord, and
praise the God of his salvation.
11. From this time he walked cheerfully, as well as
valiantly, in the ways of God. He closely followed his Master,
denying himself, and taking up his cross daily. And, thinking
he had not leisure in the day for the great work which h
had in hand, he made it an invariable rule to sit up two whol
nights in a week. These he dedicated to reading, meditation,
and prayer, in order to enter more deeply into that com
munion with the Father and the Son which was the delight
of his soul. Meantime, he lived entirely on vegetable food,
and for some time on bread, with milk and water. None can
doubt, if these austerities were well intended: But it scems
they were not well judged. It is probable, they gave the first
wound to an excellent constitution, and laid the foundation
of many infirmities, which nothing but death could cure.
l. IT was not long after he had himself “tasted the powers
of the world to come,” that he was pressed in spirit to exhort
others to seek after the same blessing. And he was the
more strongly excited to this, by seeing the world all around
him “lying in wickedness.” Being deeply sensible of the
goodness of God on the one hand, and the misery of man
kind on the other, he found an earnest longing
To pluck poor brands out of the fire,
To snatch them from the verge of hell.
This he began to do a considerable time before he was
admitted into Holy Orders. And even his first labours of
love were far from being in vain. For though he was by no
means perfect in the English tongue, particularly with regard
to the pronunciation of it; yet the earnestness with which
he spoke, (seldom to be found in English Preachers,) and
the unspeakably tender affection to poor, undone sinners,
which breathed in every word and gesture, drew multitudes
of people to hear him; and, by the blessing of God, his word
made so deep an impression on their hearts, that very few
went empty away.
2. From this time, till he undertook the direct care of souls,
he used to be in London during the sitting of the Parliament,
and the rest of the year at Tern-Hall, (as it was then called,)
instructing the young gentlemen. Every Sunday he attended
the parish church at Atcham. But when the service was
ended, instead of going home in the coach, which was always
ready, he usually took a solitary walk by the Severn side, and
spent some time in meditation and prayer. A pious domestic
of Mr. Hill's, having frequently observed him, one Sunday
desired leave to walk with him, which he constantly did from
that time. The account which he (Mr. Vaughan, still living
in London) gives of Mr. Fletcher is as follows:
“It was our ordinary custom, when the Church Service was
over, to retire into the most lonely fields or meadows, where
we frequently either kneeled down, or prostrated ourselves upon
the ground. At those happy seasons I was a witness of such
pleadings and wrestlings with God, such exercises of faith and
love, as I have not known in any one ever since. The conso
lations which we then received from God induced us to appoint
two or three nights in a week, when we duly met after his
pupils were asleep. We met also constantly on Sunday between
four and five in the morning. Sometimes I stepped into his
study on other days. I rarely saw any book before him
besides the Bible and the ‘Christian’s Pattern.” And he was
seldom in any other company, unless when necessary business
required, besides that of the unworthy writer of this paper.”
3. When he was in the country, he used to visit an
Officer of Excise at Atcham, to be instructed in singing. On
my desiring him to give me some account of what he recol
lected concerning Mr. Fletcher, he answered thus: “As
to that man of God, Mr. Fletcher, it is but little that I
remember of him; it being above nine-and-twenty years since
the last time I saw him. But this I well remember, his
conversation with me was always sweet and savoury. He was
too wise to suffer any of his precious moments to be trifled
away. When there was company to dine at Mr. Hill’s, he
frequently retired into the garden, and contentedly dined on
a piece of bread, and a few bunches of currants. Indeed, in
his whole manner of living, he was a pattern of abstemious
ness. Meantime, how great was his sweetness of temper and
heavenly-mindedness ! I never saw it equalled in any one.
How often, when I parted with him at Tern-Hall, have his
eyes and hands been lifted up to heaven to implore a blessing
upon me, with fervour and devoutness unequalled by any I
ever saw ! I firmly believe, he has not left in this land, or
perhaps in any other, one luminary like himself. I conclude,
wishing this light may be so held up, that many may see the
glory thereof, and be transformed into its likeness, May you
and I, and all that love the Lord Jesus Christ, be partakers
of that holiness which was so conspicuous in him !”
4. “Our interviews for singing and conversation,” continues
Mr. Vaughan, who was often present on these occasions, “were
seldom concluded without prayer; in which we were frequently
joined by her that is now my wife; (then a servant in the
family;) as likewise by a poor widow in the village, who had
also known the power of God unto salvation, and who died
some years since, praising God with her latest breath. These
were the only persons in the country whom he chose for his
familiar friends. But he sometimes walked over to Shrews
bury, to see Mrs. Glynne, or Mr. Appleton (who likewise now
rests from his labours, after having many years adorned the
gospel); he also visited any of the poor in the neighbourhood,
that were upon a sick bed; and, when no other person could
be procured, performed even the meanest offices for them.”
5. It was in the year 1757 that he was ordained both
Deacon and Priest. He was ordained at Whitehall; and
the same day, being informed that I had no one to assist me
at West-Street chapel, he came away as soon as ever the
ordination was over, and assisted me in the administration
of the Lord’s supper. He was now doubly diligent in
preaching, not only in the chapels at West-Street and Spital
fields, but wherever the providence of God opened a door to
proclaim the everlasting gospel. This he frequently did, not
only in English, but likewise in French, his native language;
of which he was allowed, by all competent judges, to be a
complete master.
6. “The first time,” says Mr. Vaughan, “he preached in
the country, was at Atcham church, on June 19, 1757. His
text was, (a very bold beginning !) ‘Ye adulterers and
adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of this world is
enmity with God?” (James iv. 4.) The congregation stood
amazed, and gazed upon him as if he had been a monster;
but to me he appeared as a messenger sent from heaven.”
7. It was not soon that he was invited again to preach in
Atcham church. But he was invited to preach in several other
churches in the neighbourhood. He was first invited to
preach at Wroxeter, and afterwards at the Abbey church in
Shrewsbury ; but not being yet perfect in the English
tongue, he wrote down all the sermons he preached in
churches. But I doubt whether he preached above six times
in the six months while he stayed in the country. On my
telling him I wished he had more opportunities of preaching
in this unenlightened part of the land, he answered, “The will
of God be done: I am in his hands; and if he does not call
me to so much public duty, I have the more time for study,
prayer, and praise.”
8. In the year 1758, there were many French prisoners on
their parole at Tunbridge. Being desired to preach to them
in their own language, he readily complied. Many of them
appeared to be deeply affected, and earnestly requested that
he would preach to them every Lord's day. But some
advised them, first, to present a petition to the Bishop of
London for leave. They did so; and (who would believe it?)
the good Bishop peremptorily rejected their petition | If I
had known this at the time, King George should have known
it; and I believe he would have given the Bishop little
thanks. An odd incident followed: A few months after, the
Bishop died of a cancer in his mouth. Perhaps some may
think this was a just retribution for silencing such a Prophet,
on such an occasion I I am not ashamed to acknowledge
this is my own sentiment; and I do not think it any breach
of charity to suppose that an action, so unworthy a Christian
Bishop, had its punishment in this world.
9. When he returned from London in the same year, he was
more frequently invited to preach in several of the neighbouring
churches. And before his quitting the country he gave me a
few printed papers, entitled, “A Christmas-box for Journey
men and Apprentices.” I mention it the rather because I
suppose this was the first thing which he ever published.
10. It was in the beginning of June, 1759, that he returned
the last time from London to Tern-Hall; and being now
less frequently called to public duty, he enjoyed his beloved
retirement, giving himself up to study, meditation, and
prayer, and walking closely with God. Indeed his whole
life was now a life of prayer; and so intensely was his mind
fixed upon God, that I have heard him say, “I would not
move from my seat, without lifting up my heart to God.”
Wherever we met, if we were alone, his first salute was, “Do
I meet you praying?” And if we were talking on any point
of divinity, when we were in the depth of our discourse, he
would often break off abruptly, and ask, “Where are our
hearts now 7” If ever the misconduct of an absent person
was mentioned, his usual reply was, “Let us pray for him.”
ll. It was, as I remember, about the close of this summer,
that he was frequently desired, sometimes to assist, at other
times to perform the whole service for, Mr. Chambers, then
Vicar of Madeley. On these occasions it was, that he con
tracted such an affection for the people of Madeley, as nothing
could hinder from increasing more and more to the day of
his death. While he officiated at Madeley, as he still lived
at the Hall, ten miles distant from it, a groom was ordered
to get a horse ready for him every Sunday morning. But so
great was his aversion for giving trouble to any one, that if
the groom did not wake at the time, he seldom would suffer
him to be called, but prepared the horse for himself.
12. In answer to some queries concerning him, a gentle
man who was intimately acquainted with him for many years
wrote to me as follows:-
“MY aversion to writing letters increases with my
declining years. And yet I most willingly pay this debt to
the precious memory of an old friend. I dwelt near him
only two or three years; but our intimacy was great. And
perhaps I may be able to present you with some particulars
which you have not seen before.
13. “About the year 1760, he showed me, at his lodgings,
a rope with pulleys, which he used for exercise; and added,
with a smile, that the devil often tempted him to hang himself
therewith. I said, ‘The desire of women is a temptation far
more dangerous than this.’ He answered with surprise, (or
rather, as it seemed to me, with a degree of contempt,) “In all
my life I never felt that temptation; no, not in any degree.”
But it is dangerous for a Christian, how great or good soever
he may be, to despise another for being tempted. When we
met again, he acknowledged he had been plagued, like other
men, with that formerly unknown temptation.”
14. In the same year, the living of Madeley fell vacant,
and Mr. Fletcher was presented to it; which he accepted in
preference to another, that was of double the value. He
embraced it as his peculiar charge, the object of his most
tender affection. And he was now at leisure to attend it,
being fully discharged from his former employment; for his
pupils were removed to Cambridge. The elder of them died
about the time of his coming of age; the younger first
represented the town of Salop, as his father had done, and
afterwards the county; till he took his seat in the House of
Peers, as Baron Berwick, of Atcham-House: This is now the
name that is given to what was formerly called Tern-Hall.
FROM HIS SETTLING AT MADELEY, To HIs LEAVING
1. HE settled at Madeley, according to his desire, in the
year 1760. And from the beginning he was a laborious
workman in his Lord's vineyard. At his first settling there,
the hearts of several were unaccountably set against him;
insomuch that he was constrained to warn some of these, that
if they did not repent, God would speedily cut them off. And
the truth of those predictions was shown over and over, by
the signal accomplishment of them. But no opposition could
hinder him from going on in his Master's work, and suppress
ing vice in every possible manner. Those sinners who
endeavoured to hide themselves from him, he pursued to
every corner of his parish; by all sorts of means, public and
private, early and late, in season and out of season, entreating
and warning them to flee from the wrath to come. Some
made it an excuse, for not attending the Church Service on a
Sunday morning, that they could not awake early enough, to
get their families ready. He provided for this also: Taking
a bell in his hand, he set out every Sunday at five in the
morning, and went round the most distant parts of the parish,
inviting all the inhabitants to the house of God.-
2. Yet notwithstanding all the pains he took, he saw for
some time little fruit of his labour; insomuch that he was more
than once in doubt, whether he had not mistaken his place;
whether God had indeed called him to confine himself to one
town, or to labour more at large in his vineyard. He was
not free from this doubt, when a multitude of people flocked
together at a funeral. He seldom let these awful opportunities
slip without giving a solemn exhortation. At the close of the
exhortation which was then given, one man was so grievously
offended, that he could not refrain from breaking out into
scurrilous, yea, menacing language. But, notwithstanding
all his struggling against it, the word fastened upon his
heart. At first, indeed, he roared like a lion; but he soon
wept like a child. Not long after, he came to Mr. Fletcher
in the most humble manner, asking pardon for his outrageous
behaviour, and begging an interest in his prayers. This was
such a refreshment as he stood in need of; and it was but a
short time before this poor broken-hearted sinner was filled
with joy unspeakable. He then spared no pains in exhorting
his fellow-sinners “to flee from the wrath to come.”
3. It was not long after, when, one Sunday evening, Mr.
Fletcher, after performing the usual duty at Madeley, was
about to set out for Madeley-Wood, to preach and catechise
as usual. But just then notice was brought (which should
have been given before) that a child was to be buried. His
waiting till the child was brought, prevented his going to the
Wood. And herein the providence of God appeared. For
at this very time many of the colliers, who neither feared God
nor regarded men, were baiting a bull, just by the preaching
house; and having had plenty of drink, they had all agreed,
as soon as he came, to bait the Parson. Part of them were
appointed to pull him off his horse, and the rest to set the
dogs upon him. One of these very men afterwards confessed
that he was with them when this agreement was made; and
that afterwards, while they were in the most horrid manner
cursing and swearing at their disappointment, a large china
punch-bowl, which held above a gallon, without any apparent
cause (for it was not touched by any person or thing) fell
all to shivers. This so alarmed him, that he forsook all his
companions, and determined to save his own soul.
4. From the beginning he did not confine his labours to
his own parish. For many years he regularly preached at
places, eight, ten, or sixteen miles off; returning the same
night, though he seldom got home before one or two in the
morning. At a little society which he had gathered about
six miles from Madeley, he preached two or three times a
week, beginning at five in the morning. As for visiting the
sick, this was a work for which he was always ready: If he
heard the knocker in the coldest winter night, his window
was thrown open in a moment. And when he understood
either that some one was hurt in the pit, or that a neighbour
was likely to die, no consideration was ever had of the dark
ness of the night, or the severity of the weather; but this
answer was always given: “I will attend you immediately.”
5. But in one respect Mr. Fletcher has frequently been
blamed; namely, for deserting a place where God had
eminently owned him; I mean Trevecka, in Wales. I believe
it is therefore my bounden duty to clear up the whole affair.
And I cannot do this better than by transcribing the substance
of an account which I have received from Mr. Benson, in
answer to my inquiries:
6. “My acquaintance with him,” says he, “ commenced
when I was at Kingswood,--I think, in the year 1768. As
he now and then made a short excursion from Madeley to
Bath or Bristol, in one of those excursions we invited him to
give us a sermon at Kingswood. He was peculiarly assisted
while he was applying those encouraging words: ‘Him that
cometh unto me I will in mowise cast out. The people were
exceedingly affected; indeed, quite melted down. The tears
streamed so fast from the eyes of the poor colliers, that their
grisly, black faces were washed by them, and almost univer
sally streaked with white. And as to himself, his zealous soul
had been carried out so far beyond his strength, that, when
he concluded, he put off a shirt which was as wet as if it had
been dipped in water. But this was nothing strange; when
ever he preached, it was generally the case. From this time
I conceived a particular esteem for him, chiefly on account
of his piety; and wished much for a greater intimacy with
him; a blessing which I soon after obtained.
7. “For, about this time, the Countess of Huntingdon erected
a seminary at Trevecka, in Wales, in order to educate pious
young men, of whatever denomination, for the ministry. She
proposed to admit only such as were converted to God, and
resolved to dedicate themselves to His service. They were
at liberty to stay there three years; during which they were to
have their education gratis, with every necessary of life, and
a suit of clothes once a year: Afterwards those who desired it
might enter into the ministry, either in the Established Church
of England, or among Protestants of any other denomina
tion. From the high opinion which the Countess had of Mr.
Fletcher’s piety, learning, and abilities for such an office, she
invited him to undertake the direction of that seminary.
Not that he could promise to be chiefly resident there; much
less constantly. His duty to his own flock at Madeley would
by no means admit of this. But he was to attend as often as
he conveniently could; to give advice, with regard to the
appointment of Masters, the admission or exclusion of students;
to oversee their studies and conduct; to assist their piety, and
judge of their qualifications for the work of the ministry.
8. “As Mr. Fletcher greatly approved of the design, espe
cially considering, First, that none were to be admitted but
such as feared God; and, Secondly, that when they were
prepared for it, they might enter into the ministry wherever
Providence opened a door; he readily complied with the
invitation, and undertook the charge. This he did without
fee or reward, from the sole motive of being useful in the
most important work of training up persons for the glorious
office of preaching the gospel. And some months after, with
the same view, through his means, and in consequence of
your recommendation to her Ladyship, I was made Head
Master of the school, or, as it was commonly called, the
College; though I could very ill be spared from Kingswood,
where I had acted in that capacity about four years.
9. “As yet I was greatly wanted at Kingswood. I had
likewise a term to keep at Oxford; so that I could only pay
them a short visit in January, 1770. But in spring I went
to reside there; and for some time things went on excellently
well. The young men were serious, and made a considerable
progress in learning. And many of them seemed to have a
talent for preaching. Mr. Fletcher visited them frequently,
and was received as an angel of God. It is not possible for
me: to describe the veneration in which we all held him.
Like Elijah in the schools of the Prophets he was revered;
he was loved; he was almost adored; and that, not only by
every student, but by every member of the family. And
indeed he was worthy.
“Forgive me, my dear Sir, if you think Iexceed. My heart
kindles while I write. Here it was that I saw,--shall I say, an
angel in human flesh? I should not far exceed the truth if
I said so. But here I saw a descendant of fallen Adam, so
fully raised above the ruins of the fall, that though by the
body he was tied down to earth, yet was his whole ‘conversa
tion in heaven; yet was his life, from day to day, ‘hid with
Christ in God.” Prayer, praise, love, and zeal, all ardent,
elevated above what one would think attainable in this state
of frailty, were the element in which he himself continually
lived. And as to others, his one employment was, to call,
entreat, and urge them to ascend with him to the glorious
Source of being and blessedness. He had leisure compara
tively for nothing else. Languages, arts, sciences, grammar,
1'hetoric, logic, even divinity itself, as it is called, were all
laid aside, when he appeared in the school-room among the
1students. His full heart would not suffer him to be silent.
He must speak; and they were readier to hearken to this
servant and Minister of Jesus Christ, than to attend to
Sallust, Virgil, Cicero, or any Latin or Greek historian,
poet, or philosopher they were reading. And they seldom
hearkened long, before they were all in tears, and every
heart catched fire from the flame that burned in his soul.
10. “These seasons generally terminated in this: Being
convinced that to be “filled with the Holy Ghost’ was a
better qualification for the ministry of the gospel than any
classical learning, (though that too may be useful in its place,)
after speaking awhile in the school-room, he used frequently
to say, “As many of you as are athirst for this fulness of
the Spirit, follow me into my room.” On this, many of us
have instantly followed him, and there continued till noon,
wrestling like Jacob for the blessing, praying one after
another, till we could bear to kneel no longer. This was not
done once or twice, but many times. And I have sometimes
seen him on these occasions, once in particular, so filled with
the love of God, that he could contain no more; but cried
out, ‘O my God, withhold thy hand, or the vessel will burst.”
But he afterwards told me, he was afraid he had grieved the
Spirit of God; and that he ought rather to have prayed that
the Lord would have enlarged the vessel, or have suffered it
to break; that the soul might have no farther bar or inter
ruption to its enjoyment of the supreme good.”
This is certainly a just remark. The proper prayer on
such an occasion would have been,
Give me the enlarged desire,
And open, Lord, my soul,
Thy own fulness to require,
And comprehend the whole !
Stretch my faith's capacity
Wider, and yet wider still ;
Then with all that is in thee
My ravish'd spirit fill !
11. “Such was the ordinary employment of this man of God
while he remained at Trevecka. He preached the word of life
to the students and family, and as many of the neighbour's
as desired to be present. He was ‘instant in season, out of
season;’ he ‘reproved, rebuked, exhorted, with all long
suffering. He was always employed, either in discovering;
some important truth, or exhorting to some neglected duty,
or administering some needful comfort, or relating some useful
anecdote, or making some profitable remark or observation
upon anything that occurred. And his devout soul, always
burning with love and zeal, led him to intermingle prayer with
all he said. Meanwhile his manner was so solemn, and at
the same time so mild and insinuating, that it was hardly pos
sible for any who had the happiness of being in his company
not to be struck with awe and charmed with love, as if in the
presence of an angel or departed spirit. Indeed I frequently
thought, while attending to his heavenly discourse and divine
spirit, that he was so different from, and superior to, the gene
rality of mankind, as to look more like Moses or Elijah, or some
Prophet or Apostle come again from the dead, than a mortal
man dwelling in a house of clay. It is true, his weak and long
afflicted body proclaimed him to be human. But the graces
which so eminently filled and adorned his soul, manifested
him to be divine. And long before his happy spirit returned
to God that gave it, that which was human seemed in a great
measure to be “swallowed up of life.” O what a loss did
Trevecka sustain, what an irreparable loss, when he left it !
12. “But why then did he leave it? Why did he give up
an office, for which he was so perfectly well qualified? which
he executed so entirely to the satisfaction of all the parties
wherewith he was concerned, and in which it had pleased
God to give so manifest a blessing to his labours? Perhaps
it would be better, in tenderness to some persons, eminent
for piety and usefulness, to let that matter remain still under
the veil which forgiving love has cast over it. But if it be
thought that justice to his character, and to the cause which
from that time he so warmly espoused and so ably defended,
requires some light to be cast upon it, it may be the most
inoffensive way to do it in his own words.”
It will be proper to observe here, for the better understand
ing of the following letter, that some time before Mr. Fletcher
quitted Trevecka, Mr. Benson had been discharged from his
office there; not for any defect of learning or piety, or any
fault found with his behaviour; but wholly and solely because
he did not believe the doctrine of absolute predestination.
13. “The following is an exact copy of all that is material
in a letter he wrote to me, in consequence of my dismission
from the office I had been in :
“‘DEAR SIR, June 7, 1771.
“‘THE same post brought me yours, and two from my
Lady, and one from Mr. Williams, the new Master. Those
contained no charges but general ones, which with me go for
nothing. If the procedure you mention is fact, and your
letter is a fair account of the transaction and words relative
to your discharge, a false step has been taken. I write this
post to her Ladyship on the affair, with all possible plainness.
If the plan of the College is overthrown, I have nothing more
to say to it. I will keep to my text, for one. I trust I shall
ever be a servant of all: The confined tool of any one party
I never was, and never will be. If the blow that should have
been struck at the dead spirit, is struck (contrary to the
granted liberty of sentiment) at dead Arminius, or absent
Mr. Wesley; if a Master is turned away without any fault;
it is time for me to stand up with firmness, or to withdraw.”
14. “The following paragraphs are transcribed from Mr.
Fletcher's letter to my Lady :
“‘Mr. Benson made a very just defence when he said, he
did hold with me the possibility of salvation for all men. If
this is what you call Mr. Wesley’s opinion and Arminianism,
and if every Arminian must quit the College, I am actually
discharged. For in my present view of things, I must hold
that sentiment, if I believe that the Bible is true, and that
God is love.
“‘For my part, I am no party-man. In the Lord I am
your servant, and that of your every student. But I cannot
give up the honour of being connected with my old friends,
who, notwithstanding their failings, are entitled to my
respect, gratitude, and affection. Mr. Wesley shall always be
welcome to my pulpit, and I shall gladly bear my testimony
in his as well as Mr. Whitefield's. If you forbid your
students to preach for the one, and offer them to preach for
the other; and if a Master is discarded for believing that
Christ died for all; then prejudice reigns, charity is cruelly
wounded, and party-spirit shouts, prevails, triumphs.”
15. “Two days after,” continues Mr. Benson, “he writes,
‘I am determined to stand or fall with the liberty of the
College. As I entered it a free place, I must quit it the
moment it is an harbour for party-spirit.”
“This he was soon constrained to do, as appears from the
following letter, wrote about two months after --
“‘ON my arrival at the College, I found all very quiet, I
fear through the enemy’s keeping his goods in peace. While I
preached the next day I found myself as much shackled as ever
I was in my life. And after private prayer, I concluded I
was not in my place. The same day, I resigned my office to
my Lady, and on Wednesday, to the students and the Lord.
“‘Mr. Shirley has sent my Lady a copy of part of the
Minutes of the last Conference, viz., of the year 1770. They
were called horrible and abominable. My Lady told me, she
must burn against them ; and that whoever did not fully dis
avow them must quit the College. She accordingly ordered the
Master and all the students to write their sentiments upon
them without reserve. I did so; explained them according to
Mr. Wesley’s sentiments; and approved the doctrine, though
not cautiously worded. I concluded by observing, that as,
after such a step on my part, and such a declaration on my
Lady’s, I could no longer, as an honest man, stay in the
College, I took my leave of it; wishing my Lady might find
a Minister to preside over it less insufficient than
16. “These were his reasons for resigning his charge at
Trevecka. As the Circular Letter now went abroad, under
the name of Mr. Shirley, inviting the Clergy of all denomina
tions to assemble in a body at Bristol to oppose you and the
Preachers met in Conference, and oblige you to revoke the
dreadful heresies contained in those Minutes; and as Mr.
Fletcher thought the Churches throughout Christendom to be
verging very fast toward Antinomianism; he thought the
propositions contained in those Minutes ought rather to be
confirmed than revoked. And as he was now retired to his
parish, he had more leisure for such a work than before. So,
after much prayer and consideration, he determined to write
in defence of them. In how able a manner he did this, I need
not tell any that have read those incomparable writings. I
know not how to give the character of them better, than in the
words of Dr. D , to whom I sent Mr. Fletcher's Checks,
with a recommendatory letter. He answered me,--
“‘WHEN I first read yours, I must own, I suspected
your friendship for Mr. Fletcher had made you too lavish in
your commendation of his writings; and that when I came to
read them, I should find some abatements necessary to be
made. But now I have read them, I am far from thinking
you have spoken extravagantly; or indeed, that too much can
be said in commendation of them. I had not read his first
Letter, before I was so charmed with the spirit as well as
abilities of the writer, that the gushing tear could not be hin
dered from giving full testimony of my heart-felt satisfaction.
Perhaps some part of this pleasure might arise from finding
my own sentiments so fully embraced by the author. But
sure I am the greatest share of it arose from finding those
benevolent doctrines so firmly established, and that with such
judgment, clearness, and precision, as are seldom, very seldom
to be met with. What crowns the whole is, the amiable and
Christian temper, which those who will not be convinced
must however approve, and wish that their own doctrines
may be constantly attended with the same spirit.’”
17. How much good has been occasioned by the publication
of that Circular Letter! This was the happy occasion of Mr.
Fletcher's writing those “Checks to Antinomianism;” in
which one knows not which to admire most, the purity of the
language, (such as scarce any foreigner wrote before,) the
strength and clearness of the argument, or the mildness and
sweetness of the spirit that breathes throughout the whole;
insomuch that I nothing wonder at a serious Clergyman, who,
being resolved to live and die in his own opinion, when he
was pressed to read them, replied, “No; I will never read
Mr. Fletcher's Checks; for if I did, I should be of his mind.”
18. A short extract from another of his letters will show what
was his state of mind at this crisis. “How much water,” says
he, “may at last rush out from a little opening ! What are our
dear L--’s jealousies come to? Ah, poor College | Their
conduct, among other reasons, has stirred me up to write in
defence of the Minutes. Methinks I dream, when I reflect I
have wrote controversy the last subject I thought I should
meddle with. I expect to be roughly handled on the account.
Lord, prepare me for everything thou callest me to !
ge J. F.”
1. THE frequent journeys he took to and from Trevecka
while he presided over the College, in all weathers, and at
all seasons of the year, farther impaired the firmness of his
constitution; and in some of those journeys, he had not
only difficulties, but dangers likewise, to encounter. One
day, as he was riding over a wooden bridge, just as he got to
the middle thereof, it broke in. The mare's forelegs sunk
into the river, but her breast and hinder parts were kept up
by the bridge. In that position she lay, as still as if she
had been dead, till he got over her neck, and took off his
bags, in which were several manuscripts, the spoiling of which
would have occasioned him much trouble. He then endea
voured to raise her up; but she would not stir, till he went
over the other part of the bridge. But no sooner did he set
his foot upon the ground, than she began to plunge. Imme
diately the remaining part of the bridge broke down, and
sunk with her into the river. But presently she rose up
again, swam out, and came to him.
2. About this time, Mr. Pilmoor being desirous to see the
inside of a coal-pit, Mr. Fletcher went with him to the
bottom of a sloping pit, which was supposed to be near a
mile under the ground. They returned out of it without any
inconvenience. But the next day, while several colliers were
there, a damp took fire, which went off with a vast explosion,
and killed all the men that were in it.
3. In February, 1773, I received from him the following
letter:
“REv. AND DEAR SIR,
“I HoPE the Lord, who has so wonderfully stood by you
hitherto, will preserve you to see many of your sheep, and me
among them, enter into rest. Should Providence call you first,
I shall do my best, by the Lord’s assistance, to help your
brother to gather the wreck, and keep together those who are
not absolutely bent to throw away the Methodist doctrines
and discipline, as soon as he that now letteth is removed out
of the way. Every help will then be necessary, and I shall
not be backward to throw in my mite. In the meantime, you
sometimes need an assistant to serve tables, and occasionally
to fill up a gap. Providence visibly appointed me to that
office many years ago. And though it no less evidently called
me hither, yet I have not been without doubt, especially for
some years past, whether it would not be expedient that I should
resume my office as your Deacon; not with any view of pre
siding over the Methodists after you, but to ease you a little
in your old age, and to be in the way of recovering, perhaps
doing, more good. I have sometimes thought, how shameful
it was, that no Clergyman should join you, to keep in the
Church the work God has enabled you to carry on therein.
And as the little estate I have in my own country is sufficient
for my maintenance, I have thought I would one day or other
offer you and the Methodists my free service. While my love
of retirement made me linger, I was providentially led to do
something in Lady Huntingdon's plan. But being shut out
there, it appears to me, I am again called to my first work.
Nevertheless, I would not leave this place without a fuller
persuasion that the time is quite come. Not that God uses
me much here, but I have not yet sufficiently cleared my
conscience from the blood of all men. Meantime, I beg the
Lord to guide me by his counsel, and make me willing to go
anywhere or nowhere, to be anything or nothing.
“Help, by your prayers, till you can bless by word of mouth,
“Reverend and dear Sir,
“Your willing, though unprofitable, servant in the gospel,
“MADELEY, February 6, 1773.”
4. “Providence,” says he, “visibly appointed me to that
office many years ago.” Is it any wonder, then, that he should
now be in doubt, whether he did right in confining himself to
one spot? The more I reflect upon it, the more I am con
vinced, he had great reason to doubt of this. I can never
believe it was the will of God, that such a burning and shining
light should be “hid under a bushel.” No; instead of being
confined to a country village, it ought to have shone in every
corner of our land. He was full as much called to sound an
alarm through all the nation, as Mr. Whitefield himself: Nay,
abundantly more so; seeing he was far better qualified for
that important work. He had a more striking person, equal
good breeding, an equally winning address; together with a
richer flow of fancy, a stronger understanding; a far greater
treasure of learning, both in languages, philosophy, philology,
and divinity; and, above all, (which I can speak with fuller
assurance, because I had a thorough knowledge both of one
and the other,) a more deep and constant communion with
the Father, and with the Son Jesus Christ.
5. And yet, let not any one imagine that I depreciate
Mr. Whitefield, or undervalue the grace of God, and the
extraordinary gifts, which his great Master vouchsafed unto
him. I believe he was highly favoured of God; yea, that
he was one of the most eminent Ministers that has appeared
in England, or perhaps in the world, during the present
century. Yet I must own, I have known many fully equal
to Mr. Whitefield, both in holy tempers and holiness of
conversation; but one equal herein to Mr. Fletcher I have
not known, no, not in a life of fourscore years.
6. However, having chosen, at least for the present, this
narrow field of action, he was more and more abundant in
his ministerial labours, both in public and private; not con
tenting himself with preaching, but visiting his flock in every
corner of his parish. And this work he attended to, early
and late, whether the weather was fair or foul; regarding
neither heat nor cold, rain nor snow, whether he was on horse
back or on foot. But this farther weakened his constitution;
which was still more effectually done by his intense and
uninterrupted studies; in which he frequently continued with
out scarce any intermission, fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen hours
a day. But still he did not allow himself such food as was
necessary to sustain nature. He seldom took any regular
meals, except he had company; otherwise, twice or thrice in
four-and-twenty hours, he ate some bread and cheese, or fruit.
Instead of this, he sometimes took a draught of milk, and
then wrote on again. When one reproved him for not
affording himself a sufficiency of necessary food, he replied,
“Not allow myself food | Why, our food seldom costs my
housekeeper and me together less than two shillings a week.”
7. “On the tenth of May, 1774,” says Mr. Vaughan, to
whom we are indebted for several of the preceding anecdotes,
“he wrote to me thus: ‘My brother has sent me the rent of
a little place I have abroad, eighty pounds, which I was to
receive from Mr. Chauvet and Company, in London. But
instead of sending the draught for the money, I have sent it
back to Switzerland, with orders to distribute it among thc
poor. As money is rather higher there than here, that mite
will go farther abroad than it would in my parish.’”
8. To show in how great a degree he was disengaged from
Wealth, honour, pleasure, or what else
This short-enduring world could give,
Mr. Vaughan gives us another little memoir, which fell
within his own knowledge: “After he had published two or
three small political pieces, in reference to our contest with
the Americans, ‘I carried one of them,” says he, in a letter to
me, ‘to the Earl of D. His Lordship carried it to the Lord
Chancellor, and the Lord Chancellor handed it to the King.”
One was immediately commissioned to ask Mr. Fletcher,
whether any preferment in the Church would be acceptable;
or whether he (the Chancellor) could do him any service.
He answered, ‘I want nothing, but more grace.”
9. “In 1776, he deposited with me a bill of one hundred
and five pounds, being (as I understood) the yearly produce
of his estate in Switzerland. This was his fund for charitable
uses; but it lasted only a few months before he drew upon
me for the balance, which was twenty-four pounds, to
complete the preaching-house in Madeley-Wood.”
10. In the same year, his health being more than ever
impaired by a violent cough, accompanied with spitting of
blood, of which I had had large experience myself; having
frequently seen the surprising effects of constant exercise,
together with change of air; I told him, nothing was so
likely to restore his health as a long journey. I therefore
proposed his taking a journey of some months with me,
through various parts of England and Scotland; telling him,
“When you are tired, or like it best, you may come into
my carriage; but remember, that riding on horseback is
the best of all exercises for you, so far as your strength
will permit.” He looked upon this as a call from Providence,
and very willingly accepted of the proposal. We set out (as
I am accustomed to do) early in the spring, and travelled,
by moderate journeys, suited to his strength, which gradually
increased, eleven or twelve hundred miles. When we returned
to London, in the latter end of the year, he was considerably
better. And I verily believe, if he had travelled with me,
partly in the chaise and partly on horseback, only a few
months longer, he would have quite recovered his health.
But this those about him would not permit; so, being
detained in London, by his kind but injudicious friends,
while I pursued my journeys, his spitting of blood, with all
the other symptoms, returned, and rapidly increased, till the
Physicians pronounced him to be far advanced in a true,
pulmonary consumption.
11. It being judged quite improper for him to remain in
London, on December 16, 1776, he retired to the house of a
friend, Mr. Charles Greenwood, (now with God,) to Stoke
Newington. Here he had the advice of the most eminent
Physicians that London could afford. He was also in a good
air, and had every convenience and every help which art could
bestow. One of the family, of whom I inquired concerning
this part of his life, gave me the following information :
12. “Agreeably to your desire, I endeavour to recollect some
particulars of Mr. Fletcher, during his abode at Newington.
“When he first came, he was, by Dr. Fothergill's advice,
under the strictest observance of two things,--rest and silence.
These, together with a milk diet, were supposed to be the only
probable means of his recovery. In consequence of these
directions, he spoke exceeding little. If ever he spoke more
than usual, it did not fail to increase his spitting of blood;
of which, indeed, he was seldom quite clear, although it was
not violent: Therefore, a great part of his time was spent in
being read to. But it was not possible to restrain him altogether
from speaking. The fire which continually burned in his
heart many waters could not quench. It often burst out
unawares. And then how did we wonder (like those who
formerly heard his Lord) “at the gracious words which
proceeded out of his mouth !’ He could not have sustained
life without sometimes giving vent to his heart. No penance
could have appeared so severe a cross to him, as to be
debarred from speaking of or to God. His natural vivacity,
with his intense love of Jesus, continually impelled him to
speak. But, on being reminded of his rule, with a cheerful
smile, he was all submission; consenting by signs only to
stir up those about him to pray and praise !
13. “Whoever has read Mr. Fletcher's Last Check to
Antinomianism, and has had the privilege of observing his
spirit and conduct, will not scruple to say that he was a living
comment on his own account of Christian perfection. It is
an alarming word which our Lord speaks ‘to the Angel of
the Church of Sardis: ‘I have not found thy works perfect
before God.” But, as far as man is able to judge, from the
whole tenor of his behaviour, he did possess perfect humility,
perfect resignation, and perfect love. Suitable to this was
the testimony concerning him which was given in Lady
Huntingdon's chapel at Bristol, even by Mr. V., a gentleman
strongly attached to those opinions which Mr. Fletcher
thought it his duty to oppose: ‘I have enjoyed the privilege
of being several weeks under the same roof with dear Mr.
Fletcher: And during that time, I have been greatly edified
by his perfect resignation to the will of God; and by being
a witness to his exemplary conduct and uncommon grace.”
14. “When he was able to converse, his favourite subject
was, ‘the promise of the Father, the gift of the Holy Ghost,’
including that rich, peculiar blessing of union with the Father
and the Son, mentioned in that prayer of our Lord which
is recorded in the seventeenth chapter of St. John. Many
were the sparks of living fire which occasionally darted forth
on this beloved theme. ‘We must not be content,” said he,
‘to be only cleansed from sin; we must be filled with the
Spirit.’ One asking him, what was to be experienced in the
full accomplishment of the promise; ‘O, said he, “what
shall I say? All the sweetness of the drawings of the Father,
all the love of the Son, all the rich effusions of peace and joy
in the Holy Ghost;--more than ever can be expressed, are
comprehended here ! To attain it, the Spirit maketh inter
cession in the soul, like a God wrestling with a God!”
15. “It was in these favoured moments of converse that
we found, in a particular manner, the reward which is
annexed to the “receiving a Prophet in the name of a Prophet.’
And in some of these he occasionally mentioned several
circumstances, which (as none knew them but himself) would
otherwise have been buried in everlasting oblivion.
“One of those remarkable passages was, “In the beginning,”
said he, ‘of my spiritual course, I heard the voice of God, in
an articulate but inexpressibly awful sound, go through my
soul in those words: If any man will be my disciple, let him
deny himself.’ He mentioned another peculiar manifestation
of a later date, ‘in which,” said he, ‘I was favoured, like
Moses, with a supernatural discovery of the glory of God, in
an ineffable converse with him, face to face; so that, whether
I was then in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell.’
16. “At another time he said, ‘About the time of my
entering into the ministry, I one evening wandered into a
wood, musing on the importance of the office I was going to
undertake. I then began to pour out my soul in prayer;
when such a feeling sense of the justice of God fell upon me,
and such a sense of his displeasure at sin, as absorbed all my
powers, and filled my soul with the agony of prayer for poor,
lost sinners. I continued therein till the dawn of day; and
*
I considered this as designed of God to impress upon me
more deeply the meaning of those solemn words: Therefore
knowing the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men.’
17. “The blessed state of his soul continually manifested
itself, by its overflowing good-will to all that came in his way.
And yet his spirit was so deeply impressed with those words,
“Not as though I had already attained,’ that the vehemence
of his desire for a fuller manifestation of God seemed some
times to border upon unhappiness. But his ardent soul only
felt the full impression of those words of the Apostle:
“Forgetting the things that are behind, and reaching forth
unto those that are before, I press toward the mark, for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.’
18. “One end of his retiring to Newington was, that he
might hide himself from company. But this design was in
nowise answered; for company came from every side. He
was continually visited by high and low, and by persons of
various denominations; one of whom being asked, when he
went away, what he thought of Mr. Fletcher, said, ‘I went to
see a man that had one foot in the grave, but I found a man
that had one foot in heaven. Among them that now visited
him were several of his beloved and honoured opponents; to
whom he confirmed his love (however roughly they had treated
him) by the most respectful and affectionate behaviour. But
he did not give up any part of the truth for which he had
publicly contended; although some (from whom one would
have expected better things) did not scruple to affirm the
contrary. Those of his particular friends who visited him
here will not easily forget how he exhausted his whole soul
in effusions of thankfulness: Mrs. Cartwright and Cavendish
in particular, with his faithful and affectionate friend Mr.
Ireland, will remember their interviews with him. And those
of the family were almost oppressed by the outpourings of
his love and gratitude, whenever they showed their love and
care in the most inconsiderable instance; yea, so thankful,
in proportion, would he be to even the meanest servant.
19. “It was not without some difficulty that Mr. Ireland at
length prevailed upon him to sit for his picture. While the
limner was drawing the outlines of it, he was exhorting both
him and all that were in the room, not only to get the outlines
drawn, but the colourings also, of the image of Jesus on their
hearts. He had a very remarkable facility in making allu
sions of this kind; in raising spiritual observations from
every accidental circumstance; in turning men's employments,
pleasures, and pains, into means of edification: This he did,
in order to engage the attention of the thoughtless, the more
deeply to fix the attention of the thoughtful, and to prevent
the trifling away of time in unprofitable conversation. And
such little incidents as used to pass away unnoticed by almost
any other person, acquired from Mr. Fletcher's fine imagina
tion a kind of grace and dignity. To give an instance: Being
ordered to be let blood, while his blood was running into the
cup, he took occasion to expatiate on the precious blood
shedding of the Lamb of God. And even when he did not
speak at all, the seraphic spirit which beamed from his languid
face, during those months of pain and weakness, was
A lecture silent, yet of sovereign use.”
20. But it is necessary to be observed, that this facility
of raising useful observations from the most trifling incidents
was one of those peculiarities in him which cannot be
proposed to our imitation. In him it partly resulted from
nature, and was partly a supernatural gift. But what was
becoming and graceful in Mr. Fletcher, would be disgustful
almost in any other.
21. “One of those who visited him at Newington was Mr.
William Perronet; a pious, sensible, and amiable young man,
who was snatched hence in the bloom of youth. He often said,
the first sight of Mr. Fletcher fixed an impression upon his
mind which never wore off till it issued in a real conversion
to God; ever accompanied with a most affectionate regard
for the instrument of that happy change.”
Soon after he left Newington, he wrote the following letter:--
“May 28, 1777.
“MY prayer shall always be, that the merciful may find
mercy, and that the great kindness I have found under your
quiet roof, may be showed you everywhere under the canopy
of heaven. I think with grateful joy on the days of calm
retreat I have been blessed with at Newington, and lament my
not having improved better the precious opportunity of sitting,
Mary-like, at the feet of my Great Physician. May He requite
your kind care of a dying worm, by abundantly caring for
you and yours, and making all your bed in your sickness!
May you enjoy full health ! May you hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and be abundantly filled therewith ! May you
sweetly rest in Christ ! May His protection be as a wall of
fire round about you and yours! May His rod and staff
comfort you under all the troubles of life, the decays of the
body, the assaults of the enemy, and the pangs of death !
May you stand in the clefts of the Rock of Ages, and be safely
sheltered there, when all the storms of justice blow around !
And may you always have such spiritual and temporal helps,
friends and comforts, as I have found in your pleasing
retreat! You have received a poor Lazarus; (though his
sores were not visible;) you have had compassion, like the
good Samaritan; you have admitted me to the enjoyment of
your best things; and now what can I say? what but,
‘Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift; and thanks to
my dear friends for all their favours? They will, I trust, be
found faithfully recorded in my breast, when the great
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him will render to
every man according to his works; and a raised Lazarus
shall then appear in the gate, to testify of the love of Charles
and Mary Greenwood, and their godly sister !
“I was a little better, but I now spit blood, more than I
had done for weeks before. Glory be to God for every provi
dence | His will be done in me, by health or sickness, life or
death. All from Him is, and, I trust, will be, welcome to
“Your obliged pensioner,
FROM HIs LEAVING NEWINGTON, TILL HIs RETURN FROM
1. HE continued with Mr. Greenwood at Newington
upwards of fifteen months. The Physicians then advised him
to make a trial of the Hot-Well water, near Bristol. “I was
desired by Mr. and Mrs. Ireland,” (who took him down in
April, 1777) says Miss Thornton, “to bear them company
thither; which I willingly did. Indeed I looked upon it as
a call from God; nor could I desire a greater honour, than to
share in the employment of angels, in ministering to a dis
tinguished heir of salvation. At Brislington, near Bristol, he
continued in the same holy, earnest course as at Newington.
Every day he drank the Hot-Well water, and it agreed with
him well. So that he appeared to gather a little strength;
though not so swiftly as was expected. And all the strength
which he received, he laid out in labours of love, for the benefit
of all those, rich or poor, whom Providence cast in his way.
2. “Whenever he was in company, it was his general
method, so far as his strength would admit, to pray particularly
for every person present. And from his habitual prayer
resulted that life and energy in his words, which every one
that was blessed with his society felt more or less. Now and
then likewise he adventured to pray in the family. But he was
not wary enough in this. He more than once so much exerted
himself, that he was brought very low. As soon as he was
well enough to write, he was intent upon finishing two treatises
for the press. The Plan of Reconciliation, in particular, lay
very near his heart. He longed to conclude it before he
died, which he wished to do, breathing peace to Jerusalem,
and pointing out to the children of God the most probable
means of effecting it; of uniting together, in the bonds of
peace and love, all the true Ministers and followers of Jesus.”
3. From Bristol he wrote to a friend thus: “I thank God
I am not afraid of any evil tidings: My heart standeth fast,
believing in the Lord, and desiring Him to do with me just
what pleases Him. With respect to my body, my Physician
hopes I shall do well. And so I hope and believe too. For
health or sickness, life or death, is best when the Lord
sends it.
“I am in hopes of seeing you soon; though my friends talk
of detaining me, to make a farther trial of the waters. I am
forbid preaching; but, blessed be God, I am not forbid by
my Heavenly Physician to pray, believe, and love. This is a
sweet work, which heals, strengthens, and delights: Let us do
it, till we have recovered our spiritual strength. And then,
whether we shall be seen on earth or not, it will be all alike.
“O be hearty in the cause of religion | Be either hot or
£old. It is a fearful thing to be lukewarm, and thereby fall
into the hands of the living God. Be humbly zealous for
your own salvation and for God’s glory. And forget not to
care for each other's salvation. The case of wicked Cain is
very common; the practice of many says, with that wretch,
‘Am I my brother's keeper?” O pray God to keep you by
his mighty power through faith unto salvation | Keep your
selves in the love of God, and keep one another by example,
reproof, exhortation, encouragement, social prayer, and a
faithful use of all the means of grace. Use yourselves to bow
at Christ's feet as your Prophet. Go to him continually for
the holy anointing of his Spirit, who will be a Teacher always
near, always with you and in you. If you have that inward
Instructer, you will suffer no material loss, though your
outward Teachers should be removed.
“While you have the light of God’s word, believe in the light,
that ye may be the children of the light, fitted for the kingdom
of eternal light; where, I charge you, prepare to meet with joy
“Your affectionate, though unworthy,
t “Brother and Minister,
4. I subjoin part of a letter wrote some time before, in the
same spirit, to his parishioners at Madeley:--
“December 28, 1776.
“MY DEAR PARISHIoNERs,
“THE weakness of my body confining me from you, I
humbly submit to the divine dispensation. And I ease the
trouble of my absence from you, by being present with you in
spirit, and by reflecting on the pleasure I have felt in years
past, in singing with you, “Unto us a Child is born, unto us a
Son is given.’ This truth let us receive with all readiness,
and we shall meet in Christ, the centre of lasting union. And
our hearts shall be full of the song of angels, ‘Glory be unto
God in the highest ! On earth peace, good-will toward men l’
In order to this, may the eyes of your understanding be more
and more opened to see the need of a Redeemer, and to
behold the suitableness, freeness, and fulness of the redemp
tion wrought out by the Son of God! This wish glows in my
soul so ardently, that it brings me down upon my knees while
I write. And in that posture I entreat you all to consider
and improve the day of your visitation; and to prepare in good
earnest to meet with joy your God and your unworthy Pastor
in another world ! Weak as I was when I left you, I hear that
many, who were then healthy and strong, have got the start
of me; and that some have been hurried into eternity without
a moment's warning. May this awful event strike a deeper
consideration into all our souls 1 May the sound of their bodies,
dashed in pieces at the bottom of the pit, rouse us to a speedy
conversion, that we may never, through carelessness or delay,
fall into the bottomless pit ! Tottering as I stand on the
brink of the grave, some of you also may drop into it before
me. Let us all, then, prepare for our approaching change, and
never rest till we are assured it will be a happy one. Let the
longsuffering of God toward us, who survive the hundreds
that I have buried, lead us all to repentance. Embrace Jesus
Christ, who wept for you in the manger, agonized for you in.
the garden, bled for you on the cross, and now pleads for you
on his mediatorial throne. Meet me not at the great day in
your sins and in your blood. Meet me in the robe of
Christ's merits, and in ‘the white linen’ (the purity of heart
and life) ‘which is the righteousness of the saints. Let all
wickedness be gone for ever with the old year; and with the
new year begin a new life; a life of renewed devotion to
God, and increasing love to our neighbour.
“Though I hope to see much more of the goodness of God
in the land of the living than I do see, yet, blessed be the
divine mercy, I see enough to keep my mind at all times
unruffled, and to make me calmly willing to resign my soul
into the hands of my faithful Creator. I desire your public
thanks for all the favours which he continually showeth me.
May our thankfulness crown the new year, as the Lord’s
patience and goodness have renewed our life. Permit me to
beseech an interest in your prayers also. Ask that I may be
willing to receive all that God is willing to bestow. Ask that
I may meekly suffer and zealously do all the will of God in
my present circumstances; and that, living or dying, I may
say, ‘To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.” If God
calls me soon, I beg he may, in his good providence, appoint
a more faithful shepherd over you. You need not fear but
he will. For these many months you have had no famine of
the word. And what God hath done for months, he can do
for years; yea, all the years of your life. Only pray. Ask,
and you shall have. Meet me at the throne of grace, and
you shall meet at the throne of glory
“Your affectionate, obliged, unworthy Minister,
fg J. F.”
5. To a friend, meantime, he wrote thus: “With respect to
my soul, I calmly wait, in unshaken resignation, for the full
salvation of God; ready to trust him, to venture on his faithful
love, and on the sure mercies of David, either at midnight,
noon-day, or cock-crowing. For my time is in his hand; and
his time is best, and shall be my time. Death hath lost his
sting; and I thank God I know not what hurry of spirits
is, or unbelieving fears, under the most trying circumstances.
Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift l”
6. He now spent part of his time at Bristol, but the greatest
part at Brislington. In one place or the other, as well as at
Newington, he was visited by many respectable persons.
Many of these were Calvinists; several of whom bore witness
to his deep piety and exalted spirit. But a Dissenting
Minister, after pressing him hard, with regard to some of his
opinions, told him, with great warmth, “Mr. Fletcher, you
had better have been gasping for life with an asthma, or have
had all your limbs unstrung by a palsy, than to have wrote
those Checks.” Mr. Fletcher replied, “Sir, I then wanted
more love, and I do so still:” And in his highest fervours of
divine love, he always acknowledged his want of more.
7. Here, also, he missed no opportunity of instructing
servants and children, suiting his discourse, in a manner pecu
liar to himself, to their capacity or their business. And what
would have appeared low in another, did not appear so when
spoken by him. Thus, he advised the cook to stir up the fire
of divine love in his heart, that it might burn up all the rubbish
therein, and raise a flame of holy affection; to which, with
the greatest cordiality, he would subjoin a short prayer.
Thus, to the housemaid he said, “I entreat you to sweep every
corner of your heart, that it may be fit to receive your heavenly
Guest.” To a poor man, who came there in a deep consump
tion, but little concerned for his soul, he said, in a very
solemn manner, (laying one hand on his own breast, and the
other on the poor man's,) “God has fixed a loud knocker at
your breast and mine. Because we did not regard, as we ought
to have done, the gentle knocks and calls of his Holy Spirit,
his word, and his providences, he has taken fast hold here,
and we cannot get out of his hand. O let this knocker
awaken you, who are just dropping into eternal sleep!”
8. When one or another occasionally mentioned any unkind
thing which had been said of him or his writings, if the person
who had said it was named, he would stop the speaker imme
diately, and offer up the most fervent prayer for the person
of whom he spoke. He did not willingly suffer any one to
say anything against his opponents; and he made all the
allowances for them, which, on a change of circumstances, he
would have wished them to make for him.
9. He continued at Brislington till the 1st of December,
1777. All other means having now been fairly tried, with very
little effect, most of the symptoms being nearly the same as they
were several months ago, it was determined, by the most skilful
Physicians, that nothing could save his life but a sea-voyage
When this was fixed, Mr. Ireland (a friend in need) carried
him back to Newington. While he was here, preparing for his
voyage, he wrote as follows to one of his flock at Madeley:--
“I HEARTILY thank you for your kind letter. May the God
of all grace and love, our common Father and our All, bless
you all with all spiritual blessings, and with such temporal
favours, as will best serve the end of your growing in grace.
“My desire is, if I should be spared to minister to you again,
to do it with more humility, diligence, love, and zeal. But as
matters are, you must take the will for the deed. And let us
all praise God for all that is past, and trust him for all that is
to come. The Lord enable you all to cleave to Christ, and
in him to abide in one mind, “striving together for the hope
of the gospel, the fulness of the Spirit ! Of this we have
often discoursed together; but we have not pressed into it
with sufficient ardour and violence. God give us the humble
and violent faith which inherits the promises, that we may
always triumph in Christ, in life and in death ! I beg you
would help me to thank the Author of all good for every
blessing of this life; but above all, for the lively hope of the
next, and for Christ, our common hope, peace, joy, wisdom,
righteousness, and salvation. In him I meet and embrace you
all. God bless you, and crown you with loving-kindness and
tender mercies ! I live, if you stand. Do not let me want
the reviving cordial of hearing that you stand together firm
in the faith, deep in humility, and rejoicing in loving hope
of the glory to come. Bless God much for the gift of his
only-begotten Son. Be much in private prayer. Do not
forget the assembling yourselves together, in little companies,
as well as in public. Walk humbly, as in the sight of death
and eternity; and pray still for
“Your unworthy servant,
“Let none of your little companies want. If any do, you
are welcome to my house. Take any part of the furniture
there, and make use of it for their relief. And this shall be
your full title for so doing.
“Witness my hand,
10. In the beginning of December, he set out with Mr.
Ireland and his family, beside some other company. A little
account of the former part of his journey is given by Mr.
Ireland, in a letter to a friend:--
“We left Calais, December 12. The north wind was very
high, and penetrated us even in the chaise. We put up at
Bretzul, and the next day got to Abbeville; whence we were
forced, by the miserable accommodations we met with, to set
out, though it was Sunday. Mr. Fletcher and I used to lead
the way; but now the other chaises got before us. Nine
miles from Abbeville our axletree gave way through the
hard frost, and we were both left to the piercing cold, on the
side of a hill, without any shelter. After waiting an hour
and half, we sent the axletree and wheels back to be repaired;
and, leaving the body of the chaise under a guard, procured
another to carry us to the next town. On the 15th our
chaise arrived in good repair. Travelling steadily forward,
(though the country was all covered with snow,) on the 27th
we reached Dijon. During the whole journey, Mr. Fletcher
showed visible marks of a recovery. He bore both the
fatigue and piercing cold as well as the best of us. On the
31st we put up at Lyons, and solemnly closed the year;
bowing our knees before the Throne, which indeed we did
not fail to do, all together, every day. January 4, 1778, we
left Lyons, and came on the 9th to Aix. Here we rest; the
weather being exceeding fine and warm. Mr. Fletcher walks
out daily. He is now able to read, and to pray with us,
every morning and evening. He has no remains of his
cough, or of the weakness in his breast. His natural colour
is restored, and the sallowness quite gone. His appetite is
good, and he takes a little wine.”
11. In another letter Mr. Ireland writes thus: “Soon
after our arrival here, I rode out most days with my dear and
valuable friend. He now and then complained of the uneasi
ness of the horse, and there were some remains of soreness
in his breast. But this soon went off. The beginning of
February was warm, which, when he walked in the fields,
relaxed him too much. But when the wind got north or east,
he was braced again. His appetite is good; his complexion
as healthy as it was eleven years ago. As his strength
increases, he increases the length of his rides. Last Tuesday
he set out on a journey of a hundred and twelve miles. The
first day he travelled forty miles without feeling any fatigue.
The third day he travelled fifty-five. He bore his journey as
well as I did; and was as well and as active at the end of it
as at the beginning. During the day he cried out, ‘Help
me to praise the Lord for his goodness: I never expected to
see this day. He now accepted a pressing invitation to preach
to the Protestants here. He did so on Sunday morning, on
these words: “Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the
faith. For some days before, he was afraid he had done
wrong in accepting the invitation. But O how shall I be
able to express the power and liberty which the Lord gave
him Both the French and English were greatly affected;
the word went to the heart both of saints and sinners. If
the Lord continues his strength and voice, (which is now as
good as ever it was,) he has an earnest invitation to preach
where we are going, near Montpelier. You would be astonished
at the entreaties of Pastors as well as people. He has received
a letter from a Minister in the Levine mountains, who intends
to come to Montpelier, sixty miles, to press him to go and
preach to his flock. Soon after this, his brother came to
fetch him to Switzerland. He purposes to spend the next
summer in his own country, and the following winter in
these parts, or in some part of the south of France.
12. “His brother conducted him from Montpelier to
Nyon, the place of his nativity. Here he lived in that which
was his father’s house, in the midst of his affectionate
relations, who took care that he should neither want the best
advice, perhaps equal to any in Europe, nor anything that
could possibly contribute to the full recovery of his health.”
13. About this time a letter was wrote to that venerable
old man, Mr. Perronet, Vicar of Shoreham, informing him,
that there was a valuable estate at his native place, which
properly belonged to him, and which might easily be recovered,
if he sent one of his sons to claim it. All his friends whom
he consulted on the occasion judged this information was not
to be slighted; and his youngest son, Mr. William Perronet,
was willing to undertake the journey. But before he set
out, he wrote to Mr. Fletcher, desiring his advice. Part of
his answer was as follows:
“NYoN, June 2, 1778.
“WHILE I write to you to make your title clear to a
precarious estate on earth, permit me to remind you of the
heavenly inheritance entailed upon believers. The Will (the
New Testament) by which we can recover it is proved; the
Court is equitable, the Judge loving and gracious. To enter on
the possession of part of the estate here, and of the whole here
after, weneed only to believe, and prove evangelically that we are
believers. Let us set about it now with earnestness, with perse
verance, and with full assurance that through grace we shall
carry our point. Alas, what are estates or crowns, to grace and
glory? The Lord grant we may all choose the better part !
“Since I wrote last, in order to shorten my journey, I
ventured to cross the mountains, which separate France from
this country. But on the third day, I found an unexpected
trial; a hill, which we were to ascend by a winding road, but
so steep, that the horses were hardly able to draw the empty
chaise. This obliged me to walk, in the steepest places, for
several hours together. The sun was hot. I perspired violently,
and the next day I spat blood again. But having kept to
asses’ milk ever since, I am (blessed be God) much better.
“This country is delightful. I invite you to come and see
it, and share a delightful apartment. I design to try this
fine air some months longer. We have a fine shady wood near
the lake, where I can ride in the cool all the day, and enjoy
the singing of a multitude of birds. But this, though sweet,
does not come up to the singing of my dear friends in
England. There I meet them in spirit several hours in the
day. God bless my dear friends !”
14. About the same time he wrote to Dr. Turner as
follows:
“SHould I gather strength, I should, under God,
acknowledge you, dear Sir, as the instrument of that blessing,
as you were above twenty years ago. Ten thousand thanks
I render to you, Sir, and to Mr. Perronet, for your kind and
generous care and attendance. May God reward you both,
by bestowing upon you all the blessings which can make life
happy, death comfortable, and eternity delightful and glorious !
May the richest cordials of divine love, and the balm of
Gilead, a Saviour’s precious blood, revive your souls and
comfort your hearts! And in your every want and extremity,
may you both find such tender helpers and comforters, as
have been found in you by, dear Sir,
“Your most obliged, though most unworthy,
“servant and patient,
15. In the latter end of the year, Mr. William Perronet
set out for Switzerland. In a letter he wrote from thence to
Mr. Greenwood, he gives a little farther account of Mr.
Fletcher. And this letter I the rather insert, as I believe it
is all that remains of that amiable young man, who never
more saw his native land, being called hence while he was on
his journey to England.
There is something in the beginning of his letter which is
a little humorous; but this the candid reader will easily
excuse. It runs thus:
“NYoN, January 18, 1779.
“As you desire of me to send you some account of my
journey, now I am a little settled, I will do it in the best
manner I am able.
“I set out from London on Tuesday, November 17th. We
arrived at Dover about three on Wednesday morning; embarked
on Thursday, and arrived at Calais in about three hours.
“Though it was in war time, yet we did not meet with the
least incivility, either here or in any part of France. But
the badness of the inns makes the travelling through this
country disagreeable. The rooms in general are so dirty, as
to be fitter for swine than men. Each room, both above and
below stairs, is provided with two, three, or four beds; and
they are so high as to require steps to get up to them. For
there is on each bed, first, a monstrous canvass bag, stuffed
with a huge quantity of straw; over this a feather bed, and
on this as many mattresses as the host can furnish. But the
worst is, the sheets are not damp, but rather downright wet.
Yet the good woman would constantly scold us, if we
attempted to dry them even at our own fire; insisting upon
it, that it was impossible they should be damp at all.
“At table, every one is furnished with a spoon and a fork,
but with no knives. And in general they are not needful;
For both flesh and vegetables are so stewed down, as to be
properly termed spoon-meat. However, at the meanest inn
every one is provided with a clean napkin; and both after
dinner and after supper there is a fine dessert of fruit.
“We travelled early and late; yet, having but one set of
horses, we were a whole week in getting to Paris. In Paris
all is gaiety and finery; but without the least idea of neatness.
The scarcity of water is one excuse for the general want of
cleanliness, both in their persons and houses.
“On Tuesday, December 8, we dimed at Portallier; the
prettiest town in all France: The reason of which is, being
burnt down some years ago, it was rebuilt by the late King.
The next morning we entered Switzerland, stepping over a
brook, which divides Switzerland from France. On the
French side of the brook is a cross; on the other, a pillar
with the arms of Switzerland. In the evening we arrived at
Lausanne, a famous old town. Here I remained the next
day, and on Friday, the 11th, went on to Nyon, where I had
the pleasure of finding our dear friend in pretty good health
and spirits. Mr. Fletcher's house is a fine large building,
agreeably situated. It is in the form of a castle, and is
supposed to have been built five hundred years ago.-
“In passing through France, how bitterly did I regret
the want of the Sunday Service And it was not much
better with me when I came into Switzerland. For I under
stood so little of their language, that I could not profit much
by the public Service. Indeed this loss is in some measure
made up by the company and conversation of Mr. Fletcher;
who, however engaged he is the greater part of the day, is
generally so kind as to spend a little time with me in the
evening, in prayer and conversation.
“His chief delight seems to be in the meeting of his little
society of children. And as he is exceeding fond of them,
they appear to be altogether as fond of him. He seldom
either walks abroad or rides out, but some of them follow
him; singing the hymns they have learned, and conversing
with him, by the way. But you must not suppose that he is
permitted to enjoy this happiness unmolested. Not only the
drunkards make songs upon him and his little companions,
but many of the Clergy loudly complain of such irregular
proceedings. However, he is upon good terms with the
three Ministers of the place; all of whom are not only serious
men, but desirous of promoting true religion.
“He is certainly stronger, and in better health, than he
was when he left England. But as soon as ever he ventures
to preach, his spitting of blood returns. Whenever this
happens, his strength and spirits decay surprisingly, which he
cannot in anywise recover but by lying by for some days.
“Whether I succeed in my temporal business or not, I shall
ever remember with pleasure and thankfulness the oppor
tunities I have been blessed with of spending so much time
in company with our inestimable friend; who, wherever he
goes, preaches the gospel, both by his words and example, nay,
by his very looks, not only to his friends, but to all he meets
with. So that on the top of the frozen Alps, and in the dreary
vale of Chateau d'Oex, some good seed has been sown.
“When my business constrained me to go to Chateau
d'Oex, Mr. Fletcher bore me company. And here also he
was visited by some of the principal inhabitants of the town;
who stood round him in deep attention for almost an hour,
while he both exhorted and prayed. I am, dear Sir,
“Your very sincere friend and servant,
Mr. Fletcher adds upon the same paper: “Thanks to
our kind Preserver, I am yet in the land of faith and hope,
and want to find and make it a land of happiness and love.
The Lord Jesus is alone sufficient for this. And till the
great outpouring of his love is come, we ought faithfully
to stir up the gift of God which is in ourselves and others,
and to supply by the depth of our humility, and the ardour
of our expectation, what is yet wanting to our experience.
Well; God is good; Jesus is faithful; the Spirit is truth and
love. Come, Lord! and we shall experience the power of
that God who turns death to life, darkness to light, weakness
to strength; and ‘calleth the things that are not as though
they were.’”
16. Mr. Perronet in another letter to Mr. Greenwood,
dated May 22, writes thus:
“MY dear friend is much better in health now than he
was in the winter. He preached last Sunday se’nnight in the
church. He spoke with a strong, clear voice, for above three
quarters of an hour; and did not find himself hurt by it.
But when he rode out in the afternoon, his horse dropped
down, as if he had been shot, and cut both his knees, as well
as his head. Yet Mr. Fletcher was noway hurt.
“On Good-Friday, there being no Service here, Mr.
Fletcher and I crossed the Lake into Savoy, in order to hear
a celebrated Capuchin, who was to preach that day. He made
a very good discourse; and afterwards he and his brethren
invited us to dine with them. This we declined; but after
dinner paid our respects to them; and we spent two or three
agreeable hours in serious and friendly conversation.”
17. About this time Mr. Fletcher wrote to a friend
thus:
“LET us bear with patience the decays of nature: Let us
see without fear the approach of death. We must put off
this sickly, corruptible body, in order to put on the immortal
and glorious garment.
“I have some hopes that my poor sister will yet be my
sister in Christ. Her self-righteousness, I trust, breaks as
fast as her body. I am come hither to see death make havoc
among my friends. I wear mourning for my father's brother,
and for my brother's son. The same mourning will serve me
for my dying sister, if I do not go before her. She lies on
the same bed where my father and mother died, and where
she and I were born. How near is life to death ! But,
blessed be God, Christ the resurrection is nearer to the weak,
dying believer. Death works through the body, and the
resurrection through the soul. And our soul is our real self.”
18. I believe it was about the same time that a remarkable
passage occurred, which was related to me some years ago. I
may possibly have forgot some circumstances; but the sub
stance of it was this: Mr. Fletcher having heard of a Minister
in the country, as an eminently pious man, had a great desire
to see him; and for that purpose one morning set out very
early. When he had walked several miles, he saw a great
crowd gathered together at the door of a house. He asked
what was the matter; and was answered, “A poor woman and
her child lie a dying.” He went in, and found a woman, who
had not long been delivered, in appearance very near death.
Little better was the case of the infant, which was convulsed
from head to foot. The room was filled with people. He
took occasion to show them, from that melancholy spectacle,
the dreadful effects of sin; and afterwards spoke largely of
the miserable state we are all in, through the sin of our first
parent. He then expatiated on the Second Adam, and the
blessings we may receive through him; adding, “He is able
to raise the dead. He is able to save you all from sin, as well
as save these two poor objects from death. Come, let us ask
Him to save both us and them.” He found remarkable
liberty in prayer. Presently the child’s convulsions ceased;
and the mother was easy, lively, and strong. The people were
utterly amazed, and stood speechless and almost senseless.
While they were in this state, he silently withdrew. When
they came to themselves, he was gone. Many of them asked
who it could be; and some said, “Certainly it was an angel.”
19. When he had a little recovered his strength, he made
a tour through Italy, and paid a visit to Rome. While he
was here, as Mr. Ireland and he were one day going through
one of the streets in a coach, they were informed, the Pope
was coming forward; and it would be required of them to
come out of the coach, and kneel while he went by, as all the
people did: If they did not, in all probability the zealous mob
would fall upon them and knock them on the head. But
this, whatever might be the consequence, they flatly refused
to do; judging the paying such honour to a man was neither
better nor worse than idolatry. The coachman was exceed
ingly terrified, not knowing what to do. However, at length
he made shift to turn aside into a narrow way. The Pope
was in an open landau. He waved his hands as if he had
been swimming; and frequently repeated these words, “God
bless you all!” Mr. Fletcher's spirit was greatly stirred,
and he longed to bear a public testimony against Antichrist;
and he would undoubtedly have done it, had he been able to
speak Italian. He could hardly refrain from doing it in
Latin, till he considered that only the Priests could have
understood him. One to whom he related this, saying, if he
had done this the multitude would have torn him in pieces;
he answered, “I believe the Pope himself would have
prevented; for he was a man of sense and humanity.”
20. While he was at Paris, he was desired to visit and pray
with a sick woman. Information of this was quickly given
to a Magistrate, with abundance of aggravation. In conse
quence of this an order was procured from the King himself
for the apprehending him. This might not improbably have
cost him his life, or, at least, a long and expensive imprison
ment. When the Officer came to the door of the house
where he lodged, Mr. Ireland stepped out, and said, “Sir,
have you a warrant for me?” He (supposing him to be Mr.
Fletcher) answered, “I have; you must come with me.”
Mr. Ireland went very quietly with him. But when they
came before the Magistrate, the accuser said, “This is not
the man; I know nothing of this gentleman.” Another
messenger was then sent; but before he came to the house,
Mr. Fletcher was too far off to be overtaken.
21. While he was at Nyon, he wrote (among many other
letters) to good old Mr. Perronet as follows:-
* * “February 8, 1779.
“HoNoURED AND DEAR FATHER IN CHRIST,
“I HAvE had the pleasure of accompanying your son
to your father’s birth-place. It is a charming country for
those who have a taste for highland prospects. But what is
it to our heavenly Father's hill of Sion? Thither may we all
itravel, summer and winter, and there may we all have a
happy meeting, and an eternal inheritance 1”
22. September 7. Mr. William Perronet wrote a little farther
account of him: “Mr. Fletcher,” says he, “has preached here”
*(at Nyon) “in the church, and might have preached much
oftener, if his health would have permitted; for his friendly
and prudent behaviour has won upon all the three Ministers,
so that they are now on the best terms with him. But a
inew difficulty has lately arisen. He has been summoned
before the Seigneur Bailiff, who sharply reprehended him
-(noble Bailiff indeed; worthy of his office ) for preaching
against Sabbath-breaking, which, he said, implied a censure
of the Magistrates, as if they neglected their duty. He repri
manded him also for preaching against stage-plays, which he
considered as a reflection on himself, as he had just then sent
for a company of French comedians to Nyon. In conse
quence of this, he forbid his exercising the function of a
Minister in this country. A blessed instance of Republican
liberty | Who would not wish for the same in England?
However, one of the Ministers has ventured to give him a
room in his own house. Here he preaches two or three times
a week, to a few serious persons and abundance of children.
His Lordship has not yet thought proper to interfere, although
the thing is no secret. And not only the seriousness, but
also the number, of the congregation increases daily.”
23. In the next year, 1780, Mr. Fletcher fully intended to
return to England. But not long after he wrote as follows,
to one of his parishioners at Madeley:
“I HAVE the more readily complied with the request of
my friends to stay here” (at Nyon) “a little longer, as it was
so earnestly backed by the little society which is gathered in
this place. About three weeks ago they got about me, and
besought me on their knees, with many tears, to stay till they
were a little stronger, and able to stand alone. Nor would
they be persuaded to rise, till they had got me to comply.
Happy would it be for us all, if we prayed so earnestly to
Him who can give substantial blessings !*
“Two days ago I went to Geneva, and spoke to a carrier,
to take me back to London; but his coach was full. Yester
day another came, and said he would take us at a fortnight’s
notice. The Lord is always ready to give us a lift to the
kingdom of grace, through which we must pass to the kingdom
of glory. The comfort of this journey is, that we may travel
all together, though our bodies are far asunder. For Christ
the way is everywhere, and faith is (like his word) one and
the same in every age and place. So is holiness; for in all
places we may love God with all our heart, and our neigh
bour as ourselves. I hope you and all your brethren travel
thus; and that you journey like St. Paul, who travelled so
hard, that he was running a race for a prize, a crown of life.”
24. In spring, 1781, he set out for England. But Mr.
Perronet was then exceeding ill, having all the symptoms of
an approaching consumption. He could not therefore keep
pace with Mr. Fletcher; who, being on his journey, wrote to
him as follows:
“LYoNs, April 6, 1781.
“WE are both weak and both afflicted; but Jesus careth
for us. He is everywhere. He has all power to deliver us;
and perhaps by ways we little think of. It was of the Lord
that you did not come with me; you would have been sick, as
I am. I am overdone with riding and preaching; indeed
twice I preached in the fields. I carry home with me much
weakness: The Lord’s will be done. I know I am called to
suffer and die. Let us believe and rejoice in the Lord Jesus.”
He returned to England in summer in tolerable health,
being quite recovered from his consumption. Calling at
London, he preached at the New chapel, slept at Newington,
and the next day set out for Bristol. He stayed there only
a short time, and then retired to Mr. Ireland’s, at Brislington,
who, as soon as he was capable, willingly accompanied him to
his beloved Madeley.
25. But he did not find such cause of rejoicing here as he had
fondly expected. This may be easily gathered from the letter
he then wrote to his friend at Newington. It runs thus:--
“MADELEY, June 12, 1781.
“I stAYED longer at Brislington than I designed. Mr.
Ireland was ill, and would nevertheless come hither with me;
so that I was obliged to stay till he was better. And indeed
it was well that I did not come without him; for he has helped
ame to regulate my outward affairs, which were in great
confusion. Mr. Greaves leaves me; and I will either leave
Madeley, or have an Assistant able to stir among the people;
for I had much rather be gone than stay here to see the dead
..bury their dead. Well, we shall soon remove out of all, and
rest from our little cares and labours. You do not forget, I
inope, that you have need of patience, as well as I, to inherit
the promises; the best and greatest of which are not sealed,
but to such as keep the word of Christ's patience, and such
as persevere with him in his temptations. Hold on, then,
patient faith and joyful hope ! If I were by you, I would
preach to your heart and my own a lecture on this text, “We
are saved by hope, and by a faith which is never stronger than
when it is contrary to all the feelings of flesh and blood.
“Pray what news of the glory? Does the glory of the
Lord fill the temple, your house, your heart? A cloud is
over my poor parish; but, alas! it is not the luminous cloud
by day, nor the pillar of fire by night. Even the few
remaining professors stared at me the other day, when I
preached to them on these words: ‘Ye shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost; for the promise is unto you.’ Well, the
promise is unto us: If others despise it, still let us believe
and hope. Nothing enlarges the heart and awakens the
soul more than that believing, loving expectation. Let us
wait together, until we are all endued with power from on
high.”
1. ALTHough the great Apostle has ranked the “forbidding
to marry” among the “doctrines of devils,” and has expressly
declared, “Marriage is honourable in all men, and the bed
undefiled;” yet a kind of prejudice hangs on the minds of
many even of those that love God, inclining them to
disapprove of the marriage of persons eminent in religion.
Yea, many are of opinion that it is not consistent with high
degrees of holiness; and that when any who have deep expe
rience in the things of God marry, they are in some measure
fallen from grace. Hence many were surprised that so eminent
a Christian as Mr. Fletcher should take this step. And they
could hardly help thinking that he had lost some degree of
his excellent piety, and that he was not so unreservedly
devoted to God as he had been some time before.
2. In order to satisfy every reasonable person that he had
not sustained any loss at all, that his entire self-devotion
was in nowise impaired, either before or at the time of his
marriage, I believe the most convincing way will be to give
as particular an account as possible of what occurred at that
time. The account is given by one that was an eye and ear
witness of what she relates; and whoever seriously considers
this account will easily perceive that his soul was at that time
all alive, and wholly devoted to God. And I cannot but
recommend this whole transaction to the imitation of all
Christians who enter the holy state of matrimony.
3. As I think it highly expedient to premise some account
of the person whom Mr. Fletcher chose as his companion for
life, I am glad to find this dome to my hand in the letter
which I shall now subjoin:
“REvEREND SIR,
“I THINK it my privilege, and have often found it a
blessing, to comply with the request of my honoured father,
which I now do also in great love to my valuable and much
esteemed friends, Mr. and Mrs. Fletcher. I will therefore
endeavour, with the assistance of my gracious Lord, to recol
lect and acquaint you with some particulars of the life and
character of these truly devoted servants of God, with whose
intimate acquaintance I have been favoured for near thirty
years. But, indeed, I feel my great insufficiency to relate
what might be said with the strictest truth of these worthies.
“My acquaintance with Mrs. Fletcher began when she
was about seventeen years of age. She had from her early
childhood been strongly drawn to seek the Crucified, and was
now athirst for a clean heart, and longed to have a right
spirit renewed within her. Nor did her desire to love God
with all her heart lessen, but increase, her love to her neigh
bour; as I, the most unworthy, am well able to testify, to
whom she has been a tried friend, even to the present hour.
“To give you a clear view of this, I need only transcribe
part of a letter, which she wrote to me, May 23, 1757:--
“‘THE Lord has been indeed merciful, above all we can
ask or think. I found a greater blessing the last time I was
with you than ever. I am more enabled to prayer, and to an
earnest seeking after holiness. But what most stirs me up is, I
seem to hear the Lord calling upon me, Depart ye, depart ye;
go ye out thence; touch not the unclean thing; be ye clean that
bear the vessels of the Lord. For some time, these words have
been much in my mind, with both pleasure and profit. But
within this day or two, the Lord has more clearly shown me
the way wherein I ought to walk. He seems to call me out
to more activeness; so that I am ready to cry out, What
wouldest thou have me to do? Then I consider, Can I do any
more for the souls or bodies of the poor about me? But this
does not seem to be the thing. What I am now led to wish
for is, with both soul and body to serve those who are in
Christ. And as soon as the Lord has prepared me for his
work, and set me at liberty, my firm resolution is, by the
grace of God, to be wholly given up to the Church. I plainly
see, I have no more to do with the world, than to allow
myself the necessaries of life. And though it has pleased
God that I have no need to work for my living, yet surely
that is no reason my hand should be idle. I would be like
those described 1 Timothy v. 10, to bring up children, to
lodge strangers, to be ready to do the meanest offices for the
saints, to relieve the afflicted, to visit the fatherless and
widow, and diligently to follow every good work. O pray for
me, that the Lord may shorten his work in me, and quickly
make an end of sin! O that he would say to my soul, Thou
art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee! O when shall
I be wholly given up, both body and soul, to Him who gave
himself for me?’
“I admired the spirit of this letter; but little expected to
see these good desires brought so fully into practice, as they
were in a few years after. And this may suffice as a clear
proof that God fulfils the desire of them that fear him; yea,
and shows unto them the path wherein he would have them
to walk. That her light given before was not delusive, is
plain; as it is well known, how many years she has ‘brought
up children, lodged strangers, relieved the afflicted, and
‘diligently followed every good work.’
“With regard to the dear saint that is now swallowed up
in his beloved employment, praise and adoration, it is eight
or nine and twenty years since I was first favoured with his
heavenly conversation, in company with Mr. Walsh and a
few other friends, most of whom are now in the world of
spirits. At these seasons, how frequently did we feel
The o'erwhelming power of saving grace |
How frequently were we silenced thereby, while tears of love
our eyes o'erflowed ! It sweetly affects my soul while I
recollect the humility, fervour of spirit, and strength of faith,
with which dear Mr. Fletcher so often poured out his soul
before the great Three-One, at whose feet we have lain in
holy shame and divine silence, till it seemed earth was
turned to heaven With what delight does my soul recal
those precious moments! Yet a little while, and we shall all
magnify His name together.
“This heavenly-minded servant of the Lord resembled him
likewise in his love to precious souls. I heard him preach
his first sermon at West-Street chapel. I think his text was,
“Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.’ His spirit
appeared in his whole attitude and action, though he could
not well find words in the English language to express
himself: But he supplied that defect by offering up prayers,
tears, and sighs abundantly. Nearly about this time he saw
Miss Bosanquet, and began his acquaintance with her. But
although they had a particular esteem for each other, yet
they had no correspondence for above twenty years. It was
not till the yearly Conference drew near, in July, 1781, that
he paid her a visit at her own house near Leeds. They had
much conversation together, and contracted an intimate
acquaintance. After a few days, Miss Bosanquet asked Mr.
Wesley's advice concerning Mr. Fletcher's proposal, who
approved it entirely; being persuaded, it would be much to
the glory of God. He spent much of his time at Cross-Hall,
till the following January. His general conversation was
praising God, and speaking of the love of our dear Redeemer.
He took opportunities likewise of speaking to every one in
the family concerning the state of their souls, and giving
them from time to time such directions as were suitable
thereto. At other times he met us all together, and gave us
proper exhortations and directions. Our daily meals were as
a sacrament. When he drank to any one, it was, “Heavenly
health,” or, ‘The cup of salvation. At or after the meal, he
generally begun, or called us to begin, that verse,--
‘Still, O my soul, prolong
The never-ceasing song !
Christ my theme, my hope, my joy,
His be all my happy days :
Praise my every hour employ;
Every breath be spent in praise !”
After dinner he often sung several verses of ‘Primitive
Christianity; particularly that,
O that my Lord would count me meet
To wash his dear disciples’ feet !
Sometimes he read many of those verses with tears streaming
.down his face. Thus did he walk with God, filled with the
Spirit of his beloved Lord; confirming his love to all the family,
and caring both for their spiritual and temporal concerns.
“My soul was much affected, when he asked each of us, in
a sweet, humble manner, ‘Can you give me your friend?”
To think of parting, was indeed grievous to us all. Yet we
did not dare to withhold her from him; as we all believed
the union was of God, and would be to their present and
eternal benefit. The first sermon which he preached in
Leeds, on the Sunday morning before the Conference, will
never be forgotten by any that heard it, who desire to be
perfected in love. He preached in many places while in
Yorkshire, and to numerous congregations. I have heard of
many who were greatly blessed thereby; some convinced,
others set at liberty. And whenever he either preached or
conversed, the comforts of the Holy Ghost were multiplied.
“Monday, November 12, was the day appointed for the
outward uniting of those whose hearts were before united by
the Holy Spirit. On the morning of this day, several friends
met together on this solemn occasion; who can all, as well as
me, truly say, ‘I have been at one Christian wedding.”
Jesus was invited, and truly he was at our Cana. We
reached Cross-Hall before family-prayers. Mr. Fletcher was
dressed in his canonicals; and after giving out one of Mr.
Wesley’s marriage-hymns, he read the seventh, eighth, and
ninth verses of the nineteenth chapter of the Revelation; and
spoke from them in such a manner as greatly tended to
spiritualize the solemnities of the day. He said, “We invite
you to our wedding; but the Holy Ghost here invites you to
the marriage of the Lamb. The Bride, the Lamb's wife, has
made herself ready. This Bride consists of the whole Church
triumphant and militant united together. Ye may all be the
Bride, and Jesus will condescend to be the Bridegroom.
Make yourself ready by being filled with the Spirit. He
was very solemn in prayer, and said, ‘Lord, thou knowest,
we would not take this step, if we had not eternity in view,
and if we were not as willing to be carried into the church
yard as to go into the church. At breakfast he reminded
us, ‘The postilions are now ready to carry us to the church,
in order to see our nuptials solemnized; but death will soon
be here, to transport us to the marriage of the Lamb.’
“On the way to the church, (Batley church, which was
near two miles off) he spoke much of the mystery which is
couched under marriage, namely, the union between Christ
and his Church. ‘The first Adam,” said he, “received his
wife from his side; our heavenly Adam purchased his bride
by a fountain opened in his pierced side. They were married
in the face of the congregation; the doors were opened, and
every one came in that would. We then returned home,
and spent a considerable time in singing and prayer. We
were near twenty of us. I then presented Mrs. Fletcher
with some wedding-hymns. She looked them over, and gave
them to Mr. Fletcher. He read the scripture at the top,
namely, ‘Husbands, love your wives;’ and added, “As Christ
loved the Church. Then turning to us, he said, “My God,
what a task | Help me, my friends, by your prayers to fulfil
it. As Christ loved the Church He laid aside his glory for
her l He submitted to be born into our world; to be clothed
with a human body, subject to all our sinless infirmities. He
endured shame, contempt, pain, yea, death itself, for his Church!
Omy God, none is able to fulfil this task without thine almighty
aid. Help me, O my God! Pray for me, O my friends !’
“He next read, ‘Wives, submit yourselves to your own
husbands.” Mrs. Fletcher added, “As unto the Lord.” “Well,
my dear, returned Mr. Fletcher, “only in the Lord; and if
ever I wish you to do anything otherwise, resist me with all your
might. From dinner, which was a spiritual meal, as well as
a natural one, until tea-time, our time was spent chiefly in
fervent prayer or singing. After singing the covenant-hymn,
Mr. Fletcher went to Mrs. Fletcher, and said to her, “Well,
my dearest friend, will you join with me in joining ourselves in
a perpetual covenant to the Lord? Will you with me serve
Him in his members? Will you help me to bring souls to
the blessed Redeemer; and, in every possible way this day, lay
yourself under the strongest ties you can, to help me to glorify
my gracious Lord?' She answered, like one that well knew
where her strength lay, ‘May my God help me so to do!”
“In the evening Mr. Walton preached in the hall, from
those most suitable words: “What shall I render unto the
Lord for all his benefits? I will take the cup of salvation,
and call upon the name of the Lord.’ His words did not
fall to the ground: Many were greatly refreshed. After
preaching, there was a sweet contest among us; every one
thought, ‘I in particular owe the greatest debt of praise;’
till we jointly agreed to sing,
“I’ll praise my Maker, while I’ve breath ;
And when my voice is lost in death,
Praise shall employ my nobler powers :
My days of praise shall ne'er be past,
While life, or thought, or being last,
Or immortality endures.”
“On the Wednesday following the select society met; and
it was a precious season. Among other things, Mr. Fletcher
said, “Some of you perhaps may be a little surprised at the
step my dearest friend and I have taken. But I assure you,
it was the result of much prayer and mature deliberation.
Five-and-twenty years ago, when I first saw my dear wife, I
thought, if I ever married, she should be the person. But
she was too rich for me to think of; so I banished every
thought of the kind. For many years after, I had a distaste to
a married life, thinking it impossible to be as much devoted to
God in a married as in a single life. But this objection was
removed, by reading, Enoch begat sons and daughters. And
Enoch walked with God, and was not ; for God took him. I
then saw, if Enoch at the head of a family might walk with
God, and be fit for translation; our souls under the gospel
dispensation might attain the highest degree of holiness in a
similar state, if too great an attachment, leading the soul
from God rather than to him, did not take place; instead of
that which should be a means of increasing its union with
Jesus. Yet still many obstacles stood in my way; but at
length they were all removed. Every mountain became a
plain; and we are both well assured, that the step we took
had the full approbation of God.”
“On January 2, 1782, we had a very solemn parting. But
in the midst of all the sorrow which we felt, was a sweet assur
ance that we should meet again, not only in this world, but
Where death shall all be done away,
And bodies part no more.
This brings to my mind a sentence which he wrote to us, a
little before his death: ‘Time is short. It remains, that we die
daily. Stand fast in Christ, the resurrection and the life.
That we may have a happy meeting is the wish and prayer of
‘Your affectionate friends,
‘JOHN and MARY FLETCHER...”
“To repeat all the precious sayings of this servant of God
would require many volumes; for his mouth was always
opened with wisdom, tending to minister grace to the hearers.
My earnest prayer is, that the spirit of faith, and love, and
heavenly wisdom, may rest upon you also, and guide you in
all your extensive labours, till they are swallowed up in
eternal rest. I remain, Reverend Sir,
“Your unworthy child and servant,
fg S. C.”
4. I cannot help subjoining a reflection here, which at this
time affected me much. Although I could in mowise
condemn this marriage, yet on one account it gave me pain.
When I was young, I was exceedingly affected with a relation
in Mr. Herbert's Life,--an account of Mr. Ferrar's family,
at Little Gidding, in Huntingdonshire; a very particular
description of which is given in the “Arminian Magazine.”
I longed to see such another family, in any part of the three
kingdoms. At length I had my desire; I did see exactly
such another family: I saw a family full as much devoted to
God, full as regular in all their exercises of devotion, and at
least as exemplary in every branch of Christian holiness.
This I saw, by the peculiar providence of God, settled at
Leytonstone. O that it had continued there ! The removal
of it into Yorkshire I did not advise nor approve of. However,
I rejoiced to see it settled somewhere; namely, at Cross
Hall, near Leeds. Again I did all that was in my power to
perpetuate this glorious institution. It was now totally
dissolved; and yet by a means which I did not dare to
oppose. “O God, how unsearchable are thy judgments;
and thy ways past finding out !”
1. FROM the time of his settling at Madeley with Mrs.
Fletcher, he had no return of his consumptive disorder. On
the contrary, by the blessing of God on her peculiar care and
tenderness, not only his health was confirmed, but his
strength restored as in the days of his youth. In the mean
time he took care to employ all his returning strength in the
work of faith and the labour of love: More particularly in
that which he had always found to be one of the most difficult
parts of his duty. We have in this parish, through the
lenity of the Magistrates, no less than eight public-houses.
These are well known to have been continual nurseries for
sin, particularly on Sunday evenings. It had been for many
years his unwearied endeavour to put an end to these abuses.
Yet as he very seldom had a Churchwarden who was heartily
willing to second him therein, his endeavours were almost
ineffectual, producing very little fruit. But for two years
God was now pleased to favour him with a Churchwarden
who was resolved to act according to his oath: He then
cheerfully renewed his endeavours, visiting several of these
houses every Sunday; all of them in their turn. In every
one he bore a faithful testimony; and in some it has been
attended with much good. O that no one of those who have
been at any time within the reach of his voice, may finally
inherit that curse, “Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and
perish !”
2. For many years he had felt with the deepest sensibility
the disconsolate condition of poor uninstructed children; and
some years ago he began a school, wherein he taught them
himself every day. After pursuing this method for some
time, he erected a school in Madeley-Wood; but afterward
his thoughts were much employed concerning the Sunday
schools; especially since they were recommended to him in a
letter from Mrs. Derby, a person whom he always found ready
to promote every good work. He then earnestly set about
promoting them in his own parish. Three hundred children
were soon gathered together, whom he took every opportunity
of instructing, by regular meetings, for some time before the
schools were opened. These meetings he attended, with the
utmost diligence, to the very Thursday before his illness.
In order to encourage the children, his method was to give
them little Hymn-Books, pointing them to some friend or
neighbour, who would teach them the hymns, and instruct
them to sing. The little creatures were greatly taken with
this new employment; insomuch that many of them would
scarce allow themselves time to eat or sleep, for the desire
they had of learning their lessons. At every meeting, after
inquiring who had made the greatest proficiency, he
distinguished them by some little reward.
3. In the instructing of children, one great difficulty is, to
draw and fix their attention. He had a singular gift for
doing this, by making advantage of any incident that offered.
One day, while he had a considerable number of children
before him in the preaching-house, as he was persuading
them to mind what they were about, and to remember the
text which he was going to mention, just then a robin flew
into the house, and their eyes were presently turned after
him. “Now,” said he, “I see you can attend to that robin.
Well, I will take that robin for my text.” He then gave
them an useful lecture on the harmlessness of that little
creature, and the tender care of its Creator.
4. When he observed that the number of children, instead
of falling off, as was expected, increased continually, he
wrote some proposals to the parish, which were received with
the greatest unanimity. Many of the rich, as well as the
trading people, lent their helping hand, not only to defray
the expense of teachers, but also to raise a convenient house
in Coalbrook-Dale for the instruction of the numerous
children that were on that side of the parish.
5. The proposal was as follows:-"Our national depravity
turns greatly on these two hinges, the profanation of the
Lord’s day, and the neglect of the education of children.
Till some way is found of stopping up these two great inlets
of wickedness, we must expect to see our workhouses filled
with aged parents forsaken by their prodigal children, with
wives forsaken by their faithless husbands, and with the
wretched offspring of lewd women and drunken men. Nay,
we may expect to see the gaols, and even the gallows, largely
stocked, to the perpetual reproach of our nation, with unhappy
wretches ready to fall a sacrifice to the laws of their country.
“It is a common observation,’ says Dr. Gibson, late Bishop
of London, “that public criminals, when they come to their
unhappy end, and make their dying declarations to the world,
generally charge the sinful courses in which they have lived,
to the neglect and abuse of the Lord’s day, as the first
occasion of leading them into all other wickedness. And,
considering how frequently these declarations are repeated,
and how many other instances of the same kind, though less
public, are notorious enough to those who will observe them,
they may well be a warning to us, to consider a religious
observation of the Lord’s day as the best preservative of
virtue and religion, and the neglect and profanation of it as
the greatest inlet to vice and wickedness.”
6. “A pious Clergyman farther observes: ‘The want of
education in children is one of the principal causes of the
misery of families, cities, and nations; ignorance, vice, and
misery being constant companions. The hardest heart must
melt at the melancholy sight of such a number of children,
both male and female, who live in gross ignorance, and
habitual profanation of the Lord’s day. What crowds fill the
streets and fields, tempting each other to idleness, lewdness,
and every other species of wickedness | Is it any wonder we
should have so many undutiful children, unfaithful appren
tices, disobedient servants, untrusty workmen, disloyal
subjects, and bad members of society? Whence so much
rapine, fornication, and blasphemy? Do not all these evils
centre in ignorance and contempt of the Lord's day? And
shall we do nothing to check these growing evils?’
7. “Persons concerned for the welfare of the next genera
tion, and well-wishers to Church and State, have already set
us a fair example in Stroud, Gloucester, Birmingham,
Manchester, Leeds, Bristol, and many country parishes.
They have attempted to remedy these evils by setting up.
Sunday-schools, which, by keeping children from corrupting
one another, by promoting their attendance on divine worship,
and by planting the first principles of useful knowledge in
their minds and of piety in their hearts, bid fair for a public
reformation of manners, and for nipping in the bud the
ignorance and impiety which is everywhere so common
among the lower and more numerous classes of people.”
8. The proposals concerning Sunday-schools in the parish
of Madeley, were as follows:
“I. It is proposed, that Sunday-schools be set up in this
parish, for such children as are employed all the week, and
for those whose education has been hitherto totally neglected.
“II. That the children admitted into these be taught
reading, writing, and the principles of religion.
“III. That there be a school for boys and another for
girls, in Madeley, Madeley-Wood, and Coalbrook-Dale, six
in all.
“IV. That a subscription be opened, to pay each Teacher
one shilling per Sunday, and to buy tables, forms, books,
pens, and ink.
“V. That two Treasurers be appointed to ask and receive
the contributions of the subscribers.
“VI. That whoever subscribes one guinea a year shall be
a Governor.
“VII. That three or four Inspectors be appointed, who
are to visit the schools once a week, to see that the children
attend regularly, and the Masters do their duty.
“VIII. That a book be provided, for setting down all
receipts and expenses; and another for the names of the
Teachers and the scholars.
“IX. That the schools be solemnly visited once or twice a
year; and a premium given to the children that have made
the greatest improvement.”
9. As to the success of his unwearied labours, although he
was much discouraged when he first returned from abroad, find
ing so many of those who had once run well, grown weary
and faint in their mind; yet it was not long before he
found fresh cause to rejoice, and to know that God was with
him of a truth. It was not long before he observed that a
general reformation had taken place in the parish. And it
was not only an outward reformation, even of many that had
been notorious for all manner of wickedness; but an inward
also; many both young and old having learned to worship
God “in spirit and in truth.” A considerable number of
these still mourn, as sheep bereaved of their shepherd. And
yet one cannot doubt, but a still larger company of his own
children have hailed him on the celestial shore. But the
season is coming when all secrets shall be laid open; and all
the jewels of his crown shall be made manifest in that day.
10. One instance of the success of his ministry he
mentioned some years since at Bristol: “One Sunday,” said
he, “when I had done reading prayers at Madeley, I went
up into the pulpit, intending to preach a sermon which I
had prepared for that purpose. But my mind was so
confused, that I could not recollect either my text or any
part of my sermon. I was afraid I should be obliged to
come down, without saying anything. But having recollected
myself a little, I thought I would say something on the First
Lesson, which was the third chapter of Daniel, containing
the account of the three children cast into the fiery furnace:
I found in doing it such an extraordinary assistance from
God, and such a peculiar enlargement of heart, that I
supposed there must be some peculiar cause for it. I there
fore desired, if any of the congregation found anything
particular, they would acquaint me with it in the ensuing
week.
“In consequence of this, the Wednesday after, a woman
came, and gave me the following account:--‘I have been for
some time much concerned about my soul. I have attended
the church at all opportunities, and have spent much time in
private prayer. At this my husband (who is a butcher) has
been exceedingly enraged, and threatened me severely what
he would do, if I did not leave off going to John Fletcher's
church; yea, if I dared to go any more to any religious
meetings whatsoever. When I told him I could not in
conscience refrain from going at least to our parish church,
he grew quite outrageous, and swore dreadfully, if I went
any more, he would cut my throat as soon as I came home.
This made me cry mightily to God, that he would support
me in the trying hour. And though I did not feel any
great degree of comfort, yet having a sure confidence in God,
I determined to go on in my duty, and leave the event to
Him. Last Sunday, after many struggles with the devil
and my own heart, I came down stairs ready for church.
My husband asked me, whether I was resolved to go thither.
I told him, I was. Well then, said he, I shall not (as
I intended) cut your throat; but I will heat the oven, and
throw you into it the moment you come home. Notwith
standing this threatening, which he enforced with many
bitter oaths, I went to church, praying all the way that God
would strengthen me to suffer whatever might befal me.
While you was speaking of the three children whom
Nebuchadnezzar cast into the burning fiery furnace, I found
it all belonged to me, and God applied every word to my
heart. And when the sermon was ended, I thought, if I had
a thousand lives, I could lay them all down for God. I felt
my whole soul so filled with his love, that I hastened home,
fully determined to give myself to whatsoever God pleased;
nothing doubting, but that either he would take me to
heaven, if he suffered me to be burned to death, or that he
would some way deliver me, even as he did his three servants
that trusted in Him. When I got almost to our own door,
I saw the flames issuing out of the mouth of the oven.
And I expected nothing else, but that I should be thrown
into it immediately. I felt my heart rejoice, that if it were
so, the will of the Lord would be done. I opened the door,
and, to my utter astonishment, saw my husband upon his
knees, wrestling with God in prayer for the forgiveness of his
sins. He caught me in his arms, earnestly begged my
pardon, and has continued diligently seeking God ever since.”
I now know why my sermon was taken from me; namely,
that God might thus magnify his mercy.”
11. Many were the dangers he went through in the course
of his ministry; but the Lord delivered him out of all. One
of these Mrs. Fletcher relates in the following words:--
“My husband having appointed to preach one Sunday at
a church, about fourteen miles off, I felt some concern for
his riding so far, and doing the whole Sunday’s duty twice;
especially as it was necessary for him to return home the
same night. The evening being exceeding dark and wet, I
was strongly led to commend him to God in prayer. While
I was doing this, it was suggested to me, that his horse was
fallen, and had thrown him over his head; and the whole
scene appeared to be clearly represented before my eyes.
“My God,” said I, “he is thine. His life, his limbs, his health,
are all thine. I commit him to thee by faith.’ Immediately
that word was impressed on my heart, ‘The righteous is in
the hand of the Lord; and there shall no evil touch him.”
And it empowered my soul with such a sweetness, that I
could feel no fear. The night was uncommonly bad, which
occasioned many friends to continue with me. And while
they expressed their great uneasiness at his staying two
hours longer than we could well account for, I was obliged
to hide the calmness I felt by silence, lest some should have
supposed it insensibility.* At last he came well, and praising
God; but asked for water to wash himself, because his horse
had fallen, and thrown him with great force over his head.
Yet, glory be to God, he was no way hurt, except having a
little skin grazed from one of his fingers. As he set the
Lord always before him, so he found his help in every
time of need.”
12. The laying the foundation of the Sunday-schools at
Madeley was the last public work in which he was employed.
But as the liberal man is ever devising liberal things, he had
several plans in his mind for preserving a great number of
desolate children, brought up only to beg and steal. Such
this populous parish (and indeed most others) affords in great
abundance. He had likewise proposed writing various little
tracts, f for the use of the schools. But He who cannot err
saw good to call his servant hence to enjoy, rather than leave
him here to do and suffer.
* Nay, I would have proclaimed it aloud, giving the glory to God, for the
comfort of all that were present.
+ I do not regret his not living to write those tracts; because I despair of seeing
any in the English tongue superior to those extracts from Abbé Fleury and Mr.
Poiret, published under the title of “Instructions for Children.” I have never yet
seen anything comparable to them, either for depth of sense, or plainness of
language.
HIS CHARACTEIt.
1. I AM sensible, it is the method of almost all writers, to
place the character of a man at the cor-clusion of his life. But
there seems to be a particular reason for varying from the
usual practice in this place. The death of Mr. Fletcher (hardly
to be paralleled in the present century) was so uncommon a
display of the power and goodness of God in behalf of his
highly-favoured servant, that it is not proper for any thing to
come after it. It must needs therefore close the whole account.
2. From even the imperfect account which has been given
of this great and good man, any discerning person may with
very litele difficulty extract his character. In general, it is.
easy to perceive, that a more excellent man has not appeared
in the Church for some ages. It is true, in several ages,
and in several countries, many me?, have excelled in particular
virtues and graces. But who can point out, in any age or
nation, one that so highly excelled in all? one that was
enabled in so large a measure to “put on the whole armour
of God?” yea, so to “put on Christ,” as to “perfect holiness.
in the fear of God?”
3. Yet there is a peculiar difficulty in giving a full account
of either his life or character, because we have scarce any light
from himself. He was upon all occasions very uncommonly
reserved in speaking of himself, whether in writing or conver
sation. He hardly ever said anything concerning himself,
unless it slipped from him unawares. And among the great
number of papers which he has left, there is scarce a page
(except that single account of his conversion to God) relative
either to his own inward experience, or the transactions of his
life. So that the most of the information we have is gathered
up, either from short hints scattered up and down in his letters,
from what he had occasionally dropped among his friends, or
from what one and another remembered concerning him. In
writing the lives and characters of eminent men, the Roman
Catholics have a great advantage over us. The pious members
of the Church of Rome make a conscience of concealing
anything from their Directors, but disclose to them all the
circumstances of their lives, and all the secrets of their hearts:
Whereas very few of the Protestants disclose to others, even
their most intimate friends, what passes between God and
their own souls; at least not of set purpose. Herein they
forget, or at least disregard, that wise remark of the ancient
writers (exactly agreeable to various passages that occur in
the canonical Scriptures): “It is good to conceal the secrets
of a King, but to declare the loving-kindness of the Lord.”
4. This defect was indeed in some measure supplied by
the entire intimacy which subsisted between him and Mrs.
Fletcher. He did not willingly, much less designedly, conceal
anything from her. They had no secrets with regard to each
other, but had indeed one house, one purse, and one heart.
Before her it was his invariable rule, to think aloud; always to
open the window in his breast. And to this we are indebted
for the knowledge of many particulars which must otherwise
have been buried in oblivion.
5. But, whatever the materials were, however complete our
informations, yet I am thoroughly sensible of my own inability
to draw such a portrait as Mr. Fletcher deserves. I have no
turn at all for panegyric: I have never accustomed myself to
it. It gives me therefore no small satisfaction to find, that
this is in a great measure done to my hands. The picture is
already drawn; and that by no mean pencil. All then which
I shall attempt is, to retouch Mrs. Fletcher’s observations,
and now and then to add a few articles, either from my own
knowledge, or from the information of others.
6. The following are mostly her own words,--for where
they are clear and expressive, as they generally are, I do not
t}-ink it right to alter them for altering' sake:
“Whatever he might be with regard to charity,” said she,
“he was no less eminent for his spirit of faith. Indeed he was
not so much led by sights or impressions (which many mistake
for faith) as abundance of people have been; but by a steady,
firm reliance upon the love and truth and faithfulness of God.
His ardent desire was, so to believe, as to be a partaker of all
the great and precious promises; to be a witness of all that
mind which was in Christ Jesus. And being conscious that
he must be crucified with his Master, or never reign with Him,
he gave himself up to Him, whom he continually set before
him, to lie in his hand as the passive clay. He would often
say, ‘It is my business in all events, to hang upon the Lord,
with a sure trust and confidence, that he will order all things
in the best time and manner. Indeed it would be nothing to
be a believer, nay, in truth, there would be no room for faith,
if everything were seen here. But against hope to believe in
hope, to have a full confidence in that unseen power which
so mightily supports us in all our dangers and difficulties,--
this is the believing which is acceptable to God.” Sometimes.
when I have expressed some apprehension of an approaching
trial, he would answer, ‘I do not doubt but the Lord orders.
all; therefore I leave everything to him.’ In outward dangers,
if they were ever so great, he seemed to know no shadow of
fear. When I was speaking once, concerning a danger to
which we were then particularly exposed, he answered, ‘I
know God always gives his angels charge concerning us:
Therefore we are equally safe everywhere.”
“Not less eminent than his faith was his humility. Amidst
all his laying himself out for God, and for the good of souls,
he ever preserved that special grace, the making no account
of his own labours. He held himself and his own abilities in
very low esteem; and seemed to have that word continually
before his eyes, ‘I am an unprofitable servant.” And this
humility was so rooted in him, as to be moved by no affront.
I have seen many, even of the most provoking kind, offered
him; but he received them as his proper portion; being so
far from desiring the honour which cometh of men, that he
took pleasure in being little and unknown. Perhaps it might
appear from some passages of his life, that in this he even
leaned to an extreme; for genuine humility does not require,
that any man should desire to be despised. Nay, we are to
avoid it, so far as we possibly can, consistently with a good
conscience; for that direction, ‘Let no man despise thee,’
concerns every man as well as Timothy.
“It is rare to meet with an eminent person that can bear
an equal. But it was his choice and his delight to prefer every
one to himself. And this he did in so free and easy a manner,
that in him it appeared perfectly natural. He never willingly
suffered any unkindness shown to him to be mentioned again;
and if it was, he generally answered, “O let it drop; we will
offer it in silence to the Lord.’ And indeed the best way of
bearing crosses is, to consecrate all in silence to God.
“From this root of humility sprung such a patience as I
wish I could either describe or imitate. It produced in him
a most ready mind, which embraced every cross with alacrity
and pleasure. For the good of his neighbour, nothing seemed
hard, nothing wearisome. Sometimes I have been grieved
to call him out of his study two or three times in an hour;
especially when he was engaged in composing some of his
deepest works; but he would answer, with his usual sweet
ness, ‘O, my dear, never think of that. It matters not, if
we are but always ready to meet the will of God. It is
conformity to the will of God that alone makes an employ
ment excellent.’ He never thought anything too mean, but
sin; he looked on nothing else as beneath his character. If
he overtook a poor man or woman on the road, with a burden
too heavy for them, he did not fail to offer his assistance to
bear part of it; and he would not easily take a denial. This
therefore he has frequently done.
“In bearing pain he was most exemplary, and continued
more and more so to the last. Nor was it least remarkable
in the most humbling part of the ministry, the coming down
to the capacities of the ignorant. Nevertheless he had a
most resolute courage in the reproving of sin. To daring
sinners he was a son of thunder; and no worldly considera
tions were regarded, whenever he believed God had given
him a message to deliver to any of them.
“One considerable part of humility is, to know our own
place, and stand therein. Every member has its peculiar
appointment in the human body, where the wise Master
builder has placed it; and it is well while each continues in
its place. But, as every dislocated bone gives pain, and must
continue so to do till it is replaced in its proper socket, so
every dislocated affection must give pain to the soul till it is
restored to its own place, till it is totally fixed in God, till we
resign our whole selves to the disposal of infinite wisdom.
This is the proper place of every rational creature; and in
this place he invariably stood. Whatever he believed to be
the will of God, he resolutely performed, though it were to
pluck out a right eye, to lay his Isaac on the altar. When it
appeared that God called him to any journey, he immediately
prepared for it, without the least hesitation; although, for the
last years of his life, he hardly ever travelled to any consider
able distance, without feeling some tendency to a relapse
into his former distemper; and it was usually some weeks
after his return, before he recovered his usual strength.”
Humility continually produces meekness, and the latter
bears an exact proportion to the former. I received a letter
on this head but a few days since, which it may not be
improper to subjoin :
“Rev. SIR,
“I was yesterday in company with several Clergymen,
who, among other things, mentioned Mr. Fletcher, and seemed
particularly anxious that in the account of his life a proper
degree of caution should be observed in the panegyric that
may be applied to his character. They say he was extremely
passionate; and that there was in many instances an austere
severity and rigour in his conduct to the young people under
his care, particularly at Trevecka. As this information comes
from a gentleman eminent for his knowledge of mankind,
and universally esteemed as one of the greatest geniuses of
the age, and one whose veracity has never been questioned,
it will have no small weight in the learned world.”
7. I am glad this information came to my hands in time,
as it may now receive so sufficient an answer as will probably
satisfy every candid and impartial reader.
Two things are here asserted concerning Mr. Fletcher: The
First, that he was extremely passionate: The Second, that
there was an austere severity and rigour in his conduct toward
the young persons under his care, particularly at Trevecka.
The former assertion is unquestionably true; such he was by
nature. The latter I question much, with regard to his con
duct at Tern, as well as at Trevecka. None can be a more
competent witness of his conduct at Tern, than Mr. Vaughan,
who lived so long in the same house; and whose testimony
concerning him has been so largely given in the preceding
pages. But, waving this, can it possibly be supposed, that
either Mr. Hill, or his sons, then verging toward manhood;
would have borne the austere rigour and severity of a young
man that received his bread from them? yea, and that year
after year? Surely the supposition shocks all credibility.
8. Equally incredible is the assertion of his “austere
severity and rigour ’’ toward the young men, at Trevecka.
This is inconsistent with the whole account given by Mr.
Benson, an eye and ear witness of all his conduct. Had it
been true in any degree, would it have been possible that he
should have been so esteemed and beloved by those very
young men? I cannot form the least conjecture whence
such an assertion could arise unless it was invented by some
young man after Mr. Fletcher was dismissed, in order to
ingratiate himself with his patroness.
9. The farther account which Mr. Benson gives of him from
personal knowledge is this: “Mr. Fletcher,” says he, “was
maturally a man of strong passions, and prone to anger in
particular; insomuch that he has frequently thrown himself
on the floor, and laid there most of the night bathed in tears,
imploring victory over his own spirit. And he did not strive
in vain; he did obtain the victory, in a very eminent degree.
For twenty years and upwards before his death, no one ever
saw him out of temper, or heard him utter a rash expression,
on any provocation whatever. I have often thought the
testimony that Bishop Burnet, in the History of his own
Times, bears of Archbishop Leighton, might be borne of him
with equal propriety: “After an intimate acquaintance with
the Archbishop for many years, and after being with him by
night and by day, at home and abroad, in public and in
private, on sundry occasions and in various affairs, I must
say, I never heard an idle word drop from his lips, nor any
conversation which was not to the use of edifying. I never
saw him in any temper in which I myself would not have
wished to be found at death. Any that has been intimately
acquainted with Mr. Fletcher will say the same of him. But
they that knew him best, will say it with the most assurance.
10. His “disengagements from the world, and love of the
poor,” Mrs. Fletcher joins together. “Never,” says she, “did
I behold any one more dead to the things of the world. His
treasure was above; and so was his heart also. He always
remembered that admonition of the Apostle, “No man that
warreth entangleth himself with the things of this life.” It
was his constant endeavour to preserve a mind free and disen
cumbered; and he was exceeding wary of undertaking any
business that might distract and hurry it. Yet, in his worldly
concerns, knowing himself to be a steward for God, he would
not through carelessness waste one penny. He likewise
judged it to be his bounden duty to demand what he knew to
be his right. And yet he could well reconcile this with that
word, “He that will have thy coat, let him have thy cloak
also.” Indeed, whether he had less or more, it was the same
thing upon his own account, as he had no other use for it, but
to spread the gospel, and to assist the poor. And he frequently
said, he never was happier than when he had given away the
last penny he had in his house. If at any time I had gold in
my drawers, it seemed to afford him no comfort. But if he
could find a handful of small silver, when he was going out to
see the sick, he would express as much pleasure over it as a
miser would in discovering a bag of hid treasure. He was
never better pleased with my employment, than when he had
set me to prepare food or physic for the poor. He was hardly
able to relish his dinner, if some sick neighbour had not a part
of it; and sometimes, if any one of them was in want, I could
not keep the linen in his drawers. On Sundays he provided
for numbers of people who came from a distance to hear the
word; and his house, as well as his heart, was devoted to their
convenience: To relieve them that were afflicted in body or
mind was the delight of his heart. Once a poor man, who
feared God, being brought into great difficulties, he took down
all the pewter from the kitchen shelves, saying, ‘This will
help you; and I can do without it. A wooden trencher will
serve me just as well. In epidemic and contagious dis
tempers, when the neighbours were afraid to nurse the sick,
he has gone from house to house, seeking some that were
willing to undertake it. And when none could be found, he
has offered his service, to sit up with them himself. But
this was at his first setting out here. At present, there
appears in many (and has done so for many years) a most
ready mind to visit and relieve the distressed.
11. “He thoroughly complied with that advice,--
* Give to all something; to a good poor man,
Till thou change hands, and be where he began.”
I have heard him say, that when he lived alone in his house,
the tears have come into his eyes, when one had brought him
five or six insignificant letters, at three or four pence a piece;
and perhaps he had only a single shilling in the house, to
distribute among the poor to whom he was going. He
frequently said to me, ‘O Polly, can we not do without
beer? Let us drink water, and eat less meat. Let our
necessities give way to the extremities of the poor.”
12. “But with all his generosity and charity he was
strictly careful to follow the advice of the Apostle, ‘Owe no
man any thing. He contracted no debt. While he gave
all he had, he made it a rule to pay ready money for every
thing; believing this was the best way to keep the mind
unencumbered and free from care. Meanwhile his substance,
his time, his strength, his life, were devoted to the service of
the poor. And, last of all, he gave me to them. For when
we were married, he asked me solemnly, whether I was
willing to marry his parish. And the first time he led me
among his people in this place, he said, ‘I have not married
this wife only for myself, but for you. I asked her of the
Lord, for your comfort, as well as my own.’”
13. All his life, as well as during his illness, particularly at
Newington and Brislington, (as has been largely related,) he
was grateful in a very high degree, to those who conferred
the least benefit upon him; yea, or even endeavoured so to
do. One of these was Mr. Richard Edwards, of London, to
whose care he was committed as a Leader, when he was
first admitted into the London Society. A lively sense of
the kindness which Mr. Edwards then showed him, he
retained to the end of his life. This he testified by repeated
letters; one or two of which it may be well to transcribe.
“TERN, Oct. 19, 1756.
“THIs is to let you know, that (praise be to the Lord!) I am
very well in body, and pretty well in soul. But I have very
few Christian friends here. And God has been pleased to take
away the chief of those few by a most comfortable death.
And lately I heard that my aged father is gone the way of all
flesh. But the glorious circumstances of his death make me
ample amends for the sorrow which I felt. For some years, I
have wrote to him with as much freedom as I could have done
to a son, though not with so much effect as I wished. But
last spring, God visited him with a severe illness, which brought
him to a sense of himself. And, after a deep repentance, he
died about a month ago, in the full assurance of faith. This
has put several of my friends on thinking seriously, which
affords me great cause of thankfulness. I am
“Your unworthy brother and servant in the Lord,
14. Two years after he wrote to him as follows:
“I THANK you for your encouraging observations. I want
them, and use them by the grace of God. When I received
yours, I had not had one opportunity of preaching; so incensed
were all the Clergy against me. One, however, let me have
the use of his church, the Abbey church, at Shrewsbury. I
preached in the forenoon with some degree of the demonstra
tion of the Spirit. The congregation was very numerous;
and I believe one half at least desired to hear me again. But
the Minister would not let me have the pulpit any more.
The next Sunday, the Minister of a neighbouring parish
lying a dying, I was sent for to officiate for him. He died a
few days after, and the chief man in the parish offered to
make interest that I might succeed him. But I could not
consent. The next Sunday, I preached at Shrewsbury again;
but in another church. The next day I set out for Bristol,
and was much refreshed among the brethren. As I returned
I called at New-Kingswood, about sixteen miles from Bristol.
The Minister offering me his church, I preached to a
numerous congregation, gathered on half an hour's notice.
I think the seed then sown will not be lost.”
15. “Another uncommon talent which God had given
him,” says Mrs. Fletcher, “was a peculiar sensibility of spirit.
He had a temper the most feeling of any I ever knew.
Hardly a night passed over, but some part of it was spent in
groans for the souls and bodies committed to his care. I
dreaded his hearing either of the sins or sufferings of any of
his people before the time of his going to bed, knowing how
strong the impressions would be on his mind, chasing the
sleep from his eyes.
“And yet I have heard him speak of a time, twelve or four
teen years ago, when he was greatly tempted to think, that he
was not sensible enough of the afflictions of his fellow-creatures.
He thought Christ bore our infirmities, and carried our
sorrows; but, said he, “I have not that Christ-like temper: I
do not bear the sorrows of others. After being for some time
buffeted with this temptation, he prayed, that a measure of
this spirit might be given him. Not long after, as he was
visiting a poor sick family, so lively a sense of their affliction
on a sudden fell upon his mind, that he could scarce get home.
As soon as he sat down in his house, his soul was penetrated
with such a sense of the woes of mankind as utterly depressed
and overcame him, and drank up his spirits; insomuch that
he could not help himself, nor move from one chair to another.
And he was no more able to walk or help himself, than a new
born child. At the same time he seemed to lose the use of
his memory, and of all his faculties. He thought, ‘What is
this? Is it a disease? Is it a stroke of the palsy? Rather, is
it not an answer to my own ill-judged, though well-intended,
prayer? Did I not ask a burden unsuitable to a finite, and
capable of being borne only by an infinite, being?” He
remained some hours in this situation. Then it came into his
mind, ‘If this is a purely natural event, the will of the Lord be
done ! But if it be the answer to an improper prayer, God
will answer again by removing it.” He cried to the Lord, and
was immediately restored to strength both of body and mind.
“When we were at Leeds, in the year 1784, I had another
proof of the tender sensibility of his heart. O how deeply was
he affected concerning the welfare of his brethren | When
any little disputes arose between them, his inmost soul groaned
under the burden; and, by two or three o’clock in the morning,
I was sure to hear him breathing out prayer for the peace and
prosperity of Sion. When I observed to him, I was afraid it
would hurt his health, and wished him to sleep more, he would
answer, “O Polly, the cause of God lies near my heart !”
“Toward me his tenderness was exerted in its utmost
extent. My soul, my body, my health, my ease and comfort,
were his daily study. We had no thought, either past or
present, which we purposely concealed from each other. My
spiritual advancement was his constant endeavour; and to
this he was continually stirring me up, inviting me to walk
more closely with God; urging that thought, ‘O my dear,
let us pray for dying grace; for we shall not be long here.”
His temporal affairs he committed solely to me, though he
was always ready to assist me in the smallest matters.
“One article more remains to be spoken of, namely, his
communion with God. Although he enjoyed this, more or
less, at all times and in all places, yet I have frequently heard
him observe, that the seasons of his closest communion were
always in his own house, or in the church; usually in the latter.
It is much to be lamented that we have no account of it from
his own pen. It was his constant endeavour to maintain an
uninterrupted sense of the presence of God. In order to
this, he was slow of speech, and had the greatest government
of his words. Indeed he both acted, and spoke, and thought,
as under the eye of God. And thus setting God always before
him, he remained unmoved in all occurrences; at all times
and on every occasion possessing inward recollection. Nor
did I ever see him diverted therefrom on any occasion what
ever, either going out or coming in, whether by ourselves or
in company. Sometimes he took his journeys alone; but
above a thousand miles I have travelled with him; during
which neither change of company, place, nor the variety of
circumstances which naturally occur in travelling, ever seemed
to make the least difference in his firm attention to the
presence of God. To preserve this uniform habit of soul, he
was so watchful and recollected, that, to such as were unex
perienced in these things, it might appear like insensibility.
Although no one could converse in a more lively and sensible
manner, even on natural things, when he saw it was to the
glory of God; he was always striving to raise his own and
every other spirit to a close and immediate intercourse with
God. And I can say with truth, all his union with me was
so intermingled with prayer and praise, that every employ
ment and every meal was, as it were, perfumed therewith.”
16. I had concluded what I purposed to say concerning the
character of Mr. Fletcher, when I received a long letter from
Mr. Benson; an extract of which I cannot withhold from the
reader. For although most of the particulars hereof are
contained in the preceding pages, yet as they are here placed
in quite another order, and have also several new circum
stances intermixed, I could not doubt of their being both
agreeable and profitable to every person of piety.
“As to drawing the character of that great and good man,”
says Mr. Benson, “it is what I will not attempt: But if I
can suggest anything that will assist you therein, I shall
think my little labour well bestowed. With this view I have
been looking over many of his letters, and observe in them
all, what I have a thousand times observed in his conversa
tion and behaviour, the plainest marks of every Christian
grace and virtue.
“Perhaps if he followed his Master more closely in one
thing than another, it was in humility. It is one branch of
poverty of spirit (another word for humility) to think meanly
of ourselves. As he certainly thought meanly of himself,
both as a Christian, as a Preacher, and as a writer, I need not
say how he shone in all those characters; but he knew not
that he shone in any of them. How low an opinion he had
of himself as a Christian, manifestly appears from his placing
himself at the feet of all, and showing a continual desire to
learn from every company he was in. He paid all due
deference to the judgment of others, readily acknowledged
whatever was good in them, and seemed to think himself the
only person in whom there dwelt no excellency worth notice.
Hence it was that he often wrote and spoke, as if he had not
received that grace which he undoubtedly had received. And
indeed he overlooked what he had attained, through the eager
desire he had of higher and greater things. Many of his
letters show how very meanly he thought of his own attain
ments as a Christian; through the continually increasing views
which he had of the divine purity, and of the high degree of
conformity thereto which is attainable even in this world.
“And however little he was in his own eyes as a Christian,
he was equally so as a writer and a Preacher. In consequence
of the mean opinion he had of his own abilities, he gladly offered
what he wrote to be corrected by any friend, however inferior to
himself. Thus in a letter, dated November 23, 1771, he says,
‘I have sent a letter of fifty pages upon Antinomianism. I beg,
upon my bended knees, you would revise and correct it. I
have followed my light, small as it is. Put yours to mine.’
What a mean opinion he had of his own writings appears from
a letter written March 20, 1774: ‘I do not repent of my
having engaged in this controversy; for though I doubt my
little publications cannot reclaim those who are confirmed in
believing the lie of the day, yet they may here and there stop
one from swallowing it at all, or at least from swallowing it
so deeply.” Two years after, he says, “I have almost run my
race of scribbling; and I have preached as much as I could,
though to little purpose; but I must not complain. If one
person has received good by my ten years’ labour, it is an
honour for which I cannot be too thankful, if my mind were
as low as it should be. Let us bless the Lord in all things.”
“As difficult as it is to think meanly of ourselves, it is still
more difficult to be willing that others should think meanly
of us. And how eminent he was in this appears from hence,
that he was constantly upon his guard, lest any expression
should drop either from his lips or pen, which tended to
make any one think well of him; either on account of his
family, or learning, or parts, or usefulness. Yea, he took as
much pains to conceal his excellencies, as others do to show
them; having the same desire to be little and unknown,
which many have to be known and esteemed.
“It would have remained a secret in this kingdom, even
to his most intimate friends, that he was of so great a family,
had not Mr. Ireland gone over with him to Switzerland;
where he was surprised to find Mr. Fletcher's relations some
of the first people in the country.
“‘Blessed are they that mourn,” said the Lord Jesus. And
this blessedness was as certainly his as the former. He was
a man of a serious spirit; one that stood at the utmost distance.
from levity of every kind. Though he was constantly cheer
ful, as rejoicing in hope of his heavenly inheritance, yet had
he too deep a sense of his own wants, and the wants of the
Church of God, as also of the sins and miseries of mankind, to
be at any time light or trifling. I have a letter before me,
dated December, 1771, which at once gives us a picture of
his seriousness, watchfulness, and earnestness; and contains
advices well deserving the consideration of all that fear God.
‘There is undoubtedly, said he, “such a thing as the full
assurance of faith. Be not discouraged on account of thou
sands who stop short of it: It is our own fault if we do not
attain. God would give us ample satisfaction if we did but
deeply feel our wants. Both you and I want a deeper
awakening, which will produce a death to outward things and
speculative knowledge. Let us shut our eyes to the gilded
clouds without us; let us draw inward, and search after God, if
haply we may find him. Let us hold our confidence, though
we are often constrained against hope to believe in hope. But
let us not rest in our confidence, as thousands do; let it help
us to struggle and wait till he come. Let us habituate our
selves to live inwardly. This will solemnize us, and prevent
our trifling with the things of God. We may be thankful for
what we have, without resting in it. We may strive, and yet
not trust in our striving; but expect all from divine grace.”
“Four or five years after, he says, “I send this to inquire
after your welfare, and to let you know, that though I am
pretty well in body, yet I breakfast. But I want to break
faster in my spirit than I do. Yet, blessed be God, I have
been in such pinching, grinding circumstances, for near a year,
by a series of providential and domestic trials, as have given
me some deadly blows. I am not without hope of setting
my eyes on you once more. Mr. Wesley kindly invites me
to travel with nim, and visit some of the societies. I feel an
inclination to break one of my chains, parochial retirement,
which may be a nest for self-indulgence. I leave the matter
entirely to the Lord.”
“Meantime, he mourned, not only for himself and his
friends, but also for the Church of God. ‘The few professors,’
says he, “which I see in these parts, are so far from what I
wish them to be, that I cannot but cry out, Lord, how long
wilt thou give thy heritage up to desolation? How long shall
the Heathen say, Where is now their indwelling God?” In
another letter he writes, (dated May 8, 1776) “I see so little
fruit in these parts, that I am almost disheartened. I am
closely followed with the thought, that faith in the dispensa
tion of the Spirit is at a very low ebb. But it may be better
in other places. I shall be glad to travel a little, to see the
goodness of the land. May God make and keep us humble,
loving, disinterested, and zealous!”
“These quotations give us not only an example of holy
mourning, but likewise of hungering and thirsting after righ
teousness. In this he was peculiarly worthy our imitation.
He never rested in anything he had either experienced or done
in spiritual matters. But this one thing he did: “Forgetting
those things that were behind, and reaching forth unto those
things which were before, he ‘pressed toward the mark for
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; he was
a true Christian racer, always on the stretch for higher and
better things. Though his attainments, both in experience and
usefulness, were above the common standard, yet the language
of his conversation and behaviour always was, ‘Not as though
I had already attained, either were already perfected; but I
follow after, if by any means I may apprehend that for which
I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.’ He had his eye upon a
full conformity to the Son of God; or what the Apostle
terms, ‘the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.’
Nor could he be satisfied with anything less.
“And he was meek, like his Master, as well as lowly in
heart. Not that he was so by nature, but of a fiery, passionate
spirit. But so thoroughly had grace subdued nature, so fully
was he renewed in the spirit of his mind, that, for many
years before his death, I believe he was never observed by
any one, friend or foe, to be out of temper. And yet he did
not want provocation, and that sometimes in a high degree;
especially from those whose religious sentiments he thought
it his duty to oppose. One of these, who once loved him so
well, as to be ready to pull out his eyes for him, was so
exasperated on reading his Second Check, that he wrote to
him in the most bitter terms. But none of these things
moved him; no, not in the least degree. The keenest word
he used upon the occasion was, ‘What a world, what a
religious world we live in l’
“Hence arose his readiness to bear with the weaknesses, and
forgive the faults, of others; the more remarkable, considering
his flaming zeal against sin, and deep concern for the glory of
God. Such hatred to sin, and such love to the sinner, I never
saw joined together before. This very circumstance con
vinced me of the height of his grace, bearing so much of his
Master’s image, whose hatred to sin and love to sinners are
equally infinite. He took all possible pains to detect what
was evil in any of those that were under his care; pursuing it
through all its turnings and windings, and stripping it of all its
disguises. Yet none so ready to excuse when it was confessed,
and to conceal it even from his most intimate friends.
“He never mentioned the faults of an absent person, unless
absolute duty required it: And then he spoke with the utmost
tenderness, extenuating, rather than aggravating. None could
draw his picture more exactly than St. Paul has done, in the
thirteenth of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Every
feature in that masterly piece of apostolic painting was found
in him. Let all that knew him, especially his intimate
friends, recollect the spirit and behaviour of this servant of
the God of love; and then let them judge whether I exagge
rate, when I say, He ‘suffered long and was kind; he envied
not; acted not rashly; was not puffed up; did not behave
himself unseemly; sought not his own; was not easily provoked.
He thought no evil, rejoiced not in iniquity, but rejoiced in
the truth. He covered all things, believed all things, hoped
all things, and endured all things.’ It would be easy to enlarge
on all these particulars, and show how they were exemplified
in him. But waving this, I would only observe, that, with
regard to two of them,-kindness to others, and not seeking
his own, -he had few equals. His kindness to others was
such, that he bestowed his all upon them; his time, his
talents, his substance. His knowledge, his eloquence, his
health, his money, were employed, day by day, for the good
of mankind. He prayed, he wrote, he preached, he visited the
sick and well, he conversed, he gave, he laboured, he suffered,
winter and summer, night and day; he endangered, nay,
destroyed, his health, and, in the end, gave his life also for
the profit of his neighbours, that they might be saved from
everlasting death. He denied himself even such food as was
necessary for him, that he might have to give to them that
had none. And when he was constrained to change his
manner of living, still his diet was plain and simple; and so
were his clothing and furniture, that he might save all that
was possible for his poor neighbours.
“He sought not his own in any sense; not his own honour,
but the honour of God in all he said or did: He sought not
his own interest, but the interest of his Lord; spreading
knowledge, holiness, and happiness as far as he possibly could.
He sought not his own pleasure, but studied to ‘please all
men, for their good to edification; and to please Him that
had called him to his kingdom and glory. And yet it is
certain, he found the greatest pleasure in pleasing God and
his neighbour. For nothing could give an higher delight
than this to his pious and benevolent mind.
“In the mean time, he was a man of peace, and spared no
pains to restore it where it was broken. He gave numberless
proofs of this anniable disposition. When we were at Trevecka,
(to mention but one instance,) two of the students were bitterly
prejudiced against each other. He took them into a room by
themselves, reasoned with them, wept over them, and at last
prevailed. Their hearts were broken; they were melted
down; they fell upon each other's necks and wept aloud.
“The pains which he took to make peace at the Leeds
Conference will not easily be forgotten. And although he
could not prevail so far as might have been desired, yet his
labour was not in vain.
“But I do not attempt his full character: I will only add,
what the Apostle recommends to the Philippians was exactly
copied by him. He was ‘blameless and harmless, a son of
God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation; shining among them as a light in the world.’”
I think one talent wherewith God had endued Mr. Fletcher
has not been sufficiently noted yet: I mean his courtesy; in
which there was not the least touch either of art or affectation.
It was pure and genuine, and sweetly constrained him to behave
to every one (although particularly to inferiors) in a manner
not to be described, with so inexpressible a mixture of humi
lity, love, and respect. This directed his words, the tone of
his voice, his looks, his whole attitude, his every motion.
This seems to be intended by St. Paul, in those words, ove
agxmploys"; not so well expressed in our translation by,
“behaveth not itself unseemly.” Do not the words literally
mean, “is not ill bred ?”--behaves on all occasions with
decency and good breeding? Certainly, so did Mr. Fletcher.
Never did any man more perfectly suit his whole behaviour
to the persons and the occasion: So that one might apply to
him, with great propriety, the words of the ancient poet:--
Illum quicquid agit, quoquo vestigia tendit
Componit furtim, subsequiturque decor.”
I cannot translate this; but I can give the English reader a
parallel, and more than a parallel:--
Grace was in all his steps, heaven in his eye,
In all his gestures sanctity and love.
“SoME time before he was taken ill,” says Mrs. Fletcher,
“he mentioned to me a peculiar manifestation of love which
he received in his own house, with the application of those
words, “Thou shalt walk with me in white. He added, ‘It
is not a little thing so to hang upon God by faith, as to feel
no departure from him, and no rising in the heart against
him. But this does not satisfy me; I often feel something far
beyond this; yea, I sometimes find such gleams of light and
love, such wafts, as it were, of the heavenly air; so powerful,
as if they would just then take my soul with them to glory !
But I am not filled: I want to be filled with all the fulness
of God.” In conformity to these sentiments, when he was in
his last illness, he expressed himself thus: ‘I am filled, most
sweetly filled.’ This conveyed much to my mind, as I
understood by it the accomplishment of his large desires.
“Some time before the beginning of his last sickness,
he was peculiarly penetrated with the nearness of eternity.
* This quotation from Tibullus is thus rendered by Dr. Grainger:
“A secret grace his every act improves,
And pleasing follows wheresoe'er he moves.”-EDIT.
There was scarce an hour in which he was not calling upon
us to drop every thought and every care, that we might
attend to nothing but the drinking deeper into God. We
spent much time in wrestling with God, and were led, in a
peculiar manner, to abandon our whole selves, our souls and
bodies, into the hands of God; ready to do, and willing to
suffer, whatever was well pleasing to him.
“And now the time drew near, when his faith was to be
called to its last grand exercise; that, eying his Lord, he might
True in the fiery trial prove,
And pay him back his dying love.
A little before, being on his knees in prayer for light, whether
he should go to London or not; the answer to him seemed
to be, ‘Not to London, but to thy grave.” When he
acquainted me with this, he said, with a heavenly smile, “Satan
would represent it to me as something dreadful, enforcing
those words: The cold gravel The cold grave 1° On the
Sunday following, (I think it was the next day,) that anthem
was sung in the church: ‘The Lord is my Shepherd; there
fore can I lack nothing. He shall feed me in green pastures,
and lead me forth beside the waters of comfort. He shall
convert my soul, and bring me forth in the paths of righteous
ness, for his name’s sake. Yea, though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I shall fear no evil: For thou art
with me; thy rod and thy staff shall comfort me. Thou shalt
prepare a table before me, against them that trouble me. Thou
hast anointed my head with oil, and my cup shall be full.”
“In his return home, he observed in how uncommon a
degree those words had been blessed to his soul. And from
that very time I do not remember to have seen in him the
least marks of temptation. He showed an unusual cheerful
ness and liveliness in every part of his work; and seemed to
increase in strength of body, as well as in strength of soul.
Truly it was to him according to his faith: He feared no
evil; and his cup was filled with ‘righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost.’
“On Thursday, August 4, he was employed in the work of
God from three in the afternoon till nine at night. When he
came home, he said, ‘I have taken cold; but seemed not
* I verily believe, if he had then gone to London, he would have been alive at
this day. But I blame no one for thinking otherwise.
to regard it. He was far from well on Friday and Saturday;
but was uncommonly drawn out in prayer. On Saturday
night he was abundantly worse, and his fever appeared very
strong. I begged that he would by no means think of going
to church in the morning. But he told me, it was the will
of the Lord; in which case I never dared to persuade. In
reading Prayers, he was very near fainting away. I got
through the crowd, and entreated him to come out of the
desk. But he let me and others know, in his sweet manner,
that we were not to interrupt the order of God. I then
silently retired to my pew, where all around me were in
tears. When the windows were opened, by which he appeared
to be a little refreshed, he went on ; and then preached with
a strength and recollection that surprised us all.
“After sermon he walked up to the communion-table,
uttering these words, “I am going to throw myself under the
wings of the cherubim, before the mercy-seat. The service
lasted till near two. Sometimes he was constrained to stop;
being hardly able to stand upon his feet. The people were
deeply affected, which they were not able to conceal; groans
and weeping were on every side. Gracious Lord! how was it
my soul was kept so calm in the midst of the most tender
feelings? Notwithstanding his extreme weakness, he gave
out several verses of hymns, and lively sentences of exhorta
tion. As soon as ever the service was over, we hurried him to
bed. When he lay down, nature being quite exhausted, he
immediately fainted away. He afterwards dropped into a
sleep for some time, and, on waking, cried out with a pleasant
smile, ‘Now, my dear, thou seest I am no worse for doing the
Lord’s work. He never fails me when I trust in Him.”
Having eaten a little dinner, he dozed most of the evening;
now and then waking, with the praises of God in his mouth.
At night his fever returned; but it was not violent; and yet
his strength decreased amazingly. On Monday and Tuesday
we had a little paradise together. He lay on a couch in the
study; and, though often changing posture, was sweetly
pleasant, and frequently slept a good while together. When
he was awake, he delighted in hearing me read hymns, and
treatises on faith and love. His words were all animating,
and his patience beyond expression. When he had a very
nauseous medicine to take, he seemed to enjoy the cross;
according to a word which he was used often to repeat, “We
are to seek a perfect conformity to the will of God; and leave
Him to give us pleasure or pain, as it seemeth him good.’
“I asked him, whether he had any advice to leave me, if
he should be taken from me. He replied, ‘I have nothing
particular to say: The Lord will open all before thee. I
said, ‘Have you any conviction that God is about to take
you?” He said, ‘No, not in particular. Only I always see
death so inexpressibly near, that we both seem to stand on
the verge of etermity.’ While he slept a little, I besought
the Lord, if it was his good pleasure, to spare him to me a
little longer. But my prayer seemed to have no wings; and
I could not help mingling continually therewith, ‘Lord, give
me perfect resignation l’ This uncertainty made me tremble,
lest God was going to put into my hands the bitter cup with
which he lately threatened my husband. Some weeks before,
I myself was ill of a fever, and not without danger. My
husband then felt the whole parting scene, and struggled
for perfect resignation. He said, “O Polly, shall I ever see
the day when thou must be carried out to bury? How will
the little things which thy tender care has prepared for me,
in every part of the house, wound and distress me! How is
it? I think I feel jealousy I am jealous of the worms |
I seem to shrink at the thought of giving my dear Polly to
the worms.’
“Now all these reflections returned upon my heart, with
the weight of a millstone. I cried to the Lord, and these
words were deeply impressed on my spirit: ‘Where I am,
there shall my servants be, that they may behold my glory.’
This promise was full of comfort to my soul. I saw that in
Christ's immediate presence was our home, and that we
should have our re-union in being deeply centred in him.
I received it as a fresh marriage for eternity: As such, I trust
for ever to hold it. All that day, whenever I thought of the
expression, “to behold my glory, it seemed to wipe away
every tear, and was as the ring whereby we were joined anew.
“Awaking some time after, he said, ‘Polly, I have been
thinking it was Israel's fault that they asked for signs. We
will not do so; but, abandoning our whole selves to the will
of God, will lie patiently before him; assured that he will do
all things well.’
“‘My dear love,’ said I, “if ever I have done or said
anything to grieve thee, how will the remembrance wound
my heart, if thou shouldest be taken from me!’ He entreated
me, with inexpressible tenderness, not to allow the thought ;
declaring his thankfulness for our union, in a variety of words
written on my heart, as with the adamantine pen of friend
ship deeply dipped in blood.
“On Wednesday, after groaning all day long, under the
weight of the power of God, he told me, he had received such
a manifestation of the full meaning of those words, “God is
love,’ as he could never be able to express. “It fills my
heart, said he, “every moment. O Polly, my dear Polly,
God is love / Shout ! shout aloud I want a gust of praise
to go to the ends of the earth ! But it seems as if I could
not speak much longer. Let us fix on a sign between our
selves. Now, said he, (tapping me twice with his finger) “I
mean, God is love. And we will draw each other into God.
Observe | By this we will draw each other into God.”
“Sally coming in, he cried out, ‘O Sally, God is love!
Shout, both of you ! I want to hear you shout his praise!”
All this time the medical friend, who attended him diligently,
hoped he was in no danger; as he had no headach, but
much sleep without the least delirium, and an almost regular
pulse. So was the disease, though commissioned to take his
life, restrained by the power of God.
“On Thursday his speech began to fail. While he was
able, he spoke to all that came in his way. Hearing that a
stranger was in the house, he ordered her to be called up.
But the uttering only two sentences made him ready to faint
away. And while he had any power of speech, he would
not be silent to his friendly Doctor: ‘O Sir, said he, ‘you
take much thought for my body; permit me to take thought
for your soul.” When I could scarce understand anything
he said, I spoke these words, “God is love.’ Instantly, as if
all his powers were awakened, he broke out in a rapture,
‘God is love I love I love! O for that gust of praise ! I
want to sound’--Here his voice again failed. All this time
he was in much pain, and suffered many ways; but still
with such unutterable patience as none but those that were
present can conceive. If I did but name his sufferings, he
would smile and make the sign.
“On Friday, observing his body covered with spots, I felt
a sword pierce through my soul. As I was kneeling by his
side, with my hand in his, intreating the Lord to be with us
in this tremendous hour, he strove to say many things, but
could not articulate the words. All he could do was to press
my hand, and frequently repeat the sign. At last he
breathed out, “Head of the Church, be head to my wife I’
“When I was forced to leave him for a few moments, Sally
said to him, ‘My dear master, do you know me?” He
replied, “God will put his right hand under you.” She
added, ‘O my dear master, should you be taken away, what
a disconsolate creature will my poe dear mistress be l’ He
replied, “God will be her all in all!’
“He always took a peculiar pleasure in repeating or
hearing those words,--
“Jesu's love through earth and skies,
Mercy, free, boundless mercy, cries.”
Whenever I repeated them to him, he would answer, ‘Bound
less, boundless, boundless!” He now added, though not
without much difficulty,
“Mercy's full power I soon shall prove,
Loved with an everlasting love.”
“On Saturday, in the afternoon, his fever seemed quite
off, and a few friends standing near his bed, he reached his
hand to each; and looking on a Minister, said, ‘Are you
ready to assist to-morrow?” His recollection surprised us,
as the day of the week had not been named in the room.
Many were of opinion he would recover; and one of them
said to him, “Do you think the Lord will raise you up?” He
strove to answer, and could just pronounce, “Raise me up in
the resurr’--meaning in the resurrection. To another, who
asked the same question, he said, ‘I leave it all to God.”
“In the evening the fever came again, and with greater
violence than ever. The mucus then falling on his throat,
almost strangled him. It was supposed the same painful symp
tom would grow more and more violent to the last. As I felt
this exquisitely, I cried to the Lord to remove it; and, glory be
to his name, he did. From that time it returned no more.
“As night drew on, I perceived him dying very fast. His
fingers could hardly make the sign, which he scarce ever
forgot; and his speech seemed quite gone. I said, ‘My dear
creature, I ask not for myself; I know thy soul; but for the
sake of others, if Jesus is very present with thee, lift up thy
right hand.’ Immediately he did. “If the prospect of glory
sweetly opens before thee, repeat the sign. He instantly
raised it again, and in half a minute, a second time. He
then threw it up, as if he would reach the top of the bed;
after this, his hands moved no more. But on my saying,
“Art thou in pain?’ he answered, ‘No. From this time he
lay in a kind of sleep, though with his eyes open and fixed.
For the most part he sat upright, against pillows, with his
head a little inclining to one side; and so remarkably composed,
yea, triumphant, was his countenance, that the least trace of
death was scarce discernible in it. Twenty-four hours he was
in this situation, breathing like a person in common sleep.
About thirty-five minutes past ten on Sunday night, August
14, his precious soul entered into the joy of his Lord, without
one struggle or groan, in the fifty-sixth year of his age.
“And here I break off my mournful story; but on my
bleeding heart the fair picture of his heavenly excellencies
will be for ever drawn. When I call to mind his ardent zeal,
his laborious endeavours to seek and save the lost, his
diligence in the employment of his time, his Christ-like
condescension toward me, and his uninterrupted converse
with heaven; I may well be allowed to add, My loss is beyond
the power of words to paint. I have often gone through
deep waters; but all my afflictions were nothing to this.
Well; I want no pleasant prospect but upwards, nor anything
whereon to fix my hope but immortality.
“From the time I have had the happiness and honour of
being with him, every day more and more convinced me he was
the Christian. I saw, I loved, in him the image of my Saviour;
and thought myself the happiest of women in the possession
of the most sympathizing and heavenly friend. My sorrow
bears a due proportion; but it is alleviated by that thought,
“United in God, we cannot be divided. No; we are of one
household still; we are joined in Him as our centre, ‘of whom
the whole family in heaven and earth is named. It is said
of New Testament believers, “They are come to the spirits of
just men made perfect;’ to the glorious privilege of com
munion with the Church triumphant. But this is far more
apparent to the eyes of celestial spirits, than to ours, which
are yet veiled with flesh and blood. Yet as there is joy in
heaven over one sinner that repenteth, and as the prayers of
saints still on earth are represented by incense in the hands
of the Elders, I can only consider departed spirits, and minis
tering angels, as one innumerable company, continually
surrounding us. And are they not as nearly united to their
fellow-soldiers now, as when they were in the body? What
should hinder? Gratitude and affection are natives of heaven,
and live for ever there. Forgetfulness is a property of mor
tality, and drops off with the body. Therefore they that
loved us in the Lord will surely love us for ever. Can anything
material interrupt the light or presence of a spirit? Nay,
Walls within walls no more the passage bar
Than unopposing space of liquid air.
“On the 17th, his remains were deposited in Madeley
churchyard, amidst the tears and lamentations of thousands.
The service was performed by the Rev. Mr. Hatton, Rector
of Waters-Upton, whom God enabled to speak in a pathetic
manner to the weeping flock. In the conclusion, at my
request, he read the following paper:--
“As it was the desire of my beloved husband to be buried in
this plain manner, so out of tenderness he begged that I might
not be present. And in everything I would obey him.
“Permit me then, by the mouth of a friend, to bear an
open testimony to the glory of God, that I, who have known
him in the most perfect manner, am constrained to declare,
that I never knew any one walk so closely in the ways of
God as he did. The Lord gave him a conscience tender as
the apple of an eye. And he literally preferred the interest
of every one to his own.
“He was rigidly just, and perfectly loose from attachment
to the world. He shared his all with the poor, who lay so
close to his heart, that, at the approach of death, when he
could not speak without difficulty, he cried out, ‘O my poor !
What will become of my poor !” He was blessed with so
great a degree of humility, as is scarce to be found. I am
witness how often he has rejoiced in being treated with
contempt. Indeed it seemed the very food of his soul, to be
little and unknown.
“His zeal for souls, I need not tell you. Let the labours
of twenty-five years, and a martyr's death in the conclusion,
imprint it on your hearts. His diligent visiting of the sick
occasioned the fever which, by God’s commission, tore him
from you and me. And his vehement desire to take his last
leave of you with dying lips and hands, gave (it is supposed)
the finishing stroke, by preparing his blood for putrefaction.
Thus has he lived and died your servant. And will any of
you refuse to meet him at God’s right hand in that day?
“He walked with death always in sight. About two
months ago, he came to me and said, ‘My dear love, I know
not how it is, but I have a strange impression, death is near
us, as if it were to be some sudden stroke upon one of us.
And it draws out all my soul in prayer, that we may be
ready. He then broke out, ‘Lord, prepare the soul thou
wilt call! And O stand by the poor disconsolate one that
shall be left behind ' '
“A few days before his departure, he was filled with love in
an uncommon manner. The same he testified as long as he
had a voice, and continued to the end, by a most lamb-like
patience, in which he smiled over death, and set his last seal
to the glorious truths he had so long preached among you.
“Three years, nine months, and two days, I have possessed
my heavenly-minded husband. But now the sun of my
earthly joys is set for ever, and my soul filled with an anguish
which only finds its consolation in a total resignation to the
will of God. When I was asking the Lord, if he pleased, to
spare him to me a little longer, the following promise was
impressed on my mind: ‘Where I am, there shall my servants
be, that they may behold my glory.” Lord, hasten the time !”
18. There is little need of adding any farther character of
this man of God to the foregoing account, given by one who
wrote out of the fulness of her heart. I would only observe,
that for many years I despaired of finding any inhabitant of
Great Britain, that could stand in any degree of comparison
with Gregory Lopez, or Monsieur de Renty. But let any
impartial person judge if Mr. Fletcher was at all inferior to
them. Did he not experience as deep communion with God,
and as high a measure of inward holiness, as was experienced
by either one or the other of those burning and shining
lights? And it is certain, his outward light shone before men
with full as bright a lustre as theirs. But if any would draw
a parallel between them, there are two circumstances which
should be well observed. One is, we are not assured that the
writers of their lives did not extenuate, if not suppress, their
faults. And some faults we are assured there were; namely,
some touches of superstition, and some of idolatry, as the
worship of images, angels, and saints; the Virgin Mary in
particular. But I have not suppressed, or even extenuated,
anything in Mr. Fletcher's life. Indeed, I know nothing that
needed to be extenuated, much less to be suppressed. A
second circumstance is, that the writers of their lives could not
have so full a knowledge of them as I, and much more Mrs.
Fletcher, had; being eye and ear witnesses of his whole
conduct. Consequently, we knew that his life was not sullied
with any taint of idolatry or superstition. I was intimately
acquainted with him for thirty years. I conversed with him
morning, moon, and night, without the least reserve, during a
journey of many hundred miles; and in all that time I never
heard him speak an improper word, or saw him do an improper
action. To conclude: Within fourscore years, I have known
many excellent men, holy in heart and life: But one equal
to him, I have not known; one so uniformly and deeply
devoted to God. So unblamable a man, in every respect, I
have not found either in Europe or America. Nor do I
expect to find another such on this side eternity.
Yet it is possible we may be such as he was. Let us, then,
endeavour to follow him as he followed Christ.
#tre Iits the 330'p
Vicar of Madeley;
Who was born at Nyon in Switzerland,
September 12, 1729,
And finished his course, August 14, 1705,
In this village,
Where his unexampled labours
Will never be forgotten.
He exercised his ministry for the space of twenty-five years
In this parish,
With uncommon zeal and ability.
But though many believed his report,
Yet he might with justice have adopted
The lamentation of the Prophet :
“All the day long have I stretched out my hands
Unto a disobedient and gainsaying people :
Yet surely my judgment is with the Lord,
And my work with my God.”