Thoughts on Salvation by Faith
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. It is now upwards of forty years since my brother
and I were convinced of that important truth, which is the
foundation of all real religion, that “by grace we are saved.
through faith.” And as soon as we believed, we spoke;
when we saw it ourselves, we immediately began declaring it
to others. And, indeed, we could hardly speak of anything
else, either in public or private. It shone upon our minds
with so strong a light, that it was our constant theme. It
was our daily subject, both in verse and prose; and we
vehemently defended it against all mankind.
2. But in doing this we met with abundance of difficulty;
we were assaulted and abused on every side. We were
everywhere represented as mad dogs, and treated accordingly.
We were stoned in the streets, and several times narrowly
escaped with our lives. In sermons, newspapers, and
pamphlets of all kinds, we were painted as unheard-of
monsters. But this moved us not; we went on, by the help
of God, testifying salvation by faith both to small and great,
and not counting our lives dear unto ourselves, so we might
finish our course with joy.
3. While we were thus employed, another storm arose
from a quarter whence we least expected it. Some of our
familiar friends declared open war against us for preaching
salvation by works! This we could not in anywise under
stand; we wondered what they meant. We utterly disavowed
the charge; we denied it in the strongest terms. We
declared, over and over, both in public and private, “We
believe, and constantly preach, salvation by faith. Salvation
by works is a doctrine we abhor; we neither preach nor
believe it.” But it did not avail: Say what we would, the
same charge was still repeated; and that not only when we
were at a convenient distance, but even before our face.
4. At first we were inclined to think, that many who
affirmed this, did not believe themselves; that it was merely
a copy of their countenance, spoken ad movendam invidiam.*
And could we have been fully persuaded of this, the difficulty
would have been solved. But we did not dare to give way
to the thought : Whatever they might think or say of us, we
could not but think they were upright men, and spoke
according to their real sentiments. The wonder therefore
remained, how they could impute to us a doctrine which
our soul abhorred, and which we were continually opposing,
and confuting with all our might.
5. I was in this perplexity when a thought shot across my
mind, which solved the matter at once: “This is the key:
Those that hold, “Every one is absolutely predestinated either
to salvation or damnation, see no medium between salvation
by works and salvation by absolute decrees.” It follows,
*To excite ill-will.-EDIT.
that whosoever denies salvation by absolute decrees, in so
doing (according to their apprehension) asserts salvation by
works.
6. And herein I verily believe they are right. As averse
as I once was to the thought, upon further consideration, I
allow there is, there can be, no medium. Either salvation is
by absolute decree, or it is (in a scriptural sense) by works.
Yea, this I will proclaim on the house-top,-there is no
medium between these. You must either assert unconditional
decrees, or (in a sound sense) salvation by works.
7. This deserves a fuller examination: Let us consider it
more attentively. If the salvation of every man that ever
was, is, or shall be, finally saved, depends wholly and solely
upon an absolute, irresistible, unchangeable decree of God,
without any regard either to faith or works foreseen, then it
is not, in any sense, by works. But neither is it by faith:
For unconditional decree excludes faith as well as works;
since, if it is either by faith or works foreseen, it is not
by unconditional decree. Therefore, salvation by absolute
decree excludes both one and the other; and, consequently,
upon this supposition, salvation is neither by faith nor by
works.
8. If, on the other hand, we deny all absolute decrees, and
admit only the conditional one, (the same which our blessed
Lord hath revealed,) “He that believeth shall be saved;”
we must, according to their apprehension, assert salvation by
works. We must do this, (in a sound sense of the expression,)
if we believe the Bible. For seeing no faith avails, but that
“which worketh by love,” which produces both inward and
outward good works, to affirm, No man is finally saved
without this, is, in effect, to affirm, No man is finally saved
without works. It is plain, then, if we affirm, No man is
saved by an absolute, unconditional decree, but only by a
conditional one; we must expect, all who hold unconditional
decrees will say, we teach salvation by works.
9. Let none, therefore, who hold universal redemption be
surprised at being charged with this. Let us deny it no
more; let us frankly and fairly meet those who advance it
upon their own ground. If they charge you with holding
salvation by works, answer plainly, “In your sense, I do;
for I deny that our final salvation depends upon any absolute,
unconditional decree. If, therefore, there be no medium, I
do hold salvation by works. But observe: In allowing this,
I allow no more than that I am no Calvinist. So that, by
my making you this concession, you gain--just nothing.”
10. I am therefore still consistent with myself, as well as
consistent with the Bible. I still hold, (as I have done above
these forty years,) that “by grace we are saved through
faith;” yet so as not to contradict that other expression of
the same Apostle, “Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord.” Meantime, those who maintain absolute predestina
tion, who hold decrees that have no condition at all, cannot
be consistent with themselves, unless they deny salvation by
faith, as well as salvation by works. For, if only “he that
believeth shall be saved,” then is faith a condition of salva
tion; and God hath decreed, from all eternity, that it should
be such. But if the decree admit of any condition, it is
mot an unconditional decree. Either, therefore, you must
renounce your unconditional decrees, or deny that faith is
the condition of salvation; or (which is just the same thing)
affirm, that a man may be saved without either faith or
works.
11. And I am consistent with myself, as well as with the
Bible, when I affirm, that none shall be finally saved by any
“faith” but that “which worketh by love,” both inward and
outward holiness. I fear, many of them that hold uncon
ditional decrees are not sensible of this. For they seriously
believe themselves to be in the high road to salvation,
though they are far from inward (if not outward) holiness.
They have not “put on humbleness of mind, bowels of
mercy, brotherly-kindness.” They have no gentleness, no
meekness, no longsuffering; so far are they from the “love
that endureth all things.” They are under the power of
sin; of evil-surmising; of anger; yea, of outward sin. For
they scruple mot to say to their brother, “Thou fool!”
They not only, on a slight provocation, make no scruple of
rendering evil for evil, of returning railing for railing; but
they bring railing accusations unprovoked; they pour out
floods of the lowest, basest invectives. And yet they are
within the decree I instance in the two late publications
of Mr. Rowland Hill. “O,” says Mr. Hill, “but Mr.
Wesley is a wicked man.” What then? Is he more wicked
than him that disputed with Michael about the body of
Moses? How, then, durst he bring a railing accusation
against a man, when an archangel durst not bring one
against the devil? O fight, fight for an unconditional
decree For if there be any condition, how can you be
saved ?