Some Thoughts on an Expression of St. Paul in 1 Thessalonians v. 23
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. THE words, as literally translated as the English tongue
will bear, run thus: “May the whole of you, the spirit, and
the soul, and the body, be preserved blameless.”
What does St. Paul here mean by dividing man into three
parts, “the spirit, and the soul, and the body?”
This creates what has been thought an insurmountable
difficulty by those who argue thus:
“How is it possible to contradistinguish the soul both from
the spirit and from the body? For it must be either material
or immaterial, matter or not matter: There is no medium.
But if it be matter, does it not co-incide with the body? If
it be not matter, does it not co-incide with the spirit 7”
But perhaps a way may be found of untieing this knot, of
unraveling this difficulty, by simply declaring the (at least
probable) meaning of these three terms.
May not the spirit mean (so it has been understood by
the Christians in all ages) the highest principle in man, the
immortal spirit made in the image of God, endued (as all
spirits are, so far as we can conceive) with self-motion,
understanding, will, and liberty?
Is not the body that portion of organized matter which
every man receives in the womb, with which he is born into
the world, and which he carries with him to the grave? At
present it is connected with flesh and blood. But these are
not the body. They are only the temporary clothing of the
body, which it wholly puts off in the grave.
The soul seems to be the immediate clothing of the spirit,
the vehicle with which it is connected from its first existence,
and which is never separated from it, either in life or in death.
Probably it consists of ethereal or electric fire, the purest of all
matter. It does not seem to be affected by the death of the
body, but envelopes the separate, as it does the embodied,
spirit; neither will it undergo any essential change, when it
is clothed upon with the immortal body at the resurrection.
May not the Apostle have an eye to this in those
remarkable words:--“We that are in this tabernacle” (this
corruptible flesh and blood) “do groan, being burdened; not
for that we would be unclothed,” (divested of all covering,
which belongs only to the Father of spirits,) “but clothed
upon” with the glorious resurrection-body, covering both our
soul and spirit? (2 Corinthians v. 4.) This will swallow up,
totally destroy, to Swntov,-that which was mortal, namely,
the flesh and blood, which alone was liable to death.
If we understand the words of the Apostle in this sense,
all the difficulty vanishes away. We allow, there can be no
medium between material and immaterial. But still there is
room for a wide and essential difference between the soul and
the body; the latter implying that original portion of matter
which is now clothed with flesh and blood; the former, that
vehicle of ethereal fire which immediately covers the immortal
spirit.
CoNGLETON,
March 31, 1786.