A Second Letter on 'The Enthusiasm of Methodists and Papists Compared'
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 9 (Zondervan)
Year: 1751
Author: John Wesley
---
1. I was grieved when I read the following words in the
Third Part of the “Enthusiasm of Methodists and Papists com
pared:”--“A sensible, honestwoman told the Bishop of Exeter,
in presence of several witnesses, that Mr. John Wesley came
to her house, and questioned her, whether she had “an assur
ance of her salvation.’ Her answer was, that ‘she hoped she
should be saved, but had no absolute assurance of it.” “Why
then, replied he, “you are in hell, you are damned already.”
This so terrified the poor woman, who was then with child,
that she was grievously afraid of miscarrying, and could not, in
a long time, recover her right mind. For this, and the Meth
odists asking her to live upon free cost, she determined to admit
no more of them into her house. So much is her own account
to his Lordship, on whose authority it is here published.”
2. This renewed the concern I felt some time since, when I
was informed (in letters which I have still by me) of your
* Thus translated by Gifford:
“Again Crispinus comes!”-EDIT.
Lordship's publishing this account, both at Plymouth in
Devonshire, and at Truro in Cornwall, before the Clergy
assembled from all parts of those counties, at the solemn season
of your Lordship’s visiting your diocese. But I was not
informed that your Lordship showed a deep concern for the
honour of God, which you supposed to be so dreadfully violated,
or a tender compassion for a Presbyter whom you believed to
be rushing into everlasting destruction.
3. In order to be more fully informed, on Saturday, August
25, 1750, Mr. Trembath, of St. Ginnys, Mr. Haime, of Shaftes
bury, and I, called at Mr. Morgan's, at Mitchel. The servant
telling me her master was not at home, I desired to speak
with her mistress, the “honest, sensible woman.” I imme
diately asked, “Did I ever tell you or your husband that you
would be damned if you took any money of me?” (So the
story ran in the first part of the “Comparison; ” it has now
undergone a very considerable alteration.) “Or did you or
he ever affirm,” (another circumstance related at Truro,) “that I
was rude with your maid?” She replied, vehemently, “Sir,
I never said you was, or that you said any such thing. And I
do not suppose my husband did. But we have been belied as
well as our neighbours.” She added, “When the Bishop
came down last, he sent us word that he would dine at our
house; but he did not, being invited to a neighbouring gentle
man's. He sent for me thither, and said, ‘Good woman, do
you know these people that go up and down? Do you know
Mr. Wesley? Did not he tell you, you would be damned if
you took any money of him? And did not he offer rudeness
to your maid?' I told him, ‘No, my Lord; he never said
any such thing to me, nor to my husband that I know of He
never offered any rudeness to any maid of mine. I never saw
or knew any harm of him: But a man told me once (who I
was told was a Methodist Preacher) that I should be damned
if I did not know my sins were forgiven.’”
4. This is her own account given to me. And an account
it is, irreconcilably different (notwithstanding some small
resemblance in the last circumstance) from that she is affirmed
to have given your Lordship. Whether she did give that
account to your Lordship or no, your Lordship knows best.
That the Comparer affirms it, is no proof at all; since he will
affirm any thing that suits his purpose.
5. Yet I was sorry to see your Lordship's authority cited on
such an occasion; inasmuch as many of his readers, not con
sidering the man, may think your Lordship did really counte
nance such a writer; one that turns the most serious, the most
awful, the most venerable things into mere farce; that makes
the most essential parts of real, experimental religion matter
of low buffoonery; that, beginning at the very rise of it in
the soul, namely, “repentance towards God, a broken and a
contrite heart,” goes on to “faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,”
whereby “he that believeth is born of God,” to “the love of
God shed abroad in the heart,” attended with “peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost,”--to our subsequent “wrestling not”
only “with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers
and wicked spirits in high places,”-and thence to “perfect
love,” the “loving the Lord our God with all our heart,
mind, soul, and strength; ” and treats on every one of these
sacred topics with the spirit and air of a Merry Andrew.
What advantage the common enemies of Christianity may
reap from this, your Lordship cannot be insensible.
6. Your Lordship cannot but discern how the whole tenor of
his book tends to destroy the Holy Scriptures, to render them
vile in the eyes of the people, to make them stink in the nostrils
of infidels. For instance: After reading his laboured ridicule
of the sorrow and fear which usually attend the first repent
ance, (called by St. Chrysostom, as well as a thousand other
writers, “the pangs or throes of the new birth,”) what can an
infidel think of those and the like expressions in Scripture: “I
have roared for the very disquietness of my heart: Fearfulness
and trembling are come upon me, and an horrible dread hath
overwhelmed me?” After his flood of satire on all kind of con
flicts with Satan, what judgment can a Deist form of what St.
Paul speaks concerning the various wrestlings of a Christian
with the wicked one? Above all, how will his bringing the
lewd heathem poets to expose the pure and spiritual love of
God, naturally cause them to look with the same eyes on the
most elevated passages of the inspired writings? What can be
more diverting to them than to apply his yAvicvrukpov eporos,
“bitter-sweet of love,” to many expressions in the Canticles?
(On which, undoubtedly, he supposes the Fair Circassian to
be a very just paraphrase 1) “Ay,” say they, “the very case:
‘Stay me with apples; for I am sick of love.’”
7. Probably the Comparer will reply, “No, I do not ridicule
the things themselves; repentance, the new birth, the fight of
faith, or the love of God; all which I know are essential to
religion; but only the folly and the enthusiasm which are
blended with these by the Methodists.” But how poor a pre
tence is this ! Had this really been the case, how carefully
would he have drawn the line under each of these heads,
between the sober religion of a Christian, and the enthusiasm
of a Methodist! But has he done this? Does he take particular
care to show under each what is true, as well as what is false,
religion ? where the former ends and the latter begins? what
are the proper boundaries of each? Your Lordship knows he
does not so much as endeavour it, or take any pains about it;
but indiscriminately pours the flood out of his unclean mouth,
upon all repentance, faith, love, and holiness.
8. Your Lordship will please to observe that I do not here
touch in the least on the merits of the cause. Be the
Methodists what they may, fools, madmen, enthusiasts, knaves,
impostors, Papists, or anything, yet your Lordship perceives
this does not in any degree affect the point in question: Still
it behoves every Christian, nay, every reasonable Heathen, to
consider the subject he is upon, and to take care not to bring
this into contempt, (especially if it be of the last importance,)
however inexcusable or contemptible his opponents may be.
9. This consideration, my Lord, dwelt much upon my mind
when I read the former parts of the Comparison. Iimmediately
saw there was no encountering a buffoon by serious reason and
argument. This would naturally have furnished both him and
his admirers with fresh matter of ridicule. On the other hand,
if I should let myself down to a level with him, by a less serious
manner of writing than I was accustomed to, I was afraid of
debasing the dignity of the subject. Nay, and I knew not but
I might catch something of his spirit. I remembered the ad
vice, “Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be
like unto him.” (Prov. xxvi. 4.) And yet I saw there must be an
exception in some cases, as the words immediately following
show : “Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise
in his own conceit.” I conceive, as if he had said, “Yet it is
needful, in some cases, to “answer a fool according to his folly,”
otherwise he will be “wiser in his own conceit, than seven men
that can render areason.’” I therefore constrained myself to
approach, as near as I dared, to his own manner of writing.
And I trust the occasion will plead my excuse with your
Lordship, and all reasonable men.
10. One good effect of my thus meeting him on his own
ground is visible already. Instead of endeavouring to defend,
he entirely gives up, the First Part of his Comparison.
Indeed, I did not expect this, when I observed that the Third
Part was addressed to me. I took it for granted, that he had
therein aimed at something like a reply to my answer: But
going on, I found myself quite mistaken. He never once
attempts a reply to one page, any otherwise than by screaming
out, “Pertness, scurrility, effrontery;” and in subjoining
that deep remark, “Paper and time would be wasted on such
stuff.” (Third Part, preface, p. 15.)
11. I cannot but account it another good effect, that he is
something less confident than he was before. He is likewise
not more angry or more bitter, for that cannot be, but a few
degrees more serious: So that I plainly perceive this is the
way I am to take if I should have leisure to answer the Third
Part; although it is far from my desire to write in this
manner; it is as contrary to my inclination as to my custom.
12. But is it possible that a person of your Lordship's cha
racter should countenance such a performance as this? It
cannot be your Lordship's desire to pour contempt on all
that is truly venerable among men to stab Christianity to
the heart, under a colour of opposing enthusiasm; and to
increase and give a sanction to the profaneness which already
overspreads our land as a flood.
13. Were the Methodists ever so bad, yet are they not too
despicable and inconsiderable for your Lordship's notice?
“Against whom is the King of Israel come out? against a flea?
against a partridge upon the mountains?” Such they undoubt
edly are, if that representation of them bejust which the Comparer
has given. Against whom (if your Lordship espouses his cause)
are you stirring up the supreme power of the nation? Against
whom does your Lordship arm the Ministers of all denomina
tions, particularly our brethren of the Established Church?
inciting them to paint us out to their several congregations as
not fit to live upon the earth. The effects of this have already
appeared in many parts both of Devonshire and Cornwall.
Nor have I known any considerable riot in any part of
England, for which such preaching did not pave the way.
14. I beg leave to ask, would it be a satisfaction to your
Lordship if national persecution were to return? Does your
Lordship desire to revive the old laws, de haeretico combu
rendo?" Would your Lordship rejoice to see the Methodists
themselves tied to so many stakes in Smithfield? Or would
you applaud the execution, though not so legally or decently
performed by the mob of Exeter, Plymouth-Dock, or Laun
ceston? My Lord, what profit would there be in our blood?
Would it be an addition to your Lordship’s happiness, or any
advantage to the Protestant cause, or any honour either to
our Church or nation ?
15. The Comparer, doubtless, would answer, “Yes; for it
would prevent the horrid consequences of your preaching.”
My Lord, give me leave to say once more, I willingly put the
whole causeupon this issue. What are the general consequences
of our preaching? Are there more tares or wheat? more good
men destroyed, (as Mr. Church once supposed,) or wicked
men saved? The last places in your Lordship's diocese, where
we began constant preaching, are near Liskeard in Cornwall,
and at Tiverton in Devonshire. Now, let any man inquire
here, (1.) What kind of people were those a year ago, who now
constantly hear this preaching? (2.) What are the main
doctrines the Methodists have been teaching this twelvemonth?
(3.) What effect have these doctrines had upon their hearers?
And if you do not find, (1.) That the greater part of these
were, a year or two ago, notoriously wicked men: (2.) Yet
the main doctrines they have heard since were, “Love God
and your neighbour, and carefully keep His commandments:”
And, (3.) That they have since exercised themselves herein,
and continue so to do;--I say, if any reasonable man, who
will be at the pains to inquire, does not find this to be an
unquestionable fact, I will openly acknowledge myself an
enthusiast, or whatever else he shall please to style me.
16. I beg leave to conclude this address to your Lordship
with a few morewords transcribed from the same letter: “Allow
Mr. Wesley,” says Mr. Church, “but these few points, and he
will defend his conduct beyond exception.” (Second Letter to
Mr. Church, Vol. VIII. p. 477.) That is most true. If I have
indeed been advancing nothing but the true knowledge and
* Concerning the burning of heretics.--EDIT.
love of God; if God has made me an instrument in reforming
many sinners, and bringing them to inward and pure reli
gion; and if many of these continue holy to this day, and free
from all wilful sin; then may I, even I, use those awful words,
“He that despiseth me, despiseth Him that sent me.” But I
Inever expect the world to allow me one of these points. How
ever, I must go on as God shall enable me. I must lay out
whatsoever talents he entrusts me with, (whether others will
believe I do it or no,) in advancing the true Christian knew
ledge of God, and the love and fear of God among men; in re
forming (if so be it please him to use me still) those who are yet
without God in the world; and in propagating inward and pure
religion, “righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.”
Sincerely wishing your Lordship all happiness in time and
in eternity,
I remain
Your Lordship’s most obedient servant,
November 27, 1750.
1. YoU have undertaken to prove, (as I observed in my
former letter, a few sentences of which I beg leave to repeat,)
that the “whole conduct of the Methodists is but a counter
part of the most wild fanaticisms of Popery.” (Preface to the
Eirst Part, p. 3.)
You endeavour to support this charge by quotations from our
own writings, compared with quotations from Popish authors.
It lies upon me to answer for one. But in order to spare
both you and myself, I shall at present consider only your
Second Part, and that as briefly as possible. Accordingly, I
shall not meddle with your other quotations, but, leaving
them to whom they may concern, shall examine whether
those you have made from my writings prove the charge for
which they were made or no.
If they do, I submit. But if they do not, if they are “the
words of truth and soberness,” it is an objection of no real
weight against any sentiment, just in itself, though it should
also be found in the writings of Papists; yea, of Mahometans
or Pagans.
2. In your first section, in order to prove the “vain boast
ing of the Methodists,” you quote a part of the following
sentence: “When hath religion, I will not say, since the
Reformation, but since the time of Constantine the Great,
made so large a progress in any nation, within so short a
space?” (I beg any impartial person to read the whole pas
sage, from the eighty-fourth to the ninetieth page of the
Third Appeal.”) I repeat the question, giving the glory to
God; and, I trust, without either boasting or enthusiasm.
In your second, you cite (and murder) four or five lines.
from one of my Journals, “as instances of the persuasive
eloquence of the Methodist Preachers.” (Pages 1, 9.) But it
unfortunately happens, that neither of the sentences you
quote were spoke by any Preacher at all. You know full
well the one was used only in a private letter; the other by a
woman on a bed of sickness.
3. You next undertake to prove “the most insufferable
pride and vanity of the Methodists.” (Section iii., p. 12, &c.)
For this end you quote five passages from my Journals, and
one from the Third Appeal.
The first was wrote in the anguish of my heart, to which I
gave vent (between God and my own soul) by breaking out,
not into “confidence of boasting,” as you term it, but into
those expressions of bitter sorrow : “I went to America to
convert the Indians. But O ! who shall convert me?”
(Vol. I. p. 74.) Some of the words which follow you have
picked out, and very honestly laid before your reader, without
either the beginning or end, or one word of the occasion or
manner wherein they were spoken.
Your next quotation is equally fair and generous: “Are
they read in philosophy? So was I,” &c. (Ibid. p. 76, &c.)
This whole “string of self-commendation,” as you call it,
being there brought, ex professo, to prove that, notwith
standing all this, which I once piqued myself upon, I was at
that hour in a state of damnation |
The third is a plain narrative of the manner wherein many
of Bristol expressed their joy on my coming unexpectedly
into the room, after I had been some time at London. (Vol.I.
p. 311.) And this, I conceive, will prove the charge of high
treason, as well as that of “insufferable pride and vanity.”
You say, fourthly, “A dying woman, who had earnestly
* Vol. VIII. pp. 205-209 of the present Edition.--EDIT.
desired to see me, cried out, as I entered the room, ‘Art thou
come, thou blessed of the Lord?’” (Ibid. p. 320) She did
so. And what does this prove?
The fifth passage is this: “In applying which my soul was
so enlarged, that methought I could have cried out, (in
another sense than poor vain Archimedes,) ‘Give me where
to stand; and I will shake the earth.’” My meaning is, I
found such freedom of thought and speech, (jargon, stuff,
enthusiasm to you,) that methought, could I have then spoken
to all the world, they would all have shared in the blessing.
4. The passage which you quote from the Third Appeal, I
am obliged to relate more at large:-
“There is one more excuse for denying this work of God,
taken from the instruments employed therein; that is, that
they are wicked men; and a thousand stories have been
handed about to prove it.
“Yet I cannot but remind considerate men, in how remark
able a manner the wisdom of God has, for many years, guarded
against this pretence, with regard to my brother and me in par
ticular.” “This pretence, that is, ‘of not employing fit instru
ments.’” These words are yours, though you insert them as
mine. The pretence I mentioned, was, “that they were wicked
men.” And how God guarded against this, is shown in what
follows: “From that time, both my brother and I, utterly
against our will, came to be more and more observed and
known; till we were more spoken of than perhaps two so incon
siderable persons ever were before in the nation. To make us
more public still, as honest madmen at least, by a strange con
currence of providences, overturning all our preceding resolu
tions, we were hurried away to America.”
Afterward it follows: “What persons could, in the nature of
things, have been (antecedently) less liable to exception, with
regard to their moral character at least, than those the all-wise
God hath now employed? Indeed I cannot devise what man
ner of men could have been more unexceptionable on all
accounts. Had God endued us with greater natural or acquired
abilities, this verything might have been turned into an objec
tion. Had we been remarkably defective, it would have been
matter of objection on the other hand. Had we been Dissenters
of any kind, or even Low-Churchmen (so called), it would have
been a greatstumbling-block in the way of those who are zealous
for the Church. And yet had we continued in the impetuosity
of our High-Church zeal, neither should we have been willing
to converse with Dissenters, nor they to receive any good at
our hands.” Sir, why did you break off your quotation in the
middle of this paragraph, just at, “more unexceptionable on all
accounts?” Was it not on purpose to give a wrong turn to
the whole? to conceal the real and obvious meaning of my
words, and put one upon them that never entered into my
thoughts?
5. You have reserved your strong reason for the last, namely,
my own confession: “Mr. Wesley says himself, ‘By the most
infallible of proofs, inward feeling, I am convinced of pride, &c.’”
Sir, be pleased to decipher that &c. Or I will spare you the
pains, and do it myself, by reciting the whole sentence :
“By the most infallible of proofs, inward feeling, I am con
vinced,
“(1.) Of unbelief, having no such faith in Christ as will
prevent my heart from being troubled, which it could not be,
if I believed in God, and rightly believed also in him.
“(2.) Of pride throughout my life past, inasmuch as I
thought I had what I find I have not.” (Vol. I. p. 72.)
Now, Sir, you have my whole confession. I entreat you to
make the best of it.
But I myself “acknowledge three Methodists to have
fallen into pride.” Sir, I can tell you of three more. And yet
it will not follow, that the doctrines I teach “lead men into
horrid pride and blasphemy.”
6. In the close of your fourth section, you charge me with
“shuffling and prevaricating with regard to extraordinary gifts
and miraculous powers.” Of these I shall have occasion to
speak by and by. At present I need only return the compli
ment, by charging you with gross, wilful prevarication, from the
beginning of your book to the end. Some instances of this
have appeared already. Many more will appear in due time.
7. Your fifth charges me with an “affectation of prophesy
ing.” Your first proof of it is this:--
“It was about this time that the soldier was executed. For
some time I had visited him every day. But when the love of
God was shed abroad in his heart, I told him, “Do not expect to
see me any more: I believe Satan will separate us for a season.’
Accordingly, the next day, I was informed, the commanding
,
officer had given strict orders, that neither Mr. Wesley, nor
any of his people, should be admitted.” (Vol. I. p. 266.) I
did believe so, having seen many such things before; yet with
out affecting a spirit of prophecy.
But that I do claim it, you will prove, Secondly, from my
mentioning “the great work which God intends, and is now
beginning, to work over all the earth.” By what art you ex
tract such a conclusion out of such premises, I know not.
That God intends this, none who believe the Scripture doubt.
And that he has begun it, both in Europe and America, any,
who will make use of their eyes and ears, may know without
any “miraculous gift of prophesying.”
8. In your sixth section, you assert, that I lay claim to other
miraculous gifts. (Page 45.) As you borrow this objection
from Mr. Church, I need only give the same answer I gave
before.
“‘I shall give,’” says Mr. Church, “‘but one account
more, and that is, what you give of yourself.’ The sum whereof
is, “At two several times, being ill, and in violent pain, I prayed
to God, and found immediate ease. I did so. I assert the
fact still. “But if these, you say, ‘ are not miraculous cures,
all this is rank enthusiasm.”
“I will put your argument in form:
“He that believes those are miraculous cures which are not
is a rank enthusiast:
“But you believe those to be miraculous cures which are net:
“Therefore you are a rank enthusiast.
“Before I answer, I must know what you mean by miracu
lous: If you term everything so which is ‘not strictly account
able for by the ordinary course of natural causes, then I deny
the latter part of the second proposition. And unless you can
make this good, unless you can prove the effects in question
are strictly accountable for by the ordinary course of natural
causes, your argument is nothing worth.” (First Letter to
Mr. Church, Vol. VIII. p. 412.)
Having largely answered your next objection relating to
what I still term “a signal instance of God’s particular provi
dence,” (Ibid. pp. 410,452) I need only refer you to those an
swers, not having leisure to say the same thing ten times over.
Whether I sometimes claim, and sometimes disclaim, mira
cles, will be considered by and by.
In your seventh section, you say, “I shall now give some
account of their grievous conflicts and combats with Satan.”
(Page 51, &c.) O Sir, spare yourself, if not the Methodists |
Do not go so far out of your depth. This is a subject you
are as utterly unacquainted with, as with justification, or the
new birth.
But I attend your motions. “Mr. Wesley,” you say, “was
advised to a very high degree of silence. And he spoke to none
at all for two days, and travelling fourscore miles together.
“The same whim,” you go on, “has run through several
of the religious orders. Hence, St. Bonaventura says, that
silence in all the religious is necessary to perfection. St.
Agatho held a stone in his mouth for three years, till he had
learned taciturnity. St. Alcantara carried several pebbles in
his mouth, for three years likewise, and for the same reason.
Theon observed a continual silence for thirty years. St.
Francis observed it himself, and enjoined it upon his brethren.
The rule of silence was religiously observed by St. Dominic.”
I have repeated more of your words than I otherwise
should, in order to show to a demonstration, that a man of a
lively imagination may run a parallel to any length, without
any foundation in nature.
You begin, “The same whim which led Mr. Wesley to
observe an absolute silence for two days; ” and so run on to
St. Bonaventura, St. Agatho, and I know not whom. But did
Mr. Wesley “observe an absolute silence for two days?” No.;
not for one hour. My words, “I spoke to none at all for
fourscore miles together,” (Vol. I. p. 313,) imply neither more
nor less than that I spoke to none “concerning the things of
God,” as it is in the words immediately preceding. And you
know this as well as I. But it is all one for that. Wit, not
truth, is the point you aim at.
My supposed inconsistency, with regard to the Moravians,
which you likewise drag in (as they say) by head and shoulders,
I have shown, again and again, to be no inconsistency at all;
particularly in both the Letters to Mr. Church.
10. Well, but as to conflicts with Satan: “Nor can Mr.
Wesley,” you say, “escape the attacks of this infernal spirit,”
namely, “suggesting distrustful thoughts, and buffeting him
with inward temptations.” Sir, did you never hear of any one so
attacked, unless among the Papists or Methodists? How deeply
*
then are you experienced both in the ways of God, and the
devices of Satan |
You add, with regard to a case mentioned in the Fourth
Journal, Vol. I. p. 271, “Though I am not convinced that these
fits of laughing are to be ascribed to Satan, yet I entirely
agree, that they are involuntary and unavoidable.” I am
glad we agree so far. But I must still go farther: I cannot
but ascribe them to a preternatural agent; having observed
so many circumstances attending them which cannot be
accounted for by any natural causes.
Under the head of conflicts with Satan, you observe farther,
“Mr. Wesley says, while he was preaching, the devil knew
his kingdom shook, and therefore stirred up his servants to
make a noise; that, September 18, the prince of the air made
another attempt in defence of his tottering kingdom; and that
another time, the devil’s children fought valiantly for their
master.” I own the whole charge; I did say all this. Nay,
and if need were, I should say it again.
You cite one more instance from my Fourth Journal:
“The many-headed beast began to roar again.” So your head
is so full of the subject, that you construe even poor Horace's
bellua multorum capitum” into the devil |
These are all the combats and conflicts with Satan which
you can prove I ever had. O'Sir, without more and greater
conflicts than these, none shall see the kingdom of God.
11. In the following sections, you are equally out of your
element. The first of them relates to “spiritual desertions;”
(Section viii., p. 75, &c.;) all which you make the subject of
dull ridicule, and place to the account of enthusiasm. And
the case of all you give in the following words: “We may
look upon enthusiasm as a kind of drunkenness, filling and
intoxicating the brain with the heated fumes of spirituous
particles. Now, no sooner does the inebriation go off, but a
coldness and dulness takes place.”
12. As wildly do you talk of the doubts and fears incident to
those who are “weak in faith.” (Section ix., p. 79, &c.) I
cannot prevail upon myself to prostitute this awful subject, by
entering into any debate concerning it with one who is inno
cent of the whole affair. Only I must observe that a great part of
* Rendered by Boscawen,-“A many-headed beast.”--EDIT.
what you advance concerning me is entirely wide of the ques
tion. Such is all you quote from the First, and a considerable
part of what you quote from my Second, Journal. This you
know in your own conscience; for you know I speak of myself
during the whole time, as having no faith at all. Conse
quently, the “rising and fallings.” I experienced then have
nothing to do with those “doubts and fears which many go
through, after they have by faith received remission of sins.”
The next words which you cite, “thrown into great per
plexities,” I cannot find in the page you refer to, neither those
that follow. The sum of them is, that “at that time I did not
feel the love of God, but found deadness and wanderings in
public prayer, and coldness even at the holy communion.”
Well, Sir, and have you never found in yourself any such
coldness, deadness, and wanderings? I am persuaded you have.
And yet surely your brain is always cool and temperate! never
“intoxicated with the heated fumes of spirituous particles !”
13. If you quote not incoherent scraps, (by which you may
make anything out of anything,) but entire connected sen
tences, it will appear that the rest of your quotations make no
more for your purpose than the foregoing. Thus, although I
allow, that on May 24, “I was much buffeted with tempta
tions; but I cried to God, and they fled away; that they re
turned again and again; I as often lifted up my eyes, and he
sent me help from his holy place;” (Vol. I. p. 103;) it will
only prove the very observation I make myself: “I was fight
ing both under the law and under grace. But then I was some
times, if not often, conquered; now I was always conqueror.”
That sometime after, I “was strongly assaulted again, and
after recovering peace and joy, was thrown into perplexity
afresh by a letter, asserting that no doubt or fear could con
sist with true faith; that my weak mind could not then bear
to be thus sawn asunder,” will not appear strange to any who
are not utter novices in experimental religion. No more than
that, one night the next year, “I had no life or spirit in me,
and was much in doubt, whether God would not lay me aside,
and send other labourers into his harvest.”
14. You add, “He owns his frequent relapses into sin, for
near twice ten years. Such is the case of a person who tells us
that he carefully considered every step he took; one of inti
mate communication with the Deity l’” Sir, I did not tell you
that; though, according to custom, you mark the words as mine.
It is well for you, that forging quotations is not felony.
My words are, “O what an hypocrite have I been (if this
be so) for near twice ten years! But I know it is not so. I
know every one under the law is even as I was;” namely, from
the time I was twelve years old, till considerably above thirty.
“And is it strange,” you say, “that such a one should be
destitute of means to resolve his scruples? should be ever at
variance with himself, and find no place to fix his foot?”
Good Sir, not too fast. You quite outrun the truth again.
Blessed be God, this is not my case. I am not destitute of
means to resolve my scruples. I have some friends, and a
little reason left. I am not ever at variance with myself; and
have found a place to fix my foot --
Now I have found the ground wherein
Firm my soul's anchor may remain;
The wounds of Jesus, for my sin
Before the world's foundation slain.
And yet one of your assertions I cannot deny; namely,
that you “could run the parallel between me and numbers
of fanatical Papists: ” And that not only with regard to my
temper, but my stature, complexion, yea, (if need were,) the
very colour of my hair.
15. In your next section, you are to give an account of the
“spiritual succours and advantages received either during
these trials or very soon after.” (Section x. p. 92, &c.) It is
no wonder you make as lame work with these, as with the
conflicts which preceded them. “As the heart knoweth its
own bitterness, so a stranger doth not intermeddle with his
joy.” But it is no business of mine, as you have not done
me the honour to cite any of my words in this section.
16. “The unsteadiness of the Methodists, both in senti
ments and practice,” (section xi. p. 95, &c.,) is what you next
undertake to prove. Your loose declamation with which you
open the cause, I pass over, as it rests on your own bare
word; and haste to your main reason, drawn from my
sentiments and practice with regard to the Moravians.
“He represents them,” you say, “in the blackest colours;
yet declares, in the main, they are some of the best people
in the world. His love and esteem for them increases more
and more. His own disciples among the Methodists go over
to them in crowds. But still Methodism is the strongest
barrier against the Moravian doctrines and principles.”
Sir, I bear you witness you have learned one principle, at
least, from those with whom you have lately conversed;
namely, that no faith is to be kept with heretics; of which
you have given us abundant proof. For you know I have
fully answered every article of this charge; which you repeat,
as if I had not opened my lips about it. You know that there
is not one grain of truth in several things which you here
positively assert. For instance: “His love and esteem of
them increases more and more.” Not so; no more than my
love and esteem for you. I love you both; but I do not much
esteem either. Again: “His own disciples among the
Methodists go over to them in crowds.” When? Where? I
know.not that ten of my disciples, as you call them, have gone
over to them for twice ten months. O Sir, consider ! How do
you know but some of your disciples may tell your name?
17. With the same veracity you go on: “In “The Character
of a Methodist,’ those of the sect are described as having all the
virtues that can adorn the Christian profession. But in their
‘Journals’ you find them waspish, condemning all the world,
except themselves; and among themselves perpetual broils
and confusions, with various other irregularities and vices.”
I answer, (1.) The tract you refer to (as is expressly declared
in the preface) does not describe what the Methodists are
already; but what they desire to be, and what they will be
then when they fully practise the doctrine they hear. (2.) Be
pleased to point the pages in my Journals which mention
those “various irregularities and vices.” Of their “perpetual
broils and confusions.” I shall speak under their proper head.
You add: “Sometimes they are so far from fearing death,
that they wish it: But the keenness of the edge is soon .
blunted. They are full of dreadful apprehensions that the
Clergy intend to murder them.” Do you mean me, Sir? I
plead, Not Guilty. I never had any such apprehension. Yet
I suppose you designed the compliment for me, by your
dragging in two or three broken sentences from my First
Journal. But how little to the purpose ! seeing at the time
that was written, I had never pretended to be above the fear
of death. So that this is no proof of the point in view,--of
the “unsteadiness of my sentiments or practice.”
18. You proceed: “One day they fancy it their duty to
preach; the next, they preach with great reluctance.” Very
true! But they fancy it their duty still; else they would
not preach at all. This, therefore, does not prove any in
equality either of sentiment or practice.
“Mr. Wesley is sometimes quite averse from speaking,
and then perplexed with the doubt, Is it a prohibition from
the good Spirit, or a temptation from nature and the evil one?”
Just of a piece with the rest. The sentence runs thus: “I
went several times with a design to speak to the sailors, but
could not. I mean, I was quite averse from speaking. Is not
this what men commonly mean by, “I could not speak?’ And
is this a sufficient cause of silence or no? Is it a prohibition
from the good Spirit, or a temptation from nature or the evil
one?” Sir, I was in no doubt at all on the occasion. Nor did I
intend to express any in these words; but to appeal to men’s
conscience, whether what they call “a prohibition from the good
Spirit,” be not a mere “temptation from nature or the evilone.”
19. In the next section you are to show “the art, cunning,
and sophistry of the Methodists, who, when hard pressed by
argument, run themselves into inconsistency and self-contradic
tion; and occasionally either defend or give up some of their
favourite notions and principal points.” (Section xii. p. 102.)
I dare say, Sir, you will not put them to the trial. Argu
ment lies out of the way of one,
-Solutos
Qui captat risus hominum famamque dicacis."
But to the proof. “Mr. Wesley,” you say, “at one time declares
for a disinterested love of God; at another, declares, There is
no one caution in all the Bible against the selfish love of God.”
Nay, Sir, I will tell you what is stranger still: Mr. Wesley
holds, at one time, both sides of this contradiction. I now
declare both that “all true love is disinterested, ‘seeketh not
her own;' and that there is no one caution in all the Bible
against the selfish love of God.”
What, have I the art to slip out of your hands again?
“Pardon me,” as your old friend says, “for being jocular.”
20. You add, altius insurgens : + “But it is a considerable
* One that affects the droll, and loves to raise a horse-laugh.
+ Rising to more exalted strains.-EDIT.
offence to charge another wrongfully, and contradict himself
about the doctrine of assurance.” To prove this upon me,
you bring my own words: “The assurance we preach is of
quite another kind from that Mr. Bedford writes against.
We speak of an assurance of our present pardon; not, as he
does, of our final perseverance.” (Vol. I. p. 160.)
“Mr. Wesley might have considered,” you say, “that
when they talk of “assurance of pardon and salvation, the
world will extend the meaning of the words to our eternal
state.” I do consider it, Sir; and therefore I never use that
phrase either in preaching or writing. “Assurance of pardon
and salvation” is an expression that never comes out of my
lips; and if Mr. Whitefield does use it, yet he does not preach
such an assurance as the privilege of all Christians.
“But Mr. Wesley himself says, that, “though a full assur
ance of faith does not necessarily imply a full assurance of
our future perseverance, yet some have both the one and the
other.” And now what becomes of his charge against Mr.
Bedford ? And is it not mere evasion to say afterwards,
‘This is not properly an assurance of what is future?’”
Sir, this argument presses me very hard 1 May I not be
allowed a little evasion now? Come, for once I will try to
do without it, and to answer flat and plain.
And I answer, (1.) That faith is one thing; the full assur
ance of faith another. (2.) That even the full assurance of
faith does not imply the full assurance of perseverance: This
bears another name, being styled by St. Paul, “the full assur
ance of hope.” (3.) Some Christians have only the first of
these; they have faith, but mixed with doubts and fears.
Some have also the full assurance of faith, a full conviction of
present pardon; and yet not the full assurance of hope; not
a full conviction of their future perseverance. (4.) The faith
which we preach, as necessary to all Christians, is the first of
these, and no other. Therefore, (5.) It is no evasion at all to
say, “This (the faith which we preach as necessary to all
Christians) is not properly an assurance of what is future.”
And consequently, my charge against Mr. Bedford stands
good, that his Sermon on Assurance is an ignoratio elenchi, an
“ignorance of the point in question,” from beginning to end.
Therefore, neither do I “charge another wrongfully, nor
contradict myself about the doctrine of assurances.”
21. To prove my art, cunning, and evasion, you instance
next in the case of impulses and impressions. You begin,
“With what pertinacious confidence have impulses, impres
sions, feelings, &c., been advanced into certain rules of con
duct Their followers have been taught to depend upon
them as sure guides and infallible proofs.”
To support this weighty charge, you bring one single scrap,
about a line and a quarter, from one of my Journals. The
words are these: “By the most infallible of proofs, inward
feeling, I am convinced.” Convinced of what? It immedi
ately follows, “Of unbelief, having no such faith as will pre
vent my heart from being troubled.”
I here assert, that inward feeling or consciousness is the
most infallible of proofs of unbelief,-of the want of such a
faith as will prevent the heart's being troubled. But do I
here “advance impressions, impulses, feelings, &c., into cer
tain rules of conduct?” or anywhere else? You may just
as well say, I advance them into certain proofs of transub
stantiation.
Neither in writing, in preaching, nor in private conversa
tion, have I ever “taught any of my followers to depend upon
them as sure guides or infallible proofs" of anything.
Nay, you yourself own, I have taught quite the reverse;
and that at my very first setting out. Then, as well as ever
since, I have told the societies, “they were not to judge by
their own inward feelings. I warned them, all these were in
themselves of a doubtful, disputable nature. They might be
from God, or they might not, and were therefore to be tried
by a further rule, to be brought to the only certain test, the
law and the testimony.” (Vol. I. p. 206.)
This is what I have taught from first to last. And now,
Sir, what becomes of your heavy charge? On which side
lies the “pertinacious confidence” now? How clearly have
you made out my inconsistency and self-contradiction and
that I “occasionally either defend or give up my favourite
notions and principal points ”
22. “Inspiration, and the extraordinary calls and guidances
of the Holy Ghost, are ” what you next affirm to be “given
up.” (Section xiii. p. 106, &c.) Not by me. I do not “give
up” one tittle on this head, which I ever maintained. But
observe: Before you attempt to prove my “giving them up,”
you are to prove that I laid claim to them; that I laid claim
to some extraordinary inspiration, call, or guidance of the
Holy Ghost.
You say, my “concessions on this head” (to Mr. Church)
“are ambiguous and evasive.” Sir, you mistake the fact. I
make no concessions at all, either to him or you. I give up
nothing that ever I advanced on this head; but when Mr.
Church charged me with what I did not advance, I replied,
“I claim no other direction of God’s, but what is common
to all believers. I pretend to be no otherwise inspired than
you are, if you love God.” Where is the ambiguity or
evasion in this? I meant it for a flat denial of the charge.
23. Your next section spirat tragicum satis,* charges the
Methodists “with scepticism and infidelity, with doubts and
denials of the truth of Revelation, and Atheism itself.” (Sec
tion xiv. p. 110, &c.) The passages brought from my Jour
mals to prove this charge, which you have prudently transposed,
I beg leave to consider in the same order as they stand there.
The First you preface thus: “Upon the people's ill usage
(or supposed ill usage) of Mr. Wesley in Georgia, and their
speaking of all manner of evil falsely (as he says) against
him; and trampling under foot the word, after having been
very attentive to it; what an emotion in him is hereby
raised ! “I do hereby bear witness against myself, that I
could scarce refrain from giving the lie to experience, and
reason, and Scripture, all together.’”
The passage, as I wrote it, stands thus: “Sunday, March 7.
I entered upon my ministry at Savannah. In the Second
Lesson, (Luke xviii.,) was our Lord’s prediction of the treat
ment which he himself, and consequently his followers, were
to meet with from the world.
“Yet notwithstanding these plain declarations of our Lord,
notwithstanding my own repeated experience, notwithstanding
the experience of all the sincere followers of Christ, whom I
ever talked with, read or heard of, may, and the reason of the
thing, evincing to a demonstration, that all who love not the
light must hate him who is continually labouring to pour it in
upon them; I do here bear witness against myself, that, when
I saw the number of people crowding into the church, the
deep attention with which they received the word, and the
seriousness that afterwards sat on all their faces; I could
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Francis:
“It breathes the spirit of the tragic scene.”-EDIT.
scarce refrain from giving the lie to experience, and reason,
and Scripture, all together. I could hardly believe that the
greater, the far greater, part of this attentive, serious people,
would hereafter trample under foot that word, and say all
manner of evil falsely of him that spoke it.” (Vol. I. p. 27.)
Sir, does this prove me guilty of scepticism or infidelity;
of doubting or denying the truth of Revelation? Did I
speak this, “upon the people using me ill, and saying all
manner of evil against me?” Or am I here describing “any
emotion raised in me hereby?” Blush, blush, Sir, if you
can blush. You had here no possible room for mistake.
You grossly and wilfully falsify the whole passage, to support
a groundless, shameless accusation.
24. The second passage (written January 24, 1737-8) is
this: “In a storm, I think, What if the gospel be not true?
Then thou art of all men most foolish P For what hast thou
given thy goods, thy ease, thy friends, thy reputation, thy
country, thy life? For what art thou wandering over the
face of the earth? A dream; a cunningly devised fable.”
(Vol. I. p. 74.)
I am here describing the thoughts which passed through my
mind when I was confessedly an unbeliever. But even this
implies no scepticism, much less Atheism; no “denial of the
truth of Revelation;” but barely such transient doubts as, I
presume, may assault any thinking man that knows not God.
The third passage (which you tack to the former, as if they
were one and the same) runs thus: “I have not such a peace
as excludes the possibility either of doubt or fear. When
holy men have told me I had no faith, I have often doubted
whether I had or no. And those doubts have made me very
uneasy, till I was relieved by prayer and the Holy Scrip
tures.” (Vol. I. p. 162.)
Speak frankly, Sir: Does this prove me guilty of scepticism,
infidelity, or Atheism? What else does it prove? Just nothing
at all, but the “pertinacious confidence” of him that cites it.
25. You recite more at large one passage more. The
whole paragraph stands thus:
“St. Paul tells us, ‘The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, longsuffering, gentleness, meekness, temperance. Now,
although, by the grace of God in Christ, I find a measure of
some of these in myself, viz., of peace, longsuffering, gentle
ness, meekness, temperance; yet others I find not. I cannot
find in myself the love of God or of Christ. Hence my dead
mess and wanderings in public prayer. Hence it is that, even
in the holy communion, I have rarely any more than a cold
attention. Hence, when I hear of the highest instance of
God’s love, my heart is still senseless and unaffected. Yea,
at this moment, (October 14, 1738.) I feel no more love to
Him, than one I had never heard of.” (Vol. I. p. 162.)
To any who knew something of inward religion I should have
observed, that this is what serious Divines mean by desertion.
But all expressions of this kind are jargon to you. So, allow
ing it to be whatever you please, I ask only, Do you know
how long I continued in this state? how many years, months,
weeks, or days? If not, how can you infer what my state of
mind is now, from what it was above eleven years ago?
Sir, I do not tell you, or any man else, that “I cannot
now find the love of God in myself; ” or that now, in the
year 1751, I rarely feel more than a cold attention in the
holy communion : So that your whole argument, built on
this supposition, falls to the ground at once.
26. Sensible, I presume, of the weakness of this reason,
you immediately apply to the passions, by that artful remark:
“Observe, reader, this is the man who charges our religion
as no better than the Turkish pilgrimages to Mecca, or the
Popish worship of our Lady of Loretto !” Our religion 1
How naturally will the reader suppose, that I fix the charge
either on the Protestant religion in general, or on that of
the Church of England in particular ! But how far is this
from the truth !
My words concerning those who are commonly called reli
gious are, “Wherein does their religion consist? in right
eousness and true holiness; in love stronger than death;
fervent gratitude to God, and tender affection to all his
creatures? Is their religion the religion of the heart; a
renewal of the soul in the image of God? Do they resemble
Him they worship? Are they free from pride, from vanity,
from malice, from envy; from ambition and avarice, from
passion and lust, from every uneasy and unlovely temper?
Alas! I fear neither they (the greater part at least) nor you
have any more notion of this religion, than the peasant that
holds the plough, of the religion of a Gymnosophist.
“It is well if the genuine religion of Christ has any more
alliance with what you call religion, than with the Turkish
pilgrimages to Mecca, or the Popish worship of our Lady of
Loretto. Have not you substituted, in the place of the reli
gion of the heart, something, I do not say, equally sinful, but
equally vain and foreign to the worshipping of God in spirit
and in truth? What else can be said even of prayer, public
or private, in the manner wherein you generally perform it?
as a thing of course, running round and round, in the same
dull track, without either the knowledge or the love of God;
without one heavenly temper, either attained or improved?”
(Farther Appeal, Third Part, Vol. VIII. p. 202.)
Now, Sir, what room is there for your own exclamations?
--“What sort of heavenly temper is his? How can he pos
sibly, consistently with charity, call this our general perform
ance?” Sir, I do not. I only appeal to the conscience of
you, and each particular reader, whether this is, or is not, the
manner wherein you (in the singular number) generally per
form public or private prayer. “How, possibly, without
being omniscient, can he affirm, that we (I presume you mean
all the members of our Church) pray without one heavenly
temper? or know anything at all of our private devotions?
How monstrous is all this 1” Recollect yourself, Sir. If
your terror is real, you are more afraid than hurt. I do not
affirm any such thing. I do not take upon me to know any
thing at all of your private devotions. But I suppose I may
inquire, without offence, and beg you seriously to examine
yourself before God.
So you have brought no one proof, that “scepticism, infi
delity, and Atheism are either constituent parts or genuine
consequences of Methodism.” Therefore your florid decla
mation, in the following pages, is entirely out of its place.
And you might have spared yourself the trouble of account
ing for what has no being, but in your own imagination.
27. You charge the Methodists next with “an uncharitable
spirit.” (Section xv. p. 115, &c.) All you advance in proof
of this, as if it were from my writings, but without naming
either page or book, I have nothing to do with. But what
ever you tell me where to find, I shall carefully consider.
I observe but one single passage of this sort; and that you
have worn threadbare already : “By the most infallible of
proofs, inward feeling, I am convinced of levity and luxuri
ancy of spirit, by speaking words not tending to edify; but
most by my manner of speaking of my enemies.” Sir, you
may print this, not only in italics, but in capitals, and yet it
would do you no service. For what I was convinced of then
was not uncharitableness, but, as I expressly mentioned,
“levity of spirit.”
28. Of the same “uncharitable nature,” you say, is “their
application of divine judgments to their opposers.” (Section
xvi. p. 119, &c.) You borrow two instances from Mr. Church :
But you omit the answers, which I shall therefore subjoin.
His words are, “You describe Heaven as executing judg
ments, immediate punishments, on those who oppose you.
You say, ‘Mr. Molther was taken ill this day. I believe it
was the hand of God that was upon him.’” (First Letter to
Mr. Church, Vol. VIII. p. 409.) “I do; but I do not say,
as a judgment for opposing me. That you say for me.”
“Again, you mention,” says Mr. Church, “as an awful
providence, the case of “a poor wretch, who was last week
cursing and blaspheming, and had boasted to many, that he
would come on Sunday, and no man should stop his mouth;
but on Friday God laid his hand upon him, and on Sunday
he was buried.’” “I do look on this as a manifest judgment
of God on a hardened sinner for his complicated wickedness.”
To repeat these objections, without taking the least notice of
the answers, is one of the usual proofs of your charitable spirit.
29. You pass on to “the Methodists’ uncharitable custom
of summoning their opponents to the bar of judgment.”
(Section xvii. p. 123, &c.)
You bring two passages from my writings to prove this. The
First is, “Calling at Newgate, (in Bristol,) I was informed, that
the poor wretches under sentence of death were earnestly desir
ous to speak with me; but that Alderman Beecher had sent an
express order that they should not. I cite Alderman Beecher
to answer for these souls at the judgment-seat of Christ.”
Why do you leave out those words, for these souls 2
Because they show the sentence means neither more nor
less than, “If these souls perish, he, not I, must answer for
them at the great day.”
The Second passage is still more wide from the point.
The whole of it is as follows :
“I have often inquired, who were the authors of this report,
(that I was a Papist,) and have generally found, they were
either bigoted Dissenters, or (I speak it without fear or favour)
Ministers of our own Church. I have also frequently con
sidered, what possible ground or motive they could have thus to
speak; seeing few men in the world have had occasion so
clearly and openly to declare their principles as I have done,
both by preaching, printing, and conversation, for several years
last past. And I can no otherwise think, than that either they
spoke thus (to put the most favourable construction upon it)
from gross ignorance; they knew not what Popery was; they
knew not what doctrines these are which the Papists teach; or
they wilfully spoke what they knew to be false, probably
thinking thereby to do God service. Now, take this to your
selves, whoever ye are, high or low, Dissenters or Churchmen,
Clergy or laity, who have advanced this shameless charge, and
digest it how you can.
“But how have ye not been afraid, if ye believe there is a
God, and that he knoweth the secrets of your hearts, (I speak
now to you Preachers, more especially, of whatever denomina
tion,) to declare so gross, palpable a lie, in the name of the God
of truth? I cite you all, before ‘the Judge of all the earth,’
either publicly to prove your charge, or, by publicly retracting
it, to make the best amends you can, to God, to me, and to the
world.” (Vol. I. p. 219.)
Sir, do I here “summon my opponents to the bar of judg
ment?” So you would make me do, by quoting only that scrap,
“I cite you all, before ‘the Judge of all the earth!’” You
then add, with equal charity and sincerity, “Here you have
the true spirit of an enthusiast, flushed with a modest assur
ance of his own salvation, and the charitable prospect of the
damnation of others.” O Sir, never name modesty more !
Here end your laboured attempts to show the “uncharitable
spirit” of the Methodists; who, for anything you have shown
to the contrary, may be the most charitable people under the
Sun.
30. You charge the Methodists next with “violation and
contempt of order and authority;” (Section xviii. p. 124;)
namely, the authority of the governors of the Church. I have
answered every article of this charge, in the Second and Third
Parts of the “Farther Appeal,” and the “Letter to Mr.
Church.” When you have been so good as to reply to what
is there advanced, I may possibly say something more.
What you offer of your own upon this head, I shall
consider without delay:--
“Women and boys are actually employed in this ministry
of public preaching.” Please to tell me where. I know them
not, nor ever heard of them before.
You add, what is more marvellous still, “I speak from per
sonal knowledge, that sometimes, a little before delivering of the
elements at the communion, three or four Methodists together
will take it into their heads to go away; that sometimes, while
the sentences of the offertory were reading, they have called out
to the Minister who carried the bason, reproaching him for ask
ing alms of them; that sometimes, when the Minister has deli
vered the bread into their hands, instead of eating it, they would
slip it into their pockets.” Sir, you must show your face, before
these stories will find credit on your bare asseveration.
“Yet they are surprised,” you say, “that every man in his
senses does not, without the least hesitation, join them.”
Sir, I am surprised (unless you are not in your senses) at
your advancing such a barefaced falsehood.
31. You go on: “Under this head may, not improperly, be
considered their undutiful behaviour to the civil powers.”
What proof have you of this? Why, a single sentence, on
which I laid so little stress myself, that it is only inserted by
way of parenthesis, in the body of another sentence: “Ye
learned in the law, what becomes of Magna Charta, and of
English liberty and property? Are not these mere sounds,
while, on any pretence, there is such a thing as a press-gang
suffered in the land?”
Upon this you descant: “The legislature has, at several
times, made Acts for pressing men. But no matter for this;
touch but a Methodist, and all may perish, rather than a soldier
be pressed. He who had before bound himself not to speak a
tittle of worldly things is now bawling for liberty and property.”
Very lively this! But I hope, Sir, you do not offer it by way
of argument. You are not so unlearned in the law, as not to
know, that the legislature is out of the question. The legis
lature, six years ago, did not appoint press-gangs, but legal
officers to press men. Consequently, this is no proof (and find
another if you can) of our undutiful behaviour to the civil
powers.
32. “Another natural consequence,” you say, “of Method
ism, is their-mutual jealousies and envyings, their manifold
divisions, fierce and rancorous quarrels, and accusations of
one another.” (Vol. I. p. 252.)
I shall carefully attend whatever you produce on this head:
And if you prove this, I will grant you all the rest.
You First cite those words: “Musing on the things that were
past, and reflecting how many that came after me were preferred
before me, I opened my Testament on those words: ‘The Gen
tiles, which followed not after righteousness, have attained to
righteousness; but Israel, which followed after the law of righ
teousness, hath not attained to the law of righteousness.’”
And how does this prove the manifold divisions and
rancorous quarrels of the Methodists?
Your Second argument is: “Mr. Whitefield told me, he and
I preached two different gospels;” (his meaning was, that he
preached particular, and I universal, redemption;) “and
therefore he would not join with me, but publicly preach
against me.” (Section xix. p. 34.1, &c.)
Well, Sir, here was doubtless a division for a time; but no
fierce and rancorous quarrel yet.
You say, Thirdly, “They write and publish against each
other.” True; but without any degree either of fierceness
Or rancOur.
You assert, Fourthly, “Mr. Wesley, in his sermon “On
Free Grace, opposes the other for the horrible blasphemies
of his horrible doctrine.”
Sir, away with your flourishes, and write plain English.
I opposed the doctrine of predestination, which he held. But
without any degree either of rancour or fierceness. Still,
therefore, you miss the mark.
You quote, Fifthly, these words: “I spent an hour with
Mr. Stonehouse. O what Tru6avoMoyva, “persuasiveness of
speech, is here ! Surely all the deceivableness of unright
eousness.” (Vol. I. p. 290.) But there was no fierceness or
rancour on either side.
The passage, a fragment of which you produce as a Sixth
argument, stands thus: “A few of us had a long conference
together. Mr. C. now told me plainly, he could not agree
with me, because I did not preach the truth, particularly with
regard to election.” He did so; but without any rancour. We
had a long conference; but not a fierce one. (Vol. I. p. 293.)
You, Seventhly, observe, “What scurrility of language the
Moravians throw out against Mr. Wesley!” Perhaps so. But this
will not prove that “the Methodists quarrel with each other.”
“And how does he turn their own artillery upon them?”
This is your Eighth argument. But if I do, this no more
proves the “mutual quarrels of the Methodists,” than my
turning your own artillery upon you.
33. Having, by these eight irrefragable arguments, clearly
carried the day, you raise your crest, and cry out, “Is this
Methodism?
And reign such mortal feuds in heavenly minds?”
Truly, Sir, you have not yet brought one single proof (and
yet, I dare say, you have brought the very best you have) of
any such feuds among the Methodists as may not be found
among the most heavenly-minded men on earth.
But you are resolved to pursue your victory, and so go on:
“What are we to think of these charges of Whitefield, and
Wesley, and the Moravians, one against another?” The Mora
vians, Sir, are out of the question; for they are no Methodists;
and as to the rest, Mr. Whitefield charges Mr. Wesley with hold
ing universal redemption, and I charge him with holding parti
cular redemption. This is the standing charge on either side.
And now, Sir, “what are we to think?” Why, that you have
not proved one point of this charge against the Methodists.
However, you stumble on: “Are these things so? Are
they true, or are they not true? If not true, they are grievous
calumniators; if true, they are detestable sectarists. Whether
true or false, the allegation stands good of their fierce and
rancorous quarrels, and mutual heinous accusations.”
Sir, has your passion quite extinguished your reason? Have
fierceness and rancour left you no understanding? Otherwise,
how is it possible you should run on at this senseless, shameless
rate? These things are true which Mr. Whitefield and Wes
ley object to each other. He holds the decrees; I do not: Yet
this does not prove us “detestable sectarists.” And whether
these things are true or false, your allegation of our “fierce and
rancorous quarrels, and mutual heinous accusations,” cannot
stand good, without better proof than you have yet produced.
34. Yet, with the utmost confidence, quasi re bene gesta,”
you proceed, “And how stands the matter among their dis
ciples? They are all together by the ears, embroiled and
broken with unchristian quarrels and confusions.”
* As though you had accomplished some mighty affair.-EDIT.
How do you prove this? Why thus: “Mr. Wesley's
Fourth Journal is mostly taken up in enumerating their
wrath, dissensions, and apostasies.” No, Sir, not a tenth
part of it; although it gives a full and explicit account of the
greatest dissensions which ever were among them.
But to come to particulars: You First cite these words,
“At Oxford, but a few who had not forsaken them.”
My words are, “Monday, October 1, 1738. I rode to
Oxford, and found a few who had not yet forsaken the
assembling themselves together.” This is your First proof
that “the Methodists are all together by the ears.” Your
Second is its very twin-brother. “Tuesday, 2. I went to
many who once heard the word with joy; but ‘when the sun
arose they withered away.’” (Vol. I. p. 227.)
Your Third is this: “Many were induced (by the
Moravians) to deny the gift of God, and affirm they never
had any faith at all.” (Ibid. p. 248.) You are at liberty to
enjoy this argument also; and let it prove what it can prove.
You, Fourthly, cite these words: “Many of our sisters are
shaken, grievously torn by reasonings. But few come to
Fetter-Lane, and then after their names are called over they
presently depart. Our brethren here (those who were pros
elytes to the Moravians) have neither wisdom enough to
guide, nor prudence enough to let it alone. They (the
Moravians) have much confounded some of our sisters, and
many of our brothers are much grieved.” (Ibid. p. 255.)
This proves thus much, that one society was at that time
divided; but not that the Methodists, in general, were, even
then, “all together by the ears.”
The passage you quote, in the Fifth place, is, “I believe--
are determined to go on according to Mr. Molther's direction,
and I suppose (says the writer of the letter) above half our
brethren are on their But they are so very confused,
they do not know how to go on, and yet are unwilling to be
taught, except by the Moravians.” (Ibid.)
Add to this: (I recite the whole passages in order; not as
you had mangled, and then jumbled them together:)
“Wednesday, December 19. I came to London, though
with a heavy heart. Here I found every day the dreadful
effects of our brethren’s reasoning and disputing with each
other. Scarce one in ten retained his first love; and most of
the rest were in the utmost confusion,” (they were so, more or
less, for several months,) “biting and devouring one another.”
This also proves so much, neither more nor less, that some
of the Methodists were then in confusion. And just so much
is proved by your Sixth quotation: “Many were wholly un
settled,” (by the Moravians, taking advantage of my absence,)
“ and lost in vain reasonings and doubtful disputations;
not likely to come to any true foundation.” (Ibid. p. 259.)
Your Seventh quotation (I recite the whole sentence) runs
thus: “April 19. I received a letter informing me that our
poor brethren at Fetter-Lane were again in great confusion.”
This quotation proves just as much as the preceding, or as
the following: “The plague” (of false stillness) “was now
spread to them also; ” namely, to the “little society at
Islington.” (Ibid. p. 269.)
Your Ninth is this: “I went to the society, but I found their
hearts were quite estranged. Friday, 4. I met a little handful
of them, who still stand in the old paths.” (Ibid. p. 280.)
Thus far you have been speaking of the Methodists in
London. And what have you proved concerning them? Only
that the Moravians, mixing with them twelve years ago, while
they were young and unexperienced, set them a disputing with
each other, and thereby occasioned much confusion for several
months. But you have not proved that the Methodists in
general were, even them, “all together by the ears; ” and much
less, that they have been so ever since, and that they are so now.
35. I now attend you to Kingswood. Not to “Bristol and
Kingswood,” which you artfully join together. The society
at Bristol was no more concerned with the disputes in
Kingswood, than with those in London.
Here the First quotation, though containing but two lines,
is extracted from three different paragraphs; in one of which I
say: “I had many unpleasing accounts (in December, 1740)
concerning our little society in Kingswood.” In the Second:
“I went to Kingswood, if haply I might repair the breaches
which had been made ’’ by the Predestinarian Preachers. In
the Third: “I laboured to heal the jealousies and misunder
standings which had arisen.” (Vol. I. p. 293.)
The Second passage, part of which you quote, is this: “I
returned early in the morning to Kingswood; but my con
gregation was gone to hear Mr. C.; so that I had not above
two or three men, and as many women.” (Ibid. p. 294.)
The Third is, “January 1. I explained, “If any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature. But many of our brethren had
no ears to hear, having disputed away both their faith and
love.” (Ibid. p. 295.)
The Fourth, “February 21. I inquired concerning the divi
sions and offences which began afresh to break out in Kings
wood. In the afternoon I met a few of the Bands; but it was
a cold, uncomfortable meeting.” (Ibid. p. 299.)
You have picked out here and there a word from several
pages, in order to furnish out a Fifth quotation. The most
material part of it is this: “Saturday, 28. I read the follow
ing paper at Kingswood : “For their scoffing at the word and
Ministers of God, for their backbiting and evil-speaking, I
declare the persons above-mentioned to be no longer members
of this society.’” (Ibid. p. 301.)
“And we had great reason to bless God, that, after fifty
two were withdrawn, we have still upwards of ninety left.”
(Ibid. p. 302.)
Who those other “forty were, that,” you say, “left them,”
I know not. Perhaps you may inform me.
Upon the whole, all these quotations prove only this: That
about eleven years ago, Mr. C., falling into predestination, set
the society in Kingswood a disputing with each other, and
occasioned much confusion for some months. But still you
have not gone one step toward proving, (which is the one
point in question,) that the Methodists in general were, even
then, “all together by the ears; ” and much less, that they
have been so ever since, and that they are so now.
However, you fail not to triumph, (like Louis le Grand,
after his victory at Blenheim,) “What shall we say now? Are
these the fruits of Methodism?” No, Sir. They are the fruits
of opposing it. They are the tares sown among the wheat.
You may hear of instances of the same kind, both in earlier
and later ages.
You add, “This is bad enough; but it is not the worst. For
consider, what becomes of those that leave them 7” Why, Sir,
what, if “their last end be worse than their first?” Will you
charge this upon me? By the same rule, you must have charged
upon the Apostles themselves whatever befel those who, having
“known the way of righteousness,” afterwards “turned back
from the holy commandment once delivered to them.”
36. You conclude this section: “Mr. Wesley will probably
say, “Must Ibe answerable for the Moravians, against whom I
have preached and written?” True, since he and the Mora
vians quarrelled. But who gives them a box on the ear with
the one hand, and embraces them with the other? Who first
brought over this wicked generation ? Who made a Moravian
his spiritual guide? Who fanaticized his own followers, and de
prived them of their senses? Whose societies (by his own con
fession) run over in shoals to Moravianism forty or fifty at a
time? Would they have split upon this rock, if they had not
been first Methodists? Lastly: Where is the spawn of Mora
vianism so strongly working as in the children of Methodism?”
Sir, you run very fast. And yet I hope to overtake you
by and by. “Mr. Wesley,” you say, “has preached against
the Moravians, since he quarrelled with them.” Sir, I never
quarrelled with their persons yet: I did with some of their
tenets long ago. He “gives them a box on the ear with the
one hand, and embraces them with the other.” That is, I
embrace what is good among them, and at the same time re
prove what is evil. “Who first brought over this wicked
generation?” Not I, whether they be wicked or not. I
once thought I did; but have since then seen and acknow
ledged my mistake. “Who made a Moravian his spiritual
guide?” Not I; though I have occasionally consulted several.
“Who fanaticized his own followers, and deprived them of
their senses?” Not I. Prove it upon me if you can. “Whose
societies (by his own confession) run over in shoals to Mora
vianism, forty or fifty at a time?” Truly, not mine. Two
and-fifty of Kingswood society ran over to Calvinism, and, a
year before, part of Fetter-Lane society gradually went over
to the Moravians. But I know none of ours that went over
“in shoals.” They never, that I remember, gained five at a
time; nor fifty in all, to the best of my knowledge, for
these last ten years. “Would they” (of Fetter-Lane) “have
split on this rock, if they had not first been Methodists?”
Undoubtedly they would; for several of them had not first been
Methodists. Mr. Viney, for instance, (as well as several
others,) was with the Germans before ever he saw me.
“Lastly: Where is the spawn of Moravianism working so
strongly as in the children of Methodism?” If you mean
the errors of Moravianism, they are not working at all in the
generality of the children of Methodism; the Methodists
in general being thoroughly apprized of, and fully guarded
against, them.
So much for your modest assertion, that the Methodists in
general are “all together by the ears; ” the very reverse of
which is true. They are in general in perfect peace. They
enjoy in themselves “the peace of God, which passeth all
understanding.” They are at peace with each other; and, as
much as lieth in them, they live peaceably with all men.
37. Your next charge is, that “Methodism has a tendency
to undermine morality and good works.” (Section xx. p. 146,
&c.) To prove this you assert, (1.) “That the Methodists
are trained up to wait in quietness for sudden conversion;
whence they are naturally led to neglect the means of salva
tion.” This is a mistake all over. For neither are they
taught to wait in quietness (if you mean any more than
patience by that term) for either sudden or gradual conver
sion; neither do they, in fact, neglect the means. So far
from it, that they are eminently exact in the use of them.
You assert, (2) “The doctrine of assurance of pardon and
salvation, present and future, causes a false security, to the
neglect of future endeavours.” Blunder upon blunder
again. That all Christians have an assurance of future sal
vation, is no Methodist doctrine; and an assurance of pre
sent pardon is so far from causing negligence, that it is of
all others the strongest motive to vigorous endeavours after
universal holiness.
You assert, (3.) “Impulses and impressions being made
the rule of duty, will lead into dangerous errors.” Very
true: But the Methodists do not make impulses and impres
sions the rule of duty. They totally disclaim any other rule
of duty than the written word.
You assert, (4.) “A claim of unsinning perfection” (I
mean by perfection, the loving God with all our heart)
“drives some into frenzies, others into despair.” Sir, I
doubt the fact.
You assert, (5) “The Moravian Methodists trample down
morality, and multitudes of the Wesleyans have been in
fected.” The Moravian Methodists 1 You may as well say,
the Presbyterian Papists. The Moravians have no connexion
with the Methodists. . Therefore, whatever they do, (though
you slander them too,) they and not we are to answer for.
The Methodists at present, blessed be God, are as little
infected with this plague (of condemning or neglecting good
works) as any body of people in England or Ireland.
38. From these loose assertions you proceed to quotations
from my writings, every one of which I shall consider, to
show that, not in one or two, but in every one, you are a
wilful prevaricator and false accuser of your neighbour.
You say, First, “The Moravians.” Hold, good Sir! you
are out of the way already. You well know, the Moravians
are to answer for themselves. Our present question concerns
the Methodists only.
You say, Secondly, “A general temptation prevails among
the societies of Methodists, of leaving off good works.” (Vol.
I. p. 273.) Sir, you are wrong again. The societies of
Methodists are not there spoken of; but the single society
of Fetter-Lane. Among these only that temptation then
prevailed.
You quote, Thirdly, as my words, “The poor, confused,
shattered society had erred from the faith.” My own words
are, “I told the poor, confused, shattered society, wherein
they had erred from the faith; ” (ibid. p. 274;) namely, with
regard to the ordinances; not in general, as your way of
expressing it naturally imports. Nor had all the society
erred even in this point. Many of them were still unshaken.
You quote, Fourthly, “A woman of Deptford spoke great
words and true. She ordered Mr. Humphreys to leave off
doing good.”
Must not every reader suppose, as you have placed these
words, that they were all spoke at one time? and that the
“great words and true” were those whereby she “ordered
Mr. Humphreys to leave off doing good?”
What then must every honest man think of you, when he
observes, that one half of the sentence (which you thus art
fully put together) stands in another page, and at a consider
a le distance from the other? and that I immediately subjoin
to the latter clause, “We talked largely with her, and she was
humbled to the dust, under a deep sense of the advantage
Satan had gained over her.”
You quote, Fifthly, a part of the following sentence, to
prove that I “undermine morality and good works:”
“His judgment concerning holiness is new. He no longer
judges it to be an outward thing, to consist either in doing no
harm, in doing good, or in using the ordinances of God.” (And
yet how strongly do I insist upon all these! Sir, do not you
know this?) “He sees it is the life of God in the soul, the
image of God fresh stamped on the heart.” It is so. Sir,
can you deny it? What then will you prove by this?
You quote, Sixthly, part of these words:--
“They speak of holiness as if it consisted chiefly, if not
wholly, in these two points: First, the doing no harm :
Secondly, the doing good, as it is called; that is, the using the
means of grace, and helping our neighbour.” (Vol. I. p. 225.)
And this you term, “disparaging good works!” Sir,
these things, considered barely as to the opus operatum, are
not good works. There must be something good in the heart,
before any of our works are good. Insomuch that, “though
I give all my goods to feed the poor, and have not ” this, “it
profiteth me nothing.”
You observe, by the way, “The Mystic divinity was once
the Methodists’ doctrine.” Sir, you have stepped out of the
way, only to get another fall. The Mystic divinity was never
the Methodists’ doctrine. They could never swallow either
John Tauler or Jacob Behmen; although they often advised
with one that did.
39. You say, Seventhly, “I do not find that Mr. Wesley
has ever cited those express passages of St. James.” Sir,
what if I had not? (I mean in print.) I do not cite every
text from Genesis to the Revelation. But it happens I have.
Look again, Sir; and, by and by, you may find where.
You say, Eighthly, “Mr. Wesley affirms, that the condition
of our justification is faith alone, and not good works.”
Most certainly I do. And I learned it from the Eleventh
and Twelfth Articles, and from the Homilies of our Church.
If you can confute them, do. But I subscribe to them, both
with my hand and heart.
You say, Ninthly, “Give me leave to make a remark. The
Methodists wandered many years in the new path of salvation
by faith and works, which was the time, too, of their highest
glory and popularity. During this time, they were seducing
their disciples into the most destructive errors.” Excuse me,
Sir. While they preached salvation by faith and works, they
had no disciples at all, unless you term a few pupils such ; nor
had they any popularity at all. They then enjoyed (what they
always desired) a quiet, retired life. But whatever disciples we
had, they were not seduced by us into the error of justification
by works. For they were in it before ever they saw our face,
or knew there were such men in the world.
You say, Tenthly, “Mr. Wesley only contends, that it is
possible to use them without trusting in them.” Not in that
page; because the proposition I am confuting is, “It is not
possible to use them without trusting in them.” (Vol. I. p. 258.)
You added, “And now, are not such disparaging expres
sions” (a mere possibility of using them without trusting in
them) “a great discouragement to practice?”
O Sir, when will you deviate into truth? Dare you affirm,
without any regard to God or man, “Mr. Wesley only
contends for a mere possibility of using the means without
trusting in them?”
To go no farther than the very first page you refer to, (vol.
I. p. 258,) my express words are these:
“I believe the way to attain faith is to wait for Christ in
using all the means of grace.
“Because I believe, these do ordinarily convey God’s grace
even to unbelievers.” Is this “contending only for a mere
possibility of using them without trusting in them?”
Not only in this, and many other parts of the Journals, but
in a sermon wrote professedly on the subject, I contend that
all the ordinances of God are the stated channels of his grace
to man; and that it is our bounden duty to use them all, at
all possible opportunities. So that to charge the Methodists
in general, or me in particular, with undervaluing or dis
paraging them, shows just as much regard for justice and
truth, as if you was to charge us with Mahometanism.
40. Tedious as it is to wade through so many dirty pages,
I will follow you step by step, a little farther. Your Eleventh
proof, that we “undermine morality and good works,” is
drawn from the following passage:-
“I know one ‘under the law” is even as I was for near
twice ten years. Every one when he begins to see his fallen
state, and to feel the wrath of God abiding on him, relapses into
the sin that most easily besets him, soon after repenting of it.
Sometimes he avoids, and at many other times he cannot per
suade himself to avoid, the occasions of it. Hence his relapses
are frequent, and, of consequence, his heart is hardened more
and more. Nor can he, with all his sincerity, avoid any one of
these four marks of hypocrisy, till, ‘being justified by faith,’
he ‘hath peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.’”
(Vol. I. p. 222.)
You, Sir, are no competent judge in the cause. But to
any who has experienced what St. Paul speaks in his seventh
chapter to the Romans, I willingly submit this whole question.
You know by experience, that if anger was the sin that did so
easily beset you, you relapsed into it for days, or months, or
years, soon after repenting of it. Sometimes you avoided the
occasions of it; at other times you did not. Hence your relapses
were frequent, and your heart was hardened more and more:
And yet all this time you was sincerely striving against sin;
you could say, without hypocrisy, “The thing which I do, I
allow not; the evil which I would not, that I do. To will is
even now present with me; but how to perform that which is
good I find not.”
But the Jesuits, you think, “could scarce have granted sal
vation upon easier terms. Have no fear, ye Methodists.” Sir,
I do not grant salvation, as you call it, upon so easy terms. I
believe a man in this state is in a state of damnation. “Have
no fear !” say you? Yea, but those who are thus “under the
law” are in fear all the day long. “Was there ever so pleasing
a scheme?” Pleasing with a vengeance As pleasing as to be
in the belly of hell. So totally do you mistake the whole matter,
not knowing what you speak, nor whereof you affirm.
You are, indeed, somewhat pitiable in speaking wrong on this
head, because you do it in ignorance. But this plea cannot be
allowed when you gravely advance that trite, threadbare objec
tion concerning the Lord’s supper, without taking any notice
that I have answered it again and again, both to Mr. Church
and to the late Lord Bishop of London.
41. Your Thirteenth proof is this: “Mr. Wesley has taught
as that infirmities are no sins.” Sir, you have taught me to
wonder at nothing you assert; else I should wonder at this.
The words I suppose you refer to, stand in the sermon “On
Salvation by Faith; ” though you do not choose to show your
reader where they may be found: “He that is by faith born of
God sinneth not, (1.) By any habitual sin: Nor, (2.) By any
wilful sin: Nor, (3.) By any sinful desire; for he continually
desireth the holy and perfect will of God: Nor, (4.) Doth he
sin by infirmities, whether in act, word, or thought; for his
infirmities have no concurrence of his will, and, without this,
they are not properly sins.” And this, you seriously declare,
“is a loop-hole to creep out of every moral and religious
obligation 1’’
In the same paragraph, you say I have strongly affirmed
that “all our works and tempers are evil continually; that our
whole heart is altogether corrupt and abominable, and conse
quently our whole life; all our works, the most specious of
them, our righteousness, our prayers, needing an atonement
themselves.” (Vol. I. pp. 76, 97, 161, 214.)
I do strongly affirm this. But of whom? In all these places,
but the last, of myself only. In every one, but this, I speak in
the singular number, and of myself when confessedly an unbe
liever. And of whom do I speak in that last place? Of unbe
lievers, and them only. The words are, “All our tempers and
works in our natural state are only evil continually.”
Now, Sir, where is your loop-hole to creep out? If you have
none, I fear every impartial man will pass sentence upon you,
that you have no regard either to moral or religious obligations.
I have now weighed every argument you have brought, to
prove that the “Methodists undermine morality and good
works.” A grievous charge indeed! But the more inexcusable
is he who advances it, but is not able to make it good in any
one single instance. Pardon my pertness, Sir, in not barely
affirming, (that is your manner,) but proving, this: Nay, and
in telling you, that you cannot make amends to God, to me, or
to the world, without a retractation as public as your calumny.
42. You add, “How the case stands, in fact, as to the num
ber of converts among the Methodists, and real reformation of
life to the certain and known duties of the gospel, is matter of
difficult determination.” Not at all. What is easier to be deter
mined, than, (1.) That A. B. of Exeter, or Tiverton, was for
many years a notorious drunkard, common-swearer, or Sab
bath-breaker? (2.) That he is not so now; that he is really
reformed from drunkenness, swearing, Sabbath-breaking, to
sobriety and the other certain and known duties of the gospel?
“But from what inquiry” you “can make, there is no reason
to think them, for the generality, better than their neighbours.”
Better than their neighbours ? Why, are they no worse than
their neighbours? Then, what have you been doing all this
time? But whether they are better or worse than their neigh
bours, they are undeniably better than themselves: I mean,
better than they were before they heard this preaching “in
the certain and known duties of the gospel.”
But you desire us to “consider their black art of calumny;
their uncharitableness; their excessive pride and vanity;
their scepticism, doubts, and disbelief of God and Christ;
their disorderly practices, and contempt of authority; their
bitter envying and inveterate broils among themselves; their
coolness for good works.” Sir, we will consider all these,
when you have proved them. Till then this is mere brutum
fulmen.*
43. You proceed: “If we take Mr. Wesley’s own account,
it falls very short of any considerable reformation.” You
mean, if we take that part of his account which you are
pleased to transcribe. Atticam elegantiam 1 + But let any
impartial man read my whole aceount, and then judge.
However, hence you infer that “the new reformers have
made but a slow and slight progress in the reformation of
manners.”
As a full answer to this I need only transcribe a page or
two from the last “Appeal,” pp. 237, 238, &c. :
“God begins a glorious work in our land. You set your
self against it with your might; to prevent its beginning
where it does not yet appear, and to destroy it wherever it
does. In part you prevail. You keep many from hearing
the word that is able to save their souls. Others who have
heard it, you induce to turn back from God, and to list under
the devil’s banner again. Then you make the success of your
own wickedness an excuse for not acknowledging the work of
God! You urge, ‘that not many sinners were reformed !
and that some of those are now as bad as ever !’
“Whose fault is this? Is it ours, or your own? Why
have not thousands more been reformed ? Yea, for every one
who is now turned to God, why are there not ten thousand 7
Because you and your associates laboured so heartily in the
cause of hell; because you and they spared no pains, either
to prevent or to destroy the work of God. By using all the
power and wisdom you had, you hindered thousands from
hearing the gospel, which they might have found to be the
power of God unto salvation. Their blood is upon your heads.
By inventing, or countenancing, or retailing lies, some refined,
some gross and palpable, you hindered others from profiting
* Harmless artillery.--EDIT. + Attic elegance.-EDIT.
by what they did hear. You are answerable to God for these
souls also. Many who began to taste the good word and run,
the way of God's commandments, by various methods you
prevailed on to hear it no more. So they soon drew back to
perdition. But know, that, for every one of these also, God
will require an account of you in the day of judgment!
“And yet, in spite of all the malice and wisdom and
strength, not only of men, but of ‘principalities and powers,”
of the ‘rulers of the darkness of this world, of the “wicked
spirits in high places, there are thousands found, who are
“turned from dumb idols to serve the living and true God.”
What a harvest then might we have seen before now, if all who
say they are ‘on the Lord’s side, had come, as in all reason
they ought, ‘to the help of the Lord against the mighty l’
Yea, had they only not opposed the work of God, had they
only refrained from his messengers, might not the trumpet
of God have been heard long since in every corner of our
land? and thousands of sinners in every county been brought
to “fear God and honour the King?’”
44. Without any regard to this, your next assertion is,
“That the Methodists are carrying on the work of Popery.”
(Section xxi. p. 164, &c.) This also being a charge of a very
high nature, I shall particularly consider whatever you
advance in defence of it.
Your First argument is, “They have a strain of Jesuitical,
sophistry, artifice, and craft, evasion, reserve, equivocation,
and prevarication.” So you say. But you do not so much
as aim at any proof.
Your Second argument is, “Mr. Wesley says, where a
Methodist was receiving the sacrament, God was pleased to
let him see a crucified Saviour.” Sir, Mr. W. does not say
this. It is one that occasionally wrote to him. But if he
had, what would you infer? that he is a Papist? Where is
the consequence? Why, you say, “Was not this as good an
argument for transubstantiation, as several produced by the
Papists?” Yes, exactly as good as either their arguments
o: yours; that is, just good for nothing.
Your Third argument runs thus: “We may see in Mr.
W.’s writings, that he was once a strict Churchman, but gra
dually put on a more catholic spirit, tending at length to
Roman Catholic. He rejects any design to convert others
from any communion; and consequently not from Popery.”
This is half true, (which is something uncommon with you,)
and only half false. It is true, that, for thirty years last past,
I have “gradually put on a more catholic spirit; ” finding
more and more tenderness for those who differed from me,
either in opinions or modes of worship. But it is not true
that I “reject any design of converting others from any com
munion.” I have, by the blessing of God, converted several
from Popery, who are now alive and ready to testify it.
Your Fourth argument is, That in a Collection of Prayers,
I cite the words of an ancient Liturgy, “For the faithful
departed.” Sir, whenever I use those words in the Burial
Service, I pray to the same effect: “That we, with all those
who are departed in thy faith and fear, may have our perfect
consummation and bliss, both in body and soul:” Yea, and
whenever I say, “Thy kingdom come; ” for I mean both
the kingdom of grace and glory. In this kind of general
prayer, therefore, “for the faithful departed,” I conceive
myself to be clearly justified, both by the earliest antiquity,
by the Church of England, and by the Lord's Prayer;
although the Papists have corrupted this scriptural practice
into praying for those who die in their sins.
45. Your Fifth argument is, “That they use private confes
sion, in which every one is to speak the state of his heart,
with his several temptations and deliverances, and answer as
many searching questions as may be. And what a scene,” say
you, “is hereby disclosed ! What a filthyjakes opened, when
the most searching questions are answered without reserve l”
Hold, Sir, unless you are answering for yourself: This un
doubtedly you have a right to do. You can tell best what is in
your own heart. And I cannot deny what you say: It may be
a very “filthyjakes,” for aught I know. But pray do not mea
sure others by yourself. The hearts of believers “are purified
through faith.” When these open their hearts one to another,
there is no such scene disclosed. Yet temptations to pride in
various kinds, to self-will, to unbelief in many instances,
they often feel in themselves, (whether they give any place
to them or no,) and occasionally disclose to their brethren.
But this has no resemblance to Popish confession; of which
you are very sensible. For you cite my own words: “The
Popish confession is, the confession made by a single person to
a Priest. Whereas, this is the confession of several persons
conjointly, not to a Priest, but to each other.” You add, “Will
Mr. W. abide by this, and freely answer a question?” I will.
For I desire only, “by manifestation of the truth, to com
mend myself to every man’s conscience in the sight of God.”
Your question is, “After private confessions taken in their
Bands, are not reports made to Mr. W.?” I answer, No.;
no reports are made to me of the particulars mentioned in
private Bands. “Are no delinquents, male and female,
brought before him separately, and confessed by him?” No;
none at all. You ask, “How then do I know the outward
and inward states of those under my care?” I answer, By
examining them once a quarter, more or less, not separately,
but ten or fifteen together.
Therefore, every unprejudiced person must see that there
is no analogy between the Popish confession to a Priest, and
our confessing our faults one to another, and praying one for
another, as St. James directs. Consequently, neither does
this argument, though urged with all your art and force,
amount to any shadow of proof, that “the Methodists are
carrying on the work of Popery.”
46, Your Sixth argument, such as it is, stands thus:
“Another tendency to Popery appears by the notion of a
single drop of Christ's blood being a sufficient atonement for
the sins of the whole world. For, however pious this may
appear, it is absolutely false and Papistical.” Sir, this argu
ment is perfectly new, and entirely your own. It were great
pity to disturb you in the enjoyment of it.
A Seventh argument you ground on those words in the
“Plain Account of the People called Methodists: ” “It is a
point we chiefly insist upon, that orthodoxy or right opinions is
a very slender part of religion, if any part of it at all.” “The
plain consequence whereof is,” (so you affirm,) “that teaching
and believing the fundamental errors of Popery, with the whole
train of their abominations and idolatries, are of very little
moment, if any.” Strain again, Sir ; pull hard, or you will
never be able to drag this conclusion out of these premises.
I assert, “(1.) That in a truly righteous man, right opinions
are a very slender part of religion. (2.) That in an irreligious,
a profane man, they are not any part of religion at all; such a
man not being one jot more religious because he is orthodox.”
Sir, it does not follow from either of these propositions, that
wrong opinions are not an hinderance to religion; and much
less, that “teaching and believing the fundamental errors of
Popery, with the whole train of their abominations and idol
atries,” (practised, I presume you mean, as well as taught and
believed,) “are of very little moment, if any.”
I am so far from saying or thinking this, that, in my
printed letter to a Priest of that communion, (did you never
read it, or hear of it before ?) are these express words: “I
pity you much, having the same assurance, that Jesus is the
Christ, and that no Romanist can expect to be saved, accord
ing to the terms of his covenant.” (Vol. I. p. 220.) Do you
term this “an extenuation of their abominations; a reducing
them to almost a mere nothing?”
47. You argue, Eighthly, thus: “The Methodist doctrine
of impressions and assurances holds equally for Popish enthu
siasts.” This needs no answer; I have already shown that
the Methodist doctrine in these respects is both scriptural
and rational.
Your Ninth argument is, “Their sudden conversions stand
upon the same footing with the Popish.” You should say,
“are a proof that they are promoting Popery.” I leave you
to enjoy this argument also.
But the dreadful one you reserve for the last; namely,
our “recommending Popish books. One is the Life of Mr.
de Renty, of which Mr. Wesley has published an extract.”
To prove your inimitable fairness here, you scrape up again
all the trash wherein the weak writer of that Life abounds,
and which I had pared off and thrown away. Sir, could you
find nothing to your purpose in the extract itself? I fancy
you might; for I have purposely left in two or three parti
culars, to show of what communion he was, which I did not
think it right to conceal.
You go on : “Francis of Sales is another Papist, much
commended by Mr. W.; and who, he doubts not, is in
Abraham’s bosom. He is the Methodists’ bosom friend.”
I believe he is in Abraham’s bosom; but he is no bosom
friend of the Methodists. I question whether one in five
hundred of them has so much as heard his name. And as for
me, neither do I commend him much, nor recommend him at
all. His Life I never saw, nor any of his Works, but his “ In
troduction to a Holy Life.” This the late Dr. Nichols trans
lated into English, published, and strongly recommended.
Therefore, if this be a proof of promoting Popery, that censure
falls, not on me, but him.
I have now considered all the arguments you have brought
to prove that the Methodists are carrying on the work of
Popery. And I am persuaded, every candid man, who
rightly weighs what has been said with any degree of atten
tion, will clearly see, not only that no one of those arguments
is of any real force at all, but that you do not believe your
self; you do not believe the conclusion which you make as if
you would prove: Only you keep close to your laudable
resolution of throwing as much dirt as possible.
48. It remains only to gather up some of your fragments,
as still further proofs of your integrity.
You graciously say, “I do not lay much stress upon the
charge of some of the angry Moravians against Mr. W. and
brother, for preaching Popery.” Sir, if you had, you would
only have hurt yourself. For, (1.) The Moravians never,
that I know of, brought this charge at all. (2.) When Mr.
C., and two other Predestinarians, (these were the persons)
affirmed they had heard both my brother and me preach
Popery, they meant neither more nor less thereby than the
doctrine of universal redemption.
“Some connexion between the doctrines of Methodists and
Papists hath been shown through this whole Comparison.”
Shown / But how? By the same art of wire-drawing and
deciphering, which would prove an equal connexion between
the Methodists and Mahometans.
“Jesuits have often mingled, and been the ringleaders,
among our enthusiastic sectaries.” Sir, I am greatly obliged
to you for your compliment, as well as for your parallel of
Mr. Faithful Commim.
And pray, Sir, at what time do you think it was that I
first mingled with those enthusiastic sectaries? when I came
back from Germany, or when I returned from Georgia, or
while I was at Lincoln College? Although the plot itself
might be laid before, when I was at Christ Church, or at the
Charterhouse school.
But “a Jesuit’s or enthusiast's declaring against Popery is
no test of their sincerity.” Most sure; nor is a nameless per
son’s declaring against Methodism any proof that he is not a
Jesuit. I remember well, when a well-dressed man, taking his
stand not far from Moorfields, had gathered a large company,
and was vehemently asserting, that “those rogues, the Method
ists, were all Papists;” till a gentleman coming by, fixed his
eye on him, and cried, “Stop that man! I know him person
ally; he is a Romish Priest.”
I know not that anything remains on this head which bears
so much as the face of an argument. So that, of all the charges
you have brought, (and truly you have not been sparing)
there is not one wherein your proof falls more miserably short
than in this, that “the Methodists are advancing Popery.”
49. I have at length gone through your whole performance,
weighed whatever you cite from my writings, and shown at
large how far those passages are from proving all, or any part,
of your charge. So that all you attempt to build on them, of
the pride and vanity of the Methodists; of their shuffling and
prevaricating; of their affectation of prophesying; laying claim
to the miraculous favours of Heaven; unsteadiness of temper;
unsteadiness in sentiment and practice; art and cunning;
giving up inspiration and extraordinary calls; scepticism, in
fidelity, Atheism; uncharitableness to their opponents; con
tempt of order and authority; and fierce, rancorous quarrels
with each other; of the tendency of Methodism to undermine
morality and good works; and to carry on the good work of
Popery:--All this fabricfalls to the ground at once, unless you
can find some better foundation to support it. (Sections iii.
vi.; ix., xi.--xv.; xviii.-xxi.)
50. These things being so, what must all unprejudiced men
think of you and your whole performance? You have ad
Vanced a charge, not against one or two persons only, but indis
criminately against a whole body of people, of His Majesty’s
subjects, Englishmen, Protestants, members, I suppose, of your
own Church: a charge containing abundance of articles, and
most of them of the highest and blackest nature. You have
prosecuted this with unparalleled bitterness of spirit and acri
mony of language; using sometimes the most coarse, rude,
scurrilous terms, sometimes the keenest sarcasms you could
devise. The point you have steadily pursued in thus prose
cuting this charge, is, First, to expose the whole people to the
hatred and scorn of all mankind; and, next, to stir up the
civil powers against them. And when this charge comes to
be fairly weighed, there is not a single article of it true !
The passages you cite to make it good are one and all such as
prove nothing less than the points in question; most of them
such as you have palpably maimed, corrupted, and strained to
a sense never thought of by the writer; many of them such
as are flat against you, and overthrow the very point they are
brought to support. What can they think, but that this is the
most shocking violation of the Christian rule, “Thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself;” the most open affront to all
justice, and even common humanity; the most glaring insult
upon the common sense and reason of mankind, which has
lately appeared in the world?
If you say, “But I have proved the charge upon Mr.
Whitefield;” admit you have, (which I do not allow,) Mr.
Whitefield is not the Methodists; no, nor the societies under
his care; they are not a third, perhaps not a tenth, part of
the Methodists. What then can excuse your ascribing their
faults, were they proved, to the whole body? You indict ten
men. Suppose you prove the indictment upon one, will you
therefore condemn the other nine? Nay, let every man bear
his own burden, since every man must give an account of
himself to God.
I had occasion once before to say to an opponent, “You
know not to show mercy.” Yet that gentleman did regard
truth and justice. But you regard neither mercy, justice, nor
truth. To vilify, to blacken, is your one point. I pray God
it may not be laid to your charge 1 May He show you mercy,
though you show none !
I am, Sir,
Your friend and well-wisher,