Serious Thoughts Occasioned by the Late Earthquake at Lisbon
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Year: 1755
Author: John Wesley
---
THINKING men generally allow that the greater part of
amodern Christians are not more virtuous than the ancient
Heathems; perhaps less so; since public spirit, love of our
country, generous honesty, and simple truth, are scarce any
where to be found. On the contrary, covetousness, ambition,
various injustice, luxury, and falsehood in every kind, have
infected every rank and denomination of people, the Clergy
themselves not excepted. Now, they who believe there is a
God are apt to believe he is not well pleased with this.
Nay, they think, he has intimated it very plainly, in many
parts of the Christian world. How many hundred thousand
men have been swept away by war, in Europe only, within
half a century! How many thousands, within little more
than this, hath the earth opened her mouth and swallowed
up ! Numbers sunk at Port-Royal, and rose no more!
Many thousands went quick into the pit at Lima ! The
whole city of Catanea, in Sicily, and every inhabitant of it,
perished together. Nothing but heaps of ashes and cinders
show where it stood. Not so much as one Lot escaped out
of Sodom !
And what shall we say of the late accounts from Portugal?
That some thousand houses, and many thousand persons, are
no more ! that a fair city is now in ruinous heaps | Is there
indeed a God that judges the world? And is he now making
inquisition for blood? If so, it is not surprising, he should
begin there, where so much blood has been poured on the
* This quotation from IIorace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“"Tis your own interest that calls
When flames invade your neighbour's walls."-l.pl r.
ground like water ! where so many brave men have been
murdered, in the most base and cowardly as well as barbarous
manner, almost every day, as well as every night, while none
regarded or laid it to heart. “Let them hunt and destroy
the precious life, so we may secure our stores of gold and
precious stones.”* How long has their blood been crying
from the earth! Yea, how long has that bloody House of
Mercy,t the scandal not only of all religion, but even of human
mature, stood to insult both heaven and earth ! “And shall
I not visit for these things, saith the Lord? Shall not my
soul be avenged on such a city as this?”
It has been the opinion of many, that even this nation has
not been without some marks of God’s displeasure. Has not
war been let loose even within our own land, so that London
itself felt the alarm? Has not a pestilential sickness brokcn
in upon our cattle, and, in many parts, left not one of them
alive? And although the earth does not yet open in England
or Ireland, has it not shook, and reeled to and fro like a
drunken man? and that not in one or two places only, but
almost from one end of the kingdom to the other?
Perhaps one might ask, Was there nothing uncommon,
nothing more than is usual at this season of the year, in
the rains, the hail, the winds, the thunder and lightning
which we have lately heard and scen? particularly, in the
storm which was the same day and hour that they were
playing off Macbeth's thunder and lightning at the theatre.
One would almost think they designed this (inasmuch as the
entertainment continued, notwithstanding all the artillery of
heaven) as a formal answer to that question, “Canst thou
thunder with a voice like Him?”
What shall we say to the affair of Whitson Cliffs? of which,
were it not for the unparalleled stupidity of the English, all
England would have rang long ago, from one sea to another.
And yet, seven miles from the place, they knew little more of
it in May last, than if it had happened in China or Japan.
The fact (of the truth of which any who will be at the
pains of inquiring may soon be satisficd) is this: On Tuesday,
* Merchants who have lived in Portugal inform us, that the King had a large
building filled with diamonds; and more gold stored up, coined and uncoined,
than all the other princes of Europe together.
+ The title which the Inquisition of Portugal (if not in other countries also)
takes to itself.
March 25, last, (being the week before Easter) many persons
heard a great noise near a ridge of mountains, called Black
Hamilton, in Yorkshire. It was observed chiefly on the
south-west side of the mountain, about a mile from the course
where the Hamilton races are run, near a ledge of rocks,
commonly called Whitson Cliffs, two miles from Sutton, and
about five from Thirsk.
The same noise was heard on Wednesday by all who went
that way. On Thursday, about seven in the morning, Edward
Abbot, weaver, and Adam Bosomworth, bleacher, both of
Sutton, riding under Whitson Cliffs, heard a roaring (so they
termed it) like many cannons, or loud and rolling thunder.
It seemed to come from the cliffs; looking up to which, they
saw a large body of stone, four or five yards broad, split and
fly off from the very top of the rock. They thought it strange,
but rode on. Between ten and eleven, a larger piece of the
rock, about fifteen yards thick, thirty high, and between sixty
and seventy broad, was torn off and thrown into the valley.
About seven in the evening, one who was riding by observed
the ground to shake exceedingly; and soon after several large
stones or rocks, of some tons weight cach, rose out of the
ground. Others were thrown on one side, others turned
upside down, and many rolled over and over. Being a little
surprised, and not very curious, he hasted on his way.
On Friday and Saturday the ground continued to shake,
and the rocks to roll over one another. The earth also clave
asunder in very many places, and continued so to do till
Sunday morning.
Being at Osmotherley, seven miles from the Cliffs, on
Monday, June 1, and finding Edward Abbot there, I desired
him the next morning to show me the way thither. I
walked, crept, and climbed round and over great part of the
ruins. I could not perceive by any sign, that there was ever
any cavity in the rock at all; but one part of the solid stone
is cleft from the rest, in a perpendicular line, and as smooth
as if cut with instruments. Nor is it barely thrown down,
but split into many hundred pieces, some of which lie four or
five hundred yards from the main rock.
The ground nearest the cliff is not raised, but sunk con
siderably beneath the level. But, at some distance, it is
raised in a ridge of eight or ten yards high, twelve or fifteen
broad, and near a hundred long. Adjoining to this lies an
oval piece of ground, thirty or forty yards in diameter, which
has been removed, whole as it is, from beneath the cliff,
without the least fissure, with all its load of rocks, some of
which were as large as the hull of a small ship. At a little
distance is a second piece of ground, forty or fifty yards
across, which has also been transplanted entire, with rocks of
various sizes upon it, and a tree growing out of one of them.
By the removal of one or both of these, I suppose the hollow
near the cliff was made.
All round them lay stones and rocks, great and small, some
on the surface of the earth, some half sunk into it, some almost
covered, in variety of positions. Between these the ground
was cleft asunder in a thousand places. Some of the apertures
were nearly closed again, some gaping as at first. Between
thirty and forty acres of land, as is commonly supposed,
(though some reckon above sixty,) are in this condition.
On the skirts of these, I observed, in abundance of places,
the green turf (for it was pasture-land) as it were pared off,
two or three inches thick, and wrapped round like sheets of
lead. A little farther it was not cleft or broken at all, but
raised in ridges, five or six foot long, exactly resembling the
graves in a churchyard. Of these there is a vast number.
That part of the cliff from which the rest is torn, lies so
high and is now of so bright a colour, that it is plainly
visible to all the country round, even at the distance of
several miles. We saw it distinctly, not only from the street
in Thirsk, but for five or six miles after, as we rode toward
York. So we did likewise in the great North Road, between
Sandhutton and Northallerton.
But how may we account for this phenomenon? Was it
effected by a merely natural cause? If so, that cause must
either have been fire, water, or air. It could not be fire; for
then some mark of it must have appeared, either at the time,
or after it. But no such mark does appear, nor ever did;
not so much as the least smoke, either when the first or
second rock was removed, or in the whole space between
Tuesday and Sunday.
It could not be water; for no water issued out, when the
one or the other rock was torn off. Nor had there been any
rains for some time before. It was in that part of the country
a remarkable dry season. Neither was there any cavity in
that part of the rock, wherein a sufficient quantity of water
might have lodged. On the contrary, it was one single, solid
mass, which was evenly and smoothly cleft in sunder.
There remains no other natural cause assignable, but
imprisoned air. I say imprisoned; for as to the fashionable
opinion, that the exterior air is the grand agent in earth
quakes, it is so senseless, unmechanical, unphilosophical a
dream, as deserves not to be named but to be exploded. But
it is hard to conceive, how even imprisoned air could produce
such an effect. It might indeed shake, tear, raise, or sink
the earth; but how could it cleave a solid rock? Here was
not room for a quantity of it sufficient to do anything of
this nature; at least, unless it had been suddenly and
violently expanded by fire, which was not the case. Could a
small quantity of air, without that violent expansion, have
torn so large a body of rock from the rest, to which it
adhered in one solid mass? Could it have shivered this into
pieces, and scattered several of those pieces some hundred
yards round? Could it have transported those promon
torics of carth with their incumbent load, and set them down
unbroken, unchanged, at a distance? Truly I am not so
great a volunteer in faith as to be able to believe this. He
that supposes this, must suppose air to be not only very
strong, (which we allow,) but a very wise agent; while it
bore its charge with so great caution, as not to hurt or
dislocate any part of it.
What, then, could be the cause? What indeed, but God,
who arose “to shake terribly the earth;” who purposely
chose such a place, where there is so great a concourse of
nobility and gentry every year; and wrought in such a manner,
that many might see it and fear,-that all who travel one of the
most frequented roads in England might see it, almost whether
they would or no, for many miles together? It must like
wise for many years, maugre all the art of man, be a visible
monument of His power; all that ground being now so
incumbered with rocks and stones, that it cannot be either
ploughed or grazed. Nor can it well serve any use, but to
tell all that see it, Who can stand before this great God?
Who can account for the late motion in the waters; not
Aonly that of the sea, and rivers communicating therewith, but
even that in canals, fishponds, cisterns, and all either largc or
small bodies of water? It was particularly observed, that
while thc watcr itself was so violently agitated, neither did the
G SERIOUS ThouGHTS ON
earth shake at all, nor any of the vessels which contained
that water. Was such a thing ever known or heard of before?
I know not, but it was spoken of once, near eighteen hundred
years ago, in those remarkable words, “There shall be assauoi"
(not only “earthquakes,” but various “concussions” or
“shakings”) “in divers places.” And so there have been in
Spain, in Portugal, in Italy, in Holland, in England, in Ireland;
and not improbably in many other places too, which we are
not yet informed of. Yet it does not seem that a concussion
of this kind has ever been known before, since either the
same or some other comet revolved so near the earth. For
wc know of no other natural causc in the universe which is
adequate to such an effect. And that this is the real cause,
we may very possibly be convinced in a short time.
but alas! why should we not be convinced sooner, while
that conviction may avail, that it is not chance which governs
the world? Why should we not now, before London is as
Lisbon, Lima, or Catanea, acknowlcdge the hand of the
Almighty, arising to maintain his own cause? Why, we
have a general answer always ready, to screen us from any
such conviction: “All these things are purely natural and
accidental; the result of natural causes.” But there are two
objections to this answer: First, it is untrue: Secondly, it
is uncomfortable.
First. If by affirming, “All this is purely natural,” you
mean, it is not providential, or that God has nothing to do
with it, this is not true, that is, supposing the Bible to be
true. For supposing this, you may descant ever so long on
the natural causes of murrain, winds, thunder, lightning, and
yet you are altogether wide of the mark, you prove nothing
at all, unless you can prove that God never works in or by
natural causes. But this you cannot prove; may, none can
doubt of his so working, who allows the Scripture to be of
God. For this asserts, in the clearest and strongest terms,
that “all things” (in nature) “serve him;” that (by or
without a train of natural causes) He “sendeth his rain on
the earth;” that He “bringeth the winds out of his
treasures,” and “maketh a way for the lightning and the
thunder;” in general, that “fire and hail, snow and vapour,
wind and storm, fulfil his word.” Therefore, allowing there
are natural causes of all these, they are still under the direc
tion of the Lord of nature: Nay, what is nature itself, but
the art of God, or God’s method of acting in the material
world? True philosophy therefore ascribes all to God, and
says, in the beautiful language of the wise and good man,
Here like a trumpet, loud and strong,
Thy thunder shakes our coast;
While the red lightnings wave along,
The banners of thy host.
A Second objection to your answer is, It is extremely
uncomfortable. For if things really be as you affirm; if all
these afflictive incidents entirely depend on the fortuitous
concourse and agency of blind, material causes; what hope,
what help, what resource is left for the poor sufferers by
them? Should the murrain among the cattle continue a
few years longer, and consequently produce scarcity or
famine, what will there be left for many of the poor to do,
but to lie down and die? If tainted air spread a pestilence
over our land, where shall they fly for succour? They cannot
resist either the one or other; they cannot escape from
them. And can they hope to appease
Illachrymabilem Plutona 3
Inexorable Pluto, king of shades 2
Shall they intreat the famine or the pestilence to show mercy?
Alas! they are as senseless as you suppose God to be.
However, you who are men of fortune can shift tolerably
well, in spite of these difficulties. Your money will undoubt
edly procure you food as long as there is any in the kingdom.
And if your Physicians cannot secure you from the epidemic
disease, your coaches can carry you from the place of infec
tion. Be it so: But you are not out of all danger yet, unless
you can drive faster than the wind. Are you sure of this?
And are your horses literally swifter than the lightning?
Can they leave the panting storm behind? If not, what will
you do when it overtakes you? Try your eloquence on the
whirlwind. Will it hear your voice? Will it regard either
your money, or prayers, or tears? Call upon the lightning.
Cry aloud; see whether your voice will “divide the flames of
fire.” O no ! it hath no ears to hear ! It devoureth and
showeth no pity!
But this is not all. IIere is a nearer enemy. The carth
threatens to swallow you up. Where is your protection
now? What defence do you find from thousands of gold
and silver? You cannot fly; for you cannot quit the earth,
unless you will leave your dear body behind you. And while
you are on the earth, you know not where to flee to, neither
where to flee from. You may buy intelligence, where the
shock was yesterday, but not where it will be to-morrow,
to-day. It comes I The roof trembles J The beams crack |
The ground rocks to and fro! Hoarse thunder resounds
from the bowels of the earth ! And all these are but the
beginning of sorrows. Now, what help? What wisdom can
prevent, what strength resist, the blow 7 What money can
purchase, I will not say deliverance, but an hour's reprieve?
Poor honourable fool, where are now thy titles? Wealthy
fool, where is now thy golden god? If any thing can help,
it must be prayer. But what wilt thou pray to? Not to the
God of heaven; you suppose him to have nothing to do with
earthquakes. No; they proceed in a merely natural way,
either from the earth itself, or from included air, or from
subterraneous fires or waters. If thou prayest, then, (which
perhaps you never did before,) it must be to some of these.
Begin: “O earth, earth, earth, hear the voice of thy children :
Hear, O air, water, fire !” And will they hear? You
know it cannot be. How deplorable, then, is his condition,
who in such an hour has none else to flee to ! How uncom
fortable the supposition, which implies this, by direct necessary
consequence, namely, that all these things are the pure result
of merely natural causes!
But supposing the earthquake which made such havoc at
Lisbon should never travel so far as London, is there nothing
else which can reach us? What think you of a comet?
Are we absolutely out of the reach of this? You cannot say
we are; seeing these move in all directions, and through
every region of the universe. And would the approach of
one of these amazing spheres be of no importance to us?
especially in its return from the sun; when that immense body
is (according to Sir Isaac Newton’s calculation) heated two
thousand times hotter than a red-hot cannon-ball. The late
ingenious and accurate Dr. Halley (never yet suspected of
enthusiasm) fixes the return of the great comet in the year
1758; and he observes that the last time it revolved, it moved
in the very same line which the earth describes in her annual
course round the sun; but the earth was on the other side of
her orbit. Whereas, in this revolution, it will move, not
only in the same line, but in the same part of that line
wherein the earth moves. And “who can tell,” says that great
man, “what the consequences of such a contact may be?”
Who can tell / Any man of common understanding, who
knows the very first elements of astronomy. The immediate
consequence of such a body of solid fire touching the earth
must necessarily be, that it will set the earth on fire, and
burn it to a coal, if it do not likewise strike it out of its
course; in which case, (so far as we can judge,) it must drop
down directly into the sun.
But what, if this vast body is already on its way? if it is
nearer than we are aware of? What, if these unusual,
unprecedented motions of the waters be one effect of its near
approach? We cannot be certain that it will be visible to
the inhabitants of our globe, till it has imbibed the solar fire.
But possibly we may see it sooner than we desire. We may
see it, not as Milton speaks,--
From its horrid hair
Shake pestilence and war;
but ushering in far other calamities than these, and of more
extensive influence. Probably it will be seen first drawing
nearer and nearer, till it appears as another moon in magni
tude, though not in colour, being of a deep fiery red; then
scorching and burning up all the produce of the earth, driving
away all clouds, and so cutting off the hope or possibility of
any rain or dew; drying up every fountain, stream, and river,
causing all faces to gather blackness, and all men’s hearts to
fail; then executing its grand commission on the globe itself,
and causing the stars to fall from heaven." O, who may
abide when this is done? Who will then be able to stand?
Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque regia caeli
Ardeat; et mundi moles operosa laboret 3+
What shall we do? do now, that none of these things
may come upon us unawares? We are wisely and diligently
• What security is there against all this, upon the infidel hypothesis ? But
upon the Christian, there is abundant security : For the Scripture prophecies arc
not yet fulfilled.
+ This quotation from Ovid is thus translated by Drydcn :
“When all his blazing worlds above shall burn,
And all the inferior globc to cinders turn ?"-En IT.
providing for our defence against one enemy; with such a
watchful wisdom and active diligence, as is a comfort to every
honest Englishman. But why should we not show the same
wisdom and diligence in providing against all our enemies?
And if our wisdom and strength be sufficient to defend us,
let us not seek any further. Let us without delay recruit our
forces, and guard our coasts against the famine, and murrain,
and pestilence; and still more carefully against immoderate
rains, and winds, and lightnings, and earthquakes, and
comets; that we may no longer be under any painful appre
hensions of any present or future danger, but may smile,
Secure, amidst the jar of elements,
The wreck of matter, and the crush of worlds !
But if our own wisdom and strength be not sufficient to
defend us, let us not be ashamed to seek farther help. Let
us even dare to own we believe there is a God; nay, and
not a lazy, indolent, epicurean deity, who sits at ease upon
the circle of the heavens, and neither knows nor cares what
is done below ; but one who, as he created heaven and
carth, and all the armies of them, as he sustains them all
by the word of his power, so cannot neglect the work of his
own hands. With pleasure we own there is such a God,
whose eye pervades the whole sphere of created beings, who
knoweth the number of the stars, and calleth them all by
their names; a God whose wisdom is as the great abyss,
deep and wide as etermity;
Who, high in power, in the beginning said,
Let sea, and air, and earth, and heaven be made:
And it was so : And when he shall ordain
In other sort, hath but to speak again,
And they shall be no more :
Yet more; whose mercy riseth above the heavens, and his
faithfulness above the clouds; who is loving to every man,
and his mercy over all his works. Let us secure him on our
side; let us make this wise, this powerful, this gracious
God our friend. Then need we not fear, though the earth
be moved, and the hills be carried into the midst of the sea;.
no, not though the heavens being on fire are dissolved, and
the very elements melt with fervent heat. It is enough
that the Lord of hosts is with us, the God of love is our
everlasting refuge.
- -
But how shall we secure the favour of this great God?
How, but by worshipping him in spirit and in truth; by
uniformly imitating Him we worship, in all his imitable
perfections? without which the most accurate systems of
opinions, all external modes of religion, are idle cobwebs of
the brain, dull farce and empty show. Now, God is love:
Love God then, and you are a true worshipper. Love man
kind, and God is your God, your Father, and your Friend.
But see that you deceive not your own soul; for this is not a
point of small importance. And by this you may know : If
you love God, then you are happy in God; if you love God,
riches, honours, and the pleasures of sense are no more to
you than bubbles on the water: You look on dress and
equipage, as the tassels of a fool’s cap; diversions, as the bells
on a fool's coat. If you love God, God is in all your thoughts,
and your whole life is a sacrifice to him. And if you love
mankind, it is your one design, desire, and endeavour, to
spread virtue and happiness all around you; to lessen the
present sorrows, and increase the joys, of every child of man;
and, if it be possible, to bring them with you to the rivers of
pleasure that are at God’s right hand for evermore.
But where shall you find one who answers this happy
and amiable character? Wherever you find a Christian;
for this, and this alone, is real, genuine Christianity. Surely
you did not imagine that Christianity was no more than
such a system of opinions as is vulgarly called faith; or a
strict and regular attendance on any kind of external
worship. O no! Were this all that it implied, Christianity
were indeed a poor, empty, shallow thing; such as none but
half-thinkers could admire, and all who think freely and
generously must despise. But this is not the case; the
spirit above described, this alone, is Christianity. And, if so,
it is no wonder that even a celebrated unbeliever should
make that frank declaration, “Well, after all, these Christian
dogs are the happiest fellows upon earth !” Indeed they
are. Nay, we may say more; they are the only happy men
upon earth; and that though we should have no regard at
all to the particular circumstances above mentioned; suppose
there was no such thing as a comet in the universe, or none
that would ever approach the solar system; suppose there
had never been an earthquake in the world, or that we were
assured there never would be another; yet what advantage
has a Christian (I mean always a real, scriptural Christian)
above all other men upon earth !
What advantage has he over you in particular, if you do
not believe the Christian system | For suppose you have
utterly driven away storms, lightnings, earthquakes, comets,
yet there is another grim enemy at the door; and you cannot
drive him away. It is death. “O that death,” (said a
gentleman of large possessions, of good health, and a cheerful
natural temper,) “I do not love to think of it! It comes in
and spoils all !” So it does indeed. It comes with its
“miscreated front,” and spoils all your mirth, diversions,
pleasures ! It turns all into the silence of a tomb, into
rottenness and dust; and many times it will not stay till the
trembling hand of old age beckons to it; but it leaps upon
you while you are in the dawn of life, in the bloom and
strength of your years.
* *
* The morning flowers display their swects,
And gay their silken leaves unfold,
Unmindful of the noon-tide heats,
And fearless of the evening cold.
Nipp'd by the wind's unkindly blast,
Parch'd by the sun's directer ray,
The momentary glories waste,
The short-lived beauties die away.
And where are you then? Does your soul disperse and
dissolve into common air Or does it share the fate of its
former companion, and moulder into dust? Or does it
remain conscious of its own existence, in somc distant,
unknown world? It is all unknown A black, dreary,
melancholy scene ! Clouds and darkness rest upon it.
But the case is far otherwise with a Christian. To him life
and immortality are brought to light. His eye pierces through
the vale of the shadow of death, and sees into the glories of
etermity. His view does not terminate on that black line,
The verge 'twixt mortal and immortal being;
tut extends beyond the bounds of time and place, to the
bouse of God eternal in the heavens. Hence he is so far
from looking upon death as an enemy, that he longs to feel
his welcome embrace. He groans (but they are pleasing
groans) to have mortality swallowed up of life.
Perhaps you will say, “But this is all a drcam. He is
only in a fool's paradise!” dream.
Supposing he be, it is a pleasing
Maneat mentis gratissimus error /*
If he is only in a fool's paradise, yet it is a paradise; while
you are wandering in a wide, weary, barren world. Be it
folly; his folly gives him that present happiness which all
your wisdom cannot find. So that he may now turn the
tables upon you, and say, -
“Who?'er can ease by folly get,
With safety may despise
The wretched, unenjoying wit,
The miserable wise.”
Such unspeakable advantage (even if there is none beyond
death) has a Christian over an Infidel ! It is true, he has
given up some pleasures before he could attain to this. But
what pleasures? That of eating till he is sick; till he
weakens a strong, or quite destroys a weak, constitution.
He has given up the pleasure of drinking a man into a beast,
and that of ranging from one worthless creature to another,
till he brings a canker upon his estate, and perhaps rotten
ness into his bones. But in lieu of these, he has now
(whatever may be hereafter) a continual serenity of mind, a
constant evenness and composure of temper, “a peace which
passeth all understanding.” He has learned in every state
wherein he is, therewith to be content; nay, to give thanks,
as being clearly persuaded, it is better for him than any
other. He feels continual gratitude to his supreme Bene
factor, Father of Spirits, Parent of Good; and tender,
disinterested benevolence to all the children of this common
Father. May the Father of your spirit, and the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, make you such a Christian 1 May
He work in your soul a divine conviction of things not
discerned by eyes of flesh and blood 1 May He give you to
see Him that is invisible, and to taste of the powers of the
world to come ! May He fill you with all peace and joy in
believing, that you may be happy in life, in death, in
eternity
* Let this pleasing mental error remain.-EDIT.