Advice to the People Called Methodists, with Regard to Dress
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
I. 1. I AM not fond of saying the same thing over and
over; especially when I have so many things to say, that the
day of life (which with me is far spent) is not likely to suffice
for them. But, in some cases, it is needful for you that I
should ; and then it is not grievous to me. And it may be
best to speak freely and fully at once, that there may be the
less need of speaking on this head hereafter.
2. When we look into the Bible with any attention, and
then look round into the world, to see who believes and who
lives according to this book; we may easily discern that the
system of practice, as well as the system of truth, there
delivered, is torn in pieces, and scattered abroad, like the
members of Absyrtus. Every denomination of Christians
retains some part either of Christian truth or practice; these
hold fast one part, and those another, as their fathers did
before them. What is the duty, meantime, of those who
desire to follow the whole word of God? Undoubtedly, to
“gather up ’’ all these “fragments,” that, if possible,
“nothing be lost;” with all diligence to follow all those
we see about us, so far as they follow the Bible; and to join
together in one scheme of truth and practice what almost all
the world put asunder.
3. Many years ago I observed several parts of Christian
practice among the people called Quakers. Two things I
particularly remarked among them,-plainness of speech,
and plainness of dress. I willingly adopted both, with some
restrictions, and particularly plainness of dress; the same I
recommended to you, when God first called you out of the
world; and after the addition of more than twenty years'
experience, I recommend it to you still.
4. But before I go any farther, I must entreat you, in the
Yuame of God, be open to conviction. Whatever prejudices
you have contracted from education, custom, or example,
divest yourselves of them, as far as possible. Be willing to
receive light either from God or man; do not shut your eyes.
against it. Rather, be glad to see more than you did before;
to “have the eyes of your understanding opened.” Receive
the truth in the love thereof, and you will have reason to
bless God for ever.
II. 1. Not that I would advise you to imitate the people
called Quakers in those little particularities of dress which can
answer no possible end but to distinguish them from all
other people. To be singular, merely for singularity’s sake,
is not the part of a Christian: I do not, therefore, advise you
to wear a hat of such dimensions, or a coat of a particular
form. Rather, in things that are absolutely indifferent, that
are of no consequence at all, humility and courtesy require
you to conform to the customs of your country.
2. But I advise you to imitate them, First, in the meatness
of their apparel. This is highly to be commended, and quite
suitable to your Christian calling. Let all your apparel,
therefore, be as clean as your situation in life will allow. It
is certain the poor cannot be as clean as they would, as
having little change of raiment. But let even these be as
clean as they can, as care and diligence can keep them.
Indeed, they have particular need so to be; because cleanli
mess is one great branch of frugality. It is likewise more
conducive to health than is generally considered. Let the
poor, then, especially labour to be clean, and provoke those
of higher rank to jealousy.
3. I advise you to imitate them, Secondly, in the plainness
of their apparel. In this are implied two things: (1.) That
your apparel be cheap, not expensive; far cheaper than
others in your circumstances wear, or than you would wear,
if you knew not God: (2.) That it be grave, not gay, airy, or
showy; not in the point of the fashion. And these easy
rules may be applied both to the materials whereof it is
made, and the manner wherein it is made or put on.
4. Would you have a farther rule with respect to both?
Then take one, whicl. you may always carry in your bosom :
“Do everything herein with a single eye;” and this will
direct you in every circumstance. Let a single intention to
please God prescribe both what clothing you shall buy, and
the manner wherein it shall be made, and how you shall put
on and wear it. To express the same thing in other words:
Let all you do, in this respect, be so done that you may offer
it to God, a sacrifice acceptable through Christ Jesus; so
that, consequently, it may increase your reward and brighten
your crown in heaven. And so it will do, if it be agreeable
to Christian humility, seriousness, and charity.
5. Shall I be more particular still? Then I “exhort all
those who desire me to watch over their souls,” Wear no
gold, (whatever Officers of State may do; or Magistrates, as
the ensign of their office,) no pcarls, or precious stones; use
no curling of hair, or costly apparel, how grave soever. I
advise those who are able to receive this saying, Buy no
velvcts, no silks, no fine linen, no superfluities, no mere
ornaments, though cver so much in fashion. Wear nothing,
though you have it already, which is of a glaring colour, or
which is in any kind gay, glistering, or showy, nothing made
in the very height of the fashion, nothing apt to attract the
eyes of the by-standers. I do not advise women to wear
rings, ear-rings, inccklaces, lace, (of whatever kind or colour,)
or ruffles, which, by little and little, may easily shoot out
from one to twelve inches decp. Neither do I advise men to
wear coloured waistcoats, shining stockings, glittering or
costly buckles or buttons, either on their coats, or in their
sleeves, any more than gay, fashionable, or expensive perukes.
It is true, these arc little, very little things, which are not
worth defending; therefore, give them up, let them drop,
throw them away without another word; else, a little needle
may cause much pain in your flesh, a little self-indulgence
much hurt to your soul.
III. 1. For the preceding exhortation I have the authority
of God, in clear and express terms: “I will that women”
(and, by parity of reason, men too) “adorn themselves in
modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with
broidered” (curled) “hair, or gold, or pearls,” (one kind of
precious stones, which was then most in use, put for all,) “or
costly apparel; but (which becometh women professing
godliness) with good works.” (1 Tim. ii. 9, 10.) Again:
“Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of
plaiting” (curling) “the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of
putting on of apparcl. But let it be the ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.”
(1 Peter iii. 3, 4.) Nothing can be more express; the
wearing of gold, of precious stones, and of costly apparel,
together with curling of hair, is here forbidden by name:
Nor is there any restriction made, either here, or in any
other scripture. Whoever, therefore, says, “There is no
harm in these things,” may as well say, “There is no harm
in stealing or adultery.”
2. There is something peculiarly observable in the nauner
wherein both St. Peter and St. Paul speak of these things.
“Let not your adorning,” says St. Peter, “be that outward
adorning; but let it be the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit.” The latter clause is not added barely to fill up the
sentence, but with strong and weighty reason. For there is
a direct contrariety (as little as we may suspect it) between
that outward, and this inward, adorning; and that, both
with regard to their source, and with regard to their tendency.
As to their source, all that adorning springs from nature; a
meek and quiet spirit, from grace; the former, from
conforming to our own will, and the will of man; the latter,
from conformity to the will of God. And as to their
tendency, nothing more directly tends to destroy meekness
and quietness of spirit than all that outward adorning,
whereby we seek to commend ourselves to men, and not to
God. For this cherishes all those passions and tempers which
overthrow the quiet of every soul wherein they dwell.
3. Let “them adorn themselves,” saith St. Paul, “not
with curling of hair, or with gold, pearls, or costly apparel;
but (which becometh women professing godliness) with good
works.” The latter clause is here likewise added for plain
and weighty reasons. For, (1.) That kind of adorning cannot
spring from godliness; from either the love or fear of God;
from a desire of conforming to his will, or from the mind
which was in Christ Jesus. (2.) It noway tends to increase
godliness; it is not conducive to any holy temper. But, (3.)
It manifestly tends to destroy several of the tempers most
essential to godliness. It has no friendly influence on
humility; whether we aim at pleasing others or ourselves
hereby. Either in one case or the other, it will rather
increase pride or vanity than lowliness of heart. It does not
at all minister to the seriousness which becomes a sinner
born to die. It is utterly inconsistent with simplicity; no
one uses it merely to please God. Whoever acts with a
single eye, does all things to be seen and approved of God;
and can no more dress, than he can pray, or give alms, “to
bc. seen of men.”
4. “O, but one may be as humble in velvet and embroidery,
as another is in sackcloth.” True; for a person may wear
sackcloth, and have no humility at all. The heart may be
filled with pride and vanity, whatever the raiment be.
Again: Women under the yoke of unbelieving parents or
husbands, as well as men in office, may, on several occasions,
be constrained to put on gold or costly apparel; and in cases
of this kind, plain experience shows, that the baleful influence
of it is suspended. So that wherever it is not our choice,
but our cross, it may consist with godliness, with a meek and
quict spirit, with lowliness of heart, with Christian serious
ness. But it is not true that any one can choose this from a
single eye to please God; or, consequently, without sustain
ing great loss as to lowliness and every other Christian
temper.
5. But, however this be, can you be adorned at the same
time with costly apparel and with good works; that is, in the
same degree as you might have been, had you bestowed less
cost on your apparel? You know this is impossible; the
more you expend on the one, the less you have to expend on
the other. Costliness of apparel, in every branch, is there
fore immediately, directly, inevitably destructive of good
works. You see a brother, for whom Christ died, ready to
perish for want of needful clothing. You would give it him
gladly; but, alas, “it is corban, whereby he might have
been profited.” It is given already, not indeed for the
service of God, not to the treasury of the temple; but either
to please the folly of others, or to feed vanity or the lust of
the eye in yourself. Now (even suppose these were harmless.
tempers, yet) what an unspeakable loss is this, if it be really
true, that “every man shall receive his own reward according
to his own labour !” if there be indeed a reward in heaven
for every work of faith, for every degree of the labour of
lovel
IV. 1. As to the advice subjoined, it is easy to observe,
that all those smaller things are, in their degree, liable to the
sanc objections as the greater. If they are gay, showy,
pleasing to the eye, the putting them on does not spring
from a single view to please God. It neither flows from,
nor tends to advance, a meek and quiet spirit. It does not
arise from, nor anyway promote, real, vital godliness.
2. And if they are in anywise costly, if they are purchased
with any unnecessary expense, they cannot but, in proportion
to that expense, be destructive of good works. Of conse
quence, they are destructive of that charity which is fed
thereby; hardening our heart against the cry of the poor
and needy, by inuring us to shut up our bowels of compassion
toward them.
3. At least, all unnecessary expenses of this kind, whether
small or great, are senseless and foolish. This we may defy
any man living to get over, if he allows there is another
world. For there is no reward in heaven for laying out
your money in ornaments, or costly apparel; whereas you
may have an eternal reward for whatever you expend on
earth.
4. Consider this more closely: Here are two ways proposed
of laying out such a sum of money. I may lay it out in
expensive apparel for myself, or in necessary clothing for my
neighbour. The former will please my own eye, or that of
others; the latter will please God. Now suppose there were
no more harm in one than in the other; in that which
pleases man, than in that which pleases God; is there as
much good in it? If they were equally innocent, are they
equally wise? By the one, I gratify the desire of the eye,
and gain a pleasure that perishes in the using; by the other
I gain a larger share of those pleasures that are at God’s
right hand for evermore. By the former, I obtain the
applause of men; by the latter, the praise of God. In this
way I meet with the admiration of fools; in that, I hear
from the Judge of all, “Well done, good and faithful servant;
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.”
5. Brethren, whatever ye are accounted by men, I would
not have you fools in God’s account. “Walk ye circum
spectly, not as fools, but as wise;” not in those ways which
God may possibly forgive, (to put things in the most favour
able light,) but in those which he will certainly reward.
“In wickedness be ye children” still; “but in understanding
be ye men.” I want to see a visible body of people who are
standing examples of this wisdom; patterns of doing all
things, great and small, with an eye to God and etermity.
472 ADVICE To METhonists,
V. l. But we may be assured, the wisdom of the world
will find out abundance of objections to this. Accordingly,
it is objected, First, “If God has given us plentiful fortunes,
if we are placed in the higher ranks of life, we must act
suitably to our fortune. We ought to dress according to our
rank; that is, in gold and costly apparel.” Not to insist
that mone of you are of this rank, I answer, Where is this
written? Our Saviour once occasionally said, “Behold, they
who wear gorgeous” (splendid) “apparel, are in Kings’
courts;” but he docs not say, they ought to be even there;
he neither enjoins nor countenances it. And where is this
either enjoined or allowed by IIim or any of his Apostles?
Bring me plain, scriptural proof for your assertion, or I
cannot allow it.
2. “But did not God give express command by Moses,
that some even among his chosen people should be adorned
in the most exquisite manner with gold and precious stones,
and costly array?” Indeed he did; he expressly commanded
this with regard to Aaron and his successors in the IIigh
Priesthood. But to this I answer, First, This direction
which God gave, with regard to thc Jewish IIigh Priest, cau
certainly affect no person in England, unless the Archbishop
of Canterbury; and I apprehend, he docs not plead the
precedent. Secondly, The Jews and we are under different
dispensations. The glory of the whole Mosaic dispensation
was chiefly visible and cxternal; whereas the glory of the
Christian dispensation is of an invisible and spiritual nature.
3. “But what then are gold and precious stones for?
Why have they a place in the creation?” What, if I say I
cannot tell? There are abundance of things in the creation
which I do not know the use of. What are crocodiles, lions,
tigers, scorpions for? Why have so many poisons a place in
the creation? Some of them are for medicine: But what
ever they are for, in whatever manner they may be useful,
they are certainly not to be used in such a manner as God
has expressly forbidden.
4. “But if they were not thus adorned, Kings and
Generals would be despised by their subjects and soldiers.”
Supposing they would, that is nothing to you; for you are
neither Kings nor Generals. But it is absolutely certain
they would not, if they were not despised on other accounts.
If they are valiant and wise, they will never be despised for
the plainness of their dress. Was ever General or King
more esteemed or beloved by his subjects and soldiers than
King Charles of Sweden ? And it is sure he wore no gold
or costly apparel, not so much as a common Officer. But
we need not go so many years back. Who is the Prince
that is now honoured and beloved both by his subjects and
soldiers, far beyond any other King or General in Europe?
There is no need to repeat his name. But does he gain
this honour and love by the costliness of his apparel?. So
far from it, that he rarely uses any other dress than the
uniform of his own guards.
5. “But if all men were to dress like him, how would
tradesmen live?” I answer, (1.) God certainly considered
this before ever he gave these commands. And he would
never have given them, had he not seen, that, if they were
universally observed, men in general would live better than
they otherwise could; better in this world, as well as that to
come... But, (2.) There is no danger at all that they should
be universally observed. Only a little flock in any civilized
mation will observe them, till the knowledge of God covers
the earth. (3.) If those who do observe them, employ the
money they thus save in the most excellent manner, then a
part of what before only served to fat a few rich tradesmen for
hell, will suffice to feed and clothe and employ many poor that
seek the kingdom of heaven. (4.) “And how will those
tradesmen themselves live?” They will live like men, by
honest labour; most of whom before lived like swine, wallow
ing in all gluttony and sensuality. But, (5.) This is all
mere trifling. It is only a copy of your countenance; for it
is not this, it is not a regard to trade, or the good of the
nation, that makes you disobey God. No ; it is pride,
vanity, or some other sinful temper, which is the real cause
of these sinful actions.
6. “But we cannot carry on our own trade without
dressing like other people.” If you mean only conforming
to those customs of your country that are neither gay nor
costly, why should you not dress like other people? I really
think you should. Let an Englishman dress like other
Englishmen, not like a Turk or a Tartar. Let an English
woman dress like other English women, not like a French
woman, or a German. But if you mean conformity to them
in what God has forbidden, the answer is ready at hand : If
you cannot carry on your trade without breaking God's com
mand, you must not carry it on. But I doubt the fact; I know
no trade which may not be carried on by one who uses plain
and modest apparel. I fear, therefore, this too is but a copy
of your countenance; you love these things, and therefore
think them necessary. Your heart carries away your judg
ment; if you were not fond of them, you would never dream
of their necessity.-
7. In one single case these things may be necessary, that
is, unavoidable; namely, that of women who are under the
yoke of self-willed, unreasonable husbands or parcnts. Such
may be constrained to do, in some degree, what otherwise
they would not. And they are blameless herein, if,
(1.) They use all possible means, arguments, entreaties, to
be excused from it; and, when they cannot prevail, (2.) Do
it just so far as they are constrained, and no farther.
VI. 1. And now, brethren, what remains, but that I
beseech you who are not under the yoke, who arc under God
the directors of your own actions, to set prejudice, obstinacy,
fashion aside, and to yield to Scripture, to reason, to truth.
Suppose, as some affirm, you acted on no higher motive than
to please me herein, I know not that you would have need
to be ashamed; even this you might avow in the face of the
sun. You owe something to me; perhaps it is not my fault
if you owe not your own souls also. If then you did an
indifferent thing only on this principlc, not to give me any
uneasiness, but to oblige, to comfort me in my labour, would
you do much amiss? IIow much more may you be excused
in doing what I advise, when truth, reason, and Scripture
advise the same? when the thing in question is not an
indifferent thing, but clearly determined by God himself?
2. Some years ago, when I first landed at Savannah, in
Georgia, a gentlewoman told me, “I assure you, Sir, you
will see as well-dressed a congregation on Sunday, as most
you have seen in London.” I did so; and, soon after, took
occasion to expound those scriptures which relate to dress,
and to press them freely upon my audience, in a plain and
close application. All the time that I afterward ministered
at Savannah, I saw neither gold in the church, nor costly
apparel; but the congregation in general was almost
constantly clothed in plain, clean linen or woollen.
3. And why should not my advice, grounded on Scripture
and reason, weigh with you as much as with them? I will
tell you why: (1) You are surrounded with saints of the
world, persons fashionably, reputably religious. And these
are constant opposers of all who would go farther in religion
than themselves. These are continually warning you against
running into extremes, and striving to beguile you from the
simplicity of the Gospel. (2.) You have near you still more
dangerous enemies than these, -Antinomians, whether
German or English; who, when any Christian practice is
enforced, come in with the cuckoo's note, “The law, the
law !” and, while they themselves glory in their shame,
make you ashamed of what should be your glory. (3.) You
have suffered by false Teachers of our own, who undermined
the doctrine you had received; negatively, in public, by not
insisting upon it, by not exhorting you to dress as persons
professing godliness; (and not to speak for a Christian duty
is, in effect, to speak against it;) and positively, in private,
either by jesting upon your exactness in observing the
Scripture rule, or by insinuations, which, if you did not mind
them then, yet would afterward weaken your soul.
4. You have been, and are at this day, “in perils among
false brethren;” I mean, not only those of other congrega
tions, who count strictness all one with bondage, but many of
our own; in particular those who were once clearly convinced
of the truth; but they have sinned away the conviction
themselves, and now endeavour to harden others against it,
at least by example; by returning again to the folly from
which they were once clean escaped. But what is the
example of all mankind, when it runs counter to Scripture
and reason? I have warned you a thousand times not to
regard any example which contradicts reason or Scripture.
If it ever should be, (pray that it may not be, but if ever it
should,) that I or my brother, my wife or his, or all of us
together, should set an example contrary to Scripture and
reason, I entreat you, regard it not at all; still let Scripture
and reason prevail.
5. You who have passed the morning, perhaps the noon,
of life, who find the shadows of the evening approach, set a
better example to those that are to come, to the now rising
generation. With you the day of life is far spent; the
night of death is at hand. You have no time to lose; see
that you redeem every moment that remains. Remove
everything out of the way, be it ever so small, (though
indeed gay or costly apparel is not so,) that might anyways
obstruct your lowliness and meekness, your seriousness of
spirit, your single intention to glorify God, in all your
thoughts and words and actions. Let no needless expense
hinder your being, in the highest degree you possibly can,
“rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to commu
nicate,” till you are clothed with glory and immortality.
Our carcases will soon fall into the dust; then let the
survivors adorn them with flowers. Meantime, let us regard
those ornaments only that will accompany us into eternity.
6. You that are in the morning of your days, either your
form is agreeable, or it is not. If it is not, do not make
your person remarkable; rather let it lie hid in common
apparel. On every account, it is your wisdom to recommend
yourself to the eye of the mind; but especially to the eye of
God, who reads the secrets of your hearts, and in whose sight
the incorruptible ornaments alone are of great price. But if
you would recommend yourself by dress, is anything com
parable to plain neatness? What kind of persons are those
to whom you could be recommended by gay or costly appa
rel? None that are any way likely to make you happy;
this pleases only the silliest and worst of men. At most, it
gratifies only the silliest and worst principle in those who are
of a nobler character.
7. To you, whom God has entrusted with a more pleasing
form, those ornaments are quite needless:
The adorning thee with so much art
Is but a barbarous skill ;
'Tis like the poisoning of a dart,
Too apt before to kill.
That is, to express ourselves in plain English, without any
figure of poetry, it only tends to drag them into death ever
lasting, who were going fast enough before, by additional
provocations to lust, or, at least, inordinate affection. Did
you actually design to raise either of these in those who
looked upon you? What! while you and they were in the
more immediate presence of God? What profaneness and
inhumanity mixed together ! But if you designed it not,
did you not foresee it? You might have done so without
any extraordinary sagacity. “Nay, I did not care or think
about it.” And do you say this by way of excuse? You
“scatter abroad arrows, firebrands, and death,” and do not
care or think about it !
8. O let us walk more charitably and more wisely for the
time to come ! Let us all cast aside, from this very hour,
whatever does not become men and women professing
godliness; whatever does not spring from the love and fear
of God, and minister thereto. Let our seriousness “shine
before men,” not our dress. Let all who see us know that
we are not of this world. Let our adorning be that which
fadeth not away; cven righteousness and true holiness. If
ye regard not weakening my hands, and grieving my spirit,
yet grieve not the Holy Spirit of God. Do you ask, “But
what shall I do with the gay or costly apparel, and with the
ornaments, I have already? Must I suffer them to be lost?
Ought I not to wear them, now I have them?” I answer,
There is no loss like that of using them; wearing them is
the greatest loss of all. But what then shalt thou do with
them? Burn them, rather than wear them; throw them in
the depth of the sea. Or, if thou canst with a clear con
science, sell them, and give the money to them that want;
but buy no more at the peril of thy soul. Now be a faithful
steward: After providing for those of thinc own household,
things needful for life and godliness, feed the hungry, clothe
the naked, relieve the sick, the prisoner, the stranger, with
all that thou hast: Then shall God clothe thee with glory
and honour in the presence of men and angels; and thou
shalt “shine as the brightness of the firmament,” yea, “as
the stars for ever and cver.”