A Letter to the Author of 'The Craftsman'
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
IN your late paper of June 22, I find (among many to the
same effect) these words: “Methodists place all merit in faith,
and grace, and none in good works. This unwarrantable strange
sect of a religion, founded on madness and folly, hold that there
is no justification by good works, but by faith and grace only.
They hereby banish that divine part of our constitution, reason,
and cut off the most essential recommendation to heaven, virtue.
“Men who are far gone in their mad principles of religion,
suspend the hand of industry, become inactive, and leave all
to Providence, without exercising either their heads or hands.
“The doctrine of regeneration is essential with political
Methodists;--who are now regenerated, place all merit in
faith, and have thrown good works aside.”
I am pressed by those to whose judgment I pay great regard,
to take some notice of these assertions; and the rather, because
you sometimes seem as if you thought the Christian institu
tion was of God.
Now, if you really think so, or if you desire that any man
should believe you do, you must not talk so ludicrously of
regeneration; for it is an essential doctrine of Christianity.
And you may probably have heard, or even read in former
years, that it was the Author of this institution who said,
“Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of
Cod.”
This he represents as the only possible entrance into the
experimental knowledge of that religion, which is not founded
(whatever you may suppose) on either madness or folly, but
on the inmost nature of things, the nature of God and man,
and the immutable relations between them.
By this religion, we do not banish reason, but czalt it to
its utmost perfection; this being in every point consistent
therewith, and in every step guided thereby.
But you say, “They hereby cut off the most essential
recommendation to Heaven, virtue.” What virtue? that of
self-murder; that of casting their own infants to be devoured
by beasts or wolves; that of dragging at their chariot-wheels
those whose only crimes were the love of their parents, or
children, or country? These Roman virtues our religion
does cut off; it leaves no place for them. And a reasonable
Deist will allow, “that these are not the most essential recom
mendation to Heaven.” But it is far from cutting off any
sort, degree, or instance of genuine virtue; all which is con
tained in the love of God and man, producing every divine
and amiable temper.
And this love we suppose (according to the Christian
scheme) to flow from a sense of God’s love to us; which
sense and persuasion of God’s love to man in Christ Jesus,
particularly applied, we term faith ; a thing you seem to be
totally unacquainted with. For it is not the faith whereof we
speak, unless it be a “faith working by love,” a faith “zeal
ous of good works,” careful to maintain, nay, to excel in
them. Nor do we acknowledge him to have one grain of
faith, who is not continually doing good, who is not willing
“to spend and be spent in doing all good, as he has opportu
nity, to all men.”
Whoever therefore they are, that “throw aside good
works; that suspend” (as you prettily phrase it) “the hand
of industry, become inactive, and leave all to Providence,
without exercising either their heads or hands;” they are no
more led into this by any doctrine of ours, than by the
writings of Paul of Tarsus.
And yet “this unaccountable strange sect” (so I believe
we appear to you) “place no merit at all in good works.”
Most true. No, nor in faith neither; (which you may think
more unaccountable still ;) but only in “the blood of the
everlasting covenant.” We do assuredly hold, (which I beg
to leave with you, and to recommend to your deepest consi
deration,) that there is no justification, in your sense, either
by faith or works, or both together; that is, that we are not
pardoned and accepted with God for the merit of either, or
both; but only by the grace or free love of God, for the
alone merits of his Son Jesus Christ.
I am,
Sir,
Your friend, though not admirer,