Minutes of Some Late Conversations, 1744
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Year: 1744
Author: John Wesley
---
THE following persons being met at the Foundery,-John
Wesley; Charles Wesley; John Hodges, Rector of Wenvo;
Henry Piers, Vicar of Bexley; Samuel Taylor, Vicar of Quin
ton; and John Meriton; after some time spent in prayer, the
design of our meeting was proposed; namely, to consider,
1. What to teach;
2. How to teach; and,
3. What to do; that is, how to regulate our doctrine, disci
pline, and practice.
We began with considering the doctrine of justification:
The questions relating to, with the substance of the answers
given thereto, were as follows:
Q. 1. What is it to be justified?
A. To be pardoned and received into God’s favour; into such
a state, that, if we continue therein, we shall be finally saved.
Q. 2. Is faith the condition of justification?
A. Yes; for every one who believeth not is condemned; and
every one who believes is justified.
Q. 3. But must not repentance, and works meet for repent
ance, go before this faith?
A. Without doubt; if by repentance you mean conviction of
sin; and by works meet for repentance, obeying God as far as
we can, forgiving our brother, leaving off from evil, doing good,
and using his ordinances, according to the power we have
received.
Q. 4. What is faith?
A. Faith in general is a divine, supernatural exeyxos (elen
chos) of things not seen; that is, of past, future, or spiritual
things: It is a spiritual sight of God and the things of God.
First. A sinner is convinced by the Holy Ghost, “Christ
loved me, and gave himself for me.” This is that faith by
which he is justified, or pardoned, the moment he receives it.
Immediately the same Spirit bears witness, “Thou art par
doned; thou hast redemption in his blood.” And this is saving
faith, whereby the love of God is shed abroad in his heart.
Q. 5. Have all Christians this faith? May not a man be
justified, and not know it?
A. That all true Christians have such a faith as implies an
assurance of God’s love, appears from Romans viii. 15; Ephes.
iv. 32; 2 Cor. xiii. 5; Heb. viii. 10; 1 John iv. 10, and 19.
And that no man can be justified and not know it, appears far
ther from the nature of the thing: For faith after repentance
is ease after pain, rest after toil, light after darkness. It ap
pears also from the immediate, as well as distant, fruits thereof.
Q. 6. But may not a man go to heaven without it?
A. It does not appear from holy writ that a man who hears
the gospel can, (Mark xvi. 16,) whatever a Heathen may do.
(Romans ii. 14.)
Q. 7. What are the immediate fruits of justifying faith?
A. Peace, joy, love, power over all outward sin, and power
to keep down inward sin.
Q. 8. Does any one believe, who has not the witness in him
self, or any longer than he sees, loves, obeys God?
* A. We apprehend not; seeing God being the very essence
of faith; love and obedience, the inseparable properties of it.
Q. 9. What sins are consistent with justifying faith?
A. No wilful sin. If a believer wilfully sins, he casts away
his faith. Neither is it possible he should have justifying faith
again, without previously repenting.
Q. 10. Must every believer come into a state of doubt, or
fear, or darkness? Will he do so, unless by ignorance, or
unfaithfulness? Does God otherwise withdraw himself?
A. It is certain, a believer need never again come into con
demnation. It seems he need not come into a state of doubt,
or fear, or darkness; and that (ordinarily at least) he will not,
unless by ignorance or unfaithfulness. Yet it is true, that the
first joy does seldom last long; that it is commonly followed
by doubts and fears; and that God frequently permits great
heaviness before any large manifestation of himself.
Q. 11. Are works necessary to the continuance of faith?
A. Without doubt; for a man may forfeit the free gift of
God, either by sins of omission or commission.
Q. 12. Can faith be lost but for want of works?
A. It cannot but through disobedience.
Q. 13. How is faith “made perfect by works?”
A. The more we exert our faith, the more it is increased.
“To him that hath, shall be given.”
Q. 14. St. Paul says, Abraham was not justified by works;
St. James, he was justified by works. Do they not contradict
each other?
A. No: (1) Because they do not speak of the same justifi
cation. St. Paul speaks of that justification which was when
Abraham was seventy-five years old, above twenty years before
Isaac was born; St. James, of that justification which was when
he offered up Isaac on the altar.
(2.) Because they do not speak of the same works; St. Paul
speaking of works that precede faith; St. James, of works that
spring from it.
Q. 15. In what sense is Adam’s sin imputed to all mankind?
A. In Adam all die; that is, (1.) Our bodies then became
mortal. (2.) Our souls died; that is, were disunited from
God. And hence, (3.) We are all born with a sinful, devilish
nature. By reason whereof, (4.) We are children of wrath,
liable to death eternal. (Rom. v. 18; Ephes. ii. 3.)
Q. 16. In what sense is the righteousness of Christ imputed
to all mankind, or to believers?
A. We do not find it expressly affirmed in Scripture, that
God imputes the righteousness of Christ to any; although we
do find that “faith is imputed” to us “for righteousness.”
That text, “As by one man’s disobedience all men were made
sinners, so by the obedience of One, all were made righteous,”
we conceive means, By the merits of Christ, all men are cleared
from the guilt of Adam’s actual sin.
We conceive farther, that through the obedience and death
of Christ, (1.) The bodies of all men become immortal after the
ch- ***.
resurrection. (2.) Their souls receive a capacity of spiritual
life. And, (3.) An actual spark or seed thereof. (4.) All
believers become children of grace, reconciled to God; and,
(5.) Made partakers of the divine nature.
Q. 17. Have we not then unawares leaned too much towards
Calvinism ?
|... We are afraid we have.
. 18. Have we not also leaned towards Antinomianism?
... We are afraid we have.
. 19. What is Antinomianism?
. The doctrine which makes void the law through faith.
. 20. What are the main pillars hereof?
(1.) That Christ abolished the moral law.
(2.) That therefore Christians are not obliged to observe it.
(3.) That one branch of Christian liberty is, liberty from
obeying the commandments of God.
(4.) That it is bondage to do a thing because it is com
manded, or forbear it because it is forbidden.
(5.) That a believer is not obliged to use the ordinances of
God, or to do good works.
(6.) That a Preacher ought not to exhort to good works;
not unbelievers, because it is hurtful; not believers, because it
is needless.
Q. 21. What was the occasion of St. Paul's writing his
Epistle to the Galatians?
A. The coming of certain men amongst the Galatians, who
taught, “Except ye be circumcised, and keep the law of Moses,
ye cannot be saved.”
Q. 22. What is his main design therein?
A. To prove, (1.) That no man can be justified or saved by
the works of the law, either moral or ritual. (2.) That every
believer is justified by faith in Christ, without the works of
the law.
Q. 23. What does he mean by “the works of the law?”
(Galatians ii. 16, &c.)
A. All works which do not spring from faith in Christ.
Q. 24. What, by being “under the law?” (Gal. iii. 23.)
A. Under the Mosaic dispensation.
Q. 25. What law has Christ abolished?
A. The ritual law of Moses.
Q. 26. What is meant by liberty? (Gal. v. 1.)
A. Liberty, (l.) From that law. (2.) From sin.
ON TUESDAY MoRNING, June 26th, wAs considERED THE
WITH regard to which, the questions asked, and the sub
stance of the answers given, were as follows:
Q. 1. What is it to be sanctified?
A. To be renewed in the image of God, in righteousness and
true holiness.
Q. 2. Is faith the condition, or the instrument, of sanctifi
cation?
A. It is both the condition and instrument of it. When
we begin to believe, then sanctification begins. And as faith
increases, holiness increases, till we are created anew.
Q. 3. What is implied in being a perfect Christian?
A. The loving the Lord our God with all our heart, and with
all our mind, and soul, and strength. (Deut. vi. 5, xxx. 6;
Ezek. xxxvi. 25-29.)
Q. 4. Does this imply that all inward sin is taken away?
A. Without doubt; or how could we be said to be saved
“from all our uncleannesses?” (Ver. 29.)
Q. 5. Can we know one who is thus saved? What is a rea
sonable proof of it?
A. We cannot, without the miraculous discernment of
spirits, be infallibly certain of those who are thus saved. But
we apprehend, these would be the best proofs which the nature
of the thing admits: (1) If we had sufficient evidence of their
unblamable behaviour preceding. (2.) If they gave a dis
tinct account of the time and manner wherein they were saved
from sin, and of the circumstances thereof, with such sound
speech as could not be reproved. And, (3.) If, upon a strict
inquiry afterwards from time to time, it appeared that all their
tempers, and words, and actions, were holy and unreprovable.
Q. 6. How should we treat those who think they have
attained this?
A. Exhort them to forget the things that are behind, and to
watch and pray always, that God may search the ground of
their hearts.
WEDNESDAY, June 27th, we BEGAN To considER PoinTs
WITH regard to which, the questions asked, and the sub
stance of the answers given, were as follows:
Q. 1. What is the Church of England?
A. According to the Twentieth Article, the visible Church
of England is the congregation of English believers, in which
the pure word of God is preached, and the sacraments duly
administered.
(But the word “Church” is sometimes taken, in a looser
sense, for “a congregation professing to believe.” So it is
taken in the Twenty-sixth Article; and in the first, second,
and third chapters of the Revelation.)
Q. 2. Who is a member of the Church of England?
A. A believer, hearing the pure word of God preached, and
partaking of the sacraments duly administered, in that Church.
Q. 3. What is it to be zealous for the Church?
A. To be earnestly desirous of its welfare and increase: Of
its welfare, by the confirmation of its present members, in faith,
hearing, and communicating; and of its increase, by the
addition of new members.
Q. 4. How are we to defend the doctrine of the Church?
A. Both by our preaching and living.
Q. 5. How should we behave at a false or railing sermon?
A. If it only contain personal reflections, we may quietly
suffer it: If it blaspheme the work and Spirit of God, it may
be better to go out of the Church. In either case, if opportu
nity serve, it would be well to speak or write to the Minister.
Q. 6. How far is it our duty to obey the Bishops?
A. In all things indifferent. And on this ground of obeying
them, we should observe the Canons, so far as we can with a
safe conscience.
Q. 7. Do we separate from the Church?
A. We conceive not: We hold communion therewith for
conscience sake, by constantly attending both the word
preached, and the sacraments administered therein.
Q. 8. What then do they mean, who say, “You separate
from the Church?”
A. We cannot certainly tell. Perhaps they have no deter
minate meaning; unless, by the Church they mean themselves;
that is, that part of the Clergy who accuse us of preaching
false doctrine. And it is sure we do herein separate from
them, by maintaining that which they deny.
Q. 9. But do you not weaken the Church?
A. Do not they who ask this, by the Church, mean them
selves? We do not purposely weaken any man’s hands. But
accidentally we may, thus far: They who come to know the
truth by us, will esteem such as deny it less than they did before.
But the Church, in the proper sense, the congregation of
English believers, we do not weaken at all.
Q. 10. Do you not entail a schism on the Church? that is,
Is it not probable that your hearers, after your death, will be
scattered into all sects and parties; or that they will form
themselves into a distinct sect?
A. (1.) We are persuaded the body of our hearers will even
after our death remain in the Church, unless they be thrust out.
(2.) We believe notwithstanding, either that they will be
thrust out, or that they will leaven the whole Church.
(3.) We do, and will do, all we can to prevent those conse
quences which are supposed likely to happen after our death.
(4.) But we cannot with a good conscience neglect the pre
sent opportunity of saving souls while we live, for fear of conse
quences which may possibly or probably happen after we are
dead.
BRIsrol, THURSDAY, August 1st, 1745
THE following persons being met together at the New-Room,
in Bristol; John Wesley, Charles Wesley, John Hodges,
Thomas Richards, Samuel Larwood, Thomas Meyrick, Richard
Moss, John Slocombe, Herbert Jenkins, and Marmaduke
Gwynne; it was proposed to review the Minutes of the last
Conference with regard to justification. And it was asked:
Q. 1. How comes what is written on this subject to be so
intricate and obscure? Is this obscurity from the nature of
the thing itself; or, from the fault or weakness of those who
have generally treated of it?
A. We apprehend this obscurity does not arise from the
mature of the subject; but, perhaps, partly from hence, that the
devil peculiarly labours to perplex a subject of the greatest
importance; and partly from the extreme warmth of most
writers who have treated of it?
Q. 2. We affirm, faith in Christ is the sole condition of
justification. But does not repentance go before that faith?
yea, and, supposing there be opportunity for them, fruits or
works meet for repentance?
A. Without doubt they do.
Q. 3. How then can we deny them to be conditions of justi
fication? Is not this a mere strife of words? But is it worth
while to continue a dispute on the term condition?
A. It seems not, though it has been grievously abused. But
so the abuse cease, let the use remain.
Q. 4. Shall we read over together Mr. Baxter’s “Aphorisms
concerning Justification?”
A. By all means.
Which were accordingly read. And it was desired, that each
person present would in the afternoon consult the scriptures
cited therein, and bring what objections might occur the
next morning.
FRIDAY, August 2d, THE QUESTION was PROPosED:--
Q. 1. Is a sense of God’s pardoning love absolutely necessary
to our being in his favour? Or may there be some exempt cases?
A. We dare not say there are not.
Q. 2. Is it necessary to inward and outward holiness?
A. We incline to think it is.
Q. 3. Is it indispensably necessary to final salvation? sup
pose in a Papist; or a Quaker; or, in general, among those
who never heard it preached?
A. Love hopeth all things. We know not how far any of
these may fall under the case of invincible ignorance.
Q. 4. But what can we say of one of our own society, who
dies without it, as J. W., at London?
A. It may be an exempt case, if the fact was really so. But
we determine nothing. We leave his soul in the hands of Him
that made it.
Q. 5. Does a man believe any longer than he sees a recon
ciled God?
A. We conceive not. But we allow there may be infinite
degrees in seeing God: Even as many as there are between
him who sees the sun when it shines on his eye-lids closed, and
him who stands with his eyes wide open in the full blaze of his
beams.
Q. 6. Does a man believe any longer than he loves God?
A. In nowise. For neither circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails, without faith working by love.
Q. 7. Have we duly considered the case of Cornelius? Was
not he in the favour of God, when “his prayers and alms came
up for a memorial before God:” that is, before he believed in
Christ?
A. It does seem that he was, in some degree. But we speak
not of those who have not heard the gospel.
Q. 8. But were those works of his “splendid sins?”
A. No; nor were they done without the grace of Christ.
Q. 9. How then can we maintain, that all works done before
we have a sense of the pardoning love of God are sin, and, as
such, an abomination to Him?
A. The works of him who has heard the gospel, and does
not believe, are not done as God hath “willed and commanded
them to be done.” And yet we know not how to say that they
are an abomination to the Lord in him who feareth God, and,
from that principle, does the best he can.
Q. 10. Seeing there is so much difficulty in this subject,
can we deal too tenderly with them that oppose us?
A. We cannot; unless we were to give up any part of the
truth of God.
Q. 11. Is a believer constrained to obey God?
A. At first he often is. The love of Christ constraineth him.
After this, he may obey, or he may not; no constraint being
laid upon him
Q. 12. Can faith be lost, but through disobedience?
A. It cannot. A believer first inwardly disobeys, inclines
to sin with his heart: Then his intercourse with God is cut off;
that is, his faith is lost: And after this, he may fall into out
ward sin, being now weak, and like another man.
Q. 13. How can such an one recover faith?
A. By “repenting, and doing the first works.” (Rev. ii. 5.)
Q. 14. Whence is it that so great a majority of those who
believe fall more or less into doubt or fear?
A. Chiefly from their own ignorance or unfaithfulness:
Often from their not watching unto prayer: Perhaps some
times from some defect, or want of the power of God in the
preaching they hear.
Q. 15. Is there not a defect in us? Do we preach as we
did at first? Have we not changed our doctrines?
A. (1.) At first we preached almost wholly to unbelievers.
To those therefore we spake almost continually of remission
of sins through the death of Christ, and the mature of faith in
his blood. And so we do still, among those who need to be
taught the first elements of the gospel of Christ.
(2.) But those in whom the foundation is already laid, we
exhort to go on to perfection; which we did not see so clearly at
first; although we occasionally spoke of it from the beginning.
(3.) Yet we now preach, and that continually, faith in Christ,
as the Prophet, Priest, and King, at least, as clearly, as strongly,
and as fully, as we did six years ago.
Q. 16. Do we not discourage visions and dreams too much,
as if we condemned them toto genere?
A. We do not intend to do this. We neither discourage nor
encourage them. We learn from Acts ii. 17, &c., to expect
something of this kind “in the last days.” And we cannot
deny that saving faith is often given in dreams or visions of the
night; which faith we account neither better nor worse, than
if it came by any other means.
Q. 17. Do not some of our assistants preach too much of the
wrath, and too little of the love, of God?
A. We fear they have leaned to that extreme; and hence
some of their hearers may have lost the joy of faith.
Q. 18. Need we ever preach the terrors of the Lord to those
who know they are accepted of him?
A. No: It is folly so to do; for love is to them the strongest
of all motives.
Q. 19. Do we ordinarily represent a justified state so great
and happy as it is?
A. Perhaps not. A believer, walking in the light, is inex
pressibly great and happy.
Q. 20. Should we not have a care of depreciating justifica
tion, in order to exalt the state of full sanctification?
A. Undoubtedly we should beware of this; for one may
insensibly slide into it.
Q. 21. How shall we effectually avoid it?
A. When we are going to speak of entire sanctification, let
us first describe the blessings of a justified state, as strongly
as possible.
Q. 22. Does not the truth of the gospel lie very near both
to Calvinism and Antinomianism?
A. Indeed it does; as it were, within a hair's breadth: So
that it is altogether foolish and sinful, because we do not quite
agree either with one or the other, to run from them as far as
eWer We can.
Q. 23. Wherein may we come to the very edge of Calvinism?
A. (1.) In ascribing all good to the free grace of God. (2.)
In denying all natural free-will, and all power antecedent to
grace. And, (3.) In excluding all merit from man; even for
what he has or does by the grace of God.
Q. 24. Wherein may we come to the edge of Antinomianism?
A. (1.) In exalting the merits and love of Christ. (2.) In
rejoicing evermore.
Q. 25. Does faith supersede (set aside the necessity of) holi
ness or good works?
A. In nowise. So far from it, that it implies both, as a
cause does its effects.
ABoUT TEN, we BEGAN TO SPEAK of SANCTIFICATION: witH
REGARD To whICH, IT was INQUIRED :
Q. 1. WHEN does inward sanctification begin?
A. In the moment we are justified. The seed of every
virtue is then sown in the soul. From that time the believer
gradually dies to sin, and grows in grace. Yet sin remains in
him; yea, the seed of all sin, till he is sanctified throughout
in spirit, soul, and body.
Q. 2. What will become of a Heathen, a Papist, a Church
of England man, if he dies without being thus sanctified?
A. He cannot see the Lord. But none who seeks it sincerely
shall or can die without it; though possibly he may not attain
it, till the very article of death.
Q. 3. Is it ordinarily given till a little before death?
A. It is not, to those that expect it no sooner, nor conse
quently ask for it, at least, not in faith.
Q. 4. But ought we to expect it sooner?
A. Why not? For although we grant, (1.) That the generality
of believers whom we have hitherto known were not so sancti
fied till near death: (2.) That few of those to whom St. Paul
wrote his Epistles were so at the time he wrote: (3.) Nor he
himself at the time of writing his former Epistles: Yet this
does not prove that we may not to-day.
Q. 5. But would not one who was thus sanctified be inca
pable of worldly business?
A. He would be far more capable of it than ever, as going
through all without distraction.
Q. 6. Would he be capable of marriage?
A. Why should he not?
Q. 7. Should we not beware of bearing hard on those who
think they have attained?
A. We should. And the rather, because if they are faith
ful to the grace they have received, they are in no danger of
perishing at last. No, not even if they remain in luminous
faith, as some term it, for many months or years; perhaps till
within a little time of their spirits returning to God.
Q. 8. In what manner should we preach entire sanctifica
tion ?
A. Scarce at all to those who are not pressing forward. To
those who are, always by way of promise; always drawing,
rather than driving.
Q. 9. How should we wait for the fulfilling of this promise?
A. In universal obedience; in keeping all the command
ments; in denying ourselves, and taking up our cross daily.
These are the general means which God hath ordained for our
receiving his sanctifying grace. The particular are, -prayer,
searching the Scripture, communicating, and fasting.
TUESDAY, May 13th, 1746
THE following persons being met at the New-Room, in
Bristol: John Wesley, Charles Wesley, John Hodges, Jona
than Reeves, Thomas Maxfield, Thomas Westell, and Thomas
Willis; it was inquired,--
Q. 1. Can an unbeliever (whatever he be in other respects)
challenge anything of God’s justice?
A. Absolutely nothing but hell. And this is a point which
we cannot too much insist on.
Q. 2. Do we empty men of their own righteousness, as we
did at first? Do we sufficiently labour, when they begin to be
convinced of sin, to take away all they lean upon? Should we
'not then endeavour with all our might to overturn their false
foundations?
A. This was at first one of our principal points: And it
ought to be so still. For, till all other foundations are over
turned, they cannot build upon Christ.
Q. 3. Did we not then purposely throw them into convic
tions; into strong sorrow and fear? Nay, did we not strive to
make them inconsolable, refusing to be comforted?
A. We did. And so we should do still. For the stronger
the conviction, the speedier is the deliverance. And none so
soon receive the peace of God, as those who steadily refuse
all other comfort.
Q. 4. Let us consider a particular case. Was you, Jonathan
Reeves, before you received the peace of God, convinced that,
notwithstanding all you did, or could do, you was in a state of
damnation?
J. R. I was convinced of it, as fully as that I am now alive.
Q. 5. Are you sure that conviction was from God?
J. R. I can have no doubt but it was.
Q. 6. What do you mean by a state of damnation?
J. R. A state wherein if a man dies, he perisheth for ever.
Q. 7. How did that conviction end?
J. R. I had first a strong hope that God would deliver me:
And this brought a degree of peace. But I had not that solid
peace of God till Christ was revealed in me.
Q. 8. But is not such a trust in the love of God, though it
be as yet without a distinct sight of God reconciled to me
through Christ Jesus, a low degree of justifying faith?
A. It is an earnest of it. But this abides for a short time
only; nor is this the proper Christian faith.
Q. 9. By what faith were the Apostles clean before Christ
died?
A. By such a faith as this; by a Jewish faith: For “the
Holy Ghost was not then given.”
Q. 10. Of whom then do you understand those words,--
“Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the
voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no
light?” (Isaiah l. 10.)
A. Of a believer under the Jewish dispensation; one in
whose heart God hath not yet shined, to give him the light of
the glorious love of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
Q. 11. Who is a Jew, inwardly?
A. A servant of God: One who sincerely obeys him out of
fear. Whereas a Christian, inwardly, is a child of God: One
who sincerely obeys him out of love. But was not you sincere
before Christ was revealed in you?
J. R. It seemed to me that I was, in some measure.
Q. 12. What is sincerity?
A. Willingness to know and do the whole will of God. The
lowest species thereof seems to be “faithfulness in that which
is little.”
Q. 13. Has God any regard to man's sincerity?
A. So far, that no man in any state can possibly please
God without it; neither, indeed, in any moment wherein he is
not sincere.
Q. 14. But can it be conceived that God has any regard to
the sincerity of an unbeliever?
A. Yes, so much, that, if he persevere therein, God will infal
libly give him faith.
Q. 15. What regard may we conceive him to have to the
sincerity of a believer?
A. So much, that in every sincere believer he fulfils all the
great and precious promises.
Q. 16. Whom do you term a sincere believer?
A. One that walks in the light, as God is in the light.
Q. 17. Is sincerity the same with a single eye?
A. Not altogether. The latter refers to our intention; the
former, to our will or desires.
Q. 18. Is it not all in all?
A. All will follow persevering sincerity. God gives every
thing with it; nothing without it.
Q. 19. Are not then sincerity and faith equivalent terms?
A. By no means. It is at least as nearly related to works as
it is to faith. For example, Who is sincere before he believes?
He that then does all he can; he that, according to the power
he has received, brings forth “fruits meet for repentance.” Who
is sincere after he believes? He that, from a sense of God’s
love, is zealous of all good works.
Q. 20. Is not sincerity what St. Paul terms a willing mind,
m Tpo6vula? (2 Cor. viii. 12.)
A. Yes: If that word be taken in a general sense. For it
is a constant disposition to use all the grace given.
Q. 21. But do we not then set sincerity on a level with faith?
A. No. For we allow a man may be sincere, and not be jus
tified, as he may be penitent, and not be justified; (not as
yet;) but he cannot have faith, and not be justified. The very
moment he believes, he is justified.
Q. 22. But do we not give up faith, and put sincerity in its
place, as the condition of our acceptance with God?
A. We believe it is one condition of our acceptance, as
repentance likewise is. And we believe it a condition of our
continuing in a state of acceptance. Yet we do not put it in the
place of faith. It is by faith the merits of Christ are applied
to my soul. But if I am not sincere, they are not applied.
Q. 23. Is not this that “going about to establish your own
righteousness,” whereof St. Paul speaks, Rom. x. 3?
A. St. Paul there manifestly speaks of unbelievers, who
sought to be accepted for the sake of their own righteousness.
We do not seek to be accepted for the sake of our sincerity;
but through the merits of Christ alone. Indeed, so long as
any man believes, he cannot go about (in St. Paul’s sense) to
“establish his own righteousness.”
Q. 24. But do you consider, that we are under the covenant
of grace, and that the covenant of works is now abolished?
A. All mankind were under the covenant of grace, from the
very hour that the original promise was made. If by the cove
nant of works you mean, that of unsinning obedience made with
Adam before the fall, no man but Adam was ever under that
covenant; for it was abolished before Cain was born. Yet it is
not so abolished, but that it will stand, in a measure, even to the
cnd of the world; that is, If we “do this,” we shall live; if not,
we shall die eternally: If we do well, we shall live with God in
glory; if evil, we shall die the second death. For every man shall
be judged in that day, and rewarded “according to his works.”
Q. 25. What means then, “To him that believeth, his faith
is counted for righteousness?”
A. That God forgives him that is unrighteous as soon as he
believes, accepting his faith instead of perfect righteousness.
But then observe, universal righteousness follows, though it
did not precede, faith.
Q. 26. But is faith thus “counted to us for righteousness,”
at whatsoever time we believe?
A. Yes. In whatsoever moment we believe, all our past sins
vanish away: They are as though they had never been, and
we stand clear in the sight of God.
TUEsDAY, TEN o’clock.
MR. TAYLoR of Quinton, and T. Glascot, being added, it
was inquired,
Q. 1. Are not the assurance of faith, the inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, and the revelation of Christ in us, terms nearly
of the same import?
A. He that denies one of them must deny all; they are so
closely connected together.
Q. 2. Are they ordinarily, where the pure gospel is preached,
essential to our acceptance?
A. Undoubtedly they are; and, as such, to be insisted on,
in the strongest terms.
Q. 3. Is not the whole dispute of salvation by faith or by
works a mere strife of words?
A. In asserting salvation by faith, we mean this: (1.) That
pardon (salvation begun) is received by faith producing works.
(2.) That holiness (salvation continued) is faith working by
love. (3.) That heaven (salvation finished) is the reward of
this faith.
If you who assert salvation by works, or by faith and works,
mean the same thing, (understanding by faith, the revelation
of Christ in us,--by salvation, pardon, holiness, glory,) we will
not strive with you at all. If you do not, this is not a strife
of words; but the very vitals, the essence of Christianity is
the thing in question.
Q. 4. Wherein does our doctrine now differ from that we
preached when at Oxford?
A. Chiefly in these two points (1.) We then knew nothing
of that righteousness of faith, in justification; nor (2.) Of the
nature of faith itself, as implying consciousness of pardon.
Q. 5. May not some degree of the love of God go before a
distinct sense of justification?
A. We believe it may.-
Q. 6. Can any degree of sanctification or holiness?
A. Many degrees of outward holiness may ; yea, and some
degree of meekness, and several other tempers which would be
branches of Christian holiness, but that they do not spring from
Christian principles. For the abiding love of God cannot spring
but from faith in a pardoning God. And no true Christian
holiness can exist without that love of God for its foundation.
Q. 7. Is every man, as soon as he believes, a new creature,
sanctified, pure in heart? Has he then a new heart? Does
Christ dwell therein 7 And is he a temple of the Holy Ghost?
A. All these things may be affirmed of every believer, in a
true sense. Let us not therefore contradict those who main
tain it. Why should we contend about words?
TUEsDAY, June 16th, 1747
THE following persons being met at the Foundery : John
Wesley, Charles Wesley, and Charles Manning, Vicar of
Hayes; Richard Thomas Bateman, Rector of St. Bartholo
mew’s the Great; Henry Piers, Howell Harris, and Thomas
Hardwick; it was inquired,
Q. 1. Is justifying faith a divine assurance that Christ loved
me, and gave himself for me?
A. We believe it is.
Q. 2. What is the judgment of most of the serious Dissen
ters concerning this?
A. They generally allow, that many believers have such an
assurance; and, that it is to be desired and prayed for by all
But then they affirm, that this is the highest species or degree
of faith; that it is not the common privilege of believers:
Consequently, they deny that this is justifying faith, or neces
sarily implied therein.-
Q. 3. And are there not strong reasons for their opinion?
For instance: If the true believers of old had not this assur
ance, then it is not necessarily implied in justifying faith.
But the true believers of old had not this assurance.
A. David, and many more of the believers of old, undenia
bly had this assurance. But even if the Jews had it not, it
would not follow that this is not implied in Christian faith.
Q. 4. But do you not know that the Apostles themselves had
it not till after the day of Pentecost?
A. The Apostles themselves had not the proper Christian
faith till after the day of Pentecost.
Q. 5. But were not those Christian believers, in the proper
sense, to whom St. John wrote his First Epistle? Yet to these
he says, “These things have I written unto you that believe
on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye
have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the
Son of God.” (v. 13.)
A. This does not prove that they did not know they had
eternal life, any more than that they did not believe. His
plain meaning is, “I have written unto you that you may be
the more established in the faith.” Therefore, it does not
follow from hence, that they had not this assurance; but only
that there are degrees therein.
Q. 6. But were not the Thessalonians true believers? Yet
they had not this assurance; they had only a “good hope.”
(2 Thess. ii. 16.)
A. The text you refer to runs thus: “Now our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, and God, even our Father, which hath loved us,
and given us everlasting consolation and good hope through
grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good
word and work.” This good hope does not exclude, but
necessarily implies, a strong assurance of the love of God.
Q. 7. But does not St. Paul say even of himself, “I know
nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified?” (1 Cor
inthians iv. 4.)
A. He does not say of himself here, that he was not justified,
or that he did not know it; but only, that though he had a
conscience void of offence, yet this did not justify him before
God. And must not every believer say the same? This, there
fore, is wide of the point.
Q. 8. But does he not disclaim any such assurance in those
words, “I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much
trembling?” (1 Cor. ii. 3.)
A. By no means. For these words do not imply any fear
either of death or hell. They express only a deep sense of his
utter insufficiency for the great work wherein he was engaged.
Q. 9. However, does he not exclude Christians in general
from such an assurance, when he bids them “work out” their
“salvation with fear and trembling?” (Phil. ii. 12.)
A. No more than from love; which is always joined with
filial fear and reverential trembling. And the same answer is
applicable to all those texts which exhort a believer to fear.
Q. 10. But does not matter of fact prove, that justifying
faith does not necessarily imply assurance? For can you believe
that such a person as J. A., or E. V., who have so much
integrity, zeal, and fear of God, and walk so unblamably in all
things, is void of justifying faith? Can you suppose such as
these to be under the wrath and under the curse of God;
especially if you add to this, that they are continually long
ing, striving, praying for the assurance which they have not?
A. This contains the very strength of the cause; and in
clines us to think that some of these may be exempt cases.
But, however that be, we answer,
(1.) It is dangerous to ground a general doctrine on a few
particular experiments.
(2.) Men may have many good tempers, and a blameless life,
(speaking in a loose sense,) by nature and habit, with prevent
ing grace; and yet not have faith and the love of God.
(3.) It is scarce possible for us to know all the circum
stances relating to such persons, so as to judge certainly con
cerning them.
(4.) But this we know, if Christ is not revealed in them,
they are not yet Christian believers.
Q. 11. But what will become of them then, suppose they
die in this state?
A. That is a supposition not to be made. They cannot die
in this state: They must go backward or forward. If they
continue to seek, they will surely find, righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. We are confirmed in this
belief by the many instances we have seen of such as these
finding peace at the last hour. And it is not impossible but
others may then be made partakers of like precious faith, and
yet go hence without giving any outward proof of the change
which God hath wrought.
WEDNESDAY, June 17th
Q. 1. How much is allowed by our brethren who differ from
us, with regard to entire sanctification?
A. They grant, (1.) That every one must be entirely sanc
tified in the article of death.
(2.) That, till then, a believer daily grows in grace, comes
nearer and nearer to perfection.
(3.) That we ought to be continually pressing after this, and
to exhort all others so to do.
Q. 2. What do we allow them ?
A. We grant, (1.) That many of those who have died in the
faith, yea, the greater part of those we have known, were not
sanctified throughout, not made perfect in love, till a little
before death.
(2.) That the term “sanctified” is continually applied by
St. Paul to all that were justified, were true believers.
(3.) That by this term alone, he rarely, if ever, means saved
from all sin.
(4.) That, consequently, it is not proper to use it in this
sense, without adding the word “wholly, entirely,” or the like.
(5.) That the inspired writers almost continually speak of
or to those who were justified; but very rarely, either of or to
those who were wholly sanctified.
(6.) That, consequently, it behoves us to speak in public
almost continually of the state of justification; but, more
rarely, in full and explicit terms, concerning entire sanctifica
tion,-
Q. 3. What then is the point wherein we divide?
A. It is this: Whether we should expect to be saved from
all sin before the article of death.
Q. 4. Is there any clear scripture promise of this; that God
will save us from all sin P
A. There is: “He shall redeem Israel from all his sins.”
(Psalm cxxx.8.) This is more largely expressed in the prophecy
of Ezekiel: “Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean: From all your filthiness, and from all your
idols, will I cleanse you. I will also save you from all your
uncleannesses.” (xxxvi. 25, 29.) No promise can be more clear.
And to this the Apostle plainly refers in that exhortation:
“Having these promises, let us cleanse ourselves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God.” (2 Cor. vii. 1.) Equally clear and express is that ancient
promise: “The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and
the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart and with all thy soul.” (Deut. xxx. 6)
Q. 5. But does any assertion answerable to this occur in
the New Testament?
A. There does, and that laid down in the plainest terms.
So St. John: “For this purpose the Son of God was mani
fested, that he might destroy the works of the devil;” (1 Epist.
iii. 8;) the works of the devil, without any limitation or
restriction: But all sin is the work of the devil. Parallel to
which is that assertion of St. Paul: “Christ loved the Church,
and gave himself for it; that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such
thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.”
(Ephes. v. 25, 27.) And to the same effect is his assertion in
the eighth of the Romans: “God sent his Son--that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, walking not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit.” (Verses 3, 4.)
Q. 6. Does the New Testament afford any farther ground
for expecting to be saved from all sin 7
A. Undoubtedly it does, both in those prayers and com
mands which are equivalent to the strongest assertions.
Q. 7. What prayers do you mean?
A. Prayers for entire sanctification; which, were there no
such thing, would be mere mockery of God. Such, in parti
cular, are, (1) “Deliver us from evil;” or rather, “from the
evil one.” Now, when this is done, when we are delivered
from all evil, there can be no sin remaining. (2.) “Neither
pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe
on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou,
Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in
us: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one.” (John xvii. 20, 21, 23.) (3) “I bow my knees unto
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ--that he would grant you
--that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to
comprehend, with all saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which
passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness
of God.” (Eph. iii. 14, 16-19.) (4.) “The very God of peace
sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit and
soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ.” (1 Thess. v. 23.)
Q. 8. What command is there to the same effect 7
A. (1) “Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in
heaven is perfect.” (Matt. v. 48.) (2.) “Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind.” (Matt. xxii. 37.) But if the love of God
fill all the heart, there can be no sin there.
Q. 9. But how does it appear that this is to be done before
the article of death?
A. First. From the very nature of a command, which is
not given to the dead, but to the living. Therefore, “Thou
shalt love God with all thy heart,” cannot mean, Thou shalt
do this when thou diest, but while thou livest.
Secondly. From express texts of Scripture: (1) “The
grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men,
teaching us that, having renounced (apvnaauevoi) ungodliness
and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and
godly, in this present world; looking for--the glorious
appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ; who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.” (Titus ii. 11
-14.) (2.) “He hath raised up an horn of salvation for us, -
to perform the mercy promised to our fathers; the oath which
he sware to our father Abraham, that he would grant unto
us, that we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies,
should serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him, all the days of our life.” (Luke i. 69-75.)
Q. 10. Is there any example in Scripture of persons who
had attained to this?
A. Yes. St. John, and all those of whom he says in his
First Epistle, “Herein is our love made perfect, that we may
have confidence in the day of judgment: Because as he is, so
are we in this world.” (iv. 17.)
Q. 11. But why are there not more examples of this kind
recorded in the New Testament?
A. It does not become us to be peremptory in this matter.
One reason might possibly be, because the Apostles wrote to
the Church while it was in a state of infancy. Therefore
they might mention such persons the more sparingly, lest
they should give strong meat to babes.
Q. 12. Can you show one such example now? Where is
he that is thus perfect?
A. To some who make this inquiry one might answer, “If
I knew one here, I would not tell you. For you do not inquire
out of love. You are like Herod. You only seek the young
child, to slay it.”
But more directly we answer, There are numberless reasons
why there should be few (if any indisputable) examples. What
inconveniences would this bring on the person himself, set as
a mark for all to shoot at I What a temptation would it be
to others, not only to men who knew not God, but to believers
themselves ! How hardly would they refrain from idolizing
such a person | And yet, how unprofitable to gainsayers |
“For if they hear not Moses and the Prophets,” Christ and
his Apostles, “neither would they be persuaded, though one
rose from the dead.”
Q. 13. Suppose one had attained to this, would you advise
him to speak of it?
A. Not to them who know not God. It would only
provoke them to contradict and blaspheme: Nor to any,
without some particular reason, without some particular good
in view. And then they should have an especial care to
avoid all appearance of boasting.
Q. 14. Is it a sin, not to believe those who say they have
attained?
A. By no means, even though they said true. We ought
not hastily to believe, but to suspend our judgment, till we
have full and strong proof.
Q. 15. But are we not apt to have a secret distaste to any
who say they are saved from all sin?
A. It is very possible we may, and that on several grounds;
partly from a concern for the honour of God, and the good
of souls, who may be hurt, yea, or turned out of the way, if
these are not what they profess; partly from a kind of implicit
envy at those who speak of higher attainments than our own;
and partly from our slowness and unreadiness of heart to
believe the works of God.
Q. 16. Does not the harshly preaching perfection tend to
bring believers into a kind of bondage, or slavish fear?
A. It does: Therefore we should always place it in the
most amiable light, so that it may excite only hope, joy, and
desire.
Q. 17. Why may we not continue in the joy of faith even
till we are made perfect?
A. Why indeed! since holy grief does not quench this
joy; since, even while we are under the cross, while we
deeply partake of the sufferings of Christ, we may rejoice
with joy unspeakable.
Q. 18. Do we not discourage believers from rejoicing ever
more?
A. We ought not so to do. Let them all their life long
rejoice unto God, so it be with reverence. And even if light
ness or pride should mix with their joy, let us not strike at
the joy itself, (this is the gift of God,) but at that lightness
or pride, that the evil may cease and the good remain.
Q. 19. Ought we to be anxiously careful about perfection,
lest we should die before we have attained ?
A. In nowise. We ought to be thus careful for nothing,
neither spiritual mor temporal.
Q. 20. But ought we not to be troubled on account of the
sinful nature which still remains in us?
A. It is good for us to have a deep sense of this, and to be
much ashamed before the Lord: But this should only incite
us the more earnestly to turn unto Christ every moment, and
to draw light, and life, and strength from him, that we may
go on conquering and to conquer. And, therefore, when the
sense of our sin most abounds, the sense of his love should
much more abound.
Q. 21. Will our joy or our trouble increase as we grow in
grace?
A. Perhaps both. But without doubt our joy in the Lord
will increase as our love increases.
Q. 22. Is not the teaching believers to be continually
poring upon their inbred sin, the ready way to make them
forget that they were purged from their former sins?
A. We find by experience it is; or to make them under
value and account it a little thing : whereas, indeed, (though
there are still greater gifts behind,) this is inexpressibly great