Thoughts upon Liberty
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. ALL men in the world desire liberty; whoever breathes,
breathes after this, and that by a kind of natural instinct
antecedent to art or education. Yet at the same time all men
of understanding acknowledge it as a rational instinct. For
we feel this desire, not in opposition to, but in consequence
of, our reason. Therefore it is not found, or in a very low
degree, in many species of brutes, which seem, even when
they are left to their choice, to prefer servitude before liberty.
2. The love of liberty is then the glory of rational beings;
and it is the glory of Britons in particular. Perhaps it would
be difficult to find any nation under heaven, who are more
tenacious of it; nay, it may be doubted if any nation ever
was; not the Spartans, not the Athenians; no, not the
Romans themselves, who have been celebrated for this very
thing by the poets and historians of all ages.
3. Was it not from this principle, that our British fore
fathers so violently opposed all foreign invaders; that Julius
Caesar himself, with his victorious legions, could make so little
impression upon them; that the Generals of the succeeding
Emperors sustained so many losses from them; and that,
when at length they were overpowered, they rather chose to
lose all they had than their liberty; to retire into the Cam
brian or Caledonian mountains, where, if they had nothing
else, they might at least enjoy their native freedom?
4. Hence arose the vehement struggles of the Cambro
Britons through so many generations against the yoke, which
the Saxons first, and afterwards the English, strove to
impose upon them; hence the struggles of the English
Barons against several of their Kings, lest they should lose
the blessing they had received from their forefathers; yea,
the Scottish nobles, as all their histories show, would no
more bear to be enslaved than the Romans. All these
therefore, however differing from each other in a thousand
other respects, agreed in testifying the desirableness of
liberty, as one of the greatest blessings under the sun.
5. Such was the sense of all our ancestors, even from the
earliest ages. And is it not also the general sense of the
nation at this day? Who can deny, that the whole kingdom
is panting for liberty? Is not the cry for it gone forth,
not only through every part of our vast metropolis,--from
the west end of the city to the east, from the north to the
south, so that instead of no complaining in our streets, there
is nothing but complaining,-but likewise into every corner
of our land, borne by all the four winds of heaven? Liberty!
Liberty! sounds through every county, every city, every
town, and every hamlet !
6. Is it not for the sake of this, that the name of our great
patriot (perhaps not so admirable in his private character as the
man of Ross, or so great a lover of his country as Codrus or
old Curtius) is more celebrated than that of any private man
has been in England for these thousand years; that his very
picture is so joyfully received in every part of England and
Ireland; that we stamp his (I had almost said, adored) name
on our handkerchiefs, on the cheerful bowl, yea, and on our
vessels of various kinds, as well as upon our hearts? Why is
all this, but because of the inseparable connexion between
Wilkes and liberty; liberty that came down, if not fell, from
Theaven; whom all England and the world worshippeth ?
7. But mean time might it not be advisable to consider, (if
we are yet at leisure to consider anything,) what is liberty?
Because it is well known the word is capable of various
senses. And possibly it may not be equally desirable in
every sense of the word.
8. There are many nations in America, those particularly
that border on Georgia and Carolina, wherein if one dis
approves of what another says, or perhaps dislikes his looks,
he scorns to affront him to his face, neither does he betray
the least dissatisfaction. But as soon as opportunity serves,
he steps from behind a tree and shoots him. And none calls
him that does it to an account. No; this is the liberty he
derives from his forefathers.
9. For many ages the free natives of Ireland, as well as the
Scottish Highlands, when it was convenient for them, made an
excursion from their woods or fastnesses, and carried off, for
their own proper use, the sheep, and oxen, and corn of their
neighbours. This was the liberty which the O'Neals, the Camp
bells, and many other septs and clans of venerable antiquity,
had received by immemorial tradition from their ancestors.
10. Almost all the soldiers in the Christian world, as well as
in the Mahometan and Pagan, have claimed, more especially
in time of war, another kind of liberty; that of borrowing the
wives and daughters of the men that fell into their hands;
sometimes, if they pleaded scruple of conscience or honour,
using a little necessary force. Perhaps this may be termed the
liberty of war. But I will not positively affirm, that it has never
been used in this free country, even in the time of peace.
11. In some countries of Europe, and indeed in England,
there have been instances of yet another sort of liberty, that
of calling a Monarch to account; and, if need were, taking
off his head; that is, if he did not behave in a dutiful
manner to our sovereign lords the people.
12. Now, that we may not always be talking at random,
but bring the matter to a determinate point, which of these
sorts of liberty do you desire? Is it the First sort; the
liberty of knocking on the head, or cutting the throats, of
those we are out of conceit with ? Glorious liberty indeed !
What would not king mob do to be gratified with it but for
a few weeks? But, I conceive, calm, sensible men do not
desire to see them entrusted with it. They apprehend there
might be some consequences which, upon the whole, would
not redound to the prosperity of the nation.
13. Is the Second more desirable; the liberty of taking,
when we see best, the goods and chattels of our neighbours?
Undoubtedly, thousands in the good city of London (suppose
we made the experiment here first) would be above measure
rejoiced thereat, would leap as broke from chains. O how
convenient would it be to have free access, without any let
or hinderance, to the cellars, the pantries, the larders, yea,
and the coffers of their rich, overgrown landlords! But
perhaps it would not give altogether so much joy to the
Lord Mayor or Aldermen; no, nor even to those stanch
friends of liberty, the Common Councilmen. Not that they
regard their own interest at all; but, setting themselves out
of the question, they are a little in doubt whether this liberty
would be for the good of trade.
14. Is it then the Third kind of liberty we contend for;
the liberty of taking our neighbours' wives and daughters?
Ye pretty gentlemen, ye beaux esprits, will ye not, one and
all, give your voices for this natural liberty? Will ye not
say, “If we cry out against monopolies of other kinds, shall
we tolerate the monopoly of women?” But hold. Are there
not some among you too, who have wives, if not daughters,
of your own? And are you altogether willing to oblige the
first comer with them? I say the first comer; for, observe,
as you are to give the liberty you take, so you must not pick
and choose your men; you know, by nature, all men are on
a level. “Liberty! Liberty! No restraint | We are free
born Englishmen; down with the fences I Lay all the
inclosures open l” No; it will not do. Even nature
recoils. We are not yet polished enough for this.
15. Are we not ripe, however, for the Fourth kind of
liberty, that of removing a disobedient King? Would Mr.
Wilkes, would Mr. Horne, would any free Briton, have any
objection to this? provided only, that, as soon as our present
Monarch is removed, we have a better to put in his place.
But who is he? King John ” That will not sound well,
even in the ears of his greatest admirers. And whoever
calmly considers the characters and endowments of those
other great men, who may think themselves much fitter for
the office than His present Majesty, will hardly concur in
their opinion; so that a difficulty lies in your way. What
ever claim you may have to this liberty, you must not use it
yet, because you cannot tell where to find a better Prince.
16. But to speak seriously. These things being set aside,
which the bawling mob dignify by that name; what is that
liberty, properly so called, which every wise and good man
desires? It is either religious or civil. Religious liberty is
a liberty to choose our own religion, to worship God accord
ing to our own conscience, according to the best light we
have. Every man living, as man, has a right to this, as he
is a rational creature. The Creator gave him this right
when he endowed him with understanding. And every man
must judge for himself, because every man must give an
account of himself to God. Consequently, this is an inde
feasible right; it is inseparable from humanity. And God
did never give authority to any man, or number of men, to
deprive any child of man thereof, under any colour or
pretence whatever. What an amazing thing is it, then, that
the governing part of almost every nation under heaven
should have taken upon them, in all ages, to rob all under
their power of this liberty yea, should take upon them, at
this day, so to do; to force rational creatures into their own
religion I Would one think it possible, that the most
sensible men in the world should say to their fellow-creatures,
“Either be of my religion, or I will take away your food,
and you and your wife and children shall starve: If that will
not convince you, I will fetter your hands and feet, and
throw you into a dungeon: And if still you will not see as I
see, I will burn you alive?”
17. It would not be altogether so astonishing, if this were
the manner of American savages. But what shall we say, if
numberless instances of it have occurred, in the politest
nations of Europe? Have no instances of the kind been
seen in Britain? Have not England and Scotland seen the
horrid fires? Have not the flames burning the flesh of
heretics shone in London as well as in Paris and Lisbon ?
Have we forgot the days of good Queen Mary? No; they
will be had in everlasting remembrance. And although
burning was out of fashion in Queen Elizabeth’s days, yet
hanging, even for religion, was not. It is true, her successor
did not go quite so far. But did even King James allow
liberty of conscience? By no means. During his whole
reign, what liberty had the Puritans? What liberty had
they in the following reign If they were not persecuted
unto death; (although eventually, indeed, many of them
were; for they died in their imprisonment;) yet were they
not continually harassed by prosecutions in the Bishops’
Courts, or Star-Chamber? by fines upon fines, frequently
reducing them to the deepest poverty? and by imprisonment
for months, yea, for years, together, till many of them,
escaping with the skin of their teeth, left their country and
friends, fled to seek their bread in the wilds of America?
“However, we may suppose all this was at an end under the
merry Monarch, King Charles the Second.” Was it indeed?
Where have they lived who suppose this? To wave a thou
sand particular instances; what will you say to those two
public monuments, the Act of Uniformity, and the Act against
Conventicles? In the former it is enacted, to the eternal
honour of the King, Lords, and Commons, at that memorable
period: “Every Parson, Vicar, or other Minister whatever,
who has any benefice within these realms, shall, before the
next twenty-fourth of August, openly and publicly declare
his unfeigned assent and consent to all and everything con
tained in the Book of Common Prayer, or shall, ipso facto,
be deprived of all his benefices ! Likewise, if any Dean,
Prebendary, Master, Fellow, Chaplain, or Tutor, of any
College, Hall, House of Learning, or Hospital, any public
Professor, or any other person in Holy Orders, any School
master, or Teacher, or Tutor in any private family, do not
subscribe hereto, he shall be, ipso facto, deprived of his
place, and shall be utterly disabled from continuing therein.”
Property for ever ! See how well English property was
secured in those golden days |
So, by this glorious Act, thousands of men, guilty of no
crime, nothing contrary either to justice, mercy, or truth,
were stripped of all they had, of their houses, lands, revenues,
and driven to seek where they could, or beg, their bread. For
what? Because they did not dare to worship God according
to other men's consciences ! So they and their families were,
at one stroke, turned out of house and home, and reduced to
little less than beggary, for no other fault, real or pretended,
but because they could not assent and consent to that
manner of worship which their worthy governors prescribed !
But this was not all. It was further enacted by the same
merciful lawgivers: “If any person act as a Teacher, Tutor,
or Schoolmaster, in any private family, before he has sub
scribed hereto, he shall suffer three months’ imprisonment,
without bail or mainprize.”
Liberty for ever ! Here is security for your person, as
well as your property.
By virtue of the Act against Conventicles, if any continued
to worship God according to their own conscience, they were
first robbed of their substance, and, if they persisted, of their
liberty; often of their lives also. For this crime, under this
“our most religious and gracious King,” (what were they
who publicly told God he was such 7) Englishmen were not
only spoiled of their goods, but denied even the use of the
free air, yea, and the light of the sun, being thrust by
hundreds into dark and loathsome prisons !
18. Were matters much better in the neighbouring king
dom? Nay, they were inexpressibly worse. Unheard-of
cruelties were practised there, from soon after the Restoration
till the Revolution.* What fining, plundering, beating,
maiming, imprisoning, with the most shocking circumstances !
For a specimen, look at Dunotter Castle; where young and
old, of both sexes, (sick or well, it was all one,) were thrust
together between bare walls, and that in the heat of summer,
without a possibility of either lying or sitting; yea, without
any convenience of any kind; till many of them, through
hunger, thirst, heat, and stench, were set at liberty by death !
Considering this; considering how many others were hunted
over their native mountains, and shot whenever they were
overtaken, with no more ceremony than beasts; considering
the drowning, hanging, cutting off of limbs, and various arts
of torturing, which were practised by order of King Charles,
and often in the presence of King James, who seemed to
enjoy such spectacles; it would be no wonder if the very
name of an Englishman was had in abomination from the
Tweed to the Orkneys.-
19. But is this the case at present with us? Are we
abridged of our religious liberty? His late Majesty was
desired, about thirty years ago, to take a step of this kind.
But his answer was worthy of a King, yea, the King of a free
people: “I tell you, while I sit on the English throne, no
man shall be persecuted for conscience' sake.” And it is
certain he made his promise good from the beginning of his
reign to the end. But perhaps the case is altered now.
Does His present Majesty tread in his steps? He does: He
persecutes no man for conscience sake. If he does, where is
the man? I do not ask, Whom has he committed to the
flames, or caused to die by the common hangman 7 or,
Whom has he caused to die many deaths, by hunger and
thirst, cold and nakedness? but, Whom has he tortured or
thrust into a dungeon, yea, or imprisoned at all, or fined, for
worshipping God according to his own conscience, in the
Presbyterian or any other way? O, compare King Charles,
gracious Charles the Second, with King George, and you will
know the value of the liberty you enjoy.
20. In the name of wonder, what religious liberty can you
desire, or even conceive, which you have not already? Where
is there a nation in Europe, in the habitable world, which
* See Wodrow’s “History of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland.”
ThouGIITS UPON LIBERTY. 4l
enjoys such liberty of conscience as the English? I will be
bold to say there is nothing like it in Holland, in Germany,
(Protestant or Popish,) in either the Protestant or Popish
cantons of Switzerland; no, nor in any country under the sun.
Have we not in England full liberty to choose any religion,
yea, or no religion at all? to have no more religion than a
Hottentot, shall I say? nay, no more than a bull or a swine?
Whoever therefore in England stretches his throat, and bawls
for more religious liberty, must be totally void of shame, and
can have no excuse but want of understanding.
21. But is not the ground of this vehement outcry, that
we are deprived of our civil liberty? What is civil liberty?
A liberty to enjoy our lives and fortunes in our own way;
to use our property, whatever is legally our own, according to
our own choice. And can you deny, “that we are robbed of
this liberty?” Who are? Certainly I am not. I pray, do
not face me down that I am. Do not argue me out of my
senses. If the Great Turk, or the King of France, wills that
a man should die, with or without cause, die he must. And
instances of the kind continually occur; but no such instances
occur in England. I am in no more danger of death from
King George, than from the Queen of Hungary. And if I
study to be quiet and mind my own business, I am in no
more danger of losing my liberty than my life. No, nor my
property; I mean, by any act of the King. If this is in any
degree invaded, it is not by the King, or his Parliament, or
army, but by the good patriots.
Hark! Is hell or Bedlam broke loose? What roaring is
that, loud as the waves of the sea? “It is the patriot mob.”
What do they want with me? Why do they flock about my
house? “Make haste illuminate your windows in honour
of Mr. Wilkes.” I cannot in conscience; I think it is
encouraging vice. “Then they will all be broken.” That is,
in plain English, Give them twenty shillings, or they will rob
you of five pounds. Here are champions for the laws of the
land I for liberty and property ! O vile horse-guards!
That dared, so grim and terrible, to advance
Their miscreated fronts athwart the way !
True, they did nothing and said nothing. Yet, in default of
the civil powers, who did not concern themselves with the
matter, they hindered the mob from finishing their work.
22. Why, then, these men, instead of anyway abridging it,
plainly preserved my liberty and property. And by their
benefit, not the care of those to whom it properly belonged,
I still enjoy full civil liberty. I am free to live, in every
respect, according to my own choice. My life, my person,
my property, are safe. I am not murdered, maimed, tortured
at any man’s pleasure; I am not thrown into prison; I am
not manacled; see, I have not one fetter, either on my
hands or feet. And are not you as free as I am? Are not
you at liberty to enjoy the fruit of your labours? Who
hinders you from doing it? Does King George 2 Does
Lord North? Do any of His Majesty’s officers or soldiers?
No, nor any man living. Perhaps some would hinder you,
if you acted contrary to law; but this is not liberty, it is
licentiousness. Deny the fact who can ; am not I free to
use my substance according to my own discretion? And do.
not you enjoy the self-same freedom? You cannot, you dare
not, deny it. At this hour I am at full liberty to use my
property as I please. And so are you; you do, in fact, use
your house, your goods, your land, as is right in your own
eyes. Does any one take them from you? No; nor does
any one restrain you from the full enjoyment of them.
What then is the matter? What is it you are making all
this pother about? Why are you thus wringing your hands,
and screaming, to the terror of your quiet neighbours,
“Destruction | slavery 1 bondage ' Help, countrymen | Our
liberty is destroyed! Weare ruined, chained, fettered, undone!”
Fettered ! How? Where are the fetters, but in your own
imagination? There are none, either on your hands or mine:
Neither you nor I can show to any man in his senses, that we
have one chain upon us, even so big as a knitting-needle.
23. I do not say, that the ministry are without fault; or
that they have done all things well. But still I ask, What
is the liberty which we want? It is not civil or religious
liberty. These we have in such a degree as was never known
before, not from the times of William the Conqueror.”
But all this is nothing; this will never satisfy the bellua
multorum capitum. That “many-headed beast,” the people,
roars for liberty of another kind. Many want Indian liberty,
the liberty of cutting throats, or of driving a brace of balls
* If the famous Middlesex election was an exception to this, yet observe, one
Swallow makes no summer.
through the head of those ugly-looking fellows, whom they
cannot abide the sight of Many more want the old High
land liberty, the convenient liberty of plundering. Many
others there are who want the liberty of war, of borrowing
their neighbours' wives or daughters; and not a few, though
they do not always avow it, the liberty of murdering their
Prince.
24. If you are a reasonable man, a man of real honour,
and consequently want none of these, I beg to know what
would you have? Considering the thing calmly, what liberty
can you reasonably desire which you do not already enjoy?
What is the matter with you, and with multitudes of the
good people, both in England and Ireland, that they are
crying and groaning as if they were chained to an oar, or
barred up in the dungeons of the Inquisition? The plain.
melancholy truth is this: There is a general infatuation,
which spreads, like an overflowing stream, from one end of
the land to the other; and a man must have great wisdom
and great strength, or he will be carried away by the torrent.
But how can we account for this epidemic madness? for it
deserves no better name. We must not dare to give the
least intimation, that the devil has anything to do with it.
No! this enlightened age is too wise to believe that there is
any devil in being ! Satan, avaunt we have driven thee
back into the land of shadows; keep thou among thy own
kindred :
With hydras, gorgons, and chimeras dire.
Suppose it then to be a purely natural phenomenon; I
ask again, How can we account for it? I apprehend if we
could divest ourselves of prejudice, it might be done very
easily; and that without concerning ourselves with the hidden
springs of action, the motives or intentions of men. Letting
these alone, is there not a visible, undeniable cause, which
is quite adequate to the effect? The good people of England
have, for some years past, been continually fed with poison.
Dose after dose has been administered to them, for fear the
first, or second, or tenth, should not suffice, of a poison
whose natural effect is to drive men out of their senses.
Is “the centaur not fabulous?” Neither is Circe's cup.
See how, in every county, city, and village, it is now turning
quiet, reasonable men, into wild bulls, bears, and tigers l,
But, to lay metaphor aside, how long have the public papers
represented one of the best of Princes as if he had been one
of the worst, as little better than Caligula, Nero, or Domitian!
These were followed by pamphlets of the same kind, and
aiming at the same point,-to make the King appear odious
as well as contemptible in the eyes of his subjects. Letters
succeed, wrote in fine language, and with exquisite art, but
filled with the gall of bitterness. “Yes, but not against the
king; Junius does not strike at him, but at the evil adminis
tration.” Thin pretence! Does not every one see the blow
is aimed at the King through the sides of his Ministers?
All these are conveyed, week after week, through all London
and all the nation. Can any man wonder at the effect of
this? What can be more natural? What can be expected,
but that they who drink in these papers and letters with
all greediness, will be thoroughly embittered and inflamed
thereby? will first despise and then abhor the King? What
can we expect, but that by the repeated doses of this poison
they will be perfectly intoxicated, and only wait for a con
venient season to tear in pieces the royal monster, as they
think him, and all his adherents?
25. At present there are hinderances in the way, so that
they cannot use their teeth as they would. One is an
untoward Parliament, who will not look upon the King with
the same eyes that they do; but still think he has no more
design or desire to enslave the nation, than to burn the city
of London. A still greater hinderance is the army; even
lions and bears do not choose to encounter them, so that
these men of war do really at this time preserve the peace of
ithe nation. What then can be done before the people cools,
that this precious opportunity be not lost? What indeed,
but to prevail upon the King to dissolve his Parliament and
disband his army? Nay, let the Parliament stay as it is, it
will suffice to disband the army. If these red-coats were but
out of the way, the mob would soon deal with the Parliament.
Probatum est: * Nothing is more easy than to keep malignant
members from the House. Remember Lord North not
long ago;t this was a taste, a specimen, of their activity.
What then would they not do if they were masters of the
field, if none were left to oppose them? Would not the
* This has already been put to the proof-EDIT.
+ Rudely insulted by a turbulent mob, as he was going into the House.
Titou GHTS UPON LIBERTY. 45.
avenues of both Houses be so well guarded, that none but
patriots would dare to approach?
26. But (as often as you have heard the contrary affirmed)
King George has too much understanding, to throw himself into
the hands of those men who have given full proof that they bear
him no great good-will. Nor has he reason to believe that they
are much more fond of his office than of his person. They are
not vehemently fond of monarchy itself, whoever the Monarch
be. Therefore neither their good nor ill words will induce
him, in haste, to leap into the fire with his eyes open.
27. But can anything be done to open the eyes, to restore
the senses, of an infatuated nation? Not unless the still
renewed, still operating cause of that infatuation can be
removed. But how is it possible to be removed, unless by
restraining the licentiousness of the press? And is not this
remedy worse than the disease? Let us weigh this matter a
little. There was an ancient law in Scotland, which made
leasing-making a capital crime. By leasing-making was meant,
telling such wilful lies as tended to breed dissension between
the King and his subjects. What pity but there should be
such a law enacted in the present session of Parliament! By
our present laws, a man is punishable for publishing even
truth to the detriment of his neighbour. This I would not
wish. But should he not be punished, who publishes palpable
lies? and such lies as manifestly tend to breed dissension
between the King and his subjects? Such, with a thousand
more, was that bare-faced lie of the King’s bursting out into
laughter before the city Magistrates ! Now, does not the
publisher of this lie deserve to lose his ears more than a com
mon knight of the post? And if he is liable to no punishment
for a crime of so mischievous a nature, what a grievous defect
is in our law ! And how loud does it call for a remedy
28. To return to the point whence we set out. You see
whence arose this outcry for liberty, and these dismal com
plaints that we are robbed of our liberty echoing through the
land. It is plain to every unprejudiced man, they have not
the least foundation. We enjoy at this day throughout these
kingdoms such liberty, civil and religious, as no other king
dom or commonwealth in Europe, or in the world, enjoys;
and such as our ancestors never enjoyed from the Conquest
to the Revolution. Let us be thankful for it to God and the
King ! Let us not, by our vile unthankfulness, yea, our
denial that we enjoy it at all, provoke the King of kings to
take it away. By one stroke, by taking to himself that
Prince whom we know not how to value, He might change
the scene, and put an end to our civil as well as religious
liberty. Then would be seen who were patriots and who
were not; who were real lovers of liberty and their country.
The God of love remove that day far from us! Deal not
with us according to our deservings; but let us know, at
least in this our day, the things which make for our peace!
February 24, 1772.