A Second Letter to the Rev. Dr. Free
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 8 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
IN the preface to your Sermon, lately printed, you men
tion your having received my former letter, and add, that “if
the proofs you have now brought do not satisfy me as to the
validity of your former assertions; if I am not yet convinced
that such positions are held by people who pass under the
denomination of Methodists, and will signify this by a private
letter, I shall have a more particular answer.” I desire to live
peaceably with all men; and should therefore wish for no more
than a private answer to a private letter, did the affair lie be
tween you and me. But this is not the case: You have already
appealed to the Archbishop, the University, the nation.
Before these judges you have advanced a charge of the highest
kind, not only against me, but a whole body of people.
Before these, therefore, I must either confess the charge,
or give in my answer.
But you say, “I charge blasphemy, impiety, &c., upon the
profession of Methodism in general. I use no personal
reflections upon you, nor any invective against you, but in the
character of a Methodist.” That is, you first say, “All
Methodists are pickpockets, rebels, blasphemers, Atheists; ”
and then add, “I use no reflections upon you, but in the
character of a Methodist;” but in the character of a pickpocket,
blasphemer, Atheist. None but ! What can you do more?
But this, you say, is the practice of all honest men, and a
part of the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free. Nay,
surely there are some honest men who scruple using their oppo
ments in this manner. At least, I do: Suppose you was an
Atheist, I would not bring against you a railing accusation. I
would still endeavour to “treat you with gentleness and meek
ness,” and thus to “show the sincerity” of my faith. I leave
to you that exquisite “bitterness of spirit, and extreme viru
lence of language,” which, you say, is your duty, and term zeal.
(Preface, p. 5.) And certainly zeal, fervour, heat, it is. But
is this heat from above? Is it the offspring of heaven, or a
smoke from the bottomless pit?
O Sir, whence is that zeal which makes you talk in such a
manner to his Grace of Canterbury? “I lay before you the
disposition of an enemy who threaten our Church with a gene
ral alteration or total subversion; who interrupt us as we walk
the streets,” (Whom? When? Where?) “in that very dress
which distinguishes us as servants of the state,” (altogether
servants of the state?) “in the now sad capacity of Ministers
of the falling Church of England. Such being the prostrate,
miserable condition of the Church, and such the triumphant
state of its enemies, none of the English Priesthood can expect
better security or longer continuance than the rest. They all
subsist at mercy. Your Grace and those of your order will fare
no better than those of our own.” Sir, are you in earnest? Do
you really believe Lambeth is on the point of being blown up?
You go on: “In the remote counties of England, I have
seen a whole troop of these divines on horseback, travelling with
each a sister behind him.” O Sir, O Sir,
What should be great you turn to farce!
Have you forgot, that the Church and nation are on the brink
of ruin? But pray when and where did you see this? in what
year, or in what county? I cannot but fear you take this story
on trust; for such a sight, I will be bold to say, was never seen.
With an easy familiarity you add: “My Lord, permit me
here to whisper a word” (Is not this whispering in print some
thing new 7) “that may be worth remembering. In our
memory, some of the Priesthood have not proved so good sub
jects as might have been expected, till they have been brought
over with preferments, that were due to other people.” Mean
ing, I presume, to yourself. Surely his Grace will remember
this, which is so well worth remembering, and dispose of the
next preferment in his gift where it is sojustly due. If he does
not, if he either forgets this or your other directions, you tell
him frankly what will be the consequence: “We must apply to
Tarliament;” (p. 6;) or to His Majesty; and, indeed, how
can you avoid it? “For it would be using him,” you think,
“extremely ill, not to give him proper information, that there”
are now a set of people offering such indignity to his crown and
government.
However, we are not to think your opposing the Methodists
was “owing to self-interest” alone. Though, what if it was?
“Was I to depart from my duty, because it happened to be my
interest ? Did these saints ever forbear to preach to the mob
in the fields, for fear lest they should get the pence of the
mob? Or do not” the pence and the preaching “go hand in
hand together?” No, they do not; for many years neither I,
nor any connected with me, have got any “pence,” as you
phrase it, “in the fields.” Indeed, properly speaking, they
never did. For the collections which Mr. Whitefield made, it
is well known, were not for his own use, either in whole or part.
And he has long ago given an account, in print, of the manner
wherein all that was received was expended.
But it is not my design to examine at large, either your dedi
cation preface, or Sermon. I have only leisure to make a few
cursory remarks on your “definition” of the Methodists, (so
called,) and on the account you give of their first rise, of their
principles and practice; just premising, that I speak of those
alone who began, as you observe, at Oxford. If a thousand
other sets of men “pass under that denomination,” yet they
are nothing to me. As they have no connexion with me, so I
am in no way concerned to answer either for their principles or
practice, any more than you are to answer for all who “pass
under the denomination of Church-of-England men.”
The account you give of their rise, is this: The Methodists
began at Oxford. “The name was first given to a few persons,
who were so uncommonly methodical, as to keep a diary of the
most trivial actions of their lives, as how many slices of bread
and butter they ate, how many country dances they danced at
their dancing club, or after a fast how many pounds of mutton
they devoured. For upon these occasions they ate like lions,
having made themselves uncommonly voracious.” Of this, not
one line is true; for, (1.) It was from an ancient sect of Phy
sicians, whom we were supposed to resemble in our regular diet
and exercise, that we were originally styled Methodists. (2.) Not
one of us ever kept a diary of “the most trivial actions” of
our lives. (3) Nor did any of us ever set down, what, or how
much, we ate or drank. (4.) Our “dancing club” never ex
isted; I never heard of it before. (5.) On our “fast-days.”
we used no food but bread; on the day following, we fed as on
common days. (6.) Therefore our voraciousness and eating
like lions is also pure, lively invention.
You go on: “It was not long before these gentlemen began
to dogmatize in a public manner, feeling a strong inclination to
new-model almost every circumstance or thing in the system of
our national religion.” Just as true as the rest. These gen
tiemen were so far from feeling any inclination at all “to new
model” any “circumstance or thing,” that, during their whole
stay at Oxford, they were High Churchmen in the strongest
sense; vehemently contending for every “circumstance” of
Church order, according to the old “model.” And in Georgia
too, we were rigorous observers of every Rubric and Canon; as
well as (to the best of our knowledge) every tenet of the
Church. Your account, therefore, of the rise of the Method
ists is a mistake from beginning to end.
I proceed to your definition of them: “By the Methodists,
was then and is now understood, a set of enthusiasts, who, pre
tending to be members of the Church of England, either offend
against the order and discipline of the Church, or pervert its
doctrines relating to faith and works, and the terms of salva
tion.”
Another grievous mistake. For whatever “is now, by the
Methodists then was” not “understood any set of enthusiasts,”
or not enthusiasts, “offending against the order and discipline
of the Church.” They were tenacious of it to the last degree,
in every the least jot and tittle. Neither were they “they
understood to pervert its doctrines, relating to faith and works,
and the terms of salvation.” For they thought and talked of
all these, just as you do now, till some of them, after their
return from Georgia, were “perverted” into different senti
ments, by reading the book of Homilies. Their perversion,
therefore, (if such it be,) is to be dated from this time. Conse
quently, your definition by no means agrees with the persons.
defined.
However, “as a Shibboleth to distinguish them at
present, when they pretend to conceal themselves, throw out
this, or such like proposition, “Good works are necessary to
salvation.” You might have spared yourself the labour of
proving this: For who is there that denies it? Not I: Not
any in connexion with me. So that this Shibboleth is just
good for nothing.
5. And yet we firmly believe, that a man is justified by
faith, without the works of the law; that to him that worketh
not, but believeth on Him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith,
without any good work preceding, is counted to him for righte
ousness. We believe (to express it a little more largely) that
we are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of
Christ, by faith, and not for our own works or deservings.
Good works follow after justification, springing out of true, .
living faith; so that by them living faith may be as evidently
known as a tree discerned by the fruit. And hence it follows,
that as the body without the soul is dead, so that faith which
is without works is dead also. This, therefore, properly speak
ing, is not faith; as a dead man is not properly a man.
You add, “The original Methodists affect to call themselves
Methodists of the Church of England; by which they plainly
inform us, there are others of their body who do not profess to
telong to it. Whence we may infer, that the Methodists who
take our name, do yet, by acknowledging them as namesakes
and brethren, give themselves the lie when they say they are of
our communion.” Our name ! Our communion 1 Apage cum
distá tuá magnificentid 1 * How came it, I pray, to be your name
any more than Mr. Venn's? But waving this: Here is another
train of mistakes. For, (1.) We do not call ourselves Methodists
at all. (2.) That we call ourselves members of the Church of
England is certain. Such we ever were, and such we are at this
day. (3.) Yet we do not by this plainly inform you, that there
are others of our body who do not belong to it. By what rule
of logic do you infer this conclusion from those premises?
(4) You have another inference full as good: “Hence one may
infer, that, by acknowledging them as namesakes and brethren,
* Mr. Wesley seems in this instance, as in several others, to have been pur
posely inaccurate in his quotation, to avoid the malediction couched in the ori
ginal words of Terence :
I in malam rem hinc cum istác magnificentiá,
Fugitive / (Phormio. Act. v. sc. 6, v. 37.)
which Dr. Patrick has rather broadly translated: “Go, be hanged, you rascal,
with your vain rodomontades!”
Mr. Wesley’s accommodated quotation of it may be thus rendered:
“Away with this your grandiloqueut verbiage 1”--EDIT.
they give themselves the lie when they say they are of our com
munion.” As we do not take the name of Methodists at all, so
we do not acknowledge any “namesakes” in this. But we
acknowledge as “brethren” all Dissenters (whether they are
called Methodists or not) who labour to have a conscience void
of offence toward God and toward man. What lies upon you
to prove, is this: Whoever acknowledges any Dissenters as
brethren, does hereby give himself the lie, when he says he is a
member of the Church of England.
However, you allow, there may be place for repentance:
“For if any of the founders of this sect renounce the opinions
they once were charged with, they may be permitted to lay aside
the name.” But what are the opinions which you require us to
renounce? What are, according to you, the principles of the
Methodists?
You say in general, “They are contradictory to the gospel,
contradictory to the Church of England, full of blasphemy,
impiety, and ending in downright Atheism:”--
For, “(1.) They expound the Scripture in such a manner
as to make it contradict itself.-
“(2.) With blasphemy, impiety, and diabolical frenzy, they
contradict our Saviour, by denying that he will judge man
according to his works.
“(3.) By denying this they destroy the essential attributes
of God, and ruin his character as Judge of the world.”
In support of the First charge, you say, “It is notorious;
and few men of common sense attempt to prove what is notori
ous, till they meet with people of such motorious impudence as
to deny it.”
I must really deny it. Why, then, you will prove it by Mr.
Mason's own words. Hold, Sir: Mr. Mason’s words prove
nothing. For we are now speaking of original Methodists; but
he is not one of them; nor is he in connexion with them; neither
with Mr. Whitefield nor me. So that what Mr. Mason speaks,
be it right or wrong, is nothing to the present purpose. There
fore, unless you can find some better proof, this whole charge
falls to the ground.
Well, “here it is: Roger Balls.”--Pray who is Roger Balls?
No more a Methodist than he is a Turk. I know not one good
thing he ever did or said, beside the telling all men, “I am no
Methodist,” which he generally does in the first sentence he
speaks, when he can find any one to hear him. He is therefore
one of your own allies; and a champion worthy of his cause !
If then you have no more than this to advance in support of
your first charge, you have alleged what you are not able to
prove. And the more heavy that allegation is, the more unkind,
the more unjust, the more unchristian, the more inhuman, it is
to bring it without proof.
In support of the Second charge, you say, “Our Saviour
declares our works to be the object of hisjudgment. But the
Methodist, for the perdition of the souls of his followers, says
our works are of no consideration at all.”
Who says so? Mr. Whitefield, or my brother, or I? We
say the direct contrary. But one of my “anonymous corre
spondents says so.” Who is he? How do you know he is a
Methodist? For aught appears, he may be another of your
allies, a brother to Roger Balls.
Three or threescore anonymous correspondents cannot yield
one grain of proof, any more than an hundred anonymous
remarkers on Theron and Aspasio. Before these can prove
what the Methodists hold, you must prove that these are
Methodists; either that they are original Methodists, or in
connexion with them.
Will you say, “If these were not Methodists themselves, they
would not defend the Methodists?” I deny the consequence:
Men may be far from being Methodists, and yet willing to do
the Methodists justice. I have known a Clergyman of note say
to another, who had just been preaching a very warm sermon,
“Sir, I do not thank you at all for this. I have no acquaint
ance with Mr. Whitefield or Mr. Wesley; and I do not agree
with them in opinion; but I will have no more railing in my
pulpit.”
From the principles of the Methodists, you proceed to their
practice: “They hunt,” say you, “for extraordinary marks and
revelations, whereby to know the state of the soul.” The marks
by which I know the state of any soul, are the inward fruit of
the Spirit,-love, joy, peace, and meekness, gentleness, good
ness, longsuffering, temperance, patience; shown, not by words
only, but by the genuine fruit of outward holiness.
Again : “They magnify their office beyond the truth, by
high pretences to miraculous inspiration.” To this assertion,
we have answered over and over, We pretend to no other inspi
ration than that which, not only every true gospel Minister,
but every real Christian, enjoys.
Again: “The end of all impostors is some kind of worldly
gain; and it is difficult for them to conceal their views entirely.
The love of filthy lucre will appear, either by the use they
make of it, or the means of getting it.” As to the use made of
it, you are silent. But as to the means of getting it, you say,
“Besides inhumanly wringing from the poor, the helpless
widows, the weeping orphans,” (the proof! the proof!) “they
creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with
divers lusts.” It is easy to say this, and ten times more; but
can you prove it? And ought you to say it, till you can?
I shall not concern myself with anything in your Appendix,
but what relates to me in particular. This premised, I observe
on No. I. There are several instances in my Journals, of per
sons that were in agonies of grief or fear, and roared for the
qisquietness of their heart; of some that exceedingly trennbled
before God, perhaps fell down to the ground; and of others
whom God, in his adorable providence, suffered to be lunatic
and sore vexed. The particular instances hereof, to which
you refer, have been largely vindicated already, in the Two
Letters to the Rev. Dr. Church, as well as that to the late
Bishop of London.
In the six following numbers I am not concerned. The
Eighth contains those words from my Second Journal: “The
rest of the day we spent in hearing the wonderful work which
God is beginning to work all over the earth.” Of this likewise
I have spoken at large to Dr. Church and Bishop Gibson.
The sum is, it is a great work when one notorious sinner is
thoroughly changed in heart and life. It is wonderfully great,
when God works this entire change in a large number of
people; particularly when it is done in a very short time:
But so he hath wrought in Kingswood, Cornwall, Newcastle.
It is therefore a truly wonderful work, which God hath now
more than begun to work upon earth.
I have now, Sir, briefly answered for myself, which, if
required, I will do more at large. But I trust it does already
appear, to every impartial reader, that of the many and heavy
allegations you have brought with an unparalleled bitterness of
spirit, and an acrimony of language almost without precedent,
you have not yet proved one. How far you are to be com
mended for this, (unless by Messrs. Balls and the Monthly
Reviewers,) it is not fit for me to judge. Let all lovers of truth,
of humanity, and candour, determine. At present, I have no
more to add, than that I beseech the Father of everlasting com
passion to show more mercy to you, than you have shown to,
Reverend Sir,
Your servant for Christ's sake,