On Christian Perfection: To the Rev. Mr. Dodd
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
I AM favoured with yours of January 26, for which I
return you my sincere thanks. Your frank and open manner
of writing is far from needing any apology, and I hope will never
occasion your receiving such treatment from me, as I did from
Mr. Law, who, after some very keen expressions, in answer to:
the second private letter I sent him, plainly told me he
desired to hear “no more on that head.” I do desire to
hear, and am very willing to consider, whatever you have to
wdvance on the head of Christian perfection.
When I began to make the Scriptures my chief study,
(about seven-and-twenty years ago,) I began to see that
Christians are called to love God with all their heart, and to
serve him with all their strength; which is precisely what I
apprehend to be meant by the scriptural term perfection.
After weighing this for some years, I openly declared my
sentiments before the University, in the sermon on the
Circumcision of the Heart, now printed in the second
volume.* About six years after, in consequence of an advice
I received from Bishop Gibson, “Tell all the world what you
mean by perfection,” I published my coolest and latest
thoughts in the sermon on that subject. You easily observe,
I therein build on no authority, ancient or modern, but the
Scripture. If this supports any doctrine, it will stand; if
not, the sooner it falls, the better. Neither the doctrine in
question, nor any other, is anything to me, unless it be the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. If, therefore, you will
please to point out to me any passages in that sermon
which are either contrary to Scripture, or not supported by
it, and to show that they are not, I shall be full as willing
to oppose as ever I was to defend them. I search for truth,
plain, Bible truth, without any regard to the praise or
dispraise of men.
If you will assist me in this search, more especially by
showing me where I have mistaken my way, it will be
gratefully acknowledged by,
Reverend Sir,
Your affectionate brother and servant,
N.B. I had at this time no acquaintance with Dr. Dodd;
nor did I ever see him till I saw him in prison.
* Volume V., p. 202, of the present edition.-EDIT.