A Treatise on Baptism
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
CoNCERNING baptism I shall inquire, what it is; what
benefits we receive by it; whether our Saviour designed it
to remain always in his Church; and who are the proper
subjects of it.
I. 1. What it is. It is the initiatory sacrament, which enters
us into covenant with God. It was instituted by Christ, who
alone has power to institute a proper sacrament, a sign, seal,
pledge, and means of grace, perpetually obligatory on all
Christians. We know not, indeed, the exact time of its insti
tution; but we know it was long before our Lord’s ascension.
And it was instituted in the room of circumcision. For, as
that was a sign and seal of God’s covenant, so is this.
2. The matter of this sacrament is water; which, as it
has a natural power of cleansing, is the more fit for this
symbolical use. Baptism is performed by washing, dipping,
or sprinkling the person, in the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, who is hereby devoted to the ever-blessed
Trinity. I say, by washing, dipping, or sprinkling; because
it is not determined in Scripture in which of these ways it
shall be done, neither by any express precept, nor by any
such example as clearly proves it; nor by the force or meaning
of the word baptize.
3. That there is no express precept, all calm men allow.
Neither is there any conclusive example. John’s baptism in
some things agreed with Christ's, in others differed from it.
But it cannot be certainly proved from Scripture, that even
John’s was performed by dipping. It is true he baptized in
Enon, near Salim, where there was “much water.” But this
might refer to breadth rather than depth; since a narrow place
would not have been sufficient for so great a multitude. Nor
can it be proved, that the baptism of our Saviour, or that
administered by his disciples, was by immersion. No, nor
that of the eunuch baptized by Philip ; though “they both
went down to the water:” For that going down may relate
to the chariot, and implies no determinate depth of water. It
might be up to their knees; it might not be above their ankles.
4. And as nothing can be determined from Scripture pre
cept or example, so neither from the force or meaning of the
word. For the words baptize and baptism do not necessarily
imply dipping, but are used in other senses in several places.
Thus we read, that the Jews “were all baptized in the
cloud and in the sea;” (1 Cor. x. 2;) but they were not
plunged in either. They could therefore be only sprinkled
by drops of the sea-water, and refreshing dews from the
cloud; probably intimated in that, “Thou sentest a gracious
rain upon thine inheritance, and refreshedst it when it was
weary.” (Psalm lxviii. 9.) Again: Christ said to his two
disciples, “Ye shall be baptized with the baptism that I am
baptized with ;” (Mark x. 38;) but neither he nor they were
dipped, but only sprinkled or washed with their own blood.
Again we read (Mark vii. 4) of the baptisms (so it is in the
original) of pots and cups, and tables or beds. Now, pots
and cups are not necessarily dipped when they are washed.
Nay, the Pharisees washed the outsides of them only. And
as for tables or beds, none will suppose they could be dipped.
Here, then, the word baptism, in its natural sense, is not
taken for dipping, but for washing or cleansing. And, that
this is the true meaning of the word baptize, is testified by
the greatest scholars and most proper judges in this matter.
It is true, we read of being “buried with Christ in baptism.”
But nothing can be inferred from such a figurative expression.
Nay, if it held exactly, it would make as much for sprinkling
as for plunging; since, in burying, the body is not plunged
through the substance of the earth, but rather earth is
poured or sprinkled upon it.
5. And as there is no clear proof of dipping in Scripture,
so there is very probable proof of the contrary. It is highly
probable, the Apostles themselves baptized great numbers,
not by dipping, but by washing, sprinkling, or pouring water.
This clearly represented the cleansing from sin, which is
figured by baptism. And the quantity of water used was not
material; no more than the quantity of bread and wine in the
Lord's supper. The jailer “ and all his house were baptized”
in the prison; Cornelius with his friends, (and so several
households,) at home. Now, is it likely, that all these had
ponds or rivers, in or near their houses, sufficient to plunge
them all? Every unprejudiced person must allow, the contrary
is far more probable. Again : Three thousand at one time,
and five thousand at another, were converted and baptized by
St. Peter at Jerusalem; where they had none but the gentle
waters of Siloam, according to the observation of Mr. Fuller:
“There were no water-mills in Jerusalem, because there was
no stream large enough to drive them.” The place, therefore,
as well as the number, makes it highly probable that all these
were baptized by sprinkling or pouring, and not by immer
sion. To sum up all, the manner of baptizing (whether by
dipping or sprinkling) is not determined in Scripture. There
is no command for one rather than the other. There is no
example from which we can conclude for dipping rather than
sprinkling. There are probable examples of both; and both
are equally contained in the natural meaning of the word.
II. 1. What are the benefits we receive by baptism, is the
next point to be considered. And the first of these is, the
washing away the guilt of original sin, by the application of
the merits of Christ’s death. That we are all born under the
guilt of Adam's sin, and that all sin deserves eternal misery,
was the unanimous sense of the ancient Church, as it is
expressed in the Ninth Article of our own. And the Scripture
plainly asserts, that we were “shapen in iniquity, and in sin did
our mother conceive us;” that “we were all by nature children
of wrath, and dead in trespasses and sins;” that “in Adam
all die;” that “by one man’s disobedience all were made
sinners;” that “by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin; which came upon all men, because all had
sinned.” This plainly includes infants; for they too die;
therefore they have sinned: But not by actual sin; therefore,
by original; else what need have they of the death of Christ?
Yea, “death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those
who had not sinned” actually “according to the simili
tude of Adam’s transgression.” This, which can relate to
infants only, is a clear proof that the whole race of mankind
are obnoxious both to the guilt and punishment of Adam’s
transgression. But “as by the offence of one, judgment came
upon all men to condemnation; so by the righteousness of one,
the free gift came upon all men, to justification of life.” And
the virtue of this free gift, the merits of Christ's life and death,
are applied to us in baptism. “He gave himself for the
Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing
of water by the word;” (Eph. v. 25, 26;) namely, in baptism,
the ordinary instrument of our justification. Agreeably to
this, our Church prays in the baptismal office, that the person
to be baptized may be “washed and sanctified by the Holy
Ghost, and, being delivered from God's wrath, receive remis
sion of sins, and enjoy the everlasting benediction of his
heavenly washing; ” and declares in the Rubric at the end of
the office, “It is certain, by God’s word, that children who
are baptized, dying before they commit actual sin are saved.”
And this is agreeable to the unanimous judgment of all the
ancient Fathers.
2. By baptism we enter into covenant with God; into that
everlasting covenant, which he hath commanded for ever;
(Psalm czi. 9;) that new covenant, which he promised to make
with the spiritual Israel; even to “give them a new heart and
a new spirit, to sprinkle clean water upon them,”-(of which
the baptismal is only a figure,) “and to remember their sins
and iniquities no more;” in a word, to be their God, as he pro
mised to Abraham, in the evangelical covenant which he made
with him and all his spiritual offspring. (Gen. xvii. 7, 8.) And as
circumcision was then the way of entering into this covenant,
so baptism is now; which is therefore styled by the Apostle,
(so many good interpreters render his words,) “the stipula
tion, contract, or covenant of a good conscience with God.”
3. By baptism we are admitted into the Church, and conse
quently made members of Christ, its Head. The Jews were
admitted into the Church by circumcision, so are the Chris
tians by baptism. For “as many as are baptized into Christ,”
in his name, “have” thereby “put on Christ;” (Gal. iii. 27;)
that is, are mystically united to Christ, and made one with
him. For “by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body,”
(1 Cor. xii. 13) namely, the Church, “the body of Christ.”
(Eph. iv. 12.) From which spiritual, vital union with him,
proceeds the influence of his grace on those that are baptized;
as from our union with the Church, a share in all its privi
leges, and in all the promises Christ has made to it.
4. By baptism, we who were “by nature children of wrath”
are made the children of God. And this regeneration which
our Church in so many places ascribes to baptism is more
than barèly being admitted into the Church, though commonly
connected therewith; being “grafted into the body of Christ’s
Church, we are made the children of God by adoption and
grace.” This is grounded on the plain words of our Lord:
“Except a man be born again of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God.” (John iii. 5.) By
water then, as a means, the water of baptism, we are rege
nerated or born again; whence it is also called by the
Apostle, “the washing of regeneration.” Our Church there
fore ascribes no greater virtue to baptism than Christ himself
has done. Nor does she ascribe it to the outward washing,
but to the inward grace, which, added thereto, makes it a
sacrament. Herein a principle of grace is infused, which will
not be wholly taken away, unless we quench the Holy Spirit
of God by long-continued wickedness.
5. In consequence of our being made children of God, we
are heirs of the kingdom of heaven. “If children,” (as the
Apostle observes) “then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs
with Christ.” Herein we receive a title to, and an earnest of,
“a kingdom which cannot be moved.” Baptism doth now
save us, if we live answerable thereto; if we repent, believe,
and obey the gospel: Supposing this, as it admits us into
the Church here, so into glory hereafter.
III. 1. But did our Saviour design this should remain
always in his Church 2 This is the Third thing we are to
consider. And this may be dispatched in a few words, since
there can be no reasonable doubt, but it was intended to last
as long as the Church into which it is the appointed means
of entering. In the ordinary way, there is no other means
of entering into the Church or into heaven.
2. In all ages, the outward baptism is a means of the
inward; as outward circumcision was of the circumcision of
the heart. Nor would it have availed a Jew to say, “I have
the inward circumcision, and therefore do not need the out
ward too: ” That soni was to be cut off from his people.
He had despised, he had broken, God’s everlasting covenant,
by despising the seal of it. (Gen. xvii. 14.) Now, the seal of
circumcision was to last among the Jews as long as the law
lasted, to which it obliged them. By plain parity of reason,
baptism, which came in its room, must last among Christians
as long as the gospel covenant into which it admits, and
whereunto it obliges, all nations.
3. This appears also from the original commission which
our Lord gave to his Apostles: “Go, disciple all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost; teaching them. And lo # I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world.” Now, as long as this
commission lasted, as long as Christ promised to be with them
in the execution of it, so long doubtless were they to execute it,
and to baptize as well as to teach. But Christ hath promised
to be with them, that is, by his Spirit, in their successors, to
the end of the world. So long, therefore, without dispute, it
was his design that baptism should remain in his Church.
IV. 1. But the grand question is, Who are the proper
subjects of baptism? grown persons only, or infants also ?
In order to answer this fully, I shall, First, lay down the
grounds of infant baptism, taken from Scripture, reason, and
primitive, universal practice; and, Secondly, answer the
objections against it.
2. As to the grounds of it: If infants are guilty of original
sin, then they are proper subjects of baptism; seeing, in the
ordinary way, they cannot be saved, unless this be washed away
by baptism. It has been already proved, that this original
stain cleaves to every child of man; and that hereby they are
children of wrath, and liable to eternal damnation. It is true,
the Second Adam has found a remedy for the disease which
came upon all by the offence of the first. But the benefit
of this is to be received through the means which he hath
appointed; through baptism in particular, which is the ordi
mary means he hath appointed for that purpose; and to
which God hath tied us, though he may not have tied himself.
Indeed, where it cannot be had, the case is different, but
extraordinary cases do not make void a standing rule. This
therefore is our First ground. Infants need to be washed from
original sin; therefore they are proper subjects of baptism.
3. Secondly. If infants are capable of making a covenant,
and were and still are under the evangelical covenant, then
they have a right to baptism, which is the entering seal
thereof. But infants are capable of making a covenant, and
were and still are under the evangelical covenant.
The custom of nations and common reason of mankind prove
that infants may enter into a covenant, and may be obliged by
compacts made by others in their name, and receive advantage
by them. But we have stronger proof than this, even God's
own word: “Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord,
--your captains, with all the men of Israel; your little ones,
your wives and the stranger,-that thou shouldest enter into
covenant with the Lord thy God.” (Deut. xxix. 10-12.)
Now, God would never have made a covenant with little ones,
if they had not been capable of it. It is not said children
only, but little children, the Hebrew word properly signifying
infants. And these may be still, as they were of old, obliged
to perform, in aftertime, what they are not capable of per
forming at the time of their entering into that obligation.
4. The infants of believers, the true children of faithful
Abraham, always were under the gospel covenant. They
were included in it, they had a right to it and to the seal
of it; as an infant heir has a right to his estate, though
he cannot yet have actual possession. The covenant with
Abraham was a gospel covenant; the condition the same,
namely, faith, which the Apostle observes was “imputed unto
him for righteousness.” The inseparable fruit of this faith
was obedience; for by faith he left his country, and offered
his son. The benefits were the same; for God promised, “I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee:” And he
can promise no more to any creature; for this includes all
blessings, temporal and eternal. The Mediator is the same;
for it was in his Seed, that is, in Christ, (Gen. xxii. 18;
Gal. iii. 16,) that all nations were to be blessed; on which
very account the Apostle says, “The gospel was preached
unto Abraham.” (Gal. iii. 8.) Now, the same promise that
was made to him, the same covenant that was made with
him, was made “with his children after him.” (Gen. xvii. 7;
Gal. iii. 7.) And upon that account it is called “an ever
lasting covenant.” In this covenant children were also obliged
to what they knew not, to the same faith and obedience with
Abraham. And so they are still; as they are still equally
entitled to all the benefits and promises of it.
5. Circumcision was then the seal of the covenant; which is
itself therefore figuratively termed the covenant. (Acts vii. 8.)
Hereby the children of those who professed the true religion
were then admitted into it, and obliged to the conditions of it;
and when the law was added, to the observance of that also.
And when the old seal of circumcision was taken off, this of
baptism was added in its room; our Lord appointing one
positive institution to succeed another. A new seal was set to
Abraham’s covenant; the seals differed, but the deed was the
same; only that part was struck off which was political or cere
monial. That baptism came in the room of circumcision, appears
as well from the clear reason of the thing, as from the Apostle's
argument, where, after circumcision, he mentions baptism, as
that wherein God had “forgiven us our trespasses;” to which
he adds, the “blotting out the hand-writing of ordinances,”
plainly relating to circumcision and other Jewish rites; which
as fairly implies, that baptism came in the room of circum
cision, as our Saviour’s styling the other sacrament the pass
over, (Col. ii. 11--13; Luke xxii. 15,) shows that it was insti
tuted in the place of it. Nor is it any proof that baptism did
not succeed circumcision, because it differs in some circum
stances, any more than it proves the Lord’s supper did not suc
ceed the passover, because in several circumstances it differs
from it. This then is a Second ground. Infants are capable of
entering into covenant with God. As they always were, so they
still are, under the evangelical covenant. Therefore they have
a right to baptism, which is now the entering seal thereof.
6. Thirdly. If infants ought to come to Christ, if they
are capable of admission into the Church of God, and conse
quently of solemn sacramental dedication to him, then they
are proper subjects of baptism. But infants are capable of
coming to Christ, of admission into the Church, and solemn
dedication to God.
That infants ought to come to Christ, appears from his own
words: “They brought little children to Christ, and the dis
ciples rebuked them. And Jesus said, Suffer little children to
come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom
of heaven.” (Matt. xix. 13, 14.) St. Luke expresses it still
more strongly: “They brought unto him even infants, that he
might touch them.” (xviii. 15.) These children were so little
that they were brought to him; yet he says, “Suffer them to
come unto me:” So little, that he “took them up in his arms;”
yet he rebukes those who would have hindered their coming
to him. And his command respected the future as well as the
present. Therefore his disciples or Ministers are still to suffer
infants to come, that is, to be brought, unto Christ. But they
cannot now come to him, unless by being brought into the
Church; which cannot be but by baptism. Yea, and “ of
such,” says our Lord, “is the kingdom of heaven;” not of
such only as were like these infants. For if they themselves
were not fit to be subjects of that kingdom, how could others
be so, because they were like them? Infants, therefore, are
capable of being admitted into the Church, and have a right
thereto. Even under the Old Testament they were admitted
into it by circumcision. And can we suppose they are in a
worse condition under the gospel, than they were under the
law? and that our Lord would take away any privileges
which they then enjoyed? Would he not rather make
additions to them? This, then, is a Third ground. Infants
ought to come to Christ, and no man ought to forbid them.
They are capable of admission into the Church of God.
Therefore, they are proper subjects of baptism.
7. Fourthly. If the Apostles baptized infants, then are
they proper subjects of baptism. But the Apostles baptized
infants, as is plain from the following consideration: The
Jews constantly baptized as well as circumcised all infant
proselytes. Our Lord, therefore, commanding his Apostles
to proselyte or disciple all nations by baptizing them, and not
forbidding them to receive infants as well as others, they
must needs baptize children also.
That the Jews admitted proselytes by baptism as well as
by circumcision, even whole families together, parents and
children, we have the unanimous testimony of their most
ancient, learned, and authentic writers. The males they
received by baptism and circumcision; the women by baptism
only. Consequently, the Apostles, unless our Lord had
expressly forbidden it, would of course do the same thing.
Indeed, the consequence would hold from circumcision only.
For if it was the custom of the Jews, when they gathered
proselytes out of all nations, to admit children into the Church
by circumcision, though they could not actually believe the
law, or obey it; then the Apostles, making proselytes to
Christianity by baptism, could never think of excluding
children, whom the Jews always admitted, (the reason for
their admission being the same,) unless our Lord had
expressly forbidden it. It follows, the Apostles baptized
infants. Therefore, they are proper subjects of baptism.
8. If it be objected, “There is no express mention in
Scripture of any infants whom the Apostles baptized,” I
would ask, Suppose no mention had been made in the Acts
of those two women baptized by the Apostles, yet might we
not fairly conclude, that when so many thousands, so many
entire households, were baptized, women were not excluded ?
especially since it was the known custom of the Jews to bap
tize them? The same holds of children; nay, more strongly,
on the account of circumcision. Three thousand were baptized
by the Apostles in one day, and five thousand in another.
And can it be reasonably supposed that there were no children
among such vast numbers? Again: The Apostles baptized
many families; nay, we hardly read of one master of a family,
who was converted and baptized, but his whole family (as was
before the custom among the Jews) were baptized with him:
Thus the “jailer’s household, he and all his; the household of
Gaius, of Stephanas, of Crispus.” And can we suppose, that
in all these households, which, we read, were, without excep
tion, baptized, there should not be so much as one child or
infant? But to go one step further: St. Peter says to the
multitude, “Repent and be baptized, every one of you, for
the remission of sins. For the promise is to you, and to your
children.” (Acts ii. 38,39.) Indeed, the answer is made directly
to those who asked, “What shall we do?” But it reaches
farther than to those who asked the question. And though
children could not actually repent, yet they might be baptized.
And that they are included, appears, (1.) Because the Apostle
addresses to “every one” of them, and in “every one”
children must be contained. (2.) They are expressly mentioned:
“The promise is to you, and to your children.”
9. Lastly. If to baptize infants has been the general prac
tice of the Christian Church in all places and in all ages, then
this must have been the practice of the Apostles, and, conse
quently, the mind of Christ. But to baptize infants has been
the general practice of the Christian Church, in all places and
in all ages. Of this we have unexceptionable witnesses: St.
Austin for the Latin Church, who flourished before the year
400; and Origen for the Greek, born in the second century;
both declaring, not only that the whole Church of Christ did
then baptize infants, but likewise that they received this prac
tice from the Apostles themselves. (August. de Genesi, l. 10,
c. 23; Orig. in Rom. vi.) St. Cyprian likewise is express for it,
and a whole Council with him. (Epist. ad Fidum.) If need
were, we might cite likewise Athanasius, Chrysostom, and a
cloud of witnesses. Nor is there one instance to be found in
all antiquity, of any orthodox Christian who denied baptism
to children when brought to be baptized; nor anv one of the
Fathers, or ancient writers, for the first eight hundred years
at least, who held it unlawful. And that it has been the prac
tice of all regular Churches ever since, is clear and manifest.
Not only our own ancestors when first converted to Christianity,
not only all the European Churches, but the African too and
the Asiatic, even those of St. Thomas in the Indies, do, and
ever did, baptize their children. The fact being thus cleared,
that infant baptism has been the general practice of the Chris
tian Church in all places and in all ages, that it has continued
without interruption in the Church of God for above seven
teen hundred years, we may safely conclude, it was handed
down from the Apostles, who best knew the mind of Christ.
10. To sum up the evidence: If outward baptism be gene
rally, in an ordinary way, necessary to salvation, and infants
may be saved as well as adults, nor ought we to neglect any
means of saving them; if our Lord commands such to come,
to be brought unto him, and declares, “Of such is the king
dom of heaven;” if infants are capable of making a covenant,
or having a covenant made for them by others, being included
in Abraham’s covenant, (which was a covenant of faith, an
evangelical covenant) and never excluded by Christ; if they
have a right to be members of the Church, and were accord
ingly members of the Jewish; if, suppose our Lord had
designed to exclude them from baptism, he must have expressly
forbidden his Apostles to baptize them, (which none dares to
affirm he did,) since otherwise they would do it of course,
according to the universal practice of their nation; if it is
highly probable they did so, even from the letter of Scripture,
because they frequently baptized whole households, and it
would be strange if there were no children among them; if
the whole Church of Christ, for seventeen hundred years
together, baptized infants, and were never opposed till the
last century but one, by some not very holy men in Germany;
lastly, if there are such inestimable benefits conferred in
baptism, the washing away the guilt of original sin, the
engrafting us into Christ, by making us members of his
Church, and thereby giving us a right to all the blessings of
the gospel; it follows, that infants may, yea, ought to be
baptized, and that none ought to hinder them.
I am, in the Last place, to answer those objections which
are commonly brought against infant baptism:--
1. The chief of these is: “Our Lord said to his Apostles,
“Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. (Matt. xxviii. 19.)
Here Christ himself put teaching before baptizing. There
fore, infants, being incapable of being taught, are incapable of
being baptized.”
I answer, (1.) The order of words in Scripture is no certain
rule for the order of things. We read in St. Mark i. 4:
“John baptized in the wilderness, and preached the baptism
of repentance;” and, verse 5, “They were baptized of him in
Jordan, confessing their sins.” Now, either the order of words
in Scripture does not always imply the same order of things;
or it follows, that John baptized before his hearers either
confessed or repented. But, (2.) The words are manifestly
mistranslated. For if we read, “Go and teach all nations,
baptizing them,--teaching them to observe all things,” it
makes plain tautology, vain and senseless repetition. It ought
to be translated, (which is the literal meaning of the words,)
“Go and make disciples of all nations, by baptizing them.”
That infants are capable of being made proselytes or disciples
has been already proved; therefore this text, rightly trans
lated, is no valid objection against infant baptism.
2. Their next objection is: “The Scripture says, “Repent
and be baptized; believe and be baptized. Therefore, repent
ance and faith ought to go before baptism. But infants are
incapable of these; therefore they are incapable of baptism.”
I answer: Repentance and faith were to go before circum
cision, as well as before baptism. Therefore, if this argument
held, it would prove just as well, that infants were incapable
of circumcision. But we know God himself determined the
contrary, commanding them to be circumcised at eight days
old. Now, if infants were capable of being circumcised, not
withstanding that repentance and faith were to go before
circumcision in grown persons, they are just as capable of
being baptized; notwithstanding that repentance and faith
are, in grown persons, to go before baptism. This objection,
therefore, is of no force; for it is as strong against circum
cision of infants as infant baptism.
3. It is objected, Thirdly, “There is no command for it in
Scripture. Now, God was angry with his own people, because
they did that which, he said, ‘I commanded them not.’ (Jer.
vii. 31.) One plain text would end all the dispute.”
I answer, (1.) We have reason to fear it would not: It is
as positively commanded in a very plain text of Scripture, that
we should “teach and admonish one another with psalms,
and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing to the Lord with
grace in our hearts,” (Eph. v. 19,) as it is to honour our
father and mother: But does this put an end to all dispute?
Do not these very persons absolutely refuse to do it, notwith
standing a plain text, an express command?
I answer, (2.) They themselves practise what there is
neither express command nor clear example for in Scripture.
They have no express command for baptizing women. They
say, indeed, “Women are implied in “all nations.” They
are; and so are infants too: But the command is not express
for either. And for admitting women to the Lord's supper,
they have neither express command nor clear example. Yet
they do it continually, without either one or the other. And
they are justified therein by the plain reason of the thing.
This also justifies us in baptizing infants, though without
express command or clear example.
If it be said, “But there is a command, ‘Let a man,”
avópwros, ‘examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread;’
(1 Cor. xi. 28;) the word ‘man,’ in the original, signifying
indifferently either men or women: ”I grant it does in other
places; but here the word “himself,” immediately following,
confines it to men only. “But women are implied in it, though
not expressed.” Certainly; and so are infants in “all nations.”
“But we have Scripture example for it: For it is said in
the Acts, “The Apostles continued in prayer and supplication
with the women.”’’ True, in prayer and supplication; but it
is not said, “in communicating: ” Nor have we one clear
example of it in the Bible.
Since, then, they admit women to the communion, without
any express command or example, but only by consequence
from Scripture, they can never show reason why infants
should not be admitted to baptism, when there are so many
scriptures which by fair consequence show they have a right
to it, and are capable of it.
As for the texts wherein God reproves his people for doing
“what he commanded them not;” that phrase evidently
means, what he had forbidden; particularly in that passage
of Jeremiah. The whole verse is, “They have built the high
places of Tophet, to burn their sons and their daughters in
the fire, which I commanded them not.” Now, God had
expressly forbidden them to do this; and that on pain of
death. But surely there is a difference between the Jews
offering their sons and daughters to devils, and Christians
offering theirs to God.
On the whole, therefore, it is not only lawful and innocent,
but meet, right, and our bounden duty, in conformity to the
uninterrupted practice of the whole Church of Christ from the
earliest ages, to consecrate our children to God by baptism, as
the Jewish Church were commanded to do by circumcision.
November 11, 1756.