Thoughts on a Single Life
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 11 (Zondervan)
Author: John Wesley
---
1. THE forbidding to marry, as it is well known the Church
of Rome does, and has done for several ages, (in which
marriage is absolutely forbidden, not only to all religious
orders, but to the whole body of the Clergy,) is numbered,
by the great Apostle, among “the doctrines of devils.” And
* In the year 1743 Mr. Wesley published a small pamphlet under the title of,
“Thoughts on Marriage and a Single Life.” It was afterwards superseded by
the truct now before the reader; which embodies the principal sentiments
contained in the former publication.-En1T.
among the same we need not scruple to number the despising
or condemning marriage; as do many of those in the Romish
Church who are usually termed Mystic writers. One of these
does not scruple to affirm, “Marriage is only licensed forni
cation.” But the Holy Ghost says, “Marriage is honourable
in all, and the bed undefiled.” Nor can it be doubted but
persons may be as holy in a married as in a single state.
2. In the latter clause of the sentence, the Apostle seems
to guard against a mistake, into which some sincere Christians
have fallen; particularly when they have just found such a
liberty of spirit as they had not before experienced. They
imagine a defilement where there is none, “and fear where
no fear is.” And it is possible this very fear of sin may
betray them into sin. For it may induce persons to defraud
each other, forgetting the express determination of the
Apostle: “The wife hath not power of her own body, but
the husband; and the husband hath not power of his own
body, but the wife.” (1 Cor. vii. 4.)
3. And yet we must not forget what the Apostle subjoins in
the following verses: “I say to the unmarried and widows, It
is good for them, if they abide even as I. Art thou bound
unto a wife? Seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from
a wife? Seek not a wife. But if thou marry, thou hast not
sinned. Nevertheless, such shall have trouble in the flesh.
I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried
careth for the things of the Lord, how he may please the
Lord; but he that is married careth for the things of the
world, how he may please his wife. The unmarried woman
careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both
in body and spirit; but she that is married careth for the
things of the world, how she may please her husband. And
this I speak for your own profit, that you may attend upon the
Lord without distraction.” (Verses 8, 27, 28, 32--35.)
4. But though “it is good for a man not to touch a woman,”
(verse 1) yet this is not an universal rule. “I would,” indeed,
says the Apostle, “that all men were as myself.” (Verse 7.)
But that cannot be; for “every man hath his proper gift of
God, one after this manner, another after that.” “If,” then,
“they cannot contain, let them marry; for it is better to marry
than to burn.” (Verse 9.) “To avoid ("rnication, let every
man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own
husband.” Exactly agreeable to this are the words of our
Lord. When the Apostles said, “If the case be so, it is
good not to marry; he said unto them, All men cannot
receive this saying, but they to whom it is given. For there
are some eunuchs, who were so born from their mother’s
womb; there are some, who were made eunuchs by men;
and there are eunuchs, who have made themselves eunuchs
for the kingdom of heaven’s sake. He that is able to receive
it, let him receive it.” (Matt. xix. 10-12.)
5. But who is able to “receive this saying,”--to abstain
from marriage, and yet not burn? It behoves every one
here to judge for himself; none is called to judge for another.
In general, I believe every man is able to receive it when he
is first justified. I believe every one then receives this gift;
but with most it does not continue long. Thus much is
clear; it is a plain matter of fact, which no man can deny.
It is not so clear, whether God withdraws it of his own good
pleasure, or for any fault of ours. I incline to think, it is
not withdrawn without some fault on our part. But, be that
as it may, I have now only to do with those who are still able
to “receive this saying.”
6. To this happy few I say, (1) Know the advantages you
enjoy, many of which are pointed out by the Apostle himself.
You may be without carefulness. You are under no necessity
of “caring for the things of the world.” You have only to
“care for the things of the Lord, how you may please the
Lord.” One care alone lies upon you, how you “may be
holy both in body and spirit.”
You may “attend upon the Lord without distraction;”
while others, like Martha, are cumbered with much serving,
and drawn hither and thither by many things, you may
remain centred in God, sitting, like Mary, at the Master’s
feet, and listening to every word of his mouth.
You enjoy a blessed liberty from the “trouble in the
flesh,” which must more or less attend a married state, from
a thousand nameless domestic trials which are found, sooner
or later, in every family. You are exempt from numberless
occasions of sorrow and anxiety, with which heads of families
are entangled; especially those who have sickly, or weak, or
unhappy, or disobedient children. If your servants are
wicked, you may put them away, and your relation to them
ceases. But what could you do with a wicked son or daughter?
How could you dissolve that relation?
Above all, you are at liberty from the greatest of all
entanglements, the loving one creature above all others. It
is possible to do this without sin, without any impeachment
of our love to God. But how inconceivably difficult | to
give God our whole heart, while a creature has so large a
share of it ! How much more easily may we do this, when
the heart is, tenderly indeed, but equally attached to more
than one; or, at least, without any great inequality | What
angelic wisdom does it require to give enough of our affection,
and not too much, to so near a relation |
And how much easier is it (just to touch on one point
more) wholly to conquer our natural desires, than to gratify
them exactly so far as Christian temperance allows! just so
far as every pleasure of sense prepares us for taking pleasure
in God.
7. You have leisure to improve yourself in every kind, to
wait upon God in public and private, and to do good to your
neighbour in various ways, as Christian prudence shall
suggest; whereas those who are married are necessarily taken
up with the things of the world. You may give all your
time to God without interruption, and need ask leave of none
but yourself so to do. You may employ every hour in what
you judge to be the most excellent way. But if you was
married, you may ask leave of your companion; otherwise
what complaints or disgust would follow ! And how hard
is it even to know (how much more to act suitably to that
knowledge) how far you ought to give way, for peace’ sake,
and where to stop ! What wisdom is requisite, in order to
know how far you can recede from what is most excellent,
particularly with regard to conversation that is not “to the
use of edifying,” in order to please your good-natured or
ill-natured partner, without displeasing God!
8. You may give all your worldly substance to God;
nothing need hinder. You have no increasing family, you
have no wife or children to provide for, which might occasion
a thousand doubts, (without any extraordinary measure of
divine light,) whether you had done either too much or too
little for them. You may “make yourself friends of” all
“the mammon of unrighteousness” which God entrusts you
with; having none that has any right to complain, or to
charge you with unkindness for so doing. You may lay out
all your talents of every kind entirely for the glory of God;
as you have none else to please, none to regard, but Him
that lived and died for you.
9. I say, Secondly, prize the advantages you enjoy; know
the value of them. Esteem them as highly while you have
them, as others do after they have lost them. Pray constantly
and fervently for this very thing, that God would teach you
to set a due value upon them. And let it be matter of daily
thanksgiving to God, that he has made you a partaker of
these benefits. Indeed, the more full and explicit you are
herein, the more sensible you will be of the cause you have
to be thankful; the more lively conviction you will have of
the greatness of the blessing.
10. If you know and duly prize the advantages you enjoy,
then, (3) Be careful to keep them. But this (as easy as
it may seem) it is impossible you should do by your own
strength; so various, so frequent, and so strong, are the
temptations which you will meet with to cast them away.
Not only the children of the world, but the children of God,
will undoubtedly tempt you thereto; and that partly by the
most plausible reasons, partly by the most artful persuasions.
Meantime, the old deceiver will not be wanting to give an
edge to as those reasons and persuasions, and to recal the
temptation again and again, and press it close upon your
heart. You have need, therefore, to use every help: And
the First of these is earnest prayer. Let no day pass without
this, without praying for this very thing,--that God would
work what with men is impossible; that he would vouchsafe
to preserve his own gift, and that you may not suffer any loss
this day, either by the subtlety or power of devils or men, or
the deceitfulness of your own heart.
11. A Second help may be, the conversing frequently and
freely with those of your own sex who are like-minded. It
may be of infinite service to disclose to these the very secrets
of your hearts; especially the weaknesses springing from your
natural constitution, or education, or long-contracted habit,
and the temptations which, from time to time, most easily
beset you. Advise with them on every circumstance that
occurs; open your heart without reserve. By this means a
thousand devices of Satan will be brought to nought; innu
merable snares will be prevented; or you will pass through
them without being hurt. Yea, and if at some time you should
have suffered a little, the wound will speedily be healed.
12. I say, of your own sex; for, in the Third place, it will
be highly expedient to avoid all needless conversation, much
more all intimacy, with those of the other sex; so expedient,
that unless you observe this, you will surely cast away the gift
of God. Say not, “But they have much grace and much
understanding.” So much the greater is the danger. There
would be less fear of your receiving hurt from them, if they had
less grace or less understanding. And whenever any of these
are thrown in your way, “make a covenant with your eyes,”
your ears, your hands, that you do not indulge yourself in any
that are called innocent freedoms. Above all, “keep your
heart with all diligence.” Check the first risings of desire.
Watch against every sally of imagination, particularly if it be
pleasing. If it is darted in, whether you will or no, yet, let
no “vain thought lodge within you.” Cry out, “My God
and my all, I am thine, thine alone ! I will be thine for
ever! O save me from setting up an idol in my heart | Save
me from taking any step toward it. Still bring my “every
thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.’”
13. “But how shall I attain to, or how preserve, this
strength and firmness of spirit?” In order to this, I advise you,
Fourthly, (need I say, to avoid the sin of Onan, seeing Satan
will not cast out Satan? or rather) avoid with the utmost
care, all softness and effeminacy; remembering the express
denunciation of an inspired writer, on waxxx01, the soft or
effeminate, whether poor or rich, (the Apostle does not make
any difference upon that account,) “shall not inherit the
kingdom of God.” Avoid all delicacy, first in spirit, then in
apparel, food, lodging, and a thousand nameless things; and
this the more speedily and the more resolutely, if you have
been long accustomed thereto. Avoid all needless self
indulgence, as well as delicacy and softness. All these tend
to breed or cherish those appetites and passions which you
have renounced for Christ’s sake. They either create or
increase those desires which, “for the kingdom of heaven’s
sake,” you are determined not to gratify. Avoid all sloth,
inactivity, indolence. Sleep no more than nature requires. Be
never idle; and use as much bodily exercise as your strength
will allow. I dare not add Monsieur Pascal's rule,--Avoid all
pleasure. It is not possible to avoid all pleasure, even of
sense, without destroying the body. Neither doth God
require it at our hands; it is not his will concerning us. On
the contrary, he “giveth us all things to enjoy,” so we enjoy
them to his glory. But I say, avoid all that pleasure which
anyway hinders you from enjoying him; yea, all such pleasure
as does not prepare you for taking pleasure in God. Add to
this constant and continued course of universal self-denial,
the taking up your cross daily, the enduring “hardship as a
good soldier of Jesus Christ.” Remember, “the kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.”
This is the way; walk therein; think not of a smoother path.
Add to your other exercises constant and prudent fasting,
and the Lord will uphold you with his hand.
14. I advise you, Lastly, if you desire to keep them, use all
the advantages you enjoy. Indeed, without this, it is utterly
impossible to keep them; for the mouth of the Lord hath
spoken the word which cannot be broken, which must be
fulfilled with regard to all the good gifts of God: “To him
that hath,” uses what he hath, “shall be given; and he shall
have more abundantly: But from him that hath not,” uses it
not, “shall be taken even that which he hath.” Would you
therefore retain what you now have, what God hath already
given? If so, “giving all diligence,” use it to the uttermost.
“Stand fast in ” cvery instance of “the liberty wherewith
Christ hath made you free.” Be not “entangled” again in
the “cares of this life;” but “cast all your care on Him that
careth for you. Be careful for nothing, but in everything
make your requests known unto God with thanksgiving.”
See that you “wait upon the Lord without distraction:” Let
nothing move you from your centre. “One thing is needful;”
to see, love, follow Christ, in every thought, word, and work.
Flee the “sorrow of this world;” it “worketh death.”
Let not your heart be troubled. In all circumstances, let
your soul magnify the Lord, and your spirit rejoice in God
your Saviour. Preserve a constant serenity of mind, an
even cheerfulness of spirit.
Keep at the utmost distance from foolish desires, from
desiring any happiness but in God. Still let all your “desire
be to him, and to the remembrance of his name.”
Make full use of all the leisure you have; never be unem
ployed, never triflingly employed; let every hour turn to
some good account. Let not a scrap of time be squandered
away; “gather up the fragments, that nothing be lost.”
Give all your time to God; lay out the whole as you judge
will be most to his glory. In particular, see that you waste
no part of it in unprofitable conversation; but let all your
discourse “be seasoned with salt, and meet to minister grace
to the hearers.”
Give all your money to God. You have no pretence for
laying up treasure upon earth. While you “gain all you
can,” and “save all you can,” “give all you can,” that is, all
you have.
Lay out your talents of every kind in doing all good to
all men; knowing that “every man shall receive his own
reward, according to his own labour.”
15. Upon the whole, without disputing whether the
married or single life be the more perfect state, (an idle
dispute; since perfection does not consist in any outward
state whatever, but in an absolute devotion of all our heart
and all our life to God,) we may safely say, Blessed are “they
who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of
heaven’s sake;” who abstain from things lawful in them
selves, in order to be more devoted to God. Let these never
forget those remarkable words: “Peter said, Lo, we have left
all and followed thee. And Jesus answered and said, Verily
I say unto you,” (a preface denoting both the certainty and
importance of what is spoken,) “There is no man that hath
left” (either by giving them up, or by not accepting them)
“house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife,
or children, or lands, for my sake and the gospel’s, but he
shall receive an hundred fold now in this time; and in the
world to come eternal life.” (Mark x. 28-30.)