Some Remarks on A Defence of the Preface to Aspasio Vindicated
Source: The Works of John Wesley, Volume 10 (Zondervan)
Year: 1766
Author: John Wesley
---
I HAVE neither time nor inclination to write a formal
answer to the Reverend Dr. Erskine's tract. My hope of
convincing him is lost; he has drunk in all the spirit of the
book he has published. But I owe it to God and his
children to say something for myself, when I am attacked in
so violent a manner, if haply some may take knowledge, that
I also endeavour to “live honestly, and to serve God.”
1. Dr. Erskine says, “An edition of these Letters has
been published in London, from the author's own manuscripts,
which puts the authenticity of them beyond doubt.” I
answer, This is a mistake; impartial men doubt of their
authenticity as much as ever. (I mean, not with regard to
the Letters in general, but to many particular passages.) And
that for two reasons: First, because those passages breathe
an acrimony and bitterness which Mr. Hervey in his life-time
never showed to any one, and least of all to one he was deeply
obliged to. Surely this is not what Dr. E. terms his
“scriptural and animated manner.” I hope it was not for
this cause that he pronounces this “equal, if not superior, to
any one of his controversial pieces published in his life-time.”
Indeed, I know of no controversial piece at all which he
published in his life-time. His “Dialogues” he no more
intended for such, than his “Meditations among the Tombs.”
A Second reason for doubting of their authenticity is, that he
told his brother, with his dying voice, (I have it under his
brother’s own hand,) “I desire my Letters may not be
published; because great part of them is written in a short
hand which none but myself can read.”
2. But the present question lies, not between me and Mr.
Hervey, but between Dr. E. and me. He vehemently attacks
me for saying, “Orthodoxy, or right opinion, is at best but
a very slender part of religion, if any part of it at all.” He
labours to deduce the most frightful consequences from it,
and cries, “If once men believe that right opinion is a slender
part of religion, if any part of religion, or no part at all,
there is scarce any thing so foolish, or so wicked, which Satan
may not prompt to.” (Page 6.) And what, if, after all, Dr.
E. himself believes the very same thing! I am much
mistaken if he does not. Let us now fairly make the trial.
I assert, (1.) That, in some cases, “right opinion is no
part of religion;” in other words, there may be right opinion
where there is no religion. I instance in the devil. Has he
not right opinions? Dr. E. must, perforce, say, Yes. Has
he religion? Dr. E. must say, No. Therefore, here right
opinion is no part of religion. Thus far, then, Dr. E. himself
believes as I do.
I assert, (2.) In some cases, “it is a slender part of religion.”
Observe, I speak of right opinion, as contra-distinguished
both from right tempers and from right words and actions.
Of this, I say, “It is a slender part of religion.” And can
Dr. E. say otherwise? Surely, no; nor any man living,
unless he be brimful of the spirit of contradiction.
“Nay, but I affirm, right tempers cannot subsist without
right opinion: The love of God, for instance, cannot subsist
without a right opinion of him.” I have never said anything
to the contrary: But this is another question. Though right
tempers cannot subsist without right opinion, yet right
opinion may subsist without right tempers. There may be a
right opinion of God, without either love, or one right temper
toward him. Satan is a proof of it. All, therefore, that I
assert in this matter, Dr. E. must affirm too.
But does it hence follow, that “ignorance and error areas
friendly to virtue as just sentiments?” or, that any man may
“disbelieve the Bible with perfect innocence or safety?”
Does Dr. E. himself think I believe this? I take upon me
to say, he does not think so. But why does he talk as if he
did? “Because it is a clear consequence from your own
assertion.” I answer, (1) If it be, that consequence is as
chargeable on Dr. E. as on me; since he must, nolens volens,
assert the same thing, unless he will dispute through a stone
wall. (2.) This is no consequence at all: For, admitting
“right tempers cannot subsist without right opinions,” you
cannot infer, therefore, “right opinions cannot subsist without
right tempers.” Prove this by other mediums, if you can ;
but it will never be proved by this. However, until this is
done, I hope to hear no more of this thread-bare objection.
3. Dr. E. attacks me, Secondly, with equal vehemence, on
the head of justification. In various parts of his tract, he flatly
charges me with holding justification by works. In support
of this charge, he cites several sentences out of various
treatises, abridgments of which I have occasionally published
within these thirty years. As I have not those abridgments
by me now, I suppose the citations are fairly made; and that
they are exactly made, without any mistake, either designed
or undesigned. I will suppose, likewise, that some of these
expressions, gleaned up from several tracts, are indefensible.
And what is it which any unprejudiced person can infer from
this? Will any candid man judge of my sentiments, either
on this or any other head, from a few sentences of other men,
(though reprinted by me, , after premising, that I did not
approve of all their expressions,) or from my own avowed,
explicit declarations, repeated over and over? Yet this is
the way by which Dr. E. proves, that I hold justification by
works | He continually cites the words of those authors as
mine, telling his reader, “Mr. Wesley says thus and thus.”
I do not say so; and no man can prove it, unless by citing
my own words. I believe justification by faith alone, as
much as I believe there is a God. I declared this in a
sermon, preached before the University of Oxford, eight-and
twenty years ago. I declared it to all the world eighteen
years ago, in a sermon written expressly on the subject. I
have never varied from it, no, not an hair's breadth, from
1738 to this day. Is it not strange, then, that, at this time
of day, any one should face me down, (yea, and one who has
that very volume in his hands, wherein that sermon on
justification by faith is contained,) that I hold justification
by works? and that, truly, because there are some expressions
in some tracts written by other men, but reprinted by me
during a course of years, which seem, at least, to countenance
that doctrine ! Let it suffice, (and it will suffice for every
impartial man,) that I absolutely, once for all, renounce every
expression which contradicts that fundamental truth, We are
justified by faith alone.
“But you have published John Goodwin’s ‘Treatise on
Justification.’” I have so; but I have not undertaken to
defend every expression which occurs therein. Therefore,
none has a right to palm them upon the world as mine.
And yet I desire no one will condemn that treatise before he
has carefully read it over; and that seriously and carefully;
for it can hardly be understood by a slight and cursory
reading. And let whoever has read it declare, whether he
has not proved every article he asserts, not only by plain
express Scripture, but by the authority of the most eminent
Reformers. If Dr. E. thinks otherwise, let him confute him;
but let no man condemn what he cannot answer.
4. Dr. E. attacks me, Thirdly, on the head of Christian
perfection. It is not my design to enter into the merits of
the cause. I would only just observe, (1.) That the great
argument which Dr. E. brings against it is of no force;
and, (2.) That he misunderstands and misrepresents my
sentiments on the subject.
First. His great argument against it is of no force. It runs
thus: “Paul’s contention with Barnabas is a strong argument
against the attainableness of perfection in this life.” (Page
4.1.) True, if we judge by the bare sound of the English
version. But Dr. E. reads the original: K2 sysvero Tapo:
vTuo;. It does not say that sharpness was on both sides.
It does not say that all or any part of it was on St. Paul's
side. Neither does the context prove that he was in any
fault at all. Indeed, “he thought it not good to take him
with them,” who had deserted them before. Now, certainly,
there was no blame in this; neither was there any in his sub
sequent behaviour. For when Barnabas also departed from it,
he went on still in the work. “He went through Syria and
Cilicia,” as he had proposed, “confirming the Churches.”
Secondly. He misunderstands and misrepresents my
sentiments on the subject. He says, “Mr. Wesley seems to
maintain, that sinless perfection is actually attained by every
one born of God.” (Page 39.)
I do not maintain this; I do not believe it. I believe
Christian perfection, or perfect love, (sinless perfection is an
expression which I do not use or contend for,) is not attained
by any of the children of God till they are what the Apostle
John terms fathers. And this I expressly declare in that
very sermon which Dr. E. so largely quotes.
5. Why Dr. E. should quarrel with me concerning natural
free-will, I cannot conceive, unless for quarrelling's sake.
For it is certain, on this head, if no other, we are precisely of
one mind. I believe that Adam, before his fall, had such
freedom of will, that he might choose either good or evil;
but that, since the fall, no child of man has a natural power
to choose anything that is truly good. Yet I know (and
who does not?) that man has still freedom of will in things
of an indifferent nature. Does not Dr. E. agree with me in
this? O why should we seek occasion of contention 1
6. That Michael Servetus was “one of the wildest Anti
trinitarians that ever appeared” is by no means clear. I
doubt of it, on the authority of Calvin himself, who certainly
was not prejudiced in his favour. For if Calvin does not
misquote his words, he was no Antitrinitarian at all. Calvin
himself gives a quotation from one of his letters, in which he
expressly declares, “I do believe the Father is God, the Son
is God, and the Holy Ghost is God. But I dare not use the
word Trinity or Person.” I dare, and I think them very
good words. But I should think it very hard to be burned
alive for not using them; especially with a slow fire, made of
moist, green wood |
I believe Calvin was a great instrument of God; and that
he was a wise and pious man: But I cannot but advise those
who love his memory to let Servetus alone. Yet if any one
resolves to understand the whole affair, he may see a circum
stantial account of it, published some years since, by Dr.
Chandler, an eminent Presbyterian Divine in London.
7. Of myself I shall speak a little by and by. But I
would now speak of the Methodists, so called, in general.
Concerning these, Dr. E. cites the following words, from a
little tract, published some years since:--*
“We look upon ourselves, not as the authors or ring-leaders
of a particular sect or party, but as messengers of God to those
who are Christians in name, but Heathens in heart and life,
to call them back to that from which they are fallen, to real,
genuine Christianity.--We look upon the Methodists, not as
any particular party, but as living witnesses, in and to every
party, of that Christianity which we preach.” (Page 3.)
On this Dr. E. remarks: “If the Methodist Teachers
confined themselves to preaching, there might be some room
for this plea; but hardly, when they form bands and
classes;” that is, when they advise those who are “recalled
to real Christianity,” to watch over each other, lest they fall
again into the nominal religion, or no religion, that surrounds
them. But how does this alter the case? What, if, being
jealous, “lest any” of their brethren should again “be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,” they should
“exhort one another,” not only weekly, but daily, to cleave
to God “with full purpose of heart 1.” Why might we not
plead still, that these are not to “be looked upon as any
particular party, but as living witnesses, in and to every
party, of that Christianity which we preach?”
What Dr. E. says of the mischievousness of this, and with
great plausibility, (page 27,) depends upon an entire mistake,
namely, that the Leader of a class acts just like a Romish
Priest; and that the inquiries made in a class are of the
same kind with those made in auricular confession. It all
therefore falls to the ground at once, when it is observed,
* “Advice to the People called Methodists.”
that there is no resemblance at all, either between the
Leader and the Priest, or between the inquiries made by one
and by the other.
It is true, that the Leader “sees each person once a week,
to inquire how their souls prosper;” and that when they meet,
“the Leader or Teacher asks each a few questions relating to
the present situation of their minds.” So then, that questions
are actually asked, yea, and inquiries made, cannot be denied.
But what kind of questions or inquiries? None that expose
the answerer to any danger; none that they would scruple to
answer before Dr. E., or any other person that fears God.
8. “But you form a Church within a Church, whose mem
bers in South Britain profess to belong to the Church of
England, and those in North Britain to the Church of Scot
land; while yet they are inspected and governed by Teachers
who are sent, continued, or removed by Mr. W.” (Page 3.)
All this is, in a certain sense, very true. But let us see what
all this amounts to. “You form a Church within a Church;”
that is, you raise up and join together witnesses of real
Christianity, not among Mahometans and Pagans, but within
a Church by law established. Certainly so. And that Church,
if she knew her own interest, would see she is much obliged
to us for so doing. “But the Methodists in South Britain
profess to belong to the Church of England.” They profess
the truth: For they do belong to it; that is, all who did so
before the change was wrought, not in their external mode
of worship, but in their tempers and lives. “Nay, but those
in Scotland profess to belong to the Church of Scotland.”
And they likewise profess the truth: For they do belong to
it as they did before. And is there any harm in this?
“But they are still inspected by Mr. W. and his Preachers.”
And they think this both their duty and their privilege;
namely, to be still instructed, and built up in faith and love,
by those who were the instruments, in God’s hand, of bringing
them from dead, formal religion, to “righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost.” But still those Teachers are so
careful, not to withdraw them from the Church to which they
belong, not to make any division, that they neither baptize,
nor administer the Lord's supper. If I were desirous to
form a separate party, I should do both without delay.
9. I come now to add a few words, without any preface or
ceremony, concerning myself:--
Dr. E. affirms, First, that I am a very knave; and,
Secondly, that I am in a state of damnation. As to the
First, he says, “Truth and honesty choose to enter openly
and undisguised. “He that entereth not by the door’ of a
plain, simple declaration of his sentiments, but insinuates
himself by concealing his opinions, ‘the same is a thief and a
robber.’” (Page 5.) We have more to the same purpose:
“Upon mature reflection, I saw no cause to flatter myself, that
I could procure from him satisfaction as to what offended me.
He had discovered himself no novice in the arts of subtlety
and disguise.” (Page 24.) Again: “I find little else than
that shifting at which Mr. W. is so singularly expert.” This is
as genteel as to say, “Sir, you lie;” and it is just as strong an
argument. It is indeed mere common-place, with which a man.
fond of such flowers may embellish his page on any occasion.
But what room is there for it on this occasion? By God’s
help, I will sift this matter thoroughly. And I trust no
gentleman or scholar, who weighs what I say, will throw this
dirt in my face any more.
For several years I was Moderator in the disputations
which were held six times a week at Lincoln College, in
Oxford. I could not avoid acquiring hereby some degree of
expertness in arguing; and especially in discerning and
pointing out well-covered and plausible fallacies. I have
since found abundant reason to praise God for giving me this
honest art. By this, when men have hedged me in by what
they called demonstrations, I have been many times able to
dash them in pieces; in spite of all its covers, to touch the
very point where the fallacy lay; and it flew open in a
moment. This is the art which I have used with Bishop
Warburton, as well as in the preceding pages. When Dr. E.
twisted truth and falsehood together, in many of his proposi
tions, it was by this art I untwisted the one from the other,
and showed just how far each was true. At doing this, I
bless God, I am expert; as those will find who attack me
without rhyme or reason. But “shifting, subtlety, and dis
guise,” I despise and abhor, fully as much as Dr. E. And if
he cannot see that I have answered Bishop Warburton
plainly and directly, and so untwisted his arguments that no
man living will be able to piece them together, I believe all
unprejudiced men can, and are thoroughly convinced of it.
Let any candid man review the last article, and he will see
another instance of this. Dr. E. had given us a long
paragraph about “forming a Church within a Church.” It
is to the same effect with the objection which the warm
Churchmen have often urged against the Dissenters in
England. It sounds extremely plausible, and the parts of it
are carefully knit together. But it is not a gordian knot: A
man moderately expert in arguing may untie it. And when
the threads are separate, it plainly appears to have been fine,
but not strong.
As to the Second point, I cannot at all complain of Dr.
E.’s want of openness. He speaks plain and downright:
“Seeming strictness of behaviour will not justify those who
forget, ‘There is a way which seemeth right unto a man;
but the end thereof is the way of death.” (Page 46.)
Again: “What claim can he have to genuine Christianity,
whose professed experience gives God the lie? “Say I these
things as a man, or saith not the law the same also ?’ It is
a deadly charity that flatters men with a persuasion that
they are in the way of life, whom the Scripture pronounces
in a way of destruction.”
Dr. E.'s charity is of another kind It is Mr. Sandi
man’s charity It reminds me of the charity of an
Antinomian in London; one, I mean, who was newly
recovered from that delusion: “Sir,” said she, “last week I
would not have been content to kill you, if I could not have
damned you too.” I pray God to deliver me from such
charity ! charity, cruel as the gravel
But what right have I to complain of Dr. E. ? He has no
obligation to me. My speaking of him everywhere as I have
done, was a point of justice, not of friendship. I had only
the desire, but not the power, of doing him any kindness. I
could not say to him, “Nevertheless thou owest me thine
own soul also.” I have it not under Dr. E.'s hand, as I have
under Mr. Hervey's, “Shall I call you my father, or my
friend? You have been both to me.” If those related to
me by so near, so tender, ties, thus furiously rise up against
me, how much more may a stranger,-one of another nation?
“O Absalom, my son, my son 1’’
IN his twenty-first page, Dr. E. says, “How far Mr.
Wesley’s Letter was an answer to anything material in the
Preface, the reader will best judge by perusing it.” I have
annexed it here, that the reader may judge, whether it is not
an answer to one very material thing, namely, the charge of
“concealing my sentiments,” for which Dr. E. condemns me
in the keenest manner, and on which very account he makes
no scruple to pronounce me “a thief and a robber.” I need
only premise, that I wrote it not out of fear, (as perhaps Dr.
E. thought,) neither in guile; but merely out of love to him,
and concern for the cause of God. I desire no favour from
him or any opponent: Do me justice, and I ask no more.
EDINBURGH, April 24, 1765.
REv. SIR,
BETwEEN thirty and forty years I have had the world
upon me, speaking all manner of evil. And I expected no
less, as God had called me to testify that its deeds were evil.
But the children of God were not upon me; nor did I expect
they would. I rather hoped they would take knowledge,
that all my designs, and thought, and care, and labour, were
directed to this one point,--to advance the kingdom of
Christ upon earth. And so many of them did, however
differing from me both in opinions and modes of worship. I
have the pleasure to mention Dr. Doddridge, Dr. Watts, and
Mr. Wardrobe, in particular. How then was I surprised, as
well as concerned, that a child of the same Father, a servant
of the same Lord, a member of the same family, and (as to
the essence of it) a preacher of the same gospel, should,
without any provocation that I know of, declare open war
against me ! I was the more surprised, because you had
told me, some months since, that you would favour me with
a letter. And had this been done, I make no doubt but you
would have received full satisfaction. Instead of this, you
ushered into this part of the world one of the most bitter
libels that was ever written against me;--written by a dying
man, (so far as it was written by poor, well-meaning Mr.
Hervey,) with a trembling hand, just as he was tottering on
the margin of the grave. A great warrior resigned his
crown, because “there should be some interval,” he said,
“between fighting and death.” But Mr. Hervey, who had
been a man of peace all his life, began a war not six months
before he died. He drew his sword when he was just
putting off his body. He then fell on one to whom he had
the deepest obligations, (as his own letters, which I have now
in my hands, testify,) on one who had never intentionally
wronged him, who had never spoken an unkind word of him,
or to him, and who loved him as his own child. O tell it
not in Gath! The good Mr. Hervey, (if these Letters were
his) died cursing his spiritual father.
And these Letters another good man, Mr. , has
introduced into Scotland, and warmly recommended. Why
have you done this? “Because you have concealed your
principles, which is palpable dishonesty.”
When I was first invited into Scotland, (about fourteen
years ago,) Mr. Whitefield told me, “You have no business
there; for your principles are so well known, that if you
spoke like an angel, none would hear you. And if they did,
you would have nothing to do but to dispute with one and
another from morning to night.”
I answered: “If God sends me, people will hear. And I
will give them no provocation to dispute; for I will
studiously avoid controverted points, and keep to the
fundamental truths of Christianity. And if any still begin
to dispute, they may; but I will not dispute with them.”
I came: Hundreds and thousands flocked to hear. But I
was enabled to keep my word. I avoided whatever might
engender strife, and insisted upon the grand points, -the
religion of the heart, and salvation by faith,-at all times,
and in all places. And by this means I have cut off all
occasion of dispute, from the first day to this very hour.
And this you amazingly improve into a fault; construe into a
proof of dishonesty. You likewise charge me with holding
unsound principles, and with saying, “Right opinions are
(sometimes) no part of religion.”
The last charge I have answered over and over, and very
lately to Bishop Warburton. Certainly, had you read that
single tract, you would never have repeated that stale
objection.
As to my principles, every one knows, or may know, that
I believe the Thirty-first Article of the Church of England.
But can none be saved who believe this? I know you will
not say so. Meantime, in the main point (justification by
faith) I have not wavered a moment for these seven-and
twenty years. And I allow all which Mr. Hervey himself
contends for, in his entrance upon the subject, --“Come to
Jesus as a needy beggar; hang upon him as a devoted
pensioner.” And whoever does this, I will be bold to say,
shall not perish everlastingly.
As to your main objection, convince me that it is my duty
to preach on controverted subjects, predestination in par
ticular, and I will do it. At present I think it would be a
sin. I think it would create still more divisions. And are
there not enough already? I have seen a book written by
one who styles himself, “Ecclesiae direptae et gementis
Presbyter.”* Shall I tear ecclesiam direptam et gementem?t
God forbid! No; I will, so far as I can, heal her breaches.
And if you really love her, (as I doubt not you do,) why
should you hinder me from so doing? Has she so many
friends and helpers left, that you should strive to lessen their
number? Would you wish to turn any of her friends, even
though weak and mistaken, into enemies? If you must
contend, have you not Arians, Socinians, Seceders, Infidels,
to contend with ; to say nothing of whoremongers, adulterers,
Sabbath-breakers, drunkards, common swearers? O ecclesia
gemens ! And will you pass by all these, and single out me
to fight with? Nay, but I will not. I do and will fight
with all these, but not with you. I cannot; I dare not.
You are the son of my Father; my fellow-labourer in the
gospel of his dear Son. I love your person; I love your
character; I love the work wherein you are engaged. And
if you will still shoot at me, (because Mr. Hervey has painted
me as a monster) even with arrows drawn from Bishop
Warburton’s quiver, (how unfit for Mr. 's hand!) I can
only say, as I always did before, The Lord Jesus bless you in
your soul, in your body, in your relations, in your work, in
whatever tends to his own glory !
I am,
Dear Sir,
Your affectionate brother,
• A Presbyter of a pillaged and groaning Church.-EDIT.
+ This Church which is torn asunder and groaning.--EDIT.