Thoughts, Addresses, Prayers, Letters
G r and R a pids G-6 Michig an
This edition of the complete and unabridged
THE WoRks of JoHN WESLEY is reproduced
by the photo offset process from the authorized
edition published by the Wesleyan Conference
Office in London, England, in 1872.
Lithographed in the United States of America
* * - *
* -
, , conTENTs
I. Page.
Serious Thoughts occasioned by the late Earthquake at
Lisbon. . . . . . . . . . . . .• • • - - - - - - - • • * * * * * * * I
Free Thoughts on the Present State of Public Affairs:
In a Letter to a Friend. . . . .• - - - - - - - - - - - - . . . 14
Thoughts upon Liberty . . . . . . . . . . . .• * * * * * * * * * * 3 *
Thoughts concerning the Origin of Power . . . . . . . . . . . 4G,
Thoughts on the Present Scarcity of Provisions . . . . . . . £3
Thoughts upon Slavery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A Call" Addrcss to our American Colonies. . . . . . . . . . . 80
:Some Observations on Liberty : Occasioned by a late Tract 90
A Seasonable Address to the more serious part of the
Inhabitants of Great Britain, respecting the Unhappy
Contcst between us and our American Brethren :
With an occasional Word interspersed to those of a
different Complexion. By a Lover of Peace . . . . . . } | {}
State Univers, uy of iowa
X. Page.
A Calm Address to the Inhabitants of England . . . . . . . 129
A Serious Address to the People of England, with regard
to the State of the Nation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
A Compassionate. Address to the Inhabitants of Ireland. . 149
How far is it the Duty of a Christian Minister to Preach
Politics 2 . . . . . .• * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * . . . . . 154
An Estimate of the Manners of the Present Times . . . . . 156
A Word to a Sabbath-Breaker. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
A Word to a Swearer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
A Word to a Drunkard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
A Word to an Unhappy Woman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
A Word to a Smuggler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
A Word to a Condemned Malefactor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
A Word in Season: Or, Advice to an Englishman . . . . . 182
A Word to a Protestant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187
XXIII. Page.
A Word to a Freeholder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 196
Advice to a Soldier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 198
A Collection of Forms of Prayer, for every Day in the
Week. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
A Collection of Prayers for Families. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237
Arayers for Children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250
A Short Account of the Life and Death of the Reverend
John Fletcher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
of HIs PARENTAGE AND YoUTH . . . . . . . . . . . . .277
oF HIs conversIon Tê GoD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 282
MADELEY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
FROM HIs seTTLING AT MAD ELEY, To HIs LEAV
ING TREVECKA . . . . . . . . . . . • - - - - - . . . . . . 292
FROM HIs LEAVING TREVEcKA, To IIIs GoING To
BRISTOL . . . . . . . . . . . . - - - - - - - - - - - - . . . .300
FROM HIs LEAVING NEWINGTON, TILL His RETURN
OF HIS MARRIAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326
The University of low- 1 \\raries,
vi CONTENTS.
CHAPTER VIII. Page.
FROM HIS MARRIAGE, To THE BEGINNING of His
LAST ILLNESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
HIS CHARACTER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.10
HIS DEATH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 356
A Plain Account of Christian Perfection, as believed and
taught by the Reverend Mr. John Wesley, from the
year 1725 to the year 1777 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3G6
Brief Thoughts on Christian Perfection . . . . . . . . . . . . 416
Some Thoughts on an Expression of St. Paul, in the
First Epistle to the Thessalonians, v. 23 . . . . . . . . 447
On Christian Perfection. To the Rev. Mr. Dodd . . . . . 44S
An Answer to the Rev. Mr. Dodd . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45()
Some Account of the late Dr. Dodd . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 k.
Thoughts on a Single Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 456
A Thought upon Marriage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4C3
Advice to the People called Methodists, with regard to
Dress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 466
Thoughts upon Dress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 477
CoNTENTS. vii
XXXIX. Page.
A Letter to the Ilev. Mr. Thomas Maxfield: Occasioned
by a late Publication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 478
A Clear and Concise Demonstration of the Divine
Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 [.
The Iteal Character of Montanus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 485
Letter on Preaching Christ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 486
Thoughts on Salvation by Faith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 492
4God's Eyes are over all the Earth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 496
A l'emarkable Providence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 497
An Account of the Brothers’ Steps.• • e o e o e o e - e. e. e. e. e. 498.
A Providential Event . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 500
An Extraordinary Cure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 501
Murder Prevented by a three-fold Dream . . . . . . . . . . . 502.
An Answer to a Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503.
A Letter to a Friend concerning Tea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 504
viii CONTENTS.
Thoughts on Nervous Disorders: Particularly that
which is usually termed Lowness of Spirits. . . . . . . 515
A Scheme of Self-Examination. Used by the First
Methodists in Oxford . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521
Thoughts upon Dissipation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 524
A Question concerning Dew on Coach-Glasses . . . . . . . . 526
Some Account of an Eminent Man . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 527
oCCAsiONED BY
[rn 1NTED 1N THE YEAR 1755.]
Tua res agitur, paries quum proximus ardet.*
THINKING men generally allow that the greater part of
amodern Christians are not more virtuous than the ancient
Heathems; perhaps less so; since public spirit, love of our
country, generous honesty, and simple truth, are scarce any
where to be found. On the contrary, covetousness, ambition,
various injustice, luxury, and falsehood in every kind, have
infected every rank and denomination of people, the Clergy
themselves not excepted. Now, they who believe there is a
God are apt to believe he is not well pleased with this.
Nay, they think, he has intimated it very plainly, in many
parts of the Christian world. How many hundred thousand
men have been swept away by war, in Europe only, within
half a century! How many thousands, within little more
than this, hath the earth opened her mouth and swallowed
up ! Numbers sunk at Port-Royal, and rose no more!
Many thousands went quick into the pit at Lima ! The
whole city of Catanea, in Sicily, and every inhabitant of it,
perished together. Nothing but heaps of ashes and cinders
show where it stood. Not so much as one Lot escaped out
of Sodom !
And what shall we say of the late accounts from Portugal?
That some thousand houses, and many thousand persons, are
no more ! that a fair city is now in ruinous heaps | Is there
indeed a God that judges the world? And is he now making
inquisition for blood? If so, it is not surprising, he should
begin there, where so much blood has been poured on the
* This quotation from IIorace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“"Tis your own interest that calls
When flames invade your neighbour's walls."-l.pl r.
ground like water ! where so many brave men have been
murdered, in the most base and cowardly as well as barbarous
manner, almost every day, as well as every night, while none
regarded or laid it to heart. “Let them hunt and destroy
the precious life, so we may secure our stores of gold and
precious stones.”* How long has their blood been crying
from the earth! Yea, how long has that bloody House of
Mercy,t the scandal not only of all religion, but even of human
mature, stood to insult both heaven and earth ! “And shall
I not visit for these things, saith the Lord? Shall not my
soul be avenged on such a city as this?”
It has been the opinion of many, that even this nation has
not been without some marks of God’s displeasure. Has not
war been let loose even within our own land, so that London
itself felt the alarm? Has not a pestilential sickness brokcn
in upon our cattle, and, in many parts, left not one of them
alive? And although the earth does not yet open in England
or Ireland, has it not shook, and reeled to and fro like a
drunken man? and that not in one or two places only, but
almost from one end of the kingdom to the other?
Perhaps one might ask, Was there nothing uncommon,
nothing more than is usual at this season of the year, in
the rains, the hail, the winds, the thunder and lightning
which we have lately heard and scen? particularly, in the
storm which was the same day and hour that they were
playing off Macbeth's thunder and lightning at the theatre.
One would almost think they designed this (inasmuch as the
entertainment continued, notwithstanding all the artillery of
heaven) as a formal answer to that question, “Canst thou
thunder with a voice like Him?”
What shall we say to the affair of Whitson Cliffs? of which,
were it not for the unparalleled stupidity of the English, all
England would have rang long ago, from one sea to another.
And yet, seven miles from the place, they knew little more of
it in May last, than if it had happened in China or Japan.
The fact (of the truth of which any who will be at the
pains of inquiring may soon be satisficd) is this: On Tuesday,
* Merchants who have lived in Portugal inform us, that the King had a large
building filled with diamonds; and more gold stored up, coined and uncoined,
than all the other princes of Europe together.
+ The title which the Inquisition of Portugal (if not in other countries also)
takes to itself.
March 25, last, (being the week before Easter) many persons
heard a great noise near a ridge of mountains, called Black
Hamilton, in Yorkshire. It was observed chiefly on the
south-west side of the mountain, about a mile from the course
where the Hamilton races are run, near a ledge of rocks,
commonly called Whitson Cliffs, two miles from Sutton, and
about five from Thirsk.
The same noise was heard on Wednesday by all who went
that way. On Thursday, about seven in the morning, Edward
Abbot, weaver, and Adam Bosomworth, bleacher, both of
Sutton, riding under Whitson Cliffs, heard a roaring (so they
termed it) like many cannons, or loud and rolling thunder.
It seemed to come from the cliffs; looking up to which, they
saw a large body of stone, four or five yards broad, split and
fly off from the very top of the rock. They thought it strange,
but rode on. Between ten and eleven, a larger piece of the
rock, about fifteen yards thick, thirty high, and between sixty
and seventy broad, was torn off and thrown into the valley.
About seven in the evening, one who was riding by observed
the ground to shake exceedingly; and soon after several large
stones or rocks, of some tons weight cach, rose out of the
ground. Others were thrown on one side, others turned
upside down, and many rolled over and over. Being a little
surprised, and not very curious, he hasted on his way.
On Friday and Saturday the ground continued to shake,
and the rocks to roll over one another. The earth also clave
asunder in very many places, and continued so to do till
Sunday morning.
Being at Osmotherley, seven miles from the Cliffs, on
Monday, June 1, and finding Edward Abbot there, I desired
him the next morning to show me the way thither. I
walked, crept, and climbed round and over great part of the
ruins. I could not perceive by any sign, that there was ever
any cavity in the rock at all; but one part of the solid stone
is cleft from the rest, in a perpendicular line, and as smooth
as if cut with instruments. Nor is it barely thrown down,
but split into many hundred pieces, some of which lie four or
five hundred yards from the main rock.
The ground nearest the cliff is not raised, but sunk con
siderably beneath the level. But, at some distance, it is
raised in a ridge of eight or ten yards high, twelve or fifteen
broad, and near a hundred long. Adjoining to this lies an
oval piece of ground, thirty or forty yards in diameter, which
has been removed, whole as it is, from beneath the cliff,
without the least fissure, with all its load of rocks, some of
which were as large as the hull of a small ship. At a little
distance is a second piece of ground, forty or fifty yards
across, which has also been transplanted entire, with rocks of
various sizes upon it, and a tree growing out of one of them.
By the removal of one or both of these, I suppose the hollow
near the cliff was made.
All round them lay stones and rocks, great and small, some
on the surface of the earth, some half sunk into it, some almost
covered, in variety of positions. Between these the ground
was cleft asunder in a thousand places. Some of the apertures
were nearly closed again, some gaping as at first. Between
thirty and forty acres of land, as is commonly supposed,
(though some reckon above sixty,) are in this condition.
On the skirts of these, I observed, in abundance of places,
the green turf (for it was pasture-land) as it were pared off,
two or three inches thick, and wrapped round like sheets of
lead. A little farther it was not cleft or broken at all, but
raised in ridges, five or six foot long, exactly resembling the
graves in a churchyard. Of these there is a vast number.
That part of the cliff from which the rest is torn, lies so
high and is now of so bright a colour, that it is plainly
visible to all the country round, even at the distance of
several miles. We saw it distinctly, not only from the street
in Thirsk, but for five or six miles after, as we rode toward
York. So we did likewise in the great North Road, between
Sandhutton and Northallerton.
But how may we account for this phenomenon? Was it
effected by a merely natural cause? If so, that cause must
either have been fire, water, or air. It could not be fire; for
then some mark of it must have appeared, either at the time,
or after it. But no such mark does appear, nor ever did;
not so much as the least smoke, either when the first or
second rock was removed, or in the whole space between
Tuesday and Sunday.
It could not be water; for no water issued out, when the
one or the other rock was torn off. Nor had there been any
rains for some time before. It was in that part of the country
a remarkable dry season. Neither was there any cavity in
that part of the rock, wherein a sufficient quantity of water
might have lodged. On the contrary, it was one single, solid
mass, which was evenly and smoothly cleft in sunder.
There remains no other natural cause assignable, but
imprisoned air. I say imprisoned; for as to the fashionable
opinion, that the exterior air is the grand agent in earth
quakes, it is so senseless, unmechanical, unphilosophical a
dream, as deserves not to be named but to be exploded. But
it is hard to conceive, how even imprisoned air could produce
such an effect. It might indeed shake, tear, raise, or sink
the earth; but how could it cleave a solid rock? Here was
not room for a quantity of it sufficient to do anything of
this nature; at least, unless it had been suddenly and
violently expanded by fire, which was not the case. Could a
small quantity of air, without that violent expansion, have
torn so large a body of rock from the rest, to which it
adhered in one solid mass? Could it have shivered this into
pieces, and scattered several of those pieces some hundred
yards round? Could it have transported those promon
torics of carth with their incumbent load, and set them down
unbroken, unchanged, at a distance? Truly I am not so
great a volunteer in faith as to be able to believe this. He
that supposes this, must suppose air to be not only very
strong, (which we allow,) but a very wise agent; while it
bore its charge with so great caution, as not to hurt or
dislocate any part of it.
What, then, could be the cause? What indeed, but God,
who arose “to shake terribly the earth;” who purposely
chose such a place, where there is so great a concourse of
nobility and gentry every year; and wrought in such a manner,
that many might see it and fear,-that all who travel one of the
most frequented roads in England might see it, almost whether
they would or no, for many miles together? It must like
wise for many years, maugre all the art of man, be a visible
monument of His power; all that ground being now so
incumbered with rocks and stones, that it cannot be either
ploughed or grazed. Nor can it well serve any use, but to
tell all that see it, Who can stand before this great God?
Who can account for the late motion in the waters; not
Aonly that of the sea, and rivers communicating therewith, but
even that in canals, fishponds, cisterns, and all either largc or
small bodies of water? It was particularly observed, that
while thc watcr itself was so violently agitated, neither did the
G SERIOUS ThouGHTS ON
earth shake at all, nor any of the vessels which contained
that water. Was such a thing ever known or heard of before?
I know not, but it was spoken of once, near eighteen hundred
years ago, in those remarkable words, “There shall be assauoi"
(not only “earthquakes,” but various “concussions” or
“shakings”) “in divers places.” And so there have been in
Spain, in Portugal, in Italy, in Holland, in England, in Ireland;
and not improbably in many other places too, which we are
not yet informed of. Yet it does not seem that a concussion
of this kind has ever been known before, since either the
same or some other comet revolved so near the earth. For
wc know of no other natural causc in the universe which is
adequate to such an effect. And that this is the real cause,
we may very possibly be convinced in a short time.
but alas! why should we not be convinced sooner, while
that conviction may avail, that it is not chance which governs
the world? Why should we not now, before London is as
Lisbon, Lima, or Catanea, acknowlcdge the hand of the
Almighty, arising to maintain his own cause? Why, we
have a general answer always ready, to screen us from any
such conviction: “All these things are purely natural and
accidental; the result of natural causes.” But there are two
objections to this answer: First, it is untrue: Secondly, it
is uncomfortable.
First. If by affirming, “All this is purely natural,” you
mean, it is not providential, or that God has nothing to do
with it, this is not true, that is, supposing the Bible to be
true. For supposing this, you may descant ever so long on
the natural causes of murrain, winds, thunder, lightning, and
yet you are altogether wide of the mark, you prove nothing
at all, unless you can prove that God never works in or by
natural causes. But this you cannot prove; may, none can
doubt of his so working, who allows the Scripture to be of
God. For this asserts, in the clearest and strongest terms,
that “all things” (in nature) “serve him;” that (by or
without a train of natural causes) He “sendeth his rain on
the earth;” that He “bringeth the winds out of his
treasures,” and “maketh a way for the lightning and the
thunder;” in general, that “fire and hail, snow and vapour,
wind and storm, fulfil his word.” Therefore, allowing there
are natural causes of all these, they are still under the direc
tion of the Lord of nature: Nay, what is nature itself, but
the art of God, or God’s method of acting in the material
world? True philosophy therefore ascribes all to God, and
says, in the beautiful language of the wise and good man,
Here like a trumpet, loud and strong,
Thy thunder shakes our coast;
While the red lightnings wave along,
The banners of thy host.
A Second objection to your answer is, It is extremely
uncomfortable. For if things really be as you affirm; if all
these afflictive incidents entirely depend on the fortuitous
concourse and agency of blind, material causes; what hope,
what help, what resource is left for the poor sufferers by
them? Should the murrain among the cattle continue a
few years longer, and consequently produce scarcity or
famine, what will there be left for many of the poor to do,
but to lie down and die? If tainted air spread a pestilence
over our land, where shall they fly for succour? They cannot
resist either the one or other; they cannot escape from
them. And can they hope to appease
Illachrymabilem Plutona 3
Inexorable Pluto, king of shades 2
Shall they intreat the famine or the pestilence to show mercy?
Alas! they are as senseless as you suppose God to be.
However, you who are men of fortune can shift tolerably
well, in spite of these difficulties. Your money will undoubt
edly procure you food as long as there is any in the kingdom.
And if your Physicians cannot secure you from the epidemic
disease, your coaches can carry you from the place of infec
tion. Be it so: But you are not out of all danger yet, unless
you can drive faster than the wind. Are you sure of this?
And are your horses literally swifter than the lightning?
Can they leave the panting storm behind? If not, what will
you do when it overtakes you? Try your eloquence on the
whirlwind. Will it hear your voice? Will it regard either
your money, or prayers, or tears? Call upon the lightning.
Cry aloud; see whether your voice will “divide the flames of
fire.” O no ! it hath no ears to hear ! It devoureth and
showeth no pity!
But this is not all. IIere is a nearer enemy. The carth
threatens to swallow you up. Where is your protection
now? What defence do you find from thousands of gold
and silver? You cannot fly; for you cannot quit the earth,
unless you will leave your dear body behind you. And while
you are on the earth, you know not where to flee to, neither
where to flee from. You may buy intelligence, where the
shock was yesterday, but not where it will be to-morrow,
to-day. It comes I The roof trembles J The beams crack |
The ground rocks to and fro! Hoarse thunder resounds
from the bowels of the earth ! And all these are but the
beginning of sorrows. Now, what help? What wisdom can
prevent, what strength resist, the blow 7 What money can
purchase, I will not say deliverance, but an hour's reprieve?
Poor honourable fool, where are now thy titles? Wealthy
fool, where is now thy golden god? If any thing can help,
it must be prayer. But what wilt thou pray to? Not to the
God of heaven; you suppose him to have nothing to do with
earthquakes. No; they proceed in a merely natural way,
either from the earth itself, or from included air, or from
subterraneous fires or waters. If thou prayest, then, (which
perhaps you never did before,) it must be to some of these.
Begin: “O earth, earth, earth, hear the voice of thy children :
Hear, O air, water, fire !” And will they hear? You
know it cannot be. How deplorable, then, is his condition,
who in such an hour has none else to flee to ! How uncom
fortable the supposition, which implies this, by direct necessary
consequence, namely, that all these things are the pure result
of merely natural causes!
But supposing the earthquake which made such havoc at
Lisbon should never travel so far as London, is there nothing
else which can reach us? What think you of a comet?
Are we absolutely out of the reach of this? You cannot say
we are; seeing these move in all directions, and through
every region of the universe. And would the approach of
one of these amazing spheres be of no importance to us?
especially in its return from the sun; when that immense body
is (according to Sir Isaac Newton’s calculation) heated two
thousand times hotter than a red-hot cannon-ball. The late
ingenious and accurate Dr. Halley (never yet suspected of
enthusiasm) fixes the return of the great comet in the year
1758; and he observes that the last time it revolved, it moved
in the very same line which the earth describes in her annual
course round the sun; but the earth was on the other side of
her orbit. Whereas, in this revolution, it will move, not
only in the same line, but in the same part of that line
wherein the earth moves. And “who can tell,” says that great
man, “what the consequences of such a contact may be?”
Who can tell / Any man of common understanding, who
knows the very first elements of astronomy. The immediate
consequence of such a body of solid fire touching the earth
must necessarily be, that it will set the earth on fire, and
burn it to a coal, if it do not likewise strike it out of its
course; in which case, (so far as we can judge,) it must drop
down directly into the sun.
But what, if this vast body is already on its way? if it is
nearer than we are aware of? What, if these unusual,
unprecedented motions of the waters be one effect of its near
approach? We cannot be certain that it will be visible to
the inhabitants of our globe, till it has imbibed the solar fire.
But possibly we may see it sooner than we desire. We may
see it, not as Milton speaks,--
From its horrid hair
Shake pestilence and war;
but ushering in far other calamities than these, and of more
extensive influence. Probably it will be seen first drawing
nearer and nearer, till it appears as another moon in magni
tude, though not in colour, being of a deep fiery red; then
scorching and burning up all the produce of the earth, driving
away all clouds, and so cutting off the hope or possibility of
any rain or dew; drying up every fountain, stream, and river,
causing all faces to gather blackness, and all men’s hearts to
fail; then executing its grand commission on the globe itself,
and causing the stars to fall from heaven." O, who may
abide when this is done? Who will then be able to stand?
Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque regia caeli
Ardeat; et mundi moles operosa laboret 3+
What shall we do? do now, that none of these things
may come upon us unawares? We are wisely and diligently
• What security is there against all this, upon the infidel hypothesis ? But
upon the Christian, there is abundant security : For the Scripture prophecies arc
not yet fulfilled.
+ This quotation from Ovid is thus translated by Drydcn :
“When all his blazing worlds above shall burn,
And all the inferior globc to cinders turn ?"-En IT.
providing for our defence against one enemy; with such a
watchful wisdom and active diligence, as is a comfort to every
honest Englishman. But why should we not show the same
wisdom and diligence in providing against all our enemies?
And if our wisdom and strength be sufficient to defend us,
let us not seek any further. Let us without delay recruit our
forces, and guard our coasts against the famine, and murrain,
and pestilence; and still more carefully against immoderate
rains, and winds, and lightnings, and earthquakes, and
comets; that we may no longer be under any painful appre
hensions of any present or future danger, but may smile,
Secure, amidst the jar of elements,
The wreck of matter, and the crush of worlds !
But if our own wisdom and strength be not sufficient to
defend us, let us not be ashamed to seek farther help. Let
us even dare to own we believe there is a God; nay, and
not a lazy, indolent, epicurean deity, who sits at ease upon
the circle of the heavens, and neither knows nor cares what
is done below ; but one who, as he created heaven and
carth, and all the armies of them, as he sustains them all
by the word of his power, so cannot neglect the work of his
own hands. With pleasure we own there is such a God,
whose eye pervades the whole sphere of created beings, who
knoweth the number of the stars, and calleth them all by
their names; a God whose wisdom is as the great abyss,
deep and wide as etermity;
Who, high in power, in the beginning said,
Let sea, and air, and earth, and heaven be made:
And it was so : And when he shall ordain
In other sort, hath but to speak again,
And they shall be no more :
Yet more; whose mercy riseth above the heavens, and his
faithfulness above the clouds; who is loving to every man,
and his mercy over all his works. Let us secure him on our
side; let us make this wise, this powerful, this gracious
God our friend. Then need we not fear, though the earth
be moved, and the hills be carried into the midst of the sea;.
no, not though the heavens being on fire are dissolved, and
the very elements melt with fervent heat. It is enough
that the Lord of hosts is with us, the God of love is our
everlasting refuge.
- -
But how shall we secure the favour of this great God?
How, but by worshipping him in spirit and in truth; by
uniformly imitating Him we worship, in all his imitable
perfections? without which the most accurate systems of
opinions, all external modes of religion, are idle cobwebs of
the brain, dull farce and empty show. Now, God is love:
Love God then, and you are a true worshipper. Love man
kind, and God is your God, your Father, and your Friend.
But see that you deceive not your own soul; for this is not a
point of small importance. And by this you may know : If
you love God, then you are happy in God; if you love God,
riches, honours, and the pleasures of sense are no more to
you than bubbles on the water: You look on dress and
equipage, as the tassels of a fool’s cap; diversions, as the bells
on a fool's coat. If you love God, God is in all your thoughts,
and your whole life is a sacrifice to him. And if you love
mankind, it is your one design, desire, and endeavour, to
spread virtue and happiness all around you; to lessen the
present sorrows, and increase the joys, of every child of man;
and, if it be possible, to bring them with you to the rivers of
pleasure that are at God’s right hand for evermore.
But where shall you find one who answers this happy
and amiable character? Wherever you find a Christian;
for this, and this alone, is real, genuine Christianity. Surely
you did not imagine that Christianity was no more than
such a system of opinions as is vulgarly called faith; or a
strict and regular attendance on any kind of external
worship. O no! Were this all that it implied, Christianity
were indeed a poor, empty, shallow thing; such as none but
half-thinkers could admire, and all who think freely and
generously must despise. But this is not the case; the
spirit above described, this alone, is Christianity. And, if so,
it is no wonder that even a celebrated unbeliever should
make that frank declaration, “Well, after all, these Christian
dogs are the happiest fellows upon earth !” Indeed they
are. Nay, we may say more; they are the only happy men
upon earth; and that though we should have no regard at
all to the particular circumstances above mentioned; suppose
there was no such thing as a comet in the universe, or none
that would ever approach the solar system; suppose there
had never been an earthquake in the world, or that we were
assured there never would be another; yet what advantage
has a Christian (I mean always a real, scriptural Christian)
above all other men upon earth !
What advantage has he over you in particular, if you do
not believe the Christian system | For suppose you have
utterly driven away storms, lightnings, earthquakes, comets,
yet there is another grim enemy at the door; and you cannot
drive him away. It is death. “O that death,” (said a
gentleman of large possessions, of good health, and a cheerful
natural temper,) “I do not love to think of it! It comes in
and spoils all !” So it does indeed. It comes with its
“miscreated front,” and spoils all your mirth, diversions,
pleasures ! It turns all into the silence of a tomb, into
rottenness and dust; and many times it will not stay till the
trembling hand of old age beckons to it; but it leaps upon
you while you are in the dawn of life, in the bloom and
strength of your years.
* *
* The morning flowers display their swects,
And gay their silken leaves unfold,
Unmindful of the noon-tide heats,
And fearless of the evening cold.
Nipp'd by the wind's unkindly blast,
Parch'd by the sun's directer ray,
The momentary glories waste,
The short-lived beauties die away.
And where are you then? Does your soul disperse and
dissolve into common air Or does it share the fate of its
former companion, and moulder into dust? Or does it
remain conscious of its own existence, in somc distant,
unknown world? It is all unknown A black, dreary,
melancholy scene ! Clouds and darkness rest upon it.
But the case is far otherwise with a Christian. To him life
and immortality are brought to light. His eye pierces through
the vale of the shadow of death, and sees into the glories of
etermity. His view does not terminate on that black line,
The verge 'twixt mortal and immortal being;
tut extends beyond the bounds of time and place, to the
bouse of God eternal in the heavens. Hence he is so far
from looking upon death as an enemy, that he longs to feel
his welcome embrace. He groans (but they are pleasing
groans) to have mortality swallowed up of life.
Perhaps you will say, “But this is all a drcam. He is
only in a fool's paradise!” dream.
Supposing he be, it is a pleasing
Maneat mentis gratissimus error /*
If he is only in a fool's paradise, yet it is a paradise; while
you are wandering in a wide, weary, barren world. Be it
folly; his folly gives him that present happiness which all
your wisdom cannot find. So that he may now turn the
tables upon you, and say, -
“Who?'er can ease by folly get,
With safety may despise
The wretched, unenjoying wit,
The miserable wise.”
Such unspeakable advantage (even if there is none beyond
death) has a Christian over an Infidel ! It is true, he has
given up some pleasures before he could attain to this. But
what pleasures? That of eating till he is sick; till he
weakens a strong, or quite destroys a weak, constitution.
He has given up the pleasure of drinking a man into a beast,
and that of ranging from one worthless creature to another,
till he brings a canker upon his estate, and perhaps rotten
ness into his bones. But in lieu of these, he has now
(whatever may be hereafter) a continual serenity of mind, a
constant evenness and composure of temper, “a peace which
passeth all understanding.” He has learned in every state
wherein he is, therewith to be content; nay, to give thanks,
as being clearly persuaded, it is better for him than any
other. He feels continual gratitude to his supreme Bene
factor, Father of Spirits, Parent of Good; and tender,
disinterested benevolence to all the children of this common
Father. May the Father of your spirit, and the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, make you such a Christian 1 May
He work in your soul a divine conviction of things not
discerned by eyes of flesh and blood 1 May He give you to
see Him that is invisible, and to taste of the powers of the
world to come ! May He fill you with all peace and joy in
believing, that you may be happy in life, in death, in
eternity
* Let this pleasing mental error remain.-EDIT.
Periculosae plenum opus alea
Tractas; et incedis per ignes
Suppositos cineri doloso.*-HonAT.
YoU desire me to give you my thoughts freely on the
present state of public affairs. But do you consider? I am
no politician; politics lie quite out of my province. Neither
have I any acquaintance, at least no intimacy, with any that
bear that character. And it is no easy matter to form any
judgment concerning things of so complicated a nature. It
is the more difficult, because, in order to form our judgment,
such a multitude of facts should be known, few of which can
be known with tolerable exactness by any but those who are
eye-witnesses of them. And how few of these will relate
what they have seen precisely as it was, without adding,
omitting, or altering any circumstance, either with or with
out design And may not a slight addition or alteration
give a quite different colour to the whole?
And as we cannot easily know, with any accuracy, the facts
on which we are chiefly to form our judgment; so, much less
can we expect to know the various springs of action which
gave rise to those facts, and on which, more than on the bare
actions themselves, the characters of the actors depend. It
is on this account that an old writer advises us to judge
* Thus translated by Francis :
“You treat adventurous, and incautious tread
On fires with faithless embers overspread.”--EDIT.
FREE Though TS ON PUBLIC AFFAIRS. 15
nothing before the time; to abstain, as far as possible, from
judging peremptorily, either of things or persons, till thc
time comes, when “the hidden things of darkness,” the facts
now concealed, “will be brought to light,” and the hidden
springs of action will be discovered,--“the thoughts and
intents of" every human “heart.”
Perhaps you will say, “Nay, every Englishman is a politi
cian; we suck in politics with our mother's milk. It is as
natural for us to talk politics as to breathe; we can instruct
both the King and his Council. We can in a trice reform the
State, point out every blunder of this or that Minister, and
tell every step they ought to take to be arbiters of all Europe.”
I grant, every cobbler, tinker, porter, and hackney-coachman
can do this; but I am not so deep learned: While they are
sure of everything, I am in a manner sure of nothing;
except of that very little which I see with my own eyes, or
hear with my own ears. However, since you desire me to
tell you what I think, I will do it with all openness. Only
please to remember, I do not take upon me to dictate eithcr
to you or to any one. I only use the privilege of an English
man, to speak my naked thoughts; setting down just what
appears to me to be the truth, till I have better information.
At present, indeed, I have not much information, having
read little upon this head but the public papers; and you
know these arc mostly on one side; in them little is to be seen
on the other side; and that little is seldom wrote by masterly
writers. How few of them have such a pen as Junius !
But supposing we have cver so much information, how
little can one rely on it! on the information given by either
party For is not onc as warm as the other? And who does
mot know how impossible it is for a man to sce things right
when he is angry? Does not passion blind the eyes of the
understanding, as smoke does the bodily eyes? And how
little of the truth can we learn from those who sec nothing
but through a cloud 7
This advantage then I have over both parties,--the being
angry at neither. So that if I have a little understanding
from nature or experience, it is (in this instance at least)
unclouded by passion. I wish the same happiness which I
wish to myself, to those on one side and on the other. I
would not hurt either in the lcast degree; I would not
willingly give them any pain.
I have likewise another advantage, that of having no bias
one way or the other. I have no interest depending; I want
no man’s favour, having no hopes, no fears, from any man;
and having no particular attachment of any kind to either of
the contending parties.
But am I so weak as to imagine, that because I am not
angry at them, they will not be angry at me? No; I do not
imagine any such thing. Probably both will be angry
enough; that is, the warm men on both sides, were it only
for this, -that I am not as warm as themselves. For what
is more insufferable to a man in a passion, than to see you
keep your temper? And is it not a farther provocation, that
I do not behave as he does to his opponent; that I call him
no ill names; that I give him no ill words? I expect, there
fore, to be abused on all sides; and cannot be disappointed,
unless by being treated with common humanity.
This premised, I come to the point, to give you my “free
thoughts on the present state of public affairs;” the causes
and consequences of the present commotions. But permit me
to remind you, that I say nothing peremptorily. I do not take
upon me to affirm, that things are thus or thus. I just set down
my naked thoughts, and that without any art or colouring.
“What then do you think is the direct and principal
cause of the present public commotions, of the amazing
ferment among the people, the general discontent of the
nation?” which now rises to an higher degree than it has
done in the memory of man; insomuch that I have heard it
affirmed with my own ears, “King George ought to be treated
as King Charles was 1” Is it the extraordinary bad character
of the King? I do not apprehend it is. Certainly, if he is
not, as some think, the best Prince in Europe, he is far from
being the worst. One not greatly prejudiced in his favour
does not charge him with want of virtue, (of this he judges
him to have more than enough,) but with wanting those
royal vices, which (with Machiavel and the ingenious Doctor
Mandeville) he supposes would be public benefits.
“But does he not likewise want understanding?” So it
has been boldly affirmed. And it must be acknowledged, this
charge is supported by facts which cannot be denied. The
First is, he believes the Bible; the Second, he fears God; the
Third, he loves the Queen. Now, suppose the First of these,
considering the prejudice of education, might consist with some
share of understanding, yet how can this be allowed with
regard to the Second? For although, in the times of igno
rance and barbarism men imagined, “the fear of God” was
“the beginning of wisdom,” our enlightened age has discovered
it is the end of it; that whenever the fear of God begins,
wisdom is at an end. And with regard to the Third, for a
man to love his wife, unless perhaps for a month or two,
must argue such utter want of sense, as most men of rank are
now ashamed of. But, after all, there are some who, allowing
the facts, deny the consequence; who still believe, and that
after the most accurate inquiry, from such as have had the best
means of information, that there are few noblemen or gentle
men in the nation, (and we have many not inferior to most in
Europe,) who have either so good a natural understanding, or
so general a knowledge of all the valuable parts of learning.
“But suppose something might be said for His Majesty's
understanding, what can be said in excuse of his bad actions;
as, First, his pardoning a murderer?” I really think some
thing may be said on this head also. Can you or I believe
that the King knew him to be such? understood him to be
a wilful murderer? I am not sure of it at all; neither have
you any rational proof, even supposing this to have been the
case, which is far from being clear. And if he did not know
or believe him to be such, how can he be blamed for pardon
ing him ? Not to have pardoned him in this case would
have been inexcusable before God and man.
“But what can be said in excuse of his being governed by
his mother, and fixing all his measures at Carlton-House?”
It may be said, that if it was so, it is past, and so is no
matter of present complaint. But who informed you that it
was ? any eye and ear witness? “O, it is in every body's
mouth.” Very well; but every body is nobody; so this proof
is no proof at all. And what better proof have you, or any
man, of his fixing any of his measures there? This has been
affirmed an hundred times, but never was proved yet. “Nay,
but is it not undeniable fact, that he spent hour after hour
with her; and especially when he was hard pressed, and
knew not which way to turn?” And what then ? Who
loves him better than his parent? And whom has he a right
to love better than her? Who is more faithful to him, more
steadily desirous of his welfare? And whom can he trust
better? Suppose then it was true, (which is more than any
man can prove,) that he did consult her on all occasions, and
particularly when he was in trouble and perplexity, who can
blame him for so doing?
“Well, be this as it may, who can help blaming him for
giving so many pensions?” This is a thing which I do not
understand, and can therefore neither praise nor blame.
Some indeed, I think, are well bestowed on men eminent in
their several professions. All, I believe, are well designed,
particularly those given to men who are removed from public
employments. Yet, I fear, some of these are ill bestowed on
those who not only fly in the face of their benefactor, but
avail themselves of his favours to wound the deeper. “For
were he not in the wrong, these would never turn against
him!” What pity they should enjoy them another day,
after such foul and flagrant ingratitude I
This fault (if it were really such) would argue too great
easiness of temper. But this is quite the reverse of what is
commonly objected,--inflexible stubbornness. “Nay, what
else could occasion the settled disregard of so many petitions
and remonstrances, signed by so many thousand hands, and
declaring the sense of the nation?” The sense of the nation /
Who can imagine this that knows the manner wherein nine
in ten, I might say ninety-nine in an hundred, of those
petitions are procured ? A Lord or Squire (sometimes two
or more) goes, or sends his steward, round the town where
his seat is, with a paper, which he tells the homest men is for
the good of their King and country. He desires each to set
his name or mark to this. And who has the hardiness to
gainsay; especially if my Lord keeps open house? Mean
time, the contents of it they know nothing about.
I was not long since at a town in Kent, when one of these
petitions was carrying about. I asked one and another,
“Have you signed the petition?” and found none that had
refused it. And yet not one single person to whom I spoke
had either read it, or heard it read.
Now, I would ask any man of common sense, what stress
is to be laid on these petitions; and how they do declare
“the sense of the nation;” nay, of the very persons that
have signed them? What a shocking insult is it then on
the whole kingdom, to palm these petitions upon us, of
which the very subscribers have not read three lines, as the
general “sense of the nation l”
But suppose they had read all that they have subscribed,
what judges are they of these matters? To put this beyond
dispute, let us only propose one case out of a thousand.
Step back a few years, and suppose Mr. Pitt at the head of
the administration. Here comes up a petition from New
castle-upon-Tyne, signed by five hundred hands, begging
His Majesty to dismiss that corrupt Minister, who was
taking such measures as tended to the utter ruin of the
nation. What would Mr. Pitt say to this? Would he not
ask, “How came these colliers and keelmen to be so well
acquainted with affairs of State? How long have they been
judges of public administration ? of naval and military
operations? How came they to understand the propriety or
impropriety of the measures I take? Do they comprehend
the balance of Europe? Do they know the weakness and
strength of its several kingdoms; the characters of the
Monarchs and their Ministers; the springs of this and that
public motion? Else, why do they take upon them to scan
my conduct? Ne sutor ultra crepidam / ‘Let them mind
their own work, keep to their pits and keels, and leave State
affairs to me.”
“But surely you do not place the citizens of London on a
level with the colliers of Newcastle !” I do not. And yet I
suppose they were equally incompetent judges of the measures
which Mr. Pitt took. And I doubt they are full as incom
petent judges of the measures taken by the present ministry.
To form a tolerable judgment of them requires, not only a
good understanding, but more time than common tradesmen
can spare, and better information than they can possibly
procure. I think, therefore, that the encouraging them to
pass their verdict on Ministers of State, yea, on King, Lords,
and Commons, is not only putting them out of their way,
but doing them more mischief than you are aware of.
“But the remonstrance I Surely the King ought to have
paid more regard to the remonstrance of the city of London.”
Consider the case: The city had presented a petition which
he could by no means approve of, as he judged it was
designed not so much to inform him as to inflame his subjects.
After he had rejected this, as mildly as could be done, whilst
he viewed it in this light, they present a remonstrance to the
same effect, and (as he judged) with the same design. What
then could he do less than he did? Could he seem to approve
what he did not approve? If not, how could he testify his
full disapprobation in more inoffensive terms?
As to the idle, shameless tale of his bursting out into
laughter at the Magistrates, any who know His Majesty's
temper would as soon believe that he spit in their faces, or
struck them a box on the ear.
His Majesty’s character, then, after all the pains which
have been taken to make him odious, as well as contemptible,
remains unimpeached; and therefore cannot be, in any
degree, the cause of the present commotions. His whole
conduct, both in public and private, ever since he began his
reign, the uniform tenor of his behaviour, the general course
both of his words and actions, has been worthy of an
Englishman, worthy of a Christian, and worthy of a King.
“Are not, then, the present commotions owing to his
having extraordinary bad Ministers? Can you say that his
Ministers are as blameless as himself?” I do not say this;
I do not think so. But I think they are not one jot worse
than those that went before them; nor than any set of
Ministers who have been in place for at least thirty years last
past. I think they are not a jot worse than their opponents,
than those who bawl the loudest against them, either with
regard to intellectual or moral abilities, with regard to sense
or honesty. Set twenty against twenty, or ten against tem;
and is there a pin to choose?
“However, are not these commotions owing to the extra
ordinary bad measures they have taken ? Surely you will
not attempt to defend all their measures !” No, indeed. I
do not defend General Warrants. But I observe, 1. The
giving these, be it good or bad, is no extraordinary measure.
Has it not been done by all Ministers for many years, and
that with little or no objection? 2. This ordinary measure
is of exceeding little importance to the mation in general:
So little, that it was never before thought worthy to be put
into the list of public grievances: So little, that it never
deserved the hundredth part of the outcry which has been
made concerning it.-
I do not defend the killing of Mr. Allen. But I would
have the fact truly represented. By the best information I
can gain, I believe it stands just thus: About that time the
mob had been very turbulent. On that day they were likely
to be more insolent than ever. It was therefore judged proper
*o send a party of soldiers to prevent or repress their violence.
Their presence did not prevent it; the mob went so far as to
throw stones at the soldiers themselves. One of them hit
and wounded a soldier; two or three pursued him; and fired
-at one whom, being in the same dress, they supposed to be
the same man. But it was not; it was Mr. Allen. Now,
"though this cannot be excused, yet, was it the most horrid
villany that ever was perpetrated? Surely, no. Notwith
standing all the tragical exclamations which have been made
concerning it, what is this to the killing a man in cool blood?
And was this never heard of in England?
I do not defend the measures which have been taken relative
to the Middlesex election. But let it be remembered, First,
that there was full as much violence on the one side as on
the other. Secondly, that a right of expulsion, of putting a
member out of the House, manifestly implies a right of
exclusion, of keeping him out; otherwise that right amounts
to just nothing at all. Thirdly, that consequently, a member
“expelled is incapable of being re-elected, at least during that
session; as incapable as one that is disqualified any other
way. It follows, Fourthly, that the votes given for this
disqualified person are null and void, being, in effect, given
for nobody. Therefore, Fifthly, if the other candidate had
two hundred votes, he had a majority of two hundred.
Let it be observed farther, if the electors had the liberty
of choosing any qualified person, it is absolute nonsense
to talk of their being deprived of the liberty of choosing,
because they were not permitted to choose a person utterly
unqualified.
But suppose a single borough or county were deprived of
this in a single instance; (which undoubtedly is the case,
whenever a person duly elected does not sit in the House;)
how is this depriving the good people of England, the nation,
of their birthright? What an insult upon common sense is
this wild way of talking ! If Middlesex is wronged (put it
so) in this instance, how is Yorkshire or Cumberland affected
by it; or twenty counties and forty boroughs besides; much
less all the nation? “O, but they may be affected by and
by.” Very true ! And the sky may fall !
To see this whole matter in the clearest light, let any one
read and consider the speech of Lord Chief Justice Mansfield,
on a motion, made by Lord Chatham, “to repeal and rescind
the Resolutions of the House of Commons, in regard to the
expulsion and incapacitation of Mr. Wilkes:”--
“In this debate, though it has been already spoken to.
with great eloquence and perspicuity, I cannot content
myself with only giving a single vote; I feel myself under a
strong necessity of saying something more. The subject
requires it; and though the hour is late,” (it being then near
ten o’clock,) “I shall demand your indulgence, while I offer.
my sentiments on this motion.
“I am sure, my Lords, many of you must remember, from
your reading and experience, several persons expelled the
House of Commons, without ever this House once pretending:
to interfere or call in question by what authority they did so
I remember several myself;” (here his Lordship quoted
several cases;) “in all which, though most of the candidates
were sure to be re-chosen, they never once applied, resting
contented with the expulsatory power of the House, as the.
only self-sufficient, dernier resort of application.
“It has been echoed on all sides, from the partisans of this
motion, that the House of Commons acted illegally, in accept
ing Colonel Luttrel, who had but two hundred and ninety
six votes, in preference to Mr. Wilkes, who had one thousand.
one hundred and forty-three. But this is a mistake of the
grossest nature imaginable, and which nothing but the intem-.
perature of people's zeal could possibly transport them to, as
Mr. Wilkes had been previously considered by the laws as an
unqualified person to represent the people in Parliament;.
therefore it appears very plainly, that Colonel Luttrel had a.
very great majority, not less than two hundred and ninety
six, Mr. Wilkes being considered as nobody in the eye of the
law; consequently, Colonel Luttrel had no legal opposition.
“In all contested elections, where one of the parties think
themselves not legally treated, I should be glad to know to.
whom it is they resort? Is it to the freeholders of the borough
or the county they would represent? Or is it to the people at
large? Who cannot see at once the absurdity of such a ques
tion? Who so ignorant of our laws, that cannot immediately
reply and say, ‘It is the House of Commons who are the only
judges to determine every nicety of the laws of election; and
from whom there is no appeal, after they have once given their
determination?’ All the freeholder has to do is to determine
on his object, by giving him his vote; the ultimate power lies.
with the House of Commons, who is to judge of his being a
legal object of representation in the several branches of his
qualifications. This, my Lords, I believe, is advancing no
new doctrine, nor adding an iota to the privilege of a member
of the House of Commons, more than what the constitution
long ago has given him; yet here is a cry made, in a case
that directly applies to what I have been speaking of, as if it
was illegal, arbitrary, and unprecedented.
“I do not remember, my Lords, in either the course of my
reading or observation ever to have known an instance of a
person's being re-chosen, after being expelled, till the year
1711; then, indeed, my memory serves me with the case of Sir
Robert Walpole. He was expelled the House of Commons,
and was afterwards re-chosen: But this last event did not take
place till the meeting of the next Parliament; and during that
interval, I find no debate about the illegality of his expulsion, no
interference of the House of Lords, nor any addresses from the
public, to decry that measure by a dissolution of Parliament.
“Indeed, as for a precedent of one House interfering with
the rules, orders, or business of another, my memory does
not serve me at present with the recollection of a single one.
As to the case of Titus Oates, as mentioned by the noble
Lord in my eye, (Lord Chatham,) he is very much mistaken
in regard to the mode; his was a trial in the King's Bench,
which, on a writ of error, the House of Commons interfered
in, and they had an authority for so doing. A Judge
certainly may be mistaken in points of law; the wisest and
the best of us may be so at times; and it reflects no discredit,
on the contrary, it does particular honour, when he finds
himself so mistaken, to reverse his own decree. But for one
House of Parliament interfering with the business, and
reversing the resolutions, of another, it is not only
unprecedented, but unconstitutional to the last degree.
“But suppose, my Lords, that this House coincided with
this motion; suppose we all agreed, nem. con., to repeal and
rescind the Resolutions of the House of Commons, in regard
to the expulsion and incapacitation of Mr. Wilkes;-Good
God ! what may be the consequence 1 The people are violent
enough already; and to have the superior branch of legisla
tion join them, would be giving such a public encouragement
to their proceedings, that I almost tremble while I even
suppose such a scene of anarchy and confusion.”
What then can we think of the violent outcry, that the
nation is oppressed, deprived of that liberty which their
ancestors bought with so much treasure and blood, and
delivered down through so many generations? Do those
who raise this cry believe what they say? If so, are they
not under the highest infatuation? seeing that England,
from the time of William the Conqueror, yea, of Julius
Caesar, never enjoyed such liberty, civil and religious, as it
does at this day. Nor do we know of any other kingdom or
state in Europe or in the world, which enjoys the like.
I do not defend the measures which have been taken with
regard to America: I doubt whether any man can defend
them, either on the foot of law, equity, or prudence. But
whose measures were these? If I do not mistake, Mr.
George Grenville's. Therefore the whole merit of these
measures belongs to him, and not to the present ministry.
“But is not the general dissatisfaction owing, if not to any
of the preceding causes, to the extraordinary bad conduct of
the Parliament, particularly the House of Commons?” This
is set in so clear a light by a late writer, that I need only
transcribe his words:
“The last recess of Parliament was a period filled with
unprecedented troubles; and the session opened in the midst
of tumults. Ambitious men, with a perseverance uncommon
in indolent and luxurious times, rung all the changes of
popular noise for the purpose of intimidation. The ignorant,
who could not distinguish between real and artificial clamours,
were alarmed; the lovers of their own ease wished to sacrifice
the just dignity of the House of Commons to a temporary
relief, from the grating sound of seditious scurrility.
“Hence the friends of the constitution saw the opening of
the session with anxiety and apprehension. They were afraid
of the timidity of others, and dreaded nothing more than
that panic to which popular assemblies, as well as armies, are
sometimes subject. The event has shown that their fears
were groundless: The House supported its decisions against
the current of popular prejudice; and, in defending their
own judicial rights, secured the most solid part of the liberties
of their constituents.
“Their firm adherence to their Resolutions was not more
noble than their concessions in the matter of their own rights
was disinterested and generous. The extensive privileges which,
in a series of ages, had accumulated to the members of both
Houses, were certainly inconsistent with the impartial distri
bution of justice. To sacrifice these privileges was not only
diametrically opposite to the idea of self-interest, with which
some asperse the Legislature, but it has also thrown a greater
weight into the scale of public freedom than any other Act passed
since the Revolution. And it has reflected honour on the present
administration, that a bill, so very favourable to the liberty of
the subject, was brought in and carried through by them.
“The arbitrary manner of determining petitions about
elections has been a serious complaint, and of long continu
ance. I shall not deny to Mr. Grenville the merit of bringing
in a bill for remedying this grievance; but its passing as it
did is a certain proof that the pretended influence of admi
mistration over a majority of the House is a mere bugbear,
held forth for private views by the present opposition.
“During the whole session, the House of Lords behaved
with that dignity and unalterable firmness which became the
first assembly in a great nation. Attacked with impertinent
scurrility, they smiled upon rage, and treated the ravings of
a despotic tribune with contempt. When, with an infamous
perversion of his pretended love to freedom, he attempted to
extend the control of the Peers to the resolutions of the
representatives of the people, they nobly rejected the golden
bait; and scorned to raise the dignity of their House upon
the ruins of the other. They, in short, throughout the
session, showed a spirit that disdained to be braved, a
magnanimity that diminished their own personal power for
the ease and comfort of the inferior subject.
“If the conduct of Parliament is in any instance blamable,
it is in a lenity that is inconsistent with the vulgar idea of
political courage. They have been attacked with scurrility
in the Lower House; in the Upper, they have been treated
with indecency and disrespect. Their prudence and love for
the public peace prevailed over their resentment. They
knew that legal punishment is in these times the road to
popularity; and they were unwilling to raise insignificant
men into a consequence that might disturb the State.”
So far we have gained. We have removed the imaginary
causes of the present commotions. It plainly appears, they are
not owing to the extraordinary badness, either of the King,
of his Parliament, of his Ministers, or of the measures which
they have taken. To what then are they owing? What are
the real causes of this amazing ferment among the people?
Before I say anything on this subject, let me remind you:
once more, that I do not dictate; I do not take upon me to:
affirm anything, but simply tell you what I think. I think,
the first and principal spring of the whole motion is French.
gold. “But why do you think so?” I will tell you as
plainly as I can:--
A person of a complete, uniform character, encumbered with:
no religion, with no regard to virtue or morality, squanders
away all that he has. He applies for a place, but is disap
pointed. He is thoroughly exasperated, abuses the ministry,
asperses the King's mother in the grossest manner, is prose
cuted, (not for this, but other achievements,) and retires to
France. After some time, he suddenly returns to London,
sets up for a patriot, and vehemently inveighs against evil
counsellors, grievances, and mal-administration. The cry
spreads; more and more espouse his cause, and second him
with all their might. He becomes head of the party; and
not only the vulgar but the world runs after him. He drives
on with still increasing numbers, carrying all before him,
inflaming the nation more and more, and making their
minds evil-affected, in appearance towards the Ministers of
State, but in reality towards the King. Now, can any reason
able man believe that the French are ignorant of all this; or
that they have no hand at all therein, but are mere uncon
cerned spectators? Do they not understand their own interest
better? If they did not kindle the fire, will they not use all
means to prevent its going out? Will they not take care to
add fuel to the flame? Will they not think forty or fifty thou
sand louis-d'ors well bestowed on so important an occasion?
I cannot but think this is (at least) one principal spring of
all the present commotions. But may not other causes like
wise concur? As, First, covetousness; a love of English as
well as of French gold. Do not many hunger after the
lucrative employments which their neighbours enjoy? They
had rather have them themselves. And will not those that
are hungry naturally cry for food? Secondly, ambition. How
many desire honour, perhaps more than they do money itself!
and how various are the shapes which they will put on in
order to attain it! Thirdly, those who are not so much under
the power of these, are yet susceptible of pride or envy; and
frequently of both together. To these we may, Fourthly,
add resentment. Many doubtless look upon themselves as
injured, were it only on this account, that they are not
regarded, yea, and recompensed, as their merits or services
deserve. Others are angry because they are disappointed;
because, after all their schemes, which they imagined could
not fail of success, they are not able to carry their point.
Now, all these, united by these various motives, some
encouraged by good pay in hand, (and perhaps by promises
of more,) others animated by covetousness, by ambition, by
envy, pride, and resentment, by every means animate all
they have access to. They treat both rich and poor, according
to their rank, with all elegance and profuseness. They talk
largely and vehemently. They write abundantly, having
troops enough in their service. They publish addresses,
petitions, remonstrances, directed nominally to the King,
(otherwise they would not answer the end,) but really to the
people. Herein their orators make use of all the powers of
rhetoric. They bring forth their strong reasons,--the very
best which the cause will bear. They set them off with all
the beauty of language, all the poignancy of wit. They spread
their writings in pamphlets, newspapers, magazines, &c., to
every corner of the land. They are indefatigable in their
work; they never stop to take breath; but as they have
tongues and pens at command, when one has done, another
begins, and so on and on with a continuance. By this means.
the flame spreads wider and wider; it runs as fire among the
stubble. The madness becomes epidemic, and no medicine
hitherto has availed against it. The whole mation sees the:
State in danger, as they did the Church sixty years ago; and
the world now wonders after Mr. Wilkes, as it did then after.
Dr. Sacheverel.
One means of increasing the ferment is the suffering no
contradiction; the hooting at all who labour for peace, and
treading them down like dirt; the using them just as they do
the King, without either justice or mercy. If any writes on
that head, presently the cry is raised, “O, he only writes for
pay !” But, if he does, do not those on the other side too?.
Which are paid best I do not know; but doubtless both are:
paid, a very few old-fashioned mortals excepted, who, having
nothing to hope, and nothing to fear, simply consider the
good of their country.
“But what do you think the end will be?” It is easy to
foresee this. Supposing things to take their natural course,
they must go from bad to worse.
In stipulam veluti cum flamma furentibus Austris
Incidit, aut rapidus montano flumine torrens
Eriit, oppositasque evicit gurgite moles.*
The people will be inflamed more and more; the torrent will
swell higher and higher, till at length it bursts through all
opposition, and overflows the land. The consequences of
these commotions will be (unless an higher hand interpose)
exactly the same as those of the like commotions in the last
century. First, the land will become a field of blood; many
thousands of poor Englishmen will sheathe their swords in
each other’s bowels, for the diversion of their good neigh
bours. Then either a commonwealth will ensue, or else a
second Cromwell. One must be; but it cannot be determined
which, King W , or King Mob.
“But that case is not parallel with this.” It is not, in all
particulars. In many respects it is widely different. As,
First, with regard to the King himself. Few will affirm the
character of King Charles, even allowing the account given by
Lord Clarendon to be punctually true in every respect, to be
as faultless as that of King George. But other passions, as
well as love, are blind. So that when these are raised to a
proper height, especially when Junius has thrown a little
more of his magic dust into the eyes of the people, and con
vinced them, that what are virtues in others, are mere vices
ân him, the good patriots will see no manner of difference
Between a King George and King Charles, or even a Nero.
The case is also widely different, Secondly, with regard to
the ministry. King George has no such furious drivers about
him as poor King Charles had. But a skilful painter may
easily add a few features, either to one or the other, and by a
little colouring make Lord North the very picture of Lord
Strafford, and Archbishop Cornwallis of Archbishop Laud.
How different likewise is the case, Thirdly, with regard to
*These quotations from Virgil are thus translated by Pitt :
“Thus o'er the corn, while furious winds conspire,
Rolls on a wide-devouring blaze of fire;
Or some big torrent, from a mountain's brow,
Bursts, pours, and thunders down the vale below,”
“And" rolls “resistless o'er the levell'd mounds.”-EDIT.
the administration of public affairs! The requiring tonnage
and poundage, the imposing ship-money, the prosecutions in
the Bishops’ Courts, in the High Commission Court, and in
the Star Chamber, were real and intolerable grievances. But
what is there in the present administration which bears any
resemblance to these ? Yet if you will view even such an
affair as the Middlesex election through Mr. Horne's
magnifying-glass, it will appear a more enormous instance
of oppression than a hundred Star Chambers put together.
The parallel does not hold, Fourthly, with regard to the
opposers of the King and his ministry. Is Mr. Burke the
same calm, wise, disinterested man that Mr. Hampden was?
And where shall we find twenty noblemen and twenty gentle
men (to name no more) in the present opposition, whom any
impartial man will set on a level with the same number of
those that opposed King Charles and his ministry.
Nor does the parallel hold, Fifthly, in this respect: That
was in great measure a contest about religion; at least, about
rites, and ceremonies, and opinions, which many supposed to
be religion. But all religion is out of the question now :
This is generally allowed, both by the one side and the
other, to be so very a trifle, that they do not give themselves
the least concern about it.
In one circumstance more there is an obvious difference.
The Parliament were then the King's enemies: Now they are
his firmest friends. But indeed this difference may easily be
removed. Let the King only take Mr. Wilkes's advice, and
dissolve Parliament. The Parliament of 1640, the first which
sat after the troubles began, although many therein were
much dissatisfied with the measures which had been taken, yet
would never have been prevailed upon to join in the schemes
which afterwards prevailed. But when that Parliament was
so seasonably dissolved, and a few men, wise in their
generation, practising with unwearied industry on the heated
spirits of the people, had procured a new Parliament to be
chosen after their own heart; then it was not long ere the
train took fire, and the whole constitution was blown up !
But, notwithstanding the disparity between the present
and past times in the preceding respects, yet how surprisingly
does the parallel hold in various particulars! 1. An handful
of people laid a scheme, which few would have believed had a
man then declared it unto them; though indeed it is probable
that at the beginning they had no settled scheme at all.
2. These professed great zeal for the good of their country,
were vehement contenders for liberty, cried aloud against evil
Ministers and the evil measures which they pursued, and
were continually declaiming against either real or imaginary
grievances. 3. They were soon joined by men eminent for
probity as well as for understanding, who undoubtedly were
what the others appeared, lovers of their King and country,
and desired nothing but the removal of bad Ministers, and
the redress of real grievances. 4. The spirits even of these
were gradually sharpened and embittered against the King.
And they were drawn farther and farther by the art of their
leaders, till they had gone so far, they knew not how to
retreat; yea, till they, passively at least, concurred in those
measures which at first their very souls abhorred. 5. Mean
time, the nation in general was inflamed with all possible
diligence, by addresses, petitions, and remonstrances, admir
ably well devised for the purpose; which were the most
effectual libels that could be imagined against the King and
Government, and were continually spread throughout the
land, with all care and assiduity. 6. Among the most inflamed
and embittered in all England were the people of London, as
the managers had the best opportunity of practising upon
them. 7. All this time they professed the highest regard for
the King, for his honour as well as safety; an authentic
monument whereof we have in the Solemn League and
Covenant. And these professions they continued with equal
vehemence till within a short time of the cutting off his head |
Now, what man that has the least degree of understanding
may not see, in the clearest light, how surprisingly the
parallel holds in all these circumstances?
“But do not you think it is in the power of the King to
put an end to all these commotions, by only sending his
mother away, changing his Ministers, and dissolving the
Parliament?” He may send his mother away; and so he
may his wife, if they please to rank her among his evil coun
sellors. He may put out his present Ministers, and desire the
Lord Mayor to put others in their place. He may likewise
dissolve the present Parliament, (as King Charles did that of
1640,) and exchange it for one chosen, animated, and tutored
by Mr. Wilkes and his friends. But can you really believe
this would mend the matter? would put an end to all these
commotions? Certainly the sending his mother to the Indies
would avail nothing, unless he removed his Ministers too.
Nor would the putting out these, yea, every man of them,
avail anything, unless at the same time he put in every man
whom Lord Chatham chose. But neither would this avail,
unless he struck the finishing-stroke, by dissolving the
Parliament. Then indeed he would be as perfectly safe as
the “sheep that had given up their dogs.”
It would puzzle the wisest man alive to tell what the King
-can do. What can he do, that will still the raging of the sea,
or the madness of the people? Do you imagine it is in his
power to do anything which will please all parties? Can he
do anything that will not displease one as much as it will
please the other? Shall he drive his mother out of the
land? * Will this then please all parties? Nay, will not
some be apt to inquire, “How has she deserved it at his
hands?” “Why, she is an evil counsellor.” How does this
appear? Who are the witnesses of it? Indeed we have
read as grave and formal accounts of the conferences at
Carlton-House, as if the relater had stood all the time behind
the curtain, and taken down the whole matter in short-hand.
But what shadow of proof of all this? No more than of the
conferences related in Tristram Shandy.
“But she is a bad woman.” Who ever said or thought
so, even while she was in the flower of her age? From the
time she first set foot in England, was there a more faultless
character in the nation? Nay, was not her whole behaviour
as a wife, as a mother, as a mistress, and as a Princess, not
only blameless but commendable in the highest degree, till
that period of time arrived, when it was judged proper, in
order to blacken her (supposed) favourite, to asperse her too?
And then she was illud quod dicere nolo 't One would
think that even the ignobile vulgus, “the beasts of the people,”
the lowest, basest herd who wore the human form, would be
ashamed of either advancing or crediting so senseless, shame
less a tale. Indeed I can hardly think it is credited by one
in an hundred even of those who foul their mouths with
repeating it. Let it die and be forgotten | Let it not be
remembered that ever any Englishman took so dirty a
slander into his mouth.
* This was wrote before the Princess Dowager went abroad.
+ What I am reluctant to express.-EDIT.
“However, become what will of his mother, let him put
away his bad Ministers.” Suppose they really are bad, do you
know where he can find better? Whore can he find twenty
men, we will not say of Christian but of Roman integrity?
Point them out, -men of sound judgment, of clear appre
hension, of universal benevolence, lovers of mankind, lovers
of their country, lovers of their King; men attached to no.
party, but simply pursuing the general good of the nation;
not haughty or overbearing, not addicted to passion, not of a
revengeful temper; superior to covetousness on the one hand,
free from profuseness on the other. I say, show me the men,
only this small number; or rather, show them to His Majesty.
Let clear and satisfactory proof be given that this is their
character; and if these worthy men are not employed in the
place of the unworthy ones, you will then have some reason
to stretch your throat against evil Ministers.
“But if the matter were wholly left to him, would not Lord
immediately employ twenty such?” That may bear
some doubt. It is not certain that he would; perhaps he
knows not where to find them. And it is not certain to a
demonstration, that he would employ them if he did. It is
not altogether clear, that he is such himself, that he perfectly
answers this character. Is he free from pride; from anything
haughty in his temper, or overbearing in his behaviour? Is
he neither passionate nor revengeful? Is it indisputably
plain, that he is equally clear of covetousness on the one
hand, and profuseness on the other? Is he steady and
uniform in his conduct; always one thing? Is he attached
to no party, but determined at all events singly to pursue the
general good of the nation? Is he a lover of the King? Is
he remarkably grateful to him, from whom he has received
no common favours? If not, though he has a strong under
standing, and a large share of manly eloquence, still it may
be doubted, whether he and his friends would behave a jot
better than the Ministers we have already.
And suppose the King were to dissolve the Parliament, what
hope is there of having a better, even though the nation were as
quiet and peaceable as it was ten years ago? Are not the pre
sent members, generally speaking, men of the greatest property
in the land? And are they not, the greater part of them at
least, as honest and wise as their neighbours? How then should
we mend ourselves at any time; but especially at such a time
as this? If a new Parliament were chose during this epidemic
madness, what probability of a better than the present?
Have we not all the reason in the world to apprehend it
would be a much worse? that it would be the Parliament of
1641, instead of the Parliament of 1640? Why, this is the
very thing we want, the very point we are aiming at. Then
would Junius and his friends quickly say, “Sir King, know
your place! Es et ipse lignum.* Take your choice 1 Be
King log, or to the block l”
Does it not then appear, upon the whole, that it is by no
means in the power of the King, by any step which he can
possibly take, to put a stop to the present commotions;
that especially he cannot make concessions without making a
bad matter worse; that the way he has taken, the standing
his ground, was as wise a method as he could take, and as
likely to restore the peace of the nation, as any the wit
of man could devise? If any is more likely, would it not
be, vigorously to execute the laws against incendiaries;
against those who, by spreading all manner of lies, inflame
the people even to madness; to teach them, that there is
a difference between liberty, which is the glory of English
men, and licentiousness, a wanton abuse of liberty, in
contempt of all laws, divine and human? Ought they not
to feel, if they will not see, that scandalum regis, “scandalizing
the King,” is as punishable as scandalum magnatum ?t that
for the future none may dare to slander the King, any more
than one of his nobles; much less to print and spread that
deadly poison among His Majesty's liege subjects? Is not
this little less than high treason? Is it not sowing the seeds
of rebellion ?
It is possible this might restore peace, but one cannot affirm
it would. Perhaps God has “a controversy with the land,”
for the general neglect, nay, contempt, of all religion.
Perhaps he hath said, “Shall not my soul be avenged on
such a nation as this?” And if this be the case, what can
avail, unless his anger be turned away from us? Was there
ever a time in which there was a louder call for them..that
fear God to humble themselves before him? if haply general
humiliation and repentance may prevent general destruction!
*You are yourself also a log of wood.-EDIT.
+ Scandalizing the nobility.-EDIT.
I scorn to have my free-born toe
Dragoon'd into a wooden shoe.-PRIOR.
1. ALL men in the world desire liberty; whoever breathes,
breathes after this, and that by a kind of natural instinct
antecedent to art or education. Yet at the same time all men
of understanding acknowledge it as a rational instinct. For
we feel this desire, not in opposition to, but in consequence
of, our reason. Therefore it is not found, or in a very low
degree, in many species of brutes, which seem, even when
they are left to their choice, to prefer servitude before liberty.
2. The love of liberty is then the glory of rational beings;
and it is the glory of Britons in particular. Perhaps it would
be difficult to find any nation under heaven, who are more
tenacious of it; nay, it may be doubted if any nation ever
was; not the Spartans, not the Athenians; no, not the
Romans themselves, who have been celebrated for this very
thing by the poets and historians of all ages.
3. Was it not from this principle, that our British fore
fathers so violently opposed all foreign invaders; that Julius
Caesar himself, with his victorious legions, could make so little
impression upon them; that the Generals of the succeeding
Emperors sustained so many losses from them; and that,
when at length they were overpowered, they rather chose to
lose all they had than their liberty; to retire into the Cam
brian or Caledonian mountains, where, if they had nothing
else, they might at least enjoy their native freedom?
4. Hence arose the vehement struggles of the Cambro
Britons through so many generations against the yoke, which
the Saxons first, and afterwards the English, strove to
impose upon them; hence the struggles of the English
Barons against several of their Kings, lest they should lose
the blessing they had received from their forefathers; yea,
the Scottish nobles, as all their histories show, would no
more bear to be enslaved than the Romans. All these
therefore, however differing from each other in a thousand
other respects, agreed in testifying the desirableness of
liberty, as one of the greatest blessings under the sun.
5. Such was the sense of all our ancestors, even from the
earliest ages. And is it not also the general sense of the
nation at this day? Who can deny, that the whole kingdom
is panting for liberty? Is not the cry for it gone forth,
not only through every part of our vast metropolis,--from
the west end of the city to the east, from the north to the
south, so that instead of no complaining in our streets, there
is nothing but complaining,-but likewise into every corner
of our land, borne by all the four winds of heaven? Liberty!
Liberty! sounds through every county, every city, every
town, and every hamlet !
6. Is it not for the sake of this, that the name of our great
patriot (perhaps not so admirable in his private character as the
man of Ross, or so great a lover of his country as Codrus or
old Curtius) is more celebrated than that of any private man
has been in England for these thousand years; that his very
picture is so joyfully received in every part of England and
Ireland; that we stamp his (I had almost said, adored) name
on our handkerchiefs, on the cheerful bowl, yea, and on our
vessels of various kinds, as well as upon our hearts? Why is
all this, but because of the inseparable connexion between
Wilkes and liberty; liberty that came down, if not fell, from
Theaven; whom all England and the world worshippeth ?
7. But mean time might it not be advisable to consider, (if
we are yet at leisure to consider anything,) what is liberty?
Because it is well known the word is capable of various
senses. And possibly it may not be equally desirable in
every sense of the word.
8. There are many nations in America, those particularly
that border on Georgia and Carolina, wherein if one dis
approves of what another says, or perhaps dislikes his looks,
he scorns to affront him to his face, neither does he betray
the least dissatisfaction. But as soon as opportunity serves,
he steps from behind a tree and shoots him. And none calls
him that does it to an account. No; this is the liberty he
derives from his forefathers.
9. For many ages the free natives of Ireland, as well as the
Scottish Highlands, when it was convenient for them, made an
excursion from their woods or fastnesses, and carried off, for
their own proper use, the sheep, and oxen, and corn of their
neighbours. This was the liberty which the O'Neals, the Camp
bells, and many other septs and clans of venerable antiquity,
had received by immemorial tradition from their ancestors.
10. Almost all the soldiers in the Christian world, as well as
in the Mahometan and Pagan, have claimed, more especially
in time of war, another kind of liberty; that of borrowing the
wives and daughters of the men that fell into their hands;
sometimes, if they pleaded scruple of conscience or honour,
using a little necessary force. Perhaps this may be termed the
liberty of war. But I will not positively affirm, that it has never
been used in this free country, even in the time of peace.
11. In some countries of Europe, and indeed in England,
there have been instances of yet another sort of liberty, that
of calling a Monarch to account; and, if need were, taking
off his head; that is, if he did not behave in a dutiful
manner to our sovereign lords the people.
12. Now, that we may not always be talking at random,
but bring the matter to a determinate point, which of these
sorts of liberty do you desire? Is it the First sort; the
liberty of knocking on the head, or cutting the throats, of
those we are out of conceit with ? Glorious liberty indeed !
What would not king mob do to be gratified with it but for
a few weeks? But, I conceive, calm, sensible men do not
desire to see them entrusted with it. They apprehend there
might be some consequences which, upon the whole, would
not redound to the prosperity of the nation.
13. Is the Second more desirable; the liberty of taking,
when we see best, the goods and chattels of our neighbours?
Undoubtedly, thousands in the good city of London (suppose
we made the experiment here first) would be above measure
rejoiced thereat, would leap as broke from chains. O how
convenient would it be to have free access, without any let
or hinderance, to the cellars, the pantries, the larders, yea,
and the coffers of their rich, overgrown landlords! But
perhaps it would not give altogether so much joy to the
Lord Mayor or Aldermen; no, nor even to those stanch
friends of liberty, the Common Councilmen. Not that they
regard their own interest at all; but, setting themselves out
of the question, they are a little in doubt whether this liberty
would be for the good of trade.
ThouGHTS UPON LIBERTY. 37
14. Is it then the Third kind of liberty we contend for;
the liberty of taking our neighbours' wives and daughters?
Ye pretty gentlemen, ye beaux esprits, will ye not, one and
all, give your voices for this natural liberty? Will ye not
say, “If we cry out against monopolies of other kinds, shall
we tolerate the monopoly of women?” But hold. Are there
not some among you too, who have wives, if not daughters,
of your own? And are you altogether willing to oblige the
first comer with them? I say the first comer; for, observe,
as you are to give the liberty you take, so you must not pick
and choose your men; you know, by nature, all men are on
a level. “Liberty! Liberty! No restraint | We are free
born Englishmen; down with the fences I Lay all the
inclosures open l” No; it will not do. Even nature
recoils. We are not yet polished enough for this.
15. Are we not ripe, however, for the Fourth kind of
liberty, that of removing a disobedient King? Would Mr.
Wilkes, would Mr. Horne, would any free Briton, have any
objection to this? provided only, that, as soon as our present
Monarch is removed, we have a better to put in his place.
But who is he? King John ” That will not sound well,
even in the ears of his greatest admirers. And whoever
calmly considers the characters and endowments of those
other great men, who may think themselves much fitter for
the office than His present Majesty, will hardly concur in
their opinion; so that a difficulty lies in your way. What
ever claim you may have to this liberty, you must not use it
yet, because you cannot tell where to find a better Prince.
16. But to speak seriously. These things being set aside,
which the bawling mob dignify by that name; what is that
liberty, properly so called, which every wise and good man
desires? It is either religious or civil. Religious liberty is
a liberty to choose our own religion, to worship God accord
ing to our own conscience, according to the best light we
have. Every man living, as man, has a right to this, as he
is a rational creature. The Creator gave him this right
when he endowed him with understanding. And every man
must judge for himself, because every man must give an
account of himself to God. Consequently, this is an inde
feasible right; it is inseparable from humanity. And God
did never give authority to any man, or number of men, to
deprive any child of man thereof, under any colour or
pretence whatever. What an amazing thing is it, then, that
the governing part of almost every nation under heaven
should have taken upon them, in all ages, to rob all under
their power of this liberty yea, should take upon them, at
this day, so to do; to force rational creatures into their own
religion I Would one think it possible, that the most
sensible men in the world should say to their fellow-creatures,
“Either be of my religion, or I will take away your food,
and you and your wife and children shall starve: If that will
not convince you, I will fetter your hands and feet, and
throw you into a dungeon: And if still you will not see as I
see, I will burn you alive?”
17. It would not be altogether so astonishing, if this were
the manner of American savages. But what shall we say, if
numberless instances of it have occurred, in the politest
nations of Europe? Have no instances of the kind been
seen in Britain? Have not England and Scotland seen the
horrid fires? Have not the flames burning the flesh of
heretics shone in London as well as in Paris and Lisbon ?
Have we forgot the days of good Queen Mary? No; they
will be had in everlasting remembrance. And although
burning was out of fashion in Queen Elizabeth’s days, yet
hanging, even for religion, was not. It is true, her successor
did not go quite so far. But did even King James allow
liberty of conscience? By no means. During his whole
reign, what liberty had the Puritans? What liberty had
they in the following reign If they were not persecuted
unto death; (although eventually, indeed, many of them
were; for they died in their imprisonment;) yet were they
not continually harassed by prosecutions in the Bishops’
Courts, or Star-Chamber? by fines upon fines, frequently
reducing them to the deepest poverty? and by imprisonment
for months, yea, for years, together, till many of them,
escaping with the skin of their teeth, left their country and
friends, fled to seek their bread in the wilds of America?
“However, we may suppose all this was at an end under the
merry Monarch, King Charles the Second.” Was it indeed?
Where have they lived who suppose this? To wave a thou
sand particular instances; what will you say to those two
public monuments, the Act of Uniformity, and the Act against
Conventicles? In the former it is enacted, to the eternal
honour of the King, Lords, and Commons, at that memorable
period: “Every Parson, Vicar, or other Minister whatever,
who has any benefice within these realms, shall, before the
next twenty-fourth of August, openly and publicly declare
his unfeigned assent and consent to all and everything con
tained in the Book of Common Prayer, or shall, ipso facto,
be deprived of all his benefices ! Likewise, if any Dean,
Prebendary, Master, Fellow, Chaplain, or Tutor, of any
College, Hall, House of Learning, or Hospital, any public
Professor, or any other person in Holy Orders, any School
master, or Teacher, or Tutor in any private family, do not
subscribe hereto, he shall be, ipso facto, deprived of his
place, and shall be utterly disabled from continuing therein.”
Property for ever ! See how well English property was
secured in those golden days |
So, by this glorious Act, thousands of men, guilty of no
crime, nothing contrary either to justice, mercy, or truth,
were stripped of all they had, of their houses, lands, revenues,
and driven to seek where they could, or beg, their bread. For
what? Because they did not dare to worship God according
to other men's consciences ! So they and their families were,
at one stroke, turned out of house and home, and reduced to
little less than beggary, for no other fault, real or pretended,
but because they could not assent and consent to that
manner of worship which their worthy governors prescribed !
But this was not all. It was further enacted by the same
merciful lawgivers: “If any person act as a Teacher, Tutor,
or Schoolmaster, in any private family, before he has sub
scribed hereto, he shall suffer three months’ imprisonment,
without bail or mainprize.”
Liberty for ever ! Here is security for your person, as
well as your property.
By virtue of the Act against Conventicles, if any continued
to worship God according to their own conscience, they were
first robbed of their substance, and, if they persisted, of their
liberty; often of their lives also. For this crime, under this
“our most religious and gracious King,” (what were they
who publicly told God he was such 7) Englishmen were not
only spoiled of their goods, but denied even the use of the
free air, yea, and the light of the sun, being thrust by
hundreds into dark and loathsome prisons !
18. Were matters much better in the neighbouring king
dom? Nay, they were inexpressibly worse. Unheard-of
cruelties were practised there, from soon after the Restoration
till the Revolution.* What fining, plundering, beating,
maiming, imprisoning, with the most shocking circumstances !
For a specimen, look at Dunotter Castle; where young and
old, of both sexes, (sick or well, it was all one,) were thrust
together between bare walls, and that in the heat of summer,
without a possibility of either lying or sitting; yea, without
any convenience of any kind; till many of them, through
hunger, thirst, heat, and stench, were set at liberty by death !
Considering this; considering how many others were hunted
over their native mountains, and shot whenever they were
overtaken, with no more ceremony than beasts; considering
the drowning, hanging, cutting off of limbs, and various arts
of torturing, which were practised by order of King Charles,
and often in the presence of King James, who seemed to
enjoy such spectacles; it would be no wonder if the very
name of an Englishman was had in abomination from the
Tweed to the Orkneys.-
19. But is this the case at present with us? Are we
abridged of our religious liberty? His late Majesty was
desired, about thirty years ago, to take a step of this kind.
But his answer was worthy of a King, yea, the King of a free
people: “I tell you, while I sit on the English throne, no
man shall be persecuted for conscience' sake.” And it is
certain he made his promise good from the beginning of his
reign to the end. But perhaps the case is altered now.
Does His present Majesty tread in his steps? He does: He
persecutes no man for conscience sake. If he does, where is
the man? I do not ask, Whom has he committed to the
flames, or caused to die by the common hangman 7 or,
Whom has he caused to die many deaths, by hunger and
thirst, cold and nakedness? but, Whom has he tortured or
thrust into a dungeon, yea, or imprisoned at all, or fined, for
worshipping God according to his own conscience, in the
Presbyterian or any other way? O, compare King Charles,
gracious Charles the Second, with King George, and you will
know the value of the liberty you enjoy.
20. In the name of wonder, what religious liberty can you
desire, or even conceive, which you have not already? Where
is there a nation in Europe, in the habitable world, which
* See Wodrow’s “History of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland.”
ThouGIITS UPON LIBERTY. 4l
enjoys such liberty of conscience as the English? I will be
bold to say there is nothing like it in Holland, in Germany,
(Protestant or Popish,) in either the Protestant or Popish
cantons of Switzerland; no, nor in any country under the sun.
Have we not in England full liberty to choose any religion,
yea, or no religion at all? to have no more religion than a
Hottentot, shall I say? nay, no more than a bull or a swine?
Whoever therefore in England stretches his throat, and bawls
for more religious liberty, must be totally void of shame, and
can have no excuse but want of understanding.
21. But is not the ground of this vehement outcry, that
we are deprived of our civil liberty? What is civil liberty?
A liberty to enjoy our lives and fortunes in our own way;
to use our property, whatever is legally our own, according to
our own choice. And can you deny, “that we are robbed of
this liberty?” Who are? Certainly I am not. I pray, do
not face me down that I am. Do not argue me out of my
senses. If the Great Turk, or the King of France, wills that
a man should die, with or without cause, die he must. And
instances of the kind continually occur; but no such instances
occur in England. I am in no more danger of death from
King George, than from the Queen of Hungary. And if I
study to be quiet and mind my own business, I am in no
more danger of losing my liberty than my life. No, nor my
property; I mean, by any act of the King. If this is in any
degree invaded, it is not by the King, or his Parliament, or
army, but by the good patriots.
Hark! Is hell or Bedlam broke loose? What roaring is
that, loud as the waves of the sea? “It is the patriot mob.”
What do they want with me? Why do they flock about my
house? “Make haste illuminate your windows in honour
of Mr. Wilkes.” I cannot in conscience; I think it is
encouraging vice. “Then they will all be broken.” That is,
in plain English, Give them twenty shillings, or they will rob
you of five pounds. Here are champions for the laws of the
land I for liberty and property ! O vile horse-guards!
That dared, so grim and terrible, to advance
Their miscreated fronts athwart the way !
True, they did nothing and said nothing. Yet, in default of
the civil powers, who did not concern themselves with the
matter, they hindered the mob from finishing their work.
22. Why, then, these men, instead of anyway abridging it,
plainly preserved my liberty and property. And by their
benefit, not the care of those to whom it properly belonged,
I still enjoy full civil liberty. I am free to live, in every
respect, according to my own choice. My life, my person,
my property, are safe. I am not murdered, maimed, tortured
at any man’s pleasure; I am not thrown into prison; I am
not manacled; see, I have not one fetter, either on my
hands or feet. And are not you as free as I am? Are not
you at liberty to enjoy the fruit of your labours? Who
hinders you from doing it? Does King George 2 Does
Lord North? Do any of His Majesty’s officers or soldiers?
No, nor any man living. Perhaps some would hinder you,
if you acted contrary to law; but this is not liberty, it is
licentiousness. Deny the fact who can ; am not I free to
use my substance according to my own discretion? And do.
not you enjoy the self-same freedom? You cannot, you dare
not, deny it. At this hour I am at full liberty to use my
property as I please. And so are you; you do, in fact, use
your house, your goods, your land, as is right in your own
eyes. Does any one take them from you? No; nor does
any one restrain you from the full enjoyment of them.
What then is the matter? What is it you are making all
this pother about? Why are you thus wringing your hands,
and screaming, to the terror of your quiet neighbours,
“Destruction | slavery 1 bondage ' Help, countrymen | Our
liberty is destroyed! Weare ruined, chained, fettered, undone!”
Fettered ! How? Where are the fetters, but in your own
imagination? There are none, either on your hands or mine:
Neither you nor I can show to any man in his senses, that we
have one chain upon us, even so big as a knitting-needle.
23. I do not say, that the ministry are without fault; or
that they have done all things well. But still I ask, What
is the liberty which we want? It is not civil or religious
liberty. These we have in such a degree as was never known
before, not from the times of William the Conqueror.”
But all this is nothing; this will never satisfy the bellua
multorum capitum. That “many-headed beast,” the people,
roars for liberty of another kind. Many want Indian liberty,
the liberty of cutting throats, or of driving a brace of balls
* If the famous Middlesex election was an exception to this, yet observe, one
Swallow makes no summer.
through the head of those ugly-looking fellows, whom they
cannot abide the sight of Many more want the old High
land liberty, the convenient liberty of plundering. Many
others there are who want the liberty of war, of borrowing
their neighbours' wives or daughters; and not a few, though
they do not always avow it, the liberty of murdering their
Prince.
24. If you are a reasonable man, a man of real honour,
and consequently want none of these, I beg to know what
would you have? Considering the thing calmly, what liberty
can you reasonably desire which you do not already enjoy?
What is the matter with you, and with multitudes of the
good people, both in England and Ireland, that they are
crying and groaning as if they were chained to an oar, or
barred up in the dungeons of the Inquisition? The plain.
melancholy truth is this: There is a general infatuation,
which spreads, like an overflowing stream, from one end of
the land to the other; and a man must have great wisdom
and great strength, or he will be carried away by the torrent.
But how can we account for this epidemic madness? for it
deserves no better name. We must not dare to give the
least intimation, that the devil has anything to do with it.
No! this enlightened age is too wise to believe that there is
any devil in being ! Satan, avaunt we have driven thee
back into the land of shadows; keep thou among thy own
kindred :
With hydras, gorgons, and chimeras dire.
Suppose it then to be a purely natural phenomenon; I
ask again, How can we account for it? I apprehend if we
could divest ourselves of prejudice, it might be done very
easily; and that without concerning ourselves with the hidden
springs of action, the motives or intentions of men. Letting
these alone, is there not a visible, undeniable cause, which
is quite adequate to the effect? The good people of England
have, for some years past, been continually fed with poison.
Dose after dose has been administered to them, for fear the
first, or second, or tenth, should not suffice, of a poison
whose natural effect is to drive men out of their senses.
Is “the centaur not fabulous?” Neither is Circe's cup.
See how, in every county, city, and village, it is now turning
quiet, reasonable men, into wild bulls, bears, and tigers l,
44 TIIOUGittS UPON LIBERTY.
But, to lay metaphor aside, how long have the public papers
represented one of the best of Princes as if he had been one
of the worst, as little better than Caligula, Nero, or Domitian!
These were followed by pamphlets of the same kind, and
aiming at the same point,-to make the King appear odious
as well as contemptible in the eyes of his subjects. Letters
succeed, wrote in fine language, and with exquisite art, but
filled with the gall of bitterness. “Yes, but not against the
king; Junius does not strike at him, but at the evil adminis
tration.” Thin pretence! Does not every one see the blow
is aimed at the King through the sides of his Ministers?
All these are conveyed, week after week, through all London
and all the nation. Can any man wonder at the effect of
this? What can be more natural? What can be expected,
but that they who drink in these papers and letters with
all greediness, will be thoroughly embittered and inflamed
thereby? will first despise and then abhor the King? What
can we expect, but that by the repeated doses of this poison
they will be perfectly intoxicated, and only wait for a con
venient season to tear in pieces the royal monster, as they
think him, and all his adherents?
25. At present there are hinderances in the way, so that
they cannot use their teeth as they would. One is an
untoward Parliament, who will not look upon the King with
the same eyes that they do; but still think he has no more
design or desire to enslave the nation, than to burn the city
of London. A still greater hinderance is the army; even
lions and bears do not choose to encounter them, so that
these men of war do really at this time preserve the peace of
ithe nation. What then can be done before the people cools,
that this precious opportunity be not lost? What indeed,
but to prevail upon the King to dissolve his Parliament and
disband his army? Nay, let the Parliament stay as it is, it
will suffice to disband the army. If these red-coats were but
out of the way, the mob would soon deal with the Parliament.
Probatum est: * Nothing is more easy than to keep malignant
members from the House. Remember Lord North not
long ago;t this was a taste, a specimen, of their activity.
What then would they not do if they were masters of the
field, if none were left to oppose them? Would not the
* This has already been put to the proof-EDIT.
+ Rudely insulted by a turbulent mob, as he was going into the House.
Titou GHTS UPON LIBERTY. 45.
avenues of both Houses be so well guarded, that none but
patriots would dare to approach?
26. But (as often as you have heard the contrary affirmed)
King George has too much understanding, to throw himself into
the hands of those men who have given full proof that they bear
him no great good-will. Nor has he reason to believe that they
are much more fond of his office than of his person. They are
not vehemently fond of monarchy itself, whoever the Monarch
be. Therefore neither their good nor ill words will induce
him, in haste, to leap into the fire with his eyes open.
27. But can anything be done to open the eyes, to restore
the senses, of an infatuated nation? Not unless the still
renewed, still operating cause of that infatuation can be
removed. But how is it possible to be removed, unless by
restraining the licentiousness of the press? And is not this
remedy worse than the disease? Let us weigh this matter a
little. There was an ancient law in Scotland, which made
leasing-making a capital crime. By leasing-making was meant,
telling such wilful lies as tended to breed dissension between
the King and his subjects. What pity but there should be
such a law enacted in the present session of Parliament! By
our present laws, a man is punishable for publishing even
truth to the detriment of his neighbour. This I would not
wish. But should he not be punished, who publishes palpable
lies? and such lies as manifestly tend to breed dissension
between the King and his subjects? Such, with a thousand
more, was that bare-faced lie of the King’s bursting out into
laughter before the city Magistrates ! Now, does not the
publisher of this lie deserve to lose his ears more than a com
mon knight of the post? And if he is liable to no punishment
for a crime of so mischievous a nature, what a grievous defect
is in our law ! And how loud does it call for a remedy
28. To return to the point whence we set out. You see
whence arose this outcry for liberty, and these dismal com
plaints that we are robbed of our liberty echoing through the
land. It is plain to every unprejudiced man, they have not
the least foundation. We enjoy at this day throughout these
kingdoms such liberty, civil and religious, as no other king
dom or commonwealth in Europe, or in the world, enjoys;
and such as our ancestors never enjoyed from the Conquest
to the Revolution. Let us be thankful for it to God and the
King ! Let us not, by our vile unthankfulness, yea, our
denial that we enjoy it at all, provoke the King of kings to
take it away. By one stroke, by taking to himself that
Prince whom we know not how to value, He might change
the scene, and put an end to our civil as well as religious
liberty. Then would be seen who were patriots and who
were not; who were real lovers of liberty and their country.
The God of love remove that day far from us! Deal not
with us according to our deservings; but let us know, at
least in this our day, the things which make for our peace!
February 24, 1772.
1. By power, I here mean supreme power, the power over
life and death, and consequently over our liberty and
property, and all things of an inferior nature.
2. In many nations this power has in all ages been lodged
in a single person. This has been the case in almost the
whole eastern world, from the earliest antiquity; as in the
celebrated empires of Assyria, of Babylon, of Media, Persia,
and many others. And so it remains to this day, from
Constantinople to the farthest India. The same form of
government obtained very early in very many parts of Afric,
and remains in most of them still, as well as in the empires of
Morocco and Abyssinia. The first adventurers to America
found absolute monarchy established there also ; the whole
power being lodged in the Emperor of Mexico, and the Yncas
of Peru. Nay, and many of the ancient nations of Europe
were governed by single persons; as Spain, France, the
Russias, and several other nations are at this day.
3. But in others, the power has been lodged in a few,
chiefly the rich and noble. This kind of government, usually
styled aristocracy, obtained in Greece and in Rome, after
many struggles with the people, during the later ages of the
republic. And this is the government which at present
subsists in various parts of Europe. In Venice indeed, as
well as in Genoa, the supreme power is nominally lodged in
one, namely, the Doge ; but in fact, he is only a royal shade;
it is really lodged in a few of the nobles.
4. Where the people have the supreme power, it is termed
a democracy. This seems to have been the ancient form of
government in several of the Grecian states. And so it was
at Rome for some ages after the expulsion of the Kings.
From the earliest authentic records, there is reason to believe
it was for espousing the cause of the people, and defending their
rights against the illegal encroachments of the nobles, that
Marcus Coriolanus was driven into banishment, and Manlius
Capitolinus, as well as Tiberius and Caius Gracchus, murdered.
Perhaps formerly the popular government subsisted in several
states. But it is scarce now to be found, being everywhere
swallowed up either in monarchy or aristocracy.
5. But the grand question is, not in whom this power is
lodged, but from whom it is ultimately derived. What is the
origin of power? What is its primary source? This has
been long a subject of debate. And it has been debated
with the utmost warmth, by a variety of disputants. But as
earnest as they have been on each side of the question, they
have seldom come to any good conclusion; but have left the
point undecided still, to be a ball of contention to the next
generation.
6. But is it impossible, in the nature of things, to throw any
light on this obscure subject? Let us make the experiment;
let us (without pretending to dictate, but desiring every one
to use his own judgment) try to find out some ground
whereon to stand, and go as far as we can toward answering
the question. And let not any man be angry on the account,
suppose we should not exactly agree. Let every one enjoy
his own opinion, and give others the same liberty.
7. Now, I cannot but acknowledge, I believe an old book,
commonly called the Bible, to be true. Therefore I believe,
“there is no power but from God: The powers that be are
ordained of God.” (Rom. xiii. 1.) There is no subordinate
power in any nation, but what is derived from the supreme
power therein. So in England the King, in the United Pro
vinces the States are the fountain of all power. And there
48 ThouGil TS CoNCERNING
is no supreme power, no power of the sword, of life and
death, but what is derived from God, the Sovereign of all.
8. But have not the people, in every age and nation, the
right of disposing of this power; of investing therewith whom
they please, either one or more persons; and that, in what
proportion they see good, and upon what conditions? Con
sequently, if those conditions are not observed, have they not
a right to take away the power they gave 7 And does not
this imply, that they are the judges whether those conditions
are observed or not? Otherwise, if the receivers were judges
of their own cause, this right would fall into nothing.
9. To prove this, that the people in every country are the
source of power, it is argued thus: “All men living upon
earth are naturally equal; none is above another; and all are
naturally free, masters of their own actions. It manifestly
follows, no man can have any power over another, unless by
his own consent. The power therefore which the governors
in any nation enjoy, must be originally derived from the
people, and presupposes an original compact between them
and their first governors.”
10. This seems to be the opinion which is now generally
espoused by men of understanding and education; and that
(if I do not mistake) not in England alone, but almost in
every civilized nation. And it is usually espoused with the
fullest and strongest persuasion, as a truth little less than
self-evident, as what is clear beyond all possibility of doubt,
what commands the assent of all reasonable men. Hence if
any man affected to deny it, he would in most companies be
rather hooted at than argued with; it being so absurd to
oppose what is confirmed by the general suffrage of mankind.
11. But still (suppose it to need no proof) it may need a
little explaining; for every one does not understand the term.
Some will ask, “Who are the people?” Are they every man,
woman, and child? Why not? Is it not allowed, is it not
affirmed, is it not our fundamental principle, our incontestable,
self-evident axiom, that “all persons living upon earth are
naturally equal; that all human creatures are naturally free;
masters of their own actions; that none can have any power
over others, but by their own consent?” Why then should
not every man, woman, and child, have a voice in placing their
governors; in fixing the measure of power to be entrusted with
them, and the conditions on which it is entrusted? And why
ThE ORIGIN OF POWER. 49
should not every one have a voice in displacing them too;
seeing it is undeniable, they that gave the power have a right
to take it away? Do not quibble or shuffle. Do not evade
the question; but come close to the point. I ask, By what
argument do you prove that women are not naturally as free.
as men? And, if they are, why have they not as good a
right as we have to choose their own Governors? Who can
have any power over free, rational creatures, but by their own
consent? And are they not free by nature, as well as we?
Are they not rational creatures?
12. But suppose we exclude women from using their
natural right, by might overcoming right, by main strength,
(for it is sure that we are stronger than they; I mean that
we have stronger limbs, if we have not stronger reason,) what
pretence have we for excluding men like ourselves, yea,
thousands and tens of thousands, barely because they have
not lived one-and-twenty years? “Why, they have not
wisdom or experience to judge concerning the qualifications
necessary for Governors.” I answer, (1.) Who has? How
many of the voters in Great Britain? one in twenty? one in
an hundred? If you exclude all who have not this wisdom,
you will leave few behind. But, (2.) Wisdom and experience
are nothing to the purpose. You have put the matter upon
another issue. Are they men? That is enough. Are they
human creatures? Then they have a right to choose their own
Governors; an indefeasible right; a right inherent, insepar
able from human nature. “But in England, at least, they
are excluded by law.” But did they consent to the making
of that law If not, by your original supposition, it can
have no power over them. I therefore utterly deny that we
can, consistently with that supposition, debar either women
or minors from choosing their own Governors.
13. But suppose we exclude these by main force, (which it
is certain we are able to do, since though they have most
votes they have least strength,) are all that remain, all men
of full age, the people? Are all males, then, that have lived
one-and-twenty years allowed to choose their own Governors?
“Not at all; not in England, unless they are freeholders,
unless they have forty shillings a year.” Worse and worse.
After depriving half the human species of their natural rights
for want of a beard; after depriving myriads more for want
of a stiff beard, for not having lived one-and-twenty years;
50 ThouGHTS CoNCER NING
you rob others (probably some hundred thousands) of their
birthright for want of money! Yet not altogether on this
account neither; if so, it might be more tolerable. But here
is an Englishman who has money enough to buy the estates
of fifty freeholders, and yet he must not be numbered among
the people because he has not two or three acres of land I
How is this? By what right do you exclude a man from
being one of the people because he has not forty shillings a
year; yea, or not a groat? Is he not a man, whether he be
1 rich or poor? Has he not a soul and a body? Has he not
the nature of a man; consequently, all the rights of a man,
all that flow from human nature; and, among the rest, that
of not being controlled by any but by his own consent.
14. “But he is excluded by law.” By what law? by
a law of his own making? Did he consent to the making
of it? Before this law was passed, was his consent either
obtained or asked ? If not, what is that law to him? No
man, you aver, has any power over another but by his own
consent. Of consequence, a law made without his consent
is, with regard to him, null and void. You cannot say other
wise without destroying the supposition, that none can be
governed but by his own consent.
15. See, now, to what your argument comes. You affirm,
all power is derived from the people; and presently excluded
one half of the people from having any part or lot in the
matter. At another stroke, suppose England to contain eight
millions of people, you exclude one or two millions more.
At a third, suppose two millions left, you exclude three-fourths
of these. And the poor pittance that remains, by I know
not what figure of speech, you call the people of England
16. Hitherto we have endeavoured to view this point in the
mere light of reason. And even by this means it manifestly
appears that this supposition, which is so high in vogue, which
is so generally received, nay, which has been palmed upon us
with such confidence, as undeniable and self-evident, is not
only false, not only contrary to reason, but contradictory to
itself; the very men who are most positive that the people
are the source of power, being brought into an inextricable
difficulty, by that single question, “Who are the people?”
reduced to a necessity of either giving up the point, or owning
that by the people they mean scarce a tenth part of them.
17. But we need not rest the matter entirely on reasoning;
let us appeal to matter of fact. And because we cannot
have so clear and certain a prospect of what is at too great a
distance, whether of time or place, let us only take a view of
what has been in our own country for six or seven hundred
years. I ask, then, When and where did the people of England
(even suppose by that word, the people, you mean only an
inundred thousand of them) choose their own Governors?
Did they choose, to go no farther, William the Conqueror?
Did they choose King Stephen, or King John? As to those
who regularly succeeded their fathers, it is plain the people
are out of the question. Did they choose Henry the Fourth,
Edward the Fourth, or Henry the Seventh? Who will be so
hardy as to affirm it? Did the people of England, or but
fifty thousand of them, choose Queen Mary, or Queen
Elizabeth? To come nearer to our own times, did they choose
King James the First? Perhaps you will say, “But if the
people did not give King Charles the supreme power, at least
they took it away from him. Surely, you will not deny this.”
Indeed I will; I deny it utterly. The people of England no
more took away his power, than they cut off his head. “Yes,
the Parliament did, and they are the people.” No; the
Parliament did not. The lower House, the House of Com
mons, is not the Parliament, any more than it is the nation.
Neither were those who then sat the House of Commons;
no; nor one quarter of them. But suppose they had been
the whole House of Commons, yea, or the whole Parliament;
by what rule of logic will you prove that seven or eight
hundred persons are the people of England? “Why, they
are the delegates of the people; they are chosen by them.”
No; not by one half, not by a quarter, not by a tenth part,
of them. So that the people, in the only proper sense of
the word, were innocent of the whole affair.
18. “But you will allow, the people gave the supreme
power to King Charles the Second at the Restoration.” I will
allow no such thing; unless by the people you mean General
Monk and fifteen thousand soldiers. “However, you will
not deny that the people gave the power to King William at
the Revolution.” Nay, truly, I must deny this too. I cannot
possibly allow it. Although I will not say that William the
Third obtained the royal power as William the First did;
although he did not claim it by right of conquest, which
would have been an odious title; yet certain it is, that he
52 THOUGHTS CONCERNING THE Olt IGIN OF POWER.
did not receive it by any act or deed of the people. Their
consent was neither obtained nor asked; they were never
consulted in the matter. It was not therefore the people that
gave him the power; no, nor even the Parliament. It was the
Convention, and none else. “Who were the Convention?”
They were a few hundred Lords and gentlemen, who, observing
the desperate state of public affairs, met together on that
important occasion. So that still we have no single instance
in above seven hundred years of the people of England’s con
veying the supreme power either to one or more persons.
19. Indeed I remember in all history, both ancient and
modern, but one instance of supreme power conferred by the
people; if we mean thereby, though not all the people, yet a
great majority of them. This celebrated instance occurred at
Naples, in the middle of the last century; where the people,
properly speaking, that is, men, women, and children, claimed
and exerted their natural right in favour of Thomas Aniello,
(vulgarly called Masanello,) a young fisherman. But will
any one say, he was the only Governor for these thousand
years, who has had a proper right to the supreme power? I
believe not; nor, I apprehend, does any one desire that the
people should take the same steps in London.
20. So much both for reason and matter of fact. But
one single consideration, if we dwell a little upon it, will
bring the question to a short issue. It is allowed, no man
can dispose of another's life but by his own consent. I add,
No, nor with his consent; for no man has a right to dispose
of his own life. The Creator of man has the sole right to
take the life which he gave. Now, it is an indisputable
truth, Nihil dat quod non habet, “none gives what he has
not.” It plainly follows, that no man can give to another a
right which he never had himself; a right which only the
Governor of the world has, even the wiser Heathens being
judges; but which no man upon the face of the earth either
has or can have. No man therefore can give the power of
the sword, any such power as implies a right to take away
life. Wherever it is, it must descend from God alone, the
sole disposer of life and death.
21. The supposition, then, that the people are the origin.
of power, is every way indefensible. It is absolutely over
turned by the very principle on which it is supposed to stand;
namely, that a right of choosing his Governors belongs to
THoUGHTs on THE PRESENT scARCITY of PRovisions. 53
every partaker of human nature. If this be so, then it
belongs to every individual of the human species; conse
quently, not to freeholders alone, but to all men; not to men
only, but to women also; nor only to adult men and women,
to those who have lived one-and-twenty years, but to those
who have lived eighteen or twenty, as well as those who have
lived threescore. But none did ever maintain this, nor
probably ever will. Therefore this boasted principle falls to
the ground, and the whole superstructure with it. So
common sense brings us back to the grand truth, “There is
no power but of God.”
MANY excellent things have been lately published con
cerning the present scarcity of provisions; and many causes
have been assigned for it, by men of experience and reflec
tion. But may it not be observed, there is something
wanting still, in most of those publications? One writer
assigns and insists on one cause, another on one or two
more. But who assigns all the causes that manifestly
concur to produce this melancholy effect? at the same time
pointing out, how each particular cause affects the price of
each particular sort of provision?
I would willingly offer to candid and benevolent men a few
hints on this important subject; proposing a few questions,
and subjoining to each what seems to be the plain and direct
anSWer.
I. 1. I ask, First, Why are thousands of people starving,
perishing for want, in every part of the nation? The fact I
know; I have seen it with my eyes, in every corner of the
land. I have known those who could only afford to eat a
little coarse food once every other day. I have known one
54 ThouGHTS ON THE PRESENT
in London (and one that a few years before had all the
conveniencies of life) picking up from a dunghill stinking
sprats, and carrying them home for herself and her children.
I have known another gathering the bones which the dogs.
had left in the streets, and making broth of them, to prolong
a wretched life I I have heard a third artlessly declare,
“Indeed I was very faint, and so weak I could hardly walk,
until my dog, finding nothing at home, went out, and
brought in a good sort of bone, which I took out of his
mouth, and made a pure dinner !” Such is the case at this
day of multitudes of people, in a land flowing, as it were,
with milk and honey! abounding with all the necessaries,
the conveniencies, the superfluities of life
Now, why is this? Why have all these nothing to eat?
Because they have nothing to do. The plain reason why
they have no meat is, because they have no work.
2. But why have they no work? Why are so many
thousand people, in London, in Bristol, in Norwich, in every
county, from one end of England to the other, utterly
destitute of employment?
Because the persons that used to employ them cannot
afford to do it any longer. Many that employed fifty men,
now scarce employ ten; those that employed twenty, now
employ one, or none at all. They cannot, as they have no
vent for their goods; food being so dear, that the generality
of people are hardly able to buy anything else.
3. But why is food so dear? To come to particulars:
Why does bread-corn bear so high a price? To set aside
partial causes, (which indeed, all put together, are little more
than the fly upon the chariot-wheel,) the grand cause is,
because such immense quantities of corn are continually
consumed by distilling. Indeed, an eminent distiller near
London, hearing this, warmly replied, “Nay, my partner and
I generally distil but a thousand quarters a week.” Perhaps
so. And suppose five-and-twenty distillers, in and near the
town, consume each only the same quantity: Here are five
and-twenty thousand quarters a week, that is, above twelve
hundred and fifty thousand a year, consumed in and about
London | Add the distillers throughout England, and have
we not reason to believe, that (not a thirtieth or a twentieth
part only, but) little less than half the wheat produced in the
kingdom is every year consumed, not by so harmless a way
as throwing it into the sea, but by converting it into deadly
poison; poison that naturally destroys not only the strength
and life, but also the morals, of our countrymen?
It may be objected, “This cannot be. We know how
much corn is distilled by the duty that is paid. And hereby
it appears, that scarce three hundred thousand quarters a
year are distilled throughout the kingdom.” Do we know
certainly, how much corn is distilled by the duty that is
paid? Is it indisputable, that the full duty is paid for all
the corn that is distilled? not to insist upon the multitude
of private stills, which pay no duty at all. I have myself
heard the servant of an eminent distiller occasionally aver,
that for every gallon he distilled which paid duty, he distilled
six which paid none. Yea, I have heard distillers themselves
affirm, “We must do this, or we cannot live.” It plainly
follows, we cannot judge, from the duty that is paid, of the
quantity of corn that is distilled.
“However, what is paid brings in a large revenue to the
King.” Is this an equivalent for the lives of his subjects?
Would His Majesty sell an hundred thousand of his subjects
yearly to Algiers for four hundred thousand pounds? Surely
no. Will he then sell them for that sum, to be butchered
by their own countrymen? “But otherwise the swine for
the Navy cannot be fed.” Not unless they are fed with
human flesh ! Not unless they are fatted with human
blood O, tell it not in Constantinople, that the English
raise the royal revenue by selling the flesh and blood of their
countrymen I
4. But why are oats so dear? Because there are four
times as many horses kept (to speak within compass) for
coaches and chaises in particular, as were a few years ago.
Unless, therefore, four times the oats grew now that grew
then, they cannot be at the same price. If only twice as
much is produced, (which, perhaps, is near the truth,) the
price will naturally be double to what it was.
And as the dearness of grain of one kind will always raise
the price of another, so whatever causes the dearness of wheat
and oats must raise the price of barley too. To account,
therefore, for the dearness of this, we need only remember
what has been observed above; although some particular
causes may concur in producing the same effect.
5. Why are beef and mutton so dear? Because many
considerable farmers, particularly in the northern counties,
who used to breed large numbers of sheep, or horned cattle,
and very frequently both, now breed none at all: They no
longer trouble themselves with either sheep, or cows, or
oxen; as they can turn their land to far better account by
breeding horses alone. Such is the demand, not only for
coach and chaise horses, which are bought and destroyed in
incredible numbers, but much more for bred horses, which
are yearly exported by hundreds, yea, thousands, to France.
6. But why are pork, poultry, and eggs so dear? Because
of the monopolizing of farms; perhaps as mischievous a
monopoly as was ever introduced into these kingdoms. The
land which was some years ago divided between ten or twenty
little farmers, and enabled them comfortably to provide for
their families, is now generally engrossed by one great farmer.
One farms an estate of a thousand a year, which formerly
maintained ten or twenty. Every one of these little farmers
kept a few swine, with some quantity of poultry; and, having
little money, was glad to send his bacon, or pork, or fowls
and eggs to market continually. Hence the markets were
plentifully served; and plenty created cheapness. But at
present, the great, the gentlemen-farmers are above attending
to these little things. They breed no poultry or swine,
unless for their own use; consequently they send none to
market. Hence it is not strange if two or three of these,
living near a market-town, occasion such a scarcity of these
things, by preventing the former supply, that the price of
them is double or treble to what it was before. Hence, (to
instance in a small article,) in the same town wherein, within
my memory, eggs were sold six or eight a penny, they are
now sold six or eight a groat.
Another cause (the most terrible one of all, and the most
destructive both of personal and social happiness) why not
only beef, mutton, and pork, but all kinds of victuals, are so
dear, is luxury. What can stand against this? Will it not
waste and destroy all that mature and art can produce? If a
person of quality will boil down three dozen of meats' tongues,
to make two or three quarts of soup, (and so proportionably
in other things,) what wonder that provisions fail? Only
look into the kitchens of the great, the nobility and gentry,
almost without exception; (considering withal, that “the toe
of the peasant treads upon the heel of the courtier;”) and
when you have observed the amazing waste which is made
there, you will no longer wonder at the scarcity, and conse
quently dearness, of the things which they use so much art
to destroy.
7. But why is land so dear? Because, on all these
accounts, gentlemen cannot live as they have been accus
tomed to do without increasing their income; which most of
them cannot do, but by raising their rents. And then the
farmer, paying an higher rent for the land, must have an
higher price for the produce of it. This again tends to raise
the price of land; and so the wheel runs round.
8. But why is it, that not only provisions and land, but well
nigh everything else, is so dear? Because of the enormous
taxes, which are laid on almost everything that can be named.
INot only abundant taxes are raised from earth, and fire, and
water; but, in England, the ingenious Statesmen have found
a way to lay a tax upon the very light! Yet one element
remains: And surely some man of honour will find a way to
tax this also. For how long shall the saucy air strike a
gentleman on the face, nay, a Lord, without paying for it?
9. But why are the taxes so high 7 Because of the national
debt. They must be so while this continues. I have heard
that the national expense, seventy years ago, was, in time of
peace, three millions a year. And now the bare interest of
the public debt amounts yearly to above four millions ! to
raise which, with the other stated expenses of government,
those taxes are absolutely necessary.
To sum up the whole: Thousands of people throughout the
land are perishing for want of food. This is owing to various
causes; but above all, to distilling, taxes, and luxury.
Here is the evil, and the undeniable causes of it. But
where is the remedy?
Perhaps it exceeds all the wisdom of man to tell: But it
may not be amiss to offer a few hints on the subject.
II. 1. What remedy is there for this sore evil,--many thou
sand poor people are starving? Find them work, and you will
find them meat. They will then earn and eat their own bread.
2. But how can the masters give them work without
ruining themselves? Procure vent for what is wrought, and
the masters will give them as much work as they can do.
And this would be done by sinking the price of provisions;
for then people would have money to buy other things too.
58 TIIoUGHTs ox THE PRESENT SCARCITY OF PROVISIONS.
3. But how can the price of wheat and barley be reduced?"
By prohibiting for ever, by making a full end of that bane of
health, that destroyer of strength, of life, and of virtue, -distil
ling. Perhaps this alone might go a great way toward answer
ing the whole design. It is not improbable, it would speedily
sink the price of corn, at least one part in three. If anything
more were required, might not all starch be made of rice, and
the importation of this, as well as of corn, be encouraged?
4. How can the price of oats be reduced ? By reducing
the number of horses. And may not this be effectually done,
(without affecting the ploughman, the waggoner, or any of
those who keep horses for common work,) (1.) By laying a
tax of ten pounds on every horse exported to France, for
which (notwithstanding an artful paragraph in a late public
paper) there is as great a demand as ever? (2.) By laying
an additional tax on gentlemen’s carriages? Not so much
on every wheel, (barefaced, shameless partiality !) but five
pounds yearly upon every horse. And would not these two
taxes alone supply near as much as is now paid for leave to
poison His Majesty’s liege subjects?
5. How can the price of beef and mutton be reduced ?
By increasing the breed of sheep and horned cattle. And
this would soon be increased sevenfold, if the price of horses
was reduced; which it surely would be, half in half, by the
method above mentioned.
6. How can the price of pork and poultry be reduced ?
Whether it ever will, is another question. But it can be
done, (1.) By letting no farms of above an hundred pounds
a year: (2.) By repressing luxury; whether by laws, by
example, or by both. I had almost said, by the grace of
God; but to mention this has been long out of fashion.
7. How may the price of land be reduced? By all the
methods above-named, as each tends to lessen the expense
of housekeeping: But especially the last; by restraining
luxury, which is the grand and general source of want.
8. How may the taxes be reduced? (1.) By discharging
half the national debt, and so saving, by this single means,
above two millions a year. (2.) By abolishing all useless
pensions, as fast as those who now enjoy them die: Espe
cially those ridiculous ones given to some hundreds of idle
men, as Governors of forts or castles; which forts have
answered no end for above these hundred years, unless to
ThouGHTS UPON SLAVERY. 50
shelter jackdaws and crows. Might not good part of a
million more be saved in this very article?
But will this ever be done? I fear not : At least, we have
no reason to hope for it shortly; for what good can we expect
(suppose the Scriptures are true) for such a nation as this,
where there is no fear of God, where there is such a deep,
-avowed, thorough contempt of all religion, as I never saw,
never heard or read of, in any other nation, whether Chris
tian, Mahometan, or Pagan? It seems as if God must
shortly arise and maintain his own cause. But, if so, let us
fall into the hands of God, and not into the hands of men.
LEwishAM,
January 20, 1773.
I. 1. BY slavery, I mean domestic slavery, or that of a servant
to a master. A late ingenious writer well observes, “The
variety of forms in which slavery appears, makes it almost
impossible to convey a just notion of it, by way of definition.
There are, however, certain properties which have accompanied
slavery in most places, whereby it is easily distinguished from
that mild, domestic service which obtains in our country.”*
2. Slavery imports an obligation of perpetual service, an
obligation which only the consent of the master can dissolve.
Neither in some countries can the master himself dissolve it,
without the consent of Judges appointed by the law. It
generally gives the master an arbitrary power of any
correction, not affecting life or limb. Sometimes even these
are exposed to his will, or protected only by a fine, or some
slight punishment, too inconsiderable to restrain a master of
an harsh temper. It creates an incapacity of acquiring
anything, except for the master's benefit. It allows the
master to alienate the slave, in the same manner as his cows
* See Mr. Hargrave's Plea for Somerset the Negro.
and horses. Lastly, it descends in its full extent from parent
to child, even to the last generation.
3. The beginning of this may be dated from the remotest
period of which we have an account in history. It commenced
in the barbarous state of society, and in process of time spread
into all nations. It prevailed particularly among the Jews,
the Greeks, the Romans, and the ancient Germans; and was
transmitted by them to the various kingdoms and states
which arose out of the Roman Empire. But after Christianity
prevailed, it gradually fell into decline in almost all parts of
Europe. This great change began in Spain, about the end of
the eighth century; and was become general in most other
kingdoms of Europe, before the middle of the fourteenth.
4. From this time slavery was nearly extinct till the
commencement of the sixteenth century, when the discovery
of America, and of the western and eastern coasts of Africa,
gave occasion to the revival of it. It took its rise from the
Portuguese, who, to supply the Spaniards with men to
cultivate their new possessions in America, procured Negroes
from Africa, whom they sold for slaves to the American
Spaniards. This began in the year 1508, when they imported
the first Negroes into Hispaniola. In 1540, Charles the
Fifth, then King of Spain, determined to put an end to
Negro slavery; giving positive orders that all the Negro
slaves in the Spanish dominions should be set free. And
this was accordingly done by Lagasca, whom he sent and
empowered to free them all, on condition of continuing to
labour for their masters. But soon after Lagasca returned
to Spain, slavery returned and flourished as before. After
wards, other nations, as they acquired possessions in America,
followed the examples of the Spaniards; and slavery has
taken deep root in most of our American colonies.
II. Such is the nature of slavery; such the beginning of
Negro slavery in America. But some may desire to know
what kind of country it is from which the Negroes are
brought; what sort of men, of what temper and behaviour
are they in their own country; and in what manner they are
generally procured, carried to, and treated in, America.
1. And, First, what kind of country is that from whence
they are brought? Is it so remarkably horrid, dreary, and
barren, that it is a kindness to deliver them out of it? I
believe many have apprehended so; but it is an entire
mistake, if we may give credit to those who have lived many
years therein, and could have no motive to misrepresent it.
2. That part of Africa whence the Negroes are brought,
commonly known by the name of Guinea, extends along the
coast, in the whole, between three and four thousand miles.
From the river Senegal, seventeen degrees north of the line,
to Cape Sierra-Leone, it contains seven hundred miles.
Thence it runs eastward about fifteen hundred miles, including
the Grain Coast, the Ivory Coast, the Gold Coast, and the
Slave Coast, with the large kingdom of Benin. From thence
it runs southward, about twelve hundred miles, and contains
the kingdoms of Congo and Angola.
3. Concerning the first, the Senegal coast, Monsieur Brue,
who lived there sixteen years, after describing its fruitfulness
near the sea, says, “The farther you go from the sea, the
more fruitful and well-improved is the country, abounding
in pulse, Indian corn, and various fruits. Here are vast
meadows, which feed large herds of great and small cattle;
and the villages, which lie thick, show the country is well
peopled.” And again: “I was surprised to see the land so
well cultivated: Scarce a spot lay unimproved; the low
lands, divided by small canals, were all sowed with rice; the
higher grounds were planted with Indian corn, and peas of
different sorts. Their beef is excellent; poultry plenty, and
very cheap, as are all the necessaries of life.”
4. As to the Grain and Ivory Coast, we learn from eye
witnesses, that the soil is in general fertile, producing
abundance of rice and roots. Indigo and cotton thrive
without cultivation; fish is in great plenty; the flocks and
herds are numerous, and the trees loaden with fruit.
5. The Gold Coast and Slave Coast, all who have seen it
agree, is exceeding fruitful and pleasant, producing vast quan
tities of rice and other grain, plenty of fruit and roots, palm
wine and oil, and fish in great abundance, with much tame
and wild cattle. The very same account is given us of the
soil and produce of the kingdoms of Benin, Congo, and Angola.
From all which it appears, that Guinea, in general, is far
from an horrid, dreary, barren country,-is one of the most
fruitful, as well as the most pleasant, countries in the known
world. It is said indeed to be unhealthy; and so it is to
strangers, but perfectly healthy to the native inhabitants.
6. Such is the country from which the Negroes are brought.
We come next to inquire what sort of men they are, of what
temper and behaviour, not in our plantations, but in their
native country. And here likewise the surest way is to take
our account from cye and ear witnesses. Now, those who
have lived in the Senegal country observe, it is inhabited by
three nations, the Jalofs, Fulis, and Mandingos. The King
of the Jalofs has under him several Ministers, who assist in
the exercise of justice. The Chief Justice goes in circuit
through all his dominions, to hear complaints and determine
controversies; and the Viceroy goes with him, to inspect the
behaviour of the Alkadi, or Governor, of each village. The
Fulis are governed by their chief men, who rule with much
moderation. Few of them will drink anything stronger than
water, being strict Mahometans. The Government is easy,
because the people are of a quiet and good disposition, and
so well instructed in what is right, that a man who wrongs
another is the abomination of all. They desire no more land
than they use, which they cultivate with great care and
industry: If any of them are known to be made slaves by
the white men, they all join to redeem them. They not
only support all that are old, or blind, or lame among them
selves, but have frequently supplied the necessities of the
Mandingos, when they were distressed by famine.
7. “The Mandingos,” says Monsieur Brue, “are rigid
Mahometans, drinking neither wine nor brandy. They are
industrious and laborious, keeping their ground well cultivated,
and breeding a good stock of cattle. Every town has a
Governor, and he appoints the labour of the people. The
men work the ground designed for corn; the women and girls,
the rice-ground. He afterwards divides the corn and rice
among them; and decides all quarrels, if any arise. All the
Mahometan Negroes constantly go to public prayers thrice a
day; there being a Priest in every village, who regularly
calls them together; and it is surprising to see the modesty,
attention, and reverence which they observe during their
worship. These three nations practise several trades; they
have smiths, saddlers, potters, and weavers; and they are very
ingenious at their several occupations. Their smiths not
only make all the instruments of iron which they have occa
sion to use, but likewise work many things neatly in gold
and silver. It is chiefly the women and children who weave
fine cotton cloth, which they dye blue and black.”
8. It was of these parts of Guinea that Monsieur Allanson,
correspondent of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris,
1rom 1749 to 1753, gives the following account, both as to the
country and people:--“Which way soever I turned my eyes, I
beheld a perfect image of pure nature: An agreeable solitude,
bounded on every side by a charming landscape; the rural
situation of cottages in the midst of trees; the ease and quiet
ness of the Negroes, reclined under the shade of the spreading
foliage, with the simplicity of their dress and manners: The
whole revived in my mind the idea of our first parents, and
I seemed to contemplate the world in its primitive state.
They are, generally speaking, very good-natured, sociable,
and obliging. I was not a little pleased with my very first
reception; and it fully convinced me, that there ought to be a
considerable abatement made in the accounts we have of the
savage character of the Africans.” He adds: “It is amazing
that an illiterate people should reason so pertinently concerning
the heavenly bodies. There is no doubt, but that, with proper
instruments, they would become excellent astronomers.”
9. The inhabitants of the Grain and Ivory Coast are repre
sented by those that deal with them, as sensible, courteous,
and the fairest traders on the coasts of Guinea. They rarely
drink to excess; if any do, they are severely punished by the
King’s order. They are seldom troubled with war: If a
difference happen between two nations, they commonly end
the dispute amicably.
The inhabitants of the Gold and Slave Coast likewise,
when they are not artfully incensed against each other, live
in great union and friendship, being generally well-tempered,
civil, tractable, and ready to help any that need it. In
particular, the natives of the kingdom of Whidah are civil,
kind, and obliging to strangers; and they are the most
gentleman-like of all the Negroes, abounding in good
manners toward each other. The inferiors pay the utmost
respect to their superiors; so wives to their husbands,
children to their parents. And they are remarkably indus
trious; all are constantly employed,--the men in agriculture,
the women in spinning and weaving cotton.
10. The Gold and Slave Coasts are divided into several dis
tricts, some governed by Kings, others by the principal men,
who take care each of their own town or village, and prevent or
appease tumults. They punish murder and adultery severely;
very frequently with death. Theft and robbery are punished
by a fine proportionable to the goods that were taken. All
the natives of this coast, though Heathens, believe there is one
God, the Author of them and all things. They appear like
wise to have a confused apprehension of a future state. And,
accordingly, every town and village has a place of public wor
ship. It is remarkable that they have no beggars among them;
such is the care of the chief men, in every city and village, to
provide some easy labour even for the old and weak. Some
are employed in blowing the smiths’ bellows; others in
pressing palm-oil; others in grinding of colours. If they are
too weak even for this, they sell provisions in the market.
11. The natives of the kingdom of Benin are a reasonable
and good-natured people. They are sincere and inoffensive,
and do no injustice either to one another or to strangers.
They are eminently civil and courteous: If you make them a
present, they endeavour to repay it double; and if they are
trusted till the ship returns the next year, they are sure
honestly to pay the whole debt. Theft is punished among them,
although not with the same severity as murder. If a man and
woman of any quality are taken in adultery, they are certain
to be put to death, and their bodies thrown on a dunghill, and
left a prey to wild beasts. They are punctually just and honest
in their dealings; and are also very charitable, the King
and the great Lords taking care to employ all that are capable
of any work. And those that are utterly helpless they keep
for God’s sake; so that here also are no beggars. The
inhabitants of Congo and Angola are generally a quiet people.
They discover a good understanding, and behave in a friendly
manner to strangers, being of a mild temper and an affable
carriage. Upon the whole, therefore, the Negroes who inhabit
the coast of Africa, from the river Senegal to the southern
bounds of Angola, are so far from being the stupid, senseless,
brutish, lazy barbarians, the fierce, cruel, perfidious savages
they have been described, that, on the contrary, they are
represented, by them who have no motive to flatter them, as
remarkably sensible, considering the few advantages they have
for improving their understanding; as industrious to the
highest degree, perhaps more so than any other natives of so
warm a climate; as fair, just, and honest in all their dealings,
unless where white men have taught them to be otherwise;
and as far more mild, friendly, and kind to strangers, than any
of our forefathers were. Our forefathers / Where shall we
find at this day, among the fair-faced natives of Europe, a
nation generally practising the justice, mercy, and truth,
which are found among these poor Africans? Suppose the
preceding accounts are true, (which I see no reason or
pretence to doubt of) and we may leave England and France,
to seek genuine honesty in Benin, Congo, or Angola.
III. We have now seen what kind of country it is from
which the Negroes are brought; and what sort of men (even
white men being the judges) they were in their own country.
Inquire we, Thirdly, In what manner are they generally
procured, carried to, and treated in, America.
1. First. In what manner are they procured? Part of
them by fraud. Captains of ships, from time to time, have
invited Negroes to come on board, and then carried them
away. But far more have been procured by force. The
Christians, landing upon their coasts, seized as many as they
found, men, women, and children, and transported them to
America. It was about 1551 that the English began trading
to Guinea; at first, for gold and elephants’ teeth; but soon
after, for men. In 1556, Sir John Hawkins sailed with two
ships to Cape Verd, where he sent cighty men on shore to
catch Negroes. But the natives flying, they fell farther
down, and there set the men on shore, “to burn their towns
and take the inhabitants.” But they met with such resist
ance, that they had seven men killed, and took but ten
Negroes. So they went still farther down, till, having taken
enough, they proceeded to the West Indies and sold them.
2. It was some time before the Europeans found a more
compendious way of procuring African slaves, by prevailing
upon them to make war upon each other, and to sell their
prisoners. Till then they seldom had any wars; but were in
general quiet and peaceable. But the white men first taught
them drunkenness and avarice, and then hired them to sell
one another. Nay, by this means, even their Kings are
induced to scll their own subjects. So Mr. Moore, factor of
the African Company in 1730, informs us: “When the King
of Barsalli wants goods or brandy, he sends to the English
Governor at James's Fort, who immediately sends a sloop.
Against the time it arrives, he plunders some of his neigh
bours towns, selling the people for the goods he wants. At
other times he falls upon one of his own towns, and makes
bold to sell his own subjects.” So Monsieur Brue says, “I
wrote to the King,” (not the same,) “if he had a sufficient
number of slaves, I would treat with him. He seized three
hundred of his own people, and sent word he was ready to
deliver them for the goods.” He adds: “Some of the natives
are always ready” (when well paid) “to surprise and carry off
their own countrymen. They come at night without noise, and
if they find any lone cottage, surround it and carry off all the
people.” Barbot, another French factor, says, “Many of the
slaves sold by the Negroes are prisoners of war, or taken in the
incursions they make into their enemies’ territories. Others
are stolen. Abundance of little Blacks, of both sexes, are
stolen away by their neighbours, when found abroad on the
road, or in the woods, or else in the corn-ficlds, at the time of
year when their parents keep them there all day to scare away
the devouring birds.” That their own parents sell them is
utterly false: Whites, not Blacks, are without natural affection!
3. To set the manner wherein Negroes are procured in a yet
stronger light, it will suffice to give an extract of “Two Voyages
to Guinea” on this account. The first is taken verbatim
from the original manuscript of the Surgeon’s Journal:--
“Sestro, Dec. 29, 1724.--No trade to-day, though many
traders came on board. They informed us, that the people
are gone to war within land, and will bring prisoners enough
in two or three days; in hopes of which we stay.
“The 30th.--No trade yet; but our traders came on
board to-day, and informed us the people had burnt four
towns; so that to-morrow we expect slaves off.
“The 31st.--Fair weather; but no trading yet. We sce
each night towns burning. But we hear many of the Sestro
men are killed by the inland Negroes; so that we fear this
war will be unsuccessful.
“The 2nd of January.--Last might we saw a prodigious
fire break out about eleven o’clock, and this morning see the
town of Sestro burned down to the ground.” (It contained
some hundred houses.) “So that we find their enemies are
too hard for them at present, and consequently our trade
spoiled here. Therefore about seven o’clock we weighed
anchor, to procecd lower down.”
4. The second extract, taken from the Journal of a Surgeon,
who went from New York on the same trade, is as follows:
“The commander of the vessel sent to acquaint the King,
that he wanted a cargo of slaves. The King promised to
furnish him; and, in order to it, set out, designing to surprise
some town, and make all the people prisoners. Some time
after, the King sent him word, he had not yet met with the
desired success; having attempted to break up two towns,
but having been twice repulsed; but that he still hoped to
procure the number of slaves. In this design he persisted,
till he met his enemies in the field. A battle was fought,
which lasted three days. And the engagement was so bloody,
that four thousand five hundred men were slain upon the spot.”
Such is the manner wherein the Negroes are procured ! Thus
the Christians preach the Gospel to the Heathens !
5. Thus they are procured. But in what numbers and in
what manner are they carried to America? Mr. Anderson,
in his History of Trade and Commerce, observes: “England
supplies her American colonies with Negro slaves, amounting
in number to about an hundred thousand every year;” that
is, so many are taken on board our ships; but at least ten
thousand of them die in the voyage; about a fourth part
more die at the different islands, in what is called the season
ing. So that at an average, in the passage and seasoning
together, thirty thousand die; that is, properly, are murdered.
O Earth, O Sea, cover not thou their blood |
6. When they are brought down to the shore in order to
be sold, our Surgeons thoroughly examine them, and that
quite naked, women and men, without any distinction; those
that are approved are set on one side. In the mean time, a
burning-iron, with the arms or name of the company, lies in
the fire, with which they are marked on the breast. Before
they are put into the ships, their masters strip them of all
they have on their backs: So that they come on board stark
naked, women as well as men. It is common for several
hundred of them to be put on board one vessel, where they
are stowed together in as little room as it is possible for
them to be crowded. It is easy to suppose what a condition
they must soon be in, between heat, thirst, and stench of
various kinds. So that it is no wonder, so many should die
in the passage; but rather, that any survive it.
7. When the vessels arrive at their destined port, the
Negroes are again exposed naked to the eyes of all that flock
together, and the examination of their purchasers. Then they
are separated to the plantations of their several masters, to see
68 ThiOUGh T.S UPON SLAVERY.
each other no more. Here you may see mothers hanging
over their daughters, bedewing their naked breasts with tears,
and daughters clinging to their parents, till the whipper soon
obliges them to part. And what can be more wretched than
the condition they then enter upon? Banished from their
country, from their friends and relations for ever, from every
comfort of life, they are reduced to a state scarce anyway pre
ferable to that of beasts of burden. In general, a few roots,
not of the nicest kind, usually yams or potatoes, are their food;
and two rags, that neither screen them from the heat of the
day, nor the cold of the night, their covering. Their sleep is
very short, their labour continual, and frequently above their
strength; so that death sets many of them at liberty before
they have lived out half their days. The time they work in
the West Indies, is from day-break to noon, and from two
o'clock till dark; during which time, they are attended by
overseers, who, if they think them dilatory, or think anything
not so well done as it should be, whip them most unmercifully,
so that you may see their bodies long after wealed and scarred
usually from the shoulders to the waist. And before they
are suffered to go to their quarters, they have commonly
something to do, as collecting herbage for the horses, or
gathering fuel for the boilers; so that it is often past twelve
before they can get home. Hence, if their food is not pre
pared, they are sometimes called to labour again, before they
can satisfy their hunger. And no excuse will avail. If they
are not in the field immediately, they must expect to feel the
lash. Did the Creator intend that the noblest creatures in
the visible world should live such a life as this?
Are these thy glorious work, Parent of Good P
8. As to the punishments inflicted on them, says Sir Hans
Sloane, “they frequently geld them, or chop off half a foot:
After they are whipped till they are raw all over, some put
pepper and salt upon them; some drop melted wax upon their
skin; others cut off their ears, and constrain them to broil and
eat them. For rebellion,” (that is, asserting their native liberty,
which they have as much right to as to the air they breathe,)
“they fasten them down to the ground with crooked sticks
on every limb, and then applying fire, by degrees, to the feet
and hands, they burn them gradually upward to the head.”
9. But will not the laws made in the plantations prevent or
ThiOUGHTS UPON SLAVERY. 69
redress all cruelty and oppression? We will take but a few
of those laws for a specimen, and then let any man judge:
In order to rivet the chain of slavery, the law of Virginia
ordains: “That no slave shall be set free upon any pretence
whatever, except for some meritorious services, to be adjudged
and allowed by the Governor and Council; and that where
any slave shall be set free by his owner, otherwise than is
herein directed, the Churchwardens of the parish, wherein
such Negro shall reside for the space of one month, are
hereby authorized and required to take up and sell the said
Negro by public outcry.”
10. Will not these lawgivers take effectual care to prevent
cruelty and oppression?
The law of Jamaica ordains: “Every slave that shall run
away, and continue absent from his master twelve months,
shall be deemed rebellious.” And by another law, fifty pounds
are allowed to those who kill or bring in alive a rebellious
slave. So their law treats these poor men with as little cere
mony and consideration, as if they were merely brute beasts!
But the innocent blood which is shed in consequence of such
a detestable law, must call for vengeance on the murderous
abettors and actors of such deliberate wickedness.
11. But the law of Barbadoes exceeds even this: “If any
Negro under punishment, by his master, or his order, for
running away, or any other crime or misdemeanor, shall suffer
in life or member, no person whatsoever shall be liable to any
fine therefore. But if any man, of wantonness, or only of
bloody-mindedness, or cruel intention, wilfully kill a Negro of
his own,” (now, observe the severe punishment 1) “he shall
pay into the public treasury fifteen pounds sterling! and not
be liable to any other punishment or forfeiture for the same!”
Nearly allied to this is that law of Virginia: “After
proclamation is issued against slaves that run away, it is
lawful for any person whatsoever to kill and destroy such
slaves, by such ways and means as he shall think fit.”
We have seen already some of the ways and means which
have been thought fit on such occasions; and many more might
be mentioned. One gentleman, when I was abroad, thought
fit to roast his slave alive | But if the most natural act of
“running away” from intolerable tyranny, deserves such
relentless severity, what punishment have these lawmakers to
£xpect hereafter, on account of their own enormous offences?
IV. 1. This is the plain, unaggravated matter of fact
Such is the manner wherein our African slaves are procured;
such the manner wherein they are removed from their native
land, and wherein they are treated in our plantations. I
would now inquire, whether these things can be defended, on
the principles of even heathen honesty; whether they can be
reconciled (setting the Bible out of the question) with any
degree of either justice or mercy.
1 2. The grand plea is, “They are authorized by law.” But
can law, human law, change the nature of things? Can it
turn darkness into light, or evil into good? By no means.
Notwithstanding ten thousand laws, right is right, and wrong
is wrong still. There must still remain an essential differ
ence between justice and injustice, cruelty and mercy. So
that I still ask, Who can reconcile this treatment of the
Negroes, first and last, with either mercy or justice?
Where is the justice of inflicting the severest evils on those
that have done us no wrong? of depriving those that never
injured us in word or deed, of every comfort of life? of tearing
them from their native country, and depriving them of liberty
itself, to which an Angolan has the same natural right as an
Englishman, and on which he sets as high a value? Yea,
where is the justice of taking away the lives of innocent,
inoffensive men; murdering thousands of them in their own
land, by the hands of their own countrymen; many thou
sands, year after year, on shipboard, and then casting them
like dung into the sea; and tens of thousands in that cruel
slavery to which they are so unjustly reduced ?
3. But waving, for the present, all other considerations, I
strike at the root of this complicated villany; I absolutely
deny all slave-holding to be consistent with any degree of
natural justice.
I cannot place this in a clearer light than that great
ornament of his profession, Judge Blackstone, has already
done. Part of his words are as follows:--
“The three origins of the right of slavery assigned by
Justinian, are all built upon false foundations: (1) Slavery is
said to arise from captivity in war. The conqueror having a
right to the life of his captives, if he spares that, has then a
right to deal with them as he pleases. But this is untrue, if
taken generally,-that, by the laws of nations, a man has a
right to kill his enemy. He has only a right to kill him in
particular cases, in cases of absolute necessity for self-defence.
And it is plain, this absolute necessity did not subsist, since
he did not kill him, but made him prisoner. War itself is
justifiable only on principles of self-preservation: Therefore it
gives us no right over prisoners, but to hinder their hurting
us by confining them. Much less can it give a right to torture,
or kill, or even to enslave an enemy when the war is over.
Since therefore the right of making ourprisoners slaves, depends
on a supposed right of slaughter, that foundation failing, the
consequence which is drawn from it must fail likewise.
“It is said, Secondly, slavery may begin by one man’s
selling himself to another. And it is true, a man may sell
himself to work for another; but he cannot sell himself to be
a slave, as above defined. Every sale implies an equivalent
given to the seller, in lieu of what he transfers to the buyer.
But what equivalent can be given for life or liberty? His
property likewise, with the very price which he seems to
receive, devolves ipso facto to his master, the instant he
becomes his slave: In this case, therefore, the buyer gives
nothing, and the seller receives nothing. Of what validity
then can a sale be, which destroys the very principle upon
which all sales are founded ?
“We are told, Thirdly, that men may be born slaves, by
being the children of slaves. But this, being built upon the
two former rights, must fall together with them. If neither
captivity nor contract can, by the plain law of nature and
reason, reduce the parent to a state of slavery, much less can
they reduce the offspring.” It clearly follows, that all
slavery is as irreconcilable to justice as to mercy.
4. That slave-holding is utterly inconsistent with mercy, is
almost too plain to need a proof. Indeed, it is said, “that
these Negroes being prisoners of war, our captains and
factors buy them, merely to save them from being put to
death. And is not this mercy?” I answer, (1.) Did Sir
John Hawkins, and many others, seize upon men, women,
and children, who were at peace in their own fields or houses,
merely to save them from death? (2) Was it to save them
from death, that they knocked out the brains of those they
could not bring away? (3.) Who occasioned and fomented
those wars, wherein these poor creatures were taken prisoners?
Who excited them by money, by drink, by every possible
means, to fall upon one another? Was it not themselves?
They know in their own conscience it was, if they have any
conscience left. But, (4.) To bring the matter to a short
issue, can they say before God, that they ever took a single
voyage, or bought a single Negro, from this motive? They
cannot; they well know, to get money, not to save lives, was
the whole and sole spring of their motions.
5. But if this manner of procuring and treating Negroes
is not consistent either with mercy or justice, yet there is
a plea for it which every man of business will acknowledge
to be quite sufficient. Fifty years ago, one meeting an
eminent Statesman in the lobby of the House of Commons,
said, “You have been long talking about justice and equity.
Pray which is this bill; equity or justice?” He answered
very short and plain, “D-n justice; it is necessity.” Here
also the slave-holder fixes his foot; here he rests the strength
of his cause. “If it is not quite right, yet it must be so;
there is an absolute necessity for it. It is necessary we
should procure slaves; and when we have procured them, it
is necessary to use them with severity, considering their
stupidity, stubbornness, and wickedness.”
I answer, You stumble at the threshold; I deny that villany
is ever necessary. It is impossible that it should ever be
necessary for any reasonable creature to violate all the laws
of justice, mercy, and truth. No circumstances can make it
necessary for a man to burst in sunder all the ties of humanity.
It can never be necessary for a rational being to sink himself
below a brute. A man can be under no necessity of degrading
himself into a wolf. The absurdity of the supposition is so
glaring, that one would wonder any one can help seeing it.
6. This in general. But, to be more particular, I ask, First,
What is necessary? and, Secondly, To what end? It may
be answered, “The whole method now used by the original
purchasers of Negroes is necessary to the furnishing our
colonies yearly with a hundred thousand slaves.” I grant,
this is necessary to that end. But how is that end necessary?
How will you prove it necessary that one hundred, that one,
of those slaves should be procured? “Why, it is necessary
to my gaining an hundred thousand pounds.” Perhaps so:
But how is this necessary? It is very possible you might be
both a better and a happier man, if you had not a quarter of
it. I deny that your gaining one thousand is necessary either
to your present or eternal happiness. “But, however, you
ThouGIITS UPON SLAVERY. 73
must allow, these slaves are necessary for the cultivation of
our islands; inasmuch as white men are not able to labour in
hot climates.” I answer, First, it were better that all those
islands should remain uncultivated for ever; yea, it were more
desirable that they were altogether sunk in the depth of the
sea, than that they should be cultivated at so high a price as
the violation of justice, mercy, and truth. But, Secondly, the
supposition on which you ground your argument is false. For
white men, even Englishmen, are well able to labour in hot
climates; provided they are temperate both in meat and drink,
and that they inure themselves to it by degrees. I speak no
more than I know by experience. It appears from the ther
mometer, that the summer heat in Georgia is frequently equal
to that in Barbadoes, yea, to that under the line. And yet I
and my family (eight in number) did employ all our spare time
there, in felling of trees and clearing of ground, as hard labour
as any Negro need be employed in. The German family, like
wise, forty in number, were employed in all manner of labour.
And this was so far from impairing our health, that we all con
tinued perfectly well, while the idle ones round about us were
swept away as with a pestilence. It is not true, therefore,
that white men are not able to labour, even in hot climates,
full as well as black. But if they were not, it would be
better that none should labour there, that the work should be
left undone, than that myriads of innocent men should be
murdered, and myriads more dragged into the basest slavery.
7. “But the furnishing us with slaves is necessary for the
trade, and wealth, and glory of our nation.” Here are several
mistakes. For, First, wealth is not necessary to the glory of
any nation; but wisdom, virtue, justice, mercy, generosity,
public spirit, love of our country. These are necessary to the
real glory of a nation; but abundance of wealth is not. Men
of understanding allow that the glory of England was full
as high in Queen Elizabeth’s time as it is now; although our
riches and trade were then as much smaller, as our virtue was
greater. But, Secondly, it is not clear that we should have
either less money or trade, (only less of that detestable trade of
man-stealing,) if there was not a Negro in all our islands, or in
all English America. It is demonstrable, white men, inured to
it by degrees, can work as well as them; and they would do it,
were Negroes out of the way, and proper encouragement given
them. However, Thirdly, I come back to the same point:
Better no trade, than trade procured by villany. It is far
better to have no wealth, than to gain wealth at the expense
of virtue. Better is honest poverty, than all the riches bought
by the tears, and sweat, and blood, of our fellow-creatures.
8. “However this be, it is necessary, when we have slaves,
to use them with severity.” What, to whip them for every
petty offence, till they are all in gore blood? to take that
opportunity of rubbing pepper and salt into their raw flesh?
to drop burning sealing-wax upon their skin? to castrate
them ? to cut off half their foot with an axe? to hang them
on gibbets, that they may die by inches, with heat, and
hunger, and thirst? to pin them down to the ground, and
then burn them by degrees, from the feet to the head? to
roast them alive? When did a Turk or a Heathen find it
necessary to use a fellow-creature thus?
I pray, to what end is this usage necessary? “Why, to
prevent their running away; and to keep them constantly to
their labour, that they may not idle away their time: So miser
ably stupid is this race of men, yea, so stubborn, and so wicked.”
Allowing them to be as stupid as you say, to whom is that
stupidity owing? Without question, it lies altogether at the
door of their inhuman masters; who give them no means, no
opportunity, of improving their understanding; and, indeed,
leave them no motive, either from hope or fear, to attempt any
such thing. They were no way remarkable for stupidity while
they remained in their own country: The inhabitants of
Africa, where they have equal motives and equal means of
improvement, are not inferior to the inhabitants of Europe; to
some of them they are greatly superior. Impartially survey,
in their own country, the natives of Benin, and the natives of
Lapland; compare (setting prejudice aside) the Samoeids and
the Angolans; and on which side does the advantage lie, in
point of understanding? Certainly the African is in no respect
inferior to the European. Their stupidity, therefore, in our
plantations is not natural; otherwise than it is the natural
effect of their condition. Consequently, it is not their fault,
but yours: You must answer for it, before God and man.
9. “But their stupidity is not the only reason of our treating
them with severity. For it is hard to say, which is the greatest,
this, or their stubbornness and wickedness.” It may be so:
But do not these, as well as the other, lie at your door? Are
not stubbornness, cunning, pilfering, and divers other vices,
the natural, necessary fruits of slavery? Is not this an
observation which has been made in every age and nation?
And what means have you used to remove this stubbornness?
Have you tried what mildness and gentleness would do? I
knew one that did; that had prudence and patience to make
the experiment; Mr. Hugh Bryan, who then lived on the
borders of South Carolina. And what was the effect? Why,
that all his Negroes (and he had no small number of them)
loved and reverenced him as a father, and cheerfully obeyed
him out of love. Yea, they were more afraid of a frown from
him, than of many blows from an overseer. And what pains
have you taken, what method have you used, to reclaim them.
from their wickedness? Have you carefully taught them,
that there is a God, a wise, powerful, merciful Being, the
Creator and Governor of heaven and earth? that he has
appointed a day wherein he will judge the world, will take an
account of all our thoughts, words, and actions? that in that
day he will reward every child of man according to his works?
that then the righteous shall inherit the kingdom prepared
for them from the foundation of the world; and the wicked
shall be cast into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels? If you have not done this, if you have taken no
pains or thought about the matter, can you wonder at their
wickedness? What wonder, if they should cut your throat?
And if they did, whom could you thank for it but yourself?
You first acted the villain in making them slaves, whether
you stole them or bought them. You kept them stupid and
wicked, by cutting them off from all opportunities of improv
ing either in knowledge or virtue: And now you assign their
want of wisdom and goodness as the reason for using them
worse than brute beasts'
V. 1. It remains only to make a little application of the
£observations. But to whom should that application
e made? That may bear a question. Should we address
ourselves to the public at large? What effect can this have?
It may inflame the world against the guilty, but is mot likely
to remove that guilt. Should we appeal to the English nation
in general? This also is striking wide; and is never likely to
procure any redress for the sore evil we complain of. As little
would it in all probability avail, to apply to the Parliament.
So many things, which seem of greater importance, lie before
them, that they are not likely to attend to this. I therefore
add a few words to those who are more immediately
concerned, whether captains, merchants, or planters.
2. And, First, to the captains employed in this trade. Most
of you know the country of Guinea; several parts of it, at
least, between the river Senegal and the kingdom of Angola.
Perhaps, now, by your means part of it is become a dreary,
uncultivated wilderness, the inhabitants being all murdered
or carried away, so that there are none left to till the ground.
But you well know how populous, how fruitful, how pleasant
it was a few years ago. You know, the people were not
stupid, not wanting in sense, considering the few means of
improvement they enjoyed. Neither did you find them savage,
fierce, cruel, treacherous, or unkind to strangers. On the
contrary, they were, in most parts, a sensible and ingenious
people. They were kind and friendly, courteous and obliging,
and remarkably fair and just in their dealings. Such are the
men whom you hire their own countrymen to tear away from
this lovely country; part by stealth, part by force, part made
captives in those wars which you raise or foment on purpose.
You have seen them torn away,+children from their parents,
parents from their children; husbands from their wives, wives
from their beloved husbands, brethren and sisters from each
other. You have dragged them who had never done you any
wrong, perhaps in chains, from their native shore. You have
forced them into your ships like an herd of swine,--them who
had souls immortal as your own; only some of them leaped
into the sea, and resolutely stayed under water, till they
could suffer no more from you. You have stowed them
together as close as ever they could lie, without any regard
either to decency or convenience. And when many of them
had been poisoned by foul air, or had sunk under various
hardships, you have seen their remains delivered to the deep,
till the sea should give up his dead. You have carried the
survivors into the vilest slavery, never to end but with life;
such slavery as is not found among the Turks at Algiers, no,
nor among the Heathens in America.
3. May I speak plainly to you? I must. Love constrains
me; love to you, as well as to those you are concerned
with.
Is there a God? You know there is. Is he a just God?
Then there must be a state of retribution; a state wherein
+he just God will reward every man according to his
Thou GhiTS UPON SLAVERY. 77
works. Then what reward will he render to you? O think
betimes ! before you drop into eternity | Think now, “He
shall have judgment without mercy that showed no mercy.”
Are you a man? Then you should have an human heart.
But have you indeed? What is your heart made of? Is
there no such principle as compassion there? Do you never
feel another’s pain? Have you no sympathy, no sense of
human woe, no pity for the miserable? When you saw the
flowing eyes, the heaving breasts, or the bleeding sides and
tortured limbs of your fellow-creatures, was you a stone, or
a brute? Did you look upon them with the eyes of a tiger?
When you squeezed the agonizing creatures down in the
ship, or when you threw their poor mangled remains into
the sea, had you no relenting? Did not one tear drop
from your eye, one sigh escape from your breast? Do you
feel no relenting now? If you do not, you must go on, till
the measure of your iniquities is full. Then will the great
God deal with you as you have dealt with them, and require
all their blood at your hands. And at “that day it shall
be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than for you!”
But if your heart does relent, though in a small degree,
know it is a call from the God of love. And “to-day, if
you will hear his voice, harden not your heart.” To-day
resolve, God being your helper, to escape for your life.
Regard not money ! All that a man hath will he give for
his life : Whatever you lose, lose not your soul: Nothing
can countervail that loss. Immediately quit the horrid
trade: At all events, be an honest man.
4. This equally concerns every merchant who is engaged in
the slave-trade. It is you that induce the African villain to
sell his countrymen; and in order thereto, to steal, rob,
murder men, women, and children without number, by enabling
the English villain to pay him for so doing, whom you overpay
for his execrable labour. It is your money that is the spring
of all, that empowers him to go on: So that whatever he or
the African does in this matter is all your act and deed. And
is your conscience quite reconciled to this? Does it never
reproach you at all? Has gold entirely blinded your eyes, and
stupified your heart? Can you see, can you feel, no harm
therein? Is it doing as you would be done to? Make the case
your own. “Master,” said a slave at Liverpool to the merchant
that owned him, “what, if some of my countrymen were to come
here, and take away my mistress, and Master Tommy, and
Master Billy, and carry them into our country, and make them
slaves, how would you like it?” His answer was worthy of a
man: “I will never buy a slave more while I live.” O let his
resolution be yours! Have no more any part in this detestable
business. Instantly leave it to those unfeeling wretches who
Laugh at human nature and compassion :
Be you a man, not a wolf, a devourer of the human species 1
Be merciful, that you may obtain mercy!
5. And this equally concerns every gentleman that has an
estate in our American plantations; yea, all slave-holders, of
whatever rank and degree; seeing men-buyers are exactly on
a level with men-stealers. Indeed you say, “I pay honestly
for my goods; and I am not concerned to know how they are
come by.” Nay, but you are; you are deeply concerned to
know they are honestly come by. Otherwise you are a par
taker with a thief, and are not a jot homester than him. But
you know they are not honestly come by; you know they are
procured by means nothing near so innocent as picking of
pockets, house-breaking, or robbery upon the highway. You
know they are procured by a deliberate series of more com
plicated villany (of fraud, robbery, and murder) than was ever
practised either by Mahometans or Pagans; in particular, by
murders, of all kinds; by the blood of the innocent poured
upon the ground like water. Now, it is your money that pays
the merchant, and through him the captain and the African
butchers. You therefore are guilty, yea, principally guilty, of
all these frauds, robberies, and murders. You are the spring
that puts all the rest in motion; they would not stir a step
without you; therefore, the blood of all these wretches who
die before their time, whether in their country or elsewhere, lies
upon your head. “The blood of thy brother” (for, whether
thou wilt believe it or no, such he is in the sight of Him that
made him) “crieth against thee from the earth,” from the ship,
and from the waters. O, whatever it costs, put a stop to its
cry before it be too late: Instantly, at any price, were it the
half of your goods, deliver thyself from blood-guiltiness!
Thy hands, thy bed, thy furniture, thy house, thy lands,
are at present stained with blood. Surely it is enough;
accumulate no more guilt; spill no more the blood of the
innocent! Do not hire another to shed blood; do not pay
him for doing it ! Whether you are a Christian or no, show
yourself a man I Be not more savage than a lion or a bear !
6. Perhaps you will say, “I do not buy any Negroes; I
only use those left me by my father.” So far is well; but is
it enough to satisfy your own conscience? Had your father,
have you, has any man living, a right to use another as a
slave? It cannot be, even setting Revelation aside. It cannot
be, that either war, or contract, can give any man such a
property in another as he has in his sheep and oxen. Much
less is it possible, that any child of man should ever be born
a slave. Liberty is the right of every human creature, as soon
as he breathes the vital air; and no human law can deprive
him of that right which he derives from the law of nature.
If, therefore, you have any regard to justice, (to say nothing
of mercy, nor the revealed law of God,) render unto all their
due. Give liberty to whom liberty is due, that is, to every
child of man, to every partaker of human nature. Let none
serve you but by his own act and deed, by his own voluntary
choice. Away with all whips, all chains, all compulsion |
Be gentle toward all men; and see that you invariably do
unto every one as you would he should do unto you.
7. Othou God of love, thou who art loving to every man,
and whose mercy is over all thy works; thou who art the
Father of the spirits of all flesh, and who art rich in mercy
unto all; thou who hast mingled of one blood all the nations
upon earth; have compassion upon these outcasts of men, who
are trodden down as dung upon the earth ! Arise, and help
these that have no helper, whose blood is spilt upon the
ground like water | Are not these also the work of thine
own hands, the purchase of thy Son’s blood? Stir them up
to cry unto thee in the land of their captivity; and let their
complaint come up before thee; let it enter into thy ears!
Make even those that lead them away captive to pity them,
and turn their captivity as the rivers in the south. O burst
thou all their chains in sunder; more especially the chains
of their sins! Thou Saviour of all, make them free, that
they may be free indeed!
The servile progeny of Ham
Seize as the purchase of thy blood |
Let all the Heathens know thy name:
From idols to the living God
The dark Americans convert,
And shine in every pagan heart 1
To
Ne, pueri, ne tanta animis assuescite bella,
Nett patriae validas in viscera vertite vires,"-VIRGIL.
-
I was of a different judgment on this head, till I read a
tract entitled, “Taxation no Tyranny.” But as soon as I
received more light myself, I judged it my duty to impart it
to others. I therefore extracted the chief arguments from
that treatise, and added an application to those whom it most
concerns. I was well aware of the treatment this would
bring upon myself; but let it be, so I may in any degree
serve my King and country.
A late tract, wrote in answer to this, is wrote in just such
a spirit as I expected. It is strewed over with such flowers
as these: “Contemptible sophistry ! Fallacious to the last
degree Childish quirks! Pitiful sophisms 1” with strong
assertions, repeated over and over, and with florid quotations.
But all the arguments which are produced therein, may be
contained in a nut-shell.
The writert asserts twenty times, “He that is taxed without
* Thus translated by Pitt:
“O check your wrath, my sons; the nations spare ;
And save your country from the woes of war;
Nor in her sacred breast, with rage abhorr'd,
So fiercely plunge her own victorious sword ' "-EDIT.
+ Or writers. For I am informed by a correspondent in Bristol, that this letter
was wrote by two Anabaptist Ministers, assisted by a gentleman and a tradesman
of the Church of England.
his own consent, that is, without being represented, is a
slave.” I answer, No; I have no representative in Parlia
ment; but I am taxed; yet I am no slave. Yea, nine in ten
throughout England have no representative, no vote; yet
they are no slaves; they enjoy both civil and religious liberty
to the utmost extent.
He replies, “But they may have votes if they will; they
may purchase freeholds.” What! Can every man in England
purchase a freehold? No, not one in an hundred. But, be
that as it may, they have no vote now; yet they are no
slaves, they are the freest men in the whole world.
“Who then is a slave?” Look into America, and you
may easily see. See that Negro, fainting under the load,
bleeding under the lash ! He is a slave. And is there “no
difference” between him and his master? Yes; the one is
screaming, “Murder ! Slavery !” the other silently bleeds
and dies !
“But wherein then consists the difference between liberty
and slavery?” Herein: You and I, and the English in
general, go where we will, and enjoy the fruit of our labours:
This is liberty. The Negro does not: This is slavery.
Is not then all this outcry about liberty and slavery mere
rant, and playing upon words?
This is a specimen of this writer's arguments. - Let us just
touch upon his quotations:
“All the inhabitants of England,” says the fanciful
Montesquieu, as one terms him, “have a right of voting at
the election of a representative, except such as are so mean, as
to be deemed to have no will of their own l’’ Nay, if all have
a right to vote that have a will of their own, certainly this
right belongs to every man, woman, and child in England.
One quotation more : “Judge Blackstone says, “In a free
state, every man who is supposed to be a free agent ought to
be in some measure his own governor. Therefore, one
branch, at least, of the legislative power should reside in the
whole body of the people.” But who are the whole body of
the people? According to him, every free agent. Then the
argument proves too much. For are not women free agents?
Yea, and poor as well as rich men. According to this
argument, there is no free state under the sun.
The book which this writer says I so strongly recommend,
I never yet saw with my eyes. And the words which he says
I spoke, never came out of my lips. But I really believe, he
was told so.
I now speak according to the light I have. But if any
one will give me more light, I will be thankful.
BRETHREN AND CountRY MEN,
1. THE grand question which is now debated, (and with
warmth enough on both sides) is this, Has the English
Parliament a right to tax the American colonies?
In order to determine this, let us consider the nature of
our colonies. An English colony is, a number of persons to
whom the King grants a charter, permitting them to settle
in some far country as a corporation, enjoying such powers
as the charter grants, to be administered in such a manner
as the charter prescribes. As a corporation they make laws
for themselves; but as a corporation subsisting by a grant
from higher authority, to the control of that authority they
still continue subject.
Considering this, nothing can be more plain, than that the
supreme power in England has a legal right of laying any
tax upon them for any end beneficial to the whole empire.
2. But you object, “It is the privilege of a freeman and
an Englishman to be taxed only by his own consent. And
this consent is given for every man by his representatives in
Parliament. But we have no representatives in Parliament.
Therefore we ought not to be taxed thereby.”
I answer, This argument proves too much. If the Parlia
ment cannot tax you because you have no representation
therein, for the same reason it can make no laws to bind you.
If a freeman cannot be taxed without his own consent, neither
can he be punished without it; for whatever holds with regard
to taxation, holds with regard to all other laws. Therefore
he who denies the English Parliament the power of taxation,
denies it the right of making any laws at all. But this
power over the colonies you have never disputed; you have
always admitted statutes for the punishment of offences, and
for the preventing or redressing of inconveniences; and the
reception of any law draws after it, by a chain which cannot
be broken, the necessity of admitting taxation.
3. But I object to the very foundation of your plea: That
“every freeman is governed by laws to which he has consented:”
As confidently as it has been asserted, it is absolutely false.
In wide-extended dominions, a very small part of the people
are concerned in making laws. This, as all public business,
must be done by delegation; the delegates are chosen by a
select number. And those that are not electors, who are far
the greater part, stand by, idle and helpless spectators.
The case of electors is little better. When they are near
equally divided, in the choice of their delegates to represent
them in the Parliament or National Assembly, almost half of
them must be governed, not only without, but even against,
their own consent.
And how has any man consented to those laws which were
made before he was born? Our consent to these, may, and
to the laws now made even in England, is purely passive.
And in every place, as all men are born the subjects of some
state or other, so they are born, passively, as it were,
consenting to the laws of that state. Any other than this
kind of consent, the condition of civil life does not allow.
4. But you say, you “are entitled to life, liberty, and
property by nature; and that you have never ceded to any
sovereign power the right to dispose of these without your
consent.”
While you speak as the naked sons of nature, this is
certainly true. But you presently declare, “Our ancestors,
at the time they settled these colonies, were entitled to all the
rights of natural-born subjects within the realm of England.”
This likewise is true; but when this is granted, the boast of
original rights is at an end. You are no longer in a state of
nature, but sink down into colonists, governed by a charter.
Tf your ancestors were subjects, they acknowledged a
Sovereign; if they had a right to English privileges, they
were accountable to English laws, and had ceded to the King
and Parliament the power of disposing, without their consent,
of both their lives, liberties, and properties. And did the
Parliament cede to them a dispensation from the obedience
which they owe as natural subjects? or any degree of inde
Pendence, not enjoyed by other Englishmen?
5. “They did not” indeed, as you observe, “by emigra
tion forfeit any of those privileges; but they were, and their
descendants now are, entitled to all such as their circum
stances enable them to enjoy.”
That they who form a colony by a lawful charter, forfeit no
privilege thereby, is certain. But what they do not forfeit by
any judicial sentence, they may lose by natural effects. When
a man voluntarily comes into America, he may lose what he
had when in Europe. Perhaps he had a right to vote for a
knight or burgess; by crossing the sea he did not forfeit this
right. But it is plain, he has made the exercise of it no
longer possible. He has reduced himself from a voter to one
of the innumerable multitude that have no votes.
6. But you say, “As the colonies are not represented in
the British Parliament, they are entitled to a free power of
legislation. For they inherit all the right which their
ancestors had of enjoying all the privileges of Englishmen.”
They do inherit all the privileges which their ancestors had;
but they can inherit no more. Their ancestors left a country
where the representatives of the people were elected by men
particularly qualified, and where those who wanted that
qualification were bound by the decisions of men whom they
had not deputed. You are the descendants of men who either
had no votes, or resigned them by emigration. You have
therefore exactly what your ancestors left you; not a vote in
making laws, nor in choosing legislators; but the happiness
of being protected by laws, and the duty of obeying them.
What your ancestors did not bring with them, neither they
nor their descendants have acquired. They have not, by aban
doning their right in one legislature, acquired a right to consti
tute another; any more than the multitudes in England who
have no vote, have a right to erect a Parliament for themselves.
7. However, the “colonies have a right to all the privi
leges granted them by royal charters, or secured to them by
provincial laws.”
The first clause is allowed: They have certainly a right to
all the privileges granted them by royal charters; provided
those privileges be consistent with the British constitution.
But as to the second there is a doubt: Provincial laws may
grant privileges to individuals of the province; but surely no
province can confer provincial privileges on itself! They
have a right to all which the King has given them; but not
to all which they have given themselves.
A corporation can no more assume to itself privileges which
it had not before, than a man can, by his own act and deed,
assume titles or dignities. The legislature of a colony may
be compared to the vestry of a large parish, which may lay a
cess on its inhabitants, but still regulated by the law, and
which, whatever be its internal expenses, is still liable to
taxes laid by superior authority.
8. But whereas I formerly allowed, “If there is, in the
charter of any colony, a clause exempting them from taxes
for ever, then they have a right to be so exempted;” I allowed
too much. For to say, that the King can grant an exemption
from the power of Parliament, is saying in other words, that
one branch of the legislature can grant away the power of the
others. This is so far from being true, that if there is, in
the charter of any colony, a clause exempting them from
taxes for ever, yet, unless it were confirmed by an act of the
whole Legislature, that clause is void in itself. The King (to
use the phrase of the law) was “deceived in his grant,” as
having given that which he had no right to bestow.
Of all these charters, then, it may be said, either they do
contain such a clause, or they do not. If they do not, the
plea of charter-exemption drops. If they do, although the
charter itself stands good, yet that clause of it is null and void,
as being contrary to the principles of the British Constitution.
9. Give me leave to add a few words on this head: The
following acts show clearly, that, from the Restoration, the
colonies were considered as part of the realm of England, in
point of taxation, as well as everything else --
25th Charles II, chap. 7, expressly relates to the colonies,
and lays several specific duties on commodities exported from
the plantations.
9th Anne, chap. 10, orders a revenue to be raised in America
from the post-office.
9th Anne, chap. 27, lays a duty on several goods imported
into America.
3d George II., chap. 28, lays a duty on all rice exported
from Carolina to the South of Cape Finisterre.
8th George II., chap. 19, extends the same to Georgia.
6th George II., chap. 13, lays several duties on rum, sugar,
and molasses imported into North-America.
10. All that impartially consider what has been observed,
must readily allow that the English Parliament has an
undoubted right to tax all the English colonies.
But whence then is all this hurry and tumult? Why is
America all in an uproar? If you can yet give yourselves
time to think, you will see the plain case is this:
A few years ago, you were assaulted by enemies, whom
you were not well able to resist. You represented this to
your mother-country, and desired her assistance. You was
largely assisted, and by that means wholly delivered from all.
your enemies.
After a time, your mother-country, desiring to be
re-imbursed for some part of the large expense she had been
at, laid a small tax (which she had always a right to do) on
one of her colonies.
But how is it possible, that the taking this reasonable and
legal step should have set all America in a flame?
I will tell you my opinion freely; and perhaps you will
not think it improbable. I speak the more freely, because
I am unbiassed; I have nothing to hope or fear from either
side. I gain nothing either by the Government or by the
Americans, and probably never shall. And I have no preju
dice to any man in America: I love you as my brethren
and countrymen.
11. My opinion is this: We have a few men in England
who are determined enemies to monarchy. Whether they hate
His present Majesty on any other ground than because he is.
a King, I know not. But they cordially hate his office, and
have for some years been undermining it with all diligence, in
hopes of erecting their grand idol, their dear commonwealth,
upon its ruins. I believe they have let very few into their
design; (although many forward it, without knowing anything
of the matter;) but they are steadily pursuing it, as by various
other means, so in particular by inflammatory papers, which
are industriously and continually dispersed throughout the
town and country; by this method they have already wrought
thousands of the people even to the pitch of madness. By
the same, only varied according to your circumstances, they
have likewise inflamed America. I make no doubt but these
very men are the original cause of the present breach between
England and her colonies. And they are still pouring oil
into the flame, studiously incensing each against the other,
and opposing, under a variety of pretences, all measures of
accommodation. So that, although the Americans in general
love the English, and the English in general love the
Americans, (all, I mean, that are not yet cheated and
exasperated by these artful men,) yet the rupture is growing
wider every day, and none can tell where it will end.
These good men hope it will end in the total defection of
North-America from England. If this were effected, they
trust the English in general would be so irreconcilably
disgusted, that they should be able, with or without foreign
assistance, entirely to overturn the Government; especially
while the main of both the English and Irish forces are at so
convenient a distance.
12. But, my brethren, would this be any advantage to
you? Can you hope for a more desirable form of govern
ment, either in England or America, than that which you
now enjoy? After all the vehement cry for liberty, what
more liberty can you have? What more religious liberty can
you desire, than that which you enjoy already? May not
every one among you worship God according to his own
conscience? What civil liberty can you desire, which you
are not already possessed of? Do not you sit, without restraint,
“every man under his own vine?” Do you not, every one,
high or low, enjoy the fruit of your labour? This is real,
rational liberty, such as is enjoyed by Englishmen alone; and
not by any other people in the habitable world. Would the
being independent of England make you more free? Far,
very far from it. It would hardly be possible for you to
steer clear, between anarchy and tyranny. But suppose,
after numberless dangers and mischiefs, you should settle
into one or more republics, would a republican government
give you more liberty, either religious or civil? By no
means. No governments under heaven are so despotic as
the republican; no subjects are governed in so arbitrary a
manner as those of a commonwealth. If any one doubt of
this, let him look at the subjects of Venice, of Genoa, or
even of Holland. Should any man talk or write of the Dutch
Government, as every cobbler does of the English, he would
be laid in irons before he knew where he was. And then,
woe be to him | Republics show no mercy.
13. “But if we submit to one tax, more will follow.”
Perhaps so, and perhaps not. But if they did; if you were
taxed (which is quite improbable) equal with Ireland or Scot
land, still, were you to prevent this, by renouncing connexion
with England, the remedy would be worse than the disease.
For O ! what convulsions must poor America feel, before any
other Government was settled? Innumerable mischiefs must
ensue, before any general form could be established. And
the grand mischief would ensue when it was established; when
you had received a yoke which you could not shake off.
14. Brethren, open your eyes! Come to yourselves! Be
no longer the dupes of designing men! I do not mean any of
your countrymen in America; I doubt whether any of these
are in the secret. The designing men, the Ahithophels, are
in England; those who have laid their scheme so deep, and
covered it so well, that thousands, who are ripening it, suspect
nothing at all of the matter. These well-meaning men,
sincerely believing that they are serving their country, exclaim
against grievances, which either never existed, or are aggra
wated above measure; and thereby inflame the people more
and more, to the wish of those who are behind the scene.
But be not you duped any longer; do not ruin yourselves for
them that owe you no good-will, that now employ you only for
their own purposes, and in the end will give you no thanks.
They love neither England nor America, but play one against
the other, in subserviency to their grand design of overturning
the English Government. Be warned in time; stand and
consider, before it is too late; before you have entailed
confusion and misery on your latest posterity. Have pity
upon your mother-country ! Have pity upon your own |
Have pity upon yourselves, upon your children, and upon all
that are near and dear to you ! Let us not bite and devour
one another, lest we be consumed one of another ! O let us
follow after peace | Let us put away our sins ! the real
ground of all our calamities; which never will or can be
thoroughly removed, till we fear God and honour the King!
A SERMoN preached by Dr. Smith, in Philadelphia, has
been lately reprinted in England. It has been much
admired, but proceeds all along upon wrong suppositions.
These are confuted in the preceding tract; yet I would just
touch upon them again.
Dr. Smith supposes, 1. They have a right of granting their
own money; that is, of being exempt from taxation by the
supreme power. If they “contend for” this, they contend
for neither more nor less than independency. Why then do
they talk of their “rightful Sovereign?” They acknowledge
no Sovereign at all.
That they contend for “the cause of liberty,” is another
mistaken supposition. What liberty do you want, either civil
or religious? Youhad the very same liberty we have in England.
I say you had; but you have now thrown away the substance,
and retain only the shadow. You have no liberty, civil or
religious, now, but what the Congress pleases to allow.
But you justly suppose, “We are by a plain original
contract entitled to a community of privileges, with our
trethren that reside in England, in every civil and religious
respect.” (Page 19.) Most true. And till you appointed
your new sovereigns, you enjoyed all those privileges. Indeed
you had no vote for members of Parliament; neither have I,
because I have no freehold in England. Yet the being
taxed by the Parliament is no infringement either of my civil
or religious liberty. And why have you no representatives
in Parliament? Did you ever desire them?
But you say again, “No power on earth has a right to
grant our property without our consent.” (Page 22.)
Then you have no Sovereign; for every Sovereign under
heaven has a right to tax his subjects; that is, “to grant
their property, with or without their consent.” Our Sove
reign” has a right to tax me, and all other Englishmen,
whether we have votes for Parliament-men or no.
Vainly, therefore, do you complain of “unconstitutional
exactions, violated rights, and mutilated charters.” (Page 24.)
Nothing is exacted but according to the original constitution
both of England and her colonies. Your rights are no more
violated than mine, when we are both taxed by the supreme
power; and your charters are no more mutilated by this,
than is the charter of the city of London.
Vainly do you complain of being “made slaves.” Am I
or two millions of Englishmen made slaves because we are
taxed without our own consent?
You may still “rejoice in the common rights of freemen.”
I rejoice in all the rights of my ancestors. And every right
which I enjoy is common to Englishmen and Americans.
But shall we “surrender any part of the privileges which
we enjoy by the express terms of our colonization;” that is,
of our charter? By no means; and none requires it of you.
None desires to withhold anything that is granted by the
* That is, in connexion with the Lords and Commons.
express terms of your charters. But remember! one of your
first charters, that of Massachusetts-Bay, says, in express
terms, you are exempt from paying taxes to the King for
seven years; plainly implying, that after those seven years
you are to pay them like other subjects. And remember your
last charter, that of Pennsylvania, says, in express terms, you.
are liable to taxation; yea, it objects against being taxed by
the King, unless in connexion with the Lords and Commons.
But “a people will resume,” you say, “the power which
they never surrendered, except”--No need of any exception.
They never surrendered it at all; they could not surrender
it; for they never had it. I pray, did the people, unless you
mean the Norman army, give William the Conqueror his
power? And to which of his successors did the people of
England (six or seven millions) give the sovereign power?
This is mere political cant; words without meaning. I know
but one instance in all history wherein the people gave the
sovereign power to any one: That was to Massaniello of
Naples. And I desire any man living to produce another
instance in the history of all nations.
Ten times over, in different words, you “profess yourselves
to be contending for liberty.” But it is a vain, empty
profession; unless you mean by that threadbare word, a liberty
from obeying your rightful Sovereign, and from keeping the
fundamental laws of your country. And this undoubtedly it
is, which the confederated colonies are now contending for,
1. It was with great expectation that I read Dr. Price's
“Observations on the Nature of Civil Liberty, the Principles
of Government, and the Justice and Policy of the War with
America; ” and I was not disappointed. As the author is
a person of uncommon abilities, so he has exerted them to
the uttermost in the tract before us, which is certainly a
master-piece of its kind. He has said all that can be said
upon the subject, and has digested it in the most accurate
manner; and candour requires us to believe that he has wrote
with an upright intention, with a real design to subserve
the interest of mankind in general, as well as the subjects
of the British empire. But as the Doctor is a friend to
liberty, so he can “think and let think.” He does not
desire that we should implicitly submit to the judgment,
either of him or any other fallible man; and will not there
fore be displeased at a few further observations on the same
subject. That subject is,
2. The liberty which is now claimed by the confederate
colonies in America. In order to understand this much
controverted question, I would set aside everything not
essential to it. I do not therefore now inquire, whether this
or that measure be consistent with good policy; or, whether it
is likely to be attended with good or ill success: I only want
to know, is their claim right or wrong? Is it just or unjust?
3. What is it they claim? You answer, “Liberty.” Nay,
is it not independency? You reply: “That is all one; they
do claim it, and they have a right to it.”
To independency? That is the very question. To liberty
they have an undoubted right; and they enjoy that right. (I
mean, they did, till the late unhappy commotions.) They
enjoyed their liberty in as full a manner as I do, or any
reasonable man can desire.
“What kind of liberty do they enjoy?” Here you puzzle
the cause, by talking of physical and moral liberty. What
you speak of both is exactly true, and beautifully expressed:
But both physical and moral liberty are beside the present
question; and the introducing them can answer no other end
than to bewilder and confuse the reader. Therefore, to beg
the reader “to keep these in his view,” is only begging him
to look off the point in hand. You desire him, in order to
understand this, to attend to something else! “Nay, I beg
him to look straight forward; to mind this one thing; to fix
his eye on that liberty, and that only, which is concerned in
the present question: And all the liberty to which this
question relates, is either religious or civil liberty.”
92 OBSERVATIONS ON Llls EIRTY.
4. “Religious liberty is, a liberty to choose our own
religion; to worship God according to our own conscience.
Every man living, as a man, has a right to this, as he is a
rational creature. The Creator gave him this right when he
endowed him with understanding; and every man must judge
for himself, because every man must give an account of himself
to God. Consequently, this is an unalienable right; it is
inseparable from humanity; and God did never give authority
to any man, or number of men, to deprive any child of man
thereof, under any colour or pretence whatever.”*
Now, who can deny that the colonies enjoy this liberty to
the fulness of their wishes 2
5. Civil liberty is a liberty to dispose of our lives, persons,
and fortunes, according to our own choice, and the laws of
our country.
I add, according to the laws of our country: For, although,
if we violate these, we are liable to fines, imprisonment, or
death; yet if, in other cases, we enjoy our life, liberty, and
goods, undisturbed, we are free, to all reasonable intents and
purposes.
Now, all this liberty the confederate colonies did enjoy,
till part of them enslaved the rest of their countrymen; and
all the loyal colonies do enjoy it at the present hour. None
takes away their lives, or freedom, or goods; they enjoy
them all quiet and undisturbed.
“But the King and Parliament can take them all away.”
But they do not; and, till it is done, they are freemen. The
supreme power of my country can take away either my
religious or civil liberty; but, till they do, I am free in both
respects: I am free now, whatever I may be by and by. Will
any man face me down, I have no money now, because it
may be taken from me to-morrow?
6. But the truth is, what they claim is not liberty; it is
independency. They claim to be independent of England;
no longer to own the English supremacy.
A while ago, they vehemently denied this; for matters were
not then ripe: And I was severely censured for supposing
they intended any such thing. But now the mask is thrown
off: They frankly avow it; and Englishmen applaud them
for so doing !
Nay, you will prove, that not only the colonies, but all
* See a tract, entitled, “Thoughts upon Liberty.”
mankind, have a right to it; yea, that independency is of
the very essence of liberty; and that all who are not
independent are slaves.
Nay, if all who are not independent are slaves, then there
is no free nation in Europe; then all in every nation are
slaves, except the supreme powers. All in France, for
instance, except the King; all in Holland, except the
Senate; yea, and these too; King and Senate both are
slaves, if (as you say) they are dependent upon the people.
So, if the people depend on their governors, and their
governors on them, they are all slaves together.
Mere play with words. This is not what all the world means
by liberty and slavery; therefore, to say, “If the Parliament
taxes you without your consent, you are a slave,” is mere
quibbling. Whoever talks thus, should say honestly, “Reader,
I give you warning, I affix a new sense, not the common one,
to these words, liberty and slavery.” Take the words in this
sense, and you may prove there are slaves enough in England,
as well as America; but if we take them in the old, common
sense, both the Americans and we are free men.
7. But you say, “The Parliament has already deprived
them of one great branch of liberty, by enacting, that, in the
cases there specified, they shall be tried in England.”
I answer, How grievously did they abuse that liberty before
it was taken away ! Let any fair man consider the case:
How often have we heard of their quiet and peaceable
submission to pay the duties by law established ! And what
a merit has been made of this by all their advocates! But it
was a merit that never belonged to them; for the duties
were not paid. All this time they did not, in fact, pay one
half, no, not a quarter, of those duties. They continually
defrauded the King of the far greater part of them, without
shame or fear. Indeed, what should they fear? They did
not deign to do it privately, like their fellows in England;
no, they acted openly in the face of the sun. Ship-loads of
tea, for instance, were brought into Boston harbour, and
landed at noon-day, without paying any duty at all. Who
should hinder it? If a custom-house officer hindered, was it
not at the peril of his life? And if, at any time, a seizure
was made, and the cause came to be tried by a Boston jury,
what would follow It was no more than, “Ask your
fellow, whether you are a thief.”
8. Permit me to mention one eminent instance: The
famous Mr. John Hancock, some time since, brought into
Boston a ship-load of smuggled tea, at noon-day. Just then
came in the ships from London, laden with the same com
modity, which, by the removal of the former tax, they were
now enabled to sell cheaper than him. What could he now
do pro patria 2 as Mr. Evans says; in plain English, not to
lose by his cargo? All Europe knows what was done:
“Some persons in disguise,” Dr. Price tells us, “buried the
English tea in the sea.” It was not so commonly known
who employed them, or paid them for their labour: To be
sure, good Mr. Hancock knew no more of it than the child
unborn |
9. Now, I desire to know of any reasonable man, what
could the English Government do? No officer could seize
the smuggled goods; or, if he did, no jury would condemn
the smuggler. There was therefore no possibility that the
King should have his right, without taking some such step as
was taken. There was not any alternative, but either to give
up the customs altogether, (as the evil was increasing more
and more,) or to try the offenders here; so that still they
had as much liberty as their notorious offences allowed.
With what justice, then, can this be urged as a violation of
their liberty “O!” cries the man in yon stone doublet,
“Bondage 1 slavery ! Help, Englishmen? I am deprived
of my liberty!” Certainly you are; but first you deprived
the man of his purse.
“What I Do you compare Mr. H. to a felon?” I do, in
this respect: I compare every smuggler to a felon; a private
smuggler to a sneaking felon, a pick-pocket; a noon-day
smuggler, to a bold felon, a robber on the highway. And if
a person of this undeniable character is made President of a
Congress, I leave every man of sense to determine what is to
be expected from them.
10. To return: As the colonies are free, with regard to
their persons, so they are with regard to their goods. It is
no objection that they pay out of them a tax, to which they
did not previously consent. I am free; I use my money as
I please, although I pay taxes out of it, which were fixed by
law before I was born, and, consequently, without my
consent; and indeed those taxes are so moderate, that neither
they nor I have reason to complain.
“But if the Parliament tax you moderately now, it is
Possible they may, hereafter, tax you immoderately.” It is
possible, but not probable; they never have done it yet:
When they do, then complain.
We are not talking of what may be, but what is; and it
cannot be denied, they are free (which is the present
question) in all the three particulars which Judge Blackstone
includes in civil liberty.
11. But liberty will not content either them or you. You
now openly plead for independency, and aver that the colonies
ought to be independent on England, to assert their own
supremacy, (1.) Because they are half as many as the
Fnglish. (2.) Because in a century they will be twice as many.
The argument runs thus: If the Americans are half as
many as the English, then they have a right to be independ
ent. But they are half as many; therefore, they have a
right to be independent.
I deny the consequence in the first proposition: Number
does not prove a right to independency. I deny the second
proposition too: They are not half as many; even though
you swell the number of the Americans as much as you
diminish the number of the English.
I have been surprised lately, to observe many taking so
much pains to extenuate the numbers of the inhabitants of
England. For what end is this done? Is it to make us
more respectable to our neighbours? or merely to weaken
the hands of the King and ministry? I say the King and
the ministry; for I lay no stress on their pompous professions
of love and loyalty to the King: Just such professions did
their predecessors make to King Charles, till they brought
him to the block.
12. “But are they not half as many? Do not the
confederated provinces contain three millions of souls?” I
believe not. I believe they contain about two millions. But,
allowing they did, I make no doubt but the English (beside
three millions of Scots and Irish) are ten millions at this day.
“How can that be, when there are only six hundred
thousand in London?” Believe it who can, I cannot
believe there are so few as fifteen hundred thousand in
London and its environs, allowing only two miles every way
from the walls of the city.
“But we know there were no more than six hundred
thousand, when the computation was made in the late reign;
allowing that there were, at an average, five in each house.”
They who make this allowance, probably fix their computa
tion at their own fire-side. They do not walk through every
tart of the town, up to the garrets, and down to the cellars.
I do; and by what I have seen with my own eyes, frequently
fifteen, eighteen, or twenty in one house, I cannot believe
there are fewer, at an average, than ten under one roof; and
the same I believe of Bristol, Birmingham, Sheffield, and
most other trading towns. Besides, how many thousand
houses have been added to London within these thirty or
forty years?
13. “But the people of England are continually decreas
ing.” So it has been confidently affirmed; but it is a total
mistake. I know the contrary, having an opportunity of
seeing ten times more of England, every year, than most
men in the nation. All our manufacturing towns, as
Birmingham, Sheffield, Manchester, Liverpool, increase daily.
So do very many villages all over the kingdom, even in the
mountains of Derbyshire. And, in the mean time, exceeding
few, either towns or villages, decrease.
And it is no wonder the people should increase, considering
the amazing increase of trade which has been lately, not in
London only, but much more in Bristol, Birmingham,
Sheffield, Leeds, Manchester, and indeed all parts of the
kingdom, which I have had the opportunity of observing.
There was a considerable decay of trade before; but the tide
is turned, and it now pours in abundantly. So greatly were
our American friends mistaken, who hoped, by shutting up
their ports, to ruin most of the manufacturers in England,
and so starve us into compliance with their demands.
“However, in a century, the Americans will be twice as
many as the English.” That admits of a doubt; but when
they are, then let them avail themselves of it.
14. “Nay, not only the Americans, but all men, have a right
to be self-governed and independent.” You mean, they had a
right thereto, before any civil societies were formed. But when
was that time, when no civil societies were formed? I doubt
hardly since the flood; and, wherever such societies exist, no
man is independent. Whoever is born in any civilized country,
is, so long as he continues therein, whether he chooses it or no,
subject to the laws and to the supreme governors of that country.
Whoever is born in England, France, or Holland, is subject
to their respective Governors; and “must needs be subject
to the power, as to the ordinance of God, not only for wrath,
but for conscience sake.” He has no right at all to be
independent, or governed only by himself; but is in duty
bound to be governed by the powers that be, according to the
laws of the country. And he that is thus governed, not by
himself, but the laws, is, in the general sense of mankind, a
free man; not that there ever existed any original compact
between them and those Governors. But the want of this
does not make him a slave, nor is any impeachment to his
liberty; and yet this free man is, by virtue of those laws,
liable to be deprived, in some cases of his goods; in others,
of his personal freedom, or even of his life. And all this
time he enjoys such a measure of liberty, as the condition of
civilized nations allows; but no independency: That chimera
is not found; no, not in the wilds of Africa or America.
Although, therefore, these subtle metaphysical pleas for
universal independency appear beautiful in speculation, yet
it never was, neither can be, reduced to practice. It is in
vain to attempt it:
Sensus moresque repugnant,
Atque ipsa utilitas, justi prope mater et aqui.*
15. Let us, however, give a fair hearing to these pleas, as
they are urged by this masterly writer; and it may be worth
while to trace the matter to the foundation, surveying it part
by part:
“Any will, distinct from that of the majority of a community,
which claims a power of making laws for it, produces servitude.
This lays the line between liberty and slavery.” (Page 5.)
I must beg leave to stop you on the threshold. All this
I totally deny; and require solid, rational proof of these
assertions; for they are by no means self-evident.
“From what has been said, it is obvious, that all civil
government, as far as it is free, is the creature of the people.
It originates with them; it is conducted by their direction.
In every free state, every man is his own legislator; all taxes
are free gifts; all laws are established by common consent.
If laws are not made by common consent, a Government by
them is slavery.” (Page 7.)
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“Sense, morals, 'gainst such laws unite,
And public good, true source of right.”-ED1T.
Here is a group of strong assertions. But how are they
supported? “O ! they are inferred from what has been
said.” But what has been said, has as yet nothing to
support it. If, then, these assertions stand at all, they stand
by themselves. Let us try if they cau. “All civil govern
ment, as far as it is free, is a creature of the people.” It is,
if we allow your definition of freedom; that is, if we allow
you to beg the question.
16. But before we can move a step further, I must beg
you to define another of your terms. This is the more
necessary, as it occurs again and again; and indeed the whole
question turns upon it. What do you mean by the people?
“All the members of a state?” So you express it, page 8.
“All the individuals that compose it?” So you speak in the
next page. Will you rather say with Judge Blackstone,
“Every free agent?” or with Montesquieu, “Every one that
has a will of his own 7” Fix upon which of these definitions
you please, and then we may proceed.
If my argument has an odd appearance, yet let mone think
I am in jest. I am in great earnest. So I have need to be;
for I am pleading the cause of my King and country; yea,
of every country under heaven, where there is any regular
Government. I am pleading against those principles that
naturally tend to anarchy and confusion; that directly tend
to unhinge all government, and overturn it from the found
ation. But they are principles which are incumbered with
such difficulties as the wisest man living cannot remove.
17. This premised, I ask, Who are the people that have a
right to make and unmake their Governors? Are they “all
the members of a state?” So you affirmed but now. Are
they “all the individuals that compose it?” So you said
quickly after. Will you rather say, “The people are every
free agent?” or, “Every one that has a will of his own?”
Take which you will of these four definitions, and it necessa
rily includes all men, women, and children. Now, stand to
your word. Have all men, women, and children, in a state,
a right to make and unmake their Governors? They are all
free agents, except infants; and even these have a will of
their own. They all are “members of the state;” they are,
all and every one, “the individuals that compose it.” And
had ever the people, as above defined by yourself, a right to
make and unmake their Governors?
18. Setting Mr. Evans's witticisms aside, I seriously desire
him, or Doctor Price, or any zealous assertor of the king
making right of our sovereign lords the people, to point out
a single instance of their exerting this right in any age or
nation. I except only the case of Thomas Aniello, (vulgarly
called Massanello,) in the last century. Do not tell me,
“There are many;” but point them out. I aver, I know of
none. And I believe it will puzzle any one living to name a
second instance, either in ancient or modern history.
19. And by what right, (setting the Scriptures aside, on
which you do not choose to rest the point,) by what right do
you exclude women, any more than men, from choosing their
own Governors? Are they not free agents, as well as men?
I ask a serious question, and demand a serious answer. Have
they not “a will of their own?” Are they not “members
of the state?” Are they not part of “the individuals that
compose it?” With what consistency, them, can any who
assert the people, in the above sense, to be the origin of
power, deny them the right of choosing their Governors, and
“giving their suffrages by their representatives?”
“But do you desire or advise that they should do this?”
Nay, I am out of the question. I do not ascribe these rights
to the people; therefore, the difficulty affects not me; but,
do you get over it how you can, without giving up your
principle.
20. I ask a second question: By what right do you exclude
men who have not lived one-and-twenty years from that
“unalienable privilege of human nature,” choosing their own
Governors? Is not a man a free agent, though he has lived
only twenty years, and ten or eleven months? Can you
deny, that men from eighteen to twenty-one are “members
of the state?” Can any one doubt, whether they are a part of
“the individuals that compose it?” Why then are not these
permitted to “choose their Governors, and to give their
suffrages by their representatives?” Let any who say these
rights are inseparable from the people, get over this difficulty,
if they can; not by breaking an insipid jest on the occasion,
but by giving a plain, sober, rational answer.
If it be said, “O, women and striplings have not wisdom
enough to choose their own Governors;” I answer, Whether
they have or no, both the one and the other have all the
rights which are “inseparable from human nature.” Either,
therefore, this right is not inseparable from human nature,
or both women and striplings are partakers of it.
21. I ask a third question: By what authority do you
exclude a vast majority of adults from choosing their own
Governors, and giving their votes by their representatives,
merely because they have not such an income; because they
have not forty shillings a year? What, if they have not?
Have they not the rights which, you say, belong to man as
man? And are they not included in the people? Have
they not a will of their own 7 Are they not free agents?
Who then can, with either justice or equity, debar them
from the exercise of their natural rights?
“O, but the laws of the land debar them from it.” Did
they make those laws themselves? Did they consent to
them, either in person or by their representatives, before they
were enacted? “No; they were enacted by their forefathers
long before they were born.” Then, what are they to them?
You have assured us, that if men may give away their own
liberty, they cannot give away the liberty of others, of their
children or descendants. Nay, you have told us, that no
man has a right to give away his own liberty; that it is
unalienable from the nature of every child of man. Never,
therefore, patronize those iniquitous laws. No; if you are a
lover of liberty, an enemy to slavery and oppression, exhort
them to shake off this servile yoke.
22. To set this whole matter in another light, I beg leave
to repeat the sum of a small tract lately published.* Have
not the people, in every age and nation, the right to dispose
of the supreme power; of investing therewith whom they
please, and upon what conditions they see good? Conse
quently, if those conditions are not observed, they have a
right to take it away. To prove this, it is argued, “All men
living are naturally equal; none is above another; and all
are naturally free masters of their own actions; therefore, no
man can have any power over another, but by his own
consent; therefore, the power which any Governors enjoy,
must be originally derived from the people, and presupposes
an original compact between them and their first Governors.”
23. But, who are the people? Are they every man,
woman, and child? Why not? Is it not one fundamental
* Thoughts on the Origin of Power.
principle, that “all persons living are naturally equal; that
all human creatures are naturally free; masters of their own
actions; that none can have any power over them, but by
their own consent?” Why, then, should not every man,
woman, and child, have a voice in placing their Governors, in
fixing the measure of their power, and the conditions on which
it is intrusted? And why should not every one have a voice
in displacing them too? Surely they that gave the power
have a right to take it away. By what argument do you
prove, that women are not naturally as free as men? And if
they are, why have they not as good a right to choose their
Governors? Who can have any power over free, rational
creatures, but by their own consent? And are they not free
by nature as well as we? Are they not rational creatures?
24. But suppose we exclude women from using their
natural right, by might overcoming right, what pretence have
we for excluding men like ourselves, barely because they
have not lived one-and-twenty years? “Why, they have
not wisdom or experience to judge of the qualifications neces
sary for Governors.” I answer, (1.) Who has? how many of
the voters in Great Britain? one in twenty? one in an
hundred? If you exclude all who have not this wisdom, you
will leave few behind. But, (2.) Wisdom and experience are
nothing to the purpose. You have put the matter upon
another issue. Are they men? That is enough. Are they
human creatures? Then they have a right to choose their
own Governors; an indefeasible right; a right inherent,
inseparable from human nature. “But in England they are
excluded by law.” Did they consent to the making of that
law? If not, by your original supposition, it can have no
power over them. I therefore utterly deny that we can,
consistently with that supposition, exclude either women or
minors from choosing their own Governors.
25. But, suppose we exclude these by main force; are all
that remain, all men of full age, the people? Are all males,
then, that have lived one-and-twenty years, allowed to choose
their own Governors? Not in England, unless they are
freeholders, and have forty shillings a year. Worse and
worse! After depriving half the human species of their
natural right for want of a beard; after having deprived
myriads more for want of a stiff beard, for not having lived
one-and-twenty years; you rob others, many hundred thou
sands, of their birthright for want of money ! Yet not alto
gether on this account neither; if so, it might be more tolerable.
But here is an Englishman who has money enough to buy
the estates of fifty freeholders, and yet he must not be
numbered among the people, because he has not two or three
acres of land How is this? By what right do you exclude a
man from being one of the people, because he has not forty
shillings a year; yea, or not a groat? Is he not a man, whether
he be rich or poor? Has he not a soul and a body? Has he
not the nature of a man; consequently, all the rights of a man,
all that flow from human nature; and, among the rest, that
of not being controlled by any but by his own consent?
“But he that has not a freehold is excluded by law.” By
a law of his own making? Did he consent to the making
of it? If he did not, what is that law to him ? No man,
you aver, has any power over another, but by his own
consent: Of consequence, a law made without his consent is,
with regard to him, null and void. You cannot say other
wise, without destroying the supposition, that “none can be
governed but by his own consent.”
26. See now to what your argument comes. You affirm,
all power is derived from the people; and presently exclude
one half of the people from having any part or lot in the
matter. At another stroke, suppose England to contain eight
millions of people, you exclude one or two millions more. At
a third, suppose two millions left, you exclude three-fourths
of these; and the poor pittance that remains, by I know not
what figure of speech, you call the people of England !
27. Hitherto we have endeavoured to view this point in
the mere light of reason; and, even by this, it appears,
that this supposition, which has been palmed upon us as
undeniable, is not only false, not only contrary to reason, but
contradictory to itself; the very men who are most positive
that the people are the source of power, being brought into
an inextricable difficulty, by that single question, “Who are
the people?” reduced to a necessity of either giving up the
point, or owning that by the people, they mean scarce a tenth
part of them.
28. But we need not rest the matter entirely on reasoning.
Let us appeal to matter of fact; and, because we cannot have
so clear a prospect of what is at a distance, let us only take a
view of what has been in our own country. I ask, then, When
did the people of England (suppose you mean by that word
only half a million of them) choose their own Governors?
Did they choose (to go no further) William the Conqueror?
Did they choose King Stephen or King John? As to those
who regularly succeeded their fathers, the people are out of
the question. Did they choose Henry the Fourth, Edward
the Fourth, or Henry the Seventh? Who will be so hardy
as to affirm it? Did the people of England, or but fifty
thousand of them, choose Queen Mary, or Queen Elizabeth,
or King James the First? Perhaps you will say, “If the
people did not give King Charles the supreme power, at least
they took it away.” No; the people of England no more
took away his power, than they cut off his head. “Yes; the
Parliament did, and they are the people.” No; the Parlia
ment did not : The House of Commons is not the Parliament,
any more than it is the nation. Neither were those who then
sat the House of Commons; no, nor one quarter of them.
But, suppose they had been the whole House of Commons,
yea, or the whole Parliament, by what rule of logic will you
prove that seven or eight hundred persons are the people of
England? “Why, they are the delegates of the people; they
are chosen by them.” No, not by one half, not by a quarter,
not by a tenth part of them: So that the people, in the only
proper sense of the word, were innocent of the whole affair.
29. “But you will allow, the people gave the supreme
power to King Charles the Second at the Restoration.” I will
allow no such thing, unless, by the people, you mean General
Monk and ten thousand soldiers. “However, you will not
deny that the people gave the power to King William at the
Revolution.” I will; the Convention were not the people,
neither elected by them: So that still we have not a single
instance, in above seven hundred years, of the people of England’s
conveying the supreme power either to one or more persons.
30. So much both for reason and matter of fact. But one
single consideration will bring the question to a short issue.
It is allowed, no man can dispose of another's life, but by his
own consent: I add, No, nor with his consent; for no man
has a right to dispose of his own life: The Creator of man
has the sole right to take the life which he gave. Now, it is
an indisputable truth, Nihil dat quod non habet,-“None
gives what he has not.” It follows, that no man can give to
another a right which he never had himself; a right which
only the Governor of the world has, even the wiser Heathens
being judges; but which no man upon the face of the earth
either has or can have. No man, therefore, can give the
power of the sword, any such power as gives a right to take
away life: Wherever it is, it must descend from God alone,
the sole disposer of life and death.
31. The supposition, then, that the people are the origin
of power, or that “all government is the creature of the
people,” though Mr. Locke himself should attempt to defend
it, is utterly indefensible. It is absolutely overturned by
the very principle on which it is supposed to stand, namely,
that “a right of choosing his Governors belongs to every
partaker of human nature.” If this be so, then it belongs
to every individual of the human species; consequently, not
to freeholders alone, but to all men; not to men only, but
to women also; not only to adult men and women, to those
who have lived one-and-twenty years, but to those that
have lived eighteen or twenty, as well as those who have
lived threescore. But none did ever maintain this, nor
probably ever will; therefore, this boasted principle falls to
the ground, and the whole superstructure with it. So
common sense brings us back to the grand truth, “There is
no power but of God.”
32. I may now venture to “pronounce, that the principles
on which you have argued, are incompatible with practice,”
even the universal practice of mankind, as well as with sound
reason; and it is no wonder “that they are not approved by
our Governors,” considering their natural tendency, which is,
to unhinge all Government, and to plunge every nation into
total anarchy.
This, in truth, is the tendency of the whole book; a few
passages of which I shall now recite, begging leave to make
a few remarks upon them. But I must ask the reader’s
pardon, if I frequently say the same thing more than once;
for, otherwise, I could not follow the author.
33. “All the members of a state” (which necessarily
include all the men, women, and children) “may intrust the
powers of legislation with any number of delegates, subject to
such restrictions as they think necessary.” (Page 8.) This
is “incompatible with practice:” It never was done from
the beginning of the world; it never can; it is flatly
impossible in the nature of the thing. “And thus, all the
individuals that compose a great state partake of the powers
of legislation and government.” All the individuals | Mere
Quixotism ! Where does that state exist? Not under the
canopy of heaven. “In this case, a state is still free,” (but
this case has no being,) “if the representatives are chosen by
the umbiassed voices of the majority.” Hold ! this is quite
another case; you now shuffle in a new term: The majority
we were not talking of, but all the members of a state. The
majority are not all the individuals that compose it; and
pray, how came the minority to be deprived of those rights,
which you say are “unalienable from human nature?”--
“But we disguise slavery, keeping up the form of liberty,
when the reality is lost.” It is not lost; I now enjoy all the
real liberty I can desire, civil as well as religious. The
liberty you talk of was never found; it never existed yet.
But what does all this lead to, but to stir up all the inhabit
ants of Great Britain against the Government?
34. To inflame them still more, you go on: “Liberty is more
or less complete, according as the people have more or less share
in the Government.” This is altogether contrary to matter of
fact: The greater share the people have in the Government,
the less liberty, either civil or religious, does the nation in
general enjoy. Accordingly, there is most liberty of all, civil
and religious, under a limited monarchy; there is usually less
under an aristocracy, and least of all under a democracy.
What sentences then are these: “To be guided by one's own
will, is freedom; to be guided by the will of another, is slavery?”
(Page 11.) This is the very quintessence of republicanism;
but it is a little too barefaced; for, if this is true, how free are
all the devils in hell, seeing they are all guided by their own
will ! And what slaves are all the angels in heaven, since
they are all guided by the will of another ! See another
stroke: “The people have power to model Government as
they please.” (Page 12.) What an admirable lesson, to
confirm the people in their loyalty to the Government ! Yet
again: “Government is a trust, and all its powers a delega
tion.” (Page 15.) It is a trust, but not from the people:
“There is no power but of God.” It is a delegation, namely,
from God; for “rulers are God’s ministers,” or delegates.
35. How irreconcilable with this are your principles !
Concerning our Governors in England, you teach, “A Parlia
ment forfeits its authority by accepting bribes.” If it does,
I doubt all the Parliaments in this century, having accepted
them more or less, have thereby forfeited their authority,
and, consequently, were no Parliaments at all : It follows,
that the Acts which they enacted were no laws; and what a
floodgate would this open You teach further: “If Parlia
ments contradict their trust,” (of which the people are to
judge,) “they dissolve themselves.” And certainly, a Parlia
ment dissolved is no Parliament at all. And seeing “a state
that submits to such a breach is enslaved,” what should the
people do? Knock them on the head, to be sure. And who
can doubt, but they have an unalienable power so to do,
seeing “Government was instituted for the people's sake,
and theirs is the only real omnipotence.” (Page 16.)
36. And, lest your meaning should not yet be plain enough,
you conclude this article thus: “These reflections should be
constantly present to every mind in this country. There is
nothing that requires to be more watched than power; there
is nothing that ought to be opposed with a more determined
resolution than its encroachments. The people of this king
dom were once warmed with such sentiments as these.”
Exactly such, in the glorious days of Watt the Tyler, and of
Oliver Cromwell. “Often have they fought and bled in the
cause of liberty; but that time seems to be going.” Glory
be to God, it is not going, but gone. O may it never return ?
“The fair inheritance of liberty, left us by our ancestors, we
are not unwilling to resign.” We are totally unwilling to
resign either our civil or religious liberty; and both of these
we enjoy in a far greater measure than ever our ancestors did.
Nay, they did not enjoy either one or the other, from the
time of William the Conqueror till the Revolution. “Should
any events arise,” (and you give very broad intimations that
they have arisen already,) “which should render the same
opposition necessary that took place in the time of King
Charles the First,”--the same opposition which made the
land a field of blood, set every man’s sword against his brother,
overturned the whole constitution, and cut off, first, the
flower of the nation, and then the King himself,-“I am
afraid all that is valuable to us would be lost : The terror of
the standing army would deaden all zeal,” for these noble
exploits, “and produce a general servitude.” (Page 18.)
37. What a natural tendency has all this, to instil into
the good people of England the most determined rancour
and bitterness against their Governors, against the King and
Parliament! And what a natural tendency has all that
follows to instil the same both into the English and the
Americans ! On these passages also, I shall beg leave to
subjoin a few short observations:
“A country that is subject to the legislature of another
country, in which it has no voice, and over which it has no
control, is in slavery.” This is palpably false. Take one
instance out of many: Pennsylvania was subject (till now) to
the legislature of England, in which it had no voice, and over
which it had no control; yet it never was in slavery; it never
wanted either civil or religious liberty; nay, perhaps it
was more free in both respects than any other country in the
universe. “In a country thus subjugated to another,” (a
very improper, as well as invidious word,) “there is little or
nothing to check rapacity.” If you mean the rapacity of the
English Government, the insinuation is cruelly false; it never
existed; no such rapacity was ever exercised. “And the
most flagrant injustice and cruelty may be practised without
remorse or pity.” (Page 20.) This is purely calculated to
inflame; for no such injustice or cruelty was ever practised,
nor was ever likely to be, either in this or any other province
of America. That which follows is a curious sentiment
indeed; I know not that ever I met with it before: “The
government of one country over another” (suppose of England
over North-America, or over the West Indian islands)
“cannot be supported but by a military force. This is a
state of oppression no country could submit to, an hour,
without an armed force to compel them.” (Page 23.) Was
ever anything more palpably false ! The English Govern
ment, both in the islands and North-America, is the
government of one country over another; but it has needed
no armed force to support it for above these hundred years:
And this Government which you would persuade them is
oppressive, all the colonies did not only submit to, but rejoice
in, without any armed force to compel them. They knew,
and felt, they were not oppressed; but enjoyed all the
liberty, civil and religious, which they could desire.
38. We come now to more matter entirely new : “No
country can lawfully surrender their liberty, by giving up
the power of legislating for themselves, to any extraneous
jurisdiction; such a cession, being inconsistent with the
unalienable rights of human nature, would either not bind at
all, or bind only the individuals that made it.” (Page 25.)
This is a home thrust. If this be so, all the English claim
either to Ireland, Scotland, or America, falls at once. But
can we admit this without any proof? Ought assertions to
pass for arguments? If they will, here are more of the same
kind: “No one generation can give up this for another.”
That is, the English settlers in America could not “give up
their power of legislating for themselves.” True, they could
not give up what they never had. But they never had, either
before or after they left England, any such power of making
laws for themselves as exempted them from the King and
Parliament; they never pretended to any such power till now;
they never advanced any such claim; nay, when this was laid
to their charge, they vehemently denied it, as an absolute
slander. But you go further still: “When this power”
(of independency) “is lost, the people have always a right to
resume it.” Comfortable doctrine indeed! perfectly well
calculated for the support of civil government!
39. To the same good end, you observe: “Without an
equal representation of all that are governed, government
becomes complete tyranny.” (Page 27.) Now, you had told
us before, “There is not such an equal representation in
England:” It follows, “The English Government is complete
tyranny!” We have, however, the comfort to know that
it never was any better since the Parliament subsisted. For
who can say that there ever was an equal representation
since the conquest? We know further, that we have only
neighbour's fare; for we cannot find there is any nation in
Europe, no, nor in the habitable world, where the Govern
ment is not as complete tyranny as our own; we find none
wherein there is “an equal representation of all that are
governed.” But will any man affirm, in cool blood, that
the English Government is “complete tyranny?” We have
certainly enjoyed more complete liberty since the Revolution,
than England ever enjoyed before; and the English Govern
ment, unequal as the representation is, has been admired by
all impartial foreigners.
40. “But the sword is now to determine our rights: Detested
be the measures which have brought us to this.” (Page 33.)
I once thought those measures had been originally concerted
in our own kingdom; but I am now persuaded they were not.
obSERVATIONS ON LIBERTY. 109
I allow that the Americans were strongly exhorted by letters
from England, “never to yield or lay down their arms till
they had their own terms, which the Government would be
constrained to give them in a short time:” But those mea
sures were concerted long before this; long before either the
Tea Act or the Stamp Act existed; only they were not
digested into form,-that was reserved for the good Congress.
Forty years ago, when my brother was in Boston, it was the
general language there, “We must shake off the yoke; we
never shall be a free people till we shake off the English
yoke.” These, you see, were even then for “trying the
question,” just as you are now; “not by charters,” but by
what you call, “the general principles of liberty.” And the
late Acts of Parliament were not the cause of what they have
since done, but barely the occasion they laid hold on.
41. But “a late Act declares that this kingdom has power
to make statutes to bind the colonies in all cases whatever !
Dreadful power indeed! I defy any one to express slavery in
stronger terms.” (Page 34.) In all cases whatever ! What
is there peculiar in this? Certainly, in all cases, or in none.
And has not every supreme Governor this power? This the
English Parliament always had, and always exercised, from
the first settlement of the American colonies. But it was not
explicitly declared, because it was never controverted. The
dreadfulness of it was never thought of for above an hundred
years; nor is it easy to discern where that dreadfulness lies.
Wherein does it consist? The Parliament has power to make
statutes, which bind Englishmen likewise, in all cases what
ever. And what then? Why, you say, “I defy any one to
express slavery in stronger terms.” I think I can “express
slavery in stronger terms.” Let the world judge between us.
Slavery is a state wherein neither a man’s goods, nor liberty,
nor life, are at his own disposal. Such is the state of a thou
sand, of ten thousand, Negroes in the American colonies.
And are their masters in the same state with them? in just
the same slavery with the Negroes? Have they no more
disposal of their own goods, or liberty, or lives? Does any
one beat or imprison them at pleasure; or take away their
wives, or children, or lives; or sell them like cows or horses?
This is slavery; and will you face us down that the Americans
are in such slavery as this? You answer, Yes, with regard
to their goods; for the English Parliament “leaves them.
110 opSERVATIONS ON LIBERTY.
nothing that they can call their own.” (Page 35.) Amazing !
Have they not houses, and lands, and money, and goods of
every kind, which they call their own? And did they not
enjoy, a few years since, complete liberty, both civil and
religious, instead of being bound to hard labour, smarting
under the lash, groaning in a dungeon, perhaps murdered,
or stabbed, or roasted alive, at their masters' pleasure?
42. But, “did not their charters promise them all the
enjoyment of all the rights of Englishmen?” (Page 40.)
They did; and they have accordingly enjoyed all the rights
of Englishmen from the beginning. “And allow them to
tax themselves?” Never so as to exempt them from being
taxed by Parliament. It is evident from the Acts of Parlia
ment now in being, that this was never granted, and never
claimed till now : On the contrary, the English Government
has ever claimed the right of taxing them, even in virtue of
those very charters. But you ask, “Can there be an English
man who would not sooner lose his heart’s blood, than yield to
such claims?” (Page 47.) A decent question for a subject of
England to ask Just of a piece with your assertions, that
“our constitution is almost lost;” that the claims of the Crown
have “stabbed our liberty;” and that “a free Government
loses its nature, the moment it becomes liable to be commanded
by any superior power.” (Page 49.) From the moment it
Becomes liable / This is not the case with the colonies; they
do not become liable to be commanded by the King and
Parliament; they always were so, from their first institution.
43. “The fundamental principle of our Government is, the
right of the people to grant their own money.” No.; if you
understand the word people, according to your own definition,
for all the individuals that compose the state, this is not the
fundamental principle of our Government, nor any principle
of it at all. It is not the principle even of the Government
of Holland, nor of any Government in Europe. “It was an
attempt to encroach upon this right in a trifling instance, that
produced the civil war in the reign of King Charles the First.”
Ono' it was the actual encroaching, not on this right only, but
on the feligious as well as civil rights of the subject; and that,
not in one trifling instance only, but in a thousand instances of
the highest importance. “Therefore, this is a war undertaken,
not only against our own constitution, but on purpose to destroy
other similar constitutions in America, and to substitute in their
room a military force.” (Page 50.) Is it possible that a man
of sense should believe this? Did the King and Parliament
undertake this war, on purpose to overturn a castle in the air,
to destroy a constitution that never existed ? Or is this said
purely ad movendam invidiam, “to inflame the minds of the
people?” I would rather impute it to the power of preju
dice; as also the following wonderful sentence: “How horrid,
to sheathe our swords in the bowels of our brethren, for no
other end than to make them acknowledge our supremacy l’”
Yes, for this end,--to make them lay down their arms, which
they have taken up against their lawful Sovereign; to make
them restore what they have illegally and violently taken
from their fellow-subjects; to make them repair the cruel
wrongs they have done them, as far as the nature of the thing
will aduit, and to make them allow to all that civil and
religious liberty whereof they have at present deprived them.
These are the ends for which our Government has very
unwillingly undertaken this war, after having tried all the
rmethods they could devise to secure them without violence.
44. Having considered the justice, you come now to consider
the policy, of this war. “In the last reigns, the colonies,
foregoing every advantage which they might derive from
trading with foreign nations, consented to send only to us,
whatever it was for our interest to receive from them; and
to receive only from us, whatever it was for our interest to
send them.” (Page 67.) They consented to do this / No !
they only pretended to do it; it was a mere copy of their
countenance. They never did, in fact, abstain from trading
with other nations, Holland and France in particular. They
never did, at least for forty years past, conform to the Act of
Navigation. They did not send only to us what we wanted,
or receive only from us what they wanted. What I did
they not “allow us to regulate their trade in any manner
which we thought best?” (Page 68.) No such thing.
They only allowed us to make laws to regulate their trade.
But they observed them as they thought best; sometimes a
little, sometimes not at all. “They fought our battles with
us.” Certainly we fought theirs: And we have sad reason
to remember it; for had Canada remained in the hands of
the French, they would have been quiet subjects still.
45. “But what calamities must follow” from this impolitic
war ! See “the empire dismembered.” (Page 73.) If it be,
that is not the consequence of the war, but rather the cause of
it. “The blood of thousands shed” (it is not yet; perhaps it
never may) “in an unrighteous quarrel.” Doubtless unrigh
teous on their part, who revolt from their lawful Sovereign;
and therefore whatever blood is shed will lie at their door.
“Our strength exhausted.” No, not yet; as they that try
may find to their cost. “Our merchants breaking.” But far
more before the war than since. “Our manufacturers starv
ing.” I pray, where? I cannot find them: Not in London,
in Bristol, in Birmingham, in Manchester, in Liverpool, Leeds,
or Sheffield; nor anywhere else, that I know; and I am well
acquainted with most of the manufacturing towns in England.
“The funds tottering.” Then the stocks must sink very
low: But that is not the case. “And the miseries of a
public bankruptcy impending.” Just as they have done these
hundred years. Fifty years ago I used to be much alarmed
at things of this kind. When I heard a doleful prophecy
of ruin impending on the nation, I really imagined something
would follow. Nay, nothing in the world: These predictions
are mere brutum fulmen; thunder without lightning.
46. Now for a little more of this fine painting ! But,
remember 1 it is not drawn from the life. “A nation once
the protector of liberty in distant countries, endeavouring to
reduce its own brethren to servitude.” Say, to lay down the
arms which they have taken up against their King and coun
try. “Insisting upon such a supremacy over them as would
leave them nothing they could call their own.” (Page 89.)
Yes; the supremacy insisted on would leave them all the
liberty, civil and religious, which they have had from their
first settlement. You next compare them to the brave
Corsicans, taking arms against the Genoese. But the Cor
sicans were not colonies from Genoa: Therefore, there is
nothing similar in the case. Neither in that you next quote,
the case of Holland. You say, Yes: “The United Provinces
of Holland were once subject to the Spaniards; but, being
provoked by the violation of their charters, they were driven
to that resistance which we and all the world have ever
since admired.” (Page 90.) Provoked by the violation of their
charters / yea, by the total subversion both of their religious
and civil liberties; the taking away their goods, imprisoning
their persons, and shedding their blood like water, without the
least colour of right, yea, without the very form of law; inso
much that the Spanish Governor, the Duke of Alva, made
his open boast, that “in five years he had caused upwards of
eighteen thousand persons to fall by the hands of the common
hangman.” I pray, what has this to do with America?
Add to this that the Hollanders were not colonies from
Spain, but an independent people, who had the same right
to govern Spain, as the Spaniards to govern Holland.
47. As another parallel case, you bring the war of the Romans
with the allied states of Italy. But neither is this case parallel
at all; for those states were not colonies of Rome, (although
some colonies were scattered up and down among them,) but
original, independent states, before Rome itself had a being.
Were it then true that “every Briton must approve the conduct
of those allies,” (page 91,) it would not follow, that they must
approve the conduct of the Americans; or that “we ought to
declare our applause, and say, We admire your spirit; it is the
spirit that has more than once saved us.” We cannot applaud
the spirit of those who usurp an illegal authority over their
countrymen; who rob them of their substance, who outrage
their persons, who leave them neither civil nor religious liberty;
and who, to crown all, take up arms against their King and
mother-country, and prohibit all intercourse with them.
48. See an argument of a different kind: “The laws and
religion of France were established in Canada, on purpose to
bring up thence an army of French Papists.” (Page 94.)
What proof have you, what tittle or shadow of proof, for this
strange assertion, that the laws and religion which they had
before in Canada were established on purpose to bring an
army thence? It is manifest to every impartial man, that
this was done for a nobler purpose. Every nation, you allow,
has a natural liberty to enjoy their own laws, and their own
religions: So have the French in Canada; and we have no
right to deprive them of this liberty. Our Parliament never
desired, never intended, to deprive them of this; (so far were
they from any intention of depriving their own countrymen
of it!) and on purpose to deliver them from any apprehension
of so grievous an evil, they generously and nobly gave them
a legal security, that it should not be taken from them. And
is this (one of the best things our Parliament ever did)
improved into an accusation against them? “But our laws
and religion are better than theirs.” Unquestionably they
are; but this gives us no right to impose the one or the
other, even on a conquered nation. What if we had conquered
France, ought we not still to have allowed them their own
laws and religion? Yea, if the Russians had conquered
Constantinople, or the whole Ottoman empire, ought they
not to have allowed to all they conquered, both their own
religion and their own laws; nay, and to have given them,
not a precarious toleration, but a legal security for both?
49. “But the wild Indians, and their own slaves, have
been instigated to attack them.” I doubt the fact. What
proof is there of this, either with regard to the Indians or
the Negroes? “And attempts have been made to gain the
assistance of a large body of Russians.” Another hearty
assertion, which many will swallow, without ever asking for
proof: In truth, had any such attempts been made, they
would not have proved ineffectual. Very small pay will
induce a body of Russians to go wherever they hope for good
plunder. It might just as well have been said, “Attempts
were made to procure a large body of Tartars.”
50. Now for a little more encouragement to your good
friends and allies in America: “The utmost force we can
employ does not exceed thirty thousand men to conquer half a
million of determined men, fighting for that sacred blessing
of liberty, without which man is a beast, and government a
curse.” (Page 95.) I am not sure that our utmost force is
either thirty, or forty, or fifty, thousand men. But are you
sure, that “half a million, at least, are determined to fight”
against them? Yes: For “a quarter of the inhabitants of
every country are fighting men; and the colonies consist of
two millions.” Here are several points which are not quite
clear. I doubt, (1.) Whether those colonies contain two
millions. I doubt, (2.) Whether a quarter of the inhabitants
of any country are fighting men: We usually reckon a sixth
part. I doubt, (3.) Whether a quarter of the American
fighting men, are determined to fight in so bad a cause; to
fight, not for liberty, which they have long enjoyed, but for
independency. Will you affirm, that “without this, man is
a beast, and government a curse?” Then, show me where
man is not a beast, and where government is not a curse.
51. But you give them more encouragement still: “In the
Netherlands, a few states thus circumstanced withstood the
whole force of the Spanish monarchy; and, at last, emancipated
themselves from its tyranny.” (Ibid.) Thus circumstanced :
oBSERVATIONS ON LIBERTY. 115
No; they were in wholly different circumstances; they were
cruelly and wantonly oppressed; they were robbed both of
civil and religious liberty; they were slaughtered all the day
long; and, during the contest, which was really for liberty,
they were assisted by the German Princes, by England, and
by France itself. But “what can thirty thousand men do,
when they are to be fed from hence?” (Page 96.) Do you
think they will stand with their finger in their eye? If they
cannot find food at land, (which would be strange,) the seas
and rivers are open. “Their maritime towns they are resolved
to burn themselves.” They will think twice, before they
execute that resolution. “As to their trade, the loss of it
will do them unspeakable good.” Will it indeed? Then let
them acknowledge their benefactors. “They rejoice particu
larly in the last restraining Act: This will furnish them with
a reason for confiscating the estates of all the friends of our
Government among them.” (Page 97.) A reason / All the
friends of our Government are infinitely obliged to you for
suggesting this to them, who are full ready to improve any hint
of the kind; and it will be no wonder if they soon use these
enemies of their country as the Irish did the Protestants in 1641.
52. “One consideration more. From one end of America
to the other, they are fasting and praying: But what are
we doing? Ridiculing them as fanatics, and scoffing at
religion.” This certainly is the case with many; but God
forbid it should be the case with all ! There are thousands
in England (I believe full as many, if not many more than in
America) who are daily wrestling with God in prayer for a
blessing upon their King and country; and many join fasting
therewith; which, if it were publicly enjoined, would be no
scandal to our nation. Are they “animated by piety?”
So are we; although “not unto us be the praise.” “But
can we declare, in the face of the sun, that we are not
aggressors in this war?” We can. “And that we mean
not, by it, to acquire dominion or empire, or to gratify
resentment?” (Page 99.) I humbly believe, both the King
and his Ministers can declare this before God: “But solely
to gain reparation for injury,” from men who have already
plundered very many of His Majesty’s loyal subjects, and
killed no small number of them.
53. You now proceed to answer objections; and mention,
as the First, “Are they not our subjects?” You answer:
“They are not your subjects; they are your fellow-subjects.”
Are they indeed? Do you affirm this? Then you give up
the whole question; then their independency, which you have
so vehemently maintained, falls to the ground at once.
A Second objection, you say, is this: “But we are taxed;
why should not they?” You answer: “You are taxed
by yourselves; they insist on the same privilege.” I reply,
They are now taxed by themselves, in the very same sense
that nine-tenths of us are. We have not only no vote in
the Parliament, but none in electing the members: Yet Mr.
Evans says, “We are virtually represented:” And if we
are, so are the Americans. You add: “They help you to
pay your taxes, by giving you a monopoly of their trade.”
They consented, as you observed before, to do this; but they
have not done it for many years: They have, in fact, traded
to Holland, to France, to Spain, and everywhere they could.
And how have they helped us, by purchasing our manufac
tures? Take one instance out of a thousand: They have
taken large quantities of our earthenware, for which they
regularly required three years’ credit. These they sold to
the Spaniards, at a very advanced price, and for ready
money only. And did they not hereby help themselves, at
least, as much as they helped us? And what have we lost
by losing their custom? We have gained forty, fifty, or
sixty per cent. The Spaniards now come directly to Bristol;
and pay down ready money, pieces of eight, for all the
earthenware that can possibly be procured.
54. A Third objection, you say, is this: “They will not
obey the Parliament and the laws.” You answer: “Say,
They will not obey your Parliament and your laws; because
they have no voice in your Parliament, no share in making
your laws.” (Page 100.) So, now the mask quite falls off
again. A page or two ago, you said, “They are your fellow
subjects.” Now, you frankly declare, they owe no subjection
to our Government, and attempt to prove it! To that proof
I reply: Millions in England have no more voice in the
Parliament than they ; yet that does not exempt them from
subjection to the Government and the laws. But “they
may have a voice in it if they will.” No; they cannot, any
more than the Americans. “Then they so far want liberty.”
I answer, (1.) Whether they do or no, they must needs be
subject; and that not only for wrath, for fear of punishment,
but for conscience sake. (2.) They do not want liberty; they
have all the liberty they can desire, civil as well as religious.
“Nay, I have no other motion of slavery, but being bound
by a law to which I do not consent.” If you have not, look
at that man chained to the oar: He is a slave; he cannot at
all dispose of his own person. Look at that Negro sweating
beneath his load: He is a slave; he has neither goods nor
liberty left. Look at that wretch in the Inquisition: Then
you will have a far other notion of slavery.
55. You next advance a wonderful argument to convince us
that all the Americans are slaves: “All your freehold land is
represented; but not a foot of theirs; “nay,’ says an eminent
man, “there is not a blade of grass in England but is
represented.’” This much-admired and frequently-quoted
assertion is altogether new ! I really thought, not the grass,
or corn, or trees, but the men of England, were represented
in Parliament. I cannot comprehend, that Parliament-men
represent the grass, any more than the stones or clay of the
kingdom. No blade of grass but is represented 1 Pretty
words ! But what do they mean? Here is Mr. Burke;
pray, what does he represent? “Why, the city of Bristol.”
What, the buildings so called; or the ground whereon they
stand? Nay, the inhabitants of it: The ground, the houses,
the stones, the grass, are not represented. Who till now
ever entertained so wild a thought? But let them stand
together, the independency of our colonies, and the repre
sentation of every blade of grass |
56. You conclude: “Peace may be obtained upon the
easy, the constitutional, and therefore the indispensable,
terms of an exemption from parliamentary taxation, and an
admission of the sacredness of their charters.” (Page 107.)
Are not you betraying your cause ? You have been all
along pleading, in the most explicit manner, for their exemp
tion, not only from parliamentary taxation, but legislation
also. And, if your arguments prove anything, they certainly
prove this, that the colonies have an unalienable right, not
only to tax, but to make laws for themselves; so that the
allowing them the former is nothing, unless we allow the
latter also; that is, in plain terms, unless we allow them to
be independent on the English Government.
As to your other term of peace, there is unquestionably
such a thing as the forfeiting of a charter: Whether the
colonies have forfeited theirs or not, I leave others to deter
mine. Whether they have or have not, there can be no
reason for making the least doubt but, upon their laying down
their arms, the Government will still permit them to enjoy
both their civil and religious liberty in as ample a manner as
ever their ancestors did, and as the English do at this day.
57. I add a few words more: Two or three years ago, by
means of incendiary papers, spread throughout the nation,
the minds of the people were inflamed to an amazing degree;
but the greater part of the flame is now gone out. The
natural tendency, or rather the avowed design, of this
pamphlet, is, to kindle it again; if it be possible, to blow up
into a flame the sparks that yet remain; to make the minds
of His Majesty’s subjects, both at home and abroad, evil
affected toward his Government; discontented in the midst
of plenty, out of humour with God and man; to persuade
them, in spite of all sense and reason, that they are absolute
slaves, while they are actually possessed of the greatest civil
and religious liberty that the condition of human life allows.
Let all who are real lovers of their country use every lawful
means to put out, or, at least, prevent the increase of, that
flame which, otherwise, may consume our people and nation.
Let us earnestly exhort all our countrymen to improve the
innumerable blessings they enjoy; in particular, that invalu
able blessing of liberty, civil as well as religious, which we
now enjoy in a far more ample measure than any of our
forefathers did. Let us labour to improve our religious
liberty, by practising pure religion and undefiled; by
worshipping God in spirit and in truth; and taking his
“word for a lantern to our feet, and a light in all our paths.”
Let us improve our civil liberty, the full freedom we enjoy,
both as to our lives, goods, and persons, by devoting all we
have, and all we are, to his honourable service. Then may
we hope that he will continue to us all these blessings, with
the crown of all, a thankful heart. Then shall we say, in all
the changing scenes of life, -
“Father, how wide thy glories shine,
Lord of the universe and mine !
Thy goodness watches o'er the whole,
As all the world were but one soul ;
Yet counts my every sacred hair,
As I remain'd thy single care !”
WITH AN OCCASIONAL World INTERS PERSEld To Those of A.
He beheld the city, and wept over it.-Luke xix. 41.
Let your moderation be known unto all men.-Philip. iv. 5.
UNHAPPY, very unhappy for us, we are a kingdom divided
against itself; and, without a miracle, fall we must ! What
a fall will there then be, when such “distress is upon the
land, aud wrath upon the people !” And is this a little thing,
brethren? Is it what any of us either desire or promote?
God forbid! A kingdom divided against itself is an evil, of all
others, the most dreadful; inasmuch as an innumerable train
of evils necessarily follow; no inconsiderable part of which
are the sword, fire, plunder, and famine. This our forefathers
unhappily felt, and to our inexpressible sorrow we may feel.
And is this an unlikely thing? Is it altogether impro
bable? Surely no ! But that small cloud which arose some
few years since, has, to discerning minds, been gathering
blackness, and spreading itself well-nigh over the whole land.
And is it any marvel if, by and by, it should burst upon us,
as it has done upon America? Let him that has wisdom
understand this.
Then who that has any understanding, any bowels of mercy
and compassion, would not do the utmost, that either human
or divine prudence can suggest, to prevent it? For who
knows, when the sword is once drawn, where it may stop?
Who can command it to be put up into its scabbard, and it will
obey him? Such power is not in man; it is only in Him
Who rides upon the stormy sky,
And calms the roaring seas.
Again: If the sword should be drawn, upon whom may it
light? This we know not. But supposing it should be on
yourself, or a beloved wife, an aged parent, a tender child, a
dear relative, what recompence can be found for such a loss?
What, O ! what would the whole world then be, if it might
be gained? Alas! what a poor trifle ! But, suppose you
escape with your life, and the lives of those that are near and
dear to you, there is yet another dreadful evil to fear, and
which has been the case; plunder, lawless plunder, may
deprive you of your little all. Now, who can insure another?
Who can exempt himself in the time of general distress, from
such an evil? Alas ! brethren, “we must let this alone for
ever. We are of yesterday, and know nothing” of to-morrow.
What then must we do to save (not to destroy) our kingdom,
and to save (not to destroy) our American brethren? Do,
my brethren | Why, what would we do, if either our own or
our neighbour's house were on fire? We should bring, if in
our senses, no combustible matter to increase the flame, but
water and a helping hand to extinguish it. This we should
certainly do, and our labour would not be in vain. Now,
apply this to America and Great Britain. The former is like
an house on fire; the devouring flames of an unnatural civil
war are already kindled, and some hundreds of lives have
fallen a prey to its insatiable violence. And how long before
this may be our case here, God only knows!
Stop here then, my brethren, and survey the desolation.
Behold the weeping and disconsolate widow refusing to be
comforted | Her beloved husband is fallen l is fallen l and
is no more ! See the affectionate parent hanging down his
head like the bulrush | Hear the broken language of his
heart | “My son I my son I would God I had died in thy
place I O my son I my son 1’’ This is far from the flight of
imagination, or the colouring of fancy. It is the real and
actual condition of many amongst that unhappy people, and
..a part only of their manifold distress. In a word, they and
we appear to be a people infatuated like the Jews of old, and
ripening for destruction; and no marvel if, while we are
biting and devouring one another, some stronger beasts of
prey step in and divide the spoil! Here stop then, and drop
a tear for the slain of our people, through the fire of conten
tion that is kindled amongst them ' And if on your recovery
from the horrors of so terrible a conflagration, you should
begin to inquire into its cause, a spectator begs leave to inform
you, that it was occasioned through the unhappy contention
of brethren, (which, as Solomon observes, “only cometh of
pride,”) and begs your kind assistance to extinguish the flames,
lest they and their whole substance should be consumed
together | The great danger of which, as well as the cause of
this unparalleled and fatal strife, I would beg leave to present
to your view in a piece of fine painting, done by an abler master:
“See | Here are some thousands of our brave countrymen
gathered together on this plain; they are followed by the most
tender and feeling emotions of wives, children, and an innu
merable multitude of their thoughtful, humane, and sympa
thizing countrymen. Then turn your eyes and behold a
superior number at a little distance, of their brethren, “flesh
of their flesh, and bone of their bone, who only a few years
since emigrated to the dreary wilds of America. These also are
followed with the most tender feelings of wives, children, and
countrymen. See, they advance towards each other, well
prepared with every instrument of death ! But what are they
going to do? To shoot each other through the head or heart;
to stab and butcher each other, and hasten (it is to be feared)
one another into the everlasting burnings. Why so? What
harm have they done to one another? Why, none at all.
Most of them are entire strangers to each other. But a
matter is in dispute relative to the mode of taxation. So these
countrymen, children of the same parents, are to murder each
other with all possible haste, to prove who is in the right.
Now, what an argument is this I What a method of proof!
What an amazing way of deciding controversies ! But so it
is; and O what horrors attend on it ! At what a price is
the decision made | By the blood and wounds of thousands;
the burning cities, ravaging and laying waste the country.”
Now, who that seriously considers this awful contest, can
help lamenting the astonishing want of wisdom in our
brethren to decide the matter without bloodshed? What,
are there no wise men amongst us? none that are able to
judge between brethren? But brother goeth to war against
brother; and that in the very sight of the Heathen. Surely
this is a sore evil amongst us. O how are the mighty fallent
How is wisdom perished from the wise ! What a flood of
folly and madness has broke in upon us!
But do you farther ask me, Who was first in the transgres
sion? Who began the dreadful strife? I must beg your pardon
for not touching this subject now. Excuse my saying any
thing of the second cause, as I mean only to inquire into the
first. I fear doing harm, and this is far from my design.
Another great reason for my avoiding any reflections of this
sort, on this delicate subject, is, that it has been already done
by some of the most able hands, and to very little purpose.
Argument seems lost in clamour, in confusion of passion and
party rage; and the satanic dust of prejudice seems to have put
out the eyes of our understanding. But thus much I might
venture to say,-the case is rendered very complicated, and
must in general remain unintelligible, unless to those who
thoroughly understand the constitution of each party, and
then have wisdom enough to weigh it in an unprejudiced
balance.
To be plain, the present melancholy dispute either is, or is
not, founded in a constitutional right on the one part, and
a constitutional opposition on the other. So far is certain.
Therefore, till the entire nature of both constitutions is well
and fully understood, it is utterly impossible to decide
thereon. I speak as to the matter of the dispute only; the
manner of it is another point. Now, how many understand,
or ever properly consider, either the one or the other? I
fear but few. How deplorable then is it, that almost every
one is sufficient for it, and accordingly passes sentence. An
outcry is raised. The Americans should or should not be
taxed; and many have drawn their swords, and are well
migh ready to cut their antagonists’ throats | But this is
not our wisdom; it is far from it. It is indeed fighting
uncertainly, and scattering firebrands, arrows, and death.
But go no farther. Stop here, and calmly reflect on the above
argument. Settle it in your heart, that unless you properly
understand the merits of the cause, you talk at random;
you argue uncertainly, and worse than to no purpose.
But if any man has this wisdom, and this well-poised
balance, let him stand forth in defence of his country, and
be assured his labour will not be in vain.
Here we must lament, that, instead of its being a matter of
great and general concern, it is more a party affair; and to our
shame may it be said, that such a spirit has so unhappily
influenced almost all sorts of people, that some are breathing
out slaughter against one party, and some against another.
Now, while this is the case, is it any marvel that we should
perish together? While we are contending who set the
building on fire, and looking with rage and vengeance on the
suspected party, instead of bringing the assuaging water of
heartfelt grief and pious concern, with the helping hand of
wisdom, moderation, and love, it is more than certain the
flames will spread and endanger the whole building.
If these things, therefore, are so, let us cease contending
with each other. Let us avoid unkind and bitter reflection on
one another; seeing it can do no real service to the cause we
would defend, but, in all probability, much harm. Let us
bring no combustible matter of this sort to increase the fire.
But as the flames are actually spreading, and may soon reach
from them to us, let us do our utmost to extinguish them.
Ye salt of the earth, exert the seasoning, preserving quality
which you are favoured with. Bring your contentious brethren
in your loving arms of faith and prayer, and lay them at your
Father's feet, praying him “to forgive them, as they know not
what they do.” Look upwards for help, to Him “who doeth
whatsoever pleases him in the armies of heaven, and amongst
the sons of men;” knowing it is He alone that “can quench
the violence of fire, still the raging of the sea, and the
madness of the people.” Much, brethren, depends on you,
though “the world account your life madness, and your end
to be without honour;” for you are the true “salt of the
carth;” you alone preserve it from general putrefaction; and
you, under God, are the great means of saving a divided
kingdom, “a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers;”
and had not the Lord “left you as a small remnant,” we
should long since “have been as Sodom and Gomorrah!”
But do not you, for your Master’s sake, lose your favour in
that unhallowed fire of contention, which the people who know
not God are now burning in. The old serpent may herein
deceive us, as he has too often done already. As an angel of
light he is most likely to succeed, and, under the specious
show of doing our country service, betray us, in treating our
opponents, into a spirit and temper not from above. And how
many may unhappily be influenced and led away with our
error, God only knows | But this seems to be the design of
the adversary of God and man; and if he can set the Christian
world together by the ears, he has gained his point. But
again, brethren, we may be deceived respecting the cause itself.
Our veneration and respect for the cause we would espouse
may betray us into a maze of error, imprudence, false zeal, and
bitterness of temper; which must prove highly injurious to
the public good. What has been, you know, may be again.
And as the great Governor of the world has often permitted,
particularly upon his own people, a judicial blindness, hardness
of heart, and an amazing infatuation, which terminated in their
ruin; so it is not improbable but the great and spreading
defection and intemperate zeal on the one hand, and the deter
mined purpose of maintaining the authority and dignity of
Government by fire and sword on the other, is more judicial
than we are aware of And that this is the case, I fear, is
more than probable. It has been so in this kingdom, as well
as the kingdom of Israel, in the matter of David and his son
Absalom; and it will be so while iniquity beareth rule. If this
be so, take heed what you do. Do nothing hastily or rashly.
But, rather, before you touch this awfully delicate subject, and
enter the lists, examine and weigh well the thoughts of your
heart, and the springs of motion. And with David pray,
“Search me, O God, and prove the ground of my heart,” &c.
Beg to be directed. If you cannot act from a full persuasion
that this is required at your hands, and if you cannot see the
divine cloud go before you, desist in time. “Let the dead
bury their dead;” but let not those who were designed to
save the earth destroy it. Let not Christians engage in the
controversy in the spirit and temper of the world, and bite
and devour one another, lest they should be consumed with
the world. But rather let them wish, with an eminent
Prophet, (an admirable way of showing our love to our country,
and doing it the most effectual service 1) “O that my head
were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!”
and with Christ himself, the Inspirer of the Prophets, “when
he beheld the rebellious “city, weep over it!”
But, it may be, you are of a different complexion. You
“fear not the Lord, neither regard the operation of his
hands.” Your case, I fear, is too similar to his, who of old
said, “Who is the Lord, that I should obey him?” But He
is, though you know him not, the God of your life, your
health, your strength, and all your mercies. It is “through
him you live, move, and have your being; ” and is therefore
altogether worthy of all you have and all you are. “Acquaint
yourself with him, and be at peace; and thereby good shall
come unto thee,” Till this is the case, it is morally impossible
that you should be a true patriot, a real lover of your country.
You may indeed assume the sounding title; but it is an
empty name. You may in word mightily contend for your
country’s good; but, while you are a slave to sin, you are an
enemy to God, and your country too. But let the time past
suffice. Be henceforth, not only in word, but in deed and in
truth, a patriot. Put away the accursed thing, the evil that
is found in you; so shall you love your country as your own
soul, and prevent the fearful end of both.-
That we may do this, and that it may please infinite Wisdom
to succeed our attempts, I would beg leave to pass from the
Second to the First cause. Here I would fix my foot, as on
a sure and solid foundation that will stand for ever. The
holy Scriptures give us ample accounts of the fall and rise
of the greatest monarchies. It is simply this: They rose
by virtue; but they fell by vice. “Righteousness” alone
“exalteth a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people.”
And this ever will be the case, till the end of all things. So
much in general is certain; but wherein we have well-nigh
filled up “the measure of our iniquity,” and may therefore
expect their fate, is another point. But it is certain that
iniquity of every kind, and amongst all ranks and orders of
men, has and does abound; and as we are punished with
the sword, it is not improbable but one principal sin of our
nation is, the blood that we have shed in Asia, Africa, and
America. Here I would beg your serious attention, while I
observe, that however extensively pursued, and of long
continuance, the African trade may be, it is nevertheless
iniquitous from first to last. It is the price of blood It is a
trade of blood, and has stained our land with blood | And is
the East-India trader a jot better? I fear not. They seem
very nearly allied. For though here is no leading into
* -
captivity, as in the former; yet the refined iniquity practised
there, of fomenting war amongst the natives, and seizing the
chief of the plunder, has been as conspicuous to the serious and
attentive. What millions have fallen by these means, as well
as by artificial famine! O earth, cover not thou their blood!
It will speak to heaven and to the inhabitants of the earth
to the latest posterity. O ye Governors of this great nation,
would to God that ye had seen this, and timely done your
utmost to separate those tares from the wheat of fair and
honest trade What peace therefore can we expect, while
these evils continue? “There can be no peace, saith the
Lord.” While “the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto
me from the ground,” “what hast thou to do with peace?”
“Shall I not visit for these things? Shall not my soul be
avenged on such a nation as this?” Yes, my brethren, we have
much reason to fear and tremble, as upon the brink of fate.
But there is (if aught can be worse) a sorer evil, namely,
an astonishing contempt and neglect of truly sacred things;
especially the solemn worship of Almighty God: And herein
our Nobility and Gentry almost universally distinguish them
selves. This is indeed a sore evil; one of the grossest affronts
that can be offered to the great Governor of the world. And
I am bold to say, that as he hath spoken to this nation as he
hath not to any other nation upon earth of late years, and
that in an uncommon way and manner, but as in general we
have stopped our ears, and utterly despised His call; the day
will come when the candlestick will be removed, and the
kingdom of God given to another people that will attend the
call, and bring forth fruit. And when the divine glory, in
this respect, begins to depart, the natural glory will soon
follow. Probably that day is not far off, unless we repent.
We seem indeed to have been at our meridian height of
power, greatness, &c.; (not of holiness unto the Lord;) and
it is to be feared that the glory has begun to depart, which, like
the sun when he begins to decline, will continue its declension,
finally disappear, and leave us in total darkness, unless a divine
interposition prevent. For we seem judicially given up to
pursue those measures that will effectually accomplish it. Now,
as what God hath joined together (especially such powerful
people as we and the Americans now are) for the mutual support,
comfort, and defence of each other, should not be put asunder
by any means whatsoever, as it would undoubtedly frustrate
His gracious design in this well-compacted body; so, if one
powerful member should rise up against the whole body, or the
whole body against one such member, and disunite from it;
this schism must, in the nature of things, occasion such a weak
ness and deformity in the whole body, as is only to be known
by an unhappy experience. The disunion of the ten tribes is
a melancholy proof of it. And as Judah vexed Ephraim, and
Ephraim Judah, so will it be with us. The counsel therefore
to separate cannot be from God. It has no foundation in the
nature and fitness of things beneficial, either to them or us,
and must in the end prove like the counsel of Ahithophel.
Yefriends of America, turn your eyes therefore, for amoment,
from those you suspect to be the only authors of the present
evil, and think seriously of a more secret but certain cause,
namely, the universality and enormity of every species of wick
edness that is found in our land; and then marvel not that the
£reat Governor of the world hath withheld that restraint which
he is ever wont to hold amongst the Governors of a wise and
good people. For we may be assured of this, that, were those
in authority under the temptation of despotism and oppression,
(and would to God, it never was the case!) if we as a people,
by our transgressions, had not to a great and certain degree
provoked the eyes of his glory, “I,” saith the Lord, “would
put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips.”
Ye friends of Government also, draw near, and turn your eyes
from those you suspect to be the only authors of the present
evil; look in this glass, and see the ugly monster, universal sin,
that subtle, unsuspected serpent that has inflamed our blood,
and brought on the malignant fever of contention on our body.
Here gaze, till its loathsome and hideous deformity makes you
loathe her. Then you will not marvel, that when the divine
restraint is withheld, we are capable of anything; even that
which is the most likely to end in our present and eternal ruin!
And should not ye, O ye Americans, ye unhappy sufferers by
this dreadful fire, look into the same glass, and not marvel at a
divine permission of your afflictions; but in a becoming spirit
and disposition ask, “Wherefore dost thou contend with me?
Why hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy?
Why hast thou set me as a mark against thee?” Surely them
will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people !
But is our universal impiety the first and principal cause of
our misery and wretchedness in general, and of the present
distress in particular? Then let no individual attempt to
clear himself from the dreadful charge of being accessary to
it. Let no one presume to look on himself as unconcerned
and innocent. Let no one “wipe his mouth and say, What
harm have I done?” but rather let him know that his sin in
particular has added to the general account, and not a little
contributed to the fierceness of the divine contention. I say
“divine contention;” and such doubtless it is, though in
general we conceive it merely human. But the latter is the
effect only of the former, and should never be forgotten. It
demands our first and most serious attention, being the first
and principal means of restoring the wished for peace, and
greatly desired reconciliation. For this is no other than to
make God himself our friend; and, “if He be for us, who can
be against us?” Let us do this therefore without delay. Let
every one remember his own sin, and not his neighbour's.
Let us follow the example of the Ninevites. Let us “break
off our sins by repentance.” Let us “observe such a fast as
God hath chosen.” (And, O, what need of a national fast
at this juncture !) “Let the Priests, the Ministers of the
Lord, weep between the porch and the altar; and let them
say, Spare” (not destroy) “thy people, O Lord;” and “give
not thine heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should rule
over them, and say, Where is their God? Then will the
Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people.” But
should this spirit of universal humiliation fail, and conse
quently the divine favour upon our land, let not the seed of
Abraham faint, neither let them be dismayed. Their humi
liation and intercession shall be remembered. It cannot be
forgotten; and, if Sodom is not spared for their sake, they
themselves shall nevertheless be spared, “as a man spareth his
own son that serveth him : God will make a difference between
him that serveth him, and him that serveth him not.”
Strong is his arm, and shall fulfil
His great decree and sov’reign will.
“Fear not,” therefore, ye “little flock,” if the overflowing
scourge should come. But “enter ye into the rock, and hide
ye for a little moment in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and
for the glory of his majesty, until the indignation be overpast.
For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: The earth also
shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain ''”
To
FRIENDs AND CountRYMEN,
1. AbouT a year and a half ago, being exceedingly
pained at what I saw or heard continually, I wrote a little
tract entitled, “A Calm Address to our American Colonies;”
but the ports being just then shut up by the Americans, I
could not send it abroad, as I designed. However, it was
not lost; within a few months, fifty, or perhaps an hundred
thousand copies, in newspapers and otherwise, were dispersed
throughout Great Britain and Ireland. The effect exceeded
my most sanguine hopes. The eyes of many people were
opened; they saw things in a quite different light. They
perceived, and that with the utmost clearness, how they had
been hoodwinked before. They found, they had been led
unawares into all the wilds of political enthusiasm, as far
distant from truth and common sense, as from the real love
of their country.
2. I am encouraged hereby to address myself 3nce more,
not indeed to my countrymen afar off, but to you who remain
in your native land, who are inhabitants of old England. I
have no private views in doing this. I attend no great man’s
table. I have nothing to ask, either of the King, or any of
his Ministers. You may easily believe this; for if I had
sought wealth or preferment half a century ago, I should
hardly think it worth while to seek it now, when I have one
foot in the grave. But I have a view to contribute all that in
me lies to the public welfare and tranquillity. A flame was
studiously kindled some time since, which threatened to
involve the whole nation. By the blessing of God, it is greatly
checked; it does not spread, or blaze as formerly. But it is
not quite put out. I wish to quench the remains of that
evil fire.
3. My view is, as far as is possible, to lessen, if not
remove, the misunderstandings under which many honest,
well-meaning men are labouring to this day; misunderstand
ings which have caused much animosity, nay, much bitterness
and rancour in their minds against those who equally “strive to
have a conscience void of offence towards God and towards
man.” I would fain have all these duly sensible of the blessings
which they enjoy; that they may be thankful to the Giver of
every blessing, and may love one another as He has loved us.
4. Surely every man of candour and humanity must wish
well to such an attempt; in the prosecution of which I will
first endeavour to set down, in as plain and artless a manner
as I can, according to the best light I have, the real state of
those affairs which have occasioned these misunderstandings;
and then add two or three short reflections, which I con
ceive naturally deducible therefrom.
5. And, First, I will set down, in as plain and artless a
manner as I can, according to the best light I have, the real
state of those affairs which have occasioned these misunder
standings. I have perhaps had some means of information
which many others have not had. Over and above those
accounts which have been published, I have had abundance
of letters from persons in America, on whose judgment,
veracity, and impartiality I could safely depend; especially from
the provinces of New-York, Virginia, Maryland, and Penn
sylvania. I have likewise had the opportunity of conversing
freely and largely with many that came from those provinces,
and of comparing together the accounts of those who were
attached to one or the other party. And I shall endeavour to
deliver the plain facts, without speculations concerning them.
6. In the year 1737, my brother took ship, in order to
return from Georgia to England. But a violent storm drove
him up to New-England; and he was for some time detained
at Boston. Even then he was surprised to hear the most
serious people, and men of consequence, almost continually
crying out, “We must be independent; we shall never be
well, till we shake off the English yoke.” This sounded
exceeding strange to him; as he could not form any imagi
nation, that they could be happier under any government,
than the mild one which they then enjoyed.
A gentleman who spent some time at Boston in the year
1739, informed me that he had frequently heard the very
same conversation there; although at that time the people
only spake what they had long and eagerly desired; but, it
seems, without any formed design, or having concerted any
measures upon the head.
7. Almost from their settlement in the country, but more
especially from this time, the people of this as well as the
other provinces, multiplied exceedingly. This was the
natural effect of the unparalleled lenity of the Government
they were under, and the perfect liberty they enjoyed, civil as
well as religious. Through the same causes, from the small
ness of their taxes, and the large bounties continually received
from their mother country, (which also protected them from
all their enemies,) their wealth increased as fast as their
numbers. And, together with their number and their wealth,
the spirit of independency increased also. At the same time,
it could not be but their shipping would increase in the same
proportion with their trade, which was now extended not
only through America, and not only through Great Britain
and Ireland, but also (notwithstanding the Act of Naviga
tion) through almost every part of Europe.
8. Much more wealth was accumulated in the numerous
seaport towns, by defrauding His Majesty of his customs.
This was continually done, not only by stealth, but frequently
with an high hand. Whole ship-loads of uncustomed goods
were imported, particularly at Boston, and that at noon-day.
And it is notorious, that one of the greatest dealers in this
kind was the celebrated Mr. Hancock. It is true, this now
and then met with some check from His Majesty's officers;
but it was so little, it scarce deserves the naming. However,
little as it was, they bore it not without huge indignation,
and strong marks of resentment. And whenever a matter of
this kind came before an American jury, (which could not
but frequently be the case,) it was easy to foresee the event.
The officer was sure to have his labour for his pains; for
they were too good patriots to condemn their countrymen I
By this means the customs of North-America, which ought
to have brought in so considerable a sum as would have gone
far toward defraying the expense of the government, were
reduced to a very small pittance.
9. In consideration of this, the English Government a few
years ago thought it equitable to lay a small duty upon the
stamps in America, in order, if not to bear themselves harm
less, yet to lessen their burden. Immediately a cry arose, as
if all America was just going to be swallowed up. It was
echoed across the Atlantic Ocean, from America to England.
The patriots (so they styled themselves) in England eagerly
joined the cry, and spared no labour and no expense to pro
pagate it throughout the nation. Do you suppose they did this
out of stark love and kindness to the poor, ruined Americans?
No such matter. They understood the case too well; they
knew they cried before they were hurt. But they laid hold
on this as a fair occasion to throw an aspersion on those that
were in power, being very willing, and supposing themselves
very worthy, to supply their place. However, the Ministry
finding the clamour increasing, and the storm spreading on
both sides the ocean, were persuaded to give way to the
torrent. They did so; and the Stamp Act was repealed.
10. The American leaders now apprehending that they
had a sufficient number of fast friends in England, began to
entertain higher designs; the New-England men in particular.
They had no longer anything to fear from Canada, which the
English had conquered for them. And they had nothing to
fear from England, when they judged their allies were
growing stronger and stronger. They therefore paved the
way for the execution of their favourite scheme; first, by
diligently cultivating the republican motions which they had
received from their forefathers; and then by speaking and
writing in the most contemptuous and reproachful manner of
the English Government.
11. Soon after, it being thought reasonable, that every
part of the British empire should furnish its share of the
general expense, the English Parliament laid a small duty on
the tea imported into America. Again a violent outcry
arose, and was studiously propagated through all the provinces
It was no less diligently spread throughout England. And
as they judged the time was now come to advance a little
further, the leading men, both at home and abroad, began
more and more confidently to assert, “that the English had
no right to tax the American colonies.” The assertors of
this new position in England strongly exhorted those in
America to withstand what they were pleased to call this
“illegal, unconstitutional oppression.” Thus encouraged,
the Bostonians, under the auspices of Mr. Hancock, (whose
interest was particularly at stake,) scorning to do any thing
secretly, paraded the town at noon-day with colours flying,
and bravely threw the English tea into the sea. This was
the first plain overt act of rebellion, not of a few, but of the
town of Boston. Reparation of the wrong was demanded;
but it was not obtained. Till it should be obtained, the
Parliament ordered Boston harbour to be shut up.
12. But things were not yet ripe for an open rupture:
Therefore the Americans still gave the Government good
words. They professed their loyalty, their great regard for
the King, and their desire of obeying all his legal commands.
But all this time they were using all possible art and diligence
to blacken, first the Ministry, after a time the Parliament
too, and then the King himself. Of this I had a clear and
particular account from a friend in Pennsylvania, who then
observed a storm rising in the north, and moving on toward
the southern colonies. And it moved on apace. A new
supreme power, called a Congress, appeared. It openly
assumed the reins of government, exercised all the rights of
sovereignty, burst all the bands, and totally disclaimed the
authority both of King and Parliament.
13. But still the Americans talked of allegiance, and said
they desired nothing but the liberty of Englishmen. Many
in England cordially believed them; I myself for one. And
many more (though they saw deeper; perhaps were in the
secret) affected to believe them, defended them with all their
might, and pleaded their cause, in public and private, as
honest, upright men, who only withstood oppression, and
desired nothing but what was their legal right.
14. While we were warmly debating these things in Eng
land, the Americans, believing matters were mow in a proper
forwardness, wholly threw off the mask, openly took up arms,
seized upon His Majesty’s stores and ships, and avowed them
selves to be sovereign states, independent on Britain or any
other. And herein they were still vehemently encouraged
by their numerous friends in England. Some of these (and
they were persons of no mean account) wrote them letters,
(which were carefully sent by the Congress through all the
provinces,) nearly in these words: “Make no concessions;
give up nothing. Stand your ground. Be resolute, and, you
may depend upon it, in less than a year and an half, there
will be such commotions in England, that the Government
will be glad to be reconciled to you upon your own terms.”
15. One might have imagined, for some time, that this was
a true prophecy. Many warm men at home laboured to
embarrass the Government in all its measures. They spoke
all manner of evil of the Ministry. They made the keenest
reflections on the Parliament; and, when they had whetted
themselves and one another, they spared not the King
himself. Meanwhile, they were so wonderfully tender of the
Americans, that they would not in anywise term them rebels,
though they were in open arms against their lawful Sovereign.
And all this time, whatsoever was undertaken against them
went on heavily. The King's troops were either detained in
the harbours, or stopped in their passage by contrary winds.
Some of the transports, and abundance of other ships, fell
into the hands of the Americans. Their privateers swarmed
on every side, both in the American and European seas.
They were plentifully furnished with provisions, from the
resources they had within themselves, and with all sorts of
arms and ammunition, by our good allies, the Dutch and
French. In the mean while, the few English troops that.
were in America were closely shut up in Boston, by a.
numerous army holding them in on every side, and gaping to.
swallow them up. And these within the town were in want
of all things, while those without abounded with all things.
This they gloried in, as a manifest proof that God was on.
their side. As they now were confident of success, the talk
of liberty was over: Independency was the word; this was
avowed without any disguise or reserve. And, indeed, liberty
was come to an end; it had no longer any being in the
confederate colonies. If any one dared to speak a little in
favour of the King, or in disfavour of the Congress, he was
soon taught to know his lords and masters, whose little
finger was heavier than the loins of Kings.
16. At length the King published a Proclamation for a
General Fast in England, that we might “humble ourselves
before God, and implore his blessing and assistance.” Some of
the patrons of independency mocked at this, and endeavoured
to turn it into ridicule. A company of them met at an inn in
Bristol on the fast-day, and had a plentiful entertainment.
Others stormed and raved at this hypocrisy, as they were pleased
to term it. However, there is all reason to believe that God
was well pleased with it. We now openly acknowledged him,
and he openly acknowledged us. From this very time, the tide.
turned. The King’s forces (which many said was impossible)
made good their landing at the place proposed, and that
without any loss at all. They took possession of Long
Island, and with next to no opposition. They took the island
and city of New-York, with all its boasted fortifications.
They drove the rebels out of their almost inaccessible posts,
though defended by strong intrenchments. They took Fort
Washington and Fort-Lee, which an handful of men might
have defended against a numerous army. At all these places
they took warlike stores in abundance, beside some thousands
of prisoners. They took possession of Rhode-Island, and
everywhere drove the rebels before them like a flock of sheep.
17. Where are now the two or three hundred thousand men,
that we were told would pour down upon us? But what, if they
did? What would a million do, if they ran away as soon as
the English appeared? Whatever they do, they will not fight.
I believe they cannot; for the hand of God is upon them. But
they can rob, and plunder, and destroy, and turn a well-peopled
and fruitful land into a wilderness. They can burn houses,
and drive men, women, and children into the wild woods, in
the depth of winter. Yea, they can burn whole towns, with
out any regard for the sick or aged, that necessarily perished
in the flame. But did not God regard them? Did not their
dying cries enter into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth ?
18. Such is the present state of affairs in America. Let
us now take a view of the whole: Twelve provinces, upon
various pretences, (all which have been confuted over and
over,) have declared themselves independent states, openly
renounced their allegiance to their lawful Sovereign, taken up
arms against him, and prosecuted the war in an unheard-of
manner. At first prosperity seemed to attend them in all
their undertakings. But since we sought help from God,
there has been a manifest blast upon them. Their armies are
scattered; their forts and strongholds lost; their provinces
taken one after another. Meantime, are they humbled? No;
they roar like a wild bull in a net. They tear up the ground
with fierceness and rage; repentance is hid from their eyes.
They revenge themselves--upon women and children; they
burn-all behind them / O American virtue ! Are these
the men who are proposed as a pattern to all Europe?
19. Brethren | Countrymen | What are the reflections that
now naturally arise in your breasts? Do you not immediately
observe, that after this huge outcry for liberty, which has
echoed through America, there is not the very shadow of liberty
left in the confederate provinces? There is no liberty of the
press. A man may more safely print against the Church in
Italy or Spain, than publish a tittle against the Congress in
New-England or Pennsylvania. There is no religious liberty.
What Minister is permitted to follow his own conscience in
the execution of his office? to put man in mind to be “subject
to principalities and powers?” to “fear God and honour the
King?” Who is suffered (whatever his conscience may dictate)
to “pray for the King, and all that are in authority?”
There is no civil liberty. No man hath any security, either
for his goods, or for his person; but is daily liable to have
his goods spoiled or taken away, without either law or form
of law, and to suffer the most cruel outrage as to his person,
such as many would account worse than death. And there
is no legal method wherein he can obtain redress for whatever
loss or outrage he has sustained.
20. Do not you observe, wherever these bawlers for liberty
govern, there is the vilest slavery? No man there can say
that his goods are his own. They are absolutely at the dis
posal of the mob, or the Congress. No man can say that his
tongue is his own. If he say a word for the King, what will
follow * No man can say that his body is his own. He may
be imprisoned whenever our lords the Congress please. They
are as absolute as the Emperor of Morocco: Their will is the
sole law. No man can say his life is his own. Those who
have the disposal of his substance, who have the disposal of
his liberty, have the disposal of his life also. And of this they
have given recent proofs. It is true, they do not themselves
cut throats; they do not soil their own fingers; but their
friends the mob are always ready. Thus is real liberty, in all
its branches, given up for that poor shadow, independency! a
phantom which does not, in fact, exist in any civilized nation
under heaven It never did, and never will, being wholly
inconsistent with the very idea of government. And to what
a condition are these poor colonies brought, by quitting the
substance for the shadow ! “Do you ask,” says a gentleman
who writes from Philadelphia, “what is the present state of
these provinces? You may see it upon Ezekiel's roll; such
is the condition of this country: “It is written within and
without, lamentation, and mourning, and woe.’”
ThE INHABITANTS OF ENGLAND. 137
21. And do not you observe, on the other hand, the perfect
liberty which we enjoy? Not, indeed, derived from our fore
fathers, as some writers idly talk. No; our forefathers never
enjoyed it, either before or after William the Conqueror, and
least of all in the time of the long Parliament, or under
Oliver Cromwell. They had then little more liberty, civil or
religious, than is now enjoyed in the confederate provinces.
Never talk of the liberty of our forefathers: English liberty
commenced at the Revolution. And how entire is it at this
day! Every man says what he will, writes what he will,
prints what he will. Every man worships God, if he worships
bim at all, as he is persuaded in his own mind. Every man
enjoys his own property; nor can the King himself take a
shilling of it, but according to law. Every man enjoys the
freedom of his person, unless the law of the land authorize
his confinement. Above all, every man’s life is secured, as
well from the King, as from his fellow-subjects. So that it
is impossible to conceive a fuller liberty than we enjoy, both
as to religion, life, body, and goods.
22. Do not you see then the abundant cause we have to
be thankful to God, who having “made the whole nation of
men, determined the times before appointed, and the bounds
of their habitation,” in that he hath cast our lot in a fair
ground, under the mildest government upon earth? Are
not we of all men without sense, if, instead of thankfulness,
we give way to murmuring and discontent, and finding fault
with we know not what? In all reason, we should be
perpetually praising God for this as well as for a thousand
other benefits, and endeavouring to make him a suitable
return, by devoting our lives to his service.
23. And as long as we fear God, shall we not “honour
the King?” looking upon him with a love mixed with
reverence? Should we not remember him before God in
prayer, that his throne may be established in righteousness?
that he, and all which are in authority under him, may duly
administer justice, to the punishment of wickedness and vice,
and the maintenance of true religion and virtue? And is it
not our part carefully to abstain from speaking evil of the
ruler of our people; and to study to “lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty?”
Hitherto I have addressed myself to my countrymen in
general. But I would add a word to you in particular, who
bear a religious character; whether you are members of the
established Church, or Dissenters of any denomination.
One might reasonably expect, that all of you would be
cheerfully “subject to the higher powers;” seeing you are
agreed “there is no power,” whether supreme or subordinate,
“but of God.” Nay, one would expect that you would be
continually reminding all you had any intercourse with, that
they “must needs be subject, not” only “for wrath, but”
also “for conscience’ sake.” How is it, then, that any of
you espouse the cause of those that are in open rebellion
against their lawful Sovereign that, if you do not plead
expressly for them, you at least extenuate their crime; perhaps
even scruple to call them rebels, and speak of them with
tenderness, rather than resentment? How is it that
any of you who fear God “are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities?” to “speak evil of the ruler of your people,” as
well as of those that are put in authority under him? Do you
believe that “Michael the archangel durst not bring a railing
accusation against Satan?” And dare you bring or retail an
hundred railing accusations against your lawful Governors?
Now, at least, humble yourselves before God, and act more
suitably to your character. Wherever you are, far from
countenancing, repress the base clamours of the vulgar;
remembering those awful words: “If any man among you.
seemeth to be religious,” (rather, be ever so religious,) “and
bridleth not his tongue, that man’s religion is vain.”
Are not you who dissent from the established Church, in
whatever kind or degree, particularly concerned to observe
this “for wrath” as well as “for conscience sake?” Do
you imagine, there are no High Churchmen left? Did they
all die with Dr. Sacheverel? Alas, how little do you know
of mankind I Were the present restraint taken off, you
would see them swarming on every side, and gnashing upon
you with their teeth. There would hardly need a nod from
that sacred person whom you revile, or at least lightly
esteem. Were he to stand neuter, in what a condition would
you be within one twelve months If other Bonners and
Gardiners did not arise, other Lauds and Sheldons would,
who would either rule over you with a rod of iron, or drive
you out of the land. Know the blessings you enjoy. Let
common sense restrain you, if neither religion nor gratitude
can. “Beware of the wrath of a patient man.” Dare not
again to open your lips against your Sovereign:--Lest he fall
upon you? No; but lest he cease to defend you. Then
farewell to the liberty you now enjoy.
Permit me to add a few more words to you, a small part of
whom dissent from, but the far greater part remain in, the
Church; you who are vulgarly called Methodists. Do any
of you blaspheme God or the King? None of you, I trust,
who are in connexion with me. I would no more continue
in fellowship with those who continued in such a practice, than
with whoremongers, or sabbath-breakers, or thieves, or drunk
ards, or common swearers. But there are not a few who go
under that name, though they have no connexion with us;
yea, though they cordially hate us as dreadful heretics, for
believing that “God willeth all men to be saved;” who hate the
King and all his Ministers only less than they do an Arminian;
and who speak all manner of evil of them in private, if not in
public too.” But suffer me to ask, Is this well done? Is it
gratitude 7 Is it prudence? In the name of wonder, what
could His Majesty have done for you which he has not done?
What would you have? Can you tell? What can you desire
more than you have already? Have you not full liberty of
conscience in every respect, without any shadow of restraint?
In what other nation under the sun is such religious liberty
to be found? Have you not full liberty, with regard to your
life, to your person, and to your goods? In what other country
upon earth is such civil liberty to be found? If you are not
thankful to God and the King for these blessings, you are
utterly unworthy of them. Is it prudence to speak in so bitter
and contemptuous a manner of such Governors as God has
given you? What, if by the bitterness of your spirit, the
acrimony of your language, and the inflammatory libels which
you spread abroad, you could carry your point, unhinge the
present Government, and set up another in its stead what
would you gain thereby? Would another Government allow
you more liberty than you now enjoy? Could they give you
a more unbounded liberty of conscience? It is impossible !
Would they give you a larger measure of civil liberty? They
could not if they would. And certainly they would not give
you the liberty of railing at your Governors, and stirring up
your fellow-subjects against them. If you did this, you
* But many of them are of a better mind.
would not only lose your goods, but probably your life also.
On the other hand, what if the present Government should
continue in spite of all your disloyal practices! have you any
assurance, have you any reason to believe, that our Governors
will always be so patient? Nay, undoubtedly, when things
of greater moment are settled, they will find a time for you.
Your present behaviour will then be remembered; perhaps
not altogether to your advantage. It is not the ignorance
but the wisdom of your Governors which occasions their
present silence. And if you go on thus, be assured, sooner
or later, you will meet with your reward. There is no need
that the King should do anything: He needs only not to
restrain; that is enough: There are those on every side who
are now ready to swallow you up. You will then wish you
had been wise in time, when your wisdom comes too late;
when the King of kings “laughs at your calamity, and
mocks while your fear cometh.”
To
FRIENDs AND CountRYMEN,
I would fain lay a few plain considerations before you,
before all men of candour and common sense, who are not so
totally swallowed up of prejudice as to be incapable of hearing
reason. I beg you to weigh the matter calmly; not to be
overborne by noisy or wordy men, but to use your own senses,
your own eyes and ears, and your own understanding. Do not
run away (as many do) with part of a story; but hear the
whole, and then judge. Have patience to lay all circumstances
together, and then you may form a just judgment.
ThE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND, 141
A solemn inquiry was lately made concerning the state of
the nation. If such an inquiry were properly made, so that
the real state of the nation might be clearly and distinctly
shown, it might be attended with excellent consequences.
It might enable the legislative power to redress or prevent
numerous evils. And it might lead those who conduct public
affairs to take the most effectual measures for promoting the
solid and lasting welfare of all their fellow-subjects.
On the other hand, if such an inquiry were improperly
made, and consequently the state of the nation misrepre
sented,--if it were represented as far worse than it really is,
--exceeding bad consequences might follow. It would
naturally tend to disturb, to frighten, to discourage the
people. It would tend to depress and sour their spirits, to
embitter them against others, and to make them disaffected
to His Majesty, and all that act under him. It would make
them utterly unthankful to God, for all the blessings that
surround them; the ready way to weaken our hands and
strengthen the hands of our common enemies.
Should not then an inquiry of so important a nature be
made with the greatest accuracy? And in order to this,
should not the question be stated with all possible exactness?
But in a late inquiry, I cannot find that the question was
stated at all. The inquirers jumped into the middle of it at
once, in defiance of all logic and common sense. “The state
of the nation” is a very vague and indeterminate expression;
so indeterminate, that, if the meaning of the phrase be not
fixed before the inquiry concerning it is begun, men of elo
quence may make vehement speeches, of two or three hours
long, while neither the speakers nor the hearers know what they
are talking about. And speeches of this kind tend to inflame,
not to inform, our homest countrymen. They are calculated,
not to bring light, but fire; to raise the nation into a flame.
But to come to the point: You are desirous to inquire
concerning the state of the nation. But what is it you would
know concerning it? “Certainly, whether it be prosperous
or not?” In what respects? It may be prosperous in one
respect, and not so in another. Tell us coolly and distinctly,
what is the question? And what is it you would prove?
It is this: “Is not the nation ruined?” Ruined / What
can you mean? The great men of another nation asked the
King, “Knowest thou not that Egypt is destroyed?” How
was it destroyed? Why, all the cattle of Egypt were killed
by the murrain. And not only all the flax and corn, all the
wheat and barley were consumed, but the locusts had devoured
every herb and leaf, and left no green thing in the land.
Countrymen, judge | Is England thus destroyed? Are all
our cattle killed? Have you no oxen, or cows, or sheep, or
swine?--no horses, mules, asses left? Whatever be the case
elsewhere, are not a few of them left alive in London? Is all
your corn destroyed? Look round upon the fields; is there no
green thing left? See with your own eyes. You do see, that
there is as fair a prospect, as has been for many years. I can
testify, that for more than half a century, there has not been
greater plenty, either of cattle or vegetables of every kind,
than there is at this day. England therefore is not destroyed.
“But is it not in the high road to destruction? What is its
present state? good or bad? increasing or decreasing?”
Increasing or decreasing, in what respects? I beg leave
to offer you, on this head, some of the most sensible remarks
I have seen on the subject, with some little variations and
additions:
“The state of the nation has respect to nine capital
articles; population, agriculture, manufactures; the land and
fresh-water carriage of goods, salt-water carriage of goods;
the state of our fisheries at home and abroad, the tendency
of our taxes, the clear amount of the revenue, and the
national debt. All of these, taken together, form that
complex idea which we call ‘the state of the nation.’
“In order therefore to know the state of the nation, we
should compare each of these articles, as they subsist at
present, with the like articles as they subsisted in some
former period, in order to see whether our national affairs
have gone backward or forward since that time. And what
time more proper than the year 1759?--that period of glory
and of conquest, when everything was supposed to go right,
as we are told that everything now goes wrong.”
1. “Im regard to population, it is to be feared that our
numbers have decreased since the year 1759.” This has been
boldly affirmed, and that over and over; yet I cannot allow it
by any means; and I have such opportunities of being informed
as few persons in England have; as I see almost all the large
towns in the kingdom, once in two years at least, and can there
fore make these inquiries on the spot, as minutely as I please.
We may allow, that within this time, twenty or thirty
thousand English soldiers have been sent abroad. Allow,
likewise, seventy or eighty thousand emigrants, from England
and Scotland only. Hereby there is a decrease of an hundred
thousand, within less than twenty years. I read likewise, in a
very beautiful Poem, of a “Deserted”--what? province?
county? metropolis ? No-‘‘Village,” somewhere on the
Wiltshire Downs! Yet not quite deserted; for a gentleman
who lives there informs me, he cannot learn it has had more
inhabitants within these hundred years than it has at this day.
I allow too, that some of the villages near the Land’s End
are less populous than formerly; but what is all this loss,
taken together, in comparison of the increase? I cannot but
think there has been, within twenty years, an increase of more
than an hundred thousand, in six cities and towns only; I
mean, in London, Bristol, Birmingham, Sheffield, Manchester,
and Liverpool. Do not you see with your eyes in all these
places, not only houses, but whole streets added continually?
And can any one persuade you, in the mean time, that there
is no increase of inhabitants? And yet some have wonder
fully affirmed that there is a decrease of inhabitants even in
London | Why do they not affirm, there is a decrease of
houses too? When I see one, I will believe the other.
And it is not only in cities and large towns, as some have
intimated, but even on commons, heaths, and mountains, yea,
all over the Peak of Derbyshire, that you may see little
houses (and many not very little) shooting up on every side.
And does not this denote an increase of people? Or are
they inhabited only by rats and mice? Considering these
things which I have seen with my own eyes, I cannot doubt
one moment but England has a million more inhabitants
than it had twenty years ago.
2. “As to agriculture, what was the state of it last year,
compared with the state of it in 1759? Has it advanced or
declined since that time? You may judge by considering a
very few particulars. Are your old farm-houses, barns, out
houses, tumbling down? And are no new ones erected? Are
your old enclosures, fences, drains, running to decay, and no
new ones making? Is there less land tilled and improved now,
than there was in 1759? Nay more, as is notoriously known,
by many hundred thousand acres. Are our farmers in general
grown poorer than heretofore? Are their stocks of hay and
144 A SERIOUS ADDRESS To
corn, of sheep, horses, and cattle diminished? Are they not
exceedingly increased ? I will add no more. Let those who
affirm we are on the brink of ruin show how greatly our
agriculture is decreased since the happy days of 17591’’
3. Again: Inquire, my friends, “In what respects and in
what degree have any of our manufactures declined of late?
Perhaps there is some decrease in a few branches, of weaving
in particular. And this must be in the nature of things, while
fashions are continually changing; so that a large demand for
this or that commodity cannot be expected to continue long
But is not this decrease in some branches amply compensated
by the increase in others? Let it be more particularly inquired,
Are the capital places less employed in manufactures, than they
were in 1759? Are there fewer buildings now in use for the
carrying on of great and extensive works? Are there fewer
warehouses and magazines, and fewer machines and engines
of every kind? How easily may you be convinced, that, in
every one of these articles, far from a decrease, there is a
very considerable increase, since the year 1759 |
4. “As to land and fresh-water carriage of goods, let any
of you inquire, Are there fewer public waggons on the roads
than there were formerly? And are there fewer roads fit for
waggons to travel on? If so, our trade decreases. Are there
fewer trows or barges employed on rivers and canals than there
were heretofore? If there are, we allow the decrease of these is
a sure sign of the decrease of trade. And, on the contrary,
the vast increase of these proves a proportionable increase of
it. ‘Are the rivers and canals fewer in these degenerate
times than in the year 1759?’” See, my friends, by this plain,
demonstrative proof, how sadly our trade is decreased !
And I cannot but observe, that arguments of this general
kind are abundantly more conclusive than any which are or
can be drawn from the case of particular persons. We
always find a considerable number of these, both in London
and elsewhere, who loudly complain of the decay of trade,
and the hardness of the times. What does this mean?
That “they themselves want business.” Perhaps they want
industry too. But these particular cases are of no weight,
opposed to those general considerations.
5. You may inquire next, with regard to “salt-water carriage
of goods. Is the quantity of British shipping decreased since
the year 1759? Are there fewer ships now employed in the
ThE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND. 145
coasting-trade? fewer in the Irish trade? or fewer for distant
voyages? Nay, have we fewer ship-carpenters, or fewer sail
makers at work? And do we build fewer or smaller ships
for merchants’ service than formerly?” The more particu
larly you inquire, the more clearly you will see how
immensely the nation has improved in this article.
But it is objected, “We have lost eight hundred of our
ships since the beginning of the war.” Perhaps so;
although you have no proof of this; for Lloyd's Catalogue is
no sufficient evidence. But how many have we taken?
This it is absolutely needful you should know, or you cannot
know whether we have lost or gained upon the whole. We
have taken above nine hundred. And the evidence of our
gain is at least as good as that of our loss.
“Nay, but we have also lost our Negro trade.” I would
to God it may never be found more ! that we may never
more steal and sell our brethren like beasts; never murder
them by thousands and tens of thousands ! O may this
worse than Mahometan, worse than Pagan, abomination, be
removed from us for ever ! Never was anything such a
reproach to England since it was a nation, as the having any
hand in this execrable traffic.
6. “The state of our fisheries at home and abroad forms
another important article of comparison. For as our ships of
war are our bulwarks, and our sailors are the proper guards
for defending such works, so it is of the utmost importance to
have always ready, for manning our fleets, a number of able
seamen. Now, these are most readily supplied by our fisheries.
And when were these in their most flourishing state? in
1759, or 1777? Were more British ships employed in the
fisheries on the banks of Newfoundland, or in the gulf of St.
Lawrence, or on the coasts of Labrador, then, than there are
now 7 Were there half as many? Again: Were there more
employed in the fisheries for whales, and fish to make oil?
Were there even half as many? As to the fisheries on our
own coasts, and on the coasts of Scotland and Ireland, can
any man deny that they have hugely increased during these
eighteen years? Indeed all our fisheries are now in a more
flourishing condition than ever they were before.” Allowing
then, that we have sustained some loss in Newfoundland,
what is this to the total gain? On this account, therefore, we
have no reason to talk of the “ruinous state of the nation.”
146 A SEIt IOUS ADDRESS TO
7. “As to the tendency of our taxes, having previously
observed, that the hands of the diligent and frugal are the only
hands which make a nation rich; I have then to ask, Do our
taxes in general, especially those which took place the last
year, tend to make the people diligent and frugal, or idle and
extravagant? Do they tend to promote industry, or obstruct
it? to turn bees into drones, or drones into bees? Of late
years we have made several excellent alterations in our taxes:
We have repealed that very injudicious tax which in a manner
prohibited the importing of butter, tallow, lard, and other
articles from Ireland. Hence the mutual intercourse between
the two kingdoms has prodigiously increased. Our shipping
and mavigation likewise have increased in the same proportion.
And so has the quantity of English goods and manufactures
exported thither. Does this show a decay of trade; or give
a just ground for our daily complaints and lamentations?
8. “The clear amount of the annual revenue is a matter
of fact, and capable of ocular demonstration. Now, let an
appeal be made to the proper accounts, which state the
amount of all the taxes of the year 1759; let these accounts
be compared with those of the year 1777, and you cannot
but see with your own eyes where the advantage lies; yea,
notwithstanding the loss of our tobacco-trade from Maryland
and Virginia, and notwithstanding the great failure of the
crops of sugar, as well as of cyder and perry.
9. “The last article is the national debt. And great it
undoubtedly is. Yet, comparatively speaking, it is not so
great now, as it was in 1759. For if the nation is now (as
has been clearly shown) very considerably richer, then it is
better able to bear an equal or a greater load of national
debt, than it was at that juncture.
“To illustrate this by a familiar instance: A private
trader, who has but an hundred pounds in the world, is
greatly in debt if he owes but twenty pounds; and is in
danger of stopping payment for want of cash, or of being
crushed by some wealthy rival. But if he has a thousand
pounds in stock, and owes two hundred, he is in far less
danger. And if he has ten thousand pounds stock, and owes
two thousand, he is in no danger; nay, he is a rich man.
“Not that I would encourage the running any farther in
debt. I only intend to show that our distresses, which raise
such tragical exclamations, are more imaginary than real.”
Thus far the Dean of Gloucester. And what can be more
fair and candid than these reasonings? What can be more
satisfactory to you who are of no party, but an honest inquirer
after truth? Perhaps you lately heard a strange, broken,
maimed account all on one side of the question, of debts
without any credits to balance ! And what could you learn
from this? Now you hear both sides, and thence may easily
see what is the real state of the nation. And how much
better is it, in all the preceding respects, than it was eighteen
years ago ! What becomes then of all those passionate
outcries concerning the “dreadful condition we are in,” when
it undeniably appears, to every candid inquirer, that we have
not been in so good a condition these fifty years! On how
totally insufficient grounds is the contrary supposition built !
“We have lost--near as many ships as we have taken | We
have been disturbed on the banks of Newfoundland; and we
can no longer sell our brethren like sheep, and pour out
their blood like water; therefore the nation is in a desperate
state; therefore we are on the brink of ruin l’’ And are
these the best arguments that can be found to support the
lamentable conclusion |
Now, my friends, give me leave to sum up briefly what has
been offered on the other side. And, I pray, observe the
difference; mark the firm and solid foundation whereon the
conclusion is built. The prosperous or adverse state of the
nation is to be judged of from the state of its population, its
agriculture, its manufactures, its land and fresh-water carriage
of goods, its salt-water carriage of goods, its fisheries, the
tendency of its taxes, its annual revenue, and the national debt.
But you have seen, that, in each of these particulars, considered
one by one, England is not in a worse but in a far better
state than it was eighteen years ago; so far from being on
the brink of ruin, that it is in a state of eminent prosperity.
Let none then deceive you with vain words ! Let none by
subtle reasonings, or by artful, elaborate harangues, persuade
you out of your senses. Let no sweet-tongued orator, by his
smooth periods, steal away your understanding; no thunder
ing talker fill you with vain fears of evils that have no being.
Be aware of all who (perhaps sincerely) strive to terrify you
with creatures of their own imagination. You are encom
passed with liberty, peace, and plenty: You see them on the
right hand and on the left. Let no man then cast a mist
before your eyes, and face you down that they are poverty
and slavery. Know the public as well as private blessings:
which you enjoy, and be thankful to God and man.
There is only one reason why we should fear: There is a
God that judgeth the earth. And as none can harm us if we
have Him for our friend, so none can help us if we have Him
for our enemy. Is it not wise then seriously to consider
this, Is God our friend or our enemy? But who thinks or
cares about it? Too many of us do not: God is not in all
our thoughts. I am afraid ignorance, yea, contempt, of God,
is the present characteristic of the English nation. A late
writer supposes it to be sloth and luxury; but I cannot
think so; because neither of these is peculiar to us; our
neighbours vie with us in both ; many of them are full as
slothful as us, and many of them are as luxurious. But
none can vie with us in this: There is no nation upon earth
that is cqually profane. Is there any people under heaven
that pays no more regard than we do to the Creator and
Governor of heaven and earth ? What nation (I do not say
in the Christian, but in the Mahometan or pagan, world)
uses his great and venerable name with so little ceremony?
In what country is there to be heard in so great abundance--
The horrid oath, the direful curse,
(That latest weapon of the wretch's war !)
And blasphemy, sad comrade of despair?
Comrade of despair / So it uses to be in other countries;
but in ours it is the comrade of mirth and jollity | We daily
curse and swear, and blaspheme the Most High, merely by
way of diversion, almost from the highest to the lowest.
Nobility, gentry, tradesmen, peasants, blaspheme the worthy
name whereby we are called, without provocation, without
remorse ! Sloth and luxury we allow are general among us;
but profaneness is well nigh universal. Whoever spends but
a few days in any of our large towns, will find abundant
proof, that senseless, shameless, stupid profaneness is the
true characteristic of the English nation.
Meantime we say, (in effect, if not in terms,) “Is there
knowledge in the Most High Tush, thou God carest not
for it.”
But are we sure of this? I doubt, he does: I doubt, if
this is still added to all the other instances of impiety, he will
soon say, “Shall I not visit for these things? Shall I not be
avenged on such a nation as this?” Let us be wise in time !
Let us be as wise, at least, as the inhabitants of Nineveh ;
let us make our peace with God, and then we may defy all
the men upon earth !
A nation God delights to bless,
Can all our raging foes distress,
Or hurt whom they surround?
Hid from the general scourge we are,
Nor see the bloody waste of war,
Nor hear the trumpet's sound.
O might we, Lord, the grace improve,
By labouring for the rest of love,
The soul-composing power !
Bless us with that internal peace,
And all the fruits of righteousness,
Till time shall be no more !
LoNDoN,
Feb. 20, 1778.
To
LIMERICK, May 10, 1778.
1. BEFoRE I left London (two or three months ago) a
general panic prevailed there. Some vehemently affirmed,
and others potently believed, that the nation was in a most
desperate state; that it was upon the very brink of ruin, past
all hopes of recovery. Soon after, I found that the same
panic had spread throughout the city of Bristol. I traced it
likewise wherever I went, in Gloucestershire, Worcestershire,
Staffordshire, Cheshire, and Lancashire. When I crossed
the Channel, I was surprised to find it had got before me to
Ireland; and that it was not only spread through Dublin
first, and thence to every part of Leinster, but had found its
way into Munster too, into Cork, Bandon, and Limerick: In
all which places people were terrifying themselves and their
neighbours, just as they did in London.
2. “How is it possible,” say they, “that we should contend
with so many enemies together? If General Washington
has (as Mr. Franklin of Limerick computes) sixty-five
thousand men; if the powerful fleet and numerous armies of
France are added to these; if Spain, in consequence of the
family compact, declares war at the same time; and if
Portugal join in confederacy with them, what will become of
us? Add to these the enemies of our own household, ready
to start up on every side; and when France invades us from
without, and these from within, what can follow but ruin and
destruction ?”
3. I would fain speak a word of comfort to my poor neigh
bours, that they may not be frightened to death. Perhaps,
my friends, things are not in altogether so desperate a situa
tion as you imagine. When I was at Cork last week, I con
versed largely with some persons who were just landed from
Philadelphia. I could thoroughly depend upon the account
they gave, as they had had full means of information, and.
had no possible interest to serve by misrepresenting anything.
The substance of their account was this: “In December,
General Washington had seventeen or eighteen thousand men
in his army. From that time thirty, forty, sometimes fifty
of them died in a day by a pestilential fever; and in two
months’ time, upwards of fifteen hundred deserted to General
Howe. So that many were inclined to believe he had not
when we came away much more than five thousand effective
men left.” Never fright yourselves, therefore, about General
Washington’s huge army, that melted away like snow in.
harvest. The English forces meantime are in perfect health,
(about sixteen thousand,) and have plenty of all things.
4. “But there are twenty or thirty thousand recruits to:
join him in a month or two; and what will General Howe do
then?” Just as he does now; he will regard any number of
them as much as he would so many sparrows. For what
could fifty thousand raw men do, that had never seen the face
of an enemy? especially when, by the tenure of their service,
they were only to stay in the army mine months? (The circum
stance concerning which General Washington so earnestly
expostulated with the Congress.) Will these dead-doing men,
do you think, be in haste to cut off all the old, weather-beaten
Englishmen? Otherwise they will not have made an end of
them, before the time comes for their returning home!
5. “But I do not believe the American army is in this
condition.” If you do not, I cannot help it. And you have
no more right to be angry at me for believing it, than I at
you for not believing it. Let each of us then, without
resentment or bitterness, permit the other to think for himself.
6. “O, but the French will swallow us up.” They will as
soon swallow up the sea. Pray, which way is it they are to
come at us, unless they can fly through the air? It is
certain our fleet, notwithstanding the shameless lies told to
the contrary, is now everyway in a better condition than it
ever was since England was a nation. And while we are
indisputably masters at sea, what can the French do but
gnash their teeth at us? “Nay, but Spain will join them.”
That is by no means clear. They have not forgot the
Havannah yet. But, if they do, we are well able to deal
with them both; full as able as we were the last war.
7. “Yea, but Portugal too will declare against us.” I do
not believe one word of it. The Portuguese (to say nothing
about their gratitude) are not such arrant fools; they under
stand their own interest better; they need no one to inform
them, that if the English were only to stand neuter, the
Spaniards would eat them up at a mouthful. They well know
the present war will not last always; and, in the end, either
England will prevail, or not. If it does not, if Spain prevail
over England, England cannot defend Portugal. If England
prevail over Spain, she will not. She will doubtless leave His
Most Faithful Majesty to receive the reward he has so justly
deserved from the fleet and army of his neighbour.
8. “But do not you know the French squadron is sailed
to assist them, with four thousand soldiers on board?” I really
do not, nor you neither; nor any man in Ireland. That they
are sailed, I know; but not whether to Africa, or Asia, or
America. But have they four thousand soldiers on board?
And is that all? I heard they were twelve thousand. But
in how many transports did they embark? We could not
hear of one. Where then were the soldiers to be put? in the
hold of the men-of-war, or on the shrouds? This story is
not well devised; it manifestly confutes itself. But suppose
twelve thousand are sailed, are they sure to land? Do they
command the winds and seas? And, if they do, are they sure
the English fleet will not speak with them by the way? If
they escape these, are they sure of landing without opposi
tion ? Is it certain that all our soldiers will stand meantime
with their fingers in their mouth? How great then is the
odds against the French ever joining the American army |
Although, if they did, there is no doubt but General Howe
would give a good account of them all.
9. “Why, to say the truth, we are not so much afraid of
Portugal or Spain, yea, or of France itself, as we are of those
intestine vipers, who are always ready to tear out their mother’s
bowels. And how should we defend ourselves against these, if
they made a general insurrection?” This is worth considering.
It is certain, it is undoubtedly plain, it is beyond all contradic
tion, if they gave a large dose of laudanum to all His Majesty’s
liege subjects; if every man, woman, and child in the four pro
vinces fell fast asleep all at once; if they all continued to sleep
till the insurgents had brought their matters to bear in every
city and town in the kingdom; if then the conspirators came all
in the same hour, and cut off their heads at a stroke; the nation
certainly, without all doubt, would be in a very fearful condi
tion | But till this is the case, you need no more be afraid
of ten thousand White Boys, than of ten thousand crows.
10. There is no need at present that an handful of men
should oppose themselves to a multitude. Blessed be God,
there are still within the kingdom some thousands of regular
troops, of horse as well as foot, who are ready to march
wherever they shall be wanted; over and above the inde
pendent companies at Birr, at Mountmellick, at Bandon, and
at Cork; at which city alone no less than six of these
companies are formed already; which it is supposed, when
they shall be completed, will contain at least two thousand
men. And as they exercise themselves every day, they are
already expert in the whole military exercise. So that were
any so mad as to attempt making an insurrection, it would
be crushed in its very infancy.
11. “But is there not another ground of fear? Is there
not ‘a God that judgeth the earth?’ And have not England
and Ireland (to speak in the language of Scripture) “filled
up the measure of their iniquity?’” I answer, (1.) I allow
that wickedness of various kinds has overspread the land like
a flood. It would be easy to enlarge upon this melancholy
truth; it cannot be denied that,
Th E 1NHABITANTS OF IRELAND. 153
The rich, the poor, the high, the low,
Have wander'd from his mild command:
The floods of wickedness o'erflow,
And deluge all the guilty land:
People and Priest lie drown'd in sin,
And Tophet yawns to take them in.
But yet, (2.) I totally deny that either England or Ireland
have yet “filled up the measure of their iniquities.” “Why,
what have they not done? What abomination can be
named or conceived which they have not committed?” I
will tell you: They have not done what was done of old,
before God delivered up the Jews to destruction. They have
not “shed the blood of the just in the midst of Jerusalem.”
Neither in London, Dublin, nor any other of our cities, has
there been any instance of the kind. To which of our
Governors in either England or Ireland can those words of
our Lord be applied ? “Behold, I send unto you Prophets;
and some of them ye will kill; and some of them ye will
scourge, and persecute from city to city. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee!” (Matt. xxiii. 34, &c.) Now, neither
England nor Ireland has done this, at least during the
present century. Therefore, it cannot be affirmed that they
have “filled up the measure of their iniquities.” Conse
quently we have no reason to believe that our Lord will yet
say, “Behold, your house is left unto you desolate 1”
12. I have another reason to believe that God will yet have
compassion upon a sinful land: What was it which he said
of old time to Abraham interceding for guilty Sodom? “I
will not destroy the city, if there be fifty, twenty, yea, ten
righteous men found in it.” And are there not ten, twenty,
fifty righteous men to be found in our Sodom? Dare you
affirm, or have you reason to believe, that there are only
twenty hundred? And will God “destroy the righteous
with the wicked! Shall not the Judge of all the earth do
right?” Besides, will not all these righteous men wrestle
with God for their people and nation? And does he not
hear the prayer?
Let Moses in the spirit groan,
And God cries out, Let me alone !
Let me alone, that all my wrath
May rise the wicked to consume :
While Justice hears thy praying faith
It cannot seal the sinner's doom.
My Son is in my servant's prayer,
And Jesus forces me to spare.
13. I add but one reason more, why we may rationally
hope that these kingdoms, sinful as they are, will not yet be
given up to destruction. Religion, true, scriptural religion,
the love of God and our neighbour, inviting men to avoid
evil and to do good, to practise justice, mercy, and truth, is
not decreasing thereim; no, it is continually increasing in
every part of the kingdom; as an impartial inquirer cannot
but observe, whether he turn east, west, north, or south.
Now, I know no instance in all history, from the earliest
ages to this day, of the Governor of the world delivering up
a kingdom to destruction, while religion was increasing in it.
I believe no such instance can be found. And indeed it
seems to be totally inconsistent with his wisdom and good
ness, and with the rules whereby He hath governed all
nations from the beginning of the world. Fear him there
fore with a filial fear; and you need fear nothing but him.
In this sense also, one thing is needful,--the making God
your friend. And when we have “a conscience void of
offence towards God and towards man,” we may say with
boldness, “The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob
is our refuge: Therefore will we not fear, though the earth
be moved, and though the hills be carried into the depth of
the sea. The flood thereof shall make glad the city of God,
the holy place of the tabernacle of the Most High.”
1. It is impossible to answer this question before it is
understood. We must, First, therefore endeavour to under
stand it; and then it will be easy to answer.
2. There is a plain command in the Bible, “Thou shalt
not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.” But notwith
standing this, many that are called religious people speak evil
of him continually. And they speak many things that are
palpably false; particularly when they affirm him to be a
MINISTER TO PREACII Politics? 155
weak man; whereas a Nobleman, who is not at all prejudiced
in his favour, when he was pressed to speak, made this honest
declaration: “Sir, I know him well; and I judge the King
to be one of the most sensible men in Europe. His Ministers
are no fools; but His Majesty is able to wind them all round
his finger.”
3. Now, when a Clergyman comes into a place where this
and many more stories, equally false, have been diligently
propagated against the King, and are generally believed, if
he guards the people against this evil-speaking, by refuting
those slanders, many cry out, “O, he is preaching politics!”
4. If you mean this by the term, it is the bounden duty of
every Christian Minister to preach politics. It is our bounden
duty to refute these vile aspersions, in public as well as in
private. But this can be done only now and then, when it
comes naturally in our way. For it is our main and constant
business to “preach Jesus Christ, and him crucified.”
5. Again: Many who do not so freely censure the King,
speak all manner of evil of his Ministers. If any misfortune
befals us at home or abroad, by sea or land, it is “all their
fault.” If one commander in America is surprised with all
his forces when he is dead drunk, “Lord North deserves to
be hanged.” If General Burgoyne or Lord Cornwallis is
betrayed into their enemy’s hand, all the blame is laid on our
Ministers at home. But still the King is wounded through
their sides; the blame glances from them to him. Yet if we
say a word in defence of them, (which is in effect defending
him,) this also is preaching politics.
6. It is always difficult and frequently impossible for private
men to judge of the measures taken by men in public offices.
We do not see many of the grounds which determine them to
act in this or the contrary manner. Generally, therefore, it
behoves us to be silent, as we may suppose they know their
own business best; but when they are censured without any
colour of reason, and when an odium is cast on the King by
that means, we ought to preach politics in this sense also; we
ought publicly to confute those unjust censures: Only remem
bering still, that this is rarely to be done, and only when fit
occasion offers; it being our main business to preach “repent
ance towards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.”
LEw Isua M, January 9, 1782.
1. SoME years ago an ingenious man published a treatise
with this title. According to him, the characteristics of the
English at present are sloth and luxury. And thus much we
may allow, that neither the one nor the other ever abounded
in England as they do at this day. With regard to sloth, it
was the constant custom of our ancestors to rise at four in the
morning. This was the stated hour, summer and winter, for
all that werc in health. The two Houses of Parliament met
“at five;” hord quintá antemeridianá, says their Journal.
But how is it with people of fashion now? They can hardly
huddle on their clothes before eight or nine o'clock in the
morning; perhaps some of them not before twelve. And
when they are risen, what do they do?
They waste away
In gentle inactivity the day.
How many are so far from working with their hands, that
they can scarce set a foot to the ground ! How many, even
young, healthy men, are too lazy either to walk or ride :
They must loll in their carriages day by day; and these can
scarce be made easy enough ! And must not the minor
Gentry have their coaches too? Yea, if they only ride on
the outside. See here the grand cause (together with intem
perance) of our innumerable nervous complaints | For how
imperfectly do either medicines or the cold bath supply the
place of exercise ! without which the human body can no
more continue in health than without sleep or food.
2. We allow likewise the abundant increase of luxury, both
in meat, drink, dress, and furniture. What an amazing profu
sion of food do we see, not only at a Nobleman's table, but at
an ordinary city entertainment; suppose of the Shoemakers’
or Tailors’ Company | What variety of wines, instead of the
AN ESTIMATE OF THE MANNERs, &c. 157
good, home-brewed ale, used by our forefathers! What
luxury of apparel, changing like the moon, in the city and
country, as well as at Court ! What superfluity of expensive
furniture glitters in all our great men's houses ! And luxury
naturally increases sloth, unfitting us for exercise either of
body or mind. Sloth, on the other hand, by destroying the
appetite, leads to still farther luxury. And how many does
a regular kind of luxury betray at last into gluttony and
drunkenness; yea, and lewdness too of every kind; which
indeed is hardly separable from them !
3. But allowing all these things, still this is not a true estimate
of the present manners of the English nation. For whatever is
the characteristic of a nation, is, First, universal, found in all
the individuals of it, or at least in so very great a majority, that
the exceptions are not worth regarding. It is, Secondly, con
stant, found not only now and then, but continually, without
intermission; and, Thirdly, peculiar to that nation, in contra
distinction to all others. But neither luxury nor sloth is either
universal or constant in England, much less peculiar to it.
4. Whatever may be the case of many of the Nobility and,
Gentry, (the whole body of whom are not a twentieth part of
the nation,) it is by no means true, that the English in
general, much less universally, are a slothful people. There
are not only some Gentlemen, yea, and Noblemen, who are.
of the ancient stamp, who are patterns of industry in their
calling to all that are round about them, but it is undeniable
that a vast majority of the middle and lower ranks of people
are diligently employed from morning to night, and from the
beginning to the end of the year. And indeed those who
are best acquainted with other nations, will not scruple to
testify, that the bulk of the English are at this day as diligent
as any people in the universe.
5. Neither is sloth the constant, any more than the
universal, character of the English nation. Upon many
occasions even those that are most infected with it arise and
shake themselves from the dust. Witness the behaviour of
those of the highest rank, when they were engaged in war.
Did any one charge sloth on the late Duke of Marlborough,
or the Marquis of Granby ? Witness the behaviour of many
eminent men in the militia, setting an example to all their
troops ' Yea, some of them were neither afraid nor ashamed
to march on foot at the head of their men
6. Least of all is sloth peculiar to the English nation. Is
there no such thing even in Holland? Is there none in
Germany? Certainly there is enough of it, and to spare, in
every part of France; and yet there is a more abundant
harvest of it both in Italy, Spain, and Portugal: So utterly
void of truth is that assertion, that sloth is the present
characteristic of the English nation |
7. Neither is luxury. For it is not universal, no, nor
general. The food which is used by nine-tenths of our mation
is (as it ever was) plain and simple. A vast majority of the
nation, if we take in all the living souls, are not only strangers
to gluttony and drunkenness, but to delicacy either of meat
or drink. Neither do they err in quantity any more than in
quality, but take what nature requires, and no more.
8. And as luxury in food is not universal in England, so
neither is luxury in apparel. Thousands in every part of the
kingdom are utterly guiltless of it. Whether by choice or
necessity, their dress is as plain as their food; and so is
their furniture. We may farther affirm, that even lewdness
is not yet universal in England; although we are making
swift advances toward it, by playhouses, masquerades, and
pantheons.
9. And even where luxury in food and dress is most
prevalent, yet it is not constant. Both the one and the other
are laid aside, at particular seasons, even by Gentlemen and
Noblemen. How many of these are, in time of war, regard
less both of food and apparel! Yea, what a contempt of both
did they show even during the shadow of war, while they lay
cncamped in various parts of the kingdom !
10. Neither is luxury peculiar to the English nation.
What is our luxury in dress to that of the French 7 And
luxury in food is carried to as great a height even in
Germany; and to a much greater in France: The French
scorn to stand on a level herein with the dull Germans. In
the northern kingdoms, too, there are as many gluttons as in
ours, and at least as many drunkards. And as to the basest
branch of luxury, if we may give credit to eye-witnesses, (I
cite Dr. Johnson in particular, and Lady Mary Wortley
Montague,) what is all the lewdness of London, to that of
Vienna, Paris, Rome, and all the large cities of Italy?
English ladies are not attended by their cicisbys yet; nor
would any English husband suffer it. So that, bad as we
are, we are sober and temperate, yea, and modest, in com
parison of our neighbours.
11. But if sloth and luxury are not, what is the present
characteristic of the English nation?
It is ungodliness. This is at present the characteristic of
the English nation. Ungodliness is our universal, our
constant, our peculiar character.
I do not mean Deism; the not assenting to revealed
religion. No ; a Deist is a respectable character, compared
to an ungodly man. But by ungodliness I mean, First, a
total ignorance of God; Secondly, a total contempt of him.
12. And, First, a total ignorance of God is almost universal
among us. The exceptions are exceeding few, whether among
the learned or unlearned. High and low, cobblers, tinkers,
hackney-coachmen, men and maid servants, soldiers, sailors,
tradesmen of all ranks, Lawyers, Physicians, Gentlemen,
Lords, are as ignorant of the Creator of the world as Maho
metans or Pagans. They look up to that “brave o'er-hanged
firmament, fretted with golden fires;” they see the moon
walking in brightness, the sum on his meridian throne; they
look round on the various furniture of the earth, herbs,
flowers, trees, in all their beauty; and coolly ascribe all to
nature, without having any idea affixed to the word. Should
you seriously ask them, What is nature? they know not how
to answer. Perhaps they will say, “Why, it is the course of
things, that always was and always will be.” Always was
Then you assert that the present course of things was from
eternity. If so, the world is eternal; either then there are
two eternals, or there is no God |
13. So much the good people of England in general know
of God their Creator ! And high and low, from the meanest
peasant to the gayest butterfly at court, know just as much of
God their Governor. They know not, they do not in the
least suspect, that he governs the world he has made; that
he is the supreme and absolute Disposer of all things both in
heaven and earth. A poor Heathen (though a Consul, a Prime
Minister) knew Deorum providentid cuncta geri; that “the
providence of God directs all things.” Providence What
is that? Do you know anything about it? “Yes, I do; I
never denied a general Providence.” A general Providence/
What do you mean? What is a general that includes no
particulars? What is a whole that does not contain any
parts? It is a self-contradiction, it is arrant nonsense. Either,
therefore, allow a particular providence, or do not pretend to
believe any providence at all. If you do not believe that the
Governor of the world governs all things in it, small and
great; that fire and hail, snow and vapour, wind and storm,
fulfil his word; that he rules kingdoms and cities, fleets and
armies, and all the individuals whereof they are composed;
(and yet without forcing the wills of men, or necessitating
any of their actions;) do not affect to believe that he governs
anything, or has anything to do in the world. No; be con
sistent with yourself: Say that, as nature produced, so chance
governs, all things. At least, if you must, for decency’s sake,
acknowledge a kind of God, maintain that,
Since he gave things their beginning,
And set this whirligig a-spinning,
he left it, and everything therein, to spin on in its own way.
14. Whether this is right or no, it is almost the universal
sentiment of the English nation. And if high and low are so
totally ignorant of God their Governor, are they likely to
know any more of God their Redeemer, or of God their
Judge, who will shortly reward every man according to his
works? In very deed, God is not in all their thoughts; they
do not think of him from morning to night. Whether they
are forming particular or national schemes, God has no place
therein. They do not take God into their account; they
can do their whole business without him; without considering
whether there be any God in the world; or whether he has
any share in the management of it.
15. And whatever be the event of their undertakings,
whether they have good or ill success, they do not suppose
God to have any part either in the one or the other. They
take it for granted, that the race is to the swift, and the battle
to the strong. Therefore, if things succeed well, they give
no praise to God, but to the conduct of their General and the
courage of their men. And if they succeed ill, they do not
see the hand of God, but impute all to natural causes.
16. The English in general, high and low, rich and poor,
do not speak of God. They do not say anything about Him,
from day to day, from week to week, from year to year.
They talk of anything beside; they are not so squeamish as
the old poet, who would not spend his breath in talking
De villis domibusve alienis;
Nec male necne Lepos saltet.*
We talk indifferently on everything that comes in the way;
on everything--but God. If any one were to name him in
good company, with any degree of seriousness, suppose at a
Gentleman or Nobleman's table, would not they all stand
aghast? Would not a profound silence ensue, till some one
started a more agreeable subject?
17. Again: A vast majority of the English live in the
constant neglect of the worship of God. To form a judgment
of this, you may take a specimen in the good city of London.
How few of the inhabitants worship God in public, even one
day in a week! Do not yet fewer of them make a conscience
of worshipping God in their families? And perhaps they
are a still smaller number that daily worship God in their
closets. Such, if we acknowledge the truth, is the general,
constant ungodliness of the English nation |
18. But negative ungodliness (so to speak) is the least
exceptionable part of our character. Proceed wc then to the
positive ungodliness, which overflows every part of our land.
The first branch of this positive ungodliness, and such as
shows an utter contempt of God, is perjury. And to this the
common people are strongly tempted in our public Courts
of Justice, by the shocking manner wherein oaths are
usually administered there, contrary to all sense and decency.
Forty years ago, (and perhaps it may be so still,) when an
oath was administered in the Court of Savannah in Georgia,
the Judge with all on the bench rose up, and stood uncovered
while it was administering; and Done moved his foot, or
uttered a word, till they sat down again. Has not every
English Judge power to introduce the same solemnity into
every court where he presides? Certainly he has. And
if he does not exert that power, he is inexcusable before
God and man.
19. Till this is done, our shameless manner of administering
oaths will increase the constant perjuries in our nation.
They are farther increased by our multiplying oaths to such
an amazing degree; and that on the slightest occasions.
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“How fine this house, or that estate;
How great a favourite dancer's skill,
Whether he caper well or ill.”-EDIT.
Hence perjury infects the whole nation. It is constant, from
month to month, from year to year. And it is a glory which
no nation divides with us; it is peculiar to ourselves. There
is nothing like it to be found in any other (Christian or
Heathen) nation under heaven.
20. To descend to particulars would be tedious: Suffice it
to observe in general, there are exceeding few Justices of
the Peace, Mayors of Corporations, Sheriffs, Constables, or
Churchwardens; exceeding few Officers of the Customs, the
Excise, or any public office whatever, who are not constantly
perjured, taking oaths which they never intend to keep.
Add to these, thousands, yea, myriads of the voters at
elections, particularly for members of Parliament: Add thou
sands of the students in each University, who swear to a
book of statutes, which they never read, which most of them
never design to read, and much less to observe: Then judge,
whether there be any nation on the face of the earth, which
can vie with the English in perjury !
21. There is one other species of ungodliness, which is, if
possible, still more general among us; which is also constant,
being to be heard in every street every day in the year; and
which is quite peculiar to our nation, to England, and
its dependencies; namely, the stupid, senseless, shameless
ungodliness of taking the name of God in vain. Where in
the habitable world do the people so continually pray the
great God to “damn their souls?” Where else do they so
blaspheme the Majesty of Heaven? so idly swear by the
name of God? Some wretched gentlemen (so called) set
the example, which the small vulgar readily follow. And
these curses and oaths they pour out wantonly, without any
provocation; and desperately, without any remorse. Let
those who are acquainted with ancient and modern history
say, whether there is or ever was any heathen nation,
wherein such a total contempt of God, such horrid ungodli
ness, so generally and constantly prevailed !
22. See then, Englishmen, what is the undoubted charac
teristic of our nation; it is ungodliness. True, it was not
always so: For many ages we had as much of the fear of
God as our neighbours. But in the last age, many who
were absolute strangers to this, made so large a profession
of it, that the nation in general was surfeited, and, at the
Restoration, ran headlong from one extreme to the other.
It was then ungodliness broke in upon us as a flood; and
when shall its dire waves be stayed ?
23. Countrymen, is ungodliness any honour to our nation?
Let men of reason judge. Is this outraging the Greatest
and Best of beings, a thing honourable in itself? Surely
you cannot think so. Does it gain us any honour in the
eyes of other nations? Nay, just the contrary. Some of
them abhor the very name of Englishmen, others despise us,
on this very account. They look upon us as monsters,
hardly worthy to be ranked among human creatures.
24. Ye men of candour, say, does this ungodliness bring
any real advantage to our nation? Innumerable advantages
we enjoy; but might we not have them without discarding
the fear of God? Might we not prosper as well, both by
sea and land, if we did not set God at open defiance? if we
did not so continually affront him to his face, and dare him
to do his worst? If He has not left chance to govern the
world, and if he is really stronger than men, will not our
affairs go on better if God is our friend, than if he is our
enemy? Is God an enemy to be despised? Rather, is
there not reason in those words of the old warrior:
Non me tua fervida terrent
Dicta, ferow; Dii me terrent et Jupiter hostis f*
We have had excellent, well-appointed fleets; we have had
numerous veteran armies. And what have they done?
Have we not more and more reason to make that melancholy
exclamation,
Heu, nihil invitis fas quenquam fidere Divis 1 +
25. Can you believe, that our total ignorance of God, and
our general contempt of Him, who, whether men will acknow
ledge it or no, has still all power in heaven and in earth, can
be well pleasing to him? We need not care for all the
fervida dicta, all the rodomontades, of France and Spain.
But if the Lord of the universe is against us, ought we not
* This quotation from Virgil is thus translated by Pitt -
“Not those insulting empty vaunts I dread;
No ; but the gods with fear my bosom move,
And he, my greatest foe, almighty Jove.”-EDIT.
+ This quotation from the same poet is thus translated by Pitt:
“But, Heaven against us, all attempts must fail.”-EDIT.
to care? unless we are very sure that our fleets and armies:
can prevail against Him ! Otherwise, would it be any
disgrace to humble ourselves, not to man, but to God? to
use every means to secure Him for our friend, now all our
other friends have failed us? Then, admitting “there is no
other that fighteth for us, but only thou, O God,” yet shall
none be able to hurt us, but peace and every other blessing
shall return both to us and to our colonies.
“Remember the Sabbath-day, to keep it holy.”
HAve you forgotten who spoke these words? Or do you.
set Him at defiance? Do you bid Him do his worst?
Have a care. You are not stronger than He. “Let the
potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth; but woe
unto the man that contendeth with his Maker. He sitteth
on the circle of the heavens; and the inhabitants of the earth,
are as grashoppers before him !”
“Six days shalt thou do all manner of work. But the
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.” It is not
thine, but God’s day. He claims it for his own. He always.
did claim it for his own, even from the beginning of the
world. “In six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and
rested the seventh day. Therefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath-day and hallowed it.” He hallowed it; that is, he
made it holy; He reserved it for his own service. He
appointed, that as long as the sun or the moon, the heavens.
and the earth, should endure, the children of men should
spend this day in the worship of Him who “gave them life
and breath and all things.”
Shall a man then rob God? And art thou the man?
Consider, think what thou art doing! Is it not God who
giveth thee all thou hast? Every day thou livest, is it not
his gift? And wilt thou give him none? Nay, wilt thou
deny him what is his own already? IIe will not, he cannot,
‘quit his claim. This day is God’s. . It was so from the
beginning. It will be so to the end of the world. This he
cannot give to another. O “render unto God the things
that are God's,” now; “to-day, while it is called to-day!”
For whose sake does God lay claim to this day? for his
sake, or for thine? Doubtless, not for his own. He needeth
..not thee, nor any child of man. “Look unto the heavens
and see, and behold the clouds which are higher than thou.
If thou sinnest, what doest thou against Him? If thy
transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto Him?
If thou art-righteous, what givest thou Him? Or what
receiveth. He of thine hand?” For thy own sake, therefore,
God thy Maker doeth this. For thy own sake he calleth
thee to serve him. For thy own sake He demands a part of
thy time to be restored to Him that gave thee all. Acknow
ledge his love. Learn, while thou art on earth, to praise the
King of Heaven. Spend this day as thou hopest to spend
that day which never shall have an end.
The Lord not only hallowed the Sabbath-day, but he hath
also blessed it. So that you are an enemy to yourself. You
throw away your own blessing, if you neglect to “keep this
day holy.” It is a day of special grace. The King of heaven
now sits upon his mercy-seat, in a more gracious manner
than on other days, to bestow blessings on those who observe
it. If you love your own soul, can you then forbear laying
hold on so happy an opportunity? Awake, arise, let God
give thee his blessing ! Receive a token of his love! Cry to
him that thou mayest find the riches of his grace and mercy
in Christ Jesus ! You do not know how few more of these
days of salvation you may have. And how dreadful would it
be, to be called hence in the abuse of his proffered mercy!
O what mercy hath God prepared for you, if you do not
trample it under foot! “What mercy hath He prepared for
them that fear Him, even before the sons of men l’” A peace
which the world cannot give; joy, that no man taketh from
you; rest from doubt and fear and sorrow of heart; and love,
the beginning of heaven. And are not these for you? Are
they not all purchased for you by Him who loved you, and
gave himself for you? for you, a sinner? you, a rebel against
God? you, who have so long crucified him afresh? Now
“look unto Him whom you have pierced !” Now say, Lord,
it is enough. I have fought against thee long enough. I
yield, I yield. “Jesus, Master, have mercy upon me!”
On this day, above all, cry aloud, and spare not, to the
“God who heareth prayer.” This is the day he hath set
apart for the good of your soul, both in this world and that
which is to come. Never more disappoint the design of his
love, either by worldly business or idle diversions. Let not a
little thing keep you from the house of God, either in the
forenoon or afternoon. And spend as much as you can of
the rest of the day, either in repeating what you have heard,
or in reading the Scripture, or in private prayer, or talking
of the things of God. Let his love be ever before your eyes.
Let his praise be ever in your mouth. You have lived many
years in folly and sin; now, live one day unto the Lord.
Do not ask any more, “Where is the harm, if, after
Church, I spend the remainder of the day in the fields, or in
a public-house, or in taking a little diversion?” You know
where is the harm. Your own heart tells you so plain, that
you cannot but hear. It is a base mis-spending of your
talent, and a bare-faced contempt of God and his authority.
You have heard of God’s judgments, even upon earth,
against the profaners of this day. And yet these are but as
drops of that storm of “fiery indignation, which will” at
last “consume his adversaries.”
Glory be to God who hath now given you a sense of
this. You now know, this was always designed for a day
of blessing. May you never again, by your idleness or
profaneness, turn that blessing into a curse ! What folly,
what madness would that be | And in what sorrow and
anguish would it end For yet a little while, and death will
close up the day of grace and mercy. And those who
despise them now, will have no more Sabbaths, or sacra
ments, or prayers for ever. Then how will they wish to
recover that which they now so idly cast away! But all in
vain. For they will then “find no place for repentance,
though they should seek it carefully with tears.”
O my friend, know the privilege you enjoy. Now, “remem
ber the Sabbath-day, to keep it holy.” Your day of life and
of grace is far spent. The night of death is at hand. Make
haste to use the time you have; improve the last hours of
your day. Now provide “the things which make for your
peace,” that you may stand before the face of God for ever.
“Swear not at all,”
SAITH the Lord God of heaven and earth. Art thou without
God in the world? Hast thou no knowledge of God, no
concern about him? Is not God in all thy thoughts?
Dost thou believe there is a God? Where? in heaven
only? Nay, he filleth all in all I Am I a God at hand, saith
the Lord, and not a God afar off? Can any hide himself in
secret places that I shall not see him? Do not I fill heaven
and earth?
Whither wilt thou go then from his Spirit? Or whither
wilt thou flee from his presence? If thou go up into heaven,
God is there: If thou go down into hell, he is there also.
If thou take the wings of the morning, and remain in the
uttermost parts of the sea; even there his hand shall touch
thee, and his right hand shall hold thee.
God seeth thee now; his eyes are upon thee; he observes
all thy thoughts; he compasseth thy path; he counteth all
thy steps; he is 2cquainted with all thy ways; by him thy
actions are weighed; nor is there a word in thy tongue but
he knoweth it altogether.
And does not power belong unto God; yea, all power in
heaven and in earth? Is he not able, even while thou
readest or hearest these words, to crush thee into nothing?
Can he not just now crumble thee into dust; or bid the
earth open and swallow thee up? O do not set him at
nought ! do not provoke him thus I do not fly in his face!
Can he not, in a moment, cast forth his lightnings and tear
thee; shoot out his arrows and consume thee? What
hinders him from cutting thee off this instant; sending thee
now, now, quick into hell?
Would God do thee any wrong therein? What! in giving
thee the request of thy own lips? What words were those
thou spakest but now? Did not God hear? Why, thou
didst pray to God to send thee to hell ! Thou didst ask him
to damn thy soul! How, art thou in love with damnation?
Art thou in haste to dwell with everlasting burnings; to be
day and night tormented in that flame, without a drop of
water to cool thy tongue?
Dost thou pray for this? I pray God it may never be
either my lot or thine. Alas, my brother? What, if God
take thee at thy word ' What, if he say, Be it unto thee
even as thou wilt! What, if he give thee thy wish, and let
thee drop into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels!
I had rather thou shouldest go to the paradise of God.
Hadst not thou? Is not heaven better than hell? Art
thou not convinced of this in thy own conscience? Why,
then, amend thy prayer. Cry to God: “Save my soul, for
I have sinned against thee! Save me from all my sins.
Save me from all my evil words, and evil works; from my
evil tempers, and evil desires ! Make me holy as thou art
holy! Let me know thee, and love thee, and serve thee,
now and for ever !”
And is not God willing to do this? Surely he is; for
God loveth thee. He gave his only Son, that thou mightest
not perish, but have everlasting life. Christ died for thee;
and he that believeth on him hath everlasting life. Mark
that word,--he hath it. He hath it now. He hath the
beginning of heaven even upon earth; for his soul is filled
with the love of God; and the love of God is heaven. He
that truly believes on Jesus Christ hath a peace which earth
cannot give; his mind is always calm; he hath learned in
every state therewith to be content; he is always easy, quiet,
well-pleased; always happy, in life and in death; for a
believer is not afraid to die; he desires to be dissolved and
to be with Christ; he desires to quit this house of clay, and
to be carried by angels into Abraham’s bosom ; to hear the
voice of the archangel, and the trump of God, and to see the
Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven; to stand at his
right hand, and hear that word, (which I earnestly beg of
God you and I may hear,) “Come, ye blessed, receive the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world !”
1. ARE you a man! God made you a man; but you
make yourself a beast. Wherein does a man differ from a
beast? Is it not chiefly in reason and understanding? But
you throw away what reason you have. You strip yourself
of your understanding. You do all you can to make yourself
a mere beast; not a fool, not a madman only, but a swine, a
poor filthy swine. Go and wallow with them in the mire !
Go, drink on, till thy nakedness be uncovered, and shameful
spewing be on thy glory !
2. O how honourable is a beast of God’s making, compared
to one who makes himself a beast ! But that is not all. You
make yourself a devil. You stir up all the devilish tempers
that are in you, and gain others, which perhaps were not in
you; at least you heighten and increase them. You cause
the fire of anger, or malice, or lust, to burn seven times hotter
than before. At the same time you grieve the Spirit of God,
till you drive him quite away from you; and whatever spark of
good remained in your soul you drown and quench at once.
3. So you are now just fit for every work of the devil,
having cast off all that is good or virtuous, and filled your
heart with everything that is bad, that is earthly, sensual,
devilish. You have forced the Spirit of God to depart from
you; for you would take none of his reproof; and you have
given yourself up into the hands of the devil, to be led
blindfold by him at his will.
4. Now, what should hinder the same thing from befalling
you, which befel him who was asked, which was the greatest
sin, adultery, drunkenness, or murder; and which of the
three he had rather commit. He said drunkenness was the
least. Soon after, he got drunk; he then met with another
man's wife, and ravished her. The husband coming to help
her, he murdered him. So drunkenness, adultery, and
murder went together.
5. I have heard a story of a poor wild Indian, far wiser than
either him or you. The English gave him a cask of strong
liquor. The next morning he called his friends together, and,
setting it in the midst of them, said, “These white men have
given us poison. This man” (calling him by his name) “was
a wise man, and would hurt none but his enemies; but as
soon as he had drunk of this, he was mad, and would have
killed his own brother. We will not be poisoned.” He then
broke the cask, and poured the liquor upon the sand.
6. On what motive do you thus poison yourself? only for
the pleasure of doing it? What I will you make yourself a
beast, or rather a devil? Will you run the hazard of com
mitting all manner of villanies; and this only for the poor
pleasure of a few moments, while the poison is running down
your throat? O never call yourself a Christian : Never call
yourself a man You are sunk beneath the greater part of
the beasts that perish.
7. Do you not rather drink for the sake of company?
Do you not do it to oblige your friends? “For company,”
do you say? How is this? Will you take a dose of ratsbane
for company? If twenty men were to do so before you,
would not you desire to be excused ? How much more may
you desire to be excused from going to hell for company?
But, “to oblige your friends:” What manner of friends
are they who would be obliged by your destroying yourself?
who would suffer, may, entice you so to do? They are
villains. They are your worst enemies. They are just such
friends, as a man that would smile in your face, and stab you
to the heart.
8. O do not aim at any excuse ! Say not, as many do, “I
am no one’s enemy but my own.” If it were so, what a
poor saying is this, “I give none but my own soul to the
devil.” Alas! is not that too much? Why shouldest thou
give him thy own soul? Do it not. Rather give it to God.
But it is not so. You are an enemy to your King, whom
you rob hereby of an useful subject. You are an enemy to
your country, which you defraud of the service you might do,
either as a man or as a Christian. You are an enemy to
every man that sees you in your sin; for your example may
move him to do the same. A drunkard is a public enemy.
I should not wonder at all, if you was (like Cain of old) afraid
that “every man who meeteth you should slay you.”
9. Above all, you are an enemy to God, the great God of
heaven and earth; to him who surrounds you on every side,
and can just now send you quick into hell. Him you are
continually affronting to his face. You are setting him at
open defiance. O do not provoke him thus any more! Fear
the great God!
10. You are an enemy to Christ, to the Lord that bought
you. You fly in the face of his authority. You set at
nought both his sovereign power and tender love. You
crucify him afresh; and when you call him your Saviour,
what is it less than to “betray him with a kiss?”
11. O repent 1 See and feel what a wretch you are. Pray
to God, to convince you in your inmost soul. How often
have you crucified the Son of God afresh, and put him to an
open shame ! Pray that you may know yourself, inwardly
and outwardly, all sin, all guilt, all helplessness. Then cry
out, “Thou Son of David, have mercy upon me!” Thou
Lamb of God, take away my sins! Grant me thy peace.
Justify the ungodly. O bring me to the blood of sprinkling,
that I may go and sin no more, that I may love much,
having had so much forgiven I
1. WHITHER are you going? to heaven or hell? Do
you not know? Do you never think about it? Why do you
not? Are you never to die? Nay, it is appointed for all
men to die. And what comes after? Only heaven or heli.
Will the not thinking of death, put it farther off? No; n t
a day; not one hour. Or will your not thinking of hell,
save you from it? O no; you know better. And you know
that every moment you are nearer hell, whether you are
thinking of it or no; that is, if you are not nearer heaven.
You must be nearer one or the other.
2. I intreat you, think a little on that plain question, Are
you going toward heaven or hell? To which of the two does
this way lead? Is it possible you should be ignorant?
Did you never hear, that neither adulterers nor fornicators
shall inherit the kingdom ? that fornicators and adulterers.
God will judge? And how dreadful will be their sentence,
“Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the
devil and his angels!”
3. Surely you do not mock at the word of God! You
are not yet sunk so low as this. Consider then that awful
word, “Know ye not, that ye are the temples of God?”
Was not you designed for the Spirit of God to dwell in ?
Was not you devoted to God in baptism? But “if any
man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy.” O
do not provoke him to it any longer ! Tremble before the
great, the holy God!
4. Know you not, that your body is, or ought to be, the
temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you? Know you
not, that “you are not your own? for you are bought with a
price.” And, O how great a price! “You are not redeemed
with corruptible things, as silver and gold; but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and
without spot.” O when will you glorify God, with your
body and your spirit, which are God’s
5. Ah, poor wretch! How far are you from this? How
low are you fallen | You yourself are ashamed of what you
do. Are you not? Conscience, speak in the sight of God!
Does not your own heart condemn you at this very hour?
Do not you shudder at the condition you are in? Dare, for
once, to lay your hand upon your breast, and ask, “What
am I doing? And what must the end of these things be?”
Destruction both of body and soul.
6. Destruction of body as well as of soul / Can it be
otherwise? Are you not plunging into misery in this world,
as well as in the world to come? What have you brought
upon yourself already? what infamy? what contempt?
How could you now appear among those relations and
friends that were once so loved, and so loving to you?
What pangs have you given them? How do some of them
still weep for you in secret places? And will you not weep
for yourself, when you see nothing before you but want,
pain, diseases, death? O spare yourself! Have pity upon
your body, if not your soul! Stop! before you rot above
ground and perish !
7. Do you ask, What shall I do? First, sin no more.
First of all, secure this point. Now, this instant, now, escape
for your life; stay not; look not behind you. Whatever you
do, sin no more; starve, die, rather than sin. Be more
careful for your soul than your body. Take care of that too;
but of your poor soul first.
8. “But you have no friend; none at least that is able to
help you.” Indeed you have: One that is a present help in
time of trouble. You have a friend that has all power in
heaven and earth, even Jesus Christ the righteous. He
loved sinners of old; and he does so still. He then suffered
the publicans and harlots to come unto him. And one of
them washed his feet with her tears, and wiped them with
the hairs of her head. I would to God you were in her
place I Say, Amen Lift up your heart, and it shall be
done. How soon will he say, “Woman, be of good cheer;
thy sins, which are many, are forgiven thee. Go in peace.
Sin no more. Love much; for thou hast much forgiven.”
9. Do you still ask, But what shall I do for bread; for
food to eat, and raiment to put on? I answer, in the name
of the Lord God, (and, mark well ! His promise shall not
fail,) “Seek thou first the kingdom of God, and his righteous
ness; and all these things shall be added unto thee.”
Settle it first in your heart, Whatever I have or have not,
I will not have everlasting burnings. I will not sell my soul
and body for bread; better even starve on earth than burn
in hell. Then ask help of God. He is not slow to hear.
He hath never failed them that seek him. He who feeds the
young ravens that call upon him, will not let you perish for
lack of sustenance. He will provide, in a way you thought
not of, if you seek him with your whole heart. O let your
heart be toward him; seek him from the heart | Fear sin,
more than want, more than death. And cry mightily to
Him who bore your sins, till you have bread to eat that the
world knoweth not of; till you have angels' food, even the
love of God shed abroad in your heart; till you can say,
“Now I know that my Redeemer liveth, that he hath loved
me, and given himself for me; and though after my skin
worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God!”
I. “WHAT is smuggling?” It is the importing, selling, or
buying of run goods; that is, those which have not paid the
duty appointed by law to be paid to the King.
1. Importing run goods. All smuggling vessels do this
with an high hand. It is the chief, if not the whole, business
of these to bring goods which have not paid duty.
2. Next to these are all sea Captains, Officers, sailors, or
passengers, who import anything without paying the duty
which the law requires.
3. A third sort of smugglers are all those who sell anything
which has not paid the duty.
4. A fourth sort, those who buy tea, liquors, linen, hand
kerchiefs, or anything else which has not paid duty.
II. “But why should they not? What harm is there
in it 2 *
1. I answer, open smuggling (such as was common a few
years ago, on the southern coasts especially) is robbing on the
highway; and as much harm as there is in this, just so much
there is in smuggling. A smuggler of this kind is no honester
than an highwayman. They may shake hands together.
2. Private smuggling is just the same with picking of
pockets. There is full as much harm in this as in that. A
smuggler of this kind is no honester than a pickpocket.
These may shake hands together.
3. But open smugglers are worse than common highway
men, and private smugglers are worse than common pick
pockets. For it is undoubtedly worse to rob our father than
one we have no obligation to. And it is worse still, far
worse, to rob a good father, one who sincerely loves us, and
is at that very time doing all he can to provide for us and to
make us happy. Now, this is exactly the present case.
King George is the father of all his subjects; and not only
so, but he is a good father. He shows his love to them on
all occasions; and is continually doing all that is in his
power to make his subjects happy.
4. An honest man therefore would be ashamed to ask,
Where is the harm in robbing such a father? His own
reason, if he had any at all, would give him a speedy answer.
But you are a Christian,--are you not? You say you believe
the Bible. Then I say to you, in the name of God and in
the name of Christ, “Thou shalt not steal.” Thou shalt not
take what is not thine own, what is the right of another man.
But the duties appointed by law are the King's right, as
much as your coat is your right. He has as good a right to
them as you have to this: These are his property as much as
this is yours. Therefore you are as much a thief if you
take his duties, as a man is that takes your coat.
5. If you believe the Bible, I say to you, as our Saviour
said to them of old time, “Render unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God’s.”
If then you mind our Saviour's words, be as careful to
honour the King as to fear God. Be as exact in giving the
King what is due to the King, as in giving God what is due
to God. Upon no account whatever rob or defraud him of
the least thing which is his lawful property.
6. If you believe the Bible, I say to you, as St. Paul said
to the ancient Christians, “Render unto all their dues;” in
particular, “custom to whom custom is due, tribute to whom
tribute.” Now, custom is by the laws of England due to the
King; therefore every one in England is bound to pay it him.
So that robbing the King herein is abundantly worse than
common stealing, or common robbing on the highway.
7. And so it is on another account also; for it is a general
robbery: It is, in effect, not only robbing the King, but
robbing every honest man in the nation. For the more the
King's duties are diminished, the more the taxes must be
increased. And these lie upon us all; they are the burden,
not of some, but of all the people of England. Therefore
every smuggler is a thief-general, who picks the pockets both
of the King and all his fellow-subjects. He wrongs them all;
and, above all, the honest traders; many of whom he deprives
of their maintenance; constraining them either not to sell
their goods at all, or to sell them to no profit. Some of them
are tempted hereby, finding they cannot get bread for their
families, to turn thieves too. And then you are accountable
for their sin as well as your own; you bring their blood upon
your own head. Calmly consider this, and you will never
more ask what harm there is in smuggling.
III. 1. But for all this, cannot men find excuses for it?
Yes, abundance; such as they are. “I would not do this,”
says one, “I would not sell uncustomed goods, but I am
under a necessity: I cannot live without it.” I answer,
May not the man who stops you on the highway say the
very same? “I would not take your purse; but I am under
a necessity: I cannot live without it.” Suppose the case to
be your own; and will you accept of this excuse? Would
not you tell him, “Let the worst come to the worst, you had
better be honest, though you should starve.” But that need
not be, neither. Others who had no more than you to begin
with, yet find a way to live honestly; and certainly so may
you: However, settle it in your heart, “Live or die, I will
be an honest man.”
2. “Nay,” says another, “we do not wrong the King;
for he loses nothing by us. Yea, on the contrary, the King
is rather a gainer; namely, by the seizures that are made.”
So you plunder the King, out of stark love and kindness t
You rob him to make him rich ! It is true, you take away
his purse; but you put an heavier in its place | Are you
serious? Do you mean what you say? Look me in the
face, and tell me so. You cannot. You know in your own
conscience that what comes to the King out of all seizures
made the year round, does not amount to the tenth, no, not
to the hundredth, part of what he is defrauded of.
But if he really gained more than he lost, that would not
excuse you. You are not to commit robbery, though the
person robbed were afterwards to gain by it. You are not
to “do evil, that good may come.” If you do, your
“damnation is just.”
“But certainly,” say some, “the King is a gainer by it, or
he might easily suppress it.” Will you tell him which way?
by Custom-House Officers? But many of them have no
desire to suppress it. They find their account in its con
tinuance; they come in for a share of the plunder. But
what, if they had a desire to suppress it? They have not
the power. Some of them have lately made the experiment;
and what was the consequence? Why, they lost a great part
of their bread, and were in danger of losing their lives.
Can the King suppress smuggling by parties of soldiers?
That he cannot do. For all the soldiers he has are not enough
to watch every port and every creek in Great Britain. Besides,
the soldiers that are employed will do little more than the
Custom-House Officers. For there are ways and means to
take off their edge too, and make them as quiet as lambs.
“But many courtiers and great men, who know the
King’s mind, not only connive at smuggling, but practise it.”
And what can we infer from this? Only that those great
men are great villains. They are great highwaymen and
pickpockets; and their greatness does not excuse, but makes
their crime tenfold more inexcusable.
But besides: Suppose the King were willing to be cheated,
how would this excuse your cheating his subjects? all your
fellow-subjects, every honest man, and, in particular, every
honest trader? How would it excuse your making it
impossible for him to live, unless he will turn knave as well
as yourself?
3. “Well, but I am not convinced it is a sin: My
conscience does not condemn me for it.” No ! Are you
not convinced that robbery is a sin? Then I am sorry for
you. And does not your conscience condemn you for
stealing? Then your conscience is asleep. I pray God to
smite you to the heart, and awaken it this day !
4. “Nay, but my soul is quite happy in the love of God;
therefore I cannot think it is wrong.” I answer, Wrong it
must be, if the Bible is right. Therefore either that love is
a mere delusion, a fire of your own kindling, or God may
have hitherto winked at the times of ignorance. But now
you have the means of knowing better; now light is offered
to you; and if you shut your eyes against the light, the
love of God cannot possibly continue.
5. “But I only buy a little brandy or tea now and then,
just for my own use.” That is, I only steal a little. God
says, “Steal not at all.”
6. “Nay, I do not buy any at all myself; I only send my
child or servant for it.” You receive it of them; do you
not? And the receiver is as bad as the thief.
7. “Why, I would not meddle with it, but I am forced
by my parent, husband, or master.” If you are forced by
your father or mother to rob, you will be hanged neverthe
less. This may lessen, but does not take away, the fault;
for you ought to suffer rather than sin.
8. “But I do not know that it was run.” No! Did not
he that sold it tell you it was? If he sold it under the
common price, he did. The naming the price was telling
you, “This is run.”
9. “But I do not know where to get tea which is not
run.” I will tell you where to get it; you may have it from
those whose tea is duly entered, and who make a conscience
of it. But were it otherwise, if I could get no wine but
what I knew to be stolen, I would drink water; yea, though
not only my health but my life depended upon it; for it is
better to die than to live by thieving.
10. “But, if I could get what has paid duty, I am not
able to pay the price of it; and I cannot live without it.”
I answer, (1.) You can live without it, as well as your
grandmother did. But, (2.) If you could not live without it,
you ought to die rather than steal; for death is a less evil
than sin.
11. “But my husband will buy it, whether I do or
no; and I must use what he provides, or have none.”
Undoubtedly, to have none is a less evil than to be partaker
with a thief.
IV. Upon the whole, then, I exhort all of you that fear
God, and desire to save your souls, without regarding what
others do, resolve at all hazards to keep yourselves pure.
Let your eye be fixed on the word of God, not the examples
of men. Our Lord says to every one of you, “What is that
to thee? Follow thou me!” Let no convenience, no gain,
no pleasure, no friend, draw you from following him. In
spite of all the persuasions, all the reasonings, of men, keep to
the word of God. If all on the right hand and the left will
be knaves, be you an honest man. Probably God will repay
you, (he certainly will, if this be best for you,) even with
temporal blessings; there have not been wanting remarkable
instances of this. But, if not, he will repay you with what
is far better,-with “the testimony of a good conscience
towards God;” with “joy in the Holy Ghost; ” with an
“hope full of immortality;” with “the love of God shed
abroad in your hearts:” And “the peace of God, which
passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds
in Christ Jesus !”
LoNDoN,
January 30, 1767.
WHAT a condition are you in The sentence is passed;
you are condemned to die; and this sentence is to be executed
shortly | You have no way to escape; these fetters, these
walls, these gates and bars, these keepers, cut of all hope:
Therefore, die you must. But must you die like a beast,
without thinking what it is to die? You need not; you will
not; you will think a little first; you will consider, “What
is death?” It is leaving this world, these houses, lands, and
all things under the sun; leaving all these things, never to
return; your place will know you no more. It is leaving
these pleasures; for there is no eating, drinking, gaming,
mo merriment in the grave. It is leaving your acquaintance,
companions, friends; your father, mother, wife, children.
You cannot stay with them, nor can they go with you; you
must part; perhaps for ever. It is leaving a part of yourself;
leaving this body which has accompanied you so long. Your
soul must now drop its old companion, to rot and möulder
into dust. It must cnter upon a new, strange, unbodied
state. It must stand naked before God!
2. But, O, how will you stand before God; the great, the
holy, the just, the terrible God? Is it not his own word,
“Without holiness no man shall see the Lord?” No man
shall see him with joy; rather, he will call for the mountains
to fall upon him, and the rocks to cover him. And what do
you think holiness is? It is purity both of heart and life.
It is the mind that was in Christ, enabling us to walk as he
also walked. It is the loving God with all our heart; the
loving our neighbour, every man, as ourselves; and the doing
to all men, in every point, as we would they should do
unto us. The least part of holiness is to do good to all men,
and to do no evil either in word or work. This is only the
outside of it. But this is more than you have. You are far
from it; far as darkness from light. You have not the mind
that was in Christ: There was no pride, no malice in him;
no hatred, no revenge, no furious anger, no foolish or worldly
desire. You have not walked as Christ walked; no, rather
as the devil would have walked, had he been in a body; the
works of the devil you have done, not the works of God.
You have not loved God with all your heart. You have not
loved him at all. You have not thought about him. You
hardly knew or cared whether there was any God in the
world. You have not done to others as you would they should
do to you; far, very far from it. Have you done all the
good you could to all men? If so, you had never come to
this place. You have done evil exceedingly; your sins.
against God and man are more than the hairs of your head.
Insomuch that even the world cannot bear you; the world
itself spews you out. Even the men that know not God
declare you are not fit to live upon the earth.
3. O repent, repent ! Know yourself; see and feel what
a sinner you are. Think of the innumerable sins you have
committed, even from your youth up. How many wicked
words have you spoken? How many wicked actions have
you done? Think of your inward sins; your pride, malice,
hatred, anger, revenge, lust ! Think of your sinful nature,
totally alienated from the life of God. How is your whole
soul prone to evil, void of good, corrupt, full of all abomina
tions! Feel that your carnal mind is enmity against God.
Well may the wrath of God abide upon you. He is of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity: He hath said, “The soul
that sinneth, it shall die.” It shall die eternally, shall be
“punished with everlasting destruction, from th: presence of
the Lord and from the glory of his power.”
4. How then can you escape the damnation of hell,--the
lake of fire burning with brimstone; “where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched?” You can never redeem
your own soul. You cannot atone for the sins that are past.
If you could leave off sin now, and live unblamable for the
time to come, that would be no atonement for what is past.
Nay, if you could live like an angel for a thousand years,
that would not atone for one sin. But neither can you de
this; you cannot leave off sin; it has the dominion over you.
If all your past sins were now to be forgiven, you would
immediately sin again; that is, unless your heart were
cleansed; unless it were created anew. And who can do
this? Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean *
Surely none but God. So you are utterly sinful, guilty,
helpless! What can you do to be saved?
5. One thing is needful: “Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shalt be saved !” Believe (not as the devils
only, but) with that faith which is the gift of God, which is
wrought in a poor, guilty, helpless sinner by the power of the
Holy Ghost. See all thy sins on Jesus laid. God laid on
him the iniquities of us all. He suffered once the just for
the unjust. He bore our sins in his own body on the tree.
He was wounded for thy sins; he was bruised for thy iniqui
ties. “Behold the Lamb of God taking away the sin of the
world !” taking away thy sins, even thine, and reconciling
thee unto God the Father! “Look unto him and be thou
saved !” If thou look unto Him by faith, if thou cleave to
Him with thy whole heart, if thou receive Him both to atone,
to teach, and to govern thee in all things, thou shalt be
saved, thou art saved, both from the guilt, the punishment,
and all the power of sin. Thou shalt have peace with God,
and a peace in thy own soul, that passeth all understanding.
Thy soul shall magnify the Lord, and thy spirit rejoice in
God thy Saviour. The love of God shall be shed abroad in
thy heart, enabling thee to trample sin under thy feet.
And thou wilt then have an hope full of immortality. Thou
wilt no longer be afraid to die, but rather long for the hour,
having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ.
6. This is the faith that worketh by love, the way that
leadeth to the kingdom. Do you earnestly desire to walk
therein? Then put away all hinderances. Beware of
company: At the peril of your soul, keep from those who
neither know nor seek God. Your old acquaintance are no
acquaintance for you, unless they too acquaint themselves
with God. Let them laugh at you, or say you are running
mad. It is enough, if you have praise of God. Beware of
strong drink. Touch it not, lest you should not know when
to stop. You have no need of this to cheer your spirits; but
of the peace and the love of God; beware of men that
pretend to show you the way to heaven, and know it not
themselves. There is no other name whereby you can be
saved, but the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And there
is no other way whereby you can find the virtue of his name
but by faith. Beware of Satan transformed into an angel of
light, and telling you it is presumption to believe in Christ,
182 A wolt D IN SEASON: OR,
as your Lord and your God, your wisdom and righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. Believe in him with your
whole heart. Cast your whole soul upon his love. Trust
Him alone; love Him alone; fear Him alone; and cleave to
Him alone; till He shall say to you, (as to the dying male
factor of old,) “This day shalt thou be with me in paradise.”
ort,
AD WICE TO AN ENGLISHMAN.'s
1. Do you ever think? Do you ever consider? If not,
it is high time you should. Think a little, before it is too
late. Consider what a state you are in ; and not you alone,
but our whole nation. We would have war; and we have
it. And what is the fruit? Our armies broken in pieces;
and thousands of our men either killed on the spot, or made
prisoners in one day. Nor is this all. We have now war at
our own doors; our own countrymen turning their swords
against their brethren. And have any hitherto been able to
stand before them? Have they not already seized upon one
whole kingdom? Friend, either think now, or sleep on and
take your rest, till you drop into the pit where you will
sleep no more !
2. Think what is likely to follow, if an army of French
also should blow the trumpet in our land ' What desolation
may we not then expect? what a wide-spread field of blood?
And what can the end of these things be? If they prevail,
what but Popery and slavery? Do you know what the spirit
of Popery is? Did you never hear of that in Queen Mary’s
reign; and of the holy men who were then burned alive by
the Papists, because they did not dare to do as they did; to
worship angels and saints, to pray to the Virgin Mary, to
* This was published at the beginning of the late rebellion.
bow down to images, and the like? If we had a King of
this spirit, whose life would be safe? at least, what homest
man’s? A knave indeed might turn with the times. But
what a dreadful thing would this be to a man of conscience:
“Either turn or burn: Either go into that fire, or into ‘the
fire that never shall be quenched?’”
3. And can you dream that your property would be any
safer than your conscience? Nay, how should that be?
Nothing is plainer than that the Pretender cannot be King
of England, unless it be by conquest. But every conqueror
may do what he will; the laws of the land are no laws to
him. And who can doubt, but one who should conquer
England by the assistance of France, would copy after the
French rules of government?
4. How dreadful then is the condition wherein we stand?
on the very brink of utter destruction | But why are we
thus? I am afraid the answer is too plain to every con
siderate man: Because of our sins; because we have well-nigh
“filled up the measure of our iniquities.” For, what wicked
ness is there under heaven which is not found among us at
this day? Not to insist on the Sabbath-breaking in every
corner of our land; the thefts, cheating, fraud, extortion;
the injustice, violence, oppression; the lying and dissimu
lating; the robberies, sodomies, and murders; which, with a
thousand unnamed villanies, are common to us and our
neighbour Christians of Holland, France, and Germany;
consider, over and above, what a plentiful harvest we have of
wickedness almost peculiar to ourselves. For who can vic
with us in the direction of Courts of Justice; in the manage
ment of public charities; or in the accomplished, barefaced
wickedness which so abounds in our prisons, and fleets, and
armies? Who in Europe can compare with the sloth,
laziness, luxury, and effeminacy of the English Gentry; or
with the drunkenness, and stupid, senseless cursing and
swearing which are daily seen and heard in our streets?
one great inlet, no doubt, to that flood of perjury, which so
increases among us day by day; the like whereunto is not to
be found in any other part of the habitable earth.
5. Add to all these, (what is indeed the source as well as
completion of all,) that open and professed Deism and
rejection of the Gospel, that public, avowed apostasy from
the Christian faith, which reigns among the rich and great,
and hath spread from them to all ranks and orders of men,
the vulgar themselves not excepted, and made us a people
fitted for the “destroyer of the Gentiles.”
6. Because of these sins is this evil come upon us. For,
whether you are aware of it or no, there is a God; a God who,
though he sits upon the circle of the heavens, sees and knows
all that is done upon earth. And this God is holy; he does
not love sin; he is just, rendering to all their due; and he is
strong, there is none able to withstand him; he hath all
power in heaven and in earth. He is patient indeed, and
suffers leng; but he will at last repay the wicked to his face.
He often does so in this world; especially when a whole
nation is openly and insolently wicked. Then doth God “arise
and maintain his own cause;” then doth he terribly show
both his justice and power; that if these will not repent, yet
others may fear, and flee from the wrath to come.
7. There hath been, among them that feared God, a general
expectation, for many years, that the time was coming when
God would thus arise to be avenged on this sinful nation.
At length the time is come. The patience of God, long pro
voked, gives place to justice. The windows of heaven begin
to be opened, to rain down judgments on the earth. And
yet, with what tenderness does he proceed ! in the midst of
wrath remembering mercy. By how slow degrees does his
vengeance move | Nor does his whole displeasure yet arise.
8. Brethren, countrymen, Englishmen, what shall we do;
to-day, while it is called to-day, before the season of mercy is
quite expired, and our “destruction cometh as a whirlwind?”
Which way can we remove the evils we feel? which way
prevent those we fear? Is there any better way than the
making God our friend? the securing his help against our
enemies? Other helps are little worth. We see armies
may be destroyed, or even flee away from old men and
children. Fleets may be dashed to pieces in an hour, and
sunk in the depth of the sea. Allies may be treacherous, or
slow, or foolish, or weak, or cowardly; but God is a friend
who cannot betray, and whom none can either bribe or terrify.
And who is wise, or swift, or strong like him? Therefore,
whatever we do, let us make God our friend; let us with all
speed remove the cause of his anger; let us cast away our
sins. Then shall his love have free course, and he will send
us help, sufficient help, against all our enemies.
9. Come; will you begin? Will you, by the grace of
God, amend one, and that without delay? First, then, own
those sins which have long cried for vengeance in the ears
of God. Confess, that we, and all, and you in particular,
deserve for our inward and outward abominations, not only
to be swept from the face of the earth, but to suffer the
vengeance of eternal fire. Never aim at excusing either
yourself or others; let your mouth be stopped. Plead guilty
before God. Above all, own that impudence of wickedness,
that utter carelessness, that pert stupidity, which is hardly
to be found in any part of the earth, (at least, not in such a
degree,) except in England. Do you not know what I
mean? You was not long since praying to God for damma
tion upon your soul. One who has heard you said, “Is
that right? Does not God hear? What, if he takes you
at your word?” You replied, with equal impudence and
ignorance, “What, are you a Methodist?” What, if he is
a Turk? Must thou therefore be a Heathen? God humble
thy brutish, devilish spirit !
10. Lay thee in the dust, for this and for all thy sins.
Let thy laughter be turned into heaviness; thy joy into
mourning; thy senseless jollity and mirth into sorrow and
brokenness of heart. This is no time to eat, and drink, and
rise up to play, but to afflict thy soul before the Lord. Desire
of God a deep, piercing sense of the enormous sins of the
nation, and of thy own. Remember that great example;
how when the King of Nineveh was warned of the near
approaching vengeance of God, he “caused it to be pro
claimed, Let none taste anything; let them not feed nor
drink water: But let them be covered with sackcloth, and cry
mightily to God; yea, let them turn every one from his evil
way. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn
away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?” (Jonah iii.)
11. Let them turn every one from his evil way. Cease to
do evil. Learn to do well. And see that this reformation
be universal; for there is no serving God by halves. Avoid
all evil, and do all good unto all men; else you only deceive
your own soul. See also that it be from the heart; lay the
axe to the root of the tree. Cut up, by the grace of God,
evil desire, pride, anger, unbelief. Let this be your continual
prayer to God, the prayer of your heart as well as lips:
“Lord, I would believe; help thou mine unbelief; give me
the faith that worketh by love. ‘The life which I now live,”
let me ‘live by faith in the Son of God. Let me so believe,
that I may ‘love thee with all my heart, and mind, and soul,
and strength;’ and that I may love every child of man, even
‘as thou hast loved us!’ Let me daily ‘add to my faith
courage, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kind
mess, charity; that so an entrance may be ministered to me
abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ.’”
REGARD, thou righteous God, and true,
Regard thy weeping people's prayer,
Before the sword our land go through,
Before thy latest plague we bear,
Let all to thee, their Smiter, turn,
Let all beneath thine anger mourn.
The sword, which first bereaved abroad,
We now within our borders see ;
We see, but slight, thy nearer rod :
So oft, so kindly, warn'd by thee,
We still thy warning love despise,
And dare thine utmost wrath to rise.
Yet, for the faithful remnant's sake,
Thine utmost wrath awhile defer,
If, haply, we at last may wake,
And, trembling at destruction near,
The cause of all our evils own,
And leave the sins for which we groan.
Or, if the wicked will not mourn,
And 'scape the long-suspended blow,
Yet shall it to thy glory turn,
Yet shall they all thy patience know,
Thy slighted love and mercy clear,
And vindicate thy justice here.
IM MonTAL King of kings,
Whose favour or whose frown
Monarchs and states to honour brings,
Or turns them upside down :
A WORD TO A PROTESTANT, To thee, in danger's hour,
We for our Sov’reign cry:
Protect him by thy gracious power,
And set him up on high.
Not by a mighty host
Can he deliver'd be;
Let others in their numbers trust,
We look, O Lord, to thee.
Help to thy servant send,
And strengthen from above;
And still thy minister defend
By thine almighty love.
The Spirit of thy grace
Thy heavenly unction, shed,
And hosts of guardian angels place
Around his sacred head.
Confound whoe'er oppose,
Or force them to retire;
Be thou a tower against his foes,
Be thou a wall of fire.
O bring him out of all
His sanctified distress,
And by his name thy servant call,
And fill him with thy peace.
Show him, almighty Lord,
That thou his Saviour art;
And speak the soul-converting word,
“My son, give me thy heart l”
18?
1. Do not you call yourself a Protestant? Why so? Do
you know what the word means? What is a Protestant?
I suppose you mean one that is not a Papist. But what
is a Papist? If you do not know, say so; acknowledge you
cannot tell. Is not this the case? You call yourself a
Protestant; but you do not know what a Protestant is.
You talk against Papists; and yet neither do you know what
a Papist is. Why do you pretend, then, to the knowledge
which you have not? Why do you use words which you do
not understand?
2. Are you desirous to know what these words, Papist and
Protestant, mean? A Papist is one who holds the Pope or
Bishop of Rome (the name papa, that is, father, was formerly
given to all Bishops) to be head of the whole Christian
Church; and the Church of Rome, or that which owns the
Pope as their head, to be the only Christian Church.
3. In a course of years, many errors crept into this
Church, of which good men complained from time to time.
At last, about two hundred years ago, the Pope appointed
many Bishops and others to meet at a town in Germany,
called Trent. But these, instead of amending those errors,
established them all by a law, and so delivered them down
to all succeeding generations.
4. Among these errors may be numbered, their doctrine of
seven sacraments; of transubstantiation; of communion in
one kind only; of purgatory, and praying for the dead
therein; of veneration of relics; and of indulgences, or
pardons granted by the Pope, and to be bought for money.
It is thought by some, that these errors, great as they are,
do only defile the purity of Christianity; but it is sure, the
following strike at its very root, and tend to banish true
religion out of the world:--
5. First. The doctrine of merit. The very foundation of
Christianity is, that a man can merit nothing of God; that
we are “justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ;” not for any of our works or of our
deservings, but by faith in the blood of the covenant.
But the Papists hold, that a man may by his works merit
or deserve eternal life; and that we are justified, not by faith
in Christ alone, but by faith and works together.
This doctrine strikes at the root of Christian faith, the
only foundation of true religion.
6. Secondly. The doctrine of praying to saints, and
worshipping of images. To the Virgin Mary they pray in
these words: “O Mother of God, O Queen of heaven,
command thy Son to have mercy upon us!” And, “The right
use of images,” says the Council of Trent, “is to honour
them, by bowing down before them.” (Sess. 25, pars 2.)
This doctrine strikes at the root of that great command
ment, (which the Papists call part of the first,) “Thou shalt
not bow down to them, nor worship them,” that is, not any
image whatsoever. It is gross, open, palpable idolatry, such
as can neither be denied nor excused; and tends directly to
destroy the love of God, which is indeed the first and great
commandment.
7. Thirdly. The doctrine of persecution. This has been
for many ages a favourite doctrine of the Church of Rome.
And the Papists in general still maintain, that all heretics
(that is, all who differ from them) ought to be compelled to
receive what they call the true faith; to be forced into the
Church, or out of the world.
Now, this strikes at the root of, and utterly tears up, the
second great commandment. It directly tends to bring in
blind, bitter zeal; anger, hatred, malice, variance; every
temper, word, and work that is just contrary to the loving
our neighbour as ourselves.
So plain it is, that these grand Popish doctrines of merit,
idolatry, and persecution, by destroying both faith, and the
love of God and of our neighbour, tend to banish true
Christianity out of the world.
8. Well might our forefathers protest against these: And
hence it was that they were called Protestants; even because
they publicly protested, as against all the errors of the
Papists, so against these three in particular: The making
void Christian faith, by holding that man may merit heaven
by his own works; the overthrowing the love of God by
idolatry, and the love of our neighbour by persecution.
Are you then a Protestant, truly so called? Do you
protest, as against all the rest, so in particular against these
three grand fundamental errors of Popery? Do you publicly
protest against all merit in man? all salvation by your own
works? against all idolatry of every sort? and against every
kind and degree of persecution?
I question not but you do. You publicly protest against
all these horrible errors of Popery. But does your heart
agree with your lips? Do you not inwardly cherish what
you outwardly renounce? It is well if you who cry out so
much against Papists are not one yourself. It is well if you
are not yourself (as little as you may think of it) a rank
Papist in your heart.
9. For, First, how do you hope to be saved? by doing
thus and thus? by doing no harm, and paying every man
his own, and saying your prayers, and going to church and
sacrament? Alas! alas ! Now you have thrown off the
mask: This is Popery barefaced. You may just as well
speak plain, and say, “I trust to be saved by the merit of
my own works.” But where is Christ all this time? Why,
he is not to come in till you get to the end of your prayer;
and then you will say, “for Jesus Christ's sake,”--because
so it stands in your book, O my friend, your very founda
tion is Popish. You seek salvation by your own works. You
trample upon the “blood of the covenant.” And what can
a poor Papist do more?
10. But let us go on : Are you clear of idolatry any more
than the Papists are? It may be, indeed, yours is in a
different way. But how little does that signify ! They set up
their idols in their churches; you set up yours in your heart.
Their idols are only covered with gold or silver; but yours is
solid gold. They worship the picture of the Queen of Heaven;
you, the picture of the Queen or King of England. In another
way, they idolize a dead man or woman; whereas your idol is
yet alive. O how little is the difference before God! How
small pre-eminence has the money-worshipper at London,
over the image-worshipper at Rome; or the idolizer of a
living sinner, over kim that prays to a dead saint |
11. Take one step farther: Does the Papist abroad perse
cute? Does he force another man’s conscience? So does
the Papist at home, as far as he can, for all he calls himself a
Protestant. Will the man in Italy tolerate no opinion but
his own 2 No more, if he could help it, would the man in
England. Would you? Do not you think the Government
much overseen, in bearing with any but those of the Church?
Do not you wish they would put down such and such people?
You know what you would do if you was in their place.
And by the very same spirit you would continue the Inqui
sition at Rome, and rekindle the fires in Smithfield.
12. It is because our nation is overrun with such Protest
ants, who are full of their own good-deservings, as well as of
abominable idolatry, and of blind, fiery zeal, of the whole
spirit of persecution, that the sword of God, the great, the
just, the jealous God, is even now drawn in our land; that
the armies of the aliens are hovering over it, as a vulture
over his prey; and that the open Papists are on the very
point of swallowing up the pretended Protestants.”
13. Do you desire to escape the scourge of God? Then I
entreat you, First, be a real Protestant. By the Spirit of God
assisting you, (for without him you know you can do nothing,)
cast away all that trust in your own righteousness, all hope
of being saved by your own works. Own, your merit is ever
lasting damnation; that you deserve the damnation of hell.
Humble yourself under the mighty hand of God. Lie in the
dust. Let your mouth be stopped; and let all your confidence
be in the “blood of sprinkling;” all your hope in Jesus
Christ “the righteous;” all your faith in “Him that justifieth
the ungodly, through the redemption that is in Jesus.”
O put away your idols out of your heart. “Love not the
world, neither the things of the world.” “Having food to
eat and raiment to put on, be content;” desire nothing more
but God. To-day, hear his voice, who continually cries,
“My son, give me thy heart.” Give yourself to Him who
gave himself for you. May you love God, as he has loved
us! Let him be your desire, your delight, your joy, your
portion, in time and in eternity.
And if you love God, you will love your brother also; you
will be ready to lay down your life for his sake; so far from
any desire to take away his life, or hurt a hair of his head.
You will then leave his conscience uncontrolled; you will no
more think of forcing him into your own opinions, as neither
can he force you to judge by his conscience. But each shall
“give an account of himself to God.”
14. It is true, if his conscience be misinformed, you should
endeavour to inform him better. But whatever you do, let
it be done in charity, in love and meekness of wisdom. Be
zealous for God; but remember, that “the wrath of man
worketh not the righteousness of God;” that angry zeal,
though opposing sin, is the servant of sin; that true zeal
is only the flame of love. Let this be your truly Protestant
zeal: While you abhor every kind and degree of persecution,
let your heart burn with love to all mankind, to friends and
enemies, neighbours and strangers; to Christians, Heathens,
Jews, Turks, Papists, heretics; to every soul which God hath
made. “Let” this “your light shine before men, that they
may glorify your Father which is in heaven.”
* This was wrote during the late rebellion.
192 A WoRD TO A PROTESTANT.
1 WHERE have I been so long,
Fast bound in sin and night,
Mix'd with the blind self-righteous throng
Who hate the sons of light 2
2 O how shall I presume,
Jesus, to call on thee,
Sunk in the lowest dregs of Rome,
The worst idolatry !
3. A stranger to thy grace,
Long have I labour'd, Lord,
To 'stablish my own righteousness,
And been what I abhorr'd.
4 Foe to the Popish boast,
No merit was in me !
Yet in my works I put my trust,
And not alone in thee.
5 For works that I had wrought
I look'd to be forgiven,
And by my virtuous tempers thought
At last to purchase heaven.
6 Or if I needed still
The help of grace divine,
Thy merits should come in to fill
The small defects of mine.
7 Alas! I knew not then,
Thou only didst atone
For all the sinful sons of men,
And purge our guilt alone;
0 Didst shed thy blood to pay
The all-sufficient price,
And take the world's offence away
By thy great sacrifice.
9 But O, my dying God,
By thee convinced at last,
My soul on that atoning blood,
On that alone, I cast !
10 I dare no longcr trust
On aught I do, or feel,
I}ut own, while humbled in the dust,
My whole desert is hell.
11 My works of righteousness,
I cast them all away :
Me, Lord, thou frankly must release,
For I have nought to pay.
12 Not one good word or thought
I to thy merits join ;
Dut gladly take the gift, unbought,
Of righteousness divine.
13 My faith is all in thee,
My only hope thou art;
The pardon thou hast bought for me,
Engrave it on my heart.
14 The blood by faith applied,
O let it now take place;
And speak me freely justified,
And fully saved by grace.
l For G 1 v E me, O thou jealous God,
A wretch who on thy laws have trod,
And robb'd thee of thy right;
A sinner to myself unknown,
'Gainst thee I have transgress'd, and done
This evil in thy sight.
2 My body I disdain'd to incline,
Or worship at an idol's shrine,
With gross idolatry;
But O ! my soul hath baser proved,
Honour'd, and fear'd, and served and loved
The creature more than thee.
3 IAet the blind sons of Rome bow down
To images of wood and stone;
But I, with subtler art,
Safe from the letter of thy word,
My idols secretly adored,
Set up within my heart.
4 But O! suffice the season past;
My idols now away I cast,
Pleasure, and wealth, and fame,
The world, and all its goods, I leave,
To thee alone resolved to give
Whate'er I have or am.
5 Lo! in a thankful, loving heart,
I render thee whate'er thou art,
I give myself to thee;
And thee my whole delight I own,
My joy, my glory, and my crown,
To all eternity.
1 O THou who seest what is in man,
And show'st myself to me,
Suffer a sinner to complain,
And groan his griefs to thee.
2 A sinner, that has cloak'd his shame
With self-deceiving art;
Thy worshipper reform'd in name,
But unrenew'd in heart.
3 The servants most unlike their Lord,
How oft did I condemn !
The persecuting Church abhorr'd,
Nor saw myself in them :
4 The spirit of my foes I caught,
The angry, bitter zeal;
And fierce for my own party fought,
And breathed the fire of hell.
5 Threat'ning I did and slaughter breathe,
(The flail of heresy,)
And doom the sects to bonds, or death,
That did not think with me.
G To propagate the truth, I fought
With fury and despite;
And, in my zeal for Israel, sought
To slay the Gibeonite.
7 “The temple of the Lord are we ?”
And all who dared deny,
I would not have their conscience free,
But force them to comply.
8 With wholesome discipline severe
To conquer them I strove,
And drive into the pale through fear,
Who would not come through love.
9 How vainly then the zealots blind
Of Rome did I disclaim :
Still to the church of Satan join'd,
And differing but in name.
A WoRD TO A PROTESTANT. 10 How could I, Lord, myself deceive,
While unreform'd within P
Protest against their creed, and cleave
The closer to their sin P
ll Their foulest sin my own I made,
(And humbly now confess,)
While by my anger I essay'd
To work thy righteousness.
12 A murderer convict, I come
My vileness to bewail :
By nature born a son of Rome,
A child of wrath and hell.
13 Lord, I at last recant, reject,
Through thy great strength alone,
The madness of the Romish sect,
The madness of my own.
14 Lord, I abhor, renounce, abjure,
The fiery spirit unclean,
The persecuting zeal impure,
The sin-opposing sin.
15 Let others draw, with fierce despite,
The eradicating sword,
And with the devil's weapons fight,
The battles of the Lord.
16 But O' my gracious God, to me
A better spirit impart;
The gentle mind that was in thee,
The meekly loving heart.
17 The heart whose charity o'erflows
To all, far off, and near ;
True charity to friends and foes,
Impartially sincere.
18 Heathens, and Jews, and Turks, may I,
And heretics embrace;
Nor e'en to Rome the love deny
I owe to all the race.
WHAT are you going to do? to vote for a Parliament
man? I hope then you have taken no money. For doubt
less you know the strictness of the oath,-that you have
received no “gift or reward, directly or indirectly, nor any
promise of any, on account of your vote” in the ensuing
election. Surely you start at perjury ! at calm, forethought,
deliberate, wilful perjury ! If you are guilty already, stop;
go no further. It is at the peril of your soul. Will you
sell your country? Will you sell your own soul? Will you
sell your God, your Saviour? Nay, God forbid! Rather
cast down just now the thirty pieces of silver or gold, and
say, “Sir, I will not sell heaven. Neither you nor all the
world is able to pay the purchase.”
I hope you have received nothing else, neither will receive;
no entertainment, no meat or drink. If this is given you on
account of your vote, you are perjured still. How can you
make oath, you have received no gift? This was a gift, if
you did not buy it. What! will you sell your soul to the
devil for a draught of drink, or for a morsel of bread? O
consider what you do | Act as if the whole election depended
on your single vote, and as if the whole Parliament depended
(and therein the whole nation) on that single person whom.
you now choose to be a member of it.
But if you take nothing of any, for whom shall you vote?
For the man that loves God. He must love his country, and
that from a steady, invariable principle. And by his fruits you
shall know him. He is careful to abstain from all appearance
of evil. He is zealous of good works, as he has opportunity,
doing good to all men. He uses all the ordinances of God,
and that both constantly and carefully. And he does this,
not barely as something he must do, or what he would
willingly be excused from ; no, he rejoices in this his reason
able service, as a blessed privilege of the children of God.
But what, if none of the candidates have these fruits?
Then vote for him that loves the King, King George, whom.
the wise providence of God has appointed to reign over us.
He ought to be highly esteemed in love, even for his office’
sake. A King is a lovely, sacred name. He is a Minister of
God unto thee for good. How much more such a King, as
has been, in many respects, a blessing to his subjects | You
may easily know those who love him not; for they generally
glory in their shame. They “are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities;” no, not even of the “ruler of their people.”
Perhaps you will say, “But I love my country; therefore
I am for the country interest.” I fear you know not what
you say. Are you against your King because you love your
country? Who taught you to separate your King from your
country? to set one against the other? Be assured, none
that loves either. True lovers of their country do not talk in
this senseless manner.
Is not the interest of the King of England, and of the
country of England, one and the same? If the King is
destroyed, doth it profit the country? if the country, does it
profit the King? Their interest cannot be divided. The
welfare of one is the welfare of both.
Have you an objection of a different kind? Do you say,
“I am for the Church? The Church of England for ever !
Therefore I vote for ; he is a true Churchman, a lover
of the Church.” Are you sure of that? Friend, think a
little. What kind of a Churchman is he? a whoring Church
man, a gaming Churchman, a drunken Churchman, a lying
Churchman, a cursing and swearing Churchman? or a red
hot persecuting Churchman, that would send all Dissenters
to the devil at a clap? For shame ! for shame ! Do you
call a man a Churchman, who knows no more of God than a
Turk? call a man a Churchman, that does not even pretend
to so much religion as would serve an honest Heathem? He
is a lover of the Church who is a lover of God, and conse
quently of all mankind. Whoever else talks of loving the
Church, is a cheat. Set a mark upon that man.
Above all, mark that man who talks of loving the Church,
and does not love the King. If he does not love the King,
he cannot love God. And if he does not love God, he cannot
love the Church. He loves the Church and the King just
alike. For indeed he loves neither one nor the other.
O beware, you who truly love the Church, and therefore
cannot but love the King; beware of dividing the King and
the Church, any more than the King and country. Let others
do as they will, what is that to you? Act you as an honest
man, a loyal subject, a true Englishman, a lover of the
country, a lover of the Church; in one word, a Christian one
that fears nothing but sin, that seeks nothing but heaven, and
that desires nothing but God; nothing but glory to God in
the highest, and on earth peace, good-will towards men I
1. ARE you to die? Must you leave this world, and
carry nothing of it away with you? Naked as you came out
of your mother's womb, naked shall you return. And are you
never to come back into this world? Have you no more
place under the sun ? When you leave these houscs and
fields, this flesh and blood, do you part with them for ever?
Are you sure of this? Must all men die? Can none at all
escape death ? Do rich men likewise die, and leave their
riches for others? Do princes also fall and die like one of
their people? Can you then escape it? You do not think
so. You know death is as sure as if you felt it already; as
if you was now gasping for life, sweating and trembling in
those last pangs, till the soul started off from the quivering
lips into the boundless ocean of eternity.
2. And are you to be judged? How is this to be? Why,
the Son of God shall come in his glory, and all his holy angels
with him; “and then shall he sit upon the throne of his
glory. And before Him shall be gathered all nations; and he
shall separate them from one another, as a shepherd divideth
his sheep from the goats. Behold, he cometh with clouds !
And every eye shall see Him which is, and which was, and
which is to come, the Almighty And I saw” (wilt thou also
say) “a great white throne, and Him that sat thereon, from
whose face the earth and the heavens fled away; and there was
found no place for them. And I saw the dead, small and
great, stand before God; and they were judged, every man
according to his works.” And shalt thou also be judged
according to thy works? all thy works, whether they be good
or evil? Yea, and for every idle word which thou shalt speak,
thou shalt give an account in the day of judgment. But this
is not all: The Lord, the Judge, searcheth the heart, and
trieth the reins. He understands all thy thoughts; and for
all these likewise he shall bring thee intojudgment. Supposest
thou it is enough to be outwardly good? What! though thy
inward parts are very wickedness? And are they not? Is
not thy soul fallen short of the glory (the glorious image) of
God? Look into thy breast. Art thou not a fallen spirit?
Dost thou not know and feel how very far thou art gone
from original righteousness? Desperately full thou art of
all evil, and naked of all good? Is there not in thee an
earthly, sensual, devilish mind? a mind that is enmity
against God? It is plain there is. For thou dost not love
God. Thou dost not delight in him. He is not the desire of
thy eyes, or the joy of thy heart. Thou lovest the creature
more than the Creator. Thou art a lover of pleasure more than
a lover of God. O how wilt thou stand in the judgment?
3. Are you then to go to heaven or hell? It must be
either to one or the other. I pray God you may not go
to hell! For who can dwell with everlasting burnings?
Who can bear the fierceness of that flame, without even a
drop of water to cool his tongue? yea, and that without end;
for as the worm dieth not, so the fire is not quenched. No ;
whoever is once cast into that lake of fire, shall be tormented
day and night for ever and ever. O eternity eternity :
Who can tell the length of eternity? I warn thee now,
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that thou come not
into that place of torment !
4. But, alas! Is not hell now begun in thy soul? Does
thy conscience never awake? Hast thou no remorse at any
time? no sense of guilt? no dread of the wrath of God?
Why, these (if thou art not saved from them in this life) are
the worm that never dieth. And what else is thy carnal
mind? thy enmity against God? thy foolish and hurtful lusts,
thy inordinate affections? What are pride, envy, malice,
revenge? Are they not vipers gnawing thy heart? May
they not well be called, the dogs of hell? Canst thou be out
of hell, while these are in thy soul? while they are tearing it
in pieces, and there is none to help thee? Indeed they are
not fully let loose upon thee: And while thou seest the light
of the sun, the things of the world that surround thee, or the
pleasures of sense, divert thy thoughts from them. But when
thou canst eat and drink no more, when the earth, with the
works thereof, is burned up, when the sun is fallen from
heaven, and thou art shut up in utter darkness, what a state
wilt thou be in then Mayest thou never try ! Seek thou
a better habitation, a house of God, eternal in the heavens.
5. There the wicked cease from troubling, there the weary
are at rest. For God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow
nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain, but ever
lasting joy upon their heads. But this joy our ears have
not yet heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man
to conceive. Yet a little of it the children of God can
conceive, from what they already enjoy. For the kingdom
of heaven is within them. God has given them eternal life;
the life which is hid with Christ in God. They have heaven
upon earth; “righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost.” Their souls are renewed in the image of God.
They love God. They are happy in him; and they love
their neighbour (that is, every man) as themselves, as their
own souls. Being justified by faith, they have peace with
God, yea, a peace which passeth all understanding. And
they rejoice in him, knowing their sins are blotted out; that
they are accepted in the Beloved; and that they are going
to “an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth
not away.”
6. Will you reply to all this: “But I am a soldier, and
have therefore nothing to do with these things?” Hold !
Have soldiers nothing to do with death? How so? Do
soldiers never die? Can you fright death away? No, my
friend; he will not regard all your big words and looks, nor
all the weapons of your warfare. You can neither conquer
nor escape him. Your profession may excuse you from
many other things; but there is no excusing yourself from
death. Are you less sure of this than other men are ?
No; there is one lot for all. Are you farther from it than
they? Nay, rather nearer; you live in the very jaws of
death. Why, then, a soldier (if there be any difference) has
more to do with death than other men. It is not far from
every one of us; but to him it is just at the door.
7. Or, do you fancy a soldier has nothing to do with
judgment? Will you say, then, (as poor Captain Uratz did,
when he was asked, a few minutes before his death, if he had
made his peace with God,) “I hope God will deal with me
like a gentleman?” But God said unto him, “Thou fool!
I will deal with thee as with all mankind. There is no
respect of persons with me. I reward every man according
to his works.” Thou also shalt receive of the righteous
Judge according to the things which thou hast done in the
body. Death levels all; it mingles in one dust the gentle
man, soldier, clown, and beggar; it makes all these distinc
tions void. When life ends, so do they. Holy or unholy, is
the one question then. Lo! the books are opened, that all
the dead may be judged according to the things that are
written therein. O may thy name be found written in the
book of life
8. For, have soldiers nothing to do with hell? Why,
then, is it so often in thy mouth ? Dost thou think God
does not hear the prayer? And how often hast thou prayed
him to damn thy soul? Is his ear waxed heavy, that it
cannot hear? I fear thou wilt find it otherwise. Was not
he a soldier, too, (and a terrible one,) to whom God said of
old, “Hell from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee
at thy coming?” And what marvel? For sin is the high
road to hell. And have soldiers nothing to do with sin?
Alas ! how many of you wallow therein, yea, and glory in
your shame ! How do you labour to work out your own
damnation | O, poor work, for poor wages ! The wages of
sin is death; the wages of cursing, of swearing, of taking the
name of God in vain, of Sabbath-breaking, drunkenness,
revenge, of fornication, adultery, and all uncleanness. Now,
art thou clear of these? Does not thy own heart smite
thee? Art thou not condemned already? What voice is
that which sounds in thine ears? Is it not the voice of
God? “Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord.
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a sinner as this?” It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God!
Be very sure that thou art stronger than he, before thou
fliest in his face! Do not defy God, unless thou canst over
come him. But canst thou indeed? O no; do not try.
Do not dare him to do his worst. Why should he destroy
both thy body and soul in hell? Why shouldest thou be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power?
9. But if there were no other hell, thou hast hell enough
within thee. An awakened conscience is hell. Pride, envy,
wrath, hatred, malice, revenge; what are these but hell upon
earth? And how often art thou tormented in these flames !
--flames of lust, envy, or proud wrath ! Are not these to
thy soul, when blown up to the height, as it were a lake of
fire, burning with brimstone? Flee away, before the great
gulf is fixed; escape, escape for thy life! If thou hast not
strength, cry to God, and thou shalt receive power from on
high; and He whose name is rightly called Jesus shall save
thee from thy sins.
10. And why should he not? Has a soldier nothing to
do with heaven? God forbid that you should think so !
Heaven was designed for you also. God so loved your soul,
that he gave his only-begotten Son, that you, believing in
him, might not perish, but have everlasting life. Receive,
then, the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world ! This, this is the time to make it sure; this
short, uncertain day of life. Have you then an hour to
spare? No; not a moment. Arise, and call upon thy God.
Call upon the Lamb, who taketh away the sins of the world,
to take away thy sins. Surely he hath borne thy griefs, and
carried thy sorrows | He was wounded for thy transgres
sions, and bruised for thy iniquities. He hath paid the
ransom for thy soul. Believe in him, and thou shalt be
saved. Art thou a sinner? He came not to call the
righteous, but sinners, to repentance. Art thou a lost,
undone sinner? He came to seek and to save that which
was lost. May He that gave himself for thee, give thee ears
to hear, and a heart to understand, his love | So shalt thou
also say, “The life I now live, I live by faith in the Son of
God.” So shall the love of God be shed abroad in thy
heart, and thou shalt rejoice with joy unspeakable. Thou
shalt have the mind that was in Christ, and shalt so walk as
he also walked; till, having fought the good fight, and
finished thy course, thou receive the crown that fadeth not
away !
[FInst raiNTED IN THE YEAR 1733.]
ALMIGHTY God, Fathcr of all mercies, I, thy unworthy
servant, desire to present myself, with all humility, before
thee, to offer my morning sacrifice of love and thanksgiving.
Glory be to thee, O most adorable Father, who, after thou
hadst finished the work of creation, enteredst into thy eternal
rest. Glory be to thee, O holy Jesus, who having through
the eternal Spirit, offered thyself a full, perfect, and sufficient
sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, didst rise again the
third day from the dead, and hadst all power given thee both
in heaven and on earth. Glory be to thee, O blessed Spirit,
who, proceeding from the Father and the Son, didst come
down in fiery tongues on the Apostles on the first day of the
week, and didst enable them to preach the glad tidings of
salvation to a sinful world, and hast ever since been moving
on the faces of men's souls, as thou didst once on the face of
the great deep, bringing them out of that dark chaos in which
they were involved. Glory be to thee, O holy, undivided
Trinity, for jointly concurring in the great work of our
redemption, and restoring us again to the glorious liberty of
the sons of God. Glory be to thee, who, in compassion to
human weakness, hast appointed a solemn day for the remem
brance of thy inestimable benefits. O let me ever esteem it
my privilege and happiness to have a day set apart for the
concerns of my soul, a day free from distractions, disengaged
from the world, wherein I have nothing to do but to praise
and love thee. O let it ever be to me a day sacred to divine
love, a day of heavenly rest and refreshment.
Let thy Holy Spirit, who, on the first day of the week,
descended in miraculous gifts on thy Apostles, descend on me
thy unworthy servant, that I may be always “in the spirit
on the Lord's day.” Let his blessed inspiration prevent and
assist me in all the duties of this thy sacred day, that my
wandering thoughts may all be fixed on thee, my tumultuous
affections composed, and my flat and cold desires quickened
into fervent longings and thirstings after thee. O let me
join in the prayers and praises of thy Church with ardent
and heavenly affection, hear thy word with earnest attention
and a fixed resolution to obey it. And when I approach thy
altar, pour into my heart humility, faith, hope, love, and all
those holy dispositions which become the solemn remem
brance of a crucified Saviour. Let me employ this whole
day to the ends for which it was ordained, in works of
necessity and mercy, in prayer, praise, and meditation; and
“let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my
heart, by always acceptable in thy sight.”
I know, O Lord, that thou hast commanded me, and there
fore it is my duty, to love thee with all my heart, and with all
my strength. I know thou art infinitely holy and overflowing
in all perfection; and therefore it is my duty so to love thee.
. I know thou hast created me, and that I have neither
being nor blessing but what is the effect of thy power and
goodness.
I know thou art the end for which I was created, and that
I can expect no happiness but in thee.
I know that in love to me, being lost in sin, thou didst
send thy only Son, and that he, being the Lord of glory, did
humble himself to the death upon the cross, that I might be
raised to glory.
I know thou hast provided me with all necessary helps for
carrying me through this life to that eternal glory, and this
out of the excess of thy pure mercy to me, unworthy of all
mercies.
I know thou hast promised to be thyself my “exceeding
great reward;” though it is thou alone who thyself “workest
in me, both to will and to do of thy good pleasure.”
Upon these, and many other titles, I confess it is my duty
to love thee, my God, with all my heart. Give thy strength
unto thy servant, that thy love may fill my heart, and be the
motive of all the use I make of my understanding, my
affections, my senses, my health, my time, and whatever
other talents I have received from thee. Let this, O God,
rule my heart without a rival; let it dispose all my thoughts,
words, and works; and thus only can I fulfil my duty and
thy command, of loving thee “with all my heart, and mind,
and soul, and strength.”
O thou infinite Goodness, confirm thy past mercies to me,
by enabling me, for what remains of my life, to be more
faithful than I have hitherto been to this thy great command.
For the time I have yet to sojourn upon earth, O let me
fulfil this great duty. Permit me not to be in any delusion
here; let me not trust in words, or sighs, or tears, but love
thee even as thou hast commanded. Let me feel, and then
I shall know, what it is to love thee with all my heart.
O merciful God, whatsoever thou deniest me, deny me
not this love. Save me from the idolatry of “loving the
world, or any of the things of the world.” Let me never
love any creature, but for thy sake, and in subordination to
thy love. Take thou the full possession of my heart; raise
there thy throne, and command there as thou dost in heaven.
Being created by thee, let me live to thee; being created for
thee, let me ever act for thy glory; being redeemed by thee,
let me render unto thee what is thine, and let my spirit ever
cleave to thee alone.
Iet the prayers and sacrifices of thy holy Church, offered
unto thee this day, be graciously accepted. “Clothe thy
Priests with righteousness, and pardon all thy people who are
not prepared according to the preparation of the sanctuary.”
Prosper all those who are sincerely engaged in propagating
or promoting thy faith and love ( )*: “Give thy Son the
Heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the
earth for his possession;” that from the rising up of the sun
unto the going down of the same, thy name may be great
among the Gentiles. Enable us of this nation, and especially
those whom thou hast set over us in Church and State,
in our several stations, to serve thee in all holiness, and to
“know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge.”
Continue to us the means of grace, and grant we may never
provoke thee, by our non-improvement, to deprive us of
them. Pour down thy blessing upon our Universities, that
they may ever promote true religion and sound learning.
Show mercy, O Lord, to my father and mother, my brothers.
and sisters, to all my friends, ( )* relations, and enemies,
* (-) Here mention the particular persons you would pray for.
and to all that are in affliction. Let thy fatherly hand be
over them, and thy Holy Spirit ever with them; that,
submitting themselves entirely to thy will, and directing all
their thoughts, words, and works to thy glory, they, and
those that are already dead in the Lord, may at length enjoy
thee, in the glories of thy kingdom, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, who liveth and reigneth with thee and the Holy Ghost,
one God, blessed for ever.
Ceneral Questions which a serious Christian may propose to
himself before he begins his Evening Devotions.
1. WITH what degree of attention and fervour did I use
my morning prayers, public or private?
2. Have I done anything without a present, or at least a
previous, perception of its direct or remote tendency to the
glory of God?
3. Did I in the morning consider what particular virtue I
was to exercise, and what business I had to do, in the day?
4. Have I been zealous to undertake, and active in doing,
what good I could?
5. Have I interested myself any farther in the affairs of
others than charity required?
6. Have I, before I visited or was visited, considered how
I might thereby give or receive improvement?
7. Have I mentioned any failing or fault of any man, when
it was not necessary for the good of another?
8. Have I unnecessarily grieved any one by word or deed?
9. Have I before or in every action considered how it
might be a means of improving in the virtue of the day?
Particular Questions relative to the Love of God.
1. HAVE I set apart some of this day to think upon his
perfections and mercies?
2. Have I laboured to make this day a day of heavenly
rest, sacred to divine love?
3. Have I employed those parts of it in works of necessity
and mercy, which were not employed in prayer, reading, and
meditation?
O MY Father, my God, I am in thy hand; and may I
rejoice above all things in being so. Do with me what
seemeth good in thy sight; only let me love thee with all my
mind, soul, and strength.
I magnify thee for granting me to be born in thy Church,
and of religious parents; for washing me in thy baptism, and
instructing me in thy doctrine of truth and holiness; for
sustaining me by thy gracious providence, and guiding me
by thy blessed Spirit; for admitting me, with the rest of my
Christian brethren, to wait on thee at thy public worship;
and for so often feeding my soul with thy most precious body
and blood, those pledges of love, and sure conveyances of
strength and comfort. O be gracious unto all of us, whom
thou hast this day (or at any time) admitted to thy holy table.
Strengthen our hearts in thy ways against all our tempta
tions, and make us “more than conquerors” in thy love.
O my Father, my God, deliver me, I beseech thee, from
all violent passions: I know how greatly obstructive these
are both of the knowledge and love of thee. O let none of
them find a way into my heart, but let me ever possess my
soul in meekness. O my God, I desire to fear them more
than death; let me not serve these cruel tyrants, but do
thou reign in my breast; let me be ever thy servant, and
love thee with all my heart.
Deliver me, O God, from too intense an application to even
necessary business. I know how this dissipates my thoughts
from the one end of all my business, and impairs ta' lively
perception I would ever retain of thee standing at my right
hand. I know the narrowness of my heart, and that an
eager attention to earthly things leaves it no room for the
things of heaven. O teach me to go through all my employ
ments with so truly disengaged a heart, that I may still see
thee in all things, and see thee therein as continually looking
upon me, and searching my reins; and that I may never impair
that liberty of spirit which is necessary for the love of thee.
Deliver me, O God, from a slothful mind, from all luke
warmness, and all dejection of spirit. I know these cannot
but deaden my love to thee; mercifully free my heart from
them, and give me a lively, zealous, active, and cheerful
spirit; that I may vigorously perform whatever thou com
mandest, thankfully suffer whatever thou choosest for me,
and be ever ardent to obey in all things thy holy love.
Deliver me, O God, from all idolatrous love of any creature.
I know infinite numbers have been lost to thee, by loving those
creatures for their own sake, which thou permittest, nay, even
commandest, to love subordinately to thee. Preserve me, I
beseech thee, from all such blind affection; be thou a guard
to all my desires, that they fix on no creature any farther than
the love of it tends to build me up in the love of thee. Thou
requirest me to love thee with all my heart: Undertake for
me, I beseech thee, and be thou my security, that I may
never open my heart to anything, but out of love to thee.
Above all, deliver me, O my God, from all idolatrous self
love. I know, O God, (blessed be thy infinite mercy for
giving me this knowledge,) that this is the root of all evil.
I know thou madest me, not to do my own will, but thine.
I know, the very corruption of the devil is, the having a will
contrary to thine. Obe thou my helper against this most
dangerous of all idols, that I may both discern all its subtle
ties, and withstand all its force. Othou who hast commanded
me to renounce myself, give me strength, and I will obey
thy command. My choice and desire is, to love myself, as
all other creatures, in and for thee. O let thy almighty arm
so stablish, strengthen, and settle me, that thou mayest ever
be the ground and pillar of all my love.
By this love of thee, my God, may my soul be fixed against
its natural inconstancy; by this may it be reduced to an
entire indifference as to all things else, and simply desire
what is pleasing in thy sight. May this holy flame ever
warm my breast, that I may serve thee with all my might;
and let it consume in my heart all selfish desires, that I may
in all things regard, not myself, but thee.
O my God, let thy glorious name be duly honoured and loved
by all the creatures which thou hast made. Let thy infinite
goodness and greatness be ever adored by all angels and men.
May thy Church, the Catholic seminary of divine love, be pro
tected from all the powers of darkness. O vouchsafe to all who
call themselves by thy name one short glimpse of thy goodness.
May they once taste and see how gracious thou art, that all
things else may be tasteless to them; that their desires may be
always flying up towards thee, that they may render thee love,
and praise, and obedience, pure and cheerful, constant and
zealous, universal and uniform, like that the holy angels
render thee in heaven.
Send forth thy blessed Spirit into the midst of these sinful
nations, and make us a holy people: Stir up the heart of our
Sovereign, of the Royal Family, of the Clergy, the Nobility,
and of all whom thou hast set over us, that they may be
happy instruments in thy hand of promoting this good work.
Be gracious to the Universities, to the Gentry and Commons
of this land: And comfort all that are in affliction; let the
trial of their faith work patience in them, and perfect them
in hope and love ( ).
Bless my father, &c., my friends and relations, and all that
belong to this family; all that have been instrumental to my
good, by their assistance, advice, example, or writing; and
all that do not pray for themselves.
Change the hearts of mine enemies, and give me grace to
forgive them, even as thou for Christ's sake forgivest us.
O thou Shepherd of Israel, vouchsafe to receive me this
night and ever into thy protection; accept my poor services,
and pardon the sinfulness of these and all my holy duties. O
let it be thy good pleasure shortly to put a period to sin and
misery, to infirmity and death, to complete the number of
thine elect, and to hasten thy kingdom; that we, and all that
wait for thy salvation, may eternally love and praise thee, O
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,
throughout all ages, world without end. “Our Father,” &c.
General Questions, which may be used every Morning.
DID I think of God first and last?
Have I examined myself how I behaved since last night's
rctirement?
Am I resolved to do all the good I can this day, and to be
diligent in the business of my calling?
O God, who art the giver of all good gifts, I thy unworthy
servant entirely desire to praise thy name for all the expressions
of thy bounty towards me. Blessed be thy love for giving thy
Son to die for our sins, for the means of grace, and for the
hope of glory. Blessed be thy love for all the temporal benefits
which thou hast with a liberal hand poured out upon me; for
my health and strength, food and raiment, and all other
necessaries with which thou hast provided thy sinful servant.
I also bless thee that, after all my refusals of thy grace, thou
still hast patience with me, hast preserved me this night, (--)*
and given me yet another day to renew and perfect my repent
ance. Pardon, good Lord, all my former sins, and make me
every day more zealous and diligent to improve every oppor
tunity of building up my soul in thy faith, and love, and
obedience. Make thyself always present to my mind, and
let thy love fill and rule my soul, in all those places, and
companies, and employments to which thou callest me this
day. In all my passage through this world, suffer not my
heart to be set upon it; but always fix my single eye and my
undivided affections on “the prize of my high calling.” This
one thing let me do; let me so press toward this, as to make
all things else minister unto it; and be careful so to use
them, as thereby to fit my soul for that pure bliss which
thou hast prepared for those that love thee.
O thou, who art good and doest good, who extendest thy
lovingkindness to all mankind, the work of thine hands, thine
image, capable of knowing and loving thee eternally: Suffer
me to exclude none, O Lord, from my charity, who are the
objects of thy mercy; but let me treat all my neighbours with
that tender love which is due to thy servants and to thy
children. Thou hast required this mark of my love to thee:
O let no temptation expose me to ingratitude, or make me
forfeit thy lovingkindness, which is better than life itself.
But grant that I may assist all my brethren with my prayers,
where I cannot reach them with actual services. Make me
zealous to embrace all occasions that may administer to their
happiness, by assisting the needy, protecting the oppressed,
instructing the ignorant, confirming the wavering, exhorting
the good, and reproving the wicked. Let me look upon the
failings of my neighbour as if they were my own; that I may
be grieved for them, that I may never reveal them but when
charity requires, and then with tenderness and compassion.
Let thy love to me, O blessed Saviour, be the pattern of my
love to him. Thou thoughtest nothing too dear to part with,
* (--) Here you may mention any particular mercy received.
to rescue me from etermal misery: O let me think nothing
too dear to part with to set forward the everlasting good of
my fellow Christians. They are members of thy body; there
fore I will cherish them. Thou hast redeemed them with an
inestimable price; assisted by thy Holy Spirit, therefore, I
will endeavour to recover them from a state of destruction;
that thus adorning thy holy gospel, by doing good according
to my power, I may at last be received into the endearments
of thy eternal love, and sing everlasting praise unto the Lamb
that was slain and sitteth on the throne for ever.
Extend, I humbly beseech thee, thy mercy to all men, and
let them become thy faithful servants. Let all Christians
live up to the holy religion they profess; especially these
sinful nations. Be entreated for us, good Lord; be glorified
by our reformation, and not by our destruction. “Turn
thou us, and so shall we be turned:” O be favourable to thy
people; give us grace to put a period to our provocations,
and do thou put a period to our punishment. Defend our
Church from schism, heresy, and sacrilege, and the King
from all treasons and conspiracies. Bless all Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, with apostolical graces, exemplary lives, and
sound doctrine. Grant to the Council wisdom from above,
to all Magistrates integrity and zeal, to the Universities
quietness and industry, and to the Gentry and Commons
pious and peaceable and loyal hearts.
Preserve my parents, my brothers and sisters, my friends
and relations, and all mankind, in their souls and bodies
(--). Forgive mine cnemies, and in thy due time make
them kindly affected towards me. Have mercy on all who
are “afflicted in mind, body, or estate; give them patience
under their sufferings, and a happy issue out of all their
afflictions.” O grant that we, with those who are already
dead in thy faith and fear, may together partake of a joyful
resurrection, through Him who liveth and reigneth with thee
and the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end.
Particular Questions relating to the Love of our Neighbour.
1. HAvE I thought anything but my conscience too dear
to part with, to please or serve my neighbour?
2. Have I rejoiced or grieved with him?
3. Have I received his infirmities with pity, not with
anger?
4. Have I contradicted any one, either where I had no
good end in view, or where there was no probability of
convincing?
5. Have I let him I thought in the wrong (in a trifle)
have the last word?
Most great and glorious Lord God, I desire to prostrate
myself before thy divine Majesty, under a deep sense of my
unworthiness; and with sorrow, and shame, and confusion
of face, to confess I have, by my manifold transgressions,
deserved thy severest visitations. “Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and am no more worthy to be called thy
son:” O let thy paternal bowels yearn upon me, and for
Jesus Christ's sake graciously receive me. Accept my imper
fect repentance, and send thy Spirit of adoption into my
heart, that I may again be owned by thee, call thee Father,
and share in the blessings of thy children.
Adored be thy goodness for all the benefits thou hast
already from time to time bestowed on me; for the good things
of this life, and the hope of eternal happiness. Particularly,
I offer to thee my humblest thanks for thy preservation of
me this day ( ). If I have escaped any sin, it is the
effect of thy restraining grace; if I have avoided any danger,
it was thy hand directed me. To thy holy name be ascribed
the honour and glory. O let the sense of all thy blessings
have this effect upon me,--to make me daily more diligent in
devoting myself, all I am, and all I have, to thy glory.
O my God, fill my soul with so entire a love of thee, that
I may love nothing but for thy sake, and in subordination to
thy love. Give me grace to study thy knowledge daily, that
the more I know thee, the more I may love thee. Create in
me a zealous obedience to all thy commands, a cheerful patience
under all thy chastisements, and a thankful resignation to all
thy disposals. May I ever have awful thoughts of thee;
never mention thy venerable name, unless on just, solemn, and
devout occasions; nor even then without acts of adoration.
O let it be the one business of my life to glorify thee, by every
thought of my heart, by every word of my tongue, by every
work of my hand; by professing thy truth, even to the death,
if it should plcase thee to call me to it; and by engaging all
men, as far as in me lies, to glorify and love thee.
Let thy unwearied and tender love to me, make my love
unwearied and tender to my neighbour, zealous to pray for,
and to procure and promote, his health and safety, ease and
happiness; and active to comfort, succour, and relieve all
whom thy love and their own necessities recommend to my
charity. Make me peaceful and reconcilable; easy to forgive,
and glad to return good for evil. Make me like thyself, all
kindness and benignity, all goodness and gentleness, all meek
mess and longsuffering. And, O thou Lover of souls, raise in
me a compassionate zeal to save the life, the eternal life, of
souls; and by affectionate and seasonable advice, exhortations,
and reproof, to reclaim the wicked, and win them to thy love.
Be pleased, O Lord, to take me, with my father and
mother, brethren and sisters, my friends and relations, and
my enemies, into thy almighty protection this night. Refresh
me with such comfortable rest that I may rise more fit for
thy service. Let me lie down with holy thoughts of thee,
and when I awake let me be still present with thee.
Show mercy to the whole world, O Father of all; let the
gospel of thy Son run and be glorified throughout all the
earth. Let it be made known to all infidels, and obeyed by
all Christians. Be merciful to this Church and nation; give
unto thy Bishops a discerning spirit, that they may make
choice of fit persons to serve in thy sacred ministry; and enable
all who are ordained to any holy function, diligently to feed
the flocks committed to their charge, instructing them in
saving knowledge, guiding them by their examples, praying
for and blessing them, exercising spiritual discipline in thy
Church, and duly administering thy holy sacraments. Multiply
thy blessings on our Sovereign, on the Royal Family, and on
the Nobles, Magistrates, Gentry, and Commons of this land;
that they may all, according to the several talents they have
received, be faithful instruments of thy glory. Give to
our Schools and Universities, zeal, prudence, and holiness.
Visit in mercy all the children of affliction, ( ) relieve
their necessities, lighten their burdens; give them a cheerful
submission to thy gracious will, and at length bring them
and us, with those that already rest from their labours, into
the joy of our Lord; to whom with thee, O Father, and thee,
O Holy Ghost, be all praise, now and for ever.
O ETERNAL and merciful Father, I give thee humble
thanks (increase my thankfulness, I beseech thee) for all the
blessings, spiritual and temporal, which, in the riches of thy
mercy, thou hast poured down upon me. Lord, let me not
live but to love thee, and to glorify thy name. Particularly
I give thee most unfeigned thanks for preserving me from
my birth to this moment, and for bringing me safe to the
beginning of this day, ( ) in which, and in all the days
of my life, I besecch thee that all my thoughts, words, and
works may tend to thy glory. Heal, O Father of mercies,
all my infirmities, (-) strengthen me against all my
follies; forgive me all my sins, ( ) and let them not cry
louder in thine ears for vengeance, than my prayers for
mercy and forgiveness.
Oblessed Lord, enable me to fulfil thy commands, and com
mand what thou wilt. Othou Saviour of all that trust in thee,
do with me what seemeth best in thine own eyes; only give
me the mind which was in thee; let me learn of thee to be
meek and lowly. Pour into me the whole spirit of humility;
fill, I beseech thee, every part of my soul with it, and make
it the constant, ruling habit of my mind, that all my other
tempers may arise from it; that I may have no thoughts, no
desires, no designs, but such as are the true fruit of a lowly
spirit. Grant that I may think of myself as I ought to
think, that I may “know myself, even as I am known.”
Hercin may I exercise myself continually, when I lie down
and when I rise up, that I may always appear poor, and little,
and mean, and base, and vile in mine own eyes. O convince
me that “I have neither learned wisdom, nor have the know
ledge of the holy.” Give me a lively sense that I am nothing,
that I have nothing, and that I can do nothing. Enable me
to feel that I am all ignorance and error, weakness and
uncleanness, sin and misery; that I am not worthy of the
air I breathe, the earth I tread upon, or the sun that shines
upon me. And let me be fully content when all other men
think of me as I do of myself. O save me from either
desiring or seeking the honour that cometh of men. Convince
me that the words of praise, “when smoother than oil,” then
especially “are very swords.” Give me to dread them more
than the “poison of asps,” or “the pestilence that walketh
in darkness.” And when these cords of pride, these snares
of death, do overtake me, suffer me not to take any pleasure
in them, but enable me instantly to flee unto thee, O Lord,
and to complain unto my God. Let all my bones cry out,
“Thou art worthy to be praised; so shall I be safe from
mine enemies.”
Bless, O gracious Father, all the nations, whom thou hast
placed upon the earth, with the knowledge of thee, the only
true God: But especially bless thy holy Catholic Church,
and fill it with truth and grace; where it is corrupt, purge
it; where it is in error, rectify it; where it is right, confirm
it; where it is divided and rent asunder, heal the breaches
thereof, O thou Holy One of Israel. Replenish all whom
thou hast called to any office therein with truth of doctrine
and innocency of life. Let their prayers be as precious
incense in thy sight, that their cries and tears for the city of
their God may not be in vain.
O Lord, hear the King in the day of his trouble; let thy
name, O God, defend him. Grant him his heart's desire,
and fulfil all his mind. Set his heart firm upon thee, and
upon other things only as they are in and for thee. O
defend him and his royal relations from thy holy heaven,
even with the saving strength of thy right hand.
Have mercy upon this kingdom, and forgive the sins of
this people; turn thee unto us, bless us, and cause thy face
to shine on our desolations. Inspire the Nobles and Magis
trates with prudent zeal, the Gentry and Commons with
humble loyalty. Pour down thy blessings on all seminaries
of true religion and learning, that they may remember and
answer the end of their institution. Comfort all the sons
and daughters of affliction, especially those who suffer for
righteousness' sake. Bless my father and mother, my
brethren and sisters, my friends and relations, and all that
belong to this family. Forgive all who are mine enemies,
and so reconcile them to me and thyself, that we all, together
with those that now sleep in thee, may awake to life ever
lasting, through thy merits and intercession, O blessed
Jesus; to whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
ascribed, by all creatures, “all honour, and might, and
wisdom, and glory, and blessing.”
Particular Questions relating to Humility.
1. HAve I laboured to conform all my thoughts, words,
and actions to these fundamental maxims: “I am nothing, I
have nothing, I can do nothing?”
2. Have I set apart some time this day to think upon my
infirmities, follies, and sins?
3. Have I ascribed to myself any part of any good which
God did by my hand?
4. Have I said or done anything with a view to the praise
of men P
5. Have I desired the praise of men?
6. Have I taken pleasure in it?
7. Have I commended myself, or others, to their faces,
unless for God’s sake, and then with fear and trembling?
8. Have I despised any one's advice?
9. Have I, when I thought so, said, “I am in the wrong?”
10. Have I received contempt for things indifferent, with
meekness? for doing my duty, with joy?
11. Have I omitted justifying myself where the glory of
God was not concerned? Have I submitted to be thought
in the wrong?
12. Have I, when contemned, First, prayed God it might
not discourage or puff me up; Secondly, that it might not be
imputed to the contemner; Thirdly, that it might heal my
pride?
13. Have I, , without some particular good in view,
mentioned the contempt I had met with ?
I DESIRE to offer unto thee, O Lord, my evening sacrifice,
--the sacrifice of a contrite spirit. “Have mercy upon me, O
God, after thy great goodness, and after the multitude of thy
mercies do away mine offences.” Let thy unspeakable mercy
free me from the sins I have committed, and deliver me from
the punishment I have deserved ( ). O save me from
every work of darkness, and cleanse me “from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit,” that, for the time to come, I may, with a
pure heart and mind, follow thee, the only true God.
O Lamb of God, who, both by thy example and precept,
didst instruct us to be meek and humble, give me grace
throughout my whole life, in every thought, and word, and
work, to imitate thy meekness and humility. O mortify in me
the whole body of pride; grant me to feel that I am nothing
and have nothing, and that I deserve nothing but shame and
contempt, but misery and punishment. Grant, O Lord, that
I may look for nothing, claim nothing; and that I may go
through all the scenes of life, not seeking my own glory, but
looking wholly unto thee, and acting wholly for thee. Let
me never speak any word that may tend to my own praise,
unless the good of my neighbour require it; and even then
let me beware, lest, to heal another, I wound my own soul.
Let my ears and my heart be ever shut to the praise that
cometh of men, and let me “refuse to hear the voice of the
charmer, charm he never so sweetly.” Give me a dread of
applause, in whatsoever form, and from whatsoever tongue, it
cometh. I know that “many stronger men have been slain by
it,” and that it “leadeth to the chambers of death.” O deliver
my soul from this snare of hell; neither let me spread it for
the feet of others. Whosoever perish thereby, be their blood
upon their own head, and let not my hand be upon them.
O thou Giver of every good and perfect gift, if at any time
thou pleasest to work by my hand, teach me to discern what
is my own from what is another's, and to render unto thee
the things that are thine. As all the good that is done on
earth thou doest it thyself, let me ever return to thee all the
glory. Let me, as a pure crystal, transmit all the light thou
pourest upon me; but never claim as my own what is thy
sole property.
O thou who wert despised and rejected of men, when I am
slighted by my friends, disdained by my superiors, overborne
or ridiculed by my equals, or contemptuously treated by my
inferiors, let me cry out with thy holy martyr,” “It is now
that I begin to be a disciple of Christ.” Then let me
thankfully accept, and faithfully use, the happy occasion of
improving in thy meek and lowly spirit. If for thy sake
“men cast out my name as evil,” let me “rejoice and be
exceeding glad.” If for my own infirmities, yet let me
acknowledge thy goodness, in giving me this medicine to heal
my pride and vanity, and beg thy mercy for those physicians
of my soul by whose hands it is administered to me.
* Tornati.”
“Make me to remember thee on my bed, and think upon
thee when I am waking.” Thou hast preserved me from all
the dangers of the day past; thou hast been my support
from my youth up until now; “under the shadow of thy
wings” let me pass this night in comfort and peace.
O thou Creator and Preserver of all mankind, have mercy
upon all conditions of men; purge thy holy catholic Church
from all heresy, schism, and superstition. Bless our
Sovereign in his person, in his actions, in his relations, and
in his people. May it please thee “to endue his Council,
and all the Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understand
ing;” the Magistrates, with equity, courage, and prudence;
the Gentry, with industry and temperance; and all the
Commons of this land, with increase of grace, and a holy,
humble, thankful spirit.
O pour upon our whole Church, and especially upon the
Clergy thereof, the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant to
our Universities peace and piety; and to all that labour
under affliction, constant patience and timely deliverance.
Bless all my kindred, especially my father and mother, my
brothers and sisters, and all my friends and benefactors
( ). Turn the hearts of my enemies; ( ) forgive
them and me all our sins, and grant that we, and all the
members of thy holy Church, may find mercy in the dreadful
day of judgment, through the mediation and satisfaction of
thy blessed Son Jesus Christ; to whom, with thee and the
Holy Ghost the Comforter, be all honour, praise, and
thanksgiving, in all the Churches of the saints for ever.
O Thou who dwellest in the light which no man can
approach, in whose presence there is no night, in the light of
whose countenance there is perpetual day; I, thy sinful
servant, whom thou hast preserved this night, who live by
thy power this day, bless and glorify thee for the defence of
thy almighty providence, ( ) and humbly pray thee, that
this, and all my days, may be wholly devoted to thy service.
Send thy Holy Spirit to be the guide of all my ways, and
the sanctifier of my soul and body. Save, defend, and build
me up in thy fear and love; give unto me the light of thy
countenance, peace from heaven, and the salvation of my
soul in the day of the Lord Jesus.
O thou who art “the Way, the Truth, and the Life,” thou
hast said no man can follow thee, unless he renounce himself.
I know, O Saviour, that thou hast laid nothing upon us but
what the design of thy love made necessary for us. Thou
sawest our disease, our idolatrous self-love, whereby we fell
away from God, to be as gods ourselves, to please ourselves,
and to do our own will. Lo, I come ! May I ever renounce
my own, and do thy blessed will in all things
I know, O God, thou didst empty thyself of thy eternal
glory, and tookest upon thee “the form of a servant.” Thou
who madest all men to serve and please thee, didst not please
thyself, but wast the servant of all. Thou, O Lord of the hosts
of heaven and earth, didst yield thy cheeks to be smitten,
thy back to be scourged, and thy hands and feet to be nailed
to an accursed tree. Thus didst thou, our great Master,
renounce thyself; and can we think much of renouncing our
vile selves? My Lord and my God, let me not presume to
be above my Master | Let it be the one desire of my heart,
to be as my Master; to do, not my own will, but the will of
Him that sent me.
O thou whose whole life did cry aloud, “Father, not mine,
but thy will be done,” give me grace to walk after thy
pattern; to tread in thy steps. Give me grace to “take up
my cross daily,” to inure myself to bear hardship. Let me
exercise myself unto godliness betimes, before the rains
descend and the floods beat upon me. Let me now practise
what is not pleasing to flesh and blood, what is not agreeable
to my senses, appetites, and passions, that I may not here
after renounce thee, for fear of suffering for thee, but may
stand firm in the “day of my visitation.”
O thou who didst not please thyself, although for thy
“pleasure all things are and were created,” let some portion
of thy Spirit descend on me, that I may “deny myself and
follow thee.” Strengthen my soul, that I may be temperate
in all things; that I may never use any of thy creatures but
in order to some end thou commandest me to pursue, and in
that measure and manner which most conduces to it. Let
me never gratify any desire which has not thee for its ulti
mate object. Let me ever abstain from all pleasures which
do not prepare me for taking pleasure in thee; as knowing
220 PortMS OF PRAYER.
that all such war against the soul, and tend to alienate it from
thee. O save me from ever indulging either “the desire of
the flesh, the desire of the eye, or the pride of life.” Set a
watch, O Lord, over my senses and appetites, my passions
and understanding, that I may resolutely deny them every
gratification which has no tendency to thy glory. O train me
up in this good way, “that when I am old I may not depart
from it;” that I may be at length of a truly mortified heart,
“crucified unto the world, and the world crucified unto me.”
Hear also my prayers for all mankind, and guide their feet
into the way of peace; for thy holy Catholic Church,-let
her live by thy Spirit, and reign in thy glory. Remember
that branch of it which thou hast planted in these kingdoms;
especially the stewards of thy holy mysteries; give them such
zeal, and diligence, and wisdom, that they may save both
themselves and those that hear them.
Preserve, O great King of heaven and earth, all Christian
Princes, especially our Sovereign and his family. Grant that
his Council, and all that are in authority under him, may
truly and indifferently administer justice. And to all thy
people give thy heavenly grace, that they may faithfully serve
thee all the days of their life. Bless the Universities with
prudence, unity, and holiness. However the way of truth be
evil spoken of, may they walk in it even to the end. Who
ever forget or blaspheme their high calling, may they ever
remember that they are a “chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people;” and, accord
ingly, “show forth the praise of Him who hath called them
out of darkness into his marvellous light.”
With a propitious eye, O gracious Lord, behold all my
enemies, and all that are in affliction; give them patience
under their sufferings, and grant that they, and all the
members of thy Church, may find rest, “where the wicked
cease from troubling,” and mercy in the great day of trial.
In particular I commend to thy mercy, my father and
mother, my brethren and sisters, my friends and relations
(--). Lord, thou best knowest all their wants; O suit thy
blessings to their several necessities.
Let these my prayers, O Lord, find access to the throne
of grace, through the Son of thy love, Jesus Christ the
righteous; to whom, with thee, O Father, in the unity of the
Spirit, be all love and obedience now and for ever!
Particular Questions relating to Mortification.
1. HAve I done anything merely because it was pleasing?
2. Have I not only not done what passion solicited me to,
but done just the contrary?
3. Have I received the inconveniences I could not avoid
as means of mortification chosen for me by God?
4. Have I contrived pretences to avoid self-denial? In
particular,
5. Have I thought any occasion of denying myself too
small to be embraced ?
6. Have I submitted my will to the will of every one that
opposed it, except where the glory of God was concerned?
7. Have I set apart some time for endeavouring after a
lively sense of the sufferings of Christ and my own sins? for
deprecating God’s judgment, and thinking how to amend?
O ALMIGHTY Lord of heaven and earth, I desire with
fear and shame to cast myself down before thee, humbly
confessing my manifold sins and unsufferable wickedness. I
confess, O great God, that I have sinned grievously against
thee by thought, word, and deed, particularly this day. Thy
words and thy laws, O God, are holy, and thy judgments are
terrible ! But I have broken all thy righteous laws, and
incurred thy severest judgments; and where shall I appear
when thou art angry?
But, O Lord my Judge, thou art also my Redeemer! I
have sinned, but thou, O blessed Jesus, art my Advocate!
“Enter not into judgment with me,” lest I die; but spare
me, gracious Lord, “spare thy servant, whom thou hast
redeemed with thy most precious blood.” O reserve not evil
in store for me against the day of vengeance, but let thy
mercy be magnified upon me. Deliver me from the power of
sin, and preserve me from the punishment of it.
Thou whose mercy is without measure, whose goodness is
unspeakable, despise not thy returning servant, who earnestly
begs for pardon and reconciliation. Grant me the forgive
ness of what is past, and a perfect repentance of all my sins;
that for the time to come I may with a pure spirit do thy
222 FOItMS OF PRAY Elt.
will, O God, walking humbly with thee, conversing charitably
with men, possessing my soul in resignation and holiness,
and my body in sanctification and honour.
“My Lord and my God,” I know that unless I am planted
together with thee in the likeness of thy death, I cannot in
the likeness of thy resurrection. O strengthen me, that by
“denying myself and taking up my cross daily,” I may
crucify the old man, and utterly destroy the whole body of
sin. Give me grace to “mortify all my members which are
upon earth,” all my works and affections which are according
to corrupt nature. Let me be dead unto sin, unto every
transgression of thy law, which is holy, merciful, and perfect.
Let me be dead unto the world, and all that is in the world,
“the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eye, and the pride
of life.” Let me be dead unto pleasure, so far as it tendeth
not to thee and to those pleasures which are at thy right hand
for evermore. Let me be dead unto my own will, and alive
only unto thine. I am not my own; thou hast “bought me
with a price,” with the price of thine own blood. And thou
didst therefore die for all, “that we should not henceforth
live unto ourselves, but unto Him that died for us.” Arm
thou me with this mind; circumcise my heart, and make me
a new creature. Let me no longer live to the desires of men,
but to the will of God. Let thy Holy Spirit enable me to
say with thy blessed Apostle, “I am crucified with Christ:
Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.”
O thou Great Shepherd of souls, bring home unto thy fold
all that are gone astray. Preserve thy Church from all
heresy and schism, from all that persecute or oppose the
truth; and give unto thy Ministers wisdom and holiness, and
the powerful aid of thy blessed Spirit. Advance the just
interests, and preserve the persons, of all Christian Princes,
especially our Sovereign: Give to him and his Royal Family,
and to all his subjects, in their several stations, particularly
those that are in authority among them, grace to do thy will
in this world, and eternal glory in the world to come.
Bless, O Lord, all our nurseries of piety and schools of
learning, that they may devote all their studies to thy glory.
Have mercy on all that are in affliction; remember the poor
and needy, the widow and fatherless, the friendless and
oppressed; heal the sick and languishing, give them a
sanctified use of thy rod, and when thou seest it expedient
THURSDAY MORN1 No. 223
for them, receive them into the number of thy departed
saints, and with them into thine everlasting kingdom.
O my God, I praise thee for thy continual preservation of
me, for thy fatherly protection over me this day; ( ) for
all the comforts with which thou surroundest me, spiritual
and temporal; particularly for leave now to pray unto thee.
O accept the poor services, pardon the sinfulness of this and
all my holy duties, and bless me, my friends and relations,
my benefactors and mine enemies, (this night and ever,)
with the blessings of thy children.
These my prayers, O most merciful Father, vouchsafe to
hear, through the mediation of Jesus Christ our Redeemer;
who with thee and the Holy Ghost is worshipped and glorified,
in all Churches of the saints, one God blessed for ever !
O ETERNAL God, my Sovereign Lord, I acknowledge all I
am, all I have, is thine. Ogive me such a sense of thy
infinite goodness, that I may return to thee all possible love
and obedience.
I humbly and heartily thank thee for all the favours thou
hast bestowed upon me; for creating me after thine own
image, for thy daily preserving me by thy good providence,
for redeeming me by the death of thy blessed Son, and for
the assistance of thy Holy Spirit; for causing me to be born
in a Christian country, for blessing me with plentiful means
of salvation, with religious parents and friends, and frequent
returns of thy ever blessed sacrament. I also thank thee for
all thy temporal blessings; for the preservation of me this
night; ( ) for my health, strength, food, raiment, and all
the comforts and necessaries of life. O may I always delight
to “praise thy holy name,” and, above all thy benefits, love
thee my great Benefactor.
And, O Father of mercies, shut not up thy bowels of
compassion towards me, a vile and miserable sinner; despise
not the work of thine own hands, the purchase of thy Son's
blood. For his sake I most humbly implore forgiveness of all
my sins. “Lo, I come now, to do thy will alone;” and am
resolved, by thy assistance, to have no longer any choice of
my own, but with singleness of heart to obey thy good
pleasure: “Father, not my will, but thine be done,” in all
my thoughts, words, and actions.
O thou all-sufficient God of angels and men, who art above
all, and through all, and in all; from whom, by whom, and
in whom are all things; “in whom we live, move, and have
our being;” may my will be as entirely and continually
derived from thine, as my being and happiness are !
Ibelieve, Osovereign Goodness, O mighty Wisdom, that thou
dost sweetly order and govern all things, even the most minute,
even the most noxious, to thy glory, and the good of those that
love thee. I believe, O Father of the families of heaven and
earth, that thou so disposest all events, as may best magnify
thy goodness to all thy children, especially those whose eyes
wait upon thee. I most humbly beseech thee, teach me to
adore all thy ways, though I cannot comprehend them; teach
me to be glad that thou art King, and to give thee thanks
for all things that befal me; seeing thou hast chosen that for
me, and hast thereby “set to thy seal that they are good.”
And for that which is to come, give me thy grace to do in all
things what pleaseth thee; and then, with an absolute submis
sion to thy wisdom, to leave the issues of them in thy hand.
O Lord Jesu, I give thee my body, my soul, my substance,
my fame, my friends, my liberty, my life: Dispose of me, and
all that is mine, as it seemeth best unto thee. I am not mine,
but thine; Claim me as thy right, keep me as thy charge, love
me as thy child ! Fight for me when I am assaulted, heal
me when I am wounded, and revive me when I am destroyed.
O help me with thy grace, that whatsoever I shall do or
suffer this day may tend to thy glory. Keep me in love to
thee, and to all men. Do thou direct my paths, and teach
me to set thee always before me. Let not the things of this
life, or my manifold concerns therein, alienate any part of
my affections from thee; nor let me ever pursue or regard
them, but for thee, and in obedience to thy will.
Extend, O Lord, thy pity to the whole race of mankind;
enlighten the Gentiles with thy truth, and bring into thy flock
thy ancient people the Jews. Be gracious to the holy catholic
Church; and grant she may always preserve that doctrine and
discipline which thou hast delivered to her. Grant that all of
this nation, especially our Governors and the Clergy, may,
“whatsoever they do, do all to thy glory.” Bless all nurseries of
true religion and useful learning, and let them not neglect the
end of their institution. Be merciful to all that are in distress,
(--) that struggle with pain, poverty, or reproach; be thou a
guide to them that travel by land or by water; give a strong
and quiet spirit to those who are condemned to death, liberty
to prisoners and captives, and ease and cheerfulness to every
sad heart. O give spiritual strength and comfort to scrupu
lous consciences, and to them that are afflicted by evil spirits.
Pity idiots and lunatics, and give life and salvation to all to
whom thou hast given no understanding. Give to all that
are in error the light of thy truth; bring all sinners to
repentance, (-) and give to all heretics humility and grace
to make amends to thy Church, by the public acknowledg
ment of an holy faith. Bless all my friends and relations,
acquaintance and enemies; (--) unite us all to one another
by mutual love, and to thyself by constant holiness; that we,
together with all those who are gone before us in thy faith
and fear, may find a merciful acceptance in the last day,
through the merits of thy blessed Son; to whom with thee
and the Holy Ghost be all glory, world without end |
Particular Questions relating to Resignation and Meekness.
1. HAvE I endeavoured to will what God wills, and that
only?
2. Have I received everything that has befallen me without
my choice, as the choice of infinite wisdom and goodness for
me, with thanks?
3. Have I (after doing what he requires of me to do
concerning them) left all future things absolutely to God's
disposal; that is, have I laboured to be wholly indifferent to
whichsoever way he shall ordain for me?
4. Have I resumed my claim to my body, soul, friends,
fame, or fortune, which I have made over to God; or repented
of my gift, when God accepted any of them at my hands?
5. Have I endeavoured to be cheerful, mild, and courteous
in whatever I said or did?
6. Have I said anything with a stern look, accent, or
gesture? particularly with regard to religion?
My Lord and my God, thou seest my heart, and my
desires are not hid from thee. I am encouraged by my happy
experience of thy goodness, (particularly this day past,) to
present myself before thee, notwithstanding I know myself
unworthy of the least favour from thee. I am ashamed when
I think how long I have lived a stranger, yea, an enemy to
thee, taking upon me to dispose of myself, and to please
myself in the main course of my life. But I now unfeignedly
desire to return unto thee, and, renouncing all interest and
propriety in myself, to give myself up entirely to thee; I
would be thine, and only thine for ever. But I know I am
nothing, and can do nothing of myself; and if ever I am
thine, I must be wholly indebted to thee for it. O my God,
my Saviour, my Sanctifier, turn not away thy face from a
poor soul that seeks thee; but as thou hast kindled in me
these desires, so confirm, increase, and satisfy them. Reject
not that poor gift which I would make of myself unto thee,
but teach me so to make it, that it may be acceptable in thy
sight. Lord, hear me, help me, and show mercy unto me,
for Jesus Christ’s sake.
To thee, O God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, my Creator,
Redeemer, and Sanctifier, I give up myself entirely: May I
no longer serve myself, but thee, all the days of my life.
I give thee my understanding: May it be my only care to
know thee, thy perfections, thy works, and thy will. Let all
things else be as dung and dross unto me, for the excellency
of this knowledge. And let me silence all reasonings against
whatsoever thou teachest me, who canst neither deceive, nor
be deceived.
I give thee my will: May I have no will of my own;
whatsoever thou willest may I will, and that only. May I
will thy glory in all things, as thou dost, and make that my
end in everything; may I ever say with the Psalmist,
“Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire beside thee.” May I delight to do thy
will, O God, and rejoice to suffer it. Whatever threatens
me, let me say, “It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth
him good;” and whatever befalls me, let me give thanks,
since it is thy will concerning me.
I give thee my affections: Do thou dispose of them all; be
thou my love, my fear, my joy; and may nothing have any
share in them, but with respect to thee and for thy sake. What
thou lovest, may I love; what thou hatest, may I hate; and
that in such measures as thou art pleased to prescribe me.
I give thee my body: May I glorify thee with it, and
preserve it holy, fit for thee, O God, to dwell in. May I
aneither indulge it, nor use too much rigour towards it; but
keep it, as far as in me lies, healthy, vigorous, and active, and
fit to do thee all manner of service which thou shalt call for.
I give thee all my worldly goods: May I prize them and
use them only for thee: May I faithfully restore to thee, in
the poor, all thou hast intrusted me with, above the necessaries
of life; and be content to part with them too, whenever
thou, my Lord, shalt require them at my hands.
I give thee my credit and reputation: May I never value
it, but only in respect of thee; nor endeavour to maintain it,
but as it may do thee service and advance thy honour in the
world.
I give thee myself and my all: Let me look upon myself
to be nothing, and to have nothing, out of thee. Be thou
the sole disposer and governor of myself and all ; be thou
my portion and my all.
O my God and my all, when hereafter I shall be tempted
to break this solemn engagement, when I shall be pressed to
conform to the world, and to the company and customs that
surround me; may my answer be, “I am not my own; I
am not for myself, nor for the world, but for my God. I
will give unto God the things which are God’s. God be
merciful to me a sinner.”
Have mercy, O Father of the spirits of all flesh, on all man
kind. Convert all Jews, Turks, and Heathens, to thy truth.
Bless the catholic Church; heal its breaches, and establish it
in truth and peace. Preserve and defend all Christian Princes,
especially our Sovereign and his family. Be merciful to this
nation; bless the Clergy with soundness of doctrine and
purity of life, the Council with wisdom, the Magistrates with
integrity and zeal, and the people with loyalty. Bless the
Universities with learning and holiness, that they may afford
a constant supply of men fit and able to do thee service.
Shower down thy graces on all my relations, on all my
friends, and all that belong to this family. Comfort and
relieve those that labour under any affliction of body or mind,
especially those who suffer for the testimony of a good con
science. Visit them, O gracious Lord, in all their distresses.
Thou knowest, thou seest, them under all. O stay their souls
upon thee; give them to rejoice that they are counted worthy
to suffer for thy name's sake, and constantly to look unto
the author and finisher of their faith. Supply abundantly to
all their souls who are in prison, the want of thy holy
ordinances, and in thy good time, deliver them, and be
merciful unto them, as thou usest to be unto them that love
thy name. Those that love or do good to me, reward seven
fold into their bosom; (--) those that hate me (-) convert
and forgive; and grant us all, together with thy whole
Church, an entrance into thine everlasting kingdom, through
Jesus Christ; to whom with thee and the blessed Spirit,
three Persons and one God, be ascribed all majesty,
dominion, and power, now and for evermore. Amen.
ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, I bless thee from my heart,
that of thy infinite goodness thou hast preserved me this
night past, and hast, with the impregnable defence of thy
providence, protected me from the power and malice of the
devil. Withdraw not, I humbly entreat thee, thy protection
from me, but mercifully this day watch over me with the eyes
of thy mercy. Direct my soul and body according to the
rule of thy will, and fill my heart with thy Holy Spirit, that
I may pass this day, and all the rest of my days, to thy glory.
O Saviour of the world, God of Gods, light of light, thou
that art the brightness of thy Father's glory, the express image
of his person; thou that hast destroyed the power of the devil,
that hast overcome death, “that sittest at the right hand of
the Father;” thou wilt speedily come down in thy Father's
glory to judge all men according to their works: Be thou my
light and my peace; destroy the power of the devil in me,
and make me a new creature. Othou who didst cast seven.
devils out of Mary Magdalene, cast out of my heart all
corrupt affections. Othou who didst raise Lazarus from the
dead, raise me from the death of sin. Thou who didst cleanse.
the lepers, heal the sick, and give sight to the blind, heal the
diseases of my soul; open my eyes, and fix them singly on
the prize of my high calling, and cleanse my heart from every
desire but that of advancing thy glory.
O Jesus, poor and abject, unknown and despised, have mercy
upon me, and let me not be ashamed to follow thee. O Jesus,
hated, calumniated, and persecuted, have mercy upon me, and
let me not be ashamed to come after thee. O Jesus, betrayed
:and sold at a vile price, have mercy upon me, and make me
content to be as my Master. O Jesus, blasphemed, accused,
and wrongfully condemned, have mercy upon me, and teach
me to endure the contradiction of sinners. O Jesus, clothed
with a habit of reproach and shame, have mercy upon me,
and let me not seek my own glory. O Jesus, insulted, mocked,
and spit upon, have mercy upon me, and let me run with
patience the race set before me. O Jesus, dragged to the
pillar, scourged, and bathed in blood, have mercy upon me,
and let me not faint in the fiery trial. O Jesus, crowned with
thorns, and hailed in derision; O Jesus, burdened with our
sins, and the curses of the people; O Jesus, affronted, outraged,
buffeted, overwhelmed with injuries, griefs, and humiliations;
O Jesus, hanging on the accursed tree, bowing the head,
giving up the ghost, have mercy upon me, and conform my
whole soul to thy holy, humble, suffering Spirit. O thou
who for the love of me hast undergone such an infinity of
sufferings and humiliations, let me be wholly “emptied of
myself,” that I may rejoice to take up my cross daily and
follow thee. Enable me, too, to endure the pain and
despise the shame; and, if it be thy will, to resist even
unto blood |
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, I, miserable sinner,
humbly acknowledge that I am altogether unworthy to pray
for myself. But since thou hast commanded me to make
prayers and intercessions for all men, in obedience to thy
command, and confidence of thy unlimited goodness, I
commend to thy mercy the wants and necessities of all man
kind. Lord, let it be thy good pleasure to restore to thy
Church catholic, primitive peace and purity; to show mercy
to these sinful nations, and give us grace at length to break
off our sins by repentance; defend our Church from all the
assaults of schism, heresy, and sacrilege; and bless all Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons with apostolical graccs. O let it be thy
good pleasure to defend the King from all his enemies,
spiritual and temporal; to bless all his royal relations; to
grant to the Council wisdom, to the Magistrates zeal and
prudence, to the Gentry and Commons piety and loyalty I
Lord, let it be thy good pleasure to give thy grace to the
Universities; to bless those whom I have wronged, ( )
and to forgive those who have wronged me; ( ) to
comfort the disconsolate, to give health and patience to all
that are sick and afflicted. ( )
Vouchsafe to bless my father and mother with the fear of
thy name, that they may be holy in all manner of conver
sation. Let them remember how short their time is, and be
careful to improve every moment of it. O thou who hast
kept them from their youth up until now, forsake them not
now they are grayheaded, but perfect them in every good
word and work, and be thou their guide unto death. Bless
my brethren and sisters, whom thou hast graciously taught
the gospel of thy Christ; give them further degrees of illumi
nation, that they may serve thee with a perfect heart and
willing mind. Bless my friends and benefactors, and all
who have commended themselves to my prayers ( ).
Lord, thou best knowest all our conditions, all our desires,
all our wants. O do thou suit thy grace and blessings to
our several necessities.
Hear, O merciful Father, my supplications, for the sake
of thy Son Jesus; and bring us, with all those who have
pleased thee from the beginning of the world, into the glories
of thy Son’s kingdom: To whom with thee and the Holy
Ghost, be all praise for ever and ever !
“Our Father,” &c.
Questions relating to Mortification :-See before the Prayers
for Wednesday Evening.
O GoD the Father, who canst not be thought to have made
me only to destroy me, have mercy upon me.
O God the Son, who, knowing thy Father’s will, didst
come into the world to save me, have mercy upon me.
O God the Holy Ghost, who to the same end hast so often
since breathed holy thoughts into me, have mercy upon me.
O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, whom in three
Persons I adore as one God, have mercy upon me.
Lord, carest thou not that I perish? thou that wouldest
have all men to be saved? thou that wouldest have none to
perish? And wilt thou now show thine anger against a
worm, a leaf 7 against a vapour that vanisheth before thee? O
remember how short my time is, and deliver not my soul into
the power of hell. For, alas, what profit is there in my blood?
Or, who shall give thee thanks in that pit? No; let me live
in thy sight: Let me live, O my God, and my soul shall praise
thee. Forget me as I have been disobedient, provoking thee
to anger; and regard me as I am distressed, crying out to
thee for help. Look not upon me as I am a sinner; but
consider me as I am thy creature. A sinner I am, I confess, a
sinner of no ordinary stain: Butlet not this hinder thee, O my
God; for upon such sinners thou gettest the greatest glory.
O remember for whose sake it was that thou camest from
the bosom of thy Father, and wast content to be born of thine
own handmaid. Remember for whom it was that thy tender
body was torn and scourged and crucified. Was it not for
the sins of the whole world? And shall I be so injurious to
thy glory, as to think thou hast excepted me? Or can I
think, thou diedst only for sinners of a lower kind, and leftest
such as me without remedy? What had become then of him
who filled Jerusalem with blood? what of her, who lived in
a trade of sin? Nay, what had become of thine own
disciple, who with oaths and curses thrice denied thee?
O, how easy is it for thee to forgive! for it is thy nature.
How proper is it for thee to save 1 for it is thy name. How
suitable is it to thy coming into the world ! for it is thy
business. And when I consider that I am the chief of
sinners, may I not urge thee farther, and say, Shall the chief
of thy business be left undone? Far be that from thee!
Have mercy upon me!
I ask not of thee the things of this world, give them to
whom thou pleasest, so thou givest me mercy. O say unto my
soul, “Be of good cheer; thy sins are forgiven thee.” Othat
I might never sin against thee more! And whereinsoever my
conscience accuses me most, be thou most merciful unto me.
Save me, O God, as a brand snatched out of the fire.
Receive me, O my Saviour, as a sheep that is gone astray,
but would now return to the great Shepherd and Bishop of
my soul.
Father, accept my imperfect repentance, compassionate my
infirmities, forgive my wickedness, purify my uncleanness,
strengthen my weakness, fix my unstableness, and let thy
good Spirit watch over me for ever, and thy love ever rule in
my heart, through the merits and sufferings and love of thy
Son, in whom thou art always well pleased.
Give thy grace, O holy Jesus, to all the world; and let all
who are redeemed by thy blood, acknowledge thee to be the
Lord. Let all Christians, especially those of this nation,
keep themselves unspotted from the world. Let all Gover
nors, and especially our Sovereign, rule with wisdom and
justice; and let the Clergy be exemplary in their lives, and
discreet and diligent in their labours. Let our Universities
enjoy freedom from violence and faction, and excel in true
religion and sound learning. Be a help at hand to all that
are afflicted, and assist them to trust in thee. Raise up
friends for the widow and fatherless, the friendless and
oppressed. Give patience to all that are sick, comfort to all
troubled consciences, strength to all that are tempted. Be
gracious to my relations, ( ) to all that are endeared to me
by their kindnesses or acquaintance, to all who remember
me in their prayers, or desire to be remembered in mine
( ), Sanctify, O merciful Lord, the friendship which
thou hast granted me with these thy servants ( ). O
let our prayers be heard for each other, while our hearts are
united in thy fear and love, and graciously unite them
therein more and more. Strengthen the hearts of us thy
servants against all our corruptions and temptations; enable
us to consecrate ourselves faithfully and entirely to thy
service. Grant that we may “provoke each other to love”
and serve thee, and grow up together before thee in thy fear
and love, to thy heavenly kingdom. And by thy infinite
mercies, vouchsafe to bring us, with those that are dead in
thee, to rejoice together before thee, through the merits of our
Lord Jesus Christ; to whom, with thee and the Holy Ghost,
the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord
of lords, be honour and power everlasting.
O GoD, thon great Creator and Sovereign Lord of heaven
and earth, thou Father of angels and men, thou Giver of life
and Protector of all thy creatures, mercifully accept this my
morning sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, which I desire to
offer, with all humility, to thy divine Majesty. “Thou art
praised, O Lord, by all thy works,” and magnified by every
thing which thou hast created. The sum rejoiceth to run his
course, that he may set forth thy praise who madest him. Nor
do the moon and stars refrain to manifest thy glory, even
amidst the silent night. The earth breathes forth each day
perfumes, as incense to thee, her sacred King, who hast crowned
her with herbs and trees, and beautified her with hills and
dales. The deep uttereth his voice, and lifteth up his hands
on high to thee, the great Creator, the universal King, the
everlasting God. The floods clap their hands, and the hills
are joyful together before thee; the fruitful vales rejoice and
sing thy praise. Thou feedest the innumerable multitude of
animals which thou hast created: “These all wait upon thee,
and thou givest them their meat in due season.” Thou
madest light for our comfort, and broughtest forth darkness
out of thy treasures to overshadow the earth, that the living
creatures of it might take their rest. “The fire and hail, snow
and vapour, wind and storm, fulfil thy word,” and manifest
thy glory. Inanimate things declare thee, O Lord of life; and
irrational animals demonstrate their wise Creator. Amidst
this universal jubilee of nature, suffer not, I beseech thee,
the sons of men to be silent; but let the noblest work of thy
creation pay thee the noblest sacrifice of praise. O pour thy
grace into my heart, that I may worthily magnify thy great
and glorious name. Thou hast made me and sent me into
the world to do thy work. O assist me to fulfil the end of
my creation, and to show forth thy praise with all diligence,
by giving myself up to thy service. “Prosper the work of
my hands upon me,” O Lord; O prosper thou whatever I
shall undertake this day, that it may tend to thy glory, the
good of my neighbour, and the salvation of my own soul.
Preserve me from all those snares and temptations which
continually solicit me to offend thee. Guide me by thy Holy
Spirit in all those places whither thy providence shall lead
me this day; and suffer not my communications with the
world to dissipate my thoughts, to make me inadvertent to
thy presence, or lukewarm in thy service; but let me always
walk as in thy sight, and as one who knows this life to be the
seed-time of an eternal harvest Keep me, I beseech thee,
undefiled, unblamable, and unreprovable unto the end; and
grant that I may so diligently perform thy will, in that
station wherein thou hast been pleased to place me, that I
may make my calling and election sure, through Jesus
Christ, our blessed Lord and Saviour.
Hear also, O Lord, my prayers for the whole race of
mankind, and guide their feet into the way of peace. Reform
the corruptions of thy catholic Church, heal her divisions,
and restore to her her ancient discipline; give to the Clergy
thereof, whether they be Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, grace,
as good shepherds, to feed the flocks committed to their charge.
Bless King George and all the Royal Family, and all that
are put in authority under him. Let them exceed others as
much in goodness as greatness, and be signal instruments of
thy glory. Grant that in the Universities, and in all other
places set apart for thy service, whatsoever is praiseworthy
may for ever flourish. Keep, O Lord, all the Nobility,
Gentry, and Commons of this land, in constant communion
with thy holy catholic Church, in humble obedience to the
King, and in Christian charity one towards another.
In a particular manner, I beseech thee to be gracious to my
father and mother, my brethren and sisters, and all my friends
and relations. Pardon all their sins, and heal all their infirm
ities. Give them that share of the blessings of this life,
which thou knowest to be most expedient for them; and thy
grace so to use them here, that they may enjoy thee eternally.
With a propitious eye, O gracious Comforter, behold all
that are in affliction; let the sighings of the prisoners, the
groans of the sick, the prayers of the oppressed, the desire of
the poor and needy, come before thee. (--) Give unto my
enemies ( ) grace and pardon, charity to me and love to
thee; remove the cloud from their eyes, the stony from their
hearts, that they may know and feel what it is to love their
neighbour as themselves. And may it please thee to enable
me to love all mine enemies, to bless them that now curse me.
to do good to them that hate me, and to pray for those who
despitefully use me and persecute me. Be pleased, O Lord,
of thy goodness, shortly to accomplish the number of thine
elect, and to hasten thy kingdom; that we, with all thy whole
Church, may have our perfect consummation of bliss, through
Jesus Christ our Lord; by whom, and with whom, in the
unity of the Holy Ghost, all honour and glory be unto thee,
O Father Almighty, now and for ever.
Particular Questions relating to Thankfulness.
1. HAvE I allotted some time for thanking God for the
blessings of the past week?
2. Have I, in order to be the more sensible of them,
seriously and deliberately considered the several circumstances
that attended them?
3. Have I considered each of them as an obligation to
greater love, and, consequently, to stricter holiness?
O Most great and glorious God, who art mighty in thy
power, and wonderful in thy doings towards the sons of men,
accept, I beseech thee, my unfeigned thanks and praise for
my creation, preservation, and all the other blessings which,
in the riches of thy mercy, thou hast from time to time poured
down upon me. “Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the
foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of
thine hand.” Thou createdst the sun and moon, the day and
might, and makest the outgoings of the morning and evening
to praise thee. Thou “formedst man of the dust of the
ground, and breathedst into him the breath of life.” In thine
own image madest thou him, capable of knowing and loving
thee eternally. His nature was perfect, thy will was his law,
and thy blessed self his portion. Neither after he had left
his first estate didst thou utterly withdraw thy mercy from
him; but, in every succeeding generation, didst save, deliver,
assist, and protect him. Thou hast instructed us by thy laws,
and enlightened us by thy statutes; thou hast redeemed us
by the blood of thy Son, and sanctifiest us by the grace of
thy Holy Spirit. For these and all thy other mercies, how
can I ever sufficiently love thee, or worthily magnify thy
great and glorious name? All the powers of my soul are too
few to conceive the thanks that are due to thee, even for
vouchsafing me the honour of now appearing before thee and
conversing with thee. But thou hast declared thou wilt
accept the sacrifice of thanksgiving in return for all thy
goodness. For ever therefore will I bless thee, will I adore
thy power, and magnify thy goodness: “My tongue shall
sing of thy righteousness, and be telling of thy salvation
from day to day.” I will give thanks unto thee for ever and
ever; I will praise my God while I have my being. O that
I had the heart of the seraphim, that I might burn with love
like theirs. But though I am upon earth, yet will I praise,
as I can, the King of heaven; though I am a feeble, mortal
creature, yet will I join my song with those that excel in
strength, with the immortal host of angels, and archangels,
thrones, dominions, and powers, while they laud and magnify
thy glorious name, and sing with incessant shouts of
praise,--
“Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts | Heaven and
earth are full of his glory ! Glory be to thee, O Lord most
high. Amen. Hallelujah.”
Accept, O merciful Father, my most humble thanks for thy
preservation of me this day ( ). O continue thy loving
kindness towards me, and take me into thy protection this
night. Let thy holy angels watch over me to defend me
from the attempts of evil men and evil spirits. Let me rest
in peace, and not sleep in sin; and grant that I may rise
more fit for thy service.
O thou whose kingdom ruleth over all, rule in the hearts
of all the men whom thou hast made; reform the corruptions,
and heal the breaches, of thy holy Church, and establish her
in truth and peace. Be gracious unto all Priests and Deacons,
and give them rightly to divide the word of truth. Forgive
the sins of this nation, and turn our hearts, that iniquity may
not be our ruin. Bless King George, and all the Royal
Family, with all those blessings which thou seest to be most
expedient for them; and give to his Council, and to the
TNobility and Magistracy, grace truly to serve thee in their
several stations. Bless our Universities, that they may be the
great bulwarks of thy faith and love, against all the assaults
of vice and infidelity. May the Gentry and Commons of
this realm live in constant communion with thy Church, in
obedience to the King, and in love one towards another.
Be gracious to all who are near and dear to me. Thou
knowest their names, and art acquainted with their wants. Of
thy goodness be pleased to proportion thy blessings to their
necessities. Pardon my enemies, and give them repentance
and charity, and me grace to overcome evil with good. Have
compassion on all who are distressed in mind, body, or estate,
and give them steady patience, and timely deliverance.
Now, to God the Father, who first loved us, and made us
accepted in the Beloved; to God the Son, who loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood; to God the Holy
Ghost, who sheddeth the love of God abroad in our hearts, be
all love and all glory in time and to all eternity. Amen.
ALMIGHTY and eternal God, we desire to praise thy holy
name for so graciously raising us up, in soundness of body
and mind, to see the light of this day.
We bless thee in behalf of all thy creatures; for “the
eyes of all look unto thee, and thou givest them their meat
in due season.” But above all we acknowledge thy inesti
mable benefits bestowed upon mankind in Christ Jesus. We
thank thee for his miraculous birth, for his most holy life,
his bitter agony and bloody death, for his glorious resurrec
tion on this day, his ascension into heaven, his triumph over
all the powers of darkness, and his sitting at thy right hand
for evermore.
O God, how great was thy love to the sinful sons of men,
to give “thy only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
on him might not perish, but have everlasting life l’” How
great was that love which hath committed our souls to One
so “mighty to save;” which hath chosen us to be thy sons
and heirs, together with Christ Jesus, and set such an High
Priest over thy house and family, to make intercession for
us, to pour thy blessings upon us, and to send forth his
angels to “minister unto them who shall be heirs of salva
tion 1’’ O the riches of thy grace, in sending the Holy
Ghost to make us “abound in hope” that we shall one day
rise from the dead, and, after our short labours here, rest
with thee in thy eternal glory.
O that we could begin this day in devout meditations, in
joy unspeakable, and in blessing and praising thee, who hast
given us such good hope and everlasting consolation. Lift
up our minds above all these little things below, which are
apt to distract our thoughts; and keep them above, till our
hearts are fully bent to seek thee every day, in the way
wherein Jesus hath gone before us, though it should be with
the loss of all we here possess.
We are ashamed, O Lord, to think that ever we have
disobeyed thee, who hast redeemed us by the precious blood
of thine own Son. O that we may agree with thy will in
all things for the time to come; and that all the powers of
our souls and bodies may be wholly dedicated to thy service.
We desire unfeignedly that all the thoughts and designs of
our minds, all the affections and tempers of our hearts, and
all the actions of our life, may be pure, holy, and unreprovable
in thy sight.
“Search us, O Lord, and prove us; try out our reins and
our heart. Look well if there be any way of wickedness in
us, and lead us in the way everlasting.” Let thy favour be
better to us than life itself; that so in all things we may
approve our hearts before thee, and feel the sense of thy
acceptance of us, giving us a joy which the world cannot give.
Make it our delight to praise thee, to call to mind thy
loving-kindness, and to offer the sacrifice of thanksgiving.
Help us to “take heed to ourselves, lest at any time our
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting or drunkenness, or the
cares of this life;” to have our conversation without covetous
mess, and to be content with such things as we have ; to
possess our bodies in sanctification and honour; to love our
neighbour as ourselves; and as we would that others should
do to us, do even so to them; to live peaceably, as much as
lieth in us, with all men; to put on the ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit; and to take those who have spoken in the
name of our Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and
of patience; and when we suffer as Christians, not to be
ashamed, but to glorify thee our God on this behalf.
And accept, good Lord, of all the praises of all thy people
met together this day. O that “thy ways were known upon
all the earth, thy saving health among all nations;” and that
all Christian Kings, especially, may be filled with thy Holy
Spirit, and be faithful subjects of the Lord Jesus, “the King
of kings and Lord of lords.” O that thy “Priests may be
clothed with righteousness, and thy saints rejoice and sing;”
that all who are in distress may trust in thee, the “health of
their countenance and their God.” O Lord, hear us, and
make thy face to shine upon thy servants, that we may
“enter into thy gates with thanksgiving, and into thy courts
with praise; that we may be thankful unto thee and bless thy
name.” Amen, for Jesus Christ's sake; in whose words we
conclude our imperfect prayers, saying, “Our Father,” &c.
O THoU “high and holy One that inhabitest eternity,”
thou art to be feared and loved by all thy servants. “All
thy works praise thee, O God;” and we especially give thanks
unto thee for thy marvellous love in Christ Jesus, by whom
thou hast “reconciled the world to thyself.” Thou hast
“given us exceeding great and precious promises.” Thou
hast sealed them with his blood, thou hast confirmed them
by his resurrection and ascension, and the coming of the
Holy Ghost. We thank thee that thou hast given us so
many happy opportunities of knowing the “truth as it is in
Jesus,” even “the mystery which was hid from ages and
generations,” but is now revealed to them that believe.
Blessed be thy goodness for that great consolation, and
for the assistance of thy Holy Spirit. Blessed be thy good
ness, that we have felt it so often in our hearts, inspiring us
with holy thoughts, filling us with love and joy, and comfort
able expectations of “the glory that shall be revealed.” We
thank thee, that thou hast suffered us this day to attend on
thee in thy public service; and that we have begun, in any
measure, to pursue after that eternal “rest which remaineth
for the people of God.”
We offer up again our souls and bodies to thee to be
governed, not by our will, but thine. O let it be ever the
ease and joy of our hearts, to be under the conduct of thy
unerring wisdom, to follow thy counsels, and to be ruled in
all things by thy holy will. And let us never distrust thy
abundant kindness and tender care over us; whatsoever it is
thou wouldest have us to do or to suffer in this world.
O God, purify our hearts, that we may entirely love thee, and
rejoice in being beloved of thee; that we may confide in
thee, and absolutely resign ourselves to thee, and be filled with.
constant devotion toward thee. O that we may never sink.
into a base love of anything here below, nor be oppressed
with the cares of this life; but assist us to “abhor that which
is evil, and cleave to that which is good.” Let us “use this.
world as not abusing it.” Give us true humility of spirit,
that we may “not think of ourselves more highly than we
ought to think.” Keep us from being “wise in our own con
ceits.” “Let our moderation be known to all men.” Make
us “kindly affectioned one to another;” to delight in doing
good; to “show all meekness to all men;” to “render to all
their dues; tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honour to whom honour;” and to
“owe no man anything, but to love one another.” Make us so.
happy, that we may be able to “love our enemies, to bless
those that curse us, to do good to them that hate us; to rejoice
with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.”
Compose our spirits to a quiet and steady dependence on thy
good Providence, that we may “take no thought for our life,”
nor “be careful for anything, but by prayer and supplication,
with thanksgiving, still make known our requests to thee our
God.” And help us to “pray always and not faint; in every
thing to give thanks, and offer up the sacrifice of praise con
tinually; to rejoice in hope of thy glory;” to “possess our
souls in patience;” and to “learn in whatsoever state we are
therewith to be content.” Make us “know both how to be
abased, and how to abound; everywhere, and in all things,”
instruct us “both to abound and to suffer want,” being enabled
to “do all things through Christ which strengtheneth us.”
O that the light of all Christians did so “shine before
men,” that others might “glorify thee, our Father which art
in heaven l” “Send forth thy light and thy truth” into all
the dark corners of the earth, that “all Kings may fall down
before thee, and all nations do thee service l’’ Bless these
kingdoms, and give us grace at length to “bring forth
fruits meet for repentance.” O Lord, save the King, and
“establish his throne in righteousness.” Prosper the
endeavours of all those who faithfully feed thy people, and
increase the number of them. O that the seed which hath
been sown this day, may take deep root in all our hearts;
that being “not forgetful hearers, but doers of the word,
we may be blessed in our deeds.” Help us, in all the
week following to “set a watch before our mouth, and keep
the door of our lips;” and “let not our heart incline to any
evil thing,” or “to practise wicked works with men that work
iniquity.” But “as we have received how we ought to walk
and to please thee, so may we abound more and more.”
Protect us, we beseech thee, and all our friends everywhere
this night; and awaken in the morning those good thoughts
in our hearts, that the words of our Saviour may abide in us,
and we in Him, who hath taught us when we pray to say,
“Our Father,” &c.
WE humble ourselves, O Lord of heaven and earth, before
thy glorious Majesty. We acknowledge thy eternal power,
wisdom, goodness, and truth; and desire to render thee most
unfeigned thanks, for all the benefits which thou pourest
upon us; but above all, for thine inestimable love, in the
redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ.
We implore thy tender mercies in the forgiveness of all our
sins, whereby we have offended either in thought, word, or
deed. We desire to be truly sorry for all our misdoings, and
utterly to renounce whatsoever is contrary to thy will. We
desire to devote our whole man, body, soul, and spirit, to
thee. And as thou dost inspire us with these desires, so
accompany them always with thy grace, that we may every
day, with our whole hearts, give ourselves up to thy service.
We desire to be so holy and undefiled as our blessed
Master was. And we trust thou wilt fulfil all the gracious
promises which he hath made to us. Let them be dearer to
us than thousands of gold and silver; let them be the comfort
and joy of our hearts. We ask nothing, but that it may be
unto thy servants according to his word.
Thou hast mercifully kept us the last night; blessed be
thy continued goodness. Receive us likewise into thy
protection this day. Guide and assist us in all our thoughts,
words, and actions. Make us willing to do and suffer what
thou pleasest; waiting for the mercy of our Lord, Christ
Jesus, unto etermal life.
Blessed be thy goodness, which hath not suffered us to
wander without instruction after the foolish desires of our
own hearts; but hath clearly shown us where our happiness
lies. O may we receive, with all thankfulness, those holy
words which teach us the blessedness of poverty of spirit, of
mourning after thee, of meekness and gentleness, of hunger
ing and thirsting after righteousness, of mercifulness and
purity of heart, of doing good unto all, and patiently suffering
for doing the will of our Lord Christ.
O may we always be in the number of those blessed souls.
May we ever feel ourselves happy in having the kingdom of
God within us, in the comforts of the Holy One, in being
filled with all the fruits of righteousness, in being made the
children of the Highest, and, above all, in seeing thee, our
God. Let us abound in thy love more and more; and in
continual prayers and praises to thee, the Father of mercies
and God of all consolation, in Jesus Christ our Lord.
And we desire, thou knowest, the good of all mankind,
especially of all Christian people; that they may all walk
worthy of the gospel, and live together in unity and Christian
love. For which end, we pray that all Christian Kings,
Princes, and Governors, may be wise, pious, just, and merciful,
endeavouring that all their subjects may lead peaceable lives
in all godliness and honesty; and more particularly, that our
Sovereign, King George, may be blessed with a religious,
quiet, long, and prosperous reign, and that all in authority
under him may seek, in their several stations, to right the
oppressed, to comfort the afflicted, to provide for the poor
and needy, and to relieve all those that are in any misery.
Bless all those that watch over our souls; succeed their
labours, and give us grace to follow their godly admonitions,
and to “esteem them very highly in love for their work’s
sake.” The same blessings we crave for our friends,
relations, and acquaintance, that we may all live in perfect
love and peace together, and rejoice together at the great day
of the Lord Jesus; in whose holy words we sum up all our
wants: “Our Father,” &c.
ALMIGHTY and most merciful Father, in whom we live,
move, and have our being; to whose tender compassions we
owe our safety the day past, together with all the comforts of
this life, and the hopes of that which is to come; we praise
thee, O Lord, we bow ourselves before thee, acknowledging we
have nothing but what we receive from thee. “Unto thee do we
give thanks,” O God, who daily pourest thy benefits upon us.
Blessed be thy goodness for our health, for our food and
raiment, for our peace and safety, for the love of our friends,
for all our blessings in this life, and our desire to attain that
life which is immortal. Blessed be thy love, for that we feel
in our hearts any motion toward thee. Behold, O Lord, we
present ourselves before thee, to be inspired with such a
vigorous sense of thy love, as may put us forward with a
greater earnestness, zeal, and diligence in all our duty.
Renew in us, we beseech, a lively image of thee, in all
righteousness, purity, mercy, faithfulness, and truth. O that
Jesus, the hope of glory, may be formed in us, in all humility,
meekness, patience, and an absolute surrender of our souls
and bodies to thy holy will; that we may not live, but Christ
may live in us; that every one of us may say, “The life I
mow live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who
loved me, and gave himself for me.”
Let the remembrance of his love, who made himself an
offering for our sins, be ever dear and precious to us. Let it
continually move us to offer up ourselves to thee, to do thy
will, as our blessed Master did. May we place an entire
confidence in thee, and still trust ourselves with thee, who
hast not “spared thine own Son, but freely given him up for
us all.” May we humbly accept of whatsoever thou sendest
us, and “in everything give thanks.” Surely thou “wilt
never leave us mor forsake us.” O guide us safe through all
the changes of this life, in an unchangeable love to thee, and
a lively sense of thy love to us, till we come to live with thee
and enjoy thee for ever.
And now that we are going to lay ourselves down to sleep,
take us into thy gracious protection, and settle our spirits in
such quiet and delightful thoughts of the glory where our
Lord Jesus lives, that we may desire to be dissolved and to
go to him who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep,
we might live together with him.
To thy blessing we recommend all mankind, high and low,
rich and poor, that they may all faithfully serve thee, and
contentedly enjoy whatsoever is needful for them. And
especially we beseech thee, that the course of this world may
be so peaceably ordered by thy governance, that thy Church
may joyfully serve thee in all godly quietness. We leave all
we have with thee, especially our friends, and those who are
dear unto us; desiring that when we are dead and gone,
they may lift up their souls in this manner unto thee; and
teach those that come after, to praise, love, and obey thee.
And if we awake again in the morning, may we praise thee
again with joyful lips, and still offer ourselves a more accept
able sacrifice to thee, through Jesus Christ; in whose words
we beseech thee to hear us, according to the full sense and
meaning thereof: “Our Father,” &c.
O Most great and mighty Lord, the possessor of heaven
and earth, all the angels rejoice in blessing and praising thee,
the Father of spirits; for “thou hast created all things, and
in wisdom hast thou made them all,” and spread thy tender
mercies over all thy works. We desire thankfully to acknow
ledge thy bounty to us, among the rest of thy creatures, and
thy particular grace and favour to us in Jesus Christ, our
merciful Redeemer. O give us a deep sense of that love
which gave Him to die for us, that he might be “the Author
of eternal salvation to all them that obey him.”
And hast thou not said, that thou wilt “give thy Holy
Spirit to them that ask it?” O Father of mercies, let it be
unto us according to thy word. Cherish whatever thou hast
already given us, which is acceptable in thy sight. And
since at the best we are unprofitable servants, and can do no
more than it is our duty to do, enable us to do everything
which thou hast commanded us heartily, with good-will, and
true love to thy service.
O that we might ever approach thee with delight, and feel
it the joy of our hearts to think of thee, to praise thee, to give
thee thanks, and to offer ourselves with absolute resignation
to thee. O that mercy may always please us, as it pleaseth
thee; that we may be strictly just and righteous; may cheer
fully pass by injuries, freely deny ourselves whatever is not
for thy glory; willingly submit to thy fatherly corrections,
and perform the duties of our several relations with singleness
of heart. Render us so mindful of the great love of our
Lord, that we may be zealously concerned for his glory, and
use our utmost diligence to promote his religion in the world;
delighting to commemorate his death and passion, making a
joyful sacrifice of our souls and bodies to him, and earnestly
clesiring that his kingdom may come over all the earth.
Fulfil, most merciful Lord, all our petitions; and as thou
hast graciously protected us this night, so accompany us all
this day with thy blessing, that we may please thee in body
and soul, and be safe under thy defence, who art ever nigh
unto all those that call upon thee.
And O that all men may be awakened into a lively and
thankful sense of all thy benefits. Stir up especially the
minds of all Christian people to follow “the truth as it is in
Jesus,” and exercise themselves “to have a conscience void of
offence towards God and towards man.” Bless these king
qoms, and endue our Sovereign with such excellent wisdom
and holy zeal, that we may see many good days under his
government. O that true religion, justice, mercy, brotherly
kindness, and all things else that are praiseworthy, may so
flourish among us, that we may enjoy the blessings of peace
and plenty, and there may be no complaining in our streets.
We recommend to thee all our friends and neighbours, all
the poor, the sick, and the afflicted, desiring those mercies
for them which we should ask for ourselves, were we in their
condition. “O God, whose never-failing providence ordereth
all things both in heaven and earth, keep them and us, we
beseech thee, from all hurtful things, and give us those
things which are profitable for us, according to thine abundant
mercy in our Lord Jesus;” in whose words we conclude our
supplication unto thee, saying, “Our Father,” &c.
ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, the sovereign Lord of all
creatures in heaven and earth, we acknowledge that our
beings, and all the comforts of them, depend on thee, the
Fountain of all good. We have nothing but what is owing
entirely to thy free and bounteous love, O most blessed Creator,
and to the riches of thy grace, O most blessed Redeemer.
To thee, therefore, be given, by us and by all creatures
whom thou hast made to know how great and good thou art, all
honour and praise, all love and obedience, as long as we have
any being. “It is but meet, right, and our bounden duty, that
we should, at all times and in all places, give thanks unto thee,
O Lord,” and devoutly resign both soul and body to thee, to
be absolutely governed and ruled according to thy holy will.
Further, we pray thee, increase every good desire which
we feel already in our hearts; let us always live as becomes
thy creatures, as becomes the disciples of Jesus Christ.
Incline us to be more and more in love with thy laws, till
they are written upon our hearts. Stir up our wills to “love
them exceedingly,” and to cleave unto them as our very life.
O that we might heartily surrender our wills to thine; that
we may unchangeably cleave unto it, with the greatest and
most entire affection to all thy commands. O that there
may abide for ever in us such a strong and powerful sense of
thy mighty love towards us in Christ Jesus, as may constrain.
us freely and willingly to please thee, in the constant exercise
of righteousness and mercy, temperance and charity, meek
ness and patience, truth and fidelity; together with such an
humble, contented, and peaceable spirit, as may adorn the
religion of our Lord and Master. Yea, let it ever be the joy
of our hearts to be righteous, as thou art righteous; to be
merciful, as thou, our heavenly Father, art merciful; to be
“holy, as thou who hast called us art holy, in all manner of
conversation;” to be endued with thy divine wisdom, and to
resemble thee in faithfulness and truth. O that the example
of our blessed Saviour may be always dear unto us, that we
may cheerfully follow him in every holy temper, and delight
to do thy will, O God. Let these desires, which thou hast
given us, never die or languish in our hearts, but be kept
always alive, always in their vigour and force, by the
perpetual inspirations of the Holy Ghost.
Accept, likewise, of our thanks, for thy merciful preserva
tion of us all this day. We are bold again to commit
ourselves unto thee this night. Defend us from all the
powers of darkness; and raise up our spirits, together with
our bodies, in the morning, to such a vigorous sense of thy
continued goodness, as may provoke us all the day long to
an unwearied diligence in well-doing.
And the same mercies that we beg for ourselves, we desire.
for the rest of mankind; especially for those who are called
by the name of Christ. O that every one of these may do
his duty with all fidelity; that Kings may be tender-hearted,
as the fathers of their countries; and all their subjects may
be dutiful and obedient to them, as their children; that the
Pastors of thy Church may feed their flocks with true wisdom
and understanding, and the people all may submit unto them,
and follow their godly counsels; that the rich and mighty may
have compassion on the poor and miserable; and all such
distressed people may bless the rich, and rejoice in the pros
perity of those that are above them Give to husbands and
wives, parents and children, masters and servants, the grace
to behave themselves so in their several relations, that they
may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things, and
may receive of him a crown of glory; in whose holy name and
words we continue to beseech thy grace and mercy towards us
and all thy people everywhere, saying, “Our Father,” &c.
O God, blessed for ever, we thank and praise thee for all
thy benefits, for the comforts of this life, and our hope of
everlasting salvation in the life to come. We desire to have
a lively sense of thy love always possessing our hearts, that
may still constrain us to love thee, to obey thee, to trust
in thee, to be content with the portion thy love allots unto us,
and to rejoice even in the midst of all the troubles of this life.
Thou hast delivered thine own Son for us all. How
shalt thou not with him also freely give us all things? We
depend upon thee especially for the grace of thy Holy Spirit.
O that we may feel it perpetually bearing us up, by the
strength of our most holy faith, above all the temptations
that may at any time assault us; that we may keep ourselves
unspotted from the world, and may still cleave to thee in
righteousness, in lowliness, purity of heart, yea, the whole
mind that was in Christ.
Let thy mighty power enable us to do our duty towards
thee, and towards all men, with care, and diligence, and zeal,
and perseverance, unto the end. Help us to be meek and gentle
in our conversation, prudent and discreet in ordering our affairs,
observant of thy fatherly providence in everything that befals
us, thankful for thy benefits, patient under thy chastisements,
and readily disposed for every good word and work. Preserve
in us a constant remembrance of thy all-seeing eye; of thy
inestimable love in Jesus Christ, whereof thou hast given us
so many pledges, and of the great account we must give to him
at the day of his appearing; that so we may continue stead
fast and unmovable, and be abundant in the work of the Lord,
knowing that our labour shall not be in vain in the Lord.
Deliver us, we beseech thee, from worldly cares and foolish
desires; from vain hopes and causeless fears; and so dispose
our hearts, that death itself may not be dreadful to us, but
we may welcome it with a cheerful countenance, when and
howsoever it shall approach.
O that our hearts may be so firmly established in grace, that
nothing may affright us, or shake our constancy, but we may
rather choose to die than to dishonour Him who died for us!
We resign ourselves to thy wisdom and goodness, who knowest
what is best for us; believing thou “wilt never suffer us to be
tempted above what we are able, and wilt with the temptation
also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it.”
We commend unto thee all mankind; especially thy
Church, and more particularly these kingdoms, that we
may all believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and be zealous
of good works. Bless our Sovereign, his Counsellors, his
Ministers, and all employed in public business, whether
spiritual or civil, that whatsoever they do may be for thy
glory, and the public good. Be gracious to all that are near
and dear to us, and keep us all in thy fear and love. Guide
us, good Lord, and govern us by the same Spirit, that we
may be so united to thee here, as not to be divided when
thou art pleased to call us hence, but together enter into thy
glory, to dwell with thee in love and joy that shall never die,
through Jesus Christ, our blessed Lord and Saviour; who
hath taught us when we pray to say, “Our Father,” &c.
“O LoRD, how manifold are thy works I in wisdom hast
thou made them all. The day is thine, the night also is thine;
thou hast prepared the light and the sun.” We render thee
thanks for all the benefits which thou hast bestowed on the
whole world; especially on us, whom thou hast called to the
knowledge of thy grace in Christ Jesus. It is a marvellous
love wherewith thou hast loved us. Thou hast not dealt so
with all people; and as for thy great and precious promises,
they have not known them.
Accept, O merciful Father, the good resolutions which thou
hast inspired us with by thy Spirit. Strengthen them, we
beseech thee, with thy continued grace, that no sudden desires,
vehement inclinations, ineffectual purposes, no, nor partial
performances, may lead us into a false opinion of ourselves;
but that we may bring forth actually, and with a constant
spirit, all the fruits of righteousness, which are by Christ Jesus.
Deny not, O Lord, the desires of those souls who would
offer up themselves entirely to thy service. But preserve us
always in seriousness of spirit. Let the sense of our weak
ness make us watchful and diligent, the sense of our former
negligence excite us to be fervent in spirit, and the goodness
of thy commands render us fruitful and abundant in the
work of the Lord. O that all our pious affections may be
turned into actions of piety and holiness; and may all our
actions be spirited with zeal, and all our zeal regulated with
prudence, and our prudence void of all guile, and joined with
perfect integrity of heart; that, adorning our most holy faith
here, by an upright, charitable, and discreet conversation, we
may receive praise in the day of the Lord, and be numbered
with thy saints in glory everlasting.
O lift up our affections to things above, that we may have
perfect contentment in well-doing and patient suffering, and
the good hope we have of being etermally beloved of thee
may make us rejoice evermore. Free us from the cares of
the world, from all distrust of thy good providence, from
repining at anything that befals us, and enable us in every
thing to give thanks, believing that all things are ordered
wisely, and shall work together for good.
Into thy hands we commend both our souls and bodies,
which thou hast mercifully preserved this day. We trust in
thy watchful providence, who “givest thy angels charge over
us,” who “art about our beds, and about our paths, and
spiest out all our” thoughts. O continue these holy thoughts
and desires in us till we fall asleep, that we may receive the
light of the morning, if thou prolongest our lives, with a new
joy in thee, and thankful affection to thee.
We desire likewise, O God, the good of the whole world
Pity the follies of mankind; deliver them from their miseries,
and forgive thou all their sins. Hear the groans of every
part of the creation, that is yet “subject to bondage,” and
bring them all “into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God.” Hear the daily prayers of the catholic Church.
Free her from all foul and dividing errors; let the truth as it
is in Jesus prevail, and “peace be in all her borders.” O.
that all Christian Governors may “seek peace and ensue it.”
Make thy Ministers the messengers of peace, and dispose all
who are called Christians to keep “the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace.”
Enlighten the minds of all Jews, Turks, and Infidels.
Strengthen all thy faithful servants. Bring back them that
wander out of the way; raise up those that are fallen; con
firm those that stand, and grant them steadily to persevere
in faith, love, and obedience. Relieve and comfort all that
are in distress. Let the earth bring forth her fruit in due
season; and let all honest and industrious people be blessed
in their labours.
Remember all those who have done good unto us, and
reward them sevenfold into their bosom. Grant forgiveness
and charity to all our enemies; and continue good-will
among all our neighbours. Support the sick with faith and
patience; assist those who are leaving this world. Receive
the souls which thou hast redeemed with thy Son’s precious
blood, and sanctified by the Holy Ghost: And give us all a
glorious resurrection and eternal life. “Our Father,” &c.
O LoRD, the God of our salvation, “thou art the hope of
all the ends of the earth.” Upon thee the eyes of all do wait;
for thou givest unto all life and breath and all things. Thou
still watchest over us for good; thou daily renewest to us our
lives and thy mercies; and thou hast given us the assurance
of thy word, that if we commit our affairs to thee, if we
acknowledge thee in all our ways, thou wilt direct our paths.
We desire, O Lord, to be still under thy gracious conduct
and fatherly protection. We beg the guidance and help of thy
good Spirit, to choose our inheritance for us, and to dispose
of us, and all that concerns us, to the glory of thy name.
O Lord, withdraw not thy tender mercies from us, nor the
comforts of thy presence. Never punish our past sins, by
giving us over to the power of our sins; but pardon all our
sins, and save us from all our iniquities. And grant us, O
good God, the continual sense of thy gracious acceptance of
us, in the Son of thy love, that our souls may bless thee, and
“all that is within us may praise thy holy name.”
And O that we may find the joy of the Lord to be our
strength; to defend us from all our sins, and to make us more
zealous of every good work; that herein we may “exercise
ourselves, to have a conscience void of offence, both towards
God and towards men.” O help us “to walk circumspectly;
not as fools, but as wise,” carefully “redeeming the time,”
improving all those seasons and means of grace which thou
art pleased to put into our hands. Sanctify to us all our employ
ments in the world; our crosses, also, and our comforts; all
the estates we go through, and all the events that befal us;
till, through the merits of thy Son, and the multitude of thy
mercies, we are conducted safe to “be ever with the Lord.”
Thou “hast laid help for us upon One that is mighty;”
that is “able to save unto the uttermost all those who come
unto God through him.” Through him thou hast encouraged
us to come boldly, that we “may obtain mercy, and find grace.
to help in time of need.” Help us, we beseech thee, to demean
ourselves as becomes the children of God, the redeemed of
the Lord, the members of Christ. Put thy Spirit within us,
causing us to walk in thy statutes, and to keep thy judg
ments, and do them. Yea, let it be our meat and drink to
do thy will, and to run the way of thy commandments.
O gracious Father, keep us, we pray thee, this day in thy
fear and favour, and teach us, in all our thoughts, words, and
works, to live to thy glory. If thou guide us not, we go.
astray; if thou uphold us not, we fall. O let thy good pro
vidence be our defence, and thy good Spirit our guide, and
counsellor, and supporter in all our ways. And grant that
we may do always what is acceptable in thy sight, through
Jesus Christ our Lord; in whose holy name and words we
close these our imperfect prayers: “Our Father,” &c.
Let thy grace, O Lord Jesus, thy love, O heavenly Father,
and thy comfortable fellowship, O blessed Spirit, be with
us, and with all that desire our prayers, this day and for
eVermoree
O LoRD our God, thy glory is above all our thoughts, and
thy mercy is over all thy works. We are still living monu
ments of thy mercy: For thou hast not cut us off in our sins,
but still givest us a good hope and strong consolation through
grace. Thou hast sent thy only Son into the world, “that
whosoever believeth in him should not perish” in his sins,
“but have everlasting life.” O Lord, we believe; help our
unbelief; and give us the true “repentance towards God,
and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,” that we may be in the
number of those who do indeed repent and “believe to the
saving of the soul. Being justified by faith,” let us “have
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ;” let us
“rejoice in him through whom we have now redemption in
his blood;” and let “the love of God be shed abroad in our
hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.”
And as we pray that thou wilt be to us a Father of mercies
and a God of consolation, so that thou wilt make us “followers
of God as dear children,” ever jealous over our hearts, and
watchful over our ways; continually fearing to offend, and
•endeavouring to please thee. Thou knowest, O Lord, all our
temptations, and the sin that doth so easily beset us. Thou
knowest the devices of the enemy, and the deceitfulness of
•our own hearts. We pray thee, good Lord, that thou wilt
arm us with the whole armour of God. Uphold us with thy
tree Spirit, and watch over us for good evermore.
Let our supplications also ascend before thee for the whole
race of mankind. Send thy word unto all the ends of the
-earth, and let it be the savour of life unto all that hear it.
Be gracious to this our native land. O do thou rule all our
rulers, counsel all our counsellors, teach all our Teachers, and
order all the public affairs to thy glory. Turn from us the
judgments which we feel or fear; continue thy blessings to our
souls and bodies; and, notwithstanding all our provocations,
be thou still our God, and let us be thy people. Have
compassion on all the children of affliction, and sanctify thy
fatherly corrections to them. Be gracious to all our friends
and neighbours. Reward our benefactors. Bless our relations
with the best of thy blessings, with thy fear and love.
Preserve us from our enemies, and reconcile them both to us
and to thyself. O that all the habitations of Christians may
be houses of prayer ! And be thou especially kind to the
several families where thy blessed name is called upon.
Let thy blessing rest upon us of this family. Bless all our
present estates to us; and fit us all for whatsoever thou
shalt be pleased to call us to. O teach us how “to want
and how to abound.” In every condition secure our hearts
to thyself; and make us ever to approve ourselves sincere
and faithful in thy service.
And now, O Father of mercies, be pleased to accept our
evening sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. O that thou
wouldest imprint and preserve upon our hearts a lively sense
of all thy kindness to us; that our souls may bless thee, and
all that is within us may praise thy holy name. Yea, let us
give thee thanks from the ground of the heart, and praise
our God while we have our being: For all thy patience with
us, thy care over us, and thy continual mercy to us, blessed
be thy name, O Lord God, our heavenly Father; and unto
thee, with the Son of thy love, and Spirit of grace, be all
thanks and praise, now and for evermore.
“O LoRD God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering and
abundant in goodness and truth; thou keepest mercy for
thousands; thou pardonest iniquity and transgression and
sin. How excellent is thy loving-kindness, O God! The
children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy
wings.” And therefore do we still look up to that bountiful
hand, from whence we have received all our good things.
O Lord our God, be favourable unto us, as thou usest to be
unto those that love thy holy name! O look not upon the
sin of our nature, nor the sins of our hearts and lives, which
are more than we can remember, and greater than we can
express. It is of the Lord’s mercies that we are not consumed,
because thy compassions fail not. But thou lookest upon
the face of thine Anointed, who was manifested to take away
our sins; by whom it is that we have the access unto the
Majesty on high.
O God, be merciful to us miserable sinners, for his sake
whom “thou hast exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour, to
give repentance” unto thy people, “and forgiveness of sins.”
Be merciful, O God, be merciful unto our souls, which have
greatly sinned against thee. O heal our backslidings; renew
us to repentance; establish our hearts in thy fear and love;
and establish our goings in thy way, that our footsteps slip
not. Let us waver no more; let us never more be weary or
faint in our minds; let us not revolt from thee, or turn to
folly again, after thou hast spoken peace to our souls; but
may we go on conquering and to conquer all the enemies of
our souls, and all the hinderances of our salvation, till thou
hast bruised Satan under our feet.
Seeing there is in Christ Jesus an infinite fulness of all
that we can want or wish, O that we may all receive of his
fulness, grace upon grace; grace to pardon our sins, and
subdue our iniquities; to justify our persons and to sanctify
our souls; and to complete that holy change, that renewal of
our hearts, whereby we may be transformed into that blessed
image wherein thou didst create us. O make us all meet to
be partakers of the inheritance of thy saints in light.
And teach us, O God, to use this world without abusing it;
and to receive the things needful for the body, without losing
our part in thy love, which is better than life itself. What
ever we have of this world, O may we have the same with thy
leave and love; sanctified to us by the word of God and by
prayer; and by the right improvement thereof to thy glory.
And whatever we want of worldly things, leave us not
destitute of the “things that accompany salvation;” but adorn
our souls with all such graces of thy Holy Spirit, that we may
adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.
And now that thou hast renewed our lives and thy mercies
to us this morning, help us to renew our desires and resolu
tions, and endeavours to live in obedience to thy holy will.
O restrain us from the sins into which we are most prone
to fall, and quicken us to the duties we are most averse to
perform; and grant that we may think and speak, and will
and do, the things becoming the children of our heavenly
Father; and so find the strong consolation of thy gracious
acceptance in Jesus Christ our Saviour, who, when we pray,
hath taught us to say, “Our Father,” &c.
O LoRD, thou wast before all, thou art above all, and thy
years shall not fail. Thou art the searcher of our hearts;
thou knowest the dulness and hardness, the vanity and
-deceitfulness, of them: We were born sinners, and so have
we lived. We have added sin to sin; we have abused thy great
and manifold mercies, tempted thy patience, and despised thy
goodness; and justly mightest thou have cast us into outer
darkness, where is wailing and gnashing of teeth.
But of thy loving-kindnesses there is no number. Thou
still callest us to return to thee; and “whosoever cometh
to thee, thou wilt in nowise cast out.” O meet us with thy
heavenly grace, that we may be able to come to thee. Be
thou graciously pleased to stretch forth thy hand, and loose
the chains wherewith our souls are entangled. O free us
from every weight of sin, from every yoke of bondage. O
help us to feel, and bewail, and forsake all our sins; and let
us never want the comfortable assurance of thy forgiveness
of them, thy acceptance of us, and thy love to us, in the
blessed Son of thy eternal love.
Thou art never weary, O Lord, of doing us good: Let us
never be weary of doing thce service. But, as thou hast plea
sure in the prosperity of thy servants, so let us take pleasure
in the service of our Lord, and abound in thy work, and in thy
love and praise evermore. O fill up all that is wanting, reform
whatever is amiss, in us, and perfect the thing that concerneth
us. Let the witness of thy pardoning love ever abide in all
our hearts. O speak into every one of our souls the peace
which passeth all understanding; and let us always look
upon thee as our Father, reconciled to us in Jesus Christ.
In his great name we cry unto thee in the behalf of the
whole race of mankind. O that all the ends of the earth may
see the salvation of our God. Continue thy mercies to this
sinful land; teach us at length to know thy will concerning
us; and O turn thou all our hearts unto thee, as the heart of
one man. Bless the King; O Lord, prolong his days and
prosper his government; make him always a “terror to evil
doers, and a praise to them that do well:” And grant unto.
all Magistrates and Ministers of thy word, a continual supply
of all the needful gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit. Be thou
a Father to the fatherless, a Husband to the widow, a Refuge
to the oppressed, a Physician to the sick, a Helper of the
friendless, a God of consolation to the sorrowful and distressed.
Bless to us whatsoever thou art pleased to allot us, and
everything that befals us. Make all work for our good, to
build us up in thy grace, and to help us on to thy glory.
Continue thy fatherly care over us this night. O preserve
and defend, and bless and keep us, that no evil may befalus,
“nor any plague come nigh our dwelling.” Give us comfort
able sleep to strengthen us for thy service; and whenever
thou callest us to the sleep of death, let us cheerfully resign
our spirits into thy hands, through the riches of thy grace,
and the worthiness of thy Son, in whose merits and mediation
alone we put our trust. And for all that he hath done and
suffered for us, to thy name, O blessed God of our salvation,
be the praise, and honour, and glory, given by us and all thy
people, now and for evermore. “Our Father,” &c.
WE present ourselves before thee, O Lord our God, to
pay our tribute of prayer and thanksgiving; desiring thee
mercifully to accept us and our services at the hands of
Jesus Christ. In his great name we come to beg thy pardon
and peace, the increase of thy grace, and the tokens of thy
love; for we are not worthy of the least of thy mercies:
But worthy is the Lamb that was slain to take away the sin
of the world; for whose sake thou wilt give us all things;
for he hath fulfilled those holy laws which we had broken,
and perfectly satisfied for our offences; and in him thou art
a God gracious and merciful to those who deserve nothing
but punishment.
Omerciful Father, regard not what we have done against thee;
but what our blessed Saviour hath done for us. Regard not
what we have made ourselves, but what He is made unto us of
thce our God. O that Christ may be to every one of our souls,
“wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and redemption;”
that his precious blood may cleanse us from all our sins; and
that thy Holy Spirit may renew and sanctify our souls.
May He crucify our flesh with its affections and lusts, and
mortify all our members which are upon earth. O let not
“sin reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in
the lusts thereof;” but, “being made free from sin, let us
be the servants of righteousness.” Let us approve our
hearts to thee, and let all our ways be pleasing in thy sight.
O teach us to know thee our God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou hast sent; and enable us to do thy will on earth, as it
is done in heaven. Give us to fear thee and to love thee, to
trust and delight in thee, and to cleave to thee with full
purpose of heart, that no temptations may draw us or drive
us from thee; but that all thy dispensations to us, and thy
dealings with us, may be the messengers of thy love to our
souls. Quicken us, O Lord, in our dulness, that we may
not serve thee in a lifeless and listless manner; but may
abound in thy work, and be fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord. And make us faithful in all our intercourse with our
neighbour, that we may be ready to do good and bear evil,
that we may be just and kind, merciful and meek, peaceable
and patient, sober and temperate, humble and self-denying,
inoffensive and useful in the world; that so glorifying thee
here, we may be glorified with thee in thy heavenly
kingdom.
Day by day we magnify thee, O Lord, who makest every
day an addition to thy mercies. We bless thee for preserving
us the night past, and for the rest thou gavest us therein.
O cause us to hear thy loving-kindness in the morning; for
in thee do we trust. Cause us to know the way wherein we
shall go, for we lift up our souls unto thee. O take not thy
Holy Spirit from us; but direct all our ways to please thee
our God. Help us to see thy power, to own thy presence, to
admire thy wisdom, and to love thy goodness in all thy
creatures; and by all, draw our hearts still nearer to thee.
Such thy mercy and grace we beg for ourselves, and all ours
and thine everywhere in our great Mediator's blessed
words:--
“Our Father,” &c.
O LoRD our God, thou art infinitely good, and thou hast
showed us what is good. Thou sendest out thy light and thy
truth, that they may guide us, and makest plain thy way
before our face. Thou givest us many opportunities and
advantages, to quicken and further us in thy service. We
have “line upon line,” and “precept upon precept;” thy
messengers early and late to open and apply thy word, to call
and warn, to direct and exhort us, with all long-suffering.
But how little have we improved all the precious talents
which thou hast put into our hands ! O Lord, thou mightest
justly take away the gospel of thy kingdom from us, and
give it unto another people, who would bring forth the fruits
thereof. Because thou hast called, and we refused; thou
hast stretched forth thy hands, and we have not regarded;
thou mightest leave us to our own perverseness and
impenitence, till our iniquities become our ruin.
But, O Lord God, enter not thus into judgment with thy
servants. Pardon all our contempt of thy word, and our not
profiting thereby. And help us for the time to come better
to improve the blessed opportunities set before us. “As the
rain descends from heaven and returns not thither, but
waters the earth and maketh it fruitful; so let not thy word
return unto thee void, but prosper in the work whereunto
thou sendest it.” O make it effectual to build us all up, in
the true fear and love of God, and in the right knowledge
and faith of our Lord Jesus Christ.
O gracious God, may thy Spirit cause thy word to work
thoroughly and successfully in all our hearts. And as we
daily receive how we ought to walk and to please thee our
God; so help us to “walk worthy of the Lord unto all well
pleasing;” increasing in the knowledge and love of thee, and
abounding more and more in every good work which is
pleasing in thy sight through Jesus Christ.
At his hands, O Lord our God, we beg thy gracious
acceptance of our humble praise and thanksgiving for all thy
blessings, spiritual and temporal, so freely conferred upon us.
We praise thee for all the comforts and conveniences of this
life, and for all the means and hopes of a better; particularly
for what we have received this day; the food of our souls set
before us, the word of salvation sounding in our ears, and
ithe Spirit of God striving with our hearts. O withdraw not
thy tender mercies from us, but still continue thy accustomed
goodness, and increase thy grace and heavenly blessings
upon us, and rejoice over us to do us good.
In mercy pass by all which thy most pure and holy eyes
have seen amiss in us this day. Forgive the iniquities of
'our holy things; overlook all our sins and failings through
our great Mediator and Redeemer, who ever lives at thy
right hand to make intercession for us. And for Jesus
Christ, and all which thou art pleased to give us together
with him, “not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy name’” be aly
the praise, and honour, and glory, humbly ascribed by us,
and all thy Church, now and for evermore !
“Our Father,” &c.
A LovER of your soul has here drawn up a few Prayers,
in order to assist you in that great duty. Be sure that you
do not omit, at least morning and evening, to present your
self upon your knees before God. You have mercies to pray
for, and blessings to praise God for. But take care that you
do not mock God, drawing near with your lips, while your
heart is far from him. God sees you, and knows your
thoughts; therefore, see that you not only speak with
your lips, but pray with your heart. And that you may not
ask in vain, see that you forsake sin, and make it your
endeavour to do what God has shown you ought; because
God says, “The prayers of the wicked are an abomination
unto the Lord.” Ask then of God for the blessings you
want, in the name, and for the sake, of Jesus Christ; and
God will hear and answer you, and do more for you than
you can either ask or think.
O ALMIGHTY God, Maker of all mankind, in whom we live,
and move, and have our being, who makest the outgoings of the
morning and the evening to rejoice, suffer me now to approach
thy divine Majesty with all reverence and godly fear. I desire
to adore thy sacred name, who hast in thy goodness brought
me in safety to behold the beginning of a new day and another
Sabbath. I bless thee, who hast in love to my soul, and for
the glory of thy name, set apart this day for holy uses, to
engage me in thy service, wherein consists my honour and
happiness. This is thy day: O Lord, enable me to rejoice and
be glad in it. May I ever remember to keep it holy, not doing
my own works, nor finding my own pleasure, nor speaking
my own words; but so delight in thee, that thou mayest give
me my heart's desire. Bless to me thy word, O my heavenly
Father, and all the means of grace, that I may not use them
in vain or to my own hurt, but for the instructing my mind,
reforming my life, and the saving my soul. Save me from
all hardness of heart and contempt of thy word; increase my
love to it, and enable me to hear it meekly, and to receive it
with pure affection, and to bring forth fruit unto good living.
Open my understanding to receive thy truth in the love
thereof. Set it so powerfully upon my heart, and root it so
deep in my soul, that the fruits thereof may be seen in my
life, to thy glory and praise. May I always so hear, read,
mark, learn, and inwardly digest thy word, that it may be a
savour of life to my soul. O let me not offer vain oblations
unto the Lord, drawing nigh with my lips, while my heart is
far from thee. But do thou enable me to worship thee with
holy worship, with joy and delight, with profit and pleasure.
Fill me with a comfortable sense of thy presence, that I may
serve thee with reverence and godly fear, to the comfort of
my soul and the glory of thy name. O Lord God, do thou
clothe thy Priests with rightcousness, and let thy saints rejoice
and sing. Break the bread of life to all our souls, that we may
eat and live for ever. O Lord, hear my prayers, and let my
cry come unto thee. Do more and better for me than I can
either desire or deserve, for the sake of my blessed Saviour.
and Redeemer, Jesus Christ; to whom, with thee and the Holy
Ghost, be all praise and glory, now and for ever. Amen.
“Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.
LoRD’s DAY EVENING. 261
Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses
as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into
temptation; but deliver us from evil: For thine is the king
dom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.”
MERCIFUL God, permit me to pay thee, now, my evening
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, for all the blessings and
favours to my body and soul, so freely bestowed, and so long
continued unto me. Thou hast dealt graciously with me, O
Lord God, and hast been exceedingly good and kind to me,
beyond all that I had reason to expect, or am able to express.
I bless thee, O Lord, for every help which I enjoy to the
promoting my present and eternal good. I desire to ascribe
all praise and glory to thee, to whom alone it is due. O
Lord, I bless thee that thy house is open to me, the bread of
life offered me, the word of salvation preached, and thy Spirit
striving with me. O suffer me not to receive thy grace in
vain, nor let thy word be lost upon me. Do thou apply it to
my heart, and fix it in my memory, that it may prove a
blessing to my soul. In mercy, O Lord, pass by all things
which in thy pure and holy eyes have been amiss this day
past; pardon my neglects, and the guilt of my misdoings.
And as I have heard how to walk and to please thee, O my
£od, help me to walk more worthy of the Lord unto all well
pleasing, that I may be built up in thy true fear and love,
and in the right knowledge and faith of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Be thou pleased to second every word of instruction that I
have received with the power of thy grace and Holy Spirit;
and above all, O blessed God, do thou give me a heart filled
with thy love, and lifted up in thy praise, and devoted to thy
honour and glory all the days of my life. Take me, O Lord
God, my Saviour, into thy gracious care and protection.
Preserve me from all dangers in the night season. Let me
lay down and sleep in thy arms, and when the trumpet shall
sound, and at last call me from the sleep of death, let me be
caught up into the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and
so for ever be with the Lord. All these mercies, O my God,
I most humbly ask, for the alone sake of Jesus Christ, my
Redeemer. Amen. “Our Father,” &c.
O LoRD God Almighty, Father of angels and men, I
praise and bless thy holy name for all thy goodness and
loving-kindness to me and all mankind. I bless thee for my
creation, preservation, and all the blessings of this life; but
above all, for thy great love in the redemption of the world
by our Lord Jesus Christ. I bless thee for preserving me in
the night past, and bringing me safe to the beginning of a
new day. Defend me in the same with thy mighty power,
and grant that this day I fall into no sin, neither run into
any kind of danger; but let all my doings be so ordered by
thy governance, that I may do always that which is righteous
in thy sight, through Jesus Christ my Redeemer. Grant
me such grace, that I may be able to withstand the tempta
tions of the world, the flesh, and the devil, and with a pure
heart and mind to follow the steps of my gracious Redeemer.
Keep me, I beseech thee, O Lord, from all things hurtful to
my soul or body, and grant me thy pardon and peace, that,
being cleansed from all my sins, I may serve thee with a
quiet mind, bring forth plenteously the fruit of good works,
and continue in the same unto my life’s end, through Jesus.
Christ, my Saviour and Redeemer. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
ALMIGHTY God, who art the gracious Preserver of all man
kind, I desire now to offer unto thee my praise and thanks
givings, for all the blessings thou hast this day bestowed upon
me. I confess, O my God, that I am unworthy of the least
of all thy mercies; for I have gone astray like a lost sheep.
I have followed too much the devices and desires of my own
heart. I have offended against thy holy laws. I have left
undone those things which I ought to have done, and have
done those things which I ought not to have done; and there
is no health in me. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon me,
a miserable offender. Spare me, O Lord, who now confess my
faults unto thee. Enable me to bewail my manifold sins and
offences, which I have from time to time most grievously
committed, by thought, word, and deed, against thy divine
Majesty. Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, most
merciful Father; for my Saviour Jesus Christ's sake, forgive
me all that is past, and grant me thy grace, that I may ever
hereafter serve and please thee, in newness of life, to the
honour and glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ my Lord
and Saviour. Take me under thy gracious care and keeping
this night; save and defend me from all dangers. Grant
unto my body rest in my bed, and unto my soul rest in
thyself; and be thou my God and my guide, my hope and my
help, my joy and my comfort, now and for evermore, through
Jesus Christ my Redeemer. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
O THoU Father of all mercies, and God of all goodness, I
praise and bless thy name for thy mercies and favours unto
me in the night past, and for bringing me safe to behold the
light of a new day. Send down thy heavenly grace into my
soul, that I may be enabled to worship thee and serve thee as
I ought to do. Enable me to believe in thee, to fear thee,
and to love thee with all my heart, and mind, and soul, and
strength; that I may honour thy holy name and word, and
serve thee truly, this, and all the days of my life. Give me
thy grace, that I may love all mankind as myself, and do unto
all, as I would they should do unto me. Enable me to love
and honour my parents, obey my superiors, and submit to all
my teachers. Suffer me not to hurt any body by word or
deed. Make me just and honest in all my dealings. Let me
not bear any malice or hatred in my heart. Keep my hands
from picking and stealing, my tongue from evil speaking,
lying, and slandering; keep my body in temperance, soberness,
and chastity; that I may not covet any person's goods, but
learn and labour to get my own living, and to do my duty in
the state of life wherein it shall please thee to place me.
Direct me so to pass through things temporal, that I may
not finally lose the things which are eternal, but at last be
received into thy presence, where is fulness of joy, and be
seated at thy right hand, where are pleasures for evermore,
through Jesus Christ my Saviour. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
O Lord God, the gracious Giver of all good things, I praise
and adore thee for thy goodness, which has been so plentiful
towards me an unworthy child of man. Thou hast in thy
mercy, not only preserved me this day from all dangers, but
bestowed upon me all things needful, for which I desire
entirely to praise thy fatherly goodness, and with angels and
sarchangels, and all the company of heaven, to laud and
magnify thy holy name. Bless, then, the Lord, O my soul,
and all that is within me, praise his holy name; for the Lord
is gracious, and his mercy is everlasting towards them that
fear him. And now, Lord, I most humbly implore thy fatherly
goodness to forgive me whatever has this day, in my heart or
life, offended the eyes of thy glory. O Lamb of God, Son of
the Father, that takest away the sins of the world, receive my
prayer. Prevent me, O Lord, in all my doings for the time
to come, and further me with thy continual help, that, in all
my thoughts, words, and works, I may continually glorify
thy holy name. Grant me thy grace, that I may follow thy
blessed saints in all righteousness and holy living, that I may
at last come to be a partaker with them of glory everlasting.
Do thou enable me, gracious Lord, to adorn thy gospel in all
holy conversation, and to do whatever I do to the glory of
thy name. Cleanse the thoughts of my heart, by the inspira
tion of thy Holy Spirit, that I may perfectly love thee, and
worthily magnify thy holy name. Let thy fatherly hand be
ever over me, and thy Holy Spirit be ever with me; and do
thou so lead me in the knowledge and obedience of thy word,
that, in the end, I may obtain everlasting life, through Jesus
Christ my Lord. And now, O Lord, as the night is come
upon me, and as I am ready to betake myself to rest, I desire
to commit myself to thy protection, who neither slumberest
nor sleepest, but hast still a watchful eye over me: O watch
over me for good, that none of the evils I deserve may fall
upon me. Preserve me from all terrors and dangers in the
night. Remove my sin out of thy sight, and show me the
light of thy countenance, and refresh me with the sense of
thy favour, through Jesus Christ my Redeemer; to whom,
with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honour and praise for
ever and ever. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
O LoBD God Almighty, Fountain of all goodness, and
Father of all mercies, I desire again to bow my knee before
thy holy Majesty, humbly beseeching thee to accept my
praise and thanksgivings for thy mercies to me in the night
season. I laid me down and slept, and rose up again in
safety; for it was thou only, O Lord, that sustainedst me.
And now, O my soul, return unto thy rest. Look upon
me, O Lord, in thy rich mercy, and, for thy dear Son’s sake,
be gracious unto my soul. Lighten my darkness, I beseech
thee, O Lord, and let the dayspring from on high visit me.
Enable me to cast away all the works of darkness, and to put
upon me the armour of light, that I may be able to renounce
the world, the flesh, and the devil; to keep thy holy will and
commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of my
life. Give me, O Lord, wisdom to know the things that
belong to my peace, before I go hence, and am no more
seen. Graft in my heart the love of thy name, increase in
me true religion, and mourish me with all goodness. Give
me the spirit to think and do always such things as be
rightful. Teach me to ask and seek only such things as
shall please thee and profit my soul. Give me such a
measure of thy grace, that I may run the way of thy
commandments, obtain thy gracious promises, and be made
a partaker of thy heavenly treasures. Pour down upon me
the abundance of thy mercy. Give me more than I can
either desire or deserve. O give me the increase of faith,
hope, and love; and keep me ever by thy help from all
things hurtful, and lead me to all things useful. Let thy
grace always prevent and follow me, that I may be
continually given to all good works, and may always glorify
my Father which is in heaven. These, and every other
blessing, for me, and for thy whole Church, I humbly beg in
the name, and for the sake of the merits, of Jesus Christ my
Redeemer; to whom, with thee and the Holy Ghost, &c.
“Our Father,” &c.
O GoD, the Creator and Preserver of all mankind, I most
humbly beseech thee now to accept my sincere praise and
thanksgiving for all the blessings and mercies that I have
enjoyed this day. It is thou, O Lord, alone, who hast
preserved me from dangers; and from thy gracious bounty
have I received all things needful to promote my present and
eternal happiness. Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me, but
unto thy name, be the praise. O Lord, I am unworthy,
through my manifold sins, to offer thee any sacrifice; yet, as
thy property is to have mercy and to forgive, I beseech thee
to accept this my bounden duty; not dealing with me
according to my deserving, but after thy mercy, and the
merits of thy dear Son Jesus Christ. I confess unto thee, O
my God, that I am tied and bound with the chain of my
sins; yet, let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose me. I
have no power of myself to help myself; O do thou keep me
by thy grace, both outwardly in my body, and inwardly in my
soul, that I may be enabled to present both -body and soul a
holy and pleasing sacrifice unto thee, through my Redeemer,
Jesus Christ. Grant mc, O my God, grace, that I may love
what thou hast commanded, and earnestly desire what thou
hast promised. Enable me, amidst the many changes of this
world, to fix my heart constantly upon things above. May
I, both in heart and mind, constantly thither ascend, whither
my Saviour, Jesus Christ, is gone before, to prepare a place
for me. Bring me up, O Lord, in thy fear and love. Keep
me under the protection of thy good providence. Hide me
under the shadow of thy wings; keep me from the evils of
this world, and land me safe at last on that blissful shore,
where all is quietness and assurance for ever. .
Into thy hands, O my God, I this night commend my soul
and body. Give thy angels charge over me, and grant me
such rest and sleep as may fit me for the duties of the
following day. And, O my God, do thou prepare me for my
last sleep in death, my departure out of this mortal state;
that, before I go hence, I may finish the work thou hast
given me to do, and at last finish my course with joy through
Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
O THoU eternal Fountain of all wisdom, whom I cannot
see or know but by the means of thy own light, vouchsafe to
manifest thyself to my soul, and teach me to know aright
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast.
sent. O blessed Sun of Righteousness, arise upon me with
healing in thy wings, to scatter all the clouds of folly and
ignorance that overspread my soul. Open my eyes to see
the wondrous things thy love has wrought. Suffer me not
to remain in darkness concerning anything that is needful for
me to know in order to my present peace and my eternal
glory. O Lord, incline mine ears to wisdom, and my heart.
to understanding, that I may follow on to know the Lord,
and increase in the knowledge and love of God. Give me, O.
Lord, that highest learning, to know thee; and that best.
wisdom, to know myself. Command a blessing on my studies.
and endeavours; and bless me, and help me, Lord, in my
learning all such things as shall stand me in stead, and do
me good. Let my soul and body, and all their powers, be
under thy conduct, and employed to thy glory. Show me
thy ways, O Lord, and lead me into truth; and whatever I
am ignorant of, unto me let it be given to know the mysteries.
of thy kingdom; and let me count all things but dung and
dross for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord; to whom, with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all
honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen. Vouchsafe, O.
Lord, to keep me this day from all sin. Bless my going out.
and coming in, now and for evermore. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
O MY heavenly Father, who tookest me out of my mother's.
womb, who wast my hope when Ihanged yet upon my mother's
breast, I have been preserved by thee ever since I was born;
Ogo not from me in this my youth, but send out thy light and
thy truth, that they may lead me, and bring me to thy holy
hill, and to thy dwelling-place. Teach me thy way, O Lord,
and enable me to walk in thy truth. O knit my heart unto.
thee, that I may fear thy name; and give me understanding
in the way of godliness. Lord, I am young, and cannot dis
cern between good and evil: O let me not go out of the way
of thy commandments. Learn me true understanding and
knowledge. Teach me to do the thing that pleaseth thee;
for thou art my God. Let thy loving Spirit lead me forth into
all the paths of righteousness. Let my study day and night
be in thy word, that I may become wise unto salvation. Make
thy word a light unto my feet, and a lamp to my path: Guide
me here with thy counsel, and after that receive me into
glory. Withdraw not thou,thy mercy from me, O my God;
but let thy loving-kindness and thy truth always preserve me.
Give thy blessing to me, and with thy favourable kindness
defend me, as with a shield. Show me the path of life, and
enable me to walk therein, till I come into thy presence, where
is fulness of joy, and to thy right hand, where are pleasures
for evermore. As thou hast been pleased to preserve me this
day, and hast bestowed upon me all things needful, I desire
to bless thy name for the same. Take care of me this night,
'O Lord, and visit me with thy mercies. Preserve me, O
Lord, from everything hurtful, and let thy merciful arms for
ever surround me, through Jesus Christ my Saviour. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
O Lord my God, I am taught by thy word, that I am by
mature born in sin and a child of wrath, and that except I am
born again I cannot see the kingdom of God. O Lord, do
thou teach me the meaning of the new birth, that I, a child
of wrath, may become a child of grace. Lord, take away the
veil from my heart, that I may know my sinful nature. Make
the remembrance of my sins grievous unto me, and the burden
of them intolerable. Lead me then to the fountain opened
for sin and uncleanness, that I may there wash and be
-cleansed. Suffer me not to rest till I find redemption in thy
blood, even the forgiveness of all my sins. It has pleased
thee, O Lord, to hide these things from the wise and prudent,
and to reveal them unto babes. Reveal then, O Lord, thy
love in my soul. Let me taste and see how good and gracious
thou art. Suffer a child to come unto thee, and forbid me
not. I am unworthy; but receive me as thou didst the
little children of old into thy gracious arms, and adopt me
thine for ever. Shed abroad in my heart thy love, and filk
me with all peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. Let every
thought, word, and deed, be henceforth to the glory of thy
great name through Jesus Christ, and at last grant me an
abundant entrance into thy everlasting kingdom, through
Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour. Amen.
be thou with me, O Lord, this day, to bless and keep,
guide and govern me, and let me be thine, and only thine,
for ever. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
O THou ever blessed God, the Author and Giver of life, I
desire with all humility to draw near unto thy gracious majesty,
to offer up unto thee my evening sacrifice of prayer and praise.
Thou alone, O God, art worthy to be praised, and to be had
in everlasting remembrance. Glory be to thee O most
adorable Lord God. Glory be to thy name for all thy mercies
and goodness bestowed on me thy most unworthy servant, in
the day that is now past. Give me a due sense of all thy
mercies, that my heart may be unfeignedly thankful, and grant
me thy grace, that I may show forth thy praise not only with
my lips but in my life. Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy
great goodness. According to the multitude of thy mercies,
do away mine offences. Wash me thoroughly from my
wickedness, and cleanse me from all my sins. Turn thy face
from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds. Create in me a
clean heart, O my God, and renew a right spirit within me.
Cast me not away from thy presence, neither withdraw thy
loving-kindness from me. “Spare me, O Lord, whom thou
hast redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry
with me for ever.” For the glory of thy name, turn from me
those evils that I have most righteously deserved, and enable
me to walk before thee henceforth in holiness and righteous
mess to thy praise and glory. Let thy mercy and goodness
follow me all the days of my life, and be thou my guide unto
death, and my portion for ever. Give me thy grace, that I
may duly consider my latter end and the fewness of my days,
that I may seriously apply my heart unto wisdom, and work
out my salvation with fear and trembling, before the night of
death cometh upon me, wherein no man can work. Enable
me so to live, that I may not only be looking but also longing
for my Saviour's appearing; that when he shall come, I may
also appear with him in glory. And now, O Lord my God,
I beseech thee, take me under thy protection this night, and
preserve me from all evil. I will lay me down in peace and
take my rest; for it is thou, Lord, only that makest me
dwell in safety. In thee have I trusted, let me never be
confounded. These and all other mercies I humbly beg in
the name of my Mediator Jesus Christ. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, I bless thee, that of thy
infinite goodness thou hast preserved me this night past, and
brought me in safety to this morning. Withdraw not, I
humbly beseech thee, thy protection from me, but take me
under the care of thy providence this day. Watch over me
with the eyes of thy mercy, direct my soul and body according
to the rule of thy will, that I may pass this and all my days
to thy glory. O Lord, I am but a child, and know not how
to go out or come in ; and I am in the midst of a sinful
world. Give therefore unto thy servant an understanding
heart, that I may know and choose the good, and abhor and
shun that which is evil. According to thy mercy, think upon
me, O Lord, for thy goodness. Make me to remember thee
in the days of my youth. O learn me true wisdom, and let
the law of thy mouth be dearer to me than thousands of gold
and silver, and let my whole delight be therein. O let me be
devoted to thee from my childhood. Keep out of my heart
all love of the world, of riches, or any other created thing,
and fill it with the love of God. Thou knowest how many
and powerful are the enemies of my soul, that seek to destroy
it, the flesh and the devil. O Lord, help; O Lord, save; O
Lord, deliver me from them. Give me grace to renounce
them all, and to keep thy holy will and commandments all
the days of my life. Show me and make me what I must be
before I can inherit thy kingdom. Teach me the truth as it
is in Jesus. Save me from my own will, and let thine be
done in me and by me. O make me thy child by adoption
and grace. Renew me daily with thy Holy Spirit, and guide
me in all my ways, till thou hast perfected me for thy
heavenly kingdom. Make me dutiful to my parents, affec
tionate to my relations, obedient to my superiors, and loving
towards all mankind. And grant that as I grow in stature,
I may grow in wisdom and in thy favour, till thou shalt take
me to thine everlasting kingdom, there to dwell with thee
for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ my Saviour and
Redeemer. Amen.
“Our Father,” &c.
IDEsiRE to offer unto thee, O Lord, my evening sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving for all thy mercies bestowed upon me.
I bless thee for my creation, preservation, and, above all, for
my redemption by our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. I
'bless thee for bringing me safely to the conclusion of this day,
and humbly implore the pardon of all the sins I have been
guilty of, whether in thought, word, or deed. Have mercy
upon me, O God, and do thou free me from all the sins I have
committed, and deliver me from the punishment I have
deserved. Othou blessed Guide of my youth, give me thy
grace to seek after thee in my early years, that thou mayest
not be unmindful of me in the time of age. Keep me from
the evil of the world, and carry me safe through it to thy
kingdom. Take care of me, and provide for me, and dispose
of me in the world, as shall be most for thy glory and my
good. Leave me not to myself, in the hands of my own
counsel, but let me be taught of God. Take thou, O Lord,
the gracious charge, and guidance, and government of me,
and fix in my heart thy fear and love, and direct all my ways
to please not myself but thee. O redeem me from the power
of my sins by thy grace, and from the punishment of them
by thy blood, and by both bring me to thy glory. I desire,
O my God, to give up myself wholly to thee. I would be
thine, and only thine, for ever. O my God, my Saviour,
turn not away thy face from a poor child that seeks thee.
Give me to know that I am nothing, and can do nothing, of
myself; and that if ever I am thine, I must be wholly
indebted to thee for it. Let me be entirely devoted unto.
thee, and do thou make me obedient and faithful unto the
end. Make me to remember thee in my bed, and think
upon thee when I am waking; thou hast preserved me from
the dangers of the day past, thou hast been my support ever
since I was born. Under the shadow of thy wings let me
pass this might in comfort and peace. Keep me both in.
body and soul, and give me such rest as my body has need
of And grant, O Lord, that when I lay down my body in
the grave, my soul may rise to life immortal, through the
merits and intercession of thy dear Son, my Saviour, Jesus
Christ. Amen. “Our Father,” &c.
A Prayer for Relations, Friends, &c., to be used after Morning
and Evening Prayer.
VouchsAFE, O Lord, to bless my father and mother, and
all my relations, with the fear of thy name. Bless them in
their souls and bodies; perfect them in every good word and
work, and be thou their guide unto death. Bless my friends,
forgive my enemies; and grant unto all mankind the know
ledge and love of thee. Have mercy upon all who are
afflicted in mind, body, or estate. Give them patience under
their sufferings, and a happy issue out of all their afflictions;
and receive them and me at last into thy blessed kingdom,
for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.
Grace before Meat.
O Lord, I beseech thee, give thy blessing with what thy
mercy has here provided me with, that whether I eat or
drink, or whatsoever I do, I may do all to thy glory and
praise, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.
After Meals.
O LoRD my God, I bless thy holy name for this mercy,
which I have now received from thy bounty and goodness.
Feed now my soul with thy grace, that I may make it my
meat and drink to do thy gracious will, through Jesus Christ
my Saviour. Amen.
oF
Sequor, non passibus aequis '+
* I follow him, but at a great distance.-EDIT.
No man in England has had so long an acquaint
ance with Mr. Fletcher as myself. Our acquaintance
began almost as soon as his arrival in London, about
the year 1752, before he entered into Holy Orders, or,
I believe, had any such intention; and it continued
uninterrupted between thirty and forty years, even till
it pleased God to take him to himself. Nor was ours
a slight or ordinary acquaintance; but we were of one
heart and of one soul. We had no secrets between
us for many years; we did not purposely, hide
anything from each other. From time to time he
consulted me, and I him, on the most important
occasions; and he constantly professed, not only much
esteem, but, what I valued far more, much affection.
He told me in one of his letters,--I doubt not from
his heart,
Tecum vivere amem; tecum obeam lubens.
“With thee I gladly would both live and die.”
I therefore think myself obliged by the strongest
ties to pay this small tribute to his memory. But
you may easily observe, that, in doing this, I am little
more than a compiler; for I owe a great, if not the
greatest, part of the ensuing Tract to a few friends,
who have been at no small pains in furnishing me
with materials; and, above all, to my dear friend,
(such she has been almost from her childhood,) Mrs.
Fletcher. I could easily have altered both hers and
their language, while I retained their sentiments; but
I was conscious I could not alter it for the better;
and I would not alter for altering' sake; but judged
it fairest to give you most of their accounts, very
nearly in their own words.
Amsterdam,
September 12, 1786.
1. JoHN WILLIAM DE LA FLECHERE (this was properly
his name) was born at Nyon, in Switzerland, a town about
fifteen miles north of Geneva, on September the twelfth, in
the year 1729. His father was an Officer in the French
service, till he left the army in order to marry; but after a
time he returned to the army, and was a Colonel in the
Militia of his own country.
2. In his early childhood he had much of the fear of God,
and great tenderness of conscience. One day, having offended
his father, who threatened to correct him, he did not dare to
come into his presence, but retired into the garden; and
when he saw him coming toward him, he ran away with all
speed. But he was presently struck with deep remorse, and
said to himself, “What I do I run away from my father?
Perhaps I shall live to have a son that will run away from
me.” And it was several years before the impression which
he then received was worn off.
3. Another instance of his tenderness of conscience occurred
when he was about seven years of age : He was one day
reproved by the nursery-maid, saying, “You are a naughty
boy. Do you not know, that the devil is to take away all
naughty children?” He was no sooner in bed, than he began
to reflect very deeply upon her words: He thought, “I am a
naughty boy; and how do I know but God may let the devil
take me away this night?” He then got up and wrestled
with God in prayer for a considerable time; and he would
not go to bed again till he believed God had forgiven him.
4. The following accounts Mr. Fletcher himself gave to
Mr. Samuel Webb, of London, then residing at Madeley:--
“When I was a lad, I had a design to get some fruit out
of my father's garden: The door being locked, I could not
get in, but by climbing over the wall. This was very high;
but with some difficulty I got to the top of it. As I was
walking upon it, my foot slipped, and I fell down to the
bottom. But just where I fell a large quantity of fresh
made mortar was laid. I fell exactly upon it. This broke
my fall, or it might have cost me my life.
5. “Once, as I was swimming by myself in a deep water,
one end of a strong riband which bound my hair, getting
loose I know not how, and twisting about my leg, tied me as
it were neck and heels. I strove with all my strength to
disengage myself; but it was to no purpose. No person
being within call, I gave myself up for lost. But when I
had given over struggling, the riband loosed of itself.
6. “Another instance of the tender care which God had
over me was as follows:--One evening I and four young
gentlemen, in high spirits, made a solemn agreement with
each other to swim the next day to a rocky island, five miles
distant from the shore. But this foolish adventure was
within a very little of costing us all our lives. I and another
indeed did with great difficulty and hazard swim to the
island; but when we came thither, the rock was so steep and
smooth, that we could not possibly climb up. After swim
ming round several times, and making many ineffectual
efforts, we thought we must perish there; but at length one
of us found a place, where he made a shift to crawl up. He
then helped his companion after him. The others swam
about half-way. A boat then took them up, when they were
just sinking. Another boat, which we had ordered to follow
us, afterwards came and took us home.”
7. A still more remarkable deliverance it is of which he
gave an account in the year 1760: “Some years since, I
lived at a place very near the river Rhine. In that part, it
is broader than the Thames at London Bridge, and extremely
rapid. But, having been long practised in swimming, I made
no scruple of going into it at any time; only I was always
careful to keep near the shore, that the stream might not
carry me away. Once, however, being less careful than usual,
I was unawares drawn into the mid channel. The water
there was extremely rough, and poured along like a galloping
horse. I endeavoured to swim against it, but in vain, till I
was hurried far from home. When I was almost spent, I
rested upon my back, and then looked about for a landing
place, finding I must either land or sink. With much difficulty
I got near the shore; but the rocks were so ragged and sharp,
that I saw, if I attempted to land there, I should be torn in
pieces; so I was constrained to turn again to the mid stream.
At last, despairing of life, I was cheered by the sight of a fine
smooth creek, into which I was swiftly carried by a violent
stream. A building stood directly across it, which I did not
then know to be a powder-mill. The last thing I can remem
ber was, the striking of my breast against one of the piles
whereon it stood. I then lost my senses, and knew nothing
more, till I rose on the other side of the mill. When I came
to myself, I was in a calm, safe place, perfectly well, without
any soreness or weariness at all. Nothing was amiss but the
distance of my clothes, the stream having driven me five miles
from the place where I left them. Many persons gladly
welcomed me on shore; one gentleman in particular, who
said, ‘I looked when you went under the mill, and again
when you rose on the other side; and the time of your being
immerged among the piles, was exactly twenty minutes.’”
But some will say, “Why, this was a miracle !” Undoubt
edly it was. It was not a natural event; but a work wrought
above the power of nature, probably by the ministry of angels.
8. When he was yet very young, his father sent him to
the University of Geneva. After he had gone through the
usual course of study, it was the desire of his parents that he
should be a Clergyman. But it was his own desire and
resolution to be an Officer in the army. Not being able to
gain their consent to this, he, without their consent, went
away to Lisbon. Here he gathered a company of his own
countrymen, accepted of a Captain’s commission, and engaged
to serve the King of Portugal, on board a man-of-war, which
was just then getting ready with all speed in order to sail to
Brazil. He then wrote to his parents, begging them to send
him a considerable sum of money. Of this he expected to
make a vast advantage. But they refused him roughly:
Unmoved by this, he determined to go without it, as soon as
the ship sailed. But in the morning, the maid, waiting on
him at breakfast, let the tea-kettle fall, and so scalded his leg
that he kept his bed for a considerable time after. During
that time, the ship sailed for Brazil. But it was observed,
that the ship was heard of no more.
9. But how is this reconcilable with the account which has
been given of his piety when he was a child? Very easily:
It only shows, that his piety declined while he was at the
University. (And this is too often the case of other youths
in our own Universities.) But it pleased God at or before
his journey to England to lift up his head again.
10. His desire of being an Officer in the army continued
after he returned from Lisbon. And when he was informed,
that his uncle, then a Colonel in the Dutch service, had
procured a commission for him, he joyfully set out for
Flanders. But just at that time the peace was concluded;
and his uncle dying quickly after, his hopes were blasted, and
he gave up all thoughts of going into the army; and, being
disengaged from all business, he thought it would not be
amiss to spend a little time in England.
11. Coming to the Custom-House in London, with some
other young gentlemen, none of whom could speak any
English, they were treated with the utmost surliness and ill
manners by some brutish Custom-House Officers. These not
only took out and jumbled together all the things that were in
their portmanteaus, but took away their letters of recommend
ation; telling them, “All letters must be sent by the post.”
They are such saucy and ill-mannered wretches as these that
bring up an evil report on our nation. Britons might well
be styled, hospitibus feri,” if they were all like these vermin.
12. From hence they went to an inn; but here they were
under another difficulty. As they spoke no English, they could
not tell how to exchange their foreign into English money;
till Mr. Fletcher, going to the door, heard a well-dressed Jew
talking French. He told him the difficulty they were under,
with regard to the exchange of money. The Jew replied,
“Give me your money, and I will get it changed in five
minutes.” Mr. Fletcher without delay gave him his purse, in
which were ninety pounds. As soon as he came back to his
company, he told them what he had done. They all cried
out with one voice, “Then your money is gone. You need
never expect to see a crown or a doit of it any more. Men
are constantly waiting about the doors of these inns, on
* Rude and inhospitable to foreigners.-EDIT.
purpose to take in young strangers.” Seeing no remedy, no
way to help himself, he could only commend his cause to
God. And that was enough;--before they had done break
fast, in came the Jew, and brought him the whole money.
13. Inquiring for a person who was proper to perfect him
in the English tongue, (the rudiments of which he had begun
to learn before he left Geneva,) he was recommended to
Mr. Burchell, who then kept a boarding-school at South
Nimms in Hertfordshire. And when Mr. Burchell removed
to Hatfield, he chose to remove with him. All the time he
was both at South Nimms and at Hatfield, he was of a
serious and reserved behaviour; very different from that of
the other young gentlemen who were his fellow-students.
Here he diligently studied both the English language, and all
the branches of polite literature. Meantime his easy and
genteel behaviour, together with his eminent sweetness of
temper, gained him the esteem as well as the affection of all
that conversed with him. He frequently visited some of the
first families in Hatfield, who were all fond of his conversa
tion; so lively and ingenious at the same time, evidencing
both the gentleman and the scholar. All this time he had
the fear of God deeply rooted in his heart. But he had none
to take him by the hand, and lead him forward in the ways
of God. He stayed with Mr. Burchell about eighteen
months, who loved him as his own son.
14. Afterwards, one Mr. Dechamps, a French Minister, to
whom he had been recommended, procured him the place of
tutor to the two sons of Thomas Hill, Esq., at Tern-Hall, in
Shropshire. In the year 1752, he removed into Mr. Hill's
family, and entered upon the important province of instructing
the young gentlemen. He still feared God, but had not yet
an experimental sense of his love. Nor was he convinced of
his own fallen state, till one Sunday evening, a servant came
in to make up his fire while he was writing some music, who,
looking at him with serious concern, said, “Sir, I am sorry
to see you so employed on the Lord’s day.” At first his
pride was alarmed, and his resentment moved, at being
reproved by a servant. But upon reflection, he felt the reproof
was just. He immediately put away his music, and from
that very hour became a strict observer of the Lord's day.
15. I have heard two very different accounts of the manner
wherein he had the first notice of the people called Methodists.
But I think it reasonable to prefer to any other, that which
I received from his own mouth. This was as follows:
When Mr. Hill went up to London to attend the Parlia
ment, he took his family and Mr. Fletcher with him. While
they stopped at St. Alban’s, he walked out into the town,
and did not return till they were set out for London. A
horse being left for him, he rode after, and overtook them in
the evening. Mr. Hill asking him why he stayed behind, he
said, “As I was walking, I met with a poor old woman who
talked so sweetly of Jesus Christ, that I knew not how the
time passed away.” “I shall wonder,” said Mrs. H., “if
our tutor does not turn Methodist by and by.” “Methodist,
Madam,” said he, “pray what is that?” She replied,
“Why, the Methodists are a people that do nothing but pray;
they are praying all day and all night.” “Are they?” said
he, “then, by the help of God, I will find them out, if they
be above ground.” He did find them out not long after,
and was admitted into the Society. And from this time,
whenever he was in town, he met in Mr. Richard Edwards’s
class. This he found so profitable to his soul, that he lost
no opportunity of meeting. And he retained a peculiar
regard for Mr. Edwards till the day of his death.
1. It will be most satisfactory to the serious reader, to give
an account of this in his own words. They run thus: “The
12th of January, in the year 1755, I received the sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, though my heart was as hard as a stone.
The following day, I felt the tyranny of sin more than ever,
and an uncommon coldness in all religious duties. I felt the
burden of my corruptions heavier than ever; there was no
rest in my flesh. I called upon the Lord, but with such
heaviness as made me fear it was lost labour. Many a time
did I take up the Bible to seek comfort; but not being able
to read, I shut it again. The thoughts which engrossed my
mind were these: “I am undone. I have wandered from
God more than ever. I have trampled under foot the frequent
convictions which God has wrought in my heart. Instead of
going straight to Christ, I have wasted my time in fighting
against sin by the sole use of the means of grace; as if the
means would do me good without the blessing of God. I
never had faith; and without faith it is impossible to please
God: Therefore all my thoughts, words, and works, however
specious before men, are utterly sinful before God. And if I
am not changed before I go hence, I am lost to all eternity.’
2. “When I saw that all my endeavours availed nothing
against my conquering sin, I almost gave up all hope, and
resolved to sin on and go to hell. Yet I had a strange
thought, ‘If I do go to hell, I will praise God there. And
since I cannot be a monument of his mercy in heaven, I will
be a monument of his justice in hell. But I soon recovered
my ground. I thought, ‘Christ died for all; therefore he died
for me. He died to pluck such sinners as I am out of the
devil's teeth. And as I sincerely desire to be his, he will
surely take me to himself. He will surely let me know before
I die, that he has died for me. If He leaves mc for awhile
in this dreadful state, it is only to show me the depth he draws
me out of.” But then I thought, ‘Perhaps he will do it only
at my dying hour. And must I sin on till then ? How can
I endure this?’ But I thought again, ‘My Saviour was
above three-and-thirty years on earth. Let me wait for him
as many years, and then I may have some excuse for my
impatience. Does God owe me anything? Is he bound to
time or place? Do I deserve anything at his hands but
damnation?’ Yet anger was always one of the sins which I
could not overcome. I went on sinning and repenting, and
sinning again; but still calling on God’s mercy through Christ.
3. “I was now beat out of all my strong holds. I felt my
helplessness, and lay at the feet of Christ. I cried, ‘Save
me, Lord, as a brand plucked out of the fire! Give me
justifying faith; for the devil will surely reign over me, till
thou takest me into thy hand. I shall only be an instrument
in his hand to work wickedness, till thou stretch out thy
almighty hand, and save thy lost creature by free, unmerited
grace.’ I seldom went to private prayer, but this thought came
into my mind, “This may be the happy hour, when thou
wilt prevail with God!’ But still I was disappointed. I
cried to God; but my heart did not go with my lips. I
prayed, but often could hardly keep awake. When overcome
with heaviness, I went to bed, beseeching God to spare me
284 Ll FE OF MR. FLETCII ER.
till the next day, that I might renew my wrestling with him,
till I should prevail.
4. “On Sunday, the 19th, in the evening, I heard an
excellent sermon on these words, “Being justified by faith,
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.’
I heard it attentively, but my heart was not moved. I was
only still more convinced, that I was an unbeliever, and that
till I had faith, I should never have peace. The hymn after
sermon suited the subject; but I could not join in singing it.
So I sat mourning, while others rejoiced. I went home, still
resolving to wrestle with the Lord, like Jacob, till I should
become a prevailing Israel.
5. “I begged of God, the following day, to show me the
wickedness of my heart. I besought him to increase my
convictions; for I was afraid I did not mourn enough for my
sins. But I found relief in Mr. Wesley's Journal, where I
learned, that we should not build on what we feel, but go to
Christ with all our sins, and all our hardness of heart. On
the 21st, I wrote down part of what filled my heart; namely,
a confession of my sins, misery, and helplessness, together with
a resolution to seek Christ even unto death. In the evening,
I read the Scriptures, and found a sort of pleasure in seeing
a picture of my own wickedness exactly drawn in the third of
the Romans, and that of my present condition in the seventh.
I often wished to be acquainted with somebody who had been
in my condition; and resolved to seek for onc to whom I
might unbosom my whole soul. On Thursday, Satan beset
me hard : I sinned, and grievously too. And now I almost
gave up all hope; I was on the brink of despair; and never
theless continued to fall into sin, as often as I had temptation.
But I must observe, that though I frequently thought hell
would be my portion, yet I never was much afraid of it:
Whether this was owing to a secret hope, or to hardness of
heart, I know not. But I was continually crying out, ‘What
stupidity ! I see myself hanging over hell, as it were by a
single thread ' And yet I am not afraid, but sin on 1 O
what is man without the grace of God! A very devil in
wickedness, though inferior to him in power !” In the evening
I went to a sincere friend, and told him something of my
state. He endeavoured to administer comfort; but it was not
suited to my state. When we parted, he gave me some
advice which was better suited to my condition. ‘God,” said
he, ‘is merciful; God loves you; and if he denies you
anything, it is for your good. You deserve nothing at his
hands; but wait patiently for him, and never give up your
hope, I went home, resolved to follow his advice, though I
should stay till death.
6. “I proposed to receive the Lord's Supper on the follow
ing Sunday. I therefore returned to my room, and looked
out a sacramental hymn. I learned it by heart, and prayed
it over many times, intending to repeat it at the table. Then
I went to bed with rather more hope and peace than I had
felt for some time. But Satan waked, though I slept. I
dreamed I had committed a grievous and abominable sin. I
awaked amazed and confounded, but fell upon my knees and
prayed with more faith than usual; and afterwards went
about my business with an uncommon cheerfulness. It was
not long before I was tempted by my besetting sin; but I
found it had no power. My soul was not even ruffled. I
took no notice of this at first. But having withstood the
temptation again and again, I perceived it was the Lord’s
doing. Afterwards it was suggested, ‘It is presumption for
such a sinner to hope for so great a mercy. I prayed, that
I might not be in a delusion; and the more I prayed, the
more clearly I saw it was real. For though sin stirred all the
day long, I always overcame it in the name of the Lord.
7. “In the evening I read the experiences of some of God's
children, and found mine agreed with theirs. Hereby my
faith was strengthened, and my hope considerably increased:
I intreated the Lord to deal with his servant according to his
mercy, and take all the glory to himself. I prayed earnestly,
and was persuaded I should have peace with God and
dominion over sin; not doubting but the full assurance also
would be given in God’s good time. I continued calling on
him for an increase of faith; (for still I had some fear of
being in a delusion;) and having continued my supplication
till near one in the morning, I opened my Bible on those
words: “Cast thy burden on the Lord, and he shall sustain
thee. He will not suffer the righteous to be moved. Filled
with joy, I fell upon my knees, to beg of God that I might
always cast my burden upon him. My hope was now
greatly increased; and I thought I saw myself conqueror
over sin, hell, and all manner of affliction.
8. “With this comfortable promise I shut up my Bible,
286 LIFE OF MIt. FLETCHER.
being now perfectly satisfied. As I shut it, I cast my cyes
on that word, ‘Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, I will
do it.’ So, having asked grace of God to serve him till
death, I went cheerfully to bed.”
9. So far we have Mr. Fletcher's own account, under his
own hand. From this time he “had the witness in himself;”
he knew that he had “redemption through the blood of
Christ, even the forgiveness of sins.” But he still continued
pleading with the Lord, to take a fuller possession of his
heart; till, one day, as he was in earnest prayer, lying pros
trate on his face before God, he saw, as it were, our blessed
Lord, hanging and bleeding on the cross: And, at the same
time, those words were spoken with power to his heart:
Seized by the rage of sinful men,
I see him bound, and bruised, and slain.
'Tis done ! The Martyr dies !
IIis life to ransom ours is given;
And, lo ! the fiercest fire of heaven
Consumes the sacrifice :
He suffers both from men and God |
He bears the universal load
Of guilt and misery !
He suffers to reverse our doom;
And, lo ! my Lord is here become
The bread of life to me !
10. I believe this was in January, 1754, in the second
year after he removed to Tern. Now all his bonds were
broken; he breathed a purer air, and was able to say with
confidence, “The life I now live, I live by faith in the Son
of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.” By means
of this faith, sin was under his feet. Knowing in whom he
had believed, he could continually triumph in the Lord, and
praise the God of his salvation.
11. From this time he walked cheerfully, as well as
valiantly, in the ways of God. He closely followed his Master,
denying himself, and taking up his cross daily. And, thinking
he had not leisure in the day for the great work which h
had in hand, he made it an invariable rule to sit up two whol
nights in a week. These he dedicated to reading, meditation,
and prayer, in order to enter more deeply into that com
munion with the Father and the Son which was the delight
of his soul. Meantime, he lived entirely on vegetable food,
and for some time on bread, with milk and water. None can
doubt, if these austerities were well intended: But it scems
LIFE OF MR. FLETC in ER. 287
they were not well judged. It is probable, they gave the first
wound to an excellent constitution, and laid the foundation
of many infirmities, which nothing but death could cure.
l. IT was not long after he had himself “tasted the powers
of the world to come,” that he was pressed in spirit to exhort
others to seek after the same blessing. And he was the
more strongly excited to this, by seeing the world all around
him “lying in wickedness.” Being deeply sensible of the
goodness of God on the one hand, and the misery of man
kind on the other, he found an earnest longing
To pluck poor brands out of the fire,
To snatch them from the verge of hell.
This he began to do a considerable time before he was
admitted into Holy Orders. And even his first labours of
love were far from being in vain. For though he was by no
means perfect in the English tongue, particularly with regard
to the pronunciation of it; yet the earnestness with which
he spoke, (seldom to be found in English Preachers,) and
the unspeakably tender affection to poor, undone sinners,
which breathed in every word and gesture, drew multitudes
of people to hear him; and, by the blessing of God, his word
made so deep an impression on their hearts, that very few
went empty away.
2. From this time, till he undertook the direct care of souls,
he used to be in London during the sitting of the Parliament,
and the rest of the year at Tern-Hall, (as it was then called,)
instructing the young gentlemen. Every Sunday he attended
the parish church at Atcham. But when the service was
ended, instead of going home in the coach, which was always
ready, he usually took a solitary walk by the Severn side, and
spent some time in meditation and prayer. A pious domestic
of Mr. Hill's, having frequently observed him, one Sunday
desired leave to walk with him, which he constantly did from
that time. The account which he (Mr. Vaughan, still living
in London) gives of Mr. Fletcher is as follows:
“It was our ordinary custom, when the Church Service was
over, to retire into the most lonely fields or meadows, where
we frequently either kneeled down, or prostrated ourselves upon
the ground. At those happy seasons I was a witness of such
pleadings and wrestlings with God, such exercises of faith and
love, as I have not known in any one ever since. The conso
lations which we then received from God induced us to appoint
two or three nights in a week, when we duly met after his
pupils were asleep. We met also constantly on Sunday between
four and five in the morning. Sometimes I stepped into his
study on other days. I rarely saw any book before him
besides the Bible and the ‘Christian’s Pattern.” And he was
seldom in any other company, unless when necessary business
required, besides that of the unworthy writer of this paper.”
3. When he was in the country, he used to visit an
Officer of Excise at Atcham, to be instructed in singing. On
my desiring him to give me some account of what he recol
lected concerning Mr. Fletcher, he answered thus: “As
to that man of God, Mr. Fletcher, it is but little that I
remember of him; it being above nine-and-twenty years since
the last time I saw him. But this I well remember, his
conversation with me was always sweet and savoury. He was
too wise to suffer any of his precious moments to be trifled
away. When there was company to dine at Mr. Hill’s, he
frequently retired into the garden, and contentedly dined on
a piece of bread, and a few bunches of currants. Indeed, in
his whole manner of living, he was a pattern of abstemious
ness. Meantime, how great was his sweetness of temper and
heavenly-mindedness ! I never saw it equalled in any one.
How often, when I parted with him at Tern-Hall, have his
eyes and hands been lifted up to heaven to implore a blessing
upon me, with fervour and devoutness unequalled by any I
ever saw ! I firmly believe, he has not left in this land, or
perhaps in any other, one luminary like himself. I conclude,
wishing this light may be so held up, that many may see the
glory thereof, and be transformed into its likeness, May you
and I, and all that love the Lord Jesus Christ, be partakers
of that holiness which was so conspicuous in him !”
4. “Our interviews for singing and conversation,” continues
Mr. Vaughan, who was often present on these occasions, “were
seldom concluded without prayer; in which we were frequently
joined by her that is now my wife; (then a servant in the
family;) as likewise by a poor widow in the village, who had
also known the power of God unto salvation, and who died
some years since, praising God with her latest breath. These
were the only persons in the country whom he chose for his
familiar friends. But he sometimes walked over to Shrews
bury, to see Mrs. Glynne, or Mr. Appleton (who likewise now
rests from his labours, after having many years adorned the
gospel); he also visited any of the poor in the neighbourhood,
that were upon a sick bed; and, when no other person could
be procured, performed even the meanest offices for them.”
5. It was in the year 1757 that he was ordained both
Deacon and Priest. He was ordained at Whitehall; and
the same day, being informed that I had no one to assist me
at West-Street chapel, he came away as soon as ever the
ordination was over, and assisted me in the administration
of the Lord’s supper. He was now doubly diligent in
preaching, not only in the chapels at West-Street and Spital
fields, but wherever the providence of God opened a door to
proclaim the everlasting gospel. This he frequently did, not
only in English, but likewise in French, his native language;
of which he was allowed, by all competent judges, to be a
complete master.
6. “The first time,” says Mr. Vaughan, “he preached in
the country, was at Atcham church, on June 19, 1757. His
text was, (a very bold beginning !) ‘Ye adulterers and
adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of this world is
enmity with God?” (James iv. 4.) The congregation stood
amazed, and gazed upon him as if he had been a monster;
but to me he appeared as a messenger sent from heaven.”
7. It was not soon that he was invited again to preach in
Atcham church. But he was invited to preach in several other
churches in the neighbourhood. He was first invited to
preach at Wroxeter, and afterwards at the Abbey church in
Shrewsbury ; but not being yet perfect in the English
tongue, he wrote down all the sermons he preached in
churches. But I doubt whether he preached above six times
in the six months while he stayed in the country. On my
telling him I wished he had more opportunities of preaching
in this unenlightened part of the land, he answered, “The will
of God be done: I am in his hands; and if he does not call
me to so much public duty, I have the more time for study,
prayer, and praise.”
8. In the year 1758, there were many French prisoners on
their parole at Tunbridge. Being desired to preach to them
in their own language, he readily complied. Many of them
appeared to be deeply affected, and earnestly requested that
he would preach to them every Lord's day. But some
advised them, first, to present a petition to the Bishop of
London for leave. They did so; and (who would believe it?)
the good Bishop peremptorily rejected their petition | If I
had known this at the time, King George should have known
it; and I believe he would have given the Bishop little
thanks. An odd incident followed: A few months after, the
Bishop died of a cancer in his mouth. Perhaps some may
think this was a just retribution for silencing such a Prophet,
on such an occasion I I am not ashamed to acknowledge
this is my own sentiment; and I do not think it any breach
of charity to suppose that an action, so unworthy a Christian
Bishop, had its punishment in this world.
9. When he returned from London in the same year, he was
more frequently invited to preach in several of the neighbouring
churches. And before his quitting the country he gave me a
few printed papers, entitled, “A Christmas-box for Journey
men and Apprentices.” I mention it the rather because I
suppose this was the first thing which he ever published.
10. It was in the beginning of June, 1759, that he returned
the last time from London to Tern-Hall; and being now
less frequently called to public duty, he enjoyed his beloved
retirement, giving himself up to study, meditation, and
prayer, and walking closely with God. Indeed his whole
life was now a life of prayer; and so intensely was his mind
fixed upon God, that I have heard him say, “I would not
move from my seat, without lifting up my heart to God.”
Wherever we met, if we were alone, his first salute was, “Do
I meet you praying?” And if we were talking on any point
of divinity, when we were in the depth of our discourse, he
would often break off abruptly, and ask, “Where are our
hearts now 7” If ever the misconduct of an absent person
was mentioned, his usual reply was, “Let us pray for him.”
ll. It was, as I remember, about the close of this summer,
that he was frequently desired, sometimes to assist, at other
times to perform the whole service for, Mr. Chambers, then
Vicar of Madeley. On these occasions it was, that he con
tracted such an affection for the people of Madeley, as nothing
could hinder from increasing more and more to the day of
his death. While he officiated at Madeley, as he still lived
at the Hall, ten miles distant from it, a groom was ordered
to get a horse ready for him every Sunday morning. But so
great was his aversion for giving trouble to any one, that if
the groom did not wake at the time, he seldom would suffer
him to be called, but prepared the horse for himself.
12. In answer to some queries concerning him, a gentle
man who was intimately acquainted with him for many years
wrote to me as follows:-
“MY aversion to writing letters increases with my
declining years. And yet I most willingly pay this debt to
the precious memory of an old friend. I dwelt near him
only two or three years; but our intimacy was great. And
perhaps I may be able to present you with some particulars
which you have not seen before.
13. “About the year 1760, he showed me, at his lodgings,
a rope with pulleys, which he used for exercise; and added,
with a smile, that the devil often tempted him to hang himself
therewith. I said, ‘The desire of women is a temptation far
more dangerous than this.’ He answered with surprise, (or
rather, as it seemed to me, with a degree of contempt,) “In all
my life I never felt that temptation; no, not in any degree.”
But it is dangerous for a Christian, how great or good soever
he may be, to despise another for being tempted. When we
met again, he acknowledged he had been plagued, like other
men, with that formerly unknown temptation.”
14. In the same year, the living of Madeley fell vacant,
and Mr. Fletcher was presented to it; which he accepted in
preference to another, that was of double the value. He
embraced it as his peculiar charge, the object of his most
tender affection. And he was now at leisure to attend it,
being fully discharged from his former employment; for his
pupils were removed to Cambridge. The elder of them died
about the time of his coming of age; the younger first
represented the town of Salop, as his father had done, and
afterwards the county; till he took his seat in the House of
Peers, as Baron Berwick, of Atcham-House: This is now the
name that is given to what was formerly called Tern-Hall.
FROM HIS SETTLING AT MADELEY, To HIs LEAVING
1. HE settled at Madeley, according to his desire, in the
year 1760. And from the beginning he was a laborious
workman in his Lord's vineyard. At his first settling there,
the hearts of several were unaccountably set against him;
insomuch that he was constrained to warn some of these, that
if they did not repent, God would speedily cut them off. And
the truth of those predictions was shown over and over, by
the signal accomplishment of them. But no opposition could
hinder him from going on in his Master's work, and suppress
ing vice in every possible manner. Those sinners who
endeavoured to hide themselves from him, he pursued to
every corner of his parish; by all sorts of means, public and
private, early and late, in season and out of season, entreating
and warning them to flee from the wrath to come. Some
made it an excuse, for not attending the Church Service on a
Sunday morning, that they could not awake early enough, to
get their families ready. He provided for this also: Taking
a bell in his hand, he set out every Sunday at five in the
morning, and went round the most distant parts of the parish,
inviting all the inhabitants to the house of God.-
2. Yet notwithstanding all the pains he took, he saw for
some time little fruit of his labour; insomuch that he was more
than once in doubt, whether he had not mistaken his place;
whether God had indeed called him to confine himself to one
town, or to labour more at large in his vineyard. He was
not free from this doubt, when a multitude of people flocked
together at a funeral. He seldom let these awful opportunities
slip without giving a solemn exhortation. At the close of the
exhortation which was then given, one man was so grievously
offended, that he could not refrain from breaking out into
scurrilous, yea, menacing language. But, notwithstanding
all his struggling against it, the word fastened upon his
heart. At first, indeed, he roared like a lion; but he soon
wept like a child. Not long after, he came to Mr. Fletcher
in the most humble manner, asking pardon for his outrageous
behaviour, and begging an interest in his prayers. This was
such a refreshment as he stood in need of; and it was but a
short time before this poor broken-hearted sinner was filled
with joy unspeakable. He then spared no pains in exhorting
his fellow-sinners “to flee from the wrath to come.”
3. It was not long after, when, one Sunday evening, Mr.
Fletcher, after performing the usual duty at Madeley, was
about to set out for Madeley-Wood, to preach and catechise
as usual. But just then notice was brought (which should
have been given before) that a child was to be buried. His
waiting till the child was brought, prevented his going to the
Wood. And herein the providence of God appeared. For
at this very time many of the colliers, who neither feared God
nor regarded men, were baiting a bull, just by the preaching
house; and having had plenty of drink, they had all agreed,
as soon as he came, to bait the Parson. Part of them were
appointed to pull him off his horse, and the rest to set the
dogs upon him. One of these very men afterwards confessed
that he was with them when this agreement was made; and
that afterwards, while they were in the most horrid manner
cursing and swearing at their disappointment, a large china
punch-bowl, which held above a gallon, without any apparent
cause (for it was not touched by any person or thing) fell
all to shivers. This so alarmed him, that he forsook all his
companions, and determined to save his own soul.
4. From the beginning he did not confine his labours to
his own parish. For many years he regularly preached at
places, eight, ten, or sixteen miles off; returning the same
night, though he seldom got home before one or two in the
morning. At a little society which he had gathered about
six miles from Madeley, he preached two or three times a
week, beginning at five in the morning. As for visiting the
sick, this was a work for which he was always ready: If he
heard the knocker in the coldest winter night, his window
was thrown open in a moment. And when he understood
either that some one was hurt in the pit, or that a neighbour
was likely to die, no consideration was ever had of the dark
ness of the night, or the severity of the weather; but this
answer was always given: “I will attend you immediately.”
5. But in one respect Mr. Fletcher has frequently been
blamed; namely, for deserting a place where God had
eminently owned him; I mean Trevecka, in Wales. I believe
it is therefore my bounden duty to clear up the whole affair.
And I cannot do this better than by transcribing the substance
of an account which I have received from Mr. Benson, in
answer to my inquiries:
6. “My acquaintance with him,” says he, “ commenced
when I was at Kingswood,--I think, in the year 1768. As
he now and then made a short excursion from Madeley to
Bath or Bristol, in one of those excursions we invited him to
give us a sermon at Kingswood. He was peculiarly assisted
while he was applying those encouraging words: ‘Him that
cometh unto me I will in mowise cast out. The people were
exceedingly affected; indeed, quite melted down. The tears
streamed so fast from the eyes of the poor colliers, that their
grisly, black faces were washed by them, and almost univer
sally streaked with white. And as to himself, his zealous soul
had been carried out so far beyond his strength, that, when
he concluded, he put off a shirt which was as wet as if it had
been dipped in water. But this was nothing strange; when
ever he preached, it was generally the case. From this time
I conceived a particular esteem for him, chiefly on account
of his piety; and wished much for a greater intimacy with
him; a blessing which I soon after obtained.
7. “For, about this time, the Countess of Huntingdon erected
a seminary at Trevecka, in Wales, in order to educate pious
young men, of whatever denomination, for the ministry. She
proposed to admit only such as were converted to God, and
resolved to dedicate themselves to His service. They were
at liberty to stay there three years; during which they were to
have their education gratis, with every necessary of life, and
a suit of clothes once a year: Afterwards those who desired it
might enter into the ministry, either in the Established Church
of England, or among Protestants of any other denomina
tion. From the high opinion which the Countess had of Mr.
Fletcher’s piety, learning, and abilities for such an office, she
invited him to undertake the direction of that seminary.
Not that he could promise to be chiefly resident there; much
less constantly. His duty to his own flock at Madeley would
by no means admit of this. But he was to attend as often as
he conveniently could; to give advice, with regard to the
appointment of Masters, the admission or exclusion of students;
to oversee their studies and conduct; to assist their piety, and
judge of their qualifications for the work of the ministry.
8. “As Mr. Fletcher greatly approved of the design, espe
cially considering, First, that none were to be admitted but
such as feared God; and, Secondly, that when they were
prepared for it, they might enter into the ministry wherever
Providence opened a door; he readily complied with the
invitation, and undertook the charge. This he did without
fee or reward, from the sole motive of being useful in the
most important work of training up persons for the glorious
office of preaching the gospel. And some months after, with
the same view, through his means, and in consequence of
your recommendation to her Ladyship, I was made Head
Master of the school, or, as it was commonly called, the
College; though I could very ill be spared from Kingswood,
where I had acted in that capacity about four years.
9. “As yet I was greatly wanted at Kingswood. I had
likewise a term to keep at Oxford; so that I could only pay
them a short visit in January, 1770. But in spring I went
to reside there; and for some time things went on excellently
well. The young men were serious, and made a considerable
progress in learning. And many of them seemed to have a
talent for preaching. Mr. Fletcher visited them frequently,
and was received as an angel of God. It is not possible for
me: to describe the veneration in which we all held him.
Like Elijah in the schools of the Prophets he was revered;
he was loved; he was almost adored; and that, not only by
every student, but by every member of the family. And
indeed he was worthy.
“Forgive me, my dear Sir, if you think Iexceed. My heart
kindles while I write. Here it was that I saw,--shall I say, an
angel in human flesh? I should not far exceed the truth if
I said so. But here I saw a descendant of fallen Adam, so
fully raised above the ruins of the fall, that though by the
body he was tied down to earth, yet was his whole ‘conversa
tion in heaven; yet was his life, from day to day, ‘hid with
Christ in God.” Prayer, praise, love, and zeal, all ardent,
elevated above what one would think attainable in this state
of frailty, were the element in which he himself continually
lived. And as to others, his one employment was, to call,
entreat, and urge them to ascend with him to the glorious
Source of being and blessedness. He had leisure compara
tively for nothing else. Languages, arts, sciences, grammar,
1'hetoric, logic, even divinity itself, as it is called, were all
laid aside, when he appeared in the school-room among the
1students. His full heart would not suffer him to be silent.
He must speak; and they were readier to hearken to this
servant and Minister of Jesus Christ, than to attend to
Sallust, Virgil, Cicero, or any Latin or Greek historian,
poet, or philosopher they were reading. And they seldom
hearkened long, before they were all in tears, and every
heart catched fire from the flame that burned in his soul.
10. “These seasons generally terminated in this: Being
convinced that to be “filled with the Holy Ghost’ was a
better qualification for the ministry of the gospel than any
classical learning, (though that too may be useful in its place,)
after speaking awhile in the school-room, he used frequently
to say, “As many of you as are athirst for this fulness of
the Spirit, follow me into my room.” On this, many of us
have instantly followed him, and there continued till noon,
wrestling like Jacob for the blessing, praying one after
another, till we could bear to kneel no longer. This was not
done once or twice, but many times. And I have sometimes
seen him on these occasions, once in particular, so filled with
the love of God, that he could contain no more; but cried
out, ‘O my God, withhold thy hand, or the vessel will burst.”
But he afterwards told me, he was afraid he had grieved the
Spirit of God; and that he ought rather to have prayed that
the Lord would have enlarged the vessel, or have suffered it
to break; that the soul might have no farther bar or inter
ruption to its enjoyment of the supreme good.”
This is certainly a just remark. The proper prayer on
such an occasion would have been,
Give me the enlarged desire,
And open, Lord, my soul,
Thy own fulness to require,
And comprehend the whole !
Stretch my faith's capacity
Wider, and yet wider still ;
Then with all that is in thee
My ravish'd spirit fill !
11. “Such was the ordinary employment of this man of God
while he remained at Trevecka. He preached the word of life
to the students and family, and as many of the neighbour's
as desired to be present. He was ‘instant in season, out of
season;’ he ‘reproved, rebuked, exhorted, with all long
suffering. He was always employed, either in discovering;
some important truth, or exhorting to some neglected duty,
or administering some needful comfort, or relating some useful
anecdote, or making some profitable remark or observation
upon anything that occurred. And his devout soul, always
burning with love and zeal, led him to intermingle prayer with
all he said. Meanwhile his manner was so solemn, and at
the same time so mild and insinuating, that it was hardly pos
sible for any who had the happiness of being in his company
not to be struck with awe and charmed with love, as if in the
presence of an angel or departed spirit. Indeed I frequently
thought, while attending to his heavenly discourse and divine
spirit, that he was so different from, and superior to, the gene
rality of mankind, as to look more like Moses or Elijah, or some
Prophet or Apostle come again from the dead, than a mortal
man dwelling in a house of clay. It is true, his weak and long
afflicted body proclaimed him to be human. But the graces
which so eminently filled and adorned his soul, manifested
him to be divine. And long before his happy spirit returned
to God that gave it, that which was human seemed in a great
measure to be “swallowed up of life.” O what a loss did
Trevecka sustain, what an irreparable loss, when he left it !
12. “But why then did he leave it? Why did he give up
an office, for which he was so perfectly well qualified? which
he executed so entirely to the satisfaction of all the parties
wherewith he was concerned, and in which it had pleased
God to give so manifest a blessing to his labours? Perhaps
it would be better, in tenderness to some persons, eminent
for piety and usefulness, to let that matter remain still under
the veil which forgiving love has cast over it. But if it be
thought that justice to his character, and to the cause which
from that time he so warmly espoused and so ably defended,
requires some light to be cast upon it, it may be the most
inoffensive way to do it in his own words.”
It will be proper to observe here, for the better understand
ing of the following letter, that some time before Mr. Fletcher
quitted Trevecka, Mr. Benson had been discharged from his
office there; not for any defect of learning or piety, or any
fault found with his behaviour; but wholly and solely because
he did not believe the doctrine of absolute predestination.
13. “The following is an exact copy of all that is material
in a letter he wrote to me, in consequence of my dismission
from the office I had been in :
“‘DEAR SIR, June 7, 1771.
“‘THE same post brought me yours, and two from my
Lady, and one from Mr. Williams, the new Master. Those
contained no charges but general ones, which with me go for
nothing. If the procedure you mention is fact, and your
letter is a fair account of the transaction and words relative
to your discharge, a false step has been taken. I write this
post to her Ladyship on the affair, with all possible plainness.
If the plan of the College is overthrown, I have nothing more
to say to it. I will keep to my text, for one. I trust I shall
ever be a servant of all: The confined tool of any one party
I never was, and never will be. If the blow that should have
been struck at the dead spirit, is struck (contrary to the
granted liberty of sentiment) at dead Arminius, or absent
Mr. Wesley; if a Master is turned away without any fault;
it is time for me to stand up with firmness, or to withdraw.”
14. “The following paragraphs are transcribed from Mr.
Fletcher's letter to my Lady :
“‘Mr. Benson made a very just defence when he said, he
did hold with me the possibility of salvation for all men. If
this is what you call Mr. Wesley’s opinion and Arminianism,
and if every Arminian must quit the College, I am actually
discharged. For in my present view of things, I must hold
that sentiment, if I believe that the Bible is true, and that
God is love.
“‘For my part, I am no party-man. In the Lord I am
your servant, and that of your every student. But I cannot
give up the honour of being connected with my old friends,
who, notwithstanding their failings, are entitled to my
respect, gratitude, and affection. Mr. Wesley shall always be
welcome to my pulpit, and I shall gladly bear my testimony
in his as well as Mr. Whitefield's. If you forbid your
students to preach for the one, and offer them to preach for
the other; and if a Master is discarded for believing that
Christ died for all; then prejudice reigns, charity is cruelly
wounded, and party-spirit shouts, prevails, triumphs.”
15. “Two days after,” continues Mr. Benson, “he writes,
‘I am determined to stand or fall with the liberty of the
College. As I entered it a free place, I must quit it the
moment it is an harbour for party-spirit.”
“This he was soon constrained to do, as appears from the
following letter, wrote about two months after --
“‘ON my arrival at the College, I found all very quiet, I
LIFE OF MIR, FLETCn Elt. 299
fear through the enemy’s keeping his goods in peace. While I
preached the next day I found myself as much shackled as ever
I was in my life. And after private prayer, I concluded I
was not in my place. The same day, I resigned my office to
my Lady, and on Wednesday, to the students and the Lord.
“‘Mr. Shirley has sent my Lady a copy of part of the
Minutes of the last Conference, viz., of the year 1770. They
were called horrible and abominable. My Lady told me, she
must burn against them ; and that whoever did not fully dis
avow them must quit the College. She accordingly ordered the
Master and all the students to write their sentiments upon
them without reserve. I did so; explained them according to
Mr. Wesley’s sentiments; and approved the doctrine, though
not cautiously worded. I concluded by observing, that as,
after such a step on my part, and such a declaration on my
Lady’s, I could no longer, as an honest man, stay in the
College, I took my leave of it; wishing my Lady might find
a Minister to preside over it less insufficient than
16. “These were his reasons for resigning his charge at
Trevecka. As the Circular Letter now went abroad, under
the name of Mr. Shirley, inviting the Clergy of all denomina
tions to assemble in a body at Bristol to oppose you and the
Preachers met in Conference, and oblige you to revoke the
dreadful heresies contained in those Minutes; and as Mr.
Fletcher thought the Churches throughout Christendom to be
verging very fast toward Antinomianism; he thought the
propositions contained in those Minutes ought rather to be
confirmed than revoked. And as he was now retired to his
parish, he had more leisure for such a work than before. So,
after much prayer and consideration, he determined to write
in defence of them. In how able a manner he did this, I need
not tell any that have read those incomparable writings. I
know not how to give the character of them better, than in the
words of Dr. D , to whom I sent Mr. Fletcher's Checks,
with a recommendatory letter. He answered me,--
“‘WHEN I first read yours, I must own, I suspected
your friendship for Mr. Fletcher had made you too lavish in
your commendation of his writings; and that when I came to
read them, I should find some abatements necessary to be
made. But now I have read them, I am far from thinking
you have spoken extravagantly; or indeed, that too much can
be said in commendation of them. I had not read his first
Letter, before I was so charmed with the spirit as well as
abilities of the writer, that the gushing tear could not be hin
dered from giving full testimony of my heart-felt satisfaction.
Perhaps some part of this pleasure might arise from finding
my own sentiments so fully embraced by the author. But
sure I am the greatest share of it arose from finding those
benevolent doctrines so firmly established, and that with such
judgment, clearness, and precision, as are seldom, very seldom
to be met with. What crowns the whole is, the amiable and
Christian temper, which those who will not be convinced
must however approve, and wish that their own doctrines
may be constantly attended with the same spirit.’”
17. How much good has been occasioned by the publication
of that Circular Letter! This was the happy occasion of Mr.
Fletcher's writing those “Checks to Antinomianism;” in
which one knows not which to admire most, the purity of the
language, (such as scarce any foreigner wrote before,) the
strength and clearness of the argument, or the mildness and
sweetness of the spirit that breathes throughout the whole;
insomuch that I nothing wonder at a serious Clergyman, who,
being resolved to live and die in his own opinion, when he
was pressed to read them, replied, “No; I will never read
Mr. Fletcher's Checks; for if I did, I should be of his mind.”
18. A short extract from another of his letters will show what
was his state of mind at this crisis. “How much water,” says
he, “may at last rush out from a little opening ! What are our
dear L--’s jealousies come to? Ah, poor College | Their
conduct, among other reasons, has stirred me up to write in
defence of the Minutes. Methinks I dream, when I reflect I
have wrote controversy the last subject I thought I should
meddle with. I expect to be roughly handled on the account.
Lord, prepare me for everything thou callest me to !
ge J. F.”
1. THE frequent journeys he took to and from Trevecka
while he presided over the College, in all weathers, and at
all seasons of the year, farther impaired the firmness of his
constitution; and in some of those journeys, he had not
only difficulties, but dangers likewise, to encounter. One
day, as he was riding over a wooden bridge, just as he got to
the middle thereof, it broke in. The mare's forelegs sunk
into the river, but her breast and hinder parts were kept up
by the bridge. In that position she lay, as still as if she
had been dead, till he got over her neck, and took off his
bags, in which were several manuscripts, the spoiling of which
would have occasioned him much trouble. He then endea
voured to raise her up; but she would not stir, till he went
over the other part of the bridge. But no sooner did he set
his foot upon the ground, than she began to plunge. Imme
diately the remaining part of the bridge broke down, and
sunk with her into the river. But presently she rose up
again, swam out, and came to him.
2. About this time, Mr. Pilmoor being desirous to see the
inside of a coal-pit, Mr. Fletcher went with him to the
bottom of a sloping pit, which was supposed to be near a
mile under the ground. They returned out of it without any
inconvenience. But the next day, while several colliers were
there, a damp took fire, which went off with a vast explosion,
and killed all the men that were in it.
3. In February, 1773, I received from him the following
letter:
“REv. AND DEAR SIR,
“I HoPE the Lord, who has so wonderfully stood by you
hitherto, will preserve you to see many of your sheep, and me
among them, enter into rest. Should Providence call you first,
I shall do my best, by the Lord’s assistance, to help your
brother to gather the wreck, and keep together those who are
not absolutely bent to throw away the Methodist doctrines
and discipline, as soon as he that now letteth is removed out
of the way. Every help will then be necessary, and I shall
not be backward to throw in my mite. In the meantime, you
sometimes need an assistant to serve tables, and occasionally
to fill up a gap. Providence visibly appointed me to that
office many years ago. And though it no less evidently called
me hither, yet I have not been without doubt, especially for
some years past, whether it would not be expedient that I should
resume my office as your Deacon; not with any view of pre
siding over the Methodists after you, but to ease you a little
in your old age, and to be in the way of recovering, perhaps
doing, more good. I have sometimes thought, how shameful
it was, that no Clergyman should join you, to keep in the
Church the work God has enabled you to carry on therein.
And as the little estate I have in my own country is sufficient
for my maintenance, I have thought I would one day or other
offer you and the Methodists my free service. While my love
of retirement made me linger, I was providentially led to do
something in Lady Huntingdon's plan. But being shut out
there, it appears to me, I am again called to my first work.
Nevertheless, I would not leave this place without a fuller
persuasion that the time is quite come. Not that God uses
me much here, but I have not yet sufficiently cleared my
conscience from the blood of all men. Meantime, I beg the
Lord to guide me by his counsel, and make me willing to go
anywhere or nowhere, to be anything or nothing.
“Help, by your prayers, till you can bless by word of mouth,
“Reverend and dear Sir,
“Your willing, though unprofitable, servant in the gospel,
“MADELEY, February 6, 1773.”
4. “Providence,” says he, “visibly appointed me to that
office many years ago.” Is it any wonder, then, that he should
now be in doubt, whether he did right in confining himself to
one spot? The more I reflect upon it, the more I am con
vinced, he had great reason to doubt of this. I can never
believe it was the will of God, that such a burning and shining
light should be “hid under a bushel.” No; instead of being
confined to a country village, it ought to have shone in every
corner of our land. He was full as much called to sound an
alarm through all the nation, as Mr. Whitefield himself: Nay,
abundantly more so; seeing he was far better qualified for
that important work. He had a more striking person, equal
good breeding, an equally winning address; together with a
richer flow of fancy, a stronger understanding; a far greater
treasure of learning, both in languages, philosophy, philology,
and divinity; and, above all, (which I can speak with fuller
assurance, because I had a thorough knowledge both of one
and the other,) a more deep and constant communion with
the Father, and with the Son Jesus Christ.
5. And yet, let not any one imagine that I depreciate
Mr. Whitefield, or undervalue the grace of God, and the
extraordinary gifts, which his great Master vouchsafed unto
him. I believe he was highly favoured of God; yea, that
he was one of the most eminent Ministers that has appeared
in England, or perhaps in the world, during the present
century. Yet I must own, I have known many fully equal
to Mr. Whitefield, both in holy tempers and holiness of
conversation; but one equal herein to Mr. Fletcher I have
not known, no, not in a life of fourscore years.
6. However, having chosen, at least for the present, this
narrow field of action, he was more and more abundant in
his ministerial labours, both in public and private; not con
tenting himself with preaching, but visiting his flock in every
corner of his parish. And this work he attended to, early
and late, whether the weather was fair or foul; regarding
neither heat nor cold, rain nor snow, whether he was on horse
back or on foot. But this farther weakened his constitution;
which was still more effectually done by his intense and
uninterrupted studies; in which he frequently continued with
out scarce any intermission, fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen hours
a day. But still he did not allow himself such food as was
necessary to sustain nature. He seldom took any regular
meals, except he had company; otherwise, twice or thrice in
four-and-twenty hours, he ate some bread and cheese, or fruit.
Instead of this, he sometimes took a draught of milk, and
then wrote on again. When one reproved him for not
affording himself a sufficiency of necessary food, he replied,
“Not allow myself food | Why, our food seldom costs my
housekeeper and me together less than two shillings a week.”
7. “On the tenth of May, 1774,” says Mr. Vaughan, to
whom we are indebted for several of the preceding anecdotes,
“he wrote to me thus: ‘My brother has sent me the rent of
a little place I have abroad, eighty pounds, which I was to
receive from Mr. Chauvet and Company, in London. But
instead of sending the draught for the money, I have sent it
back to Switzerland, with orders to distribute it among thc
poor. As money is rather higher there than here, that mite
will go farther abroad than it would in my parish.’”
8. To show in how great a degree he was disengaged from
Wealth, honour, pleasure, or what else
This short-enduring world could give,
Mr. Vaughan gives us another little memoir, which fell
within his own knowledge: “After he had published two or
three small political pieces, in reference to our contest with
the Americans, ‘I carried one of them,” says he, in a letter to
me, ‘to the Earl of D. His Lordship carried it to the Lord
Chancellor, and the Lord Chancellor handed it to the King.”
One was immediately commissioned to ask Mr. Fletcher,
whether any preferment in the Church would be acceptable;
or whether he (the Chancellor) could do him any service.
He answered, ‘I want nothing, but more grace.”
9. “In 1776, he deposited with me a bill of one hundred
and five pounds, being (as I understood) the yearly produce
of his estate in Switzerland. This was his fund for charitable
uses; but it lasted only a few months before he drew upon
me for the balance, which was twenty-four pounds, to
complete the preaching-house in Madeley-Wood.”
10. In the same year, his health being more than ever
impaired by a violent cough, accompanied with spitting of
blood, of which I had had large experience myself; having
frequently seen the surprising effects of constant exercise,
together with change of air; I told him, nothing was so
likely to restore his health as a long journey. I therefore
proposed his taking a journey of some months with me,
through various parts of England and Scotland; telling him,
“When you are tired, or like it best, you may come into
my carriage; but remember, that riding on horseback is
the best of all exercises for you, so far as your strength
will permit.” He looked upon this as a call from Providence,
and very willingly accepted of the proposal. We set out (as
I am accustomed to do) early in the spring, and travelled,
by moderate journeys, suited to his strength, which gradually
increased, eleven or twelve hundred miles. When we returned
to London, in the latter end of the year, he was considerably
better. And I verily believe, if he had travelled with me,
partly in the chaise and partly on horseback, only a few
months longer, he would have quite recovered his health.
But this those about him would not permit; so, being
detained in London, by his kind but injudicious friends,
while I pursued my journeys, his spitting of blood, with all
the other symptoms, returned, and rapidly increased, till the
Physicians pronounced him to be far advanced in a true,
pulmonary consumption.
11. It being judged quite improper for him to remain in
London, on December 16, 1776, he retired to the house of a
LIFE OF MIt. FLETCHER. 305
friend, Mr. Charles Greenwood, (now with God,) to Stoke
Newington. Here he had the advice of the most eminent
Physicians that London could afford. He was also in a good
air, and had every convenience and every help which art could
bestow. One of the family, of whom I inquired concerning
this part of his life, gave me the following information :
12. “Agreeably to your desire, I endeavour to recollect some
particulars of Mr. Fletcher, during his abode at Newington.
“When he first came, he was, by Dr. Fothergill's advice,
under the strictest observance of two things,--rest and silence.
These, together with a milk diet, were supposed to be the only
probable means of his recovery. In consequence of these
directions, he spoke exceeding little. If ever he spoke more
than usual, it did not fail to increase his spitting of blood;
of which, indeed, he was seldom quite clear, although it was
not violent: Therefore, a great part of his time was spent in
being read to. But it was not possible to restrain him altogether
from speaking. The fire which continually burned in his
heart many waters could not quench. It often burst out
unawares. And then how did we wonder (like those who
formerly heard his Lord) “at the gracious words which
proceeded out of his mouth !’ He could not have sustained
life without sometimes giving vent to his heart. No penance
could have appeared so severe a cross to him, as to be
debarred from speaking of or to God. His natural vivacity,
with his intense love of Jesus, continually impelled him to
speak. But, on being reminded of his rule, with a cheerful
smile, he was all submission; consenting by signs only to
stir up those about him to pray and praise !
13. “Whoever has read Mr. Fletcher's Last Check to
Antinomianism, and has had the privilege of observing his
spirit and conduct, will not scruple to say that he was a living
comment on his own account of Christian perfection. It is
an alarming word which our Lord speaks ‘to the Angel of
the Church of Sardis: ‘I have not found thy works perfect
before God.” But, as far as man is able to judge, from the
whole tenor of his behaviour, he did possess perfect humility,
perfect resignation, and perfect love. Suitable to this was
the testimony concerning him which was given in Lady
Huntingdon's chapel at Bristol, even by Mr. V., a gentleman
strongly attached to those opinions which Mr. Fletcher
thought it his duty to oppose: ‘I have enjoyed the privilege
of being several weeks under the same roof with dear Mr.
Fletcher: And during that time, I have been greatly edified
by his perfect resignation to the will of God; and by being
a witness to his exemplary conduct and uncommon grace.”
14. “When he was able to converse, his favourite subject
was, ‘the promise of the Father, the gift of the Holy Ghost,’
including that rich, peculiar blessing of union with the Father
and the Son, mentioned in that prayer of our Lord which
is recorded in the seventeenth chapter of St. John. Many
were the sparks of living fire which occasionally darted forth
on this beloved theme. ‘We must not be content,” said he,
‘to be only cleansed from sin; we must be filled with the
Spirit.’ One asking him, what was to be experienced in the
full accomplishment of the promise; ‘O, said he, “what
shall I say? All the sweetness of the drawings of the Father,
all the love of the Son, all the rich effusions of peace and joy
in the Holy Ghost;--more than ever can be expressed, are
comprehended here ! To attain it, the Spirit maketh inter
cession in the soul, like a God wrestling with a God!”
15. “It was in these favoured moments of converse that
we found, in a particular manner, the reward which is
annexed to the “receiving a Prophet in the name of a Prophet.’
And in some of these he occasionally mentioned several
circumstances, which (as none knew them but himself) would
otherwise have been buried in everlasting oblivion.
“One of those remarkable passages was, “In the beginning,”
said he, ‘of my spiritual course, I heard the voice of God, in
an articulate but inexpressibly awful sound, go through my
soul in those words: If any man will be my disciple, let him
deny himself.’ He mentioned another peculiar manifestation
of a later date, ‘in which,” said he, ‘I was favoured, like
Moses, with a supernatural discovery of the glory of God, in
an ineffable converse with him, face to face; so that, whether
I was then in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell.’
16. “At another time he said, ‘About the time of my
entering into the ministry, I one evening wandered into a
wood, musing on the importance of the office I was going to
undertake. I then began to pour out my soul in prayer;
when such a feeling sense of the justice of God fell upon me,
and such a sense of his displeasure at sin, as absorbed all my
powers, and filled my soul with the agony of prayer for poor,
lost sinners. I continued therein till the dawn of day; and
*
I considered this as designed of God to impress upon me
more deeply the meaning of those solemn words: Therefore
knowing the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men.’
17. “The blessed state of his soul continually manifested
itself, by its overflowing good-will to all that came in his way.
And yet his spirit was so deeply impressed with those words,
“Not as though I had already attained,’ that the vehemence
of his desire for a fuller manifestation of God seemed some
times to border upon unhappiness. But his ardent soul only
felt the full impression of those words of the Apostle:
“Forgetting the things that are behind, and reaching forth
unto those that are before, I press toward the mark, for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.’
18. “One end of his retiring to Newington was, that he
might hide himself from company. But this design was in
nowise answered; for company came from every side. He
was continually visited by high and low, and by persons of
various denominations; one of whom being asked, when he
went away, what he thought of Mr. Fletcher, said, ‘I went to
see a man that had one foot in the grave, but I found a man
that had one foot in heaven. Among them that now visited
him were several of his beloved and honoured opponents; to
whom he confirmed his love (however roughly they had treated
him) by the most respectful and affectionate behaviour. But
he did not give up any part of the truth for which he had
publicly contended; although some (from whom one would
have expected better things) did not scruple to affirm the
contrary. Those of his particular friends who visited him
here will not easily forget how he exhausted his whole soul
in effusions of thankfulness: Mrs. Cartwright and Cavendish
in particular, with his faithful and affectionate friend Mr.
Ireland, will remember their interviews with him. And those
of the family were almost oppressed by the outpourings of
his love and gratitude, whenever they showed their love and
care in the most inconsiderable instance; yea, so thankful,
in proportion, would he be to even the meanest servant.
19. “It was not without some difficulty that Mr. Ireland at
length prevailed upon him to sit for his picture. While the
limner was drawing the outlines of it, he was exhorting both
him and all that were in the room, not only to get the outlines
drawn, but the colourings also, of the image of Jesus on their
hearts. He had a very remarkable facility in making allu
sions of this kind; in raising spiritual observations from
every accidental circumstance; in turning men's employments,
pleasures, and pains, into means of edification: This he did,
in order to engage the attention of the thoughtless, the more
deeply to fix the attention of the thoughtful, and to prevent
the trifling away of time in unprofitable conversation. And
such little incidents as used to pass away unnoticed by almost
any other person, acquired from Mr. Fletcher's fine imagina
tion a kind of grace and dignity. To give an instance: Being
ordered to be let blood, while his blood was running into the
cup, he took occasion to expatiate on the precious blood
shedding of the Lamb of God. And even when he did not
speak at all, the seraphic spirit which beamed from his languid
face, during those months of pain and weakness, was
A lecture silent, yet of sovereign use.”
20. But it is necessary to be observed, that this facility
of raising useful observations from the most trifling incidents
was one of those peculiarities in him which cannot be
proposed to our imitation. In him it partly resulted from
nature, and was partly a supernatural gift. But what was
becoming and graceful in Mr. Fletcher, would be disgustful
almost in any other.
21. “One of those who visited him at Newington was Mr.
William Perronet; a pious, sensible, and amiable young man,
who was snatched hence in the bloom of youth. He often said,
the first sight of Mr. Fletcher fixed an impression upon his
mind which never wore off till it issued in a real conversion
to God; ever accompanied with a most affectionate regard
for the instrument of that happy change.”
Soon after he left Newington, he wrote the following letter:--
“May 28, 1777.
“MY prayer shall always be, that the merciful may find
mercy, and that the great kindness I have found under your
quiet roof, may be showed you everywhere under the canopy
of heaven. I think with grateful joy on the days of calm
retreat I have been blessed with at Newington, and lament my
not having improved better the precious opportunity of sitting,
Mary-like, at the feet of my Great Physician. May He requite
your kind care of a dying worm, by abundantly caring for
you and yours, and making all your bed in your sickness!
May you enjoy full health ! May you hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and be abundantly filled therewith ! May you
sweetly rest in Christ ! May His protection be as a wall of
fire round about you and yours! May His rod and staff
comfort you under all the troubles of life, the decays of the
body, the assaults of the enemy, and the pangs of death !
May you stand in the clefts of the Rock of Ages, and be safely
sheltered there, when all the storms of justice blow around !
And may you always have such spiritual and temporal helps,
friends and comforts, as I have found in your pleasing
retreat! You have received a poor Lazarus; (though his
sores were not visible;) you have had compassion, like the
good Samaritan; you have admitted me to the enjoyment of
your best things; and now what can I say? what but,
‘Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift; and thanks to
my dear friends for all their favours? They will, I trust, be
found faithfully recorded in my breast, when the great
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him will render to
every man according to his works; and a raised Lazarus
shall then appear in the gate, to testify of the love of Charles
and Mary Greenwood, and their godly sister !
“I was a little better, but I now spit blood, more than I
had done for weeks before. Glory be to God for every provi
dence | His will be done in me, by health or sickness, life or
death. All from Him is, and, I trust, will be, welcome to
“Your obliged pensioner,
FROM HIs LEAVING NEWINGTON, TILL HIs RETURN FROM
1. HE continued with Mr. Greenwood at Newington
upwards of fifteen months. The Physicians then advised him
to make a trial of the Hot-Well water, near Bristol. “I was
desired by Mr. and Mrs. Ireland,” (who took him down in
April, 1777) says Miss Thornton, “to bear them company
thither; which I willingly did. Indeed I looked upon it as
a call from God; nor could I desire a greater honour, than to
310 LIFE OF MIt. FLETCHER.
share in the employment of angels, in ministering to a dis
tinguished heir of salvation. At Brislington, near Bristol, he
continued in the same holy, earnest course as at Newington.
Every day he drank the Hot-Well water, and it agreed with
him well. So that he appeared to gather a little strength;
though not so swiftly as was expected. And all the strength
which he received, he laid out in labours of love, for the benefit
of all those, rich or poor, whom Providence cast in his way.
2. “Whenever he was in company, it was his general
method, so far as his strength would admit, to pray particularly
for every person present. And from his habitual prayer
resulted that life and energy in his words, which every one
that was blessed with his society felt more or less. Now and
then likewise he adventured to pray in the family. But he was
not wary enough in this. He more than once so much exerted
himself, that he was brought very low. As soon as he was
well enough to write, he was intent upon finishing two treatises
for the press. The Plan of Reconciliation, in particular, lay
very near his heart. He longed to conclude it before he
died, which he wished to do, breathing peace to Jerusalem,
and pointing out to the children of God the most probable
means of effecting it; of uniting together, in the bonds of
peace and love, all the true Ministers and followers of Jesus.”
3. From Bristol he wrote to a friend thus: “I thank God
I am not afraid of any evil tidings: My heart standeth fast,
believing in the Lord, and desiring Him to do with me just
what pleases Him. With respect to my body, my Physician
hopes I shall do well. And so I hope and believe too. For
health or sickness, life or death, is best when the Lord
sends it.
“I am in hopes of seeing you soon; though my friends talk
of detaining me, to make a farther trial of the waters. I am
forbid preaching; but, blessed be God, I am not forbid by
my Heavenly Physician to pray, believe, and love. This is a
sweet work, which heals, strengthens, and delights: Let us do
it, till we have recovered our spiritual strength. And then,
whether we shall be seen on earth or not, it will be all alike.
“O be hearty in the cause of religion | Be either hot or
£old. It is a fearful thing to be lukewarm, and thereby fall
into the hands of the living God. Be humbly zealous for
your own salvation and for God’s glory. And forget not to
care for each other's salvation. The case of wicked Cain is
very common; the practice of many says, with that wretch,
‘Am I my brother's keeper?” O pray God to keep you by
his mighty power through faith unto salvation | Keep your
selves in the love of God, and keep one another by example,
reproof, exhortation, encouragement, social prayer, and a
faithful use of all the means of grace. Use yourselves to bow
at Christ's feet as your Prophet. Go to him continually for
the holy anointing of his Spirit, who will be a Teacher always
near, always with you and in you. If you have that inward
Instructer, you will suffer no material loss, though your
outward Teachers should be removed.
“While you have the light of God’s word, believe in the light,
that ye may be the children of the light, fitted for the kingdom
of eternal light; where, I charge you, prepare to meet with joy
“Your affectionate, though unworthy,
t “Brother and Minister,
4. I subjoin part of a letter wrote some time before, in the
same spirit, to his parishioners at Madeley:--
“December 28, 1776.
“MY DEAR PARISHIoNERs,
“THE weakness of my body confining me from you, I
humbly submit to the divine dispensation. And I ease the
trouble of my absence from you, by being present with you in
spirit, and by reflecting on the pleasure I have felt in years
past, in singing with you, “Unto us a Child is born, unto us a
Son is given.’ This truth let us receive with all readiness,
and we shall meet in Christ, the centre of lasting union. And
our hearts shall be full of the song of angels, ‘Glory be unto
God in the highest ! On earth peace, good-will toward men l’
In order to this, may the eyes of your understanding be more
and more opened to see the need of a Redeemer, and to
behold the suitableness, freeness, and fulness of the redemp
tion wrought out by the Son of God! This wish glows in my
soul so ardently, that it brings me down upon my knees while
I write. And in that posture I entreat you all to consider
and improve the day of your visitation; and to prepare in good
earnest to meet with joy your God and your unworthy Pastor
in another world ! Weak as I was when I left you, I hear that
many, who were then healthy and strong, have got the start
of me; and that some have been hurried into eternity without
a moment's warning. May this awful event strike a deeper
consideration into all our souls 1 May the sound of their bodies,
dashed in pieces at the bottom of the pit, rouse us to a speedy
conversion, that we may never, through carelessness or delay,
fall into the bottomless pit ! Tottering as I stand on the
brink of the grave, some of you also may drop into it before
me. Let us all, then, prepare for our approaching change, and
never rest till we are assured it will be a happy one. Let the
longsuffering of God toward us, who survive the hundreds
that I have buried, lead us all to repentance. Embrace Jesus
Christ, who wept for you in the manger, agonized for you in.
the garden, bled for you on the cross, and now pleads for you
on his mediatorial throne. Meet me not at the great day in
your sins and in your blood. Meet me in the robe of
Christ's merits, and in ‘the white linen’ (the purity of heart
and life) ‘which is the righteousness of the saints. Let all
wickedness be gone for ever with the old year; and with the
new year begin a new life; a life of renewed devotion to
God, and increasing love to our neighbour.
“Though I hope to see much more of the goodness of God
in the land of the living than I do see, yet, blessed be the
divine mercy, I see enough to keep my mind at all times
unruffled, and to make me calmly willing to resign my soul
into the hands of my faithful Creator. I desire your public
thanks for all the favours which he continually showeth me.
May our thankfulness crown the new year, as the Lord’s
patience and goodness have renewed our life. Permit me to
beseech an interest in your prayers also. Ask that I may be
willing to receive all that God is willing to bestow. Ask that
I may meekly suffer and zealously do all the will of God in
my present circumstances; and that, living or dying, I may
say, ‘To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.” If God
calls me soon, I beg he may, in his good providence, appoint
a more faithful shepherd over you. You need not fear but
he will. For these many months you have had no famine of
the word. And what God hath done for months, he can do
for years; yea, all the years of your life. Only pray. Ask,
and you shall have. Meet me at the throne of grace, and
you shall meet at the throne of glory
“Your affectionate, obliged, unworthy Minister,
fg J. F.”
5. To a friend, meantime, he wrote thus: “With respect to
my soul, I calmly wait, in unshaken resignation, for the full
LiFE OF MIR. FLETCHER. 313
salvation of God; ready to trust him, to venture on his faithful
love, and on the sure mercies of David, either at midnight,
noon-day, or cock-crowing. For my time is in his hand; and
his time is best, and shall be my time. Death hath lost his
sting; and I thank God I know not what hurry of spirits
is, or unbelieving fears, under the most trying circumstances.
Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift l”
6. He now spent part of his time at Bristol, but the greatest
part at Brislington. In one place or the other, as well as at
Newington, he was visited by many respectable persons.
Many of these were Calvinists; several of whom bore witness
to his deep piety and exalted spirit. But a Dissenting
Minister, after pressing him hard, with regard to some of his
opinions, told him, with great warmth, “Mr. Fletcher, you
had better have been gasping for life with an asthma, or have
had all your limbs unstrung by a palsy, than to have wrote
those Checks.” Mr. Fletcher replied, “Sir, I then wanted
more love, and I do so still:” And in his highest fervours of
divine love, he always acknowledged his want of more.
7. Here, also, he missed no opportunity of instructing
servants and children, suiting his discourse, in a manner pecu
liar to himself, to their capacity or their business. And what
would have appeared low in another, did not appear so when
spoken by him. Thus, he advised the cook to stir up the fire
of divine love in his heart, that it might burn up all the rubbish
therein, and raise a flame of holy affection; to which, with
the greatest cordiality, he would subjoin a short prayer.
Thus, to the housemaid he said, “I entreat you to sweep every
corner of your heart, that it may be fit to receive your heavenly
Guest.” To a poor man, who came there in a deep consump
tion, but little concerned for his soul, he said, in a very
solemn manner, (laying one hand on his own breast, and the
other on the poor man's,) “God has fixed a loud knocker at
your breast and mine. Because we did not regard, as we ought
to have done, the gentle knocks and calls of his Holy Spirit,
his word, and his providences, he has taken fast hold here,
and we cannot get out of his hand. O let this knocker
awaken you, who are just dropping into eternal sleep!”
8. When one or another occasionally mentioned any unkind
thing which had been said of him or his writings, if the person
who had said it was named, he would stop the speaker imme
diately, and offer up the most fervent prayer for the person
of whom he spoke. He did not willingly suffer any one to
say anything against his opponents; and he made all the
allowances for them, which, on a change of circumstances, he
would have wished them to make for him.
9. He continued at Brislington till the 1st of December,
1777. All other means having now been fairly tried, with very
little effect, most of the symptoms being nearly the same as they
were several months ago, it was determined, by the most skilful
Physicians, that nothing could save his life but a sea-voyage
When this was fixed, Mr. Ireland (a friend in need) carried
him back to Newington. While he was here, preparing for his
voyage, he wrote as follows to one of his flock at Madeley:--
“I HEARTILY thank you for your kind letter. May the God
of all grace and love, our common Father and our All, bless
you all with all spiritual blessings, and with such temporal
favours, as will best serve the end of your growing in grace.
“My desire is, if I should be spared to minister to you again,
to do it with more humility, diligence, love, and zeal. But as
matters are, you must take the will for the deed. And let us
all praise God for all that is past, and trust him for all that is
to come. The Lord enable you all to cleave to Christ, and
in him to abide in one mind, “striving together for the hope
of the gospel, the fulness of the Spirit ! Of this we have
often discoursed together; but we have not pressed into it
with sufficient ardour and violence. God give us the humble
and violent faith which inherits the promises, that we may
always triumph in Christ, in life and in death ! I beg you
would help me to thank the Author of all good for every
blessing of this life; but above all, for the lively hope of the
next, and for Christ, our common hope, peace, joy, wisdom,
righteousness, and salvation. In him I meet and embrace you
all. God bless you, and crown you with loving-kindness and
tender mercies ! I live, if you stand. Do not let me want
the reviving cordial of hearing that you stand together firm
in the faith, deep in humility, and rejoicing in loving hope
of the glory to come. Bless God much for the gift of his
only-begotten Son. Be much in private prayer. Do not
forget the assembling yourselves together, in little companies,
as well as in public. Walk humbly, as in the sight of death
and eternity; and pray still for
“Your unworthy servant,
“Let none of your little companies want. If any do, you
are welcome to my house. Take any part of the furniture
there, and make use of it for their relief. And this shall be
your full title for so doing.
“Witness my hand,
10. In the beginning of December, he set out with Mr.
Ireland and his family, beside some other company. A little
account of the former part of his journey is given by Mr.
Ireland, in a letter to a friend:--
“We left Calais, December 12. The north wind was very
high, and penetrated us even in the chaise. We put up at
Bretzul, and the next day got to Abbeville; whence we were
forced, by the miserable accommodations we met with, to set
out, though it was Sunday. Mr. Fletcher and I used to lead
the way; but now the other chaises got before us. Nine
miles from Abbeville our axletree gave way through the
hard frost, and we were both left to the piercing cold, on the
side of a hill, without any shelter. After waiting an hour
and half, we sent the axletree and wheels back to be repaired;
and, leaving the body of the chaise under a guard, procured
another to carry us to the next town. On the 15th our
chaise arrived in good repair. Travelling steadily forward,
(though the country was all covered with snow,) on the 27th
we reached Dijon. During the whole journey, Mr. Fletcher
showed visible marks of a recovery. He bore both the
fatigue and piercing cold as well as the best of us. On the
31st we put up at Lyons, and solemnly closed the year;
bowing our knees before the Throne, which indeed we did
not fail to do, all together, every day. January 4, 1778, we
left Lyons, and came on the 9th to Aix. Here we rest; the
weather being exceeding fine and warm. Mr. Fletcher walks
out daily. He is now able to read, and to pray with us,
every morning and evening. He has no remains of his
cough, or of the weakness in his breast. His natural colour
is restored, and the sallowness quite gone. His appetite is
good, and he takes a little wine.”
11. In another letter Mr. Ireland writes thus: “Soon
after our arrival here, I rode out most days with my dear and
valuable friend. He now and then complained of the uneasi
ness of the horse, and there were some remains of soreness
in his breast. But this soon went off. The beginning of
February was warm, which, when he walked in the fields,
relaxed him too much. But when the wind got north or east,
he was braced again. His appetite is good; his complexion
as healthy as it was eleven years ago. As his strength
increases, he increases the length of his rides. Last Tuesday
he set out on a journey of a hundred and twelve miles. The
first day he travelled forty miles without feeling any fatigue.
The third day he travelled fifty-five. He bore his journey as
well as I did; and was as well and as active at the end of it
as at the beginning. During the day he cried out, ‘Help
me to praise the Lord for his goodness: I never expected to
see this day. He now accepted a pressing invitation to preach
to the Protestants here. He did so on Sunday morning, on
these words: “Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the
faith. For some days before, he was afraid he had done
wrong in accepting the invitation. But O how shall I be
able to express the power and liberty which the Lord gave
him Both the French and English were greatly affected;
the word went to the heart both of saints and sinners. If
the Lord continues his strength and voice, (which is now as
good as ever it was,) he has an earnest invitation to preach
where we are going, near Montpelier. You would be astonished
at the entreaties of Pastors as well as people. He has received
a letter from a Minister in the Levine mountains, who intends
to come to Montpelier, sixty miles, to press him to go and
preach to his flock. Soon after this, his brother came to
fetch him to Switzerland. He purposes to spend the next
summer in his own country, and the following winter in
these parts, or in some part of the south of France.
12. “His brother conducted him from Montpelier to
Nyon, the place of his nativity. Here he lived in that which
was his father’s house, in the midst of his affectionate
relations, who took care that he should neither want the best
advice, perhaps equal to any in Europe, nor anything that
could possibly contribute to the full recovery of his health.”
13. About this time a letter was wrote to that venerable
old man, Mr. Perronet, Vicar of Shoreham, informing him,
that there was a valuable estate at his native place, which
properly belonged to him, and which might easily be recovered,
if he sent one of his sons to claim it. All his friends whom
he consulted on the occasion judged this information was not
to be slighted; and his youngest son, Mr. William Perronet,
was willing to undertake the journey. But before he set
out, he wrote to Mr. Fletcher, desiring his advice. Part of
his answer was as follows:
“NYoN, June 2, 1778.
“WHILE I write to you to make your title clear to a
precarious estate on earth, permit me to remind you of the
heavenly inheritance entailed upon believers. The Will (the
New Testament) by which we can recover it is proved; the
Court is equitable, the Judge loving and gracious. To enter on
the possession of part of the estate here, and of the whole here
after, weneed only to believe, and prove evangelically that we are
believers. Let us set about it now with earnestness, with perse
verance, and with full assurance that through grace we shall
carry our point. Alas, what are estates or crowns, to grace and
glory? The Lord grant we may all choose the better part !
“Since I wrote last, in order to shorten my journey, I
ventured to cross the mountains, which separate France from
this country. But on the third day, I found an unexpected
trial; a hill, which we were to ascend by a winding road, but
so steep, that the horses were hardly able to draw the empty
chaise. This obliged me to walk, in the steepest places, for
several hours together. The sun was hot. I perspired violently,
and the next day I spat blood again. But having kept to
asses’ milk ever since, I am (blessed be God) much better.
“This country is delightful. I invite you to come and see
it, and share a delightful apartment. I design to try this
fine air some months longer. We have a fine shady wood near
the lake, where I can ride in the cool all the day, and enjoy
the singing of a multitude of birds. But this, though sweet,
does not come up to the singing of my dear friends in
England. There I meet them in spirit several hours in the
day. God bless my dear friends !”
14. About the same time he wrote to Dr. Turner as
follows:
“SHould I gather strength, I should, under God,
acknowledge you, dear Sir, as the instrument of that blessing,
as you were above twenty years ago. Ten thousand thanks
I render to you, Sir, and to Mr. Perronet, for your kind and
generous care and attendance. May God reward you both,
by bestowing upon you all the blessings which can make life
happy, death comfortable, and eternity delightful and glorious !
May the richest cordials of divine love, and the balm of
Gilead, a Saviour’s precious blood, revive your souls and
comfort your hearts! And in your every want and extremity,
may you both find such tender helpers and comforters, as
have been found in you by, dear Sir,
“Your most obliged, though most unworthy,
“servant and patient,
15. In the latter end of the year, Mr. William Perronet
set out for Switzerland. In a letter he wrote from thence to
Mr. Greenwood, he gives a little farther account of Mr.
Fletcher. And this letter I the rather insert, as I believe it
is all that remains of that amiable young man, who never
more saw his native land, being called hence while he was on
his journey to England.
There is something in the beginning of his letter which is
a little humorous; but this the candid reader will easily
excuse. It runs thus:
“NYoN, January 18, 1779.
“As you desire of me to send you some account of my
journey, now I am a little settled, I will do it in the best
manner I am able.
“I set out from London on Tuesday, November 17th. We
arrived at Dover about three on Wednesday morning; embarked
on Thursday, and arrived at Calais in about three hours.
“Though it was in war time, yet we did not meet with the
least incivility, either here or in any part of France. But
the badness of the inns makes the travelling through this
country disagreeable. The rooms in general are so dirty, as
to be fitter for swine than men. Each room, both above and
below stairs, is provided with two, three, or four beds; and
they are so high as to require steps to get up to them. For
there is on each bed, first, a monstrous canvass bag, stuffed
with a huge quantity of straw; over this a feather bed, and
on this as many mattresses as the host can furnish. But the
worst is, the sheets are not damp, but rather downright wet.
Yet the good woman would constantly scold us, if we
attempted to dry them even at our own fire; insisting upon
it, that it was impossible they should be damp at all.
“At table, every one is furnished with a spoon and a fork,
but with no knives. And in general they are not needful;
For both flesh and vegetables are so stewed down, as to be
properly termed spoon-meat. However, at the meanest inn
every one is provided with a clean napkin; and both after
dinner and after supper there is a fine dessert of fruit.
“We travelled early and late; yet, having but one set of
horses, we were a whole week in getting to Paris. In Paris
all is gaiety and finery; but without the least idea of neatness.
The scarcity of water is one excuse for the general want of
cleanliness, both in their persons and houses.
“On Tuesday, December 8, we dimed at Portallier; the
prettiest town in all France: The reason of which is, being
burnt down some years ago, it was rebuilt by the late King.
The next morning we entered Switzerland, stepping over a
brook, which divides Switzerland from France. On the
French side of the brook is a cross; on the other, a pillar
with the arms of Switzerland. In the evening we arrived at
Lausanne, a famous old town. Here I remained the next
day, and on Friday, the 11th, went on to Nyon, where I had
the pleasure of finding our dear friend in pretty good health
and spirits. Mr. Fletcher's house is a fine large building,
agreeably situated. It is in the form of a castle, and is
supposed to have been built five hundred years ago.-
“In passing through France, how bitterly did I regret
the want of the Sunday Service And it was not much
better with me when I came into Switzerland. For I under
stood so little of their language, that I could not profit much
by the public Service. Indeed this loss is in some measure
made up by the company and conversation of Mr. Fletcher;
who, however engaged he is the greater part of the day, is
generally so kind as to spend a little time with me in the
evening, in prayer and conversation.
“His chief delight seems to be in the meeting of his little
society of children. And as he is exceeding fond of them,
they appear to be altogether as fond of him. He seldom
either walks abroad or rides out, but some of them follow
him; singing the hymns they have learned, and conversing
with him, by the way. But you must not suppose that he is
permitted to enjoy this happiness unmolested. Not only the
drunkards make songs upon him and his little companions,
but many of the Clergy loudly complain of such irregular
proceedings. However, he is upon good terms with the
three Ministers of the place; all of whom are not only serious
men, but desirous of promoting true religion.
“He is certainly stronger, and in better health, than he
was when he left England. But as soon as ever he ventures
to preach, his spitting of blood returns. Whenever this
happens, his strength and spirits decay surprisingly, which he
cannot in anywise recover but by lying by for some days.
“Whether I succeed in my temporal business or not, I shall
ever remember with pleasure and thankfulness the oppor
tunities I have been blessed with of spending so much time
in company with our inestimable friend; who, wherever he
goes, preaches the gospel, both by his words and example, nay,
by his very looks, not only to his friends, but to all he meets
with. So that on the top of the frozen Alps, and in the dreary
vale of Chateau d'Oex, some good seed has been sown.
“When my business constrained me to go to Chateau
d'Oex, Mr. Fletcher bore me company. And here also he
was visited by some of the principal inhabitants of the town;
who stood round him in deep attention for almost an hour,
while he both exhorted and prayed. I am, dear Sir,
“Your very sincere friend and servant,
Mr. Fletcher adds upon the same paper: “Thanks to
our kind Preserver, I am yet in the land of faith and hope,
and want to find and make it a land of happiness and love.
The Lord Jesus is alone sufficient for this. And till the
great outpouring of his love is come, we ought faithfully
to stir up the gift of God which is in ourselves and others,
and to supply by the depth of our humility, and the ardour
of our expectation, what is yet wanting to our experience.
Well; God is good; Jesus is faithful; the Spirit is truth and
love. Come, Lord! and we shall experience the power of
that God who turns death to life, darkness to light, weakness
to strength; and ‘calleth the things that are not as though
they were.’”
16. Mr. Perronet in another letter to Mr. Greenwood,
dated May 22, writes thus:
“MY dear friend is much better in health now than he
was in the winter. He preached last Sunday se’nnight in the
church. He spoke with a strong, clear voice, for above three
quarters of an hour; and did not find himself hurt by it.
But when he rode out in the afternoon, his horse dropped
down, as if he had been shot, and cut both his knees, as well
as his head. Yet Mr. Fletcher was noway hurt.
LIFE OF MIt. FLETCHIEIt. 321
“On Good-Friday, there being no Service here, Mr.
Fletcher and I crossed the Lake into Savoy, in order to hear
a celebrated Capuchin, who was to preach that day. He made
a very good discourse; and afterwards he and his brethren
invited us to dine with them. This we declined; but after
dinner paid our respects to them; and we spent two or three
agreeable hours in serious and friendly conversation.”
17. About this time Mr. Fletcher wrote to a friend
thus:
“LET us bear with patience the decays of nature: Let us
see without fear the approach of death. We must put off
this sickly, corruptible body, in order to put on the immortal
and glorious garment.
“I have some hopes that my poor sister will yet be my
sister in Christ. Her self-righteousness, I trust, breaks as
fast as her body. I am come hither to see death make havoc
among my friends. I wear mourning for my father's brother,
and for my brother's son. The same mourning will serve me
for my dying sister, if I do not go before her. She lies on
the same bed where my father and mother died, and where
she and I were born. How near is life to death ! But,
blessed be God, Christ the resurrection is nearer to the weak,
dying believer. Death works through the body, and the
resurrection through the soul. And our soul is our real self.”
18. I believe it was about the same time that a remarkable
passage occurred, which was related to me some years ago. I
may possibly have forgot some circumstances; but the sub
stance of it was this: Mr. Fletcher having heard of a Minister
in the country, as an eminently pious man, had a great desire
to see him; and for that purpose one morning set out very
early. When he had walked several miles, he saw a great
crowd gathered together at the door of a house. He asked
what was the matter; and was answered, “A poor woman and
her child lie a dying.” He went in, and found a woman, who
had not long been delivered, in appearance very near death.
Little better was the case of the infant, which was convulsed
from head to foot. The room was filled with people. He
took occasion to show them, from that melancholy spectacle,
the dreadful effects of sin; and afterwards spoke largely of
the miserable state we are all in, through the sin of our first
parent. He then expatiated on the Second Adam, and the
blessings we may receive through him; adding, “He is able
to raise the dead. He is able to save you all from sin, as well
as save these two poor objects from death. Come, let us ask
Him to save both us and them.” He found remarkable
liberty in prayer. Presently the child’s convulsions ceased;
and the mother was easy, lively, and strong. The people were
utterly amazed, and stood speechless and almost senseless.
While they were in this state, he silently withdrew. When
they came to themselves, he was gone. Many of them asked
who it could be; and some said, “Certainly it was an angel.”
19. When he had a little recovered his strength, he made
a tour through Italy, and paid a visit to Rome. While he
was here, as Mr. Ireland and he were one day going through
one of the streets in a coach, they were informed, the Pope
was coming forward; and it would be required of them to
come out of the coach, and kneel while he went by, as all the
people did: If they did not, in all probability the zealous mob
would fall upon them and knock them on the head. But
this, whatever might be the consequence, they flatly refused
to do; judging the paying such honour to a man was neither
better nor worse than idolatry. The coachman was exceed
ingly terrified, not knowing what to do. However, at length
he made shift to turn aside into a narrow way. The Pope
was in an open landau. He waved his hands as if he had
been swimming; and frequently repeated these words, “God
bless you all!” Mr. Fletcher's spirit was greatly stirred,
and he longed to bear a public testimony against Antichrist;
and he would undoubtedly have done it, had he been able to
speak Italian. He could hardly refrain from doing it in
Latin, till he considered that only the Priests could have
understood him. One to whom he related this, saying, if he
had done this the multitude would have torn him in pieces;
he answered, “I believe the Pope himself would have
prevented; for he was a man of sense and humanity.”
20. While he was at Paris, he was desired to visit and pray
with a sick woman. Information of this was quickly given
to a Magistrate, with abundance of aggravation. In conse
quence of this an order was procured from the King himself
for the apprehending him. This might not improbably have
cost him his life, or, at least, a long and expensive imprison
ment. When the Officer came to the door of the house
where he lodged, Mr. Ireland stepped out, and said, “Sir,
have you a warrant for me?” He (supposing him to be Mr.
Fletcher) answered, “I have; you must come with me.”
Mr. Ireland went very quietly with him. But when they
came before the Magistrate, the accuser said, “This is not
the man; I know nothing of this gentleman.” Another
messenger was then sent; but before he came to the house,
Mr. Fletcher was too far off to be overtaken.
21. While he was at Nyon, he wrote (among many other
letters) to good old Mr. Perronet as follows:-
* * “February 8, 1779.
“HoNoURED AND DEAR FATHER IN CHRIST,
“I HAvE had the pleasure of accompanying your son
to your father’s birth-place. It is a charming country for
those who have a taste for highland prospects. But what is
it to our heavenly Father's hill of Sion? Thither may we all
itravel, summer and winter, and there may we all have a
happy meeting, and an eternal inheritance 1”
22. September 7. Mr. William Perronet wrote a little farther
account of him: “Mr. Fletcher,” says he, “has preached here”
*(at Nyon) “in the church, and might have preached much
oftener, if his health would have permitted; for his friendly
and prudent behaviour has won upon all the three Ministers,
so that they are now on the best terms with him. But a
inew difficulty has lately arisen. He has been summoned
before the Seigneur Bailiff, who sharply reprehended him
-(noble Bailiff indeed; worthy of his office ) for preaching
against Sabbath-breaking, which, he said, implied a censure
of the Magistrates, as if they neglected their duty. He repri
manded him also for preaching against stage-plays, which he
considered as a reflection on himself, as he had just then sent
for a company of French comedians to Nyon. In conse
quence of this, he forbid his exercising the function of a
Minister in this country. A blessed instance of Republican
liberty | Who would not wish for the same in England?
However, one of the Ministers has ventured to give him a
room in his own house. Here he preaches two or three times
a week, to a few serious persons and abundance of children.
His Lordship has not yet thought proper to interfere, although
the thing is no secret. And not only the seriousness, but
also the number, of the congregation increases daily.”
23. In the next year, 1780, Mr. Fletcher fully intended to
return to England. But not long after he wrote as follows,
to one of his parishioners at Madeley:
“I HAVE the more readily complied with the request of
my friends to stay here” (at Nyon) “a little longer, as it was
so earnestly backed by the little society which is gathered in
this place. About three weeks ago they got about me, and
besought me on their knees, with many tears, to stay till they
were a little stronger, and able to stand alone. Nor would
they be persuaded to rise, till they had got me to comply.
Happy would it be for us all, if we prayed so earnestly to
Him who can give substantial blessings !*
“Two days ago I went to Geneva, and spoke to a carrier,
to take me back to London; but his coach was full. Yester
day another came, and said he would take us at a fortnight’s
notice. The Lord is always ready to give us a lift to the
kingdom of grace, through which we must pass to the kingdom
of glory. The comfort of this journey is, that we may travel
all together, though our bodies are far asunder. For Christ
the way is everywhere, and faith is (like his word) one and
the same in every age and place. So is holiness; for in all
places we may love God with all our heart, and our neigh
bour as ourselves. I hope you and all your brethren travel
thus; and that you journey like St. Paul, who travelled so
hard, that he was running a race for a prize, a crown of life.”
24. In spring, 1781, he set out for England. But Mr.
Perronet was then exceeding ill, having all the symptoms of
an approaching consumption. He could not therefore keep
pace with Mr. Fletcher; who, being on his journey, wrote to
him as follows:
“LYoNs, April 6, 1781.
“WE are both weak and both afflicted; but Jesus careth
for us. He is everywhere. He has all power to deliver us;
and perhaps by ways we little think of. It was of the Lord
that you did not come with me; you would have been sick, as
I am. I am overdone with riding and preaching; indeed
twice I preached in the fields. I carry home with me much
weakness: The Lord’s will be done. I know I am called to
suffer and die. Let us believe and rejoice in the Lord Jesus.”
He returned to England in summer in tolerable health,
being quite recovered from his consumption. Calling at
London, he preached at the New chapel, slept at Newington,
and the next day set out for Bristol. He stayed there only
a short time, and then retired to Mr. Ireland’s, at Brislington,
who, as soon as he was capable, willingly accompanied him to
his beloved Madeley.
25. But he did not find such cause of rejoicing here as he had
fondly expected. This may be easily gathered from the letter
he then wrote to his friend at Newington. It runs thus:--
“MADELEY, June 12, 1781.
“I stAYED longer at Brislington than I designed. Mr.
Ireland was ill, and would nevertheless come hither with me;
so that I was obliged to stay till he was better. And indeed
it was well that I did not come without him; for he has helped
ame to regulate my outward affairs, which were in great
confusion. Mr. Greaves leaves me; and I will either leave
Madeley, or have an Assistant able to stir among the people;
for I had much rather be gone than stay here to see the dead
..bury their dead. Well, we shall soon remove out of all, and
rest from our little cares and labours. You do not forget, I
inope, that you have need of patience, as well as I, to inherit
the promises; the best and greatest of which are not sealed,
but to such as keep the word of Christ's patience, and such
as persevere with him in his temptations. Hold on, then,
patient faith and joyful hope ! If I were by you, I would
preach to your heart and my own a lecture on this text, “We
are saved by hope, and by a faith which is never stronger than
when it is contrary to all the feelings of flesh and blood.
“Pray what news of the glory? Does the glory of the
Lord fill the temple, your house, your heart? A cloud is
over my poor parish; but, alas! it is not the luminous cloud
by day, nor the pillar of fire by night. Even the few
remaining professors stared at me the other day, when I
preached to them on these words: ‘Ye shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost; for the promise is unto you.’ Well, the
promise is unto us: If others despise it, still let us believe
and hope. Nothing enlarges the heart and awakens the
soul more than that believing, loving expectation. Let us
wait together, until we are all endued with power from on
high.”
1. ALTHough the great Apostle has ranked the “forbidding
to marry” among the “doctrines of devils,” and has expressly
declared, “Marriage is honourable in all men, and the bed
undefiled;” yet a kind of prejudice hangs on the minds of
many even of those that love God, inclining them to
disapprove of the marriage of persons eminent in religion.
Yea, many are of opinion that it is not consistent with high
degrees of holiness; and that when any who have deep expe
rience in the things of God marry, they are in some measure
fallen from grace. Hence many were surprised that so eminent
a Christian as Mr. Fletcher should take this step. And they
could hardly help thinking that he had lost some degree of
his excellent piety, and that he was not so unreservedly
devoted to God as he had been some time before.
2. In order to satisfy every reasonable person that he had
not sustained any loss at all, that his entire self-devotion
was in nowise impaired, either before or at the time of his
marriage, I believe the most convincing way will be to give
as particular an account as possible of what occurred at that
time. The account is given by one that was an eye and ear
witness of what she relates; and whoever seriously considers
this account will easily perceive that his soul was at that time
all alive, and wholly devoted to God. And I cannot but
recommend this whole transaction to the imitation of all
Christians who enter the holy state of matrimony.
3. As I think it highly expedient to premise some account
of the person whom Mr. Fletcher chose as his companion for
life, I am glad to find this dome to my hand in the letter
which I shall now subjoin:
“REvEREND SIR,
“I THINK it my privilege, and have often found it a
blessing, to comply with the request of my honoured father,
which I now do also in great love to my valuable and much
esteemed friends, Mr. and Mrs. Fletcher. I will therefore
endeavour, with the assistance of my gracious Lord, to recol
lect and acquaint you with some particulars of the life and
character of these truly devoted servants of God, with whose
intimate acquaintance I have been favoured for near thirty
years. But, indeed, I feel my great insufficiency to relate
what might be said with the strictest truth of these worthies.
“My acquaintance with Mrs. Fletcher began when she
was about seventeen years of age. She had from her early
childhood been strongly drawn to seek the Crucified, and was
now athirst for a clean heart, and longed to have a right
spirit renewed within her. Nor did her desire to love God
with all her heart lessen, but increase, her love to her neigh
bour; as I, the most unworthy, am well able to testify, to
whom she has been a tried friend, even to the present hour.
“To give you a clear view of this, I need only transcribe
part of a letter, which she wrote to me, May 23, 1757:--
“‘THE Lord has been indeed merciful, above all we can
ask or think. I found a greater blessing the last time I was
with you than ever. I am more enabled to prayer, and to an
earnest seeking after holiness. But what most stirs me up is, I
seem to hear the Lord calling upon me, Depart ye, depart ye;
go ye out thence; touch not the unclean thing; be ye clean that
bear the vessels of the Lord. For some time, these words have
been much in my mind, with both pleasure and profit. But
within this day or two, the Lord has more clearly shown me
the way wherein I ought to walk. He seems to call me out
to more activeness; so that I am ready to cry out, What
wouldest thou have me to do? Then I consider, Can I do any
more for the souls or bodies of the poor about me? But this
does not seem to be the thing. What I am now led to wish
for is, with both soul and body to serve those who are in
Christ. And as soon as the Lord has prepared me for his
work, and set me at liberty, my firm resolution is, by the
grace of God, to be wholly given up to the Church. I plainly
see, I have no more to do with the world, than to allow
myself the necessaries of life. And though it has pleased
God that I have no need to work for my living, yet surely
that is no reason my hand should be idle. I would be like
those described 1 Timothy v. 10, to bring up children, to
lodge strangers, to be ready to do the meanest offices for the
saints, to relieve the afflicted, to visit the fatherless and
widow, and diligently to follow every good work. O pray for
me, that the Lord may shorten his work in me, and quickly
make an end of sin! O that he would say to my soul, Thou
art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee! O when shall
I be wholly given up, both body and soul, to Him who gave
himself for me?’
“I admired the spirit of this letter; but little expected to
see these good desires brought so fully into practice, as they
were in a few years after. And this may suffice as a clear
proof that God fulfils the desire of them that fear him; yea,
and shows unto them the path wherein he would have them
to walk. That her light given before was not delusive, is
plain; as it is well known, how many years she has ‘brought
up children, lodged strangers, relieved the afflicted, and
‘diligently followed every good work.’
“With regard to the dear saint that is now swallowed up
in his beloved employment, praise and adoration, it is eight
or nine and twenty years since I was first favoured with his
heavenly conversation, in company with Mr. Walsh and a
few other friends, most of whom are now in the world of
spirits. At these seasons, how frequently did we feel
The o'erwhelming power of saving grace |
How frequently were we silenced thereby, while tears of love
our eyes o'erflowed ! It sweetly affects my soul while I
recollect the humility, fervour of spirit, and strength of faith,
with which dear Mr. Fletcher so often poured out his soul
before the great Three-One, at whose feet we have lain in
holy shame and divine silence, till it seemed earth was
turned to heaven With what delight does my soul recal
those precious moments! Yet a little while, and we shall all
magnify His name together.
“This heavenly-minded servant of the Lord resembled him
likewise in his love to precious souls. I heard him preach
his first sermon at West-Street chapel. I think his text was,
“Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.’ His spirit
appeared in his whole attitude and action, though he could
not well find words in the English language to express
himself: But he supplied that defect by offering up prayers,
tears, and sighs abundantly. Nearly about this time he saw
Miss Bosanquet, and began his acquaintance with her. But
although they had a particular esteem for each other, yet
they had no correspondence for above twenty years. It was
not till the yearly Conference drew near, in July, 1781, that
he paid her a visit at her own house near Leeds. They had
much conversation together, and contracted an intimate
acquaintance. After a few days, Miss Bosanquet asked Mr.
Wesley's advice concerning Mr. Fletcher's proposal, who
approved it entirely; being persuaded, it would be much to
the glory of God. He spent much of his time at Cross-Hall,
till the following January. His general conversation was
praising God, and speaking of the love of our dear Redeemer.
He took opportunities likewise of speaking to every one in
the family concerning the state of their souls, and giving
them from time to time such directions as were suitable
thereto. At other times he met us all together, and gave us
proper exhortations and directions. Our daily meals were as
a sacrament. When he drank to any one, it was, “Heavenly
health,” or, ‘The cup of salvation. At or after the meal, he
generally begun, or called us to begin, that verse,--
‘Still, O my soul, prolong
The never-ceasing song !
Christ my theme, my hope, my joy,
His be all my happy days :
Praise my every hour employ;
Every breath be spent in praise !”
After dinner he often sung several verses of ‘Primitive
Christianity; particularly that,
O that my Lord would count me meet
To wash his dear disciples’ feet !
Sometimes he read many of those verses with tears streaming
.down his face. Thus did he walk with God, filled with the
Spirit of his beloved Lord; confirming his love to all the family,
and caring both for their spiritual and temporal concerns.
“My soul was much affected, when he asked each of us, in
a sweet, humble manner, ‘Can you give me your friend?”
To think of parting, was indeed grievous to us all. Yet we
did not dare to withhold her from him; as we all believed
the union was of God, and would be to their present and
eternal benefit. The first sermon which he preached in
Leeds, on the Sunday morning before the Conference, will
never be forgotten by any that heard it, who desire to be
perfected in love. He preached in many places while in
Yorkshire, and to numerous congregations. I have heard of
many who were greatly blessed thereby; some convinced,
others set at liberty. And whenever he either preached or
conversed, the comforts of the Holy Ghost were multiplied.
“Monday, November 12, was the day appointed for the
outward uniting of those whose hearts were before united by
the Holy Spirit. On the morning of this day, several friends
met together on this solemn occasion; who can all, as well as
me, truly say, ‘I have been at one Christian wedding.”
Jesus was invited, and truly he was at our Cana. We
reached Cross-Hall before family-prayers. Mr. Fletcher was
dressed in his canonicals; and after giving out one of Mr.
Wesley’s marriage-hymns, he read the seventh, eighth, and
ninth verses of the nineteenth chapter of the Revelation; and
spoke from them in such a manner as greatly tended to
spiritualize the solemnities of the day. He said, “We invite
you to our wedding; but the Holy Ghost here invites you to
the marriage of the Lamb. The Bride, the Lamb's wife, has
made herself ready. This Bride consists of the whole Church
triumphant and militant united together. Ye may all be the
Bride, and Jesus will condescend to be the Bridegroom.
Make yourself ready by being filled with the Spirit. He
was very solemn in prayer, and said, ‘Lord, thou knowest,
we would not take this step, if we had not eternity in view,
and if we were not as willing to be carried into the church
yard as to go into the church. At breakfast he reminded
us, ‘The postilions are now ready to carry us to the church,
in order to see our nuptials solemnized; but death will soon
be here, to transport us to the marriage of the Lamb.’
“On the way to the church, (Batley church, which was
near two miles off) he spoke much of the mystery which is
couched under marriage, namely, the union between Christ
and his Church. ‘The first Adam,” said he, “received his
wife from his side; our heavenly Adam purchased his bride
by a fountain opened in his pierced side. They were married
in the face of the congregation; the doors were opened, and
every one came in that would. We then returned home,
and spent a considerable time in singing and prayer. We
were near twenty of us. I then presented Mrs. Fletcher
with some wedding-hymns. She looked them over, and gave
them to Mr. Fletcher. He read the scripture at the top,
namely, ‘Husbands, love your wives;’ and added, “As Christ
loved the Church. Then turning to us, he said, “My God,
what a task | Help me, my friends, by your prayers to fulfil
it. As Christ loved the Church He laid aside his glory for
her l He submitted to be born into our world; to be clothed
with a human body, subject to all our sinless infirmities. He
endured shame, contempt, pain, yea, death itself, for his Church!
Omy God, none is able to fulfil this task without thine almighty
aid. Help me, O my God! Pray for me, O my friends !’
“He next read, ‘Wives, submit yourselves to your own
husbands.” Mrs. Fletcher added, “As unto the Lord.” “Well,
my dear, returned Mr. Fletcher, “only in the Lord; and if
ever I wish you to do anything otherwise, resist me with all your
might. From dinner, which was a spiritual meal, as well as
a natural one, until tea-time, our time was spent chiefly in
fervent prayer or singing. After singing the covenant-hymn,
Mr. Fletcher went to Mrs. Fletcher, and said to her, “Well,
my dearest friend, will you join with me in joining ourselves in
a perpetual covenant to the Lord? Will you with me serve
Him in his members? Will you help me to bring souls to
the blessed Redeemer; and, in every possible way this day, lay
yourself under the strongest ties you can, to help me to glorify
my gracious Lord?' She answered, like one that well knew
where her strength lay, ‘May my God help me so to do!”
“In the evening Mr. Walton preached in the hall, from
those most suitable words: “What shall I render unto the
Lord for all his benefits? I will take the cup of salvation,
and call upon the name of the Lord.’ His words did not
fall to the ground: Many were greatly refreshed. After
preaching, there was a sweet contest among us; every one
thought, ‘I in particular owe the greatest debt of praise;’
till we jointly agreed to sing,
“I’ll praise my Maker, while I’ve breath ;
And when my voice is lost in death,
Praise shall employ my nobler powers :
My days of praise shall ne'er be past,
While life, or thought, or being last,
Or immortality endures.”
“On the Wednesday following the select society met; and
it was a precious season. Among other things, Mr. Fletcher
said, “Some of you perhaps may be a little surprised at the
step my dearest friend and I have taken. But I assure you,
it was the result of much prayer and mature deliberation.
Five-and-twenty years ago, when I first saw my dear wife, I
thought, if I ever married, she should be the person. But
she was too rich for me to think of; so I banished every
thought of the kind. For many years after, I had a distaste to
a married life, thinking it impossible to be as much devoted to
God in a married as in a single life. But this objection was
removed, by reading, Enoch begat sons and daughters. And
Enoch walked with God, and was not ; for God took him. I
then saw, if Enoch at the head of a family might walk with
God, and be fit for translation; our souls under the gospel
dispensation might attain the highest degree of holiness in a
similar state, if too great an attachment, leading the soul
from God rather than to him, did not take place; instead of
that which should be a means of increasing its union with
Jesus. Yet still many obstacles stood in my way; but at
length they were all removed. Every mountain became a
plain; and we are both well assured, that the step we took
had the full approbation of God.”
“On January 2, 1782, we had a very solemn parting. But
in the midst of all the sorrow which we felt, was a sweet assur
ance that we should meet again, not only in this world, but
Where death shall all be done away,
And bodies part no more.
This brings to my mind a sentence which he wrote to us, a
little before his death: ‘Time is short. It remains, that we die
daily. Stand fast in Christ, the resurrection and the life.
That we may have a happy meeting is the wish and prayer of
‘Your affectionate friends,
‘JOHN and MARY FLETCHER...”
“To repeat all the precious sayings of this servant of God
would require many volumes; for his mouth was always
opened with wisdom, tending to minister grace to the hearers.
My earnest prayer is, that the spirit of faith, and love, and
heavenly wisdom, may rest upon you also, and guide you in
all your extensive labours, till they are swallowed up in
eternal rest. I remain, Reverend Sir,
“Your unworthy child and servant,
fg S. C.”
4. I cannot help subjoining a reflection here, which at this
time affected me much. Although I could in mowise
condemn this marriage, yet on one account it gave me pain.
When I was young, I was exceedingly affected with a relation
in Mr. Herbert's Life,--an account of Mr. Ferrar's family,
at Little Gidding, in Huntingdonshire; a very particular
description of which is given in the “Arminian Magazine.”
I longed to see such another family, in any part of the three
kingdoms. At length I had my desire; I did see exactly
such another family: I saw a family full as much devoted to
God, full as regular in all their exercises of devotion, and at
least as exemplary in every branch of Christian holiness.
This I saw, by the peculiar providence of God, settled at
Leytonstone. O that it had continued there ! The removal
of it into Yorkshire I did not advise nor approve of. However,
I rejoiced to see it settled somewhere; namely, at Cross
Hall, near Leeds. Again I did all that was in my power to
perpetuate this glorious institution. It was now totally
dissolved; and yet by a means which I did not dare to
oppose. “O God, how unsearchable are thy judgments;
and thy ways past finding out !”
1. FROM the time of his settling at Madeley with Mrs.
Fletcher, he had no return of his consumptive disorder. On
the contrary, by the blessing of God on her peculiar care and
tenderness, not only his health was confirmed, but his
strength restored as in the days of his youth. In the mean
time he took care to employ all his returning strength in the
work of faith and the labour of love: More particularly in
that which he had always found to be one of the most difficult
parts of his duty. We have in this parish, through the
lenity of the Magistrates, no less than eight public-houses.
These are well known to have been continual nurseries for
sin, particularly on Sunday evenings. It had been for many
years his unwearied endeavour to put an end to these abuses.
Yet as he very seldom had a Churchwarden who was heartily
willing to second him therein, his endeavours were almost
ineffectual, producing very little fruit. But for two years
God was now pleased to favour him with a Churchwarden
who was resolved to act according to his oath: He then
cheerfully renewed his endeavours, visiting several of these
houses every Sunday; all of them in their turn. In every
one he bore a faithful testimony; and in some it has been
attended with much good. O that no one of those who have
been at any time within the reach of his voice, may finally
inherit that curse, “Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and
perish !”
2. For many years he had felt with the deepest sensibility
the disconsolate condition of poor uninstructed children; and
some years ago he began a school, wherein he taught them
himself every day. After pursuing this method for some
time, he erected a school in Madeley-Wood; but afterward
his thoughts were much employed concerning the Sunday
schools; especially since they were recommended to him in a
letter from Mrs. Derby, a person whom he always found ready
to promote every good work. He then earnestly set about
promoting them in his own parish. Three hundred children
were soon gathered together, whom he took every opportunity
of instructing, by regular meetings, for some time before the
schools were opened. These meetings he attended, with the
utmost diligence, to the very Thursday before his illness.
In order to encourage the children, his method was to give
them little Hymn-Books, pointing them to some friend or
neighbour, who would teach them the hymns, and instruct
them to sing. The little creatures were greatly taken with
this new employment; insomuch that many of them would
scarce allow themselves time to eat or sleep, for the desire
they had of learning their lessons. At every meeting, after
inquiring who had made the greatest proficiency, he
distinguished them by some little reward.
3. In the instructing of children, one great difficulty is, to
draw and fix their attention. He had a singular gift for
doing this, by making advantage of any incident that offered.
One day, while he had a considerable number of children
before him in the preaching-house, as he was persuading
them to mind what they were about, and to remember the
text which he was going to mention, just then a robin flew
into the house, and their eyes were presently turned after
him. “Now,” said he, “I see you can attend to that robin.
Well, I will take that robin for my text.” He then gave
them an useful lecture on the harmlessness of that little
creature, and the tender care of its Creator.
4. When he observed that the number of children, instead
of falling off, as was expected, increased continually, he
wrote some proposals to the parish, which were received with
the greatest unanimity. Many of the rich, as well as the
trading people, lent their helping hand, not only to defray
the expense of teachers, but also to raise a convenient house
in Coalbrook-Dale for the instruction of the numerous
children that were on that side of the parish.
5. The proposal was as follows:-"Our national depravity
turns greatly on these two hinges, the profanation of the
Lord’s day, and the neglect of the education of children.
Till some way is found of stopping up these two great inlets
of wickedness, we must expect to see our workhouses filled
with aged parents forsaken by their prodigal children, with
wives forsaken by their faithless husbands, and with the
wretched offspring of lewd women and drunken men. Nay,
we may expect to see the gaols, and even the gallows, largely
stocked, to the perpetual reproach of our nation, with unhappy
wretches ready to fall a sacrifice to the laws of their country.
“It is a common observation,’ says Dr. Gibson, late Bishop
of London, “that public criminals, when they come to their
unhappy end, and make their dying declarations to the world,
generally charge the sinful courses in which they have lived,
to the neglect and abuse of the Lord’s day, as the first
occasion of leading them into all other wickedness. And,
considering how frequently these declarations are repeated,
and how many other instances of the same kind, though less
public, are notorious enough to those who will observe them,
they may well be a warning to us, to consider a religious
observation of the Lord’s day as the best preservative of
virtue and religion, and the neglect and profanation of it as
the greatest inlet to vice and wickedness.”
6. “A pious Clergyman farther observes: ‘The want of
education in children is one of the principal causes of the
misery of families, cities, and nations; ignorance, vice, and
misery being constant companions. The hardest heart must
melt at the melancholy sight of such a number of children,
both male and female, who live in gross ignorance, and
habitual profanation of the Lord’s day. What crowds fill the
streets and fields, tempting each other to idleness, lewdness,
and every other species of wickedness | Is it any wonder we
should have so many undutiful children, unfaithful appren
tices, disobedient servants, untrusty workmen, disloyal
subjects, and bad members of society? Whence so much
rapine, fornication, and blasphemy? Do not all these evils
centre in ignorance and contempt of the Lord's day? And
shall we do nothing to check these growing evils?’
7. “Persons concerned for the welfare of the next genera
tion, and well-wishers to Church and State, have already set
us a fair example in Stroud, Gloucester, Birmingham,
Manchester, Leeds, Bristol, and many country parishes.
They have attempted to remedy these evils by setting up.
Sunday-schools, which, by keeping children from corrupting
one another, by promoting their attendance on divine worship,
and by planting the first principles of useful knowledge in
their minds and of piety in their hearts, bid fair for a public
reformation of manners, and for nipping in the bud the
ignorance and impiety which is everywhere so common
among the lower and more numerous classes of people.”
8. The proposals concerning Sunday-schools in the parish
of Madeley, were as follows:
“I. It is proposed, that Sunday-schools be set up in this
parish, for such children as are employed all the week, and
for those whose education has been hitherto totally neglected.
“II. That the children admitted into these be taught
reading, writing, and the principles of religion.
“III. That there be a school for boys and another for
girls, in Madeley, Madeley-Wood, and Coalbrook-Dale, six
in all.
“IV. That a subscription be opened, to pay each Teacher
one shilling per Sunday, and to buy tables, forms, books,
pens, and ink.
“V. That two Treasurers be appointed to ask and receive
the contributions of the subscribers.
“VI. That whoever subscribes one guinea a year shall be
a Governor.
“VII. That three or four Inspectors be appointed, who
are to visit the schools once a week, to see that the children
attend regularly, and the Masters do their duty.
“VIII. That a book be provided, for setting down all
receipts and expenses; and another for the names of the
Teachers and the scholars.
“IX. That the schools be solemnly visited once or twice a
year; and a premium given to the children that have made
the greatest improvement.”
9. As to the success of his unwearied labours, although he
was much discouraged when he first returned from abroad, find
ing so many of those who had once run well, grown weary
and faint in their mind; yet it was not long before he
found fresh cause to rejoice, and to know that God was with
him of a truth. It was not long before he observed that a
general reformation had taken place in the parish. And it
was not only an outward reformation, even of many that had
been notorious for all manner of wickedness; but an inward
also; many both young and old having learned to worship
God “in spirit and in truth.” A considerable number of
these still mourn, as sheep bereaved of their shepherd. And
yet one cannot doubt, but a still larger company of his own
children have hailed him on the celestial shore. But the
season is coming when all secrets shall be laid open; and all
the jewels of his crown shall be made manifest in that day.
10. One instance of the success of his ministry he
mentioned some years since at Bristol: “One Sunday,” said
he, “when I had done reading prayers at Madeley, I went
up into the pulpit, intending to preach a sermon which I
had prepared for that purpose. But my mind was so
confused, that I could not recollect either my text or any
part of my sermon. I was afraid I should be obliged to
come down, without saying anything. But having recollected
myself a little, I thought I would say something on the First
Lesson, which was the third chapter of Daniel, containing
the account of the three children cast into the fiery furnace:
I found in doing it such an extraordinary assistance from
God, and such a peculiar enlargement of heart, that I
supposed there must be some peculiar cause for it. I there
fore desired, if any of the congregation found anything
particular, they would acquaint me with it in the ensuing
week.
“In consequence of this, the Wednesday after, a woman
came, and gave me the following account:--‘I have been for
some time much concerned about my soul. I have attended
the church at all opportunities, and have spent much time in
private prayer. At this my husband (who is a butcher) has
been exceedingly enraged, and threatened me severely what
he would do, if I did not leave off going to John Fletcher's
church; yea, if I dared to go any more to any religious
meetings whatsoever. When I told him I could not in
conscience refrain from going at least to our parish church,
he grew quite outrageous, and swore dreadfully, if I went
any more, he would cut my throat as soon as I came home.
This made me cry mightily to God, that he would support
me in the trying hour. And though I did not feel any
great degree of comfort, yet having a sure confidence in God,
I determined to go on in my duty, and leave the event to
Him. Last Sunday, after many struggles with the devil
and my own heart, I came down stairs ready for church.
My husband asked me, whether I was resolved to go thither.
I told him, I was. Well then, said he, I shall not (as
I intended) cut your throat; but I will heat the oven, and
throw you into it the moment you come home. Notwith
standing this threatening, which he enforced with many
bitter oaths, I went to church, praying all the way that God
would strengthen me to suffer whatever might befal me.
While you was speaking of the three children whom
Nebuchadnezzar cast into the burning fiery furnace, I found
it all belonged to me, and God applied every word to my
heart. And when the sermon was ended, I thought, if I had
a thousand lives, I could lay them all down for God. I felt
my whole soul so filled with his love, that I hastened home,
fully determined to give myself to whatsoever God pleased;
nothing doubting, but that either he would take me to
heaven, if he suffered me to be burned to death, or that he
would some way deliver me, even as he did his three servants
that trusted in Him. When I got almost to our own door,
I saw the flames issuing out of the mouth of the oven.
And I expected nothing else, but that I should be thrown
into it immediately. I felt my heart rejoice, that if it were
so, the will of the Lord would be done. I opened the door,
and, to my utter astonishment, saw my husband upon his
knees, wrestling with God in prayer for the forgiveness of his
sins. He caught me in his arms, earnestly begged my
pardon, and has continued diligently seeking God ever since.”
I now know why my sermon was taken from me; namely,
that God might thus magnify his mercy.”
11. Many were the dangers he went through in the course
of his ministry; but the Lord delivered him out of all. One
of these Mrs. Fletcher relates in the following words:--
“My husband having appointed to preach one Sunday at
a church, about fourteen miles off, I felt some concern for
his riding so far, and doing the whole Sunday’s duty twice;
especially as it was necessary for him to return home the
same night. The evening being exceeding dark and wet, I
was strongly led to commend him to God in prayer. While
I was doing this, it was suggested to me, that his horse was
fallen, and had thrown him over his head; and the whole
scene appeared to be clearly represented before my eyes.
“My God,” said I, “he is thine. His life, his limbs, his health,
are all thine. I commit him to thee by faith.’ Immediately
that word was impressed on my heart, ‘The righteous is in
the hand of the Lord; and there shall no evil touch him.”
And it empowered my soul with such a sweetness, that I
could feel no fear. The night was uncommonly bad, which
occasioned many friends to continue with me. And while
they expressed their great uneasiness at his staying two
hours longer than we could well account for, I was obliged
to hide the calmness I felt by silence, lest some should have
supposed it insensibility.* At last he came well, and praising
God; but asked for water to wash himself, because his horse
had fallen, and thrown him with great force over his head.
Yet, glory be to God, he was no way hurt, except having a
little skin grazed from one of his fingers. As he set the
Lord always before him, so he found his help in every
time of need.”
12. The laying the foundation of the Sunday-schools at
Madeley was the last public work in which he was employed.
But as the liberal man is ever devising liberal things, he had
several plans in his mind for preserving a great number of
desolate children, brought up only to beg and steal. Such
this populous parish (and indeed most others) affords in great
abundance. He had likewise proposed writing various little
tracts, f for the use of the schools. But He who cannot err
saw good to call his servant hence to enjoy, rather than leave
him here to do and suffer.
* Nay, I would have proclaimed it aloud, giving the glory to God, for the
comfort of all that were present.
+ I do not regret his not living to write those tracts; because I despair of seeing
any in the English tongue superior to those extracts from Abbé Fleury and Mr.
Poiret, published under the title of “Instructions for Children.” I have never yet
seen anything comparable to them, either for depth of sense, or plainness of
language.
HIS CHARACTEIt.
1. I AM sensible, it is the method of almost all writers, to
place the character of a man at the cor-clusion of his life. But
there seems to be a particular reason for varying from the
usual practice in this place. The death of Mr. Fletcher (hardly
to be paralleled in the present century) was so uncommon a
display of the power and goodness of God in behalf of his
highly-favoured servant, that it is not proper for any thing to
come after it. It must needs therefore close the whole account.
2. From even the imperfect account which has been given
of this great and good man, any discerning person may with
very litele difficulty extract his character. In general, it is.
easy to perceive, that a more excellent man has not appeared
in the Church for some ages. It is true, in several ages,
and in several countries, many me?, have excelled in particular
virtues and graces. But who can point out, in any age or
nation, one that so highly excelled in all? one that was
enabled in so large a measure to “put on the whole armour
of God?” yea, so to “put on Christ,” as to “perfect holiness.
in the fear of God?”
3. Yet there is a peculiar difficulty in giving a full account
of either his life or character, because we have scarce any light
from himself. He was upon all occasions very uncommonly
reserved in speaking of himself, whether in writing or conver
sation. He hardly ever said anything concerning himself,
unless it slipped from him unawares. And among the great
number of papers which he has left, there is scarce a page
(except that single account of his conversion to God) relative
either to his own inward experience, or the transactions of his
life. So that the most of the information we have is gathered
up, either from short hints scattered up and down in his letters,
from what he had occasionally dropped among his friends, or
from what one and another remembered concerning him. In
writing the lives and characters of eminent men, the Roman
Catholics have a great advantage over us. The pious members
of the Church of Rome make a conscience of concealing
anything from their Directors, but disclose to them all the
circumstances of their lives, and all the secrets of their hearts:
L1FE OF M it. FLETCHER. 341
Whereas very few of the Protestants disclose to others, even
their most intimate friends, what passes between God and
their own souls; at least not of set purpose. Herein they
forget, or at least disregard, that wise remark of the ancient
writers (exactly agreeable to various passages that occur in
the canonical Scriptures): “It is good to conceal the secrets
of a King, but to declare the loving-kindness of the Lord.”
4. This defect was indeed in some measure supplied by
the entire intimacy which subsisted between him and Mrs.
Fletcher. He did not willingly, much less designedly, conceal
anything from her. They had no secrets with regard to each
other, but had indeed one house, one purse, and one heart.
Before her it was his invariable rule, to think aloud; always to
open the window in his breast. And to this we are indebted
for the knowledge of many particulars which must otherwise
have been buried in oblivion.
5. But, whatever the materials were, however complete our
informations, yet I am thoroughly sensible of my own inability
to draw such a portrait as Mr. Fletcher deserves. I have no
turn at all for panegyric: I have never accustomed myself to
it. It gives me therefore no small satisfaction to find, that
this is in a great measure done to my hands. The picture is
already drawn; and that by no mean pencil. All then which
I shall attempt is, to retouch Mrs. Fletcher’s observations,
and now and then to add a few articles, either from my own
knowledge, or from the information of others.
6. The following are mostly her own words,--for where
they are clear and expressive, as they generally are, I do not
t}-ink it right to alter them for altering' sake:
“Whatever he might be with regard to charity,” said she,
“he was no less eminent for his spirit of faith. Indeed he was
not so much led by sights or impressions (which many mistake
for faith) as abundance of people have been; but by a steady,
firm reliance upon the love and truth and faithfulness of God.
His ardent desire was, so to believe, as to be a partaker of all
the great and precious promises; to be a witness of all that
mind which was in Christ Jesus. And being conscious that
he must be crucified with his Master, or never reign with Him,
he gave himself up to Him, whom he continually set before
him, to lie in his hand as the passive clay. He would often
say, ‘It is my business in all events, to hang upon the Lord,
with a sure trust and confidence, that he will order all things
in the best time and manner. Indeed it would be nothing to
be a believer, nay, in truth, there would be no room for faith,
if everything were seen here. But against hope to believe in
hope, to have a full confidence in that unseen power which
so mightily supports us in all our dangers and difficulties,--
this is the believing which is acceptable to God.” Sometimes.
when I have expressed some apprehension of an approaching
trial, he would answer, ‘I do not doubt but the Lord orders.
all; therefore I leave everything to him.’ In outward dangers,
if they were ever so great, he seemed to know no shadow of
fear. When I was speaking once, concerning a danger to
which we were then particularly exposed, he answered, ‘I
know God always gives his angels charge concerning us:
Therefore we are equally safe everywhere.”
“Not less eminent than his faith was his humility. Amidst
all his laying himself out for God, and for the good of souls,
he ever preserved that special grace, the making no account
of his own labours. He held himself and his own abilities in
very low esteem; and seemed to have that word continually
before his eyes, ‘I am an unprofitable servant.” And this
humility was so rooted in him, as to be moved by no affront.
I have seen many, even of the most provoking kind, offered
him; but he received them as his proper portion; being so
far from desiring the honour which cometh of men, that he
took pleasure in being little and unknown. Perhaps it might
appear from some passages of his life, that in this he even
leaned to an extreme; for genuine humility does not require,
that any man should desire to be despised. Nay, we are to
avoid it, so far as we possibly can, consistently with a good
conscience; for that direction, ‘Let no man despise thee,’
concerns every man as well as Timothy.
“It is rare to meet with an eminent person that can bear
an equal. But it was his choice and his delight to prefer every
one to himself. And this he did in so free and easy a manner,
that in him it appeared perfectly natural. He never willingly
suffered any unkindness shown to him to be mentioned again;
and if it was, he generally answered, “O let it drop; we will
offer it in silence to the Lord.’ And indeed the best way of
bearing crosses is, to consecrate all in silence to God.
“From this root of humility sprung such a patience as I
wish I could either describe or imitate. It produced in him
a most ready mind, which embraced every cross with alacrity
and pleasure. For the good of his neighbour, nothing seemed
hard, nothing wearisome. Sometimes I have been grieved
to call him out of his study two or three times in an hour;
especially when he was engaged in composing some of his
deepest works; but he would answer, with his usual sweet
ness, ‘O, my dear, never think of that. It matters not, if
we are but always ready to meet the will of God. It is
conformity to the will of God that alone makes an employ
ment excellent.’ He never thought anything too mean, but
sin; he looked on nothing else as beneath his character. If
he overtook a poor man or woman on the road, with a burden
too heavy for them, he did not fail to offer his assistance to
bear part of it; and he would not easily take a denial. This
therefore he has frequently done.
“In bearing pain he was most exemplary, and continued
more and more so to the last. Nor was it least remarkable
in the most humbling part of the ministry, the coming down
to the capacities of the ignorant. Nevertheless he had a
most resolute courage in the reproving of sin. To daring
sinners he was a son of thunder; and no worldly considera
tions were regarded, whenever he believed God had given
him a message to deliver to any of them.
“One considerable part of humility is, to know our own
place, and stand therein. Every member has its peculiar
appointment in the human body, where the wise Master
builder has placed it; and it is well while each continues in
its place. But, as every dislocated bone gives pain, and must
continue so to do till it is replaced in its proper socket, so
every dislocated affection must give pain to the soul till it is
restored to its own place, till it is totally fixed in God, till we
resign our whole selves to the disposal of infinite wisdom.
This is the proper place of every rational creature; and in
this place he invariably stood. Whatever he believed to be
the will of God, he resolutely performed, though it were to
pluck out a right eye, to lay his Isaac on the altar. When it
appeared that God called him to any journey, he immediately
prepared for it, without the least hesitation; although, for the
last years of his life, he hardly ever travelled to any consider
able distance, without feeling some tendency to a relapse
into his former distemper; and it was usually some weeks
after his return, before he recovered his usual strength.”
Humility continually produces meekness, and the latter
bears an exact proportion to the former. I received a letter
on this head but a few days since, which it may not be
improper to subjoin :
“Rev. SIR,
“I was yesterday in company with several Clergymen,
who, among other things, mentioned Mr. Fletcher, and seemed
particularly anxious that in the account of his life a proper
degree of caution should be observed in the panegyric that
may be applied to his character. They say he was extremely
passionate; and that there was in many instances an austere
severity and rigour in his conduct to the young people under
his care, particularly at Trevecka. As this information comes
from a gentleman eminent for his knowledge of mankind,
and universally esteemed as one of the greatest geniuses of
the age, and one whose veracity has never been questioned,
it will have no small weight in the learned world.”
7. I am glad this information came to my hands in time,
as it may now receive so sufficient an answer as will probably
satisfy every candid and impartial reader.
Two things are here asserted concerning Mr. Fletcher: The
First, that he was extremely passionate: The Second, that
there was an austere severity and rigour in his conduct toward
the young persons under his care, particularly at Trevecka.
The former assertion is unquestionably true; such he was by
nature. The latter I question much, with regard to his con
duct at Tern, as well as at Trevecka. None can be a more
competent witness of his conduct at Tern, than Mr. Vaughan,
who lived so long in the same house; and whose testimony
concerning him has been so largely given in the preceding
pages. But, waving this, can it possibly be supposed, that
either Mr. Hill, or his sons, then verging toward manhood;
would have borne the austere rigour and severity of a young
man that received his bread from them? yea, and that year
after year? Surely the supposition shocks all credibility.
8. Equally incredible is the assertion of his “austere
severity and rigour ’’ toward the young men, at Trevecka.
This is inconsistent with the whole account given by Mr.
Benson, an eye and ear witness of all his conduct. Had it
been true in any degree, would it have been possible that he
should have been so esteemed and beloved by those very
young men? I cannot form the least conjecture whence
such an assertion could arise unless it was invented by some
young man after Mr. Fletcher was dismissed, in order to
ingratiate himself with his patroness.
9. The farther account which Mr. Benson gives of him from
personal knowledge is this: “Mr. Fletcher,” says he, “was
maturally a man of strong passions, and prone to anger in
particular; insomuch that he has frequently thrown himself
on the floor, and laid there most of the night bathed in tears,
imploring victory over his own spirit. And he did not strive
in vain; he did obtain the victory, in a very eminent degree.
For twenty years and upwards before his death, no one ever
saw him out of temper, or heard him utter a rash expression,
on any provocation whatever. I have often thought the
testimony that Bishop Burnet, in the History of his own
Times, bears of Archbishop Leighton, might be borne of him
with equal propriety: “After an intimate acquaintance with
the Archbishop for many years, and after being with him by
night and by day, at home and abroad, in public and in
private, on sundry occasions and in various affairs, I must
say, I never heard an idle word drop from his lips, nor any
conversation which was not to the use of edifying. I never
saw him in any temper in which I myself would not have
wished to be found at death. Any that has been intimately
acquainted with Mr. Fletcher will say the same of him. But
they that knew him best, will say it with the most assurance.
10. His “disengagements from the world, and love of the
poor,” Mrs. Fletcher joins together. “Never,” says she, “did
I behold any one more dead to the things of the world. His
treasure was above; and so was his heart also. He always
remembered that admonition of the Apostle, “No man that
warreth entangleth himself with the things of this life.” It
was his constant endeavour to preserve a mind free and disen
cumbered; and he was exceeding wary of undertaking any
business that might distract and hurry it. Yet, in his worldly
concerns, knowing himself to be a steward for God, he would
not through carelessness waste one penny. He likewise
judged it to be his bounden duty to demand what he knew to
be his right. And yet he could well reconcile this with that
word, “He that will have thy coat, let him have thy cloak
also.” Indeed, whether he had less or more, it was the same
thing upon his own account, as he had no other use for it, but
to spread the gospel, and to assist the poor. And he frequently
said, he never was happier than when he had given away the
last penny he had in his house. If at any time I had gold in
my drawers, it seemed to afford him no comfort. But if he
could find a handful of small silver, when he was going out to
see the sick, he would express as much pleasure over it as a
miser would in discovering a bag of hid treasure. He was
never better pleased with my employment, than when he had
set me to prepare food or physic for the poor. He was hardly
able to relish his dinner, if some sick neighbour had not a part
of it; and sometimes, if any one of them was in want, I could
not keep the linen in his drawers. On Sundays he provided
for numbers of people who came from a distance to hear the
word; and his house, as well as his heart, was devoted to their
convenience: To relieve them that were afflicted in body or
mind was the delight of his heart. Once a poor man, who
feared God, being brought into great difficulties, he took down
all the pewter from the kitchen shelves, saying, ‘This will
help you; and I can do without it. A wooden trencher will
serve me just as well. In epidemic and contagious dis
tempers, when the neighbours were afraid to nurse the sick,
he has gone from house to house, seeking some that were
willing to undertake it. And when none could be found, he
has offered his service, to sit up with them himself. But
this was at his first setting out here. At present, there
appears in many (and has done so for many years) a most
ready mind to visit and relieve the distressed.
11. “He thoroughly complied with that advice,--
* Give to all something; to a good poor man,
Till thou change hands, and be where he began.”
I have heard him say, that when he lived alone in his house,
the tears have come into his eyes, when one had brought him
five or six insignificant letters, at three or four pence a piece;
and perhaps he had only a single shilling in the house, to
distribute among the poor to whom he was going. He
frequently said to me, ‘O Polly, can we not do without
beer? Let us drink water, and eat less meat. Let our
necessities give way to the extremities of the poor.”
12. “But with all his generosity and charity he was
strictly careful to follow the advice of the Apostle, ‘Owe no
man any thing. He contracted no debt. While he gave
all he had, he made it a rule to pay ready money for every
thing; believing this was the best way to keep the mind
unencumbered and free from care. Meanwhile his substance,
his time, his strength, his life, were devoted to the service of
the poor. And, last of all, he gave me to them. For when
we were married, he asked me solemnly, whether I was
willing to marry his parish. And the first time he led me
among his people in this place, he said, ‘I have not married
this wife only for myself, but for you. I asked her of the
Lord, for your comfort, as well as my own.’”
13. All his life, as well as during his illness, particularly at
Newington and Brislington, (as has been largely related,) he
was grateful in a very high degree, to those who conferred
the least benefit upon him; yea, or even endeavoured so to
do. One of these was Mr. Richard Edwards, of London, to
whose care he was committed as a Leader, when he was
first admitted into the London Society. A lively sense of
the kindness which Mr. Edwards then showed him, he
retained to the end of his life. This he testified by repeated
letters; one or two of which it may be well to transcribe.
“TERN, Oct. 19, 1756.
“THIs is to let you know, that (praise be to the Lord!) I am
very well in body, and pretty well in soul. But I have very
few Christian friends here. And God has been pleased to take
away the chief of those few by a most comfortable death.
And lately I heard that my aged father is gone the way of all
flesh. But the glorious circumstances of his death make me
ample amends for the sorrow which I felt. For some years, I
have wrote to him with as much freedom as I could have done
to a son, though not with so much effect as I wished. But
last spring, God visited him with a severe illness, which brought
him to a sense of himself. And, after a deep repentance, he
died about a month ago, in the full assurance of faith. This
has put several of my friends on thinking seriously, which
affords me great cause of thankfulness. I am
“Your unworthy brother and servant in the Lord,
14. Two years after he wrote to him as follows:
“I THANK you for your encouraging observations. I want
them, and use them by the grace of God. When I received
yours, I had not had one opportunity of preaching; so incensed
were all the Clergy against me. One, however, let me have
the use of his church, the Abbey church, at Shrewsbury. I
348 LIFE OF Mirt. FLETCHER.
preached in the forenoon with some degree of the demonstra
tion of the Spirit. The congregation was very numerous;
and I believe one half at least desired to hear me again. But
the Minister would not let me have the pulpit any more.
The next Sunday, the Minister of a neighbouring parish
lying a dying, I was sent for to officiate for him. He died a
few days after, and the chief man in the parish offered to
make interest that I might succeed him. But I could not
consent. The next Sunday, I preached at Shrewsbury again;
but in another church. The next day I set out for Bristol,
and was much refreshed among the brethren. As I returned
I called at New-Kingswood, about sixteen miles from Bristol.
The Minister offering me his church, I preached to a
numerous congregation, gathered on half an hour's notice.
I think the seed then sown will not be lost.”
15. “Another uncommon talent which God had given
him,” says Mrs. Fletcher, “was a peculiar sensibility of spirit.
He had a temper the most feeling of any I ever knew.
Hardly a night passed over, but some part of it was spent in
groans for the souls and bodies committed to his care. I
dreaded his hearing either of the sins or sufferings of any of
his people before the time of his going to bed, knowing how
strong the impressions would be on his mind, chasing the
sleep from his eyes.
“And yet I have heard him speak of a time, twelve or four
teen years ago, when he was greatly tempted to think, that he
was not sensible enough of the afflictions of his fellow-creatures.
He thought Christ bore our infirmities, and carried our
sorrows; but, said he, “I have not that Christ-like temper: I
do not bear the sorrows of others. After being for some time
buffeted with this temptation, he prayed, that a measure of
this spirit might be given him. Not long after, as he was
visiting a poor sick family, so lively a sense of their affliction
on a sudden fell upon his mind, that he could scarce get home.
As soon as he sat down in his house, his soul was penetrated
with such a sense of the woes of mankind as utterly depressed
and overcame him, and drank up his spirits; insomuch that
he could not help himself, nor move from one chair to another.
And he was no more able to walk or help himself, than a new
born child. At the same time he seemed to lose the use of
his memory, and of all his faculties. He thought, ‘What is
this? Is it a disease? Is it a stroke of the palsy? Rather, is
Ll FE OF MR, FLETCHER. 349
it not an answer to my own ill-judged, though well-intended,
prayer? Did I not ask a burden unsuitable to a finite, and
capable of being borne only by an infinite, being?” He
remained some hours in this situation. Then it came into his
mind, ‘If this is a purely natural event, the will of the Lord be
done ! But if it be the answer to an improper prayer, God
will answer again by removing it.” He cried to the Lord, and
was immediately restored to strength both of body and mind.
“When we were at Leeds, in the year 1784, I had another
proof of the tender sensibility of his heart. O how deeply was
he affected concerning the welfare of his brethren | When
any little disputes arose between them, his inmost soul groaned
under the burden; and, by two or three o’clock in the morning,
I was sure to hear him breathing out prayer for the peace and
prosperity of Sion. When I observed to him, I was afraid it
would hurt his health, and wished him to sleep more, he would
answer, “O Polly, the cause of God lies near my heart !”
“Toward me his tenderness was exerted in its utmost
extent. My soul, my body, my health, my ease and comfort,
were his daily study. We had no thought, either past or
present, which we purposely concealed from each other. My
spiritual advancement was his constant endeavour; and to
this he was continually stirring me up, inviting me to walk
more closely with God; urging that thought, ‘O my dear,
let us pray for dying grace; for we shall not be long here.”
His temporal affairs he committed solely to me, though he
was always ready to assist me in the smallest matters.
“One article more remains to be spoken of, namely, his
communion with God. Although he enjoyed this, more or
less, at all times and in all places, yet I have frequently heard
him observe, that the seasons of his closest communion were
always in his own house, or in the church; usually in the latter.
It is much to be lamented that we have no account of it from
his own pen. It was his constant endeavour to maintain an
uninterrupted sense of the presence of God. In order to
this, he was slow of speech, and had the greatest government
of his words. Indeed he both acted, and spoke, and thought,
as under the eye of God. And thus setting God always before
him, he remained unmoved in all occurrences; at all times
and on every occasion possessing inward recollection. Nor
did I ever see him diverted therefrom on any occasion what
ever, either going out or coming in, whether by ourselves or
in company. Sometimes he took his journeys alone; but
above a thousand miles I have travelled with him; during
which neither change of company, place, nor the variety of
circumstances which naturally occur in travelling, ever seemed
to make the least difference in his firm attention to the
presence of God. To preserve this uniform habit of soul, he
was so watchful and recollected, that, to such as were unex
perienced in these things, it might appear like insensibility.
Although no one could converse in a more lively and sensible
manner, even on natural things, when he saw it was to the
glory of God; he was always striving to raise his own and
every other spirit to a close and immediate intercourse with
God. And I can say with truth, all his union with me was
so intermingled with prayer and praise, that every employ
ment and every meal was, as it were, perfumed therewith.”
16. I had concluded what I purposed to say concerning the
character of Mr. Fletcher, when I received a long letter from
Mr. Benson; an extract of which I cannot withhold from the
reader. For although most of the particulars hereof are
contained in the preceding pages, yet as they are here placed
in quite another order, and have also several new circum
stances intermixed, I could not doubt of their being both
agreeable and profitable to every person of piety.
“As to drawing the character of that great and good man,”
says Mr. Benson, “it is what I will not attempt: But if I
can suggest anything that will assist you therein, I shall
think my little labour well bestowed. With this view I have
been looking over many of his letters, and observe in them
all, what I have a thousand times observed in his conversa
tion and behaviour, the plainest marks of every Christian
grace and virtue.
“Perhaps if he followed his Master more closely in one
thing than another, it was in humility. It is one branch of
poverty of spirit (another word for humility) to think meanly
of ourselves. As he certainly thought meanly of himself,
both as a Christian, as a Preacher, and as a writer, I need not
say how he shone in all those characters; but he knew not
that he shone in any of them. How low an opinion he had
of himself as a Christian, manifestly appears from his placing
himself at the feet of all, and showing a continual desire to
learn from every company he was in. He paid all due
deference to the judgment of others, readily acknowledged
whatever was good in them, and seemed to think himself the
only person in whom there dwelt no excellency worth notice.
Hence it was that he often wrote and spoke, as if he had not
received that grace which he undoubtedly had received. And
indeed he overlooked what he had attained, through the eager
desire he had of higher and greater things. Many of his
letters show how very meanly he thought of his own attain
ments as a Christian; through the continually increasing views
which he had of the divine purity, and of the high degree of
conformity thereto which is attainable even in this world.
“And however little he was in his own eyes as a Christian,
he was equally so as a writer and a Preacher. In consequence
of the mean opinion he had of his own abilities, he gladly offered
what he wrote to be corrected by any friend, however inferior to
himself. Thus in a letter, dated November 23, 1771, he says,
‘I have sent a letter of fifty pages upon Antinomianism. I beg,
upon my bended knees, you would revise and correct it. I
have followed my light, small as it is. Put yours to mine.’
What a mean opinion he had of his own writings appears from
a letter written March 20, 1774: ‘I do not repent of my
having engaged in this controversy; for though I doubt my
little publications cannot reclaim those who are confirmed in
believing the lie of the day, yet they may here and there stop
one from swallowing it at all, or at least from swallowing it
so deeply.” Two years after, he says, “I have almost run my
race of scribbling; and I have preached as much as I could,
though to little purpose; but I must not complain. If one
person has received good by my ten years’ labour, it is an
honour for which I cannot be too thankful, if my mind were
as low as it should be. Let us bless the Lord in all things.”
“As difficult as it is to think meanly of ourselves, it is still
more difficult to be willing that others should think meanly
of us. And how eminent he was in this appears from hence,
that he was constantly upon his guard, lest any expression
should drop either from his lips or pen, which tended to
make any one think well of him; either on account of his
family, or learning, or parts, or usefulness. Yea, he took as
much pains to conceal his excellencies, as others do to show
them; having the same desire to be little and unknown,
which many have to be known and esteemed.
“It would have remained a secret in this kingdom, even
to his most intimate friends, that he was of so great a family,
352 LIFE OF MR. File:TCHER.
had not Mr. Ireland gone over with him to Switzerland;
where he was surprised to find Mr. Fletcher's relations some
of the first people in the country.
“‘Blessed are they that mourn,” said the Lord Jesus. And
this blessedness was as certainly his as the former. He was
a man of a serious spirit; one that stood at the utmost distance.
from levity of every kind. Though he was constantly cheer
ful, as rejoicing in hope of his heavenly inheritance, yet had
he too deep a sense of his own wants, and the wants of the
Church of God, as also of the sins and miseries of mankind, to
be at any time light or trifling. I have a letter before me,
dated December, 1771, which at once gives us a picture of
his seriousness, watchfulness, and earnestness; and contains
advices well deserving the consideration of all that fear God.
‘There is undoubtedly, said he, “such a thing as the full
assurance of faith. Be not discouraged on account of thou
sands who stop short of it: It is our own fault if we do not
attain. God would give us ample satisfaction if we did but
deeply feel our wants. Both you and I want a deeper
awakening, which will produce a death to outward things and
speculative knowledge. Let us shut our eyes to the gilded
clouds without us; let us draw inward, and search after God, if
haply we may find him. Let us hold our confidence, though
we are often constrained against hope to believe in hope. But
let us not rest in our confidence, as thousands do; let it help
us to struggle and wait till he come. Let us habituate our
selves to live inwardly. This will solemnize us, and prevent
our trifling with the things of God. We may be thankful for
what we have, without resting in it. We may strive, and yet
not trust in our striving; but expect all from divine grace.”
“Four or five years after, he says, “I send this to inquire
after your welfare, and to let you know, that though I am
pretty well in body, yet I breakfast. But I want to break
faster in my spirit than I do. Yet, blessed be God, I have
been in such pinching, grinding circumstances, for near a year,
by a series of providential and domestic trials, as have given
me some deadly blows. I am not without hope of setting
my eyes on you once more. Mr. Wesley kindly invites me
to travel with nim, and visit some of the societies. I feel an
inclination to break one of my chains, parochial retirement,
which may be a nest for self-indulgence. I leave the matter
entirely to the Lord.”
“Meantime, he mourned, not only for himself and his
friends, but also for the Church of God. ‘The few professors,’
says he, “which I see in these parts, are so far from what I
wish them to be, that I cannot but cry out, Lord, how long
wilt thou give thy heritage up to desolation? How long shall
the Heathen say, Where is now their indwelling God?” In
another letter he writes, (dated May 8, 1776) “I see so little
fruit in these parts, that I am almost disheartened. I am
closely followed with the thought, that faith in the dispensa
tion of the Spirit is at a very low ebb. But it may be better
in other places. I shall be glad to travel a little, to see the
goodness of the land. May God make and keep us humble,
loving, disinterested, and zealous!”
“These quotations give us not only an example of holy
mourning, but likewise of hungering and thirsting after righ
teousness. In this he was peculiarly worthy our imitation.
He never rested in anything he had either experienced or done
in spiritual matters. But this one thing he did: “Forgetting
those things that were behind, and reaching forth unto those
things which were before, he ‘pressed toward the mark for
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; he was
a true Christian racer, always on the stretch for higher and
better things. Though his attainments, both in experience and
usefulness, were above the common standard, yet the language
of his conversation and behaviour always was, ‘Not as though
I had already attained, either were already perfected; but I
follow after, if by any means I may apprehend that for which
I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.’ He had his eye upon a
full conformity to the Son of God; or what the Apostle
terms, ‘the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.’
Nor could he be satisfied with anything less.
“And he was meek, like his Master, as well as lowly in
heart. Not that he was so by nature, but of a fiery, passionate
spirit. But so thoroughly had grace subdued nature, so fully
was he renewed in the spirit of his mind, that, for many
years before his death, I believe he was never observed by
any one, friend or foe, to be out of temper. And yet he did
not want provocation, and that sometimes in a high degree;
especially from those whose religious sentiments he thought
it his duty to oppose. One of these, who once loved him so
well, as to be ready to pull out his eyes for him, was so
exasperated on reading his Second Check, that he wrote to
354 LIFE of MR, FLETCHER.
him in the most bitter terms. But none of these things
moved him; no, not in the least degree. The keenest word
he used upon the occasion was, ‘What a world, what a
religious world we live in l’
“Hence arose his readiness to bear with the weaknesses, and
forgive the faults, of others; the more remarkable, considering
his flaming zeal against sin, and deep concern for the glory of
God. Such hatred to sin, and such love to the sinner, I never
saw joined together before. This very circumstance con
vinced me of the height of his grace, bearing so much of his
Master’s image, whose hatred to sin and love to sinners are
equally infinite. He took all possible pains to detect what
was evil in any of those that were under his care; pursuing it
through all its turnings and windings, and stripping it of all its
disguises. Yet none so ready to excuse when it was confessed,
and to conceal it even from his most intimate friends.
“He never mentioned the faults of an absent person, unless
absolute duty required it: And then he spoke with the utmost
tenderness, extenuating, rather than aggravating. None could
draw his picture more exactly than St. Paul has done, in the
thirteenth of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Every
feature in that masterly piece of apostolic painting was found
in him. Let all that knew him, especially his intimate
friends, recollect the spirit and behaviour of this servant of
the God of love; and then let them judge whether I exagge
rate, when I say, He ‘suffered long and was kind; he envied
not; acted not rashly; was not puffed up; did not behave
himself unseemly; sought not his own; was not easily provoked.
He thought no evil, rejoiced not in iniquity, but rejoiced in
the truth. He covered all things, believed all things, hoped
all things, and endured all things.’ It would be easy to enlarge
on all these particulars, and show how they were exemplified
in him. But waving this, I would only observe, that, with
regard to two of them,-kindness to others, and not seeking
his own, -he had few equals. His kindness to others was
such, that he bestowed his all upon them; his time, his
talents, his substance. His knowledge, his eloquence, his
health, his money, were employed, day by day, for the good
of mankind. He prayed, he wrote, he preached, he visited the
sick and well, he conversed, he gave, he laboured, he suffered,
winter and summer, night and day; he endangered, nay,
destroyed, his health, and, in the end, gave his life also for
the profit of his neighbours, that they might be saved from
everlasting death. He denied himself even such food as was
necessary for him, that he might have to give to them that
had none. And when he was constrained to change his
manner of living, still his diet was plain and simple; and so
were his clothing and furniture, that he might save all that
was possible for his poor neighbours.
“He sought not his own in any sense; not his own honour,
but the honour of God in all he said or did: He sought not
his own interest, but the interest of his Lord; spreading
knowledge, holiness, and happiness as far as he possibly could.
He sought not his own pleasure, but studied to ‘please all
men, for their good to edification; and to please Him that
had called him to his kingdom and glory. And yet it is
certain, he found the greatest pleasure in pleasing God and
his neighbour. For nothing could give an higher delight
than this to his pious and benevolent mind.
“In the mean time, he was a man of peace, and spared no
pains to restore it where it was broken. He gave numberless
proofs of this anniable disposition. When we were at Trevecka,
(to mention but one instance,) two of the students were bitterly
prejudiced against each other. He took them into a room by
themselves, reasoned with them, wept over them, and at last
prevailed. Their hearts were broken; they were melted
down; they fell upon each other's necks and wept aloud.
“The pains which he took to make peace at the Leeds
Conference will not easily be forgotten. And although he
could not prevail so far as might have been desired, yet his
labour was not in vain.
“But I do not attempt his full character: I will only add,
what the Apostle recommends to the Philippians was exactly
copied by him. He was ‘blameless and harmless, a son of
God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation; shining among them as a light in the world.’”
I think one talent wherewith God had endued Mr. Fletcher
has not been sufficiently noted yet: I mean his courtesy; in
which there was not the least touch either of art or affectation.
It was pure and genuine, and sweetly constrained him to behave
to every one (although particularly to inferiors) in a manner
not to be described, with so inexpressible a mixture of humi
lity, love, and respect. This directed his words, the tone of
his voice, his looks, his whole attitude, his every motion.
This seems to be intended by St. Paul, in those words, ove
agxmploys"; not so well expressed in our translation by,
“behaveth not itself unseemly.” Do not the words literally
mean, “is not ill bred ?”--behaves on all occasions with
decency and good breeding? Certainly, so did Mr. Fletcher.
Never did any man more perfectly suit his whole behaviour
to the persons and the occasion: So that one might apply to
him, with great propriety, the words of the ancient poet:--
Illum quicquid agit, quoquo vestigia tendit
Componit furtim, subsequiturque decor.”
I cannot translate this; but I can give the English reader a
parallel, and more than a parallel:--
Grace was in all his steps, heaven in his eye,
In all his gestures sanctity and love.
“SoME time before he was taken ill,” says Mrs. Fletcher,
“he mentioned to me a peculiar manifestation of love which
he received in his own house, with the application of those
words, “Thou shalt walk with me in white. He added, ‘It
is not a little thing so to hang upon God by faith, as to feel
no departure from him, and no rising in the heart against
him. But this does not satisfy me; I often feel something far
beyond this; yea, I sometimes find such gleams of light and
love, such wafts, as it were, of the heavenly air; so powerful,
as if they would just then take my soul with them to glory !
But I am not filled: I want to be filled with all the fulness
of God.” In conformity to these sentiments, when he was in
his last illness, he expressed himself thus: ‘I am filled, most
sweetly filled.’ This conveyed much to my mind, as I
understood by it the accomplishment of his large desires.
“Some time before the beginning of his last sickness,
he was peculiarly penetrated with the nearness of eternity.
* This quotation from Tibullus is thus rendered by Dr. Grainger:
“A secret grace his every act improves,
And pleasing follows wheresoe'er he moves.”-EDIT.
There was scarce an hour in which he was not calling upon
us to drop every thought and every care, that we might
attend to nothing but the drinking deeper into God. We
spent much time in wrestling with God, and were led, in a
peculiar manner, to abandon our whole selves, our souls and
bodies, into the hands of God; ready to do, and willing to
suffer, whatever was well pleasing to him.
“And now the time drew near, when his faith was to be
called to its last grand exercise; that, eying his Lord, he might
True in the fiery trial prove,
And pay him back his dying love.
A little before, being on his knees in prayer for light, whether
he should go to London or not; the answer to him seemed
to be, ‘Not to London, but to thy grave.” When he
acquainted me with this, he said, with a heavenly smile, “Satan
would represent it to me as something dreadful, enforcing
those words: The cold gravel The cold grave 1° On the
Sunday following, (I think it was the next day,) that anthem
was sung in the church: ‘The Lord is my Shepherd; there
fore can I lack nothing. He shall feed me in green pastures,
and lead me forth beside the waters of comfort. He shall
convert my soul, and bring me forth in the paths of righteous
ness, for his name’s sake. Yea, though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I shall fear no evil: For thou art
with me; thy rod and thy staff shall comfort me. Thou shalt
prepare a table before me, against them that trouble me. Thou
hast anointed my head with oil, and my cup shall be full.”
“In his return home, he observed in how uncommon a
degree those words had been blessed to his soul. And from
that very time I do not remember to have seen in him the
least marks of temptation. He showed an unusual cheerful
ness and liveliness in every part of his work; and seemed to
increase in strength of body, as well as in strength of soul.
Truly it was to him according to his faith: He feared no
evil; and his cup was filled with ‘righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost.’
“On Thursday, August 4, he was employed in the work of
God from three in the afternoon till nine at night. When he
came home, he said, ‘I have taken cold; but seemed not
* I verily believe, if he had then gone to London, he would have been alive at
this day. But I blame no one for thinking otherwise.
to regard it. He was far from well on Friday and Saturday;
but was uncommonly drawn out in prayer. On Saturday
night he was abundantly worse, and his fever appeared very
strong. I begged that he would by no means think of going
to church in the morning. But he told me, it was the will
of the Lord; in which case I never dared to persuade. In
reading Prayers, he was very near fainting away. I got
through the crowd, and entreated him to come out of the
desk. But he let me and others know, in his sweet manner,
that we were not to interrupt the order of God. I then
silently retired to my pew, where all around me were in
tears. When the windows were opened, by which he appeared
to be a little refreshed, he went on ; and then preached with
a strength and recollection that surprised us all.
“After sermon he walked up to the communion-table,
uttering these words, “I am going to throw myself under the
wings of the cherubim, before the mercy-seat. The service
lasted till near two. Sometimes he was constrained to stop;
being hardly able to stand upon his feet. The people were
deeply affected, which they were not able to conceal; groans
and weeping were on every side. Gracious Lord! how was it
my soul was kept so calm in the midst of the most tender
feelings? Notwithstanding his extreme weakness, he gave
out several verses of hymns, and lively sentences of exhorta
tion. As soon as ever the service was over, we hurried him to
bed. When he lay down, nature being quite exhausted, he
immediately fainted away. He afterwards dropped into a
sleep for some time, and, on waking, cried out with a pleasant
smile, ‘Now, my dear, thou seest I am no worse for doing the
Lord’s work. He never fails me when I trust in Him.”
Having eaten a little dinner, he dozed most of the evening;
now and then waking, with the praises of God in his mouth.
At night his fever returned; but it was not violent; and yet
his strength decreased amazingly. On Monday and Tuesday
we had a little paradise together. He lay on a couch in the
study; and, though often changing posture, was sweetly
pleasant, and frequently slept a good while together. When
he was awake, he delighted in hearing me read hymns, and
treatises on faith and love. His words were all animating,
and his patience beyond expression. When he had a very
nauseous medicine to take, he seemed to enjoy the cross;
according to a word which he was used often to repeat, “We
are to seek a perfect conformity to the will of God; and leave
Him to give us pleasure or pain, as it seemeth him good.’
“I asked him, whether he had any advice to leave me, if
he should be taken from me. He replied, ‘I have nothing
particular to say: The Lord will open all before thee. I
said, ‘Have you any conviction that God is about to take
you?” He said, ‘No, not in particular. Only I always see
death so inexpressibly near, that we both seem to stand on
the verge of etermity.’ While he slept a little, I besought
the Lord, if it was his good pleasure, to spare him to me a
little longer. But my prayer seemed to have no wings; and
I could not help mingling continually therewith, ‘Lord, give
me perfect resignation l’ This uncertainty made me tremble,
lest God was going to put into my hands the bitter cup with
which he lately threatened my husband. Some weeks before,
I myself was ill of a fever, and not without danger. My
husband then felt the whole parting scene, and struggled
for perfect resignation. He said, “O Polly, shall I ever see
the day when thou must be carried out to bury? How will
the little things which thy tender care has prepared for me,
in every part of the house, wound and distress me! How is
it? I think I feel jealousy I am jealous of the worms |
I seem to shrink at the thought of giving my dear Polly to
the worms.’
“Now all these reflections returned upon my heart, with
the weight of a millstone. I cried to the Lord, and these
words were deeply impressed on my spirit: ‘Where I am,
there shall my servants be, that they may behold my glory.’
This promise was full of comfort to my soul. I saw that in
Christ's immediate presence was our home, and that we
should have our re-union in being deeply centred in him.
I received it as a fresh marriage for eternity: As such, I trust
for ever to hold it. All that day, whenever I thought of the
expression, “to behold my glory, it seemed to wipe away
every tear, and was as the ring whereby we were joined anew.
“Awaking some time after, he said, ‘Polly, I have been
thinking it was Israel's fault that they asked for signs. We
will not do so; but, abandoning our whole selves to the will
of God, will lie patiently before him; assured that he will do
all things well.’
“‘My dear love,’ said I, “if ever I have done or said
anything to grieve thee, how will the remembrance wound
my heart, if thou shouldest be taken from me!’ He entreated
me, with inexpressible tenderness, not to allow the thought ;
declaring his thankfulness for our union, in a variety of words
written on my heart, as with the adamantine pen of friend
ship deeply dipped in blood.
“On Wednesday, after groaning all day long, under the
weight of the power of God, he told me, he had received such
a manifestation of the full meaning of those words, “God is
love,’ as he could never be able to express. “It fills my
heart, said he, “every moment. O Polly, my dear Polly,
God is love / Shout ! shout aloud I want a gust of praise
to go to the ends of the earth ! But it seems as if I could
not speak much longer. Let us fix on a sign between our
selves. Now, said he, (tapping me twice with his finger) “I
mean, God is love. And we will draw each other into God.
Observe | By this we will draw each other into God.”
“Sally coming in, he cried out, ‘O Sally, God is love!
Shout, both of you ! I want to hear you shout his praise!”
All this time the medical friend, who attended him diligently,
hoped he was in no danger; as he had no headach, but
much sleep without the least delirium, and an almost regular
pulse. So was the disease, though commissioned to take his
life, restrained by the power of God.
“On Thursday his speech began to fail. While he was
able, he spoke to all that came in his way. Hearing that a
stranger was in the house, he ordered her to be called up.
But the uttering only two sentences made him ready to faint
away. And while he had any power of speech, he would
not be silent to his friendly Doctor: ‘O Sir, said he, ‘you
take much thought for my body; permit me to take thought
for your soul.” When I could scarce understand anything
he said, I spoke these words, “God is love.’ Instantly, as if
all his powers were awakened, he broke out in a rapture,
‘God is love I love I love! O for that gust of praise ! I
want to sound’--Here his voice again failed. All this time
he was in much pain, and suffered many ways; but still
with such unutterable patience as none but those that were
present can conceive. If I did but name his sufferings, he
would smile and make the sign.
“On Friday, observing his body covered with spots, I felt
a sword pierce through my soul. As I was kneeling by his
side, with my hand in his, intreating the Lord to be with us
in this tremendous hour, he strove to say many things, but
could not articulate the words. All he could do was to press
my hand, and frequently repeat the sign. At last he
breathed out, “Head of the Church, be head to my wife I’
“When I was forced to leave him for a few moments, Sally
said to him, ‘My dear master, do you know me?” He
replied, “God will put his right hand under you.” She
added, ‘O my dear master, should you be taken away, what
a disconsolate creature will my poe dear mistress be l’ He
replied, “God will be her all in all!’
“He always took a peculiar pleasure in repeating or
hearing those words,--
“Jesu's love through earth and skies,
Mercy, free, boundless mercy, cries.”
Whenever I repeated them to him, he would answer, ‘Bound
less, boundless, boundless!” He now added, though not
without much difficulty,
“Mercy's full power I soon shall prove,
Loved with an everlasting love.”
“On Saturday, in the afternoon, his fever seemed quite
off, and a few friends standing near his bed, he reached his
hand to each; and looking on a Minister, said, ‘Are you
ready to assist to-morrow?” His recollection surprised us,
as the day of the week had not been named in the room.
Many were of opinion he would recover; and one of them
said to him, “Do you think the Lord will raise you up?” He
strove to answer, and could just pronounce, “Raise me up in
the resurr’--meaning in the resurrection. To another, who
asked the same question, he said, ‘I leave it all to God.”
“In the evening the fever came again, and with greater
violence than ever. The mucus then falling on his throat,
almost strangled him. It was supposed the same painful symp
tom would grow more and more violent to the last. As I felt
this exquisitely, I cried to the Lord to remove it; and, glory be
to his name, he did. From that time it returned no more.
“As night drew on, I perceived him dying very fast. His
fingers could hardly make the sign, which he scarce ever
forgot; and his speech seemed quite gone. I said, ‘My dear
creature, I ask not for myself; I know thy soul; but for the
sake of others, if Jesus is very present with thee, lift up thy
right hand.’ Immediately he did. “If the prospect of glory
sweetly opens before thee, repeat the sign. He instantly
raised it again, and in half a minute, a second time. He
then threw it up, as if he would reach the top of the bed;
after this, his hands moved no more. But on my saying,
“Art thou in pain?’ he answered, ‘No. From this time he
lay in a kind of sleep, though with his eyes open and fixed.
For the most part he sat upright, against pillows, with his
head a little inclining to one side; and so remarkably composed,
yea, triumphant, was his countenance, that the least trace of
death was scarce discernible in it. Twenty-four hours he was
in this situation, breathing like a person in common sleep.
About thirty-five minutes past ten on Sunday night, August
14, his precious soul entered into the joy of his Lord, without
one struggle or groan, in the fifty-sixth year of his age.
“And here I break off my mournful story; but on my
bleeding heart the fair picture of his heavenly excellencies
will be for ever drawn. When I call to mind his ardent zeal,
his laborious endeavours to seek and save the lost, his
diligence in the employment of his time, his Christ-like
condescension toward me, and his uninterrupted converse
with heaven; I may well be allowed to add, My loss is beyond
the power of words to paint. I have often gone through
deep waters; but all my afflictions were nothing to this.
Well; I want no pleasant prospect but upwards, nor anything
whereon to fix my hope but immortality.
“From the time I have had the happiness and honour of
being with him, every day more and more convinced me he was
the Christian. I saw, I loved, in him the image of my Saviour;
and thought myself the happiest of women in the possession
of the most sympathizing and heavenly friend. My sorrow
bears a due proportion; but it is alleviated by that thought,
“United in God, we cannot be divided. No; we are of one
household still; we are joined in Him as our centre, ‘of whom
the whole family in heaven and earth is named. It is said
of New Testament believers, “They are come to the spirits of
just men made perfect;’ to the glorious privilege of com
munion with the Church triumphant. But this is far more
apparent to the eyes of celestial spirits, than to ours, which
are yet veiled with flesh and blood. Yet as there is joy in
heaven over one sinner that repenteth, and as the prayers of
saints still on earth are represented by incense in the hands
of the Elders, I can only consider departed spirits, and minis
tering angels, as one innumerable company, continually
surrounding us. And are they not as nearly united to their
fellow-soldiers now, as when they were in the body? What
should hinder? Gratitude and affection are natives of heaven,
and live for ever there. Forgetfulness is a property of mor
tality, and drops off with the body. Therefore they that
loved us in the Lord will surely love us for ever. Can anything
material interrupt the light or presence of a spirit? Nay,
Walls within walls no more the passage bar
Than unopposing space of liquid air.
“On the 17th, his remains were deposited in Madeley
churchyard, amidst the tears and lamentations of thousands.
The service was performed by the Rev. Mr. Hatton, Rector
of Waters-Upton, whom God enabled to speak in a pathetic
manner to the weeping flock. In the conclusion, at my
request, he read the following paper:--
“As it was the desire of my beloved husband to be buried in
this plain manner, so out of tenderness he begged that I might
not be present. And in everything I would obey him.
“Permit me then, by the mouth of a friend, to bear an
open testimony to the glory of God, that I, who have known
him in the most perfect manner, am constrained to declare,
that I never knew any one walk so closely in the ways of
God as he did. The Lord gave him a conscience tender as
the apple of an eye. And he literally preferred the interest
of every one to his own.
“He was rigidly just, and perfectly loose from attachment
to the world. He shared his all with the poor, who lay so
close to his heart, that, at the approach of death, when he
could not speak without difficulty, he cried out, ‘O my poor !
What will become of my poor !” He was blessed with so
great a degree of humility, as is scarce to be found. I am
witness how often he has rejoiced in being treated with
contempt. Indeed it seemed the very food of his soul, to be
little and unknown.
“His zeal for souls, I need not tell you. Let the labours
of twenty-five years, and a martyr's death in the conclusion,
imprint it on your hearts. His diligent visiting of the sick
occasioned the fever which, by God’s commission, tore him
from you and me. And his vehement desire to take his last
leave of you with dying lips and hands, gave (it is supposed)
the finishing stroke, by preparing his blood for putrefaction.
Thus has he lived and died your servant. And will any of
you refuse to meet him at God’s right hand in that day?
“He walked with death always in sight. About two
months ago, he came to me and said, ‘My dear love, I know
not how it is, but I have a strange impression, death is near
us, as if it were to be some sudden stroke upon one of us.
And it draws out all my soul in prayer, that we may be
ready. He then broke out, ‘Lord, prepare the soul thou
wilt call! And O stand by the poor disconsolate one that
shall be left behind ' '
“A few days before his departure, he was filled with love in
an uncommon manner. The same he testified as long as he
had a voice, and continued to the end, by a most lamb-like
patience, in which he smiled over death, and set his last seal
to the glorious truths he had so long preached among you.
“Three years, nine months, and two days, I have possessed
my heavenly-minded husband. But now the sun of my
earthly joys is set for ever, and my soul filled with an anguish
which only finds its consolation in a total resignation to the
will of God. When I was asking the Lord, if he pleased, to
spare him to me a little longer, the following promise was
impressed on my mind: ‘Where I am, there shall my servants
be, that they may behold my glory.” Lord, hasten the time !”
18. There is little need of adding any farther character of
this man of God to the foregoing account, given by one who
wrote out of the fulness of her heart. I would only observe,
that for many years I despaired of finding any inhabitant of
Great Britain, that could stand in any degree of comparison
with Gregory Lopez, or Monsieur de Renty. But let any
impartial person judge if Mr. Fletcher was at all inferior to
them. Did he not experience as deep communion with God,
and as high a measure of inward holiness, as was experienced
by either one or the other of those burning and shining
lights? And it is certain, his outward light shone before men
with full as bright a lustre as theirs. But if any would draw
a parallel between them, there are two circumstances which
should be well observed. One is, we are not assured that the
writers of their lives did not extenuate, if not suppress, their
faults. And some faults we are assured there were; namely,
some touches of superstition, and some of idolatry, as the
worship of images, angels, and saints; the Virgin Mary in
particular. But I have not suppressed, or even extenuated,
anything in Mr. Fletcher's life. Indeed, I know nothing that
needed to be extenuated, much less to be suppressed. A
second circumstance is, that the writers of their lives could not
have so full a knowledge of them as I, and much more Mrs.
Fletcher, had; being eye and ear witnesses of his whole
conduct. Consequently, we knew that his life was not sullied
with any taint of idolatry or superstition. I was intimately
acquainted with him for thirty years. I conversed with him
morning, moon, and night, without the least reserve, during a
journey of many hundred miles; and in all that time I never
heard him speak an improper word, or saw him do an improper
action. To conclude: Within fourscore years, I have known
many excellent men, holy in heart and life: But one equal
to him, I have not known; one so uniformly and deeply
devoted to God. So unblamable a man, in every respect, I
have not found either in Europe or America. Nor do I
expect to find another such on this side eternity.
Yet it is possible we may be such as he was. Let us, then,
endeavour to follow him as he followed Christ.
#tre Iits the 330'p
Vicar of Madeley;
Who was born at Nyon in Switzerland,
September 12, 1729,
And finished his course, August 14, 1705,
In this village,
Where his unexampled labours
Will never be forgotten.
He exercised his ministry for the space of twenty-five years
In this parish,
With uncommon zeal and ability.
But though many believed his report,
Yet he might with justice have adopted
The lamentation of the Prophet :
“All the day long have I stretched out my hands
Unto a disobedient and gainsaying people :
Yet surely my judgment is with the Lord,
And my work with my God.”
As Isle LIEVED AND TAUGHT
FRox1 THE YEAR 1725, To THE YEAR 1777.”
1. WHAT I purpose in the following papers is, to give a
plain and distinct account of the steps by which I was led,
during a course of many years, to embrace the doctrine of
Christian perfection. This I owe to the serious part of
mankind, those who desire to know all “the truth as it is in
Jesus.” And these only are concerned in questions of this
kind. To these I would nakedly declare the thing as it is,
endeavouring all along to show, from one period to another,
both what I thought, and why I thought so.
2. In the year 1725, being in the twenty-third year of my
age, I met with Bishop Taylor’s “Rule and Exercises of
Holy Living and Dying.”. In reading several parts of this
book, I was exceedingly affected; that part in particular
which relates to purity of intention. Instantly I resolved to
dedicate all my life to God, all my thoughts, and words, and
actions; being thoroughly convinced, there was no medium;
but that every part of my life (not some only) must either be
a sacrifice to God, or myself, that is, in effect, to the devil.
Can any serious person doubt of this, or find a medium
between serving God and serving the devil?
3. In the year 1726, I met with Kempis’s “Christian's
Pattern.” The nature and extent of inward religion, the
religion of the heart, now appeared to me in a stronger light
than ever it had done before. I saw, that giving even all my
life to God (supposing it possible to do this, and go no
* It is not to be understood, that Mr. Wesley's sentiments concerning
Christian Perfection were in any measure changed after the year 1777. This
tract underwent several revisions and enlargements during his life-time; and in
every successive edition the date of the most recent revision was specified. The
last revision appears to have been made in the year 1777; and since that period,
this date has been generally continued on the title-page of the several editions of
the pamphlet.-EDIT.
farther) would profit me nothing, unless I gave my heart,
yea, all my heart, to him.
I saw, that “simplicity of intention, and purity of affection,”
one design in all we speak or do, and one desire ruling all
our tempers, are indeed “the wings of the soul,” without
which she can never ascend to the mount of God.
4. A year or two after, Mr. Law’s “Christian Perfection”
and “Serious Call” were put into my hands. These convinced
me, more than ever, of the absolute impossibility of being half
a Christian; and I determined, through his grace, (the absolute
necessity of which I was deeply sensible of) to be all-devoted
to God, to give him all my soul, my body, and my substance.
Will any considerate man say, that this is carrying matters
too far? or that anything less is due to Him who has given
himself for us, than to give him ourselves, all we have, and
all we are?
5. In the year 1729, I began not only to read, but to
study, the Bible, as the one, the only standard of truth, and
the only model of pure religion. Hence I saw, in a clearer
and clearer light, the indispensable necessity of having “the
mind which was in Christ,” and of “walking as Christ also
walked;” even of having, not some part only, but all the
mind which was in him; and of walking as he walked, not
only in many or in most respects, but in all things. And
this was the light, wherein at this time I generally considered
religion, as an uniform following of Christ, an entire inward
and outward conformity to our Master. Nor was I afraid of
anything more, than of bending this rule to the experience
of myself, or of other men; of allowing myself in any the
least disconformity to our grand Exemplar.
6. On January 1, 1733, I preached before the University,
in St. Mary’s church, on “the Circumcision of the Heart;” an
account of which I gave in these words: “It is that habitual
disposition of soul which, in the sacred writings, is termed
holiness; and which directly implies, the being cleansed from sin,
‘from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit; and, by consequence,
the being endued with those virtues which were in Christ Jesus;
the being so ‘renewed in the image of our mind, as to be “per
fect as our Father in heaven is perfect.’” (Vol. V., p. 203.)
In the same sermon I observed, “‘Love is the fulfilling of
the law, the end of the commandment. It is not only ‘the first
andgreat command, but all the commandments in one. “What
soever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, if there be
any virtue, if there be any praise, they are all comprisedin this
one word, love. In this is perfection, and glory, and happi
mess: The royal law of heaven and earth is this, ‘Thou shalt
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength. The one
perfect good shall be your one ultimate end. One thing shall
ye desire for its own sake,--the fruition of Him who is all in
all. One happiness shall ye propose to your souls, even an
union with Him that made them, the having ‘fellowship with
the Father and the Son,” the being ‘joined to the Lord in one
spirit.” One design ye are to pursue to the end of time,--the
enjoyment of God in time and in eternity. Desire other things,
so far as they tend to this; love the creature, as it leads to the
Creator. But in every step you take, be this the glorious point
that terminates your view. Let every affection, and thought,
and word, and action, be subordinate to this. Whatever ye
desire or fear, whatever ye seek or shun, whatever ye think,
speak, or do, be it in order to your happiness in God, the sole
end, as well as source, of your being.” (Ibid., pp. 207, 208.)
I concluded in these words: “Here is the sum of the perfect
law, the circumcision of the heart. Let the spirit return to
God that gave it, with the whole train of its affections.--Other
sacrifices from us he would not, but the living sacrifice of
the heart hath he chosen. Let it be continually offered up
to God through Christ, in flames of holy love. And let no
creature be suffered to share with him; for he is a jealous
God. His throne will he not divide with another; he will
reign without a rival. Be no design, no desire admitted
there, but what has Him for its ultimate object. This is the
way wherein those children of God once walked, who being
dead still speak to us: “Desire not to live but to praise his
name; let all your thoughts, words, and works tend to his
glory.’ ‘Let your soul be filled with so entire a love to Him,
that you may love nothing but for his sake.’ ‘Have a pure
intention of heart, a steadfast regard to his glory in all your
actions. For then, and not till then, is that “mind in us, which
was also in Christ Jesus, when in every motion of our heart, in
every word of our tongue, in every work of our hands, we ‘pursue
nothing but in relation to him, and in subordination to his plea
sure;’ when we too neither think, nor speak, nor act, to fulfil
“our own will, but the will of Him that sent us;’ when, “whe
CilltiSTIAN PERFECTION. 369
ther we eat or drink, or whatever, we do, we do it all ‘to the
glory of God.’” (Ibid., p. 211.)
It may be observed, this sermon was composed the first of
all my writings which have been published. This was the
view of religion I then had, which even then I scrupled not
to term perfection. This is the view I have of it now, without
any material addition or diminution. And what is there
here, which any man of understanding, who believes the
Bible, can object to? What can he deny, without flatly
contradicting the Scripture? what retrench, without taking
from the word of God?
7. In the same sentiment did my brother and I remain
(with all those young gentlemen in derision termed Methodists)
till we embarked for America, in the latter end of 1735. It
was the next year, while I was at Savannah, that I wrote the
following lines:
Is there a thing beneath the sun,
That strives with thee my heart to share ?
Ah! tear it thence, and reign alone,
The Lord of every motion there !
In the beginning of the year 1738, as I was returning from
thence, the cry of my heart was,
O grant that nothing in my soul
May dwell, but thy pure love alone !
O may thy love possess me whole,
My joy, my treasure, and my crown |
Strange fires far from my heart remove;
My every act, word, thought, be love |
I never heard that any one objected to this. And indeed
who can object? Is not this the language, not only of every
believer, but of every one that is truly awakened? But what
have I wrote, to this day, which is either stronger or plainer?
8. In August following, I had a long conversation with
Arvid Gradin, in Germany. After he had given me an
account of his experience, I desired him to give me, in
writing, a definition of “the full assurance of faith,” which
he did in the following words:--
Requies in sanguine Christi; firma fiducia in Deum, et
persuasio de gratid diviná; tranquillitas mentis summa, atque
serenitas et par; cum absentid omnis desiderii carnalis, et
cessatione peccatorum etiam internorum.
“Repose in the blood of Christ; a firm confidence in God,
and persuasion of his favour; the highest tranquillity, serenity,
and peace of mind, with a deliverance from every fleshly
desire, and a cessation of all, even inward sins.”
This was the first account I ever heard from any living
man, of what I had before learned myself from the oracles of
God, and had been praying for, (with the little company of
my friends,) and expecting, for several years.
9. In 1739, my brother and I published a volume of
“Hymns and Sacred Poems.” In many of these we declared
our sentiments strongly and explicitly. So, page 24,
Turn the full stream of nature's tide;
Let all our actions tend
To thee, their source; thy love the guide,
Thy glory be the end.
Earth then a scale to heaven shall be;
Sense shall point out the road;
The creatures all shall lead to thee,
And all we taste be God.
Again,
Lord, arm me with thy Spirit's might,
Since I am call'd by thy great name :
In thee my wand'ring thoughts unite,
Of all my works be thou the aim :
Thy love attend me all my days,
And my sole business be thy praise. (Page 122.)
Again,
Eager for thee I ask and pant,
So strong the principle divine,
Carries me out with sweet constraint,
Till all my hallow'd soul be thine;
Plunged in the Godhead's deepest sea,
And lost in thine immensity 1 (Page 125.)
Once more,--
Heavenly Adam, life divine,
Change my nature into thine;
Move and spread throughout my soul,
Actuate and fill the whole. (Page 153.)
It would be easy to cite many more passages to the same
effect. But these are sufficient to show, beyond contradiction,
what our sentiments then were.
10. The first tract I ever wrote expressly on this subject
was published in the latter end of this year. That none
might be prejudiced before they read it, I gave it the
indifferent title of “The Character of a Methodist.” In this
ChRISTIAN PERFECTION. 37]
I described a perfect Christian, placing in the front, “Not as
though I had already attained.” Part of it I subjoin without
any alteration:--
“A Methodist is one who loves the Lord his God with all
his heart, with all his soul, with all his mind, and with all his
strength. God is the joy of his heart, and the desire of his
soul, which is continually crying, ‘Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and there is none upon earth whom I desire
besides thee.’ My God and my all! “Thou art the strength
of my heart, and my portion for ever. He is therefore
happy in God; yea, always happy, as having in him a well
of water springing up unto everlasting life, and overflowing
his soul with peace and joy. Perfect love having now cast
out fear, he rejoices evermore. Yea, his joy is full, and all
his bones cry out, ‘Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to his abundant mercy,
hath begotten me again unto a living hope of an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, reserved in heaven for me.’
“And he, who hath this hope, thus full of immortality, in
everything giveth thanks, as knowing this (whatsoever it is)
is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning him. From
him therefore he cheerfully receives all, saying, ‘Good is
the will of the Lord;’ and whether he giveth or taketh
away, equally blessing the name of the Lord. Whether in
ease or pain, whether in sickness or health, whether in life or
death, he giveth thanks from the ground of the heart to Him
who orders it for good; into whose hands he hath wholly
committed his body and soul, “as into the hands of a faithful
Creator. He is therefore anxiously ‘careful for nothing, as
having ‘cast all his care on Him that careth for him;’ and
‘in all things’ resting on him, after “making’ his ‘request
known to him with thanksgiving.’
“For indeed he ‘prays without ceasing;' at all times the
language of his heart is this, “Unto thee is my mouth, though
without a voice; and my silence speaketh unto thee. His
heart is lifted up to God at all times, and in all places. In
this he is never hindered, much less interrupted, by any
person or thing. In retirement or company, in leisure, busi
ness, or conversation, his heart is ever with the Lord. Whether
he lie down, or rise up, ‘God is in all his thoughts: He walks
with God continually; having the loving eye of his soul fixed
on him, and everywhere ‘seeing Him that is invisible.’
“And loving God, he ‘loves his neighbour as himself; ”
he loves every man as his own soul. He loves his enemies,
yea, and the enemies of God. And if it be not in his power
to ‘do good to them that hate’ him, yet he ceases not to
‘pray for them, though they spurn his love, and still ‘ despite
fully use him, and persecute him.’
“For he is ‘pure in heart. Love has purified his heart
from envy, malice, wrath, and every unkind temper. It has
cleansed him from pride, whereof “only cometh contention;’
and he hath now “put on bowels of mercies, kindness, humble
ness of mind, meekness, long-suffering.’ And indeed all
possible ground for contention, on his part, is cut off. For
none can take from him what he desires, seeing he ‘loves not
the world, nor any of the things of the world;’ but “all his
desire is unto God, and to the remembrance of his name.’
“Agreeable to this his one desire, is the one design of his
life; namely, “to do, not his own will, but the will of Him
that sent him.’ His one intention at all times and in all
places is, not to please himself, but Him whom his soul
loveth. He hath a single eye; and because his ‘eye is single,
his whole body is full of light. The whole is light, as when
the bright shining of a candle doth enlighten the house.’
God reigns alone; all that is in the soul is ‘holiness to the
Lord.” There is not a motion in his heart but is according
to his will. Every thought that arises points to him, and is
in “obedience to the law of Christ.’
“And the tree is known by its fruits. For, as he loves God,
so he ‘keeps his commandments; not only some, or most of
them, but all, from the least to the greatest. He is not
content to “keep the whole law and offend in one point, but
has in all points ‘a conscience void of offence towards God, and
towards man.’ Whatever God has forbidden, he avoids; what
ever God has enjoined, he does. ‘He runs the way of God's
cornmandments, now He hath set his heart at liberty. It is
his glory and joy so to do; it is his daily crown of rejoicing,
to ‘do the will of God on earth, as it is done in heaven.’
“All the commandments of God he accordingly keeps, and
that with all his might; for his obedience is in propertion to his
love, the source from whence it flows. And therefore, loving
God with all his heart, he serves him with all his strength; he
continually presents his soul and ‘body a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God;’ entirely and without reserve devoting
Chi It ISTIAN PERFECTION. 373
himself, all he has, all he is, to his glory. All the talents he
has, he constantly employs according to his Master’s will;
every power and faculty of his soul, every member of his body.
“By consequence, ‘whatsoever he doeth, it is all to the
glory of God.” In all his employments of every kind, he not
only aims at this, which is implied in having a single eye, but
actually attains it; his business and his refreshments, as well
as his prayers, all serve to this great end. Whether he ‘sit
in the house, or walk by the way, whether he lie down, or
rise up, he is promoting, in all he speaks or does, the one
business of his life. Whether he put on his apparel, or labour,
or eat and drink, or divert himself from too wasting labour, it
all tends to advance the glory of God, by peace and good-will
among men. His one invariable rule is this: “Whatsoever
ye do, in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God, even the Father, through him.’
“Nor do the customs of the world at all hinder his
‘running the race which is set before him.’ He cannot
therefore “lay up treasures upon earth,’ no more than he can
take fire into his bosom. He cannot speak evil of his neigh
bour, any more than he can lie either for God or man. He
cannot utter an unkind word of any one; for love keeps the
door of his lips. He cannot ‘speak idle words; no corrupt
conversation” ever ‘comes out of his mouth;’ as is all that is
not “good to the use of edifying, not fit to ‘minister grace
to the hearers. But ‘whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are’ justly ‘of good
report, he thinks, speaks, and acts, ‘adorning the doctrine of
God our Saviour in all things.’”
These are the very words wherein I largely declared, for
the first time, my sentiments of Christian perfection. And
is it not easy to see, (1.) That this is the very point at which
I aimed all along from the year 1725; and more deter
minately from the year 1730, when I began to be homo unius
libri, “a man of one book,” regarding none, comparatively,
but the Bible? Is it not easy to see, (2.) That this is the
very same doctrine which I believe and teach at this day;
not adding one point, either to that inward or outward
holiness which I maintained eight-and-thirty years ago? And
it is the same which, by the grace of God, I have continued
to teach from that time till now; as will appear to every
impartial person from the extracts subjoined below.
11. I do not know that any writer has made any objection
against that tract to this day; and for some time, I did not
find much opposition upon the head, at least, not from serious
persons. But after a time, a cry arose, and, what a little
surprised me, among religious men, who affirmed, not that I
stated perfection wrong, but that “there is no perfection on
earth;” may, and fell vehemently on my brother and me for
affirming the contrary. We scarce expected so rough an
attack from these ; especially as we were clear on justifica
tion by faith, and careful to ascribe the whole of salvation
to the mere grace of God. But what most surprised us, was,
that we were said to “dishonour Christ,” by asserting that he
“saveth to the uttermost; ” by maintaining he will reign in
our hearts alone, and subdue all things to himself.
12. I think it was in the latter end of the year 1740, that
I had a conversation with Dr. Gibson, then Bishop of London,
at Whitehall. He asked me what I meant by perfection. I
told him without any disguise or reserve. When I ceased
speaking, he said, “Mr. Wesley, if this be all you mean,
publish it to all the world. If any one then can confute what
you say, he may have free leave.” I answered, “My Lord, I
will; ” and accordingly wrote and published the sermon on
Christian perfection.
In this I endeavoured to show, (1.) In what sense Christians
are not, (2.) In what sense they are, perfect.
“(1.) In what sense they are not. They are not perfect
in knowledge. They are not free from ignorance, no, nor
from mistake. We are no more to expect any living man to
be infallible, than to be omniscient. They are not free from.
infirmities, such as weakness or slowness of understanding,
irregular quickness or heaviness of imagination. Such in
another kind are impropriety of language, ungracefulness of
pronunciation; to which one might add a thousand nameless
defects, either in conversation or behaviour. From such
infirmities as these none are perfectly freed till their spirits
return to God; neither can we expect till then to be wholly
freed from temptation; for ‘the servant is not above his
master.” But neither in this sense is there any absolute
perfection on earth. There is no perfection of degrees, none
which does not admit of a continual increase.
“(2.) In what sense then are they perfect? Observe, we
are not now speaking of babes in Christ, but adult Christians.
But even babes in Christ are so far perfect as not to commit
sin. This St. John affirms expressly; and it cannot be
disproved by the examples of the Old Testament. For what,
if the holiest of the ancient Jews did sometimes commit sin?
We cannot infer from hence, that “all Christians do and must
commit sin as long as they live.’
“But does not the Scripture say, ‘A just man sinneth
seven times a day?’ It does not. Indeed it says, “A just
man falleth seven times. But this is quite another thing;
for, First, the words, a day, are not in the text. Secondly,
here is no mention of falling into sin at all. What is here
mentioned, is, falling into temporal affliction.
“But elsewhere Solomon says, “There is no man that
sinneth not. Doubtless thus it was in the days of Solomon;
yea, and from Solomon to Christ there was then no man that
sinned not. But whatever was the case of those under the
law, we may safely affirm, with St. John, that, since the
gospel was given, “he that is born of God sinneth not.’
“The privileges of Christians are in nowise to be measured
by what the Old Testament records concerning those who
were under the Jewish dispensation; seeing the fulness of
time is now come, the Holy Ghost is now given, the great
salvation of God is now brought to men by the revelation of
Jesus Christ. The kingdom of heaven is now set up on
earth, concerning which the Spirit of God declared of old
time, (so far is David from being the pattern or standard of
Christian perfection,) “He that is feeble among them, at that
day, shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as
the angel of the Lord before them.” (Zech. xii. 8.)
“But the Apostles themselves committed sin; Peter by
dissembling, Paul by his sharp contention with Barnabas.
Suppose they did, will you argue thus: ‘If two of the Apostles
once committed sin, then all other Christians, in all ages, do
and must commit sin as long as they live?’ Nay, God
forbid we should thus speak. No necessity of sin was laid
upon them; the grace of God was surely sufficient for them.
And it is sufficient for us at this day.
“But St. James says, “In many things we offend all.’
True; but who are the persons here spoken of ? Why, those
‘many masters’ or teachers whom God had not sent; not the
Apostle himself, nor any real Christian. That in the word we,
used by a figure of speech, common in all other as well as the
inspired writings, the Apostle could not possibly include
himself, or any other true believer, appears, First, from the
ninth verse, “Therewith bless we God, and therewith curse we
men. Surely not we Apostles I not we believers | Secondly,
from the words preceding the text: “My brethren, be not
many masters, or teachers, ‘knowing that we shall receive
the greater condemnation. For in many things we offend
all.” We / Who? Not the Apostles nor true believers, but
they who were to “receive the greater condemnation, because
of those many offences. Nay, Thirdly, the verse itself proves,
that “we offend all, cannot be spoken either of all men or all
Christians. For in it immediately follows the mention of a
man who ‘offends not,’ as the we first mentioned did; from
whom therefore he is professedly contradistinguished, and
pronounced a ‘perfect man.’
“But St. John himself says, “If we say that we have no
sin, we deceive ourselves; and, “If we say we have not
sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.”
“I answer, (1.) The tenth verse fixes the sense of the eighth :
“If we say we have no sin, in the former, being explained by,
“If we say we have not sinned, in the latter, verse. (2.) The
point under consideration is not, whether we have or have
not sinned heretofore; and neither of these verses asserts that
we do sin, or commit sin now. (3.) The ninth verse explains
both the eighth and tenth : “If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. As if he had said, ‘I have before
affirmed, The blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin.” And
no man can say, ‘I need it not; I have no sin to be cleansed
from.” “If we say, we have no sin, that “we have not
sinned, we deceive ourselves, and make God a liar: But “if
we confess our sins, he is faithful and just, not only ‘to
forgive us our sins, but also ‘to cleanse us from all unrighte
ousness,’ that we may “go and sin no more.’ In conformity,
therefore, both to the doctrine of St. John, and the whole
tenor of the New Testament, we fix this conclusion: A
Christian is so far perfect, as not to commit sin.
“This is the glorious privilege of every Christian, yea,
though he be but a babe in Christ. But it is only of grown
Christians it can be affirmed, they are in such a sense perfect,
as, Secondly, to be freed from evil thoughts and evil tempers.
First, from evil or sinful thoughts. Indeed, whence should
CritisTIAN PERFECTION. 377
they spring ? “Out of the heart of man, if at all, ‘proceed
evil thoughts. If, therefore, the heart be no longer evil,
then evil thoughts no longer proceed out of it: For ‘a good
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit.’
“And as they are freed from evil thoughts, so likewise from
evil tempers. Every one of these can say, with St. Paul, ‘I
am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
Christ liveth in me;’--words that manifestly describe a
deliverance from inward as well as from outward sin. This
is expressed both negatively, ‘I live not, my evil nature, the
body of sin, is destroyed; and positively, ‘Christ liveth in
me, and therefore all that is holy, and just, and good.
Indeed, both these, ‘Christ liveth in me,’ and, ‘I live not,’
are inseparably connected. For what communion hath light
with darkness, or Christ with Belial?
“He, therefore, who liveth in these Christians hath “puri
fied their hearts by faith; insomuch that every one that has
Christ in him, ‘the hope of glory, purifieth himself even as
he is pure.’ He is purified from pride; for Christ was lowly
in heart: He is pure from desire and self-will; for Christ
desired only to do the will of his Father: And he is pure
from anger, in the common sense of the word; for Christ
was meek and gentle. I say, in the common sense of the
word; for he is angry at sin, while he is grieved for the
sinner. He feels a displacency at every offence against God,
but only tender compassion to the offender.
“Thus doth Jesus save his people from their sins, not only
from outward sins, but from the sins of their hearts. “True,”
say some, “but not till death, not in this world. Nay, St.
John says, “Herein is our love made perfect, that we may
have boldness in the day of judgment; because, as he is, so
are we in this world. The Apostle here, beyond all contra
diction, speaks of himself and other living Christians, of
whom he flatly affirms, that, not only at or after death, but
‘in this world, they are “as their Master.’
“Exactly agreeable to this are his words in the first chapter:
‘God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we walk
in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us
from all sin.” And again: “If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. Now, it is evident, the Apostle here
speaks of a deliverance wrought in this world: For he saith
not, The blood of Christ will cleanse, (at the hour of death, or
in the day of judgment,) but it “cleanseth, at the time present,
us living Christians ‘from all sin.” And it is equally evident,
that if any sin remain, we are not cleansed from “all” sin. If
any unrighteousness remain in the soul, it is not cleansed from
‘all’ unrighteousness. Neither let any say that this relates to
justification only, or the cleansing us from the guilt of sin:
First, because this is confounding together what the Apostle
clearly distinguishes, who mentions, first, ‘to forgive us our
sins, and then ‘to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.’
Secondly, because this is asserting justification by works, in the
strongest sense possible; it is making all inward, as well as
all outward, holiness, necessarily previous to justification. For
if the cleansing here spoken of is no other than the cleansing
us from the guilt of sin, then we are not cleansed from guilt,
that is, not justified, unless on condition of walking “in the
light, as he is in the light.’ It remains, then, that Christians
are saved in this world from all sin, from all unrighteousness;
that they are now in such a sense perfect, as not to commit
sin, and to be freed from evil thoughts and evil tempers.”
It could not be, but that a discourse of this kind, which
directly contradicted the favourite opinion of many, who were
esteemed by others, and possibly esteemed themselves, some
of the best of Christians, (whereas, if these things were so,
they were not Christians at all,) should give no small offence.
Many answers or animadversions, therefore, were expected;
but I was agreeably disappointed. I do not know that any
appeared; so I went quietly on my way.
13. Not long after, I think in the spring, 1741, we
published a second volume of Hymns. As the doctrine was
still much misunderstood, and consequently misrepresented,
I judged it needful to explain yet farther upon the head;
which was done in the preface to it as follows:-
“This great gift of God, the salvation of our souls, is no
other than the image of God fresh stamped on our hearts. It is a
‘renewal of believers in the spirit of their minds, after the like
mess of Him that created them.” God hath now laid “the axe
unto the root of the tree, purifying their hearts by faith, and
‘cleansing all the thoughts of their hearts by the inspiration of
his Holy Spirit. Having this hope, that they shall see God as he
is, they “purify themselves even as he is pure, and are ‘holy,
as he that hath called them is holy, in all manner of conversa
tion.” Not that they have already attained all that they shall
attain, either are already in this sense perfect. But they
daily ‘go on from strength to strength; beholding” now, “as
in a glass, the glory of the Lord, they are changed into the
same image, from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord.”
“And ‘where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; such
liberty ‘from the law of sin and death, as the children of this
world will not believe, though a man declare it unto them.
‘The Son hath made them free’ who are thus ‘born of God,”
from that great root of sin and bitterness, pride. They feel
that all their ‘sufficiency is of God,” that it is He alone who
“is in all their thoughts, and ‘worketh in them both to will
and to do of his good pleasure. They feel that ‘it is not they’
that ‘speak, but the Spirit of their ‘Father who speaketh’ in
them, and that whatsoever is done by their hands, “the Father
who is in them, he doeth the works.’ So that God is to them
all in all, and they are nothing in his sight. They are freed
from self-will, as desiring nothing but the holy and perfect
will of God; not supplies in want, not ease in pain,” nor life,
or death, or any creature; but continually crying in their
inmost soul, “Father, thy will be done.” They are freed from
evil thoughts, so that they cannot enter into them, no, not for
a moment. Aforetime, when an evil thought came in, they
looked up, and it vanished away. But now it does not come in,
there being no room for this, in a soul which is full of God.
They are free from wanderings in prayer. Whensoever they
pour out their hearts in a more immediate manner before
God, they have no thought of anything past,f or absent, or to
come, but of God alone. In times past, they had wandering
thoughts darted in, which yet fled away like smoke; but now
that smoke does not rise at all. They have no fear or doubt,
either as to their state in general, or as to any particular
action. The ‘unction from the Holy One’ teacheth them
every hour what they shall do, and what they shall speak;$
nor therefore have they any need to reason concerning it.'
They are in one sense freed from temptations; for though
* This is too strong. Our Lord himself desired ease in pain. He asked for
it, only with resignation: “Not as I will,” I desire, “but as thou wilt.”
+ This is far too strong. See the sermon “On Wandering Thoughts.”
# Frequently this is the case; but only for a time.
§ For a time it may be so ; but not always.
| Sometimes they have no need; at cther times they have.
numberless temptations fly about them, yet they trouble them
not.* At all times their souls are even and calm, their
hearts are steadfast and unmovable. Their peace, flowing as
a river, ‘passeth all understanding, and they ‘rejoice with
joy unspeakable and full of glory. For they “are sealed by
the Spirit unto the day of redemption, having the witness
in themselves, that “there is laid up for them a ‘crown of
righteousness, which the Lord will give’ them “in that day.’t
“Not that every one is a child of the devil, till he is thus
renewed in love: On the contrary, whoever has “a sure con
fidence in God, that through the merits of Christ, his sins are
forgiven, he is a child of God, and, if he abide in him, an
heir of all the promises. Neither ought he in anywise to cast
away his confidence, or to deny the faith he has received,
because it is weak, or because it is ‘tried with fire, so that
his soul is ‘in heaviness through manifold temptations.”
“Neither dare we affirm, as some have done, that all this
salvation is given at once. There is indeed an instantaneous,
as well as a gradual, work of God in his children; and there
wants not, we know, a cloud of witnesses, who have received,
in one moment, either a clear sense of the forgiveness of their
sins, or the abiding witness of the Holy Spirit. But we do
not know a single instance, in any place, of a person’s
receiving, in one and the same moment, remission of sins,
the abiding witness of the Spirit, and a new, a clean heart.
“Indeed, how God may work, we cannot tell; but the
general manner wherein he does work is this: Those who
once trusted in themselves that they were righteous, that they
were rich, and increased in goods, and had need of nothing,
are, by the Spirit of God applying his word, convinced that
they are poor and naked. All the things that they have done
are brought to their remembrance and set in array before
them, so that they see the wrath of God hanging over their
heads, and feel that they deserve the damnation of hell. In
their trouble they cry unto the Lord, and he shows them
that he hath taken away their sins, and opens the kingdom of
heaven in their hearts, ‘righteousness, and peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost.’ Sorrow and pain are fled away, and “sin
has no more dominion over them. Knowing they are justified
freely through faith in his blood, they “have peace with God
* Sometimes they do not; at other times they do, and that grievously.
+ Not all who are saved from sin; many of them have not attained it yet.
through Jesus Christ;’ they ‘rejoice in hope of the glory of
God,” and ‘the love of God is shed abroad in their hearts.”
“In this peace they remain for days, or weeks, or months,
and commonly suppose they shall not know war any more; till
some of their old enemies, their bosom sins, or the sin which did
most easily beset them, (perhaps anger or desire,) assault them
again, and thrust sore at them, that they may fall. Then arises
fear, that they shall not endure to the end; and often doubt,
whether God has not forgotten them, or whether they did not
deceive themselves in thinking their sins were forgiven. Under
these clouds, especially if they reason with the devil, they go
mourning all the day long. But it is seldom long before their
Lord answers for himself, sending them the Holy Ghost to
comfort them, to bear witness continually with their spirits
that they are the children of God. Then they are indeed meek
and gentle and teachable, even as a little child. And now
first do they see the ground of their heart;” which God before
would not disclose unto them, lest the soul should fail before
him, and the spirit which he had made. Now they see all the
hidden abominations there, the depths of pride, self-will, and
hell; yet having the witness in themselves, ‘Thou art an heir
of God, a joint heir with Christ, even in the midst of this
fiery trial;’ which continually heightens both the strong
sense they then have of their inability to help themselves, and
the inexpressible hunger they feel after a full renewal in his
image, in ‘righteousness and true holiness.’ Then God is
mindful of the desire of them that fear him, and gives them a
single eye, and a pure heart; He stamps upon them his own
image and superscription; He createth them anew in Christ
Jesus; He cometh unto them with his Son and blessed
Spirit, and, fixing his abode in their souls, bringeth them
into the “rest which remaineth for the people of God.’”
Here I cannot but remark, (1.) That this is the strongest
account we ever gave of Christian perfection; indeed too
strong in more than one particular, as is observed in the
notes annexed. (2.) That there is nothing which we have
since advanced upon the subject, either in verse or prose, which
is not either directly or indirectly contained in this preface.
* Is it not astonishing, that while this book is extant, which was published
four-and-twenty years ago, any one should face me down, that this is a new
doctrine, and what I never taught before ?-[This note was first published in the
year 1765.-EDIT.]
So that whether our present doctrine be right or wrong, it is
however the same which we taught from the beginning.
14. I need not give additional proofs of this, by multiplying
quotations from the volume itself. It may suffice, to cite
part of one hymn only, the last in that volume:
Lord, I believe a rest remains,
To all thy people known;
A rest where pure enjoyment reigns,
And thou art loved alone;
A rest where all our soul's desire
Is fix'd on things above;
*”here doubt and pain and fear expire,
Cast out by perfect love.
from every evil motion freed,
(The Son hath made us free,)
On all the powers of hell we tread,
In glorious liberty.
safe in the way of life, above
Death, earth, and hell we rise;
Me find, when perfected in love,
Our long-sought paradise.
') that I now the rest might know,
Believe, and enter in :
Now, Saviour, now the power bestow,
And let me cease from sin |
Remove this hardness from my heart,
This unbelief remove :
To me the rest of faith impart,
The sabbath of thy love.
Come, O my Saviour, come away
Into my soul descend!
No longer from thy creature stay,
My author and my end.
The bliss thou hast for me prepared,
No longer be delay'd :
Come, my exceeding great reward,
For whom I first was made.
Come, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
And seal me thine abode :
Let all I am in thee be lost :
Let all be lost in God!
Can anything be more clear, than, (1.) That here also is as
full and high a salvation as we have ever spoken of? (2.) That
this is spoken of as receivable by mere faith, and as hindered
only by unbelief? (3.) That this faith, and consequently
the salvation which it brings, is spoken of as given in an
instant? (4.) That it is supposed that instant may be now?
that we need not stay another moment? that “now,” the
very “now, is the accepted time? now is the day of” this
full “ salvation?” And, Lastly, that, if any speak otherwise,
he is the person that brings new doctrine among us?
15. About a year after, namely, in the year 1742, we
published another volume of Hymns. The dispute being now
at the height, we spoke upon the head more largely than ever
before. Accordingly abundance of the hymns in this volume
treat expressly on this subject. And so does the preface,
which, as it is short, it may not be amiss to insert entire :
“(1.) Perhaps the general prejudice against Christian
perfection may chiefly arise from a misapprehension of the
nature of it. We willingly allow, and continually declare, there
is no such perfection in this life, as implies either a dispensa
tion from doing good, and attending all the ordinances of God, V
or a freedom from ignorance, mistake, temptation, and a thou
sand infirmities necessarily connected with flesh and blood.
“(2.) First. We not only allow, but earnestly contend,
that there is no perfection in this life, which implies any v.
dispensation from attending all the ordinances of God, or
from doing good unto all men while we have time, though
* especially unto the household of faith. We believe, that
not only the babes in Christ, who have newly found redemp
tion in his blood, but those also who are “grown up into
perfect men, are indispensably obliged, as often as they have
opportunity, “to eat bread and drink wine in remembrance of
Him, and to ‘search the Scriptures; by fasting, as well as
temperance, to “keep their bodies under, and bring them
into subjection;' and, above all, to pour out their souls in
prayer, both secretly, and in the great congregation.
“(3.) We Secondly believe, that there is no such perfec
*~\
tion in this life, as implies an entire deliverance, either from
| *ignorance, or mistake, in things not essential to salvation,
or from manifold temptations, or from numberless infirmities,
wherewith the corruptible body more or less presses down
the soul. We cannot find any ground in Scripture to
suppose, that any inhabitant of a house of clay is wholly
exempt either from bodily infirmities, or from ignorance of
many things; or to imagine any is incapable of mistake, or
falling into divers temptations.
“(4.) But whom then do you mean by ‘one that is perfect?’
We mean one in whom is ‘the mind which was in Christ,”
and who so “walketh as Christ also walked;’ a man ‘that
hath clean hands and a pure heart, or that is “cleansed from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit; one in whom is “no occasion
of stumbling, and who, accordingly, “does not commit sin.”
To declare this a little more particularly: We understand by
that scriptural expression, “a perfect man, one in whom God
hath fulfilled his faithful word, “From all your filthiness and
from all your idols I will cleanse you: I will also save you
from all your uncleannesses. We understand hereby, one
whom God hath “sanctified throughout in body, soul, and
spirit; one who “walketh in the light as He is in the light,
in whom is no darkness at all; the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son having cleansed him from all sin.”
“(5.) This man can now testify to all mankind, ‘I am
crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
Christ liveth in me.’ He is ‘holy as God who called him “is
holy, both in heart and ‘in all manner of conversation.” He
“loveth the Lord his God with all his heart, and serveth him
‘with all his strength.’ He ‘loveth his neighbour, every
man, “as himself; yea, “as Christ loveth us;” them, in
particular, that ‘ despitefully use him and persecute him,
because they know not the Son, neither the Father.” Indeed
his soul is all love, filled with “bowels of mercies, kindness,
meekness, gentleness, longsuffering.’ And his life agreeth
thereto, full of ‘the work of faith, the patience of hope, the
labour of love.” “And whatsoever” he “doeth either in word
or deed,” he “doeth it all in the name, in the love and power,
* of the Lord Jesus.’ ”In a word, he doeth ‘the will of God
on earth, as it is done in heaven.’
“(6.) This it is to be a perfect man, to be “sanctified through
out; even ‘to have a heart so all-flaming with the love of
God,' (to use Archbishop Usher's words,) “as continually to
offer up every thought, word, and work, as a spiritual
sacrifice, acceptable to God through Christ.’ In every thought
of our hearts, in every word of our tongues, in every work of
our hands, to ‘show forth his praise, who hath called us out
of darkness into his marvellous light.’ O that both we, and
all who seek the Lord Jesus in sincerity, may thus ‘be made
perfect in one !’”
This is the doctrine which we preached from the beginning,
and which we preach at this day. Indeed, by viewing it in every
ChRISTIAN PERFECTION. 385
point of light, and comparing it again and again with the
word of God on the one hand, and the experience of the
children of God on the other, we saw farther into the nature
and properties of Christian perfection. But still there is no
contrariety at all between our first and our last sentiments.
Our first conception of it was, It is to have “the mind which
was in Christ,” and to “walk as He walked;” to have all
the mind that was in Him, and always to walk as he walked:
In other words, to be inwardly and outwardly devoted to
God; all devoted in heart and life. And we have the same
conception of it now, without either addition or diminution.
16. The hymns concerning it in this volumes are too
numerous to transcribe. I shall only cite a part of three:
SAvroUR from sin, I wait to prove
That Jesus is thy healing name;
To lose, when perfected in love,
Whate'er I have, or can, or am ;
I stay me on thy faithful word,
“The servant shall be as his Lord.”
Answer that gracious end in me
For which thy precious life was given;
Redeem from all iniquity,
Restore, and make me meet for heaven.
Unless thou purge my every stain,
Thy suffering and my faith is vain.
Didst thou not die, that I might live,
No longer to myself but thee ?
Might body, soul, and spirit give
To Him who gave himself for me?
Come then, my Master and my God,
Take the dear purchase of thy blood.
Thy own peculiar servant claim,
For thy own truth and mercy's sake;
Hallow in me thy glorious name;
Me for thine own this moment take ;
And change and throughly purify;
Thine only may I live and die. (Page 80.)
CHose from the world, if now I stand,
Adorn'd with righteousness divine;
If, brought into the promised land,
I justly call the Saviour mine;
The sanctifying Spirit pour,
To quench my thirst and wash me clean,
Now, Saviour, let the gracious shower
Descend, and make me pure from sin.
Purge me from every sinful blot:
My idols all be cast aside :
Cleanse me from every evil thought,
From all the filth of self and pride.
The hatred of the carnal mind
Out of my flesh at onceremove:
Give me a tender heart, resign'd,
And pure, and full of faith and love.
O that I now, from sin released,
Thy word might to the utmost prove,
Enter into thy promised rest;
The Canaan of thy perfect love 1
Now let me gain perfection's height!
Now let me into nothing fall;
Be less than nothing in my sight,
And feel that Christ is all in all. (Page 258.)
LoRD, I believe, thy work of grace
Is perfect in the soul;
His heart is pure who sees thy face,
His spirit is made whole.
From every sickness, by thy word,
From every foul disease,
Saved, and to perfect health restored,
To perfect holiness:
He walks in glorious liberty,
To sin entirely dead:
The Truth, the Son hath made him free,
And he is free indeed.
Throughout his soul thy glories shine,
His soul is all renew’d,
And deck'd in righteousness divine,
And clothed and fill'd with God.
This is the rest, the life, the peace,
Which all thy people prove;
Love is the bond of perfectness,
And all their soul is love.
O joyful sound of gospel grace |
Christ shall in me appear;
I, even I, shall see his face,
I shall be holy here !
He visits now the house of clay,
He shakes his future home;
O would'st thou, Lord, on this glad day,
Into thy temple come !
Come, O my God, thyself reveal,
Fill all this mighty void;
Thou only canst my spirit fill:
Come, O my God, my God |
Fulfil, fulfil my large desires,
Large as infinity :
Give, give me all my soul requires,
All, all that is in thee! (Page 298.)
17. On Monday, June 25, 1744, our First Conference
began; six Clergymen and all our Preachers being present.
The next morning we seriously considered the doctrine of
sanctification, or perfection. The questions asked concerning
it, and the substance of the answers given, were as follows:-
“Question. What is it to be sanctified?
“ANswer. To be renewed in the image of God, ‘in
righteousness and true holiness.’
“Q. What is implied in being a perfect Christian?
“A. The loving God with all our heart, and mind, and
soul. (Deut. vi. 5.)
“Q. Does this imply, that all inward sin is taken away?
“A. Undoubtedly; or how can we be said to be ‘saved
from all our uncleannesses?” (Ezek. xxxvi. 29.)”
Our Second Conference began August 1, 1745. The next
morning we spoke of sanctification as follows:-
“Q. When does inward sanctification begin?
“A. In the moment a man is justified. (Yet sin remains
in him, yea, the seed of all sin, till he is sanctified through
out.) From that time a believer gradually dies to sin, and
grows in grace.
“Q. Is this ordinarily given till a little before death?
“A. It is not, to those who expect it no sooner.
“Q. But may we expect it sooner?
“A. Why not? For, although we grant, (1.) That the
generality of believers, whom we have hitherto known, were
not so sanctified till near death; (2.) That few of those to
whom St. Paul wrote his Epistles were so at that time; nor,
(3.) He himself at the time of writing his former Epistles;
yet all this does not prove, that we may not be so to-day.
“Q. In what manner should we preach sanctification?
“A. Scarce at all to those who are not pressing forward:
To those who are, always by way of promise; always drawing,
rather than driving.”
Our Third Conference began Tuesday, May 13, 1746.
In this we carefully read over the Minutes of the two
preceding Conferences, to observe whether anything con
tained therein might be retrenched or altered on more
mature consideration. But we did not see cause to alter in
any respect what we had agreed upon before.
Our Fourth Conference began on Tuesday, June the 16th,
1747. As several persons were present, who did not believe
the doctrine of perfection, we agreed to examine it from the
foundation.
In order to this, it was asked,
“How much is allowed by our brethren who differ from
us with regard to entire sanctification ?
“A. They grant, (1.) That every one must be entirely
sanctified in the article of death. (2.) That till then a
believer daily grows in grace, comes nearer and nearer to:
perfection. (3.) That we ought to be continually pressing:
after it, and to exhort all others so to do.
“Q. What do we allow them ?
“A. We grant, (1.) That many of those who have died in
the faith, yea, the greater part of those we have known, were
not perfected in love till a little before their death.
(2.) That the term sanctified is continually applied by St.
Paul to all that were justified. (3.) That by this term alone,
he rarely, if ever, means ‘saved from all sin.” (4.) That,
consequently, it is not proper to use it in that sense, without
adding the word wholly, entirely, or the like. (5.) That the
inspired writers almost continually speak of or to those who
were justified, but very rarely of or to those who were wholly
sanctified.* (6.) That, consequently, it behoves us to speak
almost continually of the state of justification; but more
rarely,t “at least in full and explicit terms, concerning entire
sanctification.’
“Q. What then is the point where we divide?
“A. It is this: Should we expect to be saved from all sin
before the article of death?
“Q. Is there any clear Scripture promise of this,--that
God will save us from all sin?
* That is, unto those alone, exclusive of others; but they speak to them.
jointly with others, almost continually.
+ More rarely, I allow ; but yet in some places very frequently, strongly, and
explicitly.
“A. There is: ‘He shall redeem Israel from all his sins.”
‘(Psalm crxx. 8.)
“This is more largely expressed in the prophecy of Ezekiel:
“Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
"clean; from all your filthiness and from all your idols will I
cleanse you: I will also save you from all your uncleannesses.”
(xxxvi. 25, 29.) No promise can be more clear. And to this
the Apostle plainly refers in that exhortation: ‘Having these
promises, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.” (2 Cor.
vii. 1.) Equally clear and express is that ancient promise:
“The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart
of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and
with all thy soul.” (Deut. xxx. 6.)
“Q. But does any assertion answerable to this occur in
the New Testament?
“A. There does, and that laid down in the plainest
terms. So 1 John iii. 8: “For this purpose the Son of God
was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
devil;’ the works of the devil, without any limitation or
restriction; but all sin is the work of the devil. Parallel to
which is the assertion of St. Paul: “Christ loved the Church,
and gave himself for it, that he might present it to himself
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing, but that it might be holy and without blemish.’
(Eph. v. 25-27.)
“And to the same effect is his assertion in the eighth of
the Romans, verses 3, 4: “God sent his Son, that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit.”
“Q. Does the New Testament afford any farther ground
for expecting to be saved from all sin?
“A. Undoubtedly it does; both in those prayers and com
mands, which are equivalent to the strongest assertions.
“Q. What prayers do you mean?
“A. Prayers for entire sanctification; which, were there no
such thing, would be mere mockery of God. Such in particular
are, (1.) “Deliver us from evil.” Now, when this is done,
when we are delivered from all evil, there can be no sin
remaining. (2.) “Neither pray I for these alone, but for them
also who shall believe on me through their word; that they
all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us; I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one.” (John xvii. 20-23.)
(3) “I bow my knees unto the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that he would grant you, that ye, being rooted
and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend, with all
saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height, and to know the love of Christ, which passeth know
ledge; that ye may be filled with all the fulness of God.”
(Eph. iii. 14, &c.) (4) ‘The very God of peace sanctify
you wholly. And I pray God, your whole spirit, soul, and
body, may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ.” (1 Thess. v. 23.)
“Q. What command is there to the same effect?
“A. (1.) ‘Be ye perfect, as your Father who is in heaven
is perfect.’ (Matt. v. 48.) (2.) ‘Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind. (Matt. xxii. 37.) But if the love of God fill
all the heart, there can be no sin therein.
“Q. But how does it appear that this is to be done before
the article of death?
“A. (1.) From the very nature of a command, which is
not given to the dead, but to the living. Therefore, ‘Thou
shalt love God with all thy heart, cannot mean, Thou shalt
do this when thou diest; but, while thou livest.
“(2.) From express texts of Scripture: (i) “The grace of
God, that bringeth salvation, hath appeared to all men;
teaching us that, having renounced ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present world; looking for the glorious appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works.’ (Titus ii. 11-14.). (ii) “He
hath raised up an horn of salvation for us, to perform the
mercy promised to our fathers; the oath which he sware to
our father Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we,
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, should serve
him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him,
all the days of our life. (Luke i. 69, &c.)
“Q. Is there any example in Scripture of persons who had
attained to this?
“A. Yes; St. John, and all those of whom he says,
‘Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness
in the day of judgment; because, as he is, so are we in
this world.” (1 John iv. 17.)
“Q. Can you show one such example now? Where is he
that is thus perfect?
“A. To some that make this inquiry one might answer, If
I knew one here, I would not tell you; for you do not inquire
out of love. You are like Herod; you only seek the young
child to slay it.
“But more directly we answer: There are many reasons
why there should be few, if any, indisputable examples.
What inconveniences would this bring on the person himself,
set as a mark for all to shoot at ! And how unprofitable
would it be to gainsayers ‘For if they hear not Moses and
the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, “neither would they
be persuaded though one rose from the dead.’
“Q. Are we not apt to have a secret distaste to any who
say they are saved from all sin?
“A. It is very possible we may, and that upon several
grounds; partly from a concern for the good of souls, who
may be hurt if these are not what they profess; partly from
a kind of implicit envy at those who speak of higher attain
ments than our own; and partly from our natural slowness
and unreadiness of heart to believe the works of God.
“Q. Why may we not continue in the joy of faith till we
are perfected in love?
“A. Why indeed? since holy grief does not quench this
joy; since even while we are under the cross, while we deeply
partake of the sufferings of Christ, we may rejoice with joy
unspeakable.”
From these extracts it undeniably appears, not only what
was mine and my brother’s judgment, but what was the
judgment of all the Preachers in connexion with us, in the
years 1744, 45, 46 and 47. Nor do I remember that, in any
one of these Conferences, we had one dissenting voice; but
whatever doubts any one had when we met, they were all
removed before we parted.
18. In the year 1749, my brother printed two volumes
of “Hymns and Sacred Poems.” As I did not see these
before they were published, there were some things in them
which I did not approve of But I quite approved of the
main of the hymns on this head; a few verses of which are
subjoined:
CoME, Lord, be manifested here,
And all the devil's works destroy;
Now, without sin, in me appear,
And fill with everlasting joy:
Thy beatific face display;
Ihy presence is the perfect day. (Vol. I., p. 203.)
Sw1FT to my rescue come,
Thy own this moment seize;
Gather my wand'ring spirit home,
And keep in perfect peace.
Suffer'd no more to rove
O'er all the earth abroad,
Arrest the pris'ner of thy love,
And shut me up in God! (Page 247.)
THY pris'ners release, Vouchsafe us thy peace;
And our sorrows and sins in a moment shall cease.
That moment be now ! Our petition allow,
Our present Redeemer and Comforter thou ! (Vol. II., p. 124.)
FaoM this inbred sin deliver;
Let the yoke Now be broke;
Make me thine for ever.
Partner of thy perfect nature,
Let me be Now in thee
A new, sinless creature. (Page 156.)
TURN me, Lord, and turn me now,
To thy yoke my spirit bow;
Grant me now the pearl to find
Of a meek and quiet mind.
Calm, O calm my troubled breast;
Let me gain that second rest:
From my works for ever cease,
Perfected in holiness. (Page 162.)
CoME in this accepted hour,
Bring thy heavenly kingdom in 1
Fill us with the glorious power,
Rooting out the seeds of sin. (Page 168)
CoME, thou dear Lamb, for sinners slain,
Bring in the cleansing flood;
Apply, to wash out every stain,
Thine efficacious blood.
O let it sink into our soul
Deep as the inbred sin :
Make every wounded spirit whole,
And every leper clean : (Page 171.)
PR1s’NERs of hope, arise,
And see your Lord appear:
Lo ! on the wings of love he flies,
And brings redemption near.
Redemption in his blood
He calls you to receive :
*Come unto me, the pard'ning God :
Believe,” he cries, “believe '"
Jesus, to thee we look,
Till saved from sin's remains,
Reject the inbred tyrant's yoke,
And cast away his chains.
Our nature shall no more
O'er us dominion have :
By faith we apprehend the power,
Which shall for ever save. (Page 188.)
JESU, our life, in us appear,
Who daily die thy death :
Reveal thyself the finisher;
Thy quick'ning Spirit breathe 1."
Unfold the hidden mystery,
The second gift impart;
Reveal thy glorious self in me,
In every waiting heart. (Page 195.)
IN Him we have peace, In Him we have power I
Preserved by his grace Throughout the dark hour,
In all our temptation He keeps us, to prove
His utmost salvation, His fulness of love.
Pronounce the glad word, And bid us be free I
Ah, hast thou not, Lord, A blessing for me?
The peace thou hast given, This moment impart,
And open thy heaven, O Love, in my heart! (Page 324.)
A second edition of these hymns was published in the year
1752; and that without any other alteration, than that of a
few literal mistakes.
I have been the more large in these extracts, because hence
it appears, beyond all possibility of exception, that to this
day both my brother and I maintained, (1.) That Christian
perfection is that love of God and our neighbour, which
implies deliverance from all sin. (2.) That this is received
merely by faith. (3.) That it is given instantaneously, in
one moment. (4.) That we are to expect it, not at death,
but every moment; that now is the accepted time, now is the
day of this salvation.
19. At the Conference in the year 1759, perceiving some
danger that a diversity of sentiments should insensibly steal
in among us, we again largely considered this doctrine; and
soon after I published “Thoughts on Christian Perfection,”
prefaced with the following advertisement:--
“The following tract is by no means designed to gratify
the curiosity of any man. It is not intended to prove the
doctrine at large, in opposition to those who explode and
ridicule it; no, nor to answer the numerous objections against
it, which may be raised even by serious men. All I intend
here is, simply to declare what are my sentiments on this
head; what Christian perfection does, according to my appre
hension, include, and what it does not; and to add a few
practical observations and directions relative to the subject.
“As these thoughts were at first thrown together by way
of question and answer, I let them continue in the same
form. They are just the same that I have entertained for
above twenty years.
“QUESTIoN. What is Christian perfection?
“ANswer. The loving God with all our heart, mind,
soul, and strength. This implies, that no wrong temper,
none contrary to love, remains in the soul; and that all the
thoughts, words, and actions, are governed by pure love.
“Q. Do you affirm, that this perfection excludes all infirm
ities, ignorance, and mistake?
“A. I continually affirm quite the contrary, and always
have done so.
“Q. But how can every thought, word, and work, be
governed by pure love, and the man be subject at the same
time to ignorance and mistake?
“A. I see no contradiction here: ‘A man may be filled
with pure love, and still be liable to mistake.” Indeed I do
not expect to be freed from actual mistakes, till this mortal
puts on immortality. I believe this to be a natural conse
quence of the soul's dwelling in flesh and blood. For we
cannot now think at all, but by the mediation of those bodily
organs which have suffered equally with the rest of our frame.
And hence we cannot avoid sometimes thinking wrong, till
this corruptible shall have put on incorruption.
“But we may carry this thought farther yet. A mistake
in judgment may possibly occasion a mistake in practice.
For instance: Mr. De Renty’s mistake touching the nature
of mortification, arising from prejudice of education, occa
sioned that practical mistake, his wearing an iron girdle.
And a thousand such instances there may be, even in those.
who are in the highest state of grace. Yet, where every word
and action springs from love, such a mistake is not properly
a sin. However, it cannot bear the rigour of God's justice,
but needs the atoning blood.
“Q. What was the judgment of all our brethren who met
at Bristol in August, 1758, on this head?
“A. It was expressed in these words: (1) Every one may
mistake as long as he lives. (2.) A mistake in opinion may
occasion a mistake in practice. (3.) Every such mistake is a
transgression of the perfect law. Therefore, (4) Every such
mistake, were it not for the blood of atonement, would
expose to eternal damnation. (5.) It follows, that the most
perfect have continual need of the merits of Christ, even for
their actual transgressions, and may say for themselves, as
well as for their brethren, “Forgive us our trespasses.’
“This easily accounts for what might otherwise seem to be
utterly unaccountable; namely, that those who are not
offended when we speak of the highest degree of love, yet
will not hear of living without sin. The reason is, they know
all men are liable to mistake, and that in practice as well as
in judgment. But they do not know, or do not observe, that
this is not sin, if love is the sole principle of action.
“Q. But still, if they live without sin, does not this exclude
the necessity of a Mediator? At least, is it not plain that
they stand no longer in need of Christ in his priestly office?
“A. Far from it. None feel their need of Christ like
these; none so entirely depend upon him. For Christ does.
not give life to the soul separate from, but in and with,
himself. Hence his words are equally true of all men, in
whatsoever state of grace they are: “As the branch cannot
bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can
ye, except ye abide in me: Without’ (or separate from) ‘me
ye can do nothing.’
“In every state we need Christ in the following respects.
(1.) Whatever grace we receive, it is a free gift from him.
(2.) We receive it as his purchase, merely in consideration of
the price he paid. (3) We have this grace, not only from
Christ, but in him. For our perfection is not like that of a
tree, which flourishes by the sap derived from its own root,
but, as was said before, like that of a branch which, united
to the vine, bears fruit; but, severed from it, is dried up and
withered. - (4.) All our blessings, temporal, spiritual, and
eternal, depend on his intercession for us, which is one branch
of his priestly office, whereof therefore we have always equal
need. (5.) The best of men still need Christ in his priestly
office, to atone for their omissions, their short-comings, (as
some not improperly speak,) their mistakes in judgment and
practice, and their defects of various kinds. For these are
all deviations from the perfect law, and consequently need
an atonement. Yet that they are not properly sins, we
apprehend may appear from the words of St. Paul, “He that
loveth, hath fulfilled the law; for love is the fulfilling of
the law.” (Rom. xiii. 10.) Now, mistakes, and whatever
infirmities necessarily flow from the corruptible state of the
body, are noway contrary to love; nor therefore, in the
f$cripture sense, sin.
“To explain myself a little farther on this head: (1) Not
only sin, properly so called, (that is, a voluntary trans
gression of a known law,) but sin, improperly so called, (that
is, an involuntary transgression of a divine law, known or
unknown,) needs the atoning blood. (2.) I believe there is no
such perfection in this life as excludes these involuntary trans
gressions which I apprehend to be naturally consequent on
the ignorance and mistakes inseparable from mortality. (3.)
Therefore sinless perfection is a phrase I never use, lest I
should seem to contradict myself (4.) I believe, a person
filled with the love of God is still liable to these involuntary
transgressions. (5.) Such transgressions you may call sins,
if you please: I do not, for the reasons above-mentioned.
“Q. What advice would you give to those that do, and
those that do not, call them so?
“A. Let those that do not call them sins, never think that
themselves or any other persons are in such a state as that
they can stand before infinite justice without a Mediator.
This must argue either the deepest ignorance, or the highest
arrogance and presumption.
“Let those who do call them so, beware how they confound
these defects with sins, properly so called.
“But how will they avoid it? How will thesebe distinguished
from those, if they are all promiscuously called sins? I am
much afraid, if we should allow any sins to be consistent with
perfection, few would confine the idea to those defects
concerning which only the assertion could be true.
“Q. But how can a liableness to mistake consist with
perfect love? Is not a person who is perfected in love every
moment under its influence? And can any mistake flow
from pure love?
“A. I answer, (1.) Many mistakes may consist with pure
love; (2.) Some may accidentally flow from it: I mean, love
itself may incline us to mistake. The pure love of cur neigh
bour, springing from the love of God, thinketh no evil, believeth
and hopeth all things. Now, this very temper, unsuspicious,
ready to believe and hope the best of all men, may occasion
our thinking some men better than they really are. Here then
is a manifest mistake, accidentally flowing from pure love.
“Q. How shall we avoid setting perfection too high or too
low P
“A. By keeping to the Bible, and setting it just as high
as the Scripture does. It is nothing higher and nothing
lower than this,--the pure love of God and man; the loving
God with all our heart and soul, and our neighbour as
ourselves. It is love governing the heart and life, running
through all our tempets, words, and actions.
“Q. Suppose one had attained to this, would you advise
him to speak of it?
“A. At first perhaps he would scarce be able to refrain, the
fire would be so hot within him; his desire to declare the
loving-kindness of the Lord carrying him away like a torrent.
But afterwards he might; and then it would be advisable, not
to speak of it to them that know not God; (it is most
likely, it would only provoke them to contradict and blas
pheme;) nor to others, without some particular reason, without
some good in view. And then he should have especial care
to avoid all appearance of boasting; to speak with the deepest
humility and reverence, giving all the glory to God.
“Q. But would it not be better to be entirely silent, not
to speak of it at all?
“A. By silence, he might avoid many crosses, which will
naturally and necessarily ensue, if he simply declare, even
among believers, what God has wrought in his soul. If, there
fore, such a one were to confer with flesh and blood, he would
be entirely silent. But this could not be done with a clear
conscience; for undoubtedly he ought to speak. Men do not
light a candle to put it under a bushel; much less does the
all-wise God. He does not raise such a monument of his
power and love, to hide it from all mankind. Rather, he
intends it as a general blessing to those who are simple of
heart. He designs thereby, not barely the happiness of that
individual person, but the animating and encouraging others
to follow after the same blessing. His will is, ‘that many
shall see it’ and rejoice, ‘and put their trust in the Lord.”
Nor does anything under heaven more quicken the desires of
those who are justified, than to converse with those whom they
believe to have experienced a still higher salvation. This places
that salvation full in their view, and increases their hunger and
thirst after it; an advantage which must have been entirely
lost, had the person so saved buried himself in silence.
“Q. But is there no way to prevent these crosses which
usually fall on those who speak of being thus saved?
“A. It seems they cannot be prevented altogether, while
so much of nature remains even in believers. But something
might be done, if the Preacher in every place would, (1.)
Talk freely with all who speak thus; and, (2) Labour to
prevent the unjust or unkind treatment of those in favour
of whom there is reasonable proof.
“Q. What is reasonable proof? How may we certainly
know one that is saved from all sin 2
“A. We cannot infallibly know one that is thus saved,
(no, nor even one that is justified,) unless it should please
God to endow us with the miraculous discernment of spirits.
But we apprehend those would be sufficient proofs to any
reasonable man, and such as would leave little room to doubt
either the truth or depth of the work: (1.) If we had clear
evidence of his exemplary behaviour for some time before
this supposed change. This would give us reason to believe,
he would not “lie for God,” but speak neither more nor less
than he felt; (2.) If he gave a distinct account of the time
and manner wherein the change was wrought, with sound
speech which could not be reproved; and, (3.) If it appeared
that all his subsequent words and actions were holy and
unblamable.
“The short of the matter is this: (1) I have abundant
reason to believe, this person will not lie; (2.) He testifies
before God, ‘I feel no sin, but all love; I pray, rejoice, and
give thanks without ceasing; and I have as clear an inward
witness, that I am fully renewed, as that I am justified.”
Mow, if I have nothing to oppose to this plain testimony, I
ought in reason to believe it.
“It avails nothing to object, “But I know several things
wherein he is quite mistaken.” For it has been allowed,
that all who are in the body are liable to mistake; and that
a mistake in judgment may sometimes occasion a mistake in
practice; though great care is to be taken that no ill use be
made of this concession. For instance: Even one that is
perfected in love may mistake with regard to another person,
and may think him, in a particular case, to be more or less
faulty than he really is. And hence he may speak to him
with more or less severity than the truth requires. And in
this sense, (though that be not the primary meaning of St.
James,) “in many things we offend all. This therefore is no
proof at all, that the person so speaking is not perfect.
“Q. But is it not a proof, if he is surprised or fluttered by
a noise, a fall, or some sudden danger?
“A. It is not; for one may start, tremble, change colour,
or be otherwise disordered in body, while the soul is calmly
stayed on God, and remains in perfect peace. Nay, the
mind itself may be deeply distressed, may be exceeding
sorrowful, may be perplexed and pressed down by heaviness
and anguish, even to agony, while the heart cleaves to God
by perfect love, and the will is wholly resigned to him. Was
it not so with the Son of God himself? Does any child of
man endure the distress, the anguish, the agony, which he
sustained? And yet he knew no sin.
“Q. But can any one who has a pure heart prefer pleasing
to unpleasing food; or use any pleasure of sense which is not
strictly necessary? If so, how do they differ from others?
“A. The difference between these and others in taking
pleasant food is, (1.) They need none of these things to make
them happy; for they have a spring of happiness within.
They see and love God. Hence they rejoice evermore, and
in everything give thanks. (2.) They may use them, but
they do not seek them. (3.) They use them sparingly, and
not for the sake of the thing itself. This being premised, we
answer directly,--Such a one may use pleasing food, without
the danger which attends those who are not saved from sin.
He may prefer it to unpleasing, though equally wholesome,
food, as a means of increasing thankfulness, with a single eye
to God, who giveth us all things richly to enjoy: On the same
principle, he may smell to a flower, or eat a bunch of grapes,
or take any other pleasure which does not lessen but increase
his delight in God. Therefore, neither can we say that one
perfected in love would be incapable of marriage, and of
worldly business? If he were called thereto, he would be
more capable than ever; as being able to do all things
without hurry or carefulness, without any distraction of spirit.
“Q. But if two perfect Christians had children, how could
they be born in sin, since there was none in the parents?
“A. It is a possible, but not a probable, case; I doubt
whether it ever was or ever will be. But waving this, I
answer, Sin is entailed upon me, not by immediate genera
tion, but by my first parent. ‘In Adam all died; by the
disobedience of one, all men were made sinners; all men,
without exception, who were in his loins when he ate the
forbidden fruit.
“We have a remarkable illustration of this in gardening:
Grafts on a crab-stock bear excellent fruit; but sow the
kernels of this fruit, and what will be the event? They
produce as mere crabs as ever were eaten.
“Q. But what does the perfect one do more than others?
more than the common believers?
“A. Perhaps nothing; so may the providence of God have
hedged him in by outward circumstances. Perhaps not so
much; though he desires and longs to spend and be spent for
God; at least, not externally: He neither speaks so many
words, nor dot's so many works. As neither did our Lord
himself speak so many words, or do so many, no, nor so great
works, as some of his Apostles. (John xiv. 12.) But what
then? This is no proof that he has not more grace; and by
this God measures the outward work. Hear ye Him: ‘Verily,
I say unto you, this poor widow has cast in more than them
all.’ Verily, this poor man, with his few broken words, hath
spoken more than them all. Verily, this poor woman, that
hath given a cup of cold water, hath done more than them
all. O cease to ‘judge according to appearance, and learn
to ‘judge righteous judgment l’
“Q. But is not this a proof against him,--I feel no power
either in his words or prayer?
“A. It is not; for perhaps that is your own fault. You
are not likely to feel any power therein, if any of these hin
derances lie in the way: (1.) Your own deadness of soul.
The dead Pharisees felt no power even in His words who
‘spake as never man spake.” (2.) The guilt of some unre
pented sin lying upon the conscience. (3.) Prejudice toward
him of any kind. (4.) Your not believing that state to be
attainable wherein he professes to be. (5.) Unreadiness to
think or own he has attained it. (6.) Overvaluing or idolizing
him. (7.) Overvaluing yourself and your own judgment. If
any of these is the case, what wonder is it that you feel no
power in anything he says? But do not others feel it? If
they do, your argument falls to the ground. And if they do
not, do none of these hinderances lie in their way too? You
must be certain of this before you can build any argument
thereon; and even then your argument will prove no more
than that grace and gifts do not always go together.
“‘But he does not come up to my idea of a perfect
Christian.’ And perhaps no one ever did, or ever will. For your
idea may go beyond, or at least beside, the scriptural account.
It may include more than the Bible includes therein, or,
however, something which that does not include. Scripture
perfection is, pure love filling the heart, and governing all the
words and actions. If your idea includes anything more or
anything else, it is not scriptural; and then no wonder, that
a scripturally perfect Christian does not come up to it.
“I fear many stumble on this stumbling-block. They
include as many ingredients as they please, not according to
Scripture, but their own imagination, in their idea of one
that is perfect; and then readily deny any one to be such,
who does not answer that imaginary idea.
“The more care should we take to keep the simple, scrip
tural account continually in our eye. Pure love reigning alone
in the heart and life,--this is the whole of scriptural perfection.
“Q. When may a person judge himself to have attained
this?
“A. When, after having been fully convinced of inbred sin,
by a far deeper and clearer conviction than that he experienced
before justification, and after having experienced a gradual
mortification of it, he experiences a total death to sin, and an
entire renewal in the love and image of God, so as to rejoice
evermore, to pray without ceasing, and in everything to give
thanks. Not that ‘to feel all love and no sin” is a sufficient
proof. Several have experienced this for atime, before theirsouls
402 PLAIN ACCoUNT of
were fully renewed. None therefore ought to believe that the
work is done, till there is added the testimony of the Spirit,
witnessing his entire sanctification, as clearly as his justification.
“Q. But whence is it, that some imagine they are thus
sanctified, when in reality they are not?
“A. It is hence; they do not judge by all the preceding
marks, but either by part of them, or by others that are
ambiguous. But I know no instance of a person attending
to them all, and yet deceived in this matter. I believe,
there can be none in the world. If a man be deeply and
fully convinced, after justification, of inbred sin; if he then
experience a gradual mortification of sin, and afterwards an
entire renewal in the image of God; if to this change,
immensely greater than that wrought when he was justified,
be added a clear, direct witness of the renewal; I judge it as
impossible this man should be deceived herein, as that God
should lie. And if one whom I know to be a man of veracity
testify these things to me, I ought not, without some
sufficient reason, to reject his testimony.
“Q. Is this death to sin, and renewal in love, gradual or
instantaneous P
“A. A man may be dying for some time; yet he does not,
properly speaking, die, till the instant the soul is separated
from the body; and in that instant he lives the life of
eternity. In like manner, he may be dying to sin for some
time; yet he is not dead to sin, till sin is separated from his
soul; and in that instant he lives the full life of love. And
as the change undergone, when the body dies, is of a different
kind, and infinitely greater than any we had known before,
yea, such as till then it is impossible to conceive; so the
change wrought, when the soul dies to sin, is of a different
kind, and infinitely greater than any before, and than any
can conceive till he experiences it. Yet he stills grows in
grace, in the knowledge of Christ, in the love and image of
God; and will do so, not only till death, but to all eternity.
“Q. How are we to wait for this change?
“A. Not in careless indifference, or indolent inactivity;
but in vigorous, universal obedience, in a zealous keeping of
all the commandments, in watchfulness and painfulness, in
denying ourselves, and taking up our cross daily; as well as
in earnest prayer and fasting, and a close attendance on all
the ordinances of God. And if any man dream of attaining
it any other way, (yea, or of keeping it when it is attained,
when he has received it even in the largest measure,) he
deceiveth his own soul. It is true, we receive it by simple
faith: But God does not, will not, give that faith, unless we
seek it with all diligence, in the way which he hath ordained.
“This consideration may satisfy those who inquire, why so
few have received the blessing. Inquire, how many are sceking
it in this way; and you have a sufficient answer.
“Prayer especially is wanting. Who continues instant
therein? Who wrestles with God for this very thing? So,
“ye have not, because ye ask not; or because ye ask amiss,”
namely, that you may be renewed before you die. Before you
die! Will that content you? Nay, but ask that it may be
done now; to-day, while it is called to-day. Do not call this
* setting God a time. Certainly, to-day is his time as well as
to-morrow. Make haste, man, make haste! Let
Thy soul break out in strong desire
The perfect bliss to prove;
Thy longing heart be all on fire
To be dissolved in love |
“Q. But may we not continue in peace and joy till we are
perfected in love?
“A. Certainly we may; for the kingdom of God is not
divided against itself; therefore, let not believers be discou
raged from ‘rejoicing in the Lord always.” And yet we may
be sensibly pained at the sinful nature that still remains in
ins. It is good for us to have a piercing sense of this, and a
vehement desire to be delivered from it. But this should
only incite us the more zealously to fly every moment to our
strong Helper, the more earnestly to ‘press forward to the
mark, the prize of our high calling in Christ Jesus.’ And
when the sense of our sin most abounds, the sense of his love
should much more abound.
“Q. How should we treat those who think they have
attained?
“A. Examine them candidly, and exhort them to pray
fervently, that God would show them all that is in their
Thearts. The most earnest exhortations to abound in cvery
grace, and the strongest cautions to avoid all evil, are given
throughout the New Testament, to those who are in the
highest state of grace. But this should be done with the
utmost tenderness; and without any harshness, sternness, or
sourness. We should carefully avoid the very appearance of
anger, unkindness, or contempt. Leave it to Satan thus to.
tempt, and to his children to cry out, ‘Let us examine him
with despitefulness and torture, that we may know his meek
ness and prove his patience.” If they are faithful to the grace.
given, they are in no danger of perishing thereby; no, not if
they remain in that mistake till their spirit is returning to God.
“Q. But what hurt can it do to deal harshly with them?
“A. Either they are mistaken, or they are not. If they
are, it may destroy their souls. This is nothing impossible,
no, nor improbable. It may so enrage or so discourage
them, that they will sink and rise no more. If they are not
mistaken, it may grieve those whom God has not grieved, and
do much hurt unto our own souls. For undoubtedly he that
toucheth them, toucheth, as it were, the apple of God's eye.
If they are indeed full of his Spirit, to behave unkindly or
contemptuously to them is doing no little despite to the
Spirit of grace. Hereby, likewise, we feed and increase in
ourselves evil surmising, and many wrong tempers. To
instance only in one: What self-sufficiency is this, to set
ourselves up for inquisitors-general, for peremptory judges
in these deep things of God! Are we qualified for the office?
Can we pronounce, in all cases, how far infirmity reaches?
what may, and what may not, be resolved into it? what may
in all circumstances, and what may not, consist with perfect
love? Can we precisely determine, how it will influence the
look, the gesture, the tone of voice? If we can, doubtless
we are ‘the men, and wisdom shall die with us.”
“Q. But if they are displeased at our not believing them,
is not this a full proof against them? .
“A. According as that displeasure is: If they are angry,
it is a proof against them; if they are grieved, it is not.
They ought to be grieved, if we disbelieve a real work of
God, and thereby deprive ourselves of the advantage we
might have received from it. And we may easily mistake
this grief for anger, as the outward expressions of both are
much alike.
“Q. But is it not well to find out those who fancy they
have attained when they have not?
“A. It is well to do it by mild, loving examination. But
it is not well to triumph even over these. It is extremely
wrong, if we find such an instance, to rejoice as if we had
found great spoils. Ought we not rather to grieve, to be
deeply concerned, to let our eyes run down with tears?
Here is one who seemed to be a living proof of God’s power
to save to the uttermost; but, alas, it is not as we hoped.
He is weighed in the balance, and found wanting ! And is
this matter of joy? Ought we not to rejoice a thousand
times more, if we can find nothing but pure love?
“‘But he is deceived.” What then? It is a harmless
smistake, while he feels nothing but love in his heart. It is a
mistake which generally argues great grace, an high degree
both of holiness and happiness. This should be a matter of
real joy to all that are simple of heart; not the mistake
itself, but the height of grace which for a time occasions it.
I rejoice that this soul is always happy in Christ, always full
of prayer and thanksgiving. I rejoice that he feels no unholy
temper, but the pure love of God continually. And I will
rejoice, if sin is suspended till it is totally destroyed.
“Q. Is there no danger then in a man’s being thus
deceived ?
“A. Not at the time that he feels no sin. There was danger
before, and there will be again when he comes into fresh trials.
But so long as he feels nothing but love animating all his
thoughts, and words, and actions, he is in no danger; he is
not only happy, but safe, ‘under the shadow of the Almighty;’
and, for God’s sake, let him continue in that love as long as
he can. Meantime, you may do well to warn him of the
danger that will be, if his love grow cold and sin revive;
even the danger of casting away hope, and supposing, that,
because he hath not attained yet, therefore he never shall.
“Q. But what, if none have attained it yet? What, if all
who think so are deceived?
“A. Convince me of this, and I will preach it no more.
But understand me right: I do not build any doctrine on
this or that person. This or any other man may be deceived,
and I am not moved. But, if there are none made perfect
yet, God has not sent me to preach perfection.
“Put a parallel case: For many years I have preached,
“There is a peace of God which passeth all understanding.’
‘Convince me that this word has fallen to the ground; that in
all these years none have attained this peace; that there is no
living witness of it at this day; and I will preach it no more.
“‘O, but several persons have died in that peace. Per
haps so; but I want living witnesses. I cannot indeed be
infallibly certain that this or that person is a witness; but if
I were certain there are mone such, I must have done with
this doctrine.
“‘You misunderstand me. I believe some who died in
this love, enjoyed it long before their death. But I was not
certain that their former testimony was true till some hours
before they died.’
“You had not an infallible certainty then: And a reason
able certainty you might have had before; such a certainty
as might have quickened and comforted your own soul, and
answered all other Christian purposes. Such a certainty as
this, any candid person may have, suppose there be any
living witness, by talking one hour with that person in the
love and fear of God.
“Q. But what does it signify, whether any have attained.
it or no, seeing so many scriptures witness for it?
“A. If I were convinced that none in England had attained
what has been so clearly and strongly preached by such a
number of Preachers, in so many places, and for so long a
time, I should be clearly convinced that we had all mistaken
the meaning of those scriptures; and therefore, for the time
to come, I too must teach that “sin will remain till death.’”
20. In the year 1762, there was a great increase of the work
of God in London. Many, who had hitherto cared for none of
these things, were deeply convinced of their lost estate; many
found redemption in the blood of Christ; not a few backsliders
were healed; and a considerable number of persons believed
that God had saved them from all sin. Easily foreseeing that
Satan would be endeavouring to sow tares among the wheat,
I took much pains to apprize them of the danger, particularly
with regard to pride and enthusiasm. And while I stayed in
town, I had reason to hope they continued both humble and
sober-minded. But almost as soon as I was gone enthusiasm
broke in. Two or three began to take their own imaginations
for impressions from God, and thence to suppose that they
should never die; and these, labouring to bring others into the
same opinion, occasioned much noise and confusion. Soon
after, the same persons, with a few more, ran into other extrava
gances; fancying they could not be tempted; that they should
feel no more pain; and that they had the gift of prophecy, and
of discerning of spirits. At my return to London, in autumn,
some of them stood reproved; but others were got above
instruction. Meantime, a flood of reproach came upon me
almost from every quarter; from themselves, because I was
checking them on all occasions; and from others, because,
they said, I did not check them. However, the hand of the
Lord was not stayed, but more and more sinners were
convinced; while some were almost daily converted to God,
and others enabled to love him with all their heart.
21. About this time, a friend at some distance from
London wrote to me as follows:
“BE not over alarmed that Satan sows tares among the
wheat of Christ. It ever has been so, especially on any
remarkable outpouring of his Spirit; and ever will be so, till
he is chained up for a thousand years. Till then he will
always ape, and endeavour to counteract, the work of the
Spirit of Christ.
“One melancholy effect of this has been, that a world, who
is always asleep in the arms of the evil one, has ridiculed
every work of the Holy Spirit.
“But what can real Christians do? Why, if they would
act worthy of themselves, they should, (1.) Pray that every
deluded soul may be delivered; (2.) Endeavour to reclaim
them in the spirit of meekness; and, Lastly, take the utmost
care, both by prayer and watchfulness, that the delusion of
others may not lessen their zeal in seeking after that
universal holiness of soul, body, and spirit, “without which
no man shall see the Lord.”
“Indeed this complete new creature is mere madness to a
mad world. But it is, notwithstanding, the will and wisdom
of God. May we all seek after it !
“But some who maintain this doctrine in its full extent
are too often guilty of limiting the Almighty. He dispenses
his gifts just as he pleases; therefore, it is neither wise nor
modest to affirm that a person must be a believer for any
length of time before he is capable of receiving a high degree
of the Spirit of holiness.
“God’s usual method is one thing, but his sovereign
pleasure is another. He has wise reasons both for hastening
and retarding his work. Sometimes he comes suddenly and
unexpected; sometimes, not till we have long looked for him.
“Indeed it has been my opinion for many years, that one
great cause why men make so little improvement in the
divine life is their own coldness, negligence, and unbelief.
And yet I here speak of believers.
“May the Spirit of Christ give us a right judgment in all
things, and “fill us with all the fulness of God;’ that so we
may be ‘perfect and entire, wanting nothing.’”
22. About the same time, five or six honest enthusiasts
foretold the world was to end on the 28th of February. I
immediately withstood them, by every possible means, both in
public and private. I preached expressly upon the subject,
both at West-Street and Spitalfields. I warned the society,
again and again, and spoke severally to as many as I could;
and I saw the fruit of my labour. They made exceeding few
converts: I believe scarce thirty in our whole society. Never
theless, they made abundance of noise, gave huge occasion of
offence to those who took care to improve to the uttermost every
occasion against me, and greatly increased both the number
and courage of those who opposed Christian perfection.
23. Some questions, now published by one of these,
induced a plain man to write the following
“QUERIEs, humbly proposed to those who deny perfection
to be attainable in this life.
“(1.) Has there not been a larger measure of the Holy
Spirit given under the Gospel, than under the Jewish
dispensation? If not, in what sense was the Spirit not given
before Christ was glorified? (John vii. 39.)
“(2.) Was that “glory which followed the sufferings of
Christ,” (1 Peter i. 11,) an external glory, or an internal,
viz., the glory of holiness?
“(3.) Has God anywhere in Scripture commanded us
more than he has promised to us?
“(4.) Are the promises of God respecting holiness to be
fulfilled in this life, or only in the next?
“(5.) Is a Christian under any other laws than those
which God promises to ‘write in our hearts?’ (Jer. xxxi. 31,
&c.; Heb. viii. 10.)
“(6.) In what sense is ‘the righteousness of the law
fulfilled in those who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit?’ (Romans viii. 4.)
“(7.) Is it impossible for any one in this life to ‘love God
with all his heart, and mind, and soul, and strength?’ And
is the Christian under any law which is not fulfilled in this
love?
“(8) Does the soul's going out of the body effect its
purification from indwelling sin?
“(9.) If so, is it not something else, not ‘the blood of
Christ which cleanseth it ‘from all sin P’
“(10.) If his blood cleanseth us from all sin, while the soul
and body are united, is it not in this life?
“(11.) If when that union ceases, is it not in the next?
And is not this too late?
“(12.) If in the article of death; what situation is the
soul in, when it is neither in the body nor out of it?
“(13.) Has Christ anywhere taught us to pray for what he
never designs to give?
“(14.) Has he not taught us to pray, ‘Thy will be done
on earth, as it is done in heaven?’ And is it not done
perfectly in heaven?
“(15.) If so, has he not taught us to pray for perfection on
earth? Does he not then design to give it?
“(16.) Did not St. Paul pray according to the will of God,
when he prayed that the Thessalonians might be “sanctified
wholly, and preserved” (in this world, not the next, unless
he was praying for the dead) ‘blameless in body, soul, and
spirit, unto the coming of Jesus Christ?”
“(17.) Do you sincerely desire to be freed from indwelling
sin in this life?
“(18.) If you do, did not God give you that desire?
“(19.) If so, did he not give it you to mock you, since it
is impossible it should ever be fulfilled?
“(20.) If you have not sincerity enough even to desire it,
are you not disputing about matters too high for you?
“(21.) Do you ever pray God to “cleanse the thoughts of
your heart, that you ‘may perfectly love him?”
“(22.) If you neither desire what you ask, nor believe it
attainable, pray you not as a fool prayeth?
“God help thee to consider these questions calmly and
impartially l”
24. In the latter end of this year, God called to himself
that burning and shining light, Jane Cooper. As she was
both a living and a dying witness of Christian perfection, it
will not be at all foreign to the subject to add a short account
of her death; with one of her own letters, containing a plain
and artless relation of the manner wherein it pleased God to
work that great change in her soul:
“May 2, 1761.
“I BELIEve while memory remains in me, gratitude
will continue. From the time you preached on Gal. v. 5, I
saw clearly the true state of my soul. That sermon described
my heart, and what it wanted to be; namely, truly happy.
You read Mr. M--'s letter, and it described the religion
which I desired. From that time the prize appeared in view,
and I was enabled to follow hard after it. I was kept watching
unto prayer, sometimes in much distress, at other times in
patient expectation of the blessing. For some days before you
left London, my soul was stayed on a promise I had applied
to me in prayer: ‘The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly
come to his temple.’ I believed he would, and that he would
sit there as a refiner’s fire. The Tuesday after you went, I
thought I could not sleep, unless he fulfilled his word that
night. I never knew as I did then the force of these words:
“Be still, and know that I am God.' I became nothing before
Him, and enjoyed perfect calmness in my soul. I knew not
whether he had destroyed my sin; but I desired to know,
that I might praise Him. Yet I soon found the return of
unbelief, and groaned, being burdened. On Wednesday I
went to London, and sought the Lord without ceasing. I
promised, if he would save me from sin, I would praise him.
I could part with all things, so I might win Christ. But I
found all these pleas to be nothing worth; and that if He
saved me, it must be freely, for his own name's sake. On
Thursday I was so much tempted, that I thought of destroying
myself, or never conversing more with the people of God:
And yet I had no doubt of his pardoning love; but, -
'Twas worse than death my God to love,
And not my God alone.
On Friday my distress was deepened. I endeavoured to pray,
and could not. I went to Mrs. D., who prayed for me, and
told me it was the death of nature. I opened the Bible, on,
‘The fearful and unbelieving shall have their part in the lake
which burneth with fire and brimstone.’ I could not bear it.
I opened again, on Mark xvi. 6, 7: ‘Be not affrighted; ye
seek Jesus of Nazareth. Go your way; tell his disciples he
goeth before you into Galilee; there ye shall see him.’ I was
encouraged, and enabled to pray, believing I should see Jesus
at home. I returned that night, and found Mrs. G. She
prayed for me; and the Predestinarian had no plea, but,
‘Lord, thou art no respecter of persons.’ He proved he was
not, by blessing me. I was in a moment enabled to lay hold
on Jesus Christ, and found salvation by simple faith. He
assured me, the Lord, the King, was in the midst of me, and
that I should see evil no more. I now blessed Him who had
visited and redeemed me, and was become my “wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.” I saw Jesus
altogether lovely; and knew he was mine in all his offices.
And, glory be to Him, He now reigns in my heart without a
rival. I find no will but his. I feel no pride; nor any affec
tion but what is placed on Him. I know it is by faith Istand;
and that watching unto prayer must be the guard of faith. I
am happy in God this moment, and I believe for the next. I
have often read the chapter you mention, (1 Cor. xiii.,) and
compared my heart and life with it. In so doing, I feel my
shortcomings, and the need I have of the atoning blood. Yet
I dare not say, I do not feel a measure of the love there
described, though I am not all I shall be. I desire to be lost
in that ‘love which passeth knowledge.’ I see ‘the just shall
live by faith;’ and unto me, who am less than the least of all
saints, is this grace given. If I were an archangel, I should
veil my face before him, and let silence speak his praise !”
The following account is given by one who was an eye and
ear witness of what she relates:
“(1.) In the beginning of November, she seemed to have
a foresight of what was coming upon her, and used frequently
to sing these words:
“When pain o'er this weak flesh prevails,
With lamb-like patience arm my breast.”
And when she sent to me, to let me know she was ill, she
wrote in her note, ‘I suffer the will of Jesus. All he sends is
sweetened by His love. I am as happy as if I heard a voice
say, -
‘For me my elder brethren stay,
And angels beckon me away,
And Jesus bids me come !"
“(2.) Upon my telling her, ‘I cannot choose life or death
for you, she said, ‘I asked the Lord, that, if it was His will,
I might die first. And he told me, you should survive me,
and that you should close my eyes. When we perceived it.
was the small-pox, I said to her, ‘My dear, you will not be
frighted if we tell you what is your distemper. She said, ‘I
cannot be frighted at His will.’
“(3.) The distemper was soon very heavy upon her; but
so much the more was her faith strengthened. Tuesday,
November 16, she said to me, ‘I have been worshipping
before the throne in a glorious manner; my soul was so let
into God!” I said, ‘Did the Lord give you any particular
promise?’ ‘No, replied she; ‘it was all
That sacred awe that dares not move,
And all the silent heaven of love.”
“(4.) On Thursday, upon my asking, ‘What have you to
say to me?’ she said, ‘Nay, nothing but what you know
already: God is love.’ I asked, ‘Have you any particular
promise?” She replied, ‘I do not seem to want any; I can
live without. I shall die a lump of deformity, but shall meet
you all-glorious: And, meantime, I shall still have fellowship
with your spirit.”
“(5.) Mr. M. asked, what she thought the most excellent
way to walk in, and what were its chief hinderances. She
answered: ‘The greatest hinderance is generally from the
natural constitution. It was mine to be reserved, to be very
quiet, to suffer much, and to say little. Some may think one
way more excellent, and some another : But the thing is to
live in the will of God. For some months past, when I have
been particularly devoted to this, I have felt such a guidance
of his Spirit, and the unction which I have received from the
Holy One has so taught me of all things, that I needed not
any man should teach me, save as this anointing teacheth.’
“(6.) On Friday morning she said, ‘I believe I shall die.”
She then sat up in her bed and said, ‘Lord, I bless thee, that
thou art ever with me, and all thou hast is mine. Thy love is
greater than my weakness, greater than my helplessness,
greater than my unworthiness. Lord, thou sayest to corruption,
Thou art my sister. And glory be to thee, O Jesus, thou art
my Brother. Let me comprehend, with all saints, the length,
and breadth, and depth, and height of thy love! Bless these;’
(some that were present;) ‘let them be every moment exer
cised in all things as thou wouldest have them to be.”
“(7.) Some hours after, it seemed as if the agonies of
death were just coming upon her; but her face was full of
smiles of triumph, and she clapped her hands for joy. Mrs.
C. said, ‘My dear, you are more than conqueror through the
blood of the Lamb. She answered: ‘Yes, O yes, sweet
Jesus ! O death, where is thy sting?” She then lay as in
a doze for some time. Afterwards, she strove to speak, but
could not: However, she testified her love, by shaking hands
with all in the room.
“(8.) Mr. W. then came. She said, ‘Sir, I did not know
that I should live to see you. But I am glad the Lord has
given me this opportunity, and likewise power to speak to you.
I love you. You have always preached the strictest doctrine;
and I loved to follow it. Do so still, whoever is pleased or
displeased.’ He asked, “Do you now believe you are saved
from sin 7” She said, ‘Yes; I have had no doubt of it for
many months. That I ever had, was, because I did not abide
in the faith. I now feel I have kept the faith; and perfect
love casteth out all fear. As to you, the Lord promised me,
your latter works should exceed your former, though I do not
live to see it. I have been a great enthusiast, as they term
it, these six months; but never lived so near the heart of
Christ in my life. You, Sir, desire to comfort the hearts of
hundreds by following that simplicity your soul loves.”
“(9.) To one who had received the love of God under her
prayer, she said, ‘I feel I have not followed a cunningly-devised
fable; for I am as happy as I can live. Do you press on, and
stop not short of the mark. To Miss M s she said, ‘Love
Christ; he loves you. I believe I shall see you at the right
hand of God: But as one star differs from another star in
glory, so shall it be in the resurrection. I charge you, in the
presence of God, meet me in that day all-glorious within.
Avoid all conformity to the world. You are robbed of many
of your privileges. I know I shall be found blameless. Do
you labour to be found of him in peace, without spot.’
“(10.) Saturday morning, she prayed nearly as follows:
‘I know, my Lord, my life is prolonged only to do thy will.
And though I should never eat or drink more,” (she had not
swallowed anything for near eight-and-twenty hours,) ‘thy
will be done. I am willing to be kept so a twelvemonth:
Man liveth not by bread alone. I praise thee that there is
not a shadow of complaining in our streets. In that sense
we know not what sickness means. Indeed, Lord, neither
life, nor death, nor things present, nor things to come, no, nor
any creature, shall separate us from thy love one moment.
Bless these, that there may be no lack in their souls. I
believe there shall not. I pray in faith.”
“On Sunday and Monday she was light-headed, but
sensible at times. It then plainly appeared, her heart was
still in heaven. One said to her, “Jesus is our mark.” She
replied: “I have but one mark; I am all spiritual. Miss
M. said to her, “You dwell in God.” She answered: “Alto
gether. A person asked her: “Do you love me?” She
said, ‘O, I love Christ; I love my Christ.’ To another she
said, ‘I shall not long be here; Jesus is precious, very
precious indeed. She said to Miss M., ‘The Lord is very
good; he keeps my soul above all. For fifteen hours before
she died, she was in strong convulsions: Her sufferings were
extreme. One said, ‘You are made perfect through suffer
ings. She said, “More and more so. After lying quiet
some time, she said, ‘Lord, thou art strong !” Then pausing
a considerable space, she uttered her last words, “My Jesus
is all in all to me: Glory be to him through time and
eternity. After this, she lay still for about half an hour,
and then expired without a sigh or groan.”
25. The next year, the number of those who believed they
were saved from sin still increasing, I judged it needful to
publish, chiefly for their use, “Farther Thoughts on
Christian Perfection:”--
“QUESTION 1. How is “ Christ the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believeth ?’ (Rom. x. 4.)
“ANswer. In order to understand this, you must understand
what law is here spoken of; and this, I apprehend, is, (1.) The
Mosaic law, the whole Mosaic dispensation; which St. Paul
continually speaks of as one, though containing three parts,
the political, moral, and ceremonial. (2.) The Adamic law,
that given to Adam in innocence, properly called ‘the law of
works.’ This is in substance the same with the angelie law,
being common to angels and men. It required that man
should use, to the glory of God, all the powers with which he
was created. Now, he was created free from any defect, either
in his understanding or his affections. His body was then
no clog to the mind; it did not hinder his apprehending all
things clearly, judging truly concerning them, and reasoning
justly, if he reasoned at all. I say, if he reasoned; for possibly
he did not. Perhaps he had no need of reasoning, till his
corruptible body pressed down the mind, and impaired its
native faculties. Perhaps, till then, the mind saw every
truth that offered as directly as the eye now sees the light.
“Consequently, this law, proportioned to his original
powers, required that he should always think, always speak,
and always act precisely right, in every point whatever. He
was well able so to do: And God could not but require the
service he was able to pay.
“But Adam fell; and his incorruptible body became
corruptible; and ever since, it is a clog to the soul, and
hinders its operations. Hence, at present, no child of man
can at all times apprehend clearly, or judge truly. And where
either the judgment or apprehension is wrong, it is impossible
to reason justly. Therefore, it is as natural for a man to
mistake as to breathe; and he can no more live without the
one than without the other: Consequently, no man is able
to perform the service which the Adamic law requires.
“And no man is obliged to perform it; God does not
require it of any man: For Christ is the end of the Adamic,
as well as the Mosaic, law. By his death, he hath put an end
to both; he hath abolished both the one and the other, with
regard to man; and the obligation to observe either the one
or the other is vanished away. Nor is any man living bound
to observe the Adamic more than the Mosaic law.”
“In the room of this, Christ hath established another, namely,
the law of faith. Not every one that doeth, but every one
that believeth, now receiveth righteousness, in the full sense
·of the word; that is, he is justified, sanctified, and glorified.
“Q. 2. Are we then dead to the law 7
“A. We are ‘dead to the law, by the body of Christ’
given for us; (Rom. vii. 4;) to the Adamic as well as Mosaic
law. We are wholly freed therefrom by his death; that law
expiring with him.
“Q. 3. How, then, are we ‘not without law to God, but
under the law to Christ?” (1 Cor. ix. 21.)
“A. We are without that law; but it does not follow that
we are without any law : For God has established another
law in its place, even the law of faith: And we are all under
this law to God and to Christ; both our Creator and our
Redeemer require us to observe it.
“Q. 4. Is love the fulfilling of this law?
* I mean, it is not the condition either of present or future salvation.
“A. Unquestionably it is. The whole law under which
we now are, is fulfilled by love. (Rom. xiii. 9, 10.) Faith
working or animated by love is all that God now requires of
man. He has substituted (not sincerity, but) love, in the
room of angelic perfection.
“Q. 5. How is ‘love the end of the commandment?”
(1 Tim. i. 5.)
“A. It is the end of every commandment of God. It is
the point aimed at by the whole and every part of the
Christian institution. The foundation is faith, purifying the
heart; the end love, preserving a good conscience.
“Q. 6. What love is this?
“A. The loving the Lord our God with all our heart,
mind, soul, and strength; and the loving our neighbour,
every man, as ourselves, as our own souls.
“Q. 7. What are the fruits or properties of this love?
“A. St. Paul informs us at large, love is long-suffering.
It suffers all the weaknesses of the children of God, all the
wickedness of the children of the world; and that not for a little
time only, but as long as God pleases. In all, it sees the hand
of God, and willingly submits thereto. Meantime, it is kind.
In all, and after all, it suffers, it is soft, mild, tender, benign.
‘Love envieth not; it excludes every kind and degree of
envy out of the heart: ‘love acteth not rashly, in a violent,
headstrong manner, nor passes any rash or severe judgment:
It ‘doth not behave itself indecently; is not rude, does not
act out of character: “Seeketh not her own’ ease, pleasure,
honour, or profit: ‘Is not provoked; expels all anger from
the heart: ‘Thinketh no evil; casteth out all jealousy, sus
piciousness, and readiness to believe evil: “Rejoiceth not in
iniquity; yea, weeps at the sin or folly of its bitterest enemies:
“But rejoicethin the truth; in the holiness and happiness of
every child of man. ‘Love covereth all things, speaks evil of
no man; ‘believeth all things’ that tend to the advantage of
another's character. It ‘hopeth all things,’ whatever may
extenuate the faults which cannot be denied; and it ‘endureth
all things’ which God can permit, or men and devils inflict.
This is ‘the law of Christ, the perfect law, the law of liberty.”
“And this distinction between the ‘law of faith’ (or love)
and ‘the law of works, is neither a subtle nor an unnecessary
distinction. It is plain, easy, and intelligible to any common
understanding. And it is absolutely necessary, to prevent a
ChRISTIAN PERFECTION. 4.17
thousand doubts and fears, even in those who do “walk
in love.”
“Q. 8. But do we not “in many things offend all, yea,
the best of us, even against this law?
“A. In one sense we do not, while all our tempers, and
thoughts, and words, and works, spring from love. But in
another we do, and shall do, more or less, as long as we remain
in the body. For neither love nor the ‘unction of the Holy
One makes us infallible: Therefore, through unavoidable
defect of understanding, we cannot but mistake in many things.
And these mistakes will frequently occasion something wrong,
both in our temper, and words, and actions. From mistaking
his character, we may love a person less than he really deserves.
And by the same mistake we are unavoidably led to speak or
act, with regard to that person, in such a manner as is contrary
to this law, in some or other of the preceding instances.
“Q. 9. Do we not then need Christ, even on this account?
“A. The holiest of men still need Christ, as their Prophet,
as ‘the light of the world.” For he does not give them light,
but from moment to moment: The instant he withdraws, all
is darkness. They still need Christ as their King; for God
does not give them a stock of holiness. But unless they
receive a supply every moment, nothing but unholiness would
remain. They still need Christ as their Priest, to make
atonement for their holy things. Even perfect holiness is
acceptable to God only through Jesus Christ.
“Q. 10. May not, then, the very best of men adopt the dying
Martyr's confession: ‘I am in myself nothing but sin, dark
ness, hell; but thou art my light, my holiness, my heaven?’
“A. Not exactly. But the best of men may say, ‘Thou
art my light, my holiness, my heaven. Through my union
with thee, I am full of light, of holiness, and happiness.
But if I were left to myself, I should be nothing but sin,
darkness, hell.’
“But to proceed: The best of men need Christ as their
Priest, their Atonement, their Advocate with the Father; not
only as the continuance of their every blessing depends on
his death and intercession, but on account of their coming
short of the law of love. For every man living does so.
You who feel all love, compare yourselves with the preceding
description. Weigh yourselves in this balance, and see if you
are not wanting in many particulars.
“Q. 11. But if all this be consistent with Christian perfec
tion, that perfection is not freedom from all sin; seeing ‘sin
is the transgression of the law :’ And the perfect transgress
the very law they are under. Besides, they need the atone
ment of Christ; and he is the atonement of nothing but sin.
Is, then, the term sinless perfection, proper?
“A. It is not worth disputing about. But observe in what
sense the persons in question need the atonement of Christ.
They do not need him to reconcile them to God afresh; for
they are reconciled. They do not need him to restore the
favour of God, but to continue it. He does not procure
pardon for them anew, but “ever liveth to make intercession
for them;’ and ‘by one offering he hath perfected for ever
them that are sanctified.” (Heb. x. 14.)
“For want of duly considering this, some deny that they
need the atonement of Christ. Indeed, exceeding few; I do
not remember to have found five of them in England. Of
the two, I would sooner give up perfection; but we need not
give up either one or the other. The perfection I hold,
‘Love rejoicing evermore, praying without ceasing, and in
everything giving thanks, is well consistent with it; if any
hold a perfection which is not, they must look to it.
“Q. 12. Does then Christian perfection imply any more
than sincerity?
“A. Not if you mean by that word, love filling the heart,
expelling pride, anger, desire, self-will; rejoicing evermore,
praying without ceasing, and in everything giving thanks.
But I doubt, few use sincerity in this sense. Therefore, I
think the old word is best.
“A person may be sincere who has all his natural tempers,
pride, anger, lust, self-will. But he is not perfect till his heart
is cleansed from these, and all its other corruptions.
“To clear this point a little farther: I know many that
love God with all their heart. He is their one desire, their
one delight, and they are continually happy in him. They
love their neighbour as themselves. They feel as sincere,
fervent, constant a desire for the happiness of every man,
good or bad, friend or enemy, as for their own. They rejoice
evermore, pray without ceasing, and in everything give
thanks. Their souls are continually streaming up to God, in
holy joy, prayer, and praise. This is a point of fact; and
this is plain, sound, scriptural experience.
-
“But even these souls dwell in a shattered body, and are
so pressed down thereby, that they cannot always exert
themselves as they would, by thinking, speaking, and acting
precisely right. For want of better bodily organs, they must
at times think, speak, or act wrong; not indeed through a
defect of love, but through a defect of knowledge. And
while this is the case, notwithstanding that defect, and its
consequences, they fulfil the law of love.
“Yet as, even in this case, there is not a full conformity
to the perfect law, so the most perfect do, on this very
account, need the blood of atonement, and may properly for
themselves, as well as for their brethren, say, ‘Forgive us
our trespasses.’
“Q. 13. But if Christ has put an end to that law, what
need of any atonement for their transgressing it?
“A. Observe in what sense he has put an end to it, and
the difficulty vanishes. Were it not for the abiding merit of
his death, and his continual intercession for us, that law
would condemn us still. These, therefore, we still need for
every transgression of it.
“Q. 14. But can one that is saved from sin be tempted?
“A. Yes; for Christ was tempted.
“Q. 15. However, what you call temptation, I call the
corruption of my heart. And how will you distinguish one
from the other?
“A. In some cases it is impossible to distinguish, without
the direct witness of the Spirit. But in general one may
distinguish thus:
“One commends me. Here is a temptation to pride.
But instantly my soul is humbled before God. And I feel no
pride; of which I am as sure, as that pride is not humility.
“A man strikes me. Here is a temptation to anger.
But my heart overflows with love. And I feel no anger at
all; of which I can be as sure, as that love and anger are not
the same.
“A woman solicits me. Here is a temptation to lust. But
in the instant I shrink back. And I feel no desire or lust at
all; of which I can be as sure, as that my hand is cold or hot.
“Thus it is, if I am tempted by a present object; and it is
just the same, if, when it is absent, the devil recals a commenda
tion, an injury, or a woman, to my mind. In the instant the
soul repels the temptation, and remains filled with pure love.
*
“And the difference is still plainer, when I compare my
present state with my past, wherein I felt temptation and
corruption too.
“Q. 16. But how do you know, that you are sanctified,
saved from your inbred corruption?
“A. I can know it no otherwise than I know that I am
justified. ‘Hereby know we that we are of God,” in either
sense, ‘by the Spirit that he hath given us.”
“We know it by the witness and by the fruit of the Spirit.
And, First, by the witness. As, when we were justified, the
Spirit bore witness with our spirit, that our sins were forgiven;
so, when we were sanctified, he bore witness, that they were
taken away. Indeed, the witness of sanctification is not always
clear at first; (as neither is that of justification;) neither is it
afterward always the same, but, like that of justification,
sometimes stronger and sometimes fainter. Yea, and some
times it is withdrawn. Yet, in general, the latter testimony
of the Spirit is both as clear and as steady as the former.
“Q. 17. But what need is there of it, seeing sanctification
is a real change, not a relative only, like justification?
“A. But is the new birth a relative change only ? Is not
this a real change? Therefore, if we need no witness of our
sanctification, because it is a real change, for the same reason
we should need none, that we are born of or are the children
of God.
“Q. 18. But does not sanctification shine by its own light?
“A. And does not the new birth too? Sometimes it does;
and so does sanctification; at others it does not. In the hour
of temptation Satan clouds the work of God, and injects
various doubts and reasonings, especially in those who have
either very weak or very strong understandings. At such
times there is absolute need of that witness; without which
the work of sanctification not only could not be discerned,
but could no longer subsist. Were it not for this, the soul
could not then abide in the love of God; much less could it
rejoice evermore, and in everything give thanks. In these
circumstances, therefore, a direct testimony that we are
sanctified is necessary in the highest degree.
“‘But I have no witness that I am saved from sin. And
yet I have no doubt of it.’ Very well: As long as you have
no doubt, it is enough; when you have, you will need that
witness.
Chi RISTIAN PERFECTION. 421
“Q. 19. But what scripture makes mention of any such
thing, or gives any reason to expect it?
“A. That scripture, ‘We have received, not the spirit
that is of the world, but the Spirit which is of God; that we
may know the things which are freely given us of God.”
(1 Corinthians ii. 12.)
“Now surely sanctification is one of ‘the things which are
freely given us of God.’ And no possible reason can be
assigned why this should be excepted, when the Apostle
says, “We receive the Spirit” for this very end, ‘that we may
know the things which are’ thus ‘freely given us.”
“Is not the same thing implied in that well-known scripture,
“The Spirit itself witnesseth with our spirit, that we are the
children of God?’ (Romans viii. 16.) Does he witness this
only to those who are children of God in the lowest sense?
Nay, but to those also who are such in the highest sense.
And does he not witness, that they are such in the highest
sense ? What reason have we to doubt it?
“What, if a man were to affirm, (as indeed many do,) that
this witness belongs only to the highest class of Christians?
Would not you answer, “The Apostle makes no restriction;
therefore doubtless it belongs to all the children of God?”
And will not the same answer hold, if any affirm, that it
belongs only to the lowest class?
“Consider likewise 1 John v. 19: ‘We know that we are
of God. How? ‘By the Spirit that he hath given us.”
Nay, “hereby we know that He abideth in us.” And what
ground have we, either from Scripture or reason, to exclude
the witness, any more than the fruit, of the Spirit, from
being here intended? By this then also ‘we know that we
are of God,” and in what sense we are so; whether we are
babes, young men, or fathers, we know in the same manner.
“Not that I affirm that all young men, or even fathers,
have this testimony every moment. There may be inter
missions of the direct testimony that they are thus born of
God; but those intermissions are fewer and shorter as they
grow up in Christ; and some have the testimony both of
their justification and sanctification, without any intermission
at all; which I presume more might have, did they walk
humbly and closely with God.
“Q. 20. May not some of them have a testimony from the
$pirit, that they shall not finally fall from God?
“A. They may. And this persuasion, that neither life nor
death shall separate them from Him, far from being hurtful,
may in some circumstances be extremely useful. These
therefore we should in mowise grieve, but earnestly encourage
them to ‘hold the beginning of their confidence steadfast to
the end.”
“Q. 21. But have any a testimony from the Spirit that
they shall never sin?
“A. We know not what God may vouchsafe to some
particular persons; but we do not find any general state
described in Scripture, from which a man cannot draw back
to sin. If there were any state wherein this was impossible,
it would be that of these who are sanctified, who are ‘fathers
in Christ, who rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing, and in
everything give thanks; but it is not impossible for these to
draw back. They who are sanctified, yet may fall and perish.
(Heb. x. 29.) Even fathers in Christ need that warning:
‘Love not the world.” (1 John ii. 15.) They who “rejoice,
pray, and ‘give thanks without ceasing, may, nevertheless,
‘quench the Spirit.” (1 Thess. v. 16, &c.) Nay, even they
who are ‘sealed unto the day of redemption,” may yet
“grieve the Holy Spirit of God.” (Ephesians iv. 30.)
“Although, therefore, God may give such a witness to
some particular persons, yet it is not to be expected by
Christians in general; there being no scripture whereon to
ground such an expectation.
“Q. 22. By what ‘fruit of the Spirit” may we ‘know that
we are of God, even in the highest sense?
“A. By love, joy, peace, always abiding; by invariable long
suffering, patience, resignation; by gentleness, triumphing
over all provocation; by goodness, mildness, sweetness, ten
derness of spirit; by fidelity, simplicity, godly sincerity; by
meekness, calmness, evenness of spirit; by temperance, not.
only in food and sleep, but in all things natural and spiritual.
“Q. 23. But what great matter is there in this? Have
we not all this when we are justified?
“A. What, total resignation to the will of God, without any
mixture of self-will?' gentleness, without any touch of anger,
even the moment we are provoked ? love to God, without the
least love to the creature, but in and for God, excluding all
pride? love to man, excluding all envy, all jealousy, and rash
judging? meekness, keeping the whole soul inviolably calm ?
and temperance in all things? Deny that any ever came up
to this, if you please; but do not say, all who are justified do.
“Q. 24. But some who are newly justified do. What
then will you say to these?
“A. If they really do, I will say they are sanctified; saved
from sin in that moment; and that they never need lose
what God has given, or feel sin any more.
“But certainly this is an exempt case. It is otherwise
with the generality of those that are justified: They feel in
themselves more or less pride, anger, self-will, a heart bent
to backsliding. And, till they have gradually mortified
these, they are not fully renewed in love.
“Q. 25. But is not this the case of all that are justified ?
Do they not gradually die to sin and grow in grace, till at, or
perhaps a little before, death God perfects them in love?
“A. I believe this is the case of most, but not all. God
usually gives a considerable time for men to receive light, to
grow in grace, to do and suffer his will, before they are
either justified or sanctified; but he does not invariably
adhere to this; sometimes he ‘cuts short his work: He does
the work of many years in a few weeks; perhaps in a week,
a day, an hour. He justifies or sanctifies both those who
have done or suffered nothing, and who have not had time
for a gradual growth either in light or grace. And ‘may he
not do what he will with his own? Is thine eye evil, because
he is good?”
“It need not, therefore, be affirmed over and over, and
proved by forty texts of Scripture, either that most men are
perfected in love at last, that there is a gradual work of God
in the soul, or that, generally speaking, it is a long time,
even many years, before sin is destroyed. All this we know :
But we know likewise, that God may, with man’s good leave,
‘cut short his work, in whatever degree he pleases, and do
the usual work of many years in a moment. He does so in
many instances; and yet there is a gradual work, both before
and after that moment: So that one may affirm the work
is gradual, another, it is instantaneous, without any manner
of contradiction.
“Q. 26. Does St. Paul mean any more by being ‘sealed
with the Spirit, than being ‘renewed in love?’
“A. Perhaps in one place, (2 Cor. i. 22) he does not mean
so much ; but in another, (Eph. i. 13,) he seems to include
both the fruit and the witness; and that in a higher degree
than we experience even when we are first ‘renewed in love;’
God “sealeth us with the Spirit of promise,’ by giving us
‘the full assurance of hope; such a confidence of receiving all
the promises of God, as excludes the possibility of doubting;
with that Holy Spirit, by universal holiness, stamping the
whole image of God on our hearts.
“Q. 27. But how can those who are thus sealed ‘grieve
the Holy Spirit of God?”
“A. St. Paul tells you very particularly, (1.) By such
conversation as is not profitable, not to the use of edifying,
not apt to minister grace to the hearers. (2.) By relapsing
into bitterness or want of kindness. (3.) By wrath, lasting
displeasure, or want of tender-heartedness. (4.) By anger,
however soon it is over; want of instantly forgiving one
another. (5.) By clamour or bawling, loud, harsh, rough
speaking. (6.) By evil-speaking, whispering, tale-bearing;
needlessly mentioning the fault of an absent person, though
in ever so soft a manner.
“Q. 28. What do you think of those in London, who
seem to have been lately ‘renewed in love?’
“A. There is something very peculiar in the experience of
the greater part of them. One would expect that a believer
should first be filled with love, and thereby emptied of sin;
whereas these were emptied of sin first, and then filled with
love. Perhaps it pleased God to work in this manner, to
make his work more plain and undeniable; and to distinguish
it more clearly from that overflowing love, which is often felt
even in a justified state.
“It seems likewise most agreeable to the great promise:
“From all your filthiness I will cleanse you; a new heart also
will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you.’
(Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26.)
“But I do not think of them all alike : There is a wide
difference between some of them and others. I think most
of them with whom I have spoken, have much faith, love, joy,
and peace. Some of these I believe are renewed in love, and
have the direct witness of it; and they manifest the fruit
above described, in all their words and actions. Now, let
any man call this what he will; it is what I call perfection.
“But some who have much love, peace, and joy, yet have
not the direct witness; and others who think they have, are,
nevertheless, manifestly wanting in the fruit. How many I
will not say; perhaps one in ten; perhaps more or fewer.
But some are undeniably wanting in longsuffering, Christian
resignation. They do not see the hand of God in whatever
occurs, and cheerfully embrace it. They do not in everything
give thanks, and rejoice evermore. They are not happy; at
least, not always happy; for sometimes they complain. They
say, this or that is hard |
“Some are wanting in gentleness. They resist evil, instead
of turning the other cheek. They do not receive reproach with
gentleness; no, nor even reproof. Nay, they are not able to
bear contradiction, without the appearance, at least, of resent
ment. If they are reproved or contradicted, though mildly,
they do not take it well; they behave with more distance and
reserve than they did before. If they are reproved or contra
dicted harshly, they answer it with harshness; with a loud
voice, or with an angry tone, or in a sharp and surly manner.
They speak sharply or roughly, when they reprove others;
and behave roughly to their inferiors.
“Some are wanting in goodness. They are not kind,
mild, sweet, amiable, soft, and loving at all times, in their
spirit, in their words, in their look and air, in the whole tenor
of their behaviour; and that to all, high and low, rich and
poor, without respect of persons; particularly to them that
are out of the way, to opposers, and to those of their own
household. They do not long, study, endeavour by every
means, to make all about them happy. They can see them
uneasy, and not be concerned; perhaps they make them so;
and then wipe their mouths and say, ‘Why, they deserve it;
it is their own fault.”
“Some are wanting in fidelity, a nice regard to truth,
simplicity, and godly sincerity. Their love is hardly without
dissimulation; something like guile is found in their mouth.
To avoid roughness, they lean to the other extreme. They
are smooth to an excess, so as scarce to avoid a degree of
fawning, or of seeming to mean what they do not.
“Some are wanting in meekness, quietness of spirit,
composure, evenness of temper. They are up and down,
sometimes high, sometimes low ; their mind is not well
balanced. Their affections are either not in due proportion;
they have too much of one, too little of another; or they are
not duly mixed and tempered together, so as to counterpoise
each other. Hence there is often a jar. Their soul is out of
tune, and cannot make the true harmony.
“Some are wanting in temperance. They do not steadily
use that kind and degree of food, which they know, or
might know, would most conduce to the health, strength, and
vigour of the body: Or they are not temperate in sleep;
they do not rigorously adhere to what is best both for body and
mind; otherwise they would constantly go to bed and rise
early, and at a fixed hour: Or they sup late, which is neither
good for body nor soul: Or they use neither fasting nor
abstinence: Or they prefer (which are so many sorts of
intemperance) that preaching, reading, or conversation,
which gives them transient joy and comfort, before that
which brings godly sorrow, or instruction in righteousness.
Such joy is not sanctified; it doth not tend to, and terminate
in, the crucifixion of the heart. Such faith doth not centre
in God, but rather in itself.
“So far all is plain. I believe you have faith, and love,
and joy, and peace. Yet you who are particularly concerned
know each for yourself, that you are wanting in the respects
above-mentioned. You are wanting either in long-suffering,
gentleness, or goodness; either in fidelity, meekness, or
temperance. Let us not, then, on either hand, fight about
words. In the thing we clearly agree.
“You have not what I call perfection; if others will call
it so, they may. However, hold fast what you have, and
earnestly pray for what you have not.
“Q. 29. Can those who are perfect grow in grace?
“A. Undoubtedly they can; and that not only while they
are in the body, but to all eternity.
“Q. 30. Can they fall from it?
“A. I am well assured they can; matter of fact puts this
beyond dispute. Formerly we thought, one saved from sin
could not fall; now we know the contrary. We are sur
rounded with instances of those who lately experienced all that
I mean by perfection. They had both the fruit of the Spirit,
and the witness; but they have now lost both. Neither does
any one stand by virtue of anything that is implied in the
nature of the state. There is no such height or strength of
holiness as it is impossible to fall from. If there be any that
cannot fall, this wholly depends on the promise of God.
“Q. 31. Can those who fall from this state recover it?
“A. Why not? We have many instances of this also. |
Nay, it is an exceeding common thing for persons to lose it
more than once, before they are established therein.
“It is therefore to guard them who are saved from sin, from
every occasion of stumbling, that I give the following advices.
But first I shall speak plainly concerning the work itself.
“I esteem this late work to be of God; probably the
greatest now upon earth. Yet, like all others, this also is
mixed with much human frailty. But these weaknesses are
far less than might have been expected; and ought to have
been joyfully borne by all that loved and followed after
righteousness. That there have been a few weak, warm
headed men, is no reproach to the work itself, no just ground
for accusing a multitude of sober-minded men, who are
patterns of strict holiness. Yet (just the contrary to what
ought to have been) the opposition is great; the helps few.
Hereby many are hindered from seeking faith and holiness
by the false zeal of others; and some who at first began to
run well are turned out of the way.
“Q. 32. What is the First advice + that you would give
them ?
“A. Watch and pray continually against pride. If God has
cast it out, see that it enter no more: It is full as dangerous as
desire. And you may slide back into it unawares; especially
if you think there is no danger of it. ‘Nay, but I ascribe all I
have to God.” So you may, and be proud nevertheless. For
it is pride, not only to ascribe anything we have to ourselves,
but to think we have what we really have not. Mr. L , for
instance, ascribed all the light he had to God, and so far he
was humble; but then he thought he had more light than any
man living; and this was palpable pride. So you ascribe all
the knowledge you have to God; and in this respect you are
humble. But if you think you have more than you really have;
or if you think you are so taught of God, as no longer to need
* The advices which follow were published in a separate tract in the year 1762,
under the title of “Cautions and Directions given to the Greatest Professors in
the Methodist Societies,” with the following motto:
“Set the false witnesses aside,
Yet hold the truth for ever fast.”
It was evidently intended to guard the people against the mischievous extrava
gances of George Bell and his friends, a particular account of whom is given in
Mr. Wesley's Journal about that period.-EDIT.
man’s teaching; pride lieth at the door. Yes, you have need
to be taught, not only by Mr. Morgan, by one another, by
Mr. Maxfield, or me, but by the weakest Preacher in London;
yea, by all men. For God sendeth by whom he will send.
“Do not therefore say to any who would advise or reprove
you, ‘You are blind; you cannot teach me.’ Do not say,
‘This is your wisdom, your carnal reason; but calmly weigh
the thing before God.
“Always remember, much grace does not imply much
light. These do not always go together. As there may be
much light where there is but little love, so there may be
much love where there is little light. The heart has more
heat than the eye; yet it cannot see. And God has wisely
tempered the members of the body together, that none may
say to another, “I have no need of thee.’
“To imagine none can teach you, but those who are them
selves saved from sin, is a very great and dangerous mistake.
Give not place to it for a moment; it would lead you into
a thousand other mistakes, and that irrecoverably. No;
dominion is not founded in grace, as the madmen of the last
age talked. Obey and regard ‘them that are over you in the
Lord, and do not think you know better than them. Know
their place and your own; always remembering, much love
does not imply much light.
“The not observing this has led some into many mistakes,
and into the appearance, at least, of pride. O beware of the
appearance, and the thing! Let there “be in you that lowly
mind which was in Christ Jesus.’ And ‘be ye likewise
clothed with humility. Let it net only fill, but cover you all
over. Let modesty and self-diffidence appear in all your words
and actions. Let all you speak and do show that you are
little, and base, and mean, and vile in your own eyes.
“As one instance of this, be always ready to own any fault
you have been in. If you have at any time thought, spoke,
or acted wrong, be not backward to acknowledge it. Never
dream that this will hurt the cause of God; no, it will further
it. Be therefore open and frank, when you are taxed with
anything; do not seek either to evade or disguise it; but let
it appear just as it is, and you will thereby not hinder,
but adorn, the gospel.
“Q. 33. What is the Second advice which you would
give them?
“A. Beware of that daughter of pride, enthusiasm. Okeep |
at the utmost distance from it! Give no place to a heated
imagination. Do not hastily ascribe things to God. Do not
easily suppose dreams, voices, impressions, visions, or revela
tions to be from God. They may be from him. They may be
from nature. They may be from the devil. Therefore,
“believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of
God. Try all things by the written word, and let all bow down
before it. You are in danger of enthusiasm every hour, if you
depart ever so little from Scripture; yea, or from the plain,
literal meaning of any text, taken in connexion with the con
text. And so you are, if you despise or lightly esteem reason,
knowledge, or human learning; every one of which is an
excellent gift of God, and may serve the noblest purposes.
“I advise you, never to use the words, wisdom, reason, or
knowledge, by way of reproach. On the contrary, pray that
you yourself may abound in them more and more. If you
mean worldly wisdom, useless knowledge, false reasoning,
say so; and throw away the chaff, but not the wheat.
“One general inlet to enthusiasm is, expecting the end
without the means; the expecting knowledge, for instance,
without searching the Scriptures, and consulting the children
of God; the expecting spiritual strength without constant
prayer, and steady watchfulness; the expecting any blessing
without hearing the word of God at every opportunity.
“Some have been ignorant of this device of Satan. They
have left off searching the Scriptures. They said, “God
writes all the Scriptures on my heart. Therefore, I have no
need to read it.” Others thought they had not so much need
of hearing, and so grew slack. in attending the morning
preaching. O take warning, you who are concerned hereinl
You have listened to the voice of a stranger. Fly back to
Christ, and keep in the good old way, which was “once
delivered to the saints;’ the way that even a Heathen bore
testimony of: ‘That the Christians rose early every day to
sing hymns to Christ as God.”
“The very desire of ‘growing in grace’ may sometimes be
an inlet of enthusiasm. As it continually leads us to seek new
grace, it may lead us unawares to seek something else new,
beside new degrees of love to God and man. So it has led some
to seek and fancy they had received gifts of a new kind, after a
new heart, as, (1.)The loving God with all our mind; (2) With
all our soul; (3.) With all our strength: (4.) Oneness with
God: (5.) Oneness with Christ: (6.) Having our life hid with
Christ in God: (7.) Being dead with Christ: (8.) Rising with
him: (9.) The sitting with him in heavenly places: (10.) The
being taken up into his throne: (11.) The being in the New
Jerusalem: (12.) The seeing the tabernacle of God come down
among men: (13.) The being dead to all works: (14.) The
not being liable to death, pain, or grief, or temptation.
“One ground of many of these mistakes is, the taking
every fresh, strong application of any of these scriptures to
the heart, to be a gift of a new kind; not knowing that
several of these scriptures are not fulfilled yet; that most of
the others are fulfilled when we are justified; the rest, the
moment we are sanctified. It remains only to experience
them in higher degrees. This is all we have to expect.
“Another ground of these, and a thousand mistakes, is,
the not considering deeply, that love is the highest gift of
God; humble, gentle, patient love; that all visions, revela
tions, manifestations whatever, are little things compared to
love; and that all the gifts above-mentioned are either the
same with, or infinitely inferior to, it.
“It were well you should be thoroughly sensible of this, -
‘the heaven of heavens is love.’ There is nothing higher in
religion; there is, in effect, nothing else; if you look for
anything but more love, you are looking wide of the mark,
you are getting out of the royal way. And when you are
asking others, ‘Have you received this or that blessing?” if
you mean anything but more love, you mean wrong; you
are leading them out of the way, and putting them upon a
false scent. Settle it then in your heart, that from the
moment God has saved you from all sin, you are to aim at
nothing more, but more of that love described in the
thirteenth of the Corinthians. You can go no higher than
this, till you are carried into Abraham’s bosom.
“I say yet again, beware of enthusiasm. Such is, the
imagining you have the gift of prophesying, or of discerning
of spirits, which I do not believe one of you has; no, nor ever
had yet. Beware of judging people to be either right or
wrong by your own feelings. This is no scriptural way of
judging. O keep close to ‘the law and to the testimony l’
“Q. 34. What is the Third 7
“A. Beware of Antinomianism; “making void the law, or
any part of it, “through faith. Enthusiasm naturally leads
to this; indeed they can scarce be separated. This may
steal upon you in a thousand forms, so that you cannot be
too watchful against it. Take heed of everything, whether
in principle or practice, which has any tendency thereto.
Even that great truth, that “Christ is the end of the law, may
betray us into it, if we do not consider that he has adopted
every point of the moral law, and grafted it into the law of
love. Beware of thinking, ‘Because I am filled with love, I
need not have so much holiness. Because I pray always,
therefore I need no set time for private prayer. Because I
watch always, therefore I need no particular self-examination.’
Let us ‘magnify the law, the whole written word, ‘and make
it honourable. Let this be our voice: “I prize thy com
mandments above gold or precious stones. O what love have
I unto thy law ! all the day long is my study in it. Beware
of Antinomian books; particularly the works of Dr. Crisp
and Mr. Saltmarsh. They contain many excellent things;
and this makes them the more dangerous. O be warned in
time : Do not play with fire. Do not put your hand on the
hole of a cockatrice den. I entreat you, beware of bigotry.
Let not your love or beneficence be confined to Methodists,
so called, only; much less to that very small part of them
who seem to be renewed in love; or to those who believe
yours and their report. O make not this your Shibboleth !
Beware of stillness; ceasing in a wrong sense from your
own works. To mention one instance out of many: “You
have received,” says one, ‘a great blessing. But you began
to talk of it, and to do this and that; so you lost it. You
should have been still.”
“Beware of self-indulgence; yea, and making a virtue of it,
laughing at self-denial, and taking up the cross daily, at fasting
or abstinence. Beware of censoriousness; thinking or calling
them that anyways oppose you, whether in judgment or prac
tice, blind, dead, fallen, or ‘enemies to the work. Once more,
beware of Solifidianism; crying nothing but, ‘Believe, believe!’
and condemning those as ignorant or legal who speak in a more
scriptural way. At certain seasons, indeed, it may be right to
&reat of nothing but repentance, or merely of faith, or altogether
of holiness; but, in general, our call is to declare the whole
counsel of God, and to prophesy according to the analogy of
faith. The written word treats of the whole and every parti
cular branch of righteousness, descending to its minutest
branches; as to be sober, courteous, diligent, patient, to honour
all men. So, likewise, the Holy Spirit works the same in our
hearts, not merely creating desires after holiness in general, but
strongly inclining us to every particular grace, leading us to
every individual part of ‘whatsoever is lovely.’ And this with
the greatest propriety: For as ‘by works faith is made perfect,”
so the completing or destroying the work of faith, and enjoying
the favour, or suffering the displeasure, of God, greatly
depends on every single act of obedience or disobedience.
“Q. 35. What is the Fourth?
“A. Beware of sins of omission; lose no opportunity of
doing good in any kind. Be zealous of good works; willingly
omit no work, either of piety or mercy. Do all the good you
possibly can to the bodies and souls of men. Particularly, ‘thou
shalt in anywise reprove thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon
him. Be active. Give no place to indolence or sloth; give no
occasion to say, ‘Ye are idle, ye are idle. Many will say so
still; but let your whole spirit and behaviour refute the slander.
Be always employed; lose no shred of time; gather up the
fragments, that nothing be lost. And whatsoever thy hand
findeth to do, do it with thy might. Be “slow to speak,’ and
wary in speaking. ‘In a multitude of words there wanteth
not sin.” Do not talk much; neither long at a time. Few can
converse profitably above an hour. Keep at the utmost
distance from pious chit-chat, from religious gossiping.
“Q. 36. What is the Fifth P
“A. Beware of desiring anything but God. Now you
desire nothing else; every other desire is driven out; see
that none enter again. ‘Keep thyself pure;’ let your ‘eye’
remain “single, and your whole body shall be full of light.”
Admit no desire of pleasing food, or any other pleasure of
sense; no desire of pleasing the eye or the imagination, by
anything grand, or new, or beautiful; no desire of money,
of praise, or esteem; of happiness in any creature. You may
bring these desires back; but you need not; you need feel
them no more. O stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ
hath made you free.
“Be patterns to all, of denying yourselves, and taking up
your cross daily. Let them see that you make no account of
any pleasure which does not bring you nearer to God, nor
regard any pain which does; that you simply aim at pleasing
him, whether by doing or suffering; that the constant
language of your heart, with regard to pleasure or pain,
honour or dishonour, riches or poverty, is,
*All's alike to me, so I
In my Lord may live and die!”
* Q. 37. What is the Sixth ?
“A. Beware of schism, of making a rent in the Church of
Christ. That inward disunion, the members ceasing to have a
reciprocal love ‘one for another, (1 Cor. xii. 25,) is the very
root of all contention, and every outward separation. Beware of
everything tending thereto. Beware of a dividing spirit; shun
whatever has the least aspect that way. Therefore, say not, “I
am of Paul or of Apollos; the verything which occasioned the
schism at Corinth. Say not, ‘This is my Preacher; the best
Preacher in England. Give me him, and take all the rest. All
this tends to breed or foment division, to disunite those whom
God hath joined. Do not despise or run down any Preacher;
do not exalt any one above the rest, lest you hurt both him
and the cause of God. On the other hand, do not bear hard
upon any by reason of some incoherency or inaccuracy of
expression; no, nor for some mistakes, were they really such.
“Likewise, if you would avoid schism, observe every rule
of the Society, and of the Bands, for conscience’ sake. Never
omit meeting your Class or Band; never absent yourself from
any public meeting. These are the very sinews of our Society;
and whatever weakens, or tends to weaken, our regard for
these, or our exactness in attending them, strikes at the very
root of our community. As one saith, ‘That part of our
economy, the private weekly meetings for prayer, examination,
and particular exhortation, has been the greatest means of
deepening and confirming every blessing that was received by
the word preached, and of diffusing it to others, who could
not attend the public ministry; whereas, without this reli
gious connexion and intercourse, the most ardent attempts,
by mere preaching, have proved of no lasting use.’
“Suffer not one thought of separating from your brethren,
whether their opinions agree with yours or not. Do not
dream that any man sins in not believing you, in not taking
your word; or that this or that opinion is essential to the
work, and both must stand or fall together. Beware of
impatience of contradiction. Do not condemn or think
hardly of those who cannot see just as you see, or who judge
it their duty to contradict you, whether in a great thing or a
small. I fear some of us have thought hardly of others,
merely because they contradicted what we affirmed. All
this tends to division; and, by everything of this kind, we
are teaching them an evil lesson against ourselves.
“O beware of touchiness, of testiness, not bearing to be
spoken to ; starting at the least word; and flying from those
who do not implicitly receive mine or another’s sayings!
“Expect contradiction and opposition, together with crosses
of various kinds. Consider the words of St. Paul: “To you
it is given, in the behalf of Christ,’--for his sake, as a fruit
of his death and intercession for you,-‘not only to believe,
but also to suffer for his sake.” (Phil. i. 29.) It is given /
God gives you this opposition or reproach; it is a fresh token
of his love. And will you disown the Giver; or spurn his gift,
and count it a misfortune? Will you not rather say, ‘Father,
the hour is come, that thou shouldest be glorified: Now thou
givest thy child to suffer something for thee: Do with me
according to thy will?” Know that these things, far from
being hinderances to the work of God, or to your soul, unless
by your own fault, are not only unavoidable in the course of
Providence, but profitable, yea, necessary, for you. Therefore,
receive them from God (not from chance) with willingness,
with thankfulness. Receive them from men with humility,
meekness, yieldingness, gentleness, sweetness. Why should
not even your outward appearance and manner be soft?
Remember the character of Lady Cutts: ‘It was said of the
Roman Emperor Titus, Never any one came displeased from
him. But it might be said of her, Never any one went
displeased to her: So secure were all of the kind and
favourable reception which they would meet with from her.’
“Beware of tempting others to separate from you. Give no
offence which can possibly be avoided; see that your practice be
in all things suitable to your profession, adorning the doctrine of
God our Saviour. Be particularly careful in speaking of your
self: You may not, indeed, deny the work of God; but speak
of it, when you are called thereto, in the most inoffensive man
ner possible. Avoid all magnificent, pompous words; indeed,
you need give it no general name; neither perfection, sanctifica
tion, the second blessing, nor the having attained. Rather
speak of the particulars which God has wrought for you. You
may say, “At such a time I felt a change which I am not
able to express; and since that time, I have not felt pride, or
self-will, or anger, or unbelief; nor anything but a fulness of
love to God and to all mankind.’ And answer any other
plain question that is asked with modesty and simplicity.
“And if any of you should at any time fall from what you
now are, if you should again feel pride or unbelief, or any
+emper from which you are now delivered; do not deny, do
not hide, do not disguise it at all, at the peril of your soul.
At all events go to one in whom you can confide, and speak
just what you feel. God will enable him to speak a word in
season, which shall be health to your soul. And surely He
will again lift up your head, and cause the bones that have
been broken to rejoice.
“Q. 38. What is the last advice that you would give them?
“A. Be exemplary in all things; particularly in outward
things, (as in dress,) in little things, in the laying out of your
money, (avoiding every needless expense,) in deep, steady
seriousness, and in the solidity and usefulness of all your
conversation. So shall you be ‘a light shining in a dark
place.’ So shall you daily “grow in grace, till ‘an entrance
be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.’
“Most of the preceding advices are strongly enforced in
the following reflections; which I recommend to your deep
and frequent consideration, next to the holy Scriptures :
“(1.) The sea is an excellent figure of the fulness of God,
and that of the blessed Spirit. For as the rivers all return into
the sea; so the bodies, the souls, and the good works of the
righteous, return into God, to live there in his etermal repose.
“Although all the graces of God depend on his mere
bounty, yet is He pleased generally to attach them to the
prayers, the instructions, and the holiness of those with whom
we are. By strong though invisible attractions He draws
some souls through their intercourse with others.
“The sympathies formed by grace far surpass those formed
by nature.
“The truly devout show that passions as naturally flow
from true as from false love; so deeply sensible are they of
the goods and evils of those whom they love for God’s sake.
But this can only be comprehended by those who understand
the language of love.
“The bottom of the soul may be in repose, even while we
are in many outward troubles; just as the bottom of the sea
is calm, while the surface is strongly agitated.
“The best helps to growth in grace are the ill usage, the
affronts, and the losses which befal us. We should receive
them with all thankfulness, as preferable to all others, were
it only on this account,-that our will has no part therein.
“The readiest way to escape from our sufferings is, to be
willing they should endure as long as God pleases.
“If we suffer persecution and affliction in a right manner,
we attain a larger measure of conformity to Christ, by a due
improvement of one of these occasions, than we could have done
merely by imitating his mercy, in abundance of good works.
“One of the greatest evidences of God’s love to those that
love him is, to send them afflictions, with grace to bear them.
“Even in the greatest afflictions, we ought to testify to
God, that, in receiving them from his hand, we feel pleasure
in the midst of the pain, from being afflicted by Him who
loves us, and whom we love.
“The readiest way which God takes to draw a man to
himself is, to afflict him in that he loves most, and with good
reason; and to cause this affliction to arise from some good
action done with a single eye; because nothing can more
clearly show him the emptiness of what is most lovely and
desirable in the world.
“(2.) True resignation consists in a thorough conformity
to the whole will of God; who wills and does all (excepting
sin) which comes to pass in the world. In order to this we
have only to embrace all events, good and bad, as His will.
“In the greatest afflictions which can befal the just, either
from heaven or earth, they remain immovable in peace, and
perfectly submissive to God, by an inward, loving regard to
Him, uniting in one all the powers of their souls.
“We ought quietly to suffer whatever befals us, to bear the
defects of others and our own, to confess them to God in secret
prayer, or with groans which cannot be uttered; but never
to speak a sharp or peevish word, nor to murmur or repine;
but thoroughly willing that God should treat you in the manner
that pleases him. We are his lambs, and therefore ought to
be ready to suffer, even to the death, without complaining.
“We are to bear with those we cannot amend, and to be
content with offering them to God. This is true resignation.
And since He has borne our infirmities, we may well bear
those of each other for His sake.
“To abandon all, to strip one’s self of all, in order to seek
and to follow Jesus Christ naked to Bethlehem, where he was
born; naked to the hall where he was scourged; and naked
to Calvary, where he died on the cross, is so great a mercy,
that neither the thing, nor the knowledge of it, is given to
any, but through faith in the Son of God.
“(3.) There is no love of God without patience, and no
patience without lowliness and sweetness of spirit.
“Humility and patience are the surest proofs of the
increase of love.
“Humility alone unites patience with love; without which
it is impossible to draw profit from suffering; or indeed, to
avoid complaint, especially when we think we have given no
occasion for what men make us suffer.
“True humility is a kind of self-annihilation; and this is
the centre of all virtues.
“A soul returned to God ought to be attentive to every
thing which is said to him, on the head of salvation, with a
desire to profit thereby.
“Of the sins which God has pardoned, let nothing remain
but a deeper humility in the heart, and a stricter regulation
in our words, in our actions, and in our sufferings.
“(4.) The bearing men, and suffering evils in meekness
and silence, is the sum of a Christian life.
“God is the first object of our love: Its next office is, to
bear the defects of others. And we should begin the practice
of this amidst our own household.
“We should chiefly exercise our love towards them who
most shock either our way of thinking, or our temper, or our
knowledge, or the desire we have that others should be as
virtuous as we wish to be ourselves.
“(5.) God hardly gives his Spirit even to those whom he
has established in grace, if they do not pray for it on all
occasions, not only once, but many times.
“God does nothing but in answer to prayer; and even
they who have been converted to God without praying for it
themselves, (which is exceeding rare,) were not without the
prayers of others. Every new victory which a soul gains is
the effect of a new prayer.
“On every occasion of uneasiness, we should retire to
prayer, that we may give place to the grace and light of God,
and then form our resolutions, without being in any pain
about what success they may have.
“In the greatest temptations, a single look to Christ, and the
barely pronouncing his name, suffices to overcome the wicked
one, so it be done with confidence and calmness of spirit.
“God’s command to ‘pray without ceasing’ is founded on
the necessity we have of his grace to preserve the life of God
in the soul, which can no more subsist one moment without
it, than the body can without air.
“Whether we think of, or speak to, God, whether we
act or suffer for him, all is prayer, when we have no other
object than his love, and the desire of pleasing him.
“All that a Christian does, even in eating and sleeping, is
prayer, when it is done in simplicity, according to the order
of God, without either adding to or diminishing from it by
his own choice.
“Prayer continues in the desire of the heart, though the
understanding be employed on outward things.
“In souls filled with love, the desire to please God is a
continual prayer.
“As the furious hate which the devil bears us is termed
the roaring of a lion, so our vehement love may be termed
crying after God.
“God only requires of his adult children, that their hearts
be truly purified, and that they offer him continually the
wishes and vows that naturally spring from perfect love.
For these desires, being the genuine fruits of love, are the
most perfect prayers that can spring from it.
“(6.) It is scarce conceivable how strait the way is wherein
God leads them that follow him; and how dependent on him
we must be, unless we are wanting in our faithfulness to him.
“It is hardly credible of how great consequence before God
the smallest things are; and what great inconveniences some
times follow those which appear to be light faults.
“As a very little dust will disorder a clock, and the least
sand will obscure our sight, so the least grain of sin which is
upon the heart will hinder its right motion towards God.
“We ought to be in the church as the saints are in heaven,
and in the house as the holiest men are in the church; doing
our work in the house as we pray in the church; worshipping
God from the ground of the heart.
“We should be continually labouring to cut off all the
useless things that surround us; and God usually retrenches
the superfluities of our souls in the same proportion as we do
those of our bodies.
“The best means of resisting the devilis, to destroy whatever
of the world remains in us, in order to raise for God, upon its
ruins, a building all of love. Then shall we begin, in this
fleeting life, to love God as we shall love him in eternity.
“We scarce conceive how easy it is to rob God of his due,
in our friendship with the most virtuous persons, until they
are torn from us by death. But if this loss produce lasting
sorrow, that is a clear proof that we had before two treasures,
between which we divided our heart.
“(7.) If, after having renounced all, we do not watch
incessantly, and beseech God to accompany our vigilance
with his, we shall be again entangled and overcome.
“As the most dangerous winds may enter at little openings,
so the devil never enters more dangerously than by little
unobserved incidents, which seem to be nothing, yet insensibly
open the heart to great temptations.
“It is good to renew ourselves, from time to time, by
closely examining the state of our souls, as if we had never
done it before; for nothing tends more to the full assurance
of faith, than to keep ourselves by this means in humility,
and the exercise of all good works.
“To continual watchfulness and prayer ought to be added
continual employment. For grace flies a vacuum as well as
nature; and the devil fills whatever God does not fill.
“There is no faithfulness like that which ought to be
between a guide of souls and the person directed by him.
They ought continually to regard each other in God, and
closely to examine themselves, whether all their thoughts are
pure, and all their words directed with Christian discretion.
Other affairs are only the things of men; but these are
peculiarly the things of God.
“(8.) The words of St. Paul, ‘No man can call Jesus
Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, show us the necessity of eyeing
God in our good works, and even in our minutest thoughts;
knowing that none are pleasing to him, but those which he
forms in us and with us. From hence we learn that we cannot
serve him, unless he use our tongue, hands, and heart, to do
by himself and his Spirit whatever he would have us to do.
“If we were not utterly impotent, our good works would
be our own property; whereas now they belong wholly to
God, because they proceed from him and his grace: While
raising our works, and making them all divine, he honours
himself in us through them.
“One of the principal rules of religion is, to lose no occasion
of serving God. And, since he is invisible to our eyes, we
are to serve him in our neighbour; which he receives as if
done to himself in person, standing visibly before us.
“God does not love men that are inconstant, nor good
works that are intermitted. Nothing is pleasing to him, but
what has a resemblance of his own immutability.
“A constant attention to the work which God entrusts us
with is a mark of solid piety.
“Love fasts when it can, and as much as it can. It leads
to all the ordinances of God, and employs itself in all the
outward works whereof it is capable. It flies, as it were, like
Elijah over the plain, to find God upon his holy mountain.
“God is so great, that he communicates greatness to the
least thing that is done for his service.
“Happy are they who are sick, yea, or lose their life, for
having done a good work.
“God frequently conceals the part which his children have
in the conversion of other souls. Yet one may boldly say,
that person who long groans before him for the conversion of
another, whenever that soul is converted to God, is one of
the chief causes of it.
“Charity cannot be practised right, unless, First, we exercise
it the moment God gives the occasion; and, Secondly, retire
the instant after to offer it to God by humble thanksgiving.
And this for three reasons: First, to render him what we have
received from him. The Second, to avoid the dangerous
temptation which springs from the very goodness of these
works. And the Third, to unite ourselves to God, in whom
the soul expands itself in prayer, with all the graces we have
received, and the good works we have done, to draw from him
new strength against the bad effects which these very works
may produce in us, if we do not make use of the antidotes
which God has ordained against these poisons. The true
means to be filled anew with the riches of grace is thus to
strip ourselves of it; and without this it is extremely difficult
not to grow faint in the practice of good works.
“Good works do not receive their last perfection, till they,
as it were, lose themselves in God. This is a kind of death
to them, resembling that of our bodies, which will not attain
their highest life, their immortality, till they lose themselves
in the glory of our souls, or rather of God, wherewith they
shall be filled. And it is only what they had of earthly and
mortal, which good works lose by this spiritual death.
“Fire is the symbol of love; and the love of God is the
principle and the end of all our good works. But truth
surpasses figure; and the fire of divine love has this advantage
over material fire, that it can re-ascend to its source, and
raise thither with it all the good works which it produces.
And by this means it prevents their being corrupted by pride,
vanity, or any evil mixture. But this cannot be done other
wise than by making these good works in a spiritual manner
die in God, by a deep gratitude, which plunges the soul in
him as in an abyss, with all that it is, and all the grace and
works for which it is indebted to him; a gratitude, whereby
the soul seems to empty itself of them, that they may return
to their source, as rivers seem willing to empty themselves,
when they pour themselves with all their waters into the sea.
“When we have received any favour from God, we ought
to retire, if not into our closets, into our hearts, and say, ‘I
come, Lord, to restore to thee what thou hast given; and I
freely relinquish it, to enter again into my own nothingness.
For what is the most perfect creature in heaven or earth in
thy presence, but a void capable of being filled with thee and
by thee; as the air, which is void and dark, is capable of being
filled with the light of the sun, who withdraws it every day
to restore it the next, there being nothing in the air that
either appropriates this light or resists it? O give me the
same facility of receiving and restoring thy grace and good
works | I say, thine; for I acknowledge the root from
which they spring is in thee, and not in me.’”
26. In the year 1764, upon a review of the whole subject,
I wrote down the sum of what I had observed in the following
short propositions:
“(1.) There is such a thing as perfection; for it is again
and again mentioned in Scripture.
“(2.) It is not so early as justification; for justified
persons are to ‘go on unto perfection.” (Heb. vi. 1.)
442 PLAIN ACCoUNT OF
“(3.) It is not so late as death; for St. Paul speaks of
living men that were perfect. (Philip. iii. 15.)
“(4.) It is not absolute. Absolute perfection belongs not
to man, nor to angels, but to God alone.
“(5.) It does not make a man infallible: None is infallible,
while he remains in the body.
“(6.) Is it sinless? It is not worth while to contend for a
term. It is “ salvation from sin.”
“(7.) It is ‘perfect love.” (1 John iv. 18.) This is the
essence of it; its properties, or inseparable fruits, are,
rejoicing evermore, praying without ceasing, and in every
thing giving thanks. (1 Thess. v. 16, &c.)
“(8.) It is improvable. It is so far from lying in an
indivisible point, from being incapable of increase, that one
perfected in love may grow in grace far swifter than he did
before.
“(9.) It is amissible, capable of being lost; of which we
have numerous instances. But we were not thoroughly
convinced of this, till five or six years ago.
“(10.) It is constantly both preceded and followed by a
gradual work.
“(11.) But is it in itself instantaneous or not? In
examining this, let us go on step by step.
“An instantaneous change has been wrought in some
believers: None can deny this.
“Since that change, they enjoy perfect love; they feel this,
and this alone; they ‘rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing,
and in everything give thanks. Now, this is all that I mean
by perfection; therefore, these are witnesses of the perfec
tion which I preach.
“‘But in some this change was not instantaneous.” They
did not perceive the instant when it was wrought. It is
often difficult to perceive the instant when a man dies; yet
there is an instant in which life ceases. And if ever sin
ceases, there must be a last moment of its existence, and a
first moment of our deliverance from it.
“‘But if they have this love now, they will lose it. They
may; but they need not. And whether they do or no, they
have it now; they now experience what we teach. They
now are all love; they now rejoice, pray, and praise without
ceasing.
“‘However, sin is only suspended in them; it is not
destroyed. Call it which you please. They are all love
to-day; and they take no thought for the morrow.
“‘But this doctrine has been much abused.’ So has that
of justification by faith. But that is no reason for giving up
either this or any other scriptural doctrine. “When you
wash your child,’ as one speaks, ‘throw away the water; but
do not throw away the child.”
“‘But those who think they are saved from sin say they
have no need of the merits of Christ.’ They say just the
contrary. Their language is, -
“Every moment, Lord, I want
The merit of thy death !'
They never before had so deep, so unspeakable, a conviction
of the need of Christ in all his offices as they have now.
“Therefore, all our Preachers should make a point of
preaching perfection to believers constantly, strongly, and
explicitly; and all believers should mind this one thing, and
continually agonize for it.”
27. I have now done what I proposed. I have given a plain
and simple account of the manner wherein I first received the
doctrine of perfection, and the sense wherein I received, and
wherein I do receive, and teach it to this day. I have
declared the whole and every part of what I mean by that
scriptural expression. I have drawn the picture of it at full
length, without either disguise or covering. And I would
now ask any impartial person, What is there so frightful
therein? Whence is all this outcry, which, for these twenty
years and upwards, has been made throughout the kingdom;
as if all Christianity were destroyed, and all religion torn up
by the roots? Why is it, that the very name of perfection
has been cast out of the mouths of Christians; yea, exploded
and abhorred, as if it contained the most pernicious heresy ?
Why have the Preachers of it been hooted at, like mad dogs,
even by men that fear God; nay, and by some of their own
children, some whom they, under God, had begotten through
the gospel? What reason is there for this, or what pretence?
Reason, sound reason, there is none. It is impossible there
should. But pretences there are, and those in great abund
ance. Indeed, there is ground to fear that, with some who
treat us thus, it is mere pretence; that it is no more than a
copy of their countenance, from the heginning to the end.
They wanted, they sought, occasion against me; and here they
found what they sought. “This is Mr. Wesley's doctrine !
He preaches perfection!” He does; yet this is not his doctrine
any more than it is yours, or any one’s else, that is a Minister
of Christ. For it is His doctrine, peculiarly, emphatically His;
it is the doctrine of Jesus Christ. Those are his words, not mine:
Earea 6s ev wusig reasioi, worspo IIarm uway osy rous spavo's rexsuo;
es",--“Ye shall therefore be perfect, as your Father who is in
heaven is perfect.” And who says, ye shall not; or, at least,
not till your soul is separated from the body? It is the doctrine
of St. Paul, the doctrine of St. James, of St. Peter, and St.
John; and no otherwise Mr. Wesley's, than as it is the doctrine
of every one who preaches the pure and the whole gospel. I
tell you, as plain as I can speak, where and when I found
this. I found it in the oracles of God, in the Old and Ncw
Testament; when I read them with no other view or desire
but to save my own soul. But whosesoever this doctrine is,
I pray you, what harm is there in it? Look at it again;
survey it on every side, and that with the closest attention.
In one view, it is purity of intention, dedicating all the life to
God. It is the giving God all our heart; it is one desire and
design ruling all our tempers. It is the devoting, not a part,
but all our soul, body, and substance to God. In another
view, it is all the mind which was in Christ, enabling us to
walk as Christ walked. It is the circumcision of the heart
from all filthiness, all inward as well as outward pollution. It
is a renewal of the heart in the whole image of God, the full
likeness of Him that created it. In yet another, it is the
loving God with all our heart, and our neighbour as ourselves.
Now, take it in which of these views you please, (for there is
no material difference,) and this is the whole and sole perfec
tion, as a train of writings prove to a demonstration, which I
have believed and taught for these forty years, from the year
1725 to the year 1765.
28. Now let this perfection appear in its native form, and
who can speak one word against it? Will any dare to speak
against loving the Lord our God with all our heart, and our
neighbour as ourselves? against a renewal of heart, not only
in part, but in the whole image of God? Who is he that will
open his mouth against being cleansed from all pollution both
of flesh and spirit; or against having all the mind that was
in Christ, and walking in all things as Christ walked ? What
man, who calls himself a Christian, has the hardiness to
object to the devoting, not a part, but all our soul, body,
and substance to God? What serious man would oppose
the giving God all our heart, and the having one design
ruling all our tempers? I say, again, let this perfection
appear in its own shape, and who will fight against it? It
must be disguised before it can be opposed. It must be
covered with a bear-skin first, or even the wild beasts of the
people will scarce be induced to worry it. But whatever these
do, let not the children of God any longer fight against the
image of God. Let not the members of Christ say anything
against having the whole mind that was in Christ. Let not
those who are alive to God oppose the dedicating all our life
to Him. Why should you who have his love shed abroad in
your heart withstand the giving him all your heart? Does
not all that is within you cry out, “O who that loves can
love enough?” What pity that those who desire and design
to please him should have any other design or desire ! much
more, that they should dread, as a fatal delusion, yea, abhor
as an abomination to God, the having this one desire and
design ruling every temper ! Why should devout men be
afraid of devoting all their soul, body, and substance to God?
Why should those who love Christ count it a dammable error,
to think we may have all the mind that was in him? We
allow, we contend, that we are justified freely through the
righteousness and the blood of Christ. And why are you so
hot against us, because we expect likewise to be sanctified
wholly through his Spirit? We look for no favour either from
the open servants of sin, or from those who have only the form
of religion. But how long will you who worship God in spirit,
who are “circumcised with the circumcision not made with
hands,” set your battle in array against those who seek an
entire circumcision of heart, who thirst to be cleansed “from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit,” and to “perfect holiness in
the fear of God?” Are we your enemies, because we look
for a full deliverance from that “carnal mind which is enmity
against God?” Nay, we are your brethren, your fellow
labourers in the vineyard of our Lord, your companions in
the kingdom and patience of Jesus. Although this we
confess, (if we are fools therein, yet as fools bear with us,) we
do expect to love God with all our heart, and our neighbour
as ourselves. Yea, we do believe, that he will in this world
so “cleanse the thoughts of our hearts, by the inspiration of
his Holy Spirit, that we shall perfectly love him, and worthily
magnify his holy name.”
SoME thoughts occurred to my mind this morning concern
ing Christian perfection, and the manner and time of receiving
it, which I believe may be useful to set down.
1. By perfection I mean the humble, gentle, patient love
of God, and our neighbour, ruling our tempers, words, and
actions. .
I do not include an impossibility of falling from it, either
in part or in whole. Therefore, I retract several expressions
in our Hymns, which partly express, partly imply, such an
impossibility.
And I do not contend for the term sinless, though I do not
object against it.
2. As to the manner. I believe this perfection is always
wrought in the soul by a simple act of faith; consequently,
in an instant.
But I believe a gradual work, both preceding and following
that instant.
3. As to the time. I believe this instant generally is the
instant of death, the moment before the soul leaves the body.
But I believe it may be ten, twenty, or forty years before.
I believe it is usually many years after justification; but
that it may be within five years or five months after it, I
know no conclusive argument to the contrary.
If it must be many years after justification, I would be glad
to know how many. Pretium quotus arroget annus * *
And how many days or months, or even years, can any
one allow to be between perfection and death? How far
from justification must it be; and how near to death?
LoNDoN, Jan. 27, 1767.
*This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“How many years give sanction to our lines?”-EDIT.
1. THE words, as literally translated as the English tongue
will bear, run thus: “May the whole of you, the spirit, and
the soul, and the body, be preserved blameless.”
What does St. Paul here mean by dividing man into three
parts, “the spirit, and the soul, and the body?”
This creates what has been thought an insurmountable
difficulty by those who argue thus:
“How is it possible to contradistinguish the soul both from
the spirit and from the body? For it must be either material
or immaterial, matter or not matter: There is no medium.
But if it be matter, does it not co-incide with the body? If
it be not matter, does it not co-incide with the spirit 7”
But perhaps a way may be found of untieing this knot, of
unraveling this difficulty, by simply declaring the (at least
probable) meaning of these three terms.
May not the spirit mean (so it has been understood by
the Christians in all ages) the highest principle in man, the
immortal spirit made in the image of God, endued (as all
spirits are, so far as we can conceive) with self-motion,
understanding, will, and liberty?
Is not the body that portion of organized matter which
every man receives in the womb, with which he is born into
the world, and which he carries with him to the grave? At
present it is connected with flesh and blood. But these are
not the body. They are only the temporary clothing of the
body, which it wholly puts off in the grave.
The soul seems to be the immediate clothing of the spirit,
the vehicle with which it is connected from its first existence,
and which is never separated from it, either in life or in death.
Probably it consists of ethereal or electric fire, the purest of all
matter. It does not seem to be affected by the death of the
body, but envelopes the separate, as it does the embodied,
spirit; neither will it undergo any essential change, when it
is clothed upon with the immortal body at the resurrection.
May not the Apostle have an eye to this in those
remarkable words:--“We that are in this tabernacle” (this
corruptible flesh and blood) “do groan, being burdened; not
for that we would be unclothed,” (divested of all covering,
which belongs only to the Father of spirits,) “but clothed
upon” with the glorious resurrection-body, covering both our
soul and spirit? (2 Corinthians v. 4.) This will swallow up,
totally destroy, to Swntov,-that which was mortal, namely,
the flesh and blood, which alone was liable to death.
If we understand the words of the Apostle in this sense,
all the difficulty vanishes away. We allow, there can be no
medium between material and immaterial. But still there is
room for a wide and essential difference between the soul and
the body; the latter implying that original portion of matter
which is now clothed with flesh and blood; the former, that
vehicle of ethereal fire which immediately covers the immortal
spirit.
CoNGLETON,
March 31, 1786.
REv. SIR, February 5, 1756.
I AM favoured with yours of January 26, for which I
return you my sincere thanks. Your frank and open manner
of writing is far from needing any apology, and I hope will never
occasion your receiving such treatment from me, as I did from
Mr. Law, who, after some very keen expressions, in answer to:
the second private letter I sent him, plainly told me he
desired to hear “no more on that head.” I do desire to
hear, and am very willing to consider, whatever you have to
wdvance on the head of Christian perfection.
When I began to make the Scriptures my chief study,
(about seven-and-twenty years ago,) I began to see that
Christians are called to love God with all their heart, and to
serve him with all their strength; which is precisely what I
apprehend to be meant by the scriptural term perfection.
After weighing this for some years, I openly declared my
sentiments before the University, in the sermon on the
Circumcision of the Heart, now printed in the second
volume.* About six years after, in consequence of an advice
I received from Bishop Gibson, “Tell all the world what you
mean by perfection,” I published my coolest and latest
thoughts in the sermon on that subject. You easily observe,
I therein build on no authority, ancient or modern, but the
Scripture. If this supports any doctrine, it will stand; if
not, the sooner it falls, the better. Neither the doctrine in
question, nor any other, is anything to me, unless it be the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. If, therefore, you will
please to point out to me any passages in that sermon
which are either contrary to Scripture, or not supported by
it, and to show that they are not, I shall be full as willing
to oppose as ever I was to defend them. I search for truth,
plain, Bible truth, without any regard to the praise or
dispraise of men.
If you will assist me in this search, more especially by
showing me where I have mistaken my way, it will be
gratefully acknowledged by,
Reverend Sir,
Your affectionate brother and servant,
N.B. I had at this time no acquaintance with Dr. Dodd;
nor did I ever see him till I saw him in prison.
* Volume V., p. 202, of the present edition.-EDIT.
1. YoU and I may the more easily bear with each other,
because we are both of us rapid writers, and therefore the
more liable to mistake. I will thank you for showing me any
mistake I am in; being not so tenacious of my opinions now,
as I was twenty or thirty years ago. Indeed, I am not fond
of any opinion as such. I read the Bible with what attention
I can, and regulate all my opinions thereby, to the best of
my understanding. But I am always willing to receive more
light; particularly with regard to any less common opinions,
because the explaining and defending of them takes up much
time, which I can ill spare from other employments. Who
ever, therefore, will give me more light with regard to
Christian perfection, will do me a singular favour. The
opinion I have concerning it at present, I espouse merely
because I think it is scriptural. If therefore I am convinced
it is not scriptural, I shall willingly relinquish it.
2. I have no particular fondness for the term. It seldom
occurs either in my preaching or writings. It is my oppo
nents who thrust it upon me continually, and ask me what I
mean by it. So did Bishop Gibson, till by his advice I
publicly declared what I did not mean by it, and what I did.
This I supposed might be best done in the form of a sermon,
having a text prefixed, wherein that term occurred. But
that text is there used only as an occasion or introduction to
the subject. I do not build any doctrine thereupon, nor
undertake critically to explain it.
3. What is the meaning of the term perfection? is another
question; but that it is a scriptural term is undeniable.
Therefore, none ought to object to the use of the term,
whatever they may do to this or that explication of it. I am
very willing to consider whatever you have to object to what
is advanced under the first head of that sermon. But I still
* At what time this answer was written, it is perhaps impossible exactly to
ascertain. It appears to have been sent as a private letter to Mr. Dodd, before
he had become a Doctor of Divinity; and not to have been published till the
year 1782, when it was inserted in the Arminian Magazine.-EDIT.
think that perfection is only another term for holiness, or
the image of God in man. “God made man perfect,” I
think is just the same as, “He made him holy,” or “in his
own image;” and you are the first person I ever read of or
spoke with, who made any doubt of it. Now this perfection
does certainly admit of degrees. Therefore, I readily allow
the propriety of that distinction,-perfection of kinds, and
perfection of degrees. Nor do I remember one writer,
ancient or modern, who excepts against it.
4. In the sermon of Salvation by Faith, I say, “He that is
born of God sinneth not,” (a proposition explained at large in
another sermon, and everywhere either explicitly or virtually
connected with, “while he keepeth himself,”) “by any sinful
desire; any unholy desire he stifleth in the birth.” (Assuredly
he does, “while he keepeth himself”) “Nor doth he sin by
infirmities; for his infirmities have no concurrence of his
will; and without this they are not properly sins.” Taking
the words as they lie in connexion thus, (and taken otherwise
they are not my words but yours,) I must still aver, they
speak both my own experience, and that of many hundred
children of God whom I personally know. And all this, with
abundantly more than this, is contained in that single expres
sion, “the loving God with all our heart, and serving him with
all our strength.” Nor did I ever say or mean any more by
perfection, than thus loving and serving God. But I dare
not say less than this; for it might be attended with worse
consequences than you seem to be aware of. If there be a
mistake, it is far more dangerous on the one side than on the
other. If I set the mark too high, I drive men into needless
fears; if you set it too low, you drive them into hell-fire.
5. We agree, that true “Christianity implies a destruction
of the kingdom of sin, and a renewal of the soul in righteous
mess; which even babes in Christ do in a measure experience,
though not in so large a measure as young men and fathers.”
But here we divide. I believe even babes in Christ, “while
they keep themselves, do not commit sin.” By sin, I mean,
outward sin; and the word commit, I take in its plain, literal
meaning. And this I think is fully proved by all the texts
cited Sermon III., from the sixth chapter to the Romans.
Nor do I conceive there is any material difference between
committing sin, and continuing therein. I tell my neighbour
here, “William, you are a child of the devil, for you commit
sin; you was drunk yesterday.” “No, Sir,” says the man,
“I do not live or continue in sin” (which Mr. Dodd says is
the true meaning of the text); “I am not drunk continually,
but only now and then, once in a fortnight, or once in a
month.” Now, Sir, how shall I deal with this man? Shall
I tell him he is in the way to heaven or hell? I think he is
in the high road to destruction; and that if I tell him other
wise his blood will be upon my head. And all that you say
of living, continuing in, serving sin, as different from com
mitting it, and of its not reigning, not having dominion, over
him who still frequently commits it, is making so many loop
holes whereby any impenitent sinner may escape from all the
terrors of the Lord. I dare not therefore give up the plain,
literal meaning either of St. Paul’s or St. Peter's words.
6. As to those of St. John, cited Sermon V., I do not
think you have proved they are not to be taken literally. In
every single act of obedience, as well as in a continued course
of it, rous Buxaloavyw: And in either an act or a course of sin
Troisi aplapriav. Therefore, that I may give no countenance
to any kind or degree of sin, I still interpret these words by
those in the fifth chapter, and believe, “he that is born of
God” (while he keepeth himself) “sinneth not;” doth not
commit outward sin.
7. But “it is absolutely necessary,” as you observe, “to
add sometimes explanatory words to those of the sacred
penmen.” It is so; to add words explanatory of their sense,
but not subversive of it. The words added to this text, “Ye
know all things,” are such; and you yourself allow them so
to be. But I do not allow the words wilfully and habitually
to be such. These do not explain, but overthrow, the text.
That the first Fathers thus explained it, I deny; as also that
I ever spoke lightly of them.
8. You proceed: “You allow in another sermon, in evident
contradiction to yourself, that the true children of God could,
and did, commit sin.” This is no contradiction to anything I
ever advanced. I everywhere allow that a child of God can and
will commit sin, if he does not keep himself. “But this,” you
say, “is nothing to the present argument.” Yes, it is the whole
thing. If they keep themselves, they do not; otherwise, they
can and do commit sin. I say nothing contrary to this in either
sermon. But “hence,” you say, “we conclude that he who is
born of God, may possibly commit sin:” An idle conclusion as
ever was formed; for who ever denied it? I flatly affirm it in
both the sermons, and in the very paragraph now before us.
The only conclusion which I deny is, that “all Christians do
and will commit sin, as long as they live.” Now this you
yourself (though you seem to start at it) maintain from the
beginning of your Letter to the end; namely, that all Chris
tians do sin, and cannot but sin, more or less, to their lives’
end. Therefore I do not “artfully put this conclusion;” but
it is your own conclusion, from your own premises. Indeed
were I artfully to put in anything in expounding the word
of God, I must be an arrant knave. But I do not; my
conscience bears me witness, that I speak the very truth, so
far as I know it, in simplicity and godly sincerity.
9. I think that all this time you are directly pleading for
looseness of manners, and that everything you advance natu
rally tends thereto. This is my grand objection to that doc
trine of the necessity of sinning: Not only that it is false, but
that it is directly subversive of all holiness. The doctrine of
the Gnostics was, not that a child of God does not commit
sin, that is, act the things which are forbidden in Scripture,
but that they are not sin in him, that he is a child of God
still; so they contend, not for sinless, but sinful, perfec
tion; just as different from what I contend for, as heaven is
from hell. What the Donatists were, I do not know ; but I
suspect they were the real Christians of that age; and were
therefore served by St. Augustine and his warm adherents,
as the Methodists are now by their zealous adversaries. It
is extremely easy to blacken; and could I give myself leave,
I could paint the consequences of your doctrine, in at least
as dark and odious colours as you could paint mine.
10. The passage of St. Peter, mentioned Sermon XII., I
still think proves all which I brought it to prove.
“But you allow, (Sermon XIV.,) that Paul and Barnabas
did commit sin. And these were, without all controversy,
fathers in Christ.” That is not without controversy,-that
either Barnabas when he left Paul, or Peter when he dissem
bled at Antioch, was at that time a father in Christ in St.
John’s sense; though by office undoubtedly they were. Their
example, therefore, only proves what no one denies, namely,
that if a believer keeps not himself, he may commit sin. Would
the conclusions here drawn “be made only by a very weak
opponent?” Then you are a weak opponent; for you make
them all, either from these or other premises: For you believe
and maintain, (1.) That all the other Apostles committed sin
sometimes. (2.) That all the other Christians of the apostolic
age sometimes committed sin. (3.) That all other Christians,
in all ages, do and will commit sin as long as they live.
And, (4.) That every man must commit sin, cannot help it,
as long as he is in the body. You cannot deny one of these
propositions, if you understand your own premises.
I am, Rev. Sir,
Your affectionate brother,
1. I HAVE been frequently desired to give some account
of the conversations I had with Dr. Dodd. I could have
done this more accurately some years ago, when they were
fresh in my memory.” However, I will now set down what
I can recollect. And it may enable many who love to think
for themselves to form an impartial judgment of one that has
been so variously represented.
2. I had no knowledge of Dr. Dodd till he told that
excellent woman, Mrs. Lefevre, that he was going to publish
something against Mr. Wesley. She advised him to send it
to me first. He did so, and was so far at least satisfied with
my answer, that his treatise against Christian perfection
never saw the light. This was about thirty years ago. And
here our intercourse ended; which indeed was very slight,
as I had never seen him, either in private or public.
3. When he was imprisoned, he sent to me, desiring to see
me. But I was not willing to go, supposing he only wanted
me to intercede for him with great men; which I judged would
be lost labour. He sent a second time, but I did not go. The
gentleman who brought the third message told me plainly,
“Sir, I will not go without you.” I then went with him to
Wood-Street Compter, where the Doctor then was. The
Keeper (an extremely well-behaved man) told me, “Sir, of all
* Dr. Dodd was executed for forgery, June 27th, 1777; and this account was
published in July, 1783,-EDIT.
the prisoners that have been in this place, I have not seen
such a one as Dr. Dodd. I could trust him in any part of
the house. Nay, he has gained the affection of even these
wretches, my turnkeys.” When I came into his room, and
sat down by his bed-side, (for he had then a fever,) we were
both of us silent for some time; till he began, “Sir, I have
long desired to see you; but I little thought our first inter
view would be in such a place as this.” I replied, “Sir, I
am persuaded God saw this was the best, if not the only, way
of bringing you to himself; and I trust it will have that happy
effect.” He said earnestly, “God grant it may ! God grant
it may !” We conversed about an hour; but I was agree
ably disappointed. He spoke of nothing but his own soul,
and appeared to regard nothing in comparison of it. So
that I went away far better satisfied than I came.
4. A few days after, I saw him again: the day before he
was removed to Newgate, in order to his trial, which was to
be the day following. I then stayed but about half an hour.
I found him in the same temper as before, affected as one in
such circumstances ought to be; but withal, calm and com
posed. I asked, “Sir, do not you find it difficult to preserve
your recollection, amidst all these lawyers and witnesses?”
He answered, “It is difficult; but I have one sure hold,
‘Lord, not as I will, but as thou wilt.’”
5. Being obliged to take a long journey, I did not see him
again till after he had lost the hope of life; the sentence
which had been referred to the twelve Judges having been
confirmed by them. He was now in Newgate. Entering
into that house of woe, I was utterly surprised: It was as
quiet and still as a College in the University. It seemed as
if even the felons were unwilling to disturb him. We con
versed about an hour; but had not one word about any but
spiritual things. I found his mind still quiet and composed;
sorrowing, but not without hope. And I could not but observe,
that all these times he never blamed any one but himself.
He did not appear to have the least touch of resentment to
any man, receiving everything as at the hand of God.
6. On Wednesday (two days before his death) I paid him
one visit more. As we were talking, Mrs. Dodd came in; but
when she came near him, she sunk down. He catched her in
his arms, and carried her to a chair; but had such a command
over himself, that his eyes only spoke, though without tears,
being afraid of adding to her distress. I now told him, “Sir,
I think you do not ask enough, or expect enough, from God,
your Saviour. The present blessing you may expect from
him is, to be filled with all joy, as well as peace in believing.”
“O Sir,” said he, “it is not for such a sinner as me to expect
any joy in this world. The utmost I can desire is peace; and,
through the mercy of God, that I have.” We then spent a
little time in prayer, and I solemnly commended him to God.
7. On Friday morning all the prisoners were gathered
together, when he came down into the court. He seemed
entirely composed. But when he observed most of them lifting
up their hands, praying for him, blessing him, and weeping
aloud, he was melted down, burst into tears too, and prayed
God to bless them all. When he came out of the gate, an
innumerable multitude were waiting, many of whom seemed
ready to insult him. But the moment they saw him, their
hearts were changed, and they began to bless him and pray
for him too. A Clergyman, (Mr. P.,) being desirous to see
the last of him, pressed on, though with much difficulty and
danger, and kept near him quite to the place of execution.
One of his fellow-prisoners seemed to be in utter despair. Dr.
Dodd, forgetting himself, laboured to comfort him; and
strongly applied the promises. After some time spent in
prayer, he pulled his cap over his eyes; and, sinking down,
seemed to die in a moment. I make no doubt, but in that
moment the angels were ready to carry him into Abraham’s
bosom. JOHN WESLEY.
1. THE forbidding to marry, as it is well known the Church
of Rome does, and has done for several ages, (in which
marriage is absolutely forbidden, not only to all religious
orders, but to the whole body of the Clergy,) is numbered,
by the great Apostle, among “the doctrines of devils.” And
* In the year 1743 Mr. Wesley published a small pamphlet under the title of,
“Thoughts on Marriage and a Single Life.” It was afterwards superseded by
the truct now before the reader; which embodies the principal sentiments
contained in the former publication.-En1T.
among the same we need not scruple to number the despising
or condemning marriage; as do many of those in the Romish
Church who are usually termed Mystic writers. One of these
does not scruple to affirm, “Marriage is only licensed forni
cation.” But the Holy Ghost says, “Marriage is honourable
in all, and the bed undefiled.” Nor can it be doubted but
persons may be as holy in a married as in a single state.
2. In the latter clause of the sentence, the Apostle seems
to guard against a mistake, into which some sincere Christians
have fallen; particularly when they have just found such a
liberty of spirit as they had not before experienced. They
imagine a defilement where there is none, “and fear where
no fear is.” And it is possible this very fear of sin may
betray them into sin. For it may induce persons to defraud
each other, forgetting the express determination of the
Apostle: “The wife hath not power of her own body, but
the husband; and the husband hath not power of his own
body, but the wife.” (1 Cor. vii. 4.)
3. And yet we must not forget what the Apostle subjoins in
the following verses: “I say to the unmarried and widows, It
is good for them, if they abide even as I. Art thou bound
unto a wife? Seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from
a wife? Seek not a wife. But if thou marry, thou hast not
sinned. Nevertheless, such shall have trouble in the flesh.
I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried
careth for the things of the Lord, how he may please the
Lord; but he that is married careth for the things of the
world, how he may please his wife. The unmarried woman
careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both
in body and spirit; but she that is married careth for the
things of the world, how she may please her husband. And
this I speak for your own profit, that you may attend upon the
Lord without distraction.” (Verses 8, 27, 28, 32--35.)
4. But though “it is good for a man not to touch a woman,”
(verse 1) yet this is not an universal rule. “I would,” indeed,
says the Apostle, “that all men were as myself.” (Verse 7.)
But that cannot be; for “every man hath his proper gift of
God, one after this manner, another after that.” “If,” then,
“they cannot contain, let them marry; for it is better to marry
than to burn.” (Verse 9.) “To avoid ("rnication, let every
man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own
husband.” Exactly agreeable to this are the words of our
Lord. When the Apostles said, “If the case be so, it is
good not to marry; he said unto them, All men cannot
receive this saying, but they to whom it is given. For there
are some eunuchs, who were so born from their mother’s
womb; there are some, who were made eunuchs by men;
and there are eunuchs, who have made themselves eunuchs
for the kingdom of heaven’s sake. He that is able to receive
it, let him receive it.” (Matt. xix. 10-12.)
5. But who is able to “receive this saying,”--to abstain
from marriage, and yet not burn? It behoves every one
here to judge for himself; none is called to judge for another.
In general, I believe every man is able to receive it when he
is first justified. I believe every one then receives this gift;
but with most it does not continue long. Thus much is
clear; it is a plain matter of fact, which no man can deny.
It is not so clear, whether God withdraws it of his own good
pleasure, or for any fault of ours. I incline to think, it is
not withdrawn without some fault on our part. But, be that
as it may, I have now only to do with those who are still able
to “receive this saying.”
6. To this happy few I say, (1) Know the advantages you
enjoy, many of which are pointed out by the Apostle himself.
You may be without carefulness. You are under no necessity
of “caring for the things of the world.” You have only to
“care for the things of the Lord, how you may please the
Lord.” One care alone lies upon you, how you “may be
holy both in body and spirit.”
You may “attend upon the Lord without distraction;”
while others, like Martha, are cumbered with much serving,
and drawn hither and thither by many things, you may
remain centred in God, sitting, like Mary, at the Master’s
feet, and listening to every word of his mouth.
You enjoy a blessed liberty from the “trouble in the
flesh,” which must more or less attend a married state, from
a thousand nameless domestic trials which are found, sooner
or later, in every family. You are exempt from numberless
occasions of sorrow and anxiety, with which heads of families
are entangled; especially those who have sickly, or weak, or
unhappy, or disobedient children. If your servants are
wicked, you may put them away, and your relation to them
ceases. But what could you do with a wicked son or daughter?
How could you dissolve that relation?
Above all, you are at liberty from the greatest of all
entanglements, the loving one creature above all others. It
is possible to do this without sin, without any impeachment
of our love to God. But how inconceivably difficult | to
give God our whole heart, while a creature has so large a
share of it ! How much more easily may we do this, when
the heart is, tenderly indeed, but equally attached to more
than one; or, at least, without any great inequality | What
angelic wisdom does it require to give enough of our affection,
and not too much, to so near a relation |
And how much easier is it (just to touch on one point
more) wholly to conquer our natural desires, than to gratify
them exactly so far as Christian temperance allows! just so
far as every pleasure of sense prepares us for taking pleasure
in God.
7. You have leisure to improve yourself in every kind, to
wait upon God in public and private, and to do good to your
neighbour in various ways, as Christian prudence shall
suggest; whereas those who are married are necessarily taken
up with the things of the world. You may give all your
time to God without interruption, and need ask leave of none
but yourself so to do. You may employ every hour in what
you judge to be the most excellent way. But if you was
married, you may ask leave of your companion; otherwise
what complaints or disgust would follow ! And how hard
is it even to know (how much more to act suitably to that
knowledge) how far you ought to give way, for peace’ sake,
and where to stop ! What wisdom is requisite, in order to
know how far you can recede from what is most excellent,
particularly with regard to conversation that is not “to the
use of edifying,” in order to please your good-natured or
ill-natured partner, without displeasing God!
8. You may give all your worldly substance to God;
nothing need hinder. You have no increasing family, you
have no wife or children to provide for, which might occasion
a thousand doubts, (without any extraordinary measure of
divine light,) whether you had done either too much or too
little for them. You may “make yourself friends of” all
“the mammon of unrighteousness” which God entrusts you
with; having none that has any right to complain, or to
charge you with unkindness for so doing. You may lay out
all your talents of every kind entirely for the glory of God;
as you have none else to please, none to regard, but Him
that lived and died for you.
9. I say, Secondly, prize the advantages you enjoy; know
the value of them. Esteem them as highly while you have
them, as others do after they have lost them. Pray constantly
and fervently for this very thing, that God would teach you
to set a due value upon them. And let it be matter of daily
thanksgiving to God, that he has made you a partaker of
these benefits. Indeed, the more full and explicit you are
herein, the more sensible you will be of the cause you have
to be thankful; the more lively conviction you will have of
the greatness of the blessing.
10. If you know and duly prize the advantages you enjoy,
then, (3) Be careful to keep them. But this (as easy as
it may seem) it is impossible you should do by your own
strength; so various, so frequent, and so strong, are the
temptations which you will meet with to cast them away.
Not only the children of the world, but the children of God,
will undoubtedly tempt you thereto; and that partly by the
most plausible reasons, partly by the most artful persuasions.
Meantime, the old deceiver will not be wanting to give an
edge to as those reasons and persuasions, and to recal the
temptation again and again, and press it close upon your
heart. You have need, therefore, to use every help: And
the First of these is earnest prayer. Let no day pass without
this, without praying for this very thing,--that God would
work what with men is impossible; that he would vouchsafe
to preserve his own gift, and that you may not suffer any loss
this day, either by the subtlety or power of devils or men, or
the deceitfulness of your own heart.
11. A Second help may be, the conversing frequently and
freely with those of your own sex who are like-minded. It
may be of infinite service to disclose to these the very secrets
of your hearts; especially the weaknesses springing from your
natural constitution, or education, or long-contracted habit,
and the temptations which, from time to time, most easily
beset you. Advise with them on every circumstance that
occurs; open your heart without reserve. By this means a
thousand devices of Satan will be brought to nought; innu
merable snares will be prevented; or you will pass through
them without being hurt. Yea, and if at some time you should
have suffered a little, the wound will speedily be healed.
12. I say, of your own sex; for, in the Third place, it will
be highly expedient to avoid all needless conversation, much
more all intimacy, with those of the other sex; so expedient,
that unless you observe this, you will surely cast away the gift
of God. Say not, “But they have much grace and much
understanding.” So much the greater is the danger. There
would be less fear of your receiving hurt from them, if they had
less grace or less understanding. And whenever any of these
are thrown in your way, “make a covenant with your eyes,”
your ears, your hands, that you do not indulge yourself in any
that are called innocent freedoms. Above all, “keep your
heart with all diligence.” Check the first risings of desire.
Watch against every sally of imagination, particularly if it be
pleasing. If it is darted in, whether you will or no, yet, let
no “vain thought lodge within you.” Cry out, “My God
and my all, I am thine, thine alone ! I will be thine for
ever! O save me from setting up an idol in my heart | Save
me from taking any step toward it. Still bring my “every
thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.’”
13. “But how shall I attain to, or how preserve, this
strength and firmness of spirit?” In order to this, I advise you,
Fourthly, (need I say, to avoid the sin of Onan, seeing Satan
will not cast out Satan? or rather) avoid with the utmost
care, all softness and effeminacy; remembering the express
denunciation of an inspired writer, on waxxx01, the soft or
effeminate, whether poor or rich, (the Apostle does not make
any difference upon that account,) “shall not inherit the
kingdom of God.” Avoid all delicacy, first in spirit, then in
apparel, food, lodging, and a thousand nameless things; and
this the more speedily and the more resolutely, if you have
been long accustomed thereto. Avoid all needless self
indulgence, as well as delicacy and softness. All these tend
to breed or cherish those appetites and passions which you
have renounced for Christ’s sake. They either create or
increase those desires which, “for the kingdom of heaven’s
sake,” you are determined not to gratify. Avoid all sloth,
inactivity, indolence. Sleep no more than nature requires. Be
never idle; and use as much bodily exercise as your strength
will allow. I dare not add Monsieur Pascal's rule,--Avoid all
pleasure. It is not possible to avoid all pleasure, even of
sense, without destroying the body. Neither doth God
require it at our hands; it is not his will concerning us. On
the contrary, he “giveth us all things to enjoy,” so we enjoy
them to his glory. But I say, avoid all that pleasure which
anyway hinders you from enjoying him; yea, all such pleasure
as does not prepare you for taking pleasure in God. Add to
this constant and continued course of universal self-denial,
the taking up your cross daily, the enduring “hardship as a
good soldier of Jesus Christ.” Remember, “the kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.”
This is the way; walk therein; think not of a smoother path.
Add to your other exercises constant and prudent fasting,
and the Lord will uphold you with his hand.
14. I advise you, Lastly, if you desire to keep them, use all
the advantages you enjoy. Indeed, without this, it is utterly
impossible to keep them; for the mouth of the Lord hath
spoken the word which cannot be broken, which must be
fulfilled with regard to all the good gifts of God: “To him
that hath,” uses what he hath, “shall be given; and he shall
have more abundantly: But from him that hath not,” uses it
not, “shall be taken even that which he hath.” Would you
therefore retain what you now have, what God hath already
given? If so, “giving all diligence,” use it to the uttermost.
“Stand fast in ” cvery instance of “the liberty wherewith
Christ hath made you free.” Be not “entangled” again in
the “cares of this life;” but “cast all your care on Him that
careth for you. Be careful for nothing, but in everything
make your requests known unto God with thanksgiving.”
See that you “wait upon the Lord without distraction:” Let
nothing move you from your centre. “One thing is needful;”
to see, love, follow Christ, in every thought, word, and work.
Flee the “sorrow of this world;” it “worketh death.”
Let not your heart be troubled. In all circumstances, let
your soul magnify the Lord, and your spirit rejoice in God
your Saviour. Preserve a constant serenity of mind, an
even cheerfulness of spirit.
Keep at the utmost distance from foolish desires, from
desiring any happiness but in God. Still let all your “desire
be to him, and to the remembrance of his name.”
Make full use of all the leisure you have; never be unem
ployed, never triflingly employed; let every hour turn to
some good account. Let not a scrap of time be squandered
away; “gather up the fragments, that nothing be lost.”
Give all your time to God; lay out the whole as you judge
will be most to his glory. In particular, see that you waste
no part of it in unprofitable conversation; but let all your
discourse “be seasoned with salt, and meet to minister grace
to the hearers.”
Give all your money to God. You have no pretence for
laying up treasure upon earth. While you “gain all you
can,” and “save all you can,” “give all you can,” that is, all
you have.
Lay out your talents of every kind in doing all good to
all men; knowing that “every man shall receive his own
reward, according to his own labour.”
15. Upon the whole, without disputing whether the
married or single life be the more perfect state, (an idle
dispute; since perfection does not consist in any outward
state whatever, but in an absolute devotion of all our heart
and all our life to God,) we may safely say, Blessed are “they
who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of
heaven’s sake;” who abstain from things lawful in them
selves, in order to be more devoted to God. Let these never
forget those remarkable words: “Peter said, Lo, we have left
all and followed thee. And Jesus answered and said, Verily
I say unto you,” (a preface denoting both the certainty and
importance of what is spoken,) “There is no man that hath
left” (either by giving them up, or by not accepting them)
“house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife,
or children, or lands, for my sake and the gospel’s, but he
shall receive an hundred fold now in this time; and in the
world to come eternal life.” (Mark x. 28-30.)
If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.
1. I AM not now about to speak to men of the world, or to
them that have only the form of religion; but to you who
have experienced, if you do not now, the “faith which worketh
by love:” And, in speaking to you, I do not peremptorily
464 A TiiOUGHT UPON MARRIAGE.
assert anything. I barely propose a thought that rises in
my mind, and beg you to consider it.
2. You have some thoughts of altering your condition;
and we know, “marriage is honourable in all men.” But is
your eye single herein? This is worthy your most serious
consideration. Retire a little into yourself, and ask your
own heart : “What is it moves me to think of this?”
3. I will tell you how it was with me: Though I do not
know I was ever low-spirited, (my spirits being always the
same, whether in sickness or in health,) yet I was often uneasy.
Even in vigorous health, in plenty, and in the midst of my
friends, I wanted something; I was not satisfied. I looked
about for happiness, but could not find it. Then I thought,
“O, if I had but such a person with me, I should surely be
happy.” I mused with myself, “How lovely is her look
How agreeably she talks !” I thought of Sappho’s words:--
“Bless'd as the immortal gods is he,
The youth that fondly sits by thee;
And hears and sees thee all the while
Softly speak and sweetly smile.”
“Surely, this is the very thing I want; and could I attain
it, I should then no more be solitary ! For,--
Thou from all shades the darkness wouldst exclude,
And from a desert banish solitude :
Therefore, with her I can be happy; without her I never
can.”
4. Perhaps your case is something like mine. Let me
then ask you a few questions.
Were you ever convinced of sin? of your lost, undone
state? Did you feel the wrath of God abiding on you? If
so, what did you then want to make you happy? “To know,
my God is reconciled.” You had your wish. You were
enabled to say boldly, “I know that my Redeemer liveth.”
And were not you then happy? “Indeed I was.” In what?
In the knowledge and love of God.
5. And if you have now the same knowledge and love of God,
does it not answer the same end? Will not the same cause still
produce the same effect? If, therefore, you are not happy now,
is it not because you have not that intercourse with God which
you then had? And are you seeking to supply the want of that
intercourse by the enjoyment of a creature? You imagine that
near connexion with a woman will make amends for distance
from God! Have you so learned Christ? Has your expe
rience taught you no better than this?
6. You were happy once; you knew you were; happy in
God, without being beholden to any creature. You did not
need
Love's all-sufficient sea to raise
With drops of creature-happiness.
And is it wise to seek it now anywhere else than where you
found it before? You have not the same excuse with those
who never were happy in God. And how little is the
seeking it in any creature better than idolatry ! Is it not,
in effect, loving the creature more than the Creator? Does
it not imply that you are “a lover of pleasure more than a
lover of God?”
7. O return to Him that made you happy before, and He
will make you happy again. Repeat your prayer,
“Keep me dead to all below;
Only Christ resolved to know :
Firm, and disengaged, and free;
Seeking all my bliss in thee!”
Seek, accept of nothing in the room of, God. Let all the
springs of your happiness be in him. “Seek first,” just as
you did before, “the kingdom of God and his righteousness;”
the knowledge and love of God; “fellowship with the Father
and with his Son Jesus Christ;” “and all other things
shall be added unto you;” particularly joy in the Holy
Ghost. Again,--
Know God, and teach thy soul to know
The joys that from religion flow :
Then every grace shall be thy guest,
And peace be there to crown the rest.
L1s BURN, June 11, 1785.
To
I. 1. I AM not fond of saying the same thing over and
over; especially when I have so many things to say, that the
day of life (which with me is far spent) is not likely to suffice
for them. But, in some cases, it is needful for you that I
should ; and then it is not grievous to me. And it may be
best to speak freely and fully at once, that there may be the
less need of speaking on this head hereafter.
2. When we look into the Bible with any attention, and
then look round into the world, to see who believes and who
lives according to this book; we may easily discern that the
system of practice, as well as the system of truth, there
delivered, is torn in pieces, and scattered abroad, like the
members of Absyrtus. Every denomination of Christians
retains some part either of Christian truth or practice; these
hold fast one part, and those another, as their fathers did
before them. What is the duty, meantime, of those who
desire to follow the whole word of God? Undoubtedly, to
“gather up ’’ all these “fragments,” that, if possible,
“nothing be lost;” with all diligence to follow all those
we see about us, so far as they follow the Bible; and to join
together in one scheme of truth and practice what almost all
the world put asunder.
3. Many years ago I observed several parts of Christian
practice among the people called Quakers. Two things I
particularly remarked among them,-plainness of speech,
and plainness of dress. I willingly adopted both, with some
restrictions, and particularly plainness of dress; the same I
recommended to you, when God first called you out of the
world; and after the addition of more than twenty years'
experience, I recommend it to you still.
4. But before I go any farther, I must entreat you, in the
Yuame of God, be open to conviction. Whatever prejudices
you have contracted from education, custom, or example,
divest yourselves of them, as far as possible. Be willing to
receive light either from God or man; do not shut your eyes.
against it. Rather, be glad to see more than you did before;
to “have the eyes of your understanding opened.” Receive
the truth in the love thereof, and you will have reason to
bless God for ever.
II. 1. Not that I would advise you to imitate the people
called Quakers in those little particularities of dress which can
answer no possible end but to distinguish them from all
other people. To be singular, merely for singularity’s sake,
is not the part of a Christian: I do not, therefore, advise you
to wear a hat of such dimensions, or a coat of a particular
form. Rather, in things that are absolutely indifferent, that
are of no consequence at all, humility and courtesy require
you to conform to the customs of your country.
2. But I advise you to imitate them, First, in the meatness
of their apparel. This is highly to be commended, and quite
suitable to your Christian calling. Let all your apparel,
therefore, be as clean as your situation in life will allow. It
is certain the poor cannot be as clean as they would, as
having little change of raiment. But let even these be as
clean as they can, as care and diligence can keep them.
Indeed, they have particular need so to be; because cleanli
mess is one great branch of frugality. It is likewise more
conducive to health than is generally considered. Let the
poor, then, especially labour to be clean, and provoke those
of higher rank to jealousy.
3. I advise you to imitate them, Secondly, in the plainness
of their apparel. In this are implied two things: (1.) That
your apparel be cheap, not expensive; far cheaper than
others in your circumstances wear, or than you would wear,
if you knew not God: (2.) That it be grave, not gay, airy, or
showy; not in the point of the fashion. And these easy
rules may be applied both to the materials whereof it is
made, and the manner wherein it is made or put on.
4. Would you have a farther rule with respect to both?
Then take one, whicl. you may always carry in your bosom :
“Do everything herein with a single eye;” and this will
direct you in every circumstance. Let a single intention to
468 ADVICE TO METHODISTs,
please God prescribe both what clothing you shall buy, and
the manner wherein it shall be made, and how you shall put
on and wear it. To express the same thing in other words:
Let all you do, in this respect, be so done that you may offer
it to God, a sacrifice acceptable through Christ Jesus; so
that, consequently, it may increase your reward and brighten
your crown in heaven. And so it will do, if it be agreeable
to Christian humility, seriousness, and charity.
5. Shall I be more particular still? Then I “exhort all
those who desire me to watch over their souls,” Wear no
gold, (whatever Officers of State may do; or Magistrates, as
the ensign of their office,) no pcarls, or precious stones; use
no curling of hair, or costly apparel, how grave soever. I
advise those who are able to receive this saying, Buy no
velvcts, no silks, no fine linen, no superfluities, no mere
ornaments, though cver so much in fashion. Wear nothing,
though you have it already, which is of a glaring colour, or
which is in any kind gay, glistering, or showy, nothing made
in the very height of the fashion, nothing apt to attract the
eyes of the by-standers. I do not advise women to wear
rings, ear-rings, inccklaces, lace, (of whatever kind or colour,)
or ruffles, which, by little and little, may easily shoot out
from one to twelve inches decp. Neither do I advise men to
wear coloured waistcoats, shining stockings, glittering or
costly buckles or buttons, either on their coats, or in their
sleeves, any more than gay, fashionable, or expensive perukes.
It is true, these arc little, very little things, which are not
worth defending; therefore, give them up, let them drop,
throw them away without another word; else, a little needle
may cause much pain in your flesh, a little self-indulgence
much hurt to your soul.
III. 1. For the preceding exhortation I have the authority
of God, in clear and express terms: “I will that women”
(and, by parity of reason, men too) “adorn themselves in
modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with
broidered” (curled) “hair, or gold, or pearls,” (one kind of
precious stones, which was then most in use, put for all,) “or
costly apparel; but (which becometh women professing
godliness) with good works.” (1 Tim. ii. 9, 10.) Again:
“Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of
plaiting” (curling) “the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of
putting on of apparcl. But let it be the ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.”
(1 Peter iii. 3, 4.) Nothing can be more express; the
wearing of gold, of precious stones, and of costly apparel,
together with curling of hair, is here forbidden by name:
Nor is there any restriction made, either here, or in any
other scripture. Whoever, therefore, says, “There is no
harm in these things,” may as well say, “There is no harm
in stealing or adultery.”
2. There is something peculiarly observable in the nauner
wherein both St. Peter and St. Paul speak of these things.
“Let not your adorning,” says St. Peter, “be that outward
adorning; but let it be the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit.” The latter clause is not added barely to fill up the
sentence, but with strong and weighty reason. For there is
a direct contrariety (as little as we may suspect it) between
that outward, and this inward, adorning; and that, both
with regard to their source, and with regard to their tendency.
As to their source, all that adorning springs from nature; a
meek and quiet spirit, from grace; the former, from
conforming to our own will, and the will of man; the latter,
from conformity to the will of God. And as to their
tendency, nothing more directly tends to destroy meekness
and quietness of spirit than all that outward adorning,
whereby we seek to commend ourselves to men, and not to
God. For this cherishes all those passions and tempers which
overthrow the quiet of every soul wherein they dwell.
3. Let “them adorn themselves,” saith St. Paul, “not
with curling of hair, or with gold, pearls, or costly apparel;
but (which becometh women professing godliness) with good
works.” The latter clause is here likewise added for plain
and weighty reasons. For, (1.) That kind of adorning cannot
spring from godliness; from either the love or fear of God;
from a desire of conforming to his will, or from the mind
which was in Christ Jesus. (2.) It noway tends to increase
godliness; it is not conducive to any holy temper. But, (3.)
It manifestly tends to destroy several of the tempers most
essential to godliness. It has no friendly influence on
humility; whether we aim at pleasing others or ourselves
hereby. Either in one case or the other, it will rather
increase pride or vanity than lowliness of heart. It does not
at all minister to the seriousness which becomes a sinner
born to die. It is utterly inconsistent with simplicity; no
470 ADVICE TO METHODIsTS,
one uses it merely to please God. Whoever acts with a
single eye, does all things to be seen and approved of God;
and can no more dress, than he can pray, or give alms, “to
bc. seen of men.”
4. “O, but one may be as humble in velvet and embroidery,
as another is in sackcloth.” True; for a person may wear
sackcloth, and have no humility at all. The heart may be
filled with pride and vanity, whatever the raiment be.
Again: Women under the yoke of unbelieving parents or
husbands, as well as men in office, may, on several occasions,
be constrained to put on gold or costly apparel; and in cases
of this kind, plain experience shows, that the baleful influence
of it is suspended. So that wherever it is not our choice,
but our cross, it may consist with godliness, with a meek and
quict spirit, with lowliness of heart, with Christian serious
ness. But it is not true that any one can choose this from a
single eye to please God; or, consequently, without sustain
ing great loss as to lowliness and every other Christian
temper.
5. But, however this be, can you be adorned at the same
time with costly apparel and with good works; that is, in the
same degree as you might have been, had you bestowed less
cost on your apparel? You know this is impossible; the
more you expend on the one, the less you have to expend on
the other. Costliness of apparel, in every branch, is there
fore immediately, directly, inevitably destructive of good
works. You see a brother, for whom Christ died, ready to
perish for want of needful clothing. You would give it him
gladly; but, alas, “it is corban, whereby he might have
been profited.” It is given already, not indeed for the
service of God, not to the treasury of the temple; but either
to please the folly of others, or to feed vanity or the lust of
the eye in yourself. Now (even suppose these were harmless.
tempers, yet) what an unspeakable loss is this, if it be really
true, that “every man shall receive his own reward according
to his own labour !” if there be indeed a reward in heaven
for every work of faith, for every degree of the labour of
lovel
IV. 1. As to the advice subjoined, it is easy to observe,
that all those smaller things are, in their degree, liable to the
sanc objections as the greater. If they are gay, showy,
pleasing to the eye, the putting them on does not spring
from a single view to please God. It neither flows from,
nor tends to advance, a meek and quiet spirit. It does not
arise from, nor anyway promote, real, vital godliness.
2. And if they are in anywise costly, if they are purchased
with any unnecessary expense, they cannot but, in proportion
to that expense, be destructive of good works. Of conse
quence, they are destructive of that charity which is fed
thereby; hardening our heart against the cry of the poor
and needy, by inuring us to shut up our bowels of compassion
toward them.
3. At least, all unnecessary expenses of this kind, whether
small or great, are senseless and foolish. This we may defy
any man living to get over, if he allows there is another
world. For there is no reward in heaven for laying out
your money in ornaments, or costly apparel; whereas you
may have an eternal reward for whatever you expend on
earth.
4. Consider this more closely: Here are two ways proposed
of laying out such a sum of money. I may lay it out in
expensive apparel for myself, or in necessary clothing for my
neighbour. The former will please my own eye, or that of
others; the latter will please God. Now suppose there were
no more harm in one than in the other; in that which
pleases man, than in that which pleases God; is there as
much good in it? If they were equally innocent, are they
equally wise? By the one, I gratify the desire of the eye,
and gain a pleasure that perishes in the using; by the other
I gain a larger share of those pleasures that are at God’s
right hand for evermore. By the former, I obtain the
applause of men; by the latter, the praise of God. In this
way I meet with the admiration of fools; in that, I hear
from the Judge of all, “Well done, good and faithful servant;
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.”
5. Brethren, whatever ye are accounted by men, I would
not have you fools in God’s account. “Walk ye circum
spectly, not as fools, but as wise;” not in those ways which
God may possibly forgive, (to put things in the most favour
able light,) but in those which he will certainly reward.
“In wickedness be ye children” still; “but in understanding
be ye men.” I want to see a visible body of people who are
standing examples of this wisdom; patterns of doing all
things, great and small, with an eye to God and etermity.
472 ADVICE To METhonists,
V. l. But we may be assured, the wisdom of the world
will find out abundance of objections to this. Accordingly,
it is objected, First, “If God has given us plentiful fortunes,
if we are placed in the higher ranks of life, we must act
suitably to our fortune. We ought to dress according to our
rank; that is, in gold and costly apparel.” Not to insist
that mone of you are of this rank, I answer, Where is this
written? Our Saviour once occasionally said, “Behold, they
who wear gorgeous” (splendid) “apparel, are in Kings’
courts;” but he docs not say, they ought to be even there;
he neither enjoins nor countenances it. And where is this
either enjoined or allowed by IIim or any of his Apostles?
Bring me plain, scriptural proof for your assertion, or I
cannot allow it.
2. “But did not God give express command by Moses,
that some even among his chosen people should be adorned
in the most exquisite manner with gold and precious stones,
and costly array?” Indeed he did; he expressly commanded
this with regard to Aaron and his successors in the IIigh
Priesthood. But to this I answer, First, This direction
which God gave, with regard to thc Jewish IIigh Priest, cau
certainly affect no person in England, unless the Archbishop
of Canterbury; and I apprehend, he docs not plead the
precedent. Secondly, The Jews and we are under different
dispensations. The glory of the whole Mosaic dispensation
was chiefly visible and cxternal; whereas the glory of the
Christian dispensation is of an invisible and spiritual nature.
3. “But what then are gold and precious stones for?
Why have they a place in the creation?” What, if I say I
cannot tell? There are abundance of things in the creation
which I do not know the use of. What are crocodiles, lions,
tigers, scorpions for? Why have so many poisons a place in
the creation? Some of them are for medicine: But what
ever they are for, in whatever manner they may be useful,
they are certainly not to be used in such a manner as God
has expressly forbidden.
4. “But if they were not thus adorned, Kings and
Generals would be despised by their subjects and soldiers.”
Supposing they would, that is nothing to you; for you are
neither Kings nor Generals. But it is absolutely certain
they would not, if they were not despised on other accounts.
If they are valiant and wise, they will never be despised for
With REGARD TO DRESS, 473
the plainness of their dress. Was ever General or King
more esteemed or beloved by his subjects and soldiers than
King Charles of Sweden ? And it is sure he wore no gold
or costly apparel, not so much as a common Officer. But
we need not go so many years back. Who is the Prince
that is now honoured and beloved both by his subjects and
soldiers, far beyond any other King or General in Europe?
There is no need to repeat his name. But does he gain
this honour and love by the costliness of his apparel?. So
far from it, that he rarely uses any other dress than the
uniform of his own guards.
5. “But if all men were to dress like him, how would
tradesmen live?” I answer, (1.) God certainly considered
this before ever he gave these commands. And he would
never have given them, had he not seen, that, if they were
universally observed, men in general would live better than
they otherwise could; better in this world, as well as that to
come... But, (2.) There is no danger at all that they should
be universally observed. Only a little flock in any civilized
mation will observe them, till the knowledge of God covers
the earth. (3.) If those who do observe them, employ the
money they thus save in the most excellent manner, then a
part of what before only served to fat a few rich tradesmen for
hell, will suffice to feed and clothe and employ many poor that
seek the kingdom of heaven. (4.) “And how will those
tradesmen themselves live?” They will live like men, by
honest labour; most of whom before lived like swine, wallow
ing in all gluttony and sensuality. But, (5.) This is all
mere trifling. It is only a copy of your countenance; for it
is not this, it is not a regard to trade, or the good of the
nation, that makes you disobey God. No ; it is pride,
vanity, or some other sinful temper, which is the real cause
of these sinful actions.
6. “But we cannot carry on our own trade without
dressing like other people.” If you mean only conforming
to those customs of your country that are neither gay nor
costly, why should you not dress like other people? I really
think you should. Let an Englishman dress like other
Englishmen, not like a Turk or a Tartar. Let an English
woman dress like other English women, not like a French
woman, or a German. But if you mean conformity to them
in what God has forbidden, the answer is ready at hand : If
474 ADVICE TO METHOD1sts,
you cannot carry on your trade without breaking God's com
mand, you must not carry it on. But I doubt the fact; I know
no trade which may not be carried on by one who uses plain
and modest apparel. I fear, therefore, this too is but a copy
of your countenance; you love these things, and therefore
think them necessary. Your heart carries away your judg
ment; if you were not fond of them, you would never dream
of their necessity.-
7. In one single case these things may be necessary, that
is, unavoidable; namely, that of women who are under the
yoke of self-willed, unreasonable husbands or parcnts. Such
may be constrained to do, in some degree, what otherwise
they would not. And they are blameless herein, if,
(1.) They use all possible means, arguments, entreaties, to
be excused from it; and, when they cannot prevail, (2.) Do
it just so far as they are constrained, and no farther.
VI. 1. And now, brethren, what remains, but that I
beseech you who are not under the yoke, who arc under God
the directors of your own actions, to set prejudice, obstinacy,
fashion aside, and to yield to Scripture, to reason, to truth.
Suppose, as some affirm, you acted on no higher motive than
to please me herein, I know not that you would have need
to be ashamed; even this you might avow in the face of the
sun. You owe something to me; perhaps it is not my fault
if you owe not your own souls also. If then you did an
indifferent thing only on this principlc, not to give me any
uneasiness, but to oblige, to comfort me in my labour, would
you do much amiss? IIow much more may you be excused
in doing what I advise, when truth, reason, and Scripture
advise the same? when the thing in question is not an
indifferent thing, but clearly determined by God himself?
2. Some years ago, when I first landed at Savannah, in
Georgia, a gentlewoman told me, “I assure you, Sir, you
will see as well-dressed a congregation on Sunday, as most
you have seen in London.” I did so; and, soon after, took
occasion to expound those scriptures which relate to dress,
and to press them freely upon my audience, in a plain and
close application. All the time that I afterward ministered
at Savannah, I saw neither gold in the church, nor costly
apparel; but the congregation in general was almost
constantly clothed in plain, clean linen or woollen.
3. And why should not my advice, grounded on Scripture
WITH REGARD To DRESs. 475
and reason, weigh with you as much as with them? I will
tell you why: (1) You are surrounded with saints of the
world, persons fashionably, reputably religious. And these
are constant opposers of all who would go farther in religion
than themselves. These are continually warning you against
running into extremes, and striving to beguile you from the
simplicity of the Gospel. (2.) You have near you still more
dangerous enemies than these, -Antinomians, whether
German or English; who, when any Christian practice is
enforced, come in with the cuckoo's note, “The law, the
law !” and, while they themselves glory in their shame,
make you ashamed of what should be your glory. (3.) You
have suffered by false Teachers of our own, who undermined
the doctrine you had received; negatively, in public, by not
insisting upon it, by not exhorting you to dress as persons
professing godliness; (and not to speak for a Christian duty
is, in effect, to speak against it;) and positively, in private,
either by jesting upon your exactness in observing the
Scripture rule, or by insinuations, which, if you did not mind
them then, yet would afterward weaken your soul.
4. You have been, and are at this day, “in perils among
false brethren;” I mean, not only those of other congrega
tions, who count strictness all one with bondage, but many of
our own; in particular those who were once clearly convinced
of the truth; but they have sinned away the conviction
themselves, and now endeavour to harden others against it,
at least by example; by returning again to the folly from
which they were once clean escaped. But what is the
example of all mankind, when it runs counter to Scripture
and reason? I have warned you a thousand times not to
regard any example which contradicts reason or Scripture.
If it ever should be, (pray that it may not be, but if ever it
should,) that I or my brother, my wife or his, or all of us
together, should set an example contrary to Scripture and
reason, I entreat you, regard it not at all; still let Scripture
and reason prevail.
5. You who have passed the morning, perhaps the noon,
of life, who find the shadows of the evening approach, set a
better example to those that are to come, to the now rising
generation. With you the day of life is far spent; the
night of death is at hand. You have no time to lose; see
that you redeem every moment that remains. Remove
everything out of the way, be it ever so small, (though
indeed gay or costly apparel is not so,) that might anyways
obstruct your lowliness and meekness, your seriousness of
spirit, your single intention to glorify God, in all your
thoughts and words and actions. Let no needless expense
hinder your being, in the highest degree you possibly can,
“rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to commu
nicate,” till you are clothed with glory and immortality.
Our carcases will soon fall into the dust; then let the
survivors adorn them with flowers. Meantime, let us regard
those ornaments only that will accompany us into eternity.
6. You that are in the morning of your days, either your
form is agreeable, or it is not. If it is not, do not make
your person remarkable; rather let it lie hid in common
apparel. On every account, it is your wisdom to recommend
yourself to the eye of the mind; but especially to the eye of
God, who reads the secrets of your hearts, and in whose sight
the incorruptible ornaments alone are of great price. But if
you would recommend yourself by dress, is anything com
parable to plain neatness? What kind of persons are those
to whom you could be recommended by gay or costly appa
rel? None that are any way likely to make you happy;
this pleases only the silliest and worst of men. At most, it
gratifies only the silliest and worst principle in those who are
of a nobler character.
7. To you, whom God has entrusted with a more pleasing
form, those ornaments are quite needless:
The adorning thee with so much art
Is but a barbarous skill ;
'Tis like the poisoning of a dart,
Too apt before to kill.
That is, to express ourselves in plain English, without any
figure of poetry, it only tends to drag them into death ever
lasting, who were going fast enough before, by additional
provocations to lust, or, at least, inordinate affection. Did
you actually design to raise either of these in those who
looked upon you? What! while you and they were in the
more immediate presence of God? What profaneness and
inhumanity mixed together ! But if you designed it not,
did you not foresee it? You might have done so without
any extraordinary sagacity. “Nay, I did not care or think
ThiOUGil TS UPON DRESS. 477
about it.” And do you say this by way of excuse? You
“scatter abroad arrows, firebrands, and death,” and do not
care or think about it !
8. O let us walk more charitably and more wisely for the
time to come ! Let us all cast aside, from this very hour,
whatever does not become men and women professing
godliness; whatever does not spring from the love and fear
of God, and minister thereto. Let our seriousness “shine
before men,” not our dress. Let all who see us know that
we are not of this world. Let our adorning be that which
fadeth not away; cven righteousness and true holiness. If
ye regard not weakening my hands, and grieving my spirit,
yet grieve not the Holy Spirit of God. Do you ask, “But
what shall I do with the gay or costly apparel, and with the
ornaments, I have already? Must I suffer them to be lost?
Ought I not to wear them, now I have them?” I answer,
There is no loss like that of using them; wearing them is
the greatest loss of all. But what then shalt thou do with
them? Burn them, rather than wear them; throw them in
the depth of the sea. Or, if thou canst with a clear con
science, sell them, and give the money to them that want;
but buy no more at the peril of thy soul. Now be a faithful
steward: After providing for those of thinc own household,
things needful for life and godliness, feed the hungry, clothe
the naked, relieve the sick, the prisoner, the stranger, with
all that thou hast: Then shall God clothe thee with glory
and honour in the presence of men and angels; and thou
shalt “shine as the brightness of the firmament,” yea, “as
the stars for ever and cver.”
Loud complaint has been made concerning a passage taken
out of a little tract, entitled, “The Refined Courtier,” which
is inserted in the last April Magazine, page 197.* The
passage objected to runs thus: “Let every one, when he
appears in public, be decently clothed, according to his age,
and the custom of the place where he lives.” There is no
* The Arminian Magazine for 1708.-EDIT.
fault in this. It is exactly right. Accordingly, when I
appear in public, I am decently appareled, according to my
age and the custom of England; sometimes in a short coat,
sometimes in a might-gown, sometimes in a gown and
cassock. “He that does otherwise, seems to affect singu
larity.” And though a Christian frequently may, yea, must,
be singular, yet he never affects singularity; he only takes
up his cross so far as conscience requires. Thus far, then,
there is nothing which is not capable of a fair construction.
“Nor is it sufficient that our garment be made of good
cloth,” (the author speaks all along of people of rank;
particularly those that attend the Court) “but we should
constrain ourselves to follow the garb where we reside,”
suppose at St. James’s. “Seeing custom is the law and
standard of decency, in all things of this nature.” It certainly
is; and I advise all the King's Lords of the Bedchamber,
the Queen’s Maids of Honour, to follow it. All this, there
fore, may bear a sound construction; nor does it contradict
anything which I have said or written.
To
[ruelishED IN THE YEAR 1778.]
I was a little surprised to read, in a late publication of
yours, the following assertions :
1. Thomas Maxfield was “some of the first-fruits of Mr.
Whitefield's ministry.” (Page 18.)
2. “When he went abroad, he delivered me, and many
thousands more, into the hands of those he thought he could
have trusted them with, and who would have given them
back to him again at his return. But, alas! it was not
so.” (Ibid.)
REV. TrioMAS MAXFIELD. 470
“I heard Mr. Whitefield say, at the Tabernacle, in the
presence of five or six Ministers, to Mr. -- a little before
he left England for the last time, ‘I delivered thirty thou
sand people into the hands of your brother and you, when I
went abroad. And by the time I came back, you had so
turned their hearts against me, that not three hundred of
them would come to hear me.” I knew this was true.” (Ibid.)
3. “I heard Mr. Whitefield say, ‘When I came back
from Georgia, there was no speaking evil of each other. O
what would I not give, or suffer, or do, to see such times
again But O that division I that division ? What slaughter
jt has made l’
“It was doctrine that caused the difference; or, at least,
it was so pretended.” (Ibid.)
“He preached a few times in connexion with his old
friends. But, ah! how soon was the sword of contention
drawn l’’ (Page 19.)
4. “Where can you now find any loving ones, of either
party? They have no more love to each other than Turks.”
(Ibid.)
“Read their vile contentions, and the evil characters they
give of each other, raking the filthiest ashes, to find some
black story against their fellow-Preachers.” (Page 20.)
They “slay with the sword of bitterness, wrath, and
envy. Still more their shame is what they have sent out
into the world against each other, on both sides, about five or
six years ago, and till this very day.” (Page 21.)
To satisfy both friends and foes, I propose a few queries
on each of these four heads.
I. As to the first, I read a remarkable passage in the
third Journal, (vol.I., page 196,) the truth of which may be
still attested by Mr. Durbin, Mr. Westell, and several others
then present, who are yet alive:-" A young man who stood
behind, sunk down, as one dead; but soon began to roar
out, and beat himself against the ground, so that six men
could scarce hold him. This was Thomas Maxfield.” Was
this you? If it was, how are you “the first-fruits of Mr.
Whitefield's ministry?” And how is it, that neither I, nor
your fellow-labourers, ever heard one word of this during
all those years wherein you laboured in connexion with us?
II. “When he went abroad again, he delivered me, and
many thousands, into the hands of Mr. -.”
When? where? in what manner? This is quite new to
me! I never heard one word of it before !
But stay! here is something more curious still ! “I
heard Mr. Whitefield say, at the Tabernacle, in the presence
of five or six Ministers, a little before he left England the
last time, ‘I delivered thirty thousand people into the hands
of you and your brother when I went abroad.’”
Mr. Whitefield’s going abroad, which is here referred to,
was in the year 1741. Did he then deliver you into my
hands? Was you not in my hands before? Had you not
then, for above a year, been a member of the society under
my care? Nay, was you not, at the very time, one of my
Preachers? Did you not then serve me as a son in the
Gospel? Did you not eat my bread, and lodge in my house?
Is not this then a total misrepresentation? Would to God
it be not a wilful one !
“I heard,” you say, “Mr. Whitefield say, at the Taber
macle, in the presence of five or six Ministers, a little before
he left England the last time:”--Who then can doubt the
truth of what follows? For here is chapter and verse!
Here both the time, the place, and the persons present, are
specified. And they ought to be; seeing the crime alleged
is one of a very heinous mature. Many a man has been
justly sentenced to death for sins which, in the sight of
God, were not equal to this. The point, therefore, requires
a little more examination. And, first, I desire to know
what are the names of those five or six Ministers? and
which of them heard Mr. Whitefield say, “When I went
abroad (in 1741,) I delivered thirty thousand people into the
hands of you and your brother?” Thirty thousand people !
Whence did they come? Did they spring out of the earth?
Why, there were not, at that time, five thousand Methodists
in England, or in the world. The societies in London,
Bristol, and Kingswood, (the only ones. I had,) contained
fourteen or fifteen hundred members. I believe not so
many were in his societies. But were they fewer, or more,
they were nothing to me. He never entrusted me with
them. He never delivered into mine, or my brother's
hands, either his society at the Tabernacle in London, or
that in Bristol, or in Kingswood, or any other place what
ever. He never delivered (that I remember) one single
society into my hands. I bless God, I needed it not. I
did not need to build upon another man’s foundation. A
dispensation of the Gospel was given me also; and my
labour was not in vain. I was constrained to cry out (and
you yourself used the same words to God in my behalf),--
*O the fathomless love
Which has deign'd to approve
And prosper the work of my hands !
With my pastoral crook
I went over the brook,
And, behold ! I am spread into bands !”
With what view then can you charge me with that perfidy,
which I am no more guilty of than of high treason? For
what end can you affirm, “When he went abroad, he
delivered many thousands into the hands of those he thought
he could have trusted them with ?” Delivered ! when?
where? how? What can you mean? I flatly deny that
ever he delivered one thousand, or one hundred, souls into
my hands. Do you mean, “He spoke honourably of you
to them at Kennington-common and Rose-green?” True:
But not so honourably as I spoke of you, even at London;
yea, as late as the year 1763! Yet was this the same thing
with “delivering the people” at London “into your hands?”
Nay, but “Mr. Whitefield trusted that you would have given
them back at his return.” Them! whom? His society at
London, or Bristol 2 I had them not to give. He never
entrusted me with them. Therefore I could not “give them
back.”
But how melancholy is the exclamation that follows:
“Alas! It was not so !” Was not how? Why, I did not
give back what I never had received; but went straight on
my way, taking the best care I could of those who entrusted
themselves to me.
III. So much for the second article. As to the third,
your words are, “I heard Mr. Whitefield say, ‘O that
division I that division what slaughter it has made l’”
But who made that division? It was not I. It was not
my brother. It was Mr. Whitefield himself; and that
notwithstanding all admonitions, arguments, and entreaties.
Mr. Whitefield first wrote a treatise against me by name.
He sent it to my brother, who endorsed it with these words:
“Put up again thy sword into its place.” It slept a while;
but after a time he published it. I made no reply. Soon
482 LETTER. To TEE
after Mr. Whitefield preached against my brother and me by
name. This he did constantly, both in Moorfields, and in
all other public places. We never returned railing for
railing, but spoke honourably of him, at all times, and in all
places. But is it any wonder, that those who loved us should
no longer choose to hear him? Meantime, was it we that
“turned their hearts against him?” Was it not himself?
But you say, “It was doctrine that caused the difference;”
(oddly enough expressed !) “at least, it was so pretended !”
“It was so pretended !” What do you mean? that differ
ence of doctrine was only pretended ? that we were agreed at
the bottom, and only fought, like prize-fighters, to show
our skill ? Nay, here was no pretence. The thing was as
plain as the sun at noon-day. Did not Mr. Whitefield
proclaim, upon the house-top, the difference between us and
him? And yet it was not merely the difference of doctrine
that caused the division. It was rather the manner wherein
he maintained his doctrine, and treated us in every place.
Otherwise difference of doctrine would not have created any
difference of affection; but he might lovingly have held
particular redemption, and we general, to our lives’ end.
He did indeed “preach a few times in connexion with
his old friends; but how soon was the sword of contention
drawn l’” By whom? Truly, by himself. Do not you
know, (thousands do, if you do not,) that when he preached
in the very Foundery, and my brother sat by him, he
preached the absolute decrees in the most peremptory and
offensive manner? What was this, but drawing the sword
and throwing away the scabbard? Who then is chargeable
with the contention and division that ensued ?
IV. “But where,” you ask, “can you now find any loving
ones of either party?” Blessed be God, I can find many
thousands, both in London, in Bristol, in Kingswood, and in
various parts, not only of England, but also of Scotland and
Ireland; persons as full of love, both to God and man, as
any I knew forty years ago.
Some of these I find (and much rejoice to find) in Mr.
Whitefield's societies. And I pray God, they may increase
a thousand-fold, both in number and in strength. “Nay,
they have no more love to each other than Turks.” They !
who? This is not the case with our societies. They not
only love each other, but love their enemies, even those that
still despitefully use them. But “read their vile contentions,
and the evil character they give each other, raking the
filthiest ashes, to find some black story.” I will answer for
one. I give no “evil character” of my “fellow-Preachers.”
I “rake into no filthy ashes, for black stories.” Let him
who does, take it to himself. “They slay with the sword
of bitterness, wrath, and envy.” I do not. I plead, Not
guilty. As I envy no man, so neither my wrath nor bitter
ness slays any human creature. “Still more to their shame
is what they have sent out into the world, against each other,
on both sides, about five or six years ago, and till this very
day.”
“What they have sent out against each other, on both
sides, about five or six years ago.” Within five or six years
I have been vehemently called to answer for myself; twice
Ly Mr. Richard Hill, and afterwards by his brother. Have
you read what we “have sent out into the world, against
each other, on both sides?” If you have not, how can you
so peremptorily affirm what “both sides” have done? You
cannot possibly be a judge of what you have not read; and
if you had read, you could not have passed such a sentence.
Three tracts I have wrote; but in none of these do I “slay
with the sword of bitterness, or wrath, or envy.” In none
of them do I speak one bitter, or passionate, or disrespectful
word. Bitterness and wrath, yea, low, base, virulent invec
tive, both Mr. Richard and Mr. Rowland Hill (as well as
Mr. Toplady) have poured out upon me, in great abundance.
But where have I, in one single instance, returned them
railing for railing? I have not so learned Christ. I dare
not rail, either at them or you. I return not cursing, but
blessing. That the God of love may bless both them and
you, is the prayer of your injured,
Yet still affectionate brother,
February 14, 1778.
oF THE
THERE are four grand and powerful arguments which
strongly in 'uce us to believe that the Bible must be from
God; viz., miracles, prophecies, the goodness of the doctrine,
and the moral character of the penmen. All the miracles
flow from divine power; all the prophecies, from divine
understanding; the goodness of the doctrine, from divine
goodness; and the moral character of the penmen, from
divine holiness.
Thus Christianity is built upon four grand pillars; viz., the
power, understanding, goodness, and holiness of God. Divine
power is the source of all the miracles; divine understanding,
of all the prophecies; divine goodness, of the goodness of
the doctrine; and divine holiness, of the moral character of
the penmen.
I beg leave to propose a short, clear, and strong argument
to prove the divine inspiration of the holy Scriptures.
The Bible must be the invention either of good men or
angels, bad men or devils, or of God.
1. It could not be the invention of good men or angels;
for they neither would nor could make a book, and tell lies
all the time they were writing it, saying, “Thus saith the
Lord,” when it was their own invention.
2. It could not be the invention of bad men or devils; for
they would not make a book which commands all duty,
forbids all sin, and condemns their souls to hell to all
eternity.
3. Therefore, I draw this conclusion, that the Bible must.
be given by divine inspiration.
THERE is great variety of opinions, says a late eminent
historian, about the time when Montanus first appeared to
work signs and miracles; either by the operation of God, as
the historian supposes, or by that of the devil transformed;
and that in such a manner as nobody was able to discern,
because both his life and doctrine were holy and blameless.
The time when it began to be doubted, concerning the spirit
which operated in him, and moved him after an extraordinary
manner, whether it were a good or an evil one, is very
uncertain; but it seems to be between the years of Christ
150 and 170. However, so it was, that the sentiments of
those sound in the faith, or the Christians in general, were
much divided in their judgments. Of all the ancients, none
was more express than he in the mystery of the incarnation,
or seemed more to honour the person of Christ, and extol
his merits. All the ancient heretics erred greatly from the
truth, as to this; but he was clear in this respect, preaching
up repentance, and faith in the name of the Lord Jesus alone,
as the one Mediator between God and man. Neither is it
denied that he was orthodox in the notion of the Church, as
to Christian fellowship, rightly formed, according to the
pattern delivered by Christ himself, and knit together by the
bond of the Spirit, under Pastors and Officers of several
orders, having a clear and certain mission from Him whom
they represent; but he, under the character of a Prophet, as
an order established in the Church, appeared (without
bringing any new doctrine) for reviving what was decayed,
and reforming what might be amiss; whereas others that
had been judged heretics, were not only preachers of strange
and monstrous opinions, but were utter enemies to all
manner of discipline in the Church.
It seems, therefore, by the best information we can procure
at this distance of time, that Montanus was not only a truly
good man, but one of the best men then upon earth; and that
his real crime was, the severely reproving those who professed
themselves Christians, while they neither had the mind that
was in Christ, nor walked as Christ walked; but were
conformable both in their temper and practice to the present
evil world.
LoNDoN, December 20, 1751.
THE point you speak of in your letter of September 21
is of a very important nature. I have had many serious
thoughts concerning it, particularly for some months last
past; therefore, I was not willing to speak hastily or slightly
of it, but rather delayed till I could consider it thoroughly.
I mean by preaching the gospel, preaching the love of God
to sinners, preaching the life, death, resurrection, and inter
cession of Christ, with all the blessings which, in consequence
thereof, are freely given to true believers.
By preaching the law, I mean, explaining and enforcing
the commands of Christ, briefly comprised in the Sermon on
the Mount.
Now, it is certain, preaching the gospel to penitent sinners
“begets faith; ” that it “sustains and increases spiritual
life in true believers.”
Nay, sometimes it “teaches and guides” them that believe;
yea, and “convinces them that believe not.”
So far all are agreed. But what is the stated means of
feeding and comforting believers? What is the means, as of
begetting spiritual life where it is not, so of sustaining and
increasing it where it is?f
Here they divide. Some think, preaching the law only;
others, preaching the gospel only. I think, neither the one
nor the other; but duly mixing both, in every place, if not
in every sermon.
I think, the right method of preaching is this: At our first
beginning to preach at any place, after a general declaration
of the love of God to sinners, and his willingness that they
should be saved, to preach the law, in the strongest, the
closest, the most searching manner possible; only intermix
ing the gospel here and there, and showing it, as it were,
afar off.
After more and more persons are convinced of sin, we
may mix more and more of the gospel, in order to “beget
faith,” to raise into spiritual life those whom the law hath
slain; but this is not to be done too hastily neither. There
fore, it is not expedient wholly to omit the law; not only
because we may well suppose that many of our hearers are
still unconvinced; but because otherwise there is danger,
that many who are convinced will heal their own wounds
slightly; therefore, it is only in private converse with a
thoroughly convinced sinner, that we should preach nothing
but the gospel.
If, indeed, we could suppose a whole congregation to be
thus convinced, we should need to preach only the gospel:
And the same we might do, if our whole congregation were
supposed to be newly justified. But when these grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of Christ, a wise builder would c
preach the law to them again; only taking particular care to"
place every part of it in a gospel light, as not only a com
mand, but a privilege also, as a branch of the glorious liberty
of the sons of God. He would take equal care to remind
them, that this is not the cause, but the fruit, of their
acceptance with God; that other cause, “other foundation
can no man lay, than that which is laid, even Jesus Christ;”
that we are still forgiven and accepted, only for the sake of
what he hath done and suffered for us; and that all true
obedience springs from love to him, grounded on his first
loving us. He would labour, therefore, in preaching any
part of the law, to keep the love of Christ continually before
their eyes; that thence they might draw fresh life, vigour,
and strength, to run the way of his commandments.
Thus would he preach the law even to those who were
pressing on to the mark. But to those who were careless,
or drawing back, he would preach it in another manner,
nearly as he did before they were convinced of sin. To
those, meanwhile, who were earnest, but feeble-minded, he
would preach the gospel chiefly; yet variously intermixing
more or less of the law, according to their various
necessities.
By preaching the law in the manner above described, he
would teach them how to walk in Him whom they had
received. Yea, and the same means (the main point
wherein, it seems, your mistake lies) would both sustain and
increase their spiritual life. For the commands are food, as
well as the promises; food equally wholesome, equally
substantial. These, also, duly applied, not only direct, but
likewise nourish and strengthen, the soul.
Of this you appear not to have the least conception;
therefore, I will endeavour to explain it. I ask, then, Do
not all the children of God experience, that when God gives
them to see deeper into his blessed law, whenever he gives a
new degree of light, he gives, likewise, a new degree of
strength ? Now I see, he that loves me, bids me do this;
and now I feel I can do it, through Christ strengthening
Ine.
Thus light and strength are given by the same means, and
frequently in the same moment; although sometimes there
is a space between. For instance: I hear the command,
“Let your communication be always in grace, meet to
..minister grace to the hearers.” God gives me more light
into this command. I see the exceeding height and depth
of it. At the same time I see (by the same light from
above) how far I have fallen short. I am ashamed; I am
humbled before God. I earnestly desire to keep it better;
I pray to him that hath loved me for more strength, and
I have the petition I ask of him. Thus the law not only
convicts the unbeliever, and enlightens the believing soul,
but also conveys food to a believer; sustains and increases
his spiritual life and strength.
And if it increases his spiritual life and strength, it cannot
but increase his comfort also. For, doubtless, the more we
are alive to God, the more we shall rejoice in him; the
greater measure of his strength we receive, the greater will
be our consolation also.
And all this, I conceive, is clearly declared in one single
passage of Scripture:
“The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the
testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; the
statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the
commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.
More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine
gold; sweeter also than honey, and the honey-comb.” They
are both food and medicine; they both refresh, strengthen,
and mourish the soul.
Not that I would advise to preach the law without the
gospel, any more than the gospel without the law.
Undoubtedly, both should be preached in their turns; yea,
both at once, or both in one: All the conditional promises
are instances of this. They are law and gospel mixed
together.
According to this model, I should advise every Preacher
continually to preach the law; the law grafted upon,
tempered by, and animated with, the spirit of the gospel. I
advise him to declare, explain, and enforce every command
of God; but, meantime, to declare, in every sermon, (and
the more explicitly the better) that the first and great
command to a Christian is, “Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ;” that Christ is all in all, our “wisdom, righteous
ness, sanctification, and redemption;” that all life, love,
strength, are from him alone, and all freely given to us
through faith. And it will ever be found, that the law thus
preached both enlightens and strengthens the soul; that it
both nourishes and teaches; that it is the guide, “food,
medicine, and stay,” of the believing soul.
Thus all the Apostles built up believers; witness all the
Epistles of St. Paul, James, Peter, and John. And upon
this plan all the Methodists first set out. In this manner,
not only my brother and I, but Mr. Maxfield, Nelson,
James Jones, Westell, and Reeves, all preached at the
beginning.
By this preaching it pleased God to work those mighty
effects in London, Bristol, Kingswood, Yorkshire, and New
castle. By means of this, twenty-nine persons received
remission of sins in one day at Bristol only; most of them,
while I was opening and enforcing, in this manner, our
Lord’s Sermon upon the Mount.
In this manner John Downes, John Bennet, John
Haughton, and all the other Methodists, preached, till
James Wheatly came among them, who never was clear,
perhaps not sound, in the faith. According to his under
standing was his preaching; an unconnected rhapsody of
unmeaning words, like Sir John Suckling's--
Verses, smooth and scft as cream,
In which was neither depth nor stream.
Yet (to the utter reproach of the Methodist congregations)
this man became a most popular Preacher. He was admired
more and more wherever he went, till he went over the
second time into Ireland, and conversed more intimately
than before with some of the Moravian Preachers.
The consequence was, that he leaned more and more both
to their doctrine and manner of preaching. At first, several
of our Preachers complained of this; but, in the space of a
few months, (so incredible is the force of soft words,) he, by
slow and imperceptible degrees, brought almost all the
Preachers then in the kingdom to think and speak like
himself.
These, returning to England, spread the contagion to
some others of their brethren. But still the far greater part
of the Methodist Preachers thought and spoke as they had
done from the beginning.
This is the plain fact. As to the fruit of this new manner
of preaching, (entirely new to the Methodists) speaking much
of the promises, little of the commands; (even to unbelievers,
and still less to believers;) you think it has done great
good; I think it has done great harm.
I think it has done great harm to the Preachers; not only
to James Wheatly himself, but to those who have learned of
him,-David Trathen, Thomas Webb, Robert Swindells, and
John Maddern: I fear to others also; all of whom are but
shadows of what they were; most of them have exalted
themselves above measure, as if they only “preached Christ,
preached the gospel.” And as highly as they have exalted
themselves, so deeply have they despised their brethren ;
calling them “legal Preachers, legal wretches;” and (by a
cant name) “Doctors,” or “Doctors of Divinity.” They
have not a little despised their Ministers also, for “counte
nancing the Doctors,” as they termed them. They have
made their faults (real or supposed) common topics of con
versation; hereby cherishing in themselves the very spirit of
Ham; yea, of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.
I think it has likewise done great harm to their hearers;
diffusing among them their own prejudice against the other
Preachers; against their Ministers, me in particular, (of
which you have been an undeniable instance,) against the
scriptural, Methodist manner of preaching Christ, so that
they could no longer bear sound doctrine; they could no
*- - --
longer hear the plain old truth with profit or pleasure, nay,
hardly with patience.
After hearing such Preachers for a time, you yourself
(need we further witnesses?) could find in my preaching
no food for your soul; nothing to strengthen you in the
way; no inward experience of a believer; it was all
barren and dry; that is, you had no taste for mine or
John Nelson's preaching; it neither refreshed nor nourished
you.
Why, this is the very thing I assert: That the gospel
Preachers, so called, corrupt their hearers; they vitiate their
taste, so that they cannot relish sound doctrine; and spoil
their appetite, so that they cannot turn it into nourishment;
they, as it were, feed them with sweetmeats, till the genuine
wine of the kingdom seems quite insipid to them. They
give them cordial upon cordial, which make them all life and
spirit for the present; but, meantime, their appetite is
destroyed, so that they can neither retain nor digest the pure
milk of the word.
Hence it is, that (according to the constant observation I
have made, in all parts both of England and Ireland) Preachers
of this kind (though quite the contrary appears at first)
spread death, not life, among their hearers. As soon as that
flow of spirits goes off, they are without life, without power,
without any strength or vigour of soul; and it is extremely
difficult to recover them, because they still cry out, “Cordials!
Cordials l’’ of which they have had too much already, and
have no taste for the food which is convenient for them.
Nay, they have an utter aversion to it, and that confirmed by .
principle, having been taught to call it husks, if not poison :
How much more to those bitters which are previously needful
to restore their decayed appetite |
This was the very case when I went last into the north.
For some time before my coming, John Downes had scarce
been able to preach at all; the three others in the round
were such as styled themselves Gospel Preachers. When I
came to review the societies, with great expectation of finding
a vast increase, I found most of them lessened by one-third;
one entirely broken up. That of Newcastle itself was less
by a hundred members than when I visited it before. And
of those that remained, the far greater number in every
place were cold, weary, heartless, dead. Such were the
492 ThoughTS ON
blessed effects of this gospel preaching 1 of this new method
of preaching Christ!
On the other hand, when, in my return, I took an account
of the societies in Yorkshire, chiefly under the care of John
Nelson, one of the old way, in whose preaching you could
find no life, no food, I found them all alive, strong, and
vigorous of soul, believing, loving, and praising God their
Saviour; and increased in number from eighteen or nineteen
hundred, to upwards of three thousand. These had been
continually fed with that wholesome food which you could
neither relish nor digest. From the beginning they had
been taught both the law and the gospel. “God loves you;
therefore, love and obey him. Christ died for you; therefore,
die to sin. Christ is risen; therefore, rise in the image of
God. Christ liveth evermore; therefore, live to God, till
you live with him in glory.”
So we preached; and so you believed. This is the
scriptural way, the Methodist way, the true way. God grant
we may never turn therefrom, to the right hand or to the
left ||
I am,
My dear friend,
Your ever affectionate brother,
1. It is now upwards of forty years since my brother
and I were convinced of that important truth, which is the
foundation of all real religion, that “by grace we are saved.
through faith.” And as soon as we believed, we spoke;
when we saw it ourselves, we immediately began declaring it
to others. And, indeed, we could hardly speak of anything
else, either in public or private. It shone upon our minds
with so strong a light, that it was our constant theme. It
was our daily subject, both in verse and prose; and we
vehemently defended it against all mankind.
2. But in doing this we met with abundance of difficulty;
we were assaulted and abused on every side. We were
everywhere represented as mad dogs, and treated accordingly.
We were stoned in the streets, and several times narrowly
escaped with our lives. In sermons, newspapers, and
pamphlets of all kinds, we were painted as unheard-of
monsters. But this moved us not; we went on, by the help
of God, testifying salvation by faith both to small and great,
and not counting our lives dear unto ourselves, so we might
finish our course with joy.
3. While we were thus employed, another storm arose
from a quarter whence we least expected it. Some of our
familiar friends declared open war against us for preaching
salvation by works! This we could not in anywise under
stand; we wondered what they meant. We utterly disavowed
the charge; we denied it in the strongest terms. We
declared, over and over, both in public and private, “We
believe, and constantly preach, salvation by faith. Salvation
by works is a doctrine we abhor; we neither preach nor
believe it.” But it did not avail: Say what we would, the
same charge was still repeated; and that not only when we
were at a convenient distance, but even before our face.
4. At first we were inclined to think, that many who
affirmed this, did not believe themselves; that it was merely
a copy of their countenance, spoken ad movendam invidiam.*
And could we have been fully persuaded of this, the difficulty
would have been solved. But we did not dare to give way
to the thought : Whatever they might think or say of us, we
could not but think they were upright men, and spoke
according to their real sentiments. The wonder therefore
remained, how they could impute to us a doctrine which
our soul abhorred, and which we were continually opposing,
and confuting with all our might.
5. I was in this perplexity when a thought shot across my
mind, which solved the matter at once: “This is the key:
Those that hold, “Every one is absolutely predestinated either
to salvation or damnation, see no medium between salvation
by works and salvation by absolute decrees.” It follows,
*To excite ill-will.-EDIT.
that whosoever denies salvation by absolute decrees, in so
doing (according to their apprehension) asserts salvation by
works.
6. And herein I verily believe they are right. As averse
as I once was to the thought, upon further consideration, I
allow there is, there can be, no medium. Either salvation is
by absolute decree, or it is (in a scriptural sense) by works.
Yea, this I will proclaim on the house-top,-there is no
medium between these. You must either assert unconditional
decrees, or (in a sound sense) salvation by works.
7. This deserves a fuller examination: Let us consider it
more attentively. If the salvation of every man that ever
was, is, or shall be, finally saved, depends wholly and solely
upon an absolute, irresistible, unchangeable decree of God,
without any regard either to faith or works foreseen, then it
is not, in any sense, by works. But neither is it by faith:
For unconditional decree excludes faith as well as works;
since, if it is either by faith or works foreseen, it is not
by unconditional decree. Therefore, salvation by absolute
decree excludes both one and the other; and, consequently,
upon this supposition, salvation is neither by faith nor by
works.
8. If, on the other hand, we deny all absolute decrees, and
admit only the conditional one, (the same which our blessed
Lord hath revealed,) “He that believeth shall be saved;”
we must, according to their apprehension, assert salvation by
works. We must do this, (in a sound sense of the expression,)
if we believe the Bible. For seeing no faith avails, but that
“which worketh by love,” which produces both inward and
outward good works, to affirm, No man is finally saved
without this, is, in effect, to affirm, No man is finally saved
without works. It is plain, then, if we affirm, No man is
saved by an absolute, unconditional decree, but only by a
conditional one; we must expect, all who hold unconditional
decrees will say, we teach salvation by works.
9. Let none, therefore, who hold universal redemption be
surprised at being charged with this. Let us deny it no
more; let us frankly and fairly meet those who advance it
upon their own ground. If they charge you with holding
salvation by works, answer plainly, “In your sense, I do;
for I deny that our final salvation depends upon any absolute,
unconditional decree. If, therefore, there be no medium, I
do hold salvation by works. But observe: In allowing this,
I allow no more than that I am no Calvinist. So that, by
my making you this concession, you gain--just nothing.”
10. I am therefore still consistent with myself, as well as
consistent with the Bible. I still hold, (as I have done above
these forty years,) that “by grace we are saved through
faith;” yet so as not to contradict that other expression of
the same Apostle, “Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord.” Meantime, those who maintain absolute predestina
tion, who hold decrees that have no condition at all, cannot
be consistent with themselves, unless they deny salvation by
faith, as well as salvation by works. For, if only “he that
believeth shall be saved,” then is faith a condition of salva
tion; and God hath decreed, from all eternity, that it should
be such. But if the decree admit of any condition, it is
mot an unconditional decree. Either, therefore, you must
renounce your unconditional decrees, or deny that faith is
the condition of salvation; or (which is just the same thing)
affirm, that a man may be saved without either faith or
works.
11. And I am consistent with myself, as well as with the
Bible, when I affirm, that none shall be finally saved by any
“faith” but that “which worketh by love,” both inward and
outward holiness. I fear, many of them that hold uncon
ditional decrees are not sensible of this. For they seriously
believe themselves to be in the high road to salvation,
though they are far from inward (if not outward) holiness.
They have not “put on humbleness of mind, bowels of
mercy, brotherly-kindness.” They have no gentleness, no
meekness, no longsuffering; so far are they from the “love
that endureth all things.” They are under the power of
sin; of evil-surmising; of anger; yea, of outward sin. For
they scruple mot to say to their brother, “Thou fool!”
They not only, on a slight provocation, make no scruple of
rendering evil for evil, of returning railing for railing; but
they bring railing accusations unprovoked; they pour out
floods of the lowest, basest invectives. And yet they are
within the decree I instance in the two late publications
of Mr. Rowland Hill. “O,” says Mr. Hill, “but Mr.
Wesley is a wicked man.” What then? Is he more wicked
than him that disputed with Michael about the body of
Moses? How, then, durst he bring a railing accusation
496 GoD's EYEs ARE ovKR ALL THE EARTH.
against a man, when an archangel durst not bring one
against the devil? O fight, fight for an unconditional
decree For if there be any condition, how can you be
saved ?
MANY years ago, as my eldest brother was walking in the
back street of Hackney, a gentleman accosted him, and
said, “Sir, I am old, and I would willingly inform you of a
remarkable scene of Providence, that it may be remembered
when I am gone hence:-I was walking here some time since,
(as I frequently do,) early in a morning, when a chariot
stopped at a little distance from me, and a young lady,
stepping out, ran by me with all her might. A gentleman
quickly followed her, caught her, and brought her back;
when I just heard her say, ‘What, my dear, will you serve
me so?’ Immediately that door over against us opened,
and he thrust her in before him. I mused upon it all day
and all night, and was very uneasy. In the morning, a
gardener which I employed coming in, I asked him, “Do
you know such a house in Hackney?’ He answered, ‘Sir,
I am going to trim the trees in the garden next to it; and I
will make any inquiries which you desire, and bring you
back the best account I can. The account he gave me the
next morning was this:--When I went to work, I saw over
a low hedge a gardener trimming the trees in the other
garden; and I asked him, ‘Pray, who lives in that house?”
On his answering, ‘A mad Doctor; I asked, “Has he many
patients?” He said, ‘I do not know, though I dine in the
house; for he never suffers any to see them.’ I said, ‘I
will give you a pot of beer, if you can find the name of a
young lady that came in a day or two ago. He answered,
‘I cannot promise; but I will do my best when I go in to
dinner. When I saw him again, he said, ‘No patient in
the house dares speak to any one; and I could get no pen,
ink, and paper; but I got a pin and a card, on which a
young woman has pricked her name: Here it is.’ I took
A REMAIt RA13 Ll. PROVIDENCE. 497
the card, and knew the name. The next day I went to her
father, and asked, ‘Sir, where is your daughter?” He said,
‘She is lately married to a very worthy man, and is gone
with her husband into the country.’ I then told him the
story, and we went together to the Lord Chief Justice.
Early in the morning we went to the Doctor's house, and
knocked at the door. He looked through a little grate, and
bade us go on our way; we had no business with him. I
answered, ‘Here is the Lord Chief Justice's warrant, and his
tip-staff. Open the door, or we shall break it open. He
then opened it, and I asked, ‘Where is the young lady that
was brought in hither three days ago?” He answered,
‘There is no such person in my house; you may search it
from top to bottom. We did so; but could not find any
trace of her. Coming down the stairs, I said, ‘Is there no
one under these stairs?’ The Doctor answered, “There is a
poor creature; but she is so outrageous, that we are obliged
to shut her up in the dark. On his opening the door, she
put out her head. My friend sighed, and said, ‘I know
nothing of this poor thing. She answered, ‘What, Sir, am
I so altered in three days, that you do not know your own
daughter?” He immediately knew her voice, and took her
home. Her husband was very glad to refund her fortune.”
A GENTLEMAN walking with Mr. Chapoon, (uncle to Mr.
Roquet) in Moorfields, proposed stepping into Bedlam.
After they had walked there awhile, they were turning to go
out, when a young woman cried, “Sir, I desire to speak
with you.” His friend said, “Sure, you will not stay to
hear a mad woman’s tale.” He answered, “Indeed I will:”
On which the other went away. She then said, “My father
left me and my fortune in the hands of my uncle. A young
gentleman offered me marriage, and all things were agreed
498 Account of THE BROTHERs’ sTEPs.
on; when one morning my uncle took me out with him in
the chariot, as he said, to see a friend; but instead of this
he brought me to Bedlam, where I have been confined ever
since.”
“Your story is plausible,” said Mr. C.; “but how shall I
know it is the truth?” “Very easily,” said she, “The
gentleman that was to marry me lives within a day's
journey of London. Write to him; and tell him you have
something to say concerning me, and would be glad to meet
him at such a place in town. If he does not come, let this
all pass for a mad woman’s dream.” Mr. C. wrote, and
asked the gentleman, who came to the place appointed,
whether he knew such a person. He answered, “Perfectly
well. We were to have been married before now ; but her
uncle sent me word she was taken ill.” Mr. C. then told
him the whole story. He immediately sent to her uncle;
who was very ready to take her out, and pay her fortune, to
avoid farther trouble.
So the curiosity of one to see a strange place, and of
another to hear a strange tale, was a means of detecting a
notorious scene of villany, and of setting an innocent sufferer
at liberty
LAST summer [1780] I received a letter from a friend,
wherein were these words:-
“I THINK it would be worth your while to take a view of
those wonderful marks of the Lord's hatred to duelling,
called The Brothers’ Steps. They are in the fields, about a
third of a mile northward from Montague-House; and the
awful tradition concerning them is, that two brothers quar
relled about a worthless woman, and, according to the
fashion of those days, fought with sword and pistol. The
prints of their feet are about the depth of three inches, and
Account of THE BROTHERs’ sTEPs. 499
nothing will vegetate so much as to disfigure them. The
number is only eighty-three; but probably some are at
present filled up; for I think there were formerly more in
the centre, where each unhappy combatant wounded the
other to death: And a bank on which the first who fell
died, retains the form of his agonizing couch, by the curse of
barrenness, while grass flourishes all about it. Mr. George
Hall, who was the Librarian of Lincoln’s-Inn, first showed
me those steps twenty-eight years ago, whem, I think, they
were not quite so deep as now. He remembered them about
thirty years, and the man who first showed them him, about
thirty more, which goes back to the year 1692; but 1
suppose they originated in King Charles the Second’s reign.
My mother well remembered their being ploughed up, and
corn sown, to deface them, about fifty years ago: But all
was labour in vain; for the prints returned in a while to
their pristine form; as probably will those that are now
filled up. Indeed I think an account of them in your
Magazine would be a pious memorial of their lasting reality.
“These hints are only offered as a small token of my
good-will to yourself and the work, by
“Your son and brother in the gospel,
This account appeared to me so very extraordinary, that I
knew not what to think of it. I knew Mr. Walsh to be a
person of good understanding and real piety; and he testified
what he had seen with his own eyes: But still I wanted more
witnesses, till, awhile ago, being at Mr. Cary’s in Copthall
Buildings, I occasionally mentioned The Brothers' Footsteps;
and asked the company if they had heard anything of them.
“Sir,” said Mr. Cary, “sixteen years ago, I saw and counted
them myself.” Another added, “And I saw them four years
ago.” I could then no longer doubt but they had been ; and
a week or two after I went with Mr. Cary and another
person to seek them.
We sought for near half an hour in vain. We could find
no steps at all within a quarter of a mile, no, nor half a mile,
north of Montague-House. We were almost out of hope,
when an honest man, who was at work, directed us to thc
next ground, adjoining to a pond. There we found what we
sought for, about three-quarters of a mile north of Montague
House, and about five hundred yards east of Tottenham
Court Road. The steps answer Mr. Walsh's description.
They are of the size of a large human foot, about three.
inches deep, and lie nearly from north-east to south-west.
We counted only seventy-six; but we were not exact in
counting. The place where one or both the brothers are:
supposed to have fallen, is still bare of grass. The labourer
showed us also the bank, where (the tradition is) the wretched
woman sat to see the combat.
What shall we say to these things? Why, to Atheists, or
Infidels of any kind, I would not say one word about them.
For “if they hear not Moses and the Prophets,” they will
not regard anything of this kind. But to men of candour,
who believe the Bible to be of God, I would say, Is not this
an astonishing instance, held forth to all the inhabitants of
London, of the justice and power of God? Does not the
curse he has denounced upon this ground bear some little
resemblance to that of our Lord on the barren figtree,
“Henceforth let no fruit grow upon thce for ever?” I see
no reason or pretence for any rational man to doubt of the
truth of the story; since it has been confirmed by these open,
visible tokens for more than a hundred years successively.
TIE forty King's Scholars at Westminster-School lodge in
one room, which is called the dormitory. While my eldest
brother was at school, the head boy cried out vehemently
one morning, “Lads, lads! you oversleep yourselves! you
lie too late: It is time to be at school.” They all started up,
dressed as quick as they could, and ran down with him.
When they came into the cloisters, one who was a little
before the rest saw something white, and cried out, “What
have we got here?” They went up to it, and found a man
stark naked, and so benumbed that he could not speak.
Just then the clock struck two. They took him up, carried
him into the dormitory, and put him into a warm bed
After some rest, he recovered his senses and speech; and
*=~~~-
Wheing asked how he came into that condition, he told them,
as he was coming over Chelsea-Fields, he was robbed by two
footpads, who then stripped him stark maked, tied him
neck and heels, and threw him into a ditch. There he must
have perished, but that some young women, coming to
market very early in the morning, heard him groan, and,
going to the ditch, untied him, and then ran away. He
made toward the town as well as he could, till, being unable
to walk any farther, he crept into the cloisters upon his
hands and feet, where he lay till the King’s Scholars came.
Probably in an hour or two he would have expired. After
Jhe had slept some hours, they gave him something warm to
drink; then one gave him a shirt, another a coat or waist
coat, others what they could spare, till they had clothed him
from head to foot. They then collected for him among
themselves about forty shillings, and wished him well home.
See the wisdom of God, making the sport of a boy the
smeans of saving a poor man’s life!
Bishop HALL, speaking of the good offices which angels
‘do to God’s servants, says, “Of this kind was that marvellous
cure which was wrought upon a poor cripple, at St. Madern's
in Cornwall; whereof, besides the attestation of many
hundreds of the neighbours, I took a strict examination in
my last visitation: This man, for sixteen years together, was
obliged to walk upon his hands, by reason the sinews of his
legs were so contracted. Upon an admonition in his dream,
to wash in a certain well, he was suddenly so restored to his
limbs that I saw him able to walk and get his own mainte
mance. The name of this cripple was John Trebble.”
And were “many hundreds of the neighbours,” together
with Bishop Hall, deceived in so notorious a matter of fact?
or did they all join together to palm such a falsehood on the
world? O incredulity what ridiculous shifts art thou
driven to ! what absurdities wilt thou not believe, rather
than own any extraordinary work of God!
MoNDAY, April 2, 1781, I was informed by a person in an
eminent station, of a very uncommon incident:
He had occasion to correct, with a few stripes, a lad that
lived with him at Rochester, which he resented so as to keave
his place. But sometime after, he seemed to repent, humbled
himself, and was received again. He now behaved in a
most becoming manner, and was doubly diligent in his
service.
But his mistress dreamed one night, that this lad was
going to cut her throat: And she had a twin-sister, between
whom and her there is so strange a sympathy, that if either
of them is ill, or particularly affected at any time, the other
is so likewise. This sister wrote to her from another part of
the kingdom, that she had dreamed the very same thing.
She carried this letter to her father, a gentleman that lives
not far off, and was surprised to hear that he likewise, on the
same night, had had a dream to the same effect.
The lad had been observed to come up, about noon, into
his lady's apartment, with a case-knife in his hand; and
being asked why he did so, he said, he was going into the
adjoining room, to scrape the dirt off from his master's
embroidered clothes.-
His master now took the lad aside, and examined him
strictly. After denying it for a considerable time, it was at
length extorted from him, that he had always remembered,
with indignation, his master’s severity to him, and that he
was fully resolved to be revenged, but in what particular
manner he would not confess. On this he was totally
dismissed without delay.
I HAVE lately heard; to my no small surprise, that a
person professing himself a Quaker, and supposed to be a
man of some character, has confidently reported, that he has
been at Sunderland himself, and inquired into the case of
Elizabeth Hobson; that she was a woman of a very indiffer
ent character; that the story she told was purely her own
invention; and that John Wesley himself was now fully
convinced that there was no truth in it.
From what motive a man should invent and publish all
over England (for I have heard this in various places) a
whole train of absolute, notorious falsehoods, I cannot at all
imagine. On the contrary, I declare to all the world,
1. That Elizabeth Hobson was an eminently pious woman;
that she lived and died without the least blemish of any
kind, without the least stain upon her character. 2. That
the relation could not possibly be her own invention, as
there were many witnesses to several parts of it; as Mr.
Parker, the two Attorneys whom she employed, Miss
Hosmer, and many others. And, 3. That I myself am fully
persuaded, that every circumstance of it is literally and
punctually true.
I know that those who fashionably deny the existence of
spirits are hugely disgusted at accounts of this kind. I
know that they incessantly labour to spread this disgust
among those that are of a better mind; because if one of
these accounts be admitted, their whole system falls to the
ground. But, whoever is pleased or displeased, I must
testify what I believe to be the truth. Indeed I never
myself saw the appearance of an umbodied spirit; and I
never saw the commission of a murder. Yet, upon the
testimony of unexceptionable witnesses, I can firmly believe
both one and the other.
September 12, 1782.
NEwINGTON, December 10, 1748.
1. I HAve read your letter with attention, and much
approve of the spirit with which it is wrote... You speak in
love. I desire to do so too; and then no harm can be done
on either side. You appear not to be wedded to your own
opinion, but open to further conviction. I would willingly
be of the same temper; not obstimately attached to either
side of the question. I am clearly satisfied of the necessity
of this; a willingness to see what as yet I see not. For I
know, an unwillingness to be convinced would utterly blind
either you or me; and that if we are resolved to retain our
present opinion, reason and argument signify nothing.
2. I shall not therefore think it is time or pains misem
ployed, to give the whole cause a second hearing; to recite
the occasion of every step I have taken, and the motives
inducing me so to do; and then to consider whatsoever
either you or others have urged on the contrary side of the
question.
3. Twenty-nine years since, when I had spent a few
months at Oxford, having, as I apprehended, an exceeding
good constitution, and being otherwise in health, I was a
little surprised at some symptoms of a paralytic disorder. I
could not imagine what should occasion the shaking of my
hand; till I observed it was always worst after breakfast;
and that if I intermitted drinking tea for two or three days,
it did not shake at all. Upon inquiry, I found tea had the same
effect upon others also of my acquaintance; and therefore saw
that this was one of its natural effects, (as several Physicians
have often remarked,) especially when it is largely and fre
quently drank; and most of all on persons of weak nerves. Upon
"--~" --
LETTER. To A FRIEND CONCERNING TEA. 505
this I lessened the quantity, drank it weaker, and added
more milk and sugar. But still for above six-and-twenty
years I was more or less subject to the same disorder.
4. July was two years I began to observe that abundance
of the people of London, with whom I conversed, laboured
under the same, and many other, paralytic disorders, and
that in a much higher degree; insomuch that some of their
nerves were quite unstrung; their bodily strength quite
decayed, and they could not go through their daily labour.
I inquired, “Are you not a hard drinker?” and was
answered by one and another, and another, “No, indeed,
Sir, not I; I drink scarce anything but a little tea, morning
and night.” I immediately remembered my own case; and,
after weighing the matter throughly, easily gathered from
many concurring circumstances, that it was the same case
with them.
5. I considered, “What an advantage would it be to these
poor enfeebled people, if they would leave off what so
manifestly impairs their health, and thereby hurts their
business also ! Is there nothing equally cheap which they
could use? Yes, surely; and cheaper too. If they used
English herbs in its stead, (which would cost either nothing,
or what is next to nothing,) with the same bread, butter, and
milk, they would save just the price of the tea. And hereby
they might not only lessen their pain, but in some degree
their poverty too; for they would be able to work (as well as
to save) considerably more than they can do now. And by
this means, if they are in debt, they might be more just,
paying away what they either earned or saved. If they are
not in debt, they might be more merciful, giving it away to
them that want.”
6. I considered farther: “What an advantage might this
be, particularly in such a body of men as those are who are
united together in these societies, who are both so numerous
and so poor ! How much might be saved in so numerous a
body, even in this single article of expense ! And how greatly
is all that can possibly be saved, in every article, wanted daily
by those who have not even food convenient for them l”
7. I soon perceived that this latter consideration was of a
more general nature than the former; and that it affected
many of those whom the other did not so immediately
concern; seeing it was as needful for all to save needless
expenses, as for some to regain the health they had
impaired; especially, considered as members of a society,
the wants of which they could not be unapprized of They
knew, of those to whom they were so peculiarly united, some
had not food to sustain nature; some were destitute of even
necessary clothing; some had not where to lay their head.
They knew, or might know, that the little contributions
made weekly did in nowise suffice to remove these wants,
being barely sufficient to relieve the sick; and even that in
so scanty a manner, that I know not if some of them have
not, with their allowance, pined away, and at length died for
want. If you and I have not saved all we could to relieve
these, how shall we face them at the throne of God?
8. I reflected: “If one only would save all, that he could
in this single instance, he might surely feed or clothe one of
his brethren, and perhaps save one life. What then might be
done, if ten thousand, or one thousand, or only five hundred,
would do it? yea, if half that number should say, ‘I will
compute this day what I have expended in tea, weekly or
yearly. I will immediately enter on cheaper food: And
whatever is saved hereby, I will put into that poor-box
weekly, to feed the hungry, and to clothe the naked.” I am
mistaken, if any among us need want either food or raiment
from that hour.”
9. I thought farther: “It is said, nay, many tell me to
my face, I can persuade this people to anything. I will make
a fair trial. If I cannot persuade them, there may be some
good effect. All who do not wilfully shut their eyes will see
that I have no such influence as they supposed. If I can
persuade any number, many who are now weak or sick will
be restored to health and strength. Many will pay those
debts, which others, perhaps equally poor, can but ill afford
to lose. Many will be less straitened in their own families.
Many, by helping their neighbour, will lay up for themselves
treasures in heaven.”
10. Immediately it struck into my mind, “But example
must go before precept; therefore I must not plead an
exemption for myself, from a daily practice of twenty-seven
years. I must begin.” I did so. I left it off myself in
August, 1746. And I have now had sufficient time to try
the effects, which have fully answered my expectation. My
paralytic complaints are all gone; my hand is steady as it
was at fifteen; although I must expect that or other weak
nesses soon, as I decline into the vale of years. And so
considerable a difference do I find in my expense, that I can
make it appear, from the accounts now in being, in only
those four families at London, Bristol, Kingswood, and
Newcastle, I save upwards of fifty pounds a year.
11. The first to whom I explained these things at large,
and whom I advised to set the same example to their
brethren, were a few of those who rejoice to assist my brother
and me, as our sons in the gospel. A week after, I proposed
it to about forty of those whom I believed to be strong in
faith; and the next morning to about sixty more, entreating
them all to speak their minds freely. They did so; and, in
the end, saw the good which might ensue; yielded to the
force of Scripture and reason; and resolved all, (but two or
three,) by the grace of God, to make the trial without delay.
12. In a short time, I proposed it, but with all the tender
mess I could, first, to the body of those who are supposed to
have living faith, and, after staying a few days, (that I
might judge the better how to speak,) to the whole society.
It soon appeared (as I doubted not but it would) how far
these were from calling me Rabbi, from implicitly submitting
to my judgment, or implicitly following my example. Objec
tions rose in abundance from all sides. These I now proceed
to consider; whether they are advanced by you, or by others;
and whether pointed at the premises, or directly at the
conclusion.
13. I. Some objected: “Tea is not unwholesome at all;
not in any kind prejudicial to health.”
To these I reply, First, You should not be so sure of this.
Even that casual circumstance, related in Dr. Short's history
of it, might incline you to doubt; namely, that “while the
Chinese dry the leaves, and turn it with their hands upon
the tin plates, the moisture of them is so extremely corrosive,
that it eats into the flesh, if not wiped off immediately.” It
is not probable, then, that what remains in the leaves is
quite friendly to the human body.
Secondly, Many eminent Physicians have declared their
judgment, that it is prejudicial in several respects; that it
gives rise to numberless disorders, particularly those of the
nervous kind; and that, if frequently used by those of weak
nerves, it is no other than a slow poison.
Thirdly, If all physicians were silent in the case, yet plain
fact is against you. And this speaks loud enough. It was
prejudicial to my health; it is so to many to this day.
14. “But it is not so to me,” says the objector: “Why
then should I leave it off?”
I answer, First, To give an example to those to whom it is
undeniably prejudicial.
Secondly, That you may have the more wherewith to give
bread to the hungry, and raiment to the naked.
15. “But I cannot leave it off; for it helps my health.
Nothing else will agree with me.”
I answer, First, Will nothing else agree with you? I
know not how to believe that. I suppose your body is much
of the same kind with that of your great-grandmother. And
do you think nothing else agreed with her, or with any of
her progenitors? What poor, puling, sickly things, must
all the English then have been, till within these hundred
years! But you know they were not so. Other things
agreed with them; and why not with you?
Secondly, If, in fact, nothing else will, if tea has already
weakened your stomach, and impaired your digestion to such
a degree, it has hurt you more than you are aware. It has
prejudiced your health extremely. You have need to abhor
it as deadly poison, and to renounce it from this very hour.
So says a drinker of drams: “Nothing else will agree
with me. Nothing else will raise my spirits. I can digest
nothing without them.” Indeed! Is it so? Then touch
no more, if you love your life.
Thirdly, Suppose nothing else agrees with you at first;
yet in a while many things will. When I first left off tea, I
was half asleep all day long; my head ached from morning
to night. I could not remember a question asked, even till
I could return an answer; but in a week’s time all these
inconveniences were gone, and have never returned since.
Fourthly, I have not found one single exception yet; not
one person in all England, with whom, after sufficient trial
made, nothing else would agree.
It is therefore well worth while for you to try again, if you
have any true regard for your own health, or any compassion
for those who are perishing all around you for want of the
common necessaries of life.
16. If you are sincere in this plea, if you do not talk of
CoNCERNING TEA. 509
your health, while the real objection is your inclination,
make a fair trial thus: (1.) Take half a pint of milk every
morning, with a little bread, not boiled, but warmed only:
A man in tolerable health might double the quantity. (2.)
If this is too heavy, add as much water, and boil it together,
with a spoonful of oatmeal. (3.) If this agrees not, try half
a pint, or a little more, of water-gruel, neither thick nor
thin; not sweetened, for that may be apt to make him sick,
but with a very little butter, salt, and bread. (4.) If this
disagrees, try sage, green balm, mint, or penny-royal tea,
infusing only so much of the herb as just to change the
colour of the water. (5.) Try two or three of these mixed,
in various proportions. (6.) Try ten or twelve other English
herbs. (7.) Try foltron, a mixture of herbs to be had at many
grocers’, far healthier, as well as cheaper, than tea. (8.) Try
cocoa. If, after having tried each of these for a week or ten
days, you find none of them will agree with your constitution,
then use (weak green) tea again; but at the same time know,
that your having used it so long has brought you near the
chambers of death.
17. II. “I do not know,” says another, “but tea may
hurt me; but there is nothing saved by leaving it off; for I
am sure other things cost full as much.” I pray, what
other things? Sack-and-sugar costs more; and so do
ragouts, or pheasants, or ortolans. But what is this to the
point? We do not say, All things are cheaper: But any of
the things above mentioned are; at least, if prudently
managed. Therefore, if you really desire to save what you
can, you will drink tea no more.
18. “Well, I do not design to buy any more myself; but
where others drink it, there is nothing saved by my
abstaining.” I answer, First, Yes, something is saved,
though but little; especially if you tell them before, “I shall
not drink tea.” And many a little you know, put together,
will make a great sum.
Secondly, If the whole saved were ever so little, if it
were but two mites, when you save this for God, and your
brethren’s sake, it is much.
Thirdly, Your example in saving a little now, may occasion
the saving of more by and by.
Fourthly, It is not a little advantage which you may
reap, even now, to your own soul; by habituating yourself
not to be ashamed of being singular in a good thing; by
taking up your cross, and denying yourself even in so small
an instance, and by accustoming yourself to act on rational
grounds, whether in a little matter or a great.
19. “But what is saved will be no better employed.” Do
you say this with regard to yourself, or others? If with
regard to yourself, it will be your fault if you do not employ
it better. I do not say you will, but I am sure you may;
and if you do not, it is your own sin, and your own shame.
If with regard to others, how do you know that it will not
be employed better? I trust it will. It cannot be denied
that it often has, and that it always may be. And it is
highly probable all who save anything from the best motive,
will lay it out to the best purpose.
20. “As to example,” you say, “I have lately been
without hopes of doing any good by it.” I suppose you
mean, because so exceeding few will follow either your
example or mine. I am sorry for it. This only gives me a
fresh objection to this unwholesome, expensive food; viz.,
that it has too much hold on the hearts of them that use it;
that, to use a scriptural phrase, they are “under the power
of ” this trifle. If it be so, were there no other reason than
this, they ought to throw it away at once; else they no more
regard St. Paul than they do you or me; for his rule is
home to the point: “All things are lawful for me; but I
will not be brought under the power of amy.” Away with it
then, however lawful, (that is, though it were wholesome as
well as cheap,) if you are already brought “under the power
of ” it.
And the fewer they are who follow this rule, the greater
reason there is that you should add one example more to
those few. Though, blessed be God, they are not so few
as you suppose. I have met with very many in London who
use less of it than they had done for many years; and above
an hundred who have plucked out the right eye and cast it
from them, who wholly abstain from it.
21. You add, “But I am equally, yea, abundantly more,
concerned to set an example in all Christian behaviour.” I
grant it: This, therefore, “ought you to have done, and not
to leave the other undone.”
22. But “one day,” you add, “I saw your brother drink
tea; which he said was for fear of giving offence.”
I answer, First, Learn from hence to follow neither his
nor my practice implicitly; but weigh the reason of each,
and then follow reason, wheresoever it stands. But,
Secondly, Examine your heart, and beware inclination
does not put on the shape of reason.
Thirdly, You see with your own eyes, I do not drink it
at all, and yet I seldom give offence thereby. It is not then
the bare abstaining, but the manner of doing it, which
usually gives the offence.
Fourthly, There is therefore a manner wherein you may
do it too, and yet give no more offence than I. For
instance: If any ask you, simply reply, “I do not drink tea;
I never use it.” If they say, “Why, you did drink it;”
answer, “I did so; but I have left it off a considerable
time.” Those who have either good-nature or good manners
will say no more. But if any should impertinently add, “O,
but why did you leave it off?” answer, mildly, “Because I
thought water-gruel (suppose) was wholesomer, as well as
cheaper.” If they, with still greater ill-manners and
impertinence, go on, “What, you do it because Mr. Wesley
bids you;” reply, calmly, “True; I do it because Mr.
Wesley, on good reasons, advises me so to do.” If they add
the trite cant phrase, “What, you follow man!” reply,
without any emotion, “Yes, I follow any man, you or him,
or any other, who gives me good reason for so doing.” If
they persist in cavilling, close the whole matter with, “I
neither drink it, nor dispute about it.”
23. If you proceed in this manner, with mildness and love,
exceeding few will be offended. “But you ought,” say
some, “to give up an indifferent thing, rather than give an
offence to any. So St. Paul: ‘I will eat no flesh whilst the
world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend.’” I
reply, This is not an indifferent thing, if it affects the health
either of myself or my brethren. Therefore that rule
relating wholly to things indifferent is not applicable to this
case. Would St. Paul have said, “I will drink drams while
the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend?”
“But tea is not so hurtful as drams.” I do not believe it is.
But it is hurtful; and that is enough. The question does
not turn on the degree of hurtfulness. “However, it is but
a small thing.” Nay, nothing is small if it touches con
science: Much less is it a small thing to preserve my own
or my brother's health, or to be a faithful steward cven of
the manmon of unrighteousness. O think it not a small
thing, whether only one for whom Christ died be fed or
hungry, clothed or naked !
To conclude the head of offence: You must at least allow
that all this is no plea at all for your drinking tea at home.
“Yes, it is; for my husband or parents are offended if I do
not drink it.” I answer, First, Perhaps this, in some rarc
cases, may be a sufficient reason why a wife or a child should
use this food, that is, with them; but nowhere else. But,
Secondly, try, and not once or twice only, if you cannot
overcome that offence by reason, softness, love, patience,
longsuffering, joined with constant and fervent prayer.
24. Your next objection is, “I cannot bear to give
trouble; therefore, I drink whatever others drink where I
come, else there is so much hurry about insignificant me.”
I answer,
First, This is no plea at all for your drinking tea at home
Therefore, touch it not there, whatever you do abroad.
Secondly, Where is the trouble given, even when you are
abroad, if they drink tea, and you fill your cup with milk
and water?
Thirdly, Whatever trouble is taken, is not for “insignifi
cant me,” but for that poor man who is half-starved with
cold and hunger; for that miserable woman who, while she
is poisoning herself, wipes her mouth, and says she does no
evil; who will not believe the poison will hurt her, because
it does not (sensibly at least) hurt you. O throw it away!
let her have one plea less for destroying her body, if not her
soul, before the time !
25. You object, farther, “It is my desire to be unknown.
for any particularity, unless a peculiar love to the souls of
those who are present.” And I hope, to the souls of the
absent too; yea, and to their bodies also, in a due propor
tion, that they may be healthy, and fed, and clothed, and
warm, and may praise God for the consolation.
26. You subjoin : “When I had left it off for some
months, I was continually puzzled with, Why, What, &c.;
and I have seen no good effects, but impertinent questions
and answers, and unedifying conversation about eating and
drinking.”
I answer, First, Those who were so uneasy about it, plainly
showed that you touched the apple of their eye. Conse
quently, these, of all others, ought to leave it off; for they
are evidently “brought under the power of it.”
Secondly, Those impertinent questions might have been
cut short, by a very little steadiness and common sense.
You need only have taken the method mentioned above, and
they would have dropped in the midst.
Thirdly, It is not strange you saw no good effects of
leaving it off, where it was not left off at all. But you saw
very bad effects of not leaving it off; viz., the adding sin to
sin; the joining much unedifying conversation to wasteful,
unhealthy self-indulgence.
Fourthly, You need not go far to see many good effects
of leaving it off: You may see them in me. I have reco
vered thereby that healthy state of the whole nervous system,
which I had in a great degree, and I almost thought irre
coverably, lost for considerably more than twenty years. I
have been enabled hereby to assist, in one year, above fifty
poor with food or raiment, whom I must otherwise have left
(for I had before begged for them all I could) as hungry and
maked as I found them. You may see the good effects in
above thirty poor people just now before you, who have been
restored to health, through the medicines bought by that
money which a single person has saved in this article. And
a thousand more good effects you will not fail to see, when
her example is more generally followed.
27. Neither is there any need that conversation should be
unedifying, even when it turns upon eating and drinking.
Nay, from such a conversation, if duly improved, numberless
good effects may flow. For how few understand, “Whether
ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of
God l” And how glad ought you to be of a fair occasion to
observe, that though the kingdom of God does not consist in
“meats and drinks,” yet, without exact temperance in these,
we cannot have either “righteousness, or peace, or joy in the
Holy Ghost !”
It may therefore have a very happy effect, if, whenever
people introduce the subject, you directly close in, and push
it home, that they may understand a little more of this
important truth.
28. But “I find at present very little desire to change
either my thoughts or practice.” Shall I speak plain? I
fear, by not standing your ground, by easiness, cowardice,
and false shame, you have grieved the Spirit of God, and
thereby lost your conviction and desire at once.
Yet you add: “I advise every one to leave off tea, if it
hurts their health, or is inconsistent with frugality; as I
advise every one to avoid dainties in meat, and vanity in
dress, from the same principle.” Enough, enough ! Let
this only be well pursued, and it will secure all that I
contend for. I advise no persons living to leave it off, if it
does not hurt the health either of them or their brethren;
and if it is not inconsistent with the Christian frugality of
cutting off every needless expense.
29. But “to be subject to the consequences of leaving it
off again! this I cannot bear.”
I answer, First, It may be so. You cannot easily bear it.
For, by your giving up the point once, you have made it
much harder to stand your ground now than it was at first.
Yet still it is worth all your courage and labour; since the
reasons for it are as strong as at the beginning.
Secondly, As to the consequences you fear, they are
shadowy all; they are a mere lion in the streets. “Much
trouble to others.” Absolutely none at all, if you take the
tea-kettle, and fill your cup with water. “Much foolish
discourse.” Take the preceding advice, and it will be just
the reverse. “Nothing helpful toward the renewal of my
soul in the image of Jesus Christ.” What a deep mistake is
this ! Is it not helpful to speak closely of the nature of his
inward kingdom ? to encourage one another in casting off
every weight, in removing every hinderance of it? to inure
ourselves to the bearing his cross? to bring Christianity into
common life, and accustom ourselves to conduct even our
minutest actions by the great rules of reason and religion?
30. Is it “not of any importance” to do this? I think,
it is of vast importance. However, “it is a very small
circumstance in self-denial.” It is well if you find it so. I
am sure I did not. And I believe the case is the same with
many others at this day. But you say, “I have so many
other assaults of self-indulgence, that this is nothing.” “It
is nothing,” said one to a young woman, “to fast once or
twice a week; to deny yourself a little food. Why do not
you deny yourself as to anger and fretfulness, as to peevish
mess and discontent?” She replied, “That I want; so I
ThouGHTS ON NERVOUS DISORDERS. 515
deny myself in little things first, till I am able to do it in
greater.” Neither you nor I can mend her reply. Go thou
and do likewise.
31. I have done what I proposed; and indeed in many
more words than I at first intended. I have told you the
occasions of every step I have taken, and the motives induc
ing me thereto; and have considered what either you or
others have urged on the contrary side of the question.
And now, the advice I would give upon the whole is this:
First, Pray earnestly to God for clear light; for a full,
piercing, and steady conviction, that this is the more excel
lent way. Pray for a spirit of universal self-denial, of
cheerful temperance, of wise frugality; for bowels of mercies;
for a kind, compassionate spirit, tenderly sensible of the
various wants of your brethren; and for firmness of mind; for
a mild, even courage, without fear, anger, or shame. Then
you will once more, with all readiness of heart, make this
little (or great) sacrifice to God; and withal present your
soul and body a living sacrifice, acceptable unto God through
Jesus Christ.
1. WHEN Physicians meet with disorders which they do
not understand, they commonly term them nervous ; a word
that conveys to us no determinate idea, but it is a good cover
for learned ignorance. But these are often no natural
disorder of the body, but the hand of God upon the soul,
being a dull consciousness of the want of God, and the
unsatisfactoriness of everything here below. At other times
it is conviction of sin, either in a higher or a lower degree.
It is no wonder that those who are strangers to religion
516 THOUG il TS ON NERVOUS DISORDERS.
should not know what to make of this; and that, conse
quently, all their prescriptions should be useless, seeing
they quite mistake the case.
2. But undoubtedly there are nervous disorders which
are purely natural. Many of these are connected with other
diseases, whether acute or chronical. Many are the fore
runners of various distempers, and many the consequences of
then. But there arc those which are not connected with
others, being themselves a distinct, original distemper.
And this frequently ariscs to such a height, that it seems to
be one species of madness. So, one man imagines himself
to be made of glass; another thinks he is too tall to go in at
the door. This is often termed the spleen, or vapours; often,
lowness of spirits; a phrase that, having scarce any meaning,
is so much the fitter to be given to this unintelligible disorder.
It seems to have taken its risc from hence: We sometimes
say, “A man is in high spirits;” and the proper opposite to
this is, “He is low-spirited.” Does not this imply, that a
kind of faintness, wearincss, and listlessness affects the whole
body, so that he is disinclined to any motion, and hardly
cares to move hand or foot? But the mind seems chiefly
to be affected, having lost its relish of everything, and being
no longer capable of enjoying the things it once delighted in
most. Nay, everything round about is not only flat and
insipid, but dreary and uncomfortable. It is not strange if,
to one in this state, life itself is become a burden; yea, so
insupportable a burden, that many who have all this world
can give, desperately rush into an unknown world, rather
than bear it any longer.
3. But what are the causes of this strange disorder? One
cause is, the use of spirituous liquors. This is one of the
horrid effects which naturally follow the swallowing that
fashionable poison. That liquid fire lays the foundation of
numberless diseases, and of this in particular. It is amazing
that the preparing or selling this poison should be permitted
(I will not say in any Christian country, but) in any
civilized state. “O, it brings in a considerable sum of money
to Government.” True; but is it wise to barter men’s lives
for money? Surely, that gold is bought too dear, if it is the
price of blood. Does not the strength of every country
consist in the number of its inhabitants? If so, the lessening
their number is a loss which no money can compensate. So
'T II OUG IITS ON NEltWOUS DISORDERS. 517
that it is inexcusable ill husbandry, to give the lives of useful
men for any sum of money whatever.
4. But a more extcnsive cause of this disorder than the
use of drams, I apprehend, is the use of tea; particularly
where it is taken either in large quantities, or strong, or
without cream and sugar. “Nay, weak tea is far more
hurtful.” This is a senseless, shameless falsehood. I long
drank hot sugar-and-water instead of tea; and it did me no
hurt at all. But three cups of strong tea will now make my
hand shake, so that I can hardly write. And let any try
the experiment: If any tea make his hand shake, it will not
be weak tea, but strong. This has exceedingly increased
the number of nervous complaints throughout the three
kingdoms. And this furnishes us with a satisfactory answer
to the common question, “Why are these complaints so
general now, which were scarce heard of two or three
centuries ago?” For this plain reason: Two or three
centuries ago, no tea was drank in either Britain or
Ireland.
5. But allowing both tea and spirituous liquors to have
contributed largely to the increase of nervous disorders, yet
it may be doubted, whether one or both of them are the
principal causes of them. The principal causes of them
‘(particularly among those who do not work for their living)
are, as Dr. Cadogan justly observes, indolence, intemperance,
and irregular passions.
First. Indolence, the not using such a degree of exercise
as the constitution requires. To illustrate this: Our body
is composed of earth, water, air, and fire; and the two
latter are as necessary as the two former. To supply these,
that curious engine, the lungs, continually takes in the air;
to every particle of which a particle of fire is attached, which,
being detached from it, is mingled with the blood. Now,
exercise quickens the motion of the lungs, and enables them
to collect from the air a due quantity of fire. The nerves
are the conductors of this ethereal fire, vulgarly called the
animal spirits. If this is duly diffused through the whole
body, we are lively and vigorous; if it is not, (which without
exercise it cannot be,) we soon grow faint and languid.
And if other disorders do not ensue, those termed nervous
surely will, with that whole train of symptoms which are
usually comprised in what is termed lowness of spirits.
6. Intemperance is another principal cause of this;--if
not intemperance in drink, which is not quite so common,
yet intemperance in meat; the taking more of it than
nature requires. Dr. Cheyne well observes, it is not generally
the quality, but the quantity, of what we eat which hurts us.
What hurts the nerves in particular, is the eating too much
animal food, especially at night; much more the eating at
one meal foods of several different kinds. If we consider
how few observe this, we shall not wonder that so many
have nervous disorders; especially among those that have an
opportunity of indulging themselves daily in variety, and
who are hereby continually tempted to eat more than nature.
requires.
7. But there is another sort of intemperance, of which I
think Dr. Cadogan does not take the least notice. And yet
it is the source of more nervous disorders than even intem
perance in food; I mean, intemperance in sleep; the sleeping
longer than nature requires. This alone will account for the
weak nerves of most of our Nobility and Gentry. Not that
I would insist upon the old rule, -
Sex horas quivis poscit, septemque scholaris;
Octo viator habet; nebulo quisque novem.”
I would allow between six and seven hours, at an average,
to a healthy man; or an hour more, between seven and
eight hours, to an unhealthy man. And I do not remember,
that in threescore years I have known either man or woman
who laid longer in bed than this, (whether they slept or no,)
but in some years they complained of lowness of spirits.
The plain reason of which seems to be, while we sleep all
the springs of nature are unbent. And if we sleep longer
than is sufficient, they are relaxed more than is sufficient,
and of course grow weaker and weaker. And if we lie
longer in bed, though without sleep, the very posture relaxes
the whole body; much more when we are covercd up with
clothes, which throw back on the body whatever perspires.
from it. By this means it is stewed in the moist vapour: It
* Thus paraphrastically translated by an anonymous writer in the Arminian
Magazine :
“Six hours for sleep the human frame requires;
IIard students may to seven incline;
To eight, the men whom toil or travelling tires;
But lazy knaves will all have nine.”-ED 1 r.
sucks in again what nature has cast out, and the flesh is, as
it were, parboiled therein, and becomes more and more soft
and flabby; and the nerves suffer at least as much hereby as
any other part of the habit. I cannot therefore but account
this, the lying too long in bed, the grand cause of our
nervous disorders.
8. And this alone sufficiently answers this question, “Why
are we more nervous than our forefathers?” Because we lie
longer in bed: They, rich and poor, slept about eight, when
they heard the curfew-bell, and rose at four; the bell ringing
at that hour (as well as at eight) in every parish in England.
We rise (if not obliged to work for our living) at ten, eleven,
or twelve. Is it any wonder then, were there no other cause,
that we complain of lowness of spirits?
9. Yet something may be allowed to irregular passions.
For as long as the soul and body are united, these undoubt
edly affect the body; the nerves in particular. Even violent
joy, though it raises the spirits for a time, does afterwards
sink them greatly. And every one knows what an influence
fear has upon our whole frame. Nay, even “hope deferred
maketh the heart sick;” puts the mind all out of tune.
The same effect have all foolish and hurtful desires. They
“pierce us through with many sorrows;” they occasion a
deep depression of the spirits: So, above all, does inordinate
affection; whereby so many, refusing to be comforted, sorrow
even unto death.
10. But is there no cure for this sore evil? Is there no
remedy for lowness of spirits? Undoubtedly there is; a
most certain cure, if you are willing to pay the price of it.
But this price is not silver or gold, nor anything purchasable
thereby. If you would give all the substance of your house
for it, it would be utterly despised; and all the medicines
under the sun avail nothing in this distemper. The whole
materia medica put together, will do you no lasting service;
they do not strike at the root of the disease: But you must
remove the cause, if you wish to remove the effect.
But this cannot be done by your own strength; it can
only be done by the mighty power of God. If you are
convinced of this, set about it, trusting in Him, and you will
surely conquer.
First. Sacredly abstain from all spirituous liquors. Touch
them not, on any pretence whatever. To others they may
sometimes be of use; but to nervous persons they are deadly
poison.
Secondly. If you drink any, drink but little ten, and
none at all without eating, or without sugar and cream.
“But you like it without.” No matter; prefer health before
taste.
Thirdly. Every day of your life take at least an hour’s
exercise, between breakfast and dinner. If you will, take
another hour before supper, or before you sleep. If you
can, take it in the open air; otherwise, in the house. If
your cannot ride or walk abroad, use, within, a dumb-bell, or
a wooden horse. If you have not strength to do this for an
hour at a time, do it at twice or thrice. Let nothing hinder
you. Your life is at stake. Make everything yield to this.
Fourthly. Take no more food than mature requires.
Dine upon one thing,-except pudding or pie. Eat no flesh
at supper; but something light and easy of digestion.
Fifthly. Sleep early and rise early; unless you are ill,
never lie in bed much above seven hours. Then you will
never lie awake. Your flesh will be firm, and your spirits
lively.
Sixthly. Above all,--
Give not your passions way;
God gave them to thee under lock and key.
Beware of anger; beware of worldly sorrow; beware of
the fear that hath torment; beware of foolish and hurtful
desires; beware of inordinate affection; remember the kind
command, “My son, give me thy heart !” Then shall there
be no more complaining of lowness of spirits But “the
peace of God, which passeth all understanding,” shall keep
thy heart and mind in Christ Jesus!
MELVILL-House,
May 20, 1784.
Sunday.--Love of God and Simplicity: Means of which are,
Prayer and Meditation.
1. HAve I been simple and recollected in everything I
said or did? Have I (1.) been simple in everything, that is,
looked upon God, my Good, my Pattern, my one Desire, my
Disposer, Parent of Good; acted wholly for Him; bounded
my views with the present action or hour? (2) Recol
lected? that is, has this simple view been distinct and unin
terrupted? Have I, in order to keep it so, used the signs
agreed upon with my friends, wherever I was ? Have I done
anything without a previous perception of its being the will
of God? or without a perception of its being an exercise or a
means of the virtue of the day? Have I said anything
without it?
2. Have I prayed with fervour? at going in and out of
church? in the church? morning and evening in private?
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, with my friends, at
rising? before lying down? on Saturday noon? all the time
I am engaged in exterior work in private? before I go into
the place of public or private prayer, for help therein?
Have I, wherever I was, gone to church morning and even
ing, unless for necessary mercy? and spent from one hour to
three in private? Have I, in private prayer, frequently
stopped short and observed what fervour? Have I repeated
it over and over, till I adverted to every word? Have I at
the beginning of every prayer or paragraph owned I cannot
pray? Have I paused before I concluded in his name, and
adverted to my Saviour now interceding for me at the right
hand of God, and offering up these prayers?
3. Have I duly used ejaculations? that is, have I every
hour prayed for humility, faith, hope, love, and the particular
virtue of the day? considered with whom I was the last
hour, what I did, and how 7 with regard to recollection, love
of man, humility, self-denial, resignation, and thankfulness?
considered the next hour in the same respects, offered up all
I do to my Redeemer, begged his assistance in every
particular, and commended my soul to his keeping? Have
I done this deliberately, not in haste, seriously, not doing
anything else the while, and fervently as I could?
4. Have I duly prayed for the virtue of the day? that is,
have I prayed for it at going out and coming in?
deliberately, seriously, fervently?
5. Have I used a Collect at nine, twelve, and three? and
grace before and after eating? aloud at my own room?
deliberately, seriously, fervently?
6. Have I duly meditated? every day, unless for necessary
mercy, (1.) From six, &c., to prayers? (2) From four to
five? What was particular in the providence of this day?
How ought the virtue of the day to have been exerted upon
it? How did it fall short? (Here faults.) (3.) On Sunday,
from six to seven, with Kempis? from three to four on
redemption, or God’s attributes? Wednesday and Friday,
from twelve to one, on the Passion? after ending a book, on
what I had marked in it?
Monday.--Love of Man.
1. HAvE I been zealous to do, and active in doing, good?
that is, (1.) Have I embraced every probable opportunity of
doing good, and preventing, removing, or lessening evil?
(2.) Have I pursued it with my might? (3.) Have I thought
anything too dear to part with, to serve my neighbour?
(4.) Have I spent an hour at least every day in speaking to
some one or other? (5.) Have I given any one up till he
expressly renounced me? (6.) Have I, before I spoke to
any, learned, as far as I could, his temper, way of thinking,
past life, and peculiar hinderances, internal and external?
fixed the point to be aimed at? then the means to it?
(7.) Have I in speaking proposed the motives, then the
difficulties, then balanced them, then exhorted him to con
sider both calmly and deeply, and to pray earnestly for
help? (8.) Have I in speaking to a stranger explained what
religion is not? (not negative, not external ;) and what it.
is? (a recovery of the image of God;) searched at what step
in it he stops, and what makes him stop there? exhorted
and directed him? (9.) Have I persuaded all I could to
attend public prayers, sermons, and sacraments, and in
general to obey the laws of the Church Catholic, the Church
of England, the State, the University, and their respective
Colleges? (10.) Have I, when taxed with any act of
obedience, avowed it, and turned the attack with sweetness
and firmness? (11.) Have I disputed upon any practical
point, unless it was to be practised just then ? (12.) Have
I in disputing, (i.) Desired him to define the terms of the
question; to limit it; what he grants, what denies?
(ii) Delayed speaking my opinion? let him explain and
prove his? then insinuated and pressed objections?
(13.) Have I after every visit asked him who went with me,
“Did I say anything wrong?” (14.) Have I when any one
asked advice, directed and exhorted him with all my
power?
2. Have I rejoiced with and for my neighbour in virtue or
pleasure? grieved with him in pain, for him in sin?
3. Have I received his infirmities with pity, not anger?
4. Have I thought or spoke unkindly of or to him ?
Have I revealed any evil of any one, unless it was necessary
to some particular good I had in view? Have I then done
it with all the tenderness of phrase and manner consistent
with that end? Have I anyway appeared to approve them
that did otherwise?
5. Has good-will been, and appeared to be, the spring of
all my actions toward others?
6. Have I duly used intercession? (1.) Before, (2.) After,
speaking to any? (3.) For my friends on Sunday? (4.) For
my pupils on Monday? (5.) For those who have parti
cularly desired it, on Wednesday and Friday? (6.) For the
family in which I am, every day?
1. PERHAPs nothing can be more seasonable at the present
time than to bestow a few thoughts on this. It is a fashion
able subject, very frequently spoken of, especially in good
company. An ingenious writer has lately given us an essay
upon the subject. When it fell into my hands a few days
since, I was filled with a pleasing expectation of seeing it
thoroughly explained. But my expectation was not answered;
for although many just and lively things are said there, yet
in above twenty pages I could find no definition of dissipa
tion, either bad or good.
252. But “the love of dissipation,” says the author, “is the
reigning evil of the present day.” Allowing it is; I ask,
What do you mean by dissipation? Sometimes you use the
word pleasure as an equivalent term. But what pleasure do
you mean; the pleasures of sense, or of the imagination in
general; or any particular pleasure of one or the other? At
other times you seem to make dissipation the same with
luxury; at least with a high degree of it. Sometimes, again,
you use the love of amusement as the same with the love
of dissipation. But the question recurs, What amusement do
you mean; for there are numberless sorts. So that still,
after talking about them so long, we have only a vague,
indeterminate notion of a dissipated age, a dissipated nation,
or a dissipated man; without having any clear or distinct
idea what the word dissipation means.
3. Those who are content with slight and superficial views
of things, may rest in the general account, that a dissipated
age is one wherein the bulk of mankind, especially those of
any rank or fashion, spend the main of their time in eating
and drinking, and diversions, and the other pleasures of sense
and imagination. And that we live in a dissipated age, in
this meaning of the word, is as plain as that the sun shines
at noon-day. Most of those that are commonly termed
innocent amusements fall under this head,--the pleasures of
imagination. Whenever, therefore, a general fondness of
these prevails, that is a dissipated age. A dissipated nation
is one where the people in general are vehemently attached
to the pleasures of sense and imagination. The smaller
vulgar in England are at present passionately fond of the
lowest pleasures both of sense and fancy; while the great
vulgar are equally engrossed by those they account a higher
kind. Meantime they are all equally dissipated, although in
different ways; and so indeed is every man and woman that
is passionately attached to external pleasure.
4. But without dwelling any longer on the surface of
things, let us search the matter to the bottom, and inquire,
wherein lies the original ground of human dissipation. Let
this be once pointed out, and it will place the whole question
in the clearest light.
5. Man is an immortal spirit, created in the image and for
the enjoyment of God. This is the one, the only end of his
being; he exists for no other purpose. God is the centre of
all spirits; and while they cleave to Him, they are wise, holy,
and happy; but in the same proportion as they are separated
from Him, they are foolish, unholy, and unhappy. This
disunion from God is the very essence of human dissipation;
which is no other than the scattering the thoughts and
affections of the creature from the Creator. Wherefore
fondness for sensual enjoyments of any kind; love of silly,
irrational pleasures; love of trifling amusements; luxury,
vanity, and a thousand foolish desires and tempers, are not
so properly dissipation itself, as they are the fruits of it, the
natural effects of being unhinged from the Creator, the
Father, the centre of all intelligent spirits.
6. It is this against which the Apostle guards in his advice
to the Christians at Corinth: “This I speak, that ye may
attend upon the Lord without distraction.” It might as
well be rendered, without dissipation, without having your
thoughts any way scattered from God. The having our
thoughts and affections centred in God, this is Christian
simplicity; the having them in any degree ancentred from
God, this is dissipation. And it little differs in the real
nature of things and in the eye of God, the Judge of all,
whether a man be kept in a state of dissipation from God, by
crowns and empires, and thousands of gold and silver, or
by cards, and dancing, and drinking, and dressing, and
mistressing, and masquerades, and picking straws.
7. Dissipation is then, in the very root of it, separation
from God; in other words, Atheism, or the being without
God in the world. It is the negative branch of ungodliness.
And, in this true sense of the word, certainly, England is the
most dissipated nation that is to be found under heaven.
And whether our thoughts and affections are dissipated,
scattered from God, by women, or food, or dress, or one or
ten thousand pretty trifles, that dissipation (innocent as it
may seem) is equally subversive of all real virtue and all real
happiness. It carries its own punishment: Though we are
loaded with blessings, it often makes our very existence a
burden; and, by an unaccountable anxiety, gives a foretaste
of what it is to be “punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord!”
March 26, 1783.
WHEN two or three persons are in a coach, and draw up
the glasses, it is observed they become so covered with dew,
that we can scarce see through them; but when that is once
wiped off, there is no more dew gathered upon the glass, but
it continues transparent. You will oblige your readers with
the reason of this phenomenon.
THE ANswer.
THE reason is, that in comparison of the moist vapours
that come from the persons in the coach, the glass is cold,
and condenses them, remaining cold longer than any other
part of the coach; as we find in damp weather, that marble
will become wet by condensing the moisture of the air.
Then by degrees, the glass, partaking of the warmth of the
persons in the coach, is no longer able to condense the
floating vapours into water. The proof of this is plain by
letting down the glass into its place, because there it cools,
and then being brought up it again condenses the vapour
and gathers a dew; without which it would not condense the
vapour, though in many hours’ travelling.
PHILIP VERHEYEN, Doctor of Physic, in the University of
Louvain, and Royal Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, was,
towards the end of the last and in the beginning of the
present century, one of the most eminent Physicians in
Europe. He died at Louvain on the 28th of February, 1710,
aged sixty-two. He was a man of eminent piety, wholly
detached both from the goods and glory of this world. He
gave orders not to bury him in the church, but in the
churchyard; all the will which he left being in the following
words :
Philippus Verheyen, Medicinae Doctor et Professor, partem
sui materialem hoc in caemeterio condi voluit, ne templum
dehonestaret, aut nocivis halitibus inficeret. Requiescat in
Apace.
That is,--“Philip Verheyen, Doctor and Professor of
Physic, ordered his body to be buried in this churchyard,
that he might not lessen the honour of the church, or infect
it with unwholesome vapours.”
What pity it is, that so few persons, even of sense and
piety, feel the force of these considerations ! I am so sensible
of their weight, that I have likewise left orders to bury my
remains, not in the New Chapel, but in the burying-ground
adjoining to it.
* 3: 460