&CCOUNT 


Genuine Chriſtianity. 


4 
— Yu 


£8 ND: @& Ne 
Printed by JohN PaRAMonxE, at the Foundry, 


— 


M. DCC. LXXIX. 


SOOOSOODDODDODDDD< 


A. 3-4. hk 8 


ACCU UNI, . 


E have been long diſputing about onHAISG6E 
TIANS, about CHRISTIANITY, and the 
EVIDENCE whereby it is ſupported. But what do 
theſe terms mean? Whois a chriſtian indeed ? What 
is real, genuine chr! ſtianity? And what is the ſureſt 
and moſt, acce ſlible evidence (if I may ſo ſpeak) 
whereby I may Low, that it is of God? May the 
God of the chriſtians enable me to ſpeak on theſe 
heads, in a manner ſuitable to the importance of 
them. 

Sect. I. 1. I would confider, firſt, who is a chriſ- 
tian arty ? What does that term properly imply? 
It has been io long avuled, I ſear, not only to mean 
nothing at all, but, what was far worle than nothing, 
to be a cloak for the vileſt hypocriſy, for the grol- 
ſeſt abominations and immoralities of every kind, 
that it is high time to reſcue it out of the hands of 
wretches that are a een to human nature: to 
ſhew determinately, what manner of man he is, to 
whom this name af: right belongs, 

2. A chriſtian cannot think of the author of his 
being, without abaſing himlelf before him: without 
a deep ſenſe of the diſtance between a worm of earth 
and him that ſitteth on the circle of the heavens. In 
his preſence he {inks into the duſt, knowing himſelf 
to be leſs than nothing in his eye: and being con- 
ſcious. in a manner words cannot expreſs, of his own 


littlenels, 1 ignorance, fooliſhneſs. So that he can only 


cry out, from the fulneſs of his heart, „O God! 
what * man! What am I!“ 

Ile has a continual ſenſe of his dependence on 
the parent of good, for his being, and all; the bleſ- 
ſings that attend it. To him he refers every natu- 
ral, and every moral endowmeitt, with all that is 
commonly 


— 


* 
2 
3 , 
1 
* 
4 
8 
2 
— 
* 


Ha WP 


commonly aſcribed either to fortune, orto the wiſdom, 
courage, or merit of the poſſoſſor. And hence he ac- 
q| ncices in e ee e e his will, not only 
with patience, but with thankfulneſs. He willi ingly 
religns all he 1s, all he has, to his wiſe and gracious 
diſpoſal. The ruling temper of his heart, is. the moſt 
ablolute ſubmiſſion, and the tendereſt rel 'tude to his 
ſovereign benefaftor. And this grateful love creates 
filial fear; an awful reverence toward him; and an 
earneſt care no to give place to any diſpoſition, not 
to admit an action. Ha or thoug zit, Which might 
in any degree diſpleaſ (ec that indulgen power, to 
whom he owes his life, breath, am all things, 

4. And as he has the ſtrongeſt affe tion for the 
fountain of all good, fohe has the firmeſt confidence 
in him: a confidence which * her pleature n Or 
pain, neither life nor death can But yet this, 
far from creating lloth or indolcnce, She: him on 
to the moſt vigorous induſtry. It OE s him to put 
forth all his ſtrength, in obevins him in whom ng 
conſides. So that he i is never faint in his mind. 
ver weary of doing whatever he believes to be bis 
will. And as he knows, the moſt acceptable worſhip 
of God, is to imitate him he worſhips, ſo he is con- 
tinually labouring to tranſcribe into himſelf, all his 
imitable perfections: in particular, his jullice, mer- 
cy, and truth, ſo eminently diſplayed in all his 
Creatures, 

5. Above all, remembering that God is love, he is 
conformed to the ſame likeneſs. He is full of love, to 
his neighbour: of univerſal love; not confined to 
one ſect or party; not reſtrained to thoſe who agree 
with him in opinions, or in outward modes of wor- 
ſhip; or to thoſe who are allied to him by blood, or 
recommended by nearneſs of place. Neither 0e 
love thoſe only that love him, or that are indeared to 
him by intimacy of acquaintance. But his love re— 
ſembles that of him whoſe mercy is over all his 
works. It ſoars above all theſe ſcanty bounds ; em- 
bracing neighbours and ſtrangers, friends and ene- 
mies: yea, not only the good and gentle, but alſo 
the froward; the evil and unthankful. For he loves 

A 2 J every 


> 
*2 
W 
* 
# 
9 
* 
* 
2 
* 
4 
* 
— 


4.3 


— 


every ſoul that Cod has made; every child of man, 


of whatever place or nation, And yet this univerfal 


benevolence docs in no wile interſere with a pe- 
culiar regard forhisrelations, friends and benctaGtors: 
a f:rvent love for his country: and the molt indear- 
ed affection to all men of integrity, of clear and 
generous virtue, 

6. His love, as to theſe, fo to all mankind, is itfelf 
generous and diſintereſted; ſpringing from no view 
of advantage to himſelf, from no regard to profit or 
praiſe; no, nor even the pleaſure of loving. This is 
the daughter, not the parent of his affection. By ex- 
perience he knows, that ſocial love (11 1t means the 
love of our neighbour) is abſolutely, eſſentially di- 
ferent from ſelf love, even of the moſt allowable 
kind. And yet it is ſure, that, if they are under due 
regulations, each will give additional force to the 
other, *till they mix together, never to be divided. 

7. And this univerfal, diſintereſted love, is pra- 
ductive of all right affections. It is fruitſul of 
gentleneſs, tenderneſs, ſweetneſs; of humanity, 
courteſy, and affability. It makes a chriſtian re- 
Joice in the virtues of all, and bear a part in their 
happineſs; at the ſame time that he ſympathizes with 
their pains, and compaſſionates their infirmities. It 
creates modeſty, condeſcenſion, prudence, together 
with calmneſs and evenneſs of temper. It is the 
parent of generoſity, opennels, and frankneſs, void 
of jealouſy and ſuſpicion, It begets candour, and 
willingneſs to believe and hope whatever is kind 
and friendly of every man; and invincible patience, 
never overcome of evil, but overcoming evil with 
good, | 

8. The ſame love conſtrains him to converſe, not 
only with a ſtri& regard to truth, but with arilels 
ſincerity and genuine ſimplicity, as one in whom 
there is no guile. And not content with abſtaining 
from all ſuch expreſſions as are contrary to juſtice 
or truth, he endeavours to reſrain from every un- 
loving word, cither to a preſent or of an abſent 
perſon : inall his converſation aiming at this, either 
to improve himſelf in knowledge or virtue, or * 
make 


* 1 


* 89 
* * { ® * > &- 5 
"AST 4 * 1 yy” _ Fe? CEE 

3.8. ds. 1 "IT 2 N * Sa : 


R | FW" N 1 
* ww - * * * 15 1 1 H N * 


n 


* 


make thoſe with whom he converſes ſome way wiler, 
or better, or happier than they were before. 

9. The ſame love is productive of all right actions. 
It leads him into an carneſt and ſteady dilcharge 
of all ſocial offices, of whatever is due to relations 
of every kind; to his friends, to his country, and to 
any particular community w hereof he 1s a member, 
It prevents his willingly hurting or grieving any 
man, It guides him into an uniform practice of 
juſtice and mercy, equally extenſive with the prin- 

3 whence it flows. It conſtrains him to do all 
poilible good, of every poſlible kind, to all men: 
and makes him invariably relolv ed. in every CIr- 
cumſtance of lite, to dot! at, and that only, to others, 
which ſuppoſing he were! himſelf in the ſame ſitua- 
tion, he would deſire hey ſhould do to him, 

10. And as he is caſy to others, fo he is eaſy in 
nimſelf. He is free from the painful ſwellings of 
Pride, from the flames of anger, trom the impetu- 
ous guſts of irregular ſelf-u ill, Ile is no longer 
tortured with envy or malice, or with unreaſonable 
or hurtful deſires. He is no more enſlaved to the 
pleaſures of ſenſe, but has the full power both over 
his mind and body, in a continued chearful courſe 
ot lobriety, of temperance ang chaſtity, He knows 
how to ule all things in their place, and yet is ſu- 
perior to them all. He A above 'thole low 
plealures of imagination, which captivate vulgar 
minds, whether ariſing from what mortals term 
greatneſs or novelty, or beauty. All theſe too he 

can taſte, and {till look upward; ſtill aſpire to 
nobler enjoyments. Neither is he a ſlave to fame: 
popular breath affects not him; he {tands ſteady, 
and collected in himſelf. 

11. And he who ſeeks no praiſe, cannot fear diſ- 
praiſe. Cenſure gives him no uncaſineſs; being 
conſcious to himſelf, that he would not willingly 
oflend, and that he has the approbation of the 
Lord of all. He cannot ſear want: knowing in 
whoſe hand is the earth and the fulneſs thereof, 
and that it is impoſſible for him to with-hold, from 
one that fears him, any manner of thing that is good, 


A 3 He * 


12 6 ; | 

He cannot fear pain, knowing it will never he ſent, 

unleſs it be for his real advantage ; and that then hls | 

ſtrength will be proportioned to it, as it has always 

| been in times paſt, He cannot fear death being able 

2 to truſt him he loves, with his ſoul as well as his 

3819 body; yea, glad to leave the corruptible body in the 

| duſt, 'till it is raiſed incorruptible and immortal, 

50 that i in honour or ſhame, in abundance or want, 

in caſe or pain, in life or 4 'ath, always, and in all 

things he has learned to be content, to be caly, 

I thank ful, Joy 'tul, happy. | 

| 12, Heis happy in knowing there is a God, an 
intelligent cauſe and Lord of all, and that he is not 

the produce either of blind chance or incxorabie 

neceihty, He is happy in the full ailurance he has, 

that this creator and end of all things, is a being 
boundleſs wiſdom, of inſinite power to execute all 
#| the defigns of his wiſdom, and of no lels infinite 
goodneſs to direct all his power to the advantage of 
| all his creatures, Nay, even the conſideration of 
} his immutable juſtice, rendering to all their due, of 
1 his unſpotted neſs: of his ll [uſhciency in him- 
| ſelt, and of that immenſe ocean of all perfe&t: ons, 
which center in God from eternity to cternity, is 
a continual addition to the happinek of a chriſtian, 
13. A farther addition is made thereto, while. in 
contemplating even the things that ſurround him, 
that thought ſtrikes warmly upon his heart: 

« The fe are thy glorious works, parent of good,” 
While * takes knowledge ol tlie inv ible things 
of God, even his eternal power and wiſdom, in the 
things that are ſcen, the heavens, the carth;the fowls 
of the air, the lillies of the ſield. How much more, 
while, rejoicing in the conſtant care which he ſti]k 
takes of the work of his own hand, he breaks out, 
in a Hobart of love and praiſe, „O Lord, our 
governor! how excellent is thy name 1n all the 
earth! T hou that haſt ſet thy g flory above the hea- 
vens!” while he, as it were [ces the Lord ſitting g Upon 
his throne; and ruling all things well : while he ob- 
ſerves "Bhs general prov! idence of God lo extended 

with his whole creation, and ſurveys all the effeëts 


— 


— 


r 4 y "Y * * K 1 F 
K * "4 L * * 3 A 4 4 No * - 
o 8 . * * 0 a "4 
7 . ET 4. 7 
ha 4 P's 
4%, I © ok 4M ” 2 7 N 
* == 88 * — tt DEE 


UTC — 


„ —__———_ + „ 4 4 


E T3 

of it in the heavens and earth, as a well pleaſed 
ſpectator; while he ſees the wiſdom and goodneſs of 
Is general government deſcending to every particu- 
lar; o preſiding over the whole univerſe, as over a 
lingle perſon ; lo watching over very ſingle perſon, 
as if he were the whole univerſe. How does he exult, 
when he reviews the various traces of the uy ghty 
goodneſs, in what has befallen himſelf, in the Gel 
ral circumſtances and changes of his own life ! All 
which, he now ſees, have been allotted to him and 
dealt out, in number, weight, and meaſure, With 
what triumph of foul; in farv cying either the gene- 
ral or particular prov idence of Go d. does hie obſerve 
every line pointing out an hereafter, every ſcene 
opening into eternity! 

14. He is peculiarly and ine xpreſſibly happy, in 
the cleareſt and fulleſt conviction, * his all power— 
ful, all wiſe, all gracious being, t this govenor of al}, 
loves ur. This lover of my foul is always with 
me, is never abſent, no not for a moment. And I 
love him; there is none in heaven but thee, none 
on carth that I deſire beſide thee: and he has given 
me to reſemble himſelf. He has ſtamped his image 
on my heart. And I live unto him; I do only his 
will; Igloriſy him with my body and my [pirit. And 
it will not be long before I ſhall die unto him; I ſhall 
die into the arms of God. And then farewel fin 
and pain ; then 1t only remains, that I ſhould hve 
with him for ever.“ 

15. This is the plain, naked 5 ortraiture of a chriſ- 
tian; be not prejudiced avainſt him for his name. 
Forgive his particularities of 05 inion and (what you 
th ink) ſuperſtitious modes of worfhip. Theſe are 
circumſtances but of ſmall concern; and do not 
enter into the eſſence of his character, Cover them 
with a vcil of love. and look at the lubſtan ace; his 
tempers, his holineſs, his | happinels, 

Gon calm reaſon conceive cither a more amiable 
or a more deſirable character? 

Is it your own? Away with names ! Away with 
opinions! I care not what vou are called, I aſk 
not (it does not deſerve a thought) what opinion 


ou - — 
o 2 a 


\ 
13 
you are of; ſo you are conſcious to yourſelf, that 
ou are the man, whom I have been (however 
faintly) deſcribing, Do not you know, you ought 
to be ſuch? Is the governor of the world well 
pleaſed that you are not ? | 

Do you {at leaſt) deſire it? I would to God that 
deſire may penetrate your inmoſt ſoul; and that you 
may have no reſt in your ſpirit, *till you are not only 
| almoſt but altogether a chriſtian ! 

"| Sect. II. 1. The ſecond point to be conſidered is, 

what is real genuine chriſtianity ? Whether we 
ſpeak of it as a principle in the foul, or as a ſcheme 
or iyſtem of doctrine, 

Chriſtianity, taken in the latter ſenſe, 1s, that 
ſyſtem of dottrine, which deſcribes the charatter 
above recited ; which promiſes, it ſhall be mine 
, (provided I will not reſt 'till I attain) and which 
| tells me, how I may attain it. 

2, Firſt, it deſcribes this character in all its parts, 
and that in the moſt lively and affecting manner. The 
main lines of this picture are beautifully drawn in 
many paſſages of the Old Teſtament. Theſe are 
filled up in the new, retouched and finiſhed with all 
the art of God, | 

The ſame we have in miniature more than once, 
Particularly in the thirteenth chapter of the former 
epiſtle to the Corinthians, and in that diſcourſe 
which St. Matthew records as delivered by our 
Lord, at his entrance upon his public miniſtry, 

g. Secondly, Chriſtianity promiſes this character 
ſhall be mine, if I will not re{t till I attain it. This 
. 15 promiſed both in the Old Teſtament and the new. 
A Indeed the news is, in effect, all a promiſe : ſeein 

every deſcription of the {ſervants of God e | 
therein, has the nature of a command: in conſe— 0 
quence of thoſe general injunttions, * “Be ye fol- | 
& lowers of me, as I am of Chriſt: + Be ye fol- 
« lowers of them, who through faith and patience 
inherit the promiſes,” And every command has 
the force of a promile ; in virtue of thoſe general 
i promiſes; * 
* Cor, xi Heb. vi. 12. | | 


*. 


1 


promiſes; *® @ A new heart will I give you, and I 
„will put my ſpirit within you : and cauſe you te 
„walk in my ſtatutes, and ye ſhall keep my judg- 
% ments and do them, Þ+ This is the covenant that 
« I will make aſter thoſe days, ſaith the Lord, I 
& will put my laws into their minds and write them 
& in their hearts,” Accordingly, when it is ſaid, 
T Thou ſhalt love the Lord thy God, with all 
„thy heart, and with all thy foul, and with all 
„ thy mind;” it is not only a direction, what I 
ſhall do; but a promiſe of what God will do in me; 
exactly equivalent with what is written elſewhere, 
& © The Lord thy God will circumciſe thy heart, 
and the hcart of thy ſecd” (alluding to the cuſtom 
then in uſe) © to love the Lord thy God, with all 
„ thine heart, and with all thy foul.” 

4. This being obſerved, it will readily appear to 
every ſerious perſon, who reads the New Teſtament 
with that care, which the importance of the ſubject 
demands, that every particular branch of the pre- 
ceding character is manifeſtly promiſed therein: 
either explicitly, under the very form of a promiſe, 
or virtually, under that of a deſcription or command. 

5, Chriſtianity tells me, in the third place, how 
I may attain the promiſe, namely, by faith, | 

But what is faith ? Not an opinion, no more than 
it is a form of words: not any number of opinions 
put together, be they ever ſo true, A ſtring of 
Opinions is no more chriſtian faith, than a ſtring 
of beads is chriſtian holineſs, 

It is not an aſſent to any opinion, or any number 
of opinions. A man may aſſent to three, or three 
and twenty creeds: he may aſſent to all the Old and 
New Teſtament (at lcaſt as far as he underſtands 
them) and yet have no chriſtian faith at all. 

6. The faith by which the promiſe is attained, is 
repreſented by chriſtianity, as a power wrought by 
the Almighty in an immortal ſpirit, inhabiting an 
houle of clay, to ſee thro' that veil into the world 
of ſpirits, into things inviſible and eternal: a power 

to 

* Ezek. xxxvi. 26, 27. + Heb. viii. 10, 1 Matt, XXli. 37» 

Deut. xxx. 6. 


[20 

to diſcern thoſe things which the eyes of fleſh and 
blood of no man have ſeen or can ſee: either by rea- 
ſon of their nature, which (tho' they ſurround us on 
every hde) is not perceivable, by theſe grols ſenſes : 
or by reaſon of their diſtance, as being yet atar oft, 
in the boſom of eternity, 

7. This is chriſtian faith in the general notion of 
it. In its more particular notion it is, A divine 
evidence or conviction wrought in my heart, that 
God is reconciled to me through his Son: inlepa- 
rably joined with a confidence in him, as a gracious, 
reconciled Father, as for all things ſo eſpecially for 

!1 thoſe good things which are inviſible and 
eternal, 

To believe (in the chriſtian ſenſe) is then, to 
walk in the light of eternity: and to have a clear 
ſight of, and confidence in the molt High, recon- 
ciled to me, through the Son of his love. 

8. Now, how highly deſirable is ſuch a faith, were 
it only on its own account? For how little does the 
wiſeſt of men know, of any thing more than he can 
ſee with his eyes? What clouds and darkneſs cover 
the whole ſenſe of things inviſible and eternal ? 
What does he know even of himſelf as to his invi- 
ſible part? What of his future manner of exiſtence ? 
How melancholy an account does the prying learned 
8 (perhaps the wiſeſt and beſt of all 

eathens) the great, the venerable Marcus Antoni— 
nus give of theſe things? What was the reſult of 
all his ſerious reſearches? Of his high and deep 
contemplation ? Either diſſipation (of the ſoul as 
well as the body, into the common, unthinking 
maſs) or re-ab{orpation into the univerſal fire, the 
unintelligent ſource of all things: or, ſome un- 
known manner of conſcious exiſtence, after the 
body ſinks to riſe no more. One of theſe three he 
ſuppoſed muſt ſucceed death; but which he had 
no light to determine. Poor Antoninus! with all 
his wealth, his honour, his power, with all his 


wiſdom and philoſophy ! 


« What points of knowledge did he gain? | 
That Gfe is ſacred all—and vain ? Sacred 


Sacred how high ? and vain how low ? 
He could not tell—but died to know,” 


9. He died to know! and ſo muſt you; unleſs 
you are now a partaker of chriſtian faith. O confider 
this. Nay, and conſider, not only how litttle you 
know of the immeniity of the things that are be- 
yand ſenſe and time, but how uncertainly do you 
know even that little? How faintly gllmmering a 
light is tat you have? Can you propes'y be laid to 
know any of theſe things? Is that knowledge any 
more than bare conjecture? And the reaſon is plain. 
You have no ſenſes ſuited to inviſible or eternal ob- 
jects. What deſiderata then, eſpecially to the rational, 
the reflecting part of mankind are thele ? Amore ex- 
tenſive knowledge of things inviſible and eternal, A 
greater certainty in whatever knowledge of them 

5 we have: and, in order to both, faculties capable of 
diſcerning things invifible. 

10. Is it not ſo? Let 1mpartial reaſon ſpeak, 
Does not every thinking man want a window, not 
wy fo much in his neighbour's, as in his own breaſt ? He 

| wants an opening there, of whatever Kind, that 

1 might let in light from eternity. Ile is pained to be 

| thus feeling aſter God, lo darkly, fo uncertainly : 
to know lo little of God, and indeed lo little of any 
beſide material objects, He is concerned, that he 
muſt {ec even that little not directly, but in the dim, 
ſullied glaſs of ſenſe: and conſequently fo imper- 
fectly and obſcurely, that it is all a mere ænigma 
ſtill. 

11. Now theſe very deſiderate faith ſupplies. It 
gives amore extenſive knowledgeot things inviſible, 
ſhewing what eye had not ſeen, nor ear heard, net- 

f ther could it be fore enter into our heart to conceive, 
| | And all theſe it ſhews in the cleareſt light, with the 
| fulleſt certainty and cvidence, For it does not leave 
| us to receive our notions of them, oy mere, reflection 

from the dull glaſs of fenle : but refolves a thouſand 

ænigmas of the higheſt concern, by giving faculties 
ſuited to things inviſible. Oh! who would not with * 
'F for ſuch a Faith, were it only on theſe 3 1 
LOW 


. 1 | 
how much more, if by this I may receive the pro- 
miſe, I may attain all holineſs and happineſs ? 


12, 80 Nr tells me: and fo I find it, 


may every real cliriſtian ſay: I now am aflured, 
that theſe things are ſo: I experiencethemin ow 
breaſt, What chriſtianity (conſidered as a doctrine 
promiſed, is accompliſhed in my ſoul, And chrit- 
tianity, conſidered as an inward principle is the com- 
pletion of all thoſe promiſes. It is holineſs and hap- 
pineſs, the image of God impreſſed on a created 
ſpirit: a fountain of peace and love ſpringing up 
into everlaſting life, 

Se. III. 1. And this I conceive to be the 
ſtrongeſt evidence of the truth of chriſtianity. I 
do not undervalue traditional evidence. Let it have 
its place and its due honour, It is highly ſervice- 
able in its kind, andits degree, And yet I cannot 
ſet it on a level with this. 

It is generally ſuppoſed, that traditional evidence 
is weakened by length of time; as it muſt neceſ- 
ſarily paſs thro' ſo many hands, in a continual ſuc- 
ceſſion of ages. But no length ol time can poſſibly 
effect the ſtrength of this internal evidence. It is 
equally ſtrong, i jaw new, thro' the courſe of 
ſeventeen hundred years. It paſſes now, even as it 
has done from the beginning, direttly from God 
into the believing ſoul. Do you ſuppoſe time will 
every dry up this ſtream ? O no, It ſhall never be 
cut off, 

Labitur & labetur in omne volubilis avium, 


2. Traditional evidence is of an extremely compli- 


cated nature, neceſſarily including ſo many, and fo 
various conſiderations, that only men of ſtrong and 
clear underſtanding can be ſenſible of its full force. 
On the contrary, how plain and ſimple is this? And 
how level to the loweſt capacity ? Is not this the 
ſum? © One thing I know : I was blind: but I now 
ſee.” An argument ſo plain, that a pealant, a wo- 
man, a child may feel its force. 


3. The traditional evidence of chriſtianity ſtands. 


as it were a great way off; and therefore altho' it 
Ipeaks loud and clear, yet makes a leis lively impreſ- 
| lion, 


2 — TT» Wa 9 * Fe 
oy * \ 7 
* * 07%, * 4 4 ">. * 4 
- + 
6, \ $ * 
* 9 
R \ ” 7 


[19] 
fion, It gives us an account of what was tranſafted 
long ago, in far diſtant times as well as places, It is 
nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, if thou 
believed! in the Lord Jeſus Chriſt. This then is the 
record, this is, the evidence, emphatically ſo called, 
That God hath given unto us eternal life: And this 
life is in his Son. | 

4. If then it were poſlible (which I conceive it 
is not) to ſhake the traditional evidence of chriſti- 
anity, ſtill he that has the internal evidence (and 
every true believer hath the witneſs or evidence in 
himſelf) would ſtand firm and unſhaken, Still he 
could ſay to thoſe who were ſtriking at the external 
evidence, * Beat on the ſack of Anaxagoras.” But 
you can no more hurt my evidence of chriſtianity, 
than the tyrant could hurt the ſpirit of that wiſe 
man, 

5. I have ſometimes been almoſt inchned to be- 
lieve, that the wiſdom of God has in molt latter 
ages, permitted the external evidence of chriſtianity 
to be more or lefs clogged and encumbered, for this 
very end, that men (of reflection eſpecially) might 
not altogether reſt there, but be conſtrained to look 
into themſelves alſo, and attend to the light ſhining 
into their hearts 

Nay, it feems (if it be allowed for us to pry ſo 
far into the reaſons of the divine diſpenſations) that 
particularly in this age, God ſuffers all Kinds of objec- 
tions to be raiſed againſt the traditional evidence of 
chriſtianity, that men of underſtanding, tho' un- 
willing togive it up, yet, at the fame time they de- 
fend this evidence, may not reſt the whole ſtrength 
of their caufe thereon, but have a deeper and firmer 
ſupport for it. 

6. Without this, I cannot but doubt, whether 
they can long maintain their cauſe: whether, if 
they do not obey the loud call of God, and lay 
more ſtreſs, than they have hitherto done, on this 
internal evidence of chriſtianity, they willnot, one 
after another, give up the external, and (in heart at 
leaſt) go over to thoſe whom they are now contend- 


ing with: ſo that in a century or two, the poop 
| B 0 


un 1 
1 


2 eee ee CCS 
J 4 ” d4 "© |. 


F a 9 2 > IS N SITES, 
if ! Fa" 4 


2 3 ³˙ DS - —- 


* 
* 5 = Ly 9 . A Cr! 1 4 * 7 CT 
PY TY AJEASSS a6. 4 4.3 SARESL 2 TE 7. ES os Ts. 7 . 
0 % 4 . — j * * * -S * K. = i % 8 13 a 1 0 * 7 0 
bh 7 19 1 * A 8 * * : 4 * F 2 8 . p K 
2-24 by 4 2 99 2 * 3 e. * 9 * 4 ET - © & Tx \ 
J ” I | * 42 T- FE * * OF 7”. * hd r 7 * 7 Ls 9 SB FURY 
2 . * 144 T* * ** 9 . P 0 * = 3 * TY 
1 \ J F P ff # * = „ . A * * 
arne n — N R 
24 5 * 4.) TI YEY us 22 o ". 
. -+4 * — - 
i l . 6 us : i "7 
x 4 * | . 


T4 } 


of England will be fairly divided into real deiſts, 


and real chriſtians. 
And I apprehend this would be no loſs at all, but 


rather an advantage to the chriſtian cauſe : nay, per- 


haps it would be the ſpeedieſt, yea the only effectual 
way, of bringing all reaſonable deiſts to be 
chriſtians, 

7. May I be permitted to ſpeak freely? May TI, 
without offence, aſk, of you that are called chriſ- 
tians, what real loſs would you ſuſtain, in giving up 
your preſent opinion, that the chriſtian ſyſtem 1s of 
God? Tho' you bear the name, you are not chril- 
titans now: you have neither chriſtian faith nor 
love, You have no divine evidence of things un- 
{cen : you have not entered into the holieſt by the 
blood of Jeſus. You do not love God with all your 
heart: neither do you love your neighbour as yous- 


felf. You are neither happy nor holy. You have 


not learned in every ſtate therewith to be content:: 


to rejoice evermore, even in want, pain, death; and 


in cvery thing to give thanks, You are not holy 
in heart; ſuperior to pride, to anger, to fooliſh deſires. 
Neither are you holy in life: you do not walk as 
Chriſt alſo walked. Does not the main of your 
chriſtianity he in your opinion? Decked with a 
few outward oblervances ? For as to morality, even 
Honeſt heathen morality, (O let me utter a melan- 
choly truth) many of thole whom you ſtile deiſts, 
there 1s reaſon to fear, have far more of it than you, 

8. Go on, gentlemen, and proſper. Shame theſe 
nominal chriſtians out of that poor ſuperſtition 
which they call Chriſtianity, Reaſon, rally, laugh 
them out of their dead, empty forms, void of ſpirit, 
of faith. In love convince them, that ſuch un- 
meaning pageantry (for ſuch it manifeſtly is, if there 


is nothing in the heart correſpondent with the out- 


ward ſhew) is abſolutely unworthy, you need not 
fay of God, but even of any man that is endued 
with common underſtanding. Shew them, that 
while they are endeavouring to pleaſe God thus, 
they are only beating the air, Know your time! 
preſs on; puſh your victories, till you have con- 


quered 


- _ n * * N 
* oy N 1 857 ae bo 
id * rr 
ET. * D 
We ls” * 


e 
F 


= Y , . 8 7 F * 5 a * 
* 3 „ 9 ” >. SC * 
* oF 7 * a FN LL = as "1 * ud | 
> E, * N A * . * 7 0 1 * 1 9 3 4 
1 PETS RL; a N 


1 | 
quered all that know not God. And then he whom 
neither they nor you know now, ſhall ariſe and gird 
himſelf with ſtrength, and go forth in his Almighty 
love, and ſweetly conquer you all together, 

9. O that the time were come! How do J long for 
you to be partakers of the exceeding great and pre- 
cious promiſes! How am I pained when I hear any 
of you uſing thole filly terms, which the men of 
form have taught you, calling the mentioning of the 
holy thing you want, cant! the deepeſt wiſdom, 
the thigheſt happineſs, zxTHUSIASM! What igro- 


- Yance is this? How extremely deſpicable would it 
make you in the eyes of any but a chriſtian ? But 
he cannot deſpiſe you, who loves you as his own 


ſoul, who is ready to lay down his life for your 
lake, 

10, Perhaps you will ſay, © But this internal evi- 
dence of chriſtianity affects only thoſe in whom the 

romiſe is fulfilled. It is no evidence to me.“ 

here is truth in this: objection. It does affect 
them chiefly: but it does not affect them only. It 
cannot, in the nature of things, be ſo ſtrong an evi- 
dence to others, as it is to them. And yet it ma 
bring a degree of evidence, it may reflect ſome light 
on you allo, | 

For, firſt, you ſee the beauty and lovlineſs of 
chriſtianity, when it is rightly underſtood, And 
you are ſure there is nothing to be deſired in com- 

ariſon of it. 

Secondly, you know the ſcripture promiſes this, 
and ſays, it is attained by faith, and by no other 
way. 

Thirdly, you ſee clearly how deſirable chriſtian 
faith is, even on account of its own intrinſic value, 

Fourthly, you are a witneſs that the holineſs and 
happineſs above deſcribed can be attained no other 
way. The more you have laboured after virtue and 
happineſs, the more convinced you are of this, 
Thus far then you need not lean upon other men: 
thus far you have perſonal experience. 

Fifthly, what reaſonable aſſurance can you have 
of things, whereof you have not perſonal expe- 

rience ? 


FS. a L 16 J | 
Tience? Suppoſe the queſtion were, can the blind 
be reſtored to fight? This you have not yourſelf 

experienced? How then will you know that ſuch 
a thing ever was? Can there be an eaſter or ſurer 
way than to walk with one or ſome number of men 
who were blind, but are now reſtored to fight ! 
they cannot be deceived as to the fatt in queſtion ; 
the nature of the thing leaves no room for this, 
And if they are honeſt men (which you may learn 
from other circumſtances) they will not deceive 
Ou, 

7 Now transfer this to the caſe before us ; and thoſe 
who were blind, but now ſee, thoſe who were ſick 
many years, but now are healed, thoſe who were 
miſerable, but now are happy, will afford you alſo 
a very ſtrong evidence of the truth of chriſtianity; 
as ſtrong as can be in the nature of things, *till you 
experience it in your own ſoul: and this, tho” it 
be allowed they are but plain men, and, in general, 
of weak underſtanding ; nay, though ſome of them 
ſhould be miſtaken in other points, and hold opi- 
nions which cannot be defended 
