Wesley,  John,  1703-1791. 

The  doctrine  of  original  sinl 


THE 


DOCTRINE 


O    F 


Original  Sin: 


ACCORDING    TO 


Scripture^  Reason,  ^W  Experience. 


By    J   O    H  N      JV  E    S    L    E    r. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed   by   E.    Farley,    in   Small- Street-, 


M.DCC.LVII. 


[  iii.  ]. 


T    H    £ 

PREFACE. 

I.  P'MM'^Few  Tears  ago  a  Triend  put  into 

S^  Q  my  Ha7ids  Mr, T  zylox' s  ^^  Do^rine 

W  Ww'2  tf  Original  Si?i'y    which  I  read 

car ef  idly  over  and  partly  tranfcrib- 

ed :  And  have  ?nany  'Times  ftnce  diligently  con- 

Jidered,     The  Author  is  doubtlefs  a  Perfon  of 

Senfe,  nay^  of  unufually  Jirong  Under/iandi?jgy 

joined  with  no  fmall  Livelinefs  of  Imagination^ 

and  a  good  Degree  of  various  Learning,     He 

has  likewife  an  admirable  Command  of  Temper, 

fo  that  he  almojl  every,  where  fpeaks  as  one  i?t 

good  Humour,     Add  to  this^  that  be  has  afmooth 

and  pleafijig^  yet  a  tnanly  and  nervous  Stile » 

And  all  thefe  Talents  he  exerts  to  the  uttertnojiy 

on  a  favourite  SubjeB^  in  the  Treatife  before 

us :  Which  he  has  had  Leifurefor  many  Tears y 

to  revifey  fiky  correal  afzd Jirengthen  againji  all 

Objections, 

2 .  So  finifh'd  a  Piece  furely  deferves  the  Con- 
Jideration  of  all  thofe  Majlers  of  Reafon  which 

h  2  the 


W.        P    R    E    F    A    C    £• 

the  J^ge  has  produced.  And  I  have  long  hoped^ 
T'bat  fome  ofthofe  would  attempt  tofiew^  bow 
far  the  Do6lrme  there  laid  down  is  true  ?  And 
what  Weight  there  is  in  the  Arguments  which 
are  produced^  in  Cojrfirmation  of  it.  I  know 
not  how  to  believe^  ^hat  all  the  Clergy  in  Eng-r 
land  are  of  the  fame  Opinion  with  this  Author, 
And  certainly  there  are  fome  whom  all  his  Skill 
in  Greek,  ajid  even  in  Hebrew  does  not  make 
afraid,  I fiould  rejoice  hadaiiy  of  thefe  under- 
takefi  the  T'afky  who  are  in  tnany  RefpeBs  better 
qualified  for  it:  Particularly  in  this  ^  T^hatthey 
have  T'ime  upon  their  Hands ;  they  have  full 
Leifure  for  fuch  an  Employment,  But  fince 
%  none  elfe  will^  I  cannot  but  fpeaky  thd  lying 
under  many  peculiar  Difadvantages.  I  dare 
not  be  filent  ajiy  longer  :  Necefjity  is  laid  upon 
me^  to  provide  thofe  who  defire  to  know  the  T'ruthy 
with  fome  A?2tidote  againfl  that  deadly  Poifon^ 
which  has  been  diffufing  itfelf for  feveral  Years^ 
thro  our  Nation^  our  Churchy  and  even  our  U- 
niverfities.  Nay  One  (I  hope ^  only  One)  Father 
of  the  Church  has  declared^  *'  'That  he  knows 
no  Book  more  proper  than  this,  to  fettle  the 
Trinciplcs  of  a  young  Clergyman.'^  Is  it  not 
^ime  then  for  the  very  Stones  to  cry  out  ? 

3.  For  this  is  not  a  Point  of  [mail  Impor- 
tance y  a  ^eftion  that  may  fafely  be  deter mijied 

either 

%  Since  the  writing  of  this,  I  have  feen  feveral  Trails,  which 
I  fhall  have  Qccafion  to  take  Notice  of  hereafter.  There  are 
likewife  many  excellent  Remarks  on  this  Subjed,  in  Mr. 
Herveyi  Dialogues, 


PREFACE.  V, 

either  Way.  On  the  contrary ^  it  may  be  doubtedy 
Whether  the  Scheme  before  us^  be  not  far  more 
dangerous  than  open  Deifm  itfelf  It  does  not 
Jhock  us  like  barefaced  Infidelity :  We  feel  710 
Painy  andfufpedi  no  Evil,  while  it  fieals  like 
Water  into  our  Bowels,  like  Oil  into  our 
Bones.  07ie  who  woiddbe  upon  his  Guard  in 
reading  the  Works  of  Dr.  Middleton  or  Lord 
Bolingbroke,  is  quite  open  and  miguarded  in 
reading  the  fmooth,  decent  Writings  of  Mr. 
Taylor :  One  who  does  not  oppofe,  (far  be  it 
from  him!)  but  OJily  explain  the  Scripture-^ 
who  does  7iot  raife  any  Difficulties  or  ObjeBio7is 
agai7ifi  the  Chrifiian  Revelation -y  but  07ily  re- 
moves thofe  with  which  it  had  been  unhappily 
i72CU7?iber  d for  fo  many  Centuries  I 

4.  I  SAID,  "  I'han  open  Deifm.''  For  I 
ca7it  look  on  this  Sche7ne  as  any  other  than  old 
Deifm  in  a  new  D'rejs  :  Seeing  itfaps  the  very 
Foundation  of  all  Revealed  Religiony  whether 
yewijh  or  Chrifiian.  '*  Indeed^  7ny  L — ,  faid 
an  emi7ient  Man  to  a  Perfon  of^ality,  Ica7it 
fee  that  we  have  much  Need  of  Jefus  Chrift." 
And  who  might  not  fay,  upon  this  Suppofitiony 
"  /  carit  fee  that  we  have  much  NeedofChrifii^ 
cnityT  Nay,  not  any  at  all  -,  for  they  that  are 
whole,  have  no  Need  of  a  Phyfician :  And 
the  Chrifiian  Revelation  fpeaks  of  7iothing  elfcy 
but  the  great  Phyfician  of  our  Souls :  Nor  can 
Chrifiian  Philofophyy  whatever  be  thought  of  the 
Paga7iy  be  7?iore  properly  defined  than  in  Plato'j 

A  3  Words: 


VI. 


PREFACE. 


Words:  It  is  0c^'>e7r£i«  \)/u;^^?.  The  only  true 
Method  of  healing  a  dijiemperd  Soul.  But 
what  Need  of  this  ^  if  we  are  inperfedl  Health? 
If  we  are  not  difeafed^  we  do  not  want  a  Cure, 
If  we  are  not  fick^  why  fhould  we  feek  for  a 
Medicine  to  heal  our  Sicknefs?  What  Room 
is  there  ^  to  talk  of  our  being  renewed  in  Know- 
ledge or  Holinefs,  after  the  Image  wherein 
we  were  created,  if  we  never  have  lojl  that 
Image!  If  we  are  as  knowing  and  holy  now^  (nay 
far  mcrefo)  than  Adam  was  immediately  after 
his  Creation  ?  If  therefore  we  take  away  this 
Foundation^  Hhat  Man  is  by  Nature  foolijh  and 
fmfid^  fallen  fhort  of  the  glorious  Image  of 
God,  the  Chriftian  Syftem  falls  at  once :  Nor 
will  it  deferve  fo  honourable  an  Appellation^  as 
that  of  a  cunningly  devifed  Fable. 

5.  In  confidering  this  Confutation  of  the 
Chriftian  Syftem,  /  am  under  fome  Difficulty 
f?'om  Mr,  Taylor'i  Manner  of  Writing,  It  is 
his  Cujlom  to  fay  the  fame  'Things  (fometimes  in 
different^  fometimes  in  nearly  the  fame  Words) 
fix  or  eighty  perhaps  twelve  or  fifteen  'Times  ^  in 
different  Parts  of  his  Book,  Now  I  have  ac- 
cuflomed  my f elf  for  njany  Tears,  to  fay  one  and 
the  fame  Thing  once  only.  However  to  comply 
with  his  Manner  as  far  as  poffible,  Ifkall  add 
at  proper  Intervals,  ExtraBs  from  others,  ex- 
pre/Jing  nearly  the  fame  Senti?nents,  which  I 
have  before  exprefjed  in  my  own  Words, 

6.  I  AM 


PREFACE. 


VIK 


6.  I  Kyifenfihky  in  [peaking  onfo  tender  a 
Point  as  this  muft  needs  be^  to  thofe  who  believe 
the  Chrijlian  Syjleniy  there  is  Danger  of  a 
Warmth  which  does  no  Honour  to  our  Caufe^ 
nor  is  at  all  countenanced  by  theRevelationwhich 
we  defend.  I  defire  neither  tojhew^  nor  to  feel 
thisy  but  to  fpeak  the  Truth  in  Love  (the  on- 
ly  Warmthy  which  the  Gofpel  allows)  and  to 
write  with  Calmnefsy  thd  not  Indifference. 
There  is  likewife  a  Danger  of  defpifng  our  Op- 
ponentSy  and  offpeaking  with  an  Air  of  Dif 
dain.  I  would  gladly  keep  clear  of  this  alfo-y 
well  knowing  that  a  Diffidence  of  ourfehesy  is 
far  from  implying  a  Diffidence  of  our  Caufe :  I 
dijlruft  myfelf  not  iny  Argument,  O  that  the 
God  of  the  Chrijlians  may  be  with  me  !  T'hat 
his  Spirit  may  give  7ne  Underjiandingy  and  ena- 
ble me  to  think  ^W  fpeak  as  the  Oracles  of  God, 
without  goi72g  from  them  to  the  Right-hand 
or  to  the  Left ! 


Lewisham, 
AW,  30,  1756. 


A  4  THE 


[9] 

e^  k  jHf  O  k  jw(  O  k  jM?  O  kjrf  <>  k  jm!  <^ 

THE 

DoEirine  of  Original  Sin: 

ACCORDING 

To  Scripture^  Reafon^  and  Experience. 

PART        I. 

^he  paji  and  prefenf  State  of  Mankind, 

5J(^^)!(EF0RE  we  attempt  to  account  for 
^  B  ^  any  Fadl,  we  fhould  be  well  afllir  d 
^^^w  of  the  Fad  itfelf.  Firft  therefore 
let  us  enquire  what  is  the  real  State 
of  Mankind  ?  And  in  the  fecond  Place  en- 
deavour to  account  for  it. 

I.  First,  I  fay,  let  us  enquire.  What  is 
the  real  State,  with  Regard  to  Knowledge 
and  Virtue,  wherein  Mankind  have  been 
from  the  earlieft  Times  ?  And  what  State  are 

they  in  at  this  Day  ? 

I.  What 


10  I'he  Doctrine  of 

I.  I .  What  is  the  State  (to  begin  with  the 
former  Branch  of  the  Enquiry)  with  Regard 
to  Knowledge  and  Virtue,  wherein  accord- 
ing to  the  moft  authentic  Accounts,  Man- 
kind have  been  from  the  earlieft  Times? 
We  have  no  authentic  Account  of  the  State 
of  Mankind  in  the  Times  antecedent  to  the 
Deluge,  but  in  the  Writings  of  Mofes.  What 
then,  according  to  thefe  was  the  State  of 
Mankind  in  thofe  Times  ?  Mofes  gives  us  an 
exadl  and  full  Account  3  Goo  ih^nfaw  that  the 
Wickcdnefs  of  Man  nsoas  greats  'and  that  every 
Imagination  oftheT^hoiights  of  his  Heart  was  on- 
ly Evil  co)itimially ,  Gen.  vi.  5,  12,  13.  And 
this  was  not  the  Cafe  of  only  Part  of  Man- 
kind; but  allFleJh  had  corrupted  his  Way  upon 
the  Earth,  .  And  accordingly  God  faid,  The 
End  of  all  Flefh  is  come  \  for  the  Earth  is  filled 
with  Violence  through  them.  Only  Noah  was 
righteous  before  God,  c.  vii.  i.  Therefore  only 
he  and  his  Houlliold  we're  fpared,  v/hen 
God  brougljt  the  Flood  upon  the  World  of  the 
XJngodhy  and  deftroyed  them  all  from  the 
iFace  of  tire  fearth. 

"  Let  us  examine  the  tnoft  diftinguifhing 
Features  in  this  Draught.  Not  barely  the 
\Vo'rks  of  their  Hands,  or  the  Words  of  their 
Tongue,  but  every  Imaginatio7i  of  the  Tlmights 
•^Z* their  Heart  was  evil.  The  Contagion  had 
ipread  itfelfthro'  the  inner  Man;  had  tainted 
the  Seat  of  their  Principles,  and  the  Source 

of 


Original  Sin.  ii 

of  their  Adlions.  But  was  there  not  fome 
Mixture  of  Good  ?  No;  they  were  only  Evil. 
Not  fo  much  as  a  httle  Leaven  of  Piety,  un- 
lefs  in  one  fingle  Family.  But  were  there 
no  lucid  Intervals'?  No  happy  Moments 
wherein  Virtue  gained  the  Afcendency  ? 
None:  Every  Imagination,  every  Thought 
was  only  Evil  continually  T"^ 

2.  Such  was  the  State  of  Mankind  for  at 
leaft  Sixteen  Hundred  Years.  Men  were 
corrupting  themfelves  and  each  other,  and 
proceeding  from  one  Degree  of  Wickednefs 
to  another,  'till  they  were  all  (fave  Eight 
Perfons)  ripe  for  Deftrudlion.  So  deplora- 
ble was  the  State  of  the  Moral  World,  while 
the  Natural  was  in  its  higheft  Perfedlion, 
And  yet  it  is  highly  probable,  that  the  Inha- 
bitants of  the  Earth  were  then  abundantly 
more  numerous,  than  ever  they  have  been 
fince,  confidering  the  Length  of  their  Lives, 
falling  little  fliort  of  a  thoufand  Years,  and 
the  Strength  and  Vigour  of  their  Bodies, 
which  we  may  ealily  gather  from  the  Time 
they  were  to  continue :  To  fay  nothing  of  the 
Fertility  of  the  Earth,  probably  far  greater 
than  it  is  at  prefent.  Confequently  it 
was  then  capable  of  fuftaining  fuch  a  Num- 
ber of  Inhabitants,  as  could  not  now  fubfift 

on  the  Produce  of  it. 

3.  Let 

*  Mr.  Hern;ey\  Tbcronzxid  Afpafio.  Dial,  11. 


12  I'he  Doctrine  of 

3.  Let  us  next  take  a  view  of  the  Fami-- 
lies  of  the  Sons  of  ^02hy  the  Inhabitants  of 
the  Earth  after  the  Flood.  The  firft  re- 
markable Incident  we  read  concerning  them 
is,  that  while  they  were  all  of  one  Lmiguage^ 
theyfaid  ojie  to  another^  Let  us  build  a  City  and 
a  Tcwei'y  "whofe  Top  may  reach  unto  Heaven^ 
lejl  we  be  fcattered  abroad  upon  the  Face  of  the 
Earth,  It  is  not  eafy  to  determine,  v/hat 
were  the  peculiar  Aggravations  which  at- 
tended this  Attempt.  But  it  is  certain,  there 
was  daring  Wickednefs  therein,  which 
brought  upon  them  the  very  Thing  they 
feared.  For  Vic^LoRD  by  confounding  their 
Language  (not  their  Religious  Worjlnp  :  Can 
we  fuppofe  God  would  confound  this?)^^^/- 
tcrd  them  ahi^oadupon  the  Face  of  all  the  Earth* 
Now  whatever  Particulars  in  this  Account 
may  be  varioufly  interpreted,  thus  much  is 
clear  and  undeniable.  That  all  thefe,  that 
is,  all  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Earth  had  again 
corrupted  their  TFay,  the  univerfal  Wicked- 
nefs being  legible  in  the  univerfal  Puniihment. 

4.  We  have  no  Account  of  their  reform- 
ing their  Ways,  of  any  univerfal  or  general 
Repentance,  before  God  feparated  Abraham 
to  Himfelf,  to  be  the  Father  cf  his  chofen 
People.^  Nor  is  there  any  Reafon  to  believe, 
that  die  reft  of  Mankind  were  improved  ei- 
ther in  Wifdom  or  Virtue,  when  'Lot  and 

Abraham 

*>  Gev.xi.  4,  9,     «  Bid  xil  1,  2,     •*  1;.  xi,i2^ 


Original  Sin.  i^ 

Ahr ahditn/eparated  themfekes  and  Lot  pitched 
his  T'ent  toward  Sodom.  Of  thoie  among 
whom  he  dwelt,  it  is  particularly  remarked, 
*"  The  Men  ^ Sodom  (and  of  all  the  Cities  of 
the  Plain)  were  wicked  and  Sinners  before  the 
Lord  exceedingly^  fo  that  not  even  ten  7'igh^ 
teous  Perjms  could  be  found  among  them : 
The  Confequence  of  which  was,  that  'The 
^LoRD  rained  up07i  them  B7^i7nflGne  and  Tire 
from  Z&LoRD  out  of  Hean:en. 

5.  We  have  no  Ground  to  fuppcfe,  that 
the  other  Inhabitants  of  the  Earth,  (Abra- 
ham with  his  Family  and  Defcendants  ex- 
cepted) had  either  the  Knowledge  or  theFear 
of  God,  from  that  Time  till  Jacob  went  ifito 
Egypt.  This  was  then  as  well  as  for  feveral 
Ages  after,  the  great  Seat  of  Learning :  In- 
fomuch  that  the  Wifdom  of  the  Egyptians,  was 
celebrated  even  to  a  Proverb.  And  indeed 
for  this  End,  (as  well  as  "  tofave  much  Peo^ 
pie  alive)  did  God  fend  Jofeph  into  Egypt, 
even  to  inform  their  Princes  after  his  Will^  and 
to  teach  their  Senators  Wifdom,  And  yet  not 
long  after  his  Death,  as  their  Ki7ig  hiew  not 
Jofeph,  fo  his  People  knew  not  God.  Yea, 
they  fet  Him  at  Defiance  ^  they  and  their 
King  provoked  Him  more  and  more,  and 
harden  d  their  Hearts  againfl:  Him,  even  after 
they  hzdfeen  his  Wonders  in  Egypt,  after  they 
had  grcan'd  under  his  repeated  Vengeance. 

They 

•  Gen.  xiii.  13.     *"  Ibtd.  xix.  24.     ^  Ihjd.  1.  20. 


14  7he  Doctrine  df 

They  ftill  added  Sin  to  Sin,  'till  they  con^ 
ftrained  the  Lord  to  deftroy  them  with  an 
utter  DeftrucSion;  'till  the  divided  Waters  re* 
turned  and  covered  the  Chariots  and  Horfemen 
and  all  the  Ho  ft  ^/Pharaoh. 

6.  Nor  were  the  other  Nations  who  then 
inhabited  the  Earth  any  better  than  the  £- 
^yptia?is :  The  true  Knowledge  and  fpiritual 
Worihip  of  God,  being  confined  to  the  De- 
{cQ:nd2ini^  oi  Abrahatn,  ^' He  had  not  dealt  fo 
with  other  Nations ^  7ieither  had  the  Heathens 
Knowledge  of  his  Laws,  And  in  what  State 
were  the  Ifraelites  themfelves  ?  How  did  they 
worfliip  the  God  of  their  Fathers?  Why  even 
thefe  were  '  a  jlubborn  and  rebellious  Genera^ 
tiony  a  Generation  that  fet  not  their  Heart  a^ 
right,  ^  They  kept  not  the  Covenajit  of  God, 
and  refiifed  to  walk  in  his  haw,  They  provoked 
Him  at  the  Sea^  even  at  the  Red  Sea  -,  the  very 
Place  where  He  had  fo  fignally  delivered 
them.  ^  They  made  aCalfi?i  Horeb,  andwor-- 
f'ipped  the  Molten  Image ^  w^here  they  had 
heard  the  Lord  but  a  little  before,  faying 
out  of  the  Midft  of  the  Fire,  Thou  Jhalt  not 
make  unto  thyfelf  any  graven  Image  ;  thoufialt 
not  bow  down  to  them  ?ior  worfiip  them.  And 
how  amazing  was  their  Behaviour  during 
thofe  whole  forty  Years,  that  they  fojourn'd 
in  the  Wildernefs  ?  Even  while  He  ""  led  them 

in 

^  P/htm  cxlvW.  20.     '  Ty.  Ixxvlii.  8.     ^  't,'.  10.  P/*.  cvi.  7. 
Excd,  xiv.  II,  12.     ^  /y*  cvi.  19.     "»  PfAxxvin.  14. 


Original  Sin.  jr 

in  the  Day-'fime  nvith  a  Cloud,  and  all  the 
Night  with  a  Light  of  Fire?  Such  were  the 
Knowledge  and  Virtue  of  God's  pecuHar 
People  (certainly  the  moft  knowing  and  vir- 
tuous Nation,  which  was  then  to  be  found 
upon  theFace  of  the  Earth)  'till  God  brought 
them  into  the  Land  oti Canaan:  Confidcrably 
more  than  two  thoufand  Years  from  the  Cre- 
ation of  the  World. 

None,  I  prefume,  will  fay.  There  was 
any  other  Nation  at  that  Time  more  know- 
ing and  more  virtuous  than  the  Ifraelites. 
None  can  fay  this  while  he  profeffes  to  be- 
lieve, according  to  the  fcriptural  Account, 
That  Ifrael  was  then  under  a  Theocracy, 
under  the  immediate  Government  of  God  : 
That  He  converfed  with  their  fubordinate 
Governor  Face  to  Face,  as  a  Man  talketh  with 
his  Friend',  and  that  God  was  daily  through 
him  conveying  fuch  Inftruftions  to  them,  as 
they  were  capable  of  receiving. 

7.  Shall  we  turn  our  Eyes  for  a  Mo- 
ment from  the  fcriptural,  to  the  prophane 
Account  of  Mankind  in  the  earlieft  Ages  ? 
What  was  the  general  Sentiment  of  the 
moft  polite  and  knowing  Nation,  the  Ro- 
mans^  when  their  Learning  was  in  its  utmoft 
Perfedlion?  Let  one,  who  certainly  was  no 
Bigot  or  Enthufiaft,  fpeak  for  the  reft.    And 

he  fpeaks  home  to  the  Point. 

Fuit 


i6  I'he  Doctrine  of 

Fuit  ante  Helenam  midier  teterrhna  Belli 
Caufa:  Jed  ignotis  perieru?it  mortihm  omnes 
^os  venerem  incertam  rapientes^  moreferarum 
Viribus  editior  ccedehat^  ut  in  grege  taurus. 
Full  many  a  War  has  been  for  Women 

waged 
E  er  half  the  World  in  Helen's  Caufe  en- 
gaged. 
But  unrecorded  in  hiftoric  Verfe 
Obfcurely  died  thofe  favage  Ravifhers : 
Who  like  brute  Beafts  the  Female  bore 

away, 
'Till  fome  fuperior  Brute  re-feized  the  Prey. 
As  a  wild  Bull,  his  rival  Bull  overthrown 
Claims  the  whole  fubjedt  Herd,  and  reigns 
alone. 
I  doubt  he  who  give?  this,  not  as  his  pecu-? 
liar  Opinion  but  as  what  was  then  a  gene- 
rally received  Notion,  would  fcarce  have  aU 
lowed  even  fo  much  as  yuvenal^ 
Fudicitiam  faturno  rege  moratam 

In  terris— 

Challity  did  once,  I  grant,  remain 
OnEarthj  and  flourifli'din  old  iS^/fifr;z's  Reign. 
Unlefs  one  ihould  fuppofe  the  Reign  of  aS*^- 
turn  to  have  expired,  when  Adam  was  driven 
out  of  Paradife. 

I  CANNOT  forbear  adding  another  Pidture, 
of  the  antient  Dignity  of  Human  Nature, 
drawn  by  the  fame  mafterly  Hand.  Before 
Men  dwelt  in  Cities  he  fays,  this 

^urpe 


Original  Sin.  27 

'furpe  pecuSy  glandem  atq-,  cuhilla  propter 
Certabaiit  pugnis^  deinfujlibus,  atq-,  itaporro 
Pugnabant  ar?7jis,  quce  pojlfabricaverat  ufus. 
The  Human  Herd,  unbroken  and  u  ntaught 
For  Acorns  firft,  and  graflyCouches  fought 
With  Fifts,  and  then  with  Clubs,  main^ 

tain'd  the  Fray, 
Till  urg  d  by  Hate  they  found  a  quicker 

Way 
And  forg  d  pernicious  Arms,  and  learnt 
the  Art  to  flay. 
What  a  Difference  is  there  between  this,  and 
the  gay,  florid  Accounts,  which  many  Mo- 
derns give  of  their  own  Species. 

8.  But  to  return  to  more  authentic  Ac- 
counts. At  the  Time  when  God  brought 
the  Ifraelites  into  Cai^aan,  in  what  State  were 
the  reft  of  Mankind  ?  Doubtlefs  in  nearly 
the  fame,  with  the  Canaanites ;  with  the  A- 
jnoritesy  HitfiteSy  Perizzites^  and  the  reft  of 
the  feven  Nations.  But  the  Wickednefi  of 
thefe,  we  know,  was  full:  They  were  cor- 
rupt in  the  higheft  Degree.  All  Manner  of 
Vice,  all  Ungodlinefs  and  Unrighteoufnefs 
reign'd  among  them  without  Controul. 
And  therefore  the  wife  and  juft  Governor  of 
the  World  gave  them  to  a  fwift  and  total 
Deflrudtion. 

9.  Of  Ifrael  indeed  we  read,  that  they 
""Jerved  the  Lord  all  the  Days  ^  Jofliua,  and 
all  the  Days  oftheElders  that  over-llvcd  J  oihm. 

B  And 

■7^/'.  xxiv.  31. 


i8  The  Doctrine  j/' 

And  yet  even  at  that  Time,  they  did  not 
ferve  Him  alone ;  they  were  not  free  from 
grofs  Idolatry.  Otherwife  there  had  been 
no  Need  of  his  giving  them  that  Exhorta- 
tion a  little  before  his  Death,  °  Now  therefore 
put  away  the Jlra?ige  Gods  which  are  among you^ 
the  Gods  which  your  Fathers  ferued  on  the  other 
Side  vf  the  River  (Jordan).  What  Gods 
thefe  were,  we  learn  by  the  Words  oi  A?noSy 
cited  by  St.  Stephen,  ^  O  ye  Hotife  of  Ifrael, 
have  ye  offered  Sacrifices  to  Me,  by  the  Space  of 
forty  Tears  ?  Tea,  ye  took  up  the  T'abernacle  of 
Moloch,  and  the  Star  of  your  God  Remphan, 
Figures  which  ye  made  to  worflnp  them, 

lo.  The  Sacred  Hiftory  of  what  occurred 
within  a  fhort  Space  after  the  Death  of 
JoJJjua,  for  fome  hundred  Years,  even  'till 
the  Time  that  Samuel  ]\\Agt6.  Ifrael,  gives  us 
a  large  Account  of  their  aftonilliing  Wicked- 
nefs,  during  almoft  that  whole  Period.  It 
is  true,  juft  '^  when  God  fmote  them,  then  they 
fought  Hini',  they  returned  and  enqidred  after 
God.  Tet  their  Heart  was  7iot  right  with 
Him,  neither  were  they  fledfaft  in  his  Covenant, 
And  wc  find  little  Alteration  among  them 
for  the  better,  in  the  fucceeding  Ages :  In- 
ibmuch  that  in  the  Reign  of  Ahab,  about 
nine  hundred  Years  before  Chrijl,  there  were 
only  '  ftven  thou  fond  left  in  Ifrael,  who  had 
not  bowed  the  Knee  to  Baal.     What  Manner 

of 

*>  JgjI:.  xxIv,  23.     •»  Adli  vii.  42,  43.     1  PfaL  Ixxvlii. 
34,  37,     f   1  Kiiig^  xix.  18. 


Original  Sin.  ig 

of  Men  they  were  for  the  next  three  hundred 
Years, -we  may  learn  from  the  Books  oiKing^ 
and  from  the  Prophets:  Whence  it  fully  ap- 
pears that  except  a  few  fliort  Intervals,  they 
were  given  up  to  all  Manner  of  Abomina- 
tions; by  Reafon  of  which  the  Name  of  the 
Moft  High  was  the  more  abundantly  blai^ 
phemed  among  the  Heathens.  And  this 
continued,  'till  their  open  Rebellion  againft 
God,  brought  upon  the  whole  Nation  of  the 
yews  (an  hundred  and  thirty  four  Years  after 
the  Captivity  of  the  Ten  Tribes,  and  about 
fix  hundred  before  Chrifi)  thofe  terrible  and 
long  deferved  Calamities,  which  made  them 
a  Spedacle  to  all  that  were  round  about 
them .  The  Writings  of  Ezekiel,  Daniel  and 
yeremiah^  leave  us  no  Room  to  think,  that 
they  were  reformed  by  thofe  Calamities. 
Nor  was  there  any  lafting  Reformation  in  the 
liim^oiEzra^  or  oiNehemiah  znd  Ma/acbi: 
But  they  were  ftill,  as  their  Forefathers  had 
been,  a  fatthlefs  a?id  Jiuhborn  Generatioji. 
Such  were  they  llkewife,  as  we  may  gather 
from  the  Books  oi  Maccabees  and  JofcpbuSy  to 
the  very  Time  when  Chrijl  came  into  the 

World. 

1 1.  OuRbleffedLoRD  has  given  us  a  large 
Defcription  of  thofe,  who  were  then  the  moll: 
eminent  for  Religion.  Te '  devour,  fays  He, 
Widows  HoufeSy  and  for  a  Pretence  wake  long 
Prayers.     Te  make  your  Profelytes  two-jold 

B  2  '^^^^^^ 

•  Matt.  xxHi.  14,^^. 


20  I'he  Doctrine  of 

more  the  Children  of  Hell  than  yourfehes,  Te 
jiegledl  the  weightier  Matters  of  the  Law^  J^^dg-' 
ment,  Mercv  and  Faith,  Ye  make  clean  the 
Out  fide  of  the  Ctip^  hut  within  are  fidl  of  Ex- 
tortion and  Excefs,  Te  are  like  whited  Sepul- 
chres^ outwardly  beautiful^  but  within  full  of 
dead  Mens  Bones^  and  of  all  JJncleannefs,  Te 
Serpents^  ye  Generation  of  Vipers ^  how  can  ye 
efcape  the  Damnation  of  Hell  ?  And  to  thefe 
very  Men,  after  they  had  murder'd  that  Juft 
One,  his  faithful  Follower  declared,  '  Te 
fliff-necked  and  imcircumcifed  in  Heart  and  Ear Sy 
ye  do  always  refiji  the  Holy  Ghcjl  -,  as  your  Fa- 
thers didj  fo  do  ye.  And  fo  they  continued  to 
do,  'till  the  Wrath  of  God  did  indeed  come 
upon  them  to  the  uttermoft:  'Till  eleven  hundred 
thoufand  of  them  were  deftroyed,  their  City 
and  Temple  levell'd  with  the  Duft,  and 
above  ninety  thoufand,  fold  for  Slaves  and 
fcatter'd  into  all  Lands. 

12.  Such  in  all  Generations  were  the  li- 
neal Children  oi  Abraham^  who  had  fo  un- 
fpeakable  Advantages-  over  the  reft  of  Man- 
kind :  1^0  whom  pertain  d  the  Adoption^  and  the 
Glory  ^  and  the  Covenants  ^  and  the  giving  of  the 
Law^  and  the  Service  of  God,  and  the  Pro- 
jnifes  :  Among  whom  therefore  we  may  rea- 
fonably  expedt  to  find  the  grcateft  Eminence 
of  Knowledge  and  Virtue.  If  thefe  then 
were  fo  ftupidly,  brutiflily  ignorant,  fo  def- 
pcrately  wicked  3  what  can  we  expedl  from 

the 

.*  J^s  vii.  51. 


Original  Sin.  21 

the  Heathen  World,  from  them  who  had 
not  the  Knowledge  either  of  his  Law  or  Pro- 
mifcs  ?  Certainly  we  cannot  exped:  to  find 
more  Goodnefs  among  them.  But  let  us 
make  a  fair  and  impartial  Enquiry :  And 
that  not  among  wild  and  barbarous  Nations, 
but  the  moft  civilized  and  refined.  What 
then  were  the  antient  Ro7na?is  ?  The  People 
whofe  Virtue  is  fo  highly  extoll'd,  and  fo 
warmly  commended  to  our  Imitation  ?  We 
have  their  Charafter  given  by  one  who  can- 
not deceive  or  be  deceived,  the  unerring  Spi- 
rit of  God.  And  what  Account  does  He 
give  of  thefe  beji  of  Men,  thefe  Heroes  of 
Antiquity?  ^JVhen  they  knew  God,  fays  He,  at 
leaft  as  to  his  Eternity  and  Power,  (both  im- 
plied in  that  Appellation,  which  occurs  more 
than  once  in  their  own  Poet,  Pater  Omntpo- 
tenSy  Almighty  Father)  they  glorified  Hifn  not 
^5  God,  neither  were  thankfuL  So  far  from 
it,  that  one  of  their  Oracles  of  Wifdom, 
(tho'  once  he  ftumbled  on  that  great  Truth, 
Nemo  unquam  vir  magma  fine  affatu  divino 
fait 'y  There  never  was  any  great  Man, 
without  the  AfHatus  or  Infpiration  of  God, 
yet  almoft  in  the  fame  Breath)  does  not  fcru- 
ple  to  afk,  ^is  pro  Virtiite  aut  fapieyitid 
gratias  Diis dedit  unquam'?  Who  ever  thank- 
ed God  for  Virtue  or  Wifdom  ?  No,  why 
lliould  he3  fince  thefe  are  "  his  own  Acqui- 

B  3  fition, 

*  'Rom,  i.  2 1 ;  &c. 


22  The  Doctrine  of 

fition,  the  pure  Refult  of  his  own  InduftryT* 

Accordingly  another  virtuous  Ro?na7i  has  left 

it  on  Record,  as  an  unqueffioned  Maxim. 

Jlcec  fatisejl  orareyovem  qucedonat  ^  aufert: 

Det  v'ttam\  dct  opes:  ceqiium  mi  animum  ipfe 

para  bo. 
Enough  for  common  Benefits  to  pray, 
Which  jove  can  either  give,  or  take  away: 
Long  Life  or  Wealth  his  Bounty  may  be- 
llow j 
Wifdom  and  Virtue  to  myfelf  I  owe. 
So  '  vai72  were  they  become  in  their  Imagina- 
tions  !  So  were  their  Joclijh  Hearts  darkened  I 

13.  But  this  was  only  the  firft  Step. 
They  did  not  flop  here.  FrofeJJing  themfelves 
wife^  they  yet  funk  into  fuch  grofs,  aftonilh- 
ing  Folly,  as  to  change  the  Glory  of  the  in- 
corruptible God,  (whom  they  might  have 
known  even  from  their  own  Writers  to  be 

Vajiam 
Mens  agitans  mclemy   &  magno  fe  corpora 
mifcens 

The  all-informing  Soul 
That  fills  the  mighty  Mafs,  and  moves 
the  whole.) 
into  an  Image  made  like  to  corruptible  Man^ 
yea,  to  Birds ^  to  Beajis,  to  creeping  "Things  I 
What  Wonder  was  it  then,  that  after  they 
had  thus  changed  his  Glory  into  an'  Image ^ 
God  gave  them  up  to  Unckannefs^  thro    tl:>€ 

Liijis 

t  Rom.  i.  21,  i^c. 


Original  Sin.  23 

Lujls  of  their  own  Hearts^  to  dijlmiour  their 
own  bodies  between  thetnfelves?  How.iuftlyj 
when  they  had  changed  the  Truth  of  God  in- 
to a  Lie^  and  worJJ^ipped  ajidferved  the  Crea- 
ture rather  than  the  Creator ^  did  lie  for  this 
Caufe,  punifliing  Sin  by  Sin,  give  them  up 
unto  vile  Affediions,  For  even  the  Women  did 
change  the  natural  life  into  that  which  is  again/} 
Nature,  Yea,  the  modeft  honourable  Ro- 
man  Matrons,  (So  httlc  were  they  afhamed!) 
wore  their  Pt^iapi  openly  on  their  Breafts. 
Andlikewije  the  Men  burned  in  their  Liiji  one 
toward  another^  Men  with  Men  working  that 
which  is  unfeemly.  What  an  amazing  Tefti- 
mony  of  this  is  left  us  on  Record,  even  by 
the  moft  Modeft  of  all  the  i^^w^;^  Poets ! 

Formofum  pajlor  Corydon  ardcbat  Alexin  I 
How  does  this  Pattern  of  Heathen  Chaftity 
avow,  without  either  Fear  or  Shame,  as  if 
it  were  an  innocent  at  leaft,  if  not  laudable 
Paffion,  their  biirjiing  in  Liiji  one  toward  a- 
nother  !  And  did  Men  of  the  fineft  Tafte  in 
the  Nation  cenfure  the  Song,  or  tlie  Subjedt 
of  it?  We  read  nothing  of  this:  On  the 
contrary,  the  univerfal  Honour  and  Eftcem 
paid  to  the  Writer,  and  that  by  Perfons  of 
the  higheft  Rank,  plainly  fliews  that  the 
Cafe  of  Corydon^  as  it  was  not  uncommon 
in  any  Part  of  the  Roman  Dominions,  fo  it 
was  not  conceived  to  be  any  Blemifti,  eitlicr 
to  him  or  his  Ma/ler,  but  an  innocent  /;/- 
frmity.  '  B  4  Mean- 


24  7^^  Doctrine  of 

Meantime  how  delicate  an  Idea  of  Love, 
had  the  Favourite  of  Rome  and  of  the  Mufes  ? 
Hear  him  explaining  himfclf  a  little  more 
fully,  on  this  tender  point. 

Eheu  !   quam  pingui  macer  eft  mihi  tauru$ 
in  agro  ! 

Idem  amcr  exitiumejlpeccri^pecorijqmagijiro. 
Idem  amcr  !  The  fame  Love  in  the  Bull  and 
in  the  Man !  What  Elegance  of  Sentiment ! 
Is  it  poflible  any  Thing  can  exceed  this  ? 
One  would  imagine  nothing  could,  had  not 
the  fame  chafte  Poet  furniih'd  us  with  yet 
another  Scene,  more  abundantly  fhocking 
than  this. 

Pajlphaen  nivei folafur  amove  juvenci  ! 
"  He  comforts  Pafiphae  with  the  Love  of 
her  milk-white  Bull !"  Nthi/  fupra !  The 
condoling  a  Woman  on  her  unfucccfsful  A- 
mour  with  a  Bull,  fhews  a  Brutality  which 
nothing  can  exceed  !  How  juftly  then  does 
the  Apoflle  add,  as  they  did  not  like  or  defire 
to  retain  God  /;/  their  Knowledge^  God  gave 
them  over  to  an  undifcerning  Mind,  to  do  thofe 
things  which  are  not  convenient.  In  confe- 
quence  of  this,  xh^y  y^^vQ  Jilled  with  allJJji- 
right  ecu fnefs.  Vice  of  every  Kind,  and  in  e- 
very  Degree  :  In  particular  with  Fornication 
(taking  the  Word  in  its  largcft  Senfe,  as  in- 
cluding every  Sin  of  the  Kind)  with  Wicked- 
nefsy  Covetoiiffiefsy  Malicioufnefs,  with  Envy, 
Murder^  Debate^  Deceit,  Malignity :    Being 

Haters 


Original  Sin.  2q 

Haters  of  God,  the  true  God,  the  God  of 
Ifrael^  to  whom  they  allow'd  no  Place  a- 
mong  all  their  Herd  of  Deities :  Defpitefuly 
Proudy  BoajlerSy  in  as  eminent  a  Degree  as 
ever  was  any  Nation  under  Heaven :  Invent- 
ers  of  evil  T'hingSy  in  great  Abundance,  of 
Mille  nocendi  Artes^  both  in  Peace  and  War: 
Difobedient  to  Parents,  altho'  Duty  to  thefc 
is  fuppofed  to  be  infcribed  on  the  Hearts  of 
the  moft  barbarous  Nations :  Covenant-break- 
ers,  even  of  thofe  of  the  moft  folemn  Kind, 
thofe  wherein  the  publick  Faith  was  engag- 
ed by  their  fupreme  Magiftrate:  Which  not- 
withftanding  they  made  no  Manner  of  Scru- 
ple of  breaking,  whenever  they  faw  good  : 
Only  colouring  over  their  Perfidioufnefs,  by 
giving  thofe  Magiftrates  into  their  Hands 
with  whom  the  Covenant  was  made.  And 
what  was  this  to  the  Purpofe  ?  Is  the  King 
of  France  or  the  Republick  of  Holland,  at 
Liberty  to  violate  their  moft  folemn  Treaties 
at  Pleafure,  provided  they  give  up  to  the 
Kine  of  England,  the  Ambaffador  or  Gene- 
ral  by  whom  that  Treaty  was  made  ?  What 
would  all  Europe  have  faid  of  the  late  Czar, 
if  inftead  of  punctually  performing  the  En- 
gagements made  with  the  Porte  when  in  his 
Diftrefs,  he  had  only  given  up  the  Perfons 
by  whom  he  tranfaded,  and  immediately 
broke  thro'  them  all  ?  There  is  therefore  no 

Room  to  fay 

^  Modo 


26  ^he  Doctrine  of 

Modo  Tunica  fcript a  fuperfint^  ■ 
Non  minus  inf amis  forte  Latina  Fides. 
Perhaps,  if  the  Carthaginian  Writings  were 
extant,  Roman  Faith  would  be  as  infamous 
as  Punic,  We  need  them  not.  In  vain 
have  they  deftroyed  the  Carthagi?iian  Writ- 
ings ;  for  their  own  fufficiently  teftify  of 
them ;  and  fully  prove  that  in  Perfidy,  the 
Natives  of  Carthage  could  not  excel  the  Se- 
nate and  People  of  Rome, 

14.  They  were  as  a  Nation  ^.taoyav  Void 
of  natural  AffeBion^  even  to  their  own  Bow- 
nels.  Witnefs  the  univerfal  Cuftom,  which 
obtained  for  feveral  A^es  in  Rome  and  all 
its  Dependencies  (as  it  had  done  before  thro' 
all  the  Cities  of  Greece)  when  in  their  higheft 
Repute  for  Wifdom  and  Virtue,  of  expofing 
their  own  new-born  Children,  more  or 
fewer  of  them,  as  every  Man  pleafed,  when 
he  had  as  many  as  he  thought  good  to  keep, 
throwing  them  out  to  perifh  by  Cold  and 
Hunger,  unlefs  fome  more  merciful  wild 
Beaft  fhortened  their  Pain,  and  provided 
them  a  Sepulchre.  Nor  do  I  remember  a 
fingle  Greek  or  Roman,  of  all  thofe  that  oc- 
cafionally  mention  it ,  ever  complaining  of 
this  diabolical  Cuftom,  or  fixing  the  leaft 
Touch  of  Blame  upon  it.  Even  the  tender 
Mother  in  "Terence,  who  had  fome  Compaf- 
fion  for  her  helplefs  Infant,  does  not  dare  to 
acknowledge  it  to  her  Hufband,   without 

that 


Original  Sin;  27 

that  remarkable  Preface,  Ut  mifere  fiiperfti- 
tiofa  fumus  omnes  j  as  we  Women  are  all 
miferably  fuperftitious. 

I5i  I  WOULD  defire  thofe  Gentlemen  who 
are  fo  very  fevere  upon  the  Ifraelites,  for  kil- 
ling the  Children  of  the  Canaanites,  at  their 
Entrance  into  the  Land  of  Canaan,  to  fpend 
a  few  Thoughts  on  this.  Not  to  infift,  That 
the  Creator  is  the  abfolute  Lord  and  Propri- 
etor of  the  Lives  of  all  his  Creatures :  That 
as  fuch  He  may  at  any  Time,  without  the 
leaft  Injuflice,  take  away  the  Life  which  He 
has  given  :  That  He  may  do  this,  in  what- 
foevcr  Manner,  and  by  whatever  Inflru- 
ments  He  pleafes  :  And  confequently  may 
inflift  Death  on  any  Creature  by  whom  He 
pleafes,  without  any  Blame  either  to  Him 
or  them :  Not  to  infift,  I  fay,  on  diis,  or 
many  other  Things  which  might  be  offered, 
let  us  at  prefent  fix  on  this  fingle  Confi dera- 
tion. The  Ifraelites  deftroyed  the  Children 
for  fome  Weeks  or  Months :  The  Greeks 
and  Ro7na?2S  for  above  a  thoufand  Years. 
The  one  put  them  out  of  their  Pain  at  once, 
doubtlefs  by  the  fliorteft  and  eafieft  Way. 
The  others  were  not  fo  compaffionate  as  to 
cut  their  Throats,  but  left  them  to  pine  a- 
way  by  a  lingring  Death.  Above  all,  the 
Hebrews  deftroyed  only  the  Children  of  their 
Enemies  j  the  Rjomam  deftroyed  their  own. 
O  fair  Pattern  indeed  !  Where  ftiall  we  find 

a  Pa- 


28  TZ»^  Doctrine  of 

a  Parallel  to  this  Virtue  ?  I  read  of  a  Mo- 
dern, who  took  up  a  Child,  that  fell  from 
its  Mother's  Womb,  and  threw , it  back  into 
the  Flames.  (Pure,  genuine  human  Nature!) 
Arid  Reafon  good :  For  it  was  the  Child  of 
an  Herctick.  .  But  what  Evil,  ye  Worthies 
of  antient  RomCy  did  ye  find  in  your  ow?i 
Children  ?  I  muft  ftill  fay,  this  is  without  a 
Parallel,  even  in  the  Papal  Hiftory. 

1 6.  They  were  implacable ^  unmercifuL 
Witnefs  (one  or  two  Inftances  of  ten  thouf- 
andj  poor,  grey-headed  Hannibal  (whom 
very  probably,  had  we  any  other  Accounts 
of  him  than  thofe  which  were  given  by  his 
bittereft  Enemies,  we  fhould  have  reve- 
renced, as  one  of  the  moit  amiable  Men, 
as  well  as  the  moft  Valiant  of  all  the  antient 
Heathens)  hunted  from  Nation  to  Nation, 
and  never  quitted,  till  he  fell  by  his  own 
Hand.  Witnefs  the  famous  Suffrage,  '^  De- 
lenda  eji  Carthago.  Let  Carthage  be  deftroy- 
ed."  Why  ?  It  v/as  Imperii  cemula :  The 
Rival  of  the  Roman  Glory.  Thefe  were 
open,  undeniable  Evidences  of  the  publick, 
national  Placability  sind  Mercy  of  the  Romans. 
Need  Inftances  of  a  more  private  Nature  be 
added  ?  Behold  then  one  for  all :  In  that 
Glory  of  Rome^  that  Prodigy  of  Virtue,  the 
great,  the  celebrated  Cato.  Cato  the  Rider y 
when  any  of  his  Domefticks  had  worn  them- 

felves 


Original  Sin.  20 

felves  out  in  his  Service,  and  grew  decrepid 
with  Age,  conftantly  turned  them  out  to 
ftarve,  and  was  much  applauded  for  his 
Frugality  in  fo  doing.  But  what  Mercy  was 
this  ?  Juft  fuch  as  that  which  dwelt  in  Cato 
of  Utica :  Who  repay 'd  the  Tendernefs  of 
his  Servant  endeavouring  to  fave  his  Life, 
to  prevent  his  tearing  open  his  Wound,  by 
ftriking  him  on  the  Face  with  fuch  Vio- 
lence, as  to  fill  his  Mouth  with  Blood. 
Thefe  are  thy  Gods,  O  Deifm  !  Thefe  the 
Patterns  fo  zealoufly  recommended  to  our 
Imitation ! 

17.  And  what  was  the  real  Charafter  of 
that  Hero,  whom  Cafo  himfelf  fo  admir'd? 
Whofe  Caufe  he  efpous'd  with  fuch  Eager- 
nefs,  with  fuch  unwearied  Diligence?  Of 
Pompey  the  Great  '^  Surely  never  did  any  Man 
purchafe  that  Title  at  fo  cheap  a  Rate! 
What  made  him  Great  ?  The  Villany  of 
Perpennay  and  the  Treachery  of  Pharnaces. 
Had  not  the  one  murder'd  his  Friend,  the 
other  rebell'd  againft  his  Father,  where  had 
been  Pompey\  Greatnefs?  So  this  Stalking- 
horfe  of  a  Party  procured  his  Reputation  in 
the  Common-wealth.  And  when  it  was 
procured,  how  did  he  ufe  it?  Let  his  own 
Poet,  J/Z^r^«  fpeak. 

Nee  Cc(zr  ferre  priorem^ 
Pompeiufve  parem  potuit. 
Nor  Cefar  could  to  a  Superior  look: 
Nor  Patriot  Pompey  could  an  Equal  brook? 


30  ^he  Doctrine  of 

He  would  bear  no  Equal!  And  this  a  Sena- 
tor of  i?^w^/  Nay,  the  grand  Patron  of  the 
Republick!  But  what  a  Republican  himfelfj 
when  this  Principle  was  the  Spring  of  all  his 
Defiofns  and  Aftions  ?  Indeed  a  lefs  amiable 
Charader  it  is  not  eafy  to  find,  among  all 
the  great  Men  of  Antiquity:  Ambitious, 
vain,  haughty,  furly  and  overbearing,  be- 
yond the  common  Rate  of  Men.  And  what 
Virtue  had  he  to  ballance  thefe  Faults?  I 
can  fcarce  find  One,  even  in  Lucan\  Ac- 
count, It  does  not  appear  that  in  the  latter 
Part  of  his  Life,  he  had  even  military  Vir- 
tues. What  Proof  did  he  give  of  perfonal 
Courage,  in  all  his  War  with  Cefar?  What 
Inflances  of  eminent  Condudt?  None  at  all, 
if  we  may  credit  his  Friend,  Cicero:  Who 
complains  heavily,  to  Atticiis,  that  he  adled 
like  a  Madman,  and  would  ruin  the  Caufe 
he  had  undertaken  to  defend. 

1 8.  Let  none  therefore  look  for  Placabi^ 
lity  or  Mercy  in  Pompcy,  But  was  there  any 
Unmercifulnefs  in  Cefar? 

"  Who  than  Jtilius  hopes  to  rife, 
More  brave,  more  generous,  or  more  wife?" 
Of  his  Courage  and  Senfe  there  can  be  no 
Doubt.  And  much  may  he  faid,  with  Re- 
gard to  his  Conteft  with  Pcmpey,  even  for 
the  Juflice  of  his  Caufe.  For  with  him  he 
certainly  fought  for  Life,  rather  than  Glory: 
Of  which  he  had  the  ftrongeft  Conviftion 

(tho' 


Original  Sin.  31 

(tho'  he  was  afliamed  to  own  it)  when  he 
palled  the  Ruhicoji.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted, 
but  he  was  often  merciful.  It  is  no  Proof 
of  the  contrary,  that  he  rode  up  and  down 
his  Ranks,  during  the  Battle  of  Pharfalia^ 
and  cried  to  thofe  who  were  engaged  with 
the  pretty  Gentlemen  of  Pompey^  Army, 
Miles y  faciem  feri 'y  '*  Soldier,  iirike  at  the 
Face."  For  this  greatly  fliorten'd  the  Dif- 
pute,  with  thofe  who  were  more  afraid  of 
loofing  their  Beauty  than  their  Lives,  and  fo 
prevented  the  Effufion  of  much  Blood.  But 
I  cannot  get  over  (to  fay  nothing  of  the  My- 
riads of  common  Gauls  whom  he  deflroy'd) 
a  fliort  Sentence  in  his  own  Commentaries ^ 
Verciyigetorix  per  tormcnta  necatus.  Who 
was  this  Vercingetorix'?  As  brave  a  Man, 
and  (confidering  his  Years)  as  great  a  Ge- 
neral as  even  Cefar.  What  was  his  Crime? 
The  Love  of  his  Parents,  Wife,  Children, 
Country,  and  facrificing  all  Things  in  the 
Defence  of  them.  And  how  did  Cefar 
treat  him  on  this  Account?  He  tortured  him 
to  Death.  O  Roma?i  Mercy!  Did  not  Bru- 
tus and  CaJ/tus  avenge  Vercingetorix  rather 
than  Pompey?  How  well  was  Rome  repre- 
fented  in  the  Prophetical  Vifion,  by  that 
Beaft,  dreadful  and  terrible^  which  had  great 
Iron  Teethy  and  devoured  and  brake  in  Pieces, 
and  Jlamped  muler  his  Feet  all  other  King- 
doms! 

II.   I.  Such 


32  7h  Doctrine  of 

II.  I.  Such  is  the  State,  with  Regard  to 
Knowledge  and  Virtue,  wherein  according 
to  the  moft  authentick  Accounts,  Mankind 
was  from  the  earheft  Times,  for  above  four 
thoufand  Years.  Such  nearly  did  it  conti- 
nue, during  the  Decline,  and  fince  theDef- 
truction  of  the  Roman  Empire.  But  we  will 
wave  all  that  is  paft,  if  it  only  appears,  that 
Mankind  is  virtuous  and  wife  at  this  Day. 
This  then  is  the  Point  we  are  at  prefent  to 
confider.  Are  Men  in  general  now  wife  and 
virtuous  ? 

Our  ingenious  Countryman,  Mr.  Brere^ 
"Woody  after  his  moft  careful  and  laborious 
Enquiries  computes,  that  fuppofing  that  Part 
of  the  Earth,  which  we  know  to  be  inha- 
bited, were  divided  into  thirty  equal  Parts, 
nineteen  of  thcfc  are  Heathen  ftill :  And  of 
the  remaining  eleven  fix  are  Mahometan^ 
and  only  five  Chrijiian.  Let  us  take  as  fair 
and  impartial  a  Survey  as  we  can,  of  the 
Heathens  firft,  and  then  of  the  Mahometans 
and  Chriftians. 

2.  And  firft,  of  the  Heatliens.  What 
Manner  of  Men  are  thefe,  as  to  Virtue  and 
Knowledge  at  this  Day  ?  'Many  of  late,  who 
ftill  bear  the  Chriftian  Name,  have  enter- 
tained very  honourable  Thoughts  <rf"  the  old 
Heathens.  They  cannot  believe  them  ta- 
have  been  fo  ftupid  and  fcnfelefs^:  as  they^ 
have  been  reprefented  to  be:   Particularly,. 

with 


Original  Sin.  3-5 

With  Regard  to  Idolatiy,  in  worfhiping 
Birds,  Beafts  and  creeping  Things.  Much 
lefs  can  they  credit  the  Stories  told  of  many 
Nations,  the  Egyptia?is  in  particular, 

*'  Who  are  faid  to 
Have  fet  the  Leek  they  after  pray  to." 
But  if  they  do  not  confider,  who  they  are 
that  tranfmit  to  us  thefe  Accounts^  namely 
both  thofe  Writers  who,  they  profefs  to  be- 
lieve, fpake  as  they  were  7noved  by  the  Holy 
Ghojl,  and  thofe  whom  perhaps  they  value 
more,  the  moft  credible  of  their  cotempo- 
rary  Heathens:  If,  I  fay,  they  forget  this, 
do  they  not  confider  the  prcfent  State  of  the 
Heathen  World?  Now  allowing  the  Bulk 
of  the  antient  Heathens,  (which  itfelf  is  not 
eafily  proved)  to  have  had  as  much  Under- 
ftanding  as  the  modern,  we  have  no  Pre- 
tence to  fuppofe  they  had  more.  What  there- 
fore they  were,  we  may  fafely  gather  from 
what  they  are:  We  may  judge  of  the  part 
by  the  prefent.  Would  we  know  then  (to 
begin  with  a  Part  of  the  World,  known  to 
very  early  Antiquity)  what  Manner  of  Men 
the  Heathens  in  Africa  were,  two  or  three 
thoufand  Years  ago?  Enquire  what  they  are 
now,  who  are  genuine  Vagans  flill,  not  taint- 
ed either  with  Mahometanifm  or  ChrijUanity, 
They  are  to  be  found  in  Abundance,  either 
mNegrO'land,  or  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 
Now  what  Meafure  of  Knowledge  have  the 

C  Natives 


34  2^^  Doctrine  cf 

Natives  of  thefe  Countries?  I  do  not  fay  in 
Metaphyficks,  Mathematicks,  or  Aftronomy. 
Of  thefe  it  is  plain  they  know  juft  as  much 
as  do  their  four-footed  Brethren.  The 
Lion  and  the  Man  are  equally  accomplijfhed, 
with  Regard  to  this  Knowledge.  I  will  not 
aik,  what  they  know  of  the  Nature  of  Go- 
vernment, of  the  refpedtive  Rights  of  Kings 
and  various  Orders  of  Subjefts.  In  this  Re- 
gard, an  Herd  of  Men  are  manifeflly  infe- 
rior to  an  Herd  of  Elephants.  But  let  us 
view  them  with  Refped:  to  common  Life. 
What  do  they  know  of  the  Things  they 
continually  ftand  in  Need  of?  How  do  they 
build  Habitations  for  themfelves  and  their 
Families  ?  How  feledt  and  prepare  their 
Food  ?  Cloath  and  adorn  their  Perfons  ?  A$ 
to  their  Habitations,  it  is  certain,  I  will  not 
fay,  our  Horfes,  (particularly  thofe  belong- 
ing to  the  Nobility  and  Gentry)  but  an  Eng- 
lijh  Peafant's  Dogs,  nay  his  very  Swine  are 
more  commodioufly  lodged.  And  as  to  theij;: 
Food,  Apparel  and  Ornaments,  tliey  are  juft 
fuitable  to  their  Edifices. 

"  Your  nicer  Hottentots  think  meet 
With  Guts  and  Tripe  to  deck  their  Feet. 
With  downcaft  Eyes,  on  Totta  shtg^ 
The  love-fick  Youth  moft  humbly  begs, 
She  would  not  from  his  Si^ht  reniove 
At  once  his  Breakfaft  and  bis  Love.'/ 

Such 


'Ktacli  is  the  Knowledge  of  thefe  accompllllied 
Animals  in  Things  which  cannot  but  daily 
employ  their  Thoughts  :  And  wherein  con- 
fequently  they  cannot  avoid  exerting  to  the 
uttermoft  both  their  natural  and  acquired 
Underftanding. 

And  what  are  their  prefent  Attainments 
in  Virtue  ?  Are  they  not,  one  and  all,  tvith- 
out  God  in  the  Wo?'ld?  Having  either  no 
Knowledge  of  Him  at  all,  no  Conception  of 
any  Thing  He  has  to  do  with  them,  or  they 
with  Him  :  Or  fuch  Conceptions  as  are 
far  worfe  than  none,  as  make  Him  fuch  a 
one  as  themfelves.  And  what  are  their  fo- 
cial  Virtues  ?  What  are  their  Difpofitions 
and  Behaviour  between  Man  and  Man  ?  Are 
they  eminent  for  Juftice  ?  For  Mercy,  or 
Truth  ?  As  to  Mercy,  they  know  not  what 
It  means,  being  continually  cutting  each  o- 
thcr's  Throats,  from  Generation  to  Genera- 
tion, and  felling  for  Slaves  as  many  of  thofe 
who  fall  into  their  Hands,  as  on  that  Con- 
fideration  only  they  do  not  murder.  Juflice 
they  have  none;  No  Courts  of  Juftice  at  all; 
no  publick  Method  of  redreffing  Wrong, 
but  every  Man  does  what  is  right  in  his  own 
Eyes,  'till  a  ftronger  than  he  beats  out 
his  Brains  for  fo  doing.  And  they  have  juft 
as  much  Regard  to  Truth,  Cozening,  Cheat-: 
ing,  and  Over-reaching  every  Man  that  be- 
lieves a  Word  they  fay.     Such  are  the  Moral, 

C  2  ^^^^h 


36  2^^  DocTRiNir;^ 

fuch  the  Intelledtual  Perfections,  acccrding 
to  the  latcft  and  moft  accurate  Accounts,  of 
the  prefent  Heathens-  who  are  diffufed  in 
great  Numbers  over  a  fourth  Part  of  the 
known  World!  ^•3'Jmr^  ps  ^r 

3.  It  is  true,  that  in  the  new  World,  in 
America,  they  feem  to  breathe  a  fairer  Air, 
and  to  be  in  general  Men  of  a  ftronger  Un- 
derftanding,  and  a  lefs  favagc  Temper.  A- 
mong  thele  then  we  may  lurely  find  higher 
Degrees  of  Knowledge  as  well  as  Virtue, 
But  in  order  to  form  a  juft  Conception  of 
them,  we  muft  not  take  our  Account  from 
their  Enemies;  from  any  that  would  juftify 
themfelves  by  blackening  thofc  whom  they 
feek  to  dellroy.  No,  but  let  us  enquire  of 
more  impartial  Judges,  concerning  thofe 
whom  they  have  perfonally  known,  the  /;z- 
ilians  bordering  upon:  our  own  Settlements, 
iv om,  New-England,  down  to  Georgia, 

We  cannot  learn,  that  there  is  any  great 
Difference  in  Point  of  Knowledge,  between 
any  of  th^fe,  from  Eafl  to  Wefl,  or  from 
North  to  South.  They  are  all  equally  unac- 
quainted vi\t\i  European  Learning,  being  to- 
tal Strangers  to  every  Branch  of  Literature, 
having  not  the  leaft  Conception  of  any  Part 
of  Philofophy,  fpeculative  or  praftical.  Nei- 
ther have  they  (whatever  Accounts  feme 
have  given)  any  fuch  Thing  as  a  regular, 
civil  Government  among  tliem.     They  have 

no 


nt)  i^aWJ  of  any  Kind,  unlefs  a  few,  tempo- 
rary Rules,  made  in  and  for  the  Time  of 
Waf.  They  are  likewife  utter  Strangers  to 
the  Arts  -  of  Peace,  having  fcarcc  any  fuch 
Thing  as  an  Artificer  in  a  Nation.  They 
know  nothing  of  Buildings  having  only  poor, 
miferablc,  ill-contrived  Huts,  far  inferior  to 
many  EfigliJJ:)  Dog-kennels.  Their  Cloath- 
ing,  *till  of  late,  w^as  only  Skins  ofBeafts, 
commonly  of  Deer,  hanging  down  before 
and  behind  them.  Now  among  thofe  who 
have  Commerce  with  our  Nation,  it  is  fre- 
quently a  Blanket  wrapt  about  them.  Their 
Food  lis  equally  delicate  ;  pounded  Indian 
Corn  fbmetime  mixed  with  Water,  and  fo 
eaten  at  once:  Sometimes  kneaded  into 
Cakes,  Meal  and  Bran  together,  and  half 
baked  upon  the  Coals.  Fi(h  or  Flefli,  dried 
in  the  Sun,  is  frequently  added  to  this  j  and 
now  and  then  a  Piece  of  tough,  freili-kiU'd 
Deer.  ■^■'■■'  .^i^-^^  i-n^'^^    - '-^ 

Such  is  the  Knowledge  of  th^J^M^/rit>?j^ 
whether  in  Things  of  an  abilrufer  Nature, 
or  in  the  Affairs  of  common  Life.  '  And  this, 
fo  far  as  we  can  learn,  fis  the  Condition  of 
all,  without  any  confiderable  Difference. 
But  in  Point  of  Religion,  rfiere is  ^'V-ety  ina- 
terial  Difference,'  be'tVpeteiVth(^  N^ih0 and 
fheSouth€tn'/;^^/^;/>.'-^9^hofe  m  tfceN6fth"are 
Idolatei^s  t)f  ^hiS  1oi\£fl«Ad{}.  If  ith^yac^'  n'ot 
\v'orliiyp>tfi^Devil'i':^f>ea^r%%if^?f\?n(which 
:ja  C  3  many 


jS  I'he  Doctrine  of 

many  firmly  believe  they  do,  many  think 
incredible)  certainly  they  worjQiip  the  moft 
vile  and  contemptible  Idols.  It  were  more 
excufable  if  they  only  turned  the  Glory  of  the 
incorruptible  God  into  the  Image  of  corruptible 
Man',yt^^  orofBirds^  or  four -footed  Beaflsy 
or  Reptiles^  or  any  Creature  v^hich  God  has 
made.  But  their  Idols  are  more  horrid  and 
deformed,  than  any  Thing  in  the  vifible 
Creation :  And  their  whole  Worihip  is  at 
once  the  higheft  Affront  to  the  Divine,  and 
Difgrace  to  the  Human  Nature. 

On  the  contrary,  the  Indians  of  our  South- 
ern Provinces  do  not  appear  to  have  any 
Worihip  at  all.  By  the  moft  diligent  En- 
quiry from  thofe  who  had  fpent  many  Years 
among  them,  I  could  never  learn  that  any 
of  the  Indian  Nations,  who  border  on  Georgia 
and  Carolina^  have  any  public  Worfhip,  of 
any  Kind  :  Nor  any  private.  For  they  have 
no  Idea  of  Prayer.  It  is  not  without  much 
Difficulty  that  one  can  make  any  of  them 
underftand  what  is  meant  by  Prayer,  And 
when  they  do,  they  cannot  be  made  to  ap- 
prehend, that  God  will  anfwcr  or  even 
hear  it.  They  fay  *'  He  that  fitteth  in  Hea- 
ven is  too  high,  He  is  too  far  off  to  hear  iisT 
In  Confequence  of  which  they  leave  Him  to 
Himfelf  and  manage  their  Affairs  without 
Him.  Only  \\\tChicafaws,  of  all  the  Indian 
Nations,  ar^  an  Exception  to  this. 

I    BE- 


Original  Sin.  35 

I  BELIEVE,  it  will  be  found  on  the  (lri<^eft 
Enquiry,  that  the  whole  Body  of  Southern 
Indians^  as  they  have  no  Letters  and  no  Laws, 
fo  properly  fpeaking,  have  no  Religion  at  all. 
So  that  every  one  does  what  he  fees  good : 
And  if  it  appears  wrong  to  his  Neighbour, 
he  ufually  comes  upon  him  unawares,  and 
Ihoots  or  fcalps  him  alive.  They  are  like- 
wife  all  (I  could  never  find  any  Exception) 
Gluttons,  Drunkards,  Thieves,  Diffemblers, 
Liars.  They  are  implacable y  never  forgiv- 
ing an  Injury  or  Affront,  or  being  fatisfied- 
with  lefs  than  Blood.  They  are  unmerciful 
killing  all  whom  they  take  Prifoners  in  War, 
with  the  moft  exquifite  Tortures.  They  are' 
Murderers  of  Fathers,  Murderers  of  Mothers, 
Murderers  of  their  own  Children  :  It  being 
a  common  Thing  for  a  Son  to  ihoot  his  Fa- 
ther or  Mother,  becaufe  they  are  old  and 
pafl  Labour,  and  for  a  Woman  either  to  pro- 
cure Abortion,  or  to  throw  her  Child  into 
the  next  River,  becaufe  flie  will  go  to  the 
War  with  her  Huiband.  Indeed  Huibands, 
properly  fpeaking,  they  have  none  ;  for  any 
Man  leaves  his  Wife,  lb  called,  at  Pleafurc; 
who  frequently  in  Return,  cuts  the  Throats 
of  all  the  Children  flie  has  had  by  him. 

The  Chicafaws  alone  feem  to  have  fome 
Notion  of  an  Intercourfe  between  Man  and 
a  fuperior  Being.  They  fpeak  much  of  their 
Beloved  0?ies -,  with  whom  they  fay,  ^Hcy 

C  4  ^01^- 


40  I'he  Doctrine  of 

con vcrfe  both  Day  and  Night.  But  their 
BelovedOnes  teach  them  to  eat  and  drink  from 
.Morning  to  Night,  and  in  a  Manner  from 
Night  to  Morning :  For  they  rife  at  any 
Hour  of  the  Night  when  they  wake,  and 
eat  and  drink  as  much  as  they  can,  and  fleep 
again.  Their  Beloved  Ones  likewife  ex- 
preilly  command  them,  to  torture  and  burn 
all  their  Prifoners.  Their  Manner  of  doing 
it  is  this ;  They  hold,  lighted  Canes  to  their 
Arms  and  Legs,  and  feveral  Parts  of  their 
Body,  for  fome  Time,  and  then  for  a  while 
take  tliem  away.  They  alfo  flick  burning 
Pieces  of  Wood  into  their  Flefh;  in  which 
Condition  they  keep  them  from  Morning  to 
Evening;.  Such  are  at  prefent  the  Know- 
ledge and  Virtue  of  the  Native  Heathens, 
over  another  Fourth  of  the  known  World. 
:^  - '  4.  Iia -4^^  however,  wcr  are  informed, 
thai  the  Cafe  is  widely  different.  For  altho* 
the  ^Heathens   bordering   on   Europe^     the 

\  Thoufands  and  Myriads  of  Tartars  have  not 
tnudiito  hoafl  either  as  to  Knowledge  or 
Virtue-;  and  altho'  the  numerous  little  Na- 
tions-under  the  Mogul  who  retain  their  ori- 
ginal •  Heathenifm,  are  nearly  on  a  Level 
with  them,  as  are  the  Inhabitants  of  the  ma- 
ny large  and  populous  Illands  intheEaflern 

'.  Seas ::  Yet  we  hear  high  Encomiums  of  the 
Chinefe^y\v\\o  are  as  numerous  as  all  thefe 
to-gerhcr:  Some  late  Travellers  afTuring  us. 

That 


Original  Sin.  .41 

That  G6/W  alone,  has  fifty  eight  Millions 
of  Inhabitants.  Now  thefe  have  been  dc- 
fcribed  as  Men  of  the  deepeft  Penetration, 
the  higheft  Learning  and  the  ftrideft  Inte- 
grity. And  fuch  doubtlefs  they  are,  at  leaft 
with  Regard  to  their  Underftanding,  if  we 
will  believe  their  own  Proverb,  "  The  Chi- 
nefe  have  two  Eyes,  the  Europeans  one,  and 
'Other  Men  none  at  all." 

And  one  Circumftance,  it  muft  be  own  d, 
•is  much  in  their  Favour:   They  live  fome 
.  thoufand  Miles  off.  So  that  if  it  were  affirm'd, 
sThat  every  Ckinefe  had  literally  three  Eyes, 
;it  would  be  difficult  for  us  to  difprove  it. 
Neverthelefs  there  is  Room  to  doubt  even  of 
their  Underftanding :  Nay,  one  of  the  Ar- 
guments often  brought  to  prove  the  Great- 
nefs,  to  me  clearly  demonftrates  the  Little- 
nefs  of  it;  namely.  The  thirty  thoufand  Let- 
ters of  their  Alphabet.     To  keep  an  Alpha- 
bet of  thirty  hundred  Letters,  could  never  be 
reconciled  to  common  Senfe:   Since  every 
Alphabet  aught  to  be  as  lliort,  fimple,  and 
eafy  as  poffible. .   No  more  can  we  reconcile 
to  any  Degree  of  common  Senfe,  their  crip- 
^'pling  all  the.  Women  in  the  Empire,  by  a 
filly  fenfelefs  AfFedration  of  fqueezing  their 
Feet,  'till.. they  bear  no  Proportion  to  their 
Bodies:  So  that  the  Feet  of  a  Woman   at 
thirty,  muft  ftill  be  as  fmall,  as  they  would 
.be  naturally  when  four. Years  old.     But  m 

order 


42  The  D0CTRINE5/* 

order  to  fee  the  true  Meafure  of  their  Under- 
ftanding  in  the  cleareft  Light,  let  us  look 
not  at  Women  or  the  Vulgar,  but  at  the 
Nobility,  the  wifcft  the  politeft  Part  of  the 
Nation.  Look  at  the  Majidarins^  the  Glory 
of  the  Empire;  and  fee  any,  every  one  of 
them  at  his  Meals,  not  deigning  to  ufe  his 
own  Hands,  but  having  his  Meat  put  into 
his  Mouth,  by  two  Servants,  planted  for 
that  Purpofe,  one  on  his  Right-hand,  the 
other  on  his  Left !  O  the  deep  Underftand- 
ing  of  the  noble  Lubber  that  fits  in  the 
Midft,  and 
""^"-Hiafy  cell  fidha  hinmdimsr 

Gapes,  as  the  young  Swallow  for  his  Food. 
Surely  an  Englijh  Ploughman,  or  a  Dutch 
Sailor,  would  have  too  much  Senfe  to  endure 
it.  If  you  fay.  Nay,  the  MandarmwoulA. 
not  endure  it,  but  that  it  is  aCiiftom:  I  an* 
i'wer,  Undoubtedly  it  is  -,  but  how  came  it 
to  be  a  Cuflom?  Such  a  Cuftom  could  not 
have  begun,  much  lefs  have  become  general, 
but  thro'  a  general  and  marvellous  Want  of 
common  Senfe. 

V/hat  their  Learning  is  now  I  know  not: 
But  notwithftanding  their  Eoaft  of  its  Anti- 
quity, it  was  certainly  very  low  and  con- 
temptible in  the  laft  Century,  when  they 
were  fo  ailoniihed  at  the  Skill  of  the  French 
Jefuits,  and  honoured  them  as  almoft  more 
than  human.     And  v/hatever  Progrefs  they 

may 


Original  Sin.  ^^ 

may  have  made  fince  in  the  Knowledge  of 
Aftronomy,  and  other  curious  rather  than 
ufeful  Sciences,  it  is  certain,  they  are  ftill 
utterly  ignorant,  of  what  it  moft  of  all  con- 
cerns them  to  know.  They  know  not  God, 
any  more  than  the  Hottcjitots  :  They  are  all 
Idolaters  to  a  Man.  And  fo  tenacious  are 
they  of  their  national  ldolatr}%  that  even 
thofe  whom  the  French  MiHionaries  called 
Converts,  yet  continued,  one  and  all,  to 
worfhip  Confucius^  and  the  Souls  of  their 
Anceftors.  It  is  true,  that  when  this  was 
ftrongly  reprefented  at  Ro^ne^  by  an  honeft 
'Dominicajt  who  came  from  thence,  a  Bull 
was  iffued  out  and  fent  over  into  Chinas  for- 
bidding them  to  do  it  any  longer.  But  the 
good  Fathers  kept  it  private  among  them- 
felves,  faying,  The  Chinefe  were  not  able  to 
bear  it. 

Such  is  their  Religion  with  Refpedl  to 
God.  But  are  they  not  eminent  for  all  fe- 
cial Virtues,  all  that  have  Place  between 
Man  and  Man  ?  Yes,  according  to  the  Ac- 
counts which  fome  have  given.  According 
to  thefe,  they  are  the  Glory  of  Mankind, 
and  may  be  a  Pattern  to  all  Europe,  But 
have  not  we  fome  Reafon  to  doubt,  if  thefe 
Accounts  are  true  ?  Are  Pride  and  Lazinefs 
good  Ingredients  of  fecial  Virtue  ?  And  can 
all  Europe  equal  either  the  Lazinefs  or  Pride 
of  i^z  Cljimfe  Nobiiit\^  and  Gentry?    Who 

are 


44  72^  Doctrine  of 

arc  either  too  ftately'iir  too  indolent,  even  to 
put  "the  Meat  into  their  own  Mouths?  Yet 
they  are  not  too  proud  ot  too  indolent  to 
o"pprcfs,"to  rob,  to.  defraud  all  that  fall  into 
their  Hands:  How  fligrant  Inftances  of  this 
may  any  one  find,  even  in  the  Account  of 
Lord  jinfons  Voyage?  Exaftly  agreeing  with 
the  Accounts  given  by  all  our  Countrymen, 
who  have  traded  in  any  Part  of  China  :  As 
well  as  with  the  Obfervation  made  by  a  late 
Writer,  in  his Gecgrafhical Grammar,  "Trade 
and  Commerce,  or  rather  Cheating  and  O- 
ver-reaching,  is  the  natural  Bent  and  Genius 
of  the  Chine/e.  Gain  is  their  God:  They 
prefer  this  to  every  Thing  befides.  A  Stranger 
is  in  great  Danger  of  being  cheated,  if  he 
trufls  to  his  own  Judgment.  And  if  he  em- 
ploy a  Chinefe  Broker,  it  is  well  if  he  does 
not  join  with  the  Merchant  to  cheat  the 
Stranger. 

"  Their  Laws  oblige  them  to  certain 
Rules  of  Civility  in  their  Words  and  Actions. 
And  they  are  naturally  a  fawning,  cringing 
Generation  :  But  the  greateft  Hypocrites  on 
the  Face  of  the  Earth/V      '- 

'5^! 'Such  is  the  boafted  Virtue  of  thole 
who  'are^^tyond  all  Degrees  of  Comparifon 
the  beft  and'  wifeft  of  all  the  Heathens  in 
Afttf.  '  Attd'how  little  preferable  to  them  ar© 
thofc*tlf'fe/r^/e?  Rather,  how  miny  De- 
greei^b^tieath  them  ?'  Va;ft  Numbers  of  thefe 
-  '*'  ^'  are 


v,pjlIGINAL    Sl-N.  4 J 

are  within,  the.  Borders  of  Mufcovy.  But 
how  arnazingfy  igtiorant  ?  ,How  totally  void 
both .  of  civil .  and  facred  Wifdom  !  How 
ihockingly  favage  both  in  their  Tempers 
and  Manners  ?  Their  Idolatry  is  of  the 
bafefi  and  vlleft  Kind.  They  not  only  wor- 
fhip  the  Work  of  their  own  Hands,  but 
Idols  of  tlie  moft  horrid  and  detellable 
Forms,  that  Men  or  Devils  could  devile. 
Equally  favage  (or  more  fo,  if  more  can  be) 
as  is  well-known,  are  the  Natives  of  Lap^ 
land'y  and  indeed  of  all  the  Countries  which 
have  been  difcovered  to  the  North  of  Muf- 
covy  or  Sweden,  In  Truth,  the  Bulk  of  thefe 
Nations,  feem  to  be  confiderably  more  bar- 
barous, not  only  than  the  Men  near  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope^  but  than  many  Tribes 
in  the  brute  Creation.  ^         ,     «\<.cy;>  ^  vc  q 

Thus  have  we  feen,  what  is  tneprefent 
State  of  the  Heathens,  in  every  Part  of  the^ 
known  World.  And  thefe  ftill  rnake  up, 
according;  t^o  the  preceeding  Calcvdation  very 
near  Two-thirds  of  Mankind.  Let  us-  now^ 
calmly  and  impartially  confider,  WhatMan?*> 
ner  of  Men  the  Mahometans  in  general  are^ 

6..; .  An  ingenious  Writer,  who  a  few  Years 
ago,,  pul;>h{h'd  a  pompous  Tranflation  of  the 
Krirany^  takes  great  Pains  to  give  us  a  very 
favourable  Opinion,  both  of  Mahomet  and 
his  Followers.      But  he  cannot  wafh  the 

Ethlopk, white.      After  all.  Men  who  have 

"     '^' '  ■ '  but 


46  The  Doctrine  of 

but  a  moderate  Share  of  Reafon,  canftot 
but  obferve  in  his  i&r^?;;,  even  as  polifh'd 
by  Mr.  Sale^  the  nioft  grofs  and  impious  Ab- 
fordities.  To  cite  Particulars  is  not  now  my 
Bulinefs.  It  may  fuffice,  to  oblerve  in  gene- 
ral, That  human  Underftanding  muft  be 
debafed  to  an  inconceivable  Degree,  in  thofe 
who  can  fwallow  fuch  Abfurdities,  as  di- 
vinely revealed.  And  yet  we  know  the? 
Mahometans  not  only  condemn  all  who  can- 
not fwallow  them  to  everlafting  Fire ;  not 
only  appropriate  to  themfelves  the  Title  of 
Mujfulmen^  or  T^rue  Believers :  But  even  a^ 
nathematife  with  the  utmoft  Bitternefs,  and* 
adjudge  to  eternal  Deftru6lion,  all  their  Bre- 
thren of  the  Seft  of  Hali,  all  who  contend 
for  a  figurative  Interpretation  of  them. 

That  thefe  Men  then  have  no  Knov^-^ 
ledge  or  Love  of  God  is  undeniably  mani- 
feft,  not  only  from  their  grofs,  horrible 
Notions  of ^  Him,  but  from  their  not  loving 
their  Brethren.  But  they  have  not  always 
fo  weighty  a  Caufe,  to  hate  and  murder 
one  another,  as  Difference  of  Opinion,  Ma- 
hornet ans  will  butcher  each  other  by  Thouf* 
ands,  without  fo  plaufible  a  Plea  as  this. 
Why  is  it  that  fuch  Numbers  of  T^urks  and 
Perjians^  have  ftabbed  one  another  in  cool- 
Sood  ?  Truly,  becaufe  they  differ  in  the 
Manner  of  drejjing  their  Head,  The  Ottoman 
vehemently  maintains,  (for  he  has  unqueft- 
--.-  ionable 


Original  Sin.'  ^ 

ionable  T*radition  on  his  Side)  That  a  Mujfui^ 
man  fhould  wear  a  round  Turbant,  Whereav 
the  Perfian  infifts  upon  his  Liberty  otCon- 
fcience,  and  will  wear  it  picked  before.  So,: 
for  this  wonderful  Reafon,  when  a  more 
plaufible  one  is  wanting,  they  beat  out  each 
others  Brains  from  Generation  to  Generation, 

It  is  not  therefore  ftrange,  That  ever 
fince  the  Religion  of  Maho-met  appeared  in 
the  World,  the  Efpoufers  of  it,  particular- 
ly thofe  who  under  the  Tiirkijh  Emperor, 
have  been  as  Wolves  and  Tygers  to  all  other 
Nations,  rending  and  tearing  all  that  fell 
into  their  mercilefs  Paws,  and  grinding  them 
with  their  Iron  Teeth.  That  numberlefs 
Cities  are  rafed  from  the  Foundation,  and 
only  their  Name  remaining.  That  many 
Countries  which  were  once  as  the  Garden 
of  God,  are  now  a  defolate  Wildernefs; 
and  that  fo  many  once  numerous  and  pow- 
erful Nations  are  vanifh'd  away  from  the 
Earth  !  Such  was,  and  is  at  this  Day  the 
Rage,  the  Fury,  the  Revenge,  of  thefc  De- 
ftroyers  of  Humankind ! 

7.  Proceed  we  now  to  the  Chriftian 
World.  But  we  muft  not  judge  of  Chrifti- 
ans  in  general,  from  thofe  who  are  fcattered 
thro'  the  I'urkifi  Dominions,  the  Armcniarfy^ 
Georgian^  Mengrelian  Chriflians:  Nor  in- 
deed from  any  others  of  the  Greek  Commu- 
nion.    The  grofs,  barbarous  Ignorance,  the 


48  T'he  Doctrine  of 

deep,  ftupid  Superftition,  the  blind  and 
bitter  Zeal,  and  the  endlefs  Thirft  after  vain 
Janghng  and  Strife  of  Words,  which  have 
reigned  for  many  Ages  in  the  Greek  Church, 
and  well  nigh  banifh'd  True  Religion  from 
among  them  ;  make  thefe  fcarce  worthy  of 
the  Chriftian  Name,  and  lay  an  infuperable 
Stumbling-block  before  the  Mahometans, 

8.  Perhaps  thofe  of  the  Romijh  Com* 
munion  may  fay,  "  What  Wonder,  that  this 
is  the  Cafe  with  Hereticks  ?  With  thofe  who 
have  erred  from  the  Catholick  Faith,  nay, 
and  left  the  Pale  of  the  Church?"  But  what 
is  the  Cafe  with  them,  who  have  not  left 
that  Church,  and  who  retain  the  Roman 
Faith  ftill  ?  Yea,  with  the  moft  zealous  of 
all  its  Patrons,  .the  Inhabitants  of  Italy ^  of 
Spain  and  Portugal'?  Wherein  do  they  ex- 
cel the  Greek  Church,  except  in  Italiajiifm  ^ 
Received  by  Tradition  from  their  Heathen 
Fathers,  and  diffufed  thro*  every  City  and 
Village.  They  may  indeed  praife  Cnaftity 
and  rail  at  Women,  as  loudly  as  their  Fore- 
father Juvenal.  But  what  is  the  Moral  of 
all  this  ? 

' '  Nonne  pittas  melius^  quod  tecum  pujlo  dormit  ?" 
This,  it  muft  be  acknowledged,  is  the  Glory 
of  the  Romifh  Church.  Herein  it  does  ex- 
cel the  Gr^eek, 

They  excel  it  like  wife  in  Deifm.  Per- 
haps there  is  no  Country  in  the  World,  at 

leaft. 


Original  Sin.  ^o 

le^ft  in:  that  Part  of  it,  which  bears  the 
Chriftian  Name,  wherein  fo  large  a  i'ropoi-r 
tion  of  the  Men  of  Education,  are  abfolute 
Deifts,  if  not  Atheifts,  as  Italy.  And  ii om 
hence  the  Plague  has  fpread  far  and  wide ; 
thro'  France  in  particular.  So  that  did  not 
temporal  Motives  reftrain,  no  fmall  Part  of 
the  French  Nobility  and  Gentry,  would  pay 
no  more  Regard  to  the  Chriftian  Revelation, 
than  do  the  Mandarim  in  China, 

They  excel  ftill  more  in  Murder,  both 
private  and  publick.  Inftances  of  the  for- 
mer abound  all  over  Italy^  Spain  and  Forin- 
gal.  And  the  Frequency  of  (liedding  Blood 
has  taken  away  all  that  Horror  which  other- 
Wife  might  attend  it.  Take  one  Inftance  of  a 
thoufand.  An  Englifh  Gentleman  was  feme 
Years  ago  at  an  Entertainment  in  Erefcia^ 
when  one  who  was  near  him  whifper'd  a 
few  Words  in  his  Ear,  which  he  did  not 
well  underftand.  He  aik'd  his  Hoft,  ^*What 
did  that  Gentleman  mean  by  thefe  Words?" 
And  was  anfwer'd,  "  That  he  will  murder 
you.  And  an  Italian  is  never  worfc  than 
his  Word  in  this.  You  have  no  Way  but 
to  be  before-hand  with  him."  This  he  re- 
jefted  with  Abhorrence.  But  his  Holt,  it 
feems,  being  not  of  fo  tender  a  Confcicncc 
fent  a  Stranger  to  him  in  the  Morning,  who 
laid,  "  Sir,  look  out  of  your  Window.  I 
have  done  his  Bufmefs.  ..There  he  lies. 
isL-  D  You 


50  The  Doctrine  of 

You  will  pleafe  to  give  me  my  Pay."  He 
pull'd  out  an  Handful  of  Money,  in  great 
Diforder  and  cried,  "  There,  take  what  you 
will."  The  other  replied,  *'  Sir,  I  am  a 
Man  of  Honour  :  I  take  only  m.y  Pay :" 
Took  a  fmall  Piece  of  Silver,  and  retired. 

This  was  a  Man  of  Ho?20ur  among  the 
Chriftians  of  the  Romifi  Church !  And  ma- 
ny fuch  are  to  be  found  all  over  Italy ^  whofe 
Trade  it  is,  to  cut  Throats ;  to  ftab,  for 
Hire,  in  cool  Blood.  They  have  Men  of 
Confcience  too.  Such  were  two  of  the  Ca- 
tholick  Soldiers  under  the  famous  Duke  of 
Alva,  who  broke  into  the  Houfe  of  a  poor 
Countryman  in  Flanders,  butcher'd  him  and 
his  Wife  w^ith  five  or  fix  Children ;  and  af- 
ter they  had  finifh'd  their  Work,  fat  down, 
to  enioy  the  Fruit  of  their  Labour.  But  in 
the  Midft  of  their  Meal,  Confcience  awaked. 
One  of  them  ftarted  up  in  great  Emoti- 
on, and  cried  out,  '' O  Lord!  What  have  I 
done  ?  As  I  hope  for  Salvation  I  have  eaten 
Flefli  in  Lent  /" 

The  fame  Sort  of  Ccnfcience  undoubtedly 
it  was,  which  conftrained  the  late  moji  Chrif- 
tian  King,  in  Defiance  of  the  moft  folemn 
Treaties,  yea,  of  all  Ties,  divine  and  hu- 
man, moil:  gracioufly  to  murder  fo  many 
Thoufands  of  his  quiet,  unrefifting  Subjeds  : 
To  order  his  Dragoons,  wherever  they 
found  the  Proteftants  worfliipping  God,  to 

fall 


Original  Sin.  51 

fall  in  upon  them,  Sword  in  Hand,  with- 
out any  Regard  to  Sex  or  Age.  It  was 
Cojjjaence^  no  Queftion,  which  induced  lb 
many  oi  xi^c  Dukes  oi Sa^-jcy,  notwithilanding 
the  Publick  Faith  engaged  over  and  over, 
to  fhed  the  Blood  of  their  loyal  Subjedls,  the 
Vaudoisj  like  Water,  to  ravage  their  Fields 
and  deftroy  their  Cities.  What  but  Ccnfci- 
ence  could  move  the  good  Cath clicks  of  a 
neighbouring  Kingdom  in  the  lall  Century, 
to  murder  (according  to  their  own  Account) 
two  hundred  and  fifteen  thoufand  Proteftants 
in  fix  Months !  A  cofi:ly  Sacrifice  this! 
What  is  an  Hecatomb,  an  hundred  Oxen, 
to  two  hundred  thoufand  Men  ?  And  yet 
what  is  even  this  to  the  whole  Number  of 
Victims  who  have  been  ofFer'd  up  in  Europe 
fince  the  Beginning  of  the  Rcfcrmatic?!  ? 
Partly  by  War,  partly  by  the  Inquifition^  and 
a  thoufand  other  Methods  of  Romip  Cruel- 
ty ?  No  lefs  within  forty  years,  if  the  Com- 
putation of  an  eminent  Writer  be  juft,  than 
five  and  forty  Millions ! 

Such  is  the  Confcience,  fuch  the  Reli- 
gion of  a  Romijld  Chriftian  !  Of  their  luQuili- 
tion  (the  Houfe  of  Mercy  as  it  is  mod  unfor- 
tunately called)  I  ihouid  give  fome  Account, 
but  that  it  has  been  largely  defcribed  by  o- 
thers.  Yet  it  may  not  be  improper  to  give 
a  Specimen  of  that  Mercy  which  they  ihew 
to  thofe  under  their  Care,     At  the  AB  of 

D  2  Fciith, 


52  ne  Doctrine  of 

Faithy  fo  call'd,  which  was  celebrated  fome 
Years  ago,  when  Dr.  Geddes  was  in  Portugal^ 
a  Prifoner,  who  had  been  confin'd  nine 
Years,  was  brought  out  to  Execution.  Look- 
ing up  and  feeing  what  he  had  not  feen  for 
fo  long  a  Time,  the  Sun  in  the  Midft  of 
Heaven,  he  cried  out,  "  How  can  any  who 
fees  that  glorious  Creature  worfhip  any  but 
the  God  that  made  it  ?"  The  Father  who 
attended,  immediately  ordered  a  Gag  to  be 
run  thro'  his  Lip,  that  he  might  fpeak 
no  more. 

See  the  Chriftians,  who  have  received  all 
the  Advantages  of  Education,  all  the  Helps 
of  antient  and  modern  Learning!  "  Nay,  but 
we  have  ftill  greater  Helps  than  them :  We 
who  are  reform  d  from  the  Errors  of  Popery : 
We  who  proteji  againft  all  thofe  novel  Cor- 
ruptions, with  which  the  Church  of  Ro?ne 
has  polluted  antient  Chriftianity.  The  Enor- 
mities therefore  of  Popijh  Countries,  are  not 
to  be  charged  upon  us :  We  are  Protejiants^ 
and  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  Vices  and 
Villanies  of  Romijh  Nations." 

9.  Have  we  not?  Arc  Pr(?^5/?^;7/ Nations 
nothing  concerned  in  thofe  melancholly  Re- 
fled:ions  of  Mr.  Cowley.  "  If  twenty  thou^ 
fand  naked  Americans  were  not  able  to  reiift 
the  Affaults  of  but  twenty  well-arm'd  Spa- 
iiiards^  how  is  it  poffible  for  one  honeft 
Man  to  defend  himfelf  againft  twenty  thou* 

fand 


Original  Sin.  ^^ 

fand  Knaves,  who  are  all  furnifli'd  cap-.a-pe 
with  the  defenfive  Arms  of  worldly  Pru- 
dence, and  the  offenfive  too  of  Craft  and 
Malice?  He  will  find  no  lefs  Odds  than  this 
againfl:  him,  if  he  have  much  to  do  in  human 
Affairs.  Do  you  wonder  then  that  a  virtuous 
Man  fhould  love  to  be  alone?  It  is  hard  for 
him  to  be  otherwife.  He  is  fo  when  he  is 
among  ten  thoufand.  Nor  is  it  fo  uncomfor- 
table, to  be  alone  without  any  other  Creature, 
as  it  is  to  be  alone  in  the  midft  of  wild 
Beafts.  Man  is  to  Man  all  Kind  of  Beafts, 
.a  fawning  Dog,  a  roaring  Lion,  a  thieving 
Fox,  a  robbing  Wolf,  a  diffembling  Croco- 
dile, a  treacherous  Decoy,  and  a  rapacious 
Vulture.  The  civilleft,  methinks  of  all  Na- 
tions, are  thofe  whom  we  account  the  moll: 
barbarous.  There  is  fome  Moderation  and 
Good-nature  in  the  T^Giipinamhaltiam^  who 
eat  no  Men  but  their  Enemies :  While  we 
learned  and  polite  and  Chriilian  Europeans^ 
like  fo  many  Pikes  and  Sharps,  prey  upon 
every  Thing  that  we  can  fvvallow." 

Are  Frotejlant  Nations  nothing  concerned 
in  that  humourous,  but  terrible  Pidure 
drawn  by  a  late  eminent  Hand?  "  He  was 
perfedly  aftonifli'd  (and  who  would  not, 
if  it  were  the  firft  Time  he  had  heard  it?) 
at  the  Hiftorical  Account  I  gave  him  of  our 
Affairs,  during  the  laft  Ccntur>':  Protcfting 
it  was  only  an  Heap  of  Confpiracies,  Rebcl- 

P  %  hon$, 


54  ^h^  Doctrine  cf 

lioBS,  Murders,  Maflacres^  the  very  worft 
EfFeds  that  Avarice,  Fad:ion,  Hypocrify, 
Perfidioulncfs,  Cruelty,  Rage,  Madnefs, 
Hatred,  Envy,  Luft,  Malice  and  Ambition 
could  produce.— Even  in  Times  of  Peace, 
How  many  innocent  and  excellent  Perfons, 
have  been  condemn'd  to  Death  or  Banifh- 
ment,  by  great  Minifters  prad:ifmg  upon 
the  Corruption  of  Judges,  and  the  Malice  of 
Fadions?  How  many  Villains  have  been 
exalted  to  the  highcft  Places  of  Truft, 
Power,  Dignity  and  Profit?  By  what  Methods 
have  great  Numbers  in  all  Countries  pro- 
cured Titles  of  Honour  and  vaft  Eftates? 
Perjury,  Oppreffion,  Subornation,  Fraud, 
Pandarifm  were  fome  of  the  moft  excufable. 
For  many  owed  their  Greatnefs  to  Sodomy 
or  Inceft:  Others,  to  the  proftituting  of  their 
own  Wives  or  Daughters:  Others,  to  the 
betraying  of  their  Country,  or  their  Prince : 
More,  to  the  perverting  of  Juftice,  to  deftroy 
the  Innocent."  Well  might  that  keen  Author 
add,  '■  If  a  Creature  pretending  to  Reafon, 
can  be  guilty  of  fuch  Enormities,  certainly 
the  Corruption  of  that  Faculty,  is  far  worfe 
than  Brutality  itfelf " 

Nov/  are  P^/^//7j  Nations  only  concerned 
in  this?  Are  the  Frotejiant  quite  clear?  Is 
there  no  fuch  Thing  among  them  (to  take 
one  Inftance  only)  as  "  perverting  of  Juf- 
tice," even  in  publick  Courts  of  Judicature  ? 

Can 


Original  Sin.  jj 

Can  It  not  be  faid  in  any  Frotejlant  Country. 
*'  There  is  a  Society  of  Men  among  us,  bred 
up  from  their  Youth  in  the  Art  of  pro\'ing, 
according  as  they  are  paid,  by  Words  mul- 
tiphed  for  the  Purpofe,  That  white  is  black, 
and  black  is  white?  For  Example :  If  my 
Neighbour  has  a  Mind  to  my  Cow,  he  hires 
a  Lawyer  to  prove  that  he  ought  to  ha\'e 
my  Cow  from  me.  I  muft  hire  another,  to 
defend  my  Right,  it  being  againft  all  Rules 
of  Law,  that  a  Man  fliould  fpeak  for  him- 
felf.  In  pleading  they  do  not  dwell  on  the 
Merits  of  the  Caufe,  but  upon  Circumftanccs 
foreign  thereto.  For  Inftance  :  They  do  not 
take  the  fhorteft  Method  to  know,  what 
Title  my  Adverfary  has  to  my  Cow :  But 
w^hether  the  Cow  be  red  or  black,  her  Horns 
long  or  jfhort;  whether  the  Field  ilie  graze 
in  be  round  or  fquare,  and  the  like.  After 
which  they  adjourn  the  Caufe  from  Time  to 
Time,  and  in  ten  or  twenty  Years  Time, 
come  to  an  IlTue.  This  Society  llkewife  has 
a  peculiar  Cant  and  Jargon  of  their  own, 
in  w^hich  ail  their  Laws  are  WTitten.  And 
thefe  they  take  fpecial  Care  to  multiply: 
Whereby  they  have  fo  confounded  Truth 
and  Fahliood,  Right  and  Wrong,  that  it 
will  take  twelve  Years  to  decide.  Whether 
the  Field  left  me  by  my  Anceflors  for  fix 
Generations,  belong  to  me  or  to  one  three 
hundred  Miles  off." 

D  4  Is 


56  The  Doctrine  df 

Is  it  in  Popijh  Countries  only  that  it  can 
be  faid,  ''  It  does  not  appear  that  any  one 
Perfeftion  is  required  toward  the  Procure- 
ment of  any  one  Station  among  you:  Much 
lefs,  that  Men  are  ennobled  on  Account  of 
their  Virtue;  that  Priefls  are  advanced  for 
their  Piety  or  Learning,  Judges  for  their 
Integrity,  Senators  for  the  Love  of  their 
Country,  or  Counfellors  for  their  Wifdom." 

10.  But  there  is  a  flill  greater  and  more 
undeniable  Proof,  that  the  very  Foundations 
of  all  Things,  Civil  and  Religious,  are  ut- 
terly out  of  Courfe,  in  the  Chriftian  as  well 
as  the  Heathen  World.  There  is  a  ftill 
more  horrid  Reproach  to  the  Chriftian 
Name,  yea,  to  the  Name  of  Man,  to  all 
Reafon  and  Humanity.  There  is  War 
in  the  V/orld!  War  between  Men!  War 
between  Chriftians  !  I  mean  between  thofe 
that  bear  the  Name  of  Chriji^  and  profefs  to 
walk  as  He  aljh  walked.  Now  who  can  re- 
concile War,  I  will  not  fay  to  Religion, 
but  to  any  Degree  of  Reafon  or  common 
Senfe  ? 

But  is  there  not  a  Caufe  ?  O  yes,  "  The 
Caufcs  of  War  (as  the  fame  Writer  obferves) 
are  innumerable.  Some  of  the  chief  are 
thefe:  The  Ambition  of  Princes;  or  the 
Corruption  of  their  Minifters.  Difference 
of  Opinion  ;  as  whether  Flejfh  be  Breads  or 
Bread  be  Flejh  'i  Whether  the  Juice  of  the 
>4  dijo  Grape 


Original  Sin.  p^ 

Grape  be  Blood  ov  JVi?ie?  What  Is  the  befl 
Colour  for  a  Coat,  whether  black,  white  or 
grey;  and  v/hether  it  fliould  be  long  or 
fliort?  Whether  narrow  or  wide  ?  Nor  are 
there  any  Wars  fo  furious,  as  thofe  occafion'd 
by  fuch  DiiFerence  of  Opinions. 

"  Sometimes  two  Princes  make  War, 
to  decide  which  of  them  fhall  difpoflefs  a 
Third  of  his  Dominions.  Sometimes  a  V/ar 
is  commenced,  becaufe  another  Prince  is  roo 
ftrong;  fometimes  becaufe  he  is  too  weak. 
Sometimes  our  Neighbours  want  the  Thines 
which  we  have,  or  have  the  Things  which 
we  want.  So  wc  both  fight,  untill  they  tpke 
Ours,  or  we^  take  Theirs.  It  is  a  Reafon  for 
invading  a  Country,  if  the  People  have  been, 
wafted  by  Famine,  deftroy'd  by  Peftilence, 
or  embroil'd  by  Fadlion :  Or  to  attack  our 
neareft  Ally,  if  Part  of  his  Land  would  make 
our  Dominions  more  round  and  compa(ft. 

"  Another  Caufe  of  making  War  is 
this.  A  Crew  are  driven  by  a  Storm  they 
know  not  where;  at  length  they  make  Land 
and  go  afhore  :  They  are  enteitain'd  with 
Kindnefs.  They  give  the  Country  a  new 
Name  ;  fet  up  a  Stone  or  rotten  Plank  for  a 
Memorial ;  murder  a  Dozen  of  the  Natives, 
and  bring  away  a  Couple  by  Force.  ITcrc 
com.mences  z.w^^  Right  of  Dominion  -,  Ships 
are  fent,  and  the  Natives  driven  out  or  de- 
ftroy'd. And  this  is  done  to  civilize  and 
convert  a  barbarous  and  idolatrous  People." 


58  The  Doctrine  of 

But  whatever  be  the  Caufe,  let  us  calm- 
ly and  impartially  confider  the  Thing  itfelf. 
Here  are  forty  thoufand  Men  gathered  to- 
gether on  this  Plain.  What  are  they  going 
to  do?  See,  there  are  thirty  or  forty  thoufand 
more  at  a  little  Diftance.  And  thefe  are  go- 
ing to  (lioot  them  thro'  the  Head  or  Body, 
to  ftab  them,  or  fplit  their  Sculls,  and  fend 
moft  of  their  Souls  into  everlafting  Fire,  as 
faft  as  poffibly  they  can.  Why  fo  ?  What 
Harm  have  they  done  to  them  ?  O  none  at 
all.  They  do  not  as  much  as  know  them. 
But  a  Man,  who  is  King  oi  France^  has  a 
Qiiarrel  with  another  Man,  who  is  King  of 
England,  So  thefe  Frenchmen  are  to  kill  as 
many  of  thofe  EngUJJ:}me7t  as  they  can,  to 
prove  the  King  of  Fra?ice  is  in  the  right. 
Now  what  an  Argument  is  this  ?  What  a 
Method  of  Proof?  What  an  amazing  Way 
of  deciding  Controverfies  ?  What  mufl  Man- 
kind be,  before  fuch  a  Thing  as  War  could 
ever  be  known,  or  thought  of  upon  Earth  ? 
How  iliocking,  how  inconceivable  a  Want 
muft  there  have  been  of  common  Under- 
ftanding,  as  well  as  common  Humanity, 
before  any  two  Governors  or  any  two  Na- ' 
tions  in  the  Univerfe,  could  once  think  of 
fuch  a  Method  of  Decifion  ?  If  then  all 
Nations,  Pagan,  Mahometan  and  Chriftian, 
do  in  Fad:  make  this  their  laft  Refort. 
What  farther  Proof  do  v/e  need  of  the  utter 

Degeneracy 


Original  Sin.  *g 

Degeneracy  of  all  Nations,  from  the  plain- 
eft  Principles  of  Reafon  and  Virtue?  Of  the 
abfolute  Want  both  of  common  Senfe  and 
common  Humanity,  which  runs  thro*  the 
whole  Race  of  Mankind  ? 

In  how  juft  and  ftrong  a  Light  is  this 
placed  by  the  Writer  cited  before  ?  "  I  gave 
him  aDefcription  of  Cannons,  Mulkets,  Pif- 
tols,  Swords,  Bayonets :  Of  Seiges,  Attacks, 
Mines,  Countermines,  Bombardments;  Of 
Engagements  by  Sea  and  Land  :  Ships  funk 
with  a  thoufand  Men,  twenty  thoufand  kil- 
led on  each  Side,  dying  Groans,  Limbs  fly- 
ing in  the  Air :  Smoke,  Noife,  tramphng  to 
Death  under  Horfes  Feet,  Flight,  Puriiiit, 
Vidiory  :  Fields  ftrew'd  with  Carcafes  left 
for  Food  to  Dogs  and  Beafts  of  Prey :  And 
farther,  of  plundering  ftripping,  ravlfliing, 
burning  and  deftroying.  I  alllu-ed  him,  I  had 
fecn  an  hundred  Enemies  blown  up  at  once 
in  a  Seige,  and  as  many  in  a  Ship,  and  be- 
held the  dead  Bodies  drop  down  in  Pieces 
from  the  Clouds  to  the  great  Diverfion  of  tlie 
Spedlators." 

Is  it  not  aftonliliing,  beyond  allExpreffion, 
that  this  is  the  naked  Truth.  That  within  a 
fliort  Term  of  Years,  this  has  been  the  real 
Cafe,  in  almoft  every  Part  of  even  the  Chril- 
tian  V/orld  ?  And  mean  while  we  gravely 
talk  of  the  "  Dignity  of  our  Nature,"  in  its 
prefent  State  !  This  is  really  furprizing,   and 

ini^ht 


6o  The  Doctrine  of 

might  eafily  drive  even  a  v/ell-temper'd  Man 
to  fay,  "  One  might  bear  with  Men,  if  they 
would  be  content  with  thofe  Vices  and  Fol- 
lies to  which  Nature  has  entitled  them.  I 
am  not  provoked  at  the  Sight  of  a  Pick- 
pocket, a  Gamefter,  a  Politician,  a  Suborner, 
a  Traitor,  or  the  like.  This  is  all  according 
to  the  natural  Courfe  of  Things.  But  when 
I  behold  a  Lump  of  Deformity  and  Difeafes 
both  in  Body  and  Mind  fmitten  with  Pride, 
it  breaks  all  the  Meafures  of  my  Patience. 
Neither  fliall  I  ever  be  able  to  comprehend, 
how  fueh  an  Animal  and  fuch  a  Vice  can 
tally  together." 

And  furely  all  our  Declamations  on  the 
Strength  of  human  Reafon,  and  the  Emi- 
nence of  our  Virtues,  are  no  more  than  the 
Cant  and  Jargon  of  Pride  and  Ignorance,  fo 
long  as  there  is  fuch  a  Thing  as  War  in  the 
World.  Men  in  general  can  never  be  al- 
lowed to  be  fp^fonable  Creatures,  'till  they 
know  ndt-¥/ar  ?  "^re.  So  long  as  this 
Monfter  ftalks  un^^.-.  -"d,  Where  is  Rea- 
fon, Virtue,  Humanity?  'Ihey  are  utterly  ex- 
cluded ;  they  have  no  Place ;  they  are  a 
Name,  and  nothing  more.  If  even  an 
Heathen  were  to  give  an  Account  of  an 
Age,  wherein  Reafon  and  Virtue  reigned, 
he  would  allow  no  War  to  have  Place  there- 
in.    So  Or:id  of  the  Golden  Age. 

Nondum 


Original  Sin.  6i 

Nondiim  prc^cipites  civgebant  Qppidafoffce: 

Non  galece^  non  enjis  erat.  Sine  militis  iifu 

Molliafecurce  peragebant  ctiagentes. 

Steep  Ditches  did  not  then  the  Towns 
furround, 

Nor  glitt  ring  Helm,  nor  flaught'ring  Sword 
was  found. 

Nor  Arms  had  they  to  wield,  nor  Wars 
to  wage, 

But  Peace  and  Safety  crown'd  the  bhfsful 
Age. 

II.  How  far  is  the  World  at  prefent 
from  this  State  ?  Yet  when  we  fpeak  of  die 
Folly  and  Wickednefs  of  Mankind,  may  we 
not  except  our  own  Country,  Great-Britain 
and  Ireland?  In  thefe  we  have  fuch  Advan- 
tages, for  Improvement  both  in  Knowledge 
and  Virtue,  as  fcarce  any  other  Nation  en-»- 
joys.  We  are  under  an  excellent  Conflitu- 
tion,  which  fecures  both  our  religious  and 
eivil  Liberty.  We  have  ReHgion  taught  in 
its  primitive  Purity,  its  genuine,  native  Sim- 
plicity. And  how  it  profpers  among  us,  wc 
may  know  with  great  Eafe  and  Certainty. 
For  we  depend  not  on  Hearfay,  on  the  Re- 
>  port  of  others,  or  on  fubtle  and  uncertain 
Reafonings,  but  may  fee  every  Thing  with 
our  own  Eyes,  and  hear  it  with  our  own  Ears. 
Well  tjien,  to  make  all  the  Allowance  pofli- 
ble,  we  will  fuppofe  Mankind  in  general, 
to  be  on  a  Level,  with  Regard  to  Knowledge 

and 


6t  The  Doctrine  of 

and  Virtue,  even  with  the  Inhabitants  of  our 
fortunate  lilancis :  And  take  our  Meafure  of 
Them,  from  the  prefent  undeniable  State  of 
our  own  Countrymen. 

In  order  to  take  a  thorough  Survey  of 
thefe,  let  us  begin  with  the  lowefl,  and  pro- 
ceed upward.  The  Bulk  of  the  Natives  of 
Ireland  are  to  be  found  in  or  near  theii  little 
Cabins  throughout  the  Kingdom,  moft  of 
which  are  their  own  Workmanfhip,  confift- 
ing  of  four  earthen  Walls,  cover'd  with  Straw 
or  Sods,  with  one  Opening  in  the  Side-wall, 
which  ferves  at  once  for  Door,  Window  and 
Chimney.  Here  in  one  Room  are  the  Cow 
and  Pig,  the  Woman  with  her  Children, 
and  the  Mafter  of  the  Family.  Now  what 
Knowledge  have  thefe  rational  Animals  ? 
They  know  to  plant  and  boil  their  Potatoes, 
to  milk  their  Cow,  and  to  put  their  Cloaths 
on  and  off,  if  they  have  any  befides  a  Blan- 
ket. But  other  Knowledge  they  have  none, 
unlefs  in  Religion.  And  how  much  do  they 
know  of  this  ?  A  little  more  than  the  Hotten- 
tots^ and  not  much.  They  know  the  Names 
of  God  and  Chrijl  and  the  Virgin  Mary, 
They  know  d  little  of  St.  Patrick^  the  Pope 
and  the  Prieft :  How  to  tell  their  Beads,  to 
fay  ^^v  Maria  and  Pater-nojier :  To  do  what 
Penance  they  are  bid,  to  hear  Mafs,  confefs, 
and  pay  fo  vcmchfor  the  Pardon  of  their  Sins, 
But  as  to  the  Nature  of  Religion,  the  Life  of 

God 


Original  Sin."  6-, 

God  in  the  Soul,  they  know  no  more  (I  will 
not  fay  than  the  Prieft,  but)  than  the  lieafts 
of  the  Field. 

And  how  very  little  above  thefe  are  the 
numerous  Inhabitants  of  the  northern  Parts 
of  Scotland^  or  of  the  lilands  which  lie  either 
on  the  Weft,  or  the  North  Side  of  that  King- 
dom? What  Knowledge  have  thefe?  And 
what  Religion  ?  Their  Religion  ufually  lies 
in  a  iingle  Point,  in  implicitly  believing  the 
Head  of  their  Clan,  and  implicitly  doino- 
what  he  bids.  Meantime  they  are,  one  and 
all,  as  ignorant  of  rational,  fcriptural  Reli- 
gion as  of  Algebra  :  And  altogether  as  far 
from  the  Practice,  as  from  the  Theory  of  it. 

"  But  it  is  not  fo  in  England,  The  very 
loweft  of  the  People  are  here  better  inftrudt- 
ed."  I  fhould  be  right  glad  to  find  it  fo  : 
But  I  doubt  a  fair  Trial  will  ihew  the  con- 
trary. I  am  afraid  we  may  ftill  fay,  of  thou- 
fands,  myriads  of  Peafants,  Men,  Women, 
and  Children  throughout  our  Nation 
"  Wild  as  the  untaught  /W/V?;/s;Brood, 

The  Chriftian  Savages  remain ; 
Strangers,  yea.  Enemies  to  G  o  d. 

They  make  Thee  fpend  thy  Blood  in  vain." 
The  Generality  of  Englifi  Peafants  are  not 
only  groily,  ftupidly,  I  had  almoft  faid,  bru- 
tifhly  ignorant,  as  to  all  the  Arts  of  this  Life, 
but  eminently  fo,  with  Regard  to  Religion 
and  the  Life  to  come.     Afk  a  Countryman, 

What 


64  ^he  Doctrine  of 

What  is  Faith?  What  is  Repentance?  What 
is  Hohnefs  ?  What  is  true  Rehgion  ?  And 
he  is  no  more  able  to  give  you  an  inteUigi- 
ble  Anfwer,  than  if  you  were  to  aik  him 
about  the  North-Eaft  Paffage.  Is  there  then 
any  Poffibihty  that  they  fliould  pradlice, 
what  they  know  nothing  of  ?  If  Rehgion  is 
not  even  in  their  Heads,  can  it  be  in  theif 
Hearts  or  Lives  ?  It  cannot.  Nor  is  there 
the  leaft  Savour  thereof,  either  in  their  Tem- 
pers or  Converfation.  Neither  in  the  one 
nor  the  other  do  they  rife  one  Jot  above  the 
Pitch  of  a  Turk  or  an  Heathen. 

Perhaps  it  will  be  faid,  "  Whatever  the 
Clowns  in  the  Midland  Counties  are,  the 
People  near  the  Sea-Coafts  are  more  civi- 
lized." Yes,  great  Numbers  of  them  are, 
in  and  near  all  our  Ports  :  Many  thoufands 
there  are  civilized  by  Smuggling,  The  Num- 
bers concerned  herein  upon  all  our  Coafts, 
are  far  greater  than  can  be  imagined.  But 
what  Reafon,  and  w^hat  Religion  have  thefe 
that  trample  on  all  Laws,  divine  and  human, 
by  a  Courfe  of  thieving,  or  receiving  ftolen 
Goods,  of  plundering  their  King  and  Coun- 
try ?  I  fay.  King  and  Country :  Seeing 
whatever  is  taken  from  the  King,  is  in  Ef- 
fefl:  taken  from  the  Country,  who  are  o- 
bliged  to  make  up  all  Deficiencies  in  the 
Royal  Revenue.  Thefe  are  therefore  gene- 
ral Robbers.     They  rob  you  and  me,  and 

every 


Original  Sin.  65 

every  one  of  their  Countrymen  :  Seeing  had 
the  King  his  due  Cuftoms  a  great  Part  of  our 
Taxes  might  be  fpared.  A  Sjmigglcr  (and 
in  Proportion,  every  Seller  or  Buyer,  of  un- 
accuftom'd  Goods)  is  a  Thief  of  the  firfl 
Order,  a  Highwayman  or  Pickpocket  of 
the  worft  Sort.  Let  not  any  of  thofe  prate 
about  Reafon  or  Relip-ion.       It  is  an  amaz- 

O 

ing  Inftance  of  human  Folly,  that  every 
Government  in  Europe  does  not  drive  thefe 
Vermin  away  into  Lands  not  inhabited. 

We  are  all  indebted  to  thofe  Detachments 
of  the  Army,  which  have  cleared  fome  of 
our  Coafls  of  thefe  publick  Nufances.  And 
indeed  many  of  that  Body  have  in  feveral 
Refpedls,  deferved  well  of  their  Country. 
Yet  can  we  fay  of  the  Soldiery  in  general, 
That  they  are  Men  of  Reafon  and  Religion  ? 
I  fear  not.  Are  not  the  Bulk  of  them  void 
of  almoft  all  Knowledge,  divine  and  hu- 
man ?  And  is  their  Virtue  more  eminent 
than  their  Knowledge  ?  But  I  fparc  them. 
May  God  be  merciful  to  them !  May  He 
be  glorified  by  their  Reformation,  rather 
than  their  Deft:ru6lion  ! 

Is  there  any  more  Knowledge  or  Virtue 
in  that  vaft  Body  of  Men  (fome  hundred 
thoufands)  the  Englifli  Sailors  ?  Surely  no. 
It  is  not  without  Caufe,  that  a  Ship  has  been 
called  "  a  floating  Hell."  What  Power, 
what  Form  of  Religion  is  to  be  found,  in 

E  nine 


66  T'he  Doctrine  of 

nine  out  of  ten,  fliall  I  fay  ?  Or  ninety- 
nine  out  of  an  hundred,  either  of  our  Mer- 
chantmen or  Men  of  War  ?  What  do  the 
Men  in  them  think  or  know  about  Rehgion  ? 
What  do  they  praftice  ?  Either  Sailors  or 
Marines  ?  I  doubt  whether  any  Heathen 
Sailors,  in  any  Country  or  Age,  Greeks  Ro- 
man  or  Barbarian^  ever  came  up  to  ours,  for 
profound  Ignorance  and  bare-faced,  ihame- 
lefs,  fhocking  Impiety.  Add  to  thefe,  out 
of  our  renown'd  Metropolis,  the  whole 
Brood  of  Porters,  Draymen,  Carmen,  Hack- 
ney-Coachmen, and  I  am  forry  to  fay.  No- 
blemen and  Gentlemen's  Footmen  (together 
making  up  feme  thoufands)  and  you  will 
have  luch  a  Colleftion  of  knowing  and  piom 
Chriflians,  as  all  Europe  cannot  exceed. 

"  But  all  Men  are  not  like  thefe."  No, 
'tis  Pity  they  iliould.  And  yet  how  little  bet- 
ter are  the  Retailers  of  Brandy  or  Gin,  the 
Inhabitants  of  blind  Ale-houfes,  the  Oyfter- 
women,  Fifli- wives,  and  other  good  Crea- 
tures about  Billi?igfgate^  and  the  various 
Clans  of  Pedlers  and  Hawkers,  that  patrol 
thro'  the  Streets,  or  ply  in  Rag-fair^  and 
other  Places  of  publick  Refort.  Thefe  like- 
wife  amount  to  feveral  thoufands,  even  with- 
in the  Bills  of  Mortality.  And  what  Know- 
ledge have  they  ?  What  Religion  are  they 
of?  What  Morality  do  they  pradice  ? 


cc 


But, 


Original  Sin.  67 

"  But  thefe  have  had  no  Advantage  of 
Education,  many  of  them  fcarcc  bcino^able 
to  write  or  read."  Proceed  we  then  to  thofe 
who  have  had  thefe  Advantages,  the  Officers 
of  the  Excife  and  Ciijlo}ns,  Are  thefe  in 
general  Men  of  Reaibn  ?  Who  think  with 
Clearnefs  and  Connexion,  and  fpeak  perti- 
nently on  a  given  Subjedl?  Are  they  Men 
of  Religion  ?  Sober,  temperate  ?  Fearin^"^ 
God  and  v/orking  Righteoufnefs  ?  Having 
a  Confcience  void  of  Offence,  toward  God 
and  toward  Man  ?  How  many  do  you  find 
of  this  Kind  among  them ;  Men  that  fear 
an  Oath;  that  fear  Peijury  more  than  Death? 
That  would  die  rather  than  negledl  any 
Part  of  that  Duty,  which  they  have  fworn 
to  perform  ?  That  would  fooner  be  torn  in 
Pieces,  than  fufter  any  Man,  under  any 
Pfetence,  to  defraud  his  Majefty  of  his  juft 
Right  ?  How  many  of  them  will  not  be  de- 
terred from  doing  their  Duty,  either  by  Fear 
or  Favour  ?  Regard  no  Threatnings  in  the 
Execution  of  their  Office,  and  accept  no 
Bribes,  called  Prefcnts  ?  Thefe  only  are 
wife  and  honefl  Men.  Set  down  all  the 
refl,  as  having  neither  Religion  nor  found 
Reafon. 

"  But  furely  T^radcfmcn  have."  Some  oi 
them  have  both  :  And  in  an  eminent  De- 
gree. Some  of  our  Traders  are  an  Honour 
to  the  Nation.     But  are  the  Bulk  of  them 

E  2  fo? 


68  ^he  Doctrine  o/" 

fo  ?  Arc  a  vaft  Majority  of  our  Tradefmen, 
whether  in  Town  or  Country,  I  will  not 
fay,  religious,  but  honeft  Men  ?  Who  fhall 
judge  whether  they  are  or  no  ?  Perhaps  you 
think  St.  Paul  is  too  ftridl.  Let  us  appeal 
then  to  Cicero^  an  honeft  Heathen.  Now 
v/hen  he  is  laying  down  Rules  of  Honefly 
between  Man  and  Man,  he  propofes  two 
Cafes. 

1.  Antisthenes  brings  a  Ship-load  of 
Corn  to  Rhodes^  at  a  Time  of  great  Scarcity. 
The  Rhodians  flock  about  him  to  buy.  He 
knows  that  five  other  Ships  laden  with  Corn, 
will  be  there  To-morrow.  Ought  he  to  tell 
the  Rhodians  this,  before  he  fells  his  own 
Corn  ?  Undoubtedly  he  ought,  fays  the 
Heathen.  Otherwife  he  makes  a  Gain  of 
their  Ignorance,  and  fo  is  no  better  than  a 
Thief  or  a  Robber. 

2.  A  Roman  Nobleman  comes  to  a  Gen- 
tleman to  buy  his  Houfe,  who  tells  him, 
"  There  is  another  going  to  be  built  near 
it,  which  will  darken  the  Windows,"  and 
on  that  Account  makes  a  Dedudlion  in  the 
Price.  Some  Years  after,  the  Gentleman 
buys  it  of  him  again.  Afterward  he  fues 
the  Nobleman,  for  felling  it  without  telling 
him  firft,  That  Houfes  were  built  near, 
which  darkened  the  Windows.  The  No- 
bleman pleads,  "  I  thought  he  knew  it.'* 
The  Judge  afks,  did  you  tell  him  or  not  ? 

And 


Original  Sin.  69 

And  on  his  owning,  he  did  not,  determines, 
"  this  is  contrary  to  the  Law,  Ne  quid  dolo 
malofiaf  (let  nothing  be  done  fraudulently) 
and  fentences  him  immediately  to  pay  back 
Part  of  the  Price. 

Now,  how  many  of  our  Tradej7nen  come 
up  to  the  Heathen  Standard  of  Honefly  ? 
Who  is  clear  of  Dolus  malus?  Such  Fraud 
as  the  Roman  Judge  would  immediately 
have  condemned  ?  Which  of  our  Country- 
men would  not  have  fold  his  Corn  or  other 
Wares,  at  the  higheft  Price  he  could  ?  Who 
would  have  funk  his  own  Market,  by  tel- 
ling his  Cuftomers,  there  would  be  Plenty 
the  next  Day  ?  Perhaps  fcarce  one  in  twen- 
ty. That  One  the  Heathen  would  have  al- 
lowed to  be  an  honeft  Man.  And  eveiy 
one  of  the  reft,  according  to  his  Sentence, 
is  "  no  better  than  a  Thief  or  a  Robber." 

I  MUST  acknowledge,  I  once  believed  the 
Body  of  Englifh  Merchants  to  be  Men  of 
the  ftrid:eft  Honefty  and  Honour.  But  I 
have  lately  had  more  Experience.  Wlio- 
ever  wrongs  the  Widow  and  Fatherlels, 
knows  not  what  Honour  or  Honefty  means. 
And  how  veiy  few  are  there  that  will  Icruple 
this  ?  I  could  relate  many  flagrant  [nftaiices. 

But  let  one  fuiiice.  A  Merchant  dies 
in  the  full  Courfe  of  a  very  exten five  Eufi- 
nefs.  y\nother  agrees  with  his  Widow,  Ihat 
provided  (lie  will  recommend  him  to  her 


70  'The  Doctrine  of 

late  Hulband's  Correfpondents,  he  will  al- 
low her  Yearly  fuch  a  Proportion  of  the  Pro- 
fits of  the  Trade.  She  does  fo,  and  Articles 
are  drawn,  which  fhe  lodges  with  an  emi- 
nent Man.  This  eminent  Man  pofitive- 
ly  refufes  to  give  them  b^ck  to  her;  but 
gives  them  to  the  other  Merchant,  and 
Jo  leaves  her  entirely  at  his  Mercy.  The 
Confequence  is,  the  other  fays,  There  is  no 
Profit  at  all.  So  he  does  not  give  her  a 
Groat.  Now  where  is  the  Honefty  or  Ho- 
nour, either  of  him  who  made  the  Agree- 
ment, or  him  who  gave  back  the  Articles 
to  him  ? 

That  there  is  Honour,  nay  and  Honefty 
to  be  found  in  another  Body  of  Men,  a- 
mong  the  Gentlemen  of  the  Law,  I  firmly 
believe,  vjhtthtv Attorneys,  Sollicitors  or  Coun- 
feliors.  But  are  they  not  thinly  fpread  ?  Do 
the  Generality  of  Attorneys  and  Sollicitors 
in  Chancery,  love  their  Neighbour  as  them- 
felves  ?  And  do  to  others,  what  (if  the  Cir- 
cumftance  were  changed)  they  would  have 
others  do  to  them  ?  Do  the  Generality 
of  Coimfellors  walk  by  this  Rule  ?  And  by 
the  Rules  of  Juftice,  Mercy  and  Truth  ? 
Do  they  ufe  their  utmoft  Endeavours,  do 
they  take  all  the  Care  which  the  Nature  of 
the  Thing  will  allow,  to  be  afiliired  that  a 
Caufe  is  juft  and  good,  before  they  under- 
take to  defend  it?  Do  they  never  knowingly 

defend 


Original  Sin.  71 

defend  a  bad  Caufe,  and  fo  make  themfelves 
Accomplices  in  Wrong  and  Oppreflion  ? 
Do  they  never  deliver  die  Poor  into  the  Hand 
of  his  Oppreflbr,  and  fee  that  fuch  as  are  in 
Neceffity  have  not  Right  ?  Are  they  not  often 
the  Means  of  with-holding  Bread  from  the 
Hungry,  and  Raiment  from  the  Naked  ? 
Even  when  it  is  their  own,  when  they  have 
a  clear  Right  thereto,  by  the  Law  both  of 
God  and  Man  ?  Is  not  this  cffed:ually  done 
in  many  Cafes,  by  protracting  the  Suit  from 
Year  to  Year  ?  I  have  known  a  friendly  Bill 
preferred  in  Chancery,  by  the  Confent  of  all 
Parties :  The  Manager  affuring  them,  a 
Decree  would  be  procured,  in  two  or  three 
Months.  But  altho'  feveral  Years  are  now 
elapfed,  they  can  fee  no  Land  yet.  Nor  do 
I  know,  that  we  arc  a  Jot  nearer  the  Con- 
clufion  than  we  were  the  firfl:  Day.  Now 
where  is  the  Honcfty  of  this  ?  Is  it  not  pick- 
ing of  Pockets,  and  no  better  ?  A  Lawyer 
who  does  not  finiih  his  Client's  Suit,  as  foon 
as  it  can  be  done,  I  cannot  allow  to  have 
more  Honefty  (tho'  he  has  more  Prudence) 
than  if  he  robb'd  him  on  the  Highway. 

"  But  whether  Lawyers  are  or  no,  fure 
the  Nobility  and  Gentry  are  all  Men  of  Rca- 
fon  and  Religion."  If  you  think  they  J^re 
all  Men  of  Religion,  you  think  very  differ- 
ently from  your  Mafter :  Who  made  no 
Exception  of  Time  or  Nation,  when  he  ut- 

E  4  t^^'^ 


72  Tthe  Doctrine  of 

ter'd  that  weighty  Sentence,  How  difficultly 
Jhall  they  that  have  Riches  enter  into  the  King- 
dojn  of  Heaven  !  And  when  fomc  who  fecm 
to  have  been  of  your  Judgment,  were  greatly 
aftonifh'd  at  his  Saying :  Inftead  of  retract- 
ing or  foftning,  he  adds,  Verily  I  fay  unto 
yoUy  it  is  eafer  for  a  Camel  to  go  thro  the  Rye 
of  a  Needle^  than  for  a  rich  Man  to  enter  into 
the  Ki?igdom  of  God,  You  think  differently 
from  St.  Paul,  who  declares,  in  thofe  re- 
markable Words,  verified  in  all  Ages,  Not 
many  rich  Men,  not  many  Noble  are  called: 
And  obey  the  heavenly  Calling.  So  many 
Snares  furrcund  them,  that  it  is  the  greateft 
of  all  Miracles,  if  any  of  them  have  any 
R,eligion  at  all.  And  if  you  think  they  are 
all  Men  of  found  Reafon,  you  do  not  judge 
by  Fad:  and  Experience.  Much  Money  does 
not  imply  much  Senfe;  neither  does  a  good 
Efcate  infer  a  good  Underftanding.  As  a 
,gay  Coat  may  cover  a  bad  Heart,  fo  a  fair 
Peruke  may  adorn  a  weak  Head.  Nay  a 
critical  Judge  of  human  Nature,  avers  tliat 
this  is  generally  the  Cafe.  He  lays  it  down 
as  a  Rule 

Senfus  cojmnimis  in  ilia 
Fortimd  rams 
"  Common  Senfe  is  rarely  found  in  Men  of 
Fortune."  ''  A  rich  Man,  fays  he,  has  LI- 
JDcrt^v  to  be  a  Fool.  His  Fortune  will  bear 
him  out."     Stukitiam  fatiimtur  opes  :    But 

"fibi 


Original  Sin.  73 

Tibi  parvida  res  eft,  "  You  have  little  Mo- 
ney, and  therefore  fliould  have  common 
Senfe." 

I  v^ouLD  not  willingly  fay  any  Thing  con- 
cerning thofe  v^hom  the  Providence  of  God 
has  alotted  for  Guides  to  others.  There  arc 
many  Thoufands  of  thefe  in  the  eftablifh'd 
Church :  Many,  among  DifTenters  of  all 
Denominations.  We  may  add,  fome  Thou- 
fands of  RoniJIj  Priefts,  fcattercd  thro'  Eng- 
land., and  fw^arming  in  hcJi-nd.  Of  thcfe 
therefore  I  would  only  allv,  '"  Kvt  they  all 
moved  by  the  Holy  Gholl,  to  take  upon  them 
that  Office  and  Miniftry"?  If  not,  they  do 
not  enter  by  the  Door  into  the  Shccp-foJd ;  they 
are  not  fent  of  God,  Is  their  Eye  Jingle  ?  Is 
it  their  fole  Intention  in  all  theirMiniflf  ations, 
to  glorify  God  .and  to  fave  Souls  ?  Odierw  ifc, 
the  Light  which  is  in  them  is  Darhicfs.  And 
if  it  be,  how  great  is  that  Darhnefs  ?  Is  their 
Heart  right  with  God  r  Are  their  Jffe&icns 
Jet  on  T^hings  above  ^  not  on  Things  of  the  Earth? 
Elfe  how  will  they  thcmfclves  go  one  Step 
in  the  Way,  wherein  they  are  to  guide  others? 
Once  more  ;  Are  they  holy  in  all  Manner  of 
CoJiverfation,  as  He  who  hath  called  them  is 
holy?  If  not,  with  what  Face  can  they  fay  to 
the  Flock,  Be  ye  Followers  of  mc,  as  lam  of 

Chrift  ? 

12.  We  have  new  taken  a  curfor\^  View 
of  the  prefent  State  of  Mankind  in  all  Parts^ 

of 


74  ^^^  Doctrine^ 

of  the  habitable  World,  and  ictn  in  a  general 
Way,  what  is  their  real  Condition,  both  with 
Regard  to  Knowledge  and  Virtue.  But  be- 
came this  is  not  fo  pleaiing  a  Pidlure,  as  hu- 
man Pride  is  accuftom'd  to  draw^  and  becaufe 
thole  who  are  prepoffeft  with  high  Notions 
of  their  own  Beauty,  will  not  eafily  believe, 
That  it  is  taken  from  the  Life :  1  fhall  en- 
deavour to  place  it  in  another  View,  that  it 
may  be  certainly  known,  w^hether  it.rcfem- 
i^les  the  Original.  I  fhall  defire  every  one 
who  is  w^illing  to  know  Mankind,  to  begin 
his  Enquiry  at  home.  Firft,  let  him  furvey 
himfelf ;  and  then  go  on,  Step  by  Step,  a- 
mong  his  Neighbours. 

I  ASK  then,  firft.  Are  you  throughly 
pleafed  wdth  )w/r/t7/"?  Say  you,  Who  is  not? 
Nay,  I  fay,  Vv^ho  is  ?  Do  you  obferve  no- 
thing in  yourfelf  which  you  diflike  ?  Which 
you  cannot  cordially  approve  of?  Do  you 
never  think  too  well  of  yourfelf?  Think 
yourfelf  wifer,  better  and  ftronger,  than  you 
appear  to  be  upon  the  Proof?  Is  not  this 
Pride?  And  do  you  approve  of  Pride  ?— Was 
you  never  angry  without  a  Caufc  ?  Or  farther 
then  that  Caufe  required?  Are  you  not  apt 
to  be  fo  ?  Do  you  approve  of  this  ?  Do  not 
you  frequently  refolve  againft  it  ?  And  do 
not  you  break  thofe  Refolutions  again  and 
again  ?  Can  you  help  breaking  them  ?  If  fo, 
Vv^hy  do  you  not  ? — Are  not  you  prone  to 


Original  Sin.  yr 

tinreafo?iahle  Dejires^  either  of  Pleafure,  Praile 
or  Money  r  Do  not  you  catch  yourlelf  defir- 
ing  Things  not  worth  a  Defire :  And  other 
Things  more  than  they  delerve  ?  Are  all  your 
Defires  proportion'd  to  the  real,  intrinfrc 
Value  of  Things  ?  Do  not  you  know  and  feel 
the  contrary  ?  Are  not  you  continually  liable 
to  foolifid  and  hurtful  t>efires  ?  And  do  not 
you  frequently  relapfe  into  them,  knowing 
them  to  be  fuch  :  Knowinc:  that  thev  have 
htioiit  pierced  you  through  unth  many  Sor?'ows  ? 
Have  you  not  often  refolved  again  ft  thefe  De- 
fires?  And  as  often  broke  your  Refolutions  ? 
Can  you  help  breaking  them  ?  Do  fo  :  Help 
it  if  you  can  :  And  if  not,  own  your  Help- 
leffnefs. 

Are  you  throughly  pleafed  with  your 
own  Life  ?  Nihibte  vides  quod  nolis  ?  Do  you 
obferve  nothing  there  which  you  diflikc  r  1 
prefume  you  are  not  too  fevere  a  Judge  here. 
Neverthelefs  I  afk,  Are  you  quite  fatisfied, 
from  Day  to  Day,  with  all  you  fay  or  do  ? 
Do  you  fay  nothing,  which  you  afterward 
w^ifh  you  had  not  faid  ?  Do  nothing,  which 
you  wiih  you  had  not  done  ?  Do  you  never 
fpeak  any  Thing  contrary  to  Truth  or  Love  ? 
Is  that  right  ?  Let  your  own  Confcicnce  de- 
termine. Do  you  never  do  any  Thing  c()!i- 
trary  to  Juftice'or  Mercy  ?  Is  that  well  done? 
You  know  it  is  not.  Wliy  then  do  you  not 
amend  ?  Moves,  fed  nil  pronmrs.     You   re- 

folvc 


76  The  Doctrine  of 

folve  and  refolve,  and  do  juft  as  you  did 
before. 

Your  Wife  however  is  wifer  and  better 
than  you.  Nay,  perhaps  you  do  not  think 
io,     Pofiibly  you  laid  once 

"  I'hcu  hafl  no  Faults^  or  I  no  Faults  can/py-y 
T^hou  art  all  Beauty^  or  all  Blindnefs  /," 
But  you  do  not  fay  fo  now  :  She  is  not  with- 
out Faults :  And  you  can  fee  them  plain 
enough.  You  fee  more  Faults  than  you  de- 
fire,  both  in  her  Temper  and  Behaviour. 
And  yet  you  can't  mend  them  :  And  fhe  ei- 
ther can't  or  won't.     And  fhe  fays  the  very 

fame  oi you. Do  your  Parents  or  her's  live 

with  you  ?  And  do  not  they  too  exercife  your 
Patience  ?  Is  there  nothing  in  tlmr  Temper 
or  Behaviour  that  gives  you  Pain  ?  Nothing 
which  you  wifh  to  have  alter 'd  ?  Are  you  a 
Parent  yourfelf  ?  Parents  in  general  are  not 
apt  to  think  too  meanly  of  their  own  dear 
Offspring.  And  probably  at  fometimes  you 
admire  your's  more  than  enough  ;  you  think 
there  are  none  fuch.  But  do  you  think  fo, 
upon  cool  Refleffion  ?  Is  the  Behaviour  of  all 
you;*  Children.,  of  moft,  of  any  of  them,  juft 
fuch  as  you  would  delire  ?  Toward  yourfelf, 
toward  each  other,  and  toward  all  Men  ?  Are 
their  Tempers  juft  fuch  as  you  would  wifli ; 
loving,  modeft,  mild  and  teachable  ?  Do  you 
obferve  no  Self-will,  no  PalTion,  no  Stub- 
bornnefs,  no  Ill-nature  or  Surlinefs  among 

them  ? 


Original  Sin.  77 

them  ?  Did  you  not  obferve  more  or  lefs  of 
thefe  in  every  one  of  them,  before  they  were 
two  Years  old?  And  have  not  thofe' Seeds 
ever  fmce  grown  up  with  them,  'till  dicy 
have  brought  forth  a  plentiful  Harveft. 

Your  Servants  or  Frentices  are  probably 
older  than  your  Children.  And  are  they 
wifer  and  better  ?  Of  all  thofe  who  have  fuc- 
ceeded  each  other  for  twenty  Years,  how 
many  were  good  Servants?  How  many  of 
them  did  their  Work  imto  the  Lord,  jmt  as 
pleafmg  Man  but  God?  How  many  did  the 
fame  work,  and  in  as  exad:  a  Manner,  be- 
hind your  Back  as  before  your  Face?  They 
that  did  not  were  Knaves ;  they  had  no  Re- 
ligion; they  had  no  Morality.  Which  of 
them  ftudied  your  Intereft  in  all  Things, 
juft  as  if  it  had  been  his  ovv^n?  I  am  afraid, 
as  long  as  you  have  lived  in  the  World,  you 
have  feen  few  of  thefe  black  Swans  yet. 

Have  you  had  better  Succefs  with  the 
"journeymen  and  Labourers^  whom  you  occa- 
fionally  employ?  Will  they  do  the  fame 
Work  if  you  are  at  a  Diftance,  which  they 
do  while  you  are  Handing  by?  Can  you-de- 
pend  upon  their  ufing  you,  as  they  would 
you  fliould  ufe  them?  And  will  they  do  this, 
not  fo  much  for  Gain,  as  for  Confcicnce 
Sake?  Can  you  truft  them  as  to  the  Price  of 
their  Labour?  Will  they  never  charge  more 
than  it  is  fairly  worth?   If  you  have  found 

'  a  Set 


73  ^he  Doctrine  ^/^ 

a  Set  of  fuch  Workmen,  pray  do  not  con- 
ceal  fo  valuable  a  Treafure^  but  imn:iediately 
advertifc  the  Men  and  their  Places  of  Abode, 
for  the  common  Benefit  of  your  Country- 
men. 

Happy  you,  who  have  fuch  as  thefe  about 
your  Hcufe!  And  are  your  Neighbours  as 
honefl  and  loving  as  they?  They  who  live 
cither  in  the  fame,  or  in  the  next  Houfe: 
Do  thefe  love  you  as  themfelves?  And  do  to 
you  in  every  Point,  as  they  would  have  you 
do  to  them?  Are  they  guilty  of  no  untrue  or 
unkind  Sayings,  no  unfriendly  Actions  to- 
wards you?  And  are  they  (as  far  as  you  fee 
or  know)  in  all  other  Refpedis,  reafonable 
and  religious  Men?  How  many  of  your 
Neighbours  anfwer  this  Characfler?  Would 
it  require  a  large  Houfe  to  contain  them  ? 

But  you  have  Intercourfe  not  with  the 
next  Neighbours  only,  but  with  fever al 
Tradefmeii,  And  all  very  honeft:  Are  they 
not?  You  may  eafily  make  a  Trial.  Send 
a  Child  or  a  Countiyman  to  one  of  their 
Shops.  If  the  Shopkeeper  is  an  honeft  Man, 
he  will  take  no  Advantage  of  the  Buyer's 
Ignorance.  If  he  does,  he  is  no  honefter 
than  a  Thief.  And  how  many  Tradefmen 
do  you  know  who  would  fcruple  it  ? 

Go  a  little  farthfer.  Send  to  the  Market 
for  what  you  want.  "  What  is  the  loweft 
Price  of  this?"  "  Five  Shillings,  Sir."  "  Can 

you 


Original  Sin.  7g 

you  take  no  lefs?''  "  No,  upon  my  Word. 
It  is  worth  it  every  Penny."  An  Hour  after 
he  fells  it  for  a  Shilling  lefs.  And  it  is  really 
worth  no  more.  Yet  is  not  this  the  Courfc 
(a  few  Perfons  excepted)  in  eveiy  Market 
,  thro'  the  Kingdom.  Is  it  not  generally,  tlio* 
not  always,  cheat  that  cheat  can?  Sell  as 
dear  as  you  can,  and  buy  as  cheap?  And 
what  are  they  who  fleer  by  this  Rule 
better  than  a  Company  of  Newgale- Birds? 
Shake  them  all  together;  for  there  is  not  a 
Grain  of  Honefty  among  them. 

But  are  not  your  own  'Te?ia?iis  at  leafl, 
or  your  Lajtdkrd^  honeft  Men?  You  a;e 
perfuaded  they  are.  Very  good:  Remem- 
ber then  an  honeft  Man's  Word  is  as  good 
as  his  Bond.  You  are  preparing  a  Receipt  or 
Writing  for  a  Sum  of  Money,  which  you 
are  going  to  pay  or  lend  to  this  honefl  Man. 
Writing  !  What  Need  of  that  ?  You  do  not 
fear  he  iliould  die  foon.  You  did  not  once 
think  of  it.  But  you  do  not  care  to  truil:  him 
without  it;  that  is,  you  arc  not  fure  but  he 
is  a  meer  Knave.  What,  your  Landlord  ? 
Who  is  a  Juftice  of  Peace  !  It  may  be  a 
Judge;  nay,  a  Member  of  Parliament;  pof- 
fibly  a  Peer  of  the  Realm  !  And  cannot  you 
truft  this  Honourable  (if  not  Right  Honour- 
able) Man,  without  a  paltry  Receipt  ?  I  do 
not  afk  whether  he  is  an  Whoremonger,  an 
Adulterer,  aBlafphemcr,  a  proud,  a  pallionate, 

a  re- 


8o  I'he  Doctrine  of 

a  revengeful  Man.  This  it  may  be  his  nearefl 
Friends  will  allow :  But  do  you  fufpeft  his 
Honefty  too  ? 

13.  Such  is  the  State  of  the  Proteflant 
Chrijiiaiis  in  Rn gland.  Such  their  Virtue 
from  the  leaft  to  the  greateft,  if  you  take  an 
impartial  Survey  of  your  Parents,  Children, 
Servants,  Labourers,  Neighbours,  of  Tradef- 
men.  Gentry,  Nobility.  What  then  can 
we  expedl  from  Papijis  ?  What  from  Jews^ 
Mahometans,,  Heathens  ? 

And  it  may  be  remark'd.  That  this  is  the 
plain,  glaring,  apparent  Condition  of  Hu- 
mankind. It  ftrikes  the  Eye  of  the  moft 
carelefs,  inaccurate  Obferver,  who  does  not 
trouble  himfelf  with  any  more  than  their 
Outfide.  Now  it  is  certain,  the  Generality 
of  Men  do  not  wear  their  worft  Side  out- 
ward. Rather,  they  ftudy  to  appear  better 
than  they  are,  and  to  conceal  what  they  can 
of  their  Faults.  What  a  Figure  then  would 
they  make,  were  we  able  to  touch  them 
with  Ithurieh  Spear?  What  a  Profped:  would 
there  be,  could  v/e  anticipate  the  Tranfac- 
tions  of  the  great  Day  ?  Could  we  bring  to 
Light  the  hidden  things  of  Darknefs^  and  make 
manifeji  the  Thoughts  and  Intents  of  the  Heart. 
This  is  the  plain,  naked  Fadl,  without 
any  Extenuation  on  the  one  Hand  or  Exag- 
geration on  the  other.  The  prefent  State  of 
the  Moral  World  is  as  confpicuous  as  that 

of 


Original  Sin.  gi 

of  the  Natural.  Ovid  faid  no  more  concern- 
ing both  near  2000  Years  fince,  than  is  evi* 
dently  true  at  this  Day.  Of  the  Natural 
World  he  fays  (Whether  this  took  Place  at 
the  Fall  of  Man,  or  about  the  Time  of  the 
Deluge) 

yupiter  antiqui  contraxit  temper  a  veris^ 
Perq-y  hiemes,  ^Jliifq;  &  incvquales  autumno^^ 
Et  breve  verfpatiis  exegit  quatuor  an?2iwu 
The  God  of  Nature,  and  her  fovereign 

King, 
Shortened  the  primitive  perennial  Spring  : 
The  Spring  gave  Place,  no  fooner  come 

than  pail, 
To  Summer's  Heat,  and  Winter*s  chilling 

Blaft, 
And  Autumn  fick,  irregular  and  uneven : 
While  the  fad  Year  thro*  different  Scafons 

driven 
Obey'd  the  ftern  Degree  of  angry  Heaven. 
And  a  Man  may  as  modeftly  deny,  That 
Spring  and  Summer,  Autumn  and  Winter 
fucceed  each  other,  as  deny  one  Article  of 
the  enfuing  Account  of  the  moral  World. 
Irrupit  vena  pejoris  in  arum 
Omnenefas:  Fugere  Pudor,  Verumq\  Fidefq-y 
In  quorum  fubiere  locum  fraudefq-,  doliq\ 
Injidiaq-y  &  visy  &  a??Jor  fceleratus  babcndi: 
A  Flood  of  general  Wickcdncfs  broke  in 
At  once,  and  made  the  Iron  Age  begin: 

F  Virtue 


82  'The  Doctrine  of 

•Virtue  and  Truth  forfook  the  faithlefsRacc, 
And  Fraud  and  Wrong  fucceeded  in  their 

Place. 
Deceit  and   Violence,  the  dire  Thirft  of 

Gold, 
Luft  to  poiiefs,  and  Rage  to  have  and  hold. 
What  Country  is  there  now  upon  Earth,  in 
Europe^  ^fidy  Africa  or  America^  be  the  In- 
habitants Pagans^  T'urks  or  ChriJiianSy  con- 
cerning which  we  may  not  fay, 

Vivitur  ex  rapto  :  non  Iwfpes  ab  hcfpite  hit  us: 
Filius  a?2te  diem  patrios  inquirit  in  annoSy 
Vitlajacet  Pietas ;  S^  Virgo  cade  madentes 
Ultima  Calejium  terras  Ajircea  reliquit. 
They  live  by  Pvapine.  The  unwary  Gueft 
Is  poifon'd  at  the  inhofpitable  Feait. 
The  Son,  impatient  for  his  Father's  Death, 
Numbers  his  Years,  and  longs  to  flop  his 

Breath : 
Extinguiflid  allRegardforGoD  andMan: 
.     And  Juftice,  laft  of  the  celeftial  Train,  " 
Spurns  the  Earth  drenclad  in  Blood,  and 

flies  to  Heaven  again. 
14.  Universal  Mifery  is  at  once  a  Con- 
fequence  and  a  Proof  of  this  univerfal  Cor- 
ruption. Men  are  unhappy,  (How  very  few 
are  the  Exceptions?)  becaufe  they  are  unholy. 
Culpam  Pmia  prernit  cojnes.  Pain  accompa- 
nies and  follows  Sin.  Why  is  the  Earth  fo 
full  of  complicated  Diftrefs  ?  Becaufe  it  is 

full 


Original  Sin.  83 

full  of  complicated  Wickednefs.  Why  are 
not  you  happy  ?  Other  Circumftances  may 
concur :  But  the  main  Reafon  is,  becaufe 
you  are  not  holy.  It  is  impoffiblc  in  the 
Nature  of  Things,  that  Wickednefs  can  con- 
lift  with  Happinefs.  Rojnan  Heathen,  tell 
the  Englijh  Heathens,  Nemo  malusjelix  :  No 
vicious  Man  is  happy.  And  if  you  are  not 
guilty  of  any  grofs  outward  Vice,  yet  you 
have  vicious  Tempers :  And  as  long  as  thefc 
have  Power  in  your  Heart,  true  Peace  has  no 
Place.  You  are  proud)  you  think  too  highly 
of  yourfelf.  You  are  paffionate  ;  often  angry 
without  Reafon.  You  are  fclf-willed  ;  you 
)Vould  have  your  own  Will,  your  own  Way 
in  every  Thing;  that  is  plainly,  you  would 
rule  over  God  and  Man;  you  would  be  the 
Governor  of  the  World.  You  are  daily  li- 
able to.  unreafonable  Defires :  Some  Things 
you  delire  that  are  no  Way  defirable :  Others 
which  ought  to  be  avoided,  yea  abhorred,  at 
leaft  as  they  are  now  circumftanccd.  And 
can  a  proud  or  a  paffionate  Man  be  happy? 
Oh  no :  Experience  ihews  it  is  impofTiblc. 
Can  a  Man  be  happy,  who  is  full  of  Self- 
will  ?  Not  unlefs  he  can  dethrone  the  Moft 
High.  Can  a  Man  of  unreafonable  Dcfircs 
be  happy  ?  Nay,  they  pierce  him  th'ough 
with  many  Sorrows, 

F  2  I  H-'^^'s 


84  ^he  Doctrine  of 

I  HAVE  not  touched  upon  Envy,  Malice, 
Revenge,  Covetuoufnefs,  and  other  grofs 
Vices.  Concerning  thefe  it  is  univerfally 
agreed,  by  all  thinking  Men,  Chriftian  or 
Heathen,  that  a  Man  can  no  more  be  happy, 
while  they  lodge  in  his  Bofom,  than  if  a 
Vulture  was  gnawing  his  Liver.  It  is  fup- 
pofed  indeed,  that  a  very  fmall  Part  of 
Mankind,  only  the  vileft  of  Men  are  liable 
to  thefe.  I  know  not  that:  But  certainly 
this  is  not  the  Cafe  with  Regard  to  Pride, 
Anger,  Self-will,  foolifh  Defires.  Thofe 
who  are  accounted  not  bad  Men,  are  by  no 
Means  free  from  thefe.  And  this  alone, 
(were  they  liable  to  no  other  Pain)  would 
prevent  the  Generality  of  Men,  rich  and  poor, 
learned  and  unlearned,  from  ever  knowing 
what  Happinefs  means. 

15.  You  think  however  you  could  bear 
yourfelf  pretty  well;  but  you  have  fuch  an 
Hulband  or  Wife,  fuch  Parents  and  Children 
as  are  intolerable  f  One  has  fuch  a  Tongue, 
the  other  fo  perverfe  a  Temper  !  The  Lan- 
guage of  thefe,  the  Carriage  of  thofe,  is  (o 
provoking!  Otherwife  you  fhould  be  happy 
enough.  True,  if  both  you  and  they  were 
wife  and  virtuous.  Mean-while,  neither 
tlie  Vices  of  your  Family,  nor  your  own  Will 
fuffer  you  to  reft. 

Look  out  of  your  own  Doors :  Is  there  any 
Evil  in  the  City^  aiid  Sin  hath  not  done  it?  Is 

there 


Original  Sin.  g^ 

there  any  Misfortune  or  Mifery  to  be  named, 
whereof  it  is  not  either  the  diredt  or  remote 
Occafion  ?  Why  is  it  that  the  Frieftd  or  Re- 
lation for  whom  you  are  fo  tenderly  concern- 
ed, is  involved  in  fo  many  Troubles  ?  Have 
not  you  Aont your  part  toward  making  them 
happy  ?  Yes,  but  they  will  not  do  their 
own  :  One  has  no  Management,  no  Fruga- 
lity, or  no  Induftry.  Another  is  too  fond 
of  Pleafures.  If  he  is  not  what  is  called 
fcandaJo]iijQy  vicious,  he  loves  Wine,  Wo- 
men or  Gaming.  And  to  what  does  all  this 
amount  ?  He  might  be  happy  3  but  Sin  will 
not  fufFer  it. 

Perhaps  you  will  fay.  Nay,  he  is  not  in 
Fault,  he  is  both  frugal  and  diligent.  But 
he  has  fallen  into  the  Hands  of  thofe,  who 
have  impofed  upon  his  Good-nature.  Very 
well ;  but  ftill  Sin  is  the  Caufe  of  his  Mis- 
fortunes,    Only  it  is  another's,  not  his  own. 

If  you  enquire  into  the  Troubles  under 
which  your  Neighbour,  your  Acquaintance, 
or  one  you  cafually  talk  with,  labours,  flill 
you  will  find  the  far  greater  Part  of  them 
arife,  from  fome  Fault  either  of  the  Suftcrer 
or  of  others.  So  that  ftill  Sin  is  at  the  Rool 
of  Trouble,  and  it  is  Unholinefs  which  caufes 
Unhappinefs. 

And  this  holds  as  well  with  Regard  to 
Families,  as  with  Regdrd  to  Individual^. 
Many  Familes  are  miferable  throngh  Want. 

F  3  Thrv 


86  The  Doctrine  'of 

They  have  not  the  Conveniences,  if  the  Ne- 
ceflaries  of  Life.  Why  have  they  not  ?  Be- 
caufe  they  will  not  work :  Were  they  dili- 
gent they  w^ould  want  nothing.  Or  if  not 
idle,  they  are  waftful :  Tliey  fquander  away 
in  a  fliort  Time,  what  might  have  ferved  for 
many  Years :  Others  indeed  are  diligent  and 
frugal  too ;  but  a  treacherous  Friend,  or  a 
malicious  Enemy  has  ruin'd  them  :  Or  they 
groan  under  the  Hand  of  the  Oppreffor :  Or 
the  Extortioner  has  enter'd  into  their  La- 
bours. You  fee  then,  in  all  thefe  Cafes, 
Want,  (though  in  various  Ways)  is  the  Ef- 
fect of  Sin.  But  is  there  no  rich  Man  near? 
None  that  could  relieve  thefe  innocent  Suf- 
ferers, without  impairing  his  own  Fortune  ? 
Yes,  but  he  thinks  of  nothing  lefs.  They 
may  rot  and  perifh  for  him.  See,  more  Sin 
is  implied  in  their  Suffering. 

But  is  not  the  Family  of  that  rich  Man 
himfeif  happy  ?  No;  far  from  it:  Perhaps 
farther  than  his  poor  Neighbour's.  For  they 
are  not  content :  Their  Eye  is  not  fatisfied with 
Seei??g,  nor  their  Ear  with  Henri ?ig,  Endea- 
vourino;  to  fill  their  Souls  with  the  Pleafures 
of  Senfe  and  Imagination,  they  are  only  pour- 
ing Water  into  a  Sieve.  Is  not  this  the  Cafe 
with  the  wealthiefl:  Families  vou  know?  But 
it  is  not  the  whole  Cafe  with  fome  of  them. 
There  is  a  debauched,  a  jealous,  or  an  ill- 
natur'd  Flu  (band-;  A  gaming,  paffionate,  or 
^  imperious 


Original  Sin.  87 

imperious  Wife ;  an  undutiful  Son,  or  nn 
imprudent  Daughter,  who  banifhes  Happi- 
nefs  from  the  Houfe.  And  what  is  all  this, 
but  Sin  in  various  Shapes,  with  its  fure  At- 
tendant Mifery  ? 

In  a  Town,  a  Corporation,  a  Cit}^  a 
Kingdom,  is  it  not  the  fame  Thing  llill  ? 
From  whence  comes  that  Complication  of 
all  the  Miferies  incident  to  human  Nature, 
War  ?  Is  if  not  from  the  Tempers  which 
war  in  the  Soul'?  When  Nation  rifes  up  a- 
gainft  Nation,  and  Kingdom  againft  King- 
dom, does  it  not  necelTarily  im.ply  Pride, 
Ambition,  covetingw^hat  is  another's;  or  En- 
vy, or  Malice,  or  Revenge,  on  one  Side, 
if  not  on  both  ?  Still  then  Sin  is  the  bale- 
ful Source  of  Afflidion.  And  confequcntly 
the  Flood  of  Miferies,  which  covers  the  Face 
of  the  Earth,  which  overwhelms  not  only 
fmgle  Perfons,  but  whole  Families,  Towns, 
Cities,  Kingdoms,  is  a  demonftrative  Proot 
of  the  Overflowing  of  Ungodlincfs,  in  every 
Nation  under  Heaven. 


F  4       '  T  H  1' 


[  88  ] 


THE 

DoBrine  of  Original  Sin^  &c. 

PART      II. 

T^he  Scriptural  Method  of  accountmg  for  this 
defended, 

II. 

I.  I.  j^^^*^HEFa6tthen being  undeniable, 
:n  T  Q^  I  would  afk,  How  is  it  to  be 
is-^^jrf  ^^coui^ted  for  ?  Will  you  re- 
folve  it  into  the  Prevalence  of 
Cujiom^  a^dfay,  "  Men  are  guided  more  by 
Example  than  Reafon?"    It  is  true.     They 
run  after  one  another,  like  a  Flock  of  Sheep 
(as  Seneca  remarked  long  ago)  mri  qudeundum 
eji^  fed  qua  itiir :    Not  where  they  ought  to 
go,    but  ivhere   others  go,      But  I  gain  no 
Ground  by  this :    I   am  equally  at  a  Lofs 
to  account  for  this  Cuftom.     How  is  it  (fee- 
ing Men  are  reafonable  Creatures,  and  no- 
thing is-  fo  agreeable  to  Rcafon  as  Virtue) 

that 


Original  Sin.  89 

that  the  Cuftom  of  all  Ages  and  Nations  is 
not  on  the  Side  of  Virtue  rather  than  Vice  ? 
If  you  fay,  This  is  owing  to  bad  Education, 
which  propagates  ill  Cuftorns :  Town,  Edu- 
cation has  an  amazing  Force,  far  beyond 
what  is  commonly  imagined.  I  own  too, 
that  as  bad  Education  is  found  among  Chrif- 
tians,  as  ever  obtained  among  the  Heathens. 
But  I  am  no  nearer  ftill :  I  am  not  advanced 
an  Hair's  Breadth  toward  the  Conclufion. 
For  how  am  I  to  account  for  the  almofl:  uni- 
verfal  Prevalence  of  this  bad  Education  .^  I 
want  to  know,  when  this  prevailed  lirft  ?  And 
how  came  it  to  prevail  ?  How  came  wife  and 
good  Men  (for  fuch  they  mull:  have  been 
before  bad  Education  commenced)  not  to  train 
up  their  Children  in  Wifdom  and  Goodnefs  ? 
In  the  Way  wherein  they  had  been  brought 
up  themfelves  ?  They  had  then  no  ill  Prece- 
dent before  them :  How  came  they  to  make 
fuch  a  Precedent  ?  And  how  came  all  the 
Wifdom  of  after  Ages,  never  to  corredl  that 
Precedent  ?  You  muft  fuppofe  it  to  have  been 
of  antient  Date.  Prophane  Hiftory  gives  us 
a  large  Account  of  univerfal  Wickedncfs> 
that  is,  univerfal  bad  Education,  for  above 
two  thoufand  Years  laft  part.  Sacred  Hiftory 
adds  the  Account  of  above  two  thoufand 
more:  In  the  very  Beginning  of  which 
(more  than  four  thoufand  Years  ago)  all 
Flefh  had  corrupted  their  Ways  before  the  LoR  d  ! 

Or, 


9a  'The  Doctrine  (f 

Or,  to  fpeak  agreeably  to  this  Hypotheiis, 
were  very  corruptly  educated.  Now  how  is 
this  to  be  accounted  for,  That  in  fo  long  a 
Tra(!l  of  Time,  no  one  Nation  under  the 
Sun,  has  been  able,  by  wholefome  Laws  or 
by^  any  other  Method,  to  remove  this  griev- 
ous Evil  ?  So  that  their  Children  being  well 
ediicatedy  the  Scale  might  at  length,— turn  on 
the  Side  of  Reafbn  and  Virtue. 

These  are  Queftions  which  I  conceive 
will  not  eaiily  be  anfwered,  to  the  Satisfac- 
tion of  any  impartial  Enquirer.  But  to  bring 
the  Matter  to  a  fliort  Iffue.  The  firft  Pa- 
rents who  educated  their  Children  in  Vice 
and  Folly,  either  w^ere  wife  and  virtuous 
tbemfelves,  or  were  net.  If  they  were  not,, 
your  Vice  did  not  proceed  from  Education : 
So  the  Suppolition  falls  to  the  Ground: 
Wickednefs  was  antecedent  to  bad  Educa- 
tion. If  they  were  wife  and  virtuous,  it 
cannot  be  fuppofed,  but  they  would  teach 
their  Children  to  tread  in  the  fame  Steps. 
In  no  wife  therefore  can  we  account  for  the 
prefent  State  of  Mankind  from  Example  or 
Educcitmi. 

2.  Let  us  then  have  Recourfe  to  the 
Oracles  of  God,  How  do  they  teach  us 
to  account  for  this  Fa6l,  That  all  Fleffj  cor- 
ruptcd  their  Way  before  God,  even  in  the  ^;/- 
tedihivian  World?  That  Mankind  was  little, 
if  at  all,  lefs  corrupt,    from  the  Flood  to 

the 


Original  Sin.  qi 

the  giving  of  the  Law  by  Mcfcs :  That  from 
that  Thne  'till  Christ  came,  even  God's 
chofen  People  were  a  faitklefs  and Jhihb.jni 
Generation^  little  better,  tho'  certainly  not 
worfe  than  the  Heathens  who  knew  not 
God:  That  when  Christ  came,  both  ')W'j 
and  Gentiles  were  all  under  Sin\  all  theiVcrld 
was  guilty  before  God  :  That  even  after  the 
Gofpel  had  been  preach'd  in  all  Nations, 
fldll  the  wife  and  virtuous  iioere  a  little  Flock -, 
bearing  fo  fmall  a  Proportion  to  the  Bulk  of 
Mankind,  that  it  might  yet  be  faid,  l^he 
whole  World  lieth  in  Wickedncfs:  That  from 
that  Time  the  Myjloy  of  Iniquity  wrought 
even  in  the  Church,  'till  the  Chriftians  were 
little  better  than  the  Heathens :  And,  laftly, 
That  at  this  Day  the  whole  Worlds  whether 
Pagan,  Mahometan,  or  nominally  Chriftian 
(little  indeed  is  the  Flock  which  is  to  be  ex- 
cepted!) ^ig'SAn  lieth  in  Wickednefs:  Doth  not 
kno^v  the  only  true  God  ;  doth  not  love,  doth 
not  worfhip  Him  as  God  :  Hath  not  the 
Mind  which  was  in  Chrift,  neither  walketh 
as  He  walked:  Doth  not  pradlice,  Jufticc, 
Mercy  and  Truth,  nor  do  to  others  as  they 
would  others  fhould  do  to  them  :  How,  I 
fay,  do  the  Oracles  of  God  teach  us,  to  ac- 
count for  this  plain  Fad  ? 

3.  They  teach  us.  That  /;/  "  Adam  all 

die :    That  ^y  the  firft  Man  came  both  natu- 

•^  ral 

"   I  Cor.  XV.  22.  compared  with  Gin.  ii.  and  iii. 


92  I'he  Doctrine  of 

ral  a«d  iplritual  Death,  That  "^  by  this  (j;;^ 
iWiz/z  iS/w  altered  into  the  Worlds  and  Death 
in  Confequence  of  Sin :  And  that  from  him 
Death  pajjed  upon  all  Men^  in  that  all  have 
finned,  m%y\i 

Bu T  you  aver,''  That  **  no  Evil  but  Tr;7/-^ 
penpal  Death  came  upon  Men,  in  Confe- 
quence  of  Adam\  Sin."  And  this  ygu  cn» 
deavour  to  prove  by  confidering  the  chief 
Scriptures,  which  are  fuppofed  to  relate 
thereto.  w    '\, 

The  firft  you  mention  is  Gen,  ii.  17.  'But 
of  the  Tree  of  the  K?iowledge  of  Good  and  Evily 
thou  PmU  not  cat  of  it :  For  in  the  Day  that 
thou  eateji  thereof  thou  f:alt  furely  die, 

On  this  you  obferve  :  "  Death  was  to  be 
die  Confequence  of  his  Difobedience.  And 
the  Death  here  threatned  can  be  oppofed  on- 
ly to  that  Life  God  gave  Adam  when  he 
created  him.''^  True :  But  how  are  you 
affured.  That  God  when  he  created  him, 
did  not  give  him  Jpiritualy  as  well  as  animal 
Life  ?  ^ov^  fpiritual  Death  is  oppofed  tofpi- 
ritual  Life,  And  this  is  more  than  the 
Death  of  the  Body. 

**  But  this  is  pure  Conjecflurc,  without  a 
folid  Foundation.  For  no  other  Life  is 
fpoken  of  before."  Yes  there  is.  The  Image 
of  God  is  fpoken  of  before.     This  is  not 

^  Rom.\.  12.  *  Mr.  Taylor's  Doftrinc  of  Original  Sin, 
Part  I.  to  whom  I  addrefs  myfelf  in  what  follows.  What  \i 
quoted  from  him,  generally  in  his  own  Words,  is  inclofed  in 
Comma's  "  ".     '  p.  7. 


Original  Sin.  ^-^ 

therefore  pure  Conjedure  ;  but  is  grounded 
upon  a  folid  Foundation,  upon  tlie  plain 
Word  of  God. 

^' Allowing  then,  that  "  yftJam  could  un- 
derftand  it  of  no  other  Life  than  that  which 
he  had  newly  receiv'd  :'*  Yet  would  he  na- 
turally underftand  it,  of  the  Life  of  God  in 
his  Soul,  as  well  as  of  the  Life  of  his  Body, 

"  In  this  Light  therefore  the  Senfe  of  the 
Threatning  will  Hand  thus:  Thoujkalt  furely 
die-y  as  if  he  had  faid,  I  have' ycr//W  thee 
of  the  Dujl  of  the  Ground,  and  breathed  into 
thy  Noftrih  the  Breath  of  Lives,''  both  of 
animal  Life  and  of  fpiritualLife'y  and  in  both 
Refpcfts  thou  art  become  a  living  Soul,  ''  But 
if  thou  eateft  of  the  forbidden  Tree,  thou 
fhalt  ceafe  to  be  a  living  Soul.  For  I  will 
take  from  thee"  the  Lives  I  have  given,  and 
thou  (halt  die  fpiritually,  temporally,  eter- 
nally. 

But  "  here  is  not  one  Word  relating  to 
Adam\  Pofterity.  Tho'  it  be  true,  if  he  had 
died  immediately  upon  hisTranfgreffion,  all 
his  Pofterity  muft  have  been  extln6t  with 
him."  It  is  true  :  Yet  "  not  one  Word"  of 
it  is  exprefl.  Therefore  other  Confequenccs 
of  his  Sin  may  be  equally  implied,  tho'  they 
are  no  more  expreji  than  tliis. 

4.  The  fecond  Scripture  you  cite  is  Gen. 

ill.  from  the  7^'  to  the  24^"  Verfe.* 

^  On 

f  Third  Edition  p.  8.     '  p.  9,  i«. 


94  ^he  Doctrine  of 

On  this  you  obferve,  Here  <'  we  have  fomc 
Confequences  of  our  firft  Parents  Sin  before 
God  judged  them  :  Some  appointed  by  hi^ 
judicial  Sentence ;  and  fome  which  happen- 
ed after  that  Sentence  was  pronounced.'"" 

"  Immediately  upon  their  Tranfgref- 
fion,  they  were  feized  with  Shame  and  Fear. 
Guilt  will  always  be  attended  with  Shame. 
And  a  State  of  Guilt  is  often  in  Scripture  ex- 
preft  by  being  naked,  Exod,  xxxii.  25; 
Mofes  faw  that  the  People  were  naked;  for 
Aaron  had  made  them  naked  to  their  Shame, 
among  their  Enemies^  Certainly  ?iaked  does 
not  mean  guilty  here;  but  either  ftript  of 
their  Ornaments  (C.  xxxiii.  5,  6.)  or  of 
their  Swords,  or  their  upper  Garment.  Ifai. 
xlvii.  3.  '"T'hy  Nakednefs  Jloali  be  uncovered^ 
yea  thy  Shame  Jhall  be  feen.  Here  alfo  Naked- 
nefs  does  not  mean  Guilt \  but  is  to  be  taken 
literally,  as  manifeftly  appears,  from  the 
Words  immediately  precceding,  V.  2.  Make 
bare  the  Leg^  uncover  the  T^high^  pafs  over  Ri- 
vers. KnARev.  xvi.  15.  Bleffed  is  he  that 
watcheth  and  keepeth  his  Gar?jie?itSy  left  he  walk 
naked  and  they  fee  his  Shame,  The  plain 
Meaning  is,  left  he  lofe  the  Graces  he  has 
received,  and  fo  be  alliamed  before  Men 
and  Anofcls. 

"  Their  Fear  is  defcribed  V.  8.  Adam 
a?id  his  Wife  hid  themfelves  from  the  Prefence 

•»  p.  II,    '  p.  12. 


Original  Sin.  n- 

of  the  Lord  God  among  the  Trees  of  the  Gar^ 
den.  They  had  no  fuch  Fear  wlillc  tJiey 
were  innocent:  But  now  they  were  afraid 
to  ftand  before  their  Judge.'"^ 

This  is  all  you  can  difcern  in  tlie  Mofaic 
Account,  as  the  Confequence  of  our  hrft 
Parents  Sin,  before  God  judged  them.  Mr. 
Hervey  difcerns  fomething  more.  I  make 
no  Apology  for  tranfcribing  forae  of  his 
Words.*^ 

"  Adam  violated  the  Precept,  and  as 
the  nervous  Original  exprelles  it,  died  the 
Death.  He  before  poffeft  a  Life  incompa- 
rably more  excellent,  than  that  which  thp 
Beafts  enjoy.  He  pofTeil  a  Divine  Life, 
confifting,  according  to  the  Apoffle,  it 
Knowledge^  i?i  Right eoicfnefs^  and  true  Holine/s, 
This,  which  was  the  diftingu idling  Glory 
of  his  Nature,  in  the  Day  that  he  uit  the  for- 
bidden Fruit,  was  extinft. 

•"  HisUnderftanding,  originally  enlight- 
ened with  Wifdom,  was  clouded  widi  Ig- 
norance. His  Heart,  once  warmed  with 
heavenly  Love,  became  alienated  from  God 
his  Maker.  His  Paffions  and  Appetites,  ra- 
tional and  regular  before,  fliook  off  the 
Government  of  Order  and  Reafon.  In  a 
Word,  the  whole  Moral  Frame  was  un- 
hinged,  disjointed,  broken. 

Tjji 

*  p.  13,     *  Theron  and  Mpafio^  Dial,  11. 


96  ^he  Doctrine  of 

"  The  Ignorance  of  fallen  Adam  was  paK 
pable*  Witnefs  that  abfurd  Attempt,  to  hide 
himfelf  from  the  Eye  of  Omnifcience^  among 
the  Trees  of  the  Garden.  His  Averjion  to 
the  all-gracious  God  was  equally  plain. 
Otherwife  he  would  never  have  fled  from 
his  Maker,  but  rather  have  hailed  on  the 
Wings  of  Dejire^  into  the  Place  of  the  Di- 
vine Manifeftation. 

"  A  STRANGE  Variety  of  diforderly  Paf- 
Jtons  were  evidently  predominant  in  hisBreaft. 
Fride  \  for  he  refufes  to  acknowledge  his 
Guilt,  tho*  he  cannot  but  own  the  Fad. 
Ingratitude  \  for  he  obliquely  upbraids  the 
Creator  with  his  Gift,  as  tho'  it  had  been  a 
Snare  rather  than  a  Blefling ;  the  Woman 
Thou  gaveji  me.  The  Female  Criminal  adls 
the  fame  unhumbled  Part.  She  neither  takes 
Shame  to  herfelf,  nor  gives  Glory  to  God, 
nor  puts  up  a  fingle  Petition  for  Pardon. 

"  As  all  thefe  Difaflers  enfued,  upon  the 
Breach  of  the  Commandment,  they  furnifh 
tis  with  the  bell  Key,  to  open  the  Meaning 
of  the  Penalty  annexed.  They  prove  be- 
yond any  Argument,  That  Spiritual  Death 
and  all  its  Confequcnces  were  comprized  in 
the  Extent  of  the  Threatning." 

5.  However  "  no  ^other  could  in  Juf- 
tice  be  punifhablc  for  that  Tranfgreffion, 
which  was  their  own  Ad:  and  Deed  onlv." 

If 

*■  P-  '3- 


OitiGiNAL  Sin.  (^7 

If  no  other  was  juftly  pimifiable,  then  no 
other  was  piaiijljed  for  that  Tianfgrelfion. 
But  all  Men  were  pimijled  for  that  Tranf- 
greffion,  namely,  with  Death.  Thereiore 
all  Men  wtvt  jiiftly  piinifiable  for  it. 

By  Fiinijhment  I  mean  Suffcrifig  confe- 
quent  upon  Sin  or  Pain  inflicted  becaufe  of 
Sin  preceeding.  Now  it  is  plain  all  Man- 
kind y^^^r  Deaths  and  that  this  Suffering  is 
confequent  upon  Adanis  Sin,  Yea,  and  that 
this  Pain  is  inflicfted  on  all  Men,  becaufe  of 
his  Sin.  When  therefore  you  fay,  *'  Death 
does  ^  defcend  to  iis^  in  Confequcnce  oi  his 
Tranfgreffion^"  You  allow  the  Point  wc 
contend  for^  and  are  very  welcome  to  add, 
"  Yet  it  is  not  a  Puniflmjcnt  for  his  Sin!' 
You  allow  the  Thing.  Call  it  by  what 
Name  you  pleafe. 

But  ''  Pimijljmcnt  ^  always  connotes 
Guilty  It  always  connotes  Sin  and  Suffering. 
And  here  are  both.  Jdam  finned:  His 
Pofterityy/^e'r:  And  that,  in  Coniequence 
of  his  Sin. 

But  "  Sifferings  are  Benefits  to  us." 
Doubtlefs,  but  this  does  not  hinder  their  be- 
ing Pmifhments,  The  Pain  I  fuffer  as  a 
Punifiment  for  my  o^jon  Sins,  may  be  a  Bene- 
fit to  mci  but  it  is  a  Pujiifimwit  neverthe- 

lefs.  ^ 

G  But 

*■  p.  20.      «   p.  21, 


98  ^he  Doctrine  of 

BfjT  "as  they  "  two  only  were  guilty  of 
the  firft  Sin,  fo  no  other  but  they  two  only, 
could  be  confcious  of  it  as  their  Shi"  No 
other  could  be  confcious  of  it  as  their  Sin, 
in  the  fame  Senfe  as  Adam  and  Eve  were: 
And  yet  others  may  "  charge  it  upon  thcm- 
felves,"  in  a  different  Senfe,  fo  as  to  judge 
themfelves  Children  of  Wrath  on  that  Ac-' 
count. 

To  fum  up  this  Point  in  Dr.y — 's  Words: 
"  If  there  be  any  Thing  in  this  Argument, 
That  Adams  Pofterity  could  not  be  juftly 
punifhable  for  his  Tranfgreffion,  becaufc  it 
was  his  perfonal  Ad:  and  not  theirs :  It 
muft  prove  univerfally  that  it  is  unjuft,  To 
punifli  the  Poftcrity  of  any  Man  for  his  per- 
fonal Crimes.  And  yet  moll  certain  it  is, 
that  God  has  in  other  Cafes  actually  puniih- 
ed  Mens  Sins  on  their  Pofterity.  Thus  the 
Pofterity  of  Canaan^  the  Son  of  Ham^  is 
puniflf  d  with  Slavery,  for  his  '  Sin.  Noab 
pronounced  the  Curfe  under  a  Divine  Affla- 
tus, and  God  confirmed  it  by  his  Providence. 
So  wc  do,  in  Fad  fuffer,  for  Adam's  Sin, 
and  that  too  by  the  Sentence  inflided  on  our 
firft  Parents.  We  fuflfer  Death  in  Confe- 
quence  of  their  Tranfgreffion.  Therefore 
we  are,  in  fome  Senfe,  guilty  of  their  Sin. 
I  would  afk,  What  is  Guilt,  but  an  Obli- 
gation to  fuffer  Punifliment  for  Sin  ?    Now 

fince 

h  p.  14.     i  Gen,  ix.  25,  2j. 


Original  Sin.  gg 

iince  wc  fuiFer  the  fame  penal  Evil,  tvhich 
God  threatened  to,  and  inflided  on  yldn?n 
for  his  Sin,  and  lince  it  is  allowed  we  lufTcr 
this  for  Adam%  Sin,  and  that  by  the  Sentence 
of  God,  appointing  all  Men  to  die,  becaule 
Adam  finned:  Is  not  the  Confequence  evi- 
dent? Therefore  we  are  all  fome  Way  guilty 
oi Adams  Sin.""" 

6.  "  The  Confequences  '  appointed  by 
the  judicial  Sentence  of  God,  are  found  in 
that  pronounced  on  the  Serpent,  or  the  Wo- 
man, or  the  Man. 

"  The  Serpent  is  curfed,  V.  14,  15.  And 
thofe  Words  in  the  15""  Verfe,  I  u^ill  put 
En?nity  between  thee  and  the  Wonan^  and  he- 
tween  thy  Seed  and  her  Seed :  He  (fo  the  He- 
brew )yZ^^//  bruife  thy  Head  ajidthcujhalt  bruife 
his  Heel ',  imply,  that  God  would  appoint 
his  only-begotten  Son,  to  maintain  a  King- 
dom in  the  World  oppofite  to  the  Kingdom 
oi  Satan,  'till  he  fliould  be  born  of  a  Woman, 
and  by  his  Dodrine,  Example,  Obedience 
and  Death,  give  the  laft  Strc^ke,  by  Way  of 
moral  Means,  to  the  Powxr  and  Works  of 
the  "^  Devil." 

I  DO  not  underftand  that  Exprefllon, 
"  By  Way  of  Moral  Means.''  What  I  un- 
derftand from  the  whole  Tenor  of  Scripture 
is,  That  the  eternal,  almighty  Son  of  God, 

G   2  "^'ho 

k  Vindication  of  the  Doftrine  of  Original  Sin.     '  p.  15. 
«"  p.  16. 


loo  T'he  Doctrine  of 

whots,  over  al/,  God,  blejfed  for  ever ^  having 
reconciled  us  to  God  by  his  Blood,  creates 
us  anew  by  his  Spirit,  and  reigns  till  He 
hath  deftroy'd  all  the  Works  of  the  Devil. 

"  Sentence  is  paft  upon  the  Woman, 
V.  1 6.  that  fhe  fliould  bring  forth  Children 
with  more  Pain  and  Hazard,  than  otherwife 
fhe  would  have  done."''  How  ?  With  more 
Fain  and  Hazard  th^n  otherwife  flie  would 
have  done  !  Would  flie  otherwife  had  any 
Pain  at  all  ?  Or  have  brought  forth  Children 
with  a77y  Hazard  .^  Hazard  of  what  ?  Cer- 
tainly, not  of  Death.  I  cannot  comprehend 
this. 

"Lastly,  The  Sentence  upon  the  Man, 
V.  17,  18,  19.  firft  afFeds  the  Earth,  and 
then  denounces  Death  upon  himfelf." 

'*  After  Sentence  ^  pronounced,  God 
having  clothed  Adam  and  Eve^  drove  them 
out  of  Paradife." 

Here  "  obferve  i.  a  Curfe  is  pronounced*' 
on  the  Serpent  and  on  the  Ground  ;  but  no 
Curfe  upon  the  Woman  and  the  Man."  But 
a  Curfe  fell  upon  them  in  that  very  Moment, 
wherein  they  tranfgreffed  the  Law  of  God. 
For  cur  fed  is  every  c?7.e  that  continiieth  not  in  all 
Thi?7g3  which  are  contained  in  the  Law  to  do 
them.  Vainly  therefore  do  you  fubjoin, 
"  Tho'  they  are  fubjecSted  to  Sorrow,  La- 
bour and  Death,  thefe  are  not  inflicfted  under 

the 

®  p.  17.    p  p.  18.    *»  p.  19. 


Original  Sin.  loi 

the  Notion  of  a  Curfe."  Surely  they  are  ; 
as  the  feveral  Branches  of  that  Curie,  which 
he  had  aheady  incurred.  And  which  had 
already  not  only  "  darkened  and  weakened 
his  rational  Powers/'  but  difordered  his  whole 
Soul. 

"  Observe  2.  here  is  not  one  Word  of 
any  other  Deaths  but  the  Diffolution  of  the 
Body."  Nor  was  it  needful.  He  felt  in 
himfelf  that  fpiritual  Death,  which  is  the 
Prelude  of  Death  e'-cerlajling.  "  But  the 
Words,  Duji  thou  art,  and  unto  Diijl  then 
fialt  return,  reftrain  this  Death  to  this  Dilib- 
lution  '  alone.  This  Diffolution  alone"  is 
exprejl  in  thofe  Words.  But  how  does  it  ap- 
pear, that  nothing  more  is  i?nplied?  The  di- 
red:  contrary  appears  from  your  own  AlTerti- 
ons.  For  if  thefe  Words  refer  clearly  to 
thofe,  And  the  Lord  Go'd  formed  Man  cui^of 
the  Duji  of  the  Ground,  and  breathed  into  his 
Noflrih  the  Breath  of  Lives :'  And  if*  the 
judicial  Afl:  of  Condemnation  clearly  impli- 
eth,  the  depriving  him  of  that  Life  which 
God  then  breathed  into  him  :"  It  undenia- 
bly follows,  That  this  judicial  Ad  implieth 
a  Deprivation  of  Spiritual  Life  as  well  as 
Temporal:  Seeing  God  breathed  into  him 
both  one  and  the  other,  in  order  to  his  bccom- 
ing  a  living  Sotd, 

G  3  It 

5  p.  20. 


I02  ^he  Doctrine  of 

It  remains,  That  the  Death  exprejl  in  the 
original  Threatning  and  implied  in  the  Sen- 
tence pronounced  upon  Man,  includes  all 
Evils  which  could  befal  his  Soul  and  Body : 
Death  Temporal,  Spiritual  and  Eternal. 

7.  You  next  cite  '  i  Cor.  xv.  2 1,  22.  Since 
hy  Man  came  Deaths  by  Man  came  alfo  the  Re- 
Jurrediion  of  the  Dead,  For  as  in  Adam  all 
die^  even  fo  in  Chn^  JJmU  all  be  made  alive. 

On  this  you  obferve  i. '  "  The  Apoftle  Is 
in  this  Chapter  proving  and  explaining  the 
KefiirreBion.  It  is  this  Fad:  or  Event,  and 
no  other ^  which  he  here  affirms  and  demon- 
ftrates." 

If  you  mean,  "  The  Refurreciion  of  the 
Body  to  that  Life  which  it  enjoyed  in  this 
World,  is  the  only  T^hing  which  the  Apoftle 
fpeaks  of  in  this  Chapter,"  your  Affertion  is 
palpably  falfe.  For  he  fpeaks  therein  oithat 
glorious  Life  both  of  Soul  and  Body,  which 
is  not,  cannot  be  enjoy'd  in  this  World. 

You  obferve  2.  "  It  is  undeniable,  thztall 
Mankind  die  in  Adam,  all  are  mortal,  in 
Confequence  of  his  "  Sin."  3.  "It  is  equally 
clear,  that  by  Chrift  came  the  RefurreBion  of 
the  Dead:  That  in  Chrift  all  who  die  in  A- 
dam,  that  is,  all  Mankind,  are  made  alive  J* 
It  is  neither  clear  nor  true,  That  St.  Paid 
affirms  this,  in  either  of  the  Texts  before  us. 
For  in  this  whole  Chapter  he  fpeaks  only  of 

the 

*  p.  22.    *  p.  23.    "  p.  24. 


Original  Sin.  103 

the  Refurredlion  of  the  Juft,  of  them  that  are 
Chrift's,  V.  23.  So  that  from  hence  it  cannot 
be  infer'd  at  all,  that  ^//M?;//(7W will  be  made 
alive.  Admitting  then,  *'  That  the  Rtfur- 
reBion  of  the  Dead  and  being  made  alhe,  arc 
Expreffions  of  the  fame  Signification,"  this 
proves  nothing;  fince  the  Apoftle  affirms 
neither  one  nor  the  other,  of  any  but  thofe 
who  are  fallen  afecp  in  Chrift,  V.  18.  It  is 
of  thefe  only  that  he  here  afferts,  Their 
Death  came  by  the  Firft,  their  Rcfurrc5lion^ 
by  the  Second  Adam :  Or,  That  /;/  Adam 
they  all  died,  in  Chrift  they  all  are  ?7iade  alrce. 
Whatever  Life  they  all  lofl  by  Means  of  A- 
dam^  I'hey  all  recover  by  Means  ofChri/i. 

"  From'''  this  Place  we  cannot  concKidc, 
that  any  Death  came  upon  Mankind  in  Con- 
fequence  of  Adam's  Sin  befide  that  Death 
from  which  Mankind  lliall  be  delivered  at 
the  Refurrediion." 

Nay,  from  this  Place  we  cannot  con- 
clude, that  Mankind  in  general  fhall  be  de- 
livered from  any  Death  at  all :  Seeing  it 
does  not  relate  to  Mankind  in  general,  but 
wholly  and  folcly  to  them  that  are  CliriftV. 

But  from  this  Place  we  may  firmly  con- 
clude, that  more  than  the  mere  Death  of 
the  Body  came  even  upon  thefe  by  Man^  by 
Adam\  Sin,  feeing  the  Rcfurrcclion  vvhicli 
comes  to  them  by  Man,  by  Chrijl,  is  far  more 

G  4  tlian 


104  ^be  Doctrine  of 

than  the  mere  Removal  of  that  Death: 
Therefore  their  dying  in  Adam  implies  far 
more  than  the  bare  Lofs  of  the  bodily  Life 
we  now  enjoy:  Seeing  their  being  fnade  alive 
in  Chrift  implies  far  more,  than  a  bare  Re- 
covery of  that  Life. 

Yet  it  is  true,  That  whatever  Death 
came  on  them  by  one  Man^  came  upon  all 
Mankind;  and  that  in  the  fame  Senfe  where- 
in they  died  in  Adam^  all  Mankind  died  like- 
wife.  And  that  all  Mankind  are  not  made 
alive  in  Chrifl:,  as  they  are,  is  not  God's 
Fault,  but  their  own. 

I  KNOW  not  therefore  what  you  mean  by 

faying  That  after  Doctor  f has  proved 

this  whole  Chapter  and  confequently  the  two 
Verfes  in  Queftion,  to  relate  wholly  and  fole- 
ly  to  the  Refurred:ion  of  the  Juft,  "  he 
leaves  you  in  full  Pofleflion  of  your  Argu- 
ments. Surely  if  he  proves  this,  he  wrefts 
the  whole  Argument  out  of  your  H^nds.  He 
leaves  you  not  one  Shred  of  it. 

8.  '*  We  come  now,  you  fay,  to  the  moft 
difficult  Scripture,  which  fpeaks  of  this  Point, 
Kom,  V.   12 — 19. 

A^  by  one  Man  Sin  enter  d  into  the  World 
and  Death  by  Sin ^  ev^enfo  Death  pajfed  upon 
(ill  Men,  for  that  all  havefmned. 

"For  until  the  Law ^  Sin  was  in  the  World-, 
})ut  Sin  is  not  imputed  when  there  is  no  Law, 

Never- 


Original  Sin.  jo- 

"Nevertheless  Death  reigjied  from 

Adam  to  Mofes,  eveii  over  them  that  had  not 

fimied  after  the  Si?mlitiide  of  Adam  i  Tranf 

greffiouy  who  is  the  Figure  of  him  that  was  to 

come. 

But  not  as  the  0 fence,  fo  alfo  is  the  Free- 
gift,  For  if  thro  the  Offence  of  One  many  be 
dead,  much  more  the  Grace  of  God,  and  the 
Gift  by  Grace,  which  is  by  one  Man,  Jefus 
Chrift,  hath  abounded  unto  many. 

And  not  as  it  was  by  One  that  fimied  (o  is 
the  Gift,  for  the  ftidgment  was  by  one  Offence 
unto  Condemnafion,  but  the  Free-gift  is  of  jnany 
Offejices  unto  yufifcation. 

For  if  by  one  Maris  Offence  Death  reigned 
by  one,  much  more  they  who  rrccived  tlje  Abun- 
dance of  Grace  and  of  the  G  ft  of  Kighteoifncfs, 
fJMll  reign  in  Lfe  by  one  Jcfus  Chriih 

Therefore  as  by  tIjeOffliice  of  ^^//r  Judg- 
ment came  upon  all  Men  to  Condemnation,  even 
fo  by  the  Rightecifnefs  of  one  the  Free-gift 
came  upon  all  Men,  unto  fufiification  of  Life. 
For  as  by  one  Mans  Difobedience  many 
were  made  Sinners,  fo  by  the  Obedience  oj  one 
fball  many  be  inade  Righteous. 

On  this  you  obferve,  I.  That  this  Paf- 
fage  ''  fpeaks  ^  of  temporal  Death  and  no 
other."  That  it  fpeaks  of  temporal  Death 
is  allowed;  but  not  that  it  fpeaks  of  no  other. 
How  prove  you  this?  Why  thus,  "  He  evi- 
dently 

'f  p.  26.    y  p.  28. 


io6  The  Doctrine  of 

dently  ipeaks  of  that  Death,  which  entered 
hito  the  JVcrld  by  Adairi^  Sin :  That  Death 
which  is  common  to  all  Mankind^  which 
pajjed  upon  all  Meriy  that  Death  which  reigned 
from  Adam  to  Mofes^  that  whereby  the  many 
that  is  all  Mankind  are  dead!'  He  does  fo: 
But  how  does  it  appear,  That  the  Death 
which  entered  into  the  World  by  Adam's  Sin^ 
which  is  common  to  all  Mankijid^  which 
pajjcdupon  all  Men^  which  reigned  from  Adam 
to  Mofcs,  and  whereby  the  many\  that  is, 
all-  Mankind  are  dead:  How,  I  fay,  does  it 
appear,  from  any  or  all  of  thefe  Expreffions, 
That  this  is  temporal  Death  only?  Juft  here  lies 
the  Fallacy.  *'  No  Man,  fay  you,  can  deny, 
that  the  Apoftle  is  here  fpeaking  of  that 
Death."  True:  But  when  you  infer,  '^there- 
fore he  fpeaks  of  that  only\'  We  deny  the 
Confequence. 

9.  You  affirm,  II.  "  By  Judgment  ^  to 
condemnation  V.  16,  18.  he  means  the  being 
adjudged  to  the  fore-mentioned  Death:  For 
the  Condemnation  infiifted  by  the  fudgnient 
of  God,  V.  16.  is  the  fame  Thing  with 
beifig  dead  J  V.  i  ^J'  Perhaps  fo;  but  that 
this  is  merely  the  Death  of  the  Body^  ftill  re- 
mains to  be  proved:  As,  on  the  other  Hand, 
that  *^  the  Gift^  or  Free-giff  oppofed  there- 
to, is  merely  Deliverance  from  that  Death, 

You 

-^  p.  27. 


Original  Sin.  107 

You  addj  "  In  all  the  Scriptures  there  is 
recorded  but  one  'judgment  to  Condemnation^ 
one  Sentence,  one  judicial  Adl  of  Condem- 
nation, which  came  upon  ■"  all  Men!'  Nay, 
in  this  Senfe  of  the  Word,  there  is  not  One: 
Not  on^  formal  Sentence^  which  was  explicitly 
2ind  judicially  pronounced  upon  all  Mafikind, 
That  which  you  cite,  Gen.  iii.  17,  19.  was 
not :  Neither  does  all  that  Sentence  in  Fa(fl 
co?ne  upon  all  Men.  Unto  Duftfialt  thou  return^ 
does  come  upon  all,  but  that  other  Fart  does 
not,  In  Sorrow  f:alt  thou  eat  of  it  all  the  Days 
of  thy  Life.  This  was  formally  pronounced^ 
and  a(flually  fulfilled  upon  Adam:  But  it  is 
not  fulfilled  upon  all  his  Pofterity. 

10.  You  afiirm,  3.  ''  Thefe  ^  Words  in 
the  K)"^  Verfe,  As  by  one  Mans  Difobedieyice 
many  were  made  Sinners,  mean  the  fam.e  as 
thofe  in  the  iS'*"*  As  by  the  Offence  of  one 
Judgment  came  upon  all  Men  to  Condemn  at  ion  1^ 
Not  exadly  the  iame.  The  being  made  Sin- 
ners is  different  from  being  judged,  condemned 
or  puniff^ed  as  fuch.  You  fubjoin,  "  But 
thefe  '  Words,  By  the  Offence  of  one  Judg- 
ment came  upon  all  Men  to  Condemnation,  an- 
fwer  in  Senfe  to  thofe,  V.  17.  By  one  Mans 
Offence  Death  reigned  by  one.  Neither  is  tliis 
exactly  true.  Condemnation  cam.e  firft;  and 
in  Confequence  of  that  Death  reigned.  You 
add,  "  And  by  Death  mofl  certainly  is  in- 
tended 

•  P-  29-     "  P-  3°-     ^  P-  3^* 


io8  ^he  Doctrine  of 

tended  no  other  than  temporal  Death"  Moll 
certainly  this  cannot  be  proved.  Therefore 
it  does  not  follow,  **  That  thefe  Words,  By 
one  Mans  Dijobedience  many  were  made  Sin- 
ners^ mean  no  more  than,  by  o?ie Mans Dif- 
obedience  Mankind  were  made  fubjedt  to  tem- 
poral Death.'*  "  Review,  you  fay,  this 
Reafoning,  and  fee  if  you  can  find  any  Flaw 
in  it."  There  are  feveral,  but  the  grand 
Flaw  lies  in  the  very  firft  Link  of  the  Chain. 
You  have  not  yet  proved,  That  *'  Death 
throughout  thisPaffage  means  07ily  the  Death 
of  the  Body." 

This  Flaw  is  not  amended  by  your  ob- 
ferving,  That  St.  P^/^/ was  a  Jew^  and  wrote 
to  Jews  as  well  as  Gentiles  :  That  he  often 
ufes  Hebrew  Idioms^  and  that  the  'Hebrew 
Word  which  fignifies  to  be  a  Sinner^  in  Hip- 
hi  I  fignifies  to  condemit^  or  make^  (i.  e.  declare) 
a  Man  a  Sinner  by  a  judicial  Sentence  :  That 
you  can  (by  the  Help  of  your  Concordance) 
produce  fifteen  Hebrew  Texts,  in  which  the 
Word  is  fo  taken!"  For  if  it  would  follow 
from  hence,  That  by  the  Offence  of  one^ 
Judgment  came  upon  all  Men  to  Co?2denmationy 
is  juft  equivalent  with,  by  one  Mans  Difobe- 
d^mce  many  were  made  Sinners:  Still  this  does 
not  prove,  That  the  Death  in  Queftion  is 
no  other  than  temporal  Death. 

But  indeed  it  does  not  follow,  That  two 
Exprelfions  are  juft  equivalent,  becaufe  one 

Hebrew 


'  p.  3'>  32. 


Original  Sin.  ion 

Hebrew  Word  may  contain  them  both : 
Nor  can  it  therefore  be  inferr'd  from  hence, 
that  many  were  made  Sinner i  is  juft  equivalent 
with  Judgment  came  upon  all  Men  to  Condcm^ 
nation.  Rather  the  former  Expreffion  an- 
fwers  to  all  have  finned  the  latter  to  Death 
pajfed  upon  all  Men,  Sin  is  the  Caufe  of 
their  Condemnation^  and  not  the  fame  Thing 
with  it. 

You  go  on.  "  Befides^  all  this,  It  is  here 
expreffly  affirmed,  That  the  many  are  made 
Sinners  by  the  Difobedience  of  another  Man." 
It  is  exprefQy  affirm'd  ;  and  by  an  infpircd 
Apoftle.  Therefore  I  firmly  believe  it,  " '  But 
they  can  be  made  Sinners  by  the  Difobedience 
of  another  in  no  other  Senfe  than  as  they  arc 
Sufferers!'  How  is  this  proved  ?  We  grant, 
the  Hebrew  Words  for  Sin  and  Iniquity^  are 
often  ufed  to  fignify  Siffering,  But  this  does 
not  prove  that  the  Phrafe  were  made  Sinners^ 
fignifies  only,  they  wei'-e  made  Suferers, 

"  So  Chrijl  was  'made  Sin  for  us." — No : 
Not  fo',  but^as  he  v/as  7nade  an  Offering  for 
Sin/  "  He  fuifered  on  Account  of  the  Sins 
of  Men,  and  fo  he  was  made  Sin:''  Yes,  a 
Sin-offering.  But  it  is  never  faid,  He  was 
made  a  Sinner  :  Therefore  the  ExprelTions 
are  not  parallel.  But  he  need  not  have  been 
made  Sin  at  all,  if  we  had  not  been  tmde 
dinners  by  Adam,      "  And  Men  fuffcr  on 

Account 

•  P-  3^     ^  P-  34-    *  P-  35- 


no  TTjc  Doctrine  of 

Account  of  Adam\  Sin,  and  fo  they  are  made 
Sinntrs!'  Are  they  made  Sinners,  fo  only  ? 
That  remains  to  be  proved, 

"  It  feems  then  confirmed  beyond  all 
dcubt.  That  by  ojie  Mans  Dfobedience  many 
were  made  Sinners^  meaneth  only.  By  Adam'% 
Sin  the  many,  that  is,  all  Mankind  lioere 
made fubjeB  to  Death"  He  that  will  believe 
it,  (taking  Death  in  the  common  Senfe) 
may.  But  you  have  not  confirm'd  it  by  one 
found  Argument. 

II.  You  affirm,  IV,  "  The  '^  Apoftle 
drawls  a  Comparifon  between  Adam  and 
Chrijl^  between  what  Adam  did,  with  the 
Confequences  of  it,  and  what  Chri/t  did, 
with  the  Confequences  of  that.  And  this 
Comparifon  is  the  main  Thing  he  has  in 
Viev/." 

This  is  true.  "  The  '  Comparifon  be- 
gins at  the  1 2th  Verfe.  Wherefore  as  by  one 
Man  Sin  entered  into  the  World,  and  Death  by 
Sin, — There  he  flops  awhile,  and  brings  an 
Argument  to  prove,  That  Death  came  on 
Mankind  thro'  Adants  Tranfgreffion."  He 
does  fo :  But  not  before  he  had  finifh'd 
his  Sentence,  which  literally  runs  thus : 
As  by  one  Man  Sin  ejitered  into  the  World 
and  Death  by  Sin,  even  fo  Death  pajjed  upon 
all  Men,  in  that  all  had  finned.  The  Com- 
parifon therefore  between  Adam  and  Chrijiy 

begins 

**  p.  36.    '  p.  37>  3^- 


Original  Sin.  m 

begins  not  at  the  12th  but  the  14th  Verfe, 
01  this  you  feem  fenfible  yourlelf ;  when 
you  fay,  "  Adam  is  the  Pattern  cf  him  that 
was  to  come.  "  Here  a  new  Thought,  ftarts 
in  the  Apoftle's  Mind/'  For  it  was  not  a 
new  Thought,  ftarting  into  his  Mind  hcre^ 
if  it  was  the  fame  which  he  began  to  exprels 
at  the  1 2th  Verfe. 

You  proceed,  "  The  Extent  of  the  Free^ 
Gift  in  Chriji^  anfwers  to  the  Extent  of  the 
Confequences  of -^^^;;/s  Sin:  Nay,  abounds 
far  beyond  them.  This  he  incidentally 
handles,  V.  15,  16,  17,  and  then  refumes 
his  main  Defign,  V.  18,  19,  half  of  which 
he  had  executed  in  the  12th  Verfe."  Not 
one  Jot  of  it.  That  Verfe  is  a  complcat 
Sentence,  not  half  of  one  only.  And  the 
Particle  therefore  prefixt  to  the  iSth  Verfe 
fliews,  that  the  Difcourfe  goes  ftrait  for- 
ward;  and  that  this  as  well  as  the  19th 
Verfe  are  clofely  connected  with  the  17th, 

Allowing  then,  "  That  the  '  Apoftle 
draws  a  Comparifon  between  the  Difohedicnce 
of  Adam,  by  which  all  Men  are  brought  im- 
der  Condemjtaticn^  and  the  Obedience  cf  Chrift, 
by  which  all  Men  are  (in  fome  ^cwi^)  j:fti- 
fed  unto  Life-,  ftill  it  does  not  appear,  cither 
That  this  Condemnation  means  no  more  than 
the  Death  of  the  Body,  or  that  this  7?/'?//$- 
cation  means  no  more  than  the  RefurreBion 
of  the  Body,  12.  You 

*  p.  39-    *  P-  4°' 


112  ^he  Doctrine  of 

12.  You  affirm,  V.  *'  The  whole  of  the 
Apoftle'fe  Argument  ftands  upon  thefe  two 
Principles,  That  by  the  Offe?2ce  of  one  Death 
paffed  upon  all  Men  ;  and  by  the  Obedience 
of  one ^  all  are  juftiiied." 

This  is  allowed.  But  I  cannot  allow 
your  Interpretation  of  S^in  is  not  imputed^ 
when  there  is  no  Law,  or  (as  you  would  od- 
ly,  and  contrary  to  all  precedent,  tranflate 
it.  Where  Law  is  not  in  heiiig.)  "  The 
Sins""  of  Mankind,  fay  you,  were  not  im^ 
piitedy  were  not  tax'd  with  the  Forfeiture  of 
Life,  becaufe  the  Law  which  fubjeds  the 
TranfgrefTor  to  Death,  was  not  then  in  be- 
ing. For  it  was  abrogated  upon  Adam's 
Tranfgreffion,  and  was  not  again  in  Force, 
'till  receiv'd  by  MofesT  On  this  I  would 
alk,  I,  Where  is  it  written,  That  "  the 
Law  which  fubjeded  the  TranfgrefTor  to 
Death,  was  abrogated  by  Adam'i  'Tranfgref 
fion  V  I  want  a  clear  Text  for  this.  2.  Sup^ 
pofe  it  was,  how  does  it  appear.  That  it 
was  not  again  in  Force  till  revived  by  Mofes  ? 
3.  Did  not  that  Law,  whofo  JJjeddeth  Majis 
Bloody  by  Man  pall  his  Blood  be  fidedy  "  fub- 
je6l  the  Tranfgreffor  to  Death  ?"  And  was 
it  "  not  in  Force"  ^Sxtx  Adams  Tranfgreffion 
dnd  before  Mofes  ?  4.  What  do  you  mean 
by  that  ambiguous  Expreffion,  "  Were  not 
tax'd  with  the  Forfeiture  of  Life  ?"  Your  Ar- 


gument 


p.  41, 


Original  Sin;  u^ 

gutiieilt  requires  that  it  lliould  mean,  ''  Wire 
not  punifud,  cr  punijhable  li^ith  Death!' 

But  is  this  true  ?  Were  not  the  Sins  cf 
the  Men  of  Sodom  and  indeed  the  whole 
Antediluvian  World  puni(hed  with  Death, 
during  that  Period  ? — V.  Was  not  ever)-  wil- 
ful, impenitent  Tranfgreffor,  during  tliis 
whole  Time,  fubjedl  to  Death  everlafting  ? 

Neither  can  I  allow  that  unnatural  In- 
terpretation of  thein  who  had  not  finned  after 
the  Smilitiide  of  hA^ms  ^ranfgi'ejjion^  *'  Had 
"not  finned  againftLaw,  making  Death  the 
Penalty  of  their  Sin,  as  Adam  did."  Do  not 
the  Words  obvioufly  mean,  *'  Had  not  finned 
by  any  adlual  Sin,  as  Adain  did  r" 

Nay,  *^  the  Sodoinites  and  Antediluvians 
are  no  Objecftion  to  this."  That  is  flrange 
indeed  !  But  how  fo  ?  "  Becaufe  extraordi- 
nary Interpofitions  come  under  no  Rule,  but 
the  Will  of  God."  What  is  that  to  the 
Purpofe  ?  Their  Sins  were  adually  punifh'd 
with  Death,  "  during  that  Space,  wherein 
yDufay,  Mankind  were  notfubjed:  to  Death, 
for  their  Tranfgreffions."  They  icYTi'  fubjec^t 
to  Death  for  their  Tranfgreffions :  As  God 
demonftrated  by  thofe  extraordinary  Inter- 
pofitions. 

You  add,  "  That  ^Law,  Ji1:Gfo  fieddfth 
Mans  Blood,  bv  Man  fiall  his  Blood  be  Jl:tJ. 
makes  Death  the  Penalty  of  Murder."     It 

H  does 

•  P'  42.     •  p.  43- 


114  7he  DocTRiisiE  of 

doc$V  and  thereby  overthrows  your  whole 
Ailertion.  *'Noy  For  i.  It  was  not  enaded 
'till  the  Year  of  the  World  1657."  Well, 
and  if  it  Ka4  been  enadled  only  the  Year  be- 
fore il'ii^^i^^  was  born,  it  would  ftill  have  de- 
ilroyed  your  Argument.  Lut  2.  "  It  is 
given  as  a  Rule  for  Magiftrates  in  executing 
Juilice,  and  not  as  a  Declaration  of  the  Pe- 
nalty of  Sin  to  be  inflidled  by  God  himfelf." 
What  then  ?  Vvliat  does  it  matter,  whether 
the  Penalty  annext  by  God,  were  inflided 
by  God  or  Man  r  However,  I  fuppofe,  this 
Puniiliment  on  the  Antediluvians  and  on 
Sodom  and  Gomorrahy  was  "  inflided  by  God 
HimfeliV'  But  3.  "  None  of  thefe  were 
77iade  Mortal  by  thofe  Sins."  Certainly,  in- 
fallibly true !  And  yet  the  Cafe  of  any  of 
thefe  abundantly  proves,  That  the  Law  was 
in  Force  from  Adam  to  Mofes  even  according 
to  vour  ov/n  Definition  of  it,  "  A  Rule  of 
Duty,  with  the  Penalty  of  Death  annext, 
as  due  to  the  Tranfgreffor  from  God." 

13.  You  affirm  VI.  "  The  ^Confequences 
of  Adam's  Sin  anfwer  thofe  of  Chrijl\  Obe- 
dience ;  but  not  exadly,  Not  as  the  OffencCy 
fo  is  the  Free-gift,  For  if  thro'  the  Of'ence  of 
One  many  be  deady  much  more  the  Grace  (or 
Favour)  ofGoTi  and  the  Gift  (the  Benefits  that 
are)  by  Grace ^  which  is  by  one  Man]t{\xs  Chrift, 
hath  abounded  unto  many,  V.  15.     That 

is, 
p  p.  43,  44. . 


Origi  nal  Sin.  1 1  r 

is.  He  hath  in  Chnfl  bcftowed  Benefits  upon 
Mankind,  far  exceeding  the  Coiifequences 
of  Adams,  Sin  ;  in  erecting  a  New  Diipcn- 
fation,  furniili'd  with  a  glorious  Fund  of 
Light  and  Truth,  Means  and  Motives." 
This  is  true  :  But  how  fmall  a  Part  of  the 
Truth?  What  a  poor,  low  Account  of  the 
Chriflian  Difpenfation. 

You  go  on.  V.  1 6.  Not  as  if  li^as  by  one 
that  Jiniied^  fo  is  the  Gift :  For  the  yudgmnit 
was  by  ojit  Offence  to  Condemnation  ;  hut  the 
free  Gift  is  of  many  Offhices  unto  fujUfica^ 
tion  :  "  That  is,  The  Grace  of  Gud  in 
Chrif  difcharges  Mankind  from  the  Confe- 
quen'ces  of  Adani^  one  Offence."  Does  it 
entirely  difcharge  them  from  thefe  Confe- 
quences  ?  From  Sorrow,  and  Labour  and 
Death  ?  Which  you  affirm'd  a  while  ago,  to 
be  the  only  Confequences  of  it  that  affect 
his  Pofterity.  It  ''  alfo  fets  them  quite  to 
rights  with  God,  both  as  to  a  Conformity 
to  the  Law  and  eternal  Life." 

Is  not  this  allowing  too  much  :  Is  it  well 
conffffent  with  what  you  faid  before  ? '  ''  \\\ 
the  19th  Verfe  the  Apoftle  concludes  the 
whole  Argument:  As  by  one  Mans Difohcdi- 
ence  many  were  made  Sinners,  fo  by  the  Obrdt- 
e?2ce  of  one  fall  many  be  made  Righteous.  Were 
7nade  Sinners  you  aver  means  only,  were 
made  Mortal  Iffo,  the  Counter-part, //We' 
H  2  Righteous 

^  p.  2Q,  and  feq. 


ii6  27:^^  Doctrine  of 

Righteous^  can  only  mean,  made  ImmortaL 
And  that  you  thought  fo  then  appears  from 
your  citing  as  a  parallel  Text,  hi  Chrift 
Jhall  all  be  ?nade  alive :  Which  you  had  be- 
fore aflerted  to  mean  only,  fhall  be  7'aifed 
from  the  Dead, 

14.  "  Hence'  It  followeth,  i.  That  the 
ABOUND  I NG  of  God's  Gr^^^jandtheBleflings 
by  that  Grace,  doth  not  refped:  the  Confe- 
fequences  of  Adam's  Sin,  hath  no  Reference 
to  his  Tranfgrelfion,  but  to  the  Grace  of 
God  and  the  Obedience  of  Chrift^  "  The 
ABOUNDING  of  God's Grace, '*  youinformus, 
"  has  Reference  to  the  Grace  of  God." 
Moft  furc.  But  this  does  not  prove,  That 
it  has  no  Reference  to  the  Confequences  of 
Adam's  Sin.  If  we  gain  more  Bleffing  by 
Chrifl  than  wfe  loft  by  Adam  it  is  doubtlcfs 
abounding  Grace,  But  ftill  it  has  a  Reference 
to  Adam's  Tranfgreffion,  and  the  Confe- 
quences of  it.  It  is  over  thefe  that  it  abounds. 
Therefore  it  has  a  manifeft  Refpedl  to 
them. 

"  It  followeth,'  Secondly,  That  in  the 
18'^  and  1 9""  Verfes  the  Apoftle  confiders  the 
Effe(Sts  of  Chrijfs  Obedience  only  fo  far  as 
they  anfwer  to  and  reverfe  the  Confequences 
of  Ada}7js  Dilbbedience ;  the  additiojial  Bene- 
'fits  flovv^ing  therefrom  having  been  mention- 
ed apart  in  the  15,  16  and  17  Verfes."     In 

thofe 


r    r>, 


p.  45.   ^  p.  46. 


Original  Sin.  117 

thofe  Verfes  the  Apoftle  docs  undoubtedly 
(hew,  How  the  Blefling  by  CbriJ}  abounded 
over  the  Curfe  by  Adam,  But  what  then  ? 
How  does  this  prove,  That  the  i8th  and 
19th  Verfes  do  not  refpedt  all  the  Benefits 
mention'd  before  ?  Without  Qneflion  they 
do:  They  are  a  general  Conclufion,  not  from 
one,  but  all  the  preceding  Verfes. 

^^  Again  obferve,  That  the  'Juflijication 
to  Life  is  fuch  a  Juftification  as  comes  upon 
all  Men''  It  7nay,  in  fome  Senfe.  But  dees 
it  in  Fadl  ?  According  to  your  Senfe  of  it, 
it  comes  upon  none.  For  if  it  means,  "  The 
difcharging  Men  from  the  Confequences  of 
Adam%  Sin ;  and  if  the  only  Confequences 
of  that  Sin  are  Sorrow,  Labour  and  Death," 
it  is  manifeft,  no  Man  upon  Earth  hjujlifcd 
to  this  Day. 

But  you  go  on.  *^  As  Juftijicatio?!  to  Life 
comes  upon  all  Men." — No  :  Not  in  the 
proper,  fcriptural  Senfe  of  7///?/yf6'^//'?'7.  That 
Term  is  never  once  in  the  Bible  ukd  for  the 
RefiirreSlion,  no  more  than  for  Heaven  or 
Hell. 

It  may  be  proper  here  once  for  all  to  ob- 
ferve, That  what  St.  Faid  fays  of  ahoundiiig 
Grace  is  fimply  this :  i.  The  Condemnation 
came  by  one  Offence  only  :  The  Acquittal  is 
from  many  Offences  :  2.  They  who  receive 
this  fhall  enjoy  a  far  higher  Blclling  by  Chril}. 

H  ^  than 

*  P-  47- 


iiS  I'he  Doctrine  of 

than  they  loft  by  Adam,  In  both  thefe  Re- 
fpe(fts  the  Confequences  of  Chrijt^  Death  a- 
bc tin d ovtv  the  Confequences  of  Adams  Sin. 
And  this  whole  Bkffing  by  Chrijl:  is  term'd 
in  the  i8'^  Verfe  "fujiificationy  in  the  19'^ 
being  made  Righteous, 

"  Further,  The  Phrafe,  being  ""  made 
Righteous  as  well  as  being  made  Sinners^  is 
an  Hebrew  Way  of  fpeaklng."  I  do  not 
allow  that.  Both  the  Phrafes  y-ot^^UatrhA 
^Uccioiy  or  a/xc'^TwA^j  are  pure,  and  good  Greek, 
That  therefore  there  is  anv  Hebraijm  at  all  in 
thefe  Exprellions,  cannot  be  admitted  without 
Proof.  If  then  the  fame  Hebrew  Word  does 
fignify  to  ?nake  righteous^  and  to  acquit  in 
Judgment  \  it  does  "not  follow,  that  the  Greek 
Word,  here  tranflated,  made  righteous ^  means 
only  being  acquitted.  You  yourfelf  fay  the 
contrary.  You  but  now  defined  this  very 
Gift,  "  The  "Benefits  that  are  by  Grace.'* 
And  in  explaining  thofe  very  Words,  T^he 
Free-Gift  is  of  many  Offences  unto  JuJIifcationy 
affirmed,  That  is,  "  The  Grace  of  God  in 
Ckri/iy  not  only  difcharges  Mankind  from 
the  Confequences  oi  Ada?ns  Sin,  but  alfo 
fets  them  quite  to  rights  with  God,  both  as 
to  a  Conformity  to  the  Law,  and  as  to  eter- 
nal Life."  And  is  this  no  more  than  "  ac- 
quitting them  in  Judgment?"  "  Or  revcrfmg 
tlie  Sentence  of  Condemnation  ?" 

.  Through 

"  p.  49-     "  P  44- 


Original  Sin. 

Through  this  whole  Pafiage  it  nuy  i>c 
obferved,  That  the  Gift,  the  Free-Giff,  tU 
Gift  by  Grace  mean  one  and  the  fame  Thing, 
even  the  whole  Beneiit  given  by  the  akund- 
ing  Grace  of  God,  through  the  Obedience 
of  Chriji :  Abounding  both  with  Regard  to 
the  Fountain  itfclf,  and  the  Streams :  Abun- 
dant Grace  producing  abundant  BlefTings. 

If  then  thefe  Verfes  are  ^'  evidently  paral- 
lel to  thofe  I  Cor,  xv.  2 1,  22."  It  follows  even 
hence,  That  dfmg  and  being  made  alive ^  m 
the  latter  Paffage,  do  not  refer  to  the  Body 
only :  But  that  dyi?ig  implies,  all  the  Evils 
temporal  and  fpiritual,  which  are  deriv'd 
from  Adam's,  Sin  ;  and  bei?2g  made  alive,  all 
the  Bleffings  which  are  derived  from  Chrifi, 
in  Time  and  in  Eternity. 

Whereas  therefore  you  add,  *'  It  is  "now 
evident  furely  beyond  all  Doubt,  (ftrong 
Exprefiions!)  That  the  Confequcnces  oi  A- 
damh  Sin  here  fpoken  of,  are  no  other  than 
the  T>eath  which  comes  upon  all  Men  :"  1 
mull  beg  Leave  to  reply,  It  is  not  evident  at 
all;  nay,  it  is  tolerably  evident  on  the  con- 
trary, That  this  Death  implies  all  Manner 
of  Evils,  to  Vv'hich  either  the  Body  or  Soul  is 
liable. 

15.  You  next  re-confider  the  12'^  Verfe, 
which  you  underiland  thus :  ''  ' Death  fajjed 

H  4  iipo^^ 

^  p.  50.    >■  p.  51. 


I20  72v  Doctrine  of 

upon  al/Men,  for  that  all  have  finned^  namely, 
in  Adam,  All  have  finned^  that  is,  are  fub- 
jedled  to  Death  through  that  one  Offence  of 
his."  ^^'^ 

-  You  faid  before,  "  Death  pajjed  upon  all 
Men,,  means,  All  were  by  a  judicial  Sentence 
made  fubjecfl  to  Death."  And  here  you  fay, 
"  All  have  fimied^  means,  All  have  been 
fubjefted  to  Death."  So  the  Apoftle  afferts, 
"  All  were  fubjed:ed  to  Death,  becaufe  all 
weie  fubjeded  to  Death!"  Not  fo.  ♦S'/;z  is 
one  Thing,  Death  another  \  and  the  former 
is  here  affign'd  as  the  Caufe  of  the  latter. 
"  Although  the  ""  Criticifm  on  £^*^,  is  li- 
able to  much  Exception  yet  I  leave  that  and 
the  Hebrew  Citations  as  they  ftand :  Becaufe, 
tho'  they  may  caufe  many  Readers  to  admire 
your  Learning,  yet  they  arc  not  to  the  Point. 
'  '  ''Seeing^  then  the  Phrafe  All  are  made 
Sinners  hath  been  demonjlrated  to  fignify.  All 
'  are  fubjeSted  to  Death  by  a  judicial  Sentence: 
And  feeing  the  Apoftle's  whole  Argument 
turns  on  this  Point,  That  all  Men  die  thro' 
the  one  Offence  oi  Adam  :  Who  can  doubt, 
but  all  have  fomed^  means  the  fame  with  all 
are  made  Sinner sV  I  do  not  doubt  it;  but  I 
flill  deny  that  either  Phrafe  means  no  more 
than  *'  all  are  in  a  State  of  Sufferijig^ 

i6.  In  order  fully  to  clear  this  important 
Text,  I  fliall  here  fubjoin  feme  of  Dr.  Jen- 

7nngs\ 


Original  Sin.  121 

nmgis  Remarks,^  "  The  Apoftle  having 
treated  in  the  preceding  Chapter  of  the  Caufe 
and  Manner  of  a  Sinner's  "Jujlijication  before 
God,  namely  thro'  the  Merits  of  Chrift,  and 
by  Faith  in  his  Blood  ;  and  having  fpoken  of 
the  Fruits  of  Juftilication  in  the  former  Part 
of  this  Chapter:  He  proceeds  in  the  Verfes 
before  us,  to  illuftrate  our  Salvation  by  C/j/v/?, 
by  comparing  it  with  our  Ruin  by^i/^w;.  He 
compares  Adam  with  Chrijl^  and  flie\\'s  how 
what  we  loft  by  the  one,  is  rcftored  by 
the  other  with  abundant  Advantage.  He 
makes  Adam  to  be  a  Figure  or  T^ype  oiChriJh 
Confidering  them  both  as  publick  Perfons, 
reprefenting,  the  One  all  his  natural  De- 
fcendants,  the  other  all  his  fpiritual  Seed  : 
The  one,  Adam^  all  Mankind,  who  are  all 
guilty  before  God  :  The  other,  Chrijl^  all 
thole  "who  obtain  the  Right eouffiefs  of  God, 
which  is  by  Faith^  to  all  them  that  believe. 

''  Concerning  the  Confequcnces  oi A- 
da?7t^  Sin  upon  his  Poftcrity,  we  have  here 
the  following  Particulars : 

I.  That  by  one  Man  Sin  cnter'd  into 
the  World  ^  that  the  whole  World  is  fomc 
Way  concern'd  mAdam\  Sin.  And  this 
indeed  is  evident,  bccaufe 

II.  Death,  which  is  the  IVages  of  Sin, 
and  the  very  Punifliment  thrcaten'd  to  A^ 

dam^^ 

b  Vindication  of  the  Scripture  Doarinc  of  Original  Sln^ 
Page  18—35. 


122  I'he  Doctrine  of 

dams  firft  TranfgreiTion,  enter d by  Sin  and 
paffed  upon  all  Men  5  is  actually  inflicted  on 
all  Mankind.  Upon  which  it  is  afferted  in 
the  next  Words 

III.  That  all  have  finned:  Even  fo  Death 
pajfed  upon  all  Men^  for  that  all  have  faned. 
All  Men  then  are  deem'd  Sinners  in  the  Eve  of 
God,  on  Account  of  that  one  Sin,  of  which 
atjone  the  Apoftle  is  here  fpeaking.     And  - 

IV.  Not  only  after,  but  before,  and  un- 
fit tl^  Law  (given  by  Mofcs)  Sin  was  in  the 
fVcrld ',  and  Men  were  deemed  Sinners  and 

'accordingly  punifhed  with  Death,  through 
rrlany  Generations.  Now  Sin  is  not  imputed^ 
where  ^there  is  no  Law :  Neverthelefs  Death 
reigned  from  Adam  to  Mofes :  Plainly  fliew- 
ihg,  That  all  Mankind  during  that  whole 
Period  bad  iinned  in  Adam  and  fo  died,  in 
Virtue-of  the  Death  threaten'd  to  him.  And 
Death  could  not  then  be  infli6ted  on  Man- 
kind, for  any  adlual  Sin,  "becaufe  it  was  in- 
tlidied  on  fo  many  Infants,  vvho  had  neither 
eaten  of  the  forbidden  Fruit,  nor  committed 
any  aftual  Sin  whatever,  and  therefore  had 
notfnned  in  any  Senfe,  after  the  Similitude  of 
Adam'i  T'ranfgrejjion.     Therefore 

V.  It  was  through  the  Offence  of  one ^  that 
ma?iy  a7'e  deady  V.  15.  By  o?ic  Offence  Death 
reigned  by  one^  V.  17.  And  feeing  the  Sin 
of  Ada^n  is  thus  punifh'd  in  all  Men,  it  fol- 
lows 

VI.  That 


Original  Sin.  i^ . 

VI.  That  they  were  all  involved  in  thut 
Sentence  of  Condemnation,  which  God  pais- 
ed  upon  him.  The  Judgjnent  ivas  by  one  iq 
Condemnation,  V.  i6.  By  one  OJjhice  Judg- 
ment carne  upon  all  Men  to  Condemnation,  V .  1 8. 
And  fmce  it  is  fo  plain,  that  all  Men  are 
adually  punifli'd  for  Adanh  Sin,  it  mail 
needs  follow, 

VII.  T^ AT  they  ^////i;/^^/;z  Adam.  By 
one  Mans  Difobediejice  many  were  7nadc  Si?i^ 
ners.  They  were  fo  conjiituted  Sinners  by 
Adanis  linning  as  to  become  liable  to  the 
Punilhment  threatened  to  his  TranfgrcfTion. 

Between  Adam  and  Chriji^  the  Type 
and  the  Antitype,  St.  Paul  draws  the  Paral- 
lel in  the  following  Particulars. 

I.  Both  have  done  fomething  by  which 
many  others  are  aftecfled,  who  either  lofc 
or  gain  by  what  they  did  :  Thro  the  Offence 
of  one  many  are  dead:  By  07ie,  the  Gift  of 
Grace  hath  abounded  to  many,  Vcrfe  1 5. 

II.  That  which  the  firll  Adam  did,  by 
which  many  /.  e,  all  Men  receive  Hurt,  was 
Sin,    Offence   and    Difobedience :    They    all 
fuifer  By  one  that  fmncd,  V.  16,    By  the  Of- 
fence of  one,  by  oiie  Man  s  Difobedience,  V.  iS, 

19.  That  which  the  fecond  ^^/j///  did  by 
which  many,  that  is,  all  who  believe,  re- 
ceive Benefit  is  Righteoiifnefi  and  Obedience  :^ 
By  the  Right eoufncfs  of  one,  by  the  Obedience  oj 

one,  V.  18,   19. 

III.  Tin 


124  ^^^  Doctrine  of 

III.  The  Detriment  which  all  Men  re- 
ceive through  Adam  is,  That  they  aj'e  made 
Sinners  :  That  "Judgment  is  come  upon  tkem  to 
Condemnation  -,  in  Confequence  of  which, 
Death,  the  Wages  of  Sin,  is  inflidled  on  e- 
vcry  one  of  them.  The  Benefit  which  all 
Believers  receive  through  Chrijf,  is  Grace^ 
or.  the  Favour  of  God.  Juftification,  Righ- 
teoufnefsy  or  Sandtification,.  and  Eternal  Life, 
'flije  Grace  of  God ,  aiid  the  Gift  by  Grace, 
hdth  by  _  one  Man^  Jefus  Chrift,  abounded  to 
many.  By  the  Righteoifnefs  of  one,  the  Free- 
Gift  came  upon  all  Men  (who  receive  it)  to 
fuflifcation  of  Life,  5y  the  Obedience  of  one, 
many  lire  made  righteous,  V.  15,   18,   19. 

Thus  the  Apodle  fliews  the  Parity  be- 
tween the  Effedls  of  Adam's  Sin  and  of 
CkrifFs,  Righteoufnefs.  Only  in  two  Inftances 
he  {hews,  that  the  Eftedl  of  the  latter,  vaft- 
ly  exceeds  the  I^ifedl  of  the  former. 

I.  It  removes  many  Sins,  belides  that  one 
Sin  oi  Adam,  v/hich  fo  affected  all  his  Pofte- 
rity.  If  through  one  Ofence  many  be  dead,  much 
MORE  /&  Grace  of  God  by  Jefus  Chrifl:  hath 
abounded  to  many,  ^he  fiidgment  was  by  one . 
to  Condemnation',  but  the  Free-Gift  is  of  many 
Offences  unto  fiiftificati on,  V.  ]  5,    16. 

II.  Christ  raifes  Believers  to  a  far  hap- 
pier State  than  that  which  Adam  enjoyed  in 
Paradife.  Much  mor£  they  who  receive Abim- 

dance 


Original  Sin.  to  - 

'  *"  ^ 

dance  of  Grace  and  of  the  Gft  ofRightcoufncfs^ 
JI:a// REIGN  inLife.byone,  JefusChrifi:.  V.  17." 
17.  Your  Paraphrafe'  on  the  Text,  being 
only  a  Repetition  of  what  you  had  faid  over 
and  over  before,  does  not  require  any  feparate 
Confideration.     Only  I  muft  obferve  a  few 
Miftakes    which  have  not  occurr'd  before. 
''"  The  Refurreftion  is  tlie  firil  and  funda- 
mental Step  in  the  Gofpel-Salvation."     No: 
He  fiall  five  his  Veople from  their  Si;is  -,  this 
is  the  firft  and  fundamental  Step.     2.  You 
have  very  grievoufly  miflaken  the  Meaning 
of  four  Texts  in  the  6'^  of  St.  John,     J'his  is 
the  Father  s  Will,  that  of  all  ivhich  He  hath 
given  Me,  Ifoould  lofe  nothing,  but  foul draife 
it  up  again  at  the  laf  Day,  V.  3  9.     T^his  is  the 
Will  ^Hi7n  that  fent  Me,  that  every  one  that 
feeth  the  Son  and  bclieveth  on  Him  fhouki  have 
everlafting  Life,  and  I  'will  ralfe  him  up  at  the 
laft  Day,  V.  40.     No  Man  can  come  to  Me, 
except  the  Father  draw  him  -,  and  I  will  raife 
him  up  at  the  laf  Day,  V.  44.     Whofo  eaieth 
my  Fief  and  drinketh  my  Blood,  hath  eternal 
Life,  and  I  will  raife  him  up  at  the  laft  Day, 
V.  54.     Now  you  cite  aU  thefc  Texts,  as  re- 
lating to  the  general  RefurreBicn.     Whereas 
not  one  of  them  relates  to  it  at  all.     They 
are  all,  Promifes  made  to  true  Believers  only; 
and  relate  wholly  and  folely  to  the  Rcjur- 

region  of  the  Jiift* 

iS.  It 

^  P-5i— ^4-    *  P-  ^^' 


126  "The  Doctrine  of 

1 8.  Ii^  remains  then,  all  that  has  been 
advanced  to  the  contrary  notwithftanding, 
That  the  only  true  and  rational  Way,  of 
accounting  for  the  general  Wickednefs  of 
Mankind,  in  all  Ages  and  Nations  is  pointed 
out  in  thofe  Words,  In  Adam  all  die.  In 
and  through  their  firfc  Parent  all  his  Pofterity 
died  in  a  fpiritual  Senfe :  And  they  remain 
wholly  dead  in  l^refpajjes  a7id  Sipis,  'till  the 
fecond  jidam  makes  diem  alive.  By  this  one 
Man  Sin  entered  into  the  World  and  pajjed  upon 
all  Men,  And  thro'  the  Infection  which  they 
derive  from  him,  all  Men  are  and  ever  were 
by  Nature,  entirely  alienated  from  the  Life  of 
God,  without  Hope,  without  God  in  the  World, 

1.  Your  Appendix  to  the  iirft  Part  of  your 
Book  is  wholly  employed  in  anfwering  two 
Queftions.  "  ^  One  is.  How  is  it  coiffent 
with  Jujiice,  that  all  Men  fozdd  die  by  the 
Difobedience  of  one  Man  ?  The  other.  How 
Jhall  we  account  for  all  Mens  rifng  again,  by 
the  Obedience  of  another  Man,  Jefus  Chrift  ?'* 

You  may  determine  the  former  Queftion 
as  you  pleafe,  iince  it  does  not  touch  the 
main  Point  in  Debate.  I  fliall  therefore 
take  no  farther  Pains  about  it,  than  to  make 
a  fhort  Extraft  of  what  Dr.  f —  fpeaks  on 
the  Head. 

2.  *'  'As  to  the  firft  Queftion,  Mf.  T— 
gets  rid  of  all  Difficulty,  that  may  arife  from 

the 

*  p.  65.     ^  Vindication  p.  36,  ^. 


Original  Sin.  127 

the  Confideration  of  God's  Jufticc,  by  afcrih- 
ing  it  wholly  to  his  Goodnefs,  That  Death 
pajjed  upon  all  Men,  Death,  he  tells  us,  is 
upon  the  whole  a  Benefit^  It  is  certain,  that 
BeUevers  in  Chriji  receive  Benefit  by  it.  But 
this  Gentleman  will  have  Death  to  be  an 
"  Original  Benefit,  and  that  to  all  Mankind: 
Meerly  intended  to  increafe  the  Vanity  cf  all 
earthly  Things,  and  to  abate  their  Force  to  de- 
lude us.  He  afterward  difplays  the  Benefit 
of  fhortening  human  Life,  to  its  prefcnt 
Standard  :  That  Death  being  nearer  to  our 
View  might  be  a  powerfid  Motive  to  regard  kfs 
the  Thijigs  of  a  tranjitory  World :  But  does 
the  nearer  View  of  Death,  in  Fad:  produce 
this  Effect  ?  Does  not  the  common  Obfcrva- 
tion  of  all  Ages  prove  the  contrary  ?  Has 
not  Covetoufnefs  been  the  peculiar  Vice  of 
old  Age  ?  As  Death  is  nearer  to  the  View, 
we  plainly  fee,  that  Men  have  more  and 
more  Regard  for  the  Things  of  a  tranfitory 
World.  We  are  fure  therefore  that  Deatli 
is  no  fuch  Benefit  to  the  Generality  of  Men. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  King  of  Terrors 
to  them,  the  Burden  of  their  Lives,  a  Bane 
of  their  Pleafures.  To  talk  therefore  of 
Death's  being  a  Benefit,  an  Original  Benefit, 
and  that  to  all  Mankind  is  to  talk  againll 
the  Common  Senfe  and  Experience  of  tlic 
whole  World." 


(.i 


Tis 


izS  The  Doctrine  of 

"  Tis  ftrajige  Death  fhould  be  originally 
given  by  God  as  a  Benefit  to  Man,  and 
that  the  fhortening  of  Man's  Life  afterward 
fliowld  be  defigned  as  a  farther  Benefit : 
And  yet  that  God  fhould  fo  often  promife 
his  peculiar  People  long  Life  as  the  Reward 
of  Obedience,  and  threaten  them  with 
Death,  as  a  Punifhment  of  Difobedience  ! 

"  But  the  Scripture^  he  fays,  affirms^ 
I'hat  Sufferings^  are  the  Chajlifements  of  our 
heavenly  Father^  and  'Death  iii  particular ,  But 
does  not  every  Chaftifement  fuppofe  a  Fault? 
Muft  he  not  be  a  cruel  Father,  who  will 
chaften  his  Children  for  no  Fault  at  all  ?  If 
then  God  does  but  chaften  us  for  Adams 
Sin,  the  Fault  of  it  muft  fome  Way  lie  up- 
on us.  Elfe  we  fuppofe  God's  Dealings 
with  his  Children  to  be  unreafonable  and 
unrighteous.'* 

3.  I  WOULD  only  add  two  or  three  ob- 
vious Queftlons.  i.  Did  God  propofe  Death 
as  a  Benefit  in  the  Original  Threatning  ? 
2.  Did  he  reprefent  it  as  a  Benefit  in  the 
Sentence  pronounced  on  Adain^  Dujl  thou 
arty  and  unto  Diift  thoufialt  return  ?  3.  Do 
the  infpircd  Writers  fpeak  of  God's  bringing 
a  Flood  on  the  World  of  the  Ungodly  y  as  a  Bene- 
fit  or  a  Funijldment\  4.  Do  they  mention 
the  Deftruftion  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  as 
defigned  for  a  Benefit  to  them  ?  5.  Is  it  by 
Way  of  Benefit,  that  God  declares,  The  Sctd 

that 


Original  Sin.  129 

thatfinneth^  it  pall  die?  Certainly  this  Point 
is  not  defenfible.  Death  is  properly  not  a 
Benefit,  but  a  Puniflimcnt. 

4.  The  "  other  Queftion  is,  How  JJ:all  ivc 
account  for  all  Mens  rijing  again ^  by  the  Obe- 
dience of  another  Man  Jelus  Chrift  ? 

"  To  fet  this  in  a  clear  Licrht,  I  alk  ano- 
ther  Queftion,  Wliat  ''  was  it  that  gave  the 
glorious  Perfonage,  embleniizcd  by  the  Lamb 
(Rev.v.  I,  &c.)  his  fuperior  Worthiness, 
vhis  prevailing  Interest  in  God,  beyond 
all  others  in  Pleaven  and  Earth  ?  It  was  his 
being  fain  ^  that  is,  his  Obedience  to  God, 
and  Good'ivill  to  Men  :  It  was  his  conium- 
mate  Virtue.  Then  art  Worthy— W'hy  r  Be- 
caufe  thou  haft  exhibited  to  God  fuch  an 
Inftance  of  Virtuey  Obedience  and  Coodnr/L 
Thou  haft  facrificed  thy  Life  in  the  Caufe 
of  Truth,  and  ha/l  redeemed  us,  by  that  Ad 
of  the  higheft  Obedience."  v   1   ■ 

With  what  extreme  Warincfs-is  this 
whole  Paragraph  worded?  You  do  not  care  to 
fay  diredly, "  jeJusChrijl  is  either  a  littleGor, 
or  He  is  no  God  at  all."  So  you  fay  it  \\\- 
diredly,  in  an  Heap  of  fmooth,  labourV!, 
decent  Circumlocutions.  Yet  permit  mc  to 
afK,  was  ''  that  Act  of  Obedience,  the  ongi- 
naUndfole  Ground,"  of  his  prevailing  In- 
terest IN  God,  and  of  his  Worthinkss, 
not  only  to  open  the  Book,  but  to  receive  from 

T  n  1 1 

?  p.  70.   ^  p-  r^j  72. 


130  The  Doctrine  of 

all  the  Armies  of  Heaven,  the  Power  and  the 
Riches,  and  the  Wifdcm,  and  the  Strength  3  and 
the  Honour  and  the  Glory,  and  the  Blejjing  ? 
Rev.  V.  12.  And  is  this  AB  the  original  2ind 
the  fo/e  Ground,  why  a/I  Men  muft  honour 
Him  even  as  they  honour  the  Father?  Yea, 
and  why  every  Creature  which  is  in  the  Heaven^ 
and  on  the  Earth,  and  wider  the  Earth,  and 
on  the  Sea,  and  all  that  are  in  them,  fay,  T'o 
Him  thatfitteth  on  the  'Throne  aiid  to  the  Lamby 
is  the  BleJJing,  and  the  Honour  and  the  Glory 
and  the  Power  -,  for  ever  and  ever  I  V.  13. 

To  Hi?n  that  fitteth  on  the  Throne  and  to 
the  Lamb — Does  that  iiiean,  To  the  great 
God  and  the  httle  God  ?  If  fo,  when  all 
Creatures  in  Heaven  and  Earth,  all  through- 
out the  Univerfe,  thus  hojioiir  Hi?n  even  as 
they  honour  the  Father,  are  they  not  doing 
him  too  much  Honour  ?  My  Glory,  faith  the 
Lord,  /  will  7iot  give  to  another.  How 
comes  it  then  to  be  given  to  the  Lamb  ? 

5.  You  proceed,  "  The  Worthiness  of 
Chrift  IS  his  confummate  Virtue,  Obedieiice 
to  God,  and  Benevolence  to  his  Creatures."  Is 
this  the  o?ily  Ground  of  his  Worthiness  to 
be  hcnoure'd  even  as  the  Father  ?  Is  it  on  this 
Ground  alone,  That  all  the  Angels  of  God 
are  to  worfip  H!?n  f  Or  rather,  becaufe  in 
the  Beginning,  from  Everlafting,  He  was  with 
God  ajid  was  God.  • 

''  Virtue 


Original  Sin.  jji 

"  Virtue  is  the  only  Price  whidipur- 
cbafeth  every  Thing  with  God.  True  'Vir- 
tue, or  the  right  Excrcifc  oFReafon  is  true 
fFort/jj  and  the  only  valuabk  €072/1  deration 
which  prevails  with  God." 

Do  you  then  conceive  this  to  be  the  exad 
Meaning  of  St.  raul,  when  he  fays,  7'e  are 
bought  with  a- Price.  And  that  wherq  he 
ipeaks  of  the  Church  of  God  nxiich  He  ha^b 
piirchafed  with  his  OTJii  BiooJ,  he  means^  with 
his  ow?i  Virtue  ?  Agreeably  to  which,  Thou 
haji  redeemed  us  by  thy  Blood,  niuft  mean. 
By  *'  the  right  Ex'ercife  of  thy  Reafon  /"  Well 
then  mightFather  Sociims  fay, ''  Tota  redemp- 
tionis  7ioftra  per  Chriflum  Metaphcra,  Thc^ 
whole  Metaphor  of  our  Redemption  by  Chrift." 
For  on  this  Scheme,  there  is  nothing  real 

in  it. 

"-  It  was  not  the  mere  natural  Poicrr  or 
Strength  of  the  Lamb,  but  his  moft  excellent 
Charaoferr—Slv,  Do  you  honour  the  Son,  cirn 
as  you  honour  the  Father  ?  If  you  did  could 
vou  poffibly  talk  of  Him  in  this  Straiii  ? 
"  However  all  this  does  not  aifed  the 
Quefdon  :  But  it  ftill  remains  an  unlliaken 
Tnrh,  That  all  Mens'  dying  in  Alam  is  the 
Grand  Caufe,  why  the  whole  JForld  lieth  in 

JVickedncfs. 

Newington,  Jan.  ib,    1757- 


I  2  ''  ^^ 


•  p.  73' 


V32  'I'he  Doctrine  of 

1.  In  your  Second  Fart  you'profefs  to 
/^  examine  the  principal  Paffages  of  Scrip- 
ture, which  Divines  have  apphed,  in  Sup- 
port of  the  Dod:rine  of  Original  Sin  :  Parti- 
cularly thofe  ciiQ^hy  the^JIJJanbly  of  Divines 
in  their  larger  Cafcchifmr  To  this  I  never 
fubfcribed  :  But  I  think  it  is  in  the  main,  a 
very  excellent  Compofition.  Which  I  fhall 
therefore  chearfully  endeavour  to  defend,  fo 
far  as  r  conceive  it  is  grounded  oh  clear 
Scripture, 

But  I  would  iirft  obferve  in  general,  with 
Dr.//—,  That  there  are  two  Kind  of  Texts 
in  the  enfuing  Collection  :  Some  that  di^ 
rcBly  prove ^  others  that  properly  ilhflrate  the 
Dc(fl:rine  of  Orio^inal  Sin.  And  there  are  fo 
m.any,  in  which  it  is  either  diredlly  fpoken 
of,  or  evidently  implied,  that  the  Author 
might  well  have  fpared  his  Obfervatlon, 
'^  The  ^Smptnre  jpeaks  veryfparingly  oftkeCoii- 
Jcqucnces  of  AdamV  Sin  upon  iis^  becaufe  as 
fhefe  are  freely  reve?-fed  to  Mankind  by  Chrift, 
.'we  are  not  fo  much  concerned  to  knew" them. 
The  Fafl;  here  aflirhi'd  is  equally  true  with 
the  Reafon  aflign'd  for  it." 

2.  The  Firfl  Propofition  in  the  Catechifn^ 
vvhicli  relates  to  Oriinnal  Sin  \z  this. 

The  " Ccvenani  being  ?nade  %dth  Adam  as  a 
pullick  Pi7fo?2,  not  fir  hinfcf  only^  but  for  his 
Fojierity^  (dl  Mankind  dejcending  froni  him  by 

ordinaj'v 


V-     r>      Q- 


p.  87,  SS.     '  p    50.     *"•  p.  91.  92. 


Original  Sin.  j-^-^ 

ordinary  Generation^  finned  ivith  him^  end  fcJl 
with  him  in  t}MJir(l  Trayifgrefjion, 

A5ls  xvii.  26.    God  hath  made  of  one  IMocd 

all  Nations  of  Men. 1  believe ^Dr.  y— '^ 

Remark  here  will  fuffice. 

"  '  This  is  quoted  to  prove,  That  all 
Mankind  defeend  from  Adam.  But  Mr.  T" — 
adds,  T'hat  isy  Hath  made  all  the  Nations  of 
the  World  of  o?ie  Species ^  endc^tved  ivith  the . 
fame  Facidties.  And  lb  they  might  have 
been,  if  all  Men  had  been  created  fingly 
and  feparately,  jult  as  Adam  was :  But  they 
could  not  then,  with  any  Propriety  of  Lai:t- 
guage,  have  been  faid  to  be  cf  one  Blood, 
This  Scripture  therefore  is  very  pertinently 
quoted  to  prm^e  what  it  is  brought  for.  That 
Adam  was  a  pidjlick  Perfon,  including  all  his 
Pofterity^  and  confeqiiently.,  that  all  Mankind 
defcending  from  him  by  ordinary  GcJicratio?!,. 
finned  in  him,  and  fell  ^iviih  him  in  his  frft 
T'ranfgrefion,  the  Allembly  have  proved  very 
methodically  and  fubflantially:  Firll,  from 
Gen,  ii.  16,  17,  where  Death  is  dircatncd  to 
Adam  in  Cafe  of  his  finning:  Then  iKomlljm. 
v^  12 — 20,  and  I  Cor.  xv.  21,  22,  v/htTc  we 
are  exprelly  told,  That  all  Men  die  /;;  Adam, 
and  that  by-  his  Offence,  judgment  is  come  up- 
m  all  Men  to  Condemnation. 

Prop.  All   "" Maiddnd  fvwed  in  him,  and 
fell  with  him  in  that  fall  'Imnfgreffion :  \Miich 

i  3  rh.v 

»   Vindicat!:,':  p.  \n^  ^'^-     "  P-  93»  94- 


134  ^^^^  Doctrine  of 

they  prove  by  Gen,  ii.  1 6,  17.  compared  with 
Rem,  V.  12 — 20. 

On  this  you  remark,  "  The  ^Threatning, 
'Thou  fialt  Jurely  die^  is  addreft  to  Adam  per-».. 
fonaliy.  And  therefore  nothing  can  be  con- 
cluded thence,  with  Regard  to  Adams  Po- 
itcrity."  Is  this  Confequence  good?  Was  not 
the  Sentence  ahb  grounded  on  this  Threat- 
ning,  Unto  Dujl  tkoii  Jhalt  return^  perlbnally 
diicdted  to  him  ?  And  is  this  notliing  to  his 
Fcflerity  ?  Nay  does  it  not  from  this  very 
Conlideration  appear,  That  all  his  Pofterity 
were  concern'd  in  that  Threatning,  becaufe 
they  are  all  Partakers  of  the  Death  which 
was  fo  threaten'd  to  Adam  ? 

''  Bin?  we  cannot  gather  from  Rom.  v.  or 

i  Cor,  XV.  That  all  Mankind Jhine din  Adam, 

if  we  \^w^iZx^'^ccA  Jinned  as  diftinguiihed  from 

JufferingF     It  has  been  largely  proved,  that 

we  can  :  -And  that  fmning  muft  neceffarilv 

be  underftood  there,  as  difdnguiflied  from 

Jl^ring, 

"  But  the  Apoftle  fays.  The  Offence'^  of 
c>72^  brought  Denth  into  the  World  :  Whereas 
had  all'  Mankind  finned  in  Adam  when  he 
finned,  then  that  Offence  would  not  have 
b'^cn  the  Offence  of  one  ^  but  of  m  i  l  l  ion  s  /'  It 
might  be,  in  one  Senfe,  die  Offence  of  ;;;//- 
lions ^   and  in  another,  the  Offence  of  one. 

p  p.  94.   ^  p.  95. 


Original  Sin.  i^c 

"  It  is  true,  Adanh  Poflerity  fo  fell  ivith 
him  in  that  firjl  TraiifgrelJicn,  that  il"  tlie 
Thrcatninghad  been  immediately  executed, 
he  would  have  had  no  Foftcrity  at  all." 
The  Threatning!  What  was  the  Thrcat- 
ning  to  them  r  Did  not  you  afluie  us,  in  the 
very  laft  Page,  The  Threatning  is  addrejfed  to 
Adam  perfonally,  and  therefore  ?icthing  can  he 
concluded  jrotn  thence  ivith  Regard  to  Us  Pc- 
Jierity  ? 

And  here  you  fay,  Their  very  *'Exill:ence 
did  certainly  fall  under  the  Threatning  of  the 
Law  and  into  the  Hands  of  the  Judge  to  be 
be  difpofed  of  as  He  fliould  think  ht."  **  As 
He  ihould  think  fit!"  Then  He  might  with- 
out any  Injuftice,  have  deprived  them  of  all 
Bleffings  :  Of  Being  itfclf,  the  only  poffible 
Ground  of  all!  And  this,  for  the  Sin  of 
another! 

You  clofe  the  Article  thus.  ''  Wc  can- 
not from  thofc  Pailagcs  conclude,  That 
Mankind  by  Adanis  Offence,  incurr'd  any 
Evil  but  temporal  Death  /"  Juit  the  contrar)^ 
has  been  Ihewn  at  large. 

3.  Their  fecond  Propofition  is,  The  Fall 
brought'    Mankind  into   a   State  of  Sin  and 

Mifery, 

To  prove  this,  they  cite  Rom.  v.  12.  A 
Proof  which  all   the  Art   of  Man   cannot 

evade  :  And  Rom.  iii.  23.  ylllhavcfnnedy  '^'^'^ 

J[  ^  come 


p.  96. 


136  The  Doctrine  c/* 

come  pjort  of  the  Glory  of  God.  "  But  this, 
you  lay,  means  only,  "Jews  as  well  as- Gen- 
tiles, Men  of  all  Nations  have  finnedV 
Nay,  it  is  moft  certain,  as  Dr.  y— ob^ 
ferves,  That  he  "  means-  all  Men  of  all 
Nations:  Orhc  mearis  nothing  to  the  Piir- 
pofe  of  his  Conclufion  and  his  Inferences,' 
V.  19,  20,  21,  22.  The  Apoftle  concludes 
.from  the  View  he  had  given  before  of  the 
univcrfal  Corruption  of  Mankind,  That  every 
Month  mufi  ke  flopped,  and  all  the  World  become 
guilty  before  God,  V.  19.  From  whence  he 
draws  two  Inferences,  i.  T'kerefore  by  the 
Works  of  the  Law  there  fall  710  Flefi  bejuflifed, 
2.  The  only  Way  of  Juftification  for  all  Sin- 
ners is,  By  Faith  in  Jefus  Chrift.  For  there 
is  no  Diference,  as  to  the  Way  of  Juftifica- 
tion 3  for  ail  have  fn?7ed  and  come  fort  of  the 
Glory  (fGoD,  And  therefore  whoever  they 
are  whcni  Mr.  T—  excludes  from  this  j^ll 
(all have fnned)h.t  muft  likewife  excufe  from 
having  any  Need  of  Jufcification  by  Chrifiy 
.  Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  certain,  i.  That 
jVlankind  are  now  in  a  State  of  Sin  and  Suf- 
fcri?ig.  2.  Tlvat  they  have  been  fo  in  all 
Ages,  nearly  from  the  Time  that  yldam  fell. 
Nov/  if  his  Fall  did  not  bri??g  them  into  that 
State,  I  would  be  glad  to  knovv',  What  did? 
4.  TfiEiR  third  Propofition  is,  ""Sin  is  any 
Want  of  Confcrmity  to,  cr  T^raifgrejjion  of  the 
'  Law 

'•   p.  97.      *    Fi::di:ctici:  p.  50,  kc.      "   p.  98. 


Original  Sin.  i^f 

Law  of  doD,  given  as  a  Rule  to  the  rcafcnaUe 
Creature,  This,  you  fliy,  has  no  immediate 
Relation,  to  our  prelcat  Delign.''  Ijut  it 
had  to  their's:  Which  was  to  illuilrate  the 
preceding  Affertion,  That  the  Fall  of  Adam 
brought  Mankind  into  a  State  of  Sin,  in  both 
thefe  Senfes  of  the  Word. 

5.  Their  fourth  Propofition  is;  72r 
SiTifiihtefs  of  that  State  into  "which  Adam  /c"//, 
coiyijh  in  the  Guilt  of  Adam'j  fr/i  Sin,  the 
Want  of  that  Right eouf/iefs  ^wherein  he  'was  cre- 
ated, and  the  Corruption  of  his  Nature,  ivhereby 
he  is  utterly  indifpofed,  d  fabled,  and  made  op- 
pofite  to  all  that  is  fpiritually  good,  and  ns.' holly 
inclined  to  Evil,  and  that  continually,  ivhich  is 
commonly  called  Original  Sin.  and  from  'which 
do  proceed  all  aBual  T'ranfgrcfjions, 

On  the  firft  Article  of  this  you  fay,  ''  ^ A- 
dam%  firft  Sin  was  attended  with  Confc- 
quences  which  affed  all  his  Poflcrity.  But 
we  could  not  on  Account  of  his  Sin,  become 
obnoxious  to  Funifrncntr  By  Funifmcnt 
I  mean,  Fsoil  fuftered  on  Account  of  Sin. 
And  are  wc  not  obnoxious  to  any  Evil,  <  n 
Account  of  Adanh  ? 

,  To  prove  the  rcil  of  the  Propofition,  they 
citehril,  Rom.  iii.  10—20.  On  which  you 
remark,  ''  The  'Apoille  is  here  fpcaking  of 
Jeivs  and  Gentiles,  not  in  a  perfonal,  but  in  a 
national  Capacity.     The  Mouth,  fa\s  he,  cf 

«    D.  no.      ^   p.   102. 


1 38  T'he  Doctrine  of 

all  Sorts  of  People  is  JiOpped,  and  hoth  Jews 
and  Gefitiles  are  brought  in  guilty  :  For  I  have 
proved,  That  there  are  Tranlgreffors  among 
the  "Jcws^  as  well  as  among  tlie  Gentiles!' 
Not  at  all.  If  he  proved  no  more  than  tliis, 
not  one  Perfon  would  become  guilty  before 
God.  Not  one  Mouthy  of  few  or  Gentile^ 
would  bejloppedy  by  fliewing,  ''  There  were 
fewijlj  as  well  as  Heathen  Tranfgreffors." 

I  PROCEED  to  your  Obfervations. 

*'  Obf.  I.  In  this  whole  Seftion  there  is 
not  one  Word  of  Adam!'  There  is  enough 
in  the  next  Chapter  but  one.  The  Apofile 
firil:  defcribes  the  Effect:,  and  afterward 
points  out  the  Caufe. 

*'  Obf.  2.  He  is  here  (peaking,  not  of  all 
Men,  but  of  the  "jews ;  of  thole  alone  who 
were  under  the  Lau\  V.  1 9,  and  proving  from 
their  own  Wriiiings"',  That  there  were  great 
Corruptions,  among  them  as  well  as  other 
People." 

He  is  fpeaking  of  them  chiefly,  but  not 
of  them  c?dy^  as  appears  from  the- 9""  Verfe, 
We  have  before  proved  both  ]qw^  ^W  Gentiles, 
that  they  are  all  under  Sin  :  jls  it  is  written^ 
There  is  none  righteous  (neither  among  the 
feivs  nor  Gc7itiles)  no,  not  one.  Does  this  re- 
ined; them,  in  their  ;?j//672^/ only,  not  peffo- 
nal  Capacity  }  Does  it  prove  no  m.ore  than, 
•         '  ^  **  That 

y  p.  105. 


Original  Sin.  i-^g 

"  That  there  were' great  Corruptions  among 
the  jews^  as  well  as  other  People  ?" 

''  O^-  3-  The  Section'  conlifts  of  feveral 
Quotations  out  of  the  Old  Teflament }  hut 
I.  None  of  them,  taken  feparately,  fpcaks 
of  any  Depravity  of  Nature,  but  of  Hiihits 
of  Wickednefs,  which  Men  had  thcmfeh'es 
contracted."  They  do  fpeak  of  Habits  which 
Men  had  contracted  themfelves:  But  do  they 
fpeak  of  thefe  only  ?  The  Way  to  know  this 
is,  not  to  **  take  tYitm  feparately,''  not  to  con- 
iider  the  precife  Meaning,  wherein  they  were 
Gccaiionally  fpoken,  by  Da^cid^  Sclomc}!^  or 
Ifaiah  :  But  to  take  them  conjcintl\\  as  they 
are  here  put  together  by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  to 
form  the  Charader  of  all  Mankind. 

On  one  of  them,  "■'  feparately  taken,"  you 
fay,  ''  How  could  God  look  doivnfrom  Hea- 
ven,  to  fee  if  there  "were  any  that  didjeek  God, 
if  He  knew  all  Mankind  were  naturally  dif- 
abled  from  feeking  Him?"  Why  not,  if  what- 
ever they  were  hy  Nature,  the  Grace  of  Gcd 
was  more  or  lefs,  given  to  all  ?  Though  they 
were  i.vhoHy  inclined  to  all  ^.x'Ahy  Nature,  yet 
byGma'they  might  recover  all  Goodncfs. 
,  You  aflirm,  2.  ''In  none^  of  thefe  FlnccN 
does  God  fpeak  ftrldly  of  every  Individual 
Jew  under  David  or  Sojonion.  Very  many 
were  bad  ;  but  Ibme  were  good."  They 
were  J  though  by  Grace,  not  Nature.     But 

among 


140^  2tv  Doctrine  of 

among  all  thofe  of  whom  God  fpeaks  by.St. 
Pctdy  there  was  ?io?ie  good  or  righteous^  no^ 
rM  one:  Every  Individual,  whether  few  or 
Heathen^  was giii/fy  before  God. 
■  "  I.  conclude^  therefore,,  i.  That  none 
oftheie  Texts  refer  to  any  Corruption  com- 
mon to  all  Mankind."  Perhaps  they  do  not, 
as  fooken  by  Davul ;  but  they  do  as  fpokcn 
by  St.  PmiL  "  I  conclude,  2.  Such  a  gene- 
ral Corruption  as  admits  of  no  Exception, 
was  not  neceilary  to  the  ApoftIe*s  Argu- 
rnent."  Ablolutely  neceffary  :  Had  it  not 
included  fr^r_)'  indhidtiai  Perfony  710  Pe7fc72S 
Mciith  would  have  been  Jiopped. 

These  Texts  therefore  do  "  dired:ly  and 
certainly^  prove,"  That  at  the  Time  when 
the  Apoftle  w^rote,  every  individual  Jew  and 
Gentile^  (excepting  only  thofe  who  wt\:^favcd 
by  Grace)  were  aU  under  Sin  :  That  there  was 
mne  of  them  rightems^  120^  not  one-,  Tione  thai 
underfeed  or  that  fought  after  God.  Th  is  was 
die  Faft  r  And  Vvdio  can  find  out  a  more  ra- 
tional Vv^av  of  accounting  for  this  univerfal 
Wickednefs,  than  by  an  univerfal  Corruption 
of  cur  Nature,  derived  ii*om  our  firft  Parent? 

6.  The  next  Proof  is,  ^Pfh.  ii.  i,  2,  3. 
And.  yoii  hath  He  quichud^  who  were  dead  in 
f'rfpaffcs  ojui  Sins :  lVkerei?2  in  'Time  paft  y^ 
'Similze.d^  acccrdJng  to  the  Conrfe  of  this  JVorldy 
according  to  the  Prince  of  the  Power  of  the  Air^ 
-  the 

'   "  p.  106,  IC7.    ^"  p.  loS. 


Original  Sin".  u  \ 

the  Spirit  thafnow  ivorketh  in  the  Children  cj 
^  Difobedie?2ce  :  Among  who?n  alfo  we  nil hu dour 

Converfation  i?i  T'imes  pq/l^  i?i  the  DeJJrcs  cf 
'  our  FleJ/jy  fulfilling  the  Dejires  of  the  tlejh  and 
'  of  the  Mind',  and  were  by  Nature  the  Children 

of  Wrath  even  as  others 
'  I.  '^  Nothing  is  here  intimated  of  any  ill 

Effedts  oi  Adam\  Sin  upon  us."     No?  Not 

if  we  are  Children  cf  Wrath  ky  Nature  f 

2.  •"  The  Ephefians  wcvcGe?2tiles  converted 
to  the  Faith."  Yea,  and  Jews  alfo.  In  this 
veryPaflage  the  Apoftle  fpeaks  of  both:  Firft, 
the  G^;;///e',  then  the  yt'iu>vy7j  Converts. 

3.  "In  thefe  Verfes  he  is  defcribing  their 
wretched  State,  while  they  were  in  Gentile 
Darknefs,"— and  while  they  v/ere  in  J'lvijh 
Darknefsj  the  Jews  having  been  juft  as 
wicked,  before  their  Converfion,  as  the  Hea- 
thens. Both  the  one  and  the  other  had  walked 
'till  thenj  in  the  Vanity  of  their  Mind,  having 
their  JJjiderftanding  darkeiid,   being  equally 

'  dead  in  "Trefpaffes  and  Sins,  equally  alienated^ 

from  the  Life  of  God,  through  the  Blindnefs  of 

4heir  Heart :  A  very  lively  Defcription,  not 

fo  much  of  a  wicked  Life,  as  of  an  evil 

Nature.  . 

^ .  '  ''  When  he  faith,  they  were  dea^t  m 
'frefpaffes  and  Sins,  he  fpeaks  of  their  pcrfnnal 
Iniquities."  (True,  both  oUIearf  and  Lf'. 
I  muft  mjke  fome  Variation  in  the  rert  ot 

your 

*  p.  J 09. 


142  ^he  Doctrine  5/* 

your  Paraphrafe)  Wherei?iy  faith  he,  /;/  T'imes 
pa/l  ye^  Heathens  particularly,  walked -y  in- 
wardly and  outwardly,  according  to  the  Prince 
of  the  Power  of  the  Air^  the  Spirit  that  now, 
ilill,  wcrkcth  in  the  Children  of  Difobedience  : 
Among  whom  we  Jews  alfo  had  our  Converfa- 
ticn^  being  as  dead  tit  ^refpajfes  and  Sins  as 
you. 

**  Therefore  5.  ^  When  he  adds,  A?td 
were  by  Nature  the  Children  of  Wrath  even  as 
others,  he  cannot  mean,  They  were  liable  to 
Wrath,  by  that  Nature  which  they  brought 
into  the  World."  Why  not?  This  does  not 
follow  from  any  Thing  you  have  faid  yet. 
Let  us  fee,  how  you  prove  it  now.  "  This 
Nature  is  no  other  than  God's  own  Work. 
The  Nature  of  every  Man  comes  out  of  the 
Hands  of  God."  The  fame  may  be  faid  of 
thofe  who  are  ftill  dead  in  ^refpajjes  and  Si?2S. 
Their  Origiiial  Nature  came  from  God  and 
was  no  other  than  God's  own  Work.  Yet 
the  prcfent  Corruption  of  their  Nature,  came 
not  from  God,  and  is  not  his  Work.  *'  Con- 
fequently  the  Nature  of  every  Perfon  when 
brought  into  Being,  is  juft  what  God  fees  fit 
it  fliould  be."  This  is  true  of  the  Original 
Nature  of  Mankind,  when  it  was  firft  brought 
into  Being.  But  it  is  not  true  of  our  prefcjit 
co7Tupt  Nature.  This  is  not  what  God  fees 
fit  it  fliould  be.     *'  It  is  his  Power  alone  that 

forms 
*  p.  1 10. 


Original  Sin.  j^^ 

forms  it."  Yes,  that  forms  us  Men-,  but  nor, 
that  forms  xas  fmful Men,  ''  To  fay  the  Na- 
ture HE  gives  is  the  Objed:  of  his  Wrath, 
is  little  lefs  than  Blafphemy."  As  He 
gave  it,  it  is  not  the  Objcd:  of  his  Wrath  -, 
but  it  is,  as  it  is  defiled  with  Sin.  "■  Far  was 
it  from  the  Apoftle  to  depreciate  our  Nature y 
True,  our  Original  Nature,  But  never  did 
Man  more  deeply  depreciate  our />;v/t';//,  cor- 
rupt Nature,  ''  His  Intent  is,  to  fhcw  the 
Ephejja?is^  \hty  -vjtvQ  Children  of  Wrath,  thro' 
the  Sins  in  which  they  walked,''  Yea,  and 
thro'  the  Dejires  of  the  FkJJ:  and  the  Mind 
mentioned  immediately  before  :  T'hrough  the 
Vanity  of  their  Mind,  tliro'  the  BUndncfi  of 
their  Hearts,  paji  feeling,  alienated  from  the 
Life  of  God,  Is  he  "  not  here*^  Ipeaking  of 
their  Nature,  but  of  the  vicious  Courfe  of 
Life  they  had  led  ?"  "  He  well  underftood 
the  Worth  of  the  human  Nature" — He  did, 
both  in  its  original,  and  in  \\.^  prefcnt  State — 
''  And  elfewhere  iliews,  it  was  endow'd,  even 
in  the  Heathens,  with  Light  and  Power 
fufficicnt  to  know  God,  and  obey  his  Will." 
In  what  Heathens,  in  Europe,  Ajia,  Jfrica, 
or  America,  is  Nature  now  cndow'd  with  this 
Lig-ht  and  Power  ?  I  have  never  found  it  in 
any  Heathen  yet :  And  I  have  convers'd  with 
many,  of  various  Nations.  On  the  contra- 
ry, I  have  found,  one  and  all,  deeply  igno- 
rant 

^  p.  11 1 . 


144  ^^^'  Doctrine  c/' 

rant  of  the  very  End  of  their  Exiftence.  All 
of  them  have  confirm'd  what  an  Heathen 
Meeko  (or  Chief)  told  me  many  Years  ago, 
*'  He  that  fitteth  in  Heaven  knoweth  W/6)r 
He  made  Man  :  But  we  know  nothing." 

•  ''  But  St.  Paul  fays,  fVben  the  Gentiles 
which  have  not  the  Law,  do  by  Nature  the 
T.'hings  caitained  in  the  Law,  they  are  a  Law 
to  themfches.  This  fuppofes,  they  might 
have  done  them,  by  Nature,  or  their  Jiatural 
P ewers,''  But  how  does  it  appear,  That 
by  Nature,  here  means.  By  their  mere  7mtu- 
ral  Powers  ?  It  is  certain,  they  had  not  the 
written  Law.  But  had  they  no  fupernatural 
AJjiJiance'?  Is  it  not  one  God,  who  works  in 
us  and  in  them,  both  to  will  and  to  do  ?  They 
who  by  this  Help  do  the  Things  contained 
in  the  Law,  we  grant  ''  are  not  the  Objedls 
of  God's  Wrath.'' 

"Again, he  affirms,  the -Gd'/z/Z/d'i  had  Light 
lufiicient  to  have  feen  God's  eternal  Power 
and  Godhead."  They  had  -,  but  how  does 
it  appear.  That  this  was  the  merely  natural 
Light  of  their  own  unafjified  Reafon  ?  If  they 
had  Affiftance  from  God,  and  did  not  ufe 
it,  they  were  equally  wlihoiit  Excufe,  "  Nay, 
if  their  ''Nature  v/as  corrupt,  and  therefore 
they  did  not  glorify  God,  they  had  a  fair 
Excufe."  True,  if  God  had  not  offered 
them  Grace,  to  ballancc  the  Corruption  of 

Nature. 

"^   Ro;r..  i.  iq,   20,   2T.      '•   p.  ii^ 


Original  Sin.  14^ 

Natui-c.  But  if  he  did,  they  are  ftill  -jcith- 
out  Excufe :  Becaufe  they  might  have  con- 
quered that  Corruption,  and  would  not. 
Therefore  we  are  not  "  obliged  to  fcek  any 
other  Senfe  of  the  Phrafe,  by  Nature,  t-haa 
by  the  Nature  we  bring  into  the  World." 

However  you  think  you  have  found  a- 
nother.  *'  By  Nature  may  fign'fy  really  and 
truly.  Thus  '  St.  Paul  calls  ^Timothy  yv>?r.oy 
TEHi/ov,  his  cuim,  genuine  Son  in  the  Faith  :  Not 
to  fignify,  he  was  the  Child  of  the  Apoftle  ; 
but  that  he  was  a  rr^/ Imitator  of  his  Faith. 
In  like  Manner  he  calls  the  EpLfuins  (p-Vfi 
rUvcx,  genuine  Children  of  Wrath :  Not  to  fig- 
nify,  they  were  related  to  JVrath  by  their 
natural  Birth ;  but  by  their  Sin  and  Difobt- 
dience!' 

This  is  fimply  begging  the  Qucflirn, 
without  fo  much  as  a  Shadow  of  Proof.  For 
the  Greek  Word  in  one  Text  is  not  the  fame, 
nor  any  Way  related  to  that  in  the  other. 
Nor  is  there  the  leaft  Rclemblance  between 
the  Apoftle's  calling  Timothy y  his  oven  Sen  in 
the  Faith,  and  his  affirming,  That  even 
thofe  who  are  no\v  faved  by  Grace ,  were  by 
Nature  Children  of  Wrath, 

To  add  therefore,  "  Not  as  they  came 
under  CondemJiation  by  the  Offence  ^*Adam," 
is  only  begging  the  Queftion  once  more : 
Tho'  it  is  true,  they  had  afterwards  inflam'd 
their  Account,  by  ^*'  their  own  Trefpajjes  and 
Sinsr  K  Vuu 

5  p.  113. 


146  The  Doctrine  of 

You  conclude,  ^^  ^  By  Nature  therefore 
may  be  a  metaphorical  Expreflion,  and  con- 
fequcntly  is  not  intended,"  (May  be  in  the 
Premifs,  is  not  in  the  Conclufion !  A  way 
of  arguing  you  frequently  ufe)  "  to  fignify 
Nature  in  the  proper  Senfe  of  the  Word ; 
but  to  mean.  They  were  really  and  truly  Chil- 
dren of  Wrath."  But  where  is  the  Proof  ? 
'Till  this  is  produced,  I  muft  ftill  believe, 
with  the  Chriftian  Church  in  all  Ages,  that 
all  Men  are  Children  of  Wrath  by  Nature  in 
the  plain,  proper  Senfe  of  the  Word. 

7.  The  next  Proof  is  Rom.  v.  6.  While 
we  were  yet  without  Strengthy  in  due  Time 
Chrift  died  for  the  Ungodly.  You  anfwer, 
I.  "  The  Apoftle  is  here  fpeaking,  not  of 
Mankind  in  general,  but  of  the  Gentiles  only^ 
as  'appears  by  the  whole  Thread  of  his  Dif- 
courfe  from  the  Beginning  of  the  Epiftle;." 
From  the  Beginning  of  the  Epiftle  to 
the  6'^  Verfe  of  the  v'^  Chapter,  is  the  A- 
poftle  fpeaking  of  the  Gentiles  only  ?  Other- 
wife  it  cannot  appear  "  by  the  whole  Thread 
of  his  Difcourie  from  the  Beginning  of  the 
Epiftle."  '*  But  it  appears  efpecially  from 
Chap.  iii.  Verfe  9.  What  then  ?  Are  we  Jews 
better  than  they  Gentiles  ?"  Nay,  from  that 
very  Verfe,  he  fpeaks  chiefly  of  the  fewi* 
And  you  yourfelf  a  few  ""Pages  ago,  roundly 
affirmed,  "  That  he  there  fpoke  idithe  Jews 
only!*  And 

•^  p.  114.    *  p.  115.    «»  p.  102,  &c. 


Original  Sin.  147 

And  will  you  affirm,  That  in  the  iv'*'' 
Chapter  likewife  *'  he  is  fpeaking  of  the  Gen^ 
tjles  only  ?"  Is  it  not  manifell:,  That  he  docs 
not  fpeak  of  them  at  all,  in  a  confidcrablc 
Part  of  that  Chapter?  How  then  does  it  ap- 
pear, by  the  whole  Thread  of  his  Difcourfe 
fro?n  the  Beginning  of  the  Epi/Ue,  "  That  he 
is  here  fpeaking  not  of  Mankind  in  general, 
but  of  the  Gentiles  only  ?" 

However  you  boldly  go  on  "  "  Having 
eftabliflied  the  Point,  That  the  Gentiles  have 
as  good  a  Title  to  God's  Favour  as  the 
Jews'' — How  ?  Is  this  the  only,  or  the  chief 
Point  which  St.PWeftabllflies  in  the  Fourth 
Chapter  ?  Is  not  his  main  Point  throughout 
that  Chapter  to  prove,  That  both  Jews  and 
Gentiles  were  jujlified  by  Faith  f  Or,  is  he 
"  fpeaking  this,  not  of  Mankind  in  general, 
hut  of  the  Ge?2tiles  only?  He  proceeds  C.  v.  i. 
'Therefore  being  jiiflified  by  Faith,  we  Gentiles 
have  Peace  with  God/*  In  the  fame  Man- 
ner you  thruft  in  the  Word  Gentiles,  into 
each  of  the  following  Verfes.  Had  then  the 
Gentiles  only  Peace  with  God  ?  You  might 
with  more  Colour  have  inferted  Jews  in  eve- 
ry Verfe.  For  of  them  chief y  the  Apoftlc 
had  been  fpeaking.  To  fay  that  *'  he  "prin- 
cipally fpeaks  of  and  to  the  Gentiles,  to  the 
End  of  the  Sixth  Chapter,"  is  another  Af- 
fertion  which  cannot  be  proved.    It  is  thcre- 

K  2  l<^fe 

«  p.  \\6,    •  p.  n?' 


148  T^he  Doctrine  of 

fore  by  no  Means  true,  That  ''  he  is  in  this 
Verfe  Ipeaking  of  the  Gentiles^  in  Contradi- 
ftindion  to  the  Jewsr  ^^^^  ^^^q^^b 

You  affirm,  2.  "  By  the  fame  Argument, 
he  here  confiders  the  Gentiles  only  in  a  Body, 
as  diftinguifhed  from  the  BoJy  of  the  Jews. 
For  fo  he  docs  all  along  in  the  four  iirft 
Chapters."  No,  not  in  one  of  them.  If 
he  had,  the  Mouth  of  no  one  individual  Per- 
fon  had  been  flopped.  On  the  contrary  he 
fpeaks  both  here  and  all  along  of  every  in- 
dividual, that  every  one  might  believe  in 
Him,  who  died  for  every  one  of  the  Ungodly, 

You  affirm,  3.  "In  this  ^  Verfe  he  de- 
fcribes  the  Condition  of  the  converted  Gen- 
tiles  when  in  their  Heathen  State,  in  which. 
they  were  without  Strength y  unable  to  recover 
themfelves  -,  they  were  Ungodly^  yea  SinnerSy 
and  Enemies  fo  God."  And  were  not  the 
unconverted  Jews  alio  Sinners ^  and  Enemies 
to  God,  Vngcdly^  and  without  Strength  to 
recover  themielves  ?  Thefe  four  Characfters 
therefore  are  no  Proof  at  all,  "  That  the 
Gentiles  only  are  here  fpoken  of.'* 

"  Their  Sin  and  Enmity  and  Ungodlinefs 
confifted  in  their  wicked  WorksJ'  Primarily 
in  their  wicked  T'empcrs.  But  how  came  all 
Men,  ^tews  and  G entiles ^  to  have  thofc 
wicked  T^ejnpcrSy  and  to  walk  in  thofe  wicked 
Works  ?  How  came  they  all,  till  converted, 

to 
»•  p.  118. 


Original  Sin.  149 

to  be  dead  in  Sin,  and  without  Strength  to 
recover  from  it  ?  Unlefs  /;/  Adam  a//  died, 
in  a  deeper  Senfe  than  you  are  willing  to 
allow. 

You  fum  up  your  Argument  thus:  ''  The 
''Apoftle  is  not  fpeaklng  here,  of  all  Man- 
kind's being  corrupted  in  yliiam  ;  but  of  the 
Gentiles  being  corrupted  by  the  Idolatry  and 
Wickednefs  into  which  they  had  plunged 
themfelves,  and  out  of  which  they  were  un- 
able to  recover  themfelves,  without  the  ex- 
traordinary Interpofal  of  Divine  Grace." 

If  this  was  the  Cafe  of  the  Heathens  only, 
then  the  yews  were  not  without  Strength,  but 
were  able  to  recover  themfelves  from  their 
Wickednefs,  without  any  fuch  Interpofal  ! 
But  with  Regard  to  the  Heathens  I  afk, 
I.  Was  this  the  State  of  all  H^vz/Zy;?  Nations, 
or  of  fome  only  ?  2.  If  of  fome  only,  which 
were  they  that  were  not  corrupted  ?  3.  It  it 
was  the  State  of  all  Heathen  Nations,  how 
came  it  to  be  fo  ?  How  was  it,  that  there 
was  not  one  uncorrupted  Nation  on  Earth  P 
4.  How  could  any  Heathen  Nation  be  in  this 
State?  Without  Strength?  Unable  to  recorder 
thenifekes  from  Sin,  without  the  extraordinary 
Interpofal  of  the  Divine  Grace  ?  Since  you 
are  clear  in  this.  That  ''  ail  die  '  Gentiles  are 
endow'd  with  Light  and  Power,  futficient 
to  know  God,  and  perform  Obedience  to 

K  3  his 

<>  p.  izo.     *■  p-  III* 


150  T'he  Doctrine  of 

his  Will,  by  their  natural  Powers  of  Rcafon 
and  Underftanding."  If  you  fay,  "  They 
were  once  cndow'd  with  thefe  Powers  ,  but 
now  they  had  caft  them  away  :"  I  am  not 
fatisfied  ilill.  What,  did  all  Nations  caft 
away  their  natural  Powers  of  Reafon  and  Un- 
derflanding?  Surely  not !  But  if  not,  how 
came  they  all  to  plunge  themfclves  into  this 
dreadful  Corruption? 

8.  Another  Proof  is,  Rom.  viii.  7,  8. 
l*he  carnal  Mind  is  Enmity  againjl  God  :  For 
it  is  not  fubjeB  to  the  Law  of  GoDy  fieither  in* 
deed  can  he.  So  then  they  that  are  in  the 
Flejh^  cajinot  pleafe  GoD. 

On  this  you  obferve,  i.  *'  Here  is  not 
one  Word  of  Adam^  or  any  Confequence  of 
his  Sin  upon  us.'* 

The  whole  Paflage  fpeaks  of  that  Cor- 
ruption of  our  Nature,  which  is  the  Confe- 
quence of  Ada7n\  Sin. 

The  plain  and  obvious  Senfe  of  it  is  this. 
V.  3.  W^hat  the  Law  could  not  doy  (in  that  it 
was  weak  through  the  Flejhy  too  weak  to  con- 
tend with  our  corrupt  Nature)  God  hath 
done :  Sending  his  own  Sin^  He  hath  condemned 
that  Sin  which  was  in  our  Flejl:) :  Hath  given 
Sentence  that  it  fliould  be  deftroyed  :  V.  4, 
'That  the  Right  eoufnefs  of  the  Law  might  be  ful- 
filled in  us,  who  walk  not  after  the  Flejh^  but 
after  the  Spirit :  Who  are  guided  in  all  our 
Thoughts,  Words  and  A(ftions,  not  by  cor- 
rupt 


^  Original  Sin.  iji 

nipt  Nature  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  V.  9, 
'They  that  are  after  the  Flejh — who  arc  flill 
guided  by  corrupt  Nature,  ?m?id  the  Thmg^ 
of  the  Flejh  :  Have  their  Thoughts  and  Af- 
fections fixt  on  fuch  Things  as  gratify  corrupt 
Nature  :  But  they  that  are  after  the  Spirit^ 
who  are  under  his  Guidance,  7}iind  the  T'hings 
of  the  Spirit  :  Think  of,  rehili,  love  the 
Things,  which  the  Spirit  hath  revealed, 
which  He  moves  us  to,  and  promifes  to  give 
us.  V.  6,  For  to  be  carnally  niindcd^  to  mijid 
the  T'hings  of  the  Flejh^  of  our  corrupt  Nature, 
is  Death :  The  fureMark  of  fpiritual  Death, 
and  the  Way  to  Death  everlafting.  But  to 
he  fpiritually  minded,  to  jm?id  the  Things  of 
the  Spirit,  is  Life :  The  fure  Mark  of  fpiritual 
Life,  and  the  Way  to  Life  everlafting  :  And 
attended  with  the  Peace  of  God,  and  Peace 
W//?GoD,  which  otherwife  can  have  no  Place: 
V.  7,  Becaufe  the  carnal  Mind,  the  Mind, 
Tafte,  Inclination,  the  whole  Bias  of  our  evil 
Nature  is  Enmity  agai?ill  God.  For  it  is  not 
fubjeB  to  the  Law  of  God,  iieither  indeed  can 
be:  Being  as  oppofite  thereto  as  Hell  to  Hea- 
ven. V.  8.  &  then  they  that  are  in  the  Flejh 
— ftill  unrenew'd  by  the  Spirit,  ilill  follow- 
ing the  Bent  of  corrupt  Nature,  cannot  picafe 
God.  Every  Man  now  nray  fee,  Whether 
this  Paflage  does  not  ftrongly  illufrate  the 

Depravity  of  our  Nature. 

^        ^  0.  Thf 


152  7he  DoClTRINE   of 

9.  The  laft  Proof  of  this  Part  of  the 
Propofition'  is,  Gen,  vi.  5.  God  Jaw  that  the 
Wickediiefs  of  Men  was  great  in  the  Earthy  and 
that  every  Imagination  of  the  T'houghts  of  his 
Heart  was  only  Evil  continually.  And  below, 
V.  II.  T'he  Earth  was  corrupt  before  God,  and 
the  Earth  was  filed  with  Violence,  ^loli. 

"Mankind,  you  fay,  was  univerfally 
debauch'd  into  Luft  and  Senfuality,  Rapine 
and  Violence."  And  how  came  this  univer- 
fal  Wickednefsy  if  all  Mankind  were  quite  up- 
right by  Nature  ?  You  anfwer,  '*  They  had 
corrupted  themfelves :  So  the  Text,  V.  12. 
AllFl'jh  had  corrupted  his  Way  upon  the  Earth!' 
This  Expreilion  does  not  necefTarily  imply 
any  more,  than  that  all  Flefh^  all  Men  were 
con'upted.  But  taking  it  literally,  I  afk, 
How  came  all  Flefh  to  corrupt  thcjnfelves? 
"  Oh,  by  SeilS^  Pofterity  inter-marrying  with 
the  CainitesT  But  how  came  all  the  Cainites 
to  corrupt  themfelves  ?  And  all  the  SeihileSy  to 
follow,  not,  reform  them  ?  If  the  Ballance 
v/as  even,  if  Nature  leaned  neither  Way, 
there  ought  to  have  been  as  many  Good  as 
Bad  flill:  And  the  Sethites  ought  to  have  re- 
formed as  many  of  the  Children  of  Cain^  as 
the  Cainites  corrupted  of  the  Children  of  Seth, 
How  came  it  then.  That  onlv  Noah  was  a 
jufl  Man  ?  And  does  one  good  Man  amidft 
a  World  of  the  Upgodly,    prove  that  the 

"  Nature 
•  p.  122. 


Original  Sin.  j  r^ 

"Nature  of  Mankind  in  general  is  not  cor- 
rupted?" Or  rather  flrongly  prove,  that  it  is? 
It  does  not  prove,  That  Nna/j  himlelf  was 
not  naturally  inclined  to  Evil^  but  it  does, 
That  the  World  was. 

"  'But  if  the  Corruption  of  Nature  was 
theReafon  why  the  old  World  was  deflroy'd, 
it  is  a  Reafon  for  the  Deilruddon  of  the 
World  at  any  Time."  This  ahm' wzs  never 
fuppofed  to  be  the  Reafon  -,  but  their  adual 
Wickednefs  added  thereto. 

You  add,  "  It  may  be  urged,  that  God 
faid,  Ge/2.  viii.  21.  /  will  not  again  cio'fc  the 
Ground f 07^  Mans  Sake:  For  the  Imagination 
of  Mans  Heart  is  Evilfro?n  bis  Touth.  But 
the  Hebrew  Particle  ""r  fometimcs  fignilies 
althQiigb!'  That  does  not  prove,  that  it  fio;- 
nifies  fo  here.  But  what  if  it  does  ?  Wjiat 
.  if  the  Texts  be  render'd,  T^hd  the  Imagination 
of  Ma?is  Heart  is  E'viljrom  his  Touth  ?  Even 
thus  render'd,  it  implies  as  ftrongly  as  it  did 
before.  That  Mans  Heart  is  naturally  in- 
clin'd  to  Evil. 

The  Hebrew  Word,"  tranflated  Touth,  is 
always  applied  to  Childhood^  or  tender  ylge, 
Ifa.  vii.  16.  *)P  fignifies  a  little  Child,  And 
noi:^  of  the  Texts  you  have  cited  prove  the 
contrary.  Heman,  the  Author  of  tlie  8S''' 
Ffalm,  was  doubtlcfs  afflioled  from  his  Touth 
or  Childhood.  The  Babylonians  mentioned 
Jfa.  xlvii.  12.  may  well  Idc  fuppofed  to  have 

'  p.  123.    "  p.  124.  been 


154  ^1^^  Doctrine  of 

been  trained  up  in  the  Way  of  their  Fathers, 
from  their  ear lieji  Chi /Socd:  And  the  plain 
Meaning  of  feremiah^  C.  iii.  24,  25.  Shame 
hath  devoured  the  Labour  of  our  Fathers  from 
cur  Touth — We  lie  down  in  our  Shame ;  for  we 
have  fined  againft  the\^ov.Y>  ourGoT>^  we  and 
our  Fathers  fi^om  our  Touth ^  is,  Ever  fince  we 
began  to  think  or  aft,  we  have  gone  aftray 
*  from  God. 

10.  The  preceding  Texts  were  brought 
to  prove  (and  they  do  abundantly  prove  it) 
That  our  Nature  is  deeply  corrupted,  inclin- 
ed to  Evil,  and  difinclined  to  all  that  is  fpi- 
ritually  good,  fo  that  without  fupernatural 
Grace,  we  can  neither  will  nor  do  what  is 
pleafing  to  God.  And  this  eafily  accounts 
for  the  Wickednefs  and  Mifery  of  Mankind, 
in  all  Ages  and  Nations :  Whereby  Experi- 
ence and  Reafon  do  fo  ftrongly  confirm  this 
fcriptural  Doftrine  of  Or/g-/W/  Sin. 

Yet  it  will  not  "  follow.  That  Men""  are 
no  moral  Agents!'  If  youafk,  "  Why,  how 
are  they  capable  of  performing  Duty  ?"  I 
anfwer.  By  Grace,  though  not  by  Nature, 
And  a  Meafure  of  this  is  given  to  all  Men. 

Nor  does  it  follow,  "  That  we  can  by 
no  Means  help  or  hinder  that  Sin  which  is 
natural  to  us."  Yes,  we  can.  Anger,  for 
Inftance,  is  natural  to  me  ;  yea,  irregular, 
unreafonable  Anger.    I  am  naturally  inclined 

to 

^  p.  125. 


Original  Sin.  i  -- 

to  this,  as  I  experience  ev^ery  Day.  Yet  / 
can  help  it  by  the  Grace  of  God  ;  and  do  lb 
as  long  as  I  watch  and  pray. 

Dr.  y* —  anfwers  this  Affertion  more  at 
large,  "  IfStJi  be  natural,  then  it  is  ncccjjary^ 
If  by  Sin  is  meant  the  corrupt  Bias  of  our 
Wills,  that  indeed  is  natural  to  us,  as  our 
Nature  is  corrupted  by  the  Fall ;  but  not  as 
It  came  originally  out  of  the  Hand  of  God. 
Therefore  it  is  improperly  compared  to  the 
Appetites  of  Hunger  andThirft,  which  might 
be  in  our  original  Nature,  Now  this  Bias  of 
the  Will  is  certainly  evil  and  finful,  and 
hateful  to  God;  whether  we  have  contradl- 
ed  it  ourfelves,  or  whether  we  derive  it 
from  Adayn  makes  no  Difference.  A  proud 
or  paffionate Temper  is  evil,  whether  a  Man 
has  contracted  it  himfelf,  or  derived  it  from 
his  Parents.  Therefore  the  Inference,  If 
natiiraly  and  (in  fome  Senfe)  necejfar\\  then 
no  Sin^  does  by  no  Means  hold. 

"  But  if  by  Sin  be  meant  finful  Ac- 
tions, to  which  this  corrupt  Bias  of  the  Will 
inclines  us ;  it  remains  to  be  proved,  That 
a  corrupt  Bias  of  the  Will,  makes  the  Ac- 
tions necelTary,  and  confequently  not  finful. 
And  indeed,  if  a  corrupt  Bias  makes  Sin  to 
be  neceffary,  and  confequently  to  be  no  Sin, 
then  the  more  any  Man  is  inclined  to  Sin, 
the  lefs  Sin  he  can  commit :    And  as  that 

corrupt 

*  Vindication'^.  68,  &C. 


156  "The  Doctrine  of 

corrupt  Bias  grows  ftronger,  his  adual  fin- 
ning becomes  more  neceflary :  And  fo  the 
Man  inftead  of  growing  more  wicked  grows 
more  innocent." 

11.  That  this  Doftrine  has  been  "  long 
"  held  in  the  Church  of  Rome'  is  true.  But 
fo  it  has  in  the  Greek  Church  alfo :  And  fo 
far  as  we  can  learn,  in  every  Church  under 
Heaven,  at  leaft  from  the  Time  that  God 
fpake  by  Mofes, 

From  this  Infecftion  of  our  Nature  (call 
it  Original  Sin,  or  what  you  plcafe)  fpring 
many,  if  not  all,  a<5tual  Sins.  And  this  St. 
yarnes  i^i,  14.)  plainly  intimates,  even  accord- 
ing to  your  Paraphrafe  on  his  Words.  "  £- 
very  Man  is  tempted,  is  overcome  by  Temp- 
tation, when  he  is  drawn  away  by  his  own  Luft, 
his  own  irregular  Dejire:  Where  the  Apoflle 
charges  the  Wickednefs  of  Men  on  its  pror 
per  Caufe,  their  ow7i  Lufiy  Very  true.  And 
irregidar  De/ire  is  (not  fo  much  a  Fruit  as  a) 
Part  of  Original  Sin.  For  to  fay,  "  Eve 
*had  irregidar  De fires  before  flie  finned"  is  a 
Contradiction :  Since  all  irregular  Defire  is 
Sin. 

12.  Ai^ OTHER  Proof,  that  aBual  Sins 
fpring  from  original,  is  Matt,  xv.  1 9.  Out  of 
the  Heart  proceed  evil  T'ljoughts,  Murders,  A- 
dulteries.  Fornications^  T^hcftSy  Falfe-witnefsy 
Blajphemies, 

"But 
y  p.  126.    "  p.  127. 


Original  Sin.  i  r^ 

"  But  what  has  this  Text  to  do  with 
Adam\  Sin  ?"  It  has  much  to  do  with  tlic 
Point  it  is  brought  to  prove  :  Namely,  1  hat 
aciiial  Sin  proceeds  from  original^  evil  Works 
from  2infvi I  Heart,  Do  not  therefore  tri- 
umph over  thefe  venerable  Men  (as  you 
have  done  again  and  again)  becaufe  a  Text 
cited  in  Proof  of  one  Claufe  of  a  Propofition, 
does  not  prove  the  whole. 

*  But  "  neither  of  thefe  Texts  proves, 
That  all  our  Wickednefs  proceeds  from  our 
being  corrupted  by  Adani^  Sin."  But  tliey 
both  prove  what  they  were  brought  to  prove, 
That  all  outward  Wickednefs  proceeds  from 
inward  Wickednefs.  Thofe  pious  Men 
therefore  did  not  "  mix  the  Forgery  of  their 
own  Imagination  with  the  Truth  of  God." 

But  "  if  all  adualTranfgrefiions  proceed 
from  Adams  Sin,  then  he  is  the  only  guilty 
Perfon  that  ever  lived.  For  if  his  Sin  is  the 
Caufe  of  all  ours,  he  alone  is  chargeable 
with  them." 

True:  If  all  our  Tranfgrefnons /J  pro- 
ceed from  his  Sin,  that  we  cannot  poflibly 
avoid  them.  But  this  is  not  the  Cafe :  By 
the  Grace  of  God,  we  may  cajl  aicay  all 
our  ^ranfgrejmis.  Therefore  if  we  do  not, 
they  are  chargeable  on  ourfelvcs.  We  fnay 
live  :  But  we  will  die. 

Well,  but  *'  on'  thefe  Principles,  all  ac- 
tual Sins  proceed  from  Adams  Sin,  either 

bv 

»  p.  128.    "  p.  129-  '  " 


158  The  Doctrine  of 

by  neceflary  Confequence ;  or  thro'  our  own 
Choice ;  or  partly  by  one,  and  partly  by  the 
other.'*  Yes,  partly  by  one  and  partly  by  the 
other.  We  are  inclined  to  Evil,  antecedent- 
ly to  our  own  Choice.  By  Grace  we  may 
conquer  this  Inclination :  Or  we  may  chufe 
to  follow  it,  and  fo  commit  adtual  Sin. 

13.  Their  Fifth  Propofition  is,  ^Original 
Sin  is  conveyed  from  ourfrjl  Parents  to  their 
Pojlerity  by  natural  Generation^  fo  as  all  that 
proceed  from  them  in  that  Way^  are  conceived 
and  horn  in  Sin. 

In  Proof  of  this  they  urge,  Pf.  li.  5.  ^Be- 
held I  was  Ooapen  in  Iniquity^  and  in  Sin  did 
my  Mother  conceive  me. 

On  this  you  obferve,  "  The  word  which 
we  tranflate  (loapen^  fignifies  to  briyig  forth  or 
hear.    So  here  it  means.  Behold  I  was  brought 
forth  or  born  in  Iniquity  ^ 

Suppose  it  does  (which  is  not  plain  ;  for 
you  cannot  infer,  from  its  Meaning  iofo?ne^ 
timeSy  that  it  means  fo  here)  what  have  you 
gained  ?  If  David  was  born  in  Iniquity,  it 
is  little  different  from  hting Jhapen  therein. 
•  That  the  Hebrew  Word  does  not  always 
mean  to  be  born,  but  rather  to  be  fiapen, 
forjned  or  7nadey  evidently  appears  from  Pf 
xc.  2 ;  where  it  is  applied  to  the  Formation 
of  the  Earth.  And  in  this  very  Text,  the 
feventy  render  it  by  jTAaVSw*  a  Word  of  the 

)  verv 

«  p.  130.    "^  p.  131, 


Original  Sin.  j  ^^ 

very  fame  Import.  It  is  therefore  here  very 
properly  rendered  JJmpcn :  Nor  can  it  be 
more  exadly  tranflated. 

But  "  the  Word  *i->!:rT  properly  fignlfies 
warmed  me"  You  fhouldfay,  literally  iignifies. 
But  it  fignifies  conceivdme  neverthtlefs.  And 
fo  it  is  taken  Gen.xxx,  38,  39,  41,  &c.  xxxi. 
10.  "  Nay  it  "  fignifies  there  the  Acl  of 
Copulation.  So  feveral  Tranflators  render  it." 
And  feveral  render  it  otherwife.  So  this 
does  not  determine  the  Point  either  Way. 

It  muft  therefore  be  determined  by  the 
Senfe.  Now  for  what  End  did  "^acob  put 
the  pilled  Rods  before  the  Cattle  ?  That  tlie 
Lambs  might  be  marked  as  the  Rods  were. 
And  when  is  it  that  Females  of  any  Kind 
mark  their  Young  ?  Not  in  that  Ad  :  But 
fometime  after,  when  the  Pectus  is  either 
forming  or  adlually  formed.  Throw  a  Plumb 
or  a  Pear  at  a  Woman  before  Conception^  and 
it  will  not  mark  the  Pectus  at  all:  But  it  will, 
if  thrown  while  fhc  is  coficeivijjg,  or  after 
fhe  has  conceived,  as  we  fee  in  a  thouland 
Inftances.  This  Obfervation  juftifies  our 
Tranflators  in  rendering  the  Word  by  con- 
ceiving in  all  thofe  Places. 

And  indeed  you  own,  "  Z)^'u/V  could  not 
apply  that  Word  to  his  Mother,  in  die  Senfe 
wherein  you  would  apply  it  to  the  Cattle." 
You  therefore  affirm, '   it  means  here,  7i 

7turfi. 

*  p.  132,  133-     ^  P-  *34' 


i6o  7^<?  Doctrine  of 

nwfe.  You  may  as  well  fay,  it  means,  To 
roajl.  You  have  as  much  Authority  from 
the  Bible,  for  one  Interpretation  as  for  the 
other.  Produce,  if  you  can,  one  fingle 
Text,  in  which  i-^n'  fignifies  to  nurfe^  or  any 
thing  like  it. 

You  ftride  on.  i.  "  The  Verfe  means. 
In  Sin  did  my  Mother  niirfe  me  :  2.  That  is,, 
I  am  a  Sinner  from  the  Womb  :  3 .  That  is, 
I  am  a  great  Sinner  :  4.  That  is,  I  have  con- 
traBed  Jirong  Habits  of  Sin!'  By  this  Art 
you  may  make  the  moft  expreffive  Texts, 
mean  juft  any  Thing  or  nothing. 

"  So  P/Mviii.  3.  The  Wicked  are' ejlranged 
from  the  Womb:  They  go  ajlray  asfoon  as  they 
are  born^  telling  Lies,  That  is,  my  unjuft 
Perfecutors  in  Said\  Court  are  exceedingly 
wicked."  If  this  was  all  David  meant, 
what  need  of  '^^]  are  alie?2ated?  And  that 
from  the  Bowels  of  their  Mother  ?  Nay, 
but  he  means  as  he  fpeaks.  They  ai^e  alie-- 
jiatedf'ojn  the  Life  of  God,  from  the  Time 
of  their  coming  into  the  World.  From  the 
Time  of  their  Birth  they  knew  7iot  the  Way 
of  Truth  :  Neither  can,  unlefs  they  are  born 
of  God. 

You  cite  as  a  parallel  Text,  "  Thou  wa/l 
called  a  Tranfgrefhr  from  the  Wo7nb^  that  is. 
Set  to  Iniquity  by  prevailing  Habits  and  Cuf- 
toms."     Nay,   the  plain  Meaning  is.   The 

Ifraelites 


Original  Sin.  i6i 

Ifraelites  in  general  had  never  kept  Got>*s 
Laws  fince  they  came  into  the  World. 

Perhaps  the  Phrale,  from  the  Womb  is 
once  ufed  figuratively,  namely,  fob  xxxi.  1 8. 
But  it  is  manifeft,  that  it  is  to  be  literally 
taken,  Ifa,  xlix.  i.  T^he  Lord  bath  called  Me 
from  the  Womby  from  the  Bowels  of  my  Mother 
hath  He  made  Mention  of  my  Name.  For  i , 
This  whole  Paffage  relates  to  ChriJ}\  thefe 
Expreffions  in  particular.  2.  This  was  li- 
terally fulfilled,  when  the  Angel  was  fent 
while  He  was  yet  in  the  Womb,  to  order 
that  his  Name  fhould  ht  called ]es\]S.  This 
is  not  therefore  barely  "  an  hyperbolical 
Form  of  aggravating  Sin;"  but  an  humble 
Confcflion  of  a  deep  and  weighty  Truth, 
whereof  we  cannot  be  too  fenfible. 

"  But  you  have^  no  Manner  of  Ground 
to  conclude  that  it  relateth  to  Adam\  Sin." 

Whether  it  relates  to  Adam's,  perlbnal 
Sin  or  no,  it  relates  to  a  corrupt  Nature, 
This  is  the  prefent  Queftion ;  and  your  pull- 
ing in  Adam's  Sin,  only  tends  to  puzzle  the 
Reader. 

But  how  do  you  prove  (fincc  you  will 
drag  this  in)  that  it  does  not  relate  to  Adam\ 

Sin? 

Thus;  "  i.  Li  the  whole  Plalm  there  is 
not  one  Word  about  Adam,  or  the  Efteds 

of  his  Sin  upon  us." 

L  Here, 

•  p.  i3^» 


1 62  The  Doctrine  of 

Here,  as  ufual,  you  blend  the  two 
Queftions  together;  the  ready  Way  to  con- 
found an  unwary  Reader.  But  firft,  to  the 
firft;  ''  In  the  whole  Pialm,  there  is  not  one 
Word  about  Adam,  Therefore  it  relateth 
not  to  him."  Juft  as  well  you  may  argue, 
''  In  the  whole  Pfalm,  there  is  not  one 
Word  about  Uriah,  Thereforef  it  relateth 
not  to  him."  The  fecond  AiTertion,  "  There 
is  not  one  Word  of  the  Effed:s  of  his  Sin,"  is 
a  fair  begging  the  Queftion. 

"2.  The  Pfalmift  is  here  charging  him- 
felf  with  his  own  Sin."  He  is;  and  tracing 
it  up  to  the  Fountain. 

"  3.  But  according  to  our  Verfion,  he 
does  not  charge  hijiifelfv/ith.  his  Sin,  hutfome 
other  Perfon.  He  throws  the  whole  Load 
of  his  Sin  from  off  himfelf,  on  God  who 
fhaped  him,  and  his  Mother  who  conceived 
him." 

What  you  fay  might  have  had  Weight, 
if  he  had  offer'd  this  in  Excufe  of  his  Sin, 
or  even  in  Extenuation  of  it.  But  does  he 
do  this?  Does  he  in  Fait  "  throw  the  whole 
Blame,  or  any  Part  of  it  from  off  himfelf  ? " 
Juft  the  reverfe.  He  acknowledges  and  be- 
wails his  own  total  Iniquity :  Not  to  excufe^ 
but  to  abafe  himfelf  the  more  before  God, 
for  his  inward  as  well  as  c/z/uw^  Wickednefs. 

And  yet  he  might,  in  perfedl  Confiftency 
with  this  when  God  had  caufed  the  Bones 

which 


Original  Sin.  16- 

which  had  been  broken  to  rejoice ^  cry  out,  / 
will praifeT^hee,  O  God:  For  I  am  Jearjully 
and  wonderfully  ?nade:  Yea,  and  repeat  all 
that  follows  in  the  fame  Pfalm:  Which 
proves  fo  much  and  no  more,  That  every 
Foetus  in  the  Womb  is  formed  by  the  Power 
and  Wifdom  of  God.  Yet  does  it  not  follow, 
That  the  Sin  tranfmitted  from  the  Parent 
/'  muft'  be  attributed  to  God." 

**  But  how  could  he  with  Pleafure  rcfleLl 
upon  his  Formation,  or  praife  God  for  it?" 
As  I  can  at  this  Day:  Tho'  I  know  I  was 
conceived  in  Sin^  2iV\AJ]:apen  in  Liiquity.  But 
where  Sin  abounds^  Grace  does  much  more  a- 
bound,  I  lofe  lefs  by  Ada?n  than  I  gain  by 
Chriji,       .^  V 

This  alfo  perfectly  confifts  with  the  fol- 
lowing Verfe,  ^  Behold  Ihou  defwejl  Truths  or 
it  is  thy  Will  that  we  fhould  have  Truth  in 
the  ifiward  Parts :  Thou  art  willing  to  re- 
move all  that  Iniquity  wherein  1  was  Jl:apen, 
to  give  me  a  clean  Hearty  and  renew  a  right 
Spirit  within  me.  Aiid  in  the  hidden  Part 
Thou  hajl  made  me  to  know  Wifdom:  Thou  liaft 
Jldewn  me  what  was  Good.  So  that  I  am  every 
Way  widiout  Excufe.     I  knew  thy  Will  and 

did  it  not. 

"  But  if  after'  all  you  will  adhere  to  the 
literal  Senfe,  of  this  Text,  why  do  you  not 
adhere  to  the  literal  Senfe,  of  tliat  Text, 

L  2  "^his 

!  p.  X37.    *  ^  138-    i  P-  ^38. 


164  TX'^'  DoCTRINEv^ 

T'his  is  my  Body\  and  believe  liranfubjlantia^ 
tionV  For  thofe  very :Reafons  which  you 
fuggefl:  5  I.  Becaufe  it-  is  groily  ^^bfurd,  to 
fuppofe  that  C/?r//?  fpeaks  of  what  He  then 
held  in  his  Hands,  a^his  r(?^/;  tratm-al  Body, 
But  it  is  no  Way  iibfurd,  to  fuppofe  the  Pfal- 
mift  was  conceived  i?i  Sin.  2.  Tha  Senfe  of 
^his  is  my  Body,  may  be  clearly  explained  by 
other  Scriptures,  where  the  like  Forms  of 
Speech  are  ufed.  But  there  arc  no  other 
Scriptures  where  the  like  Forms  with  this  of 
David  are  ufed  in  any  other  Senfe.  3 .  Tran- 
fubftantiation  is  attended  with  Confequences 
hurtful  to  Piety.  But  the  Doftrine  of  Origi- 
nal Sin,  and  Faith  grounded  thereon,  is  the 
only  Foundation  of  true  Piety. 

14.  The  next  Proof  is,  yob-siv.  4.  Who 
can  bf^ing  a  clean  Thi?ig  out  of  an  unclean  ? 
Not  one. 

On  this  you  obfervc,  "  yob  is  here""  {peak- 
ing of  the  Weaknefs  of  our  Nature,  not 
with  Regard  to  Sin,  but  to  the  Shortncfs 
and  Affli(!l-ions  of  Life."  Certainly,  with 
Regard  both  to  the  one  and  the  other.  For 
though  in  the  i''  and  a"**  Verfes,  he  men- 
tions the  Shortnefs  and  Troubles  of  Life,  yet 
even  thefc  are  mentioned,  with  a  manifeft 
Regard  to  Sin.  This  appears  from  the  very 
next  Verfc  i''  And  doji  Thou  open  thy  Eyes  upon 
fuch  a  one,  to  punifh  one  already  fo  wretched? 

And 

^  P-  ^39*    "  P*  H'^' 


Original  Sin.  165 

^nd  bringejl  me  into  Judgment  with  7 bee,  by 
chaftifing  mc  ftill  more  ?  It  then  immedi- 
ately follows,  JVho  can  bring  a  clean  "Thing 
out  of  an  unclean  ?  Not  one :  It  does  therefore 
by  no  Means  appear  that  "  Job  is  here  fpeak- 
ing  only  with  Regard  to  the  Shortnefs  and 
Troubles  of  Life." 

Part  of  the  following  Verfes  too  run 
thus:  V.  16,  17.  Now  Thou  number ejl  my 
Steps :  Dojl  Thou  not  watch  over  my  Sin  ?  My 
I'ranfgreJIion  is  fealed  up  in  a  Bag,  and  Time 
foweji  up  mine  Iniquity.  Let  any  one  judge 
then,  Whether  Job  in  this  Chapter  does  not 
fpeak  of  *'  the  Sinfulnefs  as  well  as  the  Mor- 
tality of  human  Nature." 

Not  that  he  "  urges"  his  natural  Pravity 
as  a  Reafon  why  he  lliould  not  be  brought 
into  Judgme7ity  No  more  than  Darid urges 
his  being  JJjapen  in  Wickednefs,  as  an  Excule 
for  that  Wickednefs.  Rather  Jcb  (as  well 
as  David)  humbly  acknowledges  his  total 
Sinfulnefs :  ConfelTing,  that  he  deferved  the 
Judgment^  which  yet  he  prays  God  not  to 
inflid:. 

,t  15.  Another  Proof  is,  Job  xv.  14.  Uljat 
h  Man  that  he  frotdd  be  clean,  and  he  that  is 
horn  of  a  Woman  that  he  jhoidd  be  righteous'^ 

On  this  you  obferve,  ''  Born  of  a  Woman 
fignifies  no  more  than  a  Man."  Often  it 
does  nots  but  here  it  is  emphatical.     ''  The 

L  3  Phraic 

"  p.  14  s. 


i66  The  PocTRiNi:  of 

Phrafe  indeed''  includes  Fr-ailty  and  Imper^ 
fediionr  How  can  that  be?  Was  Adam 
made  frail  and  i?nperfe^?  And  have  you 
forgot  that  every  Man  is  now  A?r/2  in  as  good 
a  State  as  -^^^;«  was  made  at  firft  r  "  But  it 
is  not  to  be  underftood  as  the  Reafon,  why 
Man  is  unclean  and.  unrighteous."  From 
the  placing  of  the  Words  one  would  really 
judge  it  was  :  And  how  do  you  prove,  it  is 
not  ?  Why, "3^6/^  and  his  Friends  ufe  this  JVfo;^- 
ner  of  Speech^  in  other  Places  of  this  Book. 
"^  Shall  mortal  Man  be  7nore  jiijl  than  God  ? 
Shall  a  Man  he  more  pure  than  his  Maker  ?'* 
Nay,  this  is  not  the  Manner  of  Speech  which 
is  in  Queftion  :  So  you  are  here  quite  wide 
of  the  Mark.  ''  However  that  is,  How'  can 
Man  be  jiijiified  with  God  ?  Or  can  he  be  clean 
that  is  born  of  a  Woman  V 

And  does  not  this  point  at  Original  Sin  ? 
You  fay,  No.  For  **  if  fob  and  his  Friends 
had  known,  that  the  Reafon  of  our  Unclean- 
nefs  and  Imperfection  was  our  receiving  a 
corrupted  Nature  from  Ada?n,  they  ought  to 
have  o^iven  this  Reafon  of  it."  And  do  thev 
not,  in  the  very  Words  before  us  ?  You  fay, 
**  No:  They  turn  our  Thoughts  to  a  quite 
different  Reafon,  namely,  the  Uncleannefs 
of  the  bell:  of  Creatures  in  hi  S  .ht."  This 
is  not  a  different  Reafon,  b  t  f  lis  in  with 
the  other :  And  the  natural  Meaning  of  thefe 

Texts 

p'p.  f42.     <»  Johiw.  17.     «•  Jolf  XXV.  4. 


Original  Sin.  167 

Texts  is,  '  Ho'vo  tan  he  be  clean  that  is  born  of 
a  lVo?nan,  and  fo  conceived  and  born  in  Sin  r 
Betjoidy  even  to  the  Moon,  and  it  JJjineth  net, 
compared  with  God  ;  yea,  the  Stan  are  ?iot 
pure  in  his  Sight!  How  7?iuch  lefs  Man  that 
is  a  Worm  ?  In  how  much  higher  and 
finder  a  Senfe,  is  Man  impure,  that  carries 
about  with  him  his  Mortality,  the  Teftimony 
of  that  unclean  Nature  which  he  brought 
with  him  into  the  World  ? 

^ Shall  mortal  Man  he  ""more  jujl  than  God  ! 
Shall  a  Man  be  more  pure  than  his  Maker  ? 
Shall  Man  dare  to  arraign  the  Juftice  of 
God?  To  fay,  God  punifhes  him  more  than 
he  dcferves  ?  Behold  He  puts  no  Trujl  in  his 
Serva?2ts,  and  his  A?igels  He  chargeth  icith  Fol- 
ly, Many  of  thefe  left  their  firll  Eftate  :  E- 
ven  their  Wifdom  was  not  to  be  depended 
on.  How  much  lefs  in  them  that  dwell  in  Houfcs 
of  Clay  :  Whofe  Bodies,  liable  to  Pain,  Sick- 
nefs,  Death,  are  ftanding  Monuments  of  the 
Folly  and  Wicked nefs  which  are  deep  root- 
ed in  their  Souls. 

""' What  is  Alan,  that  he  JJ:all  be  ckan,  and 
he  which  is  born  of  a  Woman,  that  he  jhculd  be 
righteous  ?  Behold  He  putteth  no  Trujl  in  his 
Holy  Ones'y  yea,  the  Heavens  are  not  pure  in 
his  Sight.  His  holy  Angels  have  fallen,  and 
the  higheft  Creatures  are  not  pure  in  Com- 

L  4  pari  Ion 

•  Job  XXV.  4.     '  Job  iv.   17,  &c.  "  p.  143-    "  7'^  ^''^ 
I4>  ^c. 


i68  ^he  Doctrine  of 

parifon  of  Him.  How  much  more  abominable 
and  filthy  y  in  the  ftrideft  Scnfe,  is  Man^  every 
Man  born  into  the  World  ?  Who  drinketh 
Iniquity  like  Water ^  Iniquity  of  every  Kind> 
fo  readily,  fo  naturally,  as  being  fo  throughly 
agreeable  to  the  Dejires  of  his  Flejlj^  and  of 
his  Mind? 

You  conclude  the  Head  thus ;  "  "^Man  in 
his  prefent  w^eak  and  flefhly  State  cannot  be 
clean  before  God."  Certainly,  as  clean  as 
the  Moon  and  Stars  at  leaft:  If  he  be  as  he 
was  firft  created.  He  w^as  made  but  a  little 
lower  than  the  Angels,  Confequently  he  was 
then  far  higher  and  more  pure,  than  thefe, 
or  the  Sun  itfelf,  or  any  other  Part  of  the 
material  Creation.  You  go  on,  "Why  can- 
not a  Man  be  clean  before  God  ?  Becaufe  he 
is  conceiv'd  and  born  in  Sin  ?  No  fuch  Thing. 
But  becaufe  if  the  pureft  Creatures  are  not 
pure  in  Comparifon  of  God,  much  Icfs  a  Be- 
ing fubjed:  to  fo  many  Infirmities  as  a  mortal 
Man:"  Infirmities !  What  then  ?  Do  innocent 
Infirmities  make  a  Man  loiclean  before  God  ? 
Do  Labour,  Pain,  bodily  Weaknefs,  or  Mor- 
tality,, make  ns  filthy  and  abominable  f  Surely 
not.  Neither  could  they  make  a  Man  pure 
from  Sin,  lefs  pure  then  the  Moon  and  Stars. 
Nor  can  we  conceive  Adam  as  he  came  out 
of  the  Hands  of  God,  to  have  been  in  any 
gcnfe  lefs  clean  than  thefe.     All  thefe  Texts 

therefprq 


Original  Sin.  169 

therefore  muft  refer  to  that  finful  Impurity, 
which  every  Man  brings  into  the  World. 

You  add,  "  Which  is  a  Demonftration  to 
me,  that  "Job  and  his  Friends  were  whollv 
Strangers  to  this  Dodrine."  A  Dcmonftra- 
tion  of  a  pecuhar  Kind  !  I  think  neither  ma- 
thematical, nor  logical. 

16.  The  laft  Proofs  is,  'John  iii.  6.  "That 
"which  is  born  of  the  FlcJJj  is  Flejh,  and  that 
ivhich  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  Spirit, 

*'  ^  Here  by  Flcp  Mr,  l^ay lor  wnicxi^xnAs 

nothing  clfe,  but  the  mere  Parts  and  Poivcrs 

of  a  Man  :  And   by  bei^ig  born  of  the  tlf:, 

the  being  born  of  a  Woman^  with  the  Coiiflitu- 

tion  and  iiatural  Pon.ve7's  of  a  Man,     Now  let 

VIS  fuppofe  that  human  Nature  is  not  at  all 

corrupted,  and  let  us  try  what  Senfe  we  can 

make  of  other  Scriptures,  where  the  Word 

Flefo  is  ufed  in  Oppofition  to  Spirit^  as  it  is 

here;  Rom.  viii.  i.  'T'here  is  no  Condemnation 

to  them  who  walk  not  after  the  Flejl:,  hut  after 

the  Spirit :  That  is,  not  after  the  pure,   un- 

corrupted  Conftitution  and  Powers  of  Man. 

Again,  V.  8.  I'hey  that  are  in  the  Flejh,  cannot 

pleafe  Gojyi    That  is,  they  that  have  the 

Parts  and  Powers  of  a  Man.     Again,   Jfye 

live  after  the  Flep  ye  J1:all  die :  That  is,  if  ye 

live  fuitably  to  the  Conftitution  and  Powers 

of  your  Nature.     Once  more:  How  (hall  we 

underftand  the  Flejlo  hifteth  agaijift  the  Spirit. 

and 

X  p.  144.     y  Vindication  Y-  78,  &C. 


170  The  Doctrine  of 

and  the  Spirit  againfl  the.FlcJh:  {Gal.  v.  17.) 
If  FleJJ?  means  nothing  but  the  Pure  and  un- 
coiTupted  Powers  of  human  Nature  ? 

"  But  this  Text,  yohn  iii.  3,  is  accord- 
ing to  Mr.  Tayhry  fo  far  from  implying  any 
Corruption  of  our  Nature,  that  "  on  the 
'contrary  it  ft^ppofcs  ive  have  a  Nature  fufcep- 
tihlc  of  the  bcji  Habit s^  and  capable  of  being 
born  of  the  Spirit  J'  And  who  ever  denied  it  ? 
Who  ever  fuppofed,  that  fuch  a  Corruption 
of  Nature,  as  for  the  prefent  difables  us  for 
fpiritual  Good,  renders  us  incapable  of  being 
born  of  the  Spirit  T' 

*'  But  if  natural  Generation  is  the  Mean 
of  conveying  a  fmful  Nature  from  our  firft 
Parents  to  their  Poflerity,  then  muft  itfelf 
be  a  finful  and  unlawful  Thing."  I  deny 
the  Confequence.  You  may  tranfmit  to 
your  Children  a  Nature  tainted  with  Sin, 
and  yet  commit  no  Sin  in  fo  doing. 

*'  Again,  we  produce  one  another,  on- 
ly as  the  Oak  produces  the  Acorn.  The 
proper  Production  of  a  Child  is  from  God. 
'But  if  God  produces  a  FcEtus,  which  has 
finful  Difpofitions,  he  produces  thofe  Difpo- 
fitions.'*  Your  Argument  proves  too  much. 
It  v/ould  prove  God  to  be  the  Author  of  all 
aEfnal  (as  w^ell  as  original)  Sin.  For  "  it  is 
the  Power  of  God  under  certain  Laws  and 
eilablifli'd  Rules,"  which  produces  not  only  , 

the 

•^  p.  145.    »  p'.  146. 


Original  Sin.  jjj 

the  pectus,  but  all  the  Motio7i  in  the  Uni- 
verfe.  It  is  his  Power  which  fo  violently 
expands  the  Air,  on  the  Dilcharge  of  a  Piltol 
or  Cannon.  It  is  the  fame  which  produces 
mufcular  Motion,  and  the  Circulation  of  all 
the  Juices  in  Man.  But  does  he  diercfore 
produce  Adultery  or  Murder  ?  Is  He  the 
Caufe  of  thofe  Jinful  Motions  ?  He  is  the 
Caufeof  the  Motion  (as  He  is  of  the  Fcctus) 
of  the  8in^  He  is  not.  Do  not  fay,  This  is 
too  fine  a  Diftinclion.  Fine  as  it  is,  you 
muft  neceffarily  allow  it.  Other  wife  you 
make  God  the  dired:  Author  of  all  the  Sin 
under  Heaven.  To  apply  this  more  diredUy 
to  the  Point.  God  does  produce  the  Foetus 
of  Man,  as  He  does  of  Trees,  impowering 
the  one  and  the  other  to  propagate  each  af- 
ter its  ICind.  And  2.  Jinful  Man  propagates 
after  his  Kind,  another  finful  Man.  Yet 
God  produces^  in  the  Senfe  above-mcntion'd, 
the  Many  but  not  tbe  Sin. 

17.  Their  Sixth  Propofition  is,  T'be  Fail 
brought  upon  Mankind  the  Lofs  of  Co?n??mnion, 
with  God,  ^his  Difpleafu?-e  afjd  Curfcy  fo  as 
we  are  by  Nature  Children  of  Wraths  Bond- 
Jlaves  to  Satan,  ''and f fly  liable  to  allPunifo' 
ments,  in  this  World  and  that  which  is  to  come: 

In  Proof  of  the  firlT:  Claule  of  this  Pro- 
pofition, they  cite  Gen.  iii.  8,  10,  24.  On 
thi..  you  obferve,   "  ^yldam  and  Eve  by  their 

Sin 

b   Gen.  iii.  8,  10,  24.      ^  Eph.  ii    2,  3.      ^  1  Tirn.  ii.  26 
«  Gen,  ii.  17.— AW.  vi.  23.     *"  p.  I47- 


172  The  Doctrine  of 

Sin  did  forfeit  Communion  with  God.  But 
God  did  not  take  the  Forfeiture/'  Surely 
He  did,  when  they  were  afraid  and  hid  them- 
fehes  from  his  Prefence,  "  But  afterward 
they  had  frequent  Communion  with  Him.'* 
This  does  not  prove,  they  did  not  lofe  it 
before. 

*'  But  their  Poflerity  did  not.  ^Abel  had 
Communion  Vvdth  Him,  and  fo  had  the 
Patriarchs  and  Prophets.  And  fo  have 
we  at  this  Day.  So  that  as  we  could  not 
juftly  have  loft  this  Communion  by  Adam's 
Sin,  it  is  true,  in  Fad:,  that  we  have  not 
loft  it.  We  ftill  have  Fellowjhip  with  the 
Father  ajid  the  Son" 

Could  we  not  juftly,  hy  Ada?ns  Sin,  have 
loft  our  very  Exiftence  ?  And  if  he  had  not 
exifted,  could  we  have  had  Communiori 
with  God  ?  *'  But  we  have  not  loft  it  in  Fad. 
We  ftill  have  Fellowjhip  with  the  Father  and 
with  the  Son  J'  Who  have  ?  All  Men  born 
into  the  V/orld  ?  All  Jews^  and  Turks^  and 
Heathens  ?  Have  all  that  are  called  Chrifti- 
ans  ?  Have  the  Generality  of  Protcftants 
Fe//ow/Jjip  with  the  Father  a?2d  the  Son? 
What  Fellowfliip  ?  Juft  as  much  as  Light 
has  with  Darknefs,  as  much  as  Chriji  has 
with  BcliaL  The  Bulk  of  Mankind,  Chrifi- 
ans  as  well  as  Heathens^  Froteflajits  as  well 
as  PapiJlSi  are  at  this  Day,  and  have  been 

ever 
«  p.  148. 


Original  Sin.  17-. 

ever  fince  they  were  born,  ivithout  God," 
a3-fc?t,  Atheijis  in  the  WoyJd. 

We  need  not  therefore  lay,  ''  Tlieir  Fel- 
lowfliip  with  God,  is  owing  to  his  Mercy 
thro*  a  Pvedeemer."  They  have  none  at  all : 
No  Fellowiliip  with  the  only  true  God,  and 
with  Jefus  Chrift  whom  He  hath  [cut.  Indeed 
they  have  no  great  Need  of  "^cjus  Chrij}^  ac- 
cording to  your  Account :  Seeing  '*  ^//that 
God's  Grace  doth  for  us  in  Chriji^  to  repair 
what  we  loft  in  Adaniy  is  raifing  us  up  at 
the  laft  Day  !"  You  add,  ''  And  '  therefore 
Communion  with  God,  is  either  the  fame 
Grace  which  was  vouchfafed  to  Adam,  con- 
tinued to  us  :"  (To  every  Man  born  into  the 
World,  as  naturally  as  Seeing  or  Hearing  !) 
"  Or,  if  there  be  any  Thing  extraordinary 
in  it"  (Which  you  judge,  can  hardly  be  al- 
lowed !)  "It  belongs  to  the  Redundancy  of 
Grace,  which  has  no  Relation  to  any  Thing 
we  loft  by  Adam:'  That  that  whole  Paf- 
fage  has  Relation  to  what  we  loft  in  yldaf}!^ 
has  been  ftiewn  already.  But  what  Con- 
ception you  have  of  Communion  with  God, 
is  eafily  feen  by  this  wonderful  Account  of  it. 

"  However  this  Text  gives  no  Intima- 
tion, that^^^w's  Pofterity'loft  Communion 
with  God  for  his  Sin.'*  It  fhews  that  Adam 
did  fo.  And  all  his  Pofterity  has  done  the 
fame.     Whence  is  this,  unlefs  from  his  Sin .' 

V.  24. 


p,  149. 


174  "^^^  Doctrine  of 

V.  24.  So  He  drove  out  the  Man  :  And  He 
placed  at  the  Eaji  of  the  Garden  2/  Eden  Che- 
rubmi  and  a  flaming  Swcrd^  which  turned  every 
Way^  to  keep  the  Way  of  the  T!ree  of  Life, 

Although  God  is  equally  prefent  in 
every  Place,  yet  this  was  a  clear  Token, 
That  Man  had  not  no  v  that  near  Commu- 
nion with  Him,  whi<.h  he  had  enjoy 'd  before 
his  Sin. 

1 8.  Trop,  The  Fall  brought  upon  Mankiitd 
GoD'i  Difpleafure  and  Curfe,  fo  as  we  are  by 
Nature  the  Children  of  Wrath. 

"The  Text  on  which  this  is  '  grounded 
"Eph,  ii.  2,  3.  we  have  confider'd  before." 
And  thofe  Confiderations  have  been  anfwer'd 
at  large. 

You  add,  "  How  Mankind  could  h^juflly 
brought  under  God*s  Difpleafure  for  Adani% 
Sin,  we  cannot  underftand.  On  the  contra- 
ry, we  do  underftand,  it  ii  unjufl.  And 
therefore,  unlefs  our  Underftanding,  or  Per- 
ception of  Truth,  be  f alfe,  //  mufl  be  unjufl. 
But  Underftanding  muft  be  the  fame  in  all 
Beings,  as  far  as  they  do  underftand.  There- 
fore ^  if  we  underftand.  That  //  is  unjufl^ 
God  underftands  it  to  be  fo  too." 

Plausible  enough.  But  let  us  take  the 
Argument  in  Pieces.  ^*  How  Mankind  could 
be  jullly  brought  under  G  o  d's  Difpleafure, 
for  Adarn^  Sin,  we  cannot  underftand."     I 

allow 
»  p.  150.    ^  p.  151. 


Original  Sin.  17- 

allow  it.  I  cannot  underiland,  that  is, 
clearly  or  fully  comprehend  the  Deep  of  die 
Divine  Judgment  therein  :  No  more  than  I 
can,  How  the  whole  Brute  Creadon  through 
his  Sin  fhould  have  been  made  fuhjp^  toVanity^ 
and  fhould  groan  together^  in  Wcakncfs,  in 
various  Pain,  in  Death,  until  this  Day. 
"  On  the  contrary,  we  do  undcrftand,  //  is 
unjuji!'  I  do  not  underftand,  it  is.  It  is 
quite  beyond  my  Underftanding.  It  is  a 
Depth  which  I  cannot  fathom.  "  There- 
fore unlefs  our  Underftanding,  or  Perception 
of  Tmith  be  falfe,  it  mujl  be  imjiijir  Here 
lies  the  Deceit.  You  fhift  the  Terms,  and 
place  as  equivalent  thofe  which  are  not 
equivalent.  Our  Perception  ofT'ruth  cannot 
be  falfe  :  Our  Underftanding  or  Apprehe?ifion 
of  Things  may.  '^  But  Underftanding  muft 
be  the  fame  in  all  Beings."  Yes  in  the  for- 
mer Senfe  of  the  Word,  but  not  the  latter. 
"  Therefore  if  we  underftand  (apprehend) 
it  is  ufijuji,  God  underftands  it  fo  too."  Nay 
verily  :  As  the  Heavens  are  higher  than  the 
Earth,  fo  are  his  Thoughts  higher  than  our 
Thoughts. 

"  What  a  God  muft  He  be,  who  can 
curfe  his  innocent  Creatures,  before  they 
have  a  Being?  Is  this  thy  God  O  Chriftianr" 

Bold  enough !    So  Lord  B "  Is  Mo/ess 

God  your  God?"  He  is  mine  :  Akho'  he 
faid,   Curfed  be  Canaan,   including  his  Pof- 

terity, 


176  ^he  Doctrine  of 

terity,  before  they  had  a  Being.  And  al- 
tho'  He  now  permits  Millions  to  come  into 
a  World,  which  every  where  bears  the 
Marks  of  his  Dlfpleafurc.  And  He  permits 
human  Souls  to  exift  in  Bodies,  which  are 
(how  we  know  not,  but  the  Fad:  we  know) 
conceived  and  born  in  Sin^  by  Reafon  whereof, 
all  Men  coming  into  the  World  are  Children 
of  Wrath.  But  He  has  provided  a  Saviour 
for  them  all.  And  this  fully  acquits  both 
his  Juftice  and  Mercy. 

18.  So  ^^  'Zi;^  are  by  Nature  Bondjlanjes  to 
Satan  2  Tim.  ii.  26.  ^ And  that  they  may  re- 
cover  themfehes  out  of  the  Snare  of  tloe.  Devil 
who  are  taken  Captive  at  his  Will. 

But  you  fay,  "  The  Apoftle  fpeaks  this 
of  the  unconverted  Gentiles ^  who  were  Slaves 
to  Satan^  not  thro'  Adam^  but  thro*  their 
own  Fault."  Both  one  and  the  other.  But 
how  does  it  appear,  That  he  fpeaks  this  of 
the  Gentiles  only  ? 

Without  offering  at  any  Proof  of  this, 
you  go  on.  "  The  Claufe,""  taken  Captive  by 
himy  is  fpoken,  not  of  the  Devil,  but  of  the 
Servant  of  the  Lord.  For  thus  the  Place 
fhould  be  render'd;  That  they  may  awake  out 
of  the  Snare  of  the  DeviU  being  revived  by 
him,  that  is,  the  Servant  of  the  Lord,  tohisy 
that  is,  God's  Will. 

Well,  the  Proof.  *'  The  Word  ?wy^/w 
fignifies  to  revive ;   and  fo  here,  to  reftore 

Men 

i  P*  '52.    !"  P-  153- 


Original  Sin.  \jn 

Men  to  Life  and  Salvation.  As  a  Proof  of 
this  Senfe  of  the  Word  you  cite  Z/?//[t  v.  lo. 
But  this  rather  proves  the  contrary.  For 
there  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  re^crcing. 
We  read  in  the  Verfe  before  of  the  Fijhcs 
which  they  had  taken:  Alludin?  to  ^^'hich, 
Jcfusy^/V/ z^;2/(?  Simon,  From  hcriceforih  thou 
Jloalt  catch  Men  :  'T'ake  them  Captrce  in  the 
Goipel  Net.  Altho'  therefore  it  were  al- 
lowed (which  cannot  be  done)  that  his  re- 
lated, not  to  the  Word  immediately  pre- 
ceding, but  to  another  which  Hands  three 
Verfes  off,  yet  even  this  would  avail  nothing: 
Since  the  Senfe  which  you  impofe  upon 
^wy^^  is  what  it  will  by  no  Means  bear. 

You  fay  indeed,  "  It  always"  means  to 
take  alive  or  fave  alive. ''  It  does  mean,  Ti? 
take  alive.  But  you  bring  not  one  Autho- 
rity to  prove,  That  it  ever  means,  To  favc 
alive.  It  therefore  "-  fuits  the  Devil  and  his 
Snare"  admirably  well:  For  he  does  not  take 
therein  thofe  who  are  free  among  the  Dead : 
But  thofe  who  are  alive  in  a  natural,  though 
deadm  z  fpiritual  Senfe. 

"But  however '  this  be,  they  were  not 
led  Captive  thro'  Jdams  Sin,  but  their  own 
Wickednefs."  They  were  "  Bond  (laves  to 
Sata?i'  (which  was  the  Point  to  be  p^^ved') 
th  rough  Mam$  Sin,  and  their  own  Wicked- 
nefs. •      '^ 

*  p.  154-     •  P'  »5)- 


lyS  T/jc  Doctrine  of 

"  YeAj  but  what  an  Inconfiftency  muft 
that  be  in  the  Divine  Difpenfations  and  in 
the  Scriptures,  if  it  can  be  made  appear 
from  them.  That  God  hath  for  no  Fault  of 
mirs^  but  ojily  for  Adam's  one  Sin,  put  us  all 
into  the  Hands  of  the  Devil:  When  "He 
hath  been  in  all  Ages  providing  Means,  to 
preferve  or  refcue  Mankind  from  him?" 
What  can  be  made  appear  from  the  Scrip- 
tures is  this:  That  from  Adam  Sin  pajjed 
upon  all  Men:  That  hereby  all  Men  being 
by  Nature  dead  in  Sin  cannot  of  themfelves 
refift  the  Devil:  And  that  confequently,  all 
who  will  not  accept  of  Help  from  God,  are 
taken  Captive  by  Satan  at  his  Will  And 
there  is  no  Inconiiftency  between  this,  and 
any  of  the  Divine  Difpenfations. 

Pj'op.  ANDju/ily  liable  to  allPuniJhments 
in  this  IVof'ld^  and  that  which  is  to  come. 

That  all  Men  are  liable  to  thefe  for  A- 
dam^  Sin  alo7ie^  I  do  not  affert:  But  they  are 
fo,  for  their  own  outward  and  inward  Sins, 
Vv'hich  thro'  their  own  Fault,  fpring  from  the 
Infedion  of  their  Nature.  And  this,  I  think 
may  fairly  be  inferr'd  from  Rom,  vi.  23.  "• 
"the  Wages  of  Sin  is  Death  ^,  its  due  Reward: 
Death,  Temporal,  Spiritual  and  Eternal. 
God  grant,  we  may  never  feel  it  fo  ! 

19.  You  conclude  this  Part:  "I  cannot* 
.  fee,  that  we  have  advanced  one  Step  further, 

than 

'"    p.    156.       n    p.    157,    158.       <»    p.    162. 


Original  Sin.  179 

than  where  we  were  at  the  Conclufion  of 
the  Firft  Part,  namely,  That  the  Conie- 
quences  of  Adams  Firft  Sin  upon  us,  are 
Labour,  Sorrow  and  Mortality,  and  no 
other." 

The  contrary  to  this  having  been  fo 
largely  proved,  inftead  of  repeating  thofe 
Proofs  over  again,  I  fl:iall  clofe  this  Part  with 
that  beautiful  Defcription  of  the  prefent  State 
of  Man,  which  Mr.  Her^cey  gives  us  from 
Mr.  Howes  Living  Temple,  ''  Only,  fays 
he,  let  me  hint,  That  it  confiders  the  Hu- 
man Soul,  as  originally  an  Habitation  of  God 
thro  the  Spirit, 

"  That  He  hath  withdrawn  Himfelf  and 
left    this    his   Temple   defolate,    we    have 
many  fad  and  plain  Proofs  before  us.     The 
ftateh  Ruins  are  vifible  to  every  Eye,  and 
bear  in  their  Front  (yet  extant)  this  doleful  In- 
fcription,  HereGod  once  dwelt.  Enough 
appears  of  the  admirable  Strudture  ot  the 
Soul  of  Man,   to  fliew  the  Divine  Pretence 
did  fometime  refide  in  it:  More  than  enough 
of  vicious  Deformity,  to  proclaim  He  is  now 
retired  and  gone.     The  Lamps  are  cxtindl, 
the  Altar  overturned;  the  Liglit  and  Love 
are  now  vanifhed,  which  did  the  one  Ju.c 
with  fo  heavenly  Brightnefs,  the  other  burn 
with  fo  pious  Fervor.     The  G.A/r;/ Oz;.*- 
ftick  is  difplaced,   to  make  Room  for  d^ 
^Vhrone  of  the  Prince^of  Darkneis.  ^The 


i8o  The  Doctrine  of 

Sacred  Ltcenfe^  which  fent  up  its  rich  Per- 
fumes, is  exchanged  for  a  poifonous  hellifh 
Vapour.  The  comely  Order  of  this  Houfe 
is  all  turned  into  Confufion:  The  Beauties 
of  Holinefs  into  noifome  Impurities:  The 
Houfe  of  Prayer  into  a  Den  of  Thieves. 
Thieves  of  the  worft  Kind;  for  every  Luft 
is  a  Thief,  and  every  Theft  is  Sacrilege. 
The  noble  Powers  which  were  defigned 
and  dedicated  to  Divine  Contemplation  and 
Delight  in  God,  are  alienated  to  the  Service 
of  the  moft  defpicable  Idols,  and  employed 
in  the  vileft  Embraces:  To  behold  and  ad- 
mire lying  Vanities,  to  indulge  and  cherifh 
Lufl:  and  Wickednefs. 

''  There  is  not  now  a  Syjlem^  an  entire 
Table  of  coherent  Truths  to  be  found,  or  a 
Frame  of  Holinefs,  but  fome  fhiver'd  Par- 
cels. And  if  any  with  great  Toil  and  La- 
bour apply  themfelves,  to  draw  out  here  one 
Piece,  and  there  another,  and  fet  them  to- 
gether; they  ferve  rather  to  fhew,  how  ex- 
quifite  the  Divine  Workmanihip  was  in  the 
Original  Compoftion^  than  to  the  excellent 
Purpofes  for  which  the  whole  was  at  iirll 
defigned.  Some  Pieces  agree,  and  own 
one  another:  But  how  foon  are  our  Enquiries 
non-plus'd  and  fuperfcded !  How  many 
Attempts  have  been  made,  lince  that  fearful 
*Fall  and  Ruin  of  this  Fabric,  to  compofe 
again  the  Truths  of  fo  many  feveral  Kinds 

into 


Original  Sin.  j8i 

into  their  diftindl  Orders,  and  make  up 
Frames  of  Science  or  ufeful  Knowlediie? 
And  after  fo  many  Ages,  nothing  is  finifli'd 
in  any  Kind.  Sometimes  Truths  arc  mil- 
placed;  and  what  belongs  to  one  Kind,  is 
transferred  to  another,  where  it  will  not  fitly 
match :  Sometimes  Falfhood  infertcd,  which 
fhatters  or  difturbs  the  whole  Frame.  And 
what  with  much  fruitleft  Pains  is  done  by 
one  Hand  is  dailied  in  Pieces  by  another: 
And  it  is  the  Work  of  a  following  Age,  to 
fwjep  away  the  fine  fpun  Cobwebs  of  a 
former.  And  thofc  Truths  which  are  of 
greateft  Ufc,  tho'  not  moll  out  of  Sight,  are 
leaft  regarded:  Their  Tendency  and  Dcfign 
are  overlooked,  or  they  are  fo  loofencd  and 
torn  off,  that  they  cannot  be  wrought  in, 
fo  as  to  take  Hold  of  the  Soul,  but  hover  as 
faint,  ineffeftual  Notions,  that  lignify  no- 
thing. 

"  Its  wQvy  fundamental  Forcers  are  flrakcn 

and  disjointed,  and  their  Order  toward  one 
another  confounded  and  broken.  So  that 
what  is  judged  co?iJiderable  is  not  conjidcrd, 
what  is  recommended  as  k'^oeJy  d.nd  cligi/j/eh 
not  loved  and  chofen.  Yea,  the  Truth  ^.vhuh 
is  after  Godlmefs  is  net  fo  much  diibclicvcd, 
2.^  hated,  ov  held  in  Unrighteoufnefs ;  and  ilnncs 
with  too  feeble  a  Light,  in  that  malignant 
Darknefs,  which  comprehends  it  not.  \ou 
come  amidfl  all  this  Confufion,  into  the 

JVI  o  luincd 


1 82  T^ke  Doctrine  of 

ruined  Palace  of  fome  great  Prince,  in  which 
you  fee,  here  the  Fragments  of  a  noble  Pil- 
lar, there  the  ihattered  Pieces  of  fome  curious 
Imagery,  and  all  lying  negledled  and  ufelefs, 
among  Heaps  of  Dirt.  He  that  invites  you 
to  take  a  View  of  the  Soul  of  Man,  gives 
you  but  fuch  another  Profped:,  and  doth  but 
fay  to  you,  Behold  the  Defolation  !  All  Things 
rude  and  wafle.  So  that  ihould  there  be  any 
Pretence  to  the  Divine  Prefence,  it  might  be 
faid.  If  God  be  here^  why  is  it  thus?  The 
faded  Glory,  the  Darknefs,  the  Diforder,  the 
Impurity,  the  decayed  State  in  all  Refpedls 
of  this  Temple,  too  plainly  fliew,  T'he 
GREAT  InhabiTx-int  is goue T' 

Newington,   "Jan,  21. 

In  your  Third  Fart  you  propofe,  firft,  to 
anfwer  fome  Objed:ions  and  Queries :  And 
then  to  confider  the  Connexion  of  the  Doc- 
trine of  Original  Sin  with  other  Parts  of  Re- 
ligion. 

''  Ohj,  I.  Are^  we  not  in  worfe  Moral 
Circumftances,  than  Adam  was  before  he 
fell  ?  I  anfwer," 

I.  *'  If  by  Moral Circiimjlances  you  mean, 
The  State  of  Religion  and  Virtue,  it  is  certain 
the  greateft  Part  of  Mankind,  ever  were  and 
ftill  are  very  corrupt.  But  this  is  not  the 
Fault  of  their  Nature,  but  occafioned  by  the 

Abufc 

"  p.  168. 


Original  Sin.  iS-. 

Abufeoflt,  in  proftitutlng  Reafon  to  Appe- 
tite, whereby  in  Procefs  of  Time,  they  have 
funk  themfelves  into  the  moft  lamentable 
Degree,  of  Ignorance,  Superftition,  Idolatry, 
Injuflice,  Debauchery." 

But  how  came  this  ?  How  came  all  Na- 
tions thus  to  "  abufe  their  Nature,"  thus  to 
"  proftitute  Reafon  to  Appetite?"  How  came 
they  all  to  link  into  this  "  lamentable  Igno- 
rance, Superftition,  Idolatry,  Injufticc,  De- 
bauchery?" How  came  it,  that  Half  of  them, 
at  leaf!:,  if  their  Nature  was  uncorrupt,  did 
not  ufe  it  well  ?  Submit  Appetite  to  Reafon, 
and  rife,  while  the  other  funk  ?  ''  Procefs  of 
Time"  does  not  help  us  out  at  all.     P'or  if  it 
made  the  one  Half  of  Mankind,  more  and 
more  vicious,  it  ought  by  the  fame  Degrees 
to  have  made  the  other  Half,  more  and  more 
virtuous.     If  Men  were  no  more  inclined  to 
one  Side  than  the  other,  this  mufl:  abfolutcly 
have  been  the  Event.     Turn   and  wind  as 
you  pleafe,  you  will  never  be  able  to  get  over 
this.     You  will  never  account  for  this  Fad, 
That  the  Bulk  of  Mankind  have  in  all  Ages, 
"  proftituted  their  Reafon  to  Appetite,"  even 
'till  they  funk  into  ''  lamentable  Ignorance, 
Superftition,     Idolatry,    lujullice    and    De- 
bauchery :"  But  by  allowing  their  very  Na- 
ture to  be  in  Fault,  to  be  more  inclined  to 
Vice  than  Virtue. 

M  A  ''  But 


184  ^he  Doctrine  of 

"  But  if  wc  have  all  a  corrupt  Nature, 
which  as  we  cannot,  fo  God  will  not  wholly 
remove  in  this  Life,  then  why  do  we  try 
to  reform  the  World  ?"  Why  ?  Becaufe, 
whether  the  corrupt  Nature  be  wholly  re- 
moved, or  no,  Men  may  be  fo  far  reform'd, 
as  to  ceafe  from  Evil^  to  be  renewed  in  the 
Spirit  of  their  Mind^  and  by  patient  Continu- 
ance in  Well- doings  to  feek  and  find.  Glory  and 
Hojiour  and  Immortality. 

"  Ianswer,"^  2.  If  by  Moral  Circiimftances 
you  mean,  Prcvifwn  and  Means  for  fpiritual 
Improvefiient^  thofe  given  us  through  Chrif 
are  far  greater  than  Adam  had  before  he  fin- 
ned." To  thofe  \^  ho  believe  in  Chrift  they 
are.  But  above  four  Fifths  of  the  World, 
are  Mahometans  or  Pagans  ftill.  And  have 
tjjefe,  (immenfely  the  greater  Part  of  Man- 
kind :  To  fay  nothing  of  FopiJI:>  Nations) 
greater  Prcvi/ion  and  Means  for  fpiritual  Im- 
prcvc?ncntj  than  Adam  before  he  finned  ? 

"  But  if  3.  by  'Moral  Circiimjlances  you 
mean  Moral^'  (rather  Natural)  '^  Abilities^ 
or  Mental  Powers^'  (a  Confideration  quite 
foreign  to  the  Quefiion)  ''  I  anfwer.  The 
Scriptures  no  where  compare  our  Faculties 
with  Adanis,  Nor  know  I  how  we  can 
judge,  but  by  comparing  the  A6tions  of  ^- 
dam  in  Innocence  v/ith  what  Men  have  per- 
formed fince." 

Yes, 

•»   p.    I^Q.       «■    p.    170. 


Original  Sin.  iSr 

Yes,  we  can  judge  thus.  There  could 
be  no  Defcd:  mAdanh  Undcrftanding,  when 
he  came  firft  out  of  the  Hands  of  his  Creator. 
But  there  are  effential  Defeds  in  mine  and 
your's,  and  eveiy  Man's  whom  we  know — 
Om  Apprehe?7/ion  IS  indiftind,  omx  "Judgment 
falfe,  our  Reafoning  wrong,  in  a  thoufand 
Inftances.  So  it  always  was :  And  fo  it  is 
ftill,  after  all  the  Care  we  can  polfibly  take. 
Therefore  *'  our  Faculties  are  not  as  found 
and  fit  for  right  Adion,  as  Adams  were  be- 
fore he  finned." 

"  Bur  any  Man  of  common  Underfiand- 
ing  might  have  dnji  and  kept  the  Garden  as 
well  as  he."  I  can  neither  affirm,  nor  deny 
this.  For  we  know  not  hoiv  he  drrjjed  and 
kept  it. 

*'  Nor  doth  it  appear,'  That  in  giving 
Names  to  all  the  Creatures,  he  fhewcd  any 
extraordinary  Penetration  into  their  Natyrcs. 
For  that  the  Names  he  gave  truly  expreflcd 
the  feveral  Qualities  of  them,  is  a  meer  Fic- 
tion, without  any  Foundation  in  Scripture- 
Hiftory,  or  the  Names  of  Animals  in  the 
original  Hebreiv'' 

This  is  really  firange!  That  any  Man  of 
Learning  fliould  be  fo  hardy  as  to  affirm  this, 
after  the  numberlefs  Infiances  which  have 
been  prodi^ced  o\^ Hebrew  Names,  cxprelTing 
the  moll  efifential  Property  of  each  Animal. 

Am) 

*  p.  171- 


i86  ^he  Doctrine  of 

And  is  this  Suppofition  likewife  "  without 
any  Foundation  in  Scripture-Hiflory  ?"  What 
is  that  ?  Geji.n,  19.  Ajid  the  Lord  God 
brought  every  Beaji  of  the  Fieldy  and  every  Fowl 
of  the  Alr^  unto  Adam,  to  fee  what  he  would 
call  therriy  to  make  Proof  of  his  Underftand- 
in g .  And  whatfoever  Adam  called  every  livi?ig 
Creature,  that  was  the  Name  thereof.  Now 
whether  thofe  Names  were  Hebrew  or  no 
(which  jowaffeB  to  doubt)  can  it  be  fuppofed 
that  God  would  have  permitted  them  to 
ftand,  if  they  had  not  fuited  the  Nature  of 
each  Creature  ?  'Tis  bold  therefore  to  affirm. 
That  "  many  of  his  Pofterity  could  have  gi- 
ven Names  to  them  as  well  as  he :  And 
that  therefore  this  is  not  a  Proof,  that'  he 
had  any  Capacity  fuperior  to  us." 

You  proceed,  "  Surely"  his  eating  the  for- 
bidden Fruit  is  no  Evidence  of  fuperior  Abi- 
lities." And  it  is  no  Evidence  of  the  con- 
trary; "  Seeing"  (as  you  yourfelf  obferve) 
"  v/hat  his  fpecial  Temptation  was,  we  do 
not  know."  Therefore  neither  do  we  know. 
Whether  any  of  his  Pofterity  could  have  over- 
come it:  Much  lefs,  That  "  many  of  his 
Pofterity,  have  overcome  Temptations  more 
violent  than  his."  All  this  is  talking  in  the 
Dark,  ?iot  hiowmg  what  we  fay,  neither  whereof 
we  affrm. 

"  And 
*  p.  172.    "^  p.  173. 


Original  Sin.  jSt 

"  And  ^now  let  any  Man  fee,  Whether 
there  be  any  Ground  in  Revelation,  for  ex- 
alting Adam\  Nature  as  Divines  have  done 
who  have  affirm'd  that  all  his  Faculties  were 
eminently  perfedl,  and  entirely  fct  to  the 
Love  and  Obedience  of  his  Creator.  'And 
yet  thefe  fame  fuppofe  him  to  have  been 
guilty  of  the  vileil  Ad:,  that  ever  was  com- 
mitted." 

They  fuppofe  Adam  to  have  been  created 
holy  and  wife,  like  his  Creator ;  and  yet 
capable  of  falling  from  it.  They  fuppofe 
farther,  that  thro'  Temptations  of  which 
we  cannot  poffibly  judge,  he  did  fall  from 
that  State;  and  that  hereby  he  brought  Pain, 
Labour  and  Sorrow,  on  himfelf,  and  all  his 
Poflerity :  Together  with  Death,  not  only 
Temporal,  but  Spiritual,  and  (without  the 
Grace  of  God)  Eternal.  And  it  mull:  be 
confeft.  That  not  only  a  few  Divines,  but 
the  whole  Body  of  Chriftians  in  all  Ages, 
did  fuppofe  this,  'till  after  feventccn  hundred 
Years  a  fvveet-tongued  Orator  arofe,  not 
only  more  enlightened  then  filly  ylJam,  but 
than  any  of  his  wife  Poflerity  :  And  declar- 
ed. That  the  whole  Suppofition  was  Folly, 
Nonfenfe,  Inconfiftency  and  Blafphcmy  ! 

"  Obj.  II.  But  do  not  the  Scriptures  fay, 
Adam  was  created  after  God's  own  Image  ? 
And  do  his  Poflerity  bear  that  Image  now  r" 

''  The 

r  p-  ^iS'  '  p-  '7^' 


i88  The  Doctrine  of 

"  The  Scriptures  do  fay,  Gen.  i.  27,  God 
created  Man  in  his  oivn  Image.  But  what- 
ever that  Phrafe  means  here,  it  doubtlefs 
means  the  fame,  mGen.  ix.  6,  Whofo  Jhed-- 
deth  Mans  Bloody  by  Man  pall  his  Blood  be 
JJoed:  Fo7^  in  the  Image  of  God  made  He  Man''' 
Certainly  it  has  the  fame  Meaning  in  both 
Places :  For  the  latter  plainly  refers  to  the 
former.  And  thus  much  we  may  fairly  in- 
fer from  hence,^  That  the  Image  of  God 
wherein  Man  was  at  firft  created  wh-ereinfo- 
ever  it  confifted  was  not  utterly  effaced  in 
the  Time  of  Noah.  Yea,  fo  much  of  it  will 
always  remain  in  all  Men,  as  will  juftify  the 
punifhing  Murderers  with  Death.  But  we 
can  in  no  wife  infer  from  hence,  That  that 
entire  Image  of  God,  in  which  Adam  was 
at  firft  created,  now  remains  in  all  his 
Pofterity. 

The  Words  of  Gen.  v.  3,  rendered  lite- 
rally are,  He  begat  in  his  Likenefs^  according 
to  his  Image.  "  Ada?n,  fays  Mr.  Hervey^ 
was  created  in  the  Image  of  God.  After  his 
Fall  the  facred  Iliftorian  varies  his  Stile,  and 
with  a  remarkable  Peculiarity,  as  well  as 
Propriety,  fays,  Adam  begat  a  Son  in  his  own 
Likenefs  :  (So  it  muft  be  tranflated  accord- 
ing to  all  the  Rules  of  Grammar,  Adain  be- 
ing the  neareft  Antecedent.)  That  every 
Reader  may  advert  to  this  melancholy,  but 

important 

y  p.  177. 


Original  Sin.  i8c; 

important  Truth,  It  is  inforced  hy  a  very 
emphatical  Repetition:  After  his  own  Image, 
as  contradiftineuifli'd  from  ihitlmazc  of  God, 
mentioned  m  the  preceding  Verfe  :  Which 
Expreflions  arc  evidently  intended  to  denote 
the  Difference  between  the  State,  in  which 
Adam  was  created  and  Seth  beo^otten." 

"  The  ^two  following  Texts  are  brought 
by  the  Ajfembly  to  fliew,  What  the  Image 
of  God  was,  in  which  Adam  was  made." 

Col,  iii.  I  o.  And  have  put  en  the  neiv  AIa?jy 
which  is  refiewedin  Knovjkdge^  after  the  Image 
of  Him  that  created  him. 

Eph,  iv.  24.  VuT  o?i  the  new  Man ^  which 
after  the  Image  of  God  is  created  in  Rigbtc^ 
oufnefs  and  true  Holinefs. 

**  I  ANSWER,  Thefe  Texts  are  parallel. 
'The  old  Man  means  a  wicked  Life,  the  ?iew* 
Man,  a  good  Life;  to  which  they  were 
formted  and  created  by  the  Gofpcl  Dilpcnfa- 
tion.  And  this  Jiew  Man  this  new  Life,  is 
after  the  Image,  that  is  agreeable  to  the  Na- 
ture of  God. 

As  you  advance  no  Proof  of  this  pcrfcvft- 
ly  new  Interpretation,  I  leave  it  to  ihift  for 

itfelf. 

To  difprove  the  common  Interpretation 
you  add,  ''  Adam  could  not  be  originally 
created,  in  Righteoufnefs  and  true  Holinefs; 
becaufe  flabits  of  Holinefs,  cawiot  be  created, 

without 

I  p.  178.    *  p.  \''^- 


I  go  The  Doctrine  of 

without  our  Knowledge,  Concurrence  or 
Confent.  For  ^  Holinefs  in  its  Nature  im- 
plies the  Choice  and  Confent  of  a  moral 
Ao:ent,  without  which  it  ca?i?iot  be  Holinefs." 

What  is  Holinefs  ?  Is  it  not,  eflentially 
Love  ?  The  Love  of  God  and  of  all  Man- 
kind ?  Love  producing  Bowels  of  Mercies^ 
Hiimhlenefs  of  Mind^  Meeknefs^  Gentkmcfs^ 
Lo?7g-fujferi?2g?  And  cannot  God  flied  abroad 
this  Love  in  any  Soul,  without  his  Concur- 
rence ?  Antecedent  to  his  Knowledge  or 
Confent  ?  And  fuppofing  this  to  be  done, 
will  Love  change  its  Nature  ?  Will  it  be  no 
longer  Holinefs  ?  This  Argument  can  never 
be  fuftained  :  Unlefs  you  would  play  upon 
the  Word  Habits.  Love  is  Holinefs  where- 
ever  it  exifts.  And  God  could  create  either 
Men  or  Angels,  endued  from  the  very  iirft 
Moment  of  their  Exiftence,  with  whatfo- 
ever  Degree  of  Love  He  pleafed. 

You  "  think,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  De- 
monftration.  That  we  cannot  be  righteous 
or  holy,  we  cannot  objerve  what  is  right, 
without  our  own  free  and  explicit  Choice." 
I  fuppofe  you  mean,  praBife  what  is  right. 
But  a  Man  may  be  righteous,  before  he  does 
what  is  right ;  holy  in  Heart  before  he  is 
holy  in  Life.  The  confounding  thefe  tw^o 
all  along,  feems  to  be  the  Ground  of  your 
ftrange   Imagination,    That  Adam   "  7miji 

chufe 

»>  p.  180. 


Original  Sin.  iqi 

chufe  to  be  righteous,  muft  exercifcTlioivtht 
and  Refledion  before  he  could  be  rio-htcous." 
Why  fo  ?  "  Becaufe  Righteoulncfs  is  the 
right  Vfe  and  Application  of  our  Powers." 
Here  is  your  capital  Miftake.  No,  it  is  not: 
It  is  the  right  State  of  our  Powers.  It  is  the 
right  Difpoftion  of  our  Soul,  the  right  Tlv;/- 
per  of  our  Mi?id,  Take  this  with  you,  and 
you  will  no  more  dream.  That  *'  God,  could 
not  create  Man  in  Righteoufnefs  and  true 
Holinefs:"  Or  that ''  to  'talk  of  wanting  that 
Righteoufnefs  in  ivhich  Adam  ^ivas  created,  is 
to  talk  of  nothing  we  want." 

On  Ro?n,  ii.  14.  you  obferve,  "  This*  Text 
clearly  proves,  that  Natural  Reafon  and  I'n- 
derftanding,  is  a  Rule  of  Adion  to  all 
Mankind,  and  that  all  Men  ought  to  follow 
it.  This  therefore  overthrows  tlie  whole 
Do6lrine  of  Original  Sin.'' 

How  do  you  prove  the  Confequence  ? 
May  not  Men  h^vc  fo/ne  Reafon  left,  whidi 
in  /me  Meafure  difcerns  Good  from  Evil, 
and  yet  be  deeply  fallen,  and  even  as  to  their 
Underftanding,  as  well  as  their  Will  and 
Affc6lions  ? 

On  Eccles,  vii.  29.  'God  bath  made  Man 
upright,  but  they  have  found  out  many  Inven- 
tions; You  fay 

"  Man  here  means,  All  Mankind  ;  Up- 
right,  Endued  with  Powers  to  know  and  per- 
form 

c  p.  181.     '^  p.  183.     f  p.  i?4'  '^v 


192  The  Doctrine?/^ 

form  their  Duty."  You  offer  no  Proof  for 
cither  of  thefe  Aflertions.  And  without  it 
I  cannot  receive  them. 

Again,   ''  'T'hey  (you  fay)  means  Mankind 
in  general."     I  rather  believe  it  means  our 
lirft   Parents,   who    are   by  Mcfes   IJkewiftL 
comprehended  under  the  common  Name  of  i^ 
Man   or  rather  ^"^^  Adain,     So  Gen,  v.  2. 
God  called  their  Name  Adam  in  the  Day  when 
they  were  created.     And  in  the  Day  that  they 
fell,  whoever  reads  Gen,  iii.  will  fee  they  found    ^ 
out  not  one,  but  7nany  Inventions,     This  Text 
therefore  in  its  obvious  Meaning  teaches  both 
the   Original  Wprightnefs,   and  fubfequent 
Fall  of  Man. 

From  all  thefe  Texts  it  manifeftly  appears,. 
I.  That  Man  was  created  in  the  Image  of 
God,  2.  That  this  Image  confifted  not  only 
in  his  rational  and  immortal  Nature,  and 
his  Dominion  over  the  Creatures,  but  alfo 
in  Knowledge^  adlual  Knowledge  both  of 
God  and  of  his  Works,  in  the  right  State  of 
his  Intellectual  Powers,  and  in  Love^  which 
is  true  Holinefs, 

''  Ohj,  III.  But  do  we  ^  not  derive  from 
Adafn  a  moral  T'ai?2t  and  InfeBion,  whereby 
we  have  a  Natural  Fropenfity  to  Sin  ? 

*'  I  ANSWER,  We  have  many  Natural 
Appetites  and  Paffions,  which  if  they  grow 
irregular,  become  finful.     But  this  docs  not 

amount 

f  p.  186. 


Original  Sin.  io-^ 

amount  to  a  Natural  Propenfity  to  Sin."  But 
is  not  Pride  Sin?  Is  not  Idolatry  Sin?  And 
is  it  not  Idolatry,  to  love  the  Creature  more 
than  the  Creator?  Is  not  Revenge  Sin?  Is  it 
not  Sin,  to  look  upon  a  JVoman,  fo  as  to  luft  af- 
J^r  her  ?  And  have  not  all  Men  a  Natural 
Propenfity  to  thefe  Things?  They  have  all 
then  a  Natural Fropenjlty  to  Sin.  Neverthe- 
lefs  this  Propenfity  is  not  necejjary^  if  by  ne- 
ceflary  you  mean  irrefiftible.  We  can  refill 
and  conquer  it  too,  by  the  Grace  which  is 
ever  at  Hand. 

This  Fropenfiiy  to  Pride,  to  Revenge,  to 
Idolatry  (call  it'Taifit^  or  any  Thing)  can- 
not be  pleafing  to  God,  who  yet  in  Facfr  docs 
permit  that  it  fliould  defcend  fi-om  yldam  to 
his  latefl;  Pofterity.  And  ''  we  can  neither 
help  nor  hinder"  its  defcending  to  Us.  In- 
deed we  can  heap  up  plaufible  Arguments, 
to  prove  the  Impoflibility  of  it.  But  ly^V/it, 
and  the  Argurricnt  drops.  Bring  ever  fo 
many  Proofs,  that  there  can  be  no  fuch 
Thing  as  Motion.  I  move  and  they  vaniih 
away. 

''But  Nature  ^cannot  be  ??iorally  corrupted^ 
but  by  the  Choice  of  a  moral  Agent."  You 
may  play  upon  Words  as  long  as  you  pleafc; 
but  ftill  I  hold  this  fail::  I,  (and  you  too,  whi- 
ther you  will  own  it  or  no)  am  inclincil, 
and  was  ever  fince  I  can  remember,  antc- 

N  ccdcntly 

e  p,  187. 


194  ^^^^    DOCTRINF    of 

cedently  to  anv  Choice  of  mv  ov/n,  to  Pride, 
Reveiigc,  Idoiatiy.  If  you  wUi  not  call 
thefe  vnox2\  Corruptions^  call  themjuft  what 
you  will.  Bu:  the  Fad:  I  am  as  well  afliired 
of,  as  that  I  have  any  Memory  or  Under- 
ftanding. 

"  But  feme  ^  have  attempted  to  explain 
this  intricate  Affair/'  I  do  not  commend 
their  Wifdom.  I  do  not  attempt  to  explain 
even  how  I,  at  this  Moment,  ftretch  out 
my  Hand,  or  move  my  Finger. 

One  more  of  your  Affertions  I  muft  not 
pafs  over.'  "  It  is  abfurd  to  fay,  Infedtion 
is  derived  from  Adam^  independent  of  the 
Will  of  God.  And  to  fay,  it  is  by  his  Will, 
is  to  make  Him  the  Author  of  the  Pollu- 
tion." 

We  anfwer.  It  is  not  derived  from  Adam^ 
independent  of  the  Will  of  God;  that  is, 
his  Permiffive  Will:  But  our  allowing  this, 
does  not  make  Him  the  Author  of  the  Pol- 
lution. 

"  Ohj.  IV.  But  do  ''  not  the  Vices  of 
Parents  often  infed:  their  Children?" 

I  KNOW  not  well,  either  how  to  affirm  or 
deny  it. 

**  Ohj.  V.  How  ^  can  we  account  for 
Children's  beginning  fo  foon  to  fin,  but  by 
fuppofing  they  have  a  natural  Propenfity 
to  itr 

"  I  ANSWER 
"  p.  1 88.    •  p.  1&9.    "  p.  190,  191.     ^  p.  192. 


Original  Sin.  i^r 

"  I  ANSWER,  who  can  (dl,  how  foon 
they  begin  r"  Then  they  begin,  when  they 
firft  fhew  wrong  Tempe;  s :  Such  as  pl^ain, 
undeniable  Frowardnels,  Revenge,  Sch'-wjU, 
which  is  as  loon  as  they  have  any  ExcrCiiC 
of  Reafon.  So  that  the  Ufe  or  Rcalbn  a:ul 
the  Abule,  generally  commence  and  grow 
up  together.  As  foon  as  their  Faculties  ap- 
pear at  all,  they  appear  to  be  dilbrder'd  :  1  he 
wrong  State  of  their  Powers,  being  caiily  in- 
fer'd  from  their  continual  wrong  Application 
of  them. 

"But  if  Parents  were  wife  and  virtuous 
themfelves,  and  then  endeavour'd  to  brin-j:  up 
their  Children   virtuoufly,    there  would   be 
lefs  Wickednefs  in   the  World."       There 
would:  But  this  does  not  reach  the  Point; 
nor,  that  *'  undilciplin'd  Children  contract 
bad  Habits."     I  have  known  wife  and  virtu- 
ous Parents,   who  did  earneftly  labour  to 
bring  up  their  Children  virtuoufly  ;  and  dif- 
ciplin'd  them  with  all  polTiblc  Care,  from  the 
very  firft  Dawn  of  Reafon.     Yet  thcfe  very 
Children  fhewed  bad  Tempers,  before  it  was 
poflible  they  fhould  ''  contrad  had  Habitsr 
They  daily  evidenced  the  icrong  State  o\  all 
their  Faculties,  both  of  their  Undcrllanding, 
Will  and  Aftci^lions,  juft  contrary  both  to  the 
Examples  and  Inftrudions  of  all  that   were 
round  about  them.     Here  then  thefc  ivrcng 
Tempers  were  not  owing  to  "  the  Fault  of 
^  N  2  carclels 


196  I'he  Doctrine  of 

carelefs  or  ungodly  Parents :  Nor  could  be 
rationally  accounted  for,  but  by  fuppofing 
thofe  Children  to  have  a  natural  Propenjity  to 
Evil 

It  is  indeed  a  general  Rule,  ""Train  tip  a 
Child  in  the  Way  he  JJmild  go^  and  whe?i  he  is 
old  he  will  not  depart  from  it :  And  thei  e  is 
much  Truth  in  that  Oblervation,  'FocliJJjnefs 
is  bound  in  the  Heart  of  a  Child-,  but  the  Rod 
of  CorreBion  JImll  drive  it  far  from  him :  Th  at 
is,  prudent  Correction  is  the  moil  probable 
Means  which  you  can  ufe  to  remove  that 
Fooliflmefs.  Yet  this  no  Way  contradid:s 
v^hat  is  Matter  of  daily  Experience,  That 
they  have  a  7iatural  Propejifity  to  Evil.  Nay, 
the  latter  of  thefe  Texts  ftrongly  confirms 
it :  For  if  there  be  no  fuch  Propeniity,  how 
comes  Fooliflmefs  (that  is  Wickednefs,  in  the 
Language  of  Solomon)  to  be  bound  in  the 
Heart  of  a  Child?  Of  every  Child,  of  Chil- 
dren in  general,  as  the  Phrafe  manifeftly  im- 
ports. It  is  not  from  Education  here  :  It  is 
luppofed  to  be  antecedent  to  Education, 
whether  good  or  bad.  "  Oh,  "Fooliflmefs 
means  only  ftrong  Appetite!'  Yes,  ftrong 
Appetite  to  Evil.  Otherwife  it  would  not  call 
for  the  Rod  ofCorreclion^  or  need  to  be  driven 
far  from  him. 

''  Ohj.  VI.  Might  not  Adam\  Pofterity 
be  faid,  x.o  fm  in  him^  zs  Levi  is  faid,  to 
■'pay  Tythes  in  Abraham  ?"  If 

o^  Pro'v.  xxii.  6..     "  V.  15.     <•  p.  193.     p  Heb.  vii.  9. 


Original  Sin.  igy 

If  the  Querift  means,  not  to  prcrce  a  Doc- 
trine already  proved,  but  only  to  illulirate 
one  Expreffion  by  another,  your  Anfwer, 
^ ''  That  it  is  a  bold  Figure,"  does  not  at  all 
affedt  him.  It  is  fo :  But  ftlll  it  may  be  per- 
tinently cited  to  illuftrate  a  fimilai  Exprellion. 

"  Obj.  VII.  '  But  there  is  a  Law  in  our 
Members  which  wars  againjl  the  Law  of  cur 
Minds ^  and  brings  us  i?2to  Captivity  to  the  Law 
of  Sin  and  Death.  And  does  not  this  prove, 
That  we  come  into  the  World  with  ffful 
Propenfities?'' 

You  anfwcr,  i.  "  '  If  we  come  into  the 
World  with  them,  they  are  Natural :  But 
if  Natural,  necefjary  :  And  if  neceffary,  then 
no  Sin." 

If  the  Confequence  were  good,  with  Re- 
gard to  what  is  fo  natural  and  necefjary^  as 
to  be  irre/ijiible,  yet  certainly  it  is  not  good, 
with  Regard  to  thofe  Propeniitics,  which 
we  may  both  refifl:  and  conquer. 

You  anfwer,  2.  "  The  Apolllc  does  not 
in  this  Chapter,  fpeak  of  any  Man  as  he 
comes  into  the  World,  but  as  he  is  afterward 
depraved  and  corrupted  by  his  own  wicked 

Choice." 

Where  is  the  Proof?  How  docs  it  appciu-. 
That  he  does  not  fpeak  of  Men  corrupted 
both  by  Choice  and  by  Nature  ? 

N  3  You 


p.  195.    '  p.  199-    *  P- 


200. 


198  The  Doctrine  of 

You  anfwcr,  3.  "  He  does'  not  fpeak  of 
himfelf,  or  any  regenerate  Man,  but  of  a 
yew  under  the  Power  of  Sin."  Nay,  your, 
Argument  proves,  He  does  not  fpeak  of  any 
yew.  For  in  Order  to  prove,  "  The  Apoftle 
does  not  fpeak  of  himielf,"  you  fay,  ''  The 
Perfons  of  whom  he  fpeaks,  were  before  the 
Co7nmandment  came^  i.  e.  before  they  came 
vnder  the  Law,  once  without  the  Law,  But 
the  Apoftle  never  was  without  the  Law!* 
No,  nor  any  yew.  ''  For  he  was  born,  and 
continued  under  the  Law^  'till  he  was  a 
Chriftian!'  So  did  all  the  yews^  as  well  as 
he — *'  And  therefore  it  cannot  be  true.  That 
he"  or  any  y^w  w^hatever,  "  was  without  the 
Law^  before  he  came  under  it."  So  you 
have  clearly  proved,  That  the  Apoftle  does 
not  in  this  Pafiage  fpeak  of  any  ^jew\t  all. 

But  why  do  you  think,  he  does  fpeak  of 

yews^^  Nay  of  them  only  ?  It  "  appears,  you 

fay,  from  V.  i .  I  fpeak  to  them  that  know  the 

Law,     For  the  Gentiles  never  were  U7ider  the 

LawT     Yes,  they  were :    All  the  Gentiles 

who  were  convinced  of  Sin^  were  tmder  the 

I -aw  in  the  Senfe  here  fpoken  of:  Under 

the  condemning  Power  of  the  Law  written  in 

their  Hearts^   for  tranfgrelTing  which   they 

were  under  the  Wrath  of  God.     And  this 

whole   Chapter,  from  the   7'"   to  the  24'*" 

Vcrfe,  defcribes  the  State  of  all  thofe,  fews 

or 
^  p.  200. 


Original  Sin.  i^^ 

or  Gentiles,  who  Jaw  -dndfeU  tiic  VVjckcdncfs 
both  of  their  Hearts  and  Lives,  and  groaned 
tp  be  dehvered  from  it. 

Many  Paifages  in  your  Paraphrafe  on  the 
former  Part  of  this  Chapter,  are  liable  to 
much  Exception  5  but  as  they  do  not  imme- 
diately touch  the  Point  in  Qucftion,  I  pafs 
on  to  the  latter  Part. 

V.  14. "  I  AM  carnal,  fold  under  Sin.  **  He 
means  a  wilhng  Slavery."  Quite  the  con- 
trary, as  appears  from  the  very  next  Words: 
For  that  which  I  do,  I  allow  7iot :  For  what  J 
would,  I  do  not  -,  but  what  I  hate,  that  I  do. 
What  I  hate :  Not  barely,  *'  what  my  Rea- 
fon  difapproves:"  But  what  I  really  detell  and 
abhor,  yet  cannot  help. 

V.  17.  Now  then,  it  is  no  more  I  that  do 
it,  hut  Sin  that  dwelleth  in  me,  *'  It  is  "  my 
fmful  Propenfities,  my  indulged  Appetites 
and  Paflions."  True:  But  thofe  Propenfi- 
ties were  antecedent  to  that  hidiilgence. 

"But  the  Apoftle  cannot  mean,  That 
there  is  fomething  in  Man,  which  makes 
him  fm,  whether  he  will  or  no.  For  then 
it  would  not  be  Sin  at  all."  Experience  ex- 
plains his  Meaning.  I  have  felt  in  me  a 
thoufand  Times,  lomcthing  which  made  mc 
trangrefs  God's  Law,  whether  I  would  or 
no.  Yet  I  dare  not  fay,  That  "tranfgrcjjion 
of  the  Law  was  "  no  Sin  at  all." 
^  N  4  V.  iS. 

"  p.  216.    ^  p.  217* 


200  T'he  Doctrine  of 

V.  1 8.  For  I  know y  that  in  me^  that  is ^  in 
my  FlefJ\  (not  my  "  flefhly  Appetites"  only, 
but  my   whole  Nature  while   unrenewed) 

dfwelkth  no  good  'Thing,  For  to  will  indeed 
is  prefent  with  me :  Not  barely  "that  natural 
Faculty,  the  Will,"  but  an  adlual  Will  to 
do  Good,  as  evidently  appears  from  the  fol- 
lowing Words,  But  how  to  perform  that  which 
is  goody  I  find  not :  I  have  the  Defire,  but 
not  the  Power. 

V.  19.  For  the  Good  that  I  would ^  that  I 
defire  and  chufe,  /  do  not :  But  the  Evil 
which  I  would  not y  which  I  hate,  that  I  do. 

V.  20.  Now  if  I  do  that  I  would  not  ^  it  is 
no  ?nore  7,  but  Sin  that  dwelleth  in  me :  But 
"  the  Prevalency  ""  of  fenfual  Affedions," 
yea  finful  Tempers  of  every*  Kind,  "  fettled 
and  ruling  in  my  Heart,"  both  by  Nature 
and  Habit. 

V.  21.  I  FIND  then,  that  when  I woidd  do 
Good,  when  I  chufe  and  earneftly  defire  it, 
I  cannot :  Evil  is  prefent  with  me  :  As  it  were 
gets  in  between. 

V.  22.  For  /  delight  in  the  Law  ofGo-D^ 
after  the  inward  Man  :  My  Mind,  my  Con- 
fcience  approves  it. 

V.  2  3 .  But  //tr^  another  haw  in  my  Mem- 
bers which  warrelh  agaijili  the  Law  i?i  my 
Mind:  "  Another  Principle  of  Adion,  which 
fights  againft  my  Reafon"  and  Confcience, 

and 

^  p.  218.    y  p.  219, 


Original  Sin.  201 

and  bringeth  me  into  Captivity  to  the  haw  of 
Sin  which  is  in  my  Members :  Which  "  cap- 
tivates and  inflaves  me  to  the  Principle  of 
Wickednefs."  (Strange  Language  vor you  to 
ufe!)  "Seated  in  the  Lufts  of  the  Flefli :" 
Seated  indeed  in  all  my  Tempers,  Pafllons 
and  Appetites,  which  are  the  feveral  Mem- 
'bers  oithe  old  Man, 

MrtV.  24.  Oivretched  Man  that  I  am  :  Who 
Jhall  deliver  me  from  the  Body  of  this  Death? 
"  He  is  under  the  Power  of  liich  Paffions,  as 
his  own  Reafon  difapproves,  but  is  too  weak 
to  conquer :  And  N.  B.  beiiig  a  Jew,  he 
(lands  condemn'd  to  eternal  Death  by  tJie 
Law.  How  fliall  fuch  a  wretched  Je'uj 
be  delivered  from  finful  Lufts,  and  the  Curfe 
of  the  Law  ?"  Did  then  none  but  a  Jew  ever 
cry  out,  under  the  Burden  of  Sin  wretched 
Man  that  I  am  ?  Are  none  but  Jews  "  under 
the  Powers  of  fuch  Paflions,  as  their  own 
Reafon  difapproves,  but  is  too  weak  to  con- 
quer?" And  does  the  Law  of  God  *' con- 
demn to  eternal  Death,"  no  Sinners  befide 
Jews?  Do  not  Chriftians  alfo  (in  the  wide 
Senfe  of  the  Word)  groan  to  be  delivered 
from  the  Body  of  this  Death?  With  what 
Truth,  with\vhat  Senfe  can  you  reftrain 
this  Paflage  to  a  Jew  any  more  than  to  a 

'Turk  ? 

I  CANNOT  but  obfer\'^e  upon  the  whole, 
The  Qucftion  is,   "  Does  not  Rom.  vii.  23, 

Ihcw 


202  .  The  Doctrine  c/' 

fhew  that  wc  come  into  the  World  with  fin- 
ful  Propenfities  ?  (This  is  all  that  is  perti- 
nent in  the  Objed;ion  awkwardly  propofed, 
p.  199.)  But  inftead  of  keeping  to  this, 
you  fpend  above  twenty  Pages  in  proving, 
that  this  Chapter  does  not  defcribc  a  rege- 
nerate Perfon  !  It  may,  or  it  may  not :  But 
this  does  not  touch  the  Queftion,  "  Do  not 
Men  come  into  the  World  with  finful  Pro- 
penfities ?" 

We  have  undoubtedly  an  additional  Proof, 
that  they  do,  in  the  Words  of  Jeremiah  C. 
xvii.  9.  T^he  Ueart^  is  deceitful  above  all  Things^ 
and  defperately  wicked:  Who  can  know  it  ?  On 
this  you  defcant  (one  Inftance  of  aThoufand, 
of  your  artful  Manner  of  declaiming,  in  or- 
der to  foreftall  the  Readers  Judgment,  and 
deceive  the  Hearts  of  the  Simple)  '^  Chriftians 
too  generally  neglediing  the  Study  of  the 
Scripture,  content  themfelves  with  a  few 
Scraps,  which  tho'  wrong  underftood,  they 
make  the  Teft  of  Truth,  in  contradiction 
to  the  whole  Tenor  of  Revelation.  Thus 
this  Text  has  been  mifapplied  to  prove.  That 
every  Man's  Heart  is  lb  defperately  wicked, 
that  no  Man  can  know  how  wicked  his 
Heart  is.'*  O  what  Tn^ocyt^XoyU'  Perfwafive- 
nefs  of  Speech  !  After  reading  this,  I  was 
much  inclined  to  believe,  without  going  a 
ftep  farther,  That  this  Text  had  been  "  gen- 
erally mifunderftood."    I  thought,  probably 

*  p.  224.  it 


Original  Sin.  203 

it  has  been  mifapplied,  and  does  not  affert, 
That  every  Man's  Heart  is  defperatcly  wicked. 
But  no  fooner  did  I  read  over  the  very  Verfes 
you  cite,  than  the  clear  Light  appeared  again. 
V.  5.  ^Cwfedbethe  Man  that  trufteth  in  Man, 
{ind  whofe  Heart  depart eth  from  the  Lord. 
ThatMz;^  whom  we  are  not  to  truft  in,  means 
Man  in  general,  cannot  be  denied.  After 
repeating  the  intermediate  Verfes,  you  your- 
felf  add,  "  He  fubjoins  a  Reafon  V.  9.  which 
demonftrates  the  Error  of  trufting  in  Man  : 
The  Heart  is  deceitfid  above  all  Things  and 
defperately  wicked:  Who  can  know  it?  This 
Text  therefore  does  not  mean.  Who  can 
know  his  own  Heart,  but  another's."  Whe- 
ther it  means  one  or  both  it  pofitively  affcrts, 
That  the  Heart  of  Man,  of  Men  in  general, 
of  every  Man,  is  defperately  wicked.  There- 
fore as  to  the  main  Point  contained  therein, 
"  Chriftians  ^  do  not  underftand  it  wrong," 
neither  mifapply  it  at  all. 

When  I  fay,  '^  I  feel,  I  have  a  ^wicked 
Heart,''  another  Thing  which  you  do  not 
underftand,  I  mean  this,  "  I  feel  much  Pride 
remaining  in  my  Heart,  much  Self-will, 
much  Unbelief."  Now  I  really  believe 
Pride  and  Self-will  and  Unbelief,  to  be  cf- 
fentially  wicked  Tempers.  Therefore  in 
whatever  Fleart  they  remain,  (and  they  re- 
main in  yours  as  well  as  mine)  That  is  a 
wicked  Heart,  After 

*  p.  225.    "  p.  224.    <=  p.  225, 


204  Ti??^  Doctrine  of 

After  a  long  Paufe,  you  return  to  the 
vii'*'  of  the  Komam  and  affirm,  "  We  '^can- 
not from  any  Thing  in  that  Chapter  infer. 
That  we  came  into  the  World  witii  finful 
Difpofitions  derived  from  Adam ;  for  the 
Apoflle  fays  nothing  about  Adam.'^  He  had 
faid  enough  in  the  v'^  Chapter  of  the  Caufe. 
Here  he  only  delcnbes  the  Efted::  The  State 
of  thofe,  who  are  now  brought  to  the  Birth  : 
But  there  is  not  yet  Strength  to  bring  forth. 

"  Nor  can  we  infer  from  hence,  That 
any  Man  fins  thro*  a  Principle  which  it  was 
never  in  his  Power  to  command.  For  then  it 
would  be  no  Sin."  Upon  this  I  would  only 
alk,  are  you  aflured,  that  no  Man  tranf- 
greiTes  God's  Law,  (whether  you  will  call 
it  Sin,  or  not)  thro'  a  Principle  which  it  was 
never  in  his  Power  to  command  ?  At  leaft 
not  for  any  Time  together  ?  Every  paflio- 
nate  Man  can  confute  you  in  this.  He  has 
fad  Experience  of  the  contrary. 

To  thofe  Objedlions  which  you  have.  In 
fome  Sort,  anfwered,  you  fubjoin  the  fol- 
lowing Qucftions. 

^leji,  I.  "Is  not  the  Doftrine^  of  Original 
Sin  neceflary  to  account  for  the  being  of  fo 
much  Wickednefs  in  the  World." 

You  anfwer,  ''  Adam'^  Nature,  it  is  al- 
lowed, was  not  finful,  and  yet  he  finned. 
Therefore  this  Doftrine  is  no  more  neceflary 

to 


^ 


p.  229.    «  p.  231, 


Original  Sin.  205 

to  account  for  the  Wickednefs  of  the  World 
than  to  account  for  Adams  Sin/*  Yes,  it  is. 
I  can  account  for  one  Man*s  finning,  or  an 
hundred,  or  even  half  Mankind,  fuppofe 
they  were  evenly  poifed  between  Vice  and 
Virtue,  from  their  own  Choice,  which  mieht 
turn  one  Way  or  the  other.  But  I  cannot 
poffibly  on  this  Suppofition  account  for  the 
general  Wickednefs  of  Mankind  in  all  Ages 
and  Nations. 

Again.  "  If  *^  Men  were  never  drawn  in- 
to Sin  any  other  Way,  than  as  Adam  was, 
namely  by  Temptations  offer 'd  from  without, 
there  might  be  fomething  in  this  Anfwer. 
But  there  are  numberlefs  Inftances  of  Men 
finning,  though  no  Temptation  is  offer'd 
from  without.  It  is  neceffary  therefore  fome 
other  Account  fhould  be  given  of  their  fin- 
nino:  than  of  Adam'$>,  And  how  to  account 
for  the  univerfal  Spread  of  Sin  over  the  whole 
World  without  one  Exception,  if  there  were 
no  Corruption  in  their  common  Head,  would 
be  an  unlurmountable  Difficulty." 

^ejl.  II.  ''  How  then  ^  are  we  born  into 
the  World  ?" 

You  anfw^er,  *'  As  void  of  adual  Know- 
ledge as  the  Brutes  ?" 

And  can  you  really  imagine  that  Text, 
'^ob  xi.  12.  Vain  Mati  woidd  be  icife  (evident- 
ly fpoken  of  Man  in  general)  tho  a  Man  be 

born 

f  Vindication i  p,  no.     «  p.  232. 


2o6  T'he  Doctrine  of 

hern  like  a  wild  Afss  Colt ;  implies  no  more 
th;^.n,  "  Men  are  born  void  of  adual  Know- 
ledge ?"  Do  we  need  Infpiration  to  make 
this  Difcovery,  That  a  new-born  Child  has 
no  adlual  Knowledge  ?  Is  Man  compared  to 
a  wild  jifsy  of  all  Animals  the  moft  ftupid, 
to  teach  us  no  more  than  this  ?  Yea,  a  wild 
Afss  Colt  ?  Does  not  this  intimate  any  Thing 
of  Intractablenefs,  Sullennefs,  Stubbornnefs, 
Perverfenefs  ?  "  How  ^  keenly  is  the  Com- 
parifon  pointed?  Like  the  Afs^  an  Animal 
ftupid  even  to  a  Proverb  :  Like  the  Afss 
Colt,  which  muft  be  ftill  more  egregioufly 
ftupid  than  its  Dam :  Like  the  wild  Afss 
Colt,  which  is  not  only  blockifh,  but  ftub- 
born  and  refractory ;  neither  has  valuable 
Qualities  by  Nature,  nor  will  eafily  receive 
them  by  Difcipline.  The  Image  in  the  O- 
riginal  is  yet  more  ftrongly  touched.  The 
Particle  like  is  not  in  the  Hebt^ew,  Born  a  wild 
Afss  Colt ;  or,  as  we  fhould  fay  in  Englifh^ 
a  7nere  wild  Afss  Colt" 

Yes,  "  We  are  born  with  many  fenfual 
Appetites  and  Paffions  :  But  every  one  of 
thefe  are  i?i  thenfelves  good!'  I  grant  all  the 
Appetites  and  Paffions  originally  implanted 
in  our  Nature,  were  good  in  themfelves. 
But  are  all  that  now  exift  in  us,  good  ?  "If 
not,  they  become  Evil  only  by  Excefs  or  A- 
bufe.'*     Firft,  This  may  be  doubted.     I  do 

not 

^  Tberon  and  Afpafa^  DiaL  1 3 . 


Original  Sin.  207 

know.  That  Love  of  Piaife,  of  Power,  of 
Money,  become  Evil  otily  by  Abuf\  1  am  a- 
fraid  thefe  and  other  P??ffions  which  we  have 
had  from  our  Infancy,  are  Evil  in  themjthes. 
But  be  that  as  ic  may,  in  how  few  do  we 
find  even  the  more  innocent  Paflions  and  Ap- 
petites, clear  of  Excefs  or  Abufe  P  ''  But  all 
that  is  wrong  in  them  is  from  Habit."  This 
cannot  be  allow'd  as  univerfally  true.  The 
littlt  Chiloren  of  wife  and  pious  Parents,  have 
not  yet  contracted  ill  Habits.  Yet  before 
they  can  go  alone,  they  fhew  fuch  Paflions, 
as  are  palpably  Exceffive,  if  not  Evil  in 
the.-  felves. 

But  whatever  they  are  in  themfelves, 
here  is  the  "  grand  Difficulty,  of  which  you 
give  us  no  Manner  of  Solution,  whence  comes 
it  to  pafs.  That  thofe  Appetites  and  Paffions, 
which  no  Doubt  were  at  firft  kindly  implant- 
ed in  our  Nature  by  an  holy  God,  are  now 
become  fo  exceflive  or  irregular,  that  no  one 
Man  from  the  Beginning  of  the  World  has 
fo  refifted  them,  as  to  keep  himfelf  pure  and 
innocent  ?" 

"  But  without  thefe  Appetites  andPalli- 
ons,  our  Nature  would  be  defective,  fluggilh 
orunarm'd.  Nor  is  there  anyone  of  them 
which  we  can  at  prefent  fpare."  We  could 
very  well  fpare  the  Excefs  and  Irregularity  of 
them  all:  And  poflibly,  fome  of  the  Paflions 
themfelves,  as  Love  of  Praife,  and  Love  of 

Revenge 


2o8  Ti'he  Doctrine  of 

Revenge.  The  Love  of  God  would  more 
than  fupply  the  Place  of  both:  Neither  does 
it  fuffer  us  to  be  fuggijl:)  or  inaBive.  Nor 
does  calm,  chriftian  Fortitude  leave  us  un-- 
armed  againft  any  Danger  which  can  occur. 
"  But  'our  Reaibn  would  have  nothing  to 
ftruggle  with."  O  yes;  not  only  all  our 
Reafon,  but  all  the  Grace  we  have  received, 
has  enough  to  ftruggle  with,  even  when  iioe 
do  not  wreflle  with  FleJJo  and  Blood.  We  are 
ftill  abundantly  "  exercifed"  by  Principalities 
and  Powers  a7id  fpiritual  JVickednefs  in  high 
Places, 

*'  On  the  other  Hand,  we  are  born  with 
rational  Powers  which  grow  gradually  capa- 
ble of  the  moft  ufeful  Knowledge.  And  we 
under  the  Gofpel  have  clear  Ideas  of  the 
Divine  Perfe(ftions :  We  fee  our  Duty,  and 
the  moft  cogent  Reafons  to  perform  it." 
This  founds  well.  But  will  Knowledge  bal- 
lance  PaJJion  ?  Or  are  rational  Powers  a 
Counterpoife  to  fenfual  Appetites  ?  Will 
clear  Ideas  deliver  Men  from  Luft  or  Vani- 
ty ?  Or  feeing  the  Duty  to  love  our  Enemies 
enable  ustopradiife  it?  What  are  coge?2t  Reafons 
oppofed  to  Covetoufnefs  or  Ambition  ?  A 
Thread  of  Tow  that  has  touch'd  the  Fire. 
*'  But  the  Spirit  of  God  is  promifed  for  our 
Afliftance."  Nay,  but  what  Need  of  Him, 
upon  your  Scheme  ?    Man  is  fufficient  for 

himfelf. 


Original  Sin.  2cg 

himfelf.  IL  that  glorieth  on  this  Hypothclis, 
muft  glory  in  himfelf,  not  in  the  Lord. 

^lejt.  III.  ''  How  far  is  our''  prefent  State 
the  fame  with  that  of  Adam  in  Paradife  r" 

I  SUPPOSE  "  our  Mental  Capacities  are  the 
fame  as  Adam's^  only  that  fome  are  above, 
fome  below  his  Standard.  Probably  there 
are  many  in  the  World  much  below  Adam^ 
in  rational  Endowments.  But  poilihly  the 
Force  and  Acutenefs  of  Underftandino^  was 
much  greater,  in  our  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  than 
in  Adam!' 

I  DO  not  apprehend,  this  requires  any 
Anfwer.  He  that  can  believe  it,  let  him 
believe  it. 

"  We  are  next  to  enquire,  Upon  what 
true  Grounds  thofe  Parts  of  Religion  ftand, 
which  the  Schoohnen  have  founded  upon  the 
Dodlrine  of  Original  Sin  :  Particularly  the 
two  grand  Articles  of  Redemption  and 
Regeneration." 

In  what  Century  did  the  Schoolmen  write.? 
How  long  before  St.  Augufiiney  (to  go  no 
higher)?  A  fad  Specimen  this  of  "the  Ho- 
nefty  and  Impartiality  with  which  you  deli- 
ver your  Sentiments ! " 

I.  Redemption. 
"  Our  Fall,  Corruption  and  Apoftafy  in 
Adam  has  been  made  the  Reafon  why  the 

O  Son 

^  p.  23?. 


2IO  I'he  Doctrine  of 

Son  of  God  came  into  the  World  and^^i;^ 

Hi mf elf  a  Ranjom  for  us." 

And  undoubtedly  it  is  the  Reafon.  Ac- 
cordingly the  very  firft  Promife  of  the  Re- 
deemer was  given  prefently  after  the  Fall. 
And  given  with  a  manifeft  Reference  to  thofe 
Evils  which  came  on  all  Men  thro'  Adam^ 
Tranfgreffion.  Nor  does  it  appear  from 
any  Scripture,  That  He  would  have  come 
into  the  World  at  all,  had  not  all  Men  died 
in  Adam. 

You  yourfclf  allow,  "The Apoftle  affirms,^ 
Rom.  v.  1 8,  19.  That  by  the  Right eotifnefs  and 
Obedience  of  Chriji^  all  Men  are  delivered 
from  the  Condemnation  and  Sentence  they 
came  under  thro'^^^;;2's  Difobedience  :  And 
that  thus  far  the  Redemption  by  CZ?r//?ftands 
in  Conneffion  with  Adani^  Tranfgreffion." 

"But  the  Redemption  by  Chrifl^  extends 
far  beyond  the  Confequences  of  Adam's 
Tranfgreffion."  It  does.  Men  receive  far 
greater  Bleflings  by  C/6r//?,  than  thofe  they 
loft  by  Ada?n.  But  this  does  not  prove. 
That  our  Fall  in  Adam  is  not  the  Ground  of 
our  Redemption  by  Chriji, 

Let  us  once  more  confider  the  Text  itfelf, 
V.  15.  But  not  as  the  Offence^  fo  is  the  Free- 
Gift,  For  if  thro  the  Offence  of  07ie  7nany  he 
deady  jnuch  ?nore  the  Grace  of  God  and  the  Gift 
by  Grace y  the  Blcffing  which  flows  from  the 
mere  Mercy  of  God,  which  is  by  one  Many 

•  p.  238,  Jefus 


Original  Sin.  211 

Jefus  Chrift,  hath  abounded  unto  mcmy.Y ,  16. 
For  not  as  it  was  by  one  that  finned^  fo  is  the 
Gift :  For  the  Judgment  was  by  one  Offence 
to  Condemnation-,  but  the  Free -Gift  is  oj  in  any 
Offences  imto  'Jujlijication,     In  this  Refpedt, 
Firft,  the  Free-Gift  by  Chriji^  hath  abounded 
much  more  than  the  Lofs  by  Adam.     And  in 
this,  Secondly,  V.  ij.  If  by  one  Maris  Of 
fenceDEATu  Spiritual  and  Temporal,  lead- 
ing to  Death  Eternal  reigned  by  one  over 
his  whole  Pofterity,  much  more  they  who  re- 
ceive the  Abundance  of  Grace  and  of  the  Gift  of 
Righteoufnefs^  the  Free-Gift  of  Juftificatioa 
and  Sandification,  JJ:aIl  reign  in  Life  ever- 
lafting  by  one  Jefus  Chrifl.     Let  any  one 
who  calmly  and  impartially  reads  this  Paf- 
fage  judge,  if  this  be  not  the  plain,    natural 
Meaning  of  it. 

But  let  us  now  obferve  your  Comment 
upon  it.  "  Here  the  Apoftle''  afferts  a  Grace 
of  God,  which  already  hath  abounded^  be- 
yond the  Effeds  o\  Ada??is  Sin  upon  us."  It 
has,  upon  them  that  are  juftified  and  fandli- 
fied;  but  not  upon  all  Mankind. — "  And 
which  has Refped,  not  to  his  o?ie  Offence' — 
Not  to  that  only,— '^  but  alfo  to  the  7nany  Of- 
fences which  Men  have  perfonally  committed. 
— Not  to  the  Death  which  reigned  by 
him." — Yes  verily  :  But  over  and  above  die 
Removal  of  this,  It  hath  alfoRefpedt ''  to  the 

O  2  Life 


"*  X).  njq 


212  T^he  Doctrine  of 

Life  in  which  they  who  receive  the  abound- 
ing Grace  fliali  reign  with  Him  for  ever/' 

Thus  far  you  have  proved  juft  nothing. 
But  you  go  on,  "The  Death  confequent'  on 
Adam\  Sin,  is  reverfed  by  the  Redemption 
in  Chrijl,  But  this  is  not  the  whole  End  of 
it  by  far.  The  grand  Reafon  and  End  of 
Redemption  is,  l^he  Grace  of  Gob y  and  the 
Gift  by  Graced  InfalHbly  it  is  3  but  this  is 
not  a  different  Thing,  but  precifely  the  fame 
with  the  Free-Gift,  Confequently  your  whole 
Strudiure  raifed  on  the  Suppofition  of  that 
Difference,  is  a  mere  Caftle  in  the  Air.  But 
if  the  Gift  by  Grace ^  and  the  Free-Gift  are 
the  very  fame  Thing,  and  if  the  Gift  by 
Grace  is  "  the  grand  Reafon  and  End  of  Re- 
demption :"  Then  our  Fall  in  Adam^  to 
which  you  allow  the  Free-Gift  diredlly  refers, 
is  "  the  Reafon  of  Chrif's  Coming  into  the 
World." 

*'  But  the  Scriptures"  of  the  NewTefta- 
ment  (excepting  Rom,  v.  12 — 19.  and  1  Cor. 
XV.  21,  22)  always  affign  the  adiual  Wick- 
ednefs  of  Mankind,  as  the  Reafon  of  Chrif% 
Coming  into  the  World."  They  generally 
do  affign  this,  their  outward  and  inward 
Wickednefs.  But  this  does  not  exclude  the 
Wickednefs  of  their  Nature,  fpringing  from 
their  Fall  in  Adam,  Rather  this,  which  is 
expreffed  in  thofe  two  Places  at  leaft,  is  pre- 

fuppoled 

"  P-  239.    °  p.  240. 


Original  Sin.  213 

fuppofed  in  all  Places.  Particularly  in  the 
Beginning  of  theEpiftle  to  the  Roma?7S,  where 
h€  defcribes  the  enormous  Wickednefs  both 
of  the  Jews  and  Ge?2tiles,  ''  'Tis  true%  he 
begins  his  Difcourfe  with  an  Account  of  the 
adlual  Tranlgreflions  of  the  idolatrous  Gen- 
tiles. Afterwards,  C.  iii.  he  treats  of  the 
Depravity  and  Corruption  of  all  Mankind  : 
And  then  proceeds,  C.  v.  tofhew,  That  we 
are  all  made  Sinners  by  Adam^  and  that  by 
his  Offence  'Judgment  is  come  upon  all  Men  to 
Condemnation,  The  Apoftle's  Method  is 
clear  and  natural.  He  begins  with  that 
which  is  moft  obvious,  even  adtual  Sin  ;  and 
then  proceeds  to  fpeak  of  Original  Sin,  as 
the  joint  Caufe  of  the  Neceffity  of  Redemp- 
tion for  all  Men.  But  which  Way  can  we 
infer,  that  becaufe  he  begins  with  the  Men- 
tion of  Adual  Sins,  in  order  to  dcmonftrate 
the  Neceffity  of  Redemption,  therefore  he  ex- 
cludes Original  out  of  the  Account?  Neither 
can  we  infer,  That  becaufe  it  is  not  exprefly 
mention'd  in  -other  Texts,  therefore  it  is  not 
implied. 

"  But  the  'Redeemer  Himfelf  faith  not 
one  Word  of  redeeming  us  from  the  Cor- 
ruption of  Nature  derlv'd  from  Adam,  And 
feeing  He  fpake  exadly  according  to  the 
Commiffion  which  the  Father  gave  Him, 
we  may  fafelv  conclude,  it  was  no  Part  of 
his  Commiffion  to  preach  the  Doclrlne  of 

O  3  Original 

P  Vindicatior,  p.  ii6,&c.     «  p.  241-     "  P-  -42- 


214-  ^ke  Doctrine  of 

Original  Sin."  "Juft  as  fafely  may  wc 
conclude,  that  it  was  no  Part  of  his  Com* 
miflion,  to  teach  and  make  known  to  Men, 
the  many  'Things  which  he  had  to  fay  to  his 
Apoftles  before  his  Death,  which  they  could 
not  then  bear,  John  xvi.  12,  but  which  ac- 
cording to  his  Promife,  He  afterward  taught 
them  by  his  Spirit,  and  by  them  to  the 
World.  It  makes  no  Difference  as  to  the 
Ground  of  our  Faith,  whether  a  Doctrine 
was  delivered  by  Chrijl  himfelf  or  by  his 
Apoftles:  And  whether  it  be  written  in  any 
ot  the  four  Gofpels,  or  of  the  Divine  Epiftles. 
There  is  only  this  Difference.  The  Epiftles 
were  wrote  after  the  Refurredlion  and  Af- 
cenfion  of  Chrijl,  Therefore  after  the  full 
Commencement  of  the  Gofpel  Difpcnfation: 
V/hereas  the  Difcourfes  of  Ch'-ift  recorded 
in  the  Gofpels,  were  delivered  before  the 
Gofpel  Difpcnfation  was  properly  begun. 
Therefore  v/e  are  to  look  for  the  peculiar 
Dodrines  of  Chrijl^  rather  in  the  Epiftles 
than  in  the  Gofpels.  However  Chrijl  did 
fpeak  of  this,  and  referred  to  it  more  than 
once,  during  his  perfonal  Miniftry ;  particu- 
larly in  his  Difcourfe  with  Nicodemus,  and 
Matt,  xxiii.  But  it  is  not  furprizing,  that 
He  did  not  fpeak  fo  largely,  of  redeeming  us 
from  Sip,  original  or  adual,  by  the  Price  of 
his  Blood,  before  that  Price  was  adually 
paid,  as  the  Apoftles  did  afterward.  He 
confider'd  the  Littlenefs  of  their  Knowledge, 

with 


Original  Sin.  2ij 

with.the  Violence  of  their  Prejudices.  TJicre- 
fore  we  have  no  Caufe  to  be  furprized,  that 
no  more  is  faid  on  this  Head  in  thofe 
Difcourfes  which  Chrijl  delivered  before  his 
Death.  But  to  Us  He  has  told  it  plainly,  and 
we  do  Ji?2d  \h^  Doftrines  of  Original  Sin  and 
Redemption  from  it  by  Jefus  Chrijl^  dillin- 
guijhed  emphatically  in  almoft  every  Page  of 
the  infpired  Epiftles." 

To  fum  up  this:  i.  Chrijl  fpeaks  very 
fparingly  of  many  Things,  whereof  his  A- 
poflles  have  fpoken  largely :  2.  Yet  He  does 
fpeak  of  the  Corruption  of  our  Nature 
(which  St.  Paul  exprefly  tells  us  is  derived 
from  Adam)  particularly  in  the  xxiii'  of  St. 
Matthew  and  the  3  of  St.  'John.  3.  Where- 
ever  He  fpeaks  of  faving  that  which  was 
lojl^  He  in  EfFecfl  fpeaks  of  this :  Efpeci- 
ally  Matth.  xviii.  1 1 ,  where  He  mentions 
little  Children  as  loft  -,  which  could  not  be  by 
adlual  Sin  :  4.  There  was  the  lefs  Need  of 
our  Lord's  fpeaking  much  on  this  Head, 
becaufe  it  was  fo  fully  declared  in  the  Old 
Teftament,  and  was  not  queftion'd  by  any 
of  thofe  falfe  Teachers,  again  ft  whom  he 
was  chiefly  concerned  to  warn  his  Difciples. 

You  add,  "  It  has'  been  delivered  as  a 
fundamental  Truth ;  That  no  Man  will 
come  to  Chrijl,  the  fecond  Adam  who  is  not 
firft  throughly  convinced  of  the  fcveral  Things* 
he  loft  in  the  firft  Adam!'  This  is  a  fun- 
damental Truth  ^  none  will  come  to  Chrifi 
^  p.  243.  O  4  a^ 


2i6  TZv  Doctrine  of 

as  a  Redeemer,  'till  he  is  throughly  con* 
vinc'd,  he  wants  a  Redeemer.  No  Man  . 
ever  will  com.e  to  Him  as  a  Savioiiry  'till  he 
knowG  and  feels  himfelf  a  lojl  Sinner.  None 
will  come  to  the  Phyjician^  but  they  that  art 
Jick^  and  are  throughly  fenfible  of  it :  That 
are  deeply  convinced  of  their  finful  Tem- 
pers, as  well  as  finful  Words  and  Aftions. 
And  thefe  Tempers  they  well  know  were 
antecedent  to  their  Choice,  and  came  into 
the  World  with  them.  So  far  ''  every  Man 
who  comes  to  Chrijl^  is  firft  convinced  of 
the  feveral  Things  he  loft  by  Adam^'  tho' 
he  may  not  clearly  know  the  Source  of  that 
Corruption  which  he  fees  and  feels  in  his 
own  Heart  and  Life.  "  But  why  does  our 
Lord  never  mention  Adam^  or  the  Corrup- 
tion of  cur  Nature  thro'  him  ?"  He  does 
mention  this  Corruption,  and  He  prefuppofes 
it  in  all  his  publick  Difcourfes.  He  does 
not  mention  it  largely  and  explicitly,  for  the 
Reafons  above  recited.  "  But  the  Apoftles 
arc  'w^holly  filent  on  this  Head,  in  their  Ser- 
mons recorded  in  the  A6fs :  And  in  their 
Epiftles  too."  Are  they  wholly  file?2t  in  their 
Epiilles  ?  This  is  a  violent  Miftake.  And 
as  to  their  Sermons,  it  may  be  obferved. 
I .  That  we  have  not  one  whole  Sermon  of 
any  one  Apoftle,  recorded  in  the  Acls  -,  nor, 
it  may  be,  the  twentieth  Part  of  one.  2.  That 

it 
*  p.  243,  244. 


Original  Sin.  217 

It  wgs  not  needful  for  them  to  prove,  what 
none  of  their  Hearer?  denied;— No,  not  even 
the  Heathens:  Even  thcle  allowed  the  Cor- 
ruption of  human  Nature.     Even  aicAc  ic- 
ceived  it  as  an  undeniable  Fad:, 
"  Vitiis  nemo  fine  nafcitm  !' 
No  Man  is  born  without  Vices. 
Thefe  acknowledged  (as  Seneca  exprefles  it) 
Omnia  in  omnibus  mtia  funt :    iVll  Vices  arc 
in    all    Men.       Thefe    faw,    There    were 
hardly  any  good  Men   to  be  found  upon 
the  Face  ot  the  Earth :  And  openly  tefti-- 
fy  it : 

Kari  quippe  bojii^  niimero  vixfimttotidcm  mot 
T!hebarumportc€^veldivitisojliaNili:    ' 
The  Good  lie  fcatter'd  in  this  barren  Soil, 
Few  as  the  Gates  of  T'hebes,  or  Mouths  of 
Nile, 
They  had  alfo  among  them  fome  faint  Ac- 
count of  the  Caufe  of  that  overflowing  Cor- 
ruption.    So  Horace  immediately  after  he 
had  afferted  the  Fa6l, 

Audax  ojnnia  perpeti 
Gens  hiimana  ruit  per  vetitum  7iefas : 
Lav/lefs,and  unreftrain'd  the  human  Race 
Ruilies  thro'  all  the  Paths  of  daring  Wick- 
ed nefs  : 
glances  at  the  Caufe  of  it,  in  their  fabulous 
Manner 

Audax  Jdpeti  genus 
Tgnemfraude  mala  gentibus  intulit : 

Pojl 


2i8  The  Doctrine  of 

Poji  ignem  cethered  domo 
Subdu^um^  macieSj  &  nova  fcbriiim 

T'erris  incubuit  cohors : 
Semotiq-,  prius  tarda  NeceJJitas 
Let  hi  corripuit  gradum, 
Prometheus  fiv^  provok'd  the  heavenly  Sire, 
Purloining  yupiters  authentic  Fire : 
Evil,  from  hence  deriv'd,  and  brooding 

Pain, 
And  ftrange  Difcafe  with  all  the  ghaftly 

Train, 
Pour*d  in  upon  the  wretched  Sons  of  Men : 
While  hafty  Fate  quickened  the  lingring 
Pace 
.    Of  diftant  Death,  unveil'd  the  Monfter's 
Face, 
And  gave  into  his  Hands  our  whole  de- 
voted Race. 
I  OBSERVE,  3.  It  was  neither  needful  nor 
proper,  for  an  Apoftle  in  his  firft  Sermon 
to  a  Congregation  wholly  unawakened,  to 
defcant  upon  Original  Sin,      No  Man  of 
common  Senfe  would  do  it  now.     Were  I 
to  preach  to  a  certain  Congregation  at  Nor- 
ivich^  I  fliould  not  fay  one  Word  of  Adam, 
but  endeavour  to  fhew  them.  That  their 
Lives,  and  therefore  their  Hearts,  were  cor- 
rupt and  abominable  before  God. 

You  conclude  this  Head,  "  Guilt  imputed 
is  i?nagi?2a?j  Guilty  and  fo  no  Objedt  of 
Redemption^     I  dare  not  fay  fo  as  to  my 

own 


Original  Sin.  219 

own  particular.  I  pray  God,  of  his  tender 
Mercy,  to  free  me  from  This  and  all  other 
Guilt,  thro  the  Redemption  which  is  in  jcius 
Chrift ! 

II.  Regeneration. 

"  Why  "muft  we  be  born  again  T'  (You 
fubjoin  the  common,  but,  as  you  fuppofe,  ab- 
furd  Anfwer  :)  "  Becaufe  we  are  horn  in  Sin. 
Nature  is  averfe  to  all  Good  and  inclined  to 
all  Evil.  Therefoie  we  mull;  be  horn  again y 
before  we  can  pleafe  God." 

In  order  to  confute  this,  you  affert,  "Then 
it  cannot  be  our  Diity\  to  be  born  again,  nor 
confequently  our  Faulty  if  we  are  not;  be- 
caufe it  is  not  in  our  Power!'  It  is,  by  Grace, 
tho'  not  by  Nature.  By  this  we  may  all  be 
born  again.  Therefore  it  is  our  Duty,  and 
if  we  fall  fhort  herein,  it  is  our  own  Fault, 

"  But  being  ^  born  again  does  really  fig- 
nify,  the  gaining  thofe  Habits  of  Virtue, 
which  make  us  Children  of  God."  Then 
St.  Paul  ought  to  have  faid,  Not^r  a7'e  all 
the  Children  of  God,  hy  Faith  in  Chrift  Jefus: 
But,  ye  are  all  the  Children  of  God,  by  gain- 
ing Hahits  of  Virtue! 

Nay,  but  according  to  the  whole  Tenor 
of  Scripture,  the  being  ^r;^  again  Aots  really 
fiP-nify,  the  being  inwardly  changed  by  the 
Almighty  Operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  : 
Changed  from  Sin  to  Holinefs:  Renew'd  in 

the 

«  p.  245.    *  p.  246. 


220  The  Doctrine  of 

the  Imaec  of  Him  that  created  us.  And 
why  mull  we  befo  changed?  Eecaufe  %mth- 
cut  Holinefs  no  Mmi Jl:all fee  the  Lord:  And 
becaufe  without  this  Change,  all  our  En- 
deavours after  Holinefs  are  ineffedlual.  God 
hath  indeed  "  endowed  us  with  Vvderfand-- 
ingj  and  given  us  abundant  Means."  But 
our  Underftanding  is  as  infufficient  for  that 
End,  as  are  the  Outward  Means,  if  not  at- 
tended with  Inward  Power. 

You  proceed  to  explain  yourfelf  at  large. 
*'  Chriji  informs  us.  That  except  a  Man  be 
lorn  again ^  he  cannot  fee  the  Kingdom  of  GcDy 
wd  thereby  teaches  us. 

-I.  "  That  God  hath  ""ereded  a  King- 
dom, united  in  and  under  Him,  for  his 
Glory,  and  Mens  mutual  Happinefs.'' 

II,  "  He  ''will  finally  admit  none  into  it,- 
who  are  not  difpofed  to  relifli  and  promote 
the  Happinefs  of  it." 

,   (Both  thefe  Propofitions  I  willingly  al- 
low) 

III.  '^  All  Wickednefs  is  quite  contrary 
to  the  Nature  and  End  of  this  Kingdom. 
Therefore  no  wicked  Men  can  be  fit  Mem- 
bers of  it.  Unlefs  ^  there  be  a  full  Perfua- 
fion,  that  Reverence,  Love  and  Obedience 
are  due  to  God:"  (I  add,  and  unlefs  it  be 
adlually  paid  Him^  otherwife  that  Perfuafon 
but  increafes  our  Condemnation)   "  Unlefs 

his 
-•*  p.  246.    "  p.  247.    y  p.  248. 


Original  Sin.  221 

his  Favour  is  preferred  before  all  other  En- 
joyments whatfoever:  Unlefs  there  be  a  De- 
light in  the  Worfhip  of  God,  and  in  con- 
verfe  with  Him:  Unlefs  every  Appetite  be 
brought  into  SubjccSVlon  to  Reafon."  (add, 
and  Reafon  to  the  Word  of  God)  "  How 
can  any  Man  be  fit  to  dwell  with  God,  or 
to  do  Him  Service  in  his  Kino-dom?" 

IV.  "  It  is  ^one  Thing  to  be  born  into 
God*s  Creation,  another  to  be  born  into  his 
peculiar  Kingdom.  In  order  to  an  Admit- 
tance into  his  peculiar  Kingdom,  it  is  not 
enough  for  an  intelligent  Being  to  exift."  I 
do  not  know  that.  Perhaps  it  is  not  poflible, 
for  God  to  create  an  intelligent  Being,  with- 
out creating  it  duly  fubjecfl  to  Himfelf,  that 
is,  A  (ubjed:  of  his  peculiar  Kingdom.  It 
is  highly  probable,  the  holy  Angels  were 
Subie6ts  of  his  peculiar  Kingdom,  from  the 
firft  Moment  of  their  Exiftence.  There- 
fore the  following  peremptory  Affertion,  and 
all  of  the  like  Kind,  are  wholly  groundlefs. 
*'  It  is  abfdutcly  necejfary^  before  any  Crea- 
ture can  be  a  Subjedt  of  this,  that  it  learn 
to  employ  and  exercife  its  Powers,  fuitably 
to  the  Nature  of  them."  It  is  not  necef- 
fary  at  all.  In  this  Senfc  furely,  God  7nay 
do  what  He  will  wi^h  his  own.  He  may  be- 
ftow  his  own  Blcffings  as  He  pleafes.  h 
thine  Eye  evi/y  becaiifi  He  is  Good? 

The 

«  p.  250,  251. 


2  22  T'he  Doctrine  of 

The  Premifes  then  being  gone,  what  be- 
comes of  the  Conclufion  ?  "  So  that  the  be- 
ing bor7i  into  God's  peculiar  Kingdom,  de- 
pends upon  a  right  Ufe  and  Application  of 
our  Life  and  Being  :  And  is  the  Privilege 
only  of  thofe  wife  Spirits,  who  attain  to  an 
Habit  of  true  Holinefs." 

This  ftands  without  any  Proof  at  all.  At 
beft  therefore  it  is  extremely  doubtful.  But 
it  mufl  appear  extremely  abfurd  to  thofe, 
who  believe  God  can  create  Spirits,  both 
wife  and  holy  :  That  he  can  ftamp  any 
Creature  with  what  Meafure  of  Holinefs  he 
fees  good,  at  the  firft  Moment  of  its  Ex- 
igence. 

The  Occailon  of  your  running  into  this 
Abfurdity  feems  to  be,  that  you  ftumbled  at 
the  very  Threfhold.  In  the  Text  under  Con- 
fideration  our  Lord  mentions  two  Things, 
The  New-Birth  and  the  Kingdom  of  God. 
Thefe  two  your  Imagination  blended  into 
on^  :  In  Confequence  of  which  you  run  on 
with  "  born  into  his  Kingdom"  (a  Phrafe 
never  ufed  by  our  Lord,  nor  any  of  his 
Apoftles)  and  an  Heap  of  other  crude  Ex- 
prejjiom  of  the  fame  Kind :  All  betraying 
that  Confufedncfs  of  'Thought^  which  alone 
could  prevent  your  ufual  Clearnefs  of  Lan- 


guage. 


Just  in  the  fame  Manner  you  go  on. 
Our  firft  Parents  in  Paradife  were  to  form 

their 


Original  Sin.  223 

'their  Minds  to  an  habitual  Subjedlion  to  the 
Law  of  God,  without  which  they  could 
not  be  received  into  his  fpiritual  Kingdom." 
This  runs  upon  the  fame  miftaken  Suppofi- 
tion.  That  God  could  not  create  the?n  Holy. 
Certainly  He  could  and  did  :  And  from  the 
very  Moment  that  they  were  created,  their 
Minds  were  in  Subjed:ion  to  the  Law  of 
God,  and  they  were  Members  of  his  fpiri- 
tual Kingdom. 

"  B  u  T  if  Adam  was  originally  perfect  in 
Holinefs,"  (fay,  perfeBly  Holy,  made  in  the 
Moral  Lnage  of  God)  "  what  Occafion  was 
there  for  any  farther  Trial  ? "  That  there 
might  be  Room  for  farther  Holinefs  and 
Happinefs:  Entire  Holinefs  does  not  exclude 
Growth  :  Nor  did  the  right  State  of  all  his 
Faculties  intitle  him  to  that  Jidl  Reward, 
which  would  have  followed  the  Right  life  of 
them. 

"  Upon^  the  whole,  Regeneration,  or 
gaining  Habits  of  Holinefs,  takes  in  no  Part 
of  the  Doctrine  of  Original  Sin."  But  Re- 
generation is  not  "  gaining  Habits  of  Holi- 
nefs :"  It  is  quite  a  different  Thing.  It  is 
not  a  Natural,  but  a  Supernatural  Change; 
and  is  juft  as  different  from  the  gradual 
"  gaining  Habits,"  as  a  Child's  being  bor7i 
into  the  World  is,  from  his  groijoiiig  up  into 
a  Man.     The  New  Birth  is  not  (as  ypu  fup- 

pofe) 

f  p.  252.  253.    *  p.  254, 


224  ^'^^  Doctrine  of 

pofe)  the  Progrefsy  or  the  Whole  of  Sanftifi- 
cation,  but  the  Begin?iing  of  it :  As  the  na^ 
tural  Birth^  is  not  the  Whole  of  Life,  but 
only  the  Entrance  upon  it.  He  that  is  hor7i 
cf  a  Womaji^  then  begins  to  live  a  natural 
Life :  He  that  is  born  of  God,  then  begins 
to  live  a  fpiritual.  And  if  every  Man  born  of 
a  Woman  had  fpiritual  Life  already,  he  would 
not  need  to  be  born  of  God. 

"  However,"  I  allow  the  Spirit  of  God 
affiils  our  Endeavours.  But  this  does  not  fup- 
pofe  any  natural  Pravity  of  our  Minds." 
Does  not  his  quickenijig  then  fuppofe  w^.  were 
dead^^  His  opening  our  Eyes^  fuppofe  we  were 
blind  ?  And  his  creating  us  anew  imply  fome- 
thing  more  than  the  ajfijling  our  Endeavours  t . 
How  very  llender  a  Part  in  Sandiification  will 
you  allow  to  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  You  fcem 
very  fearful  of  doing  Him  too  much  Honour, 
of  taking  from  Man  the  Glory  due  to  hi« 
Name  ! 

Accordingly  you  fay,  "  His  Aids  are  fo 
far  from  fuppofing  the  previous  Inaptitude  of 
our  Minds"  (to  the  being  born  again)  "  that 
onr  previous  Dcjire  of  the  Spirit's  AiTiftance, 
is  the  Condition  of  our  receiving  it."  ,  But 
who  gave  us  that  Defire  ?  Is  it  not  Goq  ^'^^^-, 
ivorketh  iji  us  to  will^  to  defire^  as  well  ■  ^s'.  fo  ^ 
do  ?  His  Grace  does  accompany  2Lnd  follow  our 
Defires  :  But  does  it  not  aKo prevent y  go  be- 

iki4^t«.iW'  sore 


P-  25 


i* 


Original  Sin.  225 

fore  them  ?  After  this,  we  may  ajk  and  feek 
farther  Affiftance :  And  if  we  do,  not  other- 
wife,  //  is  given, 

I  CANNOT  but  add  a  few  Words  from  Dr. 
Jennings,  "  ^  Mr.  Taylor  bcheves  the  In- 
fuence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  to  afjijl  ciir  fin- 
cere  EndeavourSy  is  fpoken  of  in  the  Gofpcl, 
but  never  as  fuppofing  any  natural  Praviy  of 
cur  Minds,  But  certain  it  is,  That  Chrj/l 
oppofeth  our  being  born  of  the  Spirit^  to 
our  being  born '  of  the  Flefd  :  lljat  ichich  is 
born  of  the  Flef:^  is  FleJ]?^  and  that  ivhich  is 
born  of  the  Spirit^  is  Spirit,  Therefore  the 
Influence  of  the  Spirit  in  Regeneration,  fup- 
pofeth  fomething  that  we  are  horn  with, 
which  makes  fuch  an  Influence  neccfiary  to 
our  being  born  again.  And  if  this  be  not 
fome  natural  Pravity,  let  our  Author  tell 
us  what  it  is.  It  is  plain,  it  is  not  any  ill 
Habit  afterward  acquired  -,  for  it  is  fome- 
thing that  we  are  born  with.  And  if  to  be 
born  of  the  Flejh  means  only,  to  have  the  Parts 
and  Powers  of  a  Man ;  and  if  thefe  Parts 
and  Powers,  are  all  pure  and  uncorruptcd, 
we  have  no  Need  of  any  fuch  Influence  of 
the  Spirit,  to  be  fuper-added  to  our  natural 
Powers.  Without  this,  our  own  fncere  En- 
deavours will  fuffice,  for  attaining  all  Habits 
of  Virtue,'' 

P  I  PRO- 

«  Vindication,  p.  125.     "  Johnivi.  6. 


226  T'he  Doctrine  of 

I  PROCEED  to  your  Conclufion,  "  Is  it  not, 
'highly  rnjurious  to  the  God  of  our  Nature, 
whofe  Hands  have  formed  and  fafhion'd  us, 
to  believe  our  Nature  is  originally  corrupted?'* 
It  is :  But  the  Charge  falls  not  on  uSy  hvXyou., 
We  do  not  believe  *^  our  Nature  is  originally 
corrupted"  It  is  you  who  believe  this :  Who^ 
believe  our  Nature  to  be  in  the  fame  State, 
moral  and  intellecflual,  as  it  originally  was  \ 
Highly  injurious  indeed  is  this  Supposition  to 
the  God  of  our  Nature.  Did  He  originally 
give  us  liich  a  Nature  as  this  ?  So  like  that 
of  a  wild  jlfss  Colt  t  Sq  ftupid,  fo  ftubborn, 
{o  intrad:able  !  So  prone  to  Evil !  Averfe  to 
Good  !  Did  his  Hands  form  and  fafiion  us' 
thus?  No  wifer  or  better  than  Men  at  prefent 
are  ?  If  I  believed  this.  That  Men  were  ori- 
ginally what  they  are  now  ;  if  you  could  once 
convince  me  of  this,  I  could  not  go  fo  far  as 
to  be  a  Deiji  :  I  muft  either  be  a  Majiichee^ 
or  an  Afhetjl.  I  muft  either  believe.  There 
was  an  evil  God,  or  that  there  was  no  God 
at  all. 

*^  But  to  difparage  ^  our  Nature  is  to  dis- 
parage the  Work  and  Gifts  of  God."  True: 
But  to  defcribe  the  Corruption  of  our  Nature 
as  it  is,  is  not  difparaging  the  Work  of  God. 
For  that' Corruption  is  not  his  Work,  On 
the  other  J  land,  To .  fay  it  is,  to  fay  God 
created,  us  :as>  corrupt  aSL  we  are  now,  with 
',  as 

'  p.  256.    s  p.  2^7. 


Original  Sin.  227 

as  weak  an  Underflanding  and  as  pervcrfe  a 
Will :  This  is  difparaging  the  Work  of  God> 
and  God  Himfelf  to  fome  Purpofe  ! 

"  But  doth  not  this  Dodlrine  teach  you 
to  transfer  your  Wickednefs  and  Sin  to  a 
wrong  Caufe  ?  Whereas  ^  you  ought  to 
blame  yourfelf  alone,  you  lay  the  whole 
Blame  upon  Adam.''  I  do  not.  I  know 
God  is  willing  to  fave  me  from  all  Sin,  both 
priginal  and  aftual.  Therefore  if  I  am  not 
faved,  I  muft  lay  the  whole  Blame  upon 
myfelf. 

"  But  what  good  End  does  this  Dodlrinc 
promote  ?"  The  Doftrine,  That  we  are  by 
Nature,  dead  m  Sin^  and  therefore  Child?'e?i 
ofWrathy  promotes  Repentance,  a  true  Know- 
ledge of  ourfelves,  and  thereby  leads  to  Faith 
in  Chrijl,  to  a  true  Knowledge  of  Chriji  cru- 
cified. And  Faith  worketh  Love ;  and  by 
Love,  all  Holinefs  both  of  Heart  and  Life. 
Confequently,  this  Doftrine  promotes  (nay 
and  is  abfolutely,  indilpenfably  neceflary  to 
promote)  the  whole  of  that  Religion  which 
the  Son  of  God  lived  and  died  to  eflablifh. 

"We  are  told  indeed.  That  it  promotes 
Humility.  But  neither  our  Lord,  nor  his 
Apoftlcs,  when  inculcating  Humility,  fay 
a  Word  about  natural  Corruption.  "  Sup- 
pofing  (not  granting)  that  they  did  not,  yet 
it  cannot  be,  in  the  very  Nature  of  the  Tiling, 

P  2  that 

*  p.  258. 


228  ^he  Doctrine  of 

that  any  whole  Nature  is  corrupt,  fhould 
be  humble,  fliould  know  himfelf,  without 
knowing  that  Corruption.  *      '** 

**  But  '  what  can  be  more  deftru6live 
to  Virtue,  than  to  repr efent  Sin  as  altogether 
imavoidableT'  This  does  not  follow  from  the 
Dotflrine.  Corrupt  as  we  are,  thro'  Almighty 
Grace  we  may  avoid  all  Sin. 

But  it  is  deftruftive  of  Virtue.  For  "  if 
we  believe  we  are  by  Nature  worfe  than  the 
Brutes,  wliat  Wonder  if  we  aft  worfe  than 
Brutes?"  Yea,  if  we  are  fo,  what  Won- 
der if  \Nt  ^£t  fo?  And  this  it  is  abfolutcly 
certain  Men  do,  whether  they  believe  one 
Way  or  the  other;^  For  they  who  do  not 
believe  this,  live  ho' better  than  thofe  that 
do.  Therefore  if  "  ;ffit?^enerality  of  Chrif- 
tians  have  been  thd  moft  wicked,  lewd, 
bloody  and  treacherous  of  all  Mankind,'*  it 
is  not  owing  to  this  Belief.  But  in  Truth 
they  have  not  been  fo  5  neither  are  they  at 
this  Day.  The  Generality  of  Chriftians,  fo 
called,  are  perhaps  but  little  better,  yet  furc- 
ly  they  are  no  worfe,  either  in  Tempers  or 
Acrion's,  than  the  reft  of  Mankind.  The 
(7enerility  of  yt'U'i,  yea,  oi  Turks  and  P^- 
gam^  ixtSy^Xi  as  "lewd,  bloody  and  trea- 
cherous" as  they.  ^'' '  ^  •  "^i^^  ' 
^'You  go  on.   "*"''hris  furpri2jfti^  ;;^Hat 

Ckrxfifaiis'\  (you  mean»:J;hofc  of  tliem who 
•uiii  hi^,  ^(lit5vt"e>^Uicn4r  ofifcir^    .     j;)elieVc 

:^  P-  259-  ^  P-  2^0.       ^j  ^  ^ 


^  ^      ,  Original  Sin.  220 

believe  Original  Sip),  ''  have  loft  even  a 
Senfc  of  the  Beneficence  of  God,  in  giving 
them  a  Rational  Nature."  Nay,  furely  C6/7/- 
tians.l12.ve  loft  that  Rational  Nature  itiblf, 
or  tbey  retain  it  to  very  little  Purpofe,  if 
"  the  Ge;ierality  of  them  are  the  moft  wick- 
ed, lewd,  bloody  and  treacherous  of  all 
Mankind  !"  They  ought  ''  to  be  humbled," 
for  yielding  to  thofe  evil  Propenfities,  which 
thro*  the  Grace  of  God  they  may  conquer. 
And  they  who  do  conquer,  ought  to  be  con- 
tinually, "  thanking  God,"  for  this  and  all 
his  Benefits.  ^.,- .f^ 

With  great  Decency  you  proceed, 
"  Who  can  believe  that  to  be  a  Revelation 
from  God,  which  teacheth  fo  abfurd  a  Doc- 
trine ?  I  make  no  Doubt,  this  with  other 
like  Principles,  have  filled  our  Land  with  Infi- 
dels." However  the  Gentlemen  who  difclaim 
tHefe  abfurd  Principles,  of  Original  Sin^  Re- 
demption and  Regeneration^  may  very  eafily 
convert  thofe  Infidels :  Since  there  is  fcarce 
anv  Room  for  Contention  left  between  them. 
]  '^  Is  not  this  Dodlrine  hurtful  to  '  the 
Power  of  Godliiiefs,  as  it  diverts  Men  from 
the  heavenly  and  fubftantial  Truths  of  Re- 
ligion?" Juft  the  reverfe.  There  is  no  Pof- 
iibility  of  the  Power  of  Godlincf;.  without  it. 
The  Power  of  Godlinefs  confill><  in  the  Love 
of  God  and  Man:  This  is  heavenly  arul  fub- 
ftantial Religion.     But  no  Man  can  poinbly 

«  p.  261.  P  3  '^""^ 


230  ^ke  Doctrine  ^ 

love  his  Neighbour  as  himfelf^  'till  he  loves 
God.  And  no  Man  can  poffibly  love  Gop, 
'till  he  truly  believes  in  Chriji.  And  no  Man 
truly  believes  in  Chriji^  'till  he  is  deeply  con- 
vinced of  his  ow^n  Sinfulnefs,  Guiltinefs  and 
Helpleffnefs.  But  this  no  Man  ever  was, 
neither  can  be,  who  does  not  know  he  has 
a  corrupt  Nature. 

This  Dodtrine  therefore  is  the  "  moft 
proper*  of  all  others,  "to  be  inftilPd  Into 
a  Child :"  That  it  is  by  Nature  a  Child  of 
Wrath,  under  the  Guilt  and  under  tl:^e  Power 
of  Sin  :  That  it  can  be  faved  from  Wrath, 
only  by  the  Merits,  and  Sufferings,  and  Love 
of  the  Son  of  God  :  That  it  can  be  delivered 
from  the  Power  of  Sin,  only  by  the  Infpira- 
of  his  Holy  Spirit :  But  that  by  his  Grace 
it  may  be  renewed  in  the  Image  of  God, 
perfected  in  Love,  and  made  meet  for  Glory. 

But  "  muft'"  it  not  lefTen  the  due  Love  of 
Parents  to  Children,  to  believe  they  are  the 
vileft  Creatures  in  the  World  ?"  Far  from  it; 
if  they  know  how  God  loves  both  them  and 
their's,  vile  and  flnful  as  they  are.  And  it 
is  a  certain  Fad:,  That  no  Parents  love  their 
Children  more  tenderly,  than  thofc  who 
firmly  believe  this  Do6lrine  :  And  that  none 
are  more  careful  to  bring  them  up  in  the  Nur^ 
tare  a  fid  Admonition  of  the  Lord. 

But  '*  how  can  young  People  remember 

their  Creator  without  Horror,  if  He  has  given 

»  p.  262,  263.  them 


tOk'ictNAL  Sin.  271 

tlierri  Xife  under  fuch  "deplorable  Circum- 
ftances  ?'^  They  can  remember  Him  w^th 
Plcafure,  with  earneft  Thankfulnefs,  when 
they  refled:,  out  of  wh^t  a  Pit  He  hath  iroi/gk 
them  up :  And  that  if  Sin  abounded,  both  by 
Nature  and  Habit,  Grace  did  7nuch  7?iore  a- 
bound.     '^'^^  ^  ^^^" 

You  conclude,  "  Why  "fhould  we  fubjeft 
our  Confciences  toTales  and  Fables,  invented 
by  Priejis  and  Mo?iks  ?"  This  Fable,  as  you 
term  it,  of  Original  Sin,  could  not  be  invented 
by  RomiJJo  Priefts  or  Monks :  Becaufe  it  is 
by  many  Ages  older  than  either ;  yea  than 
Chriftianity  itfelf. 

I  HAVE  now  weighed,  as  my  Leifure 
would  permit  all  the  Arguments  advanced 
in  your  Three  Parts.  And  this  I  have  done 
with  continual  Prayer,  That  I  might  know 
the  T'ruth  as  it  is  in  Jefus.  But  ftill  I  fee  no 
Ground  to  alter  my  Sentiments,  touching 
the  general  Corruption  of  Human  Nature. 
Nor  can  I  find  any  better  or  any  otlier  Way, 
of  accounting  for  that  general  Wickednefs, 
which  has  prevailed  in  all  Nations,  and  thro' 
all  Ages,  nearly  from  the  Beginning  gf  the 
World  to  this  Day. 

Lewisham,  Jiuu,zs^  ^757- 

-^  a£fi  sH  ' 
•'"'-p.  .64.  P4  PART 


f  li^ } 


^m^*         ^nO  ioWn^^s 


fqquc 

ltd!  ffA     .uv 


Xf  Ot  ^7i  £\ 


oS  J£fb 


[  233  ] 


«i»»3»^<>r^<>]«^"*5or^o 


T    H    E^ 

DoBrine  of  Original  Sin^  &c. 


PART     IIL 

An  Anfwe/  to  Mr,  Taylor  i  Supplement* 

?^&^"^0U  fubjoin  to  your  Book  a  very 
^  Y  w!!  large  Supplement y  in  Anfwer  to  Dr. 

Iml^'SjmJ  J^^^^^^S^  ^^^  Dr.  Watts.     All  that 
they  have  advanced,  I  am  not  en- 
gaged to  defend^  but  fuch  Parts  only,  as 
afFeft  the  Merits  of  the  Caufc, 

You  divide  this  Part  of  your  Work  into 
Eight  Sections.     The  Firft  treats 

Of  Imputed  Guilt. 

AN  D  here  you  roundly  affirm,  *'  No' 
ABion  is  faid  in  Scripture  to  be  im- 
puted to  any  Perfon,  for  Righteoufnefs  or 
Condemnation,  but  xhc  proper  A^  and  Deed 
of  that  Perfon." 

•  Supplement,  p.  7.  '  WcRE 


234  '^^'^  Doctrine  of 

Were  then  the  hiiquities  mid  Sins  which 
)verc  put  upon  the  Scape-Goat,  his  o^nproper 
AB  afidDeed?  You  anfwer,  '*  Here  was  no 
Imputation  of  Sin  to  the  Goat.  It  was  only 
a  figurative  Way  of  fignifying  the  Removal 
cf  Guilty  from  the  penitent  IfraeliteSy  by  the 
Goat's  going  into  the  Wildernefs/*  But  how 
cguld  it  be  a  Figure  of  any  fuch  Thing  if  no 
Guilt  was  imputed  X.0  him  ? 

"Aaron  is  commanded\  to  put  the  Lit" 
quities  ^Ifrael  upon  the  Scape-Goat,  Lev. 
xvi.  21.  And  this  Goat  is  faid.  To  bear 
the  hiiquities  of  the  Peopky  V.  22.  This  was 
plainly  ao  Imputation.  Yet  it  could  not  pof- 
fibly  be  an  Imputation  of  any  done  by  the 
Animal  itfelf.  The  Effects  alfo  which^ 
took  Place  upon  the  Execution  of  the  Ordi- 
dinance  indicate  a  Tranflation  of  Guilt. 
For  the  Congregation  was  cleanfed,  but  the 
Goat  was  polluted.  The  Congregation  fo 
cleanfcdy  that  their  Iniquities  were  borne 
away,  and  to  be  found  no  more  :  The  Goat 
{opollutedy  that  it  communicated  Defilerffent 
to  the  Perfon  who  cor.du^ted  it  into  a  Land 
not  inhabited/' 

In  Truth  the  Scape-Goat  was  a  Figure  of 
Him,  en  "icbom  the  Lord  laid  the  Iniquities  of 
us  ally  lia.  liii.  6.     He  bore  our  Iniquity ^  V.  1 1 . 
He  bare  the  Sin  of  niany^  V.  12.     The  Pro- 
phet ufcs  three  different  Words  in  the  Ori-^ 

ginal :' 

*  *[k>trin  and  jK^aJic. 


Original  Sin.  235 

ginal :  Of  which  the  firft  does  properly  fig- 
nify  the  meeting  together*,  the  laft,  the  lifti?ig 
up  a  Weight  or  Burden.  This  Burden  it 
was  which  made  }r{\\nfweat  m  it  were  great 
Drops  of  Bloody  falli?ig  to  the  Ground.  ^*  But 
''Iniquity  and  Sin  fometimes  fignify  Suffer^ 
ings"  Yes;  Suffering  for  Sin,  the  EfFedt 
being  put  for  the  Caufe.  Accordingly  what 
we  mean  by,  "  Our  Sins  were  imputed  to 
Him,  is,  He  was  puniihed  for  them:  He 
was  wounded  for  our  T^raiifgrefjions -,  He  was 
bruifed  for  our  Iniquities,  He  who  knew  no 
Sin,  but  what  was  thus  imputed,  was  made 
Sin,  a  Sin-OfFering,  /6>r  us:  *'4t  pleafed'^the 
Lord"  (your  own  Words)  *'  to  bruife  Him, 
in  Order  to  the  Expiation  of  our  Sins."         ' 

"  But  with  Regard  to  Parents  and  their 
Poftcrity,  God  affures  us,  Children /ZW/ /7^^ 
die  for  the  Iniquity  of  their  Fatfjers^  No,  not 
eternally.  I  believe  none  ever  did  or  ever 
will  die  eternally,  merely  for  the  Sin  of  our 
Firft  Father. 

"  But  the  Scripture  never  fpeaks^  of  im- 
puting any  Sin  to  any  Perfon,  but  what  is 
the  A(5tofthat  Perfon."  It  was  but  now 
you  yourfelf  obferved,  That  by  "  our  Sins 
weren^^/'/z/W/oChrift,"  we  mean,  ^'  He f of- 
fered for  them."  Our  Sins  then  were  imputed 
to  Chrif.  And  yet  thcfe  Sins  were  not  the 
Ad:  of  the  Perfon  tliat  fuftcred.     He  did  not 

commit 

5  p.  3,  .;,     **  p.  10,   II.     '  p.  13.  .14. 


'Sjfi  I'he  DoCTlftlKE  of 

commit  the  Sin  which' was  thus '  tniputea  'to 
Him.    '  '■  V   ^^ 

Bur  ^*  no  juft  ConfFitiTtioh  cai^^  piVi?fffi^  t!^ 
Innocent r  This  is  undoubtedly  true.  Thefe- 
fore  God  does  not  look  upon  Infants  as  in- 
nocent, but  as  involved  in  the  Guilt  of  A- 
dam'%  Sin.  Otherwife  Death  the  Punijl^menf 
denounced  againft  that  Sin,  could  not  be  in- 
flifted  upon  them. 

"  It  is  allow^ed  the  Pofterlty  of  Ham  and 
Gehaziy  and  the  Children  of  Dathan  and 
Abiranty  fuffered  for  the  Sins  of  their  Pa- 
rents." It  is  enough.  You  need  allows  no 
more.  All  the  World  w^ill  fee.  If  they  ^^ 
fered  for  them,  then  they  were  punijh'd  for 
them.  Yet  we  do  not  "  confound  Funijh-^ 
mentv/\^  Sufferings  zs  \i  to  ft ffery  and  to  be 
pih2iJJ?edy  were  the  fame  Thing."  Punifj- 
ment  \s  not  barely  Sufferings  hwt  fuffering  for 
Sin:  To  fuffer  and  to  ht  puniffedy  are  not 
the  fame  Thing.  But  io  fuffer  for  Sin,  and 
to  be  puniJFd  are  precifely  the  fame. 

If  therefore  the  Children  of  Dathan  and 
Ahirnm  ftffcredfor  the  Sins  of  their  Parents, 
which  no  Man  can  deny,  then  they  were 
punifjd  for  them.  Confequently  it  is  not 
true,  That  **  in  the  Inftances^  alledged,  the 
Parents  only  w^rt  punijhed  by  tht  Sufferings 
of  the  Children."  If  the  Children  fiffered 
for  thok-SinSy  then  they  were  pufiiffd  fof 

^''"^^^  them. 


p.  i6.     «  p.  17,  18.  '    ■''         "^^    - 


Original  Sin.  237 

them.  Indeed  fometimes  the  Parents  too 
were  punifhed,  hy  the  Sufferings  of  their 
Children.^,  which  is  all  that  your  Heap  of 
Quotations  proves :  And  fometimes  they 
were  not.  But  howev,^r  this  were  ;  if  the 
Children  fufferd  for.  their  ^i?Uy  tbiey  were 
pumped  for  them.  ^ 

"'llx  is  not  therefore  ''  evident,^  that  in  all 
thefe  Cafes,  Children  are  confider^d  not  as 
Criminals y  involved  in  Guilt  but  as.  the  £;;- 
joyments  of  their  Parents,  who  alone  are 
punijhed  by  their  Sufferings."  On  the  con- 
trary, it  is  very  evident,  that  the  Children 
of  Ca?iaan  \Ntvt  punij}:ed  for  the  Sin  of  Hiwi^^ 
and  that  the  Children  oi  Dot  ban  zndAbiram 
were  puni(hed  with  Death,  as  ''  involved  in 
the  Guilt  of  their  Parents." 

"  On  the  other  Hand,  the  Virtues'  of  an 
Anceftor  may  convey  great  Advantages  to 
his  Pofterity.     But  no  Man's  Pofterity  can  be 
rewarded  for  their  Anceftor's  Virtue."     The 
Point  here  in  Difpute  between  Dr.  Watts 
and  you,  is.  Whether  the  Thing,  concern- 
ing which  you  are  agreed,  Ihould  be  ex- 
preft  by  one  Tcnn  or  another  ?  You  both  a- 
gree,  (and  no  Man  in  his  Senfes  can  dcny)^ 
That  in  all  Ages,  God  has,  gn  Account  ot 
pious  Anceftors,  given  manyBleffjngs  to  their 
Offspring.     But  he  thinks,  Thefe  BleOings 
fhould  be  term'd  Rewards,  (and  fo  do  all  the 

World  : ) 


-*  p.  18. 


21. 


238  T5fv  Doc^tVine  of 

World:)  You  fay,  They  (liould  not.  The 
Fa(ft  is  plain  either  Way  :  God  does  conti- 
nually, and  did  in  all  Ages,  give  niimberlefs 
Bleffings  to  the  Children,  on  Account  of  the 
Piety  of  their  Fathers.  And  it  is  certain,^ 
Blejings  ghen  07i  Account  6f  Virtue ^  have  beea 
hitherto  term'd  Rewards  both  by  God  and 
Man. 

YoiT  conclude  this  Seftion,  "  Thus*"  it  ap-, 
peafs,  the  Diftindion  between  Perfohal  Sin 
and  Imputed  Guilty  is  without  any  Ground  in 
Scripture."  Juft  the  contrary  appears,  name- 
ly, That  Guilt  was  imputed  to  the  Scape- 
Goat,  to  the  Children  of  wicked  Parents, 
and  to  our  blefled  Lord  Himfelf,  without 
any  Ferfonal  Sin.  The  Diftinftion  there- 
fore is  found  and  fcriptural. 


SECT.     11. 

Of  the  Nature  and  Defign  of  our  AfliBiom 
and  Mortality, 

THAT  God  defigm  to  bring  Good  out 
of  thefe  is  certain.  But  does  this 
prove,  they  have  not  the  Nature  of  Fu- 
nijhments  ?  Did  Adam  himlelf  fuffer  any 
AffliBion?  Any  Toil  or  Pain  ?  Doubtlefs  he 
did,  long  before  he  returned  to  Duft.  And 
can   we  doubt,    but  he  received  Spiritual 

Good 
*'  p.  22. 


Original  Sin.  239 

Good  from  that  Pain?  Yet  it  was 'a  IPuniJh^ 
ment  ftill:  As  really  fuch,  as  if  it  had  con-j 
figned  him  over  to  everlafting  Punifhment. 
This  Argument  therefore  is  of  no  Weight: 
"  God  draws  Good  out  of  Punilhmcnts: 
Therefore  they  are  no  Punifhments  at  all.**^ 
However  then  the  Sufferings  wherein  yf/iz/^'s 
Sin  has  involved  his  whole  Pofterity,  ma^*^ 
"  try  and  purify  us,  ^  in  order  to  future  and 
everlafting  Happinefs/*  this  Circumftance 
does  not  alter  their  Nature:  They  zx^Punip:-^^ 
ments  ftill.  See  B\  Aph, 

Let  "  Afflidions,  ''Calamities  and  Death 
itfelf,  be  Means  of  improving  in  Virtue," 
of  healing  or  preventing  Sin,  this  is  no  Man- 
ner of  Proof,  that  they  are  not  PwiiJ7:?nc7ifs. 
Was  not  God  able  to  l^^al  or  prevent  Sin, 
without  either  Pain  or  Death?  Could  not 
the  Almighty  have  done  this,  as  eafily,  as 
fpeedily  and  as  effe<5lually,  without  thefe  as 
with  them?  Why  then  did  He  not?  Why 
did  Adams  Sin  bring  thefe  on  his  whole  Pol- 
tcrity  ?  Why  ftiould  one  Man  fuffer  for  ano- 
ther Man's  Fault?  If  you  fay.  To  cure  hi? 
own:  I  afk  i.  What  NecelTity  was  riicre  of 
any  Suffering  at  all  for  this?  If  God  intend- 
ed ofily,  to  cure  his  Sin,  He  could  have  done 
that  without  any  Suffering.  I  afk  2,  Why 
do  Infants  fuffer?  What  Sin  have  they  to  be 
cured  tlieceby?  Jf  yoafay,  ''  It  is  to  heal  the 

*^ffi."2  3»    »  p.  24. 


240  The  Doctrine  of 

Sin  of  their  Parents,  who  fympathife,  fufFer 
with  them:"  In  a  thoufand  Inftances  this 
has  no  Place:  The  Parents  are  not  the  bet- 
ter, nor  any  Way  Hkely  to  be  the  better, 
for  all  the  Sufferings  of  their  Children. 
Their  Sufferings  therefore,  yea  and  thofe  of 
all  Mankind  which  are  entaiFd  upon  them 
by  the  Sin  of  Adam^  arc  not  the  Refult  of 
mere  Mercy ^  but  of  'Jujlice  alfo.  In  other 
Words,  they  have  in  them  the  Nature  of 
Pimijl:mejits^  even  on  Us  and  on  our  Chil- 
dren. Therefore  Children  themfclves  are 
not  innocent  before  God.  They  fufier, 
therefore  they  defer ve  to  fuffer. 

And  here  another  Qoeflion  arifes.  What 
Benefit  accrues  to  the  Brute-Creation,  from 
the  Sufferings  v/herein  their  whole  Race  is 
involv'd,  thro'  the  Sin  of  the  firilMan?  The 
Fadl  cannot  be  denied.  Daily  Experience 
attefls  what  we  read  in  the  Oracles  of  God, 
That  the  whole  Creation  gi'oajieth  together^ 
and  travailcth  in  Pain  to  this  Day,  A  confi- 
derable  Part  of  it  groans  to  God,  under  the 
Wantonnefs  or  Cruelty  of  Man.  Their  Suf- 
ferings are  caufed,  or  at  leafl  greatly  increaf- 
ed,  by  our  Luxury  or  Inhumanity:  Nay, 
and  by  our  Diverfions  LWe  draw  E?2tertain^ 
mcnt  from  the  Pain,  the  Death  of  other  Crea- 
tures !  Not  to  mention  feveral  entire  Species, 
which  at  prclent  have  fuch  Natural  Quali* 
ties,  that  we  arc  obliged  to  inflidt  Pain,  nay, 

perhaps 


Original  Sin.  241 

perhaps  Death  upon  them,   purely  in  our 
own   Defence.       And   even   thofe    Species 
which  arc  out  of  the  reach  of  Men,  are  net 
out  of  the  reach  of  Suffering.     The  Lions  do 
lack  and  fiiffer  Hunger,  tho'  they  are  as  it 
were  Sovereigns  of  the  Plain.     Do  they  not 
acknowledge  this^    when  roaring  for  their 
Prey,  thty  feek  their  Meat  from  GdD^  And 
what  (hall  we  fay  of  their  Helplefs  Prey?  Is 
not  their  Lot  more  miferable  ftill  ?    Now 
what  Benefits,  I  fay,  have  thefe  from  tlicir 
Sufferings  ?  Are  they  alfo  "  tried  and  puri- 
fied thereby  ?"  Do  Sufferings  "  correa:  dicir 
inordinate  Paffions,  and  difpofe  their  ^T■nds 
to  fober  Refledions?"  Do  they  "  give  them 
Opportunity    of   exercifing    Kindnels    and 
Compaffion,  in  relieving  each  other's  Dif- 
treffes  ?"  That  I  know  not :  But  I  know  by 
this  and    a  thcufand  Proofs,    That  when 
Man,  the  Lord  of  the  vifible  Creation,  re- 
belled againftGoD,  every  Part  of  the  Crea- 
tion began  to  ftiffer  on  Account  oj  hts  Sin. 
And  to  Suffering  on  Account  of  Sin ;    I  can 
give  no  properer  Name  than  that  of  Punijh- 

jYient  • 

"  It  was  to  reclaim  "  Offenders,  that  an 
extraordinary  Power  was  exerciled,  either 
immediately  by  our  Lord  Hmifelf,  or  by 
his  Apoftles  of  inflifting  bodily  Diftempers, 
and  in  fome  Cafes,  Death  itfelf."     I  do  not 

Q  remember 


242  'the  Doctrine  of 

remember  any  more  than  one  lingle  Cafe^ 
wherein  one  of  the  Apoftles  '*  inflidled 
Death."  I  remember  no  Inftance  recorded 
in  Scripture,  of  their  "  mflifting  bodily  Dif- 
tcmpers."  (The  Bhndnefs  inflidied  on  £- 
lymas  cannot  he  fo  term'd,  without  great 
Impropriety)  And  certain  I  am,  that  our 
Lord  Himfelf,  infiifted  neither  one  nor  the 
other. 

The  Citations ""  in  the  next  Page  prove 
no  more  than  that  we  may  reap  Benefit  from 
the  Punipmients  of  others.  But  tho'  either 
we  or  they  reap  Benefit  from  them,  yet  they 
are  Fiinijlmients  ftill. 

*'  We  do  ^not  here  confider  Death  and 
Sufi^ering  as  they  ftand  in  the  Thrcatning  of 
the  Law."  You  are  fenfible,  if  we  did,  all 
Mankind  muft  acknowledge  them  to  be 
VuniJ})7nents.  And  this  is  the  very  Light 
wherein  we  do  and  muft  confider  them,  in 
the  prefent  Queftion.  We  confider  Death 
and  Suffering,  as  they  ftand  in  that  Threat- 
ning,  T^hou  jhalt  furely  die.  That  this  was 
denounced  to  all  Mankind  we  know,  be- 
caufe  it  is  executed  on  all.  Therefore  con- 
fidering  Siifferhig  and  Death  as  fo  thr^atncd 
and  exccMted^  we  cannot  deny,  That  they 
are  Fiini figments  :  Punilhments  not  on  Adcim 
only,    but  on  all  that  in  P'ad;  do  either  y//> 

ov juffeni..  a-.  \uC no x.i^\ici&^rgooli  L  - 

•  -vonij  ^^  To 

°  p.  26.    "^  p.  27. 


Original  Sin.  243 

To  fum  up  this  Point :  Altho'  the  Wif- 
dom  and  Mercy  of  God,  do  ''  bring  Good 
out  of  Evil :"  Altho'  God  Je/Igns  to  extracl 
BleHings  from  Punifhments,  and  does  it  in 
numberlefs  Inftances  :  Yet  this  does  not  al- 
ter the  Nature  of  Things,  but  Pumfl:me7its 
are  Pimijhments  ftill :  Still  this  Name  pro- 
perly belongs  to  all  Sicfferi?igs^  which  arc 
injiiBed  on  Account  of  Sin :  And  confequent- 
ly,  it  is  an  evident  Truth,  That  the  whole 
animate  Creation  is  punijhed  for  Adafns  Sin. 

SECT     III. 

^he  Argument  taken  from  the  Calainities  and 
Sinfulnefs  of  Maiikind  confidered. 

«c  rTT^HE  Subject  of  our  prefent  Enquiry 
J^  is  threefold,  i.  Whether^  Mankind 
be  under  God's  Difpleafure,  antecedently 
to  their  aftual  Sins?  2.  Whether  our  Nature 
be  corrupt,  from  the  Beginning  of  Life? 
And  3.  Whether  thefe  Propofitions  can  be 
proved  from  the  Calamities  and  Sinfuhiefi 
of  Mankind  ?" 

Whether  they  can  or  no,  they  have 
been  fully  proved  from  Scripture.  Let  us 
now  enquire.  If  they  may  not  be  proved 
from  the  State  of  the  World. 

But  you  think  Dr.  Watts,  "  has  here 
laid  too  great  Strefs  on  Suppofition  and  Ima- 

Q^  gination." 

^  p.  30,  31- 


244  T"/:?^  Doctrine  of 

gination."' Jn  Proof  of  which,  you  cite  from 
him  the  following  Words  :  Caji  we  fuppofe' 
that  the  ble fed  God y  would  place  bis  innocent 
Creatures  in  fiich  a  dangerous  Habitation? 
Can  wefuppofe^  that  antong  the  Roots ^  and  the 
Htrbsy  and  the  Threes  which  are  good  for  Food^ 
the  great  God  woidd  hA've  fuffered  deadly  Poi- 
Jon  to  fp7-i7ig  up  here  and  there  ?  Would  there 
have  been  any  fuch  Creatures  in  our  World  as 
Bears  and  T'ygers  ?  Can  we  ever  imagine  the 
great  arid  good  God  would  have  appointed  Men 
to  be  propagated  in  fuch  a  Way^  as  woidd  neceffa^ 
rily  give  fuch  exquifite  Pain  and  Anguijh  to  the 
Mothers  that  produce  them^  if  they  had  been  all 
accounted  in  his  Eyes^  a  Race  of  holy  andfnlefs 

Beings  ^-^^^^^^  .:j-.,uv.  ^iir-,;.  ,.v..u>iC  ^;uv.:;?.; 

I  AN^W^if?,  It  is  mf  tfae,  "that  tocrgreal 
Strefs,"  or  any  Strefs  at  all,  is  ''  here  laid  on 
?nere  Suppofition  and  Imagination."  Your 
catching  at  thofc  two  Words  fuppofe  and 
imagi?ie^  will  by  no  Means  prove  it.  For 
the  Meaning  of  them  is  plain.  "  Can  we 
fuppofey  tile  bleiTed  God  would  do  this?*' 
Is  manifeftly  the  fame  with,  '*  How  can  we 
reconcile  it  with  his  efTential  Attributes  ?'* 
In  like  Manner,  "  Can  we  ever  imagine  ?*' 
Is  plainly  equivalent  with,  *'  Can  we  pofli- 
bly  conceive?"  So  that  the  occafional  Ufe 
of  thcfc  Words  docs  not  infer  his  laying  any 
Strefs  on  Suppofition  and  Imagination.  When 
therefore  you  add,  ''  Our'  huppofticns  and 

Imaginations 
'  p.  3»-     '  P-  32- 


Original  Sin.  245 

Imaginatiom  are  not  a  juft  Standard  by  which 
to  meafure  the  Divine  Dilpenfations."  What 
you  fay  is  abfolutely  true,  but  abfolutely 
foreign  to  the  Point. 
'Some  of  the  Queftions  which  you  your- 
felf  alk,  to  expofe  his,  it  is  not  {o  eafy  t6 
anfwer,  '*  Would  innocent  Creatures  have 
been  tliruft  into  the  World,  in  fo  contempti- 
ble Circumftances  ?  And  have  been  doom'd, 
to  grow  up  fo  flowly  to  Maturity  and  the 
Ufe  of  Reafon  ?  Would  they  when  grown 
up  have  been  'conftrained  to  fpend  fo  much 
Time  in  low  and  fervile  Labour  ?  Would 
Millions  have  been  obliged  to  fpend  all  their 
Days,  from  early  Morn  'till  Evening,  in 
hewing  Stone,  fawing  Wood,  heaving,  rub- 
bing or  beating,  the  Limb  of  an  Oak,  or  a 
Bar  of  Iron  r"  I  really  think,  they  would 
not.  I  believe  all  this  Toil,  as  well  as  the 
Pain  and  Anguifli  of  Women  in  Child-birth, 
is  an  Evidence  of  the  Fall  of  Man,  of  the 
Sin  of  our  firft  Parents,  and  Part  qf  the 
Ptinijhment  denounced  and  executed  firil  q\\ 
Them,  and  then  on  all, their  Pofterity. 

You  »dd,  ''  He  "doth  not  confidcr  this 
World  as  a  State  of  Trial,  but  as  if  it  ought 
to  have  been  a  Seat  of  Happinefs."  There 
is  no  Contrariety  between  thefe  :  It  might 
be  a  State  of  Trial,  and  of  Happinefs  too. 
Andvfiiclioit  certainly  wgs  to  AiUm  in  Para- 

^f.r^^^^\  34, 35. 


246  The  Doctrine  of 

dife :  Whether  he  was  holy  or  no,  he  was 
undoubtedly  Happy.  A  State  of  Trial 
therefore  does  not  neceffary  imply  any  Kind 
or  Degree  of  natural  Evil.  And  accordingly 
the  Creator  Himfelf  aflures  us,  there  was 
none  originally  in  his  Creation.  For  fo  I 
read  at  the  Conclufion  of  it,  ^And  God  faw 
every  'Taking  that  He  had  made^  and  behold^  it 
'was  very  good, 

"But  natural  Evil  may  be  mixt  with  a 
State  of  Trial.  Confequently  this  World 
coidd  not  be  built  for  a  Seat  of  Happinefs." 
Admirable  drawing  of  Confequences !  "  It 
may  be:  Therefore  it  could  not  be  otherwife." 
Whatever  may  be  God  Himfelf  here  tells  us, 
vjhat  was.  And  from  his  own  Declaration 
it  is  infallibly  certain,  There  was  no  Natural 
Evil  in  the  World,  'till  it  enter'd  as  the 
Punifliment  of  Si7i. 

•'  Neither  doth  he  take  a''  future  State 
into  his  Reprefentation."  No,  nor  is  there 
?.ny  Need  he  fliould,  when  he  is  reprefenting 
tlie  prefent  State  of  the  World,  as  a  Punifi- 
ment  oi Adam\  Sin.  *'  Nor  doth  he  ^take 
into  his  Argument  the  Goodnefs  of  God.'* 
Not  into  this  Aro-ument :  That  is  of  after 

^  o  

Conlider^tion,  So  the  Texts  you  have  heap'd 
together  on  this  Head  alfo,  are  very  good. 
But  what  do  they  prove  ? 

**  He  fuppofes  our  Sufferings  to  be  mere 

runifbynentsT     I  fuppofe,    they  are  Pu?iifJ:- 

""  Ga:.\  31.    «  p.  36,    y  p.  37.  nie?its 


Original  Sin.  247 

ments  mixt  with  Mercy.  But  flill  they  are 
Funijlments  :  They  are  Evi/s  itijli^ed  en  Ac- 
count  of  Sin, 

"  We  find  in  Fadl,  That  the  bejl  of  Mcn^ 
may  be  made  'very  unhappy y  by  Calamities 
and  Oppreffions."  It  cannot  be.  The  bej} 
of  Men  cannot  be  made  unhappy  by  any  Ca- 
lamities or  Oppreffions  whatlbever.  For 
they  have  learned^  in  every  poffible  State  there- 
with  to  be  content.  In  Spite  of  all  Calamities, 
they  rejoice  eve?^more^  and  in  every  Thing  give 
•  Thanks, ' 

"  Fro'm"  Punifliments  inflicted  on  parti- 
cular Perfons^  he  infers  that  all  Men  are  un- 
der the  Wrath  of  God.  But  to  infer  the 
State  of  the  ivhole  from  the  Cafe  oi  fo??re,  is 
not  a  fair  Way  of  arguing."  No.  'Ihe 
Punifhments  inflidled  on  particular  Perfons 
prove  nothing,  but  with  Regard  to  thofc  on 
whom  they  are  inflided.  If  therefore  fome 
Men  only  fufter  and  die,  this  proves  nothing 
with  Regard  to  the  relt.  But  if //v  ^ivhole  of 
Mankind  fuifer  and  die,  then  the  Conclufioa 
reaches  all  Men. 

"  He  is  not  quite  jufl,  in  pronouncing  the 
prefent  Form  of  tlie  Earth,  irregular,  abrupt 
and  horrid',  and  afking  Doth  it  not  bear 
flrongly  on  our  Sight,  the  Ideas  of  Ruin  and 
Confifion,  in  vafl  broken  Mountains,  dreadful 
Cliffs  and  Precipices,  immenfe'  Extents  of -.cafe 

Q^  4  and 

^  P-  39-     '  F-  40'     "  r-  41- 


248  Tf'be  Doctrine  cf 

and  barren  Ground.  If  this  be  the  Cafe,  how 
can  che-vn^ifible  l^hingt'  of  GoT)^  he 'clearly 
feenfrm  ivxh.  a  ruined  Creation?''  Perfedly 
well.  J^'  ^ccrnal  Power  and  Godhead^  the 
Exirtence  of  a  powerful  zXid  eternal  Being, 
may  ftill  be  inferred  from  thefe  his  Works, 
grand  khd  magnificent,  tho'  in  Ruin;  Con- 
fequently,  theie  leave  the  Atheift  without 
Exciife.  And  whatever  Objections  he  might 
form  (as  Lucretius  adlually  does)  from  thefe 
palpable  Blcmifhes  and  Irregularities  of  the 
terraqueous  Globe:  The  fcriptural  Account 
of  Natural^  flowing  from  Moral  Evil,  will 
eafily  and  perfectly  folve  them.  All  which 
is  well  confiftent  with  the  Words  of  the 
PfalmiftV'  O  ""  Lord,  how  manifold  are  thy 
TForks!  In  Wifdom  hajl  T^boii  made  them  all: 
T^he  Earth  is  full  cf  tloy  Riches!  So  undoubt- 
edly it  fe,  tho'  it  bears  fo  vifible  Signs  of 
Ruin  and  Dcvallation,^  1  s d  i3va .!  ? 

*^  W]-  have  no  Authority  from  Scripture, 
to  fay  that  the  Earth,  in  its  prefent  Conjiitu^ 
iion^  is  at  all  different  from  what  it  was  at  its 
firft  Creation."  Certainly  we  have,  if  the 
Scripture  affirms,  That  God  faid^  after  A- 
dam  (i  n  ned ,  Cur  fed  is  the  Ground  for  thy  Sake  ^ 
I' horns  and'TkiJilcs  Jhall  it  bring  forth  to  tbee^ 
and,'  That  the  Rarth  ^-f^s  of  old,  Jianding  out 
cf  the  Water ^  and  in  the  Water ^  'till  GoD 
deitroycd  it  for  the  Sin'ot  it^  Inhabitants.  ^ 

Yoir 

'  P  42. 


Original  Sin.  249 

You-:gi)  on.  "  I  cannot'  agree,  nat  Dif- 
eafe^  AnguiJJ?  and  Deail\  have  eiitered  into  the 
Bowels  and  Veins-  of  Mtdtitudes,  by  an  innocent 
and  fatal  Mijlake,  of  per?iicioiis  Plants  and 
pruits  of  proper  Food!'  Why  not  ?  Doubt- 
lefs  Multitudes  have  perifh'd  hereby,  if  we 
take  in  the  Account  of  all  Ages  and  Nations : 
Multitudes  alfo  have  been  the  living  Prey\  of 
Bears  and  Tygers^  Wolves  and  Lions :  And 
Multitudes  have  had  their  Flcfh  and  Bones 
crujhed  and  churned  between  the  faivs  of  Pan- 
thers and  Leopards^  Sharks  and  Crocodiles. 
And  would  thefe  Things  have  come  upon 
Mankind,  were  it  not  on  Account  oiAdanis 
Sin? 

-:"'  Yet  you  think,  we  have  "  now  a  ^more 
extenfxve  Dominion  over  all  Creatures,  than 
^^^^7/  had  even  in  his  Innocence :  Becaufe  we 
■  have  the  Liberty  of  eating  them;  which -^- 
i^^w  never  had."  This  will  not  prove  the 
Points.  That  I  have  the  Liberty  to  eat  a 
Lamby  does  not  prove  that  I  have  Dominion 
over  a  Lion,  Certainly  I  have  not  Dominion 
over  any  Creature  which  I  can  neither  govern 
nor  refifl :  Yea,  and  if  the  Dread  fme  is  on 
every  Beajl  and  Fowl,  this  does  not  prove, 
that  I  have  any  Dominion  over  tliem.  1 
know,  on  the  contrary,  That  not  only  a 
^Typer  or  a  Bear,  but  even  a  Dove  will  not 
fioop  to  my  Dominion. 
'  *'  However 

^  P-  43-     •  ^  44- 


250  I'he  Doctrine  of 

"  However  we  have  ^  no  Authority  to 
fay,  Man  himfelf  was  curfed,  though  the 
Ground  was."  Yes,  we  have  :  The  Au- 
thority of  God  Himfelf,  Curfedis  every  Man 
that  continueth  not  in  all  the  Tubings  which  God 
hath  commanded.  The  Moment  therefore 
that  he  finned  Adam  fell  under  this  Curfe. 
And  whether  the  T'oil  and  Death  to  which 
he  and  his  Pofterity  were  fentenced,  and  the 
'Pain  of  Child-birth  be  term'd  Curfes  or  no, 
fure  it  is  they  are  Funijlmients^  and  heavy 
ones  too,  though  Mercy  is  often  mixt  with 
Judgment. 

The  main  Argument  follows,  taken  from 
the  State  of  Mankind  in  general,  with  Re- 
gard to  Religion.  But  you  fay  "  It  is  impof- 
fible*"  we  fliould  make  a  juft  Eftimate  of  the 
Wickednefs  of  Mankind:"  Yes,  zn  exaBly 
]\\\i  Eftimate  of  the  prceife  Degree  of  Wick- 
ednefs in  the  whole  World.  But  it  is  very 
poflible,  nay  very  eafy,  to  make  an  Eftimate 
m  the  grofs,  with  fuch  a  Degree  of  Juftnefs 
as  fuffices  for  the  prefent  Queftion. 

Indeed  you  ^'  think  we  carry  ourCenfures 
of  the  Heathens  too  far."  I  dare  not  carry 
them  fo  far,  as  to  lay.  No  Heathen  fhall  be 
faved.  But  this  I  fay;  I  never  knew  an  Hea- 
then yet  (and  I  have  perfonally  known  many 
out  of  various  Nations)  who  was  not  a  Slave 
to  fome  grois  Vice  or  other.     Bad  therefore 

as 


Original  Sin.  251 

as  bad  as  nominal  Chriflians  are,  1  cannot 
yet  place  them  on  a  Level  with  the  Heathens: 
Not  even  with  the  mild,  courteous,  con- 
verfable  Heathens,  who  border  on  Geo?'gia 
and   Caroli?ia.      Much    lels   would    I    lay, 
**  Poflibly  the  Heathens  may  be  lefs  ^vicious 
than  the  Chriftian  World  in  general."     If  I 
believed  this,  I  fliould  bid  adieu  to  Chrifti- 
anity,  and  commence  Heathen  without  Delay, 
"  But  if  we  'allow  Mankind  to  be  ever 
fo  wicked,  fuppofe  there  is   not  one  upon 
Earth,  who  is  truly  righteous;  it  will  not 
follow,    That  Men   are  naturally  corrupt : 
For  finful  Action  does  not  infer  a  finful  Na- 
ture.    If  it  does,  then  Adam  brought  a  finful 
Nature  with  him  into  the  World.     But  if 
we  cannot  infer  from  Adarn^  Sin,  That  his 
Nature  was  originally  corrupt,  neither  can 
we  infer  from  the  Wickednefs   of  all  Man- 
kind be  it  ever  fo  great,  That  they  have  a 
fmful  Nature." 

The  Confequence  is  not  good.  "  If  one 
Man's  committing  a  Sin  dees  not  prove  that 
he  was  naturally  inclined  to  Evil,  then  the 
Wickednefs  of  all  Mankind  for  fix  thoufand 
Years,  will  not  prove  that  they  are  naturally 
inclined  to  Evil."  For  we  may  eafily  ac- 
count for  one  Man's  committing  Sin,  tho' 
he  was  not  naturally  inclined  to  Evil :  But 
not  fo  eafily,  for  aUFIeJh  corrupting  tbemfilves, 

for 

'  p-  ?:-'>  53- 


252  Th(^'  Doctrine  of 

for  the  Wickednefs  ajF.all  Mankind,  in  all 
Ages.  It  is  not  poffible  rationally  to  account 
for  this,  for  the  Generiil  Wickednefs  of  Man- 
kind -y  for  fuch  a  Majority  of  Men  thro^  all 
Generations  being  fo  corrupt,  but  on  the 
Suppofition  of  their  having  a  corrupt  Nature: 
Sin  in  One  or  a  few  Cafes,  does  not  prove  a 
fmful  Nature :  But  Sin  overfpreading  the 
Earth,  does.  Nor  is  ''your  Argument  drawn 
from  the  Sin  of  the  Angels,  of  any  more 
Force  than  that  drawn  from  the  Sin  oiAdam: 
Unlefs  you  can  prove  that  as  great  a  Majority 
of  Angels  a,5  of  Men,  have  rebelled  againft 
their  Creator.  u  vitjv  ^:.r/  I 

."Again,.  If  our  firft  Parents  felt  Fear 
and  Shame,  and  yet  their  Nature  was  not 
originally  corrupt,  then  it  will  not  follow, 
that  Ours  is  fo,  notwithftanding  our  uneafy 
and  unruly  FalTions/'v.  Empty  Sound  !  Had 
anv  one  faid  to  Adam.  '^  Your  Nature  was 
criginally  corrupt,  for  you  feel  uneafy  and 
(inruly  Paffions:"  Would  he  not  readily 
have  an  fevered,  But  thefe  began  at  fuch  an 
Hour:  'Till  then  my  Nature  was  without 
either  Pain  or  Corruption.  Apply  this  to 
any  ChiUl  of //ii?;;/ ;  And  if  he  can  anfwcr 
in  like  Manner,  "  'Till  fuch  an  Hour  no  un- 
eafy or  unruly  Paffion  had  any  Place  in  my 
Breaft:"  We  will  then  grant,  thefe  Paffions 
no  more  prove  a  corrupt  Nature  in  the  Sons 

than 

'  P-  51.  55- 


.  .  Original  Sin,  253 

than  in  their  FIrft  Father.  But  'no^Man  can 
anfwer  thus.  You  and  I  and  eVery  Man 
muft  acknowledge,  that  uneafy  and  unruly 
Paffions,  are  coeval  with  our  Underftandin^: 
and  Memory  at  leaft,  if  not  with  our  very 
Bein^.'^  7nii*'»o:'>  ri-qn'r/r-: 

>^^  Again.  Adam  by  his  Sin  brought 
Sufferings  on  himfelf  and  his  Poflerity .  Yet 
it  does  not  follow,  That  his  Nature  was  cor- 
rupt. Therefore,  though  others  by  their 
Sins  bring  Sufferings  on  themfelves  and  their 
Pofterity,  it  will  not  follow  that  their  Nature 
is  corrupt,  or  under  the  Difpleafure  of  God." 
Two  very  different  Things  are  here  Mended 
together.  The  Corruption  of  their  Nature 
is  one  Thing,  the  Difpleafure  of  God,  ano- 
ther. None  affirms,  That  thofe  Sufferings 
which  Men  by  their  Sins  bring  on  them- 
felves or  Poilerity,  prove,  That  their  Nature 
is  corrupt.  But  do  not  the  various  Sufferings 
of  all  Mankipd,  prove  that  they  are  under 
the  Dilplealur^  of  God  P  It  is  certain,  no 
Suffering  came  upon  Jdnm  'till  lie  was  under 
the Difplenfu'x  of  Q^^,  ".-'■  •'  -^^^ 
--*«'A-GAtWi'  If  our  firll  Parents' by  rlinr 
Sin  brought  "SufFering  both  on  themfelves 

and  others,  and  ycttheir  Nature   •   -^^t 

originally  corrupt,  nor'tlndci  rhe  Di'  ^e 

ofGoD:  -Itcr^.vrlv  folic  v,,s  Yhatf^>  ^^ 

of  thof6AX%o  iufitr  *|^iirc?y  m'C.        ,       ce 
of  their  Sin,  is  not  originally  corrupt,  nor 

arc 


254  "^^^  Doctrine  of 

arc  they  under  God's  Difpleafure.**  This 
Argument  is  bad  every  Way.  For  i.  At 
the  Time  when  Ada?n  brought  the  Sentence 
of  Suffering  both  on  himfelf  and  others,  his 
Nature  was  corrupt,  and  he  was  under  the 
adual  Difpleafure  of  God.  But  z,  Suppofe 
it  were  otherwife,  all  you  could  poflibly  in- 
fer, with  Regard  to  his  Pofterity,  is,  That 
their  Suffering  does  not  prove  their  Cor- 
ruption, or  their  being  under  the  Difpleafure 
of  God.  How  could  you  think.  Their  Suf- 
fering would  prove  them  not  corrupt?  Not 
tinder  God's  Difpleafure  ?  Therefore  neither 
this  nor  the  preceding  Argument,  (feeing 
both  are  utterly inconclufivc)  "take  off  any 
Thing  that  Dr.  Watts  has  faid,"  touching 
the  prefent  State  of  the  World,  as  a  Proof 
of  God's  Difpleafure,  and  the  natural  Cor- 
ruption of  Man.  So  far  therefore  is  "  his 
Argument  from  the  Sinfulnefs  and  Mifery 
of  Mankind  from  being  altogether  infufficient 
in  every  Part:"  That  it  is  flrong  and  con- 
clufive,  any  Thing  you  have  advanced  to  the 
contrary  notwithftanding. 

You  add,  "  Siifermg  may  happen  where 
there  is  7jo  Sin,  as  in  the  Cafe  of  Brutes  and 
Infants:  Or  where  there  is  the  mofl;  per- 
fect Innocence  ;  as  in  the  Cafe  of  our  bleffed 
Lord."  Abfolutely  true:  That -ia~'. where 
there  is  no  perfonal  Sin,  but  only  Sin  iniputed. 
There  was   no  pcrjonal  Sin  in  our  :bleffed 

Lord  : 


Original  Sin.  255 

Lord:  There  can  be  none  either  in  Bmtes 
or  Infants.  He  fuffered  therefore  for  the 
Sins  of  others,  which  were  thus  imputed  to 
Him:  As  is  tlie  Sin  oi  Adam  to  Infants,  who 
fuflFer  Death  through  him,  and  in  fome  Senfc 
to  the  whole  Creation;  which  was  made  fid)  ^ 
jeB  to  Vanity\  not  willingly,  but  on  Account 
of  his  Tranfgreffion.  But  where  there  is  no 
Sin,  either  Perfonal  or  Imputed,  there  can 
be  no  Suffering. 

"  I  MAY  add.  From  the  prefent  State  of 
Things  a  diredlly  oppofite  Argument  may- 
be taken  :  'From  the  Enjoyments  and  Com- 
forts, the  good  Things  and  Bleflings,  which 
abound  in  the  World.  I  might  afk,  Are 
thefe  Creatures,  fo  weH  provided  for,  under 
God's  Dilpleafure?  Are  they  not  the  Care 
of  his  Goodnefs?  Does  He  not  love  them, 
and  delight  to  do  them  Good  ?"  I  anfwer, 
God  does  ftill  give  us  many  good  Things, 
many  Enjoyments,  Comforts  and  Bleflings. 
But  all  thefe  are  given  thro*  the  Seed  of  the 
Woman:  They  are  all  the  Purchafe  of  his 
Blood.  Through  Him  we  are  ftill  the  Care 
of  the  Divine  Goodnefs,  and  God  does  dc- 
lignt  to  do  us  Good.  But  this  does  not  at  all 
prove,  either  that  we  have  not  a  finful  Na- 
ture, or  that  we  are  not,  while  finful,  under 
his  Difpleafure. 

ip.  ;8-^6i.  SECT. 


256  Hjc  Doctrine  of 

SECT.    IV, 

So?ne  Confeque?2ce5  of  the  Do^rifie  of  Original 

Sin, 

^'  XU  Y  this  ""Doftrine  fome  have  been  led 
J3  ^o  maintain  i.  That  Men  have  not 
a  fufficient  Power  to  perform  their  Duty. 
But  if  fo,  it  ceafes  to  be  their  Duty."  I 
maintain,  That  Men  have  not  this  Power 
by  Nature.  But  they  have  or  may  have  it 
by  Grace,  Therefore  it  does  not  ceafe  to 
be  their  Duty.  And  if  they  perform  it  not, 
they  are  without  Excufe. 

"  Hence  fome  maintain,  2.  That"  wc 
have  no  Reafon  to  thank  our  Creator  for  our 
Being."  Pie  that  will  maintain  it,  may.  But 
it  does  by  no  Means  follow  from  this  Doc- 
trine: Since  whatever  we  are  by  Nature, 
we  may  by  Grace  be  Children  of  God,  and 
Heirs  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven. 

"But  Unthankfulnefs  is  a  Natural " 
Confequence  of  this  Doftrine,  which  greatly 
diminifhes,  if  not  totally  excludes  the  Good- 
nefs  and  Mercy  of  God.*'  St.  PW  thought 
otherwife.  He  imagined  the  total  Ungodli- 
nefs  and  Impotence  of  our  Nature,  to  be  the 
very  Thing  which  moft  of  all  illuftrated  the 
Goodnefs  and  Mercy  of  God.     For  a  good 

Man 

■"•    p.  63  —  69,       »    P-  70 — 73.       o    p.  74. 


Original  Sin.  257 

Man^  fays  \iQy  peradve?iture  one  would  cve?i  dare 
to  die.  But  God  commendeth^  unlpcakably, 
inconceivably,  beyond  all  human  Precedent 
bis  Love  to  iiSy  in  that  while  we  were  yet  wiik- 
out  Stre7igth  Chrift  died  for  the  Ungodly,  Here 
is  the  Ground,  the  real  and  the  ojdy  Ground 
for  true  Chrifiian  Thankfulnefs.  Chrifl:  died 
for  the  Ungodly  that  were  without  Stre?igth: 
Such  as  is  every  Man  by  Nature.  And  'till 
a  Man  has  been  deeply  fenfiblc  of  it,  he  can 
never  truly  thank  God  for  his  Redemption : 
Nor  confequently  for  his  Creation,  which  is 
in  the  Event  a  Bleffing  to  thofe  only  who  are 
created  aneio  in  Chrift  Jefus. 

"  Hence  3.  Some  have  poured  great  Con- 
tempt upon  Human  Nature:  Whereas  God 
Himfelf  does  not  defpife  Mankind,  but  thinks 
them  worthy  *  of  his  higheft  Regards.'*  To 
defcribe  Human  Nature  as  deeply  fallen,  as 
far  removed  both  from  Virtue  and  Wifdom, 
does  not  argue  that  we  defpife  it.  We  know 
by  Scripture,  as  well  as  by  fad  Experience, 
That  Men  are  now  unfpcakably  foolifli  and 
wicked.  And  fuch  the  Son  of  God  knew 
them  to  be,  when  He  laid  down  his  Life 
for  them.  But  this  did  not  hinder  Him  from 
loving  them,  no  more  than  it  docs  any  of 
the  Children  of  God. 

Yotr  next  confider  "what  Dr.  Z?"!?//;  obfcrvcs 
with  Regard  to  Infants.     Mu/iki?id,  lays  he, 

R  in 


258  The  Doctrine  of 

in  its  younger  77ars,  before  it  is  capable  0^ pros- 
per Moral  Allien,   difcovers  the  Pri^icipla  of 
Liiquity  and  the  Seeds  of  Sin,     TVhat  ycu;^' 
Ferments  of  Spite  and  Envy^    what   native 
Malice  ajul  Rage  are  found  in  ihe  little  Hearts 
of  Infant Sy  and  fufficiently  difovered  by  iheif 
Utile  Hands  and  Eyes^    and  their   wraihfiit 
Countenances^  even  before  they  can  /peak  i  1  ou 
anfwer,  '*  Our  Lord  gave  us  different  Ideas 
of  them,  when  He  taught  his  Apoftles  to  be- 
come as  little  Children^     Not  at  all.     They 
may  be  imitable  in  fome  Refpefts,  and  yet. 
have  all  the  Tempers  above  deicribed.   And 
it  is  certain  they  have;  as  any  impartial  Ob- 
ferver  will  be  convinced  by  his  ow^n  Eyes. . 
Nor  is   this  any  Way  contradidled  by  Str^ 
Paul\   Words,    "^  In  Wickednefs   ()tax/a)    he  - 
ye  Children:  Untaught,  unexperienced;   Or 
by  thofe  of  Davidy  My  '  Soul  is  even  as.  a 
li^eaned  Child, 

.    *'  But  we  difcover  in  them  alfo  the  no- 
ble Principles  of  Reafon   and  UnderftaLd-  . 
ing,  with  feveral  Tempers  which  are  capa- 
ble of  Improvement,  whereby  they  may  -b^. 
trained  up  in  a  good  Way;  and  Numbers jn 
all  Ages  of  the  World  have  rifen   to    very  . 
con fidcrable  Degrees  of  Excellence."     All 
this  is  true:  But  it  is  not   at  all  inconfiflent  , 
with  the   Account  of  them  ^iven  above  :  ' 
By  which  it  clearly  appears.  That  they  ajrc.^ 

Itrongly 

<   I  Cor.  xiv.  20.      »■  Pfal.  cxx;fi.  .2..    ,  -i    -  '•    i  * 


« 

Original  Sin.  259 

f.    ...   V.       ■ 

ffrongly  inclined  to  Evil,  long  before  any  ill 
Habits  can  be  contracted. 

SECT.    V. 

A  general  Argument  taken  from  what  God 
has  declared  c oncer Jiing  Mankind^  at  the 
Rejloration  of  the  World  after  the  Deluge, 

THERE  are  three  Paffages^  from 
which  Divines  infer  the  Excellency 
oi  Adam's  State  and  Nature  above  Our's  : 
I.  Gen.  i.  28.  And  God  blejjcd  them  a?id  /aid 
unto  thejn^  Be  fruitful  and  rnuUiply  and  r  epic  nijh 
the  Earth'*  With  this  I  have  nothing  to  do; 
for  I  infer  nothing  from  it,  with  Regard  to 
the  prefent  Queftion.  II.  "  Have  Daninion 
over  the  Fijlo  of  the  Sea.,  and  over  the  Fo^cvl  of 
the  Air,  and  over  every  livingT'hijig  that  mcvetb 
upon  the  Earth.  III.  Gen.  i.  27.  Gou  created 
Man  in  his  own  Image ^  in  the  Image  of  God 
created  He  him.  From'  thefe  three  Par»:icu- 
lars  they  deduce  the  Superiority  of  Alum's 
Nature  above  Our's.  But  the  very  fame 
Marks  of  Excellency  are  more  exprelly  pro- 
nounced by  God  upon  the  human  Nature, 
when  the  Race  of  Mankind  was  to  be  pro- 
pagated anew  from  Noah  and  his  Sons." 

I.  Gen,  ix.  I.  A?idGoD  bleffed  Noah  and 
his  Sons.    With  Regard  to  this  whole  Paffage 

R  2  I  muft 

•  p.  84.    «  p.  85. 


26o  The  Doctrine  of 

I  mull  oblerve,  ThatGoD  did  not  pronounce 
any  Bl effing  at  all,  either  on  him  or  them, 
'till  Noakhzd  built  an  Altnr  unto  the  Lord, 
and\i2A.off£iK.td  Burnt-Offerings  on  the  Altar. 
Then  k  vv:as  that  the  ho^D  fmelled a  fweet  Sa^ 
^couri  Accepted  the  Sacrifice  which  implied 
Faith  in  the  promifed  Seed,  and  for  his  Sake 
reftored  in  fomeMeaiiire  theBleffing,  which 
He  had.given  to  Adam  at  his  Creation.  And 
faid^  Be  fruitful  and  multiply^  and  replenifi 
the  Earth,— On  this  I  need  only  obferve. 
Had  Adam  ftood,  or  had  not  his  Fall  afFeftcd 
his  Pofterity,  there  would  have  been  no  Need 
of  this :  For  they  would  have  multiplied  aiid 
replenified  the  Earthy  in  Virtue  of  the  origin 
nal  Bleffing;; ...,,....  i-.;  ^y:  .*..:.  ,..:  ' 
II.  V.  z,:*TiiE  Fear yfpu  and tBr Dread 
of  you  fiall  be  upon  every  B.eafl  of  the  Earthy 
and  upon  emery  Foivl  of  the  Air^  and  upon  all 
that  moveth upon  the  Earth:  Into  your  Hi^ndi 
they  are  delivered :  Every.  ??ioving  Thing  that 
liveth  Jhall  he  Meat  for  you^  even  as  the  green 
Herb  have  I  given  you  all  Things,  On  this 
likewife  I  would  obferve,  What  Need  was 
there  of  any  fuch  Power  over  the  Creatures 
to  be  given  to  Man,  if  he  had  not  forfeited 
his  former  Power  ?  Had' Man  remained  fub- 
je6t  to  God  J  the  Creatures  would  have  re- 
piained  fubjed:  to  him,  by  Virtue  of  God's 
i^rigin-alConftitution.     And  why  was  it,  but 

behaufe 
A  ,V    TIT  .^  M  c  ^ 


Original  Sin.  261 

.becaufe  Man  had  loft  this  Power,  that  GoD 
here  in  fome  Degree  reftores  it  ?  ;: 

But  hence  you  "  infer,  "That  all  thjlt 
Power  is  reftored,  yea,  more  than  all :  That 
we  have  a  w/7r^extenfivc  Dominion,  granted 
to  us  over  the  Brutal  World,  than  was  ori* 
ginally  given  to  Adam!'  It  has  been  com- 
monly thought,  That  Adam  had  full  Do- 
minion over  the  Creatures,  fubjeft  to  him  by 
a  Kind  of  Inftinft  :  Whereas  we  have  Only 
fo  far  Power  over  them,  that  by  Labour  and 
Vigilance  we  may  ufe  or  fubdue  them.  But 
how  do  you  prove  that  we  have  a  fuller  Do- 
minion than  he  had  ?  By  thofe  Words,  T^be 
Fear  and  the  Dread  of  you  Jhall  be  upon  all: 
Into  your  Hands  they  are  delroered\  even  as  the 
green  Herb  har:e  I  given  you  all  T'hings .  N  a  v, 
the  Fear  a?id  the  Dread  of  you  JJ:all  be  itpon 
them^  does  not  imply  any  Dominion  at  all. 
A  Wolf  m2iy  fear  me,  who  yet  does  not 
obey  me.  I  dread  a  Viper ;  but  I  do  not  obey 
it.  And  thofe  Words,  Into  your  Hajids  they 
are  delivered^  are  plainly  equivalent  with,  '^i 
have  given  you  all  'Things^  even  as  .  the  green 
Herb :  Namely  for  Food;  you  may  feed  on 
any  of  them.  So  far  therefore  is  this 
Text  from  exprefy  pronouncing  a  jnore  cxfen-- 
five  Dominion  given  to  Noah  over  the  Brutal 
World  than  was  originally  given  t<y  yhlam, 
that  it  does  not  exprefs  any  proper  Dominion 
at  all. 

w  p  86.  R  3  1".  V.  6. 


262  'The  Doctrine  of 

IIL  V.  6.  V^^oso  Jheddeth  Mans  Blood  by 
MiJfifiall  his  Bleed  be  Jhed.  For  ifi  the  Image 
cf  God  madeHe  Man:  Namely  at  the  Crea- 
tion. And  fome  Remains  of  the  Natural 
image  c/'  Go  d  ,  as  we  are  Spiritual  and  Immor- 
tal Beings,  are  even  now  to  be  found  in 
ever)^  Man,  fufficient  to  juftify  the  putting 
a  Murderer  to  Death.  St.  Ja7nes  alludes  to 
the  fame  Scripture,  when  he  fays,  Therewith 
hlcfs  ive  God,  and  ciirje  Men  who  were  made 
(t8?  yzyo]>oroc<;'  not  are  made)  after  the  Similitude 
of  Goo.*  But  what  does  all  this  prove? 
That  the  being  created  in  the  Image  of  God, 
'^  is  more  exprrfy  pronounced  n^on  Noah  and 
his  Sons,  than  it  was  originally  on  AdamT* 
T  think  no  Man  of  Senfe  will  fay  this  in  cool 
Blood. 

Of  "  the  three  Particulars"  then  which 
you  brought  to  prove  the  Superiority  of 
Noah  owcvAdam  in  Innocence,  the  Firfi:  proves 
no  more  than  that  God  gave  to  both  the 
Elcfling  of  Fruitfulnefs :  The  Second  far  from 
proving  that  Noah  had  a  more  exte?7fve  Do- 
minimi  over  the  Brute  Creation  than  Adam^ 
hardly  proves  that  he  had  any  Dominion 
over  them  at  all :  And  the  Third  proves  only 
this,  That  the  Image  of  God  wherein  Man 
was  made  at  iirft,  is  not  totally  loft  now. 

TYet  ]^ou  fay,  "  Thefe  three  Particulars 
contain  all  the  Privileges  conferred  on  Adam 

at 

"    'JayjHs  iii.  9. 


Orioinal  Sin.  263 

at  firft/  i\nd  every  one  of  thefe  is  exprcfly 
repeated,  and  more  emphatically  and  cxten- 
fively  pronounced  upon  Man,  after  the 
judgment  paffed  on  Adam  had  come  upon 
his  Pofterity."  Exprejly  ?  More  emphatical- 
ly?  More  extenfively  ?  Where  ?  I  am  fure 
not  in  the  Bible. 

However  you  pompoufly  add  (ficut  Tims 
eji  Mos)  "  This  is  to  me  a  clear  and  un- 
doubted DejnonJiratio?2y 

I.  "  That  //?£»  Judgfjient  which  came  upon 
all  Men  to  Condemnation ^  did  no  Ways  alter 
the  primaiy  Relation,  in  which  God  flood 
to  Man,  and  Man  to  God."  Certainly  it 
was  alter'd  thus  far  :  God  was  a  Condcmner^ 
and  Man  was  condemned.  And  tho*  "  God 
is  ftill  the  God  and  Father  of  Mankind," 
yet  it  cannot  be  faid,  That  He  is  fo  to  unre- 
generate  Men,  Men  who  are  as  yet  dead  in 
Sin  and  Children  of  Wraths  '*  as  much"  or  in 
the  fame  Senfe  *'  as  He  was  to  Ada?n  in  In- 
nocence." Adam  then  was  furely  the  Sen  of 
God,  as  no  other  Man  is,  'till  /?orn  of  the 
Spirit,  The  Power  to  become  the  Sons  of 
God  is  now  given  to  none,  'till  they  Mieve 
on  his  Name, 

II.  ''  That  the  Love,^  Regards  and  Pro- 
vidence of  God  toward  Mankind  in  general, 
are  ftill  the  very  lame  as  to  Man  iU  his  ^rft 

rorhiation.  "^ 

R  4  Jlis 

y  p.  %-;.    ''f-  S8. 


2h%  T*}:>€  Doctrine  y 

-^  His  PrqviJenceis  ftill  6Ver  all  his  Works, 
^ut  He  cannot  regard  or^  delight  vti  fir^ 
.Man,  in  the  very  fame  Mariner  wherein  He 
Relighted  in  him  when  innocent,  " 

III.  '^  That  our  Nature  as  dinged  from 
Noah  has  juft  the  fame  Endowments,  :Na- 
tu.al  and  Moral,  with  which  Adam  was 
created."  This  does  not  follow  from'-  any 
Thinp:  that  has  yet  been  faid.'  Ifkftands 
^f  itielf;  it  may.     '"  ~^<:^    -       -'^^ ^^ri; 

,  IV.  *' That  whatever  came  upon  us 

V  from  the  ^iidgmejit  to  Condemnation y  carnc  no 

fiarther  than  was  confiftent  with  thatBleffing, 

^pronoiyiced  upon  Noah  as  well  as  Adam^  Be 

fruiffid  and  multiply'!''     This  "is  undoubtedly 

.true.     Otherwife  the  Human  Species  could 

,not  have  been  continued.'    "  So  that  the 

!  Condemnation  winch  came  upon  all  Men  cannot 

infer  fjie  ^r^if/?  of  God  upon  Mankind"-— 

«lt  may^  notwidiftanding  that  they   increafe 

^and  miiltiply :.   It  miij}^  if  they  are  by  Natwe 

^,ChiIdreji  cjf  Wrath — **  but  only  as  fubjedting 

^,,us  to  fucn "  .]Evils,  as  were  perfedlly  confiftent 

^,.with  his  BJeffing,  declared  to  Adarn^  as  foon 

^j,as  he  came  out  of  his  Maker's  Hands" — 

Namely  with  the  V>\t^\x\g,  Increafe  and  jnuU 

tiply — •'  And  confequently!  to  fuch  Evils  as 

Gon  might  juftly  have  fubjeded  Mankind 

|tOy  before  Adam  finned" — Whether  God 

could  juftly  have  done  this,  or  not,  what  a 

Confequencc 

*  p.  89. 


vOriginal  Sin^,  265 

Confequence  is  this?  "  If  God  gave  that 
Blefiing,  Increafe  a?id  multiply y  to  Men  in 
general,  as  vveU  as  He  did  to  Adam,  then 
Men  in  general  are  not  Child^-en  of  Wrath 
W^w,r  ,any  more  than  Adam  was  at  his 
Creation."     _     ^ :;,  t',.'^'-. 

eB\<^!tv"  *'I'^  is  no  lefs  evident,  That  when 
St.  Paul  {2.ys,  By  the  Difobedic7ice  of  one,  many 
(or  all)  were  made  'Si7i7iC7^Sy  he  cannot  meao, 
they  were  made  Si7in€rs  in  any  Senlc  inconfift- 
ejit.with  the  Elefling,  pronounced  on  Man 
■411  Innocence."  True 3  not  in  any  Senfe  in- 
confident  with  that  Blefling,  hicrc^fe  a7id 
multiply.  But  this  Blefling  is  no  Way  in- 
confillent  with  the^r  being  by  Nature  Childrcfi 
cfWi^ath,  "",  "ti-     '-': 

"  From  all  which  I  conclude,  That  our 
State  with  Regard  to  the  Blefling  of  God, 
_and  the  Dignity  and  Faculties  of  our  Nature 
(unlefs  debafed  by  our  own  Sins)  is  not^  in- 
ferior to  that  in  which  Adam  was  created." 
Be  this  fo,  or  not,  it  cannot  be  concluded 
from  any  Thing  that  has  gone  before :  But 
we  may  ftill  believe,  That  Men  in  general 
are  palkm  JhorJ  of  the  Glory  of  Q^od,  are  de- 
prived of  that  glorious  Image  of  God, 
.^^vy^b^rf ifl  ^lan  was  originally  created. 

Jo0.73dj3jr{V/ — *'b^[\i\.,    .,.,...     c:  T?  (?  x 
S  lurfv/    ,2cr!   TO    .?.irb  '^nnh  nvrrf  v'T 


266  The  Doctrine  of 


SECT.     VI. 

^^Je  Notion''  ^/Adam'i  being  a  Federal  Headf 
or  Reprejentative  of  Mankind  confiderd.     \ 

MY  Reafon  for  believing  he  was  fo  irf 
fome  Senfe  is  this.  Chrift  was  the 
Reprejentative  o{  Mankind,  when  God /aid 
en  Him  the  Iniquities  of  us  all^  and  He  was 
'Wounded  for  our  T^ranfgrefjions.  But  Adam 
was  a  Type  or  Figure  ^Chrift.  Therefore 
he  was  aUb  in  fome  Senfe  our  Rcprefentative. 
In  Confequence  of  which  all  died  in  him,  as 
in  Chrijl  allfhall  be  made  alive. 

But  as  neither  R.eprefentativey  nor  Federal 
Head,  are  Scripture-Words,  it  is  not  worth 
%hile  to  contend  for  them.  The  Thing  I 
mean  is  this  :  The  State  of  all  Mankind  did 
fib  far  depend  on  Adam,  that  by  his  Fall  they 
a^l  fell  into  Sorrow  and  Pain  and  Death, 
Spiritual  and  Temporal.  And  all  this  is  no 
Ways  inconliftent,  with  either  the  Juffice  or 
Goodncfr>  cf  God,  provided  all  may  recover 
through  the  Second  Adain  whatever  they  loft 
througl]  the  Firft,  Nay,  and  recover  it  with 
unfpcakable  Gain:  Since  every  additional 
I'emptation  they  feel,  by  that  Corruption  of 
their  Nature,  which  is  antecedent  to  their 
Choice,  will  if  conquer'd  by  Grace  be  a 
vv\i4;iX->  ,oqij-  Means 


Original  Sin.  267 

Means  of  adding  to  that  exceeding  aiid  etmml 
Weight  of  Glory. 

This  fingle  Confideration  totally  removes 
all  Reflexions  on  the  Divine  Juflicc  or  Mer- 
cy, in  making  the  State  of  all  Mankind,  fo 
dependent  on  the  Behaviour  of  their  common 
Parent.  For  not  one  Child  of  Man  finally 
lofes  thereby,  unlefs  by  his  own  Choice. 
And  every  one  who  receives  the  Grace  of  God 
in  Cbrijij  will  be  an  unfpeakable  Gainer. 
Who  then  has  any  Reafon  to  complain,  even 
of  having  a  Nature  inclined  to  Evil  ?  Seeing 
the  more  Opportunities  he  has  of  fighting, 
the  more  of  conquering  :  And  feeing  the 
greater  is  the  Difficulty  of  obtaining  the  Vic- 
tory, the  brighter  is  tlie  Crown  of  Gloiy. 

Now  \i  Jlda?n  and  Chrijl  did  not  ftand  or 
fall,  obey  and  fuffer  for  Mankind,  How  can' 
the  Death  of  others  be  the  Confequence  of 
Adanis  Offence  :  The  Life  of  others  tlic 
Confequence  of  ChriJH  Obedience.  How 
could  all  Men  be  in  any  Senfe  ccn/lifutcd  Sin- 
ners  by  the  one,  or  coiijUiutcd  Righiecus  by  the 
other  ? 

To  explain  this  a  little  farther  in  Mr.  Her- 
veys  Words.  ''  By  Federal  Head  or  Repre- 
fentative^  I  mean  what  the  Apoffle  teaches, 
when  he  cMs  Cbri/l^  The  Second  Mat?,^  and 
the  lafi  Adam.  The  laft  ?  How  }  Not  in  a 
numerical  Scnc;  not  in  Order  of  Time: 
But  in  this  Refpedt,  That  as  Adam  was  a 

"  I  Cor.  XV.  47.  publick 


268  ^he  Doctrine  of^ 

Perfon,  and  acfted  in  the  Stead  of  all  Man- 
kind, io  Chriji  like  wife  was  a  publick  Perfon, 
and  adled  in  Behalf  of  all  his  People  :  That 
2!^ Adam  was  the  Firft  General  Reprefentative 
of  Mankind,  ChriJI  was  the  Second  and  the 
Laft  :  (There  never  was,  and  never  will  be 
any  other :)  That  what  they  feverally  did  in 
this  Capacity,  was  not  intended  to  terminate 
in  themfelves,  but  to  affedt  as  many  as  they 
feverally  reprefented."        ^g  ^^^  ,,-^^.^ 

'*  This  does  not  reft  on  a  fingle  Text,  but 
3S  eftabliflied  again  and  again  in  the  fame 
Chapter.  The  divinely  wife  Apoftle,  fore-* 
feeing  the  Prejudices  which  Men  would  en- 
tertain againft  this  Doftrine,  as  lying  quite 
out  of  the  Road  of  Reafon's  Ri^fearches,  has 
inculcated  and  re-inculcated  this  momentous 
Point.  T^hrough  the  Offence  of  one ^  tnany  are 
dead — the  fudgriicnt  was  by  one  to  Condemnatioii 
— By  one  Mans  Offence  Death  reig?ied  by  one-^ 
By  the  Offence,  of  one ^  fudgmeiit  came  upon  all 
Men  to  Comlcmnaiion.  And  that  there  may 
remain  no.PofTibility  of  miftaking  his  Mean-< 
ing,  or  eluding  his  Argument,  he  adds,  By 
one  Maris  Difobcdience  many  'were  made  Shi^ 
7iers:  All  thefe  P'xpreiTions  demonftrate^^^ 
ThatyMz;;;  (as  well  as  Chrill)  was  o.  Repre-i. 
fntathe  of  all  Mankind.:  And  that  what) 
h^  did  iiVthis  Capacity,  did  not  terminate  iw 

lentea.  H;j^3a  rifiw  9ldBfD[a'.Ki  4 

-rs.cvr  After 


2iFtER  vehemently  'cavilling  at  the 
Terms,  you  yourfelf  allow  the  Thing.  You 
fay,  "  If  \yh^t\vas\o{i  hy  the  D/JoitYl/erice  of 
one  Perlbn,  might  afterward  be  recovered  by 
the  Obedience  of  another,  then  Matters  would 
have  flood  upon  an  equal  Footing:"  And 
this  is  indeed  the  Truth.  For  "  all  that  waa 
loft  to  us  by  Adam\  Difobedience,  is  fully  re- 
covered by  Chriji's  Obedience:.  However  we 
denominate  the  Relation,  in  which  the  one 
or  the  other  ftands  to  us."    "  ^'"'^ 

In  this  we  agree ;  but  not  in  what  fol- 
lows. "  By  'Law  in  the  v'^  of  the  Romans^ 
as  in  feveral  other  Places,  the  Apoftle  does 
not  mean  barely  a  Rule  of  Duty  -,  but  fuch 
a  Ride,  isjiih  the  Penalty  of  Death  threatened 
to  cveryTrafifgrcJfton  of  it.  Such  was  the  Law 
given  by  Mcfes:''  That  is,  ''  A  Rule  to  every 
Tranfgreffion  of  which  the  Penalty  of  Death 
was  threatened."  Not  fo;  there  were  a 
thoufand  Tranfgreffion s  of  it,  to  which 
Death  was  not  threatened.  Obferve:  By 
Death  w^e  now  mean  Temporal  Death,  ac-r. 
cording  to  the  whole  Tenor  of  your  Argu- 
ment. But  is  it  not  faid,  Cwfed  is  ei:e?y  one 
that  continiieth  7iot  in  all  T^hings  ^written  in  the 
Law  to  do  them?"  It  is.  But  whatever  this 
Ctirfe  implied,  it  did  not  imply  Temporal 
Death.  For  a  Man  might  negleft  to  do 
m^ny  T*lnngs  written  in  the  Lim\  and  yet  not 
be  punifhable  with  Death. 


270  The  Doctrine  of 

Neither  can  I  agree  with  your  Interpre- 
tation of  Rom.  vii.  9.  I  was  alive  without  the 
Law  once :  '' Namely  ^^  before  the  giving  of  the 
Law  at  Mount  Si?iai.  The  Jew  was  then 
alive  :  That  is,  becaufe  he  was  not  then  un- 
der the  Law,  he  was,  not  flain  by  his  Sin. 
His  Sin  was  not  fo  imputed  to  him,  as  to 
fubjecl  him  to  Death.  But  when  the  Com- 
mandment  came,  with  the  Penalty  of  Death 
annext ;  Sin  revived — acquir'd  full  Life  and 
Vigour*^ — (How  fo  ?  One  would  have  ex- 
pedcd  juft  the  contrary!)  "  arid  I died^  that 
is,  was  a  dead  Man  in  Law,  upon  the  firft 
Tranlgreilion  he  comm/itted."  Befide  many 
other  Objedlions  to  this  ftrange  Interpretation, 
an  obvious  one  is  this.  It  fuppofes  every 
Trapfgrefiion  punirtiable  with  Death.  But 
this  is  a  palpable  Miftake.  Therefore  all 
that  is  built  on  this  Foundation,  falls  to  the 
Ground  at  once. 

Upon  the  whole;  whatever  Objedtions 
may  lie  againll:  Dr.  JVattss  Method  of  ex- 
plaining of  it,  it  appears  from  clear  Scripture 
and  from  your  own  Words,  That  Adam  was 
the  Reprcfentative  of  Mankind. 


p.*r.i6. 


!bM 

;   -   '        ' 

\ol 

^d  ,. 

.S 

E  C  T 

»  » 

sc-. 

r 

,5x1  .<i 

fl 

Original  Sin*  271 

SECT.    VII. 

'Of  the  Forjnatlon  of  our  Nature  in  theJVovib. 

EFORE  I  fay  any  Thing  on  this  Head, 
I  mufl  premife.  That  there  are  a  thou- 
fand  Circumftanccs  relating  to  it,  concern- 
ing which  I  can  Ibrm  no  Conception  at  all : 
Eut  am  utterly  in  the  Dark.  I  know  not 
how  my  Body  was  fafI:iioned  there;  or  when 
or  how  my  Soul  was  united  to  it.  And  it  is 
far  eafier  in  fpeaking  on  fo  abftrufe  a  Subjedl, 
to  pull  down,  than  to  build  up.  I  can  eafi- 
ly  objedl  to  any  Hypothefis  which  is  ad* 
vanced  :  But  I  cannot  eafily  defend  any. 

And  if  you  alk  me,  How,  in  what  de- 
terminate Manner  Sin  is  propagated^  How  it 
is  tranfmitted  from  Father  to  Son  ?  I  anfwer 
plainly,  I  cannot  tell.  No  more  than  I  can 
tell,  How  Man  is  propagated  ?  How  a  Body 
is  tranfmitted  from  Father  to  Son  ?  I  know 
both  the  One  and  the  Odier  Fadl.  But  I  can 
account  for  neither. 

Thus  much  however  is  phij)>  That 
"  God  '  is  the  Maker  of  every  Man  ^^k$ 
comes  into  the  World."  For,  It  is  God  a- 
lone  who  gives  Man  Power  to  propagate  his 
Species.  Or  rather,  it  is  God  Himfelf  Vvho 
does  the  Work,  by  Man  as  an  Inflrumcnt; 

Mail 

*•  p.  129.    '  p.  1 38* 


272  TXv  Doctrine  of 

Man  (as  you  obferved  before)  having  no 
other  Part  in  producing  Man,  than  the  Oak 
has  in  producing  an  Acorn.  God  is  really 
the  Producer  of  every  Man,  every  Animal, 
cveiy  Vegetable  in  the  World  :  As  He  is  the 
true  Primum  Mobile^  the  Spring  of  all  Mo- 
tion throughout  the  Univerfc.  So  far  we 
agree.  But  when  you  fubfume,  "  If  it  is 
the  Power  of  God  whereby  a  finful  Species 
is  propagated,  whereby  a  Jinfiil  Father  be- 
gets zjinful  Son,  then  God  is  the  Author 
of  Sin  ;  that  Sinfulnefs  is  chargeable  upon 
Him  /'  here  w?  divide ;  I  cannot  allow  the 
Confequence  :  Becaufe  the  fame  Argument 
would  make  God  chargeable  with  a/l  the  fin- 
ful Adfmis  of  Men.  For  it  is  the  Power  of 
God  whereby  the  Murderer  lifts  up  his  Arm, 
whereby  the  Adulterer  perpetrates  his  Wick- 
ednefs  3  full  as  much  as  it  is  his  Power, 
whereby  an  Acorn  produces  an  Oak,  or  a 
Father  a  Son.  But  does  it  follow,  That 
God  is  chargeable  with  the  Sin?  You  know, 
it  does  not  follow.  The  Power  of  God 
vulgarly  term'd  Nature^  afts  from  Age  to 
Age,  under  its  fixt  Rules.  Yet  He  who 
this  Moment  fupplies  the  Power,  by  which 
^fnfil  Atlion  is  committed,  is  not  charge- 
able with  the  Sinfihefi  of  that  Aftion.  In 
like  Manner,  it  is  the  Power  of  God,  which 
from  Age  to  Age  continues  the  human  Spe- 
cies i  yet  He  whc  this  Moment  fupplies  the 

Power 


Original  Sin.  273 

Power  whereby  a  fmful  Nature  is  propa- 
gated (according  to  the  iix'd  Rules,  efta- 
bhfh'd  in  the  lower  World)  is  not  charge- 
able with  the  Sinfulnefs  of  that  Nature. 
This  Diflindion  You  muft  allow,  as  was 
obfer\'ed  before,  or  charge  God  with  all  the 
Sin  committed  under  Heaven.  And  this 
General  Anfwer  may  fuffice  any  fincere  and 
modeft  Enquirer,  without  entangling  him- 
felf  in  thofe  Minute  Particulars,  which  are 
beyond  the  Reach  of  human  Underftanding. 
"  But  does  not  God  create  the  Nature 
of  every  Man  that  comes  into  the  World  V* 
He  does  not,  in  the  proper  Senfe  of  the 
Word  create.  The  Scripture  plainly  affirms 
the  contrary.  ^On  the  fe^enth  Day  He  ref.ed 
from  all  his  Work  which  God  created  and 
made,  ^T'he  Works  which  God  created  ivere 
Enijlded from  the  Foundation  of  the  JVorld,  And 
as  foon  as  they  were  finiihed,  God  ceafed 
from  his  V/ork^  namely  from  his  Work  of 
creating.  He  therefore  now  (not  creates^ 
but)  produces  the  Body  of  every  Man,  in 
the  Manner  as  he  produces  the  Oak ;  only 
by  fupplying  the  Power  whereby  One  Crea- 
ture begets  another,  according  to  what  we 
term  'T'he  Laws  of  Nature.  In  an  higher 
Senfe  He  is  the  Creator  of  all  Souls.  But 
how  pr  when.  He  does  or  did  create  them, 
I  cannot  tell.     Neither  can  I  give  any  Ac- 

S       *  count, 

*  Qvj   ii.   2,  3.     »  Heh,  iv.  3,   10. 


Z74  ^^^^  Doctrine  of 

count,  How  or  whefi  He  unites  them  to  the 
Body.  Likewife  How  we  are  conceived  m 
Sin,  I  know  not :  But  I  know,  that  we  arc 
fo  conceived.  God  hath  faid  it.  And  I 
know  He  will  htjujiified  in  his  Sayings  and 
clear  when  He  is  judged,  ''"  ^^'^  ' ' 

It  is  certain,  That  God  Is  the  Maker  of 
every  Man.  But  it  is  neither  certain  nor 
true,  That  He  "  makes  every  Man  in  the 
Womb,  both  Soul  and  Body,  as  immediately 
as  He  made  Adam :"  And  that  therefore 
"  every""  Man  comes  out  of  the  Hands  of 
God,  as  properly  as  Adam  didJ'  To  inter- 
pret any  Scriptures  as  affirming  this,  is  to 
make  them  flatly  contradid:  other  Scriptures. 
God  made  Adam  by  immediate  Creation:  He 
does  not  fo7nake  every  Man,  or  any  Man  be- 
fide  him.  Adam  came  direBIy  out  of  the 
Hands  of  God,  without  the  Interve?2tion  of 
any  Creature.  Does  every  Man  thus  come 
oiit  of  the  Hands  of  God  ?  Do  no  Crea- 
tures now  intervene  ? 

jr  cc  gy^  j£  Q^^  produces  the  Nature  of 
every  Man  in  the  Womb,  He  mufl  produce 
it  with  all  the  Qualities,  which  belong  to 
that  Nature,  as  it  is  then  and  fo  produced.*?. 
So,  if  God  produces  the  Ail  ion  of  ever^ 
jVlan  in  the  World,  he  mufl  produce  it  with 
all  the  Qualities,  which  belong  to  that  Ac- 
don,  ^s  it  i^jhen  zndfo  produced. ;  "For  it 


Original  Sin.  275 

is  impoffible,  God  fliould  produce  our  A^^z- 
ture^  and  not  produce  the  ^alities  it  has, 
when  produced."     For  it  is  impoffible  God" 
fhould  produce  an  A^ion^  and  yet  not  pror" 
duce  the  ^alities  it  has  when  produced^ 
"  No  Siibjlance  can  be  made  without  fome' 
Quahtics.     And  it  muft  neceffarily,  as  foon 
as  it  is  made,  have  thofc  QuaKties  which 
the  Maker  gives  it,  and  no  other."     No  Ac^ 
tim  can  be  produced,  without  fome  Qua- 
Uties.    And  it  muft  neceffarily  as  foon  as  it  is 
produced,    have  thofe  Quahties  which  the 
Producer  s:Ives  it,  and  no  other.     You  fee 
what  this  Argument  would  prove,  if  it  prov'd 
any  Thing  at  all. 

We  will  trace  it  a  little  farther.  "  If  God 
produces  tlie  Nature  of  every  Man  in  the 
Womb,  with  all  its  ^alitics^  then  whatever 
thole  Qualities  are,  they  are  the  Will  and  the 
Work  of  God."  So  :  If  God  produces  the 
ABion  of  every  Man  in  the  World,  with  all 
its  ^alitieSy  then  whatever  thofe  Qualities 
are,  they  are  the  Will  and  the  Work  of  God. 
Surely,  no.  God  does  (in  the  Senfe  above 
explained)  produce  the  ABio?i  which  is 
finfuL  And  yet  (whether  I  can  account 
Vor  it,  or  no)  the  Siiifulncfs  of  it  is  not  his 
Will  or  Work.  He  does  alfo  produce  the 
Nature  which  \%- Jinful  (He  fupplies  the 
Power  by  which  it  is  produced)  And  yet 
(whether  I  can  account  for  this  or  no)  the 

S  2  Smfulncjs 


276  "The  Doctrine  of 

Sinfiilncfs  of  it  is  not  his  JVill  or  Wofk,  1  am 
fure  of  this,  as  I  am,  That  there  is  a  God: 
And  yet  impenetrable  Darknefs  refts  on  the 
Subjed:.  Yet  I  am  confcious  my  Under- 
ftanding  can  no  more  fathom  this  Deep,  than 
reconcile  Mans  Free^AA^  ^.;he^|oi^ 
knowledge  of  God.      t  'k  ^^....  . -^   ,^   r',.,.."i 

"  Consequently  thofc  ^alities  cannot 
be  finfuiy  This  Confequence  cannot  hold 
in  one  Cafe,,  unlefs  it  holds  in  both.  But  if 
it  does,  there  can  be  no  Sin  in  the  Univerfe. 

However  you  go  on.  "  'Tis  highly  dif- 
honourable  to  God,  to  fuppofe  He  is  dif- 
pleafed  at  us,  for  what  He  Himfelf  has  in- 
fufed  intQ  our  Nature."  It  is  not  allowed. 
That  He  has  "  infufed  Sin  into  our  Nature;* 
No  mpre  then  that  He  infufes  Sin  into  our 
A5tiom:.  Though  it  is  his  Power  which  pro- 
duces both  our  Adiions  and  Nature.  ^  ,  . 
,  ^,  AM  avs^are  of  thcDiflincflion,  That  Man's 
Free-^iU  is  concerned  in  the  one  Cafe,  but 
not  the  other  :  And  that  on  this  Account, 
God  cannot  be  charg  d  with  the  Sinfiilnefs  of 
Human  Actions.  But  this  does  by  no  Means 
remove  die  Difficulty.  For  i.  Docs  not 
God  know  what  the  Murderer  or  Adulterer 
is  about  to  do  ?  WhatUfe  he  will  make  of 
that  Power  to  aoi^  which  he  cannot  have  but 
from  God  ?  ^.  Does  He  not  at  the  Inftant 
fapply  him  with  that  Power  whereby  the 
Sinful  Adiion  is  done  ?  God  therefore  f  reduces 

"  l>   142.  the 


Original' §*im-  277 

the  ABion  which  is  f?iful  It  is  his  Work, 
and  his  PFill,  (for  He  %Dorks  nothing  hut  what 
He  wills).  And  yet  the  Siiifiilnefi  of  the 
Aftion  is  neither  his  Work  nor  Will, 

"But  can  thofe  Paflions  or  Propenfities 
ht  Jinfuly  which  are  neither  caufcd  nor  con- 
fented  to  by  me  ?"  I  anfwer,  Spite,  Envy, 
and  thofe  other  Paffions  and  Tempers  which 
are  manifeftly  difcernible  even  in  Httlc  Chil- 
dren, 2iVQ  CQiL\.?im\Y not  virtuous,  not  Morally 
good,  whether  you  term  them  fmful  or  not. 
And  it  is  as  certain,  thefe  exift,  before  they 
arc  confented  to,  mrch  ^efs  caufed  by  thoie 
that  feel  them.  "  But  Sin,""  if  it  is  unavoid- 
able, is  no  Sin."  Whether  you  term  it  Sin 
or  not,  it  is  coriiraiy  to  the  Nature  of  God 
and  aTranfgreffion  of  his  holy  and  good  Law. 

"  But  a  Natural-Moral  Evil  is  a  Contra- 
didion  :  For  if  it  be  Natural,  it  cannot  be 
Moral'*  That  Tempers  contrary  to  the  Na- 
ture and  the  Law  of  God  are  Natural  is  a 
Point  of  daily  Experience.  But  if  you  do 
not  chufe  to  call  thefe  Morally  Evil,  call 
them  what  you  pleafe.  All  I  aver  is,  That 
fuch  Tempers  dq  exift  in  us  antecedent  to 
our  Choice,       '^^^^  J 

--  *'  But  ifi\\ha?fmSim  of  NftH*  '^^occed 
Ifrom  a  corrupt  Nature,  they  are  unavoidable, 
and  confequently  no  Sins  at  all.'*  Jt?ual 
Sim  may  proceed  fi;om  a ,  CQrrqpt  Nature; 
rmVr.^-'^  ^v..^':r.dii^  aol^  ^^noD  ?.i  v^mK  •    ^nd 


278  7he  Doctrine  of 

and  yet  not  be  unavoidable.  But  if  Aftions 
contrary  to  the  Nature  of  God  were  una- 
voidable, it  would  not  follow.  That  they 
were  innocent. 

To  the  Queftion,  How"^  comes  it  to  pafsy 
that  our  Potions  and  Appetites  are  now  Jo  ir* 
regidar  andfirong^  that  not  one  Per/on  has  re- 

Jijled  them  fo  as  to  keep  himf elf  pure  and  innocent? 
You  anfwer  by  another  Queftion,  "  How 
came  Adam  not  to  keep  himfelf  pure  and 
innocent  ?  "  There  is  no  Parity  between 
the  one  Cafe  and  the  other.  I  can  ac- 
count for  any  one  Man's  committing  Sin, 
fuppoiing  him  to  be  naturally  upright,  as 
eafily  as  {or  Adam's  committing  it.  Any 
one  Perfon,  as  well  as  Adam^  tho'  naturally 
inclined  to  neither,  might  chufe  either  Good 
or  Evil.  And  on  this  Suppofition,  he  would 
be  as  likely  to  chufe  one  as  the  other.  But 
the  Cafe  is  extremely  different,  if  you  placo 

'"'^i/ldam  on  one  Side,  and  all  Mankind  on  the 

'^bthcr.  It  is  true,  "  the  Nature  of  Sin  is  not 
alter'd  by  its  being  general.'*  But  the  Cafe 
•j5  very  widely  alter'd.  On  this  or  that  Man 
it  irraj^  *^  come,  juft  as  it  came  w^on  Adaniy 

^y  his  own  Choice  and  Compliance  with 
Temptation."  But  how  comes  it,  That  all 
Men  v.ndcrthe  Sun,  fliould  ^/j/*/^  Evil  rather 
than  Good  ?  How  came  all  the  Children  of 
Adam,  from  the  Beginning  of  the  World  'till 
now,  to  comply  widi  Temptation  ?  How  is 
"  p.  14^  it. 


it,  that  in  all  Ages,  the  Scale.has  turn'd  the 
wrong  Way,  with  Regard  to  every  Man  born 
into  the  World  ?  Can  you  fee  no  Difficulty 
in  this  ?  And  can  you  find  any  Way  to  folve 
that  Difficulty,  but  to  fay  with  the  Pfalmift, 
'We  were  JI:^pfn  in  Iniquity,  and  in  Sin  did 
our  Mothers  conceive  us. 

SECT.     VIII. 

Of  Origijial  Right eoiifnefs, 

"  ^^Riginal'  Righteousness  is  faid 
\^  to  be,  I'hat  Moral Re5litud€,  in^ivhich 
Adam  was  created.  His  Reafon  nvas  clear ,  and 
Senfa^  Appetite  and  PaJJion  li^erc  fuhjeB  to  it. 
His  Judgment  ivas  iincojTupicd,  and  his  Will 
had  a  coijfiant  Tropenjitx  to  Holinefs.  He  had 
a  fupreme  Love  to  his  Creator^  a  Fear  ofoffend- 
ing  Him,  and  a  Readifiejs  to  do  his  Will. 
\N\\^x\Ada?n  finned,  he  loll  this  Moral  Rec- 
titude, this  Image  of  God  in  which  he  was 
created :  In  Confequencc  of  which  all  his 
Poflierity  come  into  the  World  deftitute  of 
that  Image." 

In  Order  to  remove  this  Miftakc,  you  rc- 
confider  fome  of  the  Texts  on  wliich  it  is 
grounded.  CoL  iii.  9,  10.  Lie  Jiot  one  to  ano- 
ther, feeing  ye  have  put  off  the  old  Man  ivith  his 
Deeds  ;  and  have  put  on  the  ?ieiv  Man,  ichich 
is  reneivdin  Knowledge,  after  thehnage  of  Him 
that  created  him.     Eph.  iv.  22,  23,  24.  I'hat 

S  .4  ye 

'  p.  147,  148,  149. 


28o  l*fje  D OCT K^^f^f 

ye  put  offy  concerning  t}yf fdrlner  Cmv'erfathri^ 
the  old  Man  which  is  corrupt^  according  to  the 
deceitful  Luff Sy  and  be  renewed  in  the  Spirit  of 
your  Mindy  and  put  on  the  nenv  Man  which  after 
God  is  created  in  Righteoufnefs  and  true  Holinefs^ 
'^  On  this  you  affiirm,  '''the  *  old  and  new 
Man  here  do  not  fignify  a  Courfe  of  Life. 
But  the  (?/^  4:f^;z  iigniiies  tYiC  Heathen,  the 
new  Man^  the  Chrijtian  Profession." 

This  you  prov^,  i.  From  Eph,  ii.  15. 
Chrift  abolijhed  the  Enmity ,  to  make  (or  ere-- 
tite)  in  Himfelf  of  twain  one  new  Man*' 
Does  this  only  mean  one  new  Profejjon?  It 
evidently  means,  one  Churchy  both  of  yews 
'and  Gentiles. 

You  prove  it,  2.  From  Col.  iii.  8 — 12. 
where  "  the  Apoftle  tells  the  Colojfian  Chrif- 
tians,  That  now  they  were  obliged  to  put  off 
^^nger^  and  to  put  on  Bowels  of  Mercies  %  to 
admit  the  Chriftian  Spirit  into  their  Hearts, 
and  to  pradiife  Chriftian  Duties;  for  this 
Reafon,  becaufe  they  had  put  off  the  old  Man  ^ 
and  had  put  072  the  new.  This  fl:iews  the 
new  Man  was  fomething  they  might  hsivc  put 
on,  and  yet  be  defSlive  in  perfonal,  internal 
Ilolinefs,— -'-  True  :  DfeSIive  (o  far,  as  ft  ill 
to  want  rribre ;  move  Bowels  of  Mercies,  Meek- 
72cfs,  Long-fiffering.  But  this  does  not  fliew. 
That  the?i€w  Man-  does  not  mean,  The  Prin- 
ciple both  of  Internal  and  External  Holinefs. 

The 
«  p.  150,  151, 


>Original  Sim.?  281 

The  Confcioufnefs  of  having  received  this, 
is  a  ftrong  Motive  both  to  depart  from  Evil, 
and  to  labour  after  a  continual  Increafc  of 
every  holy  and  heavenly  Ten^per.  There- 
fore here  likewife,  the  putting  off  tU  old  and 
the  putting  on  the  new  Many  does  not  meaa 
an  outward  ProfeJJion,  but  a  real,  inward 
Change ;  a  Renewal  of  Soul  in  Righteoujnefs 
and  true  Hclinefs,  ^  -,^^ 

.  You  prove  it,  3.  From  Eph,  iv.  22,  24. 
Here,  you  fay,  *'  he  confiders  the  putting  off 
the  oldy  and  putting  en  the  new  Man^  as  a 
Duty.  They  had  done  it  by  Profession, 
and  therefore  were  oblig'd  to  do  it  effcBually!' 
They  had  done  it  effectually.  So  the  whole 
Tenor  of  the  Apoftles  Words  implies.  le 
'have  not  fo  learned  Chrifl :  If  fc  be  (rather, 
feei?ig  that)  ye  have  been  taught  by  Him^ — I'hat 
ye  put  off  the  old  Man — Afid  be  renewed  in  the 
Spirit  of  your  Mind  y  and  that  ye  put  on  the 
new  Man^  which  after  God  is  created  in 
Right eouf?iefs  and  true  Hclincfs.  The  Apoflle 
here  manifeffly  fpeaks  not  of  a  Lcffon  they 
had  not  learned^  but  of  one  which  God  had 
taught  them  already:  And  d^encc  exhorts 
them,  to  walk  worthy  of  tlie  Elcifing  they 
had  received,  to  be  holy  in  all  Manner  of 
Converfation. 

But  4.  **  1  he  putting'  on  the  new  Man  is 
one  Thing,  and  die  creating  him  is  another. 

He 

«  Eph.  iv.  20—24.     "  p.  152. 


282  Tie   D0(^TRINE    of 

He  muft  Jirji  be  created,  and  the?2  put  <ml' 
No.  He  is  created  and  />2^/  c///  at  the  fame 
Time :  The  former  Word  more  diredly  re- 
ferring to  God  who  creates,  the  latter  to 
Man  who  is  created.  "  But  God,  you  fay, 
created  the  new  Man^  when  he  eredted  the 
Gofpel-Difpenfation :  As  appears  from  Eph. 
ii.  15,  19 — 22."  I  anfwer,  i.  If  thofe  lat- 
ter Verfes  are  explanatory  of  that  Expreffion 
one  new  Man  in  the  I5'\  then  it  docs  not 
mean,  one  outward  ProfeJJion^  but  the  one 
Church  of  living  Believers  in  Chriji  :  2.  The 
Expreffion  in  the  15""  V.  is  not  the  fame 
with  that  we  are  now  confidering.  Neither 
is  the  Meaning  of  that  and  this  Expreffion 
the  fame :  One  new  Man  means  one  Church 
^nd  nothing  elfc :  T!he  new  Man  means  quite 
anofher  Thing;  The  Work  of  God  in  every 
individual  Believer. 

You  fay,  5.  "  The  old  Man  and  the  new^ 
and  the  new  Maris  being  renewed  and  created^ 
and  the  renewing  of  the  Ephejians  all  refer 
not  to  any  Corruption  of  Nature  but  to  their 
late  ''wicked  Life."  What  ?  Does  their  be- 
ing renewed  in  the  Spirit  of  their  Mind ;  re- 
fer only  to  their  wiclced  Life  ?  If  you  had 
not  affirmed  this,  I  fhould  really  wonder  at 
your  affirming  quickly  after,  "  In  all  ''other 
Places  of  Scripture  except  2  Cor,  iv.  16, 
Renewing  relates  only  to  a  vicious  Courfe  of 

Life :' 

-   i^.  K^      »  p.   ISA. 


'Original  Sin.  2B3 

Life:"  Seeing  you  immediately  confute 
yourfelf,  by  both  the  following  Citations. 
^Be  not  conform  d  to  this  Word^  but  be  ye  tranf- 
formed  by  the  Renewal  of  your  Mind:  Unlefs 
the  Mind  be  only  another  ExprefTion  for  ''  a 
vicious  Courfe  of  Life."  ^  We  ourfckes  alfo 
were  femetimes  foolijh^  dijobedient^  decei'ved^ 
ferving  diverfe  Lufls  and  PIcafures -,  living 
in  Malice  and  Envy,  hateful  and  hating  cm 
another.  Do  thefe  Words  imply  nothing 
but  "  a  vicious  Courfe  of  Life  ?'*  No  in- 
v^^ard  Corruption  at  all  ?  But  after  that  th 
Loving-kindnefs  and  Love  of  God  cur  Saviour 
toward  Man  appeared — He  faved  us  by  the  Re- 
newing of  the  Holy  Ghojl,  —  From  what  ? 
From  a  vicious  Courfe  of  Life  only  r  Nay, 
but  from  Foolijlmefs  of  Heart  alfo,  from 
Error,  from  Malice,  Hatred,  Envy,  evil  Dc- 
fire  \  all  v/hich  are  Liivard  Corruptions, 
St'.  Ydu  add  "  from  all  this  we  may  gather, 
'^That  God's  creating  the  new  Man  after  his 
own  Image  in  Righteouffiefs  and  true  Holimfs, 
means  his  eredling  the  Chriftian  Church 
with  a  View  to  promote  Righteoufnefs'  and 
Holinefs  among  Men.  For  we  are  GodV 
Worhnanfnp,  created  in  Chrift  Jcfus  unto 
i^ood  Works.'*  Surely  you  do  not  cite  this 
Verfe  alfo  to  prove,'  That  the  Renewing  of 
our  Mind  implies  no  inward  Change?  It  mull 
be  fomething  more  than  an  outward  Profcf 

fion, 

y  Rom.  xii.  2.     \  Tit,  iii.  5 — 5.     *  f-  155- 


The  Doctrine  of 

fiofiy  or  the  Reforming  a  vicious  Coifrlc'  of 
Life,  by  Reafon  of  which  we  are  faid  to  be 
Gods  Workmanjldip^  created  anew  in  Chrift 
Jefus. 

These  Texts  therefore  do  manifeftly  re-^ 
fer  to  perfonal^  internal  Holinefsy  and  clearly 
prove,  That  this  is  the  chief  Part  of  that 
Image  of  God,  in  which  Man  was  originally 
created. 

The  other  Text  which  ^  you  re-confider 
is  Ecclef,  vii.  29.  God  hath  made  Man  up^ 
right*,  but  they  have  fought  out  many  Invent 
tions.  But  this,  you  fay,  does  not  mean. 
That  God  made  Man  righteous :  But  that 
he  made  him  rights  as  having  thofe  Powers, 
Means  and  Encouragements,  by  a  due  Ufe 
of  which  he  may  become  righteous.  In  or- 
der to  prove  that,  This  is  the  true  Meaning 
of  the  Words,  you  affirm  i.  "  That  Man 
here  is  not  to  be  underftood  of  Adam^  but 
of  all  Mankind/'  This  cannot  be  granted 
without  full  Proof.  You  affirm,  2.  "  This 
appears  from  the  latter  Part  of  the  Sentence: 
Th  e  y  fought  -out  ■  majiy  Inventions^  Adam 
and  2?i'^  did  ib,  in  and  after  their  Fall. 
This  therefore  proves  nothing.  You  affirm, 
3^- The  Word  ^^^^^^''(^hich  we.  tranflate 
^pright)^^''A^^\\ot  always  \vn^\y  Upn^hfnefs: 
or-  Right 'vuf^icfs '*■  But-thfeV  is  'its  '  prt^er 
Meaning  as  will  -appear  to  any  whb  feriouffy" 
^  ■-      :^     ---    ..-  .    -^..    COnfide^i^ 


Original  Sin.  285 

confidcrs  the  following  Texts,  i.  Deuf,  xii.\ 
25.  When  thouJJ:alt  do  that  which  is  right  in\ 
the  Sight  of  the  Lord.  It  is  taken  in  the^ 
very  fame  Senfe  V.  28,  C.  xiii.  18.  and 
5cxi.  9.  In  all  thefe  Texts  it  undeniably 
implies  morally  Good  or  Righteous,  2,  Deia,\ 
xxxii.  4.  A  God  of  'Truth  and  loithcut  Ini- 
quity ^  juf  ^W  right  is  He.  Pfalm  xxv.  8  : 
Good  and  upright  is  the  Lord.  3.  Pfalm 
xxxriit-4..  -  ^he  Word  of  the  Lord  is  right. 
Hof.  xiv.  9.  The  Ways  of  the  Lord^^;v  right. 
4.  Pfalm  xxxii.  II.  Be  glad  a?id  7'ejoicey  ye 
Righteous.  Pfalm  xxxiii.  i .  Rejoice  in  the 
Lord,  O  ye  Righteous.  In  the  very  fame 
SeAfe  it  occurs  in  numberlefs  Places.  As 
tne:Word  is  therefore  properly  applied  to 
GoD-Himfelf,  to  his  Word,  his  Providences, 
and  his  People  :  In  all  which  Cafes  it  mud 
neceffarily  mean  Righteous^  we  cannot  light- 
ly depart  from  this  its  proper  Signification,  i. 

But  you  think,  there  is  a  Neceflity  of 
departing  from  it  here :  Becaufe  "  to  fay, 
God  created  Adam  righteous ^  is  to  affirm  a 
Contradiftion,*'  or  what  is  inconfiftent  with 
the  very  Nature  of  Righteoufnefs.  For  a 
Righteoufnefs  wrought  in  him  without  his 
Knowledge  or  Confent,  would  have  been 
no  Righteoufnefs  at  all."  You  may  call  it 
by  any  Name  you  like  better.  But  we  muft 
ufe  the  old  Name  dill :  As  being  pcrfwad- 
cd,  That  tlie  Love  of  God,  governing  the 

«  p.  161.  Si:nk^, 


286  T'he  Doctrine  of 

Senfes,  Appetites  and  Paflions,  however  or 
whenever  it  is  wrought  in  the  Soul,  is  true, 
eflential  Righteoufnefs. 

Nay,  "  Righteoufnefs  is  Right  ABionV 
Indeed  it  is  not.  Here  fas  we  faid  before) 
is  your  fundamental  Miftake.  It  is  a  right 
State  of  Mind^  which  differ  from  right  Ac- 
tion^  as  the  Caufe  does  from  the  Effe<3:. 
Righteoufnefs  is  properly  and  diredlly,  a 
right  T*e7nper  or  Difpojition  of  Mind^  or  a 
Complex  of  all  right  Tempers. 

For  Want  of  obferving  this,  you  fay, 
"  Adam  could  not  aB^  before  he  was  cre- 
ated. Therefore  he  muft  exift,  and  uie  his 
intelleftual  Powers,  before  he  could  be  righ- 
teous/' "  But  according  to  this  Reafoningy 
as  Dr.  fennings  obferve,  Chrift  could  not  be 
righteous  at  his  Birth''  You  anfwer,  "  He 
exifted  before  He  was  made  Flefli."  I  re- 
ply. He  did,  as  God.  But  the  Man  Chriji 
fcfus  did  not.  Neither  therefore  did  He  ufe 
his  Luelkdfiial  Powers,  According  to  your 
Reafoning  then,  the  Man  Chnf  fefus^  could 
not  he  righteous  at  his  Birth, 

The  Dr.  adds,  "  Nay^  according  to  this 
Reafoni?7g,  Goo'^  could  not  be  righteous  from  £- 
teniity;  becaufe  He  muji  exijl,  before  He  was 
righteous!'  You  anfwer,  "  My  Reafoning 
would  hold  even  with  Rcfpe<5t  to  God,  were 
it  true  that  He  ever  did  begin  to  exift.  But 
neither  the  Exiftence  nor  the  Holinefs  of 

*  {).  162.  God 


Original  Sin.  287 

God  was  prior  to  each  other."  Nay,  but  if 
his  Exiftence  was  not  prior  to  his  Holinefs, 
if  He  did  not  exift  before  He  was  hoJy,  your. 
Affertion  That  every  Being  muft  exijiy  before 
it  is  righteous^  is  not  true. 
iOBesides  (to  purfue  your  Rcatbnlng  a  httle 
farther)  If  "  God  did  always  exijl^  yet  un- 
lefs  you  can  prove,  that  He  always  adcd^  it 
will  not  clear  your  Argument.  For  let  Him 
exift  Millions  of  Ages,  He  could  not  be  righ- 
teous^ (according  to  your  Maxims)  be  tore 
He  a^ed  right. 

One  Word  more  on  this  Article.  You 
{ay,  "  MyReafoning  would  hold  good,  even 
with  Relped:  to  God,  were  it  true,  that  He 
ever  did  begin  to  exift.'*  Then  I  afk  con- 
cerning the  Son  of  God,  Did  He  ever  begin 
to  exift  ?  If  He  did  not,  He  is  the  One, 
Eternal  God:  (For  there  cannot  be  Two 
Eternals)  If  He  did,  and  your  Reafuning 
hold  good,  When  He  began  to  exift,  He 
was  not  righteous.. 

"  But  St.  y^A/7  faith,  He  that  doth  Righ- 
teoiifnefs  is  righteonsr  Yes,  it  appears  he  is, 
by  his  doing  or  ^^xzdii^w^gRighteoufnefs.  "  But 
where  doth  the  Scripture  Ipeak  one  Word 
of  a  Righteoufncfs  i^ffed  into  us  r  Where  it 
fpeaks  of  the  Love  of  God  (the  Eflencc  of 
Righteoufriels)y7W  abroad  in  our  Hearts, 
juAnd  cannot  God,  by  his  Almighty  Power 
mfufe  any  Good  Tempers  into  us  ?  You  an- 


288  'The  Doctrine  of 

fwer,  "  No.  No  Being  whatever  can  do 
for  u^;,  tliat  which  cannot  be  at  all^  if  it  be 
not  our  even  Choice^  and  the  Effed:  oiour  own 
Indujlry  and  Exercife.  But  all  good  Tem- 
pers are  the  Effc6t  of  our  own  Induftry  and 
Exercife.     Otherwife  they  cannot  be  at  allT 

Nay  then,  it  is  certain,  they  cannot  be 
at  all.  For  neither  Lowlinefs,  Meeknefs, 
Long-fufFering,  nor  any  other  Good  Tem- 
per, can  ever  be  the  Effeft  of  ;;^^'  o^vn  Indujlry 
and  Exercife.  But  I  verily  believe,  they  may 
be  the  Efted:  of  God's  Spirit,  working  in  me 
whatfoever  pleafcthHim.     See  Ifa.  xxvi.  12. 

You  add,  "  The  Thing  cannot  exift,  un- 
lefs  WE  chufe,  becaufe  our  chtifjig  to  do  what 
is  right,  is  the  very  Thing  which  is  to  exift." 
No  :  The  Thing  which  is  to  exift  is.  Aright 
State  of  Mind,  And  it  is  certain,  God  can 
give  this  to  any  Creature,  at  the  very  firft 
Moment  of  its  Exiftence.  Nay,  it  may  be 
queftioned.  Whether  God  can  create  an  in- 
telligent Being,  in  any  other  State. 

''  But  an  Habit  is  gain'd  by  repeated 
Ad:s.  Therefore  Habits  of  Righteoufnefs 
could  not  be  created  in  Man."  Mere  play- 
ing upon  Words!  He  coiddbe^  he  *ze»^i  cre- 
ated fu]l  of  Love.  Now,  whether  you  call 
this  an  Habit  or  no,  it  is  tlie  Sum  of  all 
iliditeoufnefs. 

"But  this  Love  is  either  under  the  Go- 
vernment of  my  Will,  or  it  is  not."     It  is. 

4|f  :  The 


Original  Sin.  289 

The  Love  df  God  which  Ad^m  enjoyed,  was 
under  the  Government  of  his  Will.  "  But 
if  fo,  it  could  be  righteous '  only  fo  far,  as 
applied  to  Right  JiBion  in  Heart  and  Life." 
Stop  here.  The  Love  of  God  \s  Right eoiif?icJs^ 
the  Moment  it  exifts  in  any  Soul.  And  it 
muft  exift,  before  it  can  be  applied  to  Action. 
Accordingly  it  was  Righteoufnefs  in  Adam 
the  Moment  he  w^as  created.  And  yet  he 
had  a  Power  either  to  follow  the  Dictates  of 
that  Love ;  (in  which  Cafe  his  Righteoufnefs 
would  have  endured  for  ever)  or  to  act  con- 
trary thereto :  But  Z/^cV  was  RighttVhiiufs 
ftill ;  though  it  was  not  irrefiftible. 

*^  I  MIGHT  add,'  Ada7n^  Inclination  to  Sin 
(for  he  could  not  fin  without  a  finfuJ  Incli- 
nation) muft  be  foftrong  as  to  overcome  his 
(fuppofed)  inbred  Propcnfrty  to  Holinefs: 
And  fo  malignant,  as  to  expel  that  Princi- 
ple, at  once,  and  totally.  Confcqucntly, 
the  fuppofed  Original  RightcGKjmfs,  was  con- 
fiftent  with  a  finful  Propenfity,  vajlly  (Irojigcr 
and  more  7nalignant  than  e-ver  is^as  or  can  be 
in  any  of  his  Po/krity :  Who  cannot  lin  a- 
gainft  fuch  Reiiftence,  or  with  fuch  dread- 
ful Confequences.  Thus  Original  Righte- 
oufrefs  in  Adam  proves  far  worfc  than  Origi- 
nal Sin  in  his  Poderity." 

I  HAVE  fet  down  your  Argument  at  large 
that  it  may^ appear  in  its  full  Strength.  Now 
,ii        ,.  i  .     ,     .  T     /  ftfi  ♦.  .  let 

^  «*  p.  164,  165.    '  p.  166. 


290  'The  Doctrine  of 

let  us  view  it  more  clofely.  "  Adam  could 
not  lin,  without  z.  fmful  InclinoAionr  The 
Sentence  is  ambiguous.  Either  it  may  mean 
''  Adam  could  not  chiife  lll^  without  feme 
fwfid 'Temper  preceding;''  And  in  this  Senfe 
it  is  falfe :  Or,  he  could  not  commit  out- 
rcard  Sin^  without  iirft  inclining^  that  is, 
chufjng  fo  to  do.  2.  "  This  \\\sfinful  Incli- 
nation (or  Temper^  was  fo  ftrong,  as  to  over- 
come his  inbred  Propenfity  to  Holinels.''  It 
was  not  zvi^  fmful Inclination y  (in  this  Senfe) 
which  overcame  his  Propenfity  to  Holinefs: 
But  ftrong  Temptation  from  without :  How 
ftrong  we  know  not ;  and  the  Circum.ftances 
of  it,  we  know  not.  3.  "  This  \\\sjmfid  In- 
cTmation  v/as  fo  malignant,  as  to  expel  that 
Principle,  at  once  and  totally.''  Not  by  any 
Jinful  Inclination^  but  by  yielding  to  Temp- 
tation, he  did  lofe  the  Love  and  Image  of 
God.  But  that  this  was  totally  and  at  once^ 
we  have  no  Authority  to  affirm.  4.  *'  Conie- 
quently  Original  Righteoufnefs  in  Adam  was 
confiftent  with  a  fniful  Frcpeii/iiy^  'vajily 
jlronger  and  more  jnalignant.,  than  tver  'it-as 
or  can  be  in  any  of  his  Fojierityy  It  v^as 
confiftent  with  nofirfidFropcnfity  at  all,  but 
barely  with  a  Power  of  yielding  to  Tempt  aticn. 
It  declined  in  the  fame  Proportion,  and  by* 
the  fame  Degree?,  as  he  did  acftually  yitid 
to  this.     And  when  he  had  yielded  entirely 

and 


Original  Sin.  291 

and  eaten  the  Fruit,  Original  Rightcoujhcfs 
was  no  more.  Therefore  the  5'''  Propoii- 
tion,  "  Thus  Original  Rightconfncfs  ^rov^^  to 
be  FAR  WORSE  "Ck^wOiiginal  ^in,"'  is  Flou- 
rifh.  What  a  Figure  docs  this  fair  Argu- 
ment make,  now  it  is  turn'd  Infide  out  ? 

From  all  this  it  may  appear,  That  the 
Dodlrine  of  Or igiiial  Right coiifncfs^  (as  well 
as  that  oi Original  Sin)  hath  a  firm  Founda- 
tion in  Scripture,  as  well  as  in  the  Attri- 
butes of  a  wife,  holy  and  gracious  God. 

As  you  do  not  offer  any  new  Argument 
in  your  Conclufion,  I  need  not  I'pend  any 
Time  upon  it. 

You  fubjoin  Remarks^"  on  Dr.  Watfs  Ad- 
ditions to  his  Book.  Some  of  thefe  defcrvc 
a  ferious  Confideration. 

I.  Either  the  new-crcated  Man  Icjcd 
God  fzipremelyy  or  not.  If  he  did  not  ^  he  was 
not  innocent :  Since  the  'very  Law  afid  Light  of 
Nature  require fuch  a  Lo've  to  God.  IJ  he  did, 
he  flood  difpofedjor  every  AB  of  Obedience.  And 
this  is  true  Holinefs  of  Heart, 

You  anfwer  (in  many  Words)  *'  The 
new-created  Man  did  not  love  God  fu- 
premely.  For  before  he  could  love  God, 
the  Powers  of  his  Mind  mull  have  1-cen 

T   2  quite 

»  p.  186. 


292  The  Doctrine  of 

quite  finiih'd, "  and  adtudly  exercifed."  And 
doubtleft  die,  very  Moment  he  was  created, 
they  were  qmio- Jinijljed  and  aBually  exercifed 
too.  For  Man.  was  not  gradually  fonrid  by 
God,  as  a  Statue  is  by  an  human  Artificer: 
But  He  /pake  the  Wordy  and  they  were  made -y 
He  cornmanded  and  they  were  created.  And  as 
Light  and  Heat  were  not  lubfequent  to  the 
Creation  of  the  Sun,  but  began  to  exift  with 
it,  fo  that  the  Moment  it  exifted  it  fhone; 
fo  fpiritual  Light  and  Heat,  Knowledge  and 
Love  were  not  fubfequent  to  the  Creation  of 
Man :  But  they  began  to  exift  together  with 
Him.  The  Moment  he  exifted,  he  knew 
and  loved.  /  /in^mu'S' 

2.  If  the  7iew-made  Creature  had  not  a  Pro^ 
penfuy  to  love  and  obey  God,  but  was  in  a  State 
of  mere  Indifference  to  Good  or  Evily  then  his 
being  put  into  fuch  an  Union  with  Flejl:  and 
Bloody  among  a  thoufand  TemptationSy  would 
have  been  an  Over-ballance  on  the  Side  of  Vice, 
But  our  Reafcn  ca7i  never  fuppo fey  That  God 
the  fVify  Juji  and  Goody  would  have  placed  a 
72ew'fnade  Creature  in  fuch  a  Situation,  ^-v  ^ 

This  Argument  cannot  be  anfwered,  ifft-' 
lefs  it  can  be  ihewe^d,  either  i.  That  in  fuch 
a  Situation,  there  would  not  have  been  an 
Over-ballance  on  the  Side  of  Vice,  or  2.  That 
10  place  a  new-m.ade  Creature  in  a  Situation  - 
where  there  was  fuch  an  Over-ballance,  v/is- 

con- 
■  i.^Y  .   T 


knk  "  Original  Sin.  293 

confiftent  with  the  Wifdom,  Jufllce  and 
Goodnefs  of  God. 

y<iBuT  inftead  of  fhewing,  or  even  attempt- 
ing to  fhew  this,  you  feebly  fay,  *M  do 
not'  think  the  Reafon  of  Man  by  any  Means 
fufficient  to  dired:  God,  in  what  State  to 
make  moral  Agents."  (O  that  you  had  al- 
ways thought  fo  !  How  much  vain,  yea, 
mifchievous  Reafoning  had  then  been  fpar- 
ed!)  "  But  however  Adam'?>  Propenfities 
and  Temptations  were  ballanced,  he  had 
Freedom  to  chufe  Evil  as  well  as  Good." 
He  had.  But  this  is  no  Anfwer  to  the  Ar- 
gument, which  hke  the  former,  remains  in 
its  full  Force.  How  could  a  wife,  juft  and 
good  God  place  his  Creature  in  fuch  a  State 
as  that  the  Scale  of  Evil  fliould  preponde- 
rate ?  Altho'  it  be  allow'd  he  is  /;;  a  Meafure 
free  ftill :  The  other  Scale  does  not  "  fly  up 
and  kick  the  Beam." 

3.  Notwithstanding  a//  the  Cavils 
which  have  been  raijedy  yet  if  thofe  two  Texts 
[Eph.  iv.  24.  Col.  iii.  10.)  are  covfuiered  to- 
gether^ their  obvious  Meaning  will  ftrike  an 
honejl  a7id  imbia[]ed  Reader^  The  new  Man, 
or  the  Prificiple  of  true  Religion  in  the  Hearty 
is  created  by  God  after  his  moral  Imagc^  in 
that  Right  eon fnefs  and  true  Holinefs  wlxrein 
Man  was  at  firjl  created, 

T  3  You 

"  p.  187,  1S8.    '  p.  189. 


294  ^^^  Doctrine  of 

You  anfwer,  "  I  have  endeavoured  to 
prove  the  contrary,  and  he  does  not  offer  to 
point  out,  any  one  Miftake  in  my  Interpre- 
tations."    I  have  pointed  out  more  than  one. 

4.  If  theje  are  the  Salifications  with  which 
fiich  a  new-made  Creature  fhould  be  endued^ 

and  thefe  the  Circimiflances^  wherein  from  the 
Wifdonty  fiijlice  and  Goodnefs  of  God  we 
fooidd  expeB  him  to  be  fituated:  7 hen  by  a  care- 
fid  Survey  of  what  Man  is  now^  compared 
with  what  he  JJjould  he^  we  may  eafily  deter- 
minCy  whether  Man  is  at  prefent  fiich  a  Crea- 
turc^  as  the  great  and  blejjid  God  made  him 
at  firfl. 

You  anfwer,  (in  Abundance  of  Words, 
the  Sum  of  which  is  this)  "  Our  Circum- 
ftanccs,  are,  on  the  whole,  far  better  than 
Adam's  were.  For  he  was  under  that  fevere 
Law,  ^rajifgrefs  and  ^ die!'  He  was  fo:  but 
this  does  not  prove  the  Point  ftlll,  ballancing 
the  fingle  Difadvantage  (if  fuch  it  was  ;  for 
even  that  may  be  difputed)  with  the  nume- 
rous Advantages  he  was  pofTefs'd  of,  with 
the  Hohnefs  and  Happinefs  v/hich  he  en- 
joyed, and  might  have  enjoyed  for  ever,  it 
does  by  no  Means  appear.  That  the  prefent 
Circumftances  of  Mankind  in  general  are 
better  than  Adamh  were.  '^'^^^• 

5.  God  did  not  give  Noah  Dominion  over 
the  Brute  Creatures^  in  fo  a?nple  a  Manner  as 

•^  p.  190,  He 


Original  Sin.  29^ 

He  did  to  Adam.  Fear  indeed  fell  on  the 
Brutes :  But  ibis  does  not  fiifficiently  prcferve 
Man  from  their  Outrage.  In  the  innocent 
State ^  no  Man  would  have  been  poifo?ied  or  torn 
by  Serpe?2ts  or  Lions  as  now. 

Youanfwer,  ''  The  Tccond  Grant  runs, 
T^he  Fear  of  you  and  the  Dread  of  you  Jl: all  be 
upon  every  Beajl  of  the  Field,  and  upon  every 
Fowl  of  the  Air,  and  upon  all  that  moves  on 
the  Earth,  and  upon  all  the  Fijljcs  of  the  Sea  : 
Lito  your  Hafids  they  are  delivered.  Every 
movingT^hing  that  liveth  JJ:all  be  Meat  for  you: 
Even  as  the  Green  Herb  I  have  given  you  all 
Thifigs.  Now  this  Grant  is  more  extenfive 
than  the  firft."  It  is,  as  to  Fcod-,  but  not 
as  to  Dominion.  The  Liberty  of  Eating  an 
Animal  does  not  neceflarily  imply  any  Do- 
minion over  it  at  all.  "  But  the  Fear  and 
Thread  of  every  Beaft  are  the  Effects  of 
Dominion  in  Man,  and  the  Subjcd:ion  in 
Brutes."  Nay,  neither  does  Fear  nccefia- 
rily  imply  I^ominion,  I  m^iy  fear  whnt  has 
not  Dominion  over  me,  and  \\'hat  I  am  not 
fubjeB  to.  And  thofe  Animals  may  fear 
me,  over  which  ncvcrthelefs  I  have  not 
Dominion,  neither  are  t\\Qy  fuhjeB  to  mc. 
\fear  every  Viper,  yea,  every  poilbnous  Spi- 
der. And  they  fear  me  :  Yet  neither  has 
Dominion  over  the  other.  Fear,  therefore 
and  Dread  may  be  in  an  \\v^\  Degree  ;  and 
;^  T  4  yet 

•  J  p.  191. 


296  77;^  Doctrine  of 

^yet  no  Domhimi  at  all.     *^  But  they  afe  M 

\ delivered  into  our  Hands'*  Yes,  for  Meat ; 
as  the  very  next  Words  explain  that  Ex- 
preffion.     Whatever  therefore  it  may  "  im- 

Eort  in  other  Scriptures,"  the  Meaning  of  it 
ere  is  plain  and  certain.  .   .   -       . 

6.  Would  GOD  have  expofea  fbe  pure 
and  innocent  Works  of  his  Hands ^  to  fuch  un-^ 
anavoidable  Perils  and  Miferies,  as  arifefrom 
Bears^  T'ygers^  Sp'pents^  Precipices^  Volca-* 
710  s,  &c?  ^^-^^ 

You  Anfwer,  "  He  did  '"expofe  innocent 

^  Adam  to  a  Peril  and  Mifcry  greater  than  all 

,^thefe  put  together,  even  to  a  tempting  Devil." 

I  reply,    i.  This  did  not  imply  any  unavoid- 

.  able  Mifery  at  all :    2.  It  implied  no  more 

Peril  than  God  faw  was  needful,  as  a  TeiJ 

.  of  his  Obedience.     Therefore  this  is  no  pa- 

'  rallel  Cafe.      So  this  Argument  alfo  ftands 

■'■unanTwered. 

7.  Jt  has  been  f aid  indeed y  If  "  Adam  fell 
into  Sin  though  he  was  innocent^  then  among  a 

^'MiJl'iqn  cf  Creatures  every  one  might  Jin  ^  though 

^%e^Mdsds  piriocent  as  Adam.     /  anfwer^  There 

^as'hj^wttityofthe  Event:  But  the  Improba- 

^SififiWft^ytis  a  Million  to  One,  I  prove  it  thus. 

*^'  i:  MUf-on  cf  Creatures  were  made^  tn  an 

,e^uai''Brobability  to  (land  or  fall ;  and  if  all  the 

fsu^nihcrs  from  One  to  one  Million-  inclujively 

'    '  were 

^  p.  191,  192.    «  p.  194,  195. 


>' Orig-inal  Sin.  297 

nverefit  in  a  Ra?2k :  It  is  plainly  a  Million  to 
One  J  that jufi  any fingle  propofed  Number  of  this 
Multitude  Jhoidd fall.  Now  the  T^otql  Sum  is 
one  oftheje  Numbers,  that  is,  the  laji  of  them, 
Confequently,  it  is  a  Million  to  One.  againjl  the 
Suppofition,  that  the  whole.  Number  of  Men 
JhouldfalL  And  this  Argument  will  grow  fill 
ten  thoufand  'Times  jlrojiger,  if  we  fuppofe  :e?i 
■  thoufand  Millions  to  have  lived  fince.theCr cation. 
Your  Argument  flood  thus.  ^' Ii  wc 
can't  infer  from  Ada^n^  TranfgrefTion,  That 
his  Nature  was  originally  corrupt,  neitlior 
can  we  infer  from  the  Tranfgreifions  of  all 
Mankind,  that  their  Nature  is  originally 
corrupt."  It  is  anfwered.  If  a  Million  cf 
Great  tires  were  made  in  an  equal  Prol  ability  to 
(iand  or  fall,  it  is  a  Million  to  On^  they  fould 
^  not  all  fall  You  reply,  "  This  is,  "no~  An- 
fwer  to  my  Argument.'*  Surely  it  is ;  and 
a  direct  Anfwer,  That  one  Man  fnaned,  does 
not  prove  he  had  a  corrupt  Nature*,  Why  ? 
Bccaufe  (fuppofing  him  Free  to  chufe  Good 
or  Evil)  it  was  as  probable  he  ihould  fin, 
as  not,  there  being  no  Odds  on  one  Side  or 
the  other.  But  that  all  Men  (hould  fin  does 
prove  they  have  a  corrupt  Nature  :  Becaufc 
it  is  not  as  probable,  That^//M;;  fliould  fin, 
as  that  one  Man  fliould  :  The  Odds  agalnfl 
it  being  as  4^,]^^[llion  or  rather  ten  thoufand 

Millions 
•  p.  196. 


298  'Tbe  Doctrine  of 

Millions  to  One.  Either  therefore  we  muft 
allow,  That  Mankind  are  more  inclined  to 
Evil  tlian  to  Good,  or  we  muft  maintain 
a  Suppofition  fo  highly  improbable,  as  comes 
very  near  a  flat  Impoffibility. 

And  thus  much  you  yourfelf  cannot  but- 
allow  :  "  The  Reafoning  may  hold  good, 
where  all  Circumftances  agree,  to  make  the 
ProbabJlity  equal  with  Regard  to  every  Indivi- 
dual in  this  fuppofed  Million."  And  how  can 
the  Prcaah'l/ty  be  other  than  egua/^  if  every 
Individual  be  as  wife  and  as  good  2isAdam? 
But,  be  it  equal  or  no,  you  fay,  "  The  Cafe 
IS  not  to  be  eftimated  by  the  Laws  of  equal 
Probability^  but  of  InfeBmi,  For  when  Sin 
is  once  enter'd  into  a  Body  of  Men,  it  goes 
on,  not  according  to  the  Laws  of  Chance^'  (is 
this  precifely  the  idAnc\w\\hequal Probability?) 
*'  but  the  Laws  as  I  may  fay,  of  Infe^ion!' 
But  how  came  Sin  to  enter  into  a  Body  of  Men? 
That  is  the  very  Q^ieftion.  Suppofmg  iirft  a 
Body  of  Sinners,  Sin  may  "  alllime  the  Nature- 
of  a  Contagion.*'  But  the  Difficulty  lies  againfl: 
fuppofing  anv  Body  of  Sijiners  at  all.  You 
fay  indeed,  "  One  Sinner  produces  another, 
as  the  Serpent  drew  \v\Eve:  The  firfl:  Sin  and 
Sinner  being  L'ke  a  little  Leaven  which  leavens 
the  "uoholii  humpy  x'\ll  tliis  I  can  underftand, 
fuppofing  our  Nature  is  inclined  to  Evil. 
But  if  not,  why  docs  not  one  good  Man  pro- 
duce' 


Original  Sin.  299 

duce  aaother,  as  naturally  as  one  Sinner  pro* 
duces  another?  And  why  does  not  Ri^^h- 
teoufnefs  fpread  as  faft  and  as  wide  among 
Mankind  as  Wickednels  ?  Why  does  not 
this  Leaven  leaven  the  "izMe Lump ^  as  frequent- 
ly, as  readily  and  as  throughly  as  the  other  ? 
Thefe  Laws  of  InfcBion^  (lo  called)  will 
therefore  ftand  you  in  no  Stead.  For 
(to  bring  the  Matter  ftill  more  to  a  Point) 
fuppofe  Adam  and  Eve  newly  ijifeBedhy  Sin : 
They  had  then  none  to  infcB^  having  no 
Child.  Afterward  they  repented  and  found 
Mercy.  Then  Cain  was  born  :  No\7  furcly 
neither  Adam  nor  Lve  would  ivfccl  him  ! 
Flaving  fuffered  {o  feverely  for  their  own 
Sin^  which  therefore  they  mufi:  needs  guard 
him  againft.  How  then  came  he  to  be  a 
Sinner?  *'  Oh,  by  his  own  Choice,  as  Seth 
was  righteous."  Well :  Afterwards  both 
wicked  Cain  and  good  Seth^  begat  Sons  and 
Ifaughters.  Now  was  it  not  juft  as  probable, 
one  ihould  infecl  his  Children  widi  Good- 
nefs,  as  the  other  with  Wickednefs  ?  How 
came  then  Cain  to  tranfmit  Vice  any  more 
than  Seih  to  tranfmit  Virtue  :  If  you  fay, 
"  Setb  did  tranfmit  Virtue :  His  Poflcrity  was 
Virtuous  'till  they  mixt  widi  the  vicious  OfF- 
fpring  oiCain:"  I  anfwer,  i.  How  does  that 
appear  ?  How  do  you  prove.  That  all  the 
Pofterity  of  Seth  were  virtuous?  But  2.  If 

thcv 


-J  00  The  DoctMS^^^ 

they  were,  Why  did  not  this  Mixture  anieiia 
the  Vicious,  rather  than  corrupt  the  Vir- 
tuous ?  If  our  Nature  is  equally  inclined  to 
Virtue  and  Vice,  Vice  is  no  more  contagions 
than  Virtue.  How  then  came  it  totally  to 
prevail  over  Virtue,  fo  that  all  Flejh  had  cor- 
rtipted  themfches  before  the  Lord  ?  Contagion 
and  Infection  are  nothing  to  the  Purpofe  : 
Seeing  they  might  propagate  Good  as  well 
as  Evil.  ""^^ 

Let  us  go  one  Step  farther.  Eight  Per- 
fons  only  were  faved  from  the  General  De- 
luge. We  have  Reafon  to  believe,  That 
four,  at  leaft,  of  thefe  were  Perfons  truly 
virtuous.  How  then  came  Vice  to  have  a 
Majority  again,  among  the  New  Inhabitants 
of  the  Earth  ?  Had  the  Nature  of  Man  been  . 
inclined  to  neither,  Virtue  muft  certainly 
have  had  as  many  Votaries  as  Vice.  Nay, 
fuppofe  Man  a  Reafonable  Creature,  and 
fuppofmg  Virtue  to  be  agreeable  to  the  highrfl 
Reafon,  according  to  all  the  Rules  of  Pro- 
bability, the  Majority  of  Mankind  muft  in 
eveiy  Age  have  been  on  the  Side  of  Virtue, 

8.  Some  have  rcckojid  up  a  large  Catalogue 
cf  the  In  fiances  of  Divi?ie  Goodnefs^  and  would 
make  this  as  evident  a  Proof  T!hat  Mankind  f, 
fands  in  We  Favour  of  God  as  'all  the  other^^ 
Ifijiances  are^  of  an  univ erf al  Degeneracy  of 
Many -and-  the  Anger  of  God  .  againfl.  (hem. 


Original  SiNi^  301 

Btif,  'tis  enfy  to  reply,  l!he  Goodnefs  of  God  may 
ificline  Him  to  bejiow  a  thoiifand  Bounties  upon 
Criminals,  But  his  Jujlice  and  Goodnefs  ^^ill 
not  Juffer  IIim\  to  infli6l  Mifcty  in  Jucb  an 
univerfal  Manjier,  'where  there  has  been  no  Sin 
to  deferve  them^  either  in  Barents  or  Children,   . 

You  anfwer,  "  There  is  more  than  enough 
Sin  among  Mankind,  to  deferve  all  the  Suf- 
ferings God  inflidls  upon  them.  And  the 
Scriptures  reprefent  thofc  Sufferings  as  Difci- 
plinary,  for  Corredlion  and  Reformation." 
What,  all  the  Sufferings  of  all  Mankind  ? 
This  can  in  no  wife  be  allow'd.  Where  do 
the  Scriptures  fay.  That  ^//Sufferings,  thofe 
of  Infants  in  particular,  are  purely  Difcipli^ 
nary^  and  intended  only  "  for  Cojrcdtion 
^nd  Reformation  ?"  Neither  can  this  be  re- 
conciled to  Matter  of  Fadt.  How  did  the 
Sufferings  of  Grecian  or  Roman  Infants, 
tend  to  their  Correction  and  Reformation  ? 
Neither  do  they  tend  to  the  Corre6lion  or 
Reformation  of  their  Parents  or  of  any  otlief 
Perfons  under  Heaven.  And  even  as  to 
Adults :  If  univerfal  Suffering  is  a  Proof  of 
univerfal  Sin;  and  univerfal  Sin  could  not 
take  Place,  unlefs  Men  were  naturally  prone 
to  Evil,  Then  the  prefent  Sufferings  of 
Mankmd  are  a  clear  and  ftrong  Evidence  that 
their  Nature  is  prone  to  Evil. 

9.  Notwithstanding  all  God  s  Brc- 
vijionfor  the  Good  of  Man,  fill  the  Scripture 

reprefe?its 


302  The  Doctrine  cf 

reprcfenfs  Men^  while  they  are  in  their  fallen 
State y  as  dejcitute  cf  God's  Favour y  andwith^ 
%ut  Hope. 

You  anfwer,  *'  How  can^  Men  be  dejlitute 
of  God  s  Favour^  when  He  has  vouchfafed 
them  a  Redeemer  ?"  By  defiitute  of  God  s 
Favour y  we  mean,  Children  cf  Wrath ^  Ob- 
jed;s  of  God's  Difpleafure.  And  becaufe 
they  were  fo,  the  Redeemer  was  given,  to 
reconcile  them  to  God  by  his  own  Blood. 
But  notwithftanding  this,  while  we  and  they 
were  in  o\xx  fallen  State^  we  were  all  Objedta 
of  God's  Difpleafure. 

"But  how  can  they  be  without  Hope^ 
when  He  hatb  given  them  the  Hope  of  eternal 
Life  r*  All  Men  who  are  not  born  again, 
born  of  G  o  D  are  without  Hope  at  this  Day. 
God  indeed  hatb  given^  but  they  have  not 
accepted  the  Hope  of  eternal  Life,  Hence  the 
Bulk  of  Mankind  are  ftill  as  void  of  this, 
HcpCy  as  are  the  Beafts  that  perifh.  And 
fo  (the  Scripture  declares)  are  all  Men  by 
Nature,  whatever  Difference  Grace  may 
make.  By  Nature  all  are  Children  of  Wrath , 
without  Hope,  without  God  in  the  World, 

lo.  Doth  that  Man  write  thefincere  Senfe 
of  his  own  Mind  and  Confciejice,  who  charges 
the  Exprefjion^  "  Adam  was  on  Trial  for  lu 


all,''  with  this  hiferefice^ ,  ".  That  w£.  are. none 

p.  207.  ^oi^^ 


of 


Original  Sin.  303 

ofm  in  a  State  ofl'rial  now,  but  Adam  aki^ 
was  upon  T^rialfor  us  allV'  We  ha^e  owned ajid 
granted,  That  Men  are  now  in  a  State  ofTriaJ: 
But  this  is  upon  the  Foot  of  a  new  Covenoit. 

You  aniwer,  ''  what^  can  be  more  evi- 
dent, than  that  accordicg  to  this  Scheme 
jidam  alone  was  to  be  upon  Trial  for  us  all, 
and  that  none  of  Adam^  Pofterity  are  upon 
Perfonal  Trial  r"  Do  you  not  fee  the  Ambi- 
guity in  the  Word  alojie'^  Or  do  you  lee  and 
diffembleit?  Dr.  Watts  fuppofcs,  Th-^ii  Ada7n 
alone,  that  is,  T'hisfingk  Ferjon  was  on  I'rial 
for  all  Men.  Does  it  follow  from  hence, 
that  Adam  alojie,  that  is,  vo  other  Ferfon, 
w^as  ever  in  a  State  of  Trial  ?  Again :  li 
no  Ferjm  hut  Adam  was  upon-  I'rial  for  /ill 
Men,  Will  it  follow,  "  No  Ferfon  but  Adam 
w,as  upon  "Trial  at  allT  It  is  really  hard  to 
think,  that  you  here  ''  fpeak  the  fincere 
Senfe  of  your  own  Mind  and  Cooicicnce.'* 

You  go  on.  "  He  fuppofes  all  Mankind 
are  ftiirunder  the  Origmal  Covenant  with 
Ada?n,  accordirigly  to  which  he  alone  was 
upon  Trial  for  us  all,  and  none  of  his 
Poficrity  are  upon  Perfonal  Trial."  He 
does  not  iiippofc  any  Man  to  be  fo  under 
that  Covenant,  as  to  fuperfcde  his  being  up- 
on Perfonal  Trial.  Yourfclf  add,  "  I  knew 
he  owned,  wc~arc  upon  Perfonal  Trial,  and 

x^  that 

"  p.  209- 


304  ^he  Doctrine  of 

that  all  Mankind  are  now  under  the  Cove- 
nant of  Grace.  But  how  can  either  of  thefe 
confift  with  the  Scheme?"  Both  of  them 
confift  with  it   perfedtly  well.       i.  Adam 

nlone  ox  Jingk  was,  in  fome  Senfe,  on  Trial 
for  all  Mankind,  according  to  the  Tenor  of 
the  old  Covenant,  ''  Do  this  and  live."  2. 
Adam  fell,  and  hereby  the  Sentence  of  Death 
came  on  him  and  all  his  Pofterity.  3.  The 
new  Covenant  was  given,  whereby  all  Man- 
kind were  put  into  a  State  of  Perfonal  Trial. 
Yet  ftill,  4.  Death  the  Penalty  of  the  old 
Covenant,  came  (more  or  lefs)  on  all  Man- 
kind. Now  all  this  is  well  confiftent  with 
itfelf,  as  well  as  with  the  Tenor  of  Scripture. 

1 1.  Mankind  is  reprefented  as  one  collec- 
tive Body  in  fever al  Verfes  of  the  Kth  Chapter 
/o//?t' Romans. 

You  anfwer,  *'  St.  Paul'  always  diftin- 
giufhes  between  Adam^  and  all  Alen^  his 
Pcfteritv,  and  does  not  confider  Adam  with 
all  Meny  as  one  Creature." 

What  then?  This  does  not  prove,  that 
he  does  not  irprefent  Mankind  (Adam\  Pof- 
terity) as  one  colleBive  Body, 

12.  All  that  is  contained  i7t  the  Blefling 
given  to  Noah  is  CGnfijiejit  ivith  the  Curfe  which 
came  on  all  Men  hy  the  fir  ft  Sin.  But  that 
Curfe  is  not  cmffient  with  the  Original  Blef- 
fing  which  was  given  to  Adam. 

.    Yov 


Original  SiiV.-  305 

'You  anfwer,  "The  Blefling  given  ^  to 
Noah^  was  the  ''oery  fame  which  was  given 
to  Adam.'*  This  is  palpably  falfe.  The 
Bleffing  which  was  given  to  Adam  included 
I.  Freedom  from  Pain  and  Death.  2.  Do- 
minion over  the  whole  Brute  Creation.  But 
that  given  to  Noah  did  not  include  either. 
Yet  you  affirm,  *'  It  is  renewed  to  Noal\ 
without  any  Manner  of  Alteration,  after 
Pain  and  Death  were  introduced  into  the 
World!''  And  do  Pain  and  Death  then  make 
720  Manner  of  Alteration  ? 

13.  The  Dominion  over  the  Brutes  given 
to  Adam  was  not  given  to  Noah. 

You  anfwer,  ''  Our  *^  killing  and  feeding 
upon  them  is  the  higheft  Inftance  of  Do?m' 
tion  over  them."  It  is  no  Inftance  of  it  at 
all.  I  may  ihoot  a  Bear  and  then  eat  hira: 
Yet  I  have  no  Dominion,  unlefs  it  be  over 
his  Carcaie. 

P    p.    212.       •»   p.    213. 


\\v6 


\V5 


1      *•>  y-,  f 


jn;  t;j.:it:«,  ^ij^-x.. 


.a 


J^iiJiJW 


[  307  ] 

THE 

DoSIrine  of  Orkinal  Sin  6cc. 


PART      IV. 

ExtraBsfromJDi^,  Watts  ^«^  Afr.  Hebdcn. 

Jttf^:^lML  Have  now  confidered  what  is  ma- 
fg  I  g]  terial  in  your  "  Do^n?2e  of  Origi- 
^"^•^J^  ^^^  A?/;?/'  with  the  Supplement  a?id 
Reply  to  Dj\  Watts.  And  this  I 
purpofely  did  before  I  read  the  Doctor's  Book. 
But  how  was  I  furprized  on  reading  it,  to 
obferve  the  Manner  wherein  you  have  treated 
it,  of  which  I  could  not  be  a  Judge  before  ! 
The  Frame  which  he  had  fo  beautifully  and 
ftrongly  connc(5ted,  you  have  disjointed  and 
broken  in  Pieces,  and  given  us  nothing  but 
mangled  Fragments  of  it,  from  which  it  is 
impoffible  to  form  any  Judgment  of  the 
whole.  In  order  therefore  to  do  Juftice  to 
that  great  and  good  Man,  as  well  as  to  his 
Argument,  I  fubjoin  an  Extradl  of  fo  much 
of  that  Work  as  diredly  affeds  the  main 
Qupftion. 

U    2        '  I  THE 


^o8  I'he  Doctrine  of 

I  THE  rather  fabjoin  this  and  the  foUow- 
ihg  Extrafts,  for  thefe  two  Realbnsy  i.  Be- 
caufe  what  has  gone  before  being  purely  ar- 
gumentative, is  dry  and  lefs  profitable  to 
the  Generality  of  Readers.  2.  Becaufe  they 
contain  one,  uniform,  connected  Scheme 
of  the  great  Do<ftrine  which  I  have  been 
hitherto  defending:  And  which  after  the 
Objeftions  have  been  removed  out  of  the 
Way,  may  be  more  clearly  underftood  and 
firmly  embraced. 

Introduction. 

*'  *Man  is  a  Creature  made  up  of  an 
Animal  Body  and  a  Rational  Mind,  fo  united 
as  to  aft  in  a  mutual  Correfpondence  ac- 
cording to  certain  Laws  appointed  by  his 
Creator.  Now  fuppofe  the  blefi^ed  God, 
who  i*  perfeft  in  Wifdom  and  Power,  in 
Juftice  and  Goodnefs,  were  to  form  fuch  a 
New  Creature,  with  what  Qualifications 
may  we  conceive  fuch  a  Creature  would  be 
endow'd,  by  a  Being  of  fuch  Goodnefs, 
Jufiice  and  Wifdom  ? 

"I.  ^  We  cannot  but  conceive,  he  muft 
have  a  Perfection  of  natural  Po'wers^  both  of 
Body  and  iS/>/r/V,  as;  united  together,  fuited 
to  his  prefent  Circumftances.         ^'-'-'^^  -j-^i^i 

"  Not  that  we  need  conceive,  l^an  X?*5^otlTd 
be  made  fo  perfedl:  a  Being  as  God  could 

make 

*  Ruin  and  Recovery  of  Mankind,  p.  i.     "^  p.  2. 


Original  Sin.  309 

make  him.  For  the  Wifdom  of  God  plain- 
ly defign'd  to  difplay  itfelf  in  the  different 
Ranks  and  Orders  of  his  Creation.  Nor  is 
it  reafonable  to  fuppofe,  Man  would  be 
made  at  iirft  with  fuch  fublime  Perfedions, 
as  he  himfelf  might  afterwards  arrive  at,  by 
a  wife  Improvement  of  his  Powers.  But 
ftill  the  Creature  which  was  defigned  to 
bear  the  neareft  Likenefs  of  his  Maker  in 
this  lower  World,  muft  have  Powers  per- 
fedlly  fufficient  for  his  prefent  Well-being, 
and  a6ling  in  that  Station  wherein  God  had 
placed  him.  ^  All  his  Senfes  muft  be  clear 
and  ftrong,  his  Limbs  vigorous  and  adive, 
his  Body  healthy  in  all  the  inward  and  out- 
ward Parts  of  it,  and  every  natural  Power 
in  its  proper  Order.  For  God  would  furely 
form  fuch  a  Creature,  in  a  State  of  perfed: 
Eafe,  without  any  original  Malady  of  Na- 
ture, to  give  him  Pain  or  Sorrow.''  Nor 
could  there  be  any  Tendency  in  his  Body 
to  Pain  or  Difeafe  while  he  remained  wldi- 
out  Sin. 

''  And  as  the  Pcnucrs  of  bis  B^Jymw^  be 
thus  perfed,  fo  the  FaciJtirs  of  his  SguI  nuill 
have  their  FerfcHion  too. 

"  His  Under jlanding  mud  liave  that  Know- 
ledge  both  of  God  and  his  Creatures,  which 
was  needful  for  his  llappinefs.  Not  that 
he  was  formed  with  all  Knowledge  in  Arts 

T  TT    ->  and 


3IQ  The  Doctrine  of 

and  Sciences,  but  with  fuch  as  was  requi*- 
fite  to  his  Peace  and  Welfare.  His  Reafon 
mufl  be  clear,  his  Judgment  uncorrupted, 
and  his  Confcience  upright  and  fenfible, 

"  This"  leads  me  to  fpeak  of  his  Moral 
PerfeBion,  A  rational  Creature  thus  rpade, 
mull  not  only  be  tnjiocent^  as  a  Tree,  but 
muft  be  formed  Holy,  His  Will  muft  have 
an  inward  Bias  to  Virtue :  He  muft  have  an 
Inclination  td  pleafe  that  God  who  made 
him,  a  fupreme  Love  to  his  Creator,  a  Zeal 
to  ferve  Him,  and  a  tender  Fear  of  offend- 
ing Hinir 

"  For  either  the  new  created  Man  loved 
God  fupremely,  or  not.  If  he  did  not,  he 
was  not  innocent,  fince  the  Law  of  Nature 
requires  a  fupreme  Love  to  God.  If  he  did 
he  ftood  ready  for  every  Aft  of  Obedience : 
And  this  is  true  Holinefs  of  Heart.  And  in- 
deed v/ithout  this,  how  could  a  God  of 
Holinefs  love  the  Work  of  his  own  Hands  ? 

"  There  muft  be  alfo  in  this  Creature  a 
regular  Subjection  of  the  inferior  Powers  to 
the  fuperior.  Senfe  and  Appetite  andPaffion 
muft  be  fubjeft  to  Reafon.  The  Mind  muft 
have  a  Power  to  govern  thcfe  lower  Facul- 
tiej;,  that  he  might  not  offend  againft  the 
Lavv'  of  his  Creation. 

*-*  ^  He  muft  alfo  have  his  Heart  inlaid 
with  Love  tQ  the  Creatures,  cjpecially  thofe 

of 

-  p.  5.     ^  p.  6. 


Original  Sin.  3  1 1 

of  his  own  Species,  if  he  fhoiild  be  placed 
among  them:  And  with  a  Principle  of  PIo- 
nefty  and  Truth  in  dealing  with  them. 
And  if  many  of  thefe  Creatures  were  made 
at  once,  there  would  be  no  Pride,  Malice 
or  Envy,  no  Falfhood,  no  Brawls,  or  Con- 
tentions among  them  but  all  Harmony  and 
Love. 

"  This  Univerfal  Righteoufnefs,  which  is 
the  Moral  Image  of  God;  is  flir  the  nobleft 
Part  of  that  Image  in  which  Mofcs  reprefents 
Man  to  have  been  originally  created.  The 
fame  Writer  affures  us,  That  when  Con 
furvey*d  all  his  Works,  He  pronounced 
them  very  good  I  Agreeably  to  what  Sohmn 
^^  aflures  us  that  God  made  Man  upright. 

"  *Tis  true,  the  Natural  Image  of  God  in 
which  Man  was  created,  confided  in  his 
fpiritual,  intelligent  and  immortal  Nature : 
And  his  Political  Image  (if  I  may  fo  fpeak) 
in  his  being  Lord  of  this  lower  Creation. 
But  the  chief,  the  Moral  Part  of  his  Image, 
we  learn  from  St.  Paul,  to  have  been  the 
Re6litude  of  Man's  Nature  :  Who  in  his 
^'Epiftle  to  the  Epbefiam  lays.  That  the  I- 
mage  of  God,  in  which  Man  is  xo  he  ;v- 
ncwd,  and  confequently  in  which  he  was 
made  confifts  ///  Righteoujhefs  and  true  Holinefs,^ 

"  II.  From  the  Juftice  and  Goodncls  ot 
God  we  may  infer,    That  tha'  Man   xs-as 

U  4  w»^i^^ 

8  p.  7.     ^  C.  iv.  24. 


312  TToe  Doctrine  of 

made  Free  with  a  Power-  to  chufe  either 
Evil  or  Good,  that  he  might  be  put  into  i 
State  of  Probation,  yet  he  had  zfull  Suffici-^ 
ency  of  Powers  to  preferve  himfelfin  Love  mid 
Obedience  to  bis  Creator^  and  to  guard  him- 
felf  againft  every  Temptation.    .      <  ecrlt  n.i 

"  IIL  Tis  highly  ^  probable,  from  the 
Goodnefs  of  God,  that  fuch  a  Creature 
would  be  made  immortal.  Tis  true  the  Great 
God  as  Sovereign  Lohd  of  his  Creatures, 
might  take  away  all  that  He  had  given. 
But  'tis  hard  to  fuppofe  that  He  ever  would 
have  deftroy'd  an  intelligent  Creature  who 
had  continued  to  ferve  and  pleafe  Him. 

'*'  Ti  s  alfo  probable,  That  he  was  endued 
with  Power  to  arrive  at  higher  Degrees  of 
Excellency  and  Happinefs,  than  thofe  in 
which  he  was  formed  ^t  firft,  and  hereby 
he  was  greatly  encouraged  both  to  watch 
againft  every  Sin,  and  to  ufe  all  Zeal  and 
Diligence  in  improving  the  Pov/ers  he  had 
received*;;  duU  Ui\iL\ 

"  IV.  We^  may  add,  That  theHabitation 
in  whichs  a  God  of  infinite  Goodnefs  would 
place  fuch  an  innocent  and  holy  Creature, 
» would  be  fur nijfli'd  with  all  the  NeceJJmies 
mid  Convenie72ces  of  Life,  and  prepared  for 
his  Dcl%hi  as  v/ell  as  Safety.  And  fo  Mofcs 
tells.  115^; That  the  firft  created  Pair  were 
placed  in  Ede?i,  a  Garden  of  Pleafurp,  and 
ihT  a  were 

»  p.  8.     "  p.  9.     *  p.  10. 


Original  Sin.  313 

were  made  Lords  of  all  therein,  of  all  the 
Creatures,  Animal  and  Vegetable,  that  were 
round  about  them. 

"  Neither  can  we  conceive  that  any 
Thing  deftrudive  or  hurtful  could  be  fotind 
in  this  delightful  Habitadon  but  what  Man 
would  have  fufficientNotice  of  with  futficicnt 
Power  to  oppofe  or  avoid  it. 
.  ''V.  ""And  if  this  Creature  had  Power  to 
propagate  its  Kind,  the  Child  mufi:  be  inno- 
cent and  holy,  and  equally  capable  of  pcr- 
fevering  in  Virtue  and  Happincfs. 

*'  Now  if  w^e  may  judge  from  the  Wifdom, 
Juftice  and  Goodnefs  of  God,  that  diefe 
are  the  Qualifications  with  which  fuch  a 
new-made  Creature  would  be  endued,  thefe 
the  Circumftances  in  which  lie  would  be 
fituated,  then  by  a  careful  Survey  of  what 
Mankind,  is  now,  we  may  eafily  judge 
whether  Man  is  now  fuch  a  Crc^ature  as  the 
Great  and  bleffed  God  made  hhn  at  firft? 
And  this  is  the  Subjecfl  of  the  cnfuing  En- 
quiry. 

QJLJ  E  S  T  I  O  N     I. 

''Is  "Ma?i  in  hisprefent  Circtrm/lanccs  fuch  a 
Creature  as  he.  came  out  of  the  Hands  oj  Gon 
bis  Creator  ?  Wc  may  derive  a  full  Anfwer 
to  this  Enquiry  from  the  following  Confi- 
derations. 

I.  This 

•"p.     I  I,       "p.    12. 


314  57?^  Doctrine  of 

"  I.  This  Earth  which  was  defigh'd  for 
the  Habitation  of  Man,  carries  evident  To- 
kens of  Ruin  and  Defolation,  and  does  not 
feem  to  be  ordained  in  its  prefent  Form  and 
Circumftances,  for  the  Habitation  of  inno- 
cent Beings  5  but  is  apparently  fit  for  the 
DweUing-place  of  Creatures  who  are  de- 
generate and  fallen  from  God. 

"  It  is  granted  that  the  Beauty  and  Order 
of  this  lower  World,  even  in  its  prefent 
Conftitution,  and  the  wonderful  Texture, 
Compofition  and  Harmony  of  the  feveral 
Parts  of  it,  both  in  Air,  Earth  and  Sea,  do 
ftill  illuftrioufly  difplay"*  the  Power,  Wifdom 
ind  Goodnefs  of  their  Creator.  Yet  it  muft 
be  confeft  alfo,  that  there  are  glaring  Proofs, 
of  the  Terrors  of  his  Juflice  and  the  Exe- 
cution of  his  Venf!:eance. 

"  Is  not  the  prefent  Shape  of  our  Earth, 

in  its  Divifions  of  Seas  and  Shores,  rude  and 

irregular,  abrupt  and  horrid?  Survey  a  Map 

of  the  World,  and  fay.  Does  the  Form  of  it 

ftrike  our  Eyes  with  any  natural  Beauty  and 

Harmony  ?    Rather  does  it  not  ftrongly  bear 

on  our  Sight  the  Ideas  of  Ruin  and  Confu^ 

iion?  Travel  over  the  Countries  of  this  Globe, 

or  vifit  feveral  Parts  ofthislfland.     What 

various   Appearances   of  a    ruin'd   World? 

What  vaft  broken  Mountains  hang  over  the 

Heads    of  Travellers  r    What   ftupcndous 

-Clife 
-  p.  13. 


Origin^al  Sin.  315 

ClifFs  and  Promontories  rife,  high  and  hide- 
ous to  behold?  What  dreadful  Precipices, 
which  make  us  giddy  to  look  down,  and  are 
ready  to  betray  us  into  Deftrudion?  What 
immenfe Extents  are  there  in  many  Countries 
of  wafte  and  barren  Ground  r  What  vaft 
and  almoft  impaffable  Deferts?'  What  broad 
and  faithleis  Moraffes,  which  are  made  at 
once  both  Deaths  and  Graves  to  unwary 
Travellers?  What  huge  ruinous  Caverns, 
deep  and  wide,  big  enough  to  bury  whole 
Cities  r 

''  What  refiftlefs  Deluges  of  Water,  in  a 
Seafon  of  great  Rains,  come  rolling  down 
the  Hills,  bear  all  Things  before  them,  and 
fpread  fpacioiis  Defolation  ?  What  roaring 
and  tremendous  Water-falls  In  feveral  Parts 
of  the  Globe  ?  What  burning  Mountains,  iu 
^whofe  Caverns  are  Lakes  of  liquid  Fire  rea- 
dy to  burft  upon  the  lower  Lands  ?  Or  they 
are  a  mere  Shell  of  Earth,  covering  prodigi- 
ous Cavities  of  Smoke,  and  Furnaces  ot 
Flame  :  And  feem  to  wait  a  Divine  Com- 
mand, to  break  inward  and  burv  Towns  and 
Provinces  in  fiery  Jluin. 

*'  What  avllive  Treafures  of  Wind  arc 
pent  up  in  the  Bowels  o{  the  Earth,  ready  to 
break  out  into  v/ide  and  furpriling  Milchicf  ? 
What  huge  Torrents  of  Water  rulh  and  roar 
through  the  I  lollows  of  the  Cilobe  we  tread  ^ 

What 

p  p.  14-    "  P-  '5- 


3i6  72v  Doctrine  of 

What  dreadful  Sounds  and  threatning  Ap- 
pearances from  the  Region  of  Meteors  in  the 
Air  ?  What  Clouds  charged  with  Flame, 
ready  to  burft  on  the  Earth  ^nd  difcompofe 
and  terrify  all  Nature  ?  r\^^^^  \ 

"  When  I  furvey  fuch  Scenes  as  thefe,  I 
cannot  but  fay  within  myfelf,  *'  Surely  this 
Earth,  in  thefe  rude  and  broken  Appearances, 
this  unfettled  and  dangerous  State,  was  de- 
figned  as  a  Dwelling  for  fome  unhappy  In- 
habitants, who  did  or  would  tranfgrefs  the 
Laws  of  their  Maker,  and  merit'  Defolation 
from  his  Hand.  And  He  hath  here  ftored 
up  his  Magazines  of  Divine  Artillery  againft 
the  Day  of  Punifliment.'*  A 

*'  How  often  have  the  terrible  Occurrences-' 
of  Nature  in  the  Air,  Earth  and  Sea,  and 
the  calamitous  Incidents  in  feveral  Countries^ 
given  a  ftrong  Confirmation  of  this  Senti-l 
ment  ?    i  >o  rft  •^r-  ,HnR?f 

.  ''  What  DeflrucTtivc  Storms  have  we  and 
our  Fathers  {^tx\  even  in  this  temperate  Ifland 
of  Great-Brit abi  ?  What  Floods  of  Water 
and  violent  Explofions  of  Fire  do  we  read  of 
in  the  Hiftories  of  the  World?  What  fliockr.. 
ing  Convulfions  of  the  Globe,  ftretching  far 
and  wide  under  the  affrighted  Nations? 
What  huge  Diruptions  of  the  Caverns  of  the 
Earth,  with  tremendous  Bellowings,  which 
have  filled  its  Inhabitants  .with  Terror  and 

Aftonifh- 

'  p.  i6,  _  q  * 


Original  Sin.  317 

Aftonifhment,  and  made  wide  Devaftatlons  ? 
Would  a  good  and  gracious  Being  have  ori- 
ginally fo  formed  the  inanimate  ^  Parts  of 
this  lower  World,  as  to  produce  fuch  deadly 
Concuflions,  therein,  and  fuch  defolating 
Appearances,  had  He  not  defigned  it  for  the 
Habitation  of  fuch  Creatures,  as  He  forefaw 
would  deferve  thefe  Strokes  of  his  Indig- 
nation ? 

"  And  thus  hothMofes  and  StPefer  fuppofe 
God  to  'have  laid  up  Stores  of  Ruin  and  De- 
ftrudlion  within  the  Bowels  of  the  Earth, 
that  He  might  break  open  his  ""  dreadful 
Treafures  of  Flood  and  Fire  at  proper  Sea- 
fons,  to  drown  and  to  burn  the  World  toge- 
ther with  the  iinful  Inhabitants  thereof. 

Now  the  great  God,  who  appointed  fuch 
prodigious  Quantities  both  of  Water  and 
Fire  to  be  referved  in  the  Bowels  of  the 
Earth,  and  among  the  Clouds  of  Heaven, 
for  fuch  a  forefeen  Day  of  general  Deftruc- 
tion,  did  alfo  doubtlefs  prepare  tlie  Materials 
of  all  the  leiTer  ''Storms  and  Hurricanes, 
Earthquakes  and  Floods,  and  Convulfioo-s 
of  Nature;  and  treafured  up  for  thefe  Pur- 
pofes  his  Magazines  of  Wind  and  Flood  and 
Fire  in  the  Earth.  And  is  this  an  Habita- 
tion prepared  for  the  Refidence  of  pure  and 
holy  Beings  P  Is  this  fuch  a  peaceful  Place  as 
a  kind  Creator  would  have  form'd  for  inno- 
cent 

•  p.  17.    *  p.  18.    "  p.  19.    ."  p.  20. 


3i8  T'he  Doctrine  of 

cent  Creatures  ?  *Tis  abfurd  to  imagine  this 
of  a  God  fo  wife,  fo  righteous,  and  fo  mei;- 
ciful ! 

"  2.  Let  us  take  a  Survey  of  the  Vegeta- 
bles which  grow  out  of  the  Earth,  with  the 
Brute  Animals  which  are  found  on  the  Sur- 
face of  it,  and  we  fliall  find  more  Reafons 
to  conclude  that  Man  the  chief  Inhabitant, 
is  not  fuch  as  he  came  firft  out  of  his  Maker's 
Hand. 

*'  It  muft  be  granted  here  again,  that  the 
Wifdom  and  Goodnefs  of  the  Creator  are 
amazingly  ""  difplayed,  in  the  Animal  and 
the  Vegetable  World,  beyond  the  utmoft 
Reach  of  our  Thoughts  or  Praifes.  But 
ilill  we  may  have  Leave  to  enquire,  whether 
if  Man  had  continued  innocent,  among  the 
numerous  Herbs  and  Flowers  fitted  for  his 
Support  and  Delight,  any  Plants  or  Fruits 
of  a  malignant,  mortal  Nature  would  have 
grown  out  of  the  Earth,  without  fome  plain 
Mark  or  Caution  fet  upon  them  ? 

"  Can  we  fuppofe  that  among  the  Roots, 
Herbs  and  Trees  good  for  Food,  the  Great 
God  would  havefuffered  Mifchief,  Malady 
and  deadly  Poifon,  to  fpring  up  here  and 
there,  without  any  fufficient  Diftincflion,  that 
Man  might  know  how  to  avoid  them  ?  This 
is  the  Cafe  in  our  prefent  World;  Difeafe, 
Anguifh  and  Death,  have  entered  into  the 

Bowels 

"    p.    2J. 


Original  Sin.  319 

Bowels  and  Veins  of  Multitudes,  by  an  in- 
nocent and  fatal  Miftake  of  thefe  pernicious 
Things,  for  proper  Food. 

"  There  was  indeed  theTree  of  Knowledge 
in  Paradife.  ButMan  was  expreily  caution'd 
againft  it.  And  certainly  had  he  continued 
holy,  noPoifonous  Plant^  would  have  been 
fufFered  to  grow  on  the  Earth,  without  either 
fome  Natural  Mark  fet  upon  it,  or  fome 
Divine  Caution  to  avoid  it. 

"  Proceed  to  the  Animal  World.  There 
are  many  Creatures  indeed,  which  ferve  the 
Ufe  or  Pleafure  of  Man.  But  are  there  not 
many  other  Sorts,  which  he  is  neither  able 
to  govern,^  nor  to  refift  ?  And  by  which  all 
his  Race  are  expofed,  whenever  they  meet 
them,  to  Wounds  and  Anguifli  and  D^ath? 

''If Man  had  not  finned, would  there  have 
been  in  the  World  any  fuch  Creatures  as 
Bears  and  Tygers,  Wolves  and  Lions,  ani- 
mated with  fuch  Fiercenefs  and  Rage,  and 
armed  with  fuch  deftrudive  Teeth  and  Ta- 
lons? Would  the  innocent  Children  of  Men, 
have  ever  been  formed,  to  be  the  living 
Prey  of  thefe  Devourers?  Were  the  Life  and 
Limbs  of  holy  Creatures,  made  to  become 
Heaps  of  agonizing  Carnage  ?  Or  would 
their  FleHi  and  Bones  have  been  given  up  to 
be  cruihed  and  churned  between  the  Jaws 
of  Panthers  and  Leopards,  Sharks  and  Cro- 
codiles? 

V    p.  'Z7.       *    p.    2J. 


320  T^he  Doctrine  of 

codiles  ?  Let  Brutes  be  content  to  prey  on 
their  Fellow  Brutes,  but  let  Man  be  their 
Lord  and  Ruler. 

"  If  Man' were  not  falIen,would  there  have 
been  (o  many  Tribes  of  the  Serpent-kind, 
armed  with  deadly  Venom  ?  Would  fuch 
fubtle  and  ad:ive  Mifchiefs  have  been  made 
and  fent  to  dwell  in  a  World  of  Innocents  ? 
And  would  the  Race  of  all  thefe  Murderers 
and  deftrudiive  Animals,  have  been'  propa- 
gated for  fix  thoufand  Years,  in  any  Pro- 
vince of  God's  Dominion,  had  not  its  rational 
Inhabitants  been  in  Rebellion  againft  God  ? 
''What  are  the  immenfe Flights  ofLocufts 
which  darken  the  Sky,  and  lay  the  Fields 
defolate  ?  What  are  the  Armies  of  Hornets 
or  Mufcatoes,  that  frequently  make  a  plea- 
fant  Land  almoft  intolerable  ?  If  they  are 
found  in  the  Heats  of  Africky  and  of  the 
Eajl  and  Wejl-Indies^  one  would  think  they 
fhould  not  infeft  the  Folar  Regions,  if  the 
Creator  had  not  defign'd  them  for  a  Scourge 
to  the  Nations  on  all  Sides  of  the  Globe  ? 

''  What''  are  the  innumerable  Hoft  of  Ca- 
terpillars but  fo  many  Meflengers  of  the  An- 
ger of  God  againft  a  finful  Race  ?  And  fince 
we  can  neither  refift  nor  fubdue  them,  we 
may  certainly  infer,  that  we  are  not  now 
fuch  Favourites  of  Heaven,  as  God  at  firft. 
mad?  us. 

The 

*  P  H-     '  P-  2S. 


Original  Sin.**  321 

The  troublelbme  and  pernicious  Tribes  of 
Animals,  both  of  large  and  fmaller  Size, 
which  are  Fellow-Commoners  with  us  on 
this  great  Globe,  together  with  our  Impo- 
tence to  prevent  or  eicape  their  Mifchiefs,  is 
a  fufficient  Proof,  that  we  arc  not  in  the  full 
Favour  and  Love  of  the  God  that  made  us, 
and  that  He  has  quartered  his  Armies,  his 
Legions  among  us,  as  Princes  do  in  a  rebel- 
lious Province. 

"  It  is  true  all  thcfc  are  Trials  for  Man 
during  his  State  of  Probation.  But  a'  State 
of  Probation  for  innocent  Man  would  not 
have  included  Death  :  Much  lefs  a  violent 
and  bloody,  or  a  lingering  and  painful  Death. 
Accordingly  our  Return  to  Dull:  is  mention'd 
by  Mofes  as  a  Curfe'  of  God  for  tlic  Sin  of 
Man.  And  when  once  Life  is  forfeited  by 
all  Mankind,  then  a  painful  Death  may 
properly  become  a  Part,  of  the  further  Trial 
of  fuch  Creatures,  as  are  to  rife  again  :  And 
any  pious  Sufferers  may  be  rewarded  by  a 
happy  Refurredion.  But  a  paintul  Death 
could  never  be  made  a  Part  of  the  Trial  of 
innocent  Creatures,  who  had  never  forfeited 
Life,    nor  were   ever  legally   fubjed>cd  to 

Death. 

"  Upon  the  whole  therefore,  fuch  noxious 
and  deftrudtive  Plants  and  Animals,  could 

W  not 

•  p.  26.    *  p.  37» 


322  "The  Doqxi^i^E  of 

not  be  made  to  vex  and   difturb,  to  poifon 
and  deftroy,  a  Race  of  innocent  intellectual 

Beings.  -j 

/'  3.THE'Mannef  of  our  Entrance  into  Life 
is  another  Proof  of  univerfal  Sin.  Would 
the  great  and  good  God  have  appointed  In- 
telleftual  Animals,  had  they  been  finlefs,  to 
be  propagated  in  fuch  a  Way,  as  fhould  ne- 
celTarily  give  fuch  exquifite  Pain  and  Anguifli 
to  the  Mothers  w^ho  bring  them  forth  ?  And 
if  the  Contagion  had  not  been  univerfal, 
why  lliould  fuch  acute  Pangs  attend  almoft 
every  Female  Parent?  Are  not  the  multi-f 
plied  Sorrows  with  which  the  Daughters  of 
Eve  bring  forth,  an  evident  Token  that  they 
are  not  in  their  Original  State  of  Favour* 
with  that  God  who  created  them  and  pro* 
nounced  a  Blelfing  upon  them  in  their  Pro^ 
pagation  ?  ^ 

MosES^  informs  us,  That  God  bleffedih.t 
firft  Pair,  and  bid  them  be  fruitful  and  muU 
tiply  and  replenijh  the  Earth  and  fubdueiti 
And  foon  after  tells  us,  that  thefe  multiplied 
i^orroivs  in  Child-birth,  are  a  Curfe  from  an 
ifij  §n/:Jiu^riX3  ki  offended 

..^w  ^sibi  o^  i  1^  mom  iq  va-pm  imu 

^A'i.*  The  Author  has  been  cenfured  here  for  not  dropping  a 
Tear  over  the  Fair  Sex  under  their  Sorrows  and  acute  Pains; 
Bu.t  he  imagines,  he  has  been  dropping  Tears  in  every  Page, 
and  thatm'er  every  Part  of  Mankind.**    Undoubtedly  he  has : ' 
Ao4'it'^o.'-tow.unjuft,  how  crue)  is  thatCenfure?/j  iJiii>i 


Original  Sin*  323 

offended  God.  Surely  the  Curfe  is  not  as 
old  as  the  Bleffing:  But  Sin  and  Sorrow 
came  in  together,  and  fpread  a  wide  Curfe 
over  the  Birth  of  Man,  which  before  flood 
mly  under  a  Divine  Benedidion.  Not  that 
the  Bleffing  is  now  quite  taken  away,  tho* 
the  Pains  of  Child-bearing  are  added  to  it. 
And  daily  Experience  proves,  this  Curfe  is 
not  taken  away  by  the  Bleffing  repeated  to 

"  ;4.  Let  us  confider  in  the  next  Place 
how  the  Generality  of  Mankind  are  preferved 
in  Life.  Some  few  have  their  Food  with- 
out Care  or  Toil :  But  the  Millions  of  Hu- 
man Creatures,  in  all  the  Nations  of  the 
Earth,  are  conftrain'd  to  fupport  a  wretclicd 
Life  by  hard  Labour.  ^  What  dreadful 
Rifqucs  of  Life  or  Limbs,  do  Multitudes 
run,  to  purchafe  their  neceffary  Food  ? 
What  Wafte  of  the  Hours  of  fweet  Repofe, 
what  long  and  flavifh  and  painftil  Toils  by 
Day,  do  Multitudes  fuftain  in  order  to  pro- 
cure their  daily  Nourifliment  ?  'Tis  by  the 
Sweat  of  their  Brows  they  obtain  their  Bread: 
'Tis  by  a  continual  exhaufting  their  Spirits, 
that  many  of  them  arc  forced  to  relieve  their 
own  Hunger,  and  to  feed  their  helplefs  Off- 
fpring. 

"  If  we  furvey  the  lower  Ranks  of  Man- 
kind even  ia  England,  in  a  Land  of  Free- 

W  2  dom 


'  p.  30. 


324  ^he  Doctrine  of 

dom  and  Plenty,  a  Climate  temperate  and 
fertile,  which  abounds  with  Corn  and  FiTiits, 
and  rich  Variety  of  Food:  Yet  what  a  hard 
Shift  do  ten  thoufand  Families  make  to  fup- 
port  Life  ?  Their  whole  Time  is  devoured 
by  Bodily  Labour,   and  their  Souls  almoft 
eaten  up  with  gnawing  Cares,  to  anfwer 
that  Queftion,  What  fhall  I  eat,  and  what 
fliall   I   drink  ?    Even  in  the  pooreft   and 
coarfcft    Manner?     But    if  we    fend    our 
Thoughts  to  the  fultry  'Regions  oi  Africk^ 
the  Froil:  and  Snows  of  Norway^  the  Rocks 
and  Deferts  of  Lapland  and  Northern  Tar- 
tary^  what  a  frightful  Thing  is  Human  Life? 
How  is  the  Rational  Nature  loft  in  Slavery, 
and   Brutality,    and    incefiant   Toils,    and 
Hardfhips  ?  They  are  treated  like  Brutes  by 
their  Lords,  and  they  live  like  Dogs  and 
Affes,  among  Labours  and  Wants,  Hunger 
and  Wearinefs,  Blows  and  Burthens  without 
End,     Did  God  appoint  this  for  Innocents  ? 
"  Is  the  momentary  Pleafare  of  Eating 
and  Drinking  a  Recompence  for  inceffant 
Labour  ?  Does  it  bear  any  Pix)portion  to  the 
Length  of  Toil,  Pain  and  Hazard,  where- 
with the  Provifions  of  Life  are  procured? 
M^/<'j  thought  not.    j  When  he  ^Ipeaks  of 
Man's  eatiTig  Bread  in  the  S^weat  of  bi^  Brcws^ 
he  acknowledges  this  to  be  another  lof  Mthe 
Curfcs  of  God  for  the  Sin  of  Man. 
.    -  .  ''  'Tis 


'  p.  3»-     '  P-  3-- 


OriCINAL   SlNi^  325 

>.i'^-  'Tis  ftrange  that  any  Man  fliould  fay, 
^'  In  this  Sentence  of  Gov  ^  noCu?'fe  is  pronounced 
"  upon  either  Adam'i  Body,  Soul  or  Pcjierity  : 
''  That  the  Sorrow  of  Child-bearing  is  not  in-' 
^^  fliBedas  a  Ciirfe :  That  the  Labours  of  Life 
'-  were  increq/ed,  but  net  asaCurfe:  ThatDcafh 
"  was7iot  a  Cu7'fe,''  I  would  fain  afk  what  is 
a  Curfcy  if  fome  Natural  Evil  pronounced 
and  executed  upon  a  Perfon,  or  Thing,  be 
notfo  ?  Efpecially  when  it  is  pronounced  on 
Account  of  Sin,  and  by  God  Himfelf,  as 
fupremc  Governor  and  Judge?  And  even 
the  Curfe  on  the  Ground  falls  properly  on  the 
Perfon  who  tills  it. 

"  It  is  granted,  God  can  turn  Curfes 
into  Bleffings.  Yet  thefe  Evils  were  origi- 
nally pronounced  and  infiidled  as  a  Curfe  or 
Punip?nent  of  Sin,  as  it  is  written,  curfed  is 
every  07ie  who  continueth  not  in  all  T'htiigs, 
And  that  Death  was  defigned  as  a  Curfe  on 
Man  for  Sin  is  evident  5  for  Chrill  fufered 
that  Curfe  for  us, 

"  5.  Consider  the  Charadler  of  Man- 
kind in  general  witli  Regard  '  to  Religion 
and  Virtue,  and  it  will  be  hard  to  believe 
they  bear  the  Image  of  their  Common  Fa- 
ther in  Knowledge  and  Holincfs.  Some  I 
grant,  are  renewed  in  his  Image:  But  tlie 
Bulk  of  the  World  are  of  another  Stamp; 

\V   3  and 

f  P-  33- 


326  I'he  DoctrtJe  of 

and  fufficiently  fhew,  there  is  fome  fatal 
Contagion  ipread  thro'  this  Province  of  God's 
Dominion.  So  St.  John  tells  \is,  that  except 
the  few  who  a^e  born  ofQoj).  the  tVorJdlkth 
kWickednefi,  '^^X"  l^"^^  ^ 

"  And  can  we  think  df  that  grbfs  ah3 
ftupid  Ignorance  of  God,  which  reigns  thro' 
vaft  Trafts  of  Afta^  Africa  and  America^ 
^nd  the  thick  Darknefs  which  buries  all  the 
Heathen  Countries, ""  and  reduces  them  al? 
moft  to  Brutes:  Can  we  think  of  the  abo^ 
minable  Idolatries,  the  lewd  and  cruel  Rites 
of  Worfliip  which  have  been  fpread  thro' 
whole  Nations;  the  impious  and  ridiculous 
Superftitions  which  are  now  praftiled  among 
the  greateft  Part  of  the  World:  And  yet 
believe  the  blefled  God  would  put  fuch 
wretched  polluted  Workmanfhip  out  of  his 
pure  Hands?  ^    '     [.^"^.^f^^  '/'^  ^ 

"  Can  we  furvey  me  3elperate  Impiety 
and  Profanenefs,  the  Swearing  and  Curfing 
and  wild  Blafphemy,  that  is  pracftifed,  Day 
and  Night  among  vail  Multitudes  of  thofe 
who  profefs  to  know  the  true  God:  Can  we 
behold  that  almoft  Univerfal  Negledt  of 
CroD,  of  his  Fear,  his  Worfhip,  and  the 
Obedience  due  to  Him,  which  is  found  even 
among  them  who  ^xtcAltAClmJiims:  And 
^yet  imagine,  that  thefe  bear  that  Ipiage  of 
Cjod  in  which  they  were  created P^"^^^^  ^^^' 
:i:cf(;  <c  ]s[oR 

«  p.  34-  -       ' 


Original  Sin.  327 

; ,  .l\  Nor  have  Men  forgot  God  only,  but 
they  feem  alfo  to  have  abandoned  their  Du- 
ties to  their  Fellow-Creatures  alfo.  Hence 
the  perpetual  Pradices  of  Fraud  and  Villrvny 
in  the  Commerce  of  Mankind^,  the  innumer- 
able Inftances  of  Oppreflion  and  Cruelty 
which  run  thro'  the  World  ;  the  Pride'  and 
Violence  of  the  Great,  the  Wrath,  Ambi- 
tion and  Tyranny  of  Princes,  and  the  end- 
lefs  Iniquities  and  Mifchlefs  that  arife,  from 
Malice,  Envy  and  Revenge  in  lower  People. 
If  we  add  to  thefe  the  impure  Scenes  of  Luft 
and  Intemperance,  which  defy  the  Day  and 
pollute  the  Darknefs :  With  the  monftrous 
Barbarities  which  are  continually  committed 
by  the  Heathen  Savages  in  yffrick  and  A- 
merica  (feme  of  whom  kill  and  roaft  their 
Fellow- Creatures,  and  eat  up  Men  as  they 
eat  Bread)  and  by  the  Chrifti an  .Savages  in 
the  hiquijition  eftabliAed  in  AJia^  as  well  as 
in  many  Parts  oi  Europe:  Can  we  {lill  ima- 
gine, That  Mankind  abide  in  that  State, 
wherein  they  came  from  the  Hands  of  thctr 
Maker? 

*'  Th  Axfar  the"  greatejl  Number  of  Mm  my 
m/,  was  the  known  Sentiment  of  the  wifer 
Heathens.  They  faw  and  bewailed  the  un- 
deniable Fadt,  tho'  they  knew  nut  how  to 
account  for  it.  'o*  TrAs/ovf?  Kfltxo*'-  Moji  Men 
are  ^ojickedy  was  a  commoii.  pj^^fv^on  a- 
_    .  W  4  mone 

Ho/-  .  ^  ^ 

•  p.  35-     •  F-  37-  ;..    T  - 


3^  The  Doctrine  of 

inorfg  them.  Even  the  Poets  eouM  not  but 
fee  this  obvious  Trutb.^  So  F/rf//  brings  in 
Anchifisy  telling  his  Son^..^ ew  are  happy  in 
the  other  World.         ''n-'^a^ 

Pazici^  Iceta  arva  tenemus. 
And  in  this  Life  ifcr^^^. remarks  of  Men  in 
general^  J  H   ir 

Nitimur  in  vctitumfemper^  cupimiifq\  negata. 
We  ai^  always  deliring  and  purfuing  for:* 
bidden  Things.     Nay  he  lays 

Vitiis  netnojine  nafcitur.  No  Man  is  born 
Without  Vices :  And  gives  this  Charadler  of 
young  Men  in  general,  ^ 

Cereus  in  viiium  fe&i  -,  imnitoribus  tifpeK^xj 
Seneca  fays  jufl;  the  fame, 

Pejora  yuvenes facile  prcecepfa  andiunt : 
Young  Men  readily  hearken  to  evil  Councils; 
thev  are  fbft  as  Wax  to  be  moulded  into 
Vice,  but  rough   and  rugged  to  their  bed 
Monitors. 

'*  JuvenAl  abounds  with  the  fame  Ac- 
counts of  Human  Nature: 
^^'^^^ce  tam  filia  dies^  iit  cejfet proderefuretn? 
booiiliii'd  t?i;  Ad  Mores  Natiira  recurrit 

Damnafcs^  fixn  &  mu!ari  nefcia, 

S^uifnajn  ^'  honmiimi  eji^   quern  tu  contentnm 
videris  uno  _.,:  .      ...: 

Flagitio?  ,  Docilesi'mitandis     '^ 

Turpjk^ts^^ pravis  ojnTiesfumus^  , 

'  ifrnT  r;rttr["/  6.    And 
J  p.  38.     •«  p.  39. 


^Original  Sin.  329 

"  6,  And/  not  only  they  of  riper  Age, 
but  even  thofe  of  tender  Years,  difcover  the 
Principles  of  Iniquity  and  Seeds  of  Sin. 
What  young  Ferments  of  Spite  and  Envy, 
what  native  Wrath  and  Rage,  are  found  in 
the  Httle  Hearts  of  Infants,  and  fiiflicientlvt 
difcovered  by  their  Hands  and  Eyes  an<i 
Countenances,  before  they  can  fpeak  or 
know  Good  from  Evil  !  What  additional 
Crimes  of  Lying  and  Deceit,  Obftinacyand 
Perverfenefs  proceed  to  blemifli  their  younger 
Years  ? 

"  How  little  Knowledge  or  Thought  of 
God,  their  Creator  and  Governor,  is  found 
in  Children  when  they  can  diftinguifli  Good 
and  Evil  ?  What  an  utter  Difregard  of  Him 
that  made  them,  and  of  the  Duties  they  owe 
to  Him  ?  And  when  they  begin  *  to  ad:  ac- 
cording to  their  childifhAge,  how  little  Senfe 
liave  they  of  what  is  morally  right  and  good? 
How  do  evil  PalTions  or  irregular  Appetites 
continually  prevail  in  them?  Even  from  their 
iirit  Capacity  of  adting  as  Moral  Creatures, 
how  are  they  led  away  to  pradlifc  Faliliuod 
and  Injury  to  their  Play-fellows,  perhaps 
with  Cruelty  or  Revenge?  How  often  are 
they  engaged  in  bold  Difobedience  to  their 
Parents  or  Teachers  ?  And  whence  does  this 
arife  ?  What  is  the  Root,  that  brings  forth 
fuch  early  bitter  Fruit  ? 

'  p.  41.    ^  p.  42.    *  p.  43. 


33©  ^l^^  Doctrine  of 

"  It  cannot  be  imputed  to  Cuftom,  Edu- 
cation or  Example  :  For  many  of  thefe 
Things  appear  in  Cliildren  before  th^y  can 
take  any  Notice  of  ill  Examples,  or  are  ca- 
pable of  imitating  them.  And  even  where 
there  are  only  "good  Examples  about  them, 
and  when  the  beft  and  earlieft  Inftruftions 
are  given  them>  and  inculcated  with  the  ut- 
nioft  Care,  yet  their  Hearts  run  aftray  from 
God.  The  far  greateft  Part  of  them  vifibly 
follow  the  corrupt  Influences  of  Scnfe,  Ap- 
petite, Paflion,  and  manifeft  very  early  the 
evil  Principles  of  Stubbornnefs,  Pride  and 
Difobedience.  ni  bu:i  ■ 

**  I.  To""  give  a  ftill  fuller  ConjSrmatfon 
©f  this  Truth,  that  Mankind  have  a  corrupt 
Nature  in  them,  let  it  be  obferved,  that 
where  Perfons  have  not  only  had  all  poflible 
Helps  of  Education  from  their  Parents,  but 
have  themfelves  taken  a  religious  Turn  be- 
times, what  perpetual  Hindrance  do  they 
find  within  themfelves  ?  What  inward  Op-^ 
portions  work  in  their  Heart,  and  perhaps 
interrupt  their  Holy  Courfe  of  Life  ?  What 
Vanity  of  Mind,  what  irregular  Appetites, 
"what  Forgetfulnefs  of  God,  what  evil 
Thoughts  and  Tendencies  of  Heart  rife  up, 
in  Contradiffion  to  their  beft  Purpofes?  Info- 
much  that  there  ""is  7iot  ajiijl  Ma7i  upon  Earthy 

•  p.  44-    "  P-  4S-    "  P'  46. 


%vh  thro*'  his  whole  Life  doth  Good  ayid  fin- 
neth  not.  —  -;  ^  - 

"  To  fum  up' the" three  laft  Confidera* 
tibnsr "  If  the  Bulk  of  Mankind  are  grolTly 
finful,  and  if  every  Individual  without  Ex- 
ception is  adually  a  Sinner  againft  the  Law 
of  his  Creator  :  If  finful  Propenfities  appear 
even  in  our  moft  tender  Years ;  and  every 
Child  becomes  an'adual  Sinner  almoft  as 
foon  as  it  becomes  a  moral  Agent:  Then 
we  have  juft  Reafon  to  conclude,  That  there 
is  fome  Original  Taint  fpread  thro'  the  whole 
Race  of  Men  from  their  Birth.  It  has  been 
Maid  indeed,  That  "  if  the  firft  Man  fell 
"  into  Sin,  tho'  he  was  innocent  and  perfect, 
^*  then  among  a  Million  of  Men,  every  one 
"  mi^^ht  Sin,  tho'  he  was  as  innocent  and 
*^  perfect  as  Adam^ 

"  I  ANSWER,  There  is  a  bare  Poflibllity 
of  the  Event,  but  the  Improbability  of  it  is 
in  the  Proportion  of  a  Million  to  One. 
-  "  And  I  prove  it  thus.  If  a  Million  of 
Creatures  were  made  in  an  equal  Probability 
to  ftand  or  fall :  And  if  all  the  Numbers 
from  One,  to  One  Million  inclufivcly,  were 
fet  in  a  Rank,  'tis  a  Million  to  one  that  juft 
any  fmgle  propofed  Number  of  all  thelc 
fliould  fall  by  Sin.  Now  the  total  Sum  is 
one   of  thefe  Numbers,  that  is,  the  laft  ot 

them. 

V  p.  ^7, 


332  The  Doctrine  of 

them.  Confequently  it  is  a  Million  to  One 
againil:  the  Suppoiition  that  the  whole  Num- 
ber of  Men  fhould  fall. 
.  *'  And  yet  farther,  if  they  were  all  made 
(as  the  Goodnefs  of  God  feenio  to  require) 
in  a  greater  Probability  of  ftanding  than 
falling,  then  it  is  abundantly  more  than  a 
*  Million  to  One,  that  all  fliould  fm  without 
Exception.  And  the  Argument  grows  ftill 
ten  thoufand  Times  ftronger,  if  we  fup- 
pofe  ten  thoufand  Millions  to  have  lived 
fince  the  Creation. 

"  8.  That  Man  is  a  fallen  Creature, 
appesrs  farther  from  hence  :  No  Man  is 
able  by  h'S  prcfent  natural  Powers  to  per« 
form""  that  Law  of  his  Creator  which  is  ftill 
written  upon  his  Heart.  ■■■  i^^i^i  lu 

"  Does  not  this  Law  reauire  us  tci  love 
God  with  ail  our  Heart,  to  do  to  others 
as  we  would  they  iliould  do  to  us,  and  to 
govern  our  Senfes,  Appetites  and  Paflions, 
by  the  Rules  of  Reafon  ?  Does  it  not  require 
that  thefe  Things  whether  they  regard  God, 
ourfelves,  or  Others,  fliould  be  done  per- 
fe<^ly,  withouiDefed?  Doth  it  not  Jemand,^ 
that  we  ihould  fear,  honour  and- truft  the 
Great  God,  and  obey  all.his  Will  in  a  perfed:. 
Manncr  ?  Doth  it  not  prrfcribe  vconftant 
Juftic<e,.^Truth  and  Goodnefs,.  towanl^  our 

*  p.  49.    »  p.  49.    »  p.  50. 


\Original  Sin^  333 

Neighbour,  Without  one  covetous  Wirti,  one 
Aa  of  tlie  Will,  or  Tongue  or  Hand,  con- 
trary to  Truth  or  Love?  Does  it  not  demand, 
that  every  Senfe,  Appetite  and  Paflion,  fhould 
be  perfedHy  fubjedt  toRcalbn?  Now  is  there 
a  Man  on  Earth,  \vho  can  lay,  ''  I  am  able 
k  by  my  natural  Powers  to  do  this  ? "  ) 

"Even  the 'Outward  Temptations  to 
which  Man  is  expofed,  are  evidently  too 
ilrong,  to  be  effectually  and  conftantly  re- 
iiiled,  by  his  now  enfeebled  Reaion  and  Con- 
fcience;  while  at  the  fame  Time,  his  Will, 
his  Appetites  and  Paflions  have  a  powerful 
Propenfity  to  comply  with  them. 

''  '^Now  would  a  jul},  a  wife  and  a  merci- 
ful God  have  formed  Intelledual  Creatures, 
in  fuch  a  wretched  State,  with  Powers  and 
Capacities  fo  much  below  their  Duties,  that 
they  break  his  Law  daily  and  continuallyi> 
and  are  not  able  to  help  it  ? 

"  Should  it  be  faid,  ''  God  cannot  re- 
"  quire  more  than  we  are  able  to  perform." 
You  have  an  Anfwer  in  your  own  Bofom. 
For  you  know  and  feel,  God  docs  require 
this,  even  by  the  Law  He  lias  written  in 
your  Heart:  Yet  2.  You  feel  you  are  not 
able  to  perform  it,  untie  or  cut  the  Knot,> 
how  you  may. 

"  Should  it  bcfaid  'again,  *'  God  pities 
"  and  pardons  feeble  Creatures,"  I  anfwer, 

;[.  Ac.cord- 


334  "^^^  Doctrine  of 

I.  According  to  the  Covenant  of  Grace,  He 
does,  but  not  according  to  the  Law  of  Cre- 
ation. But  2.  Did  God  make  fome  of  his 
nobleft  Creatures,  fo  feeble  in  their  Original 
'state,  as  continually  to  offend,  and  want 
Pardon  ?  Did  He  give  them  fuch  a  Law  as 
fhould  never,  never  be  fulfilled  by  any  one  of 
them  ?  Would  a  God  who  adjufts  the  Pro- 
portions of  all  Things  with  the  exafteft  Wif- 
dom  give  a  Law  to  his  Creatures  fo  difpro- 
portionate  to  their  Original  Powers,  that 
even  in  the  State  of  their  Creation,  they  are 
under  a  Neceflity  of  breaking  it,  and  ftand 
in  Need  of  daily  Forgivenefs  ?  Does  not 
this  nngle  Confideration  prove,  That  Man 
is  now  a  Degenerate  Being,  and  not  fuch  as 
he  was  at  firft  created,  by  the  wife,  the 
righteous,  the  merciful  God  ! 

"If  you*  who  are  moil  unwilling  to  ac- 
knowledge the  Fall  of  Man,  would  but  look 
into  yourfelf  daily,  and  oblerve  all  the  finful 
and  irregular  Turns  of  your  own  Heart : 
How  propenfc  you  are  to  Folly,  in  greater 
or  lefs  Inftances,  how  foon  Appetite  and 
PafTion  oppofeReafon  and  Confcience ;  How 
frequently  you  fall  fhort  of  the  Demand  of 
tlie  perfect  Law  of  God  :  How  thoughtlefs 
and  forgetful  you  are  of  your  Creator,  how 
<jgld,^3languiihing  ypur. Affe^iiQii  to  Him  : 

^-«.^r-»        -S  .^--jl.     vvvrl     \\\v  How 

H   %  * 


Original  Sin.  ^^5 

How  little  Delight  you  have  in  Virtue,  or  in 
Communion  with  God  :  Could  you  think 
you  are  llich  an  innocent  and  holy  Creature, 
as  God  at  iirfl  created  you  ?  And  that  you 
have  been  fuch  even  from  your  Childhood  ? 
Surely  a  more  accurate  Oblervation  of  your 
own  Heart,  muft  convince  you,  That  you 
yourfelf  are  degenerated  from  the  iirft  Redli- 
tude  of  your  Nature, 

^v\ig.  Another  ^Pix)of  of  the  Degeneracy 
of  Mankind  is  this,  They  are  evidently 
under  the  Difpleafure  of  God,  which  could 
not  be  in  their  primaeval  State.  As  we  have 
taken  a  fliort  View  of  tbe  Shis  of  Men^  let 
us  alfo  briefly  furvey  tbe  Miferies  of  Mankind^ 
and  fee  how  thefe  confift  with  their  being  in 
the  Favour  of  God. 

"  Think  on  the  Thoufands  of  rational 
Creatures  defcending  hourly  to  the  Grave: 
A  few,  by  fome  fudden  Stroke;  but  far  the 
greater  Part  by  painful  and  flow  Approaches:. 
The  Grave!  a  dark  and  fliameful  Prifon! 
which  would  never  have  been  made  for 
Creatures,  perfifting  in  Innocence,  and  abid- 
ing in  the  Favour  of  Him  that  gave  them 
Life  and  Being.  Death  is  the  Wages  of 
Sin;  and  from  this  Punifliment  of  Sin,  none 
of  Mankind  can  claim  a  Difcharge. 

"  Had  they  ftood,  can  we  think  any  of 
them  would  have  died  ?   Much  Icfs,  every 

one 
«  p.  56. 


336  I'he  DoCTRIN-E  of 

one  of  them  ?  And  efpecially  that  half  the 
Human  Race,  fliould  have  been  doom'dto 
die  before  kv^n  Years  old  ?  Before  ^  they 
reach  the  tenth  Part  of  the  prefent  Age  of 
Man,  or  have  done  any  Thing  in  Life  worth 
living  for  ? 

-  ''But  let  its  proceed  to  other  Miferies 
that  attend  us,  and  haflen  us  down  to  the 
Grave. 

"  Think  next  of  the  Multitudes  that  are 
racked  Day  and  Night  by  the  Gout  and 
Stone,  the  Cholic  and  Rheumatifm,  and 
all  Manner  of  acute  and  painful  Difeafes : 
And  then  fay,  would  a  merciful  God  have 
contrived  tliefe  Torments  for  finlefs  Crea- 
tures ?  Think  of  the  difmal  Scenes  of  War 
and  Bloodflied,  that  have  by  Times  over- 
fpread  all  Nations  ?  Caft  your  Thought  on 
a  Field  of  Battle,  where  Thoufands  of  Men 
are  deftroycd '  like  Brute  Beads,  and  perilh 
by  fharp  ai\d  bloody  Strokes,  or  by  the  fatal 
Engines  of  Death  ?  See  Thoufands  more  lye 
on  the  cold  Ground,  with  their  Flefh  and 
Limbs  batter'd  and  torn,  wounded  and  pant- 
ing in  extreme  Anguiih,  till  the  murmuring 
Soul  takes  its  Flight  ?  Are  thefe  the  Signals 
of  th'^ir  Maker's  Love,  and  of  his  Lnage  in 
which  tliev  were  created  ? 

>"  ^Thimk  of  the  Numbers  that  are  fwal- 
lowed  ^;p.iu  tlic- mighty  Waters,,   by  the 

'<*u:  *.  Rage 

»  p.  sr-   ■'  p.  5S.   ^  p.  59.  -,.    :.. 


Original  Sin.  337 

Rage  of  ftormy  Winds  and  Seas.  Review 
the  Multitudes  which  have  been  fwept  away 
by  the  Peftilence,  or  confumed  by  the  tedi- 
ous Agonies  of  Famine.  Would  Famine 
and  Peftilence  with  all  the  Train  of  lingering 
Horrors  which  attend  them,  have  ever  been 
made  for  innocent  Creatures,  to  have  fwept 
away  whole  Nations  of  them  of  every  Age 
and  Sex,  Men,  Women  and  Children,  with- 
out Diftinftion  ?  * ' 

"  Think  ''yet  again,  what  Numbers  of 
Men  have  been  cruflied  into  Miferies  and 
Death,  and  buried  by  Earthquakes  ?  Or 
have  had  their  Bones  broken,  their  Limbs 
disjointed,  and  their  Flefh  painfully  batter'd 
by  the  Fall  of  Houfes  :  Perhaps  buried  a- 
live  in  the  Rulils,  of  entire  Towns  or  Vil- 
lages, while  their  Neighbours  have  been 
drowned  in  Multitudes,  by  the  difmal  E- 
ruptions  of  Water  or  deftroyed  by  Deluges 
of  Liquid  Fire,  burfting  out  of  the  Earth. 
Would  a  God  of  Goodnefs  and  Juftice  have 
treated  innocent  Creatures  in  this  Manner  ? 

"  Carry  your  Thoughts  to  the  Coun- 
tries of  thofe  Savages,  where  Thoufands  of 
their  conquered  Enemies,  or  Prifoncrs  of 
War,  are  offer'd  in  Sacrifice  to  their  Idols, 
or  tortured  and  roafted  to  Death  by  flow 
Fires  !  Add  this  to  all  the  former  Miferies, 
and  then  let  calm  Reflexion  iiy,  whether 

X  this 

*  p.  6o> 


338  The  Doctrine  of 

this  World  does  not  look  like  a  Province  half 
forfaken  of  its  gracious  Governor  ? 

*'  Some  'perhaps  w^ill  fay,  It  is  but  a 
fmall  Part  of  Mankind,  who  are  involv'ci 
in  thefe  dreadful  Calamities :  And  they  may 
fufFer  peculiar  Afflidions,  for  their  own  per- 
fonal  Iniquities. 

"  I  ANSWER,  take  a  juft  Survey  of  thofe 
who  have  fuffer^d  thus,  and  there  is  not  the 
leaft  Reafon  to  think,  they  were  Sinners  a- 
hove  others.  Do  not  thefe  Calamities  fpre^d 
diro'  whole  Countries  and  involve  the  heft 
and  the  worft  of  Men  together  ?  Whole  Na- 
tions fuffer  by  them  at  once.  And  indeed 
fuch  is  the  Corruption  of  Human  Nature, 
that  wherever  they  come,  they  find  none  in- 
nocent. And  it  is  the  general  Situation  of 
Mankind,  under  the  juft  Difpleafure  of 
God,  which  expofes  them  to  fuch  De- 
ftru6lion. 

''  But  to  proceed.'"     Think  of  the  innu- 
merable Common  Misfortunes  that  attend 
Iluman  Life  !  What  Multitudes  perifh  by 
thefe  in  one  Week?  And  how  much  larger 
-a  Number  do  thefe  Accidents  injure  aad  fill 
their  Lives  with  Pain,    tho'  they  are  not 
'brought  immediately  to  the  Grave  ?    Think 
of  the  Milchiefs  wiiich  one  Part  of  Man- 
^kirid, 'in  every  Place  ar-e  continually  contriv- 
ing or  priwSifing  againft  the  other.     Take  a 
'■  '^^^^i  i-.  /^  View 

»  p.  61.     "  p.  62.  fC    q  *      'i'i  .q  '■ 


Original  Sin*  3^9 

View  of  thefe  extenfive  and  reigning  Evils, 
and  then  fay  whether  this  World,  be  not  a 
Part  of  the  Creation  of  God,  which  bears 
plain  Marks  of  its  Creator's  Difpleafure  ? 

"  Much  is  added  to  the  Heap  of  human 
Mifcries  by  the  Sorrows  that  arifc  from  the 
daily  Lofs  of  our  deareft  Comforts*  What 
Groans  and  Wailings  of  the  Living  furround 
the  Pillows  of  dying  Friends  or  Relations  ? 
What  "Symptoms  of  piercing  Diftrefs  attend 
the  Remains  when  they  are  conveyed  to  the 
Grave?  By  fuch  Loffes,  the  Comforts  of 
future  Life  lofe  their  Relifh,  and  the  Sor- 
rows are  doubly  embittered. 

"  In  the  civilized  Parts  of  the  World, 
there  is  fcarce  one  Perfon  Sick  or  in  Pain, 
miferable  or  dying,  but  feveral  others  fuftain 
a  confiderable  Share  of  Mifery,  by  the  ftrong 
Ties  of  Nature  or  Friendihip.  This  diffufes 
a  perfonal  Calamity  thro'  whole  Families* 
This  multiplies  Human  Miferies  into  a  new 
and  endlefs  Number.  Add  to  this,  that 
only  the  Unkindnefs  or  Falfhood  of  thofe 
from  whom  we  expedled  the  tendereft  Af- 
fedion,  but  the  "  Anguifli  which  fprings 
from  all  our  own  utieafy  and  unruly  PaC- 
lions.  Bring  in  here  all  the  Wrath  and 
Refentment  in  the  Hearts  of  Men,  all  the 
Envy  and  Malice  that  burn  within,  all  the 
imaginary  Fears,  and  the  real  Terrors  of 
V,;  X  z  future 

•  p.  63.    •  p.  64. 


future  Diftrefs  coming  Irpbn  us,  all  the  Rage 
and  Defpair  of  loft  Blcmngs  that  werie  once 
within  Qur  Hopes,  and  all  the  Ferments  of 
Animal  Nature,  which  torment  the  Spirit 
all  Day,  and  forbid  our  nightly  Repofei 
Would  Mankind  be  in  fuch  a  Condition  as 
this,  if  they  v/ere  ftill  in  the  Favour  of. their* 
Maker'?  '     ^^'^  di^jj.- 

"  Yes,  Men  may  make  Miferies  for  them- 
"  felves,  and  be  punifhed  by  them.  But 
*'  compare  the  Sorrows  which  any  Man  ' 
/'  neceffarily  fuffers,  with  the  Comforts  he 
"  enjoys,  and  the  one  will  ballance  the  other.. 
^*  Or  if  his  Sorrows  outweigh  his  Comforts, 
"  this  may  be  neceffary  in  a  State  of  Trial : 
"  And  God  will  reward  tlie  Over-ballance 
*'  of  SufFerino;s  hereafter."  "    " 

"  I  ANSWER,  There  isnoReafon  to  think, 
the  far  greater  Part  of  Mankind  will  have 
any  Reward  hereafter  :  And  if  not,  how 
ihall  we  account  for  this  Over-ballance  of 
Sufferings  with  Regard  to  them  ?  Therefore 
we  cannot  ^  neceffarily  impute  the  fuperior 
Sorrows  merely  to  your  being  in  a  State  of 
Probation  :  But  rather  to  the  Difpleafure  of 
the  righteous  Creator  and  Governor  of  the 
World."    "  •'':  .v^^^'   "  '  ~'    ''.  '■ 

-  i5r¥o  mak^^tgi^'lfil  clearer.;  fmt 

only  tliofe'  wbo  are  grown  up  in  the  Praftice 

of  inicj^vlity,  who  may  ^e  punifli'd  for  their 

*"'■  .  own 

•*  p.  6j.     •'p.  66. 


Original  Sin.  341 

own  Sins,  but  all  Mankind  in  their  very  In- 
fancy bear  the  Tokens  of  God's  Difpleafurc. 

"  Before  Children  are  capable  of  com- 
mitting Sin,  they  are  fubjecft  to  a  thoufand 
Miferies.  What  'Anguifli  and  Pain  are  they 
frequently  expofed  to,  even  as  they  are  com- 
ing into  the  World,  and  as  foon  as  they  are 
cnter'd  into  it  ?  What  Agonies  await  their 
Birth  ?  What  numerous  and  acute  Maladies 
are  ready  to  attack  them  ?  What  Gripes, 
what  Convulfions,  what  inward  Torments, 
which  brine  fome  of  them  down  to  Death,- 
within  a  few  Hours  or  Days  after  tliey  have 
begun  to  live.  And  if  they  furvive  a  few 
Months,  what  Torture  do  they  find  in 
breeding  their  Teeth,  and  other  Maladies  of 
Infancy,  which  can  be  told  only  by  Shrieks 
and  Tears,  and  that  for  whole  Days  and 
Nights  together.  What  additional  Pains  do 
they  often  fuftain,  by  the  Negligence  of 
their  Mothers,  or  Cruelty  of  their  Nurfes  ? 
Whereby  many  of  them  are  brought  down 
to  the  Grave,  either  on  a  fudden,  or  by  flow 
and  painful  Degrees.  vjiofc 

"  And'  what  fliall  we  fiy  ofwnole  Na- 
tions in  elder  Times,  and  fome  even  at  this 
Day,  who  when  they  cannot  or  will  not 
maintain  them,  expofe  their  Children  in  the 
WoodSi  to  be  torn  and  dcvour'd  by  the  next 
wild  Beafl  that  paffes  by?  Add  to  this  the 

^m  7  common 

iiv.rc  '^ 

'  p.  67.     »  p.  68. 


34^  ^he  Doctrine  of 

common  Calamities  in  which  Infants  are  in* 
volved,  by  Fire,  Earthquake,  Peftilenqe, 
And  there  are  a  thousand  other  Accidents 
which  attend  them,  whereby  their  Members,, 
theii*  natural  Powers,  receive  difmal  Inju-^ 
ries :  So  that  perhaps  they  drag  on  Life,, 
with  Blindnefs,  Deafnefs,  Lamenefs,  or  Dif^ 
tortion  of  Body  or  Limbs.  Sometimes  they 
knguifli  on  to  Manhood,  or  even  old  Age, 
under  fore  Calamities,  which  began  almoft 
as  foon  as  their  Being  and  which  are  only- 
ended  by  Death. 

"  '  Now  as  thefe  Suiferings  cannot  be 
fent  upon  them,  to  correft  their  perfonat 
Sins,  fo  neither  are  they  fent  as  a  Trial  of 
their  Virtue ;  for  they  have  no  Knowledge 
of  Good  or  Evil.  Yet  we  fee  Multitudes  of 
thefe  little,  miferable  Beings.  And  are  thefe 
treated  as  innocent  Creatures  ?  Or  rather  as 
under  fome  general  Curfe,  involved  in  fome 
general  Punifhment  ? 

"  But  "may  not  thefe  Sufferings  of  Chil- 
"  dren  be  for  the  Punifhment  of  the  Sins  of 
**  their  Parents  ?" 

"  Not  with  any  Juftice  or  Equity,  unlefs 
the  Sins  of  the  Parents  are  imputed  to  their 
Children.  Befides,  many  of  the  Parents  of 
thefe  fuffering  Children,  are  dead  or  abfent, 
fo  as  never  to  know  it.  And  how  in  thefe 
Cafes  can  it  be  a  Punifhment  for  their  Pa- 
rents Sin,  any  otherwife  than  as  it  is  ^  ge- 

•  p;  69.     •  p.  71. 


Original  Sii^:  343^ 

neral  Punifliment  for  the  Sin  of  jl^jfr  Firft, 
Parent  ?  ,/<^ 

"  Bui:  GOD  recompenfes  them  for  thefe 
*^  Sufferings  hereafter."  Where  does  the,- 
Scripture  affirm  this?  Befides  many  of  them 
grow  up  to  Manhood.  And  if  they  prove, 
wicked  and  are  fent  to  Hell  at  laft,  what; 
Recompence  have  they  for  their  Infant- 
fufferings  ?  Or  will  you  fay,  God  puniflied 
them  before  they  had  finned,  becaufe  He 
l;new  before-hand  they  would  fm  ?  Yet  far- 
ther :  What  wife  or  good  Defign  can  this 
their  Punifhment  anfwer,  when  no  Creature 
can  know  what  they  are  puniflied  for,  if  it 
be  not  for  that  which  affeds  all  Mankind  ?  ^ 

*VBuT  how  are  fuch  Miferies  reigning  a- 
"  mong  his  Creatures  confident  with  the 
"  Goodnefs  of  God  ?"  PerfecT:ly  well  -,  I£ 
"^we  confider  Mankind  ^s  a  finful,  degene- 
rate Part  of  God's  Creation.  'Tis  moft  a- 
bundant  Goodnefs  that  they  have  any  Com- 
forts left,  and  that  their  Miferies  are  not 
doubled.  Now  the  infpired  Writers  do  conv 
fider  Mankind  as  fallen  from  God  3  and  fa 
his  Goodnefs  is  evident  in  a  thoufand  In- 
ftances:  Tho'  it  muft  be  confeft,  there  ara 
alfo  a  thoufand  Inftances  of  his  jufl  Hatred 
of  Sin,  and  his  righteous  Punifliments  among 
all  Nations. 

*'  II.  If  we"  put  together  all  thefe  Scenes 
of  Vice  and  Mifery,  it  is  evident  that  Crca- 

X  4  ,         ture? 

"  P-  73'    '  P-  74- 


344  ^^^^  Doctrine  of 

ture$  lyifig  in  fuch  deplorable  Circumftiance^; 
are  not  fuch  as  they  came  out  of  the 
Hands  of  their  Creator,  wha  is  wife, 
holy  and  good.  His  JVifdom,  which  is  all 
Harmony  and  Order,  would  not  fuffer  Hinfi 
to  frame  a  whole  Race  of  Beings,  undet 
fuch  wild  and  innumerable  Diforders,  Moral 
.as  well  as  Natural.  His  Holtjiefs  would  not 
permit  Him  to  create  Beings,  with  innate 
Principles  of  Iniquity :  Nor  his  Goodnefi  to 
produce  a  whole  Order  of  Creatures,  in 
fuch  Circumftances  of  Pain-,  Torment  and 
^ Death.  ---t:,^.         ^  ..,^:y 

*"'     '^  ^  Could  the  holy  and  blefled  Goii  o- 
r'riginally  defign  and  frame  a  whole  World 
of  intelligent  Creatures,    ift  -fuch  Circum- 
ftances, that  eveiy  one' of  them  coming  in- 
to Being,  according  to  the  Laws  of  Nature, 
in  a  long  Succeffion  of  Ages,  in  different 
Climates,  of  different  Conftitutions  andTenir- 
.  per§,  ^and  in  ten  thoufand  thoufand  different 
't  Stations  and  Conditions  of  Life  :  That  every 
one  of  them  fhould  break  the  Laws  of  Rea- 
%  ion  '  and  more  or  lefs  defile  themfelves  with 
.>5in  ?  That  every  one  fhould  offend  his  Ma- 
^jker, 'every  one  become  guilty  in  his  Sight  ? 
*^Every  one  expofe  himfelf  to  God*s  Difplea- 
'  ilire,    to   Pain    and   Mifery  and  Mortality, 
\;i\ithout  on.e  fmgle  Exception?  If  Men  were 


n3i 


fich  Creatures  as  God  at  firft  made  them, 
"''^*^'='  "  would 

'  p-  75. 


>^ 


^Original  Sin.  34^ 

would  not  one  Man,  among  fo  many  Mil- 
lions, have  made  a  right  Ufe  of  his  Reafon 
and  Confcience,  and  fo  have  avoided  Sin 
and  Death  ?  Would  this  have  been  the  uni- 
verfal  Confequent  of  their  Original  Con- 
ftitution,  as  framed  by  the  'Hand  of  a  wife, 
holy,  merciful  God  ?  What  can  be  more 
abfurd  to  imagine  then  this  ?  Surely  God 
made  Man  upright  and  happy :  Nor  could 
all  thefe  Mifchiefs  have  come  diredlly  from 
our  Creator's  Hand. 

Is  it  objeded,    That  "  ftill  the  greater 

Part  of  Men  have  more  Moral  Good  than 

Evil  in  them,   and  have  more  Pleafurc 

hV  than  Pain  ;  and  therefore,  on  the  whole, 

-!i  Mankmd  is  not  fuifitl  and  inifa'able  :  And 

x?' that  even  the  beft  Human  Conftitutions, 

,4\  lay  fome  innocent  Perfons,  under  unavoid- 

jr"  able  Hardfhips."     I  anfwer  *  i.  In  order 

to  pronounce  a  Man  mtferahJe^  he  muft  have 

more  Pain  than  Pleafure  :    But  in  order  tci 

pronounce  a  Man  a  Sinner ^  there  is  no  Need, 

that  his  Moral  Evil  fhould  exceed  his  Good. 

If  a  Man  had  an  hundred  Virtues,  one  Vice 

would  make  him  a  Criminal  in  the  Sight  of 

God  :   One  TranfgrefTion  of  the  Law  of  his 

-..r  Creator,    would  lay  him  under  liis  juft  Dif- 

pleafure.     He  that  keeps  the  whole  Law> 

-    except  in  one  Point,  affronts  that  Authority 

^    which   requires  all  Obedience.     All   Men 

.  fiiovi^  therefore 

'  p.  76.    •  p-  11^ 


546  The  DocTRiJ^E  ^' 

therefore    are    under .  this   Condemnation : 
They  are  Sinners  every  one  of  tbe?n^,,^i    :.i;)Aii 

"  As  to  Mifery,  let  it  be  fuppofed  {xho^ 
by  no  Means  granted)  That  there  are  man.y 
whofe  Pleafures  exceed  their  Uneafineffes  ; 
Yet  'tis  certain,  there  are  more,  whofe  Pains, 
*'and  Uneafineffes  far  exceed  their  Pleafures. 
j$.nd  it  is  hard  to  conceive,  how  this  fhould 
be,  if  all  Men  were  innocent  and  happy  by 
J^ature. 

"  I  ANSWER,  2.  Men  are  not  able  to  frame 
fuch  Conftitutions  in  every  Cafe,  as  fhall 
fecure  Happinefs  to  all  the  Innocent.  Their 
narrow  Views  of  Things  do  not  enable  thera 
to  provide  againft  all  future  Inconveniences. 
But  it  is  not  thus  with  the  Creator  and  Go- 
vernor  of  all  Things.  He  views  at  once  all 
Poffibles  and  all  Futures.  Therefore  He  is 
well  able  to  guard  againft  any  Inconvenience 
that  might  befall  Innocent  Beings. 

"  I  answer",  3.  Though  the  Bulk  of 
Mankind  were  happy  in  the  prefent  Confti- 
tution  of  Things,  this  gives  no  Manner  of 
Satisfaction  to  any  one  Individual,  who  is 
unhappy,  without  any  Demerit :  The  Advan- 
tage of  the  Majority  is  noReafon  at  all,  why 
any  one  Innocent  ihould  fuffer.  If  any  one 
therefore,  Man  or  Child,  and  much  more,  if 
Numbers  of  them,  have  more  Pain  than  Plea- 
fure,  they  muft  be  involved  in  fome  Guilt, 
which  may  give  juft  Occafion  to  their  Mifery. 

"   12.  To 

'  p.  78.    ^  P-  79- 


Original  Sin.  347 

"  12.  To  inforce  this,  ''after  the  Surv^ey  of 
ihefe  Pains  and  Sorrows,  let  us  confider 
what  are  the  Pleafuresof  the  Bulk  of  Man- 
kind. Caft  a  Glance  at  the  Sports  of  Chil^ 
dren,  from  five  to  fifteen  Years  of  Age. 
What  Toys  and  Fooleries  arc  thefe?  Would 
a  Race  of  wife  and  holy  Beings,  wafle  fo 
many  Years  of  early  Life  in  fuch  wretched 
Trifles  ?  And  as  for  our  manly  Tears^  What 
are  the  greateft  Part  of  the  Delights  of  Men, 
but  filly  and  irrational,  if  not  grofly  finful  ? 
What  are  the  Pleafures  even  of  the  Rich  and 
Greats  to  relieve  them  under  the  common 
Sorrows  of  Life?  If  they  be  not  Luxury  and 
Intemperance,  are  they  not  Furniture  and  E- 
quipage.  Finery  of  Drefs  and  gay  Appearances? 
To  ftiine''  in  Silks  of  various  Dye,  and  blaze 
in  the  Splendor  of  Gold  and  Jewels  ?  Now 
would  wife  and  holy  Creatures,  have  made 
this  the  Matter  of  their  Joy  and  Pleafure, 
My  Coat  is  gayer  than  your  s^  and  I  have  more 
glittering  I'hings  about  we  than  you  have! 

*'  Others  call  for  Cards  or  DicL\  to  di- 
vert their  Trouble,  and  pafs  away  their  Time. 
How  inexprefiively  trifling  are  thefe  Sports,  if 
mere  Diverfion  be  fought  therein  ?  But  it  the 
Defign  be  Gain,  how  is  the  Game  mingled 
with  uneafy  Fears,  with  the  Working  of 
various  Pailions  ?  Which  in  Cafe  of  Difap- 
pointment  and  Lofs,  often  break  out  into 
Wrath  and  Fury.  "  Again, 

^  p.  Po.    "^  p.  81. 


348  77^^  Doctrine  of 

"  Again/  What  Multitudes  drench 
themfclvcs  in  grofs  Senfualities,  ais'  their 
chief  Delight  ?  They  make  a  God  of  their 
Belly,  till  they  overload  Nature,  and  make 
Hafte  to  Difeafe  and  Death.  They  drowfi. 
their  Cares  and  their  Senfes  together;  of 
they  bury  them  in  fenfual  Impurities. 

**  Others  releafe  themfelves  from  th^ 
Troubles  of  Life,  by  gadding  abroad  and 
mixing  with  impertinent  Company.  Sorrie 
delight  in  wanton  Jefts,  in  foolifh  Merri- 
ment, in  mean  and  trifling  Con verfation'';"'a^ 
little  above  the  Chattering  of  Monkies  in  € 
Wood,  or  the  Chirping  of  Crickets  upon  a 
Hearth.  Nay  perhaps  it  is  their  DiverfionV 
to  rail  at  their  Neighbours',  to  murder  °  the  * 
Reputation  of  the  Abfent.  '  This  is  their 
Mirth  and  Recreation  \  thefe  their  Reliefs 
a^ainft  the  common  Miferies  of  Human  Life.^' 
'*  But  would  a  Race  oi  innocent  Beings' 
fly  to  fuch  mean  and  foolifli,  or  criminal  Re-' 
fuges  from  Pain  as  thefe  ?  Would  they  puf- 
fue  fuch  vain  or  vile  Delights  ?  Would  they 
become  Rivals  to  the  Beafts  of  the  Field  ? 
Or  fportthem/elves,  as  Devils  do,  in  acciifing' 
their  Fellow  Creatures  ?  Surely  if  we  furvey 
the  very  'Pkafitres^  as  well  as  the  Sorrows,  of 
the  Bulk  of  Mankind,  we  may  Ic am  from 
thence,  'that  we  are  by  noMeans  luch  Crea^-. 
tiires,  "as  we  were  oriKintllv  created.  "**V\  "^ 


-40^-y  '*       . 


13^  ^^w> 


:-y^f^j  ^^?  ^  j^EED  add  but.one  more  Proof  of 
tne  general  Ruin  of  Human  Nature.  We 
are„  alP  poffing  to  the  Grave.  Every  one  of 
us;;  are  fucceeding  our  Neighbours,  into  fome 
unknown  invifible  World.  And  we  all  pro- 
fefs  to  believe  this.  Yet  how  exceeding  few 
^re  felicitous  about  this  great  and  awful  Fu- 
turity ?  Though  we  are  expofed  to  fo  many 
Sins, and  Miferies  in  this  Life,  and  are  haften- 
ing  vifibly  and  hourly  to  the  End  of  it,  yet 
how. few  are  there  that  make  any  careful 
Preparation  for  a  better  State  than  this  ? 
WhatMultitudes  are  daily  running  down  in- 
to Darknefs,  fpeedingtoan  endlefs  Duration 
in. an  unknown  Country,  without  any  ear- 
neft  Enquiries  about  their  Manner  of  Exift- 
ence  there  ?  They  walk  over  the  bufy  Stage 
of  Life,  they  toil  and  labour,  or  play  and 
trifle  awhile  here,  and  then  plunge  into  a 
ftrange  unfeen  World,  where  they  will  meet 
with  a  juft  and  holy  God,  whofe  Wifdom 
will  affign  them  a  Place  and  Portion  fuited 
to  their  own  Charafter.  Now  ^  were  Men 
indeed  wife  and  holy,  could  they  remain  fo 
ignorant  and  thoughtlefs  of  that  State,  into 
which  they  are  all  hafting  ?  Or  could  a  gra-^j 
Cious  God  create  a  Race  of  Beings,  in  fuch 
a  ftupid  Infenfibility  of  their  eternal  Interefts, 
fo  unfuited  to  the  Felicities  of  an  immortal 
Spirit,  and  fo  negligent  of  all  Preparations 
fbrthem?  "  Upok 

\  p.  84.  '  p.  «^ 


350  ^e  Doctrine  of 

"  Upon''  this  whole  Survey,  Reafon  muft 
join  In  this  mournful  Confeffion,  That  there 
muft  be  fome  fpreading  Poifon  which  has 
tainted  our  Nature,  made  us  fo  finful  and 
miferable,  fo  thoughtlefs  of  the  Future,  and 
unprepared  for  it.  There  muft  have  been 
fome  general  Revolt  of  Mankind,  from  their 
Creator,  whereby  they  have  ruin'd  their  In- 
nocence and  Peace,  and  provoked  the  An- 
ger of  their  Maker,  whereby  they  become 
expofed  to  fuch  wretched  Circumftances, 
even  in  their  Infancy  and  Childhood,  as  well 
as  when  they  grow  to  Years  of  ripe  Undcr- 
ftanding. 

"  And'  methinks  when  I  take  a  juft  Sur- 
vey of  this  World,  with  all  the  Inhabitants 
of  it,  I  can  look  upon  it  no  otherwife,  than 
as  a  grand  and  magnificent  Strud:ure  in 
Ruins :  Wherein  lie  Millions  of  Rebels  a- 
gainft  their  Creator,  under  Condemnation  to 
Mifery  and  Death ;  who  are  at  the  fame 
Time  fick  of  a  mortal  Diftemper,  and  dif- 
order'd  in  their  Minds  even  to  Diftraftion. 
Hence  proceed  thofe  numberlefs  Follies  and 
Vices  which  are  pradiifed  here;  and  the 
righteous'"  Anger  of  an  offended  Gop  vilible 
1n  ten  thoufand  Inftances.  Yet  are  there 
Proclamations  of  Divine  Grace,  Health  and 
Life  founding  among  theni;  though  very  few 
take  any  Notice  theredf.     Only  he?e  and 

there 

^  p.  86.     »  p.  89.     «  p.  90.  V    -       ?^"^'=^ 


Original  Sin.  3^1 

there  one  attends  to  the  Call,  and  complies 
with  the  Propofals  of  Peace.  His  Sins  are 
pardon'd  and  healed.  And  tho'  his  Body 
goes  down  to  the  Duft  for  a  Seafon,  his  Soul 
is  happy  with  God  :  While  the  Bulk  of  thofe 
Criminals,  defpiiing  all  the  Offers  of  Mercy, 
perifh  in  their  own  wilful  Madnefs. 

"  What  "  is  the  chief  Temptation  that 
leads  fome  Men  to  deny  fo  glaring  a  Truth? 
Is  it  that  they  cannot  give  fome  a  Satisfactory 
Account  of  fome  of  the  Difficulties  that  attend 
it  ?  Nay  many  even  of  the  Heathen  Philo- 
fophers  believed  it,  from  their  own  Expe- 
rience, and  their  daily  Survey  of  Mankind  5 
tho'  they  were  utterly  at  a  Lofs,  how  to  ac- 
count for  it.  And  what  if  we  could  not 
aflign  a  fufficient  and  fatisfad:ory  Reafon  for 
it  ?  Or  (hew  how  this  fpreading  Degeneracy 
began^  or  how  it  came  to  take  Place  fo  uni- 
verfally  ?  What  if  we  were  ftill  at  a  Lofs 
to  explain  how  all  this  Guilt  and  Mifery 
came  upon  us  ?  Mufl  we  therefore  deny  the 
Things  which  we  fee,  and  hear,  and  feel 
daily  ? 

"  Can  we  account  for  all  the  fecret 
Things  in  the  Creation  of  God  ?  And  mufl 
we  deny  whatever  we  cannot  account  for  ? 
Does  any  Man**  refufe  to  believe,  that  the 
iflfinke  Variety  of  Plants  and  Flowers,  in  all 
their  -beauteous  Colours  and  Forms,  grow 
:-37=>ri:"  '      out 

"  p.  91.    •  P'  9-«         °^   ~ 


2se  the  Doctrine  of 

out  of  the  fame  Earth,  becaufe  he  does  not 
know  all  the  Springs  of  their  Vegetation  ? 
Do  Men  doubt  of  a  Loadftone's  drawing 
Iron  to  itfelf,  becaufe  they  cannot  find  out 
the  Way  of  its  Operation  ?  Are  we  not  fure 
that  Food  nourifhes  our  Bodies,  and  Medi- 
cines relieve  our  Pains?  Yet  we  know  not  all 
the  Ferments  and  Motions  of  thofe  Atoms, 
by  which  we  are  relieved  and  nourifh'd. 
Why  then  fhould  we  deny  that  Degeneracy 
of  our  Nature,  which  admits  of  fo  full  and 
various  Proof,  tho'  we  are  not  able  to  account 
for  every  Circumftance  relating  to  it,  or  to 
folve  every  Difficulty  that  may  attend  it? 

Q^JESTION    II.    VIIL 

How^  came  Vice  and  Mifery  to  overfp?rad  Man- 
kind in  all  Natiom^    and  in  all  Ages  ? 


'*  T  TEathfn   Philofophers  could  never 
JJL  JL  anfwer  this :   But  Chriftians  may, 
from  the  Oracles  of  God. 

"  These  inform-  us,  That  the  firfl  Man 
was  a''  Com?non  Head  and  Reprefentati'-je  of  all 
Mankind:  And  that  he  by  finning  againft 
his  Maker,  loft  his  ov/n  llolinefs  and  Hap- 
pin-efs:  And  expofed  himfelf  and  his  Poitcrity 
(whom  he  naturally  produc'd  and  whom  he 
legally  reprcfentcd)  to  the  Difpleafure  of  his 

Maker, 


Original  Sin.  353 

Maker,  and  fo  fpread  Sin  and  Mifery  thro' 
his  whole  Offspring. 

So  St.  Paul^  'As  by  one  Man  Sin  enter  dint 0 
the  World  and  Death  by  Sin,  even  Jo  Death 
pajfed  upon  all  Men^  for  that  all  have  finned. 
All  are  efteemed  in  fome  Sort  guilty  before 
God,  though  they  did  not  fin  after  the  Simi-- 
litude  of  hA2i\TiS  'TranfgreJJion,  They  did  not 
commit  acflual  perfonal  Sin  againft  a  known 
Law  as  Adam  did. 

"  This  may  more  fully  appear  from  the 
following  Particulars. 

"  I.  It  is  plainly  taught  us  in  Scripture, 
That  God  at  firft  created  one  Man  and  Wo- 
man called  Ada?n  and  Eve :  And  from  them 
is  derived  the  whole  Race  of  Mankind:  God 
hathiJiade  of  one  Blood,  as  theApoflle  obferves, 
all  Nations  of  Men,  to  dwell  on  all  the  Face  of 
the  Earth, 

"  2.  God  created  Man^  at  firft  in  a  holy  and 
happy  State  in  his  own  Likenefs,  and  in  his 
Favour.  And  God  f aid  ""let  Us  make  Man  in 
our  own  Image,  after  our  own  Likenefs,  And 
that  none  of  the  Brute  Creation  might  moleft 
him,  but  all  of  them  be  for  his  Service,  He 
faid.  Let  them  have  Dominion  over  the  Fijh 
and  the  Fowl  and  the  Cattle — So  God  created 
Man  in  his  own  Image,  And  what  this 
Image  confifted  in,  befide  his  Spiritual  and 

Y  Im- 

'  Rom.v,  \2,    p.  104.     •p»S9«     'p.  »6o,     »»C^».  i.  26. 


354  ^^  Doctrine  of 

Immortal  Nature,  a^nd  his  Dominion  over 
other  Creatures,  we  are  told  by  St.  TauU'' 
where  he  fpeaks  of  the  new  Man^  which^  fays 
he,  after  God,  that  is  after  the  Likenefs  of 
God,  is  created  i?!  Righteoufnefs  and  true  Ho^ 
linejs.  So  Solomon^  allures  us,  God  made 
Man  upright.  And  Mofes  fays,  when  God 
had  finifli'd  all  his  Creation,  God  faw  every 
Tihing  that  He  had  made ^  and  behold  it  was  very 
good.  It  was  all  according  to  his  Idea  and 
his  Will,  and  well-pleafing  in  his  Sight. 
Man  the  laft  of  his  Creatures,  as  well  as  all 
the  reft,  was  very  good^  was  holy  and  happy. 

"  3,  God  originally  appointed  t]i2XAdam 
when  innocent  ihould  produce  an  Offspring 
in  his  own  holy  Image  :  And  on  the  other 
Hand,  that  if  he  finned,  he  fhould  propa- 
gate his  Kind  in  his  own  finful  Image. 
The  former  is  allow'd.  The  latter  may  be 
gathered  from  Gen,  v.  i,  2,  3,  5.  In  the 
Day  that  God  created  Man ^  in  the  Likenefs 
cf  God  made  He  him — And  Adam  lived  an 
himdred  and  thirty  Tears  after  his  Lofs  of 
the  Image  of  God,  and  begat  a  Son  in  his 
own  Likc?2efs,  after  his  Image ^  that  is  his  own 
finful  and  mortal  Image. 

"  It'  is  not  to  be  fuppofed,  That  Mofesm 

this  brief  Hiftory  of  the  firft  Generations  of 

Men,  fliould  fo  particularly  repeat  the  Image 

~  and  Likenefs  of  God  in  which  Ada7n  was 

created 
«  Efh.'w.zji^.    ""  p.  161.    y  p.  i62» 


Original  Sin.  355 

created,  unlefs  he  had  defigned  to  fet  the 
Comparlfon  in  a  fair  Light,  between  Adam^ 
begetting  a  Son  in  his  own  iinful  and  mortal 
ImagCy  whereas  he  himfelf  was  created,  in 
God's  holy  and  immortal  Image. 

"  4.  ^  God  was  pleafed  to  put  the  Man 
whom  He  had  made  upon  a  Tryal  of  his 
Obedience  for  a  Seafon.  He  placed  him  in 
a  Garden  of  Eden  (or  Pleafure)  and  gave 
him  a  free  Ufe  of  all  the  Creatures  :  Only 
forbidding  him  to  eat  of  the  Fruit  of  one 
Tree,  'The  Tree  of  the  K?2cwledge  of  Good  a?id 
Evil.  For  in  the  Day,  faid  He,  thai  thou 
eateji  of  ity  thou  JJ:alt  furely  die.  In  which 
Threatning  were  doubtlefs  included  all  E- 
vils  :  Death  Spiritual,  Temporal,  and  Eternal. 

"  5.  As  Adam  was  under  a  Law ;  whofe 
Sanation  threatned  Death  uponDifobedience, 
fo  doubtlefs  God  favoured  him  with  a  ""  Co- 
venant of  Life,  and  a  Promife  of  Life  and 
Immortality  upon  his  Obedience. 

"  6.  ''Adam  broke  the  Law  of  his  Ma- 
ker, loft  his  Image  and  his  Favour,  forfeit- 
ed the  Hope  of  Immortality,  and  expos'd 
himfelf  to  the  Wrath  of  God,  and  all  the 
Punifhment  which  he  had  threatned :  In 
Confequence  of  which  He  was  now  painful- 
ly afraid  of  Him  in  whom  he  before  delight- 
ed ;  and  fooliflily  endeavoured  to  hide  himflf 
from  the  Prefence  of  the  Lord. 

¥2  "7.  Adam 

*  p.  163.    *  p.  164.    •  y.  .68. 


356  ^he  Doctrine  of 

"  7.  'Adam  after  his  Sin  propagated  his 
Kind,  according  to  the  Law  of  Nature:  Not 
in  the  moral  Image  or  Likenefs  of  God,  not 
in  Rightcoulhefs  and  true  Holinefs:  But  in  his 
own  finful  Likenefs,  with  irregular  '  Paffions, 
corrupt  Appetites  and  Inclinations.  To  this 
Degeneracy  Job  manifeftly  refers  in  thofe 
Expreffions.  IVhat  is  Man  that  he  Jhouldbe 
clean,  or  the  Son  of  Man  that  he  Jhould  be 
righteous^  Who  can  bring  a  clean  "Thing  out  of 
an  unclean  ?  Not  one.  And  David  fays  the 
fame  Thing.  Behold  I  was  Jloapen  in  Iniquity^ 
and  in  Sin  did  my  Mother  coficeive  me, 

"  This  is  not  an  Hyperbolical  Aggrava- 
tion of  David's  early  Sins,  and  Propenfity 
to  Evil  from  his  Childhood.  But  the  Text  is 
ftrong  and  plain  in  afferting  Sin  fome  Way 
to  belong  to  his  very  Conception,  and  to  be 
conveyed  from  his  Natural  Parents,  which  is 
a  different  Idea  from  his  Aftual  Sins,  or.Pro-^ 
penlity  to  Sin  in  his  Infancy.  It  fhews  the 
Caufe  both  of  this  Propenfity  and  of  his  Ac- 
tual Sins,  which  operated  before  he  was 
born.  So  that  if  original  Pravity  be  not  fo 
conveyed  and  deriv'd  as  is  here  afferted,  the 
Words  are  not  an  Exaggeration  of  what  is, 
but  a  downright  Fidfion  of  what  is  not, 

"  8.  As  ^  Adam  produced  his  Offspring, 
like  himfelf,  deftitute  of  the  Image  of  God' 
fo  he  produc'd  them  '^deftitute  of  the  Favour 

of 
*  p.  170.    *  p.  171.    e  p,  174.    '  p.  175, 


Original  Sin.  357 

of  God,  under  the  fame  Condemnation  with 
himfelf.  So  Job -^ Man  that  is  born  of  aWoman^ 
is  of  few  Days  and  full  of  Trouble :  i.  e.  His 
fhort  Life,  and  his  Troubles  proceed  from 
his  very  Birth ;  his  Propagation  from  finful 
and  mortal  Parents.  Otherwife  God  would 
not  have  appointed  his  nobleft  Creature  in 
this  World  to  have  been  born  to  Trouble.  Yet 
this  is  the  Cafe.  ^  Man  is  born  to  Trouble 
as  the  Sparks  fly  upward.  Naturally ;  for 
it  is  owing  to  his  Birth  and  his  natural  Deri- 
vation from  a  finful  Stock.  We  are  a  mif- 
erable  Race,  fpringing  from  a  corrupted  and 
dying  Root,  prone  to  Sin  and  liable  to  Sor- 
rows and  Sufferings. 

*'  In'  Proof  of  this  Sentence  of  Condem- 
nation and  Death  coming  upon  all  Mankind 
for  the  Sin  of  Adam^  we  need  only  read  from 
the  12^'  Verfe  of  the  v^'  Chap,  of  St.  PWs 
Epiftle  to  \ht  Romans:  On  which  I  obferve, 

"  *"  I.  Here  Ada?n  and  Clmfl  are  fet  up 
as  diftincl:  Heads  or  Reprefentatives,  of  their 
feveral  Families.  Adam  was  the  Head  of 
all  Mankind,  who  became  linful  and  mor- 
tal thro'  his  Sin  :  Cb?'{Ji  was  the  Head  of  all 
Believers,  who  obtain  Pardon  and  Life  thro' 
his  Righteoufnefs.  To  prove  this  Headfliip 
of  Adam,  the  Apoftle  fays,  loitill  the  Law, 
that  is,  from  the  Creation  'till  the  Law  of 
MofeSy  Sin  was  in  the  World  y  but  Sin  is  ?iof 
Y  3  imputed 

•Chap.  xiv.  I.    »7^^.  V.  7.    '  p.  176.    "p.  i;;- 


35?  the  Doctrine  of 

imputed  where  there  is  no  Law.  That  is^ 
where  '  there  is  no  Law  or  Conftitution  of 
Duty  or  Penalty  at  all.  Yet,  faith  he,  Death 
reigned  frof?t  Adam  to  Mofes :  Yet  Sin  was 
imputed  and  puniflied  by  Death,  even  upon 
all  Mankind,  both  fmall  and  great,  before 
the  Law  given  by  Mofes,  The  Inference  is. 
Therefore  there  was  fome  Law  or  Confti- 
tution during  all  the  Time  from  Adajn  to 
Mofs  :  in  Virtue  of  which,  Sin  was  imputed 
to  Mankind  5  and  Death  accordingly  exe- 
cuted upon  them.  Now  what  Law  or  Con- 
ftitution could  this  be,  befide  that  which 
faid  to  Adam^  as  a  Reprefentative  of  his 
whole  Pofterity,  in  the  Day  thoufinnejl  thou 
J! J  alt  die  ? 

"  2.  The  Apoftle  carries  his  Argument 
yet  farther,  Sin  was  imputed^  and  Death  reign- 
ed,  or  was  executed  even  iipcn  thcfe  who  had 
not  finned  after  the  Similitude  ^AdamV  Tranf 
greffion :  Who  had  not  broken  an  exprefs 
Command,  as  Adam  had  done.  This  ma- 
nifeftly  refers  to  Infants  :  Death  reign'd  over 
them ;  Death  was  executed  upon  them. 
And  this  muft  be  by  fome  Conftitution 
which  in  fome  Senfe  imputed  Sin,  to  them 
who  had  not  committed  Aftual  Sin.  For 
without  fnch  a  Conftitution  Sin  would  never 
have  been  imputed,  nor  Death  executed  on 
Children. 

"  Yet 
\  p.  178. 


Original  Sin.  359 

cc  mYET  3.  Death  did  not  come  upon 
them  as  a  mere  natural  Effed:  of  their  Fa- 
ther Adam\  Sin  and  Death  \  but  as  a  proper 
and  legal  Punifhment  of  Sin  :  For  'tis  faid, 
His  Sin  brought  Condemnation  upon  all 
Men."  Now  this  is  a  legal  Term  and  jfhews, 
That  Death  is  not  only  a  Natural,  but  a  penal 
Evil,  and  comes  upon  Infants  as  Guilty  and 
Condemned :  Not  for  their  own  adtual  Sins; 
for  they  had  none :  But  for  the  Sin  of 
Adam  their  legal  Head,  their  appointed  Re- 
prefentative. 

"  In  the  18'^  Verfe  the  Expreflion  is  ve- 
ry ftrong :  By  the  Offence  of  0?ie  Judgment 
came  upon  all  Men  to  Conde7?mation,  All  the 
Childen  of  Adam  young  and  old,  are  co7i^ 
demrid  for  his  one  Offence,     But  farther, 

"  4.  In  the  Original  it  is  not.  By  the  Offence 
of  One  \  but  By  one  Offence,  By  the  fingle 
Offence  of  Adam^  when  he  ftood  as  the 
Head  of  all  his  Offspring,  and  brought  Sin 
and  Death  upon  them  by  his  Difobedience : 
As,  in  the  following  Verfe,  By  one  Maiis 
Difobedience  many  were  7nade^  or  conftitutcd 
Si?hiers,  that  is,  became  liable  to  Guilt  and 
Death.  And  fo,  in  the  16"'  Verfe  ^«t' fingle 
Offence  is  reprefented  as  Condemning  thro* 
Adafn^  and  ilands  in  Oppofition  to  the  jna?iy 
Offences  which  are  pardon'd  thro'  Chrijl. 

*'  5.  *"  There  is  a  yet  farther  Proof  in 
this  Chapter  that  Ada?n  convey'd  Sin   and 

Y  4  Death 

»  p.  179.     "  Verfe  i8.     •  p.  i8i. 


360  ^he  Doctrine  of 

Death  to  his  Pofterity,  not  merely,  as  a  na- 
tural Parent,  but  as  a  Common  Head  and 
Reprefentative  of  all  his  Offspring.  As 
Adam  and  Chrijl  are  here  faid  to  be  the  two 
Springs  of  Sin  and  Righteoufnefs,  of  Death 
and  Life  to  Mankind,  fo  the  one  is  repre- 
fentcd  as  a  Type  and  Figure  of  the  other.  In 
this  very  Refpcft  '^Adam  was  a  Figure  or 
T^ype  of  Chriji,  And  for  this  very  Reafon 
Chrift  is  ''called  the  fecond  Man^  the  laft  Adam. 
As  One  was  the  Spring  of  Life,  fo  the  other 
was  the  Spring  of  Death,  to  all  his  Seed  or 
Offspring. 

"  Now  Chrijl  is  a  Spring  of  Life  not  only 
as  He  conveys  Sandlification  or  Holinefs  to 
his  Seed,  but  as  He  procures  for  them  Jufti- 
fication  and  Eternal  Life,  by  his  perfonal 
Obedience.  And  fo  Adam  is  a  Spring  of 
Death,  not  only  as  he  conveys  an  unholy 
Nature  to  his  Seed,  to  all  Men,  but  as  He 
brings  Condemnation  to  Eternal  Death  upon 
them,  by  his  Perfonal  Difobedience.  And 
this  is  the  chief  Thing  which  the  Apoftle 
feems  to  have  in  his  Eye,  throughout  the 
latter  Part  of  this  Chapter :  The  Convey- 
ance of  Condemnation  and  Death  to  the 
Seed  of  Adam,  of  Juftification  and  Eternal 
Life  to  the  Seed  of  Chiijl,  by  tiie  Means  of 
wliat  their  refpeftive  Heads  or  Reprefenta- 
tives  had  done. 

''  But 

»•  Verfe  14.     «  i  Car,  xv.  47,  4S,  49. 


Original  Sin.  361 

"  '  But  fome  objeft,  "  all  the  Bleflings 
'  which  God  gave  at  firft  to  Adaniy  confifted 

*  in  thefe  three  Particulars,   i.  The  Blejjing 
'  of  Propagation. — 2 .  Dominion  over  the  Brutes, 

*  — 3.  The  Image  of  God.     But  all  thefe 
'  three  are  more  expreflly  and  emphatically 

*  pronounced  to  Noah  and  his  Sons  than  to 
^  Adam  in  Paradife." 

"  I  answer/  If  we  review  the  Hiftory 
and  Context,  we  fhall  find  the  Blefling  of 
Adam  and  that  of  Noah^  very  widely  differ 
from  each  other,  in  all  the  three  Particulars 
mentioned. 

"  I.  The  Blefling  of  Adajn  relating  to 
Propagation,  was  without  thofe  multiply'd 
Pains  and  Sorrows,  which  after  the  firft  Sin, 
fell  upon  Women,  in  bearing  Children.  It 
was  alfo  a  Bleffing  of  Suftentation  or  Nou- 
rifhment,  without  hard  Toil  and  the  Sweat 
of  his  Brows.  It  was  a  Blefling  without  a. 
Curfe  on  the  Ground,  to  leffen  or  deftroy  the 
Fruitfulnefs  thereof.  It  was  a  Blefling  with- 
out Death,  without  returning  to  Duft  : 
V/hereas  the  Blefling  of  Noah^  did  not  ex- 
clude Death,  no  nor  the  Pains  of  Child- 
birth, nor  the  earning  our  Bread  by  the 
Sweat  of  our  Brows. 

"  2.  To  Adam'  \n2.s  giW^nDomhiicn  over  the 
Brutes,  To  Noah  it  was  only  faid,  T/>  Fear 
^fyou  and  the  Dread  ofyoufiall  be  u^on  every 

Beafl. 
'  p.  183.    «  p.  186.    «  p.  187. 


362  72?^  Doctrine  of 

Beajl.  But  notwithftanding  this  Fear  and 
Dread,  yet  they  frequently  fling  Men  to 
Death,  or  bite  and  tear  them  in  Pieces. 
Whereas  no  fuch  Calamity  could  ever  have 
befallen  innocent  Adam  or  his  innocent  OfF- 
fpring. 

3.  The''  hnage  of  God  in  which  Adam 
was  created,  confifted  eminently  in  Righ- 
teoufnefs  and  true  Holincfs*  But  that  Part 
of  the  Image  of  God  which  remained  after 
the  Fall,  and  remains  in  all  Men  to  this 
Day,  is  the  Natural  Image  of  God,  namely 
the  Spiritual  Nature  and  Immortality  of  the 
Soul :  Not  excluding  the  F clitic al  Image  of 
God,  or  a  Degree  of  Dominion  over  the 
Creatures  ftill  remaining.  But  the  Moral 
Image  of  God,  is  loft  and  defaced :  Or 
elfe  it  could  not  be  faid  to  be  reneuccd,  '"It 
is  then  evident,  that  the  Elefling  given  to 
Adam  in  Innocency,  and  that  given  to  Noah 
after  the  Flood,  diifcr  fo  widely,  that  the 
latter  was  coniiftent  with  the  Condemnation 
or  Curfe  for  Sin,  and  the  former  was  not. 
Confequently  Mankind  does  not  now  fland 
in  the  fame  Favour  of  God,  as  Adam  did 
while  he  v/as  Innocent. 

*'  Thus  it  appears,  That  the  Holy  Scrip- 
ture both  in  the  Old  and  New  Tcflaments, 
give  us  a  plain  and  full  Account,  of  the 
Conveyance  of  Sin,  Mifery,  and  Death,  from 
tlie  firft  Man  to  all  his  Offspring. 

\p.  18S.    '-p.  189.  THE 


Original  Sin.  363 


THE 

FIRST   ESSAY. 

]Do  the  frefent  Mif cries  of  Man  alone^ 
prove  his  Apojlacy  fro?n  God  ? 

SECT.      I. 

A  General  Survey  of  the  Follies  and  Miferiex 
of  Majtkind. 

W^iLjr^VO'N'  a  juft  View  of  Human  Na- 
^ ''  U  r  ture,  from  its  Entrance  into  Life, 
V  5rtr"3«  jj{  'till  it  retires  behind  the  Curtain  of 
Death,  one  would  be  ready  to  fay 
concerning  Man,  *^  Is  this  the  Creature  that 
*'  is  fofuperior  to  the  reft  of  the  ''Inhabitants 
"  of  the  Globe,  as  to  require  the  peculiar 
"  Care  of  the  Creator  in  forming  him  ?  Does 
''  he  deferve  fuch  an  illuftrious  Defcription» 
*'  as  even  the  Heathen  Poet  has  given  us  of 
''  him.'* 

S^ndliui 

•  p.  359-    *  n.  36e# 


364  57j^  Doctrine  of 

SanBhis  hisAfiimaly  mentifq-,  capactus  Alia 
Deerat  adhuCy  &  quod  dominari  in  catera 

pojjet. 
Naius  homo  eji;ji've  hunc  divinofemlne  cretum 
Ilk  Opifex  rerum  mundi  melioris  origo 
Finxit    in    Effigiem    moderantum    cunEla 

Deorum, 
Pronaq-y    cum  JpeBent  Animalia    Ccetera 

terram 
Os  homini  fublime  dedify  ccelumq^  tuert 
Jiiffity  &  ere5ios  adjidera  toller e  Vultus, 

A  Creature  of  a  more  exalted  Kindy 
Was  wanting  yet  y  and  then  was  Man  defgnd: 
Co7tfcious  of  T^hoiighty    of  more  capacious 

Breajly 
For  Empire  fornid  and  ft  to  rule  the  reft. 
Whether  with  F  articles  of  heavenly  FirCy 
The  God  of  Nature  did  his  Soul  infpirCy 
And  fnoidding  up  a  Mafs  in  Shape  like  curSy 
Fornid  a  bright  Image  of  tlo    all- ruling 

Powers, 
And  while  the  mute  Creation  downward  he^id 
I'heir  Sight,  a?id  to  their  Earthy  Mother 

tendy 
Man  looks  aloft y  ajid  with  ereBed  EyeSy 
Beholds  his  own  hereditary  Skies, 

"  Now*"  if  Man  was  formed  in  the  Image 

of  God,  certainly  he  was  a  holy  and  a  happy 

Being.     But  what  is  there  like  Holinefs  or 

Happinefs  now  found,  running  through  this 

Rank 
^  p.  Z6i, 


Original  Sin.  365 

Rank  of  Creatures  ?  Are  there  any  of  the 
Brutal  Kind  that  do  not  more  regularly  anfwer 
the  Deiign  of  their  Creation  ?  Are  there  any 
Brutes  that  we  ever  find  ad:ing  fo  much  be- 
low their  Original  Character,  on  the  Land, 
in  the  Water,  or  the  Air,  as  Mankind  does 
all  over  the  Earth  ?  Or  are  there  any  Tribes 
among  them,  through  which  Pain,  Vexa- 
tion, and  Mifery,  are  fo  plentifully  diftri- 
buted  as  they  are  among  the  Children  of 
Men? 

"  Were''  this  Globe  of  Earth  to  be  fur- 
veyed  from  one  End  to  the  other,  by  fome 
Spirit  of  a  fuperior  Order,  it  would  be  found 
fuch  a  Theatre  of  Folly  and  Madnefs,  fuch 
a  Maze  of  mingled  Vice  and  Mifery,  as 
would  move  the  Compaffion  of  his  refined 
Nature,  to  a  painful  Degree,  were  it  not 
tempered  by  a  clear  Sight  of  that  wife  and 
juft  Providence,  which  ftrongly  and  fweetly 
works  in  the  Midft  of  all ;  and  will  in  the 
End  bring  Good  out  of  all  Evilj  and  juftify 
the  Ways  of  God  with  Man, 

SECT.        II. 

A  particular^  View  of  the  Miferies  of  Man. 

"  13  UT  to  wave  for  the  prefent  the  Sins 
JL3   ^^^  Follies  of  Mankind,  May  we 

not  infer  from  his  Miferies  alqne.  That  we 
*  p.  j6z,  .•  p.  36J.  are 


366  7he  Doctrine  of 

are  degenerate  Beings,  bearing  the  moft  evi- 
dent Marks  of  the  Difpleafure  of  our  Maker? 

"  View  the  Hiftorics  of  Mankind,  and 
what  is  almoft  all  Hiftory,  but  a  Dcfcription 
of  the  Wretchedncfs  of  Men,  under  the  Mif- 
chiefs  they  bring  upon  themfelves,  and  the 
Judgments  of  the  Great  God  ?  The  Scenes 
of  Happinefs  and  Peace  are  very  thin  fet 
among  all  the  Nations :  And  there  are  rather 
a  tranfient  ^Glimpfe,  here  and  there  than  any 
Thing  folid  and  durable.  But  if  we  look 
over  the  Univerfe,  what  publick  Defolations 
by  Plague  and  Famine,  by  Storms  and  Earth- 
quakes, by  Wars  and  Peftilence  !  What  fe- 
cret  Mifchiefs  reign  among  Men,  which 
pierce  and  torture  the  Soul  ?  What  fmarting 
Wounds  and  Bruifes,  what  Pains  and  Dif- 
eafes  attack  and  torment  the  Animal  Frame? 

"  Where^  is  the  Family  of  feven  or  eight 
Perfons  wherein  there  is  not  one  or  more 
afHid:ed  with  fome  troublefome  Malady,  or 
tirefome  Inconvenience  ?  Thefe  indeed  are 
often  conceal'd  by  the  Perfons  who  fuffer 
them,  and  by  the  Famihes  where  they  dwell. 
But  were  they  all  brought  together,  what 
Hcfpttals  or  hifirmaries  would  be  able  to  con- 
tain therri  ? 

"  What  Toils  and  Hardfliips,  what  in-  * 

ward  Anxieties   and    Sorrows,    Difappoint- 

ments  and  Calamities  are  diffused  thro'  every 

Age 
*  p.  364.    R  p.  365. 


Original  Sin*  367 

Age  and  Country?  Do  not  ''the  Rich  feel 
them  as  well  as  the  Poor  ?  Are  they  not  all 
teized  with  their  own  Appetites,  which  are 
never  fatisfied  ?  And  their  impetuous  Paffions 
give  them  no  Reft.  What  keen  Anguifh  of 
Mind  arifes  from  Pride,  and  Envy,  and  Re- 
fentment  ?  What  Tortures  does  Ambition, 
or  difappointed  Love,  or  wild  Jealoufy, 
infufe  into  their  Bofoms  ?  Mean- while  the 
Poor,  together  with  Inward  Vexations  and 
corroding  Maladies  of  the  Mind,  fuftain 
likewife  endlefs  Drudgeries  in  procuring  their 
neceffary  Subfiftence.  And  how  many  of 
them  cannot  after  all,  procure,  even  Food  to 
cat  and  Raiment  to  put  on  ? 

"  Survey  Man  thro'  every  Stage.  See 
firft  what  a  Figure  he  makes,  at  his  Entrance 
into  Life  ?  I'his  Animal,  fays  Pliny,  who  is  to 
govern  the  reft  of  the  Creatures,  how  he  lies  bound 
Hand  and  Foot  all  in  'Tears,  and  begins  his 
Life  in  Mifery  and  Puniflomefit.  If  we  trace 
the  Education  of  the  Human  Race,  from 
the  Cradle  to  mature  Age,  efpecially  among 
the  Poor,  who  are  the  Bulk  of  all  Nations, 
the  Wretchednefs  of  Mankind  will  farther 
appear.  How  are  they  every  where  dragged 
up'  in  their  tender  Age,  through  a  Train  of 
Nonfenfe,  Madnefs  and  Miferies?  What 
Millions  of  uncafy  Senfations  do  they  endure 
in  Infancy  andChildliood  by  Reafon  of  thofe 

prefling 

^  p.  j65.    •  p.  367, 


368  ^je  Doctrine  of 

prelFing  Necefiities,  which  for  fome  Years 
they  can  tell  only  in  Cries  and  Groans,  and 
which  their  Parents  either  are  fo  poor  they 
cannot  relieve,  or  fo  favage  and  brutifh  that 
they  will  not  ?  How  wretchedly  arc  thefe 
young  Generations  hurried  on  through  the 
Folly  and  Weaknefs  of  Childhood,  'till  new 
Calamities  arife  from  their  own  ungoverned 
Appetites  and  impetuous  Paffions  ?  As  Youth 
advances,  the  Ferments  of  the  Blood  rife 
higher  and  the  Appetites  and  Paffions  grow 
much  ftronger,  and  give  more  abundant 
Vexation  to  the  Race  of  Mankind,  than  they  . 
do  to  any  of  the  Brutal  Creation.  And 
whereas"  the  all- wife  God,  for  kind  Rea- 
fons  has  limited  the  Gratification  of  thefe 
Appetites  by  Rules  of  Virtue  j  perhaps  thofe 
very  Rules,  through  the  Corruption  of  our 
Nature  irritate  Mankind  to  greater  ExcefTes; 
"  Would  the  Affairs'  of  Human  Life  in 
Infancy,  Childhood  and  Youth,  have  ever 
been  in  fuch  a  fore  and  painful  Situation,  if 
Man  had  been  fuch  a  Being  as  God  at 
firft  made  him,  and  had  continued  in  the 
Favour  of  his  Maker  ?  Could  Divine  Wif- 
dom  and  Gcodnefs  admit  of  thefe  Scenes, 
were  there  not  a  Degeneracy  through  the 
whole  Race,  v/hich  by  the  juft  Permiffion  of 
God,  exerts  itfelf  fome  Way  or  other  in 
every  Stage  of  Life» 

*'  Follow 
*  p.  3^8.   »  p.  170. 


Original  Sin.  369 

"  Follow  Mankind  to  the  Age  of  publick 
Appearance  upon  the  Stage  of  the  World. 
And  what  {hall  we  find  there,  but  infinite 
Cares,  Labours  and  Toil,  attended  with  fond 
Hopes  almoft  always  fruflrated  with  endlefs 
CrofTes  and  Difappointments,  thro*  ten  thou- 
fand  Accidents  that  are  every  Moment  flying 
acrofs  this  Mortal  Stage.  As  for  the  Poor, 
""how  does  the  fultry  Toil  exhaufl  their  Lives 
in  Summer,  and  what  flarving  Wretchednefs 
do  they  feel  in  Winter  ?  How  is  a  mifer- 
able  Life  fuftained  among  all  the  Pains  and 
Fatigues  of  Nature,  with  the  Oppreflion, 
Cruelty  and  Scorn  of  the  Rich. 

"  Let  us  follow  on  the  Track  to  the 
Clofe  of  Life.  What  a  Scene  is  prefented 
us  in  Old  Aore?  How  innumerable  and  how 
inexpreflible  are  the  Difaflers  and  Sorrows, 
the  Pains  and  Aches,  the  Groans  and 
Wretchednefs,  that  meet  Man  on  the  Bor- 
ders of  the  Grave,  before  they  plunge  him 
into  it. 

"  And  indeed  is  there  any  Perfon  on 
Earth,  high  or  low,  without  fuch  DiilrefTes 
and  Difficulties,  fuch  croffing  Accidents  and 
perplexing  Cares,  fuch  painful  Infirmities 
in  fome  or  other  Part  of  Life,  as  mufl  pro- 
nounce Mankind  upon  the  whole  a  mifera- 
blc  Being?  Whatever  Scenes  of  Happinefs 
feem  to  attend  him,  in  any  ihining  Hour,  a 

Z  dark 

^  p.  37«- 


i^yo  The  Doctrine  of 

dark  Cloud  foon  cafls  a  Gloom  over  them 
and  the  plealing  Vifion  vaniihes  as  a  Dream. 

"  And  wliat  are  the"  boafted  Pleafures 
which  fome  have  fuppofed  to  ballance  the 
Sorrows  of  Life  ?  Are  not  moft  of  them  ow- 
ing in  a  good  Degree,  to  fome  previous  Un- 
ealinefs?  'Tis  the  Pain  of  Hunger  which 
makes  Food  fo  relifliing;  the  Pain  of  Wea- 
rinefs,  that  renders  Sleep  fo  refrefhing.  And 
as  for  the  BlefTings  of  Love  and  Friendihip, 
among  Neighbours  and  Kindred,  do  they 
not  often  produce  as  much  Vexation  as  Sa- 
tisfaction? Not  indeed  of  themfelves;  but 
by  Reafon  of  the  endlefs  Humours  and  Fol- 
lies, Errors  and  Paflions  of  Mankind. 

"  AoyiiN.  Do  "  not  the  very  Pleafures 
of  the  Body,  prove  the  Ruin  of  ten  thou- 
fand  Souls?  They  may  be  ufed  with  Inno- 
cence and  Wifdom:  But  the  unruly  Appe- 
tites and  Paffions  of  Men,  continually  turn 
into  a  Curfe,  what  God  originally  deligned 
for  a  Blcfling. 

*'  Think  again  how  fhort  and  tranfient 
are  the  Pleafures  of  Life  in  Compariibn  of 
the  Pains  of  it?  Plow  vanifl:iing  the  fweetefl 
Senfations  of  Delight?  But  in  miany  Perfons 
and  Families,  how  many  are  the  Days,  the 
Months,  the  Years,  of  Fatigue,  or  Pain,  or 
bitter  Sorrow?  What  Pleafure  of  the  Ani* 
mal  Frame  is  either  as  lading,  or  as  intenfe 

as 

"  P-  373.    •  p.  374' 


Original  Sin.  371 

as  the  Pain  of  the  Gout  or  Stone?  How 
ihiall  is  the  Proportion  of  fenfible  Pleafure, 
to  that  of  Pain,  or  Trouble,  or  Uneaiinefs? 
And  how  far  is  it  over-ballanccd  by  the  Ma- 
ladies or  Miferies,  the  Fears  or  Sorrows  of 
the  grcateft  Part  of  Mankind  ? 

"  As  for  Intellectual  Pleafures,  how  few 
are  there  in  the  World,  who  have  any  Ca- 
pacity for  them  ?  And  among  thofe  few, 
How  many  Differences  and  Contentions  ? 
How  many  croffmg  Objedtions,  bewilder'd 
Enquiries,  and  unhappy  Miftakes  are  ming- 
led with  the  Enjoyment?  So  that  he  who  in^ 
creafeth  Krimvledge  increafeth  So^roiOy  faith 
the  wifeft  of  Men.  And  upon  the  whole 
Computation,  he  writes  on  this  alfo,  Vmiity 
arid  Vexatio7i  of  Spirit. 

"  "^  To  talk  then  of  real  Happinefs  to  be 
enjoyed  in  this  Life  (abftrafted  from  the 
Foretafte  of  another)  is  contrary  to  all  the 
Common  Senfe '  and  Experience  of  every 
thinking  Man.  Without  this  I'afte  of  the 
Powers  of  the  World  to  come^  I  know  '  not 
what  wife  Man,  would  willingly  come  into 
thefe  Scenes  of  Mortality,  or  go  thro'  them 
with  any  Patience. 

-     "  What,  to  be  train'd  up  frorn  Infancy, 

under  fo  many  unavoidable  Follies,  Preju- 

'dices  and  wretched  Delufions  thro'  the  Power 

of  Fleih  and  Senfe  ?    To  he  fujok  intP  fuch 

*s  Z  z  grofs 

'f-375-    *P-376'    VP.  377- 


372  The  Doctrine  of 

grofs  Ignorance  both  of  our  Souls,  our  bet- 
ter Selves,  and  of  the  glorious  Being  that 
made  us  ?  To  lie  under  fuch  heavy  Shades 
of  Darknefs, "  fuch  a  World  of  Miftakes  and 
Errors,  as  are  mingled  with  our  little  faint 
Glimpfes,  and  low  Notices  of  God  our 
Creator  ?  What  to  be  fo  far  diftant  from 
God,  and  to  endure  fuch  a  long  Eftrange- 
ment  from  the  wifeft  and  beft  of  Beings,  in 
this  foolilh  and  flefhly  State,  with  fo  few  apd 
llender  Communications  with  or  from  Him? 

"  What,  to  feel  fo  many  powerful  and 
difquieting  Appetites,  fo  many  reftlefs  and 
unruly  Paffions,  which  want  the  perpetual 
Guard  of  a  jealous  Eye,  and  a  ftrong  Re- 
ftraint  over  them  ?  Otherwife  they  will  be 
ever  breaking  out  into  fome  new  Mifchief. 

"  What,  to  be  ever  furrounded  with  fuch 
Delights  of  Senfe,  as  are  conftant  Tempta- 
tions to  Folly  and  Sin  ?  To  'have  fcarce  any 
Joys,  but  what  we  are  liable  to  pay  dear 
for,  by  an  exceffive  or  irregular  Indulgence  ? 
Can  this  be  a  defirable  State  ?  For  any  wife 
Being  who  knows  what  Happinefs  is,  to  be 
united  to  fuch  a  diforderly  Machine  of  Flefh 
and  Blood,  with  all  its  uneafy  and  unruly 
Ferments  ? 

''  Add  to  this  another  Train  of  inbred 

Miferics,  which  attend  this  Animal  Frame. 

What  wife. Spirit  would  willingly  put  on 

fuch  Flefh  and  Blood  as  ours,  with  all  the 

•  p.  37«-  Springs 


Original  Sin*  373 

Springs  of  Sicknefs  and  Pain,  Anguifh  and 
Difeafe  in  it  ?  What,  to  be  liable  to  the 
racking  Difquietudes  of  Gout  arid  Stone, 
and  a  thoufand  other  Diftempers  ?  To  have 
Nature  worn  out  by  flow  and  long  Aches 
and  Infirmities  and  lie  lingering  many  Years 
on  the  Borders  of  Death,  before  we  can 
find  a  Grave  ? 

"  *  Solomon  feems  to  be  much  of  this 
Mind,  when  after  a  Survey  of  the  whole 
Scheme  of  Human  Life,  in  its  Variety  of 
Scenes,  (without  the  Views  of  Hereafter) 
he  declares,  I  ""  praifed  the  Dead  who  were 
already  dead-,  more  than  the  Lhijig^  who  are 
yet  alive.  And  indeed  it  ^  appears  that  the 
Miferies  of  Life  are  fo  numerous,  as  to  over- 
ballance  all  its  real  Comforts,  and  fufficient- 
ly  to  fhew.  That  Mankind  now  lie  under 
evident  Marks  of  their  Maker's  Difpleafure 
as  being  degenerated  from  that  State  of  In- 
nocence, wherein  they  were  at  firft  created. 

SECT.  in. 

Obje6lions  anfwered* 

"  TD  UT  it  is  objedled  "  If  human  Life 
X_y  "  in  general  is  miferable,  how  is  it, 

"  that  all  Men  are  fo  unwilling  to  die  ?" 
*'  I  ANSWER,  I.  Bccaufe  they  fear  to  meet 

with  more  Mifery,  in  another  Life  than  they 

feel  in  this.     So  our  Poet : 

Z  3  the 

*  p.  380.     "  Zcdcf.  iv.  2.     "^  p.  381. 


374  ^^^^  Doctrine  of 

"  T'he  wcariejl  and  ifiojl  loathed  worldly  Life^ 
That  Pain,  Age^  Pmiry  and  Imprifonmenf 
Can  lay  on  Nature^  'tis  a  Pdradife 
T'o  what  we  fear  of  Death. 

And  in  another  Place, 

If  by  the  Sleep  of  Death  we  could  but  end 
uheHeart-ache  and  the  thoufandjjatural  Shocks 
T'hatFlefi  is  Heir  to,  'twere  a  Confummation 
Devoutly  to  be  wiJlSd,     0  who  woud  bear 
T'he  Opprejfors  tVro??gs,  the  poor  Mans  Con-- 

tumely^ 
The  Infolence  of  Office,  and  the  Spurns 
That  ^patient  Merit,  of  tlS  Unworthy  takes ^ 
With  all  the  long  Calamities  of  Life  y 
When  he  himfelf  tnight  his  Qiyetus  make 
With  a  bare  Bodkin  ?  Who  woud  bear  Jltch 

Burde72s, 
And  groan  andfweat  under  a  weary  Life^ 
But  that  the  dreadfid  Something  after  Death, 
That  undifcoverd  Country  from  whofe  Border 
No  Traveller  returns,  puzzles  the  Will, 
And  makes  us  father  bear  tloofe  Ills  we  have^ 
Thanfy  to  others  which  are  all  iinhiown, 

"  If  you  fay,  "  But  the  Heathens  knew 
nothing  of  a  future  Life:  And  yet  they  too, 
in  all  their  Generations  have  been  unwilHng 
to  die.  Nor  would  they  put  an  End  to  their 
own  Life,  Were  it  never  fo  miferable."  I 
anfwer,  Moft  of  the  Antient  (as  well  as  the 

Modern) 

*  p.  3«3-     >  p.  384.     '  P-  385. 


Original  Sin.  375 

Modern)  Heathens,  had  fome  Notions  of  a^ 
After-State 3  and  fome  Fears  of  Punilhment 
in  another  Life,  for  Sins  committed  in  this. 
And  in  the  politer  Nations  they  generally 
fuppofed  Self-murderers  in  particular  would 
be  punifh*d  after  Death. 

Proxtma  deinde  teneiit  mcejli  loca^  quifbs 

letum 
Infontes  peperere  ma?2Uy  hiccmq-y  perofi 
Projecere  animas,     ^cim  vcllent  atbcre  in 

alto 
Nunc  ^  paupericm  &  duros  perferre  labor es  f 
Fata  cbjia?2t:  durdq-^  palus  innabilis  undd 
Alligat^  &  ?20viesjlyx  interfufa  coercet. 
T'he  next  in  Place  and  Pwnjhment  are  they 
Who  prodigally  threw  their  Lives  away, 
Foolsy  who  repi?iing  at  their  wretched  Statey 
And  loathing  anxious  Life  have  hurried  on 

their  Fate, 
With  late  Repentance  now  they  would  retrieve 
T'be  Bodies  they  for fook^  andwiJJ:  to  live: 
All  Pain  and  Povet'ty  defire  to  bear^ 
To  view  the  Light  of  Heaven ,  arid  breathe 

the  vital  Air. 

But  Fate  forbids:  The  Stygian  Floods  oppofe, 

And  with  nine  circling  Streams  the  captive 

ii,r4uuSoulsinclofe. 

.,"  I  ANSWER  '   2.   Suppofe  this  Love  of 

Life  and  Averfion  to  Death  are  found,  even 

where  there  is  no  Regard  to  a  future  State, 

Z  4  this 

•  p.  386. 


J76  ^he  Doctrine  of 

this  will  not  prove  that  Mankind  is  happy: 
Lut  only  that  the  God  of  Nature,  hath 
wrought  this  Principle  into  the  Souls  of  all 
Men,  in  order  to  preferve  the  Work  of  his 
own  Hands.  So  that  Reluftancc  againft  dy- 
ing lb  owing  to  the  natural  Principle  of  Sdf- 
prefcirvation,  without  any  formed  and  fedate 
Judgment,  whether  it  is  beft  to  continue  in 
this  Life  or  no,  or  whether  Life  has  more 
Happinefs  or  Mifery. 

"  It  may  beobjeded,  Secondly,  If  Brutes 
'  fuffer  nearly  the  fame  Miferies  with  Man- 
kind,  and  yet  have  not  fmned,  how  can 
thefe  Miferies  prove  that  Man  is  an  Aooftate 
Being:  „.^^,,^  ^-t-    - 

"  I  ANsw^ER,  It  is  by  Reafon'of  Man's 

Apoftacy,    that  even  Brute  Animals  fuffer. 

The  whole  Creation  groancth  together  on  his 

Ac<ount,  andtravaildh  together  in  Vain  to  this 

Day,     For  the  Brute  Oy^/'/^-^  was  made  fub- 

je^  to  Vanity^  to  Abufe,  Pain,  Corruption, 

Death,  not  willingly ^  not  by  any  Adl  of  its 

own,  but  by  Reafon  of  hi7n  that  fiibji Sir d  it: 

Of  God   who   in  Confequence   of  Adams 

Sin,  whom  He  had  appointed  Lord  of  the 

vvho'e  lower  World,  fr  his  Sake  pronounced 

thi^  Ciirfe  (hot  only  on  ihe  Ground,  but) 

on  all  which  was  before  under  his  Domi- 
nion      "r^  ""   ^  '■*'''  ^^i^'oji^'.-  -^av    .uu.. 

VF  387-    !  p.  1^9- 


Original  Sin.  377 

"  The  Mifery  therefore  of  the  Brute  Cre- 
ation, is  fo  far  from  being  an  Objedion  to 
the  Apoftacy  of  Man,  that  it  is  a  vifiblc 
ftanding  Demonftration  thereof.  If  Beafts 
fufFer,  then  Man  is  fallen. 

SECT.     IV. 

'The  Apoftacy  of  Man  proved  by  Scripture  and 

Reafon, 

^*  T)UT  ^  whether  or  no  the  Mferies  of 
Xj  Mankind  alone  will  prove  their 
Apoftacy  from  God,  it  is  certain  thefe  toge- 
ther with  the  Sins  of  Men  are  an  abundant 
Proof,  That  we  are  fallen  Creatures.  And 
this  I  fliall  now  endeavour  to  fhew,  both 
from  the  exprefs  '^  I'ejiimony  of  Scripture^  from 
the  NeceJJity  of  renewing  Grace ^  and  from 
a  Su?'vey  of  the  Heathen  World. 

First,  The  Scripture  tcftifies,  that  an 
univerfal  Degeneracy  and  Corruption,  is 
come  upon  all  the  Sons  and  Daughters  of 
Adam,  ^  Every  Imagination  of  the  I'houghts 
of  the  Heart  of  Man  is  only  Evil  continually: 
Yea  ^  Evil  from  his  Youth,  ^  ^he  Lord  looked 
doivn  from  Heaven  upon  the  Children  of  Men^ 
to  fee  if  there  were  any  that  did  under jl and  and 
feek  God.  T'hey  are  gone  out  of  the  Way\  there 
is  7ione  that  doth  Goody  no  not  one.     *  There  is 

not 


i 


p.  409.       '^  p.  410.       *"  Ge».  vi.  5.       «  c.  viii.  21. 
F/at.  xiv.  3.     *  Eccte.  vii.  20. 


37S  T'he  Doctrine  of 

not  ajufl  Man  upon  Earthy  who  doth  Good  and 
Jhineth  not,  ^Alh^vc  like' Sheep  have  gone  ajlrayy 
we  have  turned  every  am  to  his  own  Way:  Dif- 
fcf CDtWandrings,  but  all  Wanderers.  ^  T'here 
is  none  Righteous y  710  not  one:  ^here  is  none 
that  doth  Good,  no  not  one.  Every  Mouth  is 
Jlrppcdy  and  all  the  World  become  gidlty  before 
God.  All  are  fallen  port  of  the  Glory  ofGoDy 
hecaufe  all  have  finned,  ""'If  o?ie  died  for  ally  then 
U'cre  all  dead-,  that  is  fpiritually  dead,  dead 
in  T'refpajfes  a7id  Sins, 

''■  Now  can  we  fuppofe,  that  all  God's 
Creatures  would  unlverlally  break  his  Law 
run  into  Sin  and  Death,  defile  and  deftroy 
themfelves,  and  that  without  any  one  Ex- 
ception, if  it  had  not  ariien  from  fome  Root 
of  Bitternefs,  fome  original  Iniquity,  which 
was  diffufed  thro'  them  all,  from  their  very 
Entrance  into  the  World?  Tis  utterly  incre- 
dible, that  every  fingle  Perfon,  among  the 
Millions  of  Mankind  fhould  be  born  pure 
and  innocent,  and  yet  fliould  all,  by  free 
and  voluntar}'^  Choice,  every  one  for  himfelf, 
for  near  fix  thoufand  Years  together,  rebel 
again  ft  Ilim  that  m.ade  them,  if  there  were 
not  fome  Original  Contagion  fpread  through 
them  all  at  their  Entrance  into  Life  I  v~-    -  . 

Secondly,  The  fame  Thing  appears 
trom  the  Scriptural  Doftrine  of  our  Recovery 
by  Divine  Grace.     Let  us  confider  in  what 

Manner 

^^'i,  V.  5,6.     »^c».  Ei.  10,  I2,]i9,  23.     »2Cffr.v.  14. 


Original  Sin.  ^79 

Manner  the  Scripture  reprefents  that  great 
Change  which  muil  be  wrought  in  our  Souls, 
in  order  to  our  obtaining  the  Favour  and 
Image  of  God,  and  future  Happinefs."  Ex- 
cepf  a  Man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  fee  the 
Kingdom  of  God.  In  other  Scriptures  it  is 
reprefented,  that  they  miift  be  born  of  the  Spi- 
rit \  they  muft  be  born  of  God.  'They 
muft  be  created  anew  in  Chrift  Jefus  unto 
Good  Works.  They  muft  '^  be  quickened,  or 
raifed  again  from  their  Death  in  ^refpafes  and 
Sins.  They  muft  be  renew  d  in  their  Spirit, 
or  created  after  the  Image  cj  God  in  Righteouf 
nefs  and  true  Holifiefs,  They  muft  be  recon^ 
died  to  God  by  Jefus  Chrift  :  They  muft  be 
waf:edfrom  their  Sins  in  his  Blood,  Since  all 
have  finned  and  come  jhort  of  the  Glory  of  God, 
therefore  if  ever  they  are  faved,  they  muft 
h^  jZijlified  freely  by  his  Grace,  through  the  Re- 
demption that  is  in  Chrift  Jefus.  Now  '  can 
any  one  fuppofe  God  to  have  made  fo  many 
Millions  of  Creatures,  as  have  come  into  the 
World  from  ^da^n  'till  now,  which  have  all 
enter'd  the  World,  innocent  and  holy,  and 
yet  not  one  of  them  fliould  retain  his  Image 
in  Holincfs,  or  be  lit  for  his  Favour,  without 
being  born  again,  created  anew,  raifed  from 
the  Dead,  rcdee7ned,  not  with  corruptible 
Things,  but  with  the  Blood  of  his  own  Son  ? 
;u  J3v.  >  ^n}\        Do 

''"  p.  4.13.     *•    Jo^n'uu  ^,6,S.     p  jE/-6.  ii,  10.     <  V.  5. 
*■  P-414- 


380  The  Doctrine  of     ,^^^, 

Do  not  all  tlicfe  Reprefentations  prove,  That 
every  Man  is  born  with  fome  Original  Con- 
tagion, and  under  fome  Criminal  Imputation 
in  the  Sight  of  God  ?  Elfe  would  not  one 
among  all  thefe  Millions  be  fit  to  be  made  a 
partaker  of  his  Favour,  without  fuch  amaz- 
ing Purifications  as  require  the  Blood  of  the 
Son  of  God,  and  the  Almighty  Operation  of 
his  Spirit  ?  Do  not  all  thefe  Things  fhew. 
That  Mankind  in  their  prefent  Generations, 
are  not  fuch  Creatures,  as  God  at  firft  made 
them?  H 

The  'fame  great  Truth  we  may  learn, 
Thirdly,  from  even  a  flight  Survey  of  the 
Heathen  Nations.  A  few  Days  ago  I  was 
viewing,  in  the  Map  of  the  World,  the  vaft 
Afiatic  Empires  of  ^artary  and  China,  and 
a  great  P^rt  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Moguly 
with  the  Multitude  of  IJlands  in  the  Ea'}-!?!-- 
dies,  I  went  on  to  furvey  all  the  Sou:  hern 
Part  oi  Afrit\  with  the  Savage  Nations  of 
America^  I  obferved  the  Thoufands,  or  rather 
Millions  who  dwell  on  this  Globe,  and  walk 
and  trifle  and  live  and  die  there,  under  the 
heaviell  Cloud  of  Ignorance  and  Darknefs, 
not  knowing  God  nor  the  Way  to  his  Fa- 
vour ;  who  are  drenched  in  grofs  Impieties 
iind  Superftitions,  who  are  continually  guilty 
of  National  Immoralities,  and  praftife  Ido- 
latry,   Malice  and  Lewdnefs,    Fraud  and 

Fallhood, 


Original  Sin.  381 

Falfliood,  with  fcarce  any  Regret  or  Re- 
ftraint. 

-h^KThen  fighing  within  myfelf  I  faid,  'Tis 
not  many  Years  fince  thefewere  all  Infants; 
and  they  were  brought'  up  by  Parents  who 
knew  not  God,  nor  the  Path  that  leads  to 
Life  and  Happinefs.  Are  not  thefe  unhap- 
py Children  born  under  Difficulties  almoft 
unfurmountable  ?  Are  they  not  laid  under  al- 
moft an  ImpofTibility,  of  breaking  their  Way 
of  themfelves,  thro'  fo  much  thick  Darknefs, 
to  the  Knowledge,  the  Fear  and  the  Love 
of  Him  that  made  them  ?  Dreadful  Truth 
indeed  !  Yet,  fo  far  as  I  can  fee,  certain  and 
inconteftable.  Such,  I  fear,  is  the  Cafe  of 
thofe  of  Human  Race  who  cover  at  pre^ 
fent  the  far  greateft  Part  of  the  Globe. 

"  Then  I  ran  back  in  my  Thoughts  four 
or  five  thoufand  Years,  and  faid  within  my- 
felf. What  Multitudes  in  every  Age  of  the 
World,  have  been- born  in  thefe  deplorable 
Circumftances  ?  They  are  inur'd  from  their 
Birth  to  barbarous  Cuftoms  and  impious 
Practices  :  They  have  an  Image  of  the 
Life  of  Brutes  and  Devils  wrought  in  them 
by  their  early  Education  :  They  have  had 
the  Seeds  of  wretched  Wickednefs,  •  fown, 
planted  and  cultivated  in  them,  by  the  Sa- 
vage Inftrucflions  of  thofe  that  went  before 
them.     And  their  own  Imitation  of  fuch 

horrible 

*  p.  416- 


'y?2  ^h^  Doctrine  of 

horrible  Examples  has  confirmed  the  Mif- 
chieF,  long  "  before  they  knew  or  heard  of 
the  true  God  :  If  they  have  heard  of  Him 
to  this  Day.  Scarce  any  of  them  have  ad- 
mitted one  thoughtful  Enquiry,  Whether 
they  follow  the  Rules  of  Reafon,  or  whe- 
ther they  are  in  the  Way  of  Happinefs  and 
Peace,  any  more  than  their  Parents  before 
them.  As  they  are  born  in  this  grofs  Dark- 
nefs,  fo  they  grow  up  in  the  vile  Idolatries, 
and  all  the  fhameful  Abominations  of  their 
Country,  and  go  on  to  Death  in  the  fame 
Courfe.  Nor  have  they  Light  enough, 
either  from  without  or  from  within,  to  make 
them  aik  ferioufly.  Is  there  not  a  Lie  m  my 
Right  Hand  ?  Am  I  not  in  the  Way  of  De- 
Jh'u£iio7i  ? 

'*  St.  Peter  '*' fays  indeed,  Thzt  in  every 
Nation  he  that  f caret h  God  andworketh  Righ- 
teoiifnefs  is  accepted  of  Him,  But  if  there 
were  very  few  {among  the  Jews)  who  feared 
God,  very  few  in  thofe  learned  Nations  of 
the  Gentiles^  how  much  fewer,  may  we 
fuppole,  are  in  thofe  barbarous  Countries,, 
which  have  no  Knowledge,  either  Divine 
or  Human  ? 

"  But  ""  would  this  have  been  the  Cafe 
of  thofe  unhappy  Nations,  both  of  the  Pa- 
rents andtheirChildren,  in  an  hundred  long 
Succeilions,  had  they  been  fuch  a  Race  of 

Creatures 

•  p.  417-     "  P-  419-     '  P-  42<^* 


Original  Sin.  383 

Creatures,  as  they  came  out  of  the  Hand  of 
the  Creator  ?  If  thofe  Children  had  been 
Guiltlefs  in  the  Eye  of  God  could  this  have 
been  their  Portion  ?  In  fhort,  can  we  fup- 
pofe,  the  wife  and  righteous  and  merciful 
God,  would  have  eftablilhcd  and  continued 
fuch  a  Conftitution  for  that  Propagation  of 
Mankind  which  fhould  naturally  place  fo 
many  Millions  of  them  fo  early  in  fuch  dif- 
mal  Circumflances ;  if  there  had  not  been 
fome  dreadful  and  univerfal  Degeneracy 
fpread  over  them  and  their  Fathers,  by 
fome  original  Crime,  which  met  and  feized 
them  at  the  very  Entrance  into  Life  ? 


)«(>C)^^¥)ft^)^^¥)5(^)^^)^)^)5()^^^?0( 


gnol  b^i  nc  ni  «n 

to  aoxi^  £  ilDul  ntjod  THE 


3^4  5^^^  Doctrine  of 


THE 

SECOND  ESSAY. 


A  plain  'Explication  of  the  DoBrine  ^Imputed 
Sin  and  Imputed  Righteoufnefs/ 

"  WyHW^  H  1 S  Doarlne  has  been  attend- 
O  T  w  ed  with  many  noify  Controver- 

k)f()i(S  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^  Chriftian  World,  let 
us  try  whether  it  may  not  be  fet 
in  fo  fair  and  eafy  a  Light,  as  to  reconcile 
the  Sentiments  of  the  contending  Parties. 

"  ^When  a  Man  has  broken  the  Law  of 
his  Country,  and  is  puniili'd  for  fo  doing,  'tis 
plain,  that  Sin  is  imputed  to  him-,  his  Wicked- 
nefs  is  upon  hitn\  he  beai's  his  Iniquity  \  that 
is,  he  is  reputed  or  accounted  Guilty:  He  is 
condemned  and  dealt  with  as  an  Offender. 

"  On  the  other  Lland  if  an  innocent  Man, 
who  is  falfcly  accused  is  acquitted  by  the 
Court,  Sin  is  not  if7iputcd  to  him^  but  Righte- 
9uf?irfs  is  imputed  to  him ;  or  to  ufe  another 
Phrafe,  his  Rigkteoujhefs  is  upon  him. 

•*  Or, 

•  p.  427.   >»  p.  428, 


Original  Sin.  385 

^*  Or,  if  a  Reward  be  given  a  Man  for 
any  righteous  Aiflion,  this  righteous  Adl /V 
imputed  to  him, 

''Farther,  If  a  Man  has  commit- 
ted a  Crime,  but  the  Prince  pardons '  him, 
then  he  \s  jujiijied from  it ;  and  his  Fault  is  not 
imputed  to  him, 

"  But  if  a  Man  having  committed  Trea- 
fon,  his  Eftate  is  taken  from  him  and 
his  Children,  then  they  bear  the  hiiquity  of 
their  Father^  and  his  Sin  is  imputed  to  them 
alfo. 

"  If  a  Man  lofe  his  Life  and  Eftate  for 
Murder,  and  his  Children  thereby  become 
Vagabonds,  then  the  Blood  of  the  Perfon 
murder'd  is  faid  to  be  upon  the  Murderer^  and 
upon  his  Children  alfo.  So  the  Jews:  His 
Blocd  be  on  us  and  on  our  Children :  Let  us 
and  our  Children  be  punifh'd  for  it. 

"  Or'^  if  a  Criminal  had  incur'd  the  Pe- 
nalty of  Imprifonment,  and  the  State  were 
to  permit  a  Friend  of  his  to  become  his  Sure- 
ty, and  to  be  confin'd  in  his  Room,  then  his 
Crime  is  faid  to  be  imputed  to  his  Surety^  or 
to  be  laid  upon  him  ;  he  hears  the  Iniquity  of 
his  Friend,  by  fuffering  for  him.  Mean- 
time the  Crime  for  which  the  Surety  now 
fuffers,  is  not  iynputed  to  the  real  Offender. 

**  And  fhould  we  fuppofe  the  Prince,  to 
permit  tliis  Surety  to  exert  himfelf  in  fome 

A  a  eminent 


3S6  The  Doctrine  of 

eminent  Service,  to  which  a  Reward  is  pro- 
mis'd,  rnd  all  this  in  order  to  entitle  the 
Criminal  to  the  promis'd  Reward,  then  this 
eminent  Service  may  be  faid  to  be  imputed  to 
the  Criminal,  that  is,  he  is  rewarded  on  the 
Account  of  it.  So  in  this  Cafe,  both  what 
his  Friend  has  done  and  fuffer'd,  is  imputed 
to  him. 

"  If""  a  Man  do  fome  eminent  Service  to 
his  Prince,  and  he  with  his  Pofterity  are 
dignified  on  Account  of  it:  Then  the  Service 
perform'd  by  the  Father  is  faid  to  he  imputed 
to  the  Children  alfo. 

"  Now  if  among  the  Hiilorles  of  Nations 
we  find  any  Thing  of  this  Kind,  do  we  not 
eafily  underfland  what  the  Writers  fay  ? 
Why  then  do  we  judge  thefe  Phrafes  when 
they  are  found  in  the  infpired  Writers,  to  be 
fo  hard  to  be  underftood  ? 

"  But  it  may  be  alked.  How  can  ^  the 
Afts  of  the  Parent's  Treafon,  be  imputed  to 
his  litde  Child?  Since  thofe  Ads  were  quite 
out  of  the  Reach  of  an  Infant,  nor  was  it 
poffible  for  him  to  commit  them. 

"  Or  how  can  the  eminent  Service  per- 
formed by  a  Father,  be  imputed  to  his  Cbild^ 
who  is  but  an  Infant  ? 

"  I  ANSWER,^   I.  Thofe  Ads  of  Treafon 

or  Ads  of  Service,  are  by  a  common  Figure, 

faid  to  be  imputed  to  the  Childi'cn^  when  they 

fuifer 
«  p.  431.    *  p.  432.    6  p.  433. 


Original  Sin.  387 

luffer  or  enjoy  the  Confequences  of  their  Fa- 
ther's Treafon,  or  eminent  Service  :  Tho' 
the  particular  Anions  of  Treafon  or  Service, 
could  not  be  praftifed  by  the  Children. 
This  would  eafily  be  underftood,  fliould  it 
occur  in  an  Human  Hiftory.  And  why  not, 
when  it  occurs  in  the  Sacred  Writings  ? 

*'  I  ANSWER,  2.  Sin  is  taken  either  for  an 
AB  of  Difohedie7Ke  to  a  Law,  or  for  the  legal 
Refiilt  of  fuch  an  Ad:;  that  is,  Tht  Guilty 
or  LiaMenefs  to  Punijhfnent,  Now  when  we 
fay.  The  Sin  of  a  Traitor  is  imputed  td^  his 
Children  we  do  not  mean,  That  the  A51  of 
the  Father  is  charged  upon  the  Child  :  But 
that  the  Guilt  or  Liablenefs  to  Punifliment 
is  fo  transfer 'd  to  him,  that  he  fuffers  Baniih- 
ment  or  Poverty  on  Account  of  it. 

"In  like  Manner  Righteoufnefs  is  either. 
Particular  ABs  of  Obedience  to  a  Law,  or 
the  legal  Refult  of  thofe  Adlions,  that  is,  a 
Right  to  the  Reward  annext  to  them. 

"  And  fo  when  we  fay,  The  Righteouf?2efs 
of  him  that  has  perform'd  fome  eminent 
Afl:  of  Obedience,  is  imputed  to  his  Children^ 
we  do  not  mean.  That  the  particular  A5i  of 
the  Father  is  charged  on  the  Child,  as  if 
he  had  done  it :  But  that  \}s\tRight  to  Reward^ 
which  is  the  Refult  of  that  Ad:,  is  transfer'd 
to  his  Children. 

A  a  2  Now 

^  P-  434- 


3S8  'The  Doctrine  of 

**  Now '  if  we  would  but  thus  explain 
cvervText  of  Scripture  wherein  cither  Imputed 
Sin  or  Imputed  Right eoufnefs  is  mentioned, 
(whether  in  exprefs  Words,  or  in  the  plain 
Meaning  of  them)  we  Ihould  find  them  all 
eafy  and  intelligible. 

"  Thus''  we  may  eafily  underftand,  how 
the  Obedience  ^'Chrift  is  imputed  to  all  his 
Seed  :  And  how  the  Difobedience  o/' Adam  is 
imputed  to  all  his  Children. 

"  To  confirm  this,  I  would  add  thefc 
three  Remarks : 

*'  1 .  There  arc  feveral  Hiftories  in  Scrip- 
ture, where  Expreffions  of  the  fame  Import 
occur. 

'*  So  Gen.  xxii.  16.  T'It^  Seedpall pojfefs  the 
Gate  of  his  Enemies^  becaiife  thou  haft  obey  d  my 
Voice.  Here  Abrahams  Obedience^  that  is, 
the  Refultofit,  is  imputed  to  his  Pofterity. 

*'  So'  Numb.  XXV.  1 1.  God  gave  to  Phine- 
has  and  his  Seed  after  hi  my  the  Covenant  of  an 
evcrlafting  Friejlhood^  becaufe  he  was  zealous 
for  his  God,  and  flew  the  Criminals  in  IfraeL 
This  was  fo  imputed  to  hisChildren^  that  they 
alio  rccciv'd  the  Reward  of  it. 

"  Thus  the  Sin  oi  Achan  was  fo  imputed 
to  his  Children,  that  they  were  all  floned  on 
Account  of  it,  fojh.  vii.  24.  In  like  Man- 
ner the  Covetoufnefs  of  Gehazi,  was  imputed 
tojiis  Pofterity,  {2  Kings  v.  27)  when  God 

bv 

'  P-  43^     '  p.  43^.     '  ?   437' 


Original  Sin.  ^389 

by  his  Prophet""  pronounced,  That  the  Le^ 
profy  JJoould  cleave  unto  him  and  to  his  Seed  for 
ever. 

"  2.  The  Scriptures  both  of  the  Old  and 
New  Teftament,  ufe  the  Words  Sin  and  Ini^ 
quityy  (both  in  Hebrew  and  Greek)  to  fignify 
not  only  the  Criminal  ABions  themfelves, 
but  alfo  the  Kejult  and  ^Confeqiiences  of  thofe 
Actions,  that  is,  T^he  Guilt  or  Liablenefs  to 
Punijkment :  And  fometimes  the  Pimijl:ment 
itfelf,  whether  it  fall  upon  the  Original  Cri- 
minal, or  upon  others,  on  his  Account. 

*'  In  the  fame  Manner  the  Scriptures  ufe 
the  Word  Righteotifnefsy  not  only  for  ABs 
of  Obedience,  but  alfo  the  Refult  of  them, 
that  is,  Jiiftijication^  or  Right  to  a  Reward. 
A  moderate  Study  of  fome  of  thofe  Texts 
where  thefe  Words  are  ufed,  may  convince 
us  of  this. 

"  So  yob  xxxiii.  26.  God  will  render  to  a 
Man  his  Right eoiifnefs:  That  is,  The  Reward 
of  it.  Hof.  X.  12,  Sow  to  yourfelves  in  Righ- 
teoitfnefs^  'till  the  Lord  come  a?: d  rain  Righte^ 
oiifnefs  upon  you :  That  is,  'till  Ke  pour  down 
the  Rewards  or  Fruits  of  it  upon  you. 

"  "  I  MIGHT  add  here,  That  in  feveral 
Places  of  St.  Paul's  Epiflles,  Rigbteoufncfs 
means  yufliJicatiGn^  in  the  Paflive  Senfe  of 
the  Word. 

"  So  Ro?n.  X.  4.  Chrift  is  the  End  of  the 
Tiawfor  Right eouf?iefs  to  every  one  that  bdiev- 

A  a  3  eth : 


390  TT^e  Doctrine  of 

eth :  That  is,  in  order  to  the  Juftification  of 
Believers.  Rom.  x.  lo.   Witb  the  Heart  Man 

bcUrvcfh  unto  Rtghteouf72efs  -^  that  is,  fo  as  to 
obtain  Juftification.  G^/.  ii.  21.  If  Rigljteouf- 
nefsy  that  is,  Juftification,  come  by  the  Law, 
then  Chrift  is  dead  in  vain.  This  particularly 
holds,  where  the  Word  >^oy{^oiMoci  or  impute 
is  joined  with  Right ecufncfs.  As  Rom.  iv.  3. 
Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  imputed 
to  him  for  Right coufnefs.  Rojn.  iv.  5.  His 
Faith  is  counted  to  him  for  Right  coufnefs.  It 
is  not  ai'Tt  or  ^Tn^'  for^  or  inJleadofRighteouf 
ncfs :  But  £t?  ^lytccioa-vi^vu'  i?i  order  to  fiflification 
or  Acceptance  with  God. 

*'  And  in  other  Places  of  Scripture,  a 
Work^  whether  Good  or  Evil,  is  put  for  the 
Reward  of  it.  fob  xxxiv.  11.  T'he  Work  of 
a  Man  will  He  render  unto  him ;  that  is.  The 
Recompence  of  it.  So  St.  Paul  defires  Pi6/- 
lemon^  to  impute  any  Wrong  he  had  received 
from  Orafwius  to  himfelf :  That  is,  Not  the 
Evil  Aution,  but  the  Damage  he  had  fuftain'd. 

'^  Indeed  when  ^in  or  Righteoufnefs  are 
faid  to  be  imputed  to  any  Man,  on  account 
of  what  himfelf  hath  done,  the  Words  ufu- 
ally  denote  both  the  Good  or  Evil  Adtions 
thcmfeh'cs,  and  the  legal  Refult  of  them. 
But  when  the  Sin  or  Righteoufnefs  of  one 
Pcrfon  is  fiid  to  be  ifuputed  to  another,  then 
generally  diofe  Words  mean  only  the  Refult 
thereof,  that  is  a  Llablenefs  to  Punifhment 

on 


Original  Sin.  391 

on  the  one  Hand,  and  to  Reward  on  the 
other. 

"  '^  But  let  us  fay  what  we  will,  to  con- 
fine the  Senfe  of  the  Imputation  of  Sin  and 
Right eoiifnefs^  to  the  Legal  Refiilt^  the  Reward 
or  Punifhment  of  Good  or  Evil  Anions:  Let 
us  ever  fo  explicitly  deny  the  Imputation  of 
the  A6lions  themfelves  to  others :  Still  Mr. 
TCaylor  will  level  almofl  all  -his  Arguments, 
again  ft  the  Imputation  of  the  ABiom  themfches^ 
and  then  triumph  in  having  demolifhed 
what  we  never  built,  and  refuting  what  we 
never  afferted. 

"  3.  The  'Scripture  does  not,  tliat  I  re- 
member, any  where  fay  in  exprefs  Words, 
That  the  Sin  of  Adam  is  imputed  to  his  Chil- 
dren ;  or,  That  the  Sins  of  Believers  are  im- 
puted to  Chrift  5  or,  That  the  Righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  is  imputed  to  Believers.  But  the  true 
Meaning  of  all  thefe  Expreffions  is  fuffici- 
ently  found  in  feveral  Places  of  Scripture. 

"  '  Yet  fince  thefe  exprefs  Words  and 
Phrafes,  of  the  Imputation  of  Adam'^  Sin  to 
us,  of  our  Sins  to  Chrift,  and  of  ChriftV 
Righteoufnefs  to  us,  are  not  plainly  written  in 
Scripture  :  We  fliould  not  impofe  it  on  every 
Chriftian,  to  ufe  thefe  very  Expreflions.  Let 
every  one  take  his  Liberty,  either  of  confin- 
ing himfelf  to  ftridlly  Scriptural  Language ; 
or  of  manifefting  his  Senfe  of  thefe  plain 
A  a    4  Scriptural 

"  p.  444.    -■  p.  446.    '  p.  447- 


3g2  ^be  Doctrine  of 

Scriptural  Dodtrines,  in  Words  and  Phrafes 
of  his  own. 

"  Buxif  the  Words  were  cxprefly  written 
in  the  Bible,  they  could  not  reasonably  be  in- 
terpreted in  any  other  Senfe,  than  this  which 
I  have  explained  by  fo  many  Examples,  both 
in  Scripture,  Hiftory  and  in  Common  Life. 

"  I  WOULD  only  add,  If  it  were  allowed, 
tliat  the  very  ylcl  of  Adatii^  Difobedience 
was  imputed  to  all  his  Pofterity;  that  all  the 
fame  finful  Acliom  which  Men  have  com^ 
mltted,  were  imputed  to  Chriji^  and  the  very 
Anions  which  CImJl  did  upon  Earth,  were 
imputed  to  Believers:  What  greater  Punifli- 
ments  would  the  Pofterity  of  Adam  fuffer? 
Or  what  greater  Bleffings  could  Believers 
enjoy,  beyond  what  Scripture  has  alTign'd, 
cither  to  Mankind^  as  the  Refult  of  the  Sin 
r){  Adam\  or  to  Chrijl^  as  the  Refult  of  the 
Sins  oi  Men\  or  to  Believers^  as  the  Refult 
of  the  Righteoufnefs  of  Chrijl  r 


THE 


Original  Sin.  393 


THE 

DoSIrine  of  Original  Sin^  &c; 

i'*'){()J("*iBELiEVE  every  impartial  Reader  is 
^  I  ^  now  able  to  judge.  Whether  Mr. 
^ww^  T^aylor  has  folidly  anfwercd  Dr. 
Watts  or  no.  But  there  is  ano- 
ther not  inconfiderable  Writer  whom  I 
cannot  find  he  has  anfwered  at  all,  tho'  he 
has  publiflied  four  feveral  Trafts,  profeffedly 
againfl  Mr.  'Taylor  :  Of  which  he  could  not 
be  ignorant  becaufe  they  are  mentioned  in 
the  *'  Ruin  aiid  Recovery  of  Human  Nature'' 
I  mean,  the  Kqv.  Mr,  Samuel  HMeji,  Mini- 
fter  at  WWntham  in  Suffolk,  I  think  it  there- 
fore  highly  expedient,  to  fubjoin  a  Ihort  Ab- 
ilradl  of  thefe  alfo  :  The  rather,  becaufe  the 
Tradts  thcmfclves  are  very  fcarce,  having 
been  for  fome  Time  out  of  Print* 

EcCLEf^^, 


39+  77;^  Doctrine  y 

EccLES.  vii.  29. 

Lo  this  o?ily  have  I  founds   T'hat  God  made 
Man  up7'ight  >  but  they  have  fought  out  many 
.Lwcntiom. 


» ^j .» --> 


"  TN  '  the  preceding  Verfe  Solomon  had 
JL  declared,  How  few  wife  and  good 
Perlons  he  had  found  in  tlie  whole  Courfe 
of  his  Life.  But  left  any  fhould  blame  the 
Providence  of  God  for  this,  he  here  obferves. 
That  thefe  were  not  what  God  made  Man 
at  lirft:  and  that  their  bcin^what  thev  were 
not,  was  the  Efted  of  a  wretched  Apoftafy 
from  God.  The  Original  Words  ftand  thus, 
Onhy  fee  thoUy  I  have  found — 

*'  Oiily-y  This  Word  fets  a  Mark  on  what 
it  is  prefixt  to,  as  a  Truth  of  great  Certainty 
and  Importance.  See^  obferve,  thou.  He 
invites  every  Hearer  and  Reader,  in  par- 
ticular, to  confider  what  he  was  about  to 
uifer.  /  have  found,  I  have  difcovered 
this  certain  Truth,  and  aflert  it  on  the  fulleft 
Evidence  :  "^fhat  God  made  Man  upright -y  but 
they  have  fought  out  many  Inventmis, 

"  The  Hebrew  Word  *^*;^**  which  we  ren- 
der upright  is  properly  '  oppofed  to  c?'ookedy 
irregular,  perverfe.     It  is  applied  to  Things, 

to 

•  P-  3-     '  P-  4.     '  p.  5- 


Original  Sin.  39^ 

to  fignify  their  hdngjlra/g/jf,  or  agreeable  to 
Rule.  But  it  is  likevvife  applied  both  to 
God  and  Man,  with  the  f^orJs  and  ^orh 
of  both.  As  applied  to  God,  the  I^Fays  of 
God,  the  Word  oi  God ^  it  is  join'd  with 
Good^  Pfalm  xxv.  8.  with  righteous,  Ffahn 
cxix.  137.  with  true  and  good^  Neh.  ix.  13, 
where  Mention  is  made  q{  7'ight  yiidgments^ 
true  Laws^  good  Statutes,  The  Zkrightnefs 
with  which  God  is  faid  to  miniflerjiidgment 
to  the  People  anfwers  to  Rigi  teoufiicjs.  In  a 
Word,  God's  Uprightnefs  is  the  Moral  Redi- 
tude  of  his  Nature,  infinitely  wife,  good, 
jufh  and  perfed:.  The  Uprigbtjiefs  of  Man ^ 
is  his  Conformity  of  Heart  and  Life,  to  the 
Rule  he  is  under,  which  is  the  Law  or  Will 
of  God.  Accordingly  we  read  of  Upright^ 
nefs  of  Heart,  Pfal  xxxvi.  10.  Job.  xxxiii.  3. 
and  Upright?iefs  of  Way  or  Converfaiion,  Pf, 
xxxvii.  14.  and  often  elfewhere.  l^he  upright 
Man  throughout  the  Scripture,  is  a  truly 
good  Man,  a  Man  of  Litegrity,  an  holy  Per- 
fon.'  In  Jcbi.  i,  8.  C.  ii.  3.  Upright  h  thc^ 
fame  with,  per feB  (as  in  P/2?/.  xxxvii.  37.  and 
many  other  Places)  and  is  explained  by,  o?ie 
who  fear eth  God  and  rfche%vcth  Evil,  In  Job 
viii.  6.  it  is  join'd,  and  is  the  fame  with,  pure. 
In  the  fame  Si^nk  it  is  taken  (to  mention  but 
a  few  out  of  many  Texts  which  might  be 
produced)  Prov.  x.  29.  ^he  Way  of  the  Lord 

.  is 
"  p.  6. 


396  The  Doctrine  of 

U  Stre?igtb  to  the  Upright,  but  DeJlruBion 
Ihall  be  )o  the  Workers  of  Iniquity,  C.  xi.  3, 
'The  Integrity  of  the  Upright  pall  guide  them  ; 
but  the  Pe?-ierjhiefs  ofTranfgnjforsJballdeJiroy 
them,  V.  6.  'The  Righteoiijhefs  of  the  Upright 
f]:all  deliver  them;  but  l^ranfgreffors  fl:all  be 
taken  in  their  own  Naught i?iefs,  V.  1 1 .  By 
the  BleJJing  of  the  Upright  the  City  is  exalted, 
C.  XV.  8.  ne  Sacrifice  of  the  Wicked  is  an  A- 
boinination  to- the  Lord,  but  the  Prayer  of  the 
Upright  is  his  Delight,  C.  xxi.  29.  A  wicked 
Man  hardneth  bis  Face,  but  as  for  the  Upright^ 
He  direBeth  his  Way,  From  even  thefe 
Texts  it  maniteftly  appears,  That  Upright^ 
nefs  as  applied  to  Man,  is  the  very  fame  with 
Rigbttoufnefs,  Holificfsy  or  Integrity  of  Heart 
and  Converfation. 

*'  When  therefore  Solomon  fays,  God  made 
Man  upright,  the  plain,  undeniable  Mean- 
ing is,  God  at  firft  form' d  Man""  righteous  or 
holy;  altho'  they  have  fought  out  many  live?!- 
fi'jns.  I'hey, — this  refers  to  Adam,  which  is 
both  a  Singular  and  a  Plural  Noun :  They^ 
our  firfl:  Parents,  and  with  them  their  Pofte- 
rity,  hu'-ce  fought  out  7nany  Inventions,  many 
Contrivances,  to  offend  God  and  injure 
thcmfclvcs.  Thefe  many  Inventions  arc  op- 
pofed  to  the  Uprigbtnefs,  the  Simplicity  of 
Heart  and  Integrity,  with  which  our  iirft 
Parent.^,  and  Mankind  in  them,  were  origin 
nally  made  by  God^ 

''  The 


Original  Sin.  397 

"The  Doftrine  of  the  Text  then  is, 
That  God  at  his  Creation  made  Ma?!  upright 
or  righteous ;  not  only  Rational  and  a  Free^ 
Agents  but  holy.  Therefore^  to  maintain, 
That  "  Man  neither  was  nor  could  be  form'd 
"  Holy,  becaufc  none  can  be  holy,  but  in 
"  Conlequence  of  his  own  Choice  and  Ea- 
"  deavour,"  is  bold  indeed!  To  prove  the 
contrary,  and  juftify  Solomons  Affertion,  I 
offer  a  few  plain  Arguments. 

"  L  Moses  in  his  Account  of  the  Creation 
writes,  And  God  faid^  Let  Us  make  Man  in 
our  own  Image,  Now^  that  Righteoufnefs  or 
Holinefs  is  the  principal  Part  of  this  Image 
of  God,  appears  from  Eph.  iv.  22,  24.  and 
CoL  iii.  9,  10.  On  which  PafHiges  I  obferve, 
I.  By  the  old  Man  is  not  meant  an  heatbeniJJs 
Lifey  or  an  ungodly  Converfation ;  but  a 
corrupt  Nature.  For  the  Apoftle  elfewherc 
fpeaks  of  our  old  Man,  as  crucifiedwith  Chrift; 
and  here  diftinguilLes  from  it  their  ^crz/f^r 
Converfation,  or  fmful  Adions,  which  he  calh 
the  Deeds  of  the  old  Man,  2.  By  the  new 
Man  is  meant,  not  a  7iew  Courfe  of  Life ,  (as 
the  Socinians  interpret  it)  but  a  Principle  of 
Grace,  called  by  St.  Peter,  the  hidden  Man  of 
the  Heart,  and  a  divine  Nature,  3.  To  ^put 
cfthe  old  Man  (the  fame  as  to  crucify  the 
Flejh)  is  to  fubdue  and  mortify  our  corrupt 
Nature  :  To  put  on  the  jkw  Man  is  to  ftir  up 

and 

♦  p.  8.     «  p.  9.     "  p.   10' 


^9?  The  Doctrine  of 

and  cultivate  that  gracious  Principle,    that 

New  Nature.  This,  faith  the  Apoftle,  is 
created  after  God,  ifi  Right eonfnefs  and  true 
Holi?2efs,  It  is  created:  Which  cannot 
properly  he  faid,  of  a  7iew  Coiirfe  of  Life ; 
but  nia\s  of  a  new  Nature,  It  is  created  after 
Gor,  or  /;/  his  Image  and  Likenefs  m^ntiontd 
by  Mofes.  But  what  is  it  to  be  created  after 
God,  or  in  his  hnage  ?  It  is,  to  be  created  in 
Right eoufncfs  andtriteHolinefs:  (Term'dT&zoic;- 
ledgCy  the  practical  Knowledge  of  God,  CoL 
iii.  lo)  But  if  to  be  created  after  God,  or  in 
his  Image  andLikenefs,  is  to  be  created  in  Righ- 
ieoiifncfs  and  true  IIoli7iefsy  and  if  that  Principle 
of  Righteoufnefs  and  Holinefs  by  which  we 
are  created  unto  good  Works,  is  a  72aw  Man^  a 
diijine  Nature  ;  it  is  eafy  to  infer,  That  Man 
was  at  firfl  created  righteous  or  holy, 

''  II.  All  Things,  as  at  firft  made  by  God, 
^^rre  very  good.  Nor  indeed  could  He  make 
them  otherwife.  Now  a  Rational  Being  is 
not  good,  unlefs  his  rational  Powders  are  all 
devoted  to  God.  The  Goodncfs  of  Man,  as 
a  rational  Being  muft  lie '  in  a  Devotednefs 
and  Confecration  to  God.  Confequently, 
Man  was  at  firft  thus  devoted  to  God  : 
Otiicrwife  he  was  7wt  good.  But  this  De- 
vorednefs  to  the  Love  and  Service  of  God  is 
true  Righteoufnefs  or  Holinefs.  This  Righ- 
teoufnefs then,  this  Goodnefs,  or  Upright- 

'    P-    I  I.       '    p.     12. 


Original  Sin.  399 

nefs,  this  regular  and  due  State,  or  Difpo- 
fition  of  the  Human  Mind,  was  at  firft  Na- 
tural to  Man.  It  was  wrought  into  his  Na^, 
ture,  and  con-created  with  his  Rational 
Powers.  A  I'-ational  Creature,  as  fuch,  is 
capable  of  knowing,  loving,  ferving,  living 
in  Communion  with  the  Moft  Holy  One. 
Adam  at  firft  either  did  or  did  not  ufe  this 
Capacity  j  either  he  knew  and  loved  God  or 
he  did  not.  If  he  did  not,  he  was  not  very 
good^  no,  nor  good  at  all  j  if  he  did,  he  was 
upright,  righteous,  holy. 

"  III.  When  God  vefted  Man  with  Do- 
minion over  the  other  Creatures,  how  was 
he  qualified. for  exercifing  thatDominion,  un- 
lefs  he  had  in  himfelf  a  Principle  of  Love  and 
Obedience  to  the  Supreme  Governor  ?  Did 
not  God  form  ^  the  Creatures  obedient  to 
Man,  to  confirm  Man  in  his  loving  Obedi- 
ence to  God  ?  Or  did  He  create  them,  with 
a  Difpofition  to  depend  on  and  obey  Man  as 
their  Lord,  and  not  create  Man  with  a 
Difpofition  to  obey  and  live  dependent  on 
the  Lord  of  All  ?  But  this  Difpofition  is 
Uprightnefs.  Therefore  God  7nade  Man 
upright, 

"  IV",  Either  Man  was  created  with  Prin- 
ciples of  Love  and  Obedience,  or  he  was  cre- 
ated an  Enemy  to  God.  One  of  thefe  muft 
be  :  For  as  all  the  Duty  required  of  Man,  as 

a  rational 


*  p.  15- 


466*^  77j>^  EfoCTRiNE  of 

a  rattoh^  Being  is  fummarily  cbmprifecHh  * 
Love,  a  fupreme  Love  to  God,  and  a  fubor- 
dihate  Love  to  others,  for  his  Sake:  So  there 
can  be  no  Medium  between  a  rational  Crea- 
ture's loving  God,  and  not  loving,  which  is  a 
Degree  of  Enmity  to  Him.  Either,  O  Man, 
thou  loveft  God,  or  thou  doft  not:  If  thou 
doft,  thou  art  holy  or  righteous :  If  thou 
doft  not,  thou  art  indifpofed  to  ferve  Him 
in  fuch  a  Manner,  and  with  fuch  a  Frame 
of  Spirit  as  He  requires.  Then  thou  art  an 
'  Enemy  to  God,  a  Rebel  againft  his  Au- 
thority. But  God  could  not  create  Man  in 
fuch  a  State,  in  a  State  of  Enmity  againft 
Himfelf  It  follows.  That  Man  was  created 
a  Lover  of  God,  that  is  righteous  and  holy. 
"  In  a  Word.  ""  Can  you  prove,  either 
that  Man  was  not  created  after  God,  or  that 
this  does  not  mean  being  created  in  Righte-- 
oufnefs  a7id  ti'ue  Holinefs  ?  Was  not  Man,  as 
nil  Creatures,  good  in  his  Kind  ?  And  is  a 
rational  Creature  good^  unlefs  all  its  Powers 
arc  devoted  to  God  ?  Was  not  Man  duly 
qualified  at  firft  to  exercife  Dominion  over 
the  other  Creatures  ?  And  could  he  be  fo 
qualified,  without  a  Principle  of  Love  and 
Obedience  to  their  common  Lord  ?  Laftly, 
Can  any  Man  prove,  either  that  Man  could 
be  innocent^  if  he  did  not  love  the  Lord  his 
God  with  all  his  He^rt?    Or  that  fuch  a 

Love 

»  p.  14.    «  p.  1^. 


Original  Sin.  401 

Love  to  God  is  not  Rigbteoufnefs  and  true 
Holinefs  ? 

"  "  From  the  Doclrine  of  Man*s  Original 
Rigbteoufnefs  we  may  eaiily  conclude  that  of 
Original  Sin,  °  For  this  Reafbn  it  is,  that 
fome  fo  earneftly  proteft  againft  Original 
Rigbteoufnefs,  becaufe  they  dread  looking  on 
themfelves  as  iy  Nature  fallen  Creatures  and 
Children  of  Wrath,  If  Man  was  not  holy 
at  firft,  he  could  not  fall  from  a  State  of 
Holinefs :  And  confequently  the  firft  Tranf- 
greffion  expofed  him  and  his  Pofterity  to 
nothing  but  Temporal  Death.  But  on  the 
other  Hand,  if  Man  was  made  upright  it  fol- 
lows, I.  That  Man  when  he  fell  loft  his 
Original  Rigbteoufnefs,  and  therewith  his 
Title  to  God's  Favour  and  to  Communion 
with  God.  2.  That  he  thereby  incurred, 
not  only  Temporal  but  Spiritual  Death,  He 
became  dead  in  Sin  and  a  Child  of  Wrath. 
And  3 .  That  all  his  Pofterity  are  born  with 
fuch  a  Nature,  not  as  Man  had  at  firft,  but 
as  he  contrafted  by  his  Fall. 


Bb  Gen. 

p.    ZO,      •    p.    21. 


402  T^be  Doctrine  of 

Gen.  ii.  j6,  17. 

^;/^  the  Lord  God  commanded  the  Ma?2,  fay- 
/W,  Of  every  T'ree  of  the  Garden  thou  mayji 
freely  eat :  But  of  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  of 
Good  and  Evily  thoujhaltnoteatofit.  For 
in  the  Day  that  thou  edteji  thereof  thou  Jhalt 
furely  die, 

"  ''  /^~^  O  D  forbad  Man  to  eat  of  this 
Vjr  Tree,  in  Token  of  his  Sovereign 
Authority,  and  for  the  Exercife  of  Man's 
Love'',  and  the  Trial  of  his  Obedience.  The 
Words  added.  In  the  Day  thou  eateft  thereof 
thou  Jhalt  furely  die^  or  literally.  In  dying  thou 
flialt  die^  mean,  not  only,  Thou  fait  certain- 
ly die,  but.  Thou  fait  fuffer  every  Kind  of 
Death.  Thy  Soul  as  well  as  thy  Body  fhall 
die.  And  Indeed  if  God  made  Man  upright 
or  holy :  If  Man  at  firft  enjoy 'd  the  Life  of 
God,  inckiding  Holinefs  joined  with  BleC- 
fednefs :  And  if  the  miferable  State  of  the 
Soul  (as  well  as  the  DifTolution  of  the  Body) 
is  in  Scripture  termed  Death-,  it  plainly  fol- 
lows, That  the  Original  Tlireatning  includes 
^  nothing  I'efs,  than  a  Lofs  of  Man  s  Original 

Uprightnefs 

»  p.  126.    «  p.  27.       ^~    -  '  . 


ORifiiNAL  Sin.  403 

Uprightnefs,  of  his  Title  to  God's  Favour, 
and  a  Life  of  happy  Communion  with  God. 
"  The  Words  mean  farther,  T^hou  '  floalt 
i7ijlantly  die -y  as  foon  as  ever  thou  eateft. 
And  io  he  did.  For  in  that  Inftant,  his 
Original  Righteoufnefs,  Title  to  God's  Fa- 
vour, '  and  Communion  w^ith  God  being 
loft,  he  was  fpiritually  dead,  dead  in  Siuy 
his  Soul  was  dead  to  God,  and  his  Body 
liable  to  Death,  Temporal  and  Eternal. 

"  And  as  there  is  a  Threatning  of  Death 
expreffed  in  thefe  Words,  fo  a  Profnife  of 
Life  is  implied.  The  threatning  Death, 
only  in  Cafe  of  Difobedience,  implied,  that 
otherwife  he  Ihould  not  die.  And  even 
'  fince  the  Fall,  the  Law  of  God  promifes 
Life  to  Obedience,  as  well  as  threatens 
Death  to  Difobedience  :  Since  the  Tenor  of 
it  is,  Do  this  and  live :  If  thou  wilt  enter  into 
Life^  keep  the  Comma?id?nents, 

"  "Now  a  Law  given  by  God  with  a 
Promife  of  Life  and  a  Threatning  of  Death, 
confented  to  by  Man,  is  evidently,  a  Cove-- 
7ia?it,  For  what  is  a  Covenant  ?  But  a  mu- 
tual Agreement  of  two  or  more  Parties  on 
certain  Terms  ?  Now  in  this  Senfe  God 
cove?2anted  with  Man,  and  Man  covenanted 
with  God.  God  gave  a  Law,  promifing 
Life  in  Cafe  of  Obedience,  threatning  Death, 

B  b  2  in 

••  p.  28.    •  p.  29.   \  p.  30.    I,  p.  31. 


404  I'he  £) o'cV R  rVfi  'of 

in  Cafe'oFDilbbcdiciTlce.  And  Man  accept- 
ed cf  the' Terms.     Hei^e  therefore  was  ^  d 

'^^^  *'*'Bu"T  to  guard  this  „againft  Objeftion^, 

'  'V/'M'li:'^  do  not  affirm,  That  God  vifibly 
appeared,  and  formally  treated  with  Adam^ 
as  one  Man  with  anothei^.  Without  fo  for- 
mal'*' a  Procedure,  God  could  and  douhtlefs 
did,  fignlfy  to  him,  on  what  Terms  he  was 
to  expedl  Life  or  Death. 

*^  2.  We  do  not  affert,  That  God  pro- 
mlfed  to  tranllate  him  to  Heaven :  But  with- 
out Que  ft]  on  he  made  Adam  fenfible,  That 
if  he  continued  obedient  he  fliould  continue 
happv,  whether  in  Paradife,  or  fome  other 
Rco-ion.  '^^cx'^ 

**  3.  If  "one  greatly  Superior  will  freely 
condefcend  to  treat  with  an  Inferior,  this 
do6s  not  difannul  the  mutual  Agreement,  or 
hinder  its  having  the  Nature  of  a  Covenant, 
So  God  enter'd  into  a  proper  Covenant  with 
Ahraham  of  old,  and  with  his  People  in  the 
Gofpel.  And  if  fo,  much  more  might  He 
do  fo,  with  Man,  when  .perfectly  upright  io- 
ward  Goi3.^'^'  iRv;vo>l  ^ma.  L-irx>- 

""'And  this  Covenant  was  made  with  A- 
dnffi  not  only  for  htmfclf,  but  likewife  for  all' 
his  PcJ}erity,'   This  appear^^^-^^"*^-»^c5  ^t\    :. 
-^  *H^-  '  ;>ili  lo  JBdl  Ion  .noii:>i?^^ 

"  I.  From 

"  p-  32.    "  p.  33- 


Original  Sin.  405 

^.,1^^  ^From  the  Tenor  of  the  Original 
Threat'ning,  compared  with  the  prefent 
State  of  Mankind.  For  it  is  evident,  That 
every  one  of  his  Pofterity  is  born  liable  to 
Death :  That  the  Death  to  which  all  are  lia- 
ble, was  not  threat'ned,  but  in  Cafe  of  Man's 
Jinning :  That  Man  was  not  liable  to  Dca:h 
till  he  fmneiU  and  his  being  fo,  was  the  Re- 
fult  of  the  Threatening;  and,  that  the  Scrip- 
ture conftantly  points  at  Srn  as  the  fole  Caufe 
of  Deaths  and  of  all  Suffering,  But  if  all 
Mankind,  are  born  liable  to  that  which  was 
originally  threat'ned  only  to  »S/;/,  then  all 
Mankind  are  accounted  Sinners,  and  as 
fuch  are  concern'd  in  the  Originan^hrcatning^ 
and  confequently  in  the  Original  Prowife, 

2.  'From  i  Cor.  xv.  21.  /;;  Adam  all  die. 
Here  the  Apoffle  fpeaks,  not  of  both  our 
Parents,  but  of  Adam  fingly,  (as  alfo  Rc?n. 
V.)  to  denote  our  peculiar  Relation  to  hiin. 
The  All  mention'd  are  all  his  natural  De- 
fcendents,  who  all  die  in  or  th7'o'  him\^  that 
is,  are  liable  to  Death,  on  Account  of  their 
Relation  to  him.  And  it  is  not  only  '^bodily 
Death  that  is  here  fpoken  of;  for  it  ftands 
oppofed  not,  to  a  bare  Revival  of  the  Body> 
but  to  a  happy  and  glorious  Refurredion^ 
fuch  as  they  that  are  Chrilf  i  Vv^ill  partake  of 
at  his  Second  Coming.  For  of  this  Relur- 
reftion,  not  that  of  the  Ungodlv,  the  Apoftlo 

B  b  3       '  is 

y  p.  34-     "■  P-  35- 


4o6  "The  Doctrine  g/' 

is  fpeaking  throughout  this  Chapter.  But 
'they  could  not  die  //^.Adam.,  if  they  did  not 
in  feme  Stnihjin  hi  him,  and  fall  with  hitn: 
If  the  Covenant  had  not  been  made  with 
him,  not  for  himfelf  only  but  for  all  his 

Pofterity.  V\Y  ,  'A  '^.  "-- 

"  3.  From  Verfe  45  and  47  oF*tKe  fame 
Chapter.  The  fojl  Man,  Adam,  and  the 
fccond  Man,  the  laji  Adam  are  here  oppofed. 
Now  why  is  Chrijl,  notwithftanding  the 
Millions  of  Men  intervening  between  Adam 
and  Him,  and  following  after  his  Birth, 
called  the  Second  Man,  and  the  lajl  Adam  ? 
We  have  an  Anfwer  Rom,  v.  12,  14,  &c. 
where  Adam  is  faid  to  be  a  Figure  c/'Chrift: 
And  theRefemblance  between  them  is  fhewn 
to  lie  in  this,  That  as  Sin  and  Death  defcend 
from  one,  fo  Right eoiifnefs  and  Life  from  the 
other.  Confequently  what  ChriJi  is  with 
llegcrd  to  all  his  Spiritual  Seed,  that  Adam 
is  with  Regard  to  all  his  Natural  Defcen- 
dents,  namely,  a  publick  Perfon,  a  federal 
Head,  a  legal  Reprcfe?itative :  One  with 
whom  the  Covenant  was  made  not  only  for 
himfelf,  but  alfo  for  his  whole  Pofterity. 

^  #  *^ 

John 


Origin  At  Sin.~  407 

^  v>\\'^?  iitn  bar   .$<\^^^v.  "73c  ^rrnot  :^!! 

«i)jw  ^bBcn  i!!^"n  -roa  ^voD 

^Id  Ik  to)  rJoHN  iii.  5,  6..  ^^^  ^^^ 

Except  a  Man  be  born  of  Water  and  of  the  Spi" 
rit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  Kingdom  ofGoT>, 

T'hat  which  is  born  cf  the  Flejlj^  is  FleJJ: :  A?id 
that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit,  is  Spirit, 

''  TN  this  Text  we  have 
/fX  '"  I.  The  New  Birth  defcribed^ 
''  II.  The  Neceffity  of  it  infifted  oil; 
.  5\  III.  The  Original  Corruption  of  every 
Child  of  Adam  obferved,  as  that  frorn  which 
the  Neceffity  of  fuch  a  Change  arifes. 

"I.  The  New  Birth  is  here  defcrrbed. 
Whatever  this  implies,  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
the  fole  Author  of  it.  He  does  not  help  a 
Man  to  regenerate  himfelf,  but  takes  the 
V/ork  into  his  own  Hands.  A  Child  of  God, 
as  fuch,  is  7iot  born  of  Blood-,  does  not  become 
fo  by  a  Defcent  from  pious  Parents.  He  is 
not  ho?'n  of  the  Will  of  the  Flep-,  Is  not  renew'd 
by  the  Power  of  his  own  carnal  Will  ;  7wrof 
Man,  of  any  Man  whatfoevcr,  /;///  of  Gob: 
By  the  fole  Power  of  his  Spirit. 

"  In  Regeneration  the  Holy  Spirit  morti- 
fies the  old  Man,  corrupt  Nature,  and  breathes 
a  Principle  of  Life  into  the  Soul  :  A  P;  inci- 
ple  of  Faith,  of  fmcere  Love,  and  willing 
B  b  4  Obedience 


/r8  ^he  Doctrine  ^ 

Obedience  to  God.     He  who  was  dead  in 
Sirty  is  now  dead  ta  Sin,  and  alive  to  Go V> 
ibrough  Jefiis  Chrift.     God  has  createdin  him 
a  clean  Heart,    and  renewed  a  right  Spirit 
within  him.     He  has  created  him  unto  good 
Works,  and  written  his  Law  in  his  Heart. 
Bat  if  the  Spirit  of  God  is  the  fole  Agent  in 
the  Work  of  Regeneration  :  If  the  Soul  of 
Man  has  no  Ad:ive  Intereft  or  Concern  in 
hh  being  born  again:    If  Man  was  created 
holy,    and   Regeneration    re-inftamps   that 
holy  Image  of  God  on  the  Soul :  lithe  new 
Man  is  crea-ed  after  God  /;/  Righteoufnefs  and 
true  Holinefs  :    If  the  Corruption  of  Nature 
(term'd  thecldManofFleJh)  is  not  contra<3:ed 
by  Imitation  or  Cuftom,  but  is  an  inbred, 
hereditary  Diftemper,  Coeval  with  our  Na- 
ture :  If  all  truly  Good  Works  are  the  Fruits 
of  a  Good  Heart,  a  good  Principal  wrought 
in   the  Soul:    It  plainly  foljows,  That  the 
Faith,  Hope,  Love,  Fear,  which  diftinguiflv 
the  Children  of  God  fronV  others,  are  not  of 
the  Nature  of  acquired,  bat  of  infufed  Habits 
Q\'  Principles.     To  fay  then,   *'  That  Holi- 
"  ncfs  rniift  be  the  EfFc(n:  of  a  Man's  own 
**  Choice  and  Endeavour,  and  that  by  a  right 
"  life  of  his  Natural  Powers,  every  Man  may 
*'  and  mufi:  atrain  an  Flabit  of  Holinefs,  that 
**  is,  be  Imm  again T^'AHowcvet  pleafing  it: 
mav   be  to  Human  Vanity,  is  contrary  to* 
the  \\  hole  Tenor  of  Scripture. 

"  And 


^V/^^.-And  all  the.  Scriptural  Expreffions  on 
this 'Head,,  are  groimded  on  the  real  Nature 
lof. Things.  Sin  is  of  the  Nature -of  Fi/lh 
'2kX\A  Comiptio7i.  It  pollutes  the  whole  Man, 
^nd  renders  him  as  2.W'iinekan  Thine>-  in 
the  Sight  of  Gojd.  When  therefore  the 
Spirit  of.  Gor>  removes  this,  Fie  is  faid,  To 
create  a  clean  Hearty  to  purify  fix  Hearty  to 
fprinkk  clean  Water  upon  us,  to  wapjusfrom 
our  Fikhinefs,  And.  this  cleanfing  Efficacy 
is  in  the  Text  exprefl:  by  being  bcrn  of  Water 
and  of  the  Spirit,  ^di  no  q  5x?K.rr 

Vi^i'>WHEN  therefore  our  Lord  fpeaks  of 
being  bcrn  of  the  Spirit^  his  plain  Meaning 
is, /There  is  a  fpiritual  Cleanfing  you  muft 
partake  of,  mentioned  in  thofe  Pronniies,  / 
vMl  fpr  inkle  clean  Water  upon  yon  and  ye  fall 
he  clean  ^  from  all  your  Fill  hinfs  and  from  all 
your  Idols  will.  I  cleanfe  you,  A^  ?iew  fit  art  alfo 
iJDill  I  groe  yoUy  and  a  new  Spirit  ^%pi II  I  put 
within  you.  Arid  I  will  take  away  the  flony 
Hearty  and  I  will  give  you  an  Heart  of  Flef\ 
Thefe  Promifes  gives  vis  a  plain  Dcfcription 
of  the  Spirits  regenerating  Work  :,  A^^'ithput 
experiencing  v^^hich,  our  State  is  rniferablc 
now,  and  v/ill  be  much  more'fo.hercafrcr, 

**  II.  For  this  Spiritual  Renovado|j  of  the 
Soul,  is  indifpcnfably  neccila!  y. .  Withc^ut  it 
none  can  enter  the  Kifigdofnof  /i'^i.?^7,,(£it|]cr 
the  Kingdom,  of  .Grai^e  Qf,.^,,(?]o(3^.  ^^-j  \j^ . 

"  Except 


410  The  Doctrine  of 

"I.  Except  a  Ma7i  be  horn  of  the  Spirit^ 
he  cannot  enter  into  the  Ktjigdom  f  Grace :  He 
cannot  be  a  loyal  Subjedt  of  ffiis  Chrijl, 
By  Nature  we  are  Subjedts  oi  Satan:  And 
fiich  we  muft  remain,  unlefs  renewing  Grace 
tranjlate  us  into  the  Kifigdom  oj  God'5  dear  Sont 

"  2.  Consequently,  except  we  are  horn 
again,,  ijue  cannot  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of 
Glory.  Indeed,  fuppofmg  he  could  be  ad-^' 
mittcd  there,  v/hat  could  an  unregenerate 
Sinner  do  in  Heaven  ?  He  could  not  pof- 
fibiy  have  any  Relifli  either  for  the  Bufinefs, 
the  Company,  or  the  Enjoyments  of  that 
World. 

III.  Our  Lord  having  aflertcd  the  abfo- 
lute  Neceffity  of  the  New  Birth,  to  fliew  the 
Ground  of  this  Necefiity  adds  'T^hat  which  is 
h,  n  of  the  FleJIj^  is  Flejh  ;  ajid  that  which  is 
hern  of  the  Spirit,  is  Spirit,     Here  obferve 

"  K  Our  Lord  oppofes  Fief  and  Spirit 
to  each  other,  which  Oppofition  we  often 
meet  with.  Whatever  therefore  is  meant 
by  thefe  two,  they  denote  Things  oppofite* 

"  2.  He  fpeaks  here  of  two  feveral  Births^ 
which  arc  diftinclly  mentioned. 

"  3.  The  former  of  thefe  two  is  fpoken 
of,  as  that  which  renders  the  other  fo  ne- 
ccfiary.  Recaufe  that  which  is  horn  of  the 
Fhf,  IS  Fhf\  therefore  we  muft  he  horn  of 
the  Spirit.  Therefore  this  great  Change 
muft  be  wrought  in  us,  or  we  cannot  enter 
into  the  Kingdom  of  God.  **  4.  If 


-Original  Sin.  411 

*'  4.  If  the  latter  of  thefe  is  made  necef- 
fary  by  the  former,  then  to  be  born  Flep  is 
to  be  born  corrupt  and  finful.  And  indeed. 
The  Word  FleJJj  is  very  frequently  taken 
for  the  corrupt  Principle  in  Man.  It  is  al- 
ways fo  taken  when  it  ftands  oppofed  to  the 
Spirit^  or  to  that  inwrought  Principle  of 
Obedience,  which  itfelf  alfo  (taking  the 
Name  of  its  Autl^pr)  is  fometimes  term'd 
Spirit,  '  f  , 

"  Now  in  the  Text,  whatever  or  who- 
ever is  born  of  a  Man  fince  the  Fall,  is  de- 
nominated FIcJIj,  And  that  Flejh  is  here 
put,  not  for  linlefs  Frailty,  but  linful  Cor- 
ruption, we  learn  from  its  being  oppofed  to 
the  Spirit,  Chriji  was  born  frail,  as  well  as 
we,  and  in  this  Senfe  was  Flejh :  Yet  being 
without  Sin,  he  had  no  Need  to  be  ior?i  of 
the  Spirit,  This  is  not  made  neceflary  by 
any  linlefs  Infirmities,  but  by  a  finful  Na- 
ture only.  This  alone  is  oppofite  to  the 
Spirit :  Thus  therefore  we  muft  underftand 
it  here. 

''  But  Mr.  I'aykr  fays,  *'  To  be  born  of 
*'  the  Flefli  is  only  to  be  naturally  born  of  a 
"  Woman."  I  anfwer,  Is  not  Flejh  oppofed 
to  Spirit  in  this  Vcrfe  ?  Is  it  not  the  Spiiit 
of  God  which  is  fpoken  of  in  the  latter 
Claufe,  together  widi  the  Principle  of  Gracc^, 
which  is  in  every  regenerate  Perfon  ?  And 

-T       .  ,     V.    ,^^3H^\y         lite 


412  The  Doctrine  ^/^ 

fite  to  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  No  certainly: 
But  if  fo,  and  if  wherever  Fk/I:  is  oppofed 
to  the  Spirit,  it  implies  finful  Corruption^, 
then  it  is, evident,  to  be  born  of  the  F/eJJj  h 
to  be  the  finful  Offspring  of  finful  Parents,i 
fo  as  to  have  Need  of  the  renewing  Influences 
of  tl\e  Holy  Spirit,  on  that  Account  even, 
from  our  Birdi. 

"  If  to  walk  after  the  FleJI:^  as  oppofed  to 
ivalki)ig  after  the  Spirit^  is  to  follow  our  fin-, 
ful  Inclinations  ;  if  to  be  in  the  Flefo  oppofed 
to  being  in  the  Spirity  is  to  be  in  a  State  of 
Sin  3  \l  the  Fief d  and  the  Spirit  are  two  con- 
traiy  Principles,  which  counter- aft^  each 
others  GaLy.  i6,  37:  Xl  the  Works  of  the 
Flefo  and  the  Lifs  of  the  Fief:  are  oppofed 
to  the  Spirit  and  the  Fruit  of  the  Spirit:  Then 
tq  be  hern  cf  the  Flefh  muft  fignify  more  than 
barely  to  be  born  of  a  Woman.  Had  Adam 
tranfmittcd  a  pure  Nature  to  his  Defcen- 
dant.^,  ftjll  each  of  them  would  have  been 
born  of  ^  Woman  :  But  they  would  have 
liaji  iip.Neceffity  of  being  born  of  the  Spirit ^ 
or  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghoft. 
:i  **■  Buj,  what  is  that  Corruption  of  Nature, 
which  the  Scripture  terms  Flefi^  There  are 
two  Branches  of  it  ^  \.  K  Want  of  Original 
Hightcoufnefs,     2.  A  Natural  Propenfity  to 


Sin. 


I.  A  Want  of  Original  Righteoufnefs. 

loline  .  was 
con-natural 


God  created  Man  righteous:  Holine  1  was 


OrYginal  Sin.  413" 

con-natural  to  his  Soul  ;\  Principle  ofLov^' 
and  Obedience  to  God,     But  when  he  iin-^ 
ned,  he  loft  this  Principled    And  eV^fy  Man' 
i^  now  born,  totally  void  both  of  theKnow- 


Al   01] 


ledge  and  Love  of  God.  ^ 

"^**^'^v  A  Natural  Prcpenfity  to  Sin  is  in 
evei^y  Man.  And  this  is  infeparable  from 
the  other.  If  Man  is  born  and  grows  up 
without  the  Knowledge  or  Love  of  God, 
he  is  born  and  grows  up  propenfe  to  Sin : 
Which  includes  two  Things,  An  Averfion 
to  what  is  Good,  and  an  Inclination  to  what 
is  Evil.  ^''''^' 

"  We  are  naturally  averfe  to  what  is 
good.  'The  carnal  Mind  is  Enmity  againjl 
God.  Nature  does  not,  v/ill  not,  cannot 
fubmit  to  his  holy,  juft  and  good  Law. 
Therefore  they  that  are  in  the  Fleflj  cajvtot 
pleafe  God.  Being  averfe  to  the  Will,  Law 
and  Ways  of  God,  they  are  utterly  indif- 
pofcd  for  fuch  an  Obedience,  as  the  Relation 
tween  God  and  Man  indifpenfably  requires. 

"  And  as  we  are  all  naturally  averfe  to 
what  ia  Good,  fo  we  are  naturally  inclined  to 
what  is  Evil.  Even  young  Children  of 
themfelves  run  into  Evil  :  but  are  with  Dif- 
iiculty  brought  to  prat^life  what  is  Good.  No  \ 
fooner  do  they  difdover  Reafon,  than  theyl 
di (cover  Evil,  unreafonableDifpofitions.  And 
thefe  difcovering  themfelves  in  every  one,  e- 
ven  from  his  early  Childhood,  manifcf!  ly 

"■--■  prove 


414  "^^^^  Doctrine  of 

prove  the  inbred  and  univerfal  CorrubtioB  of 
Human  Nature.  ^        ^  -au  jd^ 

"  But  why  is  this  Corruption  termed 
Flep  ?  Not  becaufe  it  is  confined  to  the 
Body.  It  is  the  Corruption  of  our  whole 
Nature,  and  is  therefore  term'd  the  old 
Md?i.  Not  becaufe  it  confifts  merely  in 
a  Repugnance  of  the  Senfual  Appetites  to 
Reafon.  This  is  but  one  Branch  of  that 
Corruption  :  The  whole  of  it  is  far  more  ex^*- 
ten  five.  Not  becaufe  it  is  primarily  feated 
in  the  Body  :  It  is  primarily  feated  in  the 
Soul.  If  Sin  reig72S  i?i  our  mortal  Bodies^  it 
is  becaufe  the  finful  Soul  ufes  the  bodily 
Meinbers  as  hijinimcnts  ofXJjirighteoiifijefs, 
,  "^l^KTy  all  which  thofe  Words,  That 
''  which  isbcr?!  of  Flep  is  Flejh^  mean,  is  this. 
"  All  Men  being  defcended  of  frail,  and 
"  jjiortal  Parents,  are  like  them,  frail  and 
"  mortal.  In  Confequence  of  Adam%  Sin, 
**  all  his  Defcendents  die.'*  .•,/*.^.-;^j^^.', 

''  I  ANSWER,  I.  Tho'  this  is  true,  it  is 
jiot  the  whole  Truth »  Nor  is  it  the  proper 
Truth  of  the  Text :  Which  fpeaks  of  our 
being  born  of  the  Flejl\  as  the  Reafon  why 
we  muft  be  horn"  of  the  Spirit. 

^*  2.  It  is  not  confiftent  with  the  Moral 
Perfections  of  GoD,  fpr  iinlefs  Creatures  to 
be  born  mortd.  Death  in  every  Senfe  of 
the  Word  is  the  pr^oper  tVages  of  Sin.     Sin 

has 

u£    Li,     S. 


Original  Sin.  ^ij 

has  the  fame  caufal  Influence  on  Death,  as 
the  Obedience  of  Chriji  has  on  Eternal  Life. 

"  3.  We  were  not  only  born  mortal,  but 
Children  of  Wrath:  We  who  are  now  regen- 
erate, as  well  as  others. 

"  4.  The  Scripture  afcribes  both  our 
Mortality  and  Corruption  to  our  Relation  to 
Adam,  In  him  all  die :  Thro  the  Offence  of 
One,  many,  all  Mankind,  are  dead,  liable  to 
Death.  Again  :  By  the  Difobedience  of  One, 
the  fame,  mariy  are  conflituted  Sinners.  There- 
fore when  our  Lord  fays,-  "That  which  is  born 
of  the  Flejlo  is  Flejh,  He  means  not  only. 
That  we  and  our  Parents  are  mortal:  But 
that  all  Mankind  derive  Spiritual  as  well  as 
Temporal  Death,  from  their  Firft  Father. 


.iT 


THE 


4i6  "T^e  Doctrine*  of 


T    H    E 
SCRIPTURE   DOCTRINE 

O    F 

Imputed  Sin  and  Righteoufnefs. 


"  I:  r^^^JN'  is  a  rrmifgrejion  cf  the  Law, 

S  -^  fe^  ^^  ^'^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^  which 
w  ^^  W  ^  rational  Creature  is  iubjed:. 
Righteoufnefs  is,  A  Fulfilment 
of,  or  Conformity  to  that  Law.  This  is  the 
proper  Scriptural  Senfe  of  the  Words.'*  But 
'^s  Sin  involves  the  Creature  in  Guilt,  that  is 
a  Liablenefs  to  Puniflimcnt,  the  fame  Words 
are  often  ufed  to  denote  either  ^in  itfclf,  or 
Guilt  and  Pumjl:ment.  On  the  other  Hand, 
Rightcoujhefs  denotes  not  only  a  fulfilling  of 
tlie  Law,  but  alfo  a  Freedom  Jrom  Guilt,  and 
Fuwjhm'eiit.  Yea,  and  fometimes  all  the 
Re^.Ciirds  of  Riohtecufnefs. 

''  'Accordingly,  toiwptite  Sin,  is  either 
'to  impute  Siji  i.'felf,  ov:  Guilt  on  the  Account 


'~s*^fj.'.  I         ►    p.    2.      «    p.  '5. 


of 


Original  Sin.  417 

of  it.  To  impute  Sin  itfelfio  a  Perfon,  is 
to  account  hini  a  Tranlgreffor  of  the  Law ; 
to  pronounce  him  fuch  :  Or  to  treat  him  as 
a  Tranfgreflbr.  To  impute  Guilt  to  a  Perfon, 
is  to  account  him  obnoxious  to  a  threatned 
Punishment :  To  pronounce  him  fo ;  or  to 
inflid:  that  Punllliment.  So,  to  i?npute  Righ- 
temfnefs  properly  fo  called,  is  to  account  him 
a  FulfiUer  of  the  Law  :  To  pronounce  him  fo 
to  be :  And  to  treat  him  as  righteous.  And 
to  impute  Rightecufnefs  as  oppofed  to  Guilty 
is  to  account^  to  pronounce^  and  to  treat  him 
as  guiltlefs. 

"  Thus  much  is  agreed.  But  the  Point 
in  Queftion  is,  "  Does  God  impute'^  no  Siji 
ov  Righteoufnefs  but  what  is  Pe?fona/?'*  Mr. 
Baylor  pofitively  aflerts,  He  does  not.  I  un- 
dertake to  prove,  That  He  does :  That  He 
imputes  Adanis  Firft  Sin  to  all  Mankind, 
and  our  Sins  to  Chriji. 

"  L  GOD  imputes  Adam's  Firjl  Sin  to  all 
Mankind.  I  do  not  mean,  That  the"  a5lual 
CommiJJion  of  it  was  imputed  to  any  befide 
himfelf;  (it  was  impoffible,  itiliould).  Nor 
is  the  Guilt  of  it  imputed  to  any  of  his  De- 
fendants, in  the  full  Latitude  of  it,  or  in 
Regard  to  its  attendant  Circumftances.  It 
conftitutcs  none  of  them  equally  guilty  with 
him.  Yet  both  that  Sin  itfelf,  and  a  Degree 
of  Guilt  on  Account  of  it,  are  imputed  to  all 
his  Pofterity :  The  Sin  itfelf  is  imputed  to 
*  -  p.  5.    « p.  6.  C  c  Them^ 


4i8  The  Doctrine  of 

Them,  as  included  in  their  Head.  And  on 
this  Account,  they  are  reputed  guiltyy  are 
Children  of  Wrath^  hable  to  the  threatened 
Puniiliment.  And  this  cannot  be  denied, 
luppofing  I.  Man's  Original  Righteoufnefs, 
2.  Adam\  being  the  Federal  Head  of  all 
Mankind. 

"  I.  Man's'  Original  Righteoufnefs  has 
been  largely  proved.  Let  me  add  only  an^ 
Argument  ad  hominefn,  Suppofing  (not 
granting)  that  the  Son  of  God,  is  no  more 
than  the  firft  of  Creatures,  either  He  was 
originally  righteous^  or  He  was  not.  If  He 
was  not,  then  Time  was,  when  He  was  not 
the  Holy  0?2e  of  God  ;  and  poffibly  He  never 
might  have  been  fuch,  no,  nor  righteous  at 
ally  but  inflead  of  that,  as  imgodly,  guilty ^ 
and  wretched  as  the  Devil  himfelf  is.  For 
the  befc  Creature  is  (Mr.  Taylor  grants)  al- 
terable for  the  worie,  and  the  beft  when 
corrupted  becomes  the  worft.  Again,  If  the 
Son  of  God  was  a  mere  Creature,  and  as 
fuch  made  without  ''Righteoufnefs  (which 
every  Creature  mufl  be  according  to  Mr. 
Taylor)  then  He  was  not,  could  not  be  at 
firft  as  Righteous,  as  like  God  as  the  Holy 
Angels  are  now,  yea,  or  as  any  Holy  Man 
on  Earth  is.  But  if  thefe  Suppcfitions  arc 
fhockingly  abfurd,  if  the  Son  of  God  could 
not  have  become  as  bad  as  the  Devil,  if  He 

never 
''p.  7.    «  p.  9.    »•  p.  10.  ^ 


Original  Sin.  419 

never  was  unrighteous,  if  He  was  not  ori- 
ginally Icfs  holy,  than  Angels  and  Men  are 
now :  Then  the  Affertion,  *'  That  Righte- 
"  oufnefs  muft  be  the  EfFedl  of  a  Creature's 
*'  antecedent  Choice  and  Endeavour,"  falls 
to  the  Ground. 

"  But  the  Hebrew  Word  "Jajloer^  Mr. 
T'aylor  fays  "  does  not  generally  fignify  a 
''  Moral  Character."  This  is  one  of  the 
numerous  Critical  Miftakes  in  this  Gentle- 
man's Books.  Of  the  more  than  1 50  Texts 
in  which  Jajher^  or  the  Subftantive  JoJJ:er 
occurs,  there  are  very  few  which  do  not 
confirm  our  Interpretation  of  Ecclef.  vii.  29. 
''  But  Jafiar  is  applied  to  various  Things 
*'  not  capable  of  Moral  Adlion."  It  is;  And 
what  then  ?  Many  of  thofe  Applications  are 
neither  for  us,  nor  againft  us.  Some  make 
ftrongly  for  us  ;  as  when  'tis  applied  to  the 
Words  or  Ways  of  God  and  Man.  But 
the  Queftion'  now  is,  what  it  fignifies,  when 
applied  to  God,  or  to  Moral  Agents^  and  that 
by  Way  of  Oppolition  to  a  vicious  Charac- 
ter and  Condud?  Is  it  not  in  the  Text,  be- 
fore us  applied,  to  Man  as  a  Moral  Agent, 
and  by  Way  of  Oppofition  to  a  corrupt  Cha- 
rader  and  Condud:  ?  No  Man  can  deny  it. 
Either  therefore  prove,  That  Jafljar^  when 
oppofed,  as  here,  to  a  corrupt  Coududl  and 
Charader,  does  not  iignify  righteous^  or  ac- 

C  c  2  know- 


II.    ^  p.  12. 


420  "T'he  Doctrine  %f 

knowledge  the  Truth,  that  God  created Mah 

• .  "To  evade  the  Afgilftient- from  TEph.W. 
•24.  Mr.  'Taylor  firft  fays,  "  The  old  Man 
means  an  Iieafhe?iiJJj  Life,  and  then  fays^ 
"  Tbe  old  and  72ew  Man  do  not  fignify  a 
"  Courfe  of  Life."  What  then  do  they  fig- 
nify ?  Why,  "  The  old  Man,  fays  he,  relates 
"  to  the  Gentile  State :  And  the  new  Man  is 
"  either  the  Chriftian  State,  or  the  Chriftian 
"  Church,  Body,  Society."  But  for  all  this, 
he  fays  again  a  Page  or  two  after,  "  The  old 
''and  72ew  Man,  and  the  new  Mans  being 
"  renewed,  and  the  Renewing  of  the  Efhe- 
^^Jlans  do  all  manifeflly  refer  to  their  Gen- 
^\tile  State  and  wicked  Courfe  of  Life,^  from 
*^  which  they  were  lately  converted."    '^" 

*'  When  then  the Apoftle  fays,  {Rom,v\,6Pj 
Our  old  Man  is  crucified  with  Chrift,  is  it  the 
Ce?itile  State  or  Courfe  of  Life,  which  was  fo 
crucified  ?  No  :  Sut  the  corrupt  Nature,  the 
Body  of  Sin,  as  it  is  term'd  in  the  fame  Verfe. 
And  To  put  off  the  old  Ma?t '  is  (according  to 
5t.  Paul)  to  crucify  this,  with  its  AffeBions 
andDe/ihL  On  the  other  Hand,  lo  put  on 
the  Jicw'Mdn,  is  to  cultivate  the  Divine  Prin- 
ciple, "\vlnch  is  form'd  \n  the  Soul  of  every 
Dcii'e\ier/'tiy  the  Spirit  of  Ckrifi,  It  is  this 
of  wh^tHjt  is  faid,-  i .  It  is  created ;  Arid' in 
Regard  tb  it  we  are;  faid  to  \>t  "  creute/i  pinio 

"^rt^.  1^.    «  p.  14. -5  ^  Oil  .q  *=    o^!  -<|  • 


^Original  Sin.  421 

goadWorh.  2.  It  is  renew d-y  for  it  is  in- 
deed no  other  than  Original  Righteoufnefs 
reftor.ed.  3.  It  is  after  God y  after  his  Image 
apd  Likenefs,  now  ftamp'd  afrefh  on  the 
Soul:.-., 4.  It  confifts  in  Righteoufnefs  and 
Holinefsy  or  that  Knowledge  which  compre- 
hends both.  ,,,,,->  1^ 

.^.  "  Again.  'To  that  Argument,  "  Either 
*'  Man  at  firft  loved  God,  or  he  was  an 
Enemy  to  God,"  Mr.  I'aylor  gives  only  this 
flight,  fuperficial  Anfwer,  "  Man  could  not 
"  love  God  before  he  knew  Him :"  With- 
out vouchfafing  the  leaft  Notice  of  the  Ar- 
guments which  prove,  that  Man  was  not 
created  without  the  Knowledge  of  God. 
Let  him  attend  to  thofe  Proofs,  and  either 
honeftly  yield  to  their  Force,  or  if  he  is  able, 
fairly  confute  them.^Qy^, 
«h/5  The  Doctrine  of  Original  Sin  pre- 
fuppofes, 

"  2.  Adam's  being  thfe  Federal  Head  of 
all  Mankind.  Several  Proofs  of  this  having 
been  given  already,  I  need  not  produce  more 
'till  thofe  are  anfwer'd.  ;'.^  r 

,^  ^t  II.  God  imputes  our  Sim  or  the  Guilt 
of  them  to  ChriJL  He  confented  to  be  re- 
fponfible  for  them,  tofuffbr  the  Punifhment° 
due  for  them.  This  fufficiently  appears 
from  ^i.  liii.  which  contains  a  Summary  of 
the  Scripture  Doctrine  upon  this  Head.  He 
'bath  borne  our  Griefs  and  carried  our  Sorrows, 

•  p.  15.    °  p.  16.  C  c  ,3  q  «     >     The 


422  n^e  Doctrine     of 

The  ^Word  Nafa  (borne)  fignifies,  i.  To 
take  up  fomewhat,  as  on  one's  Shoulders,  2. 
To  bear  or  carry  fomething  weighty,  as  a 
Porter  does  a  Burden  3  3.  To  take  away: 
And  in  all  thefe  Senfes  it  is  here  applied  to 
the  Son  of  God  :  He  carried — as  a  ftrong 
Man  does  an  heavy  Burden  (the  clear,  indif- 
putable  Senfe  of  the  other  Word,  Sabal)  our 
Sorrows :  The  Sufferings  of  various  Kinds, 
which  were  due  to  our  Sins.  He  was  "^wounded 
for  our  ^ranfgreJjionSy  and  bruifedfor  our  Lii- 
qiiities.  Wounds  and  Bruifes  are  put  for  the 
Whole  of  his  Sufferings ;  as  his  Death  and 
Blood  frequently  are.  He  was  wounded  and 
bruifedj  not  for  Sins  of  his  own ;  not  merely^ 
to  ihew  God's  Hatred  of  Sin,  not  chiefy,  to 
give  us  a  Pattern  of  Patience ;  but  for  our 
Sins,  as  the  proper,  impulfive  Caufe.  Our 
Sins  were  the  procuring  Caufe  of  all  his  Suf- 
ferings. His  Sufferings  were  the  penal 
Effects  of  our  Sins.  '  The  Chaflifement  of  our 
Peace,  the  Punifhment  neceftary  to  procure 
it,  was  laid  on  Him,  freely  fubmitting  there- 
to :  And  by  his  Stripes  (a  Part  of  his  Suffer- 
ings again  put  for  the  Whole)  we  are  healed: 
Pardon,  Sandification  and  Final  Salvation, 
are  all  purchafed  and  beflowed  upon  us. 
Every  Chaflifement  is  for  fonie  Fault.  That 
laid  on  Chrift  was  not  for  his  own,  but  OurS; 
and  was  needful  to  reconcile  an  offended' 

Law- 

"  p.  17-    '  p-  18.    '  p.  19.    «  p.  20. 


Original  Sin.  423 

X^awiGiver,  and  offending  guilty  Creatures 
to  each  other.  So  the  Lord  laid  on  htm  the 
Iniquity  of  us  all,  that  is,  the  Punifl^ment 
due  to  our  Iniquity. 

.,^  :^  ^|;Tis  true,  as  Mr.  Taylor  fays,  "  Sin 
.",^and  Iniquity  often  fignify  AjJliBi'on  or  Suf" 
'*yferingr  But  why  ?  Becaufe  'tis  ufual  for 
a  Caufe  to  give  Denomination  to  its  EffeB, 
And  fo  the  Confequences  of  Sin  are  called 
by  the  "fame  Name.  But  this  rather  hurts 
Mr.  Taylors  Caufe  than  helps  it.  For  Suf- 
ferings could  with  no  Propriety  be  called  Sin^ 
if  they  were  not  the  proper  Effe6ls  of  it. 
Man  in  Innocence  was  liable  to  no  Sufcring 
or  Sorrow :  He  was  indeed  tried ;  but  not 
by  Siifferijig.  All  Sorrow  was  introduced  by 
Sin  5  and  if  Man  is  horn  to  Trouble,  it  is  be- 
caufe he  is  born  in  Sin.  God  indeed  does 
afliB  his  Children  for  their  Good-,  and  turns 
even  Death  into  a  Bleffmg.  Yet  as  it  is  the 
Effed;  of  Sin,  fo  is  it  in  itfelf  an  Enemy  to 
all  Mankind  :  Nor  would  any  Man  have 
been  either  tried  or  correded  by  Affliclion, 
had  it  not  been  for  Sin. 

''  '"  The  Lord'j  laying  on  Chrift  the  Ini- 
quity cf  us  all  v/as  eminently  typified  by  the 
High-Prieft,  putting  all  the  Iniquities  of  IJrad 
on  the  Scape-Goat,  who  then  carried  x\\^\w 
away,  ''  But  the  ''Goat,  (ixys  Mr,  Taylor, 
was  to  fuffer  nothing."  This.  iS;  .a  grof's 
Z  C  c  4  Millakc. 

,•   p.    21.       "    p,    Z2.       ""'    p.    23.       "    p.    24.' 


424  ^/-^^  DOCTRIKE   tj 

MiftaKe?  It  was  2.  Sin-Offering,  iy^i'S^ 
and  as  fuch  was  to  biar  upon  him^  all  the 
Iniquities  of  the  People  into  the  Wilder* 
nel's  and  there  (as  the  Jewifi  Dodlors  una* 
nimoufly  hold)  to  fufFer  a  violent  Death,  by 
Way  of  Puni/hment y  indeed  of  the  People, 
for  their  Sins  put  upon  bim\  Yet  yir. Taylor 
fays,  *'  Here  was  no  Imputation  of  Sin"  Noi 
What  is  the  Difference  between  imputing 
Sins  and  putting  them  upon  him  ?  This  is  juft 
of  a  Piece  with  "  A  Sin-Offering  that  fuf- 
"  fered  nothing:"  A  Creature  *'  turned 
''  loofe  into  a  Land  the  propereft '^  for  iu 
-*'  Subfiflence,"  vAiA^  bearing  upon  him. ell  the 
Iniquities  cfGo\)s  People!"  ^'p^.  "^o  ^^'VA  ' 
.'  ''  ""Thus  Chrift  redeemed  us  from  the  Ciirfe 
tf  the  haw  being  made  a  Curfe  for  us,  ""Mr. 
I'ayhr  when  he  wrote  his  late  Books  was 
not  apprifcd  of  the  ufual  Scripture-Meaning 
of  this  awful  Word  Curfe,  'Tis  often  put  to 
Signify  the  L  egal  Pwiifiment  of  Sin,  What  the 
Law  of  God  threatens  againft  Tranfgreffors 
'or  the  Tlircatning  itfelf  is  frequently  called 
'bv  this  Name.  What  fignifies  then  his 
•trifling  Obfervatlon,  "  That  God  inflifted  ;;o 
Curfe  on  our  fir  ft  Parents,  G^«.iii.  16,  17,  18." 
That  i$,v\He  did  not  fay  in  fo  many  Words, 
"r  Curfid  mn:  tkm,  O  Mdn;i  or  'O  Woman." 
But  Ooii^turiing 4hi*  Gmmd'for.  Mans  Sake, 
was  xQAXf-a  Giirfe  prortounbed  ^againft ^fo^j 
and  what  the  Lord  fald  to  the  Woman  was 

y  p.  25.      ^  p.  39.      •p.  40.  -^S     -; 


fc^llyf^  Qfr^, '  aPenlalty  kgnUy  infliticd  on 
fc. '."vFor  Goo  is  then  faid  to  ctirf^y  \vhen  He 
cither  ^£r^ig/«?;;ii  to  puiliila,  "or  a6tuallyj^/«///,^j 
his  Gceatures  ioi'Mn.  A  ^tt  Detd,  xxvii.  15, 
fe..Gvx3cviiL  i6.,&c^;5^<fr.  xvii.  5.  Zcch.y,  3. 
^t  "To  conclude.  ^Either  we  muft  allow 
/^<?  Imputation 'of  Adam*5  ^/;/,  whatever  Difr 
ficulties  attend  it^u.or  renounce  "Juflijication 
by  Chrifl-,  and  Salvation  thrciigh  the  Merit  of 
his  Blood.  Accordingly  the  Sociniam  do 
this.  Whether  Mr.  Trn'/cr  does,  let  every 
thinking  Man  judge,  after  having  weigh 'd 
what  he  writes,  particularly  at  p.  72,  73,  of 
hk  IScripture-DoSfrine,  "  The  Worthi- 
"  NESS  of  Chriji  is  his  confummate  Virtue. 
"It  is  Virtue  that  carrieth  every  Caufc 
"in  Heaven.  Virtue  is  the  only  Price 
."  which  purchafeth  every  Thing  with  God. 
^^'« True  Virtue,  dr  the  right  Exercife  of 
<"  Reafon,^  is  true  Worthy  and  the  only  va^ 
f*  liiahlc  Coiifiderattfj}!^  the  only  Pcwe?-  which 
;f'  prevails  with.GoiD."  Thefe  Pafiages  are 
indeed  connedled  v/ich  others,  which  carry 
with  them  a  Shew  of  afcribing  Honour  to 
Ghrist  land  GRAt:E.  But  the  Fallacy  lies 
open  to  every  careful,  intelligent,  unpreju- 
diced Reader.  He  afcribes  to  Cbriji  a  fingii- 
\st:Woi^tf}inifs  r  But 'tis  nothing  more  than  a 
/updrior  Degree,  .of  the  fame  Kind  of  Wor- 
.thiikfs  which  belongs  to  every  virttious  Man . 
^^'-7  ^^.^rnC'^'-f  ;r:.;  ^;  uihi  ^xoa  Drn  .ij;nv/   He 


^26  1'he  Doctrine  of. 

He  talks  o{ClmJi\  confummate  Virtue,  or 
his  Obedience  to  God,  and  Good-will  to 
Man.  And  to  this  Virtue  of  his,  as  imi- 
tated by  lis,  he  would  teach  us  to  afcribe  our 
Acceptance  with  God  :  Which  is  indeed  to 
afcribe  it  to  ourfelves,  or  to  our  own  Virtue  : 
To  JVorks  of  Right eoufnefs  dene  by  as,  in  direft 
Oppofition  to  the  whole  Tenor  of  the  Gofpel. 
To  what  dangerous  Lengths  are  Men  carried 
by  an  Ignorance  of  God,  as  infinitely  holy  and 
juft  i  by  a  fond  Conceit  of  their  own  Abi- 
lities, and  a  refolved  Oppofition  to  the  Doc- 
trine of  Original  Sin !  Rather  than  allow 
this,  they  renounce  Chri/l,  as  the  meritorious 
'Procurer  of  Salvation  for  Sinners.  They 
may  feem  indeed  to  acknowledge  Him  as 
fuch,  and  talk  of  "  Eternal  Life  as  given  by 
*'  God  thro'  his  Son."  But  all  this  is  mere 
Shew,  and  can  only  impofe  on  the  Ignorant, 
and  Unwary.  They  dare  not  profefs  in  plain 
Terms,  That  Chriji  has  ?ncrited  Salvation  for 
any :  Neither  can  they  confiflently  allow 
this,  while  they  deny  Original  Sin. 

**  Let  not  any  then  who  regard''  their 
everlafting  Interefts,  entertain  or  even  tam- 
per with  Dodrines,  wliich  how  plaufibly  fo- 
ever  recommended,  are  contrary  to  many  ex- 
prefs  Texts,  nay  to  the  whole  Tenor  of 
Scripture,  and  which  cannot  be  embraced 
widiout  renouncing  an  humble  Dependance 

on 

*   p.    S2. 


Original  Sin.  427 

on  Chrijl,  and  rejeding  the  Gofpel-Method 
of  Salvation. 

*'  God*"  grant  every  Reader  of  this  plain 
Tfeatife,  may  not  only  be  convinced  of  the 
Truth  and  Importance,  of  the  Scripture- 
Dodlrines  maintained  therein,  but  invincibly 
confirmed  in  his  Attachments  to  them,  by 
an  experimental  Knowledge  of  their  hap- 
py Influence  on  Faith,  Holinefs  and  Com- 
fort !  Then  iliall  we  gladly  fay,'  We,  who 
are  made  Sinners  by  the  Difobedience  of  A- 
daniy  are  made  Righteous  by  the  Obedience 
of  Chrijl,  His  Righteoufnefs  entitles  us  to 
a  far  better  Inheritance  than  that  we  loll  in 
Adam,  In  Confequence  of  being  juflified 
thro*  Him,  we  fhall  reign  in  Life  with  Him : 
Unto  whom,  with  God  the  Father,  and  the 
Sandlifying,  Comforting  Spirit,  be  afcribed 
all  Praife  for  ever !  *' 


THE 

P    ^3- 


428  ^he  Doctrine  g/" 


i^^<.?r>;-.r'v  Y    n 


>4::>ibQ[  ^iA  Ik  ^risbiqai  ot  hi 

DocTR  I N  E  o{  Ormnal  Sin 

.   "'Explained  ^zW  Vinpicat ed.       ' 


•;;4si 


^  T  uj  as  we  can  difcovcr,  was  firftufed 
K'^^S  in  the  Fourth  Century.  The 
firft  who  ufed  it  was  either  Sf, 
Chryfoftom^  or  Hilary^  fome  of  whofe  Word^ 
are  thefe  ;  *'  The  Pfalmijl  fays,  Behold  I  was 
*'  conceived  in  Iniquities y  iti  Si?is  did  my  Mother 
*'  conceive  me,""  He  acknowledges.  That  h^ 
"  was  born  under  Original  Sin,  and  the 
'^  Law  of  Sin."  Soon  after  Hilarys  Time, 
St.  AtigtijUne  and  other  Chriftian  Writers 
brought  it  into  common  Ufe.^  ^    .    >  ■> 

"  The  Scriptural  Doctrine  of  Original 
Sin  may  be  comprize^  in  the  following  Pro- 
portions t""-  .  ,^::  .1  ^^:-A^^.v^  :-K  r  i!'!-/! 

vv^<«  I.  Man  was  originally  made  righteous^ 
OF  holy  t'^ni  '^(;^T>i^^'3>^«  ^js  ,10 /I  VA*?,^'!^'^^^?  bne 
(;in37d  9xb  xA  iHaiixmn  ax  aull  IL  Th-a-'i' 

i<)!l?-  2.    *  p.  3,    «  p.  8. 


Original  Sin.  429 

"  II.  That  Original  Righteoufnefs  was 

Ic^  by  the  Firft  Sin :     <t  *  ,*  ,.^  ^,^^  ,<>  ,^.  >, 

^   "  IIL  THEREBY.Kan  incuFd  Death  of 
every  Kind :  For^V^e 

"  IV.  Adam's  firft  Sin  was  the  Sin  of  a 
Publick  Perfo?2y  onci  whom  God  had  appoint- 
«d  to  reprefent  all  his  Defcendants : 
V  "  V.  Hence  all  thefe  are  from  their 
'Ku^  Children  of  Wrath,  void  of  all  Righte- 
oufnefs, and  propenfe  to  Sin  of  all  Sorts. 

"  I  ADD,  VI.  This  is  not  only  a  Truth 
agreeable  to  Scripture  and  Reafon,  but  a 
Truth  of  the  utmoft  Importance,  and  one 
to  which  the  Churches  of  Chriji  from  the 
Beginning,  have  bore  a  clear  Teftimony. 

*'  L  Man  was  originally  made  righteous 
or  holy :  Formed  with  fuch  a  Principle  of 
Love  andObedience  to  his  Maker,  as  difpofed 
and  enabled  him  to  perform  the  whole  of  his 
Duty  with  Eafe  and  Pleafure.  This  has  been 
-proved  already.  And  this  wholly  overturns 
Mr.  'Taylors  fundamental Aphorifm,  * What- 
*'  ever  is  Natural  is  Neceffary,  and  what  is 
"  neceffary  is  not  finful. "  For  if  Man  was 
originally  righteous  or  holy,  we  may  argue 
thus.  It  was  at  firft  Natural  Xo  Man  to  love 
and  obey  his  Maker ;  yet  it  was  not  necejfary: 
Neither  as  7iecejfary  is  oppofed  to  voluntary  or 
free :  (For  he  both  loved  and  obeyed  freely 
and  willingly)  Nor,  as  necefary  means  una" 
W^jii!^.\.(Thisis  manifeft  by  the  Event:) 

^    .  No, 


430  The  Doctrine  5/" 

No,  nor  as  neccffary  is  oppofed  to  rewardable. 
For  had  he  continued  to  love  and  obey,  he 
would  have  been  rewarded  with  everlaft- 
in^  Happinefs.      Therefore  that  Affertion, 
*'  "whatever  is  Natural  is  Necejfary^'  is  pal- 
pably, glaringly  falfe.    Confequently,  what 
is  Natural'  as  well  as  what  is  acquir'd,  may 
be  Good  or  Evil,  rewardable  or  punifhable. 
"  II.  Man's  Original  Rightcoufnels  was 
loft  by  the  firft  Sin.     Tho'  he  was  made 
righteous,  he  was  not  made  immutable.    He 
was  free  to  ftand  or  fall.     And  he  foon  fell 
and  loft'  at  once  both  the  Favour  and  Image 
of  God.     This  fully  appears,   i.  From  the 
Account  which  Mofes  gives  of  our  Firft  Pa- 
rents, Gen.  iii :    Where  we  read,  (i.)  T'he 
Eyes  of  them  both  were  opened^  and  they  knew 
that  they  were  naked:  That  is  they  were  con- 
fcious  of  Guilt,   and  touched  with  a  pun- 
gent Senfc  of  their  Folly  and  Wickednefs. 
They  began  to  iind  their  Nakednefs  irkfoni. 
to  them,  and  to  refled:  on  it  with  finful  E- 
motions  of  Soul.      (2.)   Immediately  they 
were  indifpolcd  for  Communion  with  God, 
and  ftruck  with  fuch  a  Dread  of  Him  as 
could  not  confift  with  true  Love,  V.  8.  (3.) 
When   queftion'd   by  God,    how  do  they 
prevaricate^  inftead  of  confefling  their  Sin, 
and  humbly  imploring  ForgivenefsP  Which 
proves  not  only  their  having  finned,  but  their 


*.p.  10.    ^  p.  14. 


being 


Original  Sin.  431 

being  as  yet  wholly  impenitent.  (4.)  The 
Judgment  paft  upon  them  was  d  Proof  of 
their  being*  Guilty  in  the  Sight  of  God. 
Thus  was  Man's  Original  Righteoufnefs 
loft.  Thus  did  he  fall  both  from  the  Fa- 
vour and  Image  of  God. 

"  This  appears,  2.  From  the  Guilt  which 
infeparably  attends  every  Tranfgreflion  of 
the  Divine  Law.  I  fay,  every  Tranfgref- 
fion;  becaufe  eveiy  Sin  virtually  contains 
all  Sin.  For  ivhofoever  keepeth  the  whole  Law 
and  offendeth  in  one  Pointy  he  is  guilty  of  all. 
Every  fingle  Offence  is  a  virtual  Breach  of 
all  the  Commands  of  God.  There  is  in 
every  particular  Sin,  the  Principle  of /^//Sin; 
namely,  the  Contempt  of  that  Sovereign 
Authority,  which  is  equally  ftamp'd  upon 
every  Command.  When  therefore  our  firft 
Parents  ate  the  forbidden  Fruit, ^  they  not 
only  violated  a  particular  Precept  but  the 
entire  Law  of  God.  They  could  not  fin  in 
one  Inftance,  without  virtually  tranfgrefling 
the  whole  Law  of  their  Creation  :  Which 
being  once  done,  their  Title  to  God's  Fa- 
vour and  their  Original  Righteoufnefs  were 
both  loft. 

"  This  appears,  3.  From  the  compre- 
henfive  Nature  and  aggravating  Circumftan- 
ces  of  the  firft  TranfgrefTion.  For  it  impli':d, 
(i.)  JJjibelief:  Man  did  not  dare  to  break 
the  Divine  Command,  'till  he  was  brought 

^p.  15.    e  p.  i6.  to 


^32  ^e  Doctrine  rf 

to  queftion'  the  Truth  of  the  Divine  Threat- 
nin g .  ( 2 . )  Irreverence  of  God,  Reverence 
is  a  Mixture  of  Love  and  Fear.  And  had 
they  continued  in  their  firfl  Love  and  filial 
Fear,  they  could  not  fo  foon  have  broken 
thro'  the  fole  Command  of  God.  (3.)  /;2- 
gratitude.  For  what  a  Return  did  they  here- 
by make  to  their  Creator  for  all  his  Benefits  ! 
(4.)  Fride  and  Ambition,  Affedting  to  be 
as  Gods  J  knoidng  Good  and  Evil  (5.)  ^en^ 
fualit)\  The  Woman  looked  upon  the 
Fruit  with  an  irregular  Appetite.  Here  the 
Conflicil:  betwen  Reafon  and  Senfe  began.  To 
talk  of  fuch  a  Confiidt  in  Man  before  he 
fell,  is  to  reprefent  him  as  in  a  Degree  finful 
and  guilty  even  tvhlle  Innocent.  For  Conjiift 
implies  Oppofiion,  Aad  an  Oppofition  oi Ap- 
petite to  Reafon^  is  nothing  elfe  than  a  Re- 
pugnance to  the  Law  of  God.  But  of  this 
our  fiiil  Parents  were  no  Way  guilty,  'till 
their  Innocence  was  impaired  ^  'till  they  were 
led  by  the  Temptation  of  the  Devil,  to  defire 
the  forbidden  Fruit.  (6.)  Robbery^  for  the 
Fruit*  was  none  of  theirs.  They  had  no  Man- 
ner of  Right  to  it.  Therefore  their  taking 
it  was  a  flat  Robbery  of  God,  v/hich  cannot 
be  Icfs  criminal  than  robbing  our  Fellow- 
Creature?.  So  comprehenfive  was  the  Na- 
ture, fo  aggravated  the  Circumftances  of 
Man's  firft  Tranfgrellion. 

III.  Hereby 
•  p.  i'S   '  p  i^.         h  V 


^  «  I  G  I N  A  L    S  I N.  43  3 

"  ITT  Hereby  he  irtcurr'd  Death  of  every 
Kind ;  fiot  only  Tempdral,  but  ahb  Spiritual 
and  EfehidL  By  lofingivis  Original  Righte- 
oufn€fe>»^he  became  not' only  mortal  as  to  bis 
Body,  butalib  fpififuaWydead,  dcadfoGoD^ 
dead  in  Siji  i*V(5'\i\:  dl^th^t  Principle,  which 
St.  Paul  terms  the "" Life  of  God,  Eph.  iv.  i8. 
$t.  yobn,  Eternal  Life-  abiding  in  us,  'A  John 
iii.  15.  A  Creature  formed  with  a  Capacity 
of  knowing,  loving,  and  ferving  God,  mufl 
be  either  dead  in  Sin,  or  alive  to  God.  Adam 
in  his  primitive  State,  was  alive  to  God  ; 
but  after  he  had  finned,  dead  in  Sin^  as  well 
2iS  dead  in  Law^.^   /U   r 

-^  BuTiMr.  I'aylor  is  fure,  only  Temporal 
Death  was-  to  be  the  Confequence  of  his  DiC- 
obedience.  "  For  Death  is  the,  Lofs  of 
"  Life,  and  muft  beunderftood  accordin?  to 
"  the  Nature  of  the  Life'  to  which  it  is  op- 
''  pofed."  Moft  true :  And  the  Life  to  which 
it  is  here  oppofed,  the  Life  AdatH  e'njoyed 
'till  loft  by  Sin,  was  not  only  Bo(UfyLife^  but 
that  Principle  of  Holinefs,  which  th^  Scrip* 
ture  terms  I'he  Life  of  God.  It  was  alib  a 
Title  to  Eternal  Life.  All  this  therefore  he 
loft  by  Sin.  And  that  juftly  :  For  Death  u 
the  due  Wages  of  Sin  j  Death,  both  Tempcw- 
ral,  Spiritual  and  Eternal.  * 

^"  "  IV.  Adam's  firft  Sin  was  the  Sin  of  ft 
public  Perfon,  one  whom  God  had  appoint*- 
«(fi,to  reprefent  all  his  Dcfcendents. 

D  d  V   ,ji  This 

^  p.  20.    '  p.  21. 


434  ^^^  Doctrine  of 

"  This  alio  has  been  proved.  In  one 
Senfe  indeed '  Ada7n%  Sin  was  not  ours.  It 
was  not  our  Perlonal Fault,  our  adtualTranf- 
oreffion.  But  in  another  Senfe,  it  was  ours: 
It  was  the  Sin  of  our  common  Reprelenta- 
tive.  And  as  fuch  St.  Paul  fhews  it  is  im- 
puted to  us  and  all  his  Delcendants.    Hence 

*'  V.  All  thefe  are  from  their  Birth, 
Children  cf  Wrath,  void  of  all  Righteoufnels, 
and  pi  openfe  to  Sin  of  all  Sorts. 

"In  order  to  clear  and  confirm  this  Pro- 
pofition  I  intend, 

"  I.  To  confider  a  Text  which  proves 
Orisfinal  Sin  in  the  full  Extent  of  it :" 

"  2.  To  explain  fome  other  Texts  which 
relate  either  to  the  Guilt,  or  the  Corruption 
we  derive  from  our  firft  Parents: 

**  3.  To  add  fome  Arguments,  which  Mr. 
T'aylor  has  taken  no  Notice  of,  or  touched 
but  very  llighrly  : 

"  4.  To  anfwer  Objedlions. 

*'  And  I.  To  confider  that  Text,  Eph.  ii. 
3.  And  were  by  Nature  Children  of  Wrath,  even 
as  others.  In  the  Beginning  of  the  Chapter 
St.  Paid  puts  the  Ephefians  in  Mind,  of  what 
God  had  done  for  them.  This  led  him  to 
obferve,  what  they  h^d  been,  before  their 
Convcrfion  to  Gqd.  They  had  been  dead 
in  Trcfpaffes  and  Sins,  but  were  now  quick- 
ened, made  alive  to  God.  They  h^d  walked 
accorAi?7g  to  the  Prince  of  the  Power  of  the  Air ^ 

""  p  2':,>     "  P..26.    :  ^-^r^V    ^,  ,  the 


'^"Original  Sin.  43 j; 

the  Spirit  that  worketh  with  Energy  in  the 
Children  of  Difohedience.     Among  luch,  faith 
the  Apoftle,  We  all  had  our  Converfation  in 
Times  paji^  the  whole  Time  beibre  our  Con- 
verfion,  fulfilling "  the  Defires  of  the  FleJJj  and 
of  the  Mind,  and  were  by  Nature  Children  of 
Wrathy  even  as  others.     On  this  1  obferve 
»ui<<^j^  The  Perfons  fpoken  of,  are  both  the 
believing  Ephefians,  and  the  Apoftle  himlelf. 
For  he  fays  not,    Te  were,   fpeaking  in  the 
fecond  Perfon,  as  he  had  done  Verfe  i,  2: 
But  we  wejr,  plainly  with  a  Defign  the  more 
exprefly  to  include  himfelf.     Indeed  had  he 
ftill  fpoken  in  the  fecond  Perfon,  yet  what 
is  here  affirm'd  would  have  been  true  of  hi  my 
as  well  -as  them.     But  for  the  Sake  of  more 
explicitly  including  himfelf,  he  chofe  to  fay, 
we  were:    You,    Ephe/ians,    who  were  oe- 
fcended  of  Heathen  Parents,  and  /who  was 
born  in  the  vifible  Church. 

"  2.  The  PF'^ath  here  fpoken  of  means, 
eitter  GoD*s  Difpleafure  at  Sinners,  or  the 
Punifhment,  which  He  threatens  and  inflidls 
^  for  Sin. 

"3.  Children  of  Wrath  is  an  Hebraifmy 
and  denotes  Perfons  worthy  of,  or  liable  to 
Wrath.  And  this  implies  the  being  Sin- 
ners; Seeing  Sin  only  expofes  us  to  God's 
Difpleafure  and  the  dreadful  EfFeds  ot  it. 

"  4.  This  Charge  the  Apoftle  fixes  on 

himfelf  and  them,   as  they  had  been  beiore 

*  p.  27.    p  p,  28.  D  d  2  their 


.-6  ^he  Doctrine  of 

their  Convcrfion.    He  does  not  fay,  we  are, 
but  ur  ivcre  Children  of  Wrath, '• 

''  5.  He  fpeaks  of  hiinfelf  and  the  convert- 
ed Ephefmns,  as  having  been  fo  equally  with 
others.  There  is  an  Emphafis  on  the  Words, 
eve?i  as  others-,  even  as  the  ftubborn  fews 
and  idolatrous  Heathens :  Even  as  all  who 
are  ftill  Stra?2gers  and  Ejiemies  to  Chrift. 
Thefe  are  ftill  Children  of  Wrath.  But  what- 
ever Difference  there  is  between  us  and  them, 
we  were  once  what  they  are  now. 

'^6.  He  expreily  fays,  we  were  Children  of 
Wrath  even  as  others,  by  Nature,  or,  from 
our  Birth.  He  does  not  fay,  we  became  fo, 
by  Education,  or  by  Imitation,  or  by  CufoM 
in  finning.  But  to  fhew  us,  when  it  is  that 
we  commence  Sinners,  by  what  Means  we 
become  Children  of  Wrath,  whence  it  is  that 
we  are^J  prone  to  Evil  from  our  Infancy,  and 
to  imitate  bad,  rather  than  good  Examples,  he 
fays,  we  were  Children  of  Wrath  byNature; 
we  were  born  fallen  Creatures.  We  came 
into  the  World  Sinners,  and  as  fuch  liable  to 
Wrath,  in  Confequence  of  tjie  Fall  of  our 
Firft  Father. 

''  But  it  is  affirmed,  i.  That  "  by  Nature 
**  means  by  Habit  or  Cujlom"  I  anfwer, 
Tho'  the  Term  Nature,  with  fome  qualify- 
ing Expreffion  annext,  is  fometimes  taken 
for  inveterate  Cuftom,  yet  'tis  never  fo  taken 
when  put  fingly,  without  any  fuch  qualify- 

"  r-  29-  mg 


Original  Sin.  437 

iftg  Expreffion.  When  therefore  the  Apoftle 
fay.  abfolutely,  we  were  Children  of  Wrath 
by  Nature^  this,  according  to  the  conflant 
Senfe  of  the  Words,  muft  mean,  we  were 
fo  from  our  Birth. 

"It  is  affirm'd,  2.  That  "  becaufe  the 
"  original  Words  ftand  thus  tUv^  (pJo-f.  J^yrr 
"  Children  by  Nature  of  Wrath ;  therefore 
"  Children  by  Nature  means  only,  truly  and 
"  really  Children  of  Wrath."  I  anfwer, 
The  Confequence  is  good  for  nothing  :  For 
let  the  Words  ftand  how  they  will,  it  is  evi- 
dent, that  T£xva  <pu(rft  are  Children  by  Birth^ 
or  fuch  as  are  born  fo,  in  Diftind:ion  from 
thofe  who  become  fuch  afterward. 

"  It  is  affirm'd,  3.  "  That  <?-^^f*  by  Na- 
"  ture  fignifies  no  more  than  truly  or  really.'* 
I  anfwer,  (i.)  'Tis  not  allow'd,  that  any 
good  Greek  Writers  ever  ufe  the  Word  in  this 
Senfe.'  (2.)  Whatever  others  do,  the  Writers 
of  the  New  Teftament,  always  ufe  it  in  a- 
nother  Senfe.  So  Gal.  ii.  15.  We  who  are 
Jews  by  Nature^  ^jori  'W^ioi*  That  is,  We 
who  are  born  Jews,  in  Contradiftindlion 
to  Profelytes.  Gal.  iv.  8.  Te  did  Service  to 
them  which  by  Nature  are  no  Gods :  i^^  <P-'c-£'  «^* 
-9-foK'  Perfons  or  Things  which  are  Partakers 
of  no  Divine  Nature,  Rom.  ii.  14.  The 
Gentiles  do  by  Nature  the  Things  contained  in 
the  haw  :  That  is,  by  their  own  natural 
Powers j  without  a  written  Law.  Neither 
'p.  31.    « p.  32.  D  d  3  here 


438  The  Doctrine  y 

hcre'^r^  any  where  elfe  does  the  Word 
fu<r£i  figniiy  no  more  than  really  or  truly, 

•«  iTnemains  then,  that  the  Word  which 
we  render  by  Nature^  does  really  fo  fignify. 

"  And  yet  it  is  allowed,  we  are  not  io 
giiilty  by  Nature,  as  a  Courfe  of  aftual  Sin 
afterward  makes  us.  But  we  are  antecedent 
to  that  Courfe  Children  of  Wraih^  liable  to 
fome  Deeree  of  Wrath  and  Punifliment. 
Here  then  from  a  plain  Text,'  taken  in  its 
obvious  Scnfe,  we  have  a  clear  Evidence, 
both  of  what  Divines  term  Original  Sin  im- 
puted, and  of  Original  Sin  inherent.  The 
Ibrmer  is,  The  Sin  of  Adam  fo  far  reckon'd 
mirs^  as  to  conftitute  us  in  fome  Degree 
Guilty  :  The  latter,  A  Want  of  Original 
Righteoufnefs,  and  a  Corruption  of  Nature; 
whence  it  is,  that  from  our  Infancy  we  are 
averfe  to  what  is  Good  and  propenfe  to  what 
is  Evil- 

^'  I  AM,  2.  To  explain  fome  other  Texts 
which  relate  either  to  the  Guilt  or  the  Cor- 
ruption which  we  derive  from  our  firft 
Parents. 

''  Gkn.  V.  3.  flere  the  Image  ^p/^Adam 
in  v.'liich  he  begat  a  Son  after  his  Fall,  ftands 
oppofcd  to  the  Image  of  God,  in  which  Man 
Was  atfiril  created.  ^  Mojes  had  faid,  V.  i. 
1/  fhe  Day  that  God  created  Man,  in  the 
LikcTiefi  of  God  7nade  He  him.  In  this,  fpeak- 
ing  t)f  Adaniy  as  he  was  after  the  Fall,  he 

•  p.  33-  -^  ■  ^-^  does 


Original  Sin.  439 

does  not  fay,  he  begat  a  Son  in  the  Likenefs  of 
God  ;  but  he  begat  a  Son  in  his  own  Like- 
ne/sy  after  his  Image,  Now  this  muft_  refer 
to  /4dam,  cither  zs  a  Man-,  or  2i$  a  good 
Man;  or  as  a  mortal^  finful Man,^  /But  it 
could  not  refer  to  him  merely  as  a  Man* 
The  infpired  Writer  could  not  defign  to 
inform  us,  That  Adam  begat  a  Man,  not  a 
Lion,  or  an  Horfe.  It  could  not  well  refer 
to  him  as  a  good  Man,  For  it  is  not  faid, 
Adam  begat  a  Son,  who  at  Length  became 
pious  like  himfelf ;  but  he  begat  a  Son  in  his 
own  Likenefs,  It  refers  to  him  therefore  as 
a  mortal^  fitful  Man  ;  giving  us  to  know, 
that  the  Mortality  and  Corruption,  contrad^ 
ed  by  the  Fall,  defcended  from  Adajn  to 
his  Son  :  Adam  a  Sinner  begat  a  Sinner  like 
himfelf.  And  if  Seth  was  thus  a  Sinner  by 
Nature^  fo  is  every  other  Defcendant  of 
Adam.^ 

"  Mr.  'Baylor  takes  no  Notice  of  the  An- 
tithefis  between  the  Likenefs  of  God y  V.  i, 
and  the  Likenefs  of  Adam,  V.  3.  On  the 
other  Hand,  he  fpcaks  of  thefe  Two  as 
One  :  As  if  Seth  had  been  born  in  the  very 
fame  Image  of  God,  wherein  Ada^n  was 
made.  But  this  cannot  be  admitted;  becaufe 
Adam  had  now  loft  his  Original  Righteouf- 
nefs.  It  muft  therefore  be  the  Likenefs  of 
fallen,  corrupted  Adam  which  is  here  in- 
tended. .  \ 
«p.  35.    «  p.  36.         Dd  4  -^'"  Gen. 


44c^  Tie  DoCJtRiJJE  rf 

"  Gen.  vi.  5.  AndGoTffaw  that  theWi^^ 
edncfs  of  Man  was  great  in  the  Earthy  and  that 
cviry  Imagination  rf  the  T'houghts  of  his  Heart 
ivas  only  evil  continually.  Here  Mofes\iZS\Xi^ 
ohTerved,  as  the  Caufe  of  the  Flood,  that 
God  (aw  that  the  Wickednefs  of  Man  was  greats 
to  account  for  this  General  Wickednefs  adds. 
Every  Imagination  of  the  Thoughts  of  his 
Hearty  was  evil,  yea,  was  only  evil,  and  that 
continually.  The  Heart  of  Man  is  here  put 
"for  his  Soul.  This  God  had  form'd  with  a 
marvellous  Thinking  Power.  But  fo  is  his 
Soul  debated  that  every  Imagination,  Yigmtnt, 
Formation  of  the  Thoughts  of  it,  is  evil,  on- 
ly evil,  continually  evil.  Whatever  it  forms 
within  itfelf,  as  a  Thinking  Power,  is  an 
evil  Formation.  This  Mofes  fpoke  of  the  An- 
tediluvians :  But  we  cannot  confine  it  to 
Them.*  If  all  their  actual  Wickednefs 
fprung  from  the  evil  Formations  of  their  cor- 
rupt Heart ;  and  if  confequently  they  were 
Sinners  from  the  Birth,  fo  are  all  others 
like  wife. 

^ '  G E  N .  viii .  21.   I  will  not  again  curfe  the 

Ground  any  more  for  Majjs  Sake  :  For  the  7- 

maginaiion  of  Mans  Heart  is  evil  from  his 

Touth  :  Neither  will  I  again  fmite  any  more 

every  livi?ig  Thing.     I  \vill  not  be  provoked 

to  this  by  the  Wickednefs  of  Mankind  ;  for 

they  are  inclined  to  Sin  from  their  Childhood. 

Was 
'  r-  37- 


'Original  Sin.'.  441 

Was  I  therefore  to  do  this  as  often  as  they 
deferve,  I  muft  be  continually  deftroying  the 
Earth.  The  Word  ^^'  Imagination  (as  was 
obferved  before)  includes  the  Thoughts,  Af- 
fed:ions,  Inclinations,  with  every  Thing  which 
the  Soul,  as  a  Thinking  Being,  forges  and 
frames  within  itfelf.  And  the  Word  we 
render  Touth,  includes  Childhood  and  In- 
fancy, the  earlieft  Age  of  Man;  the  whole 
Time  from  his  Birth,  or  (as  others  affirm) 
from  his  Formation  in  the  Womb. 

^'  "Indeed  Mr.  Taylor  would  tranflate  the 
Text,  Although  the  Imagination^  of  Mans 
Heart  Jhould  be  evil  from  his  Tenth,  But  i. 
Though  the  Particle  *^  fometimes  fignifies 
although^  yet  for  is  its  Comm.on  Meaning. 
And  we  are  not  to  recede  from  the  ufual  Sig- 
nification of  a  Word  without  any  NecelTity. 
2.  If  we  read  although^  it  will  not  at  all  in- 
validate our  Proof.  For  ftill  the  plain  Mean- 
ing of  the  Words  would  be,  I  will  not  fend 
another  General  Flood,  although  every  Fig- 
ment or  Formation  of  the  Heart  of  every 
Man  is  evil  from  his  earlieft  Infancy. 

"  Job  v.  6,  j.Althd  Affli5lion  cometh  not  forth 
of  the  Duft^  yet  Man  is  born  to  "Trouble,  as  the 
Sparks  fly  upivards.^  The  Word  which  is 
here  render d  A^i^ion,  fometimes- fignifies 
Iniquity,  For  what  Reafon  but  to  fhew 
that  thefe  two,  Sin  and  udfli^Jfion  are  infepa- 

rable  ? 

^  p.  39-    '  P-  40- 


442  The  Doctrine  of 

rable  ?  Sin  is  the  Caufe  of  Afflidioit,  ind 
Afflidion  of  whatever  Kind,  is  the  genuine 
Effe(ft  of  Sin.  Indeed  it  is  incompatible  with 
the  Juflice  and  MerCy'  of  God,  ta  appoint 
Atiiidionsof  any  Kind  for  the  Innocent.  If 
CV;;*/// fuffer'd,  it  wasbecaufe  the  Sins  of  others 
were  imputed  to  Hirrt.  If  then  eviery  one 
of  the  Poflerity  of  Adam^  is  born  to  Trouble^ 
it  muft  be,  becaufe,  he  is  born  a  Sinner. 
Man  was  not  originally  made  to  fufler. 
Nor  while  he  preferv'd  his  Innocence  was 
he  liable  to  Suffering  of  any  Kind.  Are  the 
Angels,  or  any  pure,  finlefs  Creatures,  liable 
to  any  Sorrow  or  Afflidlion  ?  Surely  no. 
But  every  Child  of  Adam  is.  And  it  is  in 
Confequence  of  his  Sin,  that  the  prefent 
Life  of  Man  is  fhort  and  afflid ive  :  Of  which 
the  very  Heathens  were  deeply  fenfible. 
They  alfo  faw,  tlmt  great  I'ravelis  created  for 
every  Ma?2,  ajidan  heavy  Toke  is  upon  the  Sons 
o/^Adam,  from  the  Day  that  they  go  out  of  their 
Mothers  JVomh,  'till  the  Day  that  they  return  to 
the  Mother  of  all  'Things. 

''  Job  xi.  12.  Vain  Man  ivould  be  wife^ 
though  Man  be  born  like  a  wildAfss  Colt :  In 
the  Original,  Though  Man  be  born  (will  be 
born  in  eveiy  Age)  the  Colt  of  a  wild  Afs. 
Mr.  Taylor  owns,  "  We  are  born  quite  ig- 
*'  norant.*"  But  this  is  far  from  reaching  the 
plain-  Import  of  the  Text,  in  which  Man  ^s 
born  into  the  World  is  compared  to  an  Ani- 


OrigI;Nal  Sin.  4^^ 

mal  moft  remarkably  ftupid  and  intradlable. 
And  luch  all  the  Sons  oi  Adam  naturally  are, 
particularly  with  Regard  to  the  Things  of 
God  :  From  their  .  Inrancy  fiow  to  learn 
what  is  good,  tho'  impetuoufly  propenfe  t« 
learn  and  pradife  what  is  evil.'' 

"  Job  xiv.  4.  and  xv.  14.  I  join  thefe,  be- 
caufe  the  latter  confirms  the  former.  PFbo 
can  bring  a  clean  Tubing,  or  Perfon,  out  of  an 
zmckan?  Not  one.  This  is  exprefs.  y^?/^  had 
been  refled:ing  on  the  forrowful,  uncertain, 
imperfed:  State,  of  all  ^^^^'s  Children  in  the 
prefent  World,  V.  i,  2,  3.  Then  he  car- 
ries his  Thoughts  to  the  Spring  of  fuch  a 
State,  the  Original  Corruption  of  Man. 
Wloo^  what  Creature,  can  make  an  innocent, 
righteous  Perfon  proceed  from  a  Parent  de- 
filed by  Sin  ?  Not  one.  Through  the  whole 
Scripture  we  may  obferve,  Sin  is  defcribed 
as  TJnckannefs^  and  a  Sinner  as  an  unclean 
Thing.  On  the  contrary  Holinefs  is  expreft 
by  Cleannefs  of  Heart  and  Hands,  and  the 
righteous  Man  is  defcribed  as  clean.  Agree- 
ably to  which,  the  Text  alTerts  the  Natural 
Impoffibility  of  any  Mans  being  born  clca?i, 
guiltlefs  and  fmlefs,  becaufe  he  proceeds 
from  them  who  are  unclcan-y  guilty  and  de- 
filed with  Sin. 

*'  The  Septuagint  tv^ind'Atc  the  Text,  Wbo 
Jhall  be  clean  Jrcm  Filth  t  Not  one :  Even  thd 

his 
hen  P-  44- 


444  ^^^  Doctrine  of 

his  Life  on  Earth  be  a  Jingle  Day.  And  this 
Rcndring,  tho*  not  according  to  thcHeireWy 
is  follow'd  by  all  the  Fathers :  And  fhews 
what  was  the  general  Belief  of  the  Jews, 
before  Chri/i  came  into  the  World. 

*'  But  fince  the  Heavens  and  Stars  are  re-. 
**  prefentei'  as  not  clean  compared  to  God, 
*'  may  not  Man  alfo  be  here  termed  unclean^ 
^*  only  as  compared  with  Him?"  I  anfwer, 
I.  The  Heavens  are  manifeflly  compared 
with  God  :  But  Man  is  not,  in  either  of 
thefe  Texts.  He  is  here  defcribed,  not  as  he 
is  in  Comparifon  of  God,  but  as  he  is  abfo- 
lutely  in  himfelf.  2.  When  the  Heavens  and 
Man  are  mentioned  in  the  fame  Text,  and 
Man  is  fet  forth  as  unclean^  his  Uncleannefs 
is  expreft  by  his  being  imrighteous ;  And  that 
always  means  guilty  or  finful.  Nor  indeed 
is  the  innocent  Frailty  of  mankind',  ever  in 
Scripture  term'd  Uncleannefs. 

"  Psalm  li.  5.  Behold^  I  was  JJjapen  in 
hiiquitv^"  aridinSi?!  did  my  Mother  conceive  me. 
The  Plalmift  here  confeffes,  bewails  and 
condemns  himfelf  for,  his  natural  Corruption, 
as  that  which  principally  gave  Birth  to  the 
horrid  Sins,  with  which  he  had  been  over- 
taken. Behold  I  He  prefixes  this,  to  render 
his  ConfelTion  the  more  remarkable,  and  to 
fliew  the  Importance  of  the  Truth  here  de- 
clared:  I  ^d:as  ffjapen  :  This  Paffive  Verb  de-- 

notes 
•  P-  45-     '  P-  46.     •  p.  47- 


Original  Sin.  44^; 

notes  fomewhat  in  which  neither  David^  nor 
his  Parents  had  any  acJ^ive  Concern  :  In  or 
with  Iniquity^  and  in  or  with  Sin  did  my  Mo- 
ther cojjceive  me.  The  Word '^  which  we  ren- 
der conceive^  fignifies  properly  to  warm  or  to 
cherijh  by  Warmth,  It  does  not  therefore  fo 
diredtly  refer  to  the  A(fl  of  co?2ceivifig,  as  to 
the  cherijhing  what  is  conceived,  'till  the 
Time  of  its  Birth.  But  either  Way  the  Proof 
is  equally  ftrong,  for  the  Corruption  of  Man- 
kind from  their  iirfl:  Exiftence. 

^'  PsAL.  Iviii.  3,  4.  'The  Wicked  are  ejlrajiged 
from  the  Womb  \^  they  go  ajlray  asfoon  as  they 
are  born^  fpeaking  Lies.  'They  are  ejiranged 
from  the  Womb,  Strangers  and  averfe  to  true, 
pradlical  Religion,  from  the  Birth.  They  go 
ajlray  as  foon  as  they  are  born^  fpeaking  hies. 
Not  that  they  aftually  fpeak  Lies  as  foon  as 
they  are  born.  But  they  naturally  incline 
that  Way,  and  difcover  that  Inclination  as 
early  as  is  poffible.'' 

"  Prov.  xxii.  1 5.  Foolifmefs  is  bound  in  the 
Heart  of  a  Child-,  but  the  Rod  ofCorreBion 
floall  drive  it  far  from  him.  Chap.  xxix.  15. 
The  Rod  and  Reproof  give  Wifdom-,  but  a  Child 
left  to  himfelf  bringeth  his  Mother  to  Shame. 
Thefe  Paifages  put  together  are  a  plain  Tef- 
timony  of  the  inbred  Corruption  of  young 
Children.  Foolijhriefs,  in  the  former,  is  not 
barely  "  Appetite,  or  a  Want  of  the  Know- 

"  ledge 

'p.  48.    ^  p.  51.    "  p.  52. 


446  Tlje  Doctrine  of 

"  ledge  attainable  by  Inftrudion."  Neither 
of  thcle  delerve  that  {harp  Corredlion.  But 
it  is  an  Indifpofednefs  to  what  is  Good,  and 
and  a  ftrong  Propenfity  to  Evil.  This  Foo^ 
lijhmfs  is  bound  in  the  Heart  of  a  Child-,  'tis 
rooted  in  his  inmoft  Nature.  It  is,  as  it  were, 
f alien  d  to  him  by  firong  Cords :  So  the  Origi- 
nal Word  fignifies.  From  this  Corruption 
of  Heart  in  every  Child  it  is,  that  the  Rod 
of  CorreBion  is  neceffary  to  give  him  Wifdom, 
Hence  it  is,  that  a  Child  left  to  himfelf  with- 
out Correction,  brings  his  Mother  to  Shame. 
If  a  Child  were  born  equally  inclined  to 
Virtue  and  Vice,  why  fliould  the  wife  Man 
fpeak  oi  FooliJJmefs,  orWickednefs,  as  faften'd 
fo  clofely  to  his  Heart  ?  And  why  fhould 
the  Rod  and  Reproof  h^  fo  neceffary  for  him  ? 
Thefe  Texts  therefore  are  another  clear  Proof 
ot  the  Corruption  of  Human  Nature. 

"  Matt. XV.  i8,  19.  M?r>^vii.  20 — 23. 
Thofe  Things*  "which  proceed  out  of  the  Mouthy 
come  from  the  Hearty  and  they  defile  the  Man* 
For  from  ivi thin  out  of  the  Hearty  proceed  evil 
T'hougbfs^  Adidteries-,  Murders — all  thefe  T^hings 
come  from  imthin^  and  defile  the  Man,  Our 
Lord"  here  teaches,  that  all  evil  Thoughts, 
Words  and  Actions  of  every  Kind,  flow  out 
of  the  Heart,  the  Soul  of  Man,  as  being 
now  avcrfe  to  all  Good,  ind- inclined  to  all 

"  Rom, 

» p.  55.  *  p.  r^^.  ■"'^  1  ■: 


^Original  Sin.  447 

^^  Rom.  V.  12 — 19.  Let  the  Reader  pleafe 
to  read  the  Vhole  Paffage  very  carefully. 
The  Apoftle  here  difcourfes  of  ^dam  and 
Chrijl  as  two  Reprefcntatives  or  publick  Per- 
fons,  comparing  the  Sin  of  the  one,  with 
the  Righteouf?ieJs  of  the  other. 

"  On  this  I  obferve,  i.  The  G72e  Man  fpo- 
ken  of  throughout,  is  Adam^  the  Commoa 
Head  of  Mankind.  And  to  Him  (not  to  the 
Devil  or  Eve)  the  Apoftle  defcribes  the  In- 
troduction of  Sin  and  Death,  The  Devil 
was  the  firft  Sinner,  and  Rve  feduced  by 
him,  finned  before  her  Hufband.  Yet  the 
Apoftle  faith,  By  one  Man  Sin  entered  into 
the  World :  T^hrd  the  Offence  of  One,  many 
are  dead :  T'he  Judgment  was  ^y  One  to  con- 
demnation :  Death  reigned  hy  One.  By  the 
Offence  ofQnt^  "Judgment  ca?ne  upon  all  Men\ 
by  One  Man's  Difobedience  many  were  made 
Si?2ners.  Now  why  fhould  the  Apoftle  lay 
all  this  on  Adam,  whofe  Sin  was  pofterior 
both  to  the  Devils  and  Eves  :  If  Adafn  was 
not  appointed  by  God,  the  Federal  Head 
of  Mankind  ?  In  Regard  to  which  the  A- 
poftlc  points  at  him  fingly,  as  the  Type  or 
Figure  of  Him  that  wns  to  co?ne.  According 
to  Mr.  Taylors  Dodlrine,  he  ftiould  rather 
have  faid,  Bv  the  Devil  Sin  entered  into  the 
IVorld:  Or,  Thro*  the  I)i [obedience  of  Eve, 
ma'tiy  were  made  Sinner s^.    But  inftead  of  this 

MO>l    ''  ^^ 

»  p.  66.  .  .  , 


^48  77j^  Dqgtrij^E' 5/" 

he  fixes'"  on  our  firfl  Father  alone,  as  bring- 
ing Sin  and  Death  on.  all  his  Poftcrity. 

''  z.'TuE  Sh,  l^ra?ifgrcffion,  Offence; Dif-^ 
obedience  here  fpokenof,  was  ^^^;7i's  eating 
the  forbidden  Fruit.  .  'Tis  remarkable,  that 
as  the  Apoftle  throughout  his  Difcourie,  ar-^ 
raigns  onv  Man  only,  fo  he  afcribes  all  the 
Milchief  done  to  onefmgie  Offence  of  that  one 
Man.  And  as  he  then  ftood  in  that  fpecial 
Relation  of  Federal,  as  well  as  Natural  Head 
to  his  Defcen  dents,  fo  upon  his  committing 
that  one  Sin,  this  fpecial  Relation  ceafed,   .•. 

''  3.  The  AlU  V.  12,^  18,  and  the  mcmyi 
V.  15,  19.  are  all  the  natural  Defcendents  of 
Ad(im\  equivalent  with  the  Worldr-N:,  azi 
which  means,  The  Inhabitants  of  iti"  t^^*^^  i^'^^ 
t'."  4.  The  Effeds  oi.Adani^  Sin^  on  his 
Defcendents  the  Apoille  reduces  tet-twd 
Hend9,  Sin  and  Death.-  By  one mmt'&n  en- 
ter d  into  the  World ^  andi  Death  by  Shi ;  and 
io  Death  paffed  on  albMen^  for  thatallhofoe 
Jinncii.  Si?t  fometimes.  means  Pimijhment  ^ 
but  not  h\.Te  :  Sin  and  De^th  arc  here  plainly 
diiHnguifhcd.  The  cbmmon  Tranllation  k 
thereffirc  right,  and  gives  us  the  true  Mean- 
ing of  the  Words.  .  Death jpaffdupon  dl  Meniy 
for  that'  cdl  kavejimmij .  ti  amely,  in  '  Of  *  with 
their  iirllFathen.  And  this  agreed  with. the 
Coiitdkt,  the  Purport 'of  which  :is--.  That  &1L 
havcLi.jl^nncdi.  and.anJeikereforje  li^bfe  to.  tfec 
Doath  originally  thre^tin'd,  is  evident  from 

^^^  this, 

*  P-  ^7-     "  P    69. 


Original  Sin.  449 

this,  that  until  the  Law  Sin  was  in  the  World: 
In  the  Ages  that  preceded  the  LawofMofeSy 
all  Men  were  Sinners  in  the  Sight  of  God. 
But  Sin  is  not  imputed^  where  there  is  no  Law : 
None  can  be  Sinners  in  the  Sight  of  God, 
if  they  are  not  Tranfgreffors  of  fome  Law, 
for  the  Tranfgrefling  of  which  they  are  re- 
puted guilty.  Neverthelefs  Death  reigned  all 
the  Timey^^?;;/ Adam  to  Mofes,  over  all  Man- 
kind. Now  if  none  is  liable  to  Death,  but 
for  Sin  ;  if  Sin  is  not  imputed  where  there  is  no 
Law  ',  and  if  notwithftandirlg  this,  all  Man- 
kind in  all  Ages  have  died ;  Infants  thcm- 
felves,  who  cannot  actually  fin,  not  excepted: 
It  is  undeniable,  that  Guilt  is  imputed  to  all, 
for  the  Sin  oi  Adam,  Why  elfe  are  they  li- 
able to  that,  which  is  inflifted  on  none  but 
for  Sin  ? 

"  This  is  the  Purport  of  the  Apoftles  ar- 
guing, V.  12,  13,  14:  Which  having  led 
him  to  mention  Adani  as  a  Figure  of  Chriji^ 
he  then  draws  a  Parallel  between  them.  The 
Subftance  of  it  is  this :  As  thro*  the  Offence 
c/' Adam  many  are  deady  as  by  the  Difobedience 
of  him,  many  are  made  Sinners ;  So  thro'  the 
Righteoufnefs  or  Obedience  of  Chrift,  marry 
are  made  righteous.  But  how  are  many  dead, 
or  made  Sinners,  thro*  the  Difobedience  of 
Adam  ?  His  firft  Sin  fo  far  affedts '  all  his 
Dcfcendents,  as  to  conftitute  them  guilcy, 
I.  E  e  or 


4J0  1*he  Doctrine    of 

or  liable  to  all  that  Death,  which  was  con- 
tain'd  in  the  Original  Threatning.  \<^ 

"  But  Mr.  Taylor  avers,  "To  be  made 
M  Sinmrs  means  only  to  be  fubjefted  to 
"  Temporal  Death."  ^Jiomnii   \(ikiiig 

.  "  I  ANSWER,  I.  Whatever  it  means,  the 
Difobedience  of  Adam  had  a  proper,  caufal 
Influence  upon  it :  Juft  as  the  Obedience  of 
Chrijl  has,  upon  our  being  made  righteous. 

"  2.  What  to  be  made  Sinners  means, 
muft  be  learnt  from  the  Oppofite  to  it,  in  the 
latter  Part  of  ^  the  Verfe.  Now  allowing 
the  Apoftle  to  be  his  own  Interpreter,  being 
made  righteous  is  the  fame  with  fujiijication^ 
V.  i6.  Of  this  he  had  treated  largely  be- 
fore. And  through  the  whole  of  his  Dif- 
courfe,  to  be  jujiified  is.  To  be  acquitted 
from  Guilt,  and  accepted  of  God  as  righteous. 
Confequently,  to  be  made  Sinners^  is  to  be 
condemned  of  God  y  or  to  be  Children  of  Wraths 
and  that  on  Account  of -/^J^w's  Sin. 

"  I  CoR.  XV.  21,  22.  By  Man  came  Death: 
In  Adam  all  die^  Let  the  Reader  pleafe  to 
bear  in  Mind  the  whole  of  the  two  Vcrfcs 
and  the  Context.  ^^  Man  in  the  2 1 ''  Verfe 
is  meant  Adatn,  The  All  fpoken  of  are  all 
his  Natural  Defcendents.  Thefe  all  die-, 
that  is,  as  his  Defcendents,  are  liable  to 
Death,  yea,  to  Death  everlafting.  That  this 
is  the  Meaning  appears  hence:  That  the 
•  .    .    :  being 

'  P-  73-     '  p.  74.        -  .-r    :,  .     .,.  .-.    • 


^Original  Sin.  451 

6ei?2g  made  alive,  to  which  this  Dying  ftands 
oppofed,  is  not  a  mere  Recovery  of  Life,  but 
a  blefled  RefurrecSion  to  a  glorious  Immor- 
tality. Hence  I  obferve,  i.  Man  was  ori- 
ginally immortal  as  well  as  righteous.  In 
his  primitive  State  he  was  not  liable  to  Death. 

2.  Death'  is  conftantly  afcribed  to  Sin,  as 
the  fole  and  proper  Caufe  of  it.  As  it  was 
threaten'd  only  for  Sin,'  fo  the  Sentence  was 
not  pronounced,   'till  after  Man  had  finned. 

3.  All  Men  are  Mortal  from  their  Birth. 
As  foon  as  they  begin  to  live,  they  are  liable 
to  Death,  the  Punifliment  denounced  againft 
Sin,  and  Sin  only.  4.  This  is  the  genuine 
EfFedl  of  the  firft  Sin  of  our  firft  Father. 
The  Apoftle  does  not  attribute  it  to  the  De- 
vil :  Neither  does  he  fay,  in  Adam  a?2d  Eve 
all  die.  But  here  alfo  he  mentions  ^dam 
fingly.  Him  he  fpeaks  of  as  a  Figure  ^Chrill, 
V.  45,  47,  48.  And  here  as  the  fole  Au- 
thor of  Death,  to  all  his  Natural  Defcendents. 
In  jiddm,  or  on  Account  of  his  Fall,  all  of 
Mankind,  in  tvtvy  Age,  die,  Confequcntly, 
in  him  all  finned.  With  him  all  fell,  in  his 
firft  TranfgrefTion.  That  they  are  all  born 
liable  to  the  legal  Punilhment  of  Sin,  proves 
him  the  Federal  as'  well  as  Natural  Head  of 
Mankind :  Whofe  Sin  is  fo  far  imputed  to  all 
Men,  that  they  are  born  Children  of  Wrath 
*and  liable  to  Death. 

■s^^l  Ee  2  "Thus 

'  p.  75*     •  P-  76.     '  p.  77- 


452  "the  Docmi^fe  5/" 

''  Tkus  ha^eTdoHrider'd  a  large^^^umbet 
of  Texts,  which  teftify  of  Original  Sin^  ifrt- 
putcd  and  inb^ren*.  Sonie  are  more  eiprefs^ 
than  others ;  t>f  which  Kind  are  j^o^  xiv.  4-^, 
Pfalm  li.  5.  Ivi.  3.  Rom:v,i2y&c,  i  C/o?^^!: 
XV.  2 2 .  Eph,  it  ^ .  That  mEphe/ta72lprtkn& 
us  with  a  direct  Proof  of  the  entire  Do&ine. 
Thofe  in  Romans  and  Corinthians  relate  di- 
reftly  to  Origijial  Sin  imputed^  and  are  but 
Confequential  Proofs  of  Original  Corruption;; 
The  reft  refer  particularly  to  this^  and  are  but 
confequential  Proofs  oi  Original &m  imputed, 

*'  And  as  this  Dodlrine  ftands  impregna- 
ble on  the  Bafis  of  Scripture,  fo  it  is  perfedtly 
agreeable  to"  found  Reafbh ;  as  may  appear 
from  a  few  plain  Arguments  which  confirm 
this  Scripture  Dodlrine.        ^"^  ^*^^  aoiarqC) 

**''ii  If  the  firft  Man  was  by  God's  Ap- 
pointment as  has  been  fhewn,  the  Federal 
Head  of  all  his  Defcendents ;  It  follows"^ 
that  v^\itViAdam  finned  and  fell,  they  all  fin-' 
ned  In  him  and  fell  with  him.  And  if  they 
did,  they  mull  come  into  the  World  both 
guilty  and  unclean.'     •  -  •;^.: 

-  "  Bi^T  we  had  no^Hatid  in  Ada^jTs'Smj 
"  and  therefore  cannot  be  guilty  on  Account 
'^ofit.".-"^-^'^-^  ^-'^      ■"-■ 


hr^'  Thi$,  We  had  no  Hand  in  it,'W 

goolis.     It  means  either,  "  We  did  not  ac^^ 

''  tualiyjbm  therein :"  Which  no  one  denie^Y 
,aol£i'3>r  to  a^navo'JhO  \hm  ^xi  I    '-  cfm   q^ 


Original  SiNr  453 

Or,  "  We  were  wholly  unconcern'd  in  it :' 
The  contrary  to  which  has  been  fully  proved. 
. .  "  2.  Since  -/f^^Vs  Pofterity  are  born  lia*^ 
ble  to  Death,  which  is  the  due  fFages  of  Sin, 
it  follows.  That  they  are  6or?2  Sinners.  No 
Art  canfet  afidethe  Confequencc. 

*'  3.  Either  Cbn'/i  is  the  Saviour  of  In- 
fants,orHe  is  not.  If  He  is  not,  how  is  He  the 
Saviour  of  all  Men  ?  But  if  He  is,  then  In- 
fants are  Sinners.  For  He  fuffer'd  Death  for 
Sinners  only.  He  came  to  feek  a?td  fave 
only  that  which  was  loft ;  to  fave  his  People 
from  their  Sins.  It  follows  that  Infants  are 
Sinners  J  that  they  are  loft,  and  without 
Chriji  are  undone  for  ever.  y>t  aldr^  • 

rr,*:\[^>  The  Confequences  of  the  contrary 
Opinion  are  ihockingly  abfurd.«nu:lqn3c*.  rij^j; 
_^^  ( I.)  If  Original  Sin  is  not,  either  Death 
i^  not  the  Wages  of  Sin,  or  there  is  Pu- 
nifliment  without  Guilt:  God  ""  puniflies 
innocent,  guiltlefs  Creatures.  To  fuppofe 
which,  i^  to  impute  Iniquity  to  theMoftHoly.. 

*',  {<Z\)  If  we  are  not  Sinners  by  Nature, 
there  are  finful  Actions  without  a  JPrinciplc, 
Fruit  growing  without  a  Root.  *'  No:  Men 
*'  contrail  finful  Habits  by  Degrees^  .^nd  then 
''  commence  Siniiers."  But  whence  is  it, 
that  they  contrad:  thofe  Habits  fo  eafily  and 
fpeedily  ?  Whence  is  it,  that  as  foon  as  ever 
we  difcover  Reafon,  we  difcover  finful  Dif- 
pofitions  ?  The  early  Difcoveries  of  Reafon, 

>^p.  84.  E  e  3  prove 


454  ^^  Doctrine  of 

prove  a  Principle  of  Reafon  planted  In  our 
Nature.  In  like  Manner  the  early Difcove- 
ries  of  finful  Difpofitions,*  prove  thofe  Dif- 
pofitions  planted  therein. 

"  (3.)  If  we  were  not  ruined  by  the  firft 
Adam,  neither  are  we  recovered  by  the  fb- 
cond.  If  the  Sin  of  Adam  was  not  imputed 
to  us,  neither  is  the  Righteoufnefs  oi  Chrift. 

*'  (4.)  If  we  do  not  derive  a  corrupt  Na- 
ture from  Adaniy  we  do  not  derive  a  new 
Nature  from  Cbrijl.  .-^  -  • 

"  (5.)  A  Denial  of  Original  Sm,  Aot  on- 
ly* renders  Baptifm  needlefs  with  Regard  to 
Infants,  but  reprcfents  a  great  Part  of  Man- 
kind as  having  no  Need  of  Chriji^  or  the 
Grace  of  the  new  Covenant.  I  now  Ipeak 
of  Infants  in  particular,  who  if  not  guilty 
before  God,  no  more  needs  the  Merits  and 
Grace  of  the  fecond  Adam^  than  the  Brutes 
themfelves. 

"Lastly,  A  Denial  of  Original  Sin, 
contradicts  the  main  Defign  of  the  Gofpel, 
which  is  to  humble  vain  Man,  and  to  a- 
fcribe  to  God's  Free-Grace,  not  Man's  Free^ 
Will,  the  whole  of  his  Salvation.  Nor  in- 
deed can  we  let  this  Do<ftrine  go,  without 
giving  up  at  the  fame  Time  the  greateft 
Part,  if  not  all,  of  the  effential  Articles  of 
the  Chriftian  Faith.  If  we  give  up  this,  we 
cannot  defend  eitbt;i  Juftification  by  the 
Merits  of  Chriji,    or  the  Renewal  of  our 

""  p.  85.  r   ^  -^  Natures 


^Original  Sin.  455 

Natures  by  his  Spirit*  Mr.  Taylors  Book  is 
nottherefore  fubverfive  of  a  particularBiaiich', 
but  of  the  whole  Scheme  of  Chriftianity. 

"  VI.  The  Dodrine  therefore  of  Original 
Sin  is  not  only  a  Truth  agreeable  to  Scrip- 
ture and  Reafon,  but  a  Truth  of  the  utmoft 
Importance.  And  it  is  a  Truth  to  which 
the  Churches  of  Chrijl  from  the  Beginning 
have  borne  a  clear  Teftimony. 

^'  Few  Truths,  if  any,  are  more  neceflary 
to  be  known,  believed  and  throughly  con* 
fidered.  For  if  we  are  not  acquainted  with 
this,  we  do  not  know  ourfelves.  And  if  we 
do  not  know  ourfelves,  we  can*t  rightly  know 
Chriji  and. the  Grace  of  God.  And  on  this 
Knowledge  of  Chf'i/i  and  the  Grace  of  God 
depends  the  whole  of  our  Salvation.  St. 
Aiigufline  therefore  well  remarks,  '*  Chrifti- 
**  anity  lies  properly  in  the  Knowledge  of 
"  what  concerns  Adam  and  Chriji^  Foi* 
certainly  if  we  do  not  know  Chrijl^  we  know 
nothing  to  any  Purpofe.  And  we  cannot 
know  G&^j/?, .  without  fome  Knowledge  of 
what  relates  to  Adattty  who  was;^i6^  Figure 
of  Him  that  'was  to  com^i  t.,  ^^U^dv^r^'^A' 
V j-^'^:  But  if  this  Dodlrine  is  lo  important, 
ff.why  is  fo  lLtd^irai4  pf  it  in  Scripture,  and 
^^  in  the  Writings  of  the  Antients  ?" 
-.J^-"  Thi§  is  a^gr^ind  Miftake.  We  totally 
deny  that  the  Scripture  fays  littlp  of  it.  Mr. 
Baylor  indeed  affirms,  "  T^^^e  are  but  five 
^'^m^M' E^e  4^     '"'      "Paflagec 


456  Tie  Voo^^inmOf 

^'  Pafl^ges:  of  Scripture  ^hat  pliinl^  rckte 
>'  to  the  EfFeds  of  4Jflfef7/>,FaUi^^^^     Not  fd. 
Many  Scriptures^  as  tos  been  (hewn,  plajJily 
:and  diredly  teach  u^  this.  Do(ftrinc. '  Jink 
many  others  delivtF  that,;  from  Avhich  it 
may  be  x^tionally  a«d  eafily  dedtteed^i  rjk^ 
<Jeed  -  the  whok  Doftrine  ,of  Salvat^.  by 
Chfl/i  and  Divine  Grace  implies  thls^vjAnd 
each  of  its  main  Rranches,  Juftificationrand 
Regeneration  directly  leads  to  it;  Sodoes  the 
Dodtrine-pf  Man's  Original  Righteoufnefs,  *• 
than  which  nothing  is  more  clearly  revealed. 
/  *  A  N  D  if  the  Writers  befolx  S  ti  jiuguftine 
fay  little  concerning  Jti  is  not  the  Reafoil 
plain  ?  The  Occaflons  of  their  Wiiti^gldid 
not  lead  them  to  inlarge,  on  what  none  had 
ever  oppofed  or  denied.   For  none  had  jev€t 
oppofed  or  denied  thisDodrine.    "  Who  fays 
''  Vincentius  Lirmenfis  before  CeleJlhiSy  denied 
"  all  Mankind  to  be  involved  in  the  Guilt  of 
''  Adajfis  Tranfgreflion  ?'*  Yet  they  are  not 
filent  concerning  it.      Jjlflm  Martyr  fpeaks 
of  ^'  Mankind,  as  fallen  under  Death  and 
^*  the  Deceit  of  the  Serpent :"    {Dial,  with 
T^ryi^ho)   Of  ''  all  Adams  Defcendents,    as 
"  condemned  for  his  Sin,  and  all  that  are 
'l-^:rijl\,  vas  jullified  by  Him."     In  Irenmis 
there  are  numerous,  ftrong,  exprefs  Tcfti- 
mopie.s  both  to  Original  Righteoufnefs  and 
QrigimhSin  m  the  full  Extent.     ''  What 
'''^^:^}<^riy\'yldam,  that  is,  d.  h^xng  ajieru'hi 
'^  Image  andLikenefs  ofQon^  this.we  recover 
•rp.  ss.  ^^    ^^  by 


>©RiGrKiM;.'SiN.r  '457 

#l>fcgr.  Chn/:'  (I.  3 .  c;  a'd.)    Agairt^^  <*'T"hey 
*•  who  receive  the  ingrafted  Word  return  to 
?f  tbe'^fttientNataie^of  Man,  thatty  which 
he  was  made  after  the  'Image  iifi^t  Li kcnefi 
o/'GoD."  (1;  5, :ci:-l o.)  He  lik^5wife  fpeaks 
of  our  15'  fimiing  MAdam:''  *'  Ifti-dte  ^rft  A- 
f^  Jamy:^{dys  he,  we 'offended  &ofi>^  in  the 
:?■  ifecond- '-^.^i?/-  we  are  reconciles"    And 
l^i frequently,  df  *' Man's  loiing  the  Image 
^^  of  God  by  the  Fall,  and  recdveriftg  it  hf 
^\CbfuJi"-  TertuUian  fays,  ''  Man  Was  in  the 
^:Beginning  deceived,  iind  therefore  con- 
^^  demned  to  Death:  Upon  which  his  whole 
*'  Ra6e  became  infecfled  and  Partaker  of  his 
U:  Cpad^nnation."    (De  T'ejlirmnio  Amines) 
'(jfpriarL'\^  exprefs  in  his  Epiftle  X.^Fidui, 
Origen:^2iySy  "  the  Curfe  oi  Adam  in  common 
4'^  to- all:'*  Again,  "  Man  by  finning  loft  the 
5^  Image  and  Likenefe  of  God,"  And  again, 
'f*^^  No  one  is  clean  from  the  Filth  of  Sin, 
''  even  tho'  he  is  not  above  a  Day  old."  ^ 
.  ^^^^  The  whole  of  me,  {^.ys  Nazianzm^  has 
*'  Need  of  being  faved,  fmce  tlie  whole  of 
"  me  fell,  and  was  condemned  for  the  Dif- 
"  obedience  of  my  firft  Father.''      Many 
more  are  the  Teftlmonies  of  Ath  an  alius.  Ba- 
fd,  Hilary  -,  all  prior  to  St.  Auguliim\     And 
how  generally  fmce  St.  Aug ujiine  this  im- 
portant Truth  has  been    affertcd,    is  well 
known.       Plain  it  is   therefore,    That  the 
Churches  of  Chrij?  from  the  Beginning,  have 
borne  clear  TeftimGny.to.it'.'--  ^  ■^^'^^"^'. 

,35^  .<<  To 
'  p.  93,  ^o 


45S  'The  Doctrine  df 

"  To  conclude,  i.  This  is  a  Scriptural 
Dodrine.  Many  pi ain Texts  diredly  teach  it. 

"  2.  It  is  a  Rational  Dodrine,  throughly 
confillent  with  the  Diftates  of  found  Re  a- 
fon :  And  diis,  notwithftandiiig  there  may, 
be  fome  Circumftanees  relating  thereto,. 
which  Human  Reafon  cannot  fathom.'' 

"  3.  It  is  a  Pradical  Dodrine.  It  has  the 
clofeft  Connexion  with  the  Life,  Power  and 
Pradice  of  Religion.  It  leads  Man  to  the 
Foundation  of  all  Chriftian  Pradice,  The 
Knowledge  ofhimfelf:  And  hereby,  to  the 
Knowledge  of  Goi>,  and  the  Knowledge 
of  Chriji  crucified.  It  prepares  him  for, 
and  confirms  him  in,  jufl  Conceptions  of 
the  Dependence  of  his  Salvation,  on  the 
Merits  of  Chriji  for  Juftiiication,  and  the 
Power  of  his  Spirit  for  inward  and  outward 
Holinefs.  It  humbles  the  natural  Pride  of 
Man  :  It  excludes  Self-Applaufe  and  Boaft- 
ing :  And  points  out  the  true  and  only  Way, 
whereby  we  may  fulfil  all  Righteouinefs. 

"  4.  It  is  an  Experimental  Dodrine. 
The  fincerc  Chrifl^ian  Day  by  Day  carries 
the  Proof  of  it  in  his  own  Boforn  :  Experi- 
encing that  in  liimfdf  which  is  abundantly 
fufHcicnt  to  convinecJ>ini,  That  in  him  by 
Nature  drwellvtb  ziG  goM "Thing  ^^  but  that  it  is 
God  alone,  ivho  worketh  in  himyboth  to  will 
andtodo,.  6f  hii  goodPkafureTl  [i^TnJqiiDl  ,3vii 

LeWishaMj'  Mai^sh'M^^^  tf^'jO  ioimi'^ 


Origii^al  Siisr.^  459 

-  I  HAVE  now  gone  thro*,  as  my  Leifure 
would  permit,  this  whole  complicated  Quef- 
tion:  And  I  have  fpoken  on  each  Branch  of 
it  with  Plainnefs  and  Opennels,  according 
to  the  beft  Light  I  have  at  prefent.  I  have 
only  a  few  Words  more  to  add,  and  that 
with  the  fame  Opennefs  and  Simplicity. 

What  I  have  often  acknowledged,  I 
now  repeat.  Were  it  not  on  a  Point  of  fo 
fo  deep  Importance,  I  would  no  more  enter 
the  Lifts  with  Dr.  T'aylor^  than  I  would  Hft 
my  Hand  againft  a  Giant.  I  acknowledge 
your  Abilities  of  every  Kind:  Your  natural 
and  acquired  Endowments:  Your  ftrong  Un- 
derftanding,  your  lively  and  fruitful  Imagi- 
nation, your  plain  and  eafy,  yet  nervous 
Stile.  I  make  no  Doubt  of  your  having  ftu- 
died  the  Original  Scriptures  for  many  Years.. 
And  I  believe  you  have  moral  Endowments, 
which  arc  infinitely  more  valuable  and  more 
amiable  than  all  thefe.  For  (if  I  am  not 
greatly  deceived)  you  bear  Good-'will  to  all 
Men.     And  may  not  I  add,  you  fear  God? 

O  WHAT  might  not  you  do,  with  thefe 
Abilities  ?  What  would  be  too  great  for  you 
to  attempt  and  effed:?  Of  what  Service  might 
you  be,  not  only  to  your  own  Countrymen, 
but  to  all  that  bear  thcChriftian  Name?  How 
might  you  advance  the  Caufe  of  true,  primi- 
tive, fcriptural  Chriftianity?  Of  folid,  rational 
Virtue?  Of  the  deep,  holy,  happy,  fpiritual 

Religion, 


460  Tl^e  Doctrine  cf 

Religion,  which  is  brought  to  Light  by  the 
Gofpel?  How  capable  are  you  oi". recom- 
mending, not  barely^ M?r^///y  (the  .Duty  of 
Man  to  Man)  but  P/f/j',,  the  Duty  of  Man 
to  God  :^  Even,  iht  ^ipcrjrjlpping  Him  vi  Spirit 
md.  in"frutb?  How  well  qualified,  are  you, 
to  explain,  in  force,   defend,  even  the  deep 
T/^/'/v^f^/^'GoD?  The  Nature  of  the  King- 
dom of  God  icifkifi  us?  Yea,  the  Interior  a 
Rcgni  Dei?  (I  fpeak  on  Suppolition  of  your 
having  tbe  UnBionof  the  Hcly  One^  added  to 
your   other  Qualifications)    And    are  you, 
whom  God  has  fo  highly  favour'd,  among 
thofe  who  ferve  the  oppofite  Caufe^  If  one 
might  transfer  the  Words  of  a  Man  to  Him, 
might  not  one  conceive  him  to  fay,  Kal  c-u  \k 
IjceVwv  ><J o-y, TiKvov-  Are^^^/^f'diflcrving  the  Caufe 
of  inna^afd  Rel igioiV f  Xabouring  to  deflroy 
the  /;;'zrj/'j  Kingdom  of  God  ?  Sapping  the 
Foundation  of  all  t.xw^[  fpiritual  Worjhip? 
Advancing  Morality  on  the  Ruins  oi  Piety? 
Arc  you  among  thole  v/ho  are  overthrowing 
the  very  Foundations  pf^rifWVm',  fcriptural 
CZt//?/^;2//)'?  Which  certainly  can  have  no 
Ground- to  ftancl  upon,  if  the  Scheme  lately 
advanced  be  true/    What  Room  is  there 
for  it,  'tilLP/Ien  I'epentl  Know  themfelves? 
Without  thisj  can  they  know  or  love  God? 
O  why  (hbuld^w/  block  up  the  Way  to  Re-.| 
pent^ncG^  And  confequently,  to  the  whole' 
KelIgipn"of  tlie Heart?  Ld  a  Man  be  a  Fool, 


?3,t 


fays 


Original  Sin.*  A6i 

fays  the  Apoftle,  ihat  be  may  be  wffeV   Biit 

you  tell  htm,  he  is  'r£;//^' already:.  Th^t  every^ 

Man  is  by  Natui^e,  as  wife  as  Aikm  .was.  in 

Paradifc.     .He  gladly  drinks  in  the  foothing 

Sound,  and  fleeps  on  and  takes  his  Reft,  We 

befeech  thofe  who  are  fyiad  after   earthly. 

Things,  to  take  Knowledge  of  the  dreadful 

State  they  are  in :  To  return  to  their  Father, 

and  beg  of  Him  the  Spirit  of  Love  and  of  a 

fotmd  Mind,     You  tell  them,  they  are  of  a 

fmnd  Mind  already.     They  believe,    and 

turn  to  their  Hufks  again.     Jesus  comes  to 

feek  andfave  that  which  is  lojl.     You  tell  the 

Men  of  Form  (tho'  as  dead  to  God  as  a  Stone) 

that  they  are  not  loji:    That  (inafmuch  as 

they  are  free  from  grofs  Sins)  they  are  in  a 

good  Way,  and  tc?/// undoubtedly  iefaved.  So 

they  live  and  die,  without  the  Knowledge,, 

Love  or  Image  of  God,  and  die  eternally! 

V^^vTh£y  wi/l  be  faved."     But  ^zr^  they 

fatted  already?  We  know  all  real  Chriftians 

are.     If  they  are,  if  thefe  are  polTeft  of  the 

prefe7it  Salvation  which  the  Scripture  ipeak  of, 

what  is  that  Salvation?  How  poor,  dry,  dull, 

ihallow,  fuperficial  a  Thing  ?  Wherein  does 

it  excell  what  the  wifer  Heathens  taught,^ 

nayV  and  perhaps  experienced?  What  poor 

pitiable  Creatures  are  thofe  ChriftianSj  fo  cal-^ 

ledi  who  have  advanced  no  higher  than  this? 

You  fee  enough  of  thefe  on  every  Side:  Per-?) 

haps  even  in  your  own  Congregation.  What 

/-^  Knowledge 


462  ^n^e  Doctrine  of 

Knowledge  have  they  of  the  Things  of  God? 
What  Love  to  God,  or  to  Chriji?  What 
Heavenly-mindednefs  ?  How  much  of  the 
Mi fjd  'which  was  in  Chrift  Jefus?  How  httle 
have  they  profited  by  all  your  Inftruftions? 
How  few  are  wifer  and  better  then  when 
you  knew  them  lirll?  O  take  Knowledge  of 
the  Reafon  why  they  are  not.  That  Dod:rine 
-will  not  make  them  ivife  unto  Salvation,  All 
it  can  poffibly  do,  is  to  fhake  off  the  Leaves. 
It  does  not  effeft  the  Branches  of  Sin.  Un- 
holy Tempers  are  juft  as  they  were.  Much 
lefs  does  it  ftrike  at  the  Root:  Pride,  Self- 
will,  Unbelief,  Heart- Idolatiy  remain  un- 
difturb'd,  and  unfufpeded.  .^vi/^^-" 

I  AM  grieved  for  the  People  who  are  thus 
feekino;  Death  in  the  Error  of  their  Life.  I 
am  grieved  iox ycu^  who  furely  defire  to  teach 
them  the  Way  of  God  in  Truth.  O  Sir, 
think  it  poffible,  that  you  may  have  been 
miftaken !  That  you  may  have  leaned  too  far, 
to  v/hat  you  thought  the  better  Extreme.  Be 
perfuadcd  once  more  to  review  your  whole 
Caufe,  and  that  from  the  very  Foundation. 
And  in  doing  fo,  you  will  not  difdain,  to  defire 
more  than  natural  Light.  O  that  the  Father  of 
Glory  m?iY  give  unto  yoii  the  Spirit  of  Wifdom 
and  Revelation  I  May  he  inlighten  the  Eyes  of 
your  V)idcrjidnding^  that  you  may  -know  what  is 
the  Hope  of  his  Callings  and  what  the  Riches  of 
the  Glory  of  his  Inheritance  in  the  Saints. 

Lewisham,  Mj;t^  24,   1757.   '"' 


Original  Sin.  463 

DoSlrine  of  Original  Sin ^  Sec. 


r^^"^ECAUSE  of  the  unfpeakable  Im- 


ine  this  erand  Foundation  of  all 


^  B  ^  portance  of  throughly  underftand- 


Revealed  Religion,  I  fubjoin  on€ 
more  Extradt,  relating  both  to  the  Original 
and  the  Prefent  State  of  Man. 

"GOD  made  Man  upright.''  By  Man 
wc  are  to  underfland  ouv  Jirji  Parents^  the 
archetypal  Pair,  the  Root  of  Mankind. 
This  Man  was  made  right  (agreeably  to  the 
Nature  of  God,  whofe  Work  is  perfed) 
without  any  Imperfeftion,  Corruption,  or 
Principle  of  Corruption  in  his  Body  or  Soul. 
He  was  made  upright y  that  is  Strcight  with 
the  Will  and  Law  of  God,  without  any  Ir- 
regularity ia  his  Soul.     God  7nade  him  thus; 

•  Mr.  Bofon'i  Four-fold  State  of  Man, 


464  I'f^^  Doctrine  of 

He  did  not  firft  make  him,  and  then  make 
him  righteous:  But  in  the  very  Making  of 
him  He  made  him  righteous ;  Righteoufnefs 
was  concreated  with  him.  With  the  fame 
Breath  that  God  breathed  in  him  a  hving 
Soul,  He  breathed  in  him  a  righteous  Soul. 

"  This  Righteoufnefs  was,  The  Con- 
formity of  all  the  Faculties  and  Powers  of 
his  Soul  to  the  Moral  Law:  Which  implied 
three  Things. 

"  First,  His  Underjlanding  was  a  Lamp 
o? Light,  He  was  made  after  God's  Image, 
and  confequently  could  not  want  Know- 
ledge, which  is  a  Part  thereof.  And  a  per- 
fect K7i(^wledge  of  the  Law  was  neceffafy  to 
fit  him  for  univerfal  Obedience,  feeing  no 
Obedience  can  be  according  to  the  Law, 
unlefs  it  proceed  from  a  Senfe  of  the  Com- 
mand of  God  requiring  it.  *Tis  true  Adam 
had  not  the  Law  writ  on  Tables  of  Stone  : 
But  it  was  written  upon  his  Mind.  God 
imprcft  it  upon  his  Soul,  and  made  him  a 
Law  to  himfef  as  the  Remains  of  it  even  a- 
mong  the  Heathens  teftify.  And  feeing 
Man  was  made  to  be  the  Mouth  of  the  Cre- 
ation, to  glorify  GoD  in  his  Works,  we  have 
Ground  to  believe,  he  had  an  exquifite 
Kjiowledge  of  the  Works  of  God,  We  have  a 
Proof  of  this  in  his  giving  Names  to  the 
Beafls  of  the  Field,  and  the  Fowls  of  the' 
Air,  ahcjthefe  fuch  us.  cxprefs  their  Nature. 

-''    •  -  -  mat-^ 


P^ij3ii*AL  Sin*  465 

Wiatfoe^ven  Ad^vci  cal^d,ei:cry  living  T'hing^ 
that  li^m.ti^  Name  thereof.  And  th-e  Domi- 
nion whicli  God  gav£  bim  over  the,  *  Crea- 
tures, Igfcei'ly  to  ule  them  according  .to  his 
Will  (ftill  in  Subordination  to  die  Will  of 
God)  implies  a  Knowledge  of  their  JW/r^r^j. 
"  S  E  CON  D  L  Y  >  His  Will  1  ay  Jlr eight  with 
the  Will  of  God.  There  was  no  Corrup- 
tion in  his  Will,  no  Bent  or  Inclination  to 
iSvil ;  for  that  is  Sin,  properly  fo  called ; 
and  therefore  inconfiftent  with  that  Upright^ 
;zi^,  with  which  it  is  exprefly  faid  he  was 
endued  at  his  Creation.  The  Will  of  Man 
was  then  naturally  inclin'd  to  God  and  Good- 
nels  th.djmUahly,  It  was  difpofed  by  its  Ori- 
ginal Malie,  to  follow  the  Creator's  Will,  as 
th^  Shadow  does  the  Body.  It  was  not  left 
Inan  equal  Balance  to  Good  and  Evil :  For 
then^  he  had  not  been  upright ^  or  conform 
to  .the  Law  ^  which  no  more  can  allow  the 
Crea.ture)  not  to  be  inclined  to  God  as  his 
End,  J  any  more  than  it  can  allow  Man  to 
b^  %r£rW  ta  himlelf. 

^^^S.Thirdly,  His  AfFedlions  were  regular, 
piire/and  holy.  All  his  Paffions,  yea  all  his 
/J;2/?//i;^  Motions,  and  Inclinations,  were  fu- 
bordinaite  to  his  Reafon  and  Will,  which 
lay  ilreight  with  the  Will  pf  God.  They 
were  ajl  therefore  pure  from  all  Defilement, 
free  i^ovts.^  all  Diforder  or  Diftemper  -,  be- 
caufe  in  all  their  Motions  they  were  duly 

.^^"  '   "'         Ff flibjeaed 


466  The  Doctrine  of 

liibj^dted'^to  his  clear  Reafon  and  his  holy 
will.  He  had  alio  an  executive  Power ^  an- 
fwerahlc  to  his  Will :  A  Power  to  do  the 
Good  which  he  htew  fhould  be  done  and 
which  he  ijicl'med  to  do ;  even  to  fulfil  the 
whole  Law  of  God.  If  it  had  not  been 
fo,  God  would  not  have  required  perfed: 
Obedience  of  him.  For  to  fay  that  T'he 
Lord  gather eth  where  He  hath  notjirewed^  is 
but  the  Blafphemy  of  a  flothful  Servant. 

"  From  what  has  been  faid  it  may  be 
gathered  that  Man*s  Original  Righteoufnefs 
was  u?iiverfal  and  yiatural^  yet  mutable, 

"  I.  It  was  univcrfal,  both  with  Refpeft 
to  the  Subjed:  of  it,  the  whole  Man,  and 
the  Objed  of  it,  the  whole  Law :  It  was 
dlffuled  thro'  the  whole  Man  ;  it  was  a  blef- 
fed  Leaven  that  leaven'd  th€  whole  Lump. 
Man  was  then  holy  in  Soul,  Body  and  Spi- 
rit :  While  the  Soul  remain  d  untainted,  the 
Members  of  the  Body  were  confecrated 
Veficls  and  Inrtruments  of  Righteoufnefs. 
A  Combat  between  Reafon  and  Appetite, 
nay  the  lead  Inclination  to  Sin,  was  utterly 
inconfillent  with  this  IJprightnefs  in  which 
Man  was  created ;  and  has  been  invented 
to  veil  the  Corruption  of  Man*s  Nature,  and 
to  obfciire  the  Grace  of  God  in  Chrijl  Jefus. 
And  as  this  Righteoufnefs  fpread  thro*  the 
whole  Man,  fo  it  relpedted  the  whole  Law. 
There  \vas  nothing  in  the  Law,  but  what 


was 


Original  Sin.  467 

was  agreable  to  his  Reafon  and  Will.  His 
Soul  was  (hapen  out,  in  Length  and  Breadth, 
to  the  Commandment^  tho'  exceeding  broad  : 
So  that  his  Original  Righteoufneis  was  not 
only  perfecSl  in  Parts  but  in  Degrees. 

**  2.  As  it  was  univerlal,  fo  it  was  natu- 
ral to  him.  He  was  created  with  it.  And 
it  was  neceffary  to  the  Perfedion  of  Man, 
as  he  came  out  of  the  Hand  of  God  :  Ne- 
ceffary to  conftitute  him  in  a  State  of  Inte- 
grity.    Yet 

"  3.  It  was  mutable.  It  was  a  Righ- 
teoufnefs  which  might  be  loft,  as  appears 
from  the  fad  Event.  His  Will  was  not  in- 
different to  Good  and  Evil :  God  fet  it  to- 
wards Good  only,  yet  did  not  fo  fix  it,  that 
it  could  not  alter ;  it  was  moveable  to  Evil; 
but  by  Man  himfelf  only.  n^vi. 

"  Thus  was  Man  made  originally  righ- 
ieoiis^  being  created  in  God's  own  Image ^ 
[Gen.  i.  27.)  which  confifts  in  Kfiowledgey 
Right eoiifjiefs  and  Holi?2eJs  [Col.  iii.  10.  Eph. 
iv.  24.)  AH  that  God  made  was  very  goody 
according  to  their  feveral  Natures,  Gen.  i.  31. 
And  fo  Man  was  morally  good,  being  made 
after  the  Image  of  Him  who  is  good  a?id  up- 
right. Pf.xxv.  8..  Without  this,  he  could 
not  have  anfwer'd  the  End  of  his  Creation, 
which  was  to  know,  love  and  ferve  his 
God.  Nay,  he  could  not  be  created  other- 
wife.     For  he  muft  either  have  been  con- 

F  f  2  form 


46S  The  Doctrine  of 

form  to  the  Law  in  his  Powers,  Principles 
and  Inclinations,  or  not.  If  he  was,  he 
was  righteous:  If  not,  he  was  a  Sinner y 
which  \^  abfurd  and  horrible  to  imagine. 

*'  And  as  Man  W2is Holy y  fo  he  was  Happy. 
He  was  full  of  Peace  as  well  as  of  Love. 
And  he  was  the  Favourite  of  Heaven.  He 
bore  the  Image  of  God,  who  cannot  but 
love  his  own  Image.  While  he  was  alone 
in  the  World,  he  was  not  alone  -,  for  he  had 
free,  full  Communion  with  God.  As  yet  there 
was  nothing  to  turn  away  the  Face  of  God 
from  the  Work  of  his  own  Hands :  Seeing 
Sin  had  not  as  yet  entei'^d,  which  alone  could 
make  the  Breach,    wn?^  i*  -r  ^g 

**  He  was  alfo  Lord  of  the  World,  Univer- 
fal  Emperor  of  the  whole  Earth.  His  Crea- 
tor gave  liim  Doininion  over  the  Fifj  of  the 
Seay  the  Fowl  of  the  Air,  and  every  'Thing  that 
?noveth  on  the  Earth,  He  was  God's  Deputy- 
Governor  in  the  lower  World  :  And  this  his 
Dominion  was  an  Image  of  God's  Sovereign- 
ty. Tlius  was  Man  crowned  with  Glory  and 
Hmiour,  having  all  Thingsiput  under  his  Feet, 
'  ''  Again;  as  he  had  ^^vitdi  Traijquility 
in  his  own-  Breaft,  fo  he  had  a  perfeB  Calm 
without.  His  Heart  had  nothing  to  reproach 
him  with,  and  without,  there  was  nothing 
to  annoyhim.  Th^r  beautiful  Bodies  were 
not;^Spabl<5  of  Injuries  from  the  Air.^  They 
Were^li^ibje  to  nO  Difiafcsov  Pains :    And 

I  J  '^  tho' 


\Original  Sin.V  469 

tho*  they  were  not  to  live  idle,  yet  7i?/7, 
Wearinefs  and  Sweat  of  the  BrowSy  were  not 
known  in  this  State.^jpn 

"-LASTLY,  He  was  immortal.  He  would 
never  have  died  if  he  had  not  finned.  Death 
was  threatned  only  in  Cafe  of  Sin.  The  per- 
fecfl  Conftitution  of  his  Body,  which  came 
out  of  God's  Hand  very  good,  and  the  Righ- 
teoufnefs  of  his  Soul  removed  all  inward 
Gaufes  of  Death.  And  God's  fpecial  Care 
of  his  innocent  Creature  fecured  him  againft 
outward  Violence.  Such  were  the  Holinefs 
and  the  Happinefs  of  Man  in  his  Original 
States  anGi£  d'Aibfi  ^b"^ 

''  But  there  is  now  a  fad  Alteration  in 
in  our  Nature.     It  is  now  entirely  corrupted. 
Where  at  firft  there  was  nothing  evil,  there 
is  now  nothing  good.     I  fliall ->iii  -j 
.i^^.  First,  Prove  this:  ■'^ 

-vf^  Secondly,  Reprefent  this  .Corruption 
in  its  feveral  Parts.  ^'^  nr  f 

— ^^'  Thirdly,  Shew  how  Mans  Nature 
comes  to  be  thus  conaipted. 
v^^-.  First,  I  iliall  prove  that  Man's  Na- 
ture is  corrupted,  both  by  God's  Word,  and 
by  Mens*  Experience  and  Obfervation. 
ib^-I.  For  Proof  from  God's  Word,  let 
us  confider, 

"  I.  How  it  takes  particular  Notice  of 
fallen  Adam\  communicating  hitj  Image  to 
his  Pofterity.     Gen,  v.  3.  Adam  begat  a  Son 

F  f  3  /;/ 


470  l^^he  Doctrine  if 

in  his  own  Likcnefs^  after  his  Image.  Com- 
pare this  with  V.  I.  In  the  Day  that  Go& 
created  Man^  in  the  Image  of  Got>  made  He 
Um.  Behold  here,  how  the  Image  after 
which  Man  was  made^  and  the  Image  after- 
which  he  is  begotten  are  oppofed.  Man  was 
made  in  the  Likenefs  of  God  ;  an  holy  and 
righteous  God  made  an  holy  and  righteous 
Creature  :  But  fallen  Adam  begat  a  Son,  not 
in  the  Likenefs  of  God,  but  in  his  own  Like- 
nefs :  Corrupt,  finful  Adam  begat  a  corrupt 
fintiil  Son.  For  as  the  Image  of  God  in- 
cluded Right  con fnefs  and  Immortality^  fo  this 
Image  of  fallen  Adani^  included  Corruption 
and  Death,  Mofes  giving  us  in  this  Chapter 
the  firft  Bill  of  Mortality  that  ever  was  in  the 
World,  ulliers  it  in  with  this  Obfervation, 
that  dying  Adam  begat  Mortals.  Having  fin- 
ned he  became  mortal^  according  to  the 
Threatning.  And  fo  he  begat  a  Son  in  his 
own  Likenefs^  fffd  and  therefore  mortal  y 
and  fo  Sin  and  Death  pajjed  on  alL 

"  Le T  us  confider,  2.  that  Text:  Job  xWi 
4.  ^rho  can' bring  a  clean  1'hi?7g  out  of  an  un- 
clean  ?  Not  one.  Our  firft  Parents  were  un- 
clean; how  then  can  we  be  clean?  How 
could  our  immediate  Paients  be  clesn  ?  Or 
how  rtiall  our  Children  be  fo  ?  The  Viiclean" 
ncfi  here  mentioned  is  2i  finful  Uncleannefs  : 
For  it  is  fuch  as  makes  Man's  Days  fidl  of 
Trouble,  ■■•-Ax\d  it  \^  natural,    being  derived 


Original  Sin.  471 

from  unclean  Parents.  How  ca?i  he  be  clean 
that  is  born  of  a  Womayi  ?  God  can  b7'i?ig  a 
clean  Thing  cut  of  an  unclean  ^  And  did 
fo  in  the  Cafe  of  the  Man,  Chrijl;  but  no 
other  can.  Every  Perfon  then  that  is  bom 
according  to  theCourfe  of  Nature  is  born  un- 
clean :  If  the  Root  be  corrupt  fo  are  the 
Branches.  Neither  is  the  Matter  mended, 
tho'  the  Parents  be  holy.  For  they  are  fuch 
by  Gr^^^,  \\o\.\y^  Nature:  And  they  beget 
their  Children  as  Men,  not  as  holy  Men  : 
Wherefore  as  the  circumclfed  Parent  be- 
gets an  uncircumcifed  Child,  fo  the  holicfl 
Parents  beget  unholy  Children,  and  cannot 
communicate  their  Grace  to  them  as  they  do 
their  Nature. 

"  3.  Hear  our  Lord's  Determination  of 
the  Point,  yohn  iii.  6.  That  which  is  born  of 
the  FleJ];)  is  FkfJ:).  Behold,  the  Corruption  of 
all  Mankind  -,  all  are  Fhi/h,  It  does  not 
mean,  all  -i^xt  frail  (tho'  that  is  a  fad  Truth 
too  :  yea,  and  our  natural  Frailty  is  an  Evi- 
fience  of  our  natural  Corruption:)  but,  all 
are  corrupt  and  jinfiily  and  that  naturoUy. 
Hence  our  Lord  argues,  that  becaufe  they 
are  Vlclh^  thererefore  they  jmtjl  be  born  again^ 
or  they  cannot  enter  into  the  Kingdom  oj  Goj^, 
V.  3,^5)  ,  And  as  the  Corruption  of  owv  Na- 
ture evidences  the  abfolute  Neceflity  of  Re- 
generation,  fo  tlie  Neceflity  of  Regeneration 
proves  the  Corruption  of  our  Nature.  For 
why  fnould  a  Man  need  a /V^;/*/ Birth,  if  his 

I"  \  J.  Nature 


47^  7y&^  Doctrine  ^jT 

Nature  weie  net  ruin'd  in  the  firji  Birth  ? 
Even  Infants  muft  be  born  again  j  for  this 
Rule  admits  of  no  Exception.  And  ther^ 
fore  they  were  circumeiled  under  the  Old 
Tcflament  3  as  having  the  Body  of  the  Sins  of 
the  Flefi  (which  is  convey 'd  to  them  by  na^- 
tural  Generation)  the  whole  Old  Man,  to 
put  off,  (Col  ii.  1 1.)  And  now  by  the  Ap- 
pointment of  Chrif^  they  are  to  be  baptifed; 
which  fliews  they  are  unclean,  and  that  there 
is  no  Salvation  for  them,  but  by  the  Wajhing 
of  Regeneration^  and  Renewing  of  the  Holy 
Ghofl. 

*^  4.  We  are  by  Nature  Children  of  Wrath. 
We  are  worthy  of,  and  liable  to  the  Wrath 
of  God  :  And  that  by  Nature  -,  and  therefore 
doubtlefs  we  are  by  Nature  fmful  Creatures. 
We  are  condemned  before  we  have  done 
Good  or  Evil ;  under  the  Curfe  ere  we  know 
wliat  it  \?..  But  will  a  Lion  roar  in  the  Forefi 
labile  he  hath  no  Prey  ?  Will  an  holy  and  juft 
God  roar  in  his  Wrath  againft  Man,  if  he 
he  not  by  his  Sin  made  a  Prey  for  Wrath  ? 
No  I  le  will  not,  He  cannot.  We  conclude 
then,  that  according  to  the  Word  of  God, 
iMan's  Nature  is  a  corrupt  Nature. 

II.  If  we  confult  Experie?2cey  and  ob- 
ferve  the  Cafe  of  the  World,  in  the  Things 
tliat  arc  obvious  to  any  Perfon,  we  fhall  by 
its  Fruits  cafily  difcover  the  Root  of  Bitter- 
pci^.  ;.rt;43iall  inftance  but  in  a  few^fiJ  r^u) 

''   I,  Who 


ORicJiiTi^r. 'Sin.  jf.y^ 

"  I.  Wiro  fees  iioC  a  Flood  of  M//Jr/Vj 
overflowing  the  Worlds  Every  oile  at  home 
and  abroad,  in  City  and'  Country,  in  Palaces 
and  Cottages,  is  groaning  under"  fofne  un- 
pleafing  Circumftahce  or  other.     Some  are 
oppreft  with  Poverty  or  Want,  fome  chaf- 
ten'd  with  Pain  or  Sicknefs  :    Some  are  la- 
menting their   LoiTes  -,    none  is  without  a 
Crofs  of  one  Sort  or  another.     No  Man's 
Condition  is  fo  foft,  but  there  is  fome  Thorn 
of  Unealinefs  in  it.     And  at  length  Death, 
the  Wages  of  Shiy  comes  and  fweeps  all  a- 
way.     Now  what  but  Sin  has  open'd  the 
Sluice  ?  There  is  not  a  Complaint  or  Sigh 
heard  in  the  World,    or  a  Tear  that  falls 
from  our  Eye,  but  it  is  an  Evidence,  thatMan 
is  fallen  as  a  Star  from  Heaven.     For  God 
Aiftributeth  Sorrows  in  his  Anger  {Job.xxi.i'j.) 
This  is  a  plain  Proof  of  the  Corruption  of 
Nature  :  Forafmuch  as  thofe  that  have  not 
acflually  finned,  have  their  Share  of  thefe 
Sorrows  5    yea,  and  draw  their  firft  Breath 
weeping.       There  are  alfo   Graves  of  the 
fmalleft  as  well  as  the  largeft  Size :   And 
there  are  never  wanting  fome  in  the  World, 
who  like  Rachel,  are  *wceping  for  their  Chil- 
dren, becanfe  fhcyare'tiot:        ■■'■^'    »^    ^^ 
:j  :*^  2.  How  early  does  this  CoiVit^fiOn  of 
Nature  appear  ?  It  is  foon  difcerrt'd,  which 
Way  the  Bias  of  the  Heart 'lies.     Do  not 
the  Children  of  tallen  Adamlbt^orc  they 

can 


474  '^'^^^  Doctrine  of 

can  go  alone,  follow  their  Father's  Foot- 
flcps)  What  Pride,  Ambition,  Ciiriofity, 
Vanity,  Wilfulncfs  and  Avcrfenefs  to  Good 
appears  in  them?  And  when  they  creep  out 
of  Infancy,  there  is  a  Neceflity  of  uling 
the  Rod  of  CorrcBion  to  drive  away  the  FooliJJ:)- 
fhjs  that  is  bound  in  their  Heart, 

"  3.  Take  a  View  of  the  Outbreaklngs 
of  Sin  in  the  World.  The  Wickednejs  of  Man 
is  yet  great  in  the  Earth.  Behold  the  bitter 
Fruits  of  corrupt  Nature  !  By  Swearing  and 
Lying  a?id  Killing  and  Steali?ig  and  committi?ig 
Adultery  they  break  out  (like  the  breaking 
forth  of  Waters)  and  Blood  toiicheth  Blood. 
The  World  is  filled  with  all  Manner  of  Fil- 
thinefs,  Wickednefs  and  Impiety.  And 
whence  is  this  Deluge  of  Sin  on  the  Earthy 
but  from  the  breaking  of  the  Fountains  of 
the  great  Deep,  the  Heai^t  of  Man^  out  of 
which  proceed  Adulteries^  Fornicatio7is^  Mur- 
ders^ i'hefts^  Covetou/hefs,  Wickednefs,  Ye 
may,  it  may  be,  thank  God,  that  ye  are 
not  in  thele  Refpeds,  like  other  Men,  And 
you  have  Realbn  ;  for  the  Corruption  of 
Nature,  is  the  veiy  fame  in  you,  as  in  them. 
■  >^>^  4.  Cast  your  Eye  upon  thofe  terrible 
Convulfions  the  World  is  thrown  into  by  the 
Wickednefs  of  Men.  Lions  prey  not  on 
Lions,  nor  Wolves  on  Wolves  -,  but  Men 
bite  and  devour  one  another.  Upon  how 
ftight  Occafions  will  Men  (heath  their  Swards 

in 


Original  Sin.  47^ 

in  one  another's  Bowels  ?  Since  Cain  ilied 
-^/^^/'s  Blood,  the  World  has  been  turned 
into  a  Slaughter-Houle.  And  the  Chafe 
has  been  continued,  ever  lince  Nimrod  be- 
gan his  Hunting :  As  on  the  Earth,  fo  in 
the.  Seas,  the  greater  ftill  devouring  tlie  lel- 
fer.  Now  when  wc  fee  the  World  in  fuch 
a  Ferment,  every  one  ftabbing  another  with 
Words  or  Swords  :  Thefe  violent  Heats  a- 
mong  the  Sons  of  Adam^  fpeak  the  whole 
Body  to  be  diftempered  -,  the  ivbok  Head  to 
he/ick^  and  the  whole  Heart  faint, 

"  5.  Consider  the  Necelfity  of  Human 
Laws,  fenced  with  Terrors  and  Severities. 
Man  was  made  for  Society:  And  God  Him- 
felf  faid  wdien  He  created  him,  it  was  not 
good  for  him  to  be  alone.  Yet  the  Cafe 
is  fuch  now,  that  in  Society,  he  muft  be 
hedged  in  with  Thorns.  And  tliat  from 
hence  we  may  the  better  difcern  the  Corrup- 
tion of  Man's  Nature,  confider -to  Every 
Man  naturally  loves  to  be  at  full  Liberty 
himlelf ;  and  were  he  to  follow  his  Incli- 
nation, would  vote  himfelf  out  of  the  Reach 
ef  all  Laws,  Divine  and  Human :  Yet  2. 
No  Man  would  willingly  adventure  to  live 
in  a  lawlefs  Society :  And  therefore  even 
Pirates  and  Robbers  have  Laws  among 
themfelvcs.  Thus  Men  Ihew  they  are  con- 
fc ious  of  the  Corruption  of  Nature,  not  dar- 
ing to  truft  one  another  but  upon  Security. 

3.  How 


476  1'he  Doctrine  of 

4>?HdW dangerous  foever  it  is  to  break  thro' 
the  Hed^e,  yet  many  will  do  it  daily.  Th^p 
will  not  only  facrifice  their  Confcience  arid 
Credit;'  'but  for  the  Pleafure  of  a  few  M©i 
mcnts,  lay  themfelves  open  to  a  violent  Death, 
by  the  Laws  of  the  Land  wherein  they  live. 

4.  Laws  are  often  made  to  yield  to  Man*s 
Lnfls.  Sometimes  whole  Societies  break 
off  the  Fetters,  and  the  Voice  of  Laws  can- 
not be  heard  for  the  Noife  of  Arms.  And 
feldom  there  is  a  Time,  wherein  there  are 
not  fome  Perfons  fo  great  and  daring,  that 
the  Laws  dare  not  look  them  in  the  Face. 

5.  Obferve  even  the  Ifraelites^  feparated  to 
God  from  all  the  Nations  of  the  Earth. 
Yet  what  horrible  Confufions  were  among 
them,  when  there  was  no  King  in  Ifrael  ? 
How  hard  was  it  to  reform  them,  when 
they  had  the  beft  of  Magiftrates  ?  And  how 
quickly  did  they  turn  alide  again,  when 
they  had  wicked  Rulers  ?  It  feems  one 
grand  Defign  of  that  facred  Hiftory,  was  to 
difcover  the  Corruption  of  Man's  Nature.    * 

"  6.  Consider  the  Remains  of  Natural 
Corruption  even  in  them  that  believe.  Tho' 
Grace  has  enter'd.  Corruption  is  not  expel- 
led •,  they  find  it  with  them  at  all  Times 
and  in  all  Places.  If  a  Man  have  an  ill 
Neighbour  he  may  remove  :  But  fliould  he 
go  into  a  Wildernefs,  or  pitch  his  Tent  on 
a  remote  Rock  in  the  S#a,  there  it  will  be 

with 


O R I G I N AL  Sin.  477 

with  him.  I  need  not  ftand  to  prove  fb 
clear  a  Point.  But  confider  thefe  few  Things 
on  this  Head.  i.  If  it  be  thus  in  the  green 
Tree,  how  muft:  it  be  in  the  dry  ?  Does  fo 
much  of  the  old  remain  even  in  thofe  who 
have  received  a  Jicw  Nature  ?  How  great 
then  muft  that  Corruption  be  in  thofe,  where 
it  is  unmixed  v^iXh.  renewing  Grace!  2.  Tho* 
natural  Corruption  is  no  Burden  to  a  na- 
tural Man,  is  he  therefore  free  from  it? 
No,  no.  '  Only  he  is  dead^  and  feer^  not 
the  .finking  Weight.  Many  a  Groan  is  heard 
from  a  Sick-bed  but  never  one  from  a  Grave. 
J.  The  good  Man  refifts  the  old  Nature : 
He  ftrives  to  ftarve  it ;  vet  it  remains.  How 
muft  it  fpread  then  and  ftrengthen  itfelf  in 
the  Soul,  where  it  is  not  ftarved,  but  itfiy 
as  In  Unbelievers  ?  If  the  Garden  of  the  Di- 
ligent ^find  him  full  Work,  in  cutting  off 
and  rooting  up,  furcly  that  of  the  Sluggard 
muft  nef  ds_  be  all  grown  over  with  T^horns, 

"  IvSH^Lt  add  but  one  Obfervation  more. 
That  in  e^^ry  Man  naturally  the  Image  of 
fallen  Adam  appears  :  To  evince  wJiich,  I 
appeal  to  the  Confciences  of  all,  in  the  fol-> 

lowing  PartlcularSnuiKK^  ^^^li  :>jiiir  > 

^;"  I.  If  God  by  his  holy  Law  cfr  wife 
Providence  put  a  Reftraint  upon  us,  to  keep 
us  back  from  any  Thiggi  does  not ^lat  Kc^; 
ftraint  whet  the  Edge  gf  pun  |<a,t^ir;£ilIftCli-, 
nations,  and  malfe  us  i^  I'tiu^h  ihevlce^nqr- in; 
rili\^^  our 


478  *nv  Doctrine  of 

our  Ddires  ?  The  very  Heathens  were  cohf- 
vinc'd,  that  there  is  this  Spirit  of  Contra dicftion 
in  us,  tho'  they  knew  not  the  Spring  of  it. 
How  often  do  Men  give  themfelves  a  Loofe 
in  thofe  Things,  wherein  if  God  had  left 
them  at  Liberty,  they  would  have  bound  up 
themfelves  r  And  is  not  this  a  Repeating  of 
our  Father's  Folly,  that  Men  will  rather 
climb  for  forbidden  Fruit,  than  gather  v/hat 
Providence  offers  to  them,  when  they  have 
God's  exprefs  Allowance  for  it? 

"  2.  Is  it  not  natural  to  us,  to  care  for 
the  Body,  at  the  Expence  of  the  Soul  ?  This 
was  one  Ingredient  in  the  Sin  of  our  firft  Pa- 
rents, {Ge?i.m.  6.)  Gh  how  happy  might 
we  be,  if  we  were  but  at  half  the  Pains  a- 
bout  our  Souls,  which  we  beftow  upon  our 
Bodies  ?  If  that  Queftion,  PFbat  mu/i  I  do  to 
be  faveJy  did  but  run  near  fo  oft  thro'  our 
Winds,  as  thofe,  What  JJ:aU  we  eat?  What 
Jhall  we  drink  .^  Wherewithal  jhall  we  be 
clothed? 

*V  7,,  Is  not  every  one  by  Nature  difcon- 
tent  with  his  prefent  Lot,  or  with  fome  one 
Thing  or  other  in  it  ?  Some  one  Thing 
is  always  milTmg  5  f©  that  Man  is  a  Creature 
given  to  change.  If  any  doubt  of  this,  let 
them  look  over  all  their  Enjoyments,  and  af- 
ter a  Revic^v  of  them,  liften  to  their  own 
Hearts,  and  they  v.'ill  hear  a  fecret  Mut- 
muring,  for  Want  of  Something.  Since  the 
•      '  Hearts 


Original  Sin.  475 

Hearts  of  our  firft  Parents  wandred  from 
God,  their  Pofterity  have  a  Natural  Dlfeafe 
which  Solomo?i  calls  I'he  Wandring  of  De/Jre^ 
literally,  The  Walking  of  the  Soul,  (Eccks.  vi. 
^)l  bThis  is  a  Sort  of  diabolical  Trance, 
wherein  the  Soul  traverfeth  the  World,  feeds 
itfelf  with  a  thoufand  airyNothings,fnatcheth 
at  this  and  the  other  imagined  Excellency  3 
goes  here  and  there  and  every  where,  ex- 
cept where  it  iliould  go.  And  the  Soul  is 
never  cured  of  this  Difeafe,  'till  it  takes  up 
its  Reft  in  God  thro'  Chriji, 

"  4.  Do  not  Adajii'i^  Children  naturally 
follow  his  Footfteps,  in  hiding  themfelves 
fioni  the  Prefence  ^  //v  Lord?  {Gen,  iii.  8.) 
We  are  juft  as  blind  in  this  Matter  as  he 
was,  who  thought  to  hide  himfelf  frojn  the 
Frefence  of  the  Lord  among  the  'Trees  of  the 
Garden,  We  promife  ourfelves  more  Secu- 
rity in  a  fecret  Sin,  than  in  one  that  is  openly 
committed.  The  Adulterer  faith ^  No  Eye 
Jlxillfee  7ne,  And  Men  will  freely  do  that  in 
fecret,  which  they  would  be  afliamed  to  do 
in  the  Prcfence  of  a  Child  :  As  if  Darknefs 
could  hide  from  an  all-feeing  God.  Arc  we 
not  naturally  carelefs  of  Communion  withGov: 
Nay,  ^hd^a'uerfe  to.it  ?  Never  was  there  any 
Cornmunion  between  God  and  Adam*s  Chil- 
dren, where  God  Himfelf  hud  not  the  firft 
Word.    If  He  would  let  them  alone,  they 

would  never  inquire  after  Him, 

-j-i£'jXx  "   c.  How 


j^So  The  Doctrine  of 

•'  5.  How  loth  are  Men  to  confifs  Swj 
to  take  Guilt  and  Shame  to  themfelves  ?  And 
was  it  not  thus  in  the  Cale  before  us  ?  jidam 
confeffes  his  Nakednefs,  (which  indeed  he 
could  not  deny)  but  not  one  Word  does  he 
fay  about  his  Sin.  It  is  as  natural  for  us  to 
hide  Sin  as  to  commit  it.  Many  Inftances 
of  this  we  fee  daily ;  but  how  many  will 
there  be  in  that  Day,  when  God  will  judge 
the  Secrets  ofMe?2.  Many  a  foul  Mouth  will 
then  be  fcen,  which  is  now  wiped  cmd faiths 
I  have  done  no  Wickednefs. 

''  Lastly,  Is  it  not  natural  for  us  to 
exfe?iuate  our  Sin,  and  transfer  the  Guilt  to 
others  ?  As  Adam  laid  the  Blame  of  his  Sin 
on  the  Woman  :  And  did  not  the  Womai> 
lay  the  Blame  on  the  Serpent  ?  Adanis 
Children  need  not  be  taught  this  ;  for  before 
they  can  well  fpeak,  if  they  can  t  deny,  they 
lifp  out  fomething  to  leffen  their  Fault,  and 
lay  the  Bhime  upon  another.  Nay  fo  natural 
i«  this  to  Men,  that  in  the  greateft  of  Sins 
thcv  will  charge  the  Fault  on  God  Himfelfj 
blai'p'ncming  his  Providence  under  the  Name 
of  Ill-luck  or  Misfortune^  and  fo  laying  the 
Blame  of  tlieir  Sin  at  Heaven's  Door.  Thus 
docs  tl)e  Foolijlmefs  of  Man  pervert  his  Ways  ; 
and  his  Jleart  fretteth  againft  the  Lord. 
Let' us  then  call  Adam^  Father  :  Let  \j^ 
not  deny  the  Relation^  feeing  we  bear  his 
Image. 


"    I    PROCEEP 


Original  Sin. 

"  I  PROCEED  to  enquire  into  the  Corrup- 
tion of  Nature  in  the  feveral  Parts  of  it.  But 
who  can  take  the  exad:  Dimenfions  of  it,  in 
its  Breadth,  Length,  Height  and  Depth? 
T:he  Heart  is  deceitful  above  all  T'hingSy  and 
defperately  ^wicked :  Who  can  know  it  ?  How- 
ever we  may  quickly  perceive  fo  much  of  it, 
as  may  fhew  the  abfolute  NecefTity  of  Re- 
generation. Man  in  his  natural  State  is  al- 
together corrupt,  thro'  all  the  Faculties  of 
his  Soul :  Corrupt  in  his  Underftanding,  his 
Will,  his  Affedlions,  his  Confcience  and  his 
Memory. 

"  I.  The  Underftanding  is  defpoil'd  of  its 
primitive  Glory,  and  covered  over  with  Con- 
fufion.  We  are  fallen  into  the  Hands  of  our 
grand  Adverfary,  and  are  deprived  of  our 
two  Eyes.  Inhere  is  none  that  underjlandeth\ 
the  very  Mind  and  Confcience  of  the  natural 
Man  are  defiled  ov  fpoiled.  But  to  point  out 
this  Corruption  of  the  Underftanding  more 
particularly,  let  the  following  Things  be 
confidered. 

*'  First,  There  is  a  natural  Weaknefs  in 
tlie  Minds  of  Men,  with  Refped:  to  fpiritual 
Things.  How  hard  is  it  to  teach  them  the 
common  Principles  of  Religion,  to  make 
Truths  fo  plain,  that  they  may  underftand 
them  ?  Try  the  fame  Perfons  in  other  Things, 
ibeak  of  the  Things  of  this  World,  and  they 
4.-  Gg  will 


y^i^  The  Doctrine     of 

will  underftand  quicklyi'But   it  is  Hard  to 
make  them  know,  how  their  Souls  may  be 
faved,  or  how  their  Hearts  rhay  find  Reft  in 
'Chri/i.    Confider  even  thofe  who  have  many 
Advantages  above  the  common  Run  of  Man- 
kind :  Yet  how  fmall  is  their  Knowledge 
of  divine  Things!  What  Confufion  fiill  re- 
mains in  their  Minds?  How  often  are  they 
•mired,  and  Jpeak  as  a  Child^    even  in  the 
Matter  of  practical  Truths  ?  It  is  a  pitiaMe 
Weakncfi,  that  we  cannot  perceive  the  Things 
which   God    has   revealed.     And  it  muft 
needs  be  ^fmful  Weaknefs\  fince  the  Law  of 
God  requires  us  to  know  and  believe  them. 
*'  Si- coNDLY,  Man's  Underftanding  i&na- 
turally  overwhelmed  with  grofs  Darknefs  in 
fpiritual  Things.     Man,  at  the  Inftigation 
of  the  Devil,  attempting  to  break  out  a  new 
Lightin  his  Mind,  inftead  of  that,  broke  up 
the  Doors  of  the  bottomlefs  Pit,    by    the 
Smoak  whereof  he  was  covered  with  Dark- 
nels.     When  God  at  firft  made  Man,  his 
Mind  was  a  Lamp  of  Light:  But  Sin  has 
now  turn'd  it  into  Darknefs.     Sin  has  clofed 
the  Window  of  the  Soul.     It  is  the  Land  of 
Darknefs  and  the  Shadow  of  Death,  where 
the  Light  is  as  Darknefs.      The  Prince  of 
Darknefs  reigns  therein,    and  nothing   but 
the  'Works  of  Darknefs  are  framed  there. 
That-  you  miry  be  the  more  fully  convinced 
t>f  this,  .take  the  following  Evidences  of  it. 

I.  The 


V, Original  Sin.  483 

^  f^f-K  The  Darknefs  that  was  upon. the 
Face  of  the  JVcrld  before,  and  at  the  Time 
that  Chriji  came*  When  Adam  by  his  Sin 
had  loft  his  firft  Light,  it  pleafed  God 
to*  :i?^ve^l  to  him  the  Way  of  Salvation, 
Gen,  iii.  15.  This  was  handed  down  by 
holy  Men  before  the  Flood :  Yet  the  natural 
Darknefs  of  the  Mind  of  Man  fo  prevailed, 
as  to  carry  off  all  Senfe  of  true  Religion 
from  the  Old  World,  except  what  remain- 
ed in  Naafjs  Family*  After  the  Flood,  as 
Men  increafed,  their  natural  Darknefs  of 
Mind  prevailed  again,  and  the  Light  de- 
cayed, 'till  it  died  out  among  the  Gene- 
rality of  Mankind,  and  was  preferved  only 
among  the  Pofterity  of  Sbem,  And  even 
with  them  it  was  near  fetting,  when  God 
called  Abraham  from  ferving  other  Godsy 
Jop,  xxiv.  1 5.  God  gave  him  a  more  full 
Revelation,  which  he  communicated  to  his 
Family  5  Gen,  xviii.  19.  Yet  th^  natural 
Darknefs  wore  it  out  at  length,  lave  that  it 
was  preferved  among  the  Pofterity  of  Jacob. 
In  Egypt  that  Darknefs  fo  prevail'd  over  them 
alfo,  that  a  new  Revelation  was  neceffary. 
And-  many  a  dark  Cloud  got  above  that, 
during  the  Time  from  Mofes  to  Chri/K  When 
Cbf'/ji  came,  nothing  was  to  be  ken  in  the 
Gentile  World,  buf  Darknefs  and  cruel  Habi- 
■imitations.  They  were  drowned  in  Superftition 

<^  i?  .».!  ;;uj  :.^.  ^^^ 


..iii 


484  'I'f^  Doctrine  of 

and  Idolatry  :    And  whatever  Wifdom  was 
among  their  Philofopher$;  /^^  World  by  ^'^ 
Wifdom  hmo  not  God,  but  became  more  and' 
more  vain  in  their  Imaginations.     Nor  were 
the  Jews  much  wifer :  Except  a  few,  gro{s^ 
Darknefs  covered  therri  alfo.     Their  Tra^" 
ditions  were  muh:iplied;  but  the  Knowledge* 
of  thofe  Things  wherein  the  Life  of  Relff 
gion  lies,  was  Toft.     They  gloried  in  ^c^t^* 
ward   Ordinances,    but   knew   nothing  oP 
"iiscrfiippijig  God  in  Spirit  and  in  1'nith,  -  '  ^-^ 
''  Now   what  but  the  natural  DarktfeA^^ 
of  Mens  Minds,  could  ftill  thus  wear  but 
the   Light   of  exterrtd   Revelation?    Meil 
did  not  forget  the  Way-  of  preferving  theli^' 
Lives :  But  how  quickly  did  they  forget  thfe^ 
Way,  of  faving  their  Souls  ?  So  that  It  wa^^ 
necelTary  for  God  Himfelf  to  reveal  it  againR 
and  again.     Yea,  and  a  mere  External  Re^- 
velation  did  not  fufficc  to  remove  this  DarJ^* 
nefs :  No>  not  when  it  was  made  by  Chrijf' 
in  Perfon :    There  needed  alfo  the  Holy^ 
Ghoft  fent  down  from  Heaven.     Such  is  th^fi 
natural  Darknefs  of  our  Minds,  that  it  only"^ 
yields  to  the  Blood  and  Spirit  of  C/6rj/?.         - 
.  *'  2.  Every  natural  Man's  Heart,  how^^^ 
refined  foeverhe  appear,  is  full  of  Darknefs^^ 
Dilbrder  and  Confufion.     The  unrenewed 
Part  of  Mankind  are  rambling  through  the  ' 
World,  like  fo  many  blind  Men,  who  will^ 
neither  take  a  Guide,  nor  can  guide  theni-i^ 
.•>:.:!/:    i  ^  ..-  felves. 


^..-.  Originax  oin,      ^  .  rf48c 

felyes,  and  therefore  i"ipjll.  o\'^r'|tSsr'sn4  the 
other  Precipice  into  Ddlruftio^.  »•  ,^bme  ar^ 
running    after   their    Covetuoufnefe,  ,  feme 
fticking  in  the  Mire  of  Senfuality,  others 
dafhing  on  the  Rock  of  Pride :  Every  one 
ftumbling  on  one  Stone  of  Stumbling  or 
other,  as  their  unmortified   Paflions  drive 
them.     And  while  fome  are  lying  along  in 
the  Way,  others  are  coming  up  and  falling 
headlong  over  them.     Errors  fwarm  in  the 
World :    All  the  Unregenerate  are  utterly 
miflaken  in  the  Point  of  true  Happinefs.. 
All  defire  to  be  happy;   but  touching  the 
Way  to  Happinefs,  there  are  almoft  as  many 
Opinions  as  there  arc  Men.     They  are  like 
the  blind  Sodomites  about  Lot's  Houfe,  all 
k^mgio  find  the  Door  y  but  in  vain.     Look 
into  thine  own  Heart,   (if  thou  art  not  born 
again}  and  thou  wilt  fee  all  turned  Upfide 
dpwnj  Heaven  lying  under  and  Earth  a-top : 
Look  into  thy  Life,   and  fee  how  thou  art 
playing  the  Madman,  eagerly  flying  after) 
that  which  is  not^  and  flighting  that  \^'hich/i, 
and  will  be  for  ever.     Thus  is  Man's  L^nder- 
ftanding  naturally  overwhelmed  with  grofs 
Darknefs  in  fpiritual  Things.       ivvs-.j;  /jL^rjai 
*'  Thirdly,  There  is  in  the  Minci  ofj 
Man  a  natural  Bicts  to  Evil:  Let  us  refie^M 
a  htde,  and  we  fliall  find  incpoteftable.JE>YiTV 
dence..94J^jj^  ,,,  ,,.,«.  J  i>  ^^.^J  :.?I^'rn 

.a^vbl  ^'^  3  '^i.Mkns^ 


4^6  57^^  D 6 t'±'R\y^of 

"  I.  Mens*  Minds  have  a  natural  Dex- 
terity to  do  Miicliicf:  None  are  fo  fimple  as 
to  want  skill  for  this.  None  needs  to  be 
taught  it ;  tut  as  Weeds  without  being 
fown,  grow  up  of  their  own  Accord,  fo  does 
this  earthly^  Jhifual^  dci:ilijb  Wifiom^  natu- 
rally grow  up  in  us.     '-'^  '   -  ^"^ 

''  2.  We  naturally  form  ^ro/}  C^^/6'^///«j^/« 
of  fpiritual  Things,  as  if  the  Soul  were  quite 
imniers'd  In  Flefh  and  Blood.  Let  Men 
but  look  into  themfclves,  and  they  will  find 
this  Bias  in  their  Minds  :  Whereof  the  Ido- 
latiy  which  ftill  prevails  fo  far  and  wide,  is 
an  inconteftable  Evidence.  For  it  plainly 
fliews,  Men  would  have  a  vi/ible  Deity ; 
therefore  they  change  the  Glory  of  the  incor- 
riiptihk  God  into  an  Image.  Indeed  the  Re- 
fonnation  of  thefe  Nations,  has  baniili'd 
grofs  Idolatry  out  of  our  Churches.  But 
Heart-Reformation  alone  can  banifli  Men- 
tal-Idolatry, fubtle  and  relin'd  Image- Wor- 
Wip  dut  of  our  Minds. 

*'  3,  How  difficult  is  it,   to  detain  the 

cai^nal  Mind  before  the  Lord  ?    To  fix  it  in 

the  Meditation  of  Spiritual  Things  ?  When 

'God  is  fpcaking  to  Men  by  his  Word,  or 

they  are   fpeaking  to  Him  in  Prayer,    the 

Body  remains  before  God,  but  the  World 

fleals  away  the  Heart.      Tho'  the  Eyes  be 

clofcd,  riic  Man  fees  a  thouiimd  Vanities, 

•'and  the  Mind  roves    hither   a^id  thither  : 

^"^^'■^^'^  And 


><,Ol),IGINAJ-    SlN^i>  487 

And  rnany  Times  the  Man  fcarcc  ccmes  to 
hin^felf^  till  \iz  'i^^ne  from  t^e/Pm fence  of 
t^eluQRjD.  The.worl41y  Man'$^  Mind  does 
not  v^^ander,  when  he  is  contriving  Bufinefs, 
cafting  up  hi&  Accounts,  •  or  telling  his. Mo- 
ney* If  he  anfwers  you  not  at  firft,  he  tells 
you,  he  did  not  hear  you,  he  was  bufy,  hi^ 
Mind  was  iix*d.  But  the  carnal  Mind,  em- 
ploy'd  about  fpiritual  Things,  is  out  of  its 
Element,  and  therefore  cannot  fix. 
-  "  4.  Consider  how  the  carnal  Imiigina- 
tion  fupplies  the  Want  of  real  Objcds  to  the 
corrupt  Heart.  The  unclean  Perfon  is  fill'd 
with  fpeculative  Impurities,  ha'viiig  B^ycsfnll 
of  Adultery.  The  covetous  Man  fills  his 
Heart  with  the  World,  if  he  cannot  get  his 
Hands  full  of  it.  The  malicious  Perfon 
a(3;s  his  Revenge  in  his  o>vn  Breaft^  the  En- 
vious, within  his  own  narrow  Soul,  fees  his 
Neighbour  laid  low  enough  :  And  io  ever}' 
Lufl  is  fed  by  the  Imagination.  Thclc 
Things  may  fuffice  to  convince -.us^^r^f  the 
natural  Bias  of  the  Mind  to  Evil 

Fourthly,  There  is  in  the  carnal  Mind 
an  Oppofition  to  fpiritual  T^rutbs^<  d^ni  .3i\\  A- 
verfion  to  the  receiving  thein.^rr'GoD  has 
reveal'd  to  Sinners,  the  Way  of  SaViition : 
He /has,  given  h^s  Wordj  .  But ^_vj^^, natural 
Men,  believe  it .f'f  Indeed  t)>ey  .do^jK)t.  They 
believe  not  the  Promiies  of  tl>e  W^rd  :  For 
they  vyho  receive  them  aro  thereby^  made 
G  g  4  Tiirtakcn 


Pariah^  pf  the  DivfAf'MdturSi'^^^^V^ 
lieve  *fl(*Mhe  Threi^mf^^  ttf  the- Wb^  f 
Otherwife  they  could  not  live  as  they  do.  -I 
doubt  not  but  rhoft,  #-not  all'bf  'ydiirw^^ 
arc  in 'a  State  of  Nature,  'will  iiore  pfead* 
riot  guilty.'  But  the  ve?ry  Difficulty  you  find 
in  alTenting  to  this  Truth,  proves  the  Un- 
belief with  which  I  charge  you.  Tlas  it 
not  proceeded  fo  far  with  fonie,  that  it  has 
fteel'd  their  Foreheads,  openly  to  rejefl:  all 
reveal'd  Religion  ?  And  tho'  ye  fet  not  yoiii 
Mouths  as  they  do  againft  the  Heav^nS,  yet 
the  fame  bitter  Root  of  Unbelief  is- iii  yolr] 
and  reigns  and  will  reign  in  you ' till* ovei'- 
CO  ning  Grace  captivate  your  Minds  to  tli^ 
Belief  of  the  Truth.  To  convince  you  of  this 
"  Consider  i.  How  have  you  learrfd 
thofe  Truths  which  you  think  you  believe  ? 
Is  it  not  merely  by  the  Benefit  of  youfEdtlf^ 
cation,  and  of  external  Revelation  F'Yoli 
are  Strangers  to  the  inward  Work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  bearing  Witnefs  by  and  w-ith 
the  Word  in  your  Hearts:  And  fo  you  can- 
not have  the  AjjuraJice  of  Faiths  even^wifh 
Refpedl  to  the  outward  Revelation.  And 
therefore  ye  are  flill  Unbelievers."  '  It  is 
^written  in  the  Prophets,  And  they  pall  be  all 
twilight  of  God.  Every  one  therefore  that  hath 
heard  and  learned  rf  the  Father^-  faith  oiir 
Lord,  corneih  unto  Me.'  But  ye' have  ndt 
come  to  Chrift :  Therefore  ye  have  not  been 

taught 


O R  lO  IN  A h   §  I N^T'  489 

taughfjfGoD,^  Ye  have  not  been  (otaugbfi 
and  tl^erefpi^e  ^t  l^y^.  aot  ft^w^^'jY^J^U^^ 

j(  ;^i,C^NsiDEB>  2.  rTJbe  utter  Incp^fiftency 
ef  r«|fifft-,Mens  Lives  with  the  Principles 
which  they  profefs.  They  profefs  to  believe 
the  Scripture :  But  how  little  are  they  conn 
cern'd  about  what  is  reveard  therein  ?  How 
unconcern'd  are  ye  even  about  that  weighty 
Point,  whether  ye  be  born  again,  or  not  ? 
Many  live  as  they  were  born,  and  are  Hke 
to  die  as  they  live,  and  yet  live  in  Peace. 
Do  fuch  believe  the  Sinfulnefs  of  a  natural 
State  ?  Do  they  believe  they  are  Children  of 
Wrath  ?  Do  they  believe  there  is  no  Salva- 
tion without  Regeneration  ?  And  no  Rege* 
neration  but  what  makes  Man  a  new  Crea- 
ture ?  O  no  !  If  ye  did,  ye  could  not  hve  in 
your  Sins,  live  out  of  Chriji^  and  yet  hope 

for  Mercy.  3 v3>{  km sto  lEo  bng  ,r. 
.^*"-piFTHLY,  Man  IS  naturally  high- 
mine!  ed.  Lovvlinefs  is  not  a  Flower  which 
grows  in  the  Field  of  Nature.  It  is  natural 
to  Man  to  think  highly  of  himfelf  and  what 
is  his  own.  Vain  Man  ii^ould  be  wife:  So 
he  accounts  himfelf,  and  fo  he  would  be 
accounted  by-  others.  His  Way ;,is,  right, 
becaufe  it  is  his  own--,  for  ev^ryM^ay  of  a 
Man  ii)right  in  hit  oivn  Eyes,  \  H?-  is  ^live 
mlhout  the  Law ;  and  thcrefore,his  Hope  is 
4lrong  and  his  Confidence  firm.,;  Itjs  anr 
%s. .  other 


pther  Tower  of  J3abel:^  .The  Wprd  batter,^ 
it,  yet  it. Hands.  One  \yhile  Breaches  a,rq 
nvadc  in  it,  but  they  are  quickly  repaired? 
At  another  Time,  it  is  all  made  to 'ihake.^ 
but  it  IS  ihll  kept  up:  'Till  God's  Spirk 
laife  an  i^c^?r/-jWe^  within  the  Man,  which 
tumbles  it  down,  and  leaves  not  oneStone 
upon  another.  ^ 

"  Thus  much  of  the  Corruption  of  the 
Underllanding.  Call  the  Underftanding 
Jchabod\  for  the  Glory  is  departed  Jrmi  it. 
Confider  this,  ye  that  are  yet  in  the  State  of 
Nature,  and  groan  ye  out  your  Cafe  before 
the  Lord,  that  the  Sun  of  Righteoufnefs 
may  arife  upon  you,  before  ye  be  fliut  up  in 
^verlafting  Darkncfs.  What  avails  your 
worldly  Wifdom  ?  What  do  all  your  At- 
tainments in  Religion  avail,  while  your  Un- 
derftanding lies  wrapt  up  in  Darknefs  and 
Confufion,  utterly  void  of  the  Light  of  Life  ? 

MvaV  n.  Nor  is  tbe  Will  lefs  corrupted  than 
the  Underftanding.  It  was  at  firft  faithfulv, 
and  ruled  with  God  :  But  now  it  is  turn'd 
I'raitor  againft  God,  and  rules  with  and  for 
the  Devil.  To  open  this  Plague  of  the 
Heart,  let  the  following :  Things  be  con- 
fider'd.        • 

"  First,  There  is  in  the  unrenewed  Will 
an  utter  Lrability  for  what  is  truly  good  in 
^e  Sigbt  of  God.     Indeed  a  natural  Man 

has 


Original  Sin.^  491 

has  a  Power  to  chufe  and  do  what  is  mate^ 
rially  good  :  But  though  he  can  will  what  is 
good  and  right,  he  can  do  nothing  aright  and 
wclL  Without  Mc,  that  is,  feparate  from  Me, 
ye  can  do  mthing  ;  nothing  truly  and  Ipiratu- 
ally  good.  To  evidence  this,  confider 
■\'^^<--i.'  How  often  do  Men  fee  die  Good 
they  fhould  chufe,  and  the  Evil  they  lliould 
refufe  :  And  yet  their  Hearts  have  no  more 
Power  to  comply  with  their  Light,  than  if 
they  were  arrelled  by  fome  invifible  Hand  ? 
Their  Confciences  tell  them  the  right  Way  : 
Yet  cannot  their  Will  be  brought  up  to  it. 
Elfe,  how  is  it,  that  the  clear  Arguments  on 
the  Side  of  Virtue,  do  not  bring  Men  over 
to  that  Side  ?  Although  Heaven  and  Hell 
were  but  a  may  be^  even  thk  would  determine 
the  Will  to  Holinefs,  could  it  be  detcrmin'd 
by  Reafon.  Yet  fo  far  is  it  from  this,  that 
Men  kno%vingthe  'Judgment  sfGoD^  thatthty 
ivho  do  fuch  T^hings  are  'worthy  of  Deaths  not 
only  do  the  fame  ^  but  have  Pie  a  jure  in  the  fu  that 
do  them. 

"  2.  Let  thofe  who  have  been  truly  con- 
vinced of  the  Spirituality  of  the  Law,  fpcak 
and  tell,  if  they  then  found  themfclves  able 
to  incline  their  Hearts  toward  it.  Nay,  the 
more  that  Light  flione  into  their  Souls,  did 
i:they  not  find  their  Hearts  more  and  more 
wuible  to  comply  with  it  P  Yea,  tiierc  are 
fome  who  are  yet  in  the  Devil's  Camp,  that 
*^a  can 


can  tell'  ft6iTi  their t^(i^A^£iperienc^ 
let  5nty'^tH6  Mind^  cUfiot  ^ivc  Jyif^j^io^^ 
WiW';  '6?^able  it  to  comply  th^rewit|i.  ^j^- 
•''^  ^E?:oNt>LY,  There  is  in  the  unVenew  a 
Will  ^n  A'-jerJhiefs  to  Gobd,     Sin  is  the  Na- . 
tural  Man'^  Element :  And  he  is  as  loth  to 
part  with  it,  as  the  Fiflies  are  to  come  out  of 
the  Water.     He  is  lick;   but  utterly  averie 
to  the  Remedy ;  he  lovds  his  Difeafe/  lb  that 
he  loaths  the  Phyfician.     He  is  a  CaotM-e,  ^, 
Prilbner  and  a  Slavey  but  he  loves  his  Cqn-^^. 
queror,    Tailor  and  Mafcer  :    He 'is  fond  oF 
his^  Fetters,  Prifon  and  Drudgery^'  arid  has. '^ 
no  Liking^  to  his   Liberty.     For  Evidence.^ 
of  this  Averfenefs  to  Good  iii  jjie  Will   of 
Man-'  '   "      '   ■^''^--'''-  ^<(^'  ' 

-^    eONSlI)ER;^^I^^#^fli^^i/J     of 

Cbtltfr^i,     How  Wlfe^Sfe-  they  to  Reftraint ? . 
Are  thcv  jjot  ^zj  Biifloch  imaccujlomedjo  ib^:. 
Yoh  f  -Tea,  it  h  far  eafier,  to  tame  y bung  ^ 
Bullocks  to  the  Yokc^  than  to  bring  young 
Children  under  Difcipline.    Every  Man  may  ' 
fee  in  thi!^,  a$  fn  aGlafs,  that  Maii  is  natu- 
rally Avilfl-'  and  wilful ;    that  a.ccpr(ling  to 
Zt7/>f^rr's"-Obfervation,  he  ^V ^(?r7r^; 'j|/7/^  i 
Co/t.     What  can  be  fai'd"  more?^Tj[.erk^i^e^  " 
Co/fy  -the  Colt,  of  2Ln  y:IJs]  the  Coir  of  ^  a  "mU.- 
Afs  r\^'WJ^  Jfsv^^^^^  Jhat'.\ 

fmffjrth  V^^the'W^^^^  Jfl^^T. 


"  5.  What  Pain  and  Difficulty  do  Mea 
find,  mbrmging  their  Hearts  to,  rcligioua 
Duties  ?  And  what  a  Taik  is  it  to  tjie  natural 
Man  to  abide  at  thern  ?  To  leave  the  World 
but  a  little>  and  conver/e  with  God  ?  Wheri 
theyj  are  engaged  in '  worldly   Bufinefs   or 
Corhpany,  Time  feeipas  to  fly  ai)d  is  gone 
before  they  are  aware.     But  how  lieavily' 
does  it  drive,  while  a  Prayer,  a  8ermon  or 
a  Sabbath  lafts  ?    With  many  the  Lord's 
Day  is  the  longeft  Day  in  the  Week :  And 
therefore  they  muft  fleep  longer  that  Morn- 
irig,/and  go  fooner  to  Bed  that  Night,  than 
ordinarily  they  do,  that  the  Day  may  be 
made  of  a  tolerable  Length.     And  ftill  their . 
Hearts  fay,  When  "will  the  Sabbath  be  gone? 
.  "  .';.    Consider  how  the  Will  of  the 
natural  Man  rebels  againjl  the  Light,    Some- 
times he  is  not  able  to  keep  it  out :  But  ha.. 
loves  Darknefs  rather  than  Light,     The  outer  ^ 
Door  of  the  Underflanding  is  broken  open  ,-  \ 
but  the  inner  Door  of  the  Will  remains  fliut.  3 
Corruption  and  Confcience  then  encounter ;  . 
'till  Confcience  is  forced  to  give  back  :  Con- 
vidlions  are  murder'd,  and  Truth  is  made 
and  held  Prifoner  in  Unrighteoufnefs,  -^^ 

"  4.  When  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  iswork- ^ 
ing  a  deeper  Work,  yet  what  Rejijlance  doea  ^ 
the  Soul  make  ?  When  he  comes,  he  findb  a 
xhcjlrong  Man  keeping  the  Houfe^  while  the  ^ 
Soul  is  faft  afleep  in  the  Devil's  Arms :  'Till 
^^-  the 


494  ^^^  Doctrine  of 

the  Lord  awakens  the  Sinner,  opens  his 
Eyes,  and  ibikes  him  with  Terror,  while 
the  Clouds  are  black  above  his  Hei^d,  and 
the  Sword  of  Vengeance  is  held  to  his  Breaft. 
But  what  Pains  is  he  at,  to  put' a  fair  Face 
on  a  black  Heart  ?  To  fliake  off  his  pears, 
or  make  Head  agalnft  tliem  ?  Carnal  Rea- 
jbn  fuggefts,  If  it  be  ill  with  him,  it  will  be 
ill  with  many.  When  he  is  beat  from  this, 
and  fees  no  Advantage  in  going  to  Hell  with 
Company,  he  refolves  to  leave  his  Sins :  But 
cannot  think  of  breaking  offfojoofi  y  there  is 
Time  enough,  and  he  will  do  it  afterwards. 
When  at  length  he  is  conftrained  to  part 
with  fome  Sins,  others  are  kept  as  Right- 
Hands  or  Right-Eyes.  Nay,  whenheisfo 
prell:,  that,  he  mufl:  needs  fay  before  the 
Lord,'  he  is  willing  to  part  with  all  his  Idols, 
yet  how  long  will  his  Heart  give  the  Lie 
to  liis  Tongue,  and  prevent  the  Execution 
of  it  ?  .  ^  3iU  Y- 

''  Thirdly,  There  Is  in  the  Will  of  Man 
a  natural  Pronenefs  to  EviL  Men  are  na- 
turally /'f/i/  to  biick/liding  from  God:  They 
hang  (as  the  Word  is)  towards  Backfliding. 
Leave  the  unrenewed  Will  to  itfelf,  it  will 
chufe  Sin  and  r-ejedt  Holin^fs :  And  th^^t  as 
certainly,  as  Water  pour'd  on  the.  Side  of 
an  Hill,  will  run  downward  an4  npt  ,iip.- 
ward.  .        ■     3^:^315  V/    ,\\^^?. 


Original  Sin.  495 

'^^^^  tVTls  not  the  Way  of  Evil  the>>y2  //^zy, 
wherein  the  Children  of  Men  go  ?  Do  not 
their  Inclinations  plainly  appear  on  the 
wrong  Side,  while  they  have  not  Cunning  to 
hide  them  ?  As  foon  as  it  appears  we  are 
reafmabk  Creatures,  it  appears  we  are  finful 
Creatures.  FooUjhnefs  is  bound  in  the  Heart 
of  a  Child^  till  the  Rod  of  CorreBion  dri'ves  it 
from  hitn.  It  is  bound  in  the  Heart,  woven 
into  our  very  Nature :  Nor  will  the  Knots 
Jooie;  they  muft  be  broke  afunder  by  Strokes. 
Words  will  not  do;  the  Rod  muft  be  taken 
to  drive  it  away.  Not  that  the  Rod  of  itfelf 
will  do  this  :  The  fad  Experience  of  many 
Parents  teftifies  the  contrary.  And  Solomon 
himfelf  tells  you,  T'ho"  thou  JJ:ouldji  bra\'  a 
Fool  in  a  Mortar^  yet  will  not  his  Foolifinell 
depart  from  him.  But  the  Rod  is  an  Ordi- 
jiance  of  God,  appointed  for  that  End; 
which,  like  the  Word,  is  made  effectual, 
by  the  Spirit's  accompanying  liis  own  Or- 
dinance. •     ' 

''  2.  How  eaiily  Men  are  led  into  Sin  ! 
Perfwaded  to  Evil,  tho*  not  to  Good,  Tliofe 
whom  the  Word  cannot  draw  to  1  foiineft, 
F*  Satan  leads  to  Wickednefs  at  his  Pleafure. 
To  learn  doing  111,  is  always  eafy  to  the'un- 
Fenew'd  Man :  But  to  learn  tQ  do  Good,  is 
as  difficult  as  for  the  Ethiopia?!  to  cha^ige  his 
Skin,  Were  the  Will  evenly  poifed  between 
Good  and  Evil,  one*  might  be  embraced 

\\ith 


496  77j^  Doctrine  of 

with  as  much  Eafe  as  the  other.  But  Ex- 
perience tcfafies,  it  is  not :  Yea,  the  Expe- 
rience of  all  Ages.  How  often  did  the  if- 
raelites  forfake  the  Almighty  God,  and  dote 
upon  the  Idols  of  tlie  Nations.  But  did 
ever  one  of  thofe  Nations  forfake  their  Idols,, 
and  grow  fond  of  the  God  of  Ifrael?  No, 
no.  Tho'  Man  is  naturally  given  to  change, 
it  is  but  from  Evil  to  Evil,  not  from  Evil  to 
Good.  Surely  then  the  Will  of  Man  ftands 
not  in  equal  Balance,  but  has  a  Caft  on  the 
wrong  Side. 

''  3.  Consider  how  Men  go  on  ftill  in 
the  Way  of  Sin,  till  they  meet  with  a  Stop 
from  another  Hand  then  their  own.  /  hid 
me^  and  he  went  en  frowardly  in  the  Way  of 
bis  own  Heart.  If  God  withdraws  his  re- 
draining  Hand,  Man  is  in  no  Doubt  which, 
Way  to  chufe.  For  the  Way  of  Sin,  is  tJye 
Way  of  his  Heart :  His  Heart  naturally  lies 
that  Way.  As  long  as  God  fuffereth  them, 
all  Nations,  to  ivalk  in  their  own  Way,  The 
natural  Man  is  fo  iix'd  in  Evil,  that  there 
needs  no  more  to  Ihew  he  is  off  of  God's 
Way,  than  to  fay,  he  is  upon  his  own, 

"-  Fourthly,  There  is  a  natural  Con- 
trariety, a  direfl:  Qppofitlon  in  the  Will  of 
Man  to  God  Himfelf.  The  carnal  Mind  is 
Enmity  again/l  God:  It  is  7JGt  fubjeSl  to  the 
Law  of  God,  neither  can  be. 


e  I 


"    I  HAVE 


Originial  Sin.  497 

"  I  HAVE  a  Charge  againft  every  unre- 
generate  Man  and  Woman,  to  be  proved  by 
the  Teftimony  of  Scripture,  and  their  own 
Gonfcience ;  Namely,  that  whether  they 
have  the  Form  of  Religion  or  no,  they  are 
Heart-enemies  to  God:  To  the  Son  of  God, 
to  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  to  the  Law  of 
God.  Hear  this,  all  ye  carclefs  Souls,  that 
hve  at  Eafe  in  your  natural  State. 

"  I.  Ye  are  Enemies  to  God  in  ymir  Mind, 
Ye  are  not  as  yet  reconciled  to  Him.  The 
natural  Enmity  is  not  flain,  tho'  perhaps  it 
lies  hid,  and  ye  do  not  perceive  it.  Every 
natural  Man  is  an  Enemy  to  God,  as  he  is 
reveal'd  in  his  Word  ;  to  an  infinitely  kol\\ 
juj}^  powerful  and  true  Being.  In  Effedt, 
Men  are  naturally  Haters  of  God  :  And  if 
riiey  could,  they  would  certainly  make  Him 
another  than  what  He  is. 

"  To  convince  you  of  this,  let  me  pro-^ 
pofe  a  few  Queries,  (i.)  How  are  your 
Hearts  afFefted  to  the  infinite  Holincfs  of 
God  ?  If  ye  are  not  Partakers  of  his  HoUnefsy 
yc -cannot  be  reconciled  to  it.  The  Heathens y 
finding  they  were  not  like  God  in  Holinefs, 
made  their  Gods  like  themfelves  in  Filthi- 
nefs  5  and  thereby  difcover'd  what  Sort  of  a 
God  the  natural  Man  would  have.  God  is 
Bfi&lyi  *  Can  an  unholy  Creature  love  his  un- 
fpotted  Holinefs  ?  Nay,  it  is  the  Righteous 
pnly  that  can  give  Thanks  at  the  Remembrance 

Hh  of 


49^  'The  Doctrine  d^ 

cf  kis  Holinefs.  God  is  j^Light :  Gaa  Crea- 
tures of  Parknefs,  and  that  walk  in  Dark- 
nefs,  rejoice  therein  ?  Nay,  fUfry  one  \  that 
doth  Evil  hateth  the  Light.  For  wh^t  Com-: 
munion  hatli  Light  with  Darkiiefs  ?' \(2..).v 
How  are  your  Hearts  afFe<3:ed  to  th&  Juftice 
of  God  ?  There  is  not  a  Man,  who  is  wed- 
ded to  his  Sins,  but  would  be  content  with 
the  Blood  of  his  Body,  to  blot  that  Letter 
out  of  the  Name  of  God.  Can  the  Malc- 
fadlor  love  his  condemning  Judge  ?  Or  an 
nnjuftitied  Sinner  a  juft  God  ?  No,  he  can- 
not. And  hence  fince  Men  cannot  get  the 
Dodirinc  of  his  Juftice  blotted  out  of  the 
Bible,  yet  it  is  fuch  an  Eye-fore  to  them, 
that  they  ftrive  to  blot  it  out  of  their  Minds: 
They  ruin  themfelves  by  prefuming  on  his 
Mercy,  Jliymg  in  their  Hearty  the  Lord  *wiU 
not  do  Goody  neither  will  He  do  EviL  (3.)  How 
are  ye  afFeded  to  the  Omnifcience  and  Om- 
niprefencc  of  God  ?  Men  naturally  would 
rather  have  a  blind  Idol,  than  an  all-feeing 
God,  and  therefore  do  what  they  can, 
as  Adam  did,  to  hide  themfelves  frvm  the 
F  re  fence.. of  the  Lord.  They  no  more  love 
an  omniprcient  God,  than,  the  Thief  loves 
to  have  the  Judge  witnefs  to  his  evil  Deeds. 
{4.)  How- arc  ye  afteded  to  the  Truth  of 
God  ?  How  many,  Hope^thiatGor  will  not 
be  true  to  his  Word?/. There  are  Thoufand^ 
that  hcariilfcb  Gotland  hope  to  be  faved, 
YKi\r/I  X  •'  V  i\  H  who 


Original  Sin.  "  499 

who  never  experienced  the  new  Birth,  nor 
do  at  all  concern  themfelves  in  that  Queftion,  t 
whether  they  are  born  again,  or  not  ?  Our 
Lord's  Words  are  plain  and  peremptory, 
Except  a  Man  be  horn aga'in^  he  cannot  fee  the 
Kingdom  o/Gon,  What  then  are  fuch  Hopes, * 
but  real  Hopes  that  God  will  7rcall  his* 
Word,  and  that  C/j/t/?  will  prove  a  falfe 
Prophet?  (5.)  How  are  they  affedled  to  the 
Power  of  God  ?  None  but  new  Creatures 
can  love  Him  for  it.  Every  natural  Man 
would  contribute  to  the  building  another 
Tower  of  Bak'I,  to  hem  it  in.  On  thefe 
Grounds  I  declare  every  unrenew'd  Man  a?i 
Enemy  to  GoD.-syH  fli: 
:d6^i  2i  Ye  are  Enemies  to  the  Son  of  God, 
That  Enmity  to  Chriji  is  in  your  Hearts, 
which  would  have  made  you  join  the  Huf- 
baudmeny  who  killed  the  Hei?\  a)id  caji  him  out' 
ofth  Vineyard.  Am  I  a  Dog,  ye  will  fay, 
to  have  fo  treated  my  dear  Saviour  ?  So  faid 
JJazaely  in  anotlier  Cafe.  Yet  how  did  he 
aii  I  Many  call  him  Dear  ;  to  whom  their 
Sins  are  ten  I'imes  dearer  than  their  Saviour. 
He  is  no  otherwife  dear  to  them,  than  as  they 
abnfe  his  Dcadi,  for  the  peaceable  Enjoy- 
ment of  their  £ins :  That  they  may  live  as 
they  lift  in  this  World ;  and  when  th^y  die 
be  kept  out  of  Hell.  To  convince  you  of 
diis,-  I  \Yill  lay  before  you  the  Enmity  of  your 
H-fiartS\2gakiil  -Cbrifl  ia  all  his  Offices. 
oxiv/  H  h  2  "I.  E-VERY 


500  The  Doctrine  of 

"  1.  Every  unregenerate  Man  is  an  Ene- 
my to  Chrift  in  his  Prophetic  O^ce.  ^Fcg 
Evidence  of  this  confider,  p'  ^  .>      - 

**  i.The  Entertainment  He  meets  with, 
when  He  comes  to  teach  Souls  ww^r^/y  hy 
his  .S/Zr//.  Men  do  wh^t  they  can  ^to  flop 
their  Ears,  that  they  rnay  not  hear  his  Vpice^ 
They  always  rcjiji  the  Holy  Ghoji  :  Th^y^de- 
Jirc  not  the  Knowledge  of  his  Ways.  TThe  old 
Cahimny  is  thrown  upon  Him  again,  JT^/jr 
mad:  Why  hear  ye  Him?  "The  Spirit  of 
Bondage  is  accounted  by  many  mere  Diftrac- 
tion  and  Melancholly  :  Men  thus  blafpheoi- 
ing  God's  Work,  becaufe  they  themfelves 
are  befide  themfelves,  and  cannot  iudge  of 
thole  Matters.        ,   \      ^,   '     ^  r,    r    .-x 

*'  2.  Consider  thp  Entertainment  He 
meets  with,  when  He, comes  to  teach  Men 
outwardly  by  his  Word.  .."^  "^- r'^-V  ^'"1"  ^"^  •• 

*'  (i.)  His 'Zi-77/'^^;2  Word,  tae  Bible,  \^ 
flighted.  Many  lay  by  their  Bibles  witli 
their  Sunday  Cloaths.  Alas!  The  Dufl  a- 
bout  your  Bibles  is  a  Witnefs  of  the  Enmity 
of  your  Hearts  againfl  Chrijl  as  a  Prophet. 
And  of  thofe  who  read  them  oftner,  how  few 
are  there  that  read  them,  as  the  Word  of 
the  Lord  to  their  Souls  in  particular,  fo  as 
to  keep  up  Communion  with  God  therein? 
Hence  they  are  Straiigefs  Ip  the  {oYiACoMort 
cfthe  Scriptures  :  ,  And  if  a^t  aijy^fime/mel; 
are  dej^^ftcij,  it  ji'fbmetliihg'elle,  ami  not; 


Original  Sin.  501 

tne   Word  of  GoD,.j^hich  revivfs  their 

drooping  Spirits.  ^,  .^.,  .,.| ..; 

''  (2.)  Christ's  Word  preached  is  de- 
i^ifed.  Men  can  without  Remorfe  jnake  to 
themfelves  one  filcnt.  Sabbath  after  another. 
And  alas,  when  they  tj-ead  his  Courts  how 
little  Reverence  and  Awe  of  God  appears  on 
their  Spirits!  Many  ftand  like  brazen  Walls 
before  the  Word,  on  whom  it  makes  no 
Breach  at  all.  Nay,  not  a  few  are  growing 
-Worfe  and  worfe,  notwithftanding  Prcctft 
upon  Precept,  What  Tears  of  Blood  are 
fufficient  to  lament  this  ?  Remember,  we 
are  but  the  Voice  of  one  crying,  Tha  Speaker 
is  in  Heaven.  Yet  ye  rcfufe  Him  that 
fpeaketh,  and  prefer  the  Prince  of  Darknels 
before  the  Prince  of  Peace.  A  dil'mal  Dark- 
tiefs "overfpread  the  World  by  Adams  Fall, 
more  terrible  than  if  the  Sun  and:Moon  had 
been  extinguiflied.  And  it  muft  have 
coverd  us  eternally,  had  not  the  Grace  oj 
God  appeared  to  diipel  it.  But  we  fly  from 
it-^  and  like  the  wild  Beads,  lay  ourfelves 
down  in  our  Denh  -S^^^'^  is  the  Eimiity  of 
the  Hearts  of  Men,'  againft  C/^r//?  ia  hi^  pro- 
phetic Office.    *     \V       ■  ,  :  CMi^I  :: 

;   ""II.  The  natiVrat'Miin  is  ari'ipjiQ^my  to 

CM/imhA^  PrlcAly  Office, .  He.i§A|j^poiute4 
rif'the  Father  a  Pj'itj}  Jcr  ever^.^'^^l.^^^^ 
Sacrifice  and  Interceffion  ulone,  Sii)p^q;s4nay 
h^ve  Acceis  to,'  and  Peace  with'  t^oD.     But 
^^".  •      I-I  h   3  Chrij} 


•(^02  Tl^  Doctrine.^/' 

€hril}  crucified  is  everna  Saimbling-Block 
and  Fooliflmefs  to  the  unregenerate  Part  cf 
Mankind.     •.iWjiiJn'ii.^>    -       oi  ii\i^o    ■  • .  .'   ic 

*'  None  of  ^^^;;?'s  Children  naturally  in- 
cline to  receive  the  Blefllng  in  borrow'd 
Robes,  but  would  always  climb  up  to  Hea- 
ven on  a  Thread  fpun  out  of  their  own 
Bowels.  They  look  on  God  as  a  great 
Mafter,  and  themfelves  as  his  Servants,  that 
muft  work  and  ivijt  Heaven  as  therr  Wages, 
Hence  when  Confoience  awakes,  they  think 
that,  to  he  faved,  they  muft  anfwer  theDe- 
mands  of  the  Law ;  Serve  God  as:  niiiell  as 
they  cauy  and  pray  for  Mercy  wherein  they 
come  (hort.  And  thus  many  come  to  Du* 
ties,  that  never  come  out  ofthejn  x.oChrifi,^:^ 

*'  Inphrd  the  natural  Man  going  to  Goil 
in  Duties,  will  continually  be  found,  either 
to  go  idihoiit  a  Mediator,  or  with  more  Me-^ 
diators  than  Ojie,  Nature  is  blind  and  there^ 
fore  venturous:  It  puts  Men  on  going  imme- 
diately to  God  ivithout  Chrifi.  Converfe  with 
many  Hearers  of  the  Gofpel  on  their  Hopes 
of  Salvafion,  and  the  Name  of  Chrifi  will 
fcarcc  l^ef  'heard  from  their  Mouth.  Afk 
tlicin,  How  they  think  to  find  the  Pardon 
of  Silvfl- They  fay.  They  look  for  Mercy ^ 
E^daufe'  0<?yD  y  a  merciful  God  :  And  thi"^ 
is  alt  the^  have  to  fruli'ih.  Others. look  for 
n^ci-cy/or€/77//V  Sake.  But  how  do  they 
kuoM^VaMfl  will  take  their  Plea  in-Hand^ 
^<^^         '  -     iM  <^   Whv 


>OaiaiNAj.' Sjk.^  -503 

^'  Why: they  pray,  mourn,  confefs  and  have 
**^  great  Dciires."  Sa  they  have  fomething 
of  their  own  to  recommend  them  to  Him. 
They  were  never  rtfade />d?^r  in  ^firit^  and 
brought  empty-handed  to  God,  to  lay  the 
Strtfs  tf  all  on  his  atoning  Blood.  * 
wM  III.  The  natural  Man  is  an  Enemy 
lo  Chriji  m  his  Kingly  Office. 
H:rH  How  unwilling  are  natural  Men  to  fub- 
mit  to  the  Laws  and  Difcipline  of  his  King- 
dom !  However  they  may  be  brought  to 
fome  Outward  Submiffion  to  the  King  of 
Saints,  yet  Sin  always  retains  its  Throne  in 
their  Hearts,  and  they  are  fervi?7g  Szrrs 
Lujis  and  Pleafures,  None  but  thofc  in 
whom  Chrift  is  formed,  do  really  put  the 
Crown  on  his  Head.  None  but  thefe  receive 
the  Kingdom  of  ChriJl  within  them,  and  let 
Him  fet  up  and  put  down  in  their  Souls  as 
He  will.  As  for  others,  any  Lord  fliall 
fooner  have  the  Rule  over  them  tlian  the 
Lord  of  Gkr\\  They, kindly  entertain  his 
Enemies,  and  will  never  ahfolutely  refign 
themfelvcs  to  his  Government.  Tjtus  you 
fee,  the- natural  Man  is  an  Eudipiy  to  J^y/Vj 
C/^r//?  in  all  his  Oilices,:  •,--':  -j-.\^    '  -V  . 

"3.  Ye  are:  Eneffiies-lo .the  Spirit  of 
God:  He  is  thc.S.pifit  pf  Holinefs.  The 
natural  ManJ«  unhplyv .  and  lovc$  $0  be  fo  i 
and  therefore  rr<:»;f//5  ibe  Uely  Gjxjt  The 
Work  (^f  th.^  S^irjt  is,to  ^^/;i)/;f?a'  fhe  JKor}d  oj 
7r  ^  H  h  4  ^in. 


504  ^^  DocrrnHv:  »of 

Sifh  Righteoufnefs  and:  yudgmmt.:^'VB\jSi  0\ 

how  do  Men  flrivc  to  ^\^ard  oft  tbefe  Gori^ 

yi<SionSj  as  .they  would  a  Blow  that  threatened 

their  Life  !  If  the  Spirit,  dart  them  in  fd  that 

they  cannot  avoid  them,  does  not  the  Heart 

fay,  Haji  Thou  found  mi\  0:mtne  Enemy? 

And  indeed  they  treat  Him  as  an  Enemy, 

doins:  their  utmoft  to  ftifle  their  Convidtiom, 

and  to  murder  thefe  Harbingers   that  come 

to  prepare  the  Way  of  the  Lord  into-  the 

Soul.     Some  fill  their  Hands  witli  Bujinefs^ 

to  put  Convictions  cut  of  their  Head,  as  Caiit , 

who  fell  to  building  a  City.:    Some. put  them 

oil  with  fair  PromifeSy  as  Felix  did  5  fome 

fport  or  Jlcep  them  away.     And  how  can  it 

be  otherwife  ?    For  it  is  the  Work  of  the 

Holy  Spirit,  to  fubdue  Lufts  and  burn  up 

Corruption.     How  then  can  he  whofe  Lulls 

are  dear  as  his  Life,  fail  of  being  an  Enemy 

to  Him  ?  A  ba  teVI  , 

t>L.  *^  'LAfeiTiLY,  Ye  are  Enemies  to  the  Law 

;<)f  God.      Tho*  the  natural  Man  de/ires  to 

^be  wider  ihe  Law,  as  a  Covenant  of  Works, 

'iyet  as  it  is  a  Rule  of  Life,  he  h  not  fubjeSl  to 

>y\X^  neither  indeed  can  be,  -  For  i.  Every  na- 

,.tural  Man  is  wedded  to  fome  Sin,  which 

yhe  cannot  part  with.v     And  as  he  cannot 

obrine;  up  his  Inclinat'ons  to  the  Law,   he 

owonld  fain  bring  down  the  Law  to  his  In- 

Xclinations;     And  this  ig  a  plain,  Handing 

rpvidcnad/lof  the  Enmity  x)f  his  Heart  againft 

oitui'w  '  it. 


it)  Zvi-The  Law  fet  home  on  tbe  jaji^^k^nod 
Confcience  in  ks  SpkkuAruyi.  iiiiitatcs  Cor:- 
ruption.  It  is  as  Gil  to  the  Fire^.  aYhich  in- 
ftead  of  quenchingi  makes .  it  flkme  the 
more.  fVif^n  the  Commandment  c.^meSy  Sin 
revives.  What  Reafon  can  be  affigh'd  for 
this,  but  the  natural  Enmity  of  the  Heart 
againft  the  holy  Law  ?  We  conclude  then, 
that  the  Unregenerate  are  Heart-Enemies 
to  God,  his  Son,  his  Spirit,  and  his  Law; 
that  there  is  a  natural  Contrariety,  Oppofi- 
tion  and  Enmity  in  the  Will  of  Man,    to 

..Cod  Himfclf  and  his  holy  Will. 

^m^^  Fifthly,    The   unrenewed  Will  is 

TiV/holly  perverfe,  in  Reference  to  the  End  of 
Man.  Man  is  a  merely  dependent  Being ; 
ibaving  no  Exiftence  or  Good nels,  originally 
from  himfelf :  But  all  he  has  is  from  God, 
as  the  firfl:  Caufe  and  Spring  of  alK  Perfec- 
tion, Natural  and  Moral.  Dependence  is 
woven  into  his  very  Nature  -,  fo  that  ihould 
God  withdraw  from  him,  he  would  link 
into  nothing.  Since  then  whatever  Man  is, 
he  is  of'  Him,  furely  whatever  he  is,  he 
fluould  be  to  Him  :  As  the  Waters  which 
ceme  out  of  the  Sea,  return  thither  again. 

^And  thus  Man  was  created,  lookingdiredly 
ito  God,  as  his^  laft  End :    But  failing  into 

.r£in,Jie  fell  off  from.Goa,  anditurned  into 
Jaimfelf.     Now .  this  iofers,  Zj  .total  Apoilaly 

:  and   iu)iverfal  i  Ct^truptidn-  dnlcMun-v  •    For 

ji  where 


^o6  "The  Doctrine  ^/ 

where  thelaftEnd  is  changed,,  there  tan  be 
no  real  Gof>dnels.  And  this  is  the  Cafe  bf 
all  Men  iii  their  natural  State  :  They  leeR 
not  God  but  themielves.  Hence  tho'  ma^ 
ny  tiiir  Shreds  of  Morality  are  among  theni^ 
yet  there  is  none  that  doth  Gcod^  no  not  one^' 
For  tho'  fome  of  them  rim  iveU,  they  are 
ftill  cff'the  V/ay  ;  they  never  aim  at  the 'right 
Mark.  Whitherfoever  they  move  they  can^ 
not  move  beyond  the  Circle  of  Self.  They 
feek  l^hemfelvesy  they  a(3r  for  "Them/elves : 
Their  natural,  civil  and  religious  A(5tions, 
from  whatever  Spring  they  come,  do  all  run 
into,  and  meet  in  this  dead  Sea.\^  \-iii%lti  ^;it\:> 
'*  Most  Men  are  fo  far  frofe , making 
God  their  End  in  their  ?tatiiral  alid  civil 
Adions,  that  He  is  net  in  all  tlieir  Thoughts. 
They  eat  and  drink  for  no  higher  End,  than 
their  own  Plealure  or  Neceflity.  Nor  do  the 
Drops  of  Sweetnefs  God  has  put  into  the 
Creatures  raife  their  Souls  toward  that  Ocean 
of  Delights  that  are  in  the  Creator.  And 
what  are  tlie  natural  Man's  civil  A&Aons^ 
fuch  as  buying,  felling,  working,  but  Fruit 
iohimfelf"^  Yea,  Self  \%  the  higheft  End  of 
unregenerate  Men,  even  in  their  religions 
Adions.  They  perform  Duties  for  a  Name; 
for  fome  wordly  Intcreft  :  Or,  at  b^ft,  iti 
order  to  efcape  from  Hell.  They  feek  not 
God  at  all,  but  for  their  own  Intcreft:  So 
that  God  is  •nly  the  Means,  and  &^  their 
End.  "  Thus 


^ORIGXIfAL    SlN.^  507' 

".  Tmjs  have  I  given  a  rude  Draught  of 
Man's  Will  in  his  natural  State,  drawn  from 
Scripture  and  our  own  Experience.  Now 
fince  all  muft  be  wrong,  where  the  Under- 
ftanding  and  Will  are  fo  corrupt,  I.  ihall 
briefly  diipatch  what  remains.:.^' it  'av\^  tdv 
va/b  'i  o«^t  -^n*^ 

"III.  The  AffeBic72s  ^vq  corrupted;  whol- 
ly difordcr'd  and  diftemper'd.  They  are 
like  an  unruly  Horfe,  that  cither  will  not 
receive,  or  violently  runs  away  with  the  Ri- 
der. Man's  Heart  is  naturally  a  Mother  of 
Abominations  :  For  fi-om  within  cut  of 
the  Heart  of  Men^  proceed  coil  'Thoughts,  A- 
dulterieSj  Fornicatiotis^  Murders,  Thefts,  Co- 
vetoufftefs.  The  natural  Mans  Affed;ions 
arc  wholly  mifplaced  -,  he  is  a  fpiritual  yion- 
fter.  His  Hearts  isi,  where  his  Feet  Ihould 
be,  fix'd  on  Earth :  His  Heels  are  lifted  up 
aiffainfl:  Heaven,  which  his  Heart  fhould  be 
fct  on  :  His  Face  is  toward  Hell,  his  Back 
toward  Heaven.  He  loves  what  he  ihould 
hate^  and  bates  what  he  fliould  love ;  joys  in 
what  he  ou2:ht  to  mourn  for,  and  mourns 
for  what  he  lliould  i^ejoice  in  ;  glories  in  his 
Shame,  and  is  apamed  of  his  Crlory  ;  abhors 
what  he  fliould  defre,  and  defids  what  he 
ihould  ^Noor,  If  his  Aifecflions  are  let  on 
lawful  Objects,  they  are  cidier  execefjive  or 
defeSive.  Thefe  Objedts  haye  cither  too 
3i-3fl:?  \Wd  -  9rij  yln©  ai  aordittlc 

. uhT  ''  bad 


'5o8  "The  V>ot-1f^^^^^-hf 

little  of:  them-  or  tcky^riilidl;  Bat^^fj^Mtual 
a^hings  hn\  c  ul ways  too  littlci^^^-^ic.^^  ri^iflTX 
3'jttHKKE  IS  a  threefGldGord^agai6l!$5c'd^€ff; 
not  eafily  broken,  a  blind  Mind,  a  pefverfe 
Will,  diforder'd  Affcaioiis.  The  Minfl 
fweird  with  Pride,  fays,  The  Mzn  fi^ou/d 
not  ftoop  y  the  Will  oppofite  to  the  Vlll  of 
God,  fays,  He  will  7Wt :  And  the  corrlipt 
Affeclions,  rifing  againft  the  Lord,  in  De^ 
fence  of  the  corrupt  Will,  fay,  Hejhallmf: 
And  thus  we  ftand  out  againft  God,  till  we 
arc  created  anew  by  Chriji  jfefusj^  ^^^^  ^?  ^-^^ 

*'  IV.  1l\\¥ Cofifcience  is  corrupt,  arid  de- 
filed, It  cannot  do  its  Work,  but  accord- 
ing to  the  Light  it  hath  to  work  by.  Where- 
fore feeing  ^The  natural  Man  difcerneth  not 
fpi ritual  Thi?igs^  his  Confeience  is  quite  ufc-^ 
lefs-j  in  that  Point.  It  may  indeed  check 
for  groiTer  Sins,  but  fpiritual  Sins  it  difccrns 
not.  Thus  it  will  fly  in  the  Face  of  many-^ 
for.Driinkcnnefs ;  who  y€t  have  a  profound 
Pcace^.-Ao'  they  live  mXlnbelieJ]  and  are  ut-^ 
ter  Stnmgtrs'  to  fpiritiml  Wor^JlAp  and  the  Life 
of  Fahbiv  And  the  Light- of  his  Confeience: 
being  fairatHandjlangmfl^iing,  even  in  thb^ 
Thin-gs; which Ht  does  'reach:  -its  Incitement^ 
to  Duty,  ^ndLStruggks  againft  Sin- are- very- 
n^jiai^aiid  eafily  got  ovir.-  '  Butnthere & -^fef 
a(faife  Liglitijin  tlie  dark  Mind,  'Nvhii:^  ofteil 
AZfcjHi|yDGd*4r'and  Go^dEvik  Ana fudhii 
uouquiioD  Confeience 


Original  Sin.  509 

Gonfcience  is  like  a  blind  and  fiiriious  Horic;' 
which  violently  runs. down  all  tliat  comes 
in  his  Way.  Indeed  whenever  Confcience 
is  awakened  by  the  Spirit  of  ConviiSion,  it 
will  rage  and  roar,  and  put  tlie  whole  Man 
if^.a^Confternation.  7  It  m-akes  the  ftifFHeart 
to  tremble,  and  the  Knees  to  bow;  lets  the 
Eyes  a  weeping,  the  Tongue  ^  confcfTing,* 
But  ftill  it  is  an  evil  GoHfcie nee,  whicli  na- 
turally leads  only  to  Defpair  :  And  will  do 
it  effe<ftually,  unlefs  either  Sin  prevails  over 
it,  to  lull  it  alleep,  as  in  tlie  Cafe  of  Fe/ix: 
Or  the  Blood  oiChriJi  prevail  over  it,  fprink- 
ling  ^nd  j)/^r^7'/zg:  it^fim  (kad  Works. 

"  Thus  is  Man  by  Nature  wholly  cor4 
rupted.  But  whence  came  this  total  Cor-*^ 
ruption  of  our  Nature?  That  Man^6  Nature> 
was  corrupt  the  very  Ifeathens  perceived:  But 
how  &;/ t'/2^^r^^  they '  could  not  telL  But 
the  Scripture  is  very  plain  in  the  Poiiit.  By 
Que  Man  Sin  entered  into  the  World,  By  one^ 
Mans  Difobcdience  ?na?iy  (all)  were  made  Sin^ 
?jers.  Adam\  Sin  corrupted  Man's  Naturc^l 
and  leaven'd  the  whole  Lump  of  Mankind/ 
We  putrified  in  Adam  as  our  Root.  The 
Root  was  poifon*d,  and  fo  the  Branches  were 
invenom'd.  The  Vine  turned  //jf  Vim  of 
Sodom,  and  lo  the  Grapes  became -G/w^rj^/ 
GalL  .Adam  by.h&vSin  became -not  only 
guilty  \>\xt  corrupt ^kUA  fo  tianfmits  Guilt  and 
3Dfi3i^:iaoJ  Corrupdou 


CqnuptIoi>t;p  his  Pofterityi.  By  his  Sin  Im 
flripf^ed  himielf  of  hisOrigmal  Right^ouftiiefr 
ai^i  corrupted  himfelf.  We  were ;. in;  him 
reprt'lhifatrcely^  as  our  Moral  Head :  Wt 
were  in  hira  feminally,  as  our  Natural  Head* 
Hence  we  fell  /;;  him:,  {^s  Levi  paid  T^ythcs^ 
when  in  the  Loins  ^'Abraham)  By  his  jyij^ 
obedience^  we  were  made  Sinners ;  ■:^\%  firfl 
Sin  is  imputed  to  us.  And  we  are  left  wilh?o 
out  that  Original  Righteoufnefs,  which  be*; 
ing  given  to  him  as  a  conimon  Perfon,  he 
calt  off.  And  this  is  necefiarily  followed  in 
him  and  us,  by  the  Corruption  of  our  whole 
Nature :  Righteoufnefs  and  Corruption  being 
two  Contraries,  one  of  which  muft  always 
be  in.  Man.  And  Adatn  o\xv  common  Fa- 
ther being  corrupt,  fo  are  we :  For:  whfi  MU 
bring  a  ckm.j^^^'t^g  <^iit  oflm  mihwi  l^a  ^lij  iu 

-t^'f  It  jemains  only^  to  ap^ly  this  Doftrin^ii 
And  lirft,  For  Information.     Is  Man's  JSTa^t 
tuj-€  wholly  corrupted  ?  Then  i.  No  Won- 
d^/tli^jjiGi-aye  opens  its  devouring  Moutha 
for  us,  lis  fopn  as  th<3  Wpinb  ha§  Cail:  vis 
f(>rth.     Fpf-y/^  are  ail  in,  a  ipiritual  Senfe 
dead-boriv;  Yea,  m\(XJiilhy  (Pjahn%yv.  3,;). 
nolfoni,    rank    and   fiinking,    as  a  rd^r^f 
Thing:  (60  the  Word:  imports),     Letvus: 
not  complain  of  the  My?'ri:J;  we  are  expofed. 
to.  a<  ;mU'. >1-Uii'an€e,  or  during  ouf  ContijE>Utj£ 
aiH^^/ir^,  tli^^^^prl^i,^  J]fer^,is;j^e  yedooitl 
iljjxi  that 


Original  Sin. '^  ^iii 

thAhas  poifortM  all  the  Springs  of  earthly^ 
Enjoyments.  It  is  the  Corruption  ofhii--^ 
man  Nature,  which  brings  fbrtli  all  tbe^ 
Miferies  of  Life,  M   wu    -.■  ,'Av/\\^^^^',^   v/' 

i>«^b.  Behold  here  as  in  a  Glafs,    the' 
Spriiig   of  all  the  Wicktd?iefs,    Profaneneis^ 
and  Formality  in  the  World.     Every  Thing' 
adts  agreeably  to  its  own  Nature ;  and  (6-' 
corrupt  Man  ad:s  corruptly.     You  need  not 
wonder  at  die  Sinfulness  of  your  own  Heart 
and  Life,  nor  at  the  Sinfulnefs  and  Perverfe- 
nefs  of  others.     If  a  Man  be  crooked,  he 
cannot  but  halt;  and  if  the  Clock   be   fee 
w^ong,  how  can  it  point  the  Hour  right  ? 

:Y^*-"  3*  See  here,  why  Sin  is  ioplcafant^  and 
Religion  fuch  a  Burden  lo  Men :  Sin  is  7W- 
/«r^/  V  Holinefs  not  fo.  Oxen  cannot  feed 
in  the  Sea,  nor  Fifhes  in  the  fruitful  Fiold. 
A  Swine  brought  into  a  Palace  would  prefer 
the  Mire,  And  corrupt  Nature  tends  ever 
to  Impurity.  .tiOiJi.  i.  :o  i   ,ii:::  i>:ix 

rrt^  4.  Learn  from  hence  the  Nature  ancji 
Neceffity  of  Regeneration.  Firit,  the  Xa-^^ 
ture:  It  is  not  a  partial  but  a  tofal  Change:^ 
Thy  whole  Nature  is  corrupted.  *Therdbre^ 
the  whole  muft  be  renewed.  All  ^ThingP 
rt\vA  become  7ieii\  If  a  Man  who  had  re^^ 
ceived— many  Wounds,  were  cured  of  alf 
bat^v^ne,  he  might  ftill  bleed  to  Death.  It?* 
is  not  a  Change  made  by  human  lndu(lr)V^ 
but  by  the  Almighty  Spirit  of  God.  A  MaA^- 

riuU  muft 


512  The  Doctrine  of 

muft  be  born  of  the  Spirit.  Our  Nature  is 
corrupt,  and  none  but  the  God  of  Nature 
can  change  it.  Man  may  pin  a  new  Life 
to  an  old  Heart;  but  he  can  never  change 
the  Heart.  Secondly,  tlie  Neceflity:  It  is 
abfolutely  neceffary  in  order  to  Salvation. 
Except  a  Man  be  born  again ^  he  cannot  fee  the 
Kingdom  ^'God.  No  unclean  Thing  can  en- 
ter the  //t'li' Jerufalcm;  but  thou  art  by  Nature 
u'holly  unclean.  Deceive  not  thyfelf :  No 
Mercy  of  God,  no  Blood  of  Chrif^  will 
bring  an  unregenerate  Sinner  to  Heaven, 
For  God  will  never  open  a  Fountain  of  Mer- 
cy, to  wafli  away  his  own  Holinefs  and 
Truth  :  Nor  did  Chriji  Ihcd  his  precious 
Blood,  to  blot  out  the  Truths  of  God. 
Heaven  !  What  would  you  do  there,  who 
are  not  born  again  ?  An  holy  Head,  and  cor^ 
rupt  Mcaibers !  An  Head  full  of  Treafures 
of  Grace  ;  Members  filFd  with  Treafures  of 
Wickednefs!  Ye  are  no  Ways  adapted  to 
the  Society  above,  more  than  Beafts  to  con- 
vcric  with  Men.  Could  the  unrenew'd  Man 
go  to  Heaven,  he  would  go  to  it  no  other- 
wife,  than  now  he  comes  to  the  Duties  of 
Holinefs,  that  is,  leaving  his  Heart  behind 
him. 

**  Wf:  may  apply  this  Dodrine,  Secondly, 
for  Lamentation,  Well  mav  we  lament  thv' 
Cafe,  O  ULitural  Man>,  for  it  is -the  faddeft 

,  ^  Cafe 


Original  Sin.  ^13 

Cafe  bhe' can  be  in,  but  of  Hell.  It  is  Time 
to  lament  for  thee;  for  thou  art  dead  already, 
dead  while  thou  liveft.  Thou  carrieft  about 
a  dead  Soul  in  a  living  Body;  and  becaufe 
thou  art  dead,  canft  not  lament  thy  own 
Cafe.  Thou  haji  no  Good  in  thcc:  Thy  Soul 
is  a  Mafs  of  Darknefs,  Rebellion  and  Vile- 
nefs  before  God.  Thou  canfl  do  no  Good: 
Thou  canft  do  nothing  but  Sin.  For  thou 
art  the  Servant  of  Sin^  and  therefore  free 
from  Righteoufnefs :  Thou  doft  not,  canft 
not  meddle  with  it.  Thou  art  under  the 
Dominion  of  Sin^  a  Dominion  where  Righte- 
oufnefs can  have  no  Place.  Thou  art  a 
Child  and  a  Servant  of  the  Devil,  as  long 
as  thou  art  in  a  State  of  Nature.  But  to 
prevent  any  Miftake,  conlider  that  Satan 
hath  two  Kinds  of  Servants.  There  are 
fome  employed,  as  it  were,  in  coarfer  Work. 
Thefe  bear  the  Devil's  Mark  in  their  Fore- 
heads having  no  Form  of  Godlinefs,  not  fo 
much  as  performing  the  external  Duties  of 
Religion,  but  living  apparently  as  Sons  of 
Earth,  only  minding  earthlyThings.  Where- 
as others  are  employed  in  more  refined  Work, 
who  carry  his  Mark  in  their  "Right-handy 
which  they  can  and  do  hide  by  a  Form  of 
Religion,  from  the  View  of  the  World. 
Thefe  facrifice  to  the  corrupt  Af/W,  as  the 
other  to  the  Flejh,  Pride,  Unbelief,  Self- 
pleafing,  and  the  like  fpiritual  Sins,  prey 

I  i  on 


514  The  DocTRlNl  5/^ 

(Ml  thekicorrupted,  wholly  corrupted  Soulsi 
jSdiii  ti^Servants  of  the  fame  Houfe,  equally 
voiii  of^l^rgteeoufnefs.  Xv^*  - 

-s:.^  Indeed  how  IS  it  poffiWethou  fhouldft 
be  able  to  do  any  Tiling  good,  whofe  Na^ 
ture  is  wholly  corrupt?  Can  an  evil  l^ree 
bring  forth  good  Fruit  ?  Do  Men  gather 
Grapes  of  l^horns  ?  If  then  thy  Nature  be  to^ 
tally  Evil,  all  thou  doft  is  ceitainly  fo  too. 

**  Hear,  O  Sinner,  what  is  thy  Gafe. 
Innumerable5/;7JCompafsthee  about:  Floods 
of  Impurities  overwhelm  th«e.  Sins  of  all 
Sorts  roll  up  and  down  in  tlie  dead  Sea  of 
thy  Soul ;  where  no  Good  can  breathe,  be-? 
caufe  of  the  Corruption  there.  Thy  Lips  are 
unclean  :  The  opening  of  thy  Mouth  is  as 
the  opening  of  a  Grave,  full  of  Stench  and 
Rottennefs.  Thy  natural  Adions  are  Sin  : 
For  when  yB  did  eat^  and  when  ye  did  drink ^ 
did  not  ye  eat  for  yourfehes  and  drink  for  your^ 
felves  ?  Z^ch,  vii,  6.  Thy  civil  Ad^ions  are 
Sin.  Prov.  xxi.  4.  T^he* Plowing  of  the  Wicked 
is  Sin,  Thy  religious  Anions  are  Sin.  Tl'he 
Sacrifice  of  the  Wicked  is  an  Abomination  to 
the  Lord.  The  Thoughts  and  Imaginations 
of  thy  Heart  are  only  Evil  continually.  A 
Deed  may  be  foon  done>  a  Word  foon  fpo- 
kcn,  a  Thought  pais;  but  ^ach  of  thefe  is 
an  It^m  in  thy  Accounts.  G  fad  Reckoning  ! 
As  maily  Thoughts;  Words,  Aftions,  ia 
Uiany  &iiis :    And.  the  longet^  thou  liveil;- 

r»^^  ?J  i  *  thy 


OiUGiNAL  Sin.  515 

thi^  Accounts  fwell  the  more,  -Should  a 
Tear  be  dropt  for  every  Sin,  thine  Eyes  muft 
be  Fountains  of  Tearf.  For  nothing  but  Sin 
comes  from  thee :  Thy  Heart  frames  no- 
thing but  evil  Imaginations :  There  is  no- 
thing in  thy  Life,  but  what  is  framed  by 
thy  Heart :  Therefore  there  is  nothing  in  thy 
Heart  or  Life  but  Evil. 

"  And  all  thy  Religion,  if  thou  haft  any, 
is  loft  Labour,  if  thou  art  not  born  again. 
Truly  then  thy  Duties  are  Sins.  Would  not 
the  beft  Wine  be  loathfome  in  a  foul  Veffel  ? 
So  is  the  Religion  of  an  unregenerate  Man. 
Thy  Duties  cannot  make  thy  corrupt  Soul 
holy ;  but  thy  corrupt  Heart  makes  them 
unclean.  Thou  waft  wont  to  divide  thy 
Works  into  two  Sorts ;  to  count  fome  Good 
and  fome  EviL  But  thou  muft  count  again, 
and  put  all  under  one  Head  j  for  God  writes 
on  them  all,  Only  EviL  iv^^v^ 

"}■: "  And  thou  canft  not  help  thylelf.  What 
canft  thou  do  to  take  away  thy  Sin,  wlio 
art  wholly  corrupt  ?  Will  Mud  and  Filth 
wafli  out  Filthinefs  I  And  wilt  thou  purge 
out  Sin  by  Sinning  ?  Job-iook  a  PotHierd  to . 
fcrape  himfelf,  becaufe  his  Hands  were  as 
full  of  Boils  as  his  Body.  This  is  die  Caic 
of  thy  corrupt  Soul,  fo  long  as  thou  art  \\\ 
a  State  of  Nature.  Thou  art  poor  indeed^ 
extremely  miferable  mid  poor  ;  thou  hall  no 
Shelter,  hxxi  a  Refuge  cf  Lia^ :  Nq  parment 
\ih  I  i  2  for 


5i6  The  DoCtRtNlE'>f 

for  tliy  Soul,  hnx.  filthy  Rdgs,  notKmg  M 
nourifti  it,  but  Hujks  that  cannot  fatisfy; 
More  than  that,  thou  haft  got  fuch  a  Bruife 
in  the  Loins  oi  Adam^  that  thou  art  withut 
Strength,  unable  to  do  any  Thing.  Nay; 
more  than  all  this,  thou  canft  not  fo  much 
as  y^r/^  aright,  but  lieft  helplefs,  as  an  Infant 
expolcd  in  the  open  Field. 

"  O  THAT  ye  would  believe  this  fad 
Truth.  How  little  is  it  believed  in  the 
World  ?  Few  are  concerned  to  have  their 
evil  Lives  reform'd;  but  fewer  far,  to  have 
their  evil  Nature  chang  d.  Moft  Men  know 
not  what  they  are;  as  the  Eye,  which  feeing 
many  Things,  never  fees  itfelf.  But  until 
ye  know  every  one  the  Plague  of  his  cwn 
Hx^rt,  there  is  no  Hope  of  your  Recovery. 
"VA'Iiy  will  ye  not  believe  the  plain  Teftimony 
of  Scripture  ?  Alas !  That  is  the  Nature  of 
your  Difeafe.  'Thou  kno^wefl  not  that  thou  art 
*wr etched,  and  inferable  and  poor  ajid  blind  and 
naked.  Lord  open  their  Eyes,  before  they 
lift  them  up  in  Hell,  and  fee  what  they  will 
not  fee  now  !  »  nonqm 

•  *'  Mean  Time  let  us  have  a  'pecial  Eye 
upon  the  Corruption  and  Sin  of  our  Nature. 
Vvhr.t  avails  it  to  take  Notice  of  other  Sins, 
while  this  Mother  Sin  is  unnoticed?  This  is  a 
wci(;hty  Point ;  in  fpeaking  to  which  I  fhall 
^ii:*V  i;  Point  at  feme  Evidences  of  Men's 
t«;?r/(^#!?/;^'thc  Sin  of  their  Nature.  :  As  (i.) 
^yy^  -  Men's 


'  lOi^d[eiifAL  Sin.-  ^jj 

Men  s  being  fo  confident  of  themfelves,  as 
if  they  were  ia  no  Danger  of  grofs  Sins* 
Many  would  take  heinoufly  fuch  a  Caution 
as  Chrijl  gave  his  Apoftles,  ^uke  heed  ojSur* 
f citing  and  Drtrnkmnefi ,  TheyAvouid  be 
ready  to  cry  oxiXy  Am  la  Dog?  \t^o\AA 
raife  the  Pride  of  their  Heart,  not  their  Fear 
and  Trembling.  And  all  this  is  a  Proofs 
that  they  know  not  the  Corruption  of  their 
own  Nature.  (2.)  Untendernefs  toward  them 
that  fall.  Many  in  this  Cafe  caft  off  all 
Bowels  of  Compaffion :  A  plain  Proof  that 
they  do  not  know  or  confider  themjehcs^  left 
they  alfo  be  tempted.  Grace  indeed  does  make 
Men  zealous  againft  Sin,  in  others  as  well 
as  in  themfelves.  But  Eyes  turned  inward 
to  the  Corruption  of  Nature,  clothe  them 
with  Pity  and  Compaffion,  and  fill  them 
with  Thankfulnefs,  that  they  were  not  the 
Perfons  left  to  be  fuch-  Spectacles  of  human 
Frailty.  (3.)  Men's  venturing  fo  boldly  on 
•Temptation,  in  Confidence  of  their  coming 
off  fairly.  Were  they  fenfible  of  the  Cor- 
ruption of  their  Nature,  they  would  beware 
of  entring  on  the  Devil's  Ground  :  As  one 
girt  about  with  Bags  ot  Gunpowder,  would 
be  loth  to  walk  where  Sparks  of  Fire  were 
ilying.       . 

J   "  2.  I  SHALL  mention  a  few  Things,  in 

which  ye  fliould  have  a  I'pecial  Eye  to  the 

(Sin  of  your  Nature,.  (:i.)  In  your  Applica- 

imH  tion 


^i8  ^he  DocTRiN;B  of 

ticHx  to  Cloriji.  When  you  are  with  the  Phy- 
iician,  O  forget  not  this  Difeafe.  They  ne- 
ver yet  knew  their  Errand  to  Chriji^  who 
went  not  to  Him  for  the  Sin  of  their  Nature  j 
for  his  Blood  to  take  away  the  Guilt,  and 
hi?  Spirit  to  break  the  Power  of  it.  The* 
ye  fhould  lay  before  Him  a  Catalogue  of 
Sins,  which  might  reach  from  Earth  to 
Heaven,  yet  if  you  omit  this,  you  have  for- 
got the  beft  Part  of  the  Errand  a  poor  Sin- 
ner has  to  the  Phyfician  of  Souls.  (2.)  Have 
a  fpecial  Eye  to  it  in  your  Repentance.  If 
you  would  repent  indeed,  let  the  Streams 
lead  you  up  to  the  Fountain,  and  mourn 
over  your  corrupt  Nature,  as  the  Caufe  of 
all  Sin,  in  Heart,  Word  and  Work.  Agatnjl 
^beCy  T'hee  only  have  I  Jinnedy  and  done  this 
Evil  in  thy  Sight,  Behold  I  was  Jhapen  in 
Iniquity^  and  in  Sin  did  my  Mother  coiceive. 
mc,  {3.)  Have  a  fpecial  Eye  to  it  in  your 
Mortification.  Crucify  the  FleJIj  with  its  Af 
feci  ions  and  De fires.  It  is  the  Root  of  Bit- 
tornefs  which  muft  be  ftruck  at;  elfe  we 
labour  in  vain.  In  vain  do  we  go  about  to 
purge  the  Streams,  if  we  are  at  no  Pains  a- 
bout  th^  muddy  Fountain.  (4.)  Ye  are  to 
eye  thi3  inyour  daily  Walk.  He  that  would 
walk  uprightly,  muft  have  one  Eye  upward 
to  yefus^ChriJ}^  another  inward  to  the  Cor- 
ruption of  his  own  Nature.       ...m^i  sj.ii  ux 


wA    ^iw>.\X   i 


alsaly?  "  III.  I  SHALL 


Or  r g  I  NAt  S I  w/"  jl^ 

^'  TIL  I  SHALL  offer  fome  Rcafons,  why 
we  fliauld  efpecially  obferve  the  Sin  of  our 

Nature.    ■      '      )    i-nun^    :,::•::    v\Jii^   j-;\     :.  .;■ 

*'  i/BECAtT?E  bf-all  5ins  Whthenwft 
extenffDe  and  diffiijrce^-  It  goes  thro'  the  whole 
Man  and  fpoils  all.  Other  Sins  mar  parti- 
cular Parts  of  the  Image  of  God  ;  but  this 
diefaces  the  whole.  It  is  the  Poifon  of  the 
old  Serpent  caft  into  the  Fountain,  and  fo 
infedls  every  Adion,  every  Breathing  of  the 
Soul.  io  oi 

yr  ^'  2vIt  is  the  Caufe  of  all  particular  Sins, 
both  in  our  Hearts  and  Lives.  Out  of  the 
Heart  of  Men  proceed  evil  Thoughts^  Adulter 
rieSy  and  all  other  Abominations.  It  is  the 
bitter  Fountain,  and  particular  Lufls  are 
but  Rivulets  running  from  itj  which  bring 
forth  into  the  Life  a  Part  only,  not  the  whole 
of  what  is  within.^  W\Vi  r^'^  \t\  V>\^ii  x 

ij^"  3.  It  is  virtually  all  Sins  :  Fbr  it  is  the 
Seed  of  all,  which  want  but  the  Occafion 
to  fet  up  their  Heads.  Hence  it  is  called  a 
Body  of  Death,  as  confifling  of  the  feveral 
Members  which  conrtitute  that  Body  of  Shn 
(Col,  ii.  II.)  whofc  Life  lies  in  fpiritual 
Death.  It  is  the  curfed  Ground,  fit  to  bring 
forth  all  Manner  of  noxious  Weeds.  Never 
did  every  Sin  appear  in  the  Converfation  of 
the  vileft  WretcJi  that  ever  lived.  But  look 
into  thy  Nature,  and  thou  mayft  fee  all  and 
every  Sin  in  the  Root  thereof.      There  is  a 

J  JAKE  i  olli  Fulnefs 


^20  7X^  Doctrine  of 

Fulnefs  of.  all  Unrighteoufnefs  there :  A-. 
theiim,'  Idolatry,  Adultery,  Murder.  Per- 
haps none  of  thefe  appear  to  thee  in  thy 
Heart :  But  there  is  more  in  that  unfathom- 
able Depth  of  Wickednefs  than  thou  knoweft. 

"  4.  The  Sin  of  our  Nature  is  of  all 
Sins  the  moil  /x/  and  abiding.  Sinful  Ac- 
tions are  tranfient,  tho'  the  Guilt  and  Stain 
of  them  may  remain.  But  the  Corruption 
of  Nature  pafles  not  away.  It  remains  in 
its  full  Power,  by  Night  and  by  Day,  at  all 
Times,  till  Nature  is  -changed  by  convert- 
ing Grace. 

"  You  may  obferve  three  Things  In  the 
corrupt  Heart,  (i.)  There  is  the  corrupt 
Nature^  the  evil  jB^;^/ of  the  Heart,  whereby 
Men  are  unapt  for  all  Good,  and  fitted  for 
all  Evil.  (2.)  There  are  particular  Lufts 
or  Difpofitions  of  that  corrupt  Nature,  fuch 
as  Pride,  Paflion,  Covetuoufnefs.  (3.)  There 
is  one,  of  thefe  ftronger  than  all  the  reft. 
'the  Sin  which  dothfo  eajily  be  Jet  us.  So  that 
the  River  divides  into  many  Streams,  where- 
of one  is  greater  than  the  reft.  The  Cor- 
ruption of  Nature  is  the  River-head,  which 
has  many  particular  Lufts  wherein  it  runs ; 
but  it  mainly  dift)urdens  itfelf  into  that  which 
we  call  the  prcdomiiiant  Sin,  But  as  in  fome 
Rivers  the  main  Stream  runs  not  always  in 
the  fame  Channel,  fo  the  befctting  Sin  may 
change,  as  Luft  in  Youth  may  be  fucceeded 

bv 


Original  Sin.  521 

by  Covetoufnefs  in  Old  Age.  Now  what 
ddcG  it  avail,  to  reform  in  other  Things, 
while  the  reigning  Sin  retains  its  full  Power? 
What  if  a  particular  Sin  be  gone  ?  If  the  Sin 
of  our  Nature  keep  the  Throne,  it  will  fct 
up  another  in  its  Stead  :  As  when  a  Water- 
courfc  is  ftopt  in  one  Place,  it  will  break 
forth  in  another.  Thus  feme  caft  off  their 
Prodigality  ;  but  Covetoufnefs  comes  in  its 
Stead.  Some  quit  their  Profanenefs  ;  but 
the  fame  Stream  runs  in  the  other  Channel 
of  Self-righteoufnefs. 

"  That  you  may  have  a  full  View  of 
the  Sin  of  your  Nature,  I  would  recom- 
mend to  you  three  Things,  (i.)  Study  to 
know  the  Spirituality  and  Extent  of  the 
Law  of  God  >  for  that  is  the  Glafs  wherein 
you  may  fee  yourfelvcs.  (2.)  Obferve  your 
Hearts  at  all  Times ;  but  efpecially  under 
Temptation.  Temptation  is  a  Fire  that 
brings  up  the  Scum  of  the  unregenerate 
Heart.  (3.)  Go  to  God  thro'  Jefus  Chriji, 
for  Illumination  by  his  Spirit.  Say  unto  Kim, 
What  I  know  not^  teach  thou  mc :  And  be 
willing  to  take  in  Light,  from  the  Word. 
It  is  by  the  Word  the  Spirit  teacheth ;  but 
unlefs  he  teach,  all  other  Teaching  is  to 
little  Purpofe.  You  will  never  fee  yourfc!f 
aright,  'till  He  light  his  Candle  in  your 
Breaft.  Neither  me  Fulnefs  and  Glory  of 
Chrtji^  nor  the  Corruption  andVilencfs  of  our 

K  k  Nature/ 


522  7?>^  Doctrine     gJ 

Nature,   ever  were  or  can  be  righty  learned, 
but  where  the  Spirit  oi  Chrijii^  the  Teacjier. 
*'  To  conclude  :  L<it  tKe  C6nri&ratibn  of 
what  has  been  faid,  commend  Chriji  to  you 
all.     Ye  that  are  brought  out  of  your  natu- 
ral State,  be  humble ;  ftill  coming  to  Chriji^ 
ftiil  cleaving  to  Him,  for  the  purging  out 
what  remains  of  your  natural  Corruption. 
Ye  that  are  yet  in  your  natural  State,  what 
will  ye  do  ?    Ye  muft  die  :    Ye  muft  ft  and 
at  the  Judgment  Seat  of  God.     Will  you 
lie  down,  and  fleep  another  Night  at  Eafe 
in  this  Cafe  ?  Sec,  ye  do  it  not.     Before  a-^ 
nother  Day  you  may  be  fet  before  his  dread- 
ful Tribunal,  in  the  Grave-Clothes  of  your 
corrupt  State,  and  your  vile  Souls  caft  into  the 
Pit  of  Deftru6lion,  to  be  for  ever  buried  out 
of  God's  Sight.  For  I  teftify  unto  you,  there 
is  no   Peace   with    God,    no  Pardon,    no 
Heaven  for  you  in  this  State.     There  is  but 
a  Step  betwixt  you  and  eternal  Deftrudion 
from  the  Prefence  of  the  Lord.     If  the 
brittle  Thread  of  Life,  which  may  be  broke 
with  a  Touch,  in  a  Moment,  or  ever  you 
are  aware,  be  broken  while  you  are  in  this 
State,  you  are  ruined  for  ever,  and  without 
Remedy.      But  come  ye  fpeedily  to  yefus 
Chriji,     He  hath  cleanfed  as  vile  Souls  as 
yours.     Covfefi  yciir  S:ns -,  and  He  will  both  ^ 
/ir^;V  yoiii- Sins,  and dennfc ycu from  aUUn-''' 
righicct^/hrfs. 

FINIS. 

Bristol,  ^Kg.  17,   1757. 