* 1 
EARNYEÄTr 
APPE A L 


T OO ME KH OF 


REASON 


AND 


% 


RELIGION. 


By ZOHAN WESLEY, M. A. 
Late Fellow of LIN cOLIXx-Cor tze, OxrorD, 
WL PPE Rs 


Jonn vü. 51, 
Doth our Law judge any Man before it hear him, 
and know what he doth ? | 


WR 2. 
THE EIGHTH EDITION. TY 


———— 
LONDON: 


riated for G. WH1TF1ELD, New-Chapel, City-Road 
and ſold at the Methodiſt Preaching-Houſes, 
in Town and Country, 


1796. 


| Ws 5 
EARNEST APPEAL 
10 


MEN OF REASON AND RELIGION. 
2. .. 23 I PIPE 


N it is with us a © very ſmall thing to 
| be judged of you, or of man's judgment,” fee- 
ing we know God will “ make our 1NNOCENCY as 
clear as the light, and our jusT DEALING as the noon- 
day; yet are we ready to give any that are willing to 
hear, a plain account both of our principles and ac- 
tions: * as having renounced the hidden things of 
ſhame,” and deſiring nothing more, * than by manifeſ- 
tation of the truth to commend ourſelves to every man's 
conſcience in the fight of Gop.” N | 
2. We ſee (and who does not ?) the numberleſs fol- 
lies and miſeries of our fellow creatures. We ſee on 
every ſide, either men of no religion at all, or men of 
a lifeleſs, formal religion. We are grieved at the ſight, 
and ſhould greatly rejoice, if by any means we might 
convince ſome, that there is a better religion to be at- 
tained, a religion worthy of God that gave it. And 
this we conceive to be no other than love; the love of 
God and of all mankind ; the loving God with all our 
heart, and ſoul, and ſtrength, as having brit loved us, 
as the fountain of all the good we have received, and 
of all we ever hope to enjoy; and. the loving every 
foul which God hath made, every man on earth, as our 
own ſoul. | | 

3. This love we believe to be the medicine of life, 
the never-failing remedy, for all the evils of a diſordered 
world, for all the miſeries and vices of men. Where- 
ever this is, there are virtue and happineſs, going hand 

A A 2 in 


4 An EAR NEAT APPEAL 


in hand. There is humbleneſs of mind, gentleneſs, 
long-ſuffermg, the whole image of God, and at Te 
ſame time a _—_ that paſſeth all underſtanding, and 
joy unſpeakable and full "= glory. 


& Eternal ſunſhine of the ſpotleſs mind; ; 
Each prayer accepted, and each wiſh refign'd : 
Deſires compos'd, affettions ever even, 

Tears that delight, and ſighs that waft to heaven.“ 


4. This religion we long to ſee eſtabliſhed in the 
world, a religion of love, and joy, and peace, having 
its font | in the heart, in the inmoſt ſoul, but ever ſhew- 
ing itſelf, by its fruits, continually ſpringing forth not 
only in all innocence, (for love worketh no ill to his 
neighbour) but likewiſe in every kind of beneficence, 
ſpreading virtue and happinels all around it. 

5. This religion have we been following after for 
many years, as many know if they would teſtify : but 
all this time, ſeeking wiſdom we found it not ; we were 
{pending our ſtrength in vain. And being now under 

Ul conviftion of this, we declare it to all marikind : 
for we deſire not that others ſhould wander out of the 


Way as we have done before them; but rather that they 


may profit by our loſs, that they may go (tho* we did 
not, having then no man to guide us) the ſtreight way 
to the religion of love, even Dy faith. 

6. Now faith (ſuppoling the Scripture to be of God) 
is Tpaypuaruy Hiyx®- & Pamopirur, the demonſtrative evi- 
dence of things unſeen, the ſupernatural evidence of 
things inviſible, not perceivable by eyes of fleſh, or by 
any of our natural ſenſes or faculties. Faith is that di- 
vine evidence, whereby the ſpiritual man diſcerneth 
God and the things of God. It is with regard to the 
{piritual world, what ſenſe is with regard to the natural. 
It is the ſpiritual ſenſation of every ſoul that is born of 


God. 


7. Perhaps you have not confidered it in this view 
I will then explain it a little further, / 
Faith, according to the ſcriptural account, is the eye 
of the new-born ſoul. Hereby every true believer in 
God « ſeeth him who is inviſible.” Hereby (in a 
more particular manner ſince life and immortality have 


been 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 6 


been brought to light by the goſpel) he “ ſeeth the 
light of the glory of God in the face of Jeſus Chriſt ;” 
and, 4 beholdeth what manner of love it is, which the 
Father hath beſtowed =— us, that we“ (who are 
born of the Spirit) © ſhould be called the ſons of 
God.“ 

It is the ear of the ſoul, whereby a ſinner “ hears 
the voice of the Son of God and lives;” even that 
voice which alone wakes the dead, © ſon, thy ſins are 
forgiven thee.“ | 

It is if I may be allowed the expreſſion) the palate 
of the ſoul : for hereby a believer “ taſtes the good 
word, and the powers of the world to come; and 
hereby he both taſtes and ſees that God is gracious, yea 
and merciful to him a-ſfinner,” , 

It is the feeling of the ſoul, whereby a believer per- 
ceives, through the power of the Higheſt overſhadowing 
him, both the exiſtence and the preſence of Him, in 
whom he lives, moves, and has his being; and indeed 
the whole inviſible world, the entire ſyſtem of things 
eternal. And hereby, in particular, he feels the love of 
God fhed abroad in his heart. | BY 

8. By this Faith we are ſaved from all uneaſineſs of | 
mind, from the anguiſh of a wounded'ſpirit, from di- 
content, from fear, and ſorrow of heart, and from 
that inexpreſſible liſtleſſneſs and wearineſs, both of the 

world and of ourſelves, which we had fo helple{ily 
laboured under for many years; eſpecially when we 
were out of the hurry of the world, and ſunk mto 
calm reflection. In this we find that love of God, and 
of all mankind, which we had elſewhere ſought in 
Vain. This we know. and feel, and therefore cannot 
but declare, faves every one that partakes of it, both 
from ſin and miſery, from every unhappy and every 
, ynholy temper. | | 
6 Soft peace ſhe brings, wherever ſhe arrives, 
She builds our quiet, as ſhe forms our lives 
| Lays the rough paths of peeviſh nature even, 
And opens in each breaſt a little heaven.” 
„ 9 If you aſk, © Why then have not all men this 
faith? All at leaſt who conceive it to he ſo happy. a 
thing? Why do they not believe immediately ??? 
| . A 3 | We 


\ 


8 ber APPEAL 


We anſwer, ſon the Scripture hypotheſis), It is the 
gift of, God. No man is able to —_— it in himſelf, It 
15 a work of omnipotence. It requires no leſs power 
thus to. quicken a dead ſoul, than to raiſe a body that 
lies in the grave. It is a new creation ; and none can 
create a {oul anew but he who at firſt created the heg- 
vens and the earth. 

10. May not your own experience teach you this P 
Can you give yourſelf this Faith r Is it now in your 
power to ſee, or hear, or taſte, or feel God ? Have 
you already, or can you raiſe in yourſelf any percep- 
tion of God, or of an inviſible world: I ſuppoſe you 
do not deny, that there is an inviſible world: you will 
not charge i in poor old Heſiod, to Chriſtian preju- 
dice of education, when. he fays, in thoſe well known 
words, | 

Millions of ſpiritual creatures walk. the earth 

Unſeen, whether we wake, or if we ſleep. 


Now, is there any power in your ſoul, whereby you 
diſcern either theſe, or him that created them ? Or, 
gan all your wiſdom and ſtrength open an intercourſe 
between yourſelf and the world of ſpirits? Is it in 
our power to burſt the veil that is on your heart, and 
et in the light of eternity? You know it is not, You 
not only do not, but cannot (by your own ſtrength) 
thus believe. The more you labour ſo to do, the more 
you will be convinced, it is the gift of God. | 
11. It is the free gift of God, which he beſtows not 
on thoſe who are worthy of his fayour, not on ſuch 
as are previouſſy holy, and fo fit to be crowned with all 
the bleſſings of his goodneſs : but on the ungodly and 
unholy : on thoſe who till that hour were fit only for 
everlaſting deſtruction; thoſe in whom was no good 
thing, and whoſe only plea was, God, be merciful to 
me a finner. No merit, no goodneſs in man precedes 
the forgiving love of God. His pardoning mercy ſup- 
poſes nothing in us but a ſenſe of mere fin and miſery : 
and to all who ſee, and feel, and own their wants, 
and their utter inability to remove them, God freely 
gives Faith, for the fake of him in whom he is atways 
well pleaſed, 3 
8 12. Thie 


1 


To Men of Reaſan and Religion. 7 


12. This is a ſhort rude ſketch of the doftrine we 
teach, Theſe are our fundamental principles ; and we 
ſpend our lives in confixming others herein, and in « 
— ſuitable to them. 

Now, if you are a reaſonable man, although you do 
not believe the Chriſtian ſyſtem to be of God, lay 
your hand upon your breaſt, and calmly confider, 
what is it that you can here condemn.? What evil 
have we done to you, that you ſhoula join the common 
cry againſt us ?. Why ſhould you fay, © away with 
ſuch fellows from the earth : it 15 not fit that they 
mould live?“ 

13. Tis true, your judgment does not fall in with 
ours, We believe the Scripture to be of God. This 
you do not believe. And how do you defend your- 
ſelves againſt them who urge you with the guilt of un- 
belief? Do you not ſay, Every man mit judge ac- 
cording to the light he has, and that if he be true to 
this he ought not to be condemned? Keep then to 
this, and turn the tables. Muft not we alſo judge ac- 
cording to the light we have? You can in no wiſe 
condemn us, without involving yourfelues in the ſame 
condemnation. According to the light we have, we 
cannot but believe the Scripture is of God; and, chile 
we believe this, we dare not turn aſide from it, to the 
right hand or to the left. 

14. Let us conſider this point a little farther. You 
yourſelf believe there is a God. You have the wit- 
neſs of this in your own breaſt, Perhaps ſometimes 
you tremble before him, You believe there is fuch a 
thing as right and that there is a difference 
between moral good and evil, Of conſequence, you 
muſt allow, there is fuch a thing as conſcience; I 
mean, that every perſon capable of reflection, is con- 
{cious to himſelf, when he looks back on any thing he 
has done, whether it be good or evil, You muſt like- 
wiſe allow, that every man 3s to be guided by his own 
conſcience, not another's. Thus far, doubtleſs, you 
may go, without any danger of being a volunteer . 
Faith. 2 
15. Now then, be confiſtent with vobrtelt. 17 thers* 
be a God, who being juſt and good, (attributes inſepa- 


\ 


8 | An rtaxnesT APPIML 


rable from the very idea of God) is a rewarder of them 
that diligently ſeek him, "ought we not to do whatever 
we believe will be acceptable to ſo good a maſter ? 
Obſerve : if we believe, if we are fully perſuaded of this 
in our own mind, ought we not thus to ſeek him ? and 


Ta FTE that with all diligence ? Elſe, how ſhould we expet᷑t 


- any reward at his hands ? | 
16. Again: ought we not to do what we believe is 
morally good, and to abſtain from what we judge is 
evil? By good I mean, conducive to the good of 
mankind, tending to advance peace, and good-will 
among men, promotive of the happineſs of our fel- 
low-creatures ; and by evil, what 1s contrary thereto, 
Then ſurely you cannot condemn our endeavouring 
. after our power, to make mankind happy ; (I now 
ſpeak only with regard to the preſent world) our ſtriv- 
ing, as we can, to leſſen their ſorrows, and to teach 
them in whatſoever ſtate they are, therewith to be 
content. | 

17. Yet again, Are we to be guided by our own 
conſcience, or by that of other men? You ſurely will 
not ſay,” that any man's conſcience can preclude mine. 
You, at leaſt, will not plead — us, of what 
you ſtrongly claim for yourſelves. I mean, the right 
of private judgment, which is indeed unalienable from 
realonable creatures. You well know, that unleſs we 
faithfully follow the dictates of our own mind, we can- 
not have a conſcience void of offence toward God and 
towards man. N . 

18. Upon your own principles therefore you muſt. 
allow us to be, at leaſt, innocent. Do you find any 
difficulty in this? You ſpeak much of prepoſſeſſion 
and prejudice, beware you are not entangled therein 
vyourſelves. Are you not prejudiced againſt us, becauſe 
ve believe and ſtrenuouſly defend that ſyſtem of doc- 
-trines which you oppole? Are you not enemies to us, 
becauſe you take it for granted we are ſo to you ? Nay, 
God forbid! I once ſaw one, who, from a plentiful ' 
fortune, was reduced to the loweſt extremity. He was 
lying on a ſick bed, in violent pain, without even con- 
vetierit food, or one friend to comfort him; ſo that 
when his merciful landlord, to complete all, ſent one 

Wa le > | . o 


* 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 9 


to take his bed from under him, I was not ſurpriſed at 
his attempt to put an end to ſo miſerable a life. Now, 

when 1 ſaw that poor man, weltering in his blood, 

could I be angry at him? Surely no. No more can 

I at you. I can no more hate than I can envy you. 1 

can only lift up my heart to God for you (as I did then 

for him) and, with ſilent tears, beſeech the Father of 
mercies, that he would look on you in your blood, and 
ſay unto you, Live. 

19. © Sir, (ſaid that unhappy man, at my firſt inter- 
view with him) I ſcorn to deceive you or any man. 
You mult not tell me of your Bible; for I don't be- 
lieve one word of it. I know there is a God, and be- 
lieve he is all and in all, the Anima Mundi, the 

| % vaſtam 

Mens agitans molem, & magno fe corpore miſcens. 
© But farther than this, I believe not; all is dark; my 
thought is loſt, But I hear (added he) you preach to 
a great number of people every night and morning. 
Pray, what would you do with them? Whither would 
you lead them? What religion do you preach ? What 
15 it good for ? I replied, © I do preach to as many 
as deſite to heax, every night and morning. You aſk, 
++ What I would do with them?” I would make 
them virtuous and happy, eaſy in themſelves, and uſe- 
ful to others. Whither would I lead them ? To 
heaven; to God the judge, the lover of all, and to 
1 the mediator of the new covenant. What re- 

igion do I preach? The religion of love; the law of 
kindneſs brought to light by the goſpel. What is 
this good for ?” To make all who receive it enjoy 
God and themſelves: To make them like God ; lovers 
of all ; contented in their lives; and crying out at their 
death, in calm aſſurance, O grave where is thy victory | 
Thanks be unto God, who giveth me the victory, thro! 
my Lord Jeſus Chriſt.” 

20. Will you object to ſuch a religion as this; that 
it is not reaſonable ? Is it not reaſonable then to love 
God? Hath he not given you life, and breath, and 
all things? Does he not ſtill continue his love to 
ou, filling your heart with food and gladneſs ? 
hat have you which you have not _—_—_— of 

him 


10 An EARNEST APPEAL 
him ? And does not love demand a return of love ? 
Whether, therefore, you do love God or no, you 
cannot but own it is reaſonable ſo to do; nay, ſeeing 
- is the parent of all good, to love him with all your 

eart, | 1 

21. Is it not reaſonable alſo to love our neighbour p 
Every man whom God hath made? Are we not bre- 
thren? The children of one Father? Ought we not 
then to love one another? And, ſhould we only love 
them that love us? Is that acting like our Father which 
3 in heaven? He cauſeth his {un to ſhine on the evil 
and on the good, and ſendeth rain on the juſt and on 
the unjuſt. And can there be a more equitable rule of 
our love, than © thou ſhalt love thy neighbour as thy- 
ſelf ? You will plead for the reaſonableneſs of this; 
as alſo for that golden rule, (the only adequate meaſure 
of brotherly love, in all our words and actions) What- 
ſoever ye would that men ſhould do unto you, even ſo 
do unto them.“ 

22. Is it not reaſonable then, that as we have oppor- 
tunity, we ſhould do good unto all men? Not only 
friends but enemies, not only to the deſerving, but like- 
wiſe to the evil and unthankful. Is it not right that all 


our life ſhould be one continued labour of love? If 


a day paſſes without doing good, may one not well ſay, 
With Titus, * Amici, diem perdidi / And is it enough, 
to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to viſit thoſe 
ho are fick or in priſon? Should we have no pity 
for thoſe 

* Who ſigh beneath guilt's horrid ſtain, 

« The worſt confinement and the heavieſt chain?“ 
Should we ſhut up our compaſlion toward thoſe who 
are of all men moſt miſerable, becauſe they are miſerable 
by their own#fault ? If we have found a medicine to 
heal even that ſickneſs, ſhould we not, as we have 
freely received it, freely give ? Should we not pluck 
them as brands out of the fire? The fire of Wi an- 


ger, malice, revenge? Your inmoſt ſoul anſwers, It 
{hould be done; it is reaſonable in the higheſt degree. 
Well, this is the ſum of our preaching, and of our lives, 

our enemies themſelves being the judges. If therefore 
| vou 


* My friends, I have loſt a day! 


22 4 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 11 


you allow, that it is reaſonable. to love God, to love 
mankind, and to do good to all men, you cannot but 
allow, that religion which we preach and live, to be 
agreeable to the higheſt reaſon. 

23. Perhaps all this you can bear, It is tolerable. 
enough: and if we ſpoke only of being ſaved by love, 
you ſhould have no great objection: bi you not 
comprehend what we ſay of being f/aved by faith.” I 
know you do not. Vou do not in any degree compre- 
hend what we mean by that expreſſion; have patience 
then, and I will tell you yet again. By thoſe words, 
we are ſaved by faith, we mean, that the moment a man 
receives that faith which is above deſcribed, he is 
faved from doubt and fear, and ſorrow of heart, by a 
peace that paſſes all underſtanding ; from the heavi- 
neſs of a wounded ſpirit, by joy unſpeakable ; and 
from his ſins, of whatſoever kind they were ; from his 
vicious defires, as. well as words and actions, by the 
love of God and of all mankind, then ſhed abroad in 
his heart. 

24. We grant nothing is more unreaſonable, than to 
imagine that ſuch mighty effects as theſe can be wrought: 
by that poor, empty, inſignificant thing which the- 
world calls faith, and you among them. But ſuppoſing: 
there be ſuch a faith on the earth, as that which the 
apoſtle ſpeaks of, ſuch an intercourſe between God and: 
E ſoul, what is too hard for ſuch a faith? You your- 
ſelves may conceive, that “all things are poſſible to 
him that thus believeth: to him that thus walks with: 
God, that is now a citizen of heaven, an inhabitant of 
eternity, If therefore you will contend with us, you 
muſt change the ground of your attack. You muſt: 
flatly deny, there 1s any faith upon earth : but perhaps 
this you might think too large a ſtep. You cannot do 
this, without a ſecret condemnation in your own breaſt, 
O that you would at length cry to God for that 
heavenly gift ! whereby alone this truly reaſonable re- 
ligion, this beneficent love of God and man can be 
planted in your heart. | 
25. If you ſay, © But thoſe that profeſs this faith, 
are the moſt unreaſonable of all men; I aſk, © Who 
are thole that profeſs this faith 7 Perhaps you do not 


+. | pa lonally 


142 An AAN APPEAL 

$erſonally know ſuch a man in the world. Who are 
they that ſo much as profeſs to have this evidence of 
. not ſeen ? That profels to ſee him that is mvifi- 
ble? To hear the voice of God; and to have hrs S * 
ever witneffng with their ſpirits, that they are the chi 
= ? I fear you will find few that even profeſs this 


th, among the large numbers of thoſe Who are called 

ievers. 

26. However, there are enough that profeſs them- 
ſelves Chriſtians.” Yea, too many, God knoweth; 
too many that confute their vain profeſſions, by the 
whole tenor of their lives. I wilt allow all you can 
ſay on this head, and perhaps more than all. It'is now 
ſome: years ſince I was engaged unawares in a conver- 
| ſation with a ſtrong] reaſoner, Who at firft urged the 
= . wickednels of — American Indians, as a bar to our, 
* hope of converting them to Chriſtiarity. But when 1 
mentioned their temperanee, juſtice, and veracity, (ac- 


cording! to the accounts I Jad ther received) it way 


aſked, * Why, if thoſe heathens are ſuch men as theſe, 
what will they gain by being made Chriſtians ? What 
$1 would they gain by being fuck Chrifttans as we lee every 
. where round about us? 1 could not deny, they 
would loſe, not gain, By ſuch a Chriſtianity as this. 
Upon which ſhe added, Why, what elſe do you mean 
by Chriſtianity ? My plain anſwer was, What do you 
apprehend to be more valuable than good ſenſe, good 
nature, and good manners? All thete are contained, 
and that in- the higheſt degree, in what I mean by 
Chriſtianity. Good ſenſe, (ſo called) is but a poor, dim 
ſhadow of what Chriſtians call faith, Good nature is 
only a-faint, diſtant reſemblance of Chriſtian” charity, 
| And good manners, if of the moſt finiſhed: kind that 
nature aſſiſted by art can attain to, is but a dead picture 
| of that holineſs of converſation, which is the image of 
1 God viſibly expreſſed. All theſe put together by the 
art of God, I call Chriſtianity. © Sir, if this be Chriſ- 
1 tianity, (faid my opponent in amaze) I never faw a 
| Chriſtian in my life.” 
| 27. Perhaps, it is the ſame caſe with you, If fo, I 
1 am grieved for you, and can only wiſh, till you do 
| | lee a n proof of this, that you would not ſay, yoit 


| |} fee 


1 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 1 3 
fee 4 chriſtian, For this is ſcriptural chriſtianity, and 
this alone. Whenever therefore you ſee an unreaſon- 
able man, you foe one who 3 calls himſelf by 
that name, but ig no more a chriſtzan than he is an an- 

4. So far as he departs from true genuine reaſon, ſo 
Far he departs from chriſtianity, Do not ſay, this. is 
only aſſerted, not proved. It is undeniably proved by 
the original charter of chriſtianity, We appeal to this, 
to the written word, If any man's temper, or Words, 
or actions, are eee to right reaſon; it 15 evi- 
dent to a demonſtration, they are contradiftory to this. 
Produce any poſſible or conceivable inſtance, and you 
will find the fact is ſo. The lives therefore of thoſe. 
who are called chriſtians, is no juſt objection to chriſ- 
tianity. | | | 

28. We join with you then in deſiring a religion 
founded on reaſon, and every way agreeable thereto. . 
But one queſtion ſtill remains to 45 aſked, What do 
you mean by reaſon ? I ſuppols you mean the eternal, 
reaſon, or, the nature of things: The nature of God, 
and the nature of man, with the relations neceſſarily 
ſubſiſting between them. Why, this is the very reli- 
gion we preach : a religion 1 Me founded on, and' 
every way agreeable to eternal . to the eſſential 
nature of things. Its foundation ſtands on the nature 
of God and the nature of man, together with their 
mutual relations. And it is every way ſuitable there; 
to: to the nature of God; for it begins in knowing, 
him, and where but in the true knowledge of God. 
can you conceive true religion to begin? It goes on 
in loving him, and all mankind, (for you cannot but 
imitate whom you love :) It ends in 2 him; in 
doing his will; in obeying him whom we know and 
love. | Bo 
29. It is every way ſuited to the nature of man; for 

it begins in man's knowing himſelf; knowing himſelf 
to be what he really is, fooliſh, vicious, miſerable. It 
goes on to point out the remedy for this, to make him 
truly wiſe, virtuous, and happy; as every thinking 
mind (perhaps from ſome implicit remembrance of What 
it originally was) longs 5 
BY | It 


F 


N 


14 An zarxesT APPEAL 


It finiſhes all, by reſtoring the due zation between 
God and man; by uniting for ever the tender Father, 


and the grateful, obedient ſon; the great Lord of all, 
and the Fiithful ſervant, doing not his own will, but 
the will of him that ſent him. | . 
go. But perhaps by reaſon you mean, the faculty of 
reaſoning, of inferring one thing from another. 
There are many, it is confeſſed, (particularly thoſe 
who are ſtiled myſtic divines) that utterly decry the uſe 


of reaſon, thus underſtood, in religion: nay, that con- 
demn all reaſoning concerning the things of God, as 


utterly deſtructive of true religion. 


But we can in no wiſe agree with this. We find. 
no authority for it in holy writ. So far from it, that 


we find there both our Lord and his 1 continu- 
ally reaſoning with their oppoſers. either do. we 


know, in all the productions of ancient and modern. 


times, ſuch a chain of reaſoning or argumentation, ſo 


cloſe, fo ſolid, ſo regularly connected, as the epiſtle to 
the Hebrews. And the ſtrongeſt reaſoner whom we 


have ever obſerved {excepting only Jeſus of Nazareth) 
was that Paul of Tarſus; the ſame who has left that 


Plain direction for all chriſtians, . In malice, or wicked- 
neſs, be ye children.; but in underſtanding, or reaſon, be 


ye men. 


1. We therefore not only allow, but earneſtly ex- 
Hort all who ſeek after true religion, to uſe all the rea- 


ſon which God hath given them, in ſearching out the 
things of God. But your reaſoning juſtly, not only on 
this, but on any ſubject whatſoever, pre- ſuppoſes true 
Judgments already formed, whereon to ground your ar- 
gumentation, Elſe, you know, you will ſtumble at 
every ſtep: becauſe ex falſo non ſequitur verum. It is 
impoſſible, if your premiſes are falſe, to infer from them 
true concluſions. ; 


32. You know likewiſe, that before it is poſlible 


for you to form a true judgment of them, it is abſolute- 


ty neceſſary, that you have a clear apprehenſion of the 
things of God, and that your' ideas thereof be all 
fixed, diſtinct, and determinate, And ſeeing our ideas 
are not innate, but muſt all originally come from our 


fenfes, it is certainly neceſfary that you have fenſes ca- 


pable 
\.; . * 
F 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 13 
pable of diſcerning objects of this kind. Not thoſe 
only which are called natural ſenſes, which in this 
reſpect profit nothing, as being altogether incapable 
of diſcerning objects of a ſpiritual kind, but ſpiritual 
ſenſes, exerciſed to diſcern ſpiritual good and evil. 
It is neceſſary that you have the hearing ear, and the 
ſceing eye, emphatically ſo called; that you have a 
new claſs of ſenſes opened in your Soul, not depend- 
ing on organs of fleſh and blood, to be the evidence 
of things not ſcen, as your bodily ſenſes are of viſible 
things; to de the avenues to the inviſible world, to 
diſcern ſpiritual objects, and to furniſh you with ideas 
of what the outward eye hath not ſeen, neither the ear 
heard, 

33. And till you have theſe internal ſenſes, till the 
eyes of your underſtanding are opened, you can have 
no apprehenſion of divine things, no idea of them at all. 
Nor conſequently, till then, can you either judge truly, 
or reaſon juſtly concerning them : ſeeing your Reaſon 
Has no ground whereon to ſtand, no materials to work 
upon. 225 

2 To uſe the trite inſtance. As you cannot reaſon 
concerning colours, if you have no natural fight, be- 
cauſe all the ideas received by your other ſenſes are of 
a different kind ; ſo that neither your hearing, nor an 
other ſenſe, can ſupply your want of fight, or furni 
your reaſon in this reſpe& with matter to work upon: 
ſo you cannot reaſon concerning ſpiritual things, if you 
have no ſpiritual fight ; becaule all your ideas received 
by your outward ſenſes are of a different kind. Vea, 
far more different from thoſe received by faith or inter- 
nal ſenſation, than the idea of colour from that of ſound, 
Theſe are only different ſpecies of one genus, namely, 
ſenſible ideas, received by external ſenſation: whercas 
the ideas of faith differ toto genere from thole of external 
ſenſation. So that it is not conceiveable that external 
ſenſation ſhould ſupply the want of internal ſenſes ; or 
furniſh your reaſon in this reſpect with matter to work 
upon, | 
35. What then will your reaſon do here? How 
will it paſs from things natural to ſpiritual ? From the 
things that are ſeen to _— that are not ſeen? From 

ee ; < the 


"I 


3 
r —— — 


16 An ran „akt APPEAL 


tlie viſible to the inviſible world? What a gulph is 
here? By. what art will reaſon get over the immenſe 


chaſm ? is cannot be till the Almighty come in to 


ſuccour, and give you that Faith you have hitherto de- 


ſpiſed. Then upborn as it were upon cagles' wings, 


you ſhall ſoar away into the regions of eternity; and 
your enlightened reaſon ſhall explore even the dee 


| things of God, God himſelf revealing them to you by his 


Spurtt, 
36. I expetted to have received much light on this 


Head, from a treatiſe lately publiſhed, and earneſtly 


recommended to me, I mean, Chriſttanity not founded 


on Argument. But on a careful peruſal of that piece, 


notwithſtanding my prejudice in its favour, I could 
not but perceive, that the great delign uniformly pur- 
ſued throughout the work, was to render the whole of 
the Chriſtian inſtitution both odious and contemptible. 
In order to this the author gleans up with great care 
and diligence, the moſt lauſible of thoſe many ob- 
I Aions that have been rd againſt it by late writers, 
and propoſes them with the utmoſt ſtrength of which 
he was capable, To do this with the more effect, he 
perſonates a Chriſtian : he makes a fhew of defending 
an avowed doctrine of Chriſtianity, namely, the ſuper- 
natural influence of the Spirit of God; and often, for 
ſeveral ſentences together, (indeed in the beginning of 
almoſt every paragraph) ſpeaks ſo like a Chriſtian, that 
not a few have received him according to his wiſh, 
Mean while, with all poſſible art and fhow of reaſon, 
and in the mo!! LOOT language, he purſues his point 
throughout, which is to prove, © that Chriſtianity is 
“ contrary to reaſon ;*” or, © that no man acting ac- 
& cording to the principles of reaſon, can polkbly be a 
« Chriſtian,” 3 

37. It is a wonderful proof of the power that ſmooth 
words may have even on ſerious minds, that ſo many 
have miſtook ſuch a writer as this for a friend of Chriſ- 
tianity : ſince almoſt every Page of his tract is filled 
with groſs falſehood and broad blaſphemy : and theſe 
ſupported by fuch exploded fallacies, and common place 
ſophiſtry, that a perſon of two or thiee years ſtanding 
in the univerſity, might give them a ſufficient ens 

an 


4 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 17 


and make the author appear as irrational and contemp- 
tible as he labours to make Chriſt and his apoſtles. 
38. I have hitherto ſpoken to thoſe, chiefly, who do 
not receive the Chriſtian ſyſtem as of God. I would 
add a few words to another fort of men; (the ughi not 
ſo much with regard to our princip'es or practice, as 
with regard to their own e) to you who do receive it, 
who believe the ſcripture, but yet do not take upon you 
the character of religious men, I am therefore obliged to 
addreſs myſelf to you likewiſe, under the character of 
men of reaſon. | 8 
39. I would only aſk, Are you ſuch indeed ? Do 
you anſwer the character under which you appear? If 
{o, you are conſiſtent with yourſelves. Your principles 
and pratt.ce agree together. 
Let us try whether this 15 ſo or not. Do you not 
take the name of God in vain? Do you remember the 
Sabbath-day to keep it holy? Do you not ſpeak evil 
of the ruler of your people? Are you not 2 drunkard, 
or a glutton, faring as ſumptuouſly as you can every 

day? Making a God of your belly? Do you not 
avenge yourſelf? Are yon not a whoremonger or adul- 
terer? Anſwer plainly to your own heart, before God 
the judge of all. f 

| Why then do you ſay, you truly believe the ſcripture ? 
If the ſcripture is true you are loſt. You are in the broad 
way that leadeth to deſtruftion. Your damnation ſlum- 
bereth not. You are heaping up to yourſelf wrath 
againſt the day of wrath, and revelation of the righte- 
ous judgment of God. Doubtleſs, if the ſcripture is 
true, (and you-remain thus) it had been good for you 
if you had never been born. 
40. How is it that you call yourſelves men of rea- 
Jon P ls reaſon inconſiſtent with itſelf ? You are the 
fartheſt of all men under the ſun from any pretence to 
that character. A common {wearer, a ſabbath breaker, 
a whoremonger, a drunkard, who ſays he believes the 
ſcripture is of God, is a monſter upon earth, the greateft 
contradittion to his own, as well as to the reaſon of all 
mankind. In the name of God, (that worthy name 
whereby you are called) and which you gdaily cauſe to 
be blaſphemed) turn either to the right hand or to the 

B 3 left, 


ccc 
I—— 


4 


4 - ms av— ame LEO ꝗ] md — = 


13 An EARNEST APPEAL 
left. Either profeſs you, are an infidel, or be a Chriſ- 


tian, Halt no longer thus between two opinions. Ei- 
ther caſt off the Bible, or your fins. And in the mean 
time, if you have any ſpark of your boaſted reaſon left, 
do not count us your enemies (as I fear you have done 
hitherto, and as thouſands do wherever we have declar- 
ed, © they who do ſifch things ſhall not inherit eternal 
life, „) becauſe we tell you the truth Seeing theſe are 
not, our words, but the words of him that ſent us, Yea, 
though in doing this, we uſe” great Len of ſpeech, 
as becomes the miniſtry we have recei + For we 
are not as many who corrupt (cauponize, ſoften, and 


thereby adultcrate) © the word of God, But as of ſin- 


cerity, but as of God, in the ſight cf God, ſpeak we 
m Chriſt.” 

41. But it may be, you are none of theſe, You * 
ſtain from all ſuch things. You have an unſpotted re- 
putation. You are a man of honour, or a woman of 
virtue. You ſcorn to do an unhandſome thing, and 
are of an unblameable life and converſation. You are 
harmleſs (if I underſtand you right) and uſeleſs from 
morning to night. You do no hurt, —and no good te 
any one, no more than a ſtraw floating upon the 
water. Your life glides ſmoothly on from year to year; 
and from one ſeaſon to another, having no occaſion to 
work, 

% You waſte away 
In gentle inactivity the day.“ 

42. I will not now ſhock the eaſineſs of your tem- 
Per, by talking about a future ſtate, - But ſuffer me to 
— you 2 — about preſent things. Are you now 

apPY 
"8 ſeen a large company of reaſonable creatures 
called Indians, ſitting in a _ on the ſide of a river, 
looking ſometimes at one her, ſometimes at the ſky, 
and ſometimes at the bub oy the water, And fo 
they fat, (unleſs in the time-of Jpn for a great part of 
the year, from morning to night. 
Theſe were doubtleſs. much at eaſe. But can you 


think they were happy And how little A eee are 
D * they ? 


. 
.*% 
"22 
be 
7 


7 RE 
1 
= 


= 
= 
4% 
i” 
1 4 


N ö 
£ 18 


FE: 


To Men of Resſon and Religion. 19 


43. You eat, and drink, and ſleep, and dreſs, and 
dance, and fit down to play. You are carried abroad, 
You are at the maſquerade, the theatre, the opera-houſe, 
the park, the levee, the drawing-room. What do you 
do — ? Why ſometimes you talk ; ſometimes you 
look at one another. And what are you to do to-mor- 
row ? The next day ? The next week ? The next 
year? You are to eat, and drink, and ſleep, and dance, 
and dreſs, and play again. And you are to be carried 
abroad again, that you may again look at one another ! 
And is this all? Alas, how little more happineſs have 
you ba this, than the Indians in looking at the ſky or 
water. | 

Ah poor, dull round! I do not wonder that Col. 
M—, 25 any man of reflection) ſhould prefer death 
nſelf, even in the midſt of his years, to ſuch a life as 
this! and ſhould frankly declare, that he choſe to go 
out of the world, bccauſe he found nothing in it worth 
living for.“ | ; 

44. Yet it is certain there is buſineſs to be done: 
and many we find in all places (not to ſpeak of the vul- 
gar, the drudges of the earth) who are continually em- 
ployed therem. Are you of that number? Are you 
engaged in trade, or ſome other reputable employment ? 
I {uppoſe, profitable too ; for you would not ſpend 
your time, and labour, and thought, for nothing. 
You are then making your fortune ; you are getting 
money. True : but money is not your ultimate end. 

e trealuring up gold and filver, for its own fake, 
all men own, is as fooliſh and abſurd, as groſsly unrea- 
ſonable, as the treaſuring up ſpiders, or the wings of 
butterflies. You conſider this but as a means to ſome 
further end. And what is that? Why, the enjoying 
yourlelf, the being at eaſe, the taking your pleaſure, 
the living like a gentleman, That is plainly, either 


PEI 


the whole, or ſome part of, the happineſs above de- 


ſcribed. 

Suppoſing then your end to be actually attained, ſup- 
pole you have your wiſh, before you drop inte eter- 
nity : go and fit down with Thleeanowhee and his com- 


panions on the river ſide.— After you have toiled for 


fifty years, you are juſt as happy as they. 


20 An ARN EST APPEAL 


43. Are you, can you, or any reaſonable man, be 
Satisfied with this? You are not. It is not poſſible 
you ſhould. But what elſe can you do? You would 
have ſomething better to employ your time; but you 
know not where to find it upon earth, 

And indeed it is obvious, that the Earth, as it is now 
conſtituted, even with the help of all European arts, 
does not find ſuffictent employment, to take up half the 
waking hours of half its inhabitants. 

What then can you do ? How can you employ the 
time that lies ſo heavy upon your wa ? This very 

thing which you ſeek, declare we unto you. The 
thing you want, is the religion we preach. That alone 


leaves no time upon our hands, It fills up all the A 
blank ſpaces of life. It exactly takes up all the time by 
WE have to ſpare, be it more or leſs : ſo that he that 4 
hath much, hath nothing over, and he that has little, has 1 

no lack, | NH 
4356. Once more. Can you (or any man of reaſon) A 
think, you was made for the life you now lead ? You 1 
cannot poſſibly think ſo; at leaſt, not till you tread the I 
Bible under foot. The oracles of God bear thee wit- 

nels in every page, (and thine own heart agreeth there- 

to) that thou waſt made in the image of God, an in- 
corruptible picture of the God of glory. And what 
art thou even in thy preſent ſtate? An everlaſting 

ſpirit, going to God, For what end then did he create 

thee, but to dwell with him, above this periſhable 
world, to know him, to love him, to do his will, to 

enjoy him for ever and ever! O look more deeply in- 

to thyſelf! and into that Scripture, which thou pre- 
feſſeſt to receive as the word of God, as right concerning E. 
all things. There thou wilt find a nobler, happier ſtate MR 
deſcribed, than it ever yet entered mto thy heart to = 
conceive, But God hath now revealed it to all thoſe 
-who - rejoice evermore, and pray without ceaſing, and in 
every thing give thanks, and do his will on earth as it us 
- done in heaven, For this thou waſt made. Hereunto 
alſo thou art called. O be not diſobedient unto the 
-heavenly calling! At leaſt, be not angry with thoſe 
who would fain bring thee to be a living witneſs of that 


To Men of 'Reaton and Religion. 21 


religion, whoſe ways are indeed ways of pleafantneſs, and 
all her paths, peace. | 

47- Do you ſay in your heart, © I know all this al- 

eady. I am not barely a man of reaſon, I am a re- 
ligious man: for 1 not only avoid evil and do good, 
but uſe all the means of grace. I am conſtantly at 
church, and at the ſacrament too. I ſay my prayers 
every day. I read many good books. I faſt—every 
Thirticth of January, and Good - Friday.” Do you. in- 
= deed? Do you do all this? This you may do: You 

may go thus far, and yet have no religion at all; no fuch 
= religion as avails before God. Nay, much farther than 
this, than you have ever gone yet, or ſo much as 
thought of going. For you may give all your ' goods to 
feed the. poor, yea, your body to be burned, and yet very 
Poſſibly, if St, Paul be a judge, have no charity, no 
true religion. 

48. This religion, which alone is of value before 
God, is the very thing you want. You want (and 
in wanting this, you want all) the religion of love. 
You do not love neighbour as yourſelf, no more 
than you love God with all your heart. Aſk your 
own heart now, if it be not o? It is plain you do 
not love God. If you did you would be happy in 
him. But you know you arc not happy. Your for- 
mal religion no more makes you happy, than your | 
nerghbour's gay religion does him. O how much have 
5 ſuffered for want of plain dealing! Can you now 

ar to hear the naked truth? You have the form 
Godlineſt, but not the power, You are a mere whit 
wall. Before the Lord your God I atk you, Are you 
not? Too ſure, For your © inward parts are very 
wickedneſs.” You love © the creature more than the 
Creator.” You are “ a lover of pleaſure more than a 
lover of God.” A lover of God! You do not love 
God at all, no more than you love a ftone. You 
love the world; therefore the love of the Father is not 
in you. 

49. Lou are on the brink of the pit, ready to be 
plunged into everlaſting perdition. Indegd you have 
2-zeal for God; but not according to kndwledge, O 
how terribly have you been deceived ! Poſting to hell, 

and 


22 An xAANEST APPEAL. 


and fancying it was heaven. See at length that outward 
religion without inward, is nothing; is far worle than 
nothing, being indeed no other than a folemn mockery 
of God. And inward religion you have not, You 
have not the faith that worketh by love. Your faith 
(ſo called) is no living, ſaving principle. It is not 
the Apoſtle's faith, the ſubſtance (or ſubſiſtence) of 
things hoped for, the evidence of things not ſeen. So 
far from it, that this faith is the very thing which you 
Call enthufiaſm, You are not content with being 
without it, unleſs you blaſpheme it too. You even 
revile that life which 25 hid with Chriſt in Cod; all 
ſeeing, taſting, hearing, fecling God, 'Theſe things are 
fooliſhneſs unto you, No marvel ; “ ſor they are ſpiritu- 
ally diſcerned.” ; 
50. Oh! no longer ſhut your eyes againſt the light, 
Know you have a name that you live, but are dead. 
Your ſoul is utterly dead in fin ; dead in pride, in va- 
nity, in ſelf-will, in ſenſuality, in love of the world, 
You are utterly dead to God, There is no intercourſe 
tween your ſoul and God. You have neither feen 
him, (by faith, as our Lord witneſſed againſt them of 
old time) nor heard his voice at any time. You have 
no ſpiritual ſenſes exerciſed to diſcern ſpiritual good and 
evil, You are angry at infidels, and are all the while as 
mere an infidel before God as they. You have eyes 
that fee not, and ears that hear not. You have a callous 
unfeeling heart. 
51. Bear with me a little longer: My ſoul is diſtreſt 
for you. The god of this world hath blinded your eyes, 
and you are ſeeking death in the error of your life. Be- 
cauſe you do not commit groſs ſin, becauſe you give 


alms, and go to the Church and Sacrament, you ima« 


gine that you are ſerving God ; yet in very deed you 
are ſerving the devil. For you are doing ſtill your own 


will, not the will of God your Saviour. You are 


pleaſing yourſelf in all you do. Pride, vanity, and 

If-will (the genuine fruits of an earthly, ſenſual, de- 
viliſh heart) pollute all your words and actions. You 
are in darkneſs, in the ſhadow of death. Oh! that 
God would fay to you in thunder, Awake, thou that 


© 


+ 
"= 
= 
* * 

7 * 
* * 
"x 

1 
nd * 


' (BY 
_ 
1 4 T 
- 2 % - 
ſt, « | 
— . VB I 
% 
4 
. 
AF iN 


* 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 29 
fleepeſt, and ariſe from the dead, and Chriſt ſhall give 
| 2 bleſſed be God ! He hath not yet left him - 
ſelf without witneſs! 
% All are not loſt ! There be, who faith prefer, 

«© Though few, and piety to God!” 
Who know the power of faith, and are no ſtrangers to 
that inward vital religion, the mind. that was in Chriſt, 
« righteouſneſs, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghoſt.” 
Of you who have * taſted the good word of God, and 
the power of the world to come,” we would be glad to 
learn, if we have erred from the faith, or walked con- 
trary to the truth as it is in eſus. Let the righteous 
{mite me friendly, and reprove me; if haply that 
which is amiſs may be done away, and what is wanting 
ſupplied, till we all come to the meaſure of the ſtature 
of the fulneſs of Chriſt. | l ates | 
53. Perhaps the firſt thing that now occurs to your 
mind, relates to the doctrine which we teach. You 
have heard, that we ſay, Men may live without ſin.“ 
And have you not heard, that the Scripture ſays the 
ſame ? (we mean without committing fin.) Does not 
St. Paul fay plainly, that thoſe who believe, do not 
continue in ſin ?—That they cannot live any longer 
therein ?” Rom. vi. 1, 2. Dees not St. Peter ſay, 
6 He that ſuffereth in the fleſh, hath ceaſed from ſin ? 
that he no longer ſhould live—to the deſires of men, 
but to the will of God,“ 1 Pet. iv. 1, 2. And does 
not St. John ſay moſt expreſsly, He that committeth 
ſin is of the devil: For this purpoſe the Son of God 
was manifeſt, that he might deſtroy the works of the 
devil? Whoſoever is born of God, doth not commit 
fin : for his ſeed remaineth in him, and he cannot com- 
mit fin, becauſe he is born of God,” 1 John iii. 8, &c. 
And again, We know that whoſoever is born of God 
ſinneth not.“ ch. v. 18. | 
54. You ſee then, it is not we that ſay this, but the 
Lord. Theſe are not our words but his. And who is 
he that replieth againſt God ? Who is able to make 
God a liar ? Surely he will be juſtified in his laying, 
and clear when he is judged! Can you deny it? Have 
you not often felt a ſecret check, when you was contra- 


dicting 


- - 
CY 


24 An An NEST APPEAL 


dicting this great truth? And how often have yo 
wiſhed what you was taught to deny? Nay, can yo 
help wiſhing for it at this moment ? Do you not now 

earneſtly deſire to ceaſe from fin ? To commit it no 

more? Does not your ſoul pant after this glorious li- 

berty of the ſons of God? And what ſtrong reaſon 

have you to expett it? Have you not had a foretaſte 
of it already? Do you not remember the tame when. 
God firſt lifted up the light of his countenance upon 

you? Can it ever be forgotten? The day when the 
candle of the Lord firſt ſhone upon your head ? 


% Butter and honey did you eat, 


And lifted up on high, 5 
You ſaw the clouds beneath your feet, 
And rode upon the {ky, 
&« Far, far above all earthly things, 
Triumphantly you rode; 


You ſoar d to heaven on eagles“ win 
And found, and talk'd with God,” 


You then had power not to commit ſin. You found 
the Apoſtle's words ſtrictly true, he that is begotten of 
God keepeth himſelf, and that wicked one toucheth 


him not. But thoſe whom you took to be experienced, 


Chriſtians, telling you, „ This was only the time of 
your eſpouſals; this could not laſt always; you muſt 
come down from the mount,“ and the like, ſhook your 


faith, You looked at men more than God, and io 


became weak, and like another man, Whereas, had 


you then had any to guide you according to the truth 


of God, had you then heard the dottrine which now 


* 


ings of God are without repentance. 


55. Have you not another objection nearly allied to 2» 


this, namely, that we preach perfection? True; but 


what perf wn? The term you cannot object to; be- 4 
cauſe it is ſcriptural. All the difficulty is, to fix the 
meaning of it according to the word of God, Ard 
this we have done again and again, declaring to all the 


world, that Chriſtian Perfection docs not imply an ex» i 


emption 


ou blame, you had never fallen from your ſtedfaſtneſs ; : 
Gt had found, that in this ſenſe alſo, the gifts and call- 


nm 
—_ 


ww es ext 5 


— 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 25 
emption, from ignorance or miſtake, or infirmities, or. 
temptations : but that it does imply, the-being ſo cru- 
cified with Chriſt, as to able to teſtify, J live not, but 
Chriſt liveth in me, (Gal. ü. 23:) and hath purified my, 
heart by faith, (Acts xv. g.) It does imply the of th 


down every hagh thing that exalteth itſelf againſt the 
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought 
to the obedrence'of Chriſt, It does imply, the being holy, 
as he that hath called us is holy, in all manner of. tonver- 
ſation, (2 Cor. x. 5. 1 Pet. i. 15.) And, in a word, 
the loving the Lord our God with all our heart, and ſeru- 
ing him with all our ſtrength. 
56, Now, is it poſſible for any who believe the 

ſcripture, to deny one tittle of this? Lou cannot. 
You, dare not. You would not for the world. You. 
know it is the pure word of God. And this is the 
whole of what we preach ; this is the height and — n 
of What we (with bt. Paul) call perfection: a ſtate of 

ſoul devoutly to be wiſhed, by all who have taſted of 
the love of God. O pray for it without ceaſing. It 
is the one thing you want. Come with boldneſs to the 
throne of grace, and be aſſured that when you aſk this 
of God, you ſhall have the petition you aſk of him. 
We know indeed that to man, to the natural man, this 
is impoſhble. But we know alſo, that as no work is 
impoſſible with God, ſo all things are poſſible to him 

that believeth, . . 
57. For we are ſaved by faith. But have you not 
heard this urged as another objection againſt us, that 
we preach ſalvation by faith alone ? And dom not St. 
Paul do the ſame thing? By grace, faith he, ye are 
ſaved through faith. Can any words be more expreſs? 
And elſewhere, Believe in the Lord Feſus, and thou 
ſhalt be ſaved, Acts xvi. g1. 1 


expluned already) is, that we are ſaved from our fins, 
only by a confidence in the love of God. As ſoon ag 
we behold what manner of love it is which the Father 
hath beſtowed uſhon us, we love him (as the Apoſtle ob- 
ſerves) becauſe he firſt loved us. And then is that com- 
mandment written in our heart, that he who loveth 


Cod loveth his brother alſo : from which love of God 
C and 


— * | . "0 _ \ p 
5 N e 1 3 * 5 * " 
. 9 « 4 1 TED " : - by bf 1 4 L 7 1 7 mt 2 0 , 
1 2 IS I Wax 8 -. 4s + _— F- 9 . » ag. "0 $ * 4 _ 4 4 * 2 * PETS, l of N 8 TRACES.” Pa of P Fr 4 S * 1 wb 7 — 1 ds 4 a 
: > a 2 SI 2 K - WY 2 1 n 228888 x r * re. ade.» < - of 3 e 2 pt bx P p _ 
. v rs? -» ts : 3 1 . 8 a K * my — 64 2 — 2 wah Ay” 1 Nun — : a 2 . A, 1 % Lo * N 8 2 - - - 2 — a — "I 7 K : | * II SY _— 2 
5 Fa p —_ : * Ty 8 x _ , K 5 3 5 k * S4 8 . 
n TTY 3 © ON BIEN 4 Go ed dd ES ERNEST EC IRIS Ode CE TE . N « 
PE W S ta a RR 3 WE. og = 
4 4 * 2 ” * 1 > J 7 "a . 3 : » - 
| > DOR . p 1 3 . : * 8 ** 


What we mean by this (if it has not been ſufficiently © 


26 An ANN APPEAL 


and man, meekneſs, humbleneſs of mind, and all holy 
tempers, ſpring. Now theſe are the very eſſence of 
falvation, of Chriſtian falvation, ſalvation from fin. 
And from theſe, ' outward ſal vation fl ws, that is, holi- 
neſs of life and converſation, Well, and are not theſe 
things ſo? If you know in whom you have believed, 
you need no further witneſſes. | 

58, But perhaps you doubt, whether that faith 
whereby we are thus ſaved, implies ſuch a truſt and 
confidence in God as we deſcribe, * You cannot 
think faith implies aſſurance: an aſſurance of the love 
of God to our ſouls, of his being now reconciled to us, 
and having forgiven all our ſins.” And this we freely 
confeſs, that if number of voices is to decide the queſ- 
tion, we muſt give it up at once; for you have on 
your ſide, not only ſome who deſire to be Chriſtians 
indeed, but all nominal Chriſtians in every place, and 
the Romiſh church, one and all. Nay, theſe laſt are 
ſo vehement in your defence, that in the famed council 
of Trent, they have decreed, If any man hold 
{fduicam) truſt, confidence, or aſſurance of pardon to 
be eſſential to faith, let him be accurſed.” 

59. Thus does that council anathematize the church 
of England. For ſhe is convicted hereof, by her own 
confeſſion. The very words in the Homily on Salva- 
tion are, Even the devils believe, that Chriſt was 
born of a virgin ; that he wrought all kind of miracles, 
declaring himſelf very God; that for our ſakes he ſuf- 
fered a moſt painful death, to redeem us from death 
everlaſting. Theſe articles of our faith the devils be- 
heve ; and ſo they believe all that was written in the 
old and new Teſtament. And yet for all this faith, 
they be but devils, They remain ſtill in their damnable 
eſtate, lacking the very true, Chriſtian faith.“ 

“ The right and true Chriſtian faith is, not only to 
believe the Holy Scriptures and the articles of our 
faith are true, but alſo to have a ſure truſt and con- 
fidence to be ſaved from everlaſting damnation through 
Chriſt.” Or, (as it is expreſt a little after.) A ſure 
truſt and confidence which a man hath in God, that by the 
merits of Chriſt his fins are forgiven, aud he reconciled to 
the favour of God. 4 
60. Indeed 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 5 27 


60. Indeed the biſhop of Rome ſaith, If any man 
hold this, let him be an Anathema Maran-atha.” But 


7 it is to be hoped, Papal Anathemas do not move you. 
= You are a member of the church of England. Are 


you? Then the controverſy is at an end. Then hear 
the church. Faith is a ſure truſt which a man hath 
in God, that his fins are forgiven, Or if you are not, 
whether you hear our church or no, at leaſt, hear the 
ſcriptures, Hear believing Job, declaring his faith, 


XF 7 know, that my Redeemer livetk. Hear Thomas, (when 


having ſeen, he believed) crying out, My Lord and my 
God. Hear St. Paul clearly deſcribing the nature of 
his faith, the life I now live, I live by faith in the Son of 
God, who loved me, and gave himſelf for me, Here (to 
mention no more) all the believers who were with 
Paul when he wrote to the Coloſſians, bearing witnels, 
e give thanks unto the Father, who hath delivered us 
from the power of darkneſs, and hath tranſlated us into the 
kingdom of his dear Son: in whom we have redemption 
through his blood, even the forgiveneſs of ſins, ch. i. ver. 
12, 13, 14. : 

61, Bur what need have we of diſtant witneſſes ? 
You have a witneſs in your own breaſt, For am I not 


= ſpeaking to one that loves Cod? How came you then 


to love him at firſt? Was it not, becauſe you knew 
that he loved you? Did you, could you love God at 
all, till you taſted and ſaw that he was gracious * That 
he was merciful to you a ſinner ? What avails then 
controverly or ſtrife of words? Out of thy own mouth! 
You own, you had no love to God, till you was ſen- 
ſible of his love to you. And whatever expreſſions 
any ſinner who loves God uſes, to denote God's love 
to him, you will always upon examination, find, that 
they directly or indirectly imply forgiveneſs. Pardon- 
ing love is ſtill at the root of all, He who was offended 
is now reconciled, The new ſong which God puts in 
every mouth, is always to that effect, O Lord, T will 


WV Praiſe thee : though thou waſt angry with me, thine anger 


is turned away. Behold, God is my ſalvation. I will 
truſt and not be afraid; for the Lord Jehovah is my 
firength and my ſong : he is alſo become my ſalvation, 


Ila, X11, 1, 2, 
C 2 | 62. A 


28 | An ARNTST APPEAL * 
: 


62. A confidence then in a pardoning God, is. ef- 
ſential to true faith. The forgiveneſs of fins is one of 
the firſt. of thoſe unſeen things, whereof faith is the 
evidence. And if you are ſenſible of this, will you 
quarrel with us concerning an indifferent circumſtance 
of it? Will you think it an important objeftion that 
we aflert, that this faith is uſually given in a moment ?P 
Firſt, let me intreat you to read over that authentic 
account of God's dealings with men, the Acts of the 
Apoſtles, In this treatiſe you will find, how he wrought 
from the beginning on thoſe who received remiflion of 
ins by faith. And can you find one of theſe, (except 
perhaps St. Paul) who did not receive it in a moment? 
But abundance you find of thoſe who did, beſifles 
Cornelius and the three thouſand, and to this alto 
agrees, the experience of thoſe who now receive the 
heavenly gift, Three or four. exceptions only have I 
found in the courle of ſeveral years, (perhaps you 
yourſelf may be added to that number, and one or two 
more whom you have known.) But all the reſt of 
thoſe, who from time to time among us have beheved 
in the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, were in a moment brought 
from darkneſs to light, and from the power of Satan 
unto God. 5 | 
63. And why ſhould it ſeem a thing incredible to 
vou, who have known the power of God unto falva- 
tion; (whether he hath wrought thus in your ſoul or 
no; for there are diverſities of operations hut the ſame 
Jpirit) that the dead jhould hear the voice of the Son 
of God, and in that moment live? Thus he uſeth to 
act, to ſhew that when he willeth, to do is preſent with 
him. Let there be light, ſaid God, and there was light. 
He ſpate the word, and it was done. Thus the heavens 
and the earth were created, and all the hoſts of them. 
And this manner of acting in the preſent caſe, highly 
tuits both his power and love, There is therefore no 
hindrance on God's part; ſince as his Majeſty is, fo is 
his mercy, And whatever hindrance there 1s on the 
part of man, when God ſpeaketh, it is not. Only fk 
then, O finner, and it ſhall be given thee, even the faith 
that brings ſalvation : and that, without any merit or 


good work of thine ; for it is not of works, left any man 


- 


Nou 


* 


4 
4 
W 1 
4 * 
_—— 
_— 
- 
- + xY 
* 
4 a\ 
1 
+ 8 
BY 
. 7 
1 7 
4 
14 
wy 
4 
a. 
_ 
oy 
* 7 
- 
* 
: a 
= 
_” 
ST. 
YI 
1 
1 
N 


K — — m 
* wy LA 3 2 * . * 7 * N ö * 9 * 
S * 1. - * 8 * 19 2 * 5 — 
* 4 r Err $i non A, * - _—_ 8 FE 0 a 
=: IHE 2 - FINS. 8 33 N — > ene? we Te. "on" | n 
1 3 by Gb er Ms he "aL * 4 9 — . - Clo CY =& We Fn 
« "i — - 1 N 7 1 4 * 6 — 0 — p. 7 rn — 82 2 _— f 7 ES : . p 
A N - . 7 4 3 - 8 u be 4 * 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 29 


fhou'd boaſt, No; it is of grace, of grace ale ne. For 
unto him that worketh not, but belteveth on him that 
Juſtifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for 
righteouſneſs. 

64. But by talking thus you encourage ſinners.”” 
I do encourage them to repent: And do not you p 
Do not you know, how many heap ſin upon fin, purely 
for want of ſuch encouragement ? Becauſe they think, 
te they can never be forgiven ; there is no place for re- 
pentance left? Does not your heart alſo bleed for 


them? What would you think too dear to part 


with ? What would you not do? What would you 
not ſuffer, to bring one ſuch ſinner to repentance ? 
Could not your love endure all things for them ? 
© Yes —— if you believed it would do them good; if 
you had any hope, they would ever be better.” Why 
do you not believe it would do them good? Why have 
you not a hope that they will be better? Plainly, be- 
cauſe you do not love them enough : becauſe you have 
not that charity, which not only endureth, but at the 


# fame time believeth and hopeth all things. 


65. But that you may lee the whole {trength of this 
objection, I will ſhew you without any diſguiſe or re- 
ſerve, how I encourage the very chief of ſinners, my 
uſual language to them runs thus : | 

O ye that deny the Lord that bought you, yet hear 


© the word of the Lord. You ſeek reſt, but find none. 


Even in laughter your heart is in heavineſs. How 
long ſpend ye your labour for that which is not bread, 
and your ſtrength for that which ſatisfieth not? You 
know your foul is not ſatisfied. It is ſtill an aking 
void. Sometimes you find. (in ſpite of your principles) 
a ſenſe of guilt, an awakened conſcience. That grifl 
phantom, religion (ſo you deſcribe her) will now and 
then haunt you ſtill, Righteouſneſs looking down 
from heaven, is indeed to us no unpleaſing fight, 
But how does it appear to you. | 


Horribili ſuper aſpectu mortalibus aftans ? 


How often are you in fear of the very things you 

deny ? How often in racking ſuſpence ? © What if 

there be an hereafter ? A judgment to eome? An 
C3 unhappy 


30 An RARNESH APPEAL 


unhappy eternity ? Do you not ſtart at the thoughts? 


Can you te content to be always thus? Shall it be ſaid 
of you alſo, 


Here lies a dicer, long in doubt 
If death could kill the ſoul, or not ? 
Here ends his doubtfulneſs ; at laſt 
Convinc'd. But, O the die is caſt ! ”? 


Or, are you already convinced, there is no hereafter ? 
What a poor ſtate then are you in now? Taking a 
few more dull turns upon earth, and then dropping 
into nothing! What kind of ſpirit muſt you be of, 
if you can ſuſtain yourſelf under the thought! Under 
the expectation of being in a few months ſwept away 
by the ſtream of time, and then for ever F 


e ſwallow'd up, and loſt, 
In the wide womb of uncreated night!“ 


But neither indeed are you certain of this ; nor of any 
thing elſe. ** It may be ſo; it may not. A vaſt ſcene 
is behind. But clouds and darkneſs reſt upon it.“ 
All is doubt and uncertainty. You are continually 
toſſed to and fro, and have no firm ground for the ſole 
of your foot. O let not the poor wiſdom of man any . 

longer exalt itſelf againſt the wiſdom of God. You 
have fled from him long enough: at length ſuffer your 
eyes to be opened by him that made them, You want 
reſt to your ſoul. Aſk it of him, who giveth to all 
men liberally, and — not! You are now a 
mere riddle to yourſelf, and your condition full of 
darkneſs and perplexity. You are one among many 
reſtleſs inhabitants, of a miſerable, diſordered world, 
walking in a vain ſhadow, and diſquieting yourſelf in 
vain, But the light of God will ſpeedily diſperſe the 
anxiety of your vain conjeftures. By adding heaven 
to earth, and eternity to time; it will open fuch a 
glorious view of things, as will lead you, even in the. 
2 world, to a peace which paſſeth all under- 

nding. 4 


66. O ye groſs, vile, ſcandalous ſinners, bear ye the 3 
word of the Lord. Turn ye, turn ye from your evi! 
| ways; 


N 2 
q b PL — 4 4 

” 732 
8 1 » 0 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 


gt 
ways ; fo iniquity ſhall not be your ruin. As I live, 
faith the Lord, I have no pleaſure in the death of a fin- 
mer, but rather that he ſhould turn and live. O make 
haſte ; delay not the time. Come, and let us reaſon to- 


gether. Though your fins be as ſcarlet, they all be 
zohite as ſnow : though they be red as crimſon, they ſhall 
be as wool, —Who ts this that cometh from Edom, with 
dyed garments, red in his apparel ? It is he on whom 
the Lord hath laid the iniguities of us all ! Behold, be- 
hold the Lamb of God, that taketh away thy fins! See 


the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and 


truth | He loveth thee. He gave himſelf for thee. 
Now, his bowels of compaſſion yearn over thee! O 
believe in the Lord Jeſus, and thou ſhalt be ſaved! C 


in peace, fin no more! 


67. Now cannot you join in all this? Is it not the 
very language of your heart? O when will you take 
knowledge, that our whole concern, our conſtant la- 
bour 1s, to bring all the world to the religion which 
you feel, to ſolid, inward, vital religion! What power 
is it then that keeps us aſunder? I thine heart right, 
as my heart is with thy heart? If it be, give me thy 
hand. Come with me and fee, and rejoice in my 2eat. 


for the Lord. No difference between us (if thou art 


a child of God) can be ſo. conſiderable as our agree- 
ment is. If we differ in ſmaller things, we agree in 
that which is greateſt of all. How is it poſſible then 
that you ſhould be induced, to think or ſpeak evil of 


us? How could it ever come into your mind, to op- 


pole us or weaken. our hands? How long ſhall we 
complain of the wounds which we receive in tne houſe 
of our friends? Surely the children of this world are 


{till wiſer in their generation than the children of light. 


Satan is not divided againſt himſelf : Why are they, 
who are on the Lord's fide? How is it that wiſdom is 
not juſtified of her own children ?: 

68. Is it, becauſe you have heard, © That we only 
make religion a cloak for covetouſnels? And becauſe 
you have heard abundance of particulars alleged in 
ſupport of that general charge ? It is probable, you 
may allo have heard, © How much we have gained by 
preaching already: and, to crown all, * That we 

- 5 are 


32 An zanxesr APPEAL 


are only papiſts in diſguiſe, who are undermining and 
deſtroying the church?“ 

69. * You have heard this,” Well: and can you 
believe it ? Have you then never heard the 5th chap- 
ter of St. Matthew? I would to God you could be- 
lieve this! what is written there? How readeſt thou ? 
Bleſſed are ye when men fhall revile you and perſecute 
you, and fay all manner of evil againſt you falſely for 
my name's fake, * Rejoice and be exceeding glad ; for 
great is your reward in heaven; for ſo perſecuted they the 
prophets that were before you namely, by reviling them, 
and ſaying all manner of evil of them falſely, Do not 
you know that this (as well as all other ſcriptures) muſt 
needs be fulfilled? If fo, take knowledes that this 
day alſo it is fulfilled in your ears. For our Lord's fake, 
and for the ſake of his goſpel which we preach, men do 
revile us and ßperſecute us, and (bleſſed be God who 

iveth us to rejoice therein) jay all manner of evil of us 
faljely. And how can it be otherwiſe ? The diſciple is 
not above his maſter, It is enough for the diſciple, that 
he be as his maſter, and the ſervant as his Lord, If 
they have called the maſter of the houſe Beelzebub, how 
much more fhall they call them of his houſehold ? 

70. This only we confeſs, that, we preach inward 
ſalvation, now attainable by faith.” And for preaching 
this, (for no other crime was then ſo much as pretended) 
we were forbid to preach. any more in any of thoſe 
churches, were, till then, we. were gladly received. 
This is a notorious fact. Being thus hindered from 
preaching in the places we ſhould firſt have choſen, 
we now declare the grace of God which bringeth ſalva- 
tion, in all places of his dominion : as well know. 
ing that God dwelleth not m temples made with 
hands. This is the real, and it is the only real ground 
of complaint againit us. And this we avow before all 
mankind, we do preach this ſalvation by faith. And 
not being ſuffered to preach it in the uſual places, we 
declare it wherever a door is opened, either on a moun- 
tain or a plain, or by a river ſide, (for all which we 
conceive we have ſufficient precedent) or in a priſon, 
or, as it were, in the houſe, of Juſtus, or the ſchool of 

one Tyrannus, Nor dare we refrain. A ä 
| © 


o 
£3 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 33 


a „ 
8 
I 4 
*, =. 8 © 
* Z 


of the goſpel is committed to me; and “ woe is me if I 
preach not the goſpel.” _ 28 
| 71, Here we allow the fact, but deny the guilt. 

But in every other point alledged,. we deny the fact, 
and call upon the world to prove it, if they can. 
More eſpecially we call upon thoſe who for many 
years ſaw our manner of life at Oxford. "Theſe well 
know, that after the moſt ſtraiteſt ſect of our religion, 
we lived Phariſees : and that the grand objettion to us 
for all thoſe years, was the being righteous overmuch : 
the reading, falling, Praying, denying ourſelves ; the 
going to church, to the Lord's table ; the relieving the 
poor, viſiting thoſe that were ſick and in priſon ; in- 
ſtructing the ignorant, and labouring to reclaim the 
wicked more than was neceſſary for ſalvation. 
Theſe were our open, flagrant crimes, from the year 
1729 to the year 1737; touching which our Lord 
XX ſhall judge in that day. 

172. But waving the things that are paſt : which of 
vou now convinceth us of fin ? Which of you (I here 
more eſpecially appeal to my brethren the clergy) can 
= perſonally convict us of any ungodlineſs or unholineſs 
of converſation? Ye know in your own hearts, (all 
that are candid men, all that are not uiterly blinded 
with prejudice) that we labour to have a conſcience void 
e, offence toward God and toward man. Brethren, I 
would to God that in this ye were even as we. But 
indeed (with grief I ſpeak it) ye are not. There are 
among 7 ungodly and unholy men; openly, 
undeniably ſuch : drunkards, gluttons, returners of evil 
for evil, lars, ſwearers, prophaners of the day of the 
XZ Lord. Proof hereof is not wanting if ye require it. 
Xx Were then is your zeal againſt theſe? A clergyman, 
ſo drunk he can ſcarce ſtand or ſpeak, may, in the 
IX preſence of a thouſand people, * ſet upon another 
IF clergyman of the ſame chureh, both with abuſive words 
and open violence. And what follows? Why, the 
one is {till allowed to diſpenſe the ſacred ſigns of the 
body and blood of Chriſt, But the other is not 
allowed to receive them. Becauſe he is a field 


- „ 
y jp . 
„„ 
2 RP 
3 6 


, . 9 
> +, 5 hd 24 ET $f, Woo Be oP — LE 81 . 8 2 l 
7277 SS 
vl * d 2 2 ng » 4 ti — - = — « £% 8 3 a 
2 8 Ph : _ OO . . : 


+ At Epworth, in Lincolnſhire. dion 
73 O ye 


| 
'| 
4s 


n 
bh a 


| 34 An EAN EST APPEAL 


173. O ye pillars and fathers of the church, are 
theſe things well-pleaſing to him, who hath made you 
overſeers over that flock which he hath purchaſed with 
his own blood? O that ye would ſuffer me to boaſt 


myſelf a little! Is there not a cauſe? Have not ye 


compelled me? Which of your clergy are more un- 
fpotted in their lives, which more unwearied in their 
labours, than thole whoſe names ye caft out as evil, 
whom ye count as the filth and off-fcouring of the world? 
Which of them is more zealous to ſpend and be ſpent, 
for the loſt ſheep of the houle of Iſrael? Or, who 
amongſt them is more ready to be ofered up for their 
flock upon the ſacrifice and ſervice of their faith ? 

74. Will ye ſay, (as the hiſtorian of Cataline) Si fic 
pro patria ! If this were done in defence of the 
church, and not in order to undermine and deſtroy 
it! That is the very propoſition I undertake to prove. 
That „we are now defending the church, even the 
church of England, in oppoſition to all thoſe who 
either ſecretly undermine, or more openly attempt to 
deſtroy it.“ 
73. That we are Papiſts, (we, who are daily and 
hourly preaching that very doftrine, which is ſo ſo- 
lemnly anathematized by the whole church of Rome) 
is ſuch a charge, that I dare not waſte my time in in- 
duſtriouſly confuting it. Let any man of common 
ſenſe only look on the title pages of the ſermons we 
have lately preached at Oxford, and he will need 
nothing more to ſhew him the weight of this ſenſeleſs 
ſhameleſs accuſation ; unleſs he can ſuppoſe the go- 
vernors both of Chriſt-church and Lincoln college, 
nay, and all the univerſity to be Papr/ts too. 

76. You yourſelf can eafily acquit us of this: but 
not of the other part of the charge. You ſtill think 
we are ſecretly undermining, if not openly deſtroying 


* the church. 


What do you mean by the church ? A viſible church 
fas our article defines it) is, A company of faithful (or 
believing) people > cetus credentium, This is the eſſence 
of a church: and the properties thereof are (as they 
are deſcribed in the words that follow) That the pure 
word of God be preached therein, and the ſacraments duly 

ve 18 admaniſtered, 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 35 
adminiſtered. Now then [according to this authentic 
account) what is The church of England? What is it 
indeed, but the faithful people, the true believers of 
England ? It is true, if theſe are ſcattered abroad they 
come under another conſideration. But when they are 
viſibly joined, by aſſembling together to hear the pure 
word of God preached, and to eat of one bread, and 
drink of one cup, they are then properly the viſible 
church of England. | 

77. It were well if this were a little more conſidered 

by Gabe who ſo vehemently cry out, The church, the 
church, (as thoſe of old, The temple of the Lord ! the 
| temple of the Lord 1) not knowing what they ſpeak, nor 
whereof they affirm. A provincial or national church, 
according to our article, is, the true believers of that 
province or nation, If theſe are diſperſed up and 
down, they are only a part of the inviſible church of 
= Chriſt. But if they are viſibly joined by aſſembling 
together to hear his word and 2 of his ſupper, 
they are then a viſible church, ſuch as the church of 
England, France, or any other. 
78. This being premiſed, I aſk, How do we under- 
mine or deſtroy the church? The provincial, viſible 
church of England? The article mentions three 
things as eſſential to a viſible church: 1ſt, Living 
faith, without which indeed there can be no church at 
all, neither viſible nor inviſible; 2dly, Preaching (and 
conſequently hearing) the pure Nat of God, elſe the 
faith would languiſh and die; and gdly, A due ad- 
miniſtration of the ſacraments, the ordinary means 
whereby God increaſeth faith. Now come cloſe to 
the queſtion : in which of theſe points do we under- 
mine, or deſtroy the church ? 

Do we ſhut the door of faith ? Do we lefſen the 
number of believing people in England ? Only re- 
member what faith is, according to our homilies, (viz. 
A ſure truſt and confidence in God, that through 
the merits of Chriſt my fins are forgiven, and I recon- 
ciled to the favour of God.“) And we appeal to all 
mankind, do we deſtroy this faith, which 1s the life 
and ſoul of the church ? Is there, in fact, leſs of this 
faith in England, than there was before we went forth! 

| I think 


© I ". l TT. 
FI, * 4 8 
* ” 
q ” _ — 
bd . 8 8 "+ — 
r „. 3 ap. = ——_— 4 * . — 4 - 
Za - & Mu d 0 4 a Y * 
_ . a - 4 * „ = 1 b f d 1 4 
ws Cam, I . 2 3 ++ — R 


5 D 8 . RS, 
8 os a EA 
OI rn LEI 2” n 


i 1 8 a =D Fg 
* 8 1 
* =_ «4 * 
* 4 


- 6. ht 


g6 An ranwvent APPEAL 
1 think this is an aſſertion which the father of lies 
himſelf will ſcarce dare to utter or maintain. 

With regard then to this firſt point it is undeniable, 
we neither undermine nor deſtroy the church. The 
ſecond thing 1s, the preaching and hearing the pure 
word of God. And do we hinder this? Do we hin- 
der any miniſter from preaching the pure word of 


God? If any preach not at all, or not the pure word | 


of God,. is the hindrance in us or in themfelves? Or, 


do we leflen the number of thoſe that hear the pure 1 
word of God ? Are then the hearers thereof (whether 


read or preached) fewer than they were in times paſt ? 


Are the uſual places of public Worſhip leſs frequented i 
by means of our preaching ?  Whereſoever our lot has 


been caſt for any time, are the churches emptier than 
they were before? Surely, none that has any regard 


left either for truth or modeſty, will ſay, that in this | 


oint we are enemies to, or deſtroyers of, the church. 
The third thing requiſite (if not to the being, at 
leaſt) to the well-being of a church, is the due adminiſ- 
tration of the ſacraments, particularly that of the Lord's 
ſupper. And are we, in this reſpect, underminers or 
deſtroyers of the church ? Do we either by our exam- 


le or advice, draw men away from the Lord's table? l , 


here we have laboured moſt, are there the feweſt 
communicants? How does the fact ſtand in London, 
Briſtol, Newcaſtle? O that you would no longer ſhut 
your eyes againſt the broad light which encompaſſes 
you-on every fide ! | 

79. I believe you are ſenſible by this time, not only 


how weak this objection is, but. likewiſe how. eaſy it 2 


- 


would be, terribly to retort, every branch of it upon | x 


moſt of thoſe that make it: Whether we ſpeak of true 
living faith, of preaching the pure word of God, or 


of the due adminiſtration of the facraments, both of 
baptiſm and the Lord's ſupper. But I ſpare you. It 


fafficeth that our God knoweth, and will make manifeſt 
in that day, whether it be by reaſon ous or you, that 
men abhor the offering of the Lord. —* 

80. Others biel, „That we do not obſerve the 
laws of the Church, and thereby undermine it.“ What 
laws? 'Thg rubricks or canons? In every pariſh 

where 


TY 22 


: 1 8 4 - 
* 5 — > A 8 8 2 9 ” 2 * TY To » w 8 oP 
— < N - — nd HS Fa 3 — err 2 
r 1 Wo RE I a ES 1 e 8 « 


as,” 


k 
- a Vs 


P 2 
It nts. Wc K* 


a * ö 4 
8 l r * 
8 *. FED . wy * by * 
* PRC n * 1 Genes 
erer a 
my ET ik 


. 


To To hes oft bees and Kere, F 87 
here 1 ba e curate y I have oblervad che tu · 
brieks 9 55 e not for Wrath, butt 
for e 2 — And this, Ig far as belong te an 
unbenehced miniſter,. or Tall a. Private member ofthe 
church, I do now. uſt. mention · a Jew; ofithemy 
and leave. Juv. mA conſe, which of us has obleryed 
or does ob em moſt, % 24 01 Hu 
1. Days of faſting on abſtinence to be oblaryeds (17 
he forty:days of. Len, .,-., - 113 do ad 
 Tho:Einber days ot the four (nts: do 8H 1 
The three Rogation days, 1 Ls ven 
An Fridays in the Year, except, Chriſt beg Day 
* So many as intend to be partalgers of ther holy 
communion, Hall. ſignify. their Names) > AQ curate 
A ſome time the day before: (1 15 tts 
k if any of theſe be an open and, nocorieuaant 
© liver, —the, curate ſhall advertiſe him, tha im any 
© wiſe he preſume not to come tothe Lord's tahle watt 
he hath openly declared himſelf to have Nye cc 
ented. 20 1 
1 £ g. Then (after 8 exced), the, eu 
Hb declare unto the Fuer What e eee 
= are in the week- een tor be ob ſer ved. vd n def» 
4. The mittiſter ſhall firſt receive the. cu 108 
of both kinds himſelf, and then proceed to deliytiethe 
ſame to the biſhops, prieſts, and deacons, in like man- 
ner, if any be preſent, and after that, to the people, 
8. « In cathedral and collegiate ehurches, — 6 
es, where there are many prieſts and deacons; they 


2 — all receive the communion with: . prieſt, efery 
2 Sunday -at the leaſt. . £2 809 
3 6. The children to be ba Rn} of be 
the font, immediately aſter the laſt leſſon. 
7+ The qurates of every ſball warn the Peo- 
ple, that without great nece i they procure not their 
e to be baptized at home in their houſes, - 
8. © The curate of every pariſh ſhall diligenthiupon 
Sundays and dns after the ſecond Leſſon at den- 
1 Ing prayer, openly in the church, inſtruct and exanane 
ſo many chi en as, | (he ſball- think convenient, mhſbude 
part . the Catechiſm, 
D 9. 66 When- 


- 4 BY 
A 1 
1 — * 22 * _ * 3 . 
* 4 1 ow * 
r 
* 1 4 , opt x > Þ- 


_ 
— 
7 FRY 


< % — - 
4. We I 5 
e — 4 — 
»* — , 4 ry b 
— ; 


4 -4 
3 


— 


3 3 . ES 
n 8 8 n ns 
N , 0 \ , Ix td ENG * _ 3 


38 2 EARNEST APPEAL | 


de a ve ever dhe biſhop ſhall give notice for 
children to be brought unto him fot their confirmation, 
the curate of every pariſh ſhall" either bring or ſend in 
writing, with His hand fubſcribed thereunto, the names 
of all ſuch perſons within his — as he : ſhall t think 
fit:to be ted to the bi 
8H Now the queſtion is not, whether ee rubricks 
ought to be obſerved, (you take this for granted in 
making the obſection) but whether in fact they have 
been obſerved, by you or me, moſt * Many can witneſs Wl 
I have obſerved them 4 yea, ſometimes at the 
hazard of my life : as many, I fear, that you have 
not obſerved them * all, ea th that ſeveral of them you 
never pretended to obſerve. And is it vou that are 
accuſing me, for not obſerving the rubricks of the 
— ? What grimace is this! O tell it not in Gath ! 
Publiſh it not in the ſtreets of Aſtelon 
82. With 4 5070 65 hon 1 Wed in the firſt | 
— Lelre you to conſider, two or three N que M 

7 "Mp 


it. He you ever read For over? | 2 
- 2dly. How can theſe be be x % The eas of the 
church of England? they were never legally 
eſtabliſhed by the church ? (7 Never We confirmed 
many full convocation? 
J34dly. By what right am I required to obſerve ſuch 
canons as were never legally eſtablinedꝰ 
And then 1 will join iſſue with you on one queſtion 
2 „vis. Whether you or 1 have obſerved them 
wolt ? | 
Jo inſtance Gl in a few. 
Can. 29. No 3 ſnall be Aue | godfather or 
r to any child, — before the laid perſon hath i 
ern he holy communion. _ 
Can. 59. Every Parſon, Vicar, or Curate, upon 
Sunday and Holiday, before Evening Prayer, 
wall, for half an hour, or more, examine inſtruct 
the youth and ignorant perſons of his pariſh. 
Can. 64. Every Parſon, Vicar, or Curate, ſhall de- 
5 to t Here every Sunday, whether there be any 


GY or the week following. 
; Can, 68. 


IV, 3 


r 2 
, ohne fo IE o-, 


\ ve, - A -* f 0 . 4 * » 

*. * Q "= 4 F N * 4 0 __ ”'% OE 2 W E PLS : „ 

ge . At.” + al a od, OS \ TT, YO OOTY h p 4 
. A 


als EE. Mc, 


R 
ö 


e 


— E 
. . 
= \,v 
ASP, _—" 


r A | 2 Ss % | wo. 2 nh, A 
r 


eee. 0% 
| To Men of Reaſon and Reli ion. 39 
46 62: 06h St V0 G3 ELgNTC IO0 7114533 JOU 
Can. 68, No miniſter ſhall refuſe or delay to chriſten 
any child that is brought to the church to him upon 
Sundays or holidays to be chriſtened, or to bury auy 
corps that is brought to the church or church-yard.,,.; 
(N, B. Inability to pay fees does not alter the caſe.) , 
Can. 76. No ecclefiaſtical perſons {hall ſpend their 
2 idly, by day or by night, playing at dice, cards 
tables, 3 4 wes unt 
Now let the clergyman , who has obſerved only the 
five canons for one year laſt, paſt, and Who has rea 
over all the canons in his congregation; (as the King's 
ratification ſtraitly enjoins im to do once every year) 
let him, I ſay, caſt the firſt, ſtone at us,, for not obſerv- 
* Canons (fo called) of the church of England. 
3. * However we cannot be (it is ſaid) friends to 
the church, becauſe we do not obey the Governors of it, 
and /ubmt ourſelves (as at our ordination. we 2 
to do) to all their godly admonitions and injunctions.“ 
RE 1 anſ.ver, in every individual point of an indifferent 
nature, We do and will (by the grace of God) obey 
RE the governors of the church. But the teſtifying. tl 
AF geſpel of the grace of God, is not a point of an indif- 
ferent nature. The miniſtry which we have received of 
tee Lord Jeſus, we are at all hazards to fulfil. It is the 
= 5.7:hen of the Lord which is laid upon us here; and 
ve are to obey God rather than man. Nor yet do we in 
any ways violate the promiſe which each of us made, 
when it was laid unto him, Take thou authority to 
preach the word of God, in the name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghoſt.” We then 
promiſed to ſubmit (mark the words) to the godly ad- 
monitions and injunctions of our ordinary. But we dith 
| HEY. | * Ma e PAI? 
FTbe author of a: tract juſt publiſhed at Necattle, fen 
titled, The Notions of the Methodiſis fully diſproved, in u 
letter to the Rev. Mr. John Weſley) much inſiſts, upon this 
objetklion. I have read, and believe it quite needleſs oke 
any further notice of this performance? the writer bebe fo 
wterly unacquainted with the merits'of the caüſe, and (bei 
himſelf fo perfectly a firanger both to my liſe, hin e 
wnting ; and to the word of God, and to the 3 and ho- 
milies of the church of Eugl ang. 


1 * 
oy a _— — 


D 2 „ 


40 An zaxnzer APPEAL 


not, could not promiſe to obey ſuck injunctions, a8. te 
know are contrary to the word of Gt. 
84. © But why chen (ſay ſome) do you leave the 
church Leave the thurch f What can you, mean ? 
Do we leave ſo much as the church walls? Four on 
eyes tell you, we do not. Do we leave the ordinances 
* church ® You daily fee and know the centrary. 
we leave the fundamental doftrine of the church, 
namely, Salvation by Faith ? -It is our conſtant theme, 
in public, in private, in writing, in converſation. Do 
we leave the” practice of the church, the ſtandard where- 
of are the ten commandments ? Which are ſo eſſentially 
in-wrought in her conſtitution, (as little as you may 
«pprehend it) that whoſoever breaks one of the leaſt of 
theſe, 'is no member of the church of England. I be- 
lieve you do not care to put the cauſe on this iſſue, 
Neither do you mean this, by leaving the church. In 
truth, I cannot coriceive what you mean. I doubt 
you cannot. "conceive yourfef.. You have retailed a 
Pwene from ſomebody elſe, which you no more un- 
derſtand than he. And no marvel; for it is a true 
obſervation, © © 0 8 
Nonſenſe is never to be underſtood,” 

88. Nearly related to this is that other objection, 
that we divide the church. Remember the church is, 
The faithful people, or true believers. Now how do 
e divide theſe? Why, by :our: ſocieties.” Very 
good. Now the caſe is plain. We divide them (you 
{ay) by. uniting them together,” Truly, a very uncom- 
mon way of diuiding. O, but we divide thoſe who 
are thus united with each other, from the reſt of the 
church.“ By no means. Many of them were before 
Joined to all their brethren of the church of England 
(and many were not, until they knew us) by affembling 
themſelves "together, to hear the word of God, and to 
eat of one bread, and drink of one cup. And do they 
now forſake that afſenbling themſelves together? You 
cannot, you dare not ſay it. You know they are more 
diligent therein than ever; it being one of the fixed 
rules of our ſacieties, That every member attend the 
ordinances of God,” i. e. le doth not divide from the 


church, 


. 
> - — 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. it 


church. And if any member of the church does thus 
divide from or leave it, he hath no more place among 
G e eee, Ib 17.91 1 40 
86. I have conſidered this objection the more at 
large, becauſe it is of moſt weight with ſincere minds. 
And to all theſe, if they have fairly and impartially 
weighed the anſwer as well as the objection, I believe 
it clearly appears, that we are neither undermining not 
deftroying, neither dividing nor leaving the church. 8 
far from it, that we have great heavineſs, on her ac- 
count, yea, continual ſorrow in our hearts. And our 
prayer to God is, that he would repair the breaches 
of Sion, and build the walls of Jeruſalem, that this our 
deſolate church may flouriſh again, and be the praiſe 
of-the' whole earth,” 39049 5 12h 1 He20 ge "I OITG 
87. But perhaps you have heard, that we in truth 
regard no church at all : that gain'is the true ſpring of 
all our actions: thu J, in particular, am well paid for 
my work, having thirteen hundred pounds a year (as 
Reverend Author accurately computes it) at the Foun- 
dery alone, over and above what I receive from Briſtol, 
== Kingſwood, Newcaſtle, and other places: and that 
BE wholoever ſurvives me, will fee I have made good uſe 
of my time; for I ſhall not die a beggar- . 
88. I freely own, this is one of the beſt adviſed ob- 
jections which has ever yet been made; becauſe it not 
only puts us upon 33 a negative, (Which is ſeld pom 
an eaſy taſk) but alſo one of ſuch a kind as ſcarce ad- 
mits of any demonſtrative proof at all. But for ſuch 
proof as the nature of the thing allows, I appeal to ny 
manner of life which hath been from 3 
Ye who have ſeen it (and not with a friendly eye) for 
theſe twelve or fourteen years laſt paſt, or for ay 
part of that time, Have ye ever ſeen any thing like 
the love of gain therein? Did I not continually re- 
member the words of the Lord Jeſus, „It is more 
bleſſed to give than to receive? Ye of Oxford, Do ye 
not know theſe things are ſo ? What gain did I ſeek 
among you? Of whom did I take any thing? From 
whom did I covet filver, or gold, or apparel ? To 
whom did I deny any thing which I had even to the 
hour that I departed from you ? Ve of Epworth and 
SEO D 3 W roote, 


43 2h An 'EARNEST APPEAL 


Wrooete;, zwang whom 1 miniſtered for (nearly) the 
ace of three. years, what gain did I ſeek among you? 
r of whom did I take or covet any thing Ve of 
Savannah and Frederica, among whom God afterwards 
proved me, and ſhewed me what Was in my heart, 
What gain did I ſeek among you Of whom did I take 
any thing? Or whoſe food or apparel did I covet (for 
Hlver or gold had ye none, no more than I myſelf for 
aunny months) even when I was in hunger and naked- 
neſs ? Ye yourſelves, and the God and Father of our 
Lord Jeſus Chriſt, know that 1 lie not. 
89. But lit is ſaid) things are fairly altered now. 
Now I cannat-complain of wanting any thing ; having 
the yearly income of a biſhop of London, over and 
above what I gain at other places,” At what other 
places my friend '? Inform yourſelf a little better, and 
vou will find, that both at Newcaſtle, Briſtol, and 
Kingſwood, (che only places beſide London, where 
any collection at all is made) the money collected is 
both received and expended by the ſtewards of thoſe 
ſeveral ſocieties, and never comes into my hands at all, 
meit her firſt nor laſt. And you, or any who deſire it, 
Fhall read over the accounts kept by any of thoſe ſtew - 
ards, and fee with your ,own eyes, that by all theſe 
Adcietzes I gain juſt as much as you do. 
90. The caſe in London ſtands thus. In November 
12439, two gentlemen, then unknown to me (Mr. Ball 
And Mr. Watkins) came and deſired me once and again, 
to preach in a place called the Foundery near Moor- 
Felds. With much reluctance I at length complied. 
To ſoon. after preſſed to take that place into my own 
hands. Theſe who-were moſt earneſt therein, lent me 
the purchaſe money, which was 1151. Mr. Watkins 
and Mr. Ball then delivered me the names of ſeveral 
ſubſcribers, whe offered to pay, ſome four, or ſix, ſome 
ten ſhillings a year towards the repayment of the pur- 
chaſe- money, and the putting the buildings into repair. 
This amounted one year to near 200l. the ſecond to 
8 about 140, and ſo the hſt. | 1% 0 
9. The united ſociety begun a little after, whoſe 
weelly contribution (chiefly for the poor) is received 
. and\ewpendediby- ſy ata *- = 
Tot. 7s 6 ands 


To Men of Reaſon and Rellgion. 43 


hands at all. But there is alſo a quarterly ſubſeription 
of many of the ſociety, which is nearly equal to that 
above mentioned. Y WP 
92. The uſes to which theſe ſubſcriptions have been 
hitherto applied, are, 1ſt, the payment of that 414151, 
adly. The repairing (I might almoſt ſay rebuilding) 
that vaſt, uncouth heap of ruins at the Foundery ; 
gdly. The building galleries both for men and women ; 
gthly. The enlarging the ſociety room to near thrice 
its firſt bigneſs. All taxes and occaſional expences are 
likewiſe defrayed out of this fund. And it has been 
hitherto ſo far from yielding any overplus, that it has 
never {ufficed for theſe purpoſes yet. So far from it, 
that I am ſtill in debt, on theſe accounts, near gool. 
So much have I hitherto gained by preaching the goſ- 
pel ! Beſides a debt of 130l. ſtill remaining on account 
of the ſchools built at Briſtol ; and another of above 
2001, on account of that now building at Newcaſtle. 
J deſire any reaſonable man would now ſit down and 
lay theſe things together, and let him ſee, whether, al- 
lowing me a gram of common ſenſe, (if not of common 
honeſty) he can poſſibly conceive, that a view of gain 
would induce me to act in this manner. s 
93. You can never reconcile it with any degree af 
common ſenſe, that a man who wants nothing, who 
has already all the neceſſaries, all the conveniencies, 
nay, and many of the ſuperfluities of life, and theſe nat 
only independent on any one, but lefs liable to comin- 
1 than even a gentleman's frechold eſtate, that 
uch an one ſhould calmly and deliberately throw up 
his eaſe, moſt of his friends, his reputation, and that 
way of life which of all others is moſt agreeable both 
to his natural temper and education: that he ſhould 
toil day and night, ſpend all his time and ſtrength, 
knowingly deſtroy a firm conſtitution, and haften into 
weakneſs, pain, diſeaſes, death, to gain a debt of 
ſix or ſeven hundred pounds! | 
94. But ſuppoſing the ballance an the other fide, let 
me alk you one plain queſtion. For What gain (ſet- 
ting conſcience aſide) will you be obliged to att thus? 
To live exactly as I do? For what price will you 
Preach (and that wich all your might, not 40 .caſy 
3 TS ne | 


* 


44 An rARN EST APPEAL © 


indolent faſhionable way) eighteen, or nineteen times 
every week ? And this throughout the year? What 
ſhall I give you, to travel ſeven or eight hundred miles, 
in all weathers, every two or three months ? For 'what 
ſalary will you abſtam from all other diverſions, than 
the doing good, and the praiſing God? I am miſtaken 
if you would not prefer ſtrangling to ſuch a life even 
with thouſands of gold and ſilver. 

95. And what is the comfort you have found out 
for me in theſe circumſtances? Why, that I ſhall 
not die a beggar.” So now I am ſuppoſed to be heap- 
ing up riches, — © that I may leave them behind me. 
Leave them behind me! For whom? My wife and 
children? Who are they? They are yet unborn; 
Unleſs thou meaneſt the children of faith whom-God 
hath given me. But my heavenly Father feedeth them; 
Indeed if I lay up riches at all, it muſt be to leave be- 
hind me : (ſeeing my fellowſhip is a proviſion for life.) 
But I cannot underſtand this. What comfort would 
it be to my ſoul, now launched into eternity, that I had 
teft bend me gold as the duſt, and ſilver as the ſand of 
the ſea ? Will it follow me over the great gulph? Or 
can I go back to it? Thou that lifteſt up thy eyes in 
hell, what do thy riches profit thee now? Will all 
| thou once hadſt under the ſun, gain thee a drop of wa- 
ter to cool thy tongue? O the comfort of riches left 
behind to one who is tormented in that flame! — You 

me in mind of thoſe celebrated lines (which I once 
exceedingly admired) addreſſed by way of ern 
to. the ſoul of a poor ſelf-murderer : . + 


4 Yet ſhall thy grave with riſing flowers be dreſt, 
And the green turf lie light upon thy breaſt! 
Here ſhall the year its earlieſt S ſhow ; 
Here the firſt roſes of the ſpring ſhall blow : 
While angels, with their ers wings o'erſhade 
The place, now ſacred by thy relicks made.” 


96. I will now ſimply tell you my ſenſe. of theſe 
matters, Whether you will hear, or whether you will 
'forbear; Food and raiment 1 have; ſuch food as 1 
chuſe to eat, and ſuch raiment as I chuſe to put on. I 
have «of nor where to lay my head. 8 is 
n 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 45 


needful for life and godlineſs. And I apprehend this 
is all the world can afford. The kings of the earth 
can give me no more. For, as to gold and ſilver, I 
count it dung and droſs: I trample it under my feet. 
I (yet not I, but by the grace of God that is in me) 
eſteem it juſt as the mire in the ſtreets. I deſire it not; 
I ſeek it not: I only fear, leaſt any. of it ſhould. cleave 
to me, and I ſhould not be able to ſhake it off, before 
my ſpirit returns to God, It muſt indeed paſs through 
my hands; but I will take care (God being my helper) 
that the mammon of unrighteouſneſs /ſhall only pals 
through; it ſhall not reſt there. None of the accurſed 
thing ſhall be found in my tents, when the Lord cal- 
leth me hence. And hear ye this, all you Who have 
diſcovered the treaſures which I am to leave behind 
me: If I leave behind me ten pounds (above my debts, 
and the little arrears ,of my fellowſhip) you and all 
= mankind bear witneſs againſt me, that I lived and 
died a thief and a robber. 
—_ 97. Before I conclude, 1 3 bat intreat you 
who know God, to review the whole matter from the 
foundation. Call to mind what the ſtate of religion 
was, in our nation, a few years ſince. In whom did 
you find the holy tempers that were in Chriſt? Bowels 
of mercies, lowlineſs, meeknels, ,gentlenels, | contempt 
of the world, patience, temperance, long: ſuffering ? 
A burning love to God, rejoicing evermore, and in 
every thing giving thanks; and a tender love to all 
mankind, covering, believing, hoping, enduring all 
things? Perhaps yen dd aol know en ſuch man ja 
the world. But how many, that had all un ialy tem- 
pers What vanity and pride, what ſtubbornmeſs and 
lelf-will, what anger, fretfulneſs, diſcontent, what ſuſ- 
picion and reſentment, what mordinate affeftions, what 
irregular paſſions, what, foobſh and hurtful deſires 
might you find, in thoſe who are called the beſt of men? 
In thoſe Who made the ſtrifteſt profeſſion of religion 7 
And how few did you know who went ſo far as the 
profeſſion of religion, who had even the form of god- 
lineſs ? Did you not frequently bewail, wherever your 
lot was caſt, the general want of even outward'religion ? 
How few were ſeen at the public worſhip or 
o 


46 An rARNT ST APPEAL 
How much ſewer at the Lord's table? And was even 
this lit rle flock zealous of good works, careful, as they 
had time, to do good to all men? On the other hand, 
did you not with grief obſerve, outward irreligion in 
every place? Where could you be for one week, 
without being an eye or an ear witneſs, of curling, 
ſwearing,” or prophaneneſs, of fſabbath-breaking or 
drunkenneſs, of quarrelling or brawling, of revenge 
or 'obſcenity ? Were 'theſs things done in a corner? 
Did not groſs iniquity of all kinds overſpread our land 
as à flood ? Yea, and daily increaſe, in ſpite of all 
the oppoſition 'which the children of God did or could 
make againſt it, thin Reagan fon 50 
98. If you had been then told, that the jealous God 
would ſoon ariſe and maintain his own cauſe ; that he 
would pour down his Sparit from on high, and renew 
the face of the earth; that he would ſhed abroad his 
love in the hearts of the outcaſts of men, producing 
all holy and heavenly tempers, expelling anger, and 
pride, and evil deſire, and all unholy and earthly tem- 
pers; cauſing outward religion, the work of faith, the 
Patience of hope, the labour of love, to flouriſh and 
abound ; and wherever it ſpread, aboliſhing outward- 
irreligion, deſtroying all the works of the devil: if 
ou had been told, that this living knowledge of the 
rd would in a ſhort ſpace overſpread our land; yea, 
and daily encreaſe, in ſ.»te of all the oppoſition 
which the devil and his children did or could make 
againſt it: Would you not vehemently have deſired 
ta ſee that day, that you might bicſs God and rejoice 
therein 34k 05 3 | 6 | 
99. Behold the day of the Lord is come. He 1s 
again viſiting and redeeming his people. Having eyes, 
fee ye not? Having ears, do ye not hear? Neither 
underſtand with your hearts ? At this hour the Lord 
is rolling away our reproach. Already his ſtandard is 
ſet up. His ſpirit is poured forth on the outcaſts of 
men, and his love ſhed abroad 'in their hearts. Love 
of all mankind, meekneſs, gentlencfs, humblenels of 
mind, holy and heavenly affections, do take place of 
hate, anger, pride, revenge, and vile or vain affettions. 
Hence wherever the power of the Lord ſpreads, fprings 
WII | outward 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 47 


ontward religion in all its forms. The houſes of God 
dre filled ; the table of the Lord is thronged on every 
ſide. And thoſe, who thus ſhew their love of God, 
ſhew they love. their neighbour alſo, by being careful 
to maintain good works, by doing all manner of good 
(as they have time) to all men, They are likewiſe 
careful to abſtain from all evil. Curſing, ſabbath- 
breaking, drunkenneſs, with all other (however faſhion- 
able) works of the devil, are not once named among 
chem. All this is plain, demonſtrable fact. For this 
alſo is not done in a corner. Now, do you acknow- 
tledge the day of your viſitation ? Do you bleſs God 
and rejoice therein ? 

100. What hinders? Is it this, that men fay all 
manner of evil of thoſe whom God is pleaſed to uſe as 
inſtruments in his work? O ye fools, did ye ſuppole 
the devil was dead? Or that he would not fight for 
his kingdom? And what weapons ſhall he fight with 
if not with lies? Is he not a liar, and the father of it ? 
Suffer ye then thus far. Let the devil and his children 
fay all manner of evil of us. And let them go on de- 
ceiving each other, and being deceived. But ye need 
not be deceived alſo.— Or if you are, if you will 
believe all they ſay: be it ſo, that we are weak, filly, 
wicked men; without ſenſe, without learning, without 
even a deſire or deſign of doing good: yet I inſiſt 
upon the fact. Chriſt is preached, and ſinners are 
converted to God. This none but a madman can 
deny. We are ready to prove it by a cloud of wit- 
neſſes. Neither therefore can the inference be denied, 
that God is now viſiting his people. O that all men 
may know in this their day, the things that make for 
their peace h 

101. Upon the whole, to men of the world I would 
ſtill recommend the known advice of Gamaliel : Re- 
frain from theſe men, and let them alone ; for if this 
work be of men, it will come to nought ; but if it be of 
Cod, ye cannot overthrow it, left haply ye be found even 
to fight againſt God. But unto you whom God hath 
choſen out of the world, I fay ye are our brethren, and 
of our Father's houſe, it behoveth you, in whatſoever 


manner ye are able, to ſtrengthen our hands in God. 


And 


48 „Ha b Rar APPEAL, &c. 


And this ye are all able to do; to wiſh us good luck ig 
che name of the Lord, arid, to pray contihually, that 
none of theſe things may de ws; arid ey we" may not 
count our lives tens unto ourſelves, fo that we may finiſh 
our courſe” with joy, and the mimftry 4 which. we have fe- 
cave * ** Lint efies P 


1 1 „ 
6 1 -11 4 14 
_ 4 
\ 
o 1 
” © # 
'S. p 
* 
”" 
1 
1 
* 
; : | 
. 
11 
* 
1 
4 
LY * 
- 
I 
. 
3 
1 ; 
* .* 1 
* 
J 
4 7 
E 
3 „ 
, 3 5 
« > 
6 1 *s Ev *_ . 


Pug =» - n 
. — 33 os . 4 - 8 < 2 
f a a 1 . f q g , * . . . 
» N 8 . e 8 1 — * 3 7 a 3 — : 5 5 
. 4 fi * < - 0 0 _>_ * *: , * — 4 z 1 A a _—_— * 4 5 
Ms - 5 0 To © . $43 1, wy 8 F - Y 5 ** N 5 * Ln, Fo 
wa F 4 0 A > a > i "3 Ace - , 1 p 4 lt \ = by 


| 
5 
1 
7 
; 7 
* 
5 


I 9 =—y 


— 49 J 


&+ $4 44% Kk Kk K KEK % 


Primitive Chriſtianity. 


APPY the ſouls who firſt believ'd, 
To Jeſus, and each other cleav'd, 
Join'd by the unction from above, 
In myſtic fellowſhip of love. 


Meek, ſimple followers of the Lamb 
They liv'd, and ſpake, and thought the ſame, 
Brake the Commemorative bread, 


And drank the Spirit of their Head. 


On God they caſt their every care, 
Wreſtling with God in mighty prayer, 
They claim'd the grace, thro' Jeſus given: 
By prayer, they ſhut, and open'd heaven.. 


To Jeſus they perform'd their vows,. 
A little church in every houſe; 
They joyfully conſpir'd to raiſe 
Their ceaſeleſs ſacrifice of praiſe. 


Propriety was there unknown, 
None call'd what he poſſeſs'd his on; 
Where all the common bleſſings ſhare,, 
No ſelfiſh happinels was there. 


With grace abundantly endu'd, 

A pure, believing multitude ; 

They all were of one heart and ſoul, 
And only love inſpir'd the whole. 


O what an-age of golden days! 

O what a choice, peculiar race ! 

Waſh'd in the Lamb's all cleanſing blood, 
Anointed. kings, and prieſts to God! 


| * 
E 8 Where: 


„ 
8 Where ſhall I wander now to find - 
The ſucceſſors they left behind ? 
The faithful, whom I ſeck in vain, 
Are miniſh'd from the ſons of men. 


9 Ye different ſets, who all declare, 
Lo! here is Chriſt, or Chriſt is there ! 
Your ſtronger proofs divinely give, * 
And ſhew me where the Chriſtians live. 


10 Your claim, alas! ye cannot prove, 
Ye want the genuine mark of love: 
Thou only, Lord, thine own canſt ſhew, 
For ſure Thou haſt a church below, 


11 The gates of hell cannot prevail, 
The church on earth can never fail : 
Ah! join me to thy ſecret ones, 

Ah! gather all thy living ſtones, 


12 Scatter'd o'er all the earth they lie, 
*Till Thou collett them with thine eye, 
Draw by the mulick of thy name, 
And charm into a beauteous frame. 


13 For this the pleading Spirit groans, 
And cries in all thy baniſh'd ones: 
Greateſt of gifts, thy love impart, 
And make us of one mind and heart. 


— - - _ - 
* = 
— 2 * - 
— KW W TTTTTWt 4 
* 
= 


14 Join every ſoul that looks to Thee, 
In bonds of perfett charity : 
Now, Lord, the glorious fulneſs give, 
And all in all for ever hve, 


. 


1 JESUS, from whom all bleſſings flow, 
Great Builder of thy church below, 
If now thy Spirit moves my breaſt, 
Hear, and fulfil thy own requeſt, 


Cor J 
The few that truly call Thee Lord, 
And wait thy ſanctifying word, 
And Thee their utmoſt Saviour own, 
Unite, and perfect them in one. 


Gather them in on every ſide, 

And in thy tabernacle hide; 

Give them a reſting place to find, 
A covert from the ſtorm and wind. 


O find them out ſome calm receſs, 
Some unfrequented wilderneſs ! 

Thou, Lord, the ſecret place prepare, 
And hide, and feed the woman there. 


Thither collect thy little flock, 

Under the ſhadow of their rock : 

The holy ſeed, the royal race, 

The ſtanding monuments of thy grace ? 


O let them all thy mind expreſs, 
Stand forth thy choſen witneſles ! 
Thy power unto ſalvation ſhew, 
And perfect holinels below : 


The fulneſs of thy grace receive, 
And ſimply to thy glory live; 

Strongly reflect the light divine, 
And in a land of darkneſs ſhine, 


In them let all mankind behold, 
How Chriſtians liv'd in days of old ; 
(Mighty their envious foes to move, 
A proverb.of reproach—and love.) 


O make them of one ſoul and heart, 
The all conforming mind impart ; 
2. op of peace and unity, 

Ihe ſinleſs mind that was in Thee. 


10 


— 


11 


12 


14 


15 


16 


1 

Call them into thy wond'rous light, 
Worthy to walk with Thee in white; 
Make up thy jewels, Lord, and ſhew 
The glorious, ſpotlets church below. 


From every ſinful wrinkle free, 
Redeem'd rom all iniquity: 

The fellowſhip of ſaints make known; 
And O my God, might I be one! 


O might my lot be caſt with theſe, 
The leaſt of Jeſu's witneſſes ! 

O that my Lord would count me meet 
To walh his dear diſciples feet! 


This only thing do I require, 
Thou know'ſt *tis all my heart's deſire, 
Freely what I receive to give, 


The ſervant of thy church to live. 


After my lowly Lord to go, 

And wait upon the ſaints below, 
Enjoy his grace to angels given, 
And ſerve the royal heirs of heaven. 


Lord, if I now thy drawings feel, 
And aſk according to thy wall, 
Confirm the prayer, the ſeal impart, 
And ſpeak the anſwer to my heart. 


Tell me (or Thou ſhalt never go) 
Thy prayer is heard, it ſhall be ſo.“ — 
The word hath paſs'd thy lips—and IL 
Shall with thy people live and die. 


— 


I 


FARTHER APPEAL 


TO MEN OF 


REASON ax» RELIGION. 


N 


N a former Treatiſe I declared, in the plaineſt- 

manner I could, both my Principles and Practice; 
and anſwered ſome of the moſt important, as well as. - 
the moſt common objections to each. But I have not 
yet delivered my own ſoul, I believe it is ſtill incum- 
bent upon me to anſwer other objections, particularly 
ſuch as have been urged by thoſe who are-eſteemed re- 
ligious or reaſonable men. | 

Theſe partly relate to the Doctrines I teach, partly 
to my manner of teaching them, and partly to the ef- 
fetts which are ſuppoſed to follow from teaching theſe 
dottrines m this manner. 5 | 

I. 1. I will briefly mention what thoſe doctrines 
are, before I conſider, the objections againſt: them. 
Now all I teach reſpetts either the nature and con- 
dition of Juſtification, the nature and condition of 
Salvation, the nature of juſtifying and ſaving Faith, 
or the Author of Faith and Salvation. | | 

2, Firſt, The nature of Juſtification, It ſometimes 
mcans,* our acquittal at the laſt day, But this is alto- 


I gether 


84 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part I. 


gether out of the preſent queſtion: that Juſtification 
whereof our Articles and Homilies ſpeak, meaning pre- 
ſent forgiveneſs, pardon of fins, and conſequently ac- 
ceptance with God: who therein * declares his righ- 
teoufneſs or mercy, by or for the remiſſion of the fins 
that are paſt, ſaying, I will be merciful to thy unrigh- 
teouſneſs, and thine iniquities I will remember no more. 

I believe, + the condition of this, is Faith : I mean, 
not only, that without Faith we, cannot be juſtified : 
but alſo, that as foon as any one has true Faith, in that 
moment he is juſtiſied. 

} Good works follow this faith, but cannot go be- 
fore it: much leſs can ſanctification, which implies, a 
continued courſe of good works, ſpringing from holinels 
of Heart. But it is allowed, that entire 5 ſanctification 
goes before our juſtification at the laſt day. 

It is allowed alſo, that || Repentance, and T fruits 
meet for repentance, go before Faith. Repentance ab- 
ſolutely muſt go before faith; fruits meet for it, if there 
be opportunity. By repentance, I mean conviction of 
fin, producing real deſires and fincere reſolutions of 
amendment : and by fruits meet for repentance, ** for- 
giving our brother, ++ ceaſing from evil, doing good, 
77 uſing the ordinances of God, and in general $$ obcy- 
img him according to the meaſure of grace which we 
have received. But theſe, I cannot as yet, term good 
works ; becauſe they do not ſpring from faith and the 
love of God. 

g. By ſalvation I mean, not barely, according to the 
vulgar notion: deliverance from hell, or going to hea- 
ven: but a preſent deliverance from fin, a reſtoration 
of the ſoul to its primitive health, its original purity ; a 
recovery of the divine nature ; -the renewal of our ſouls 
after the image of God, in righteouſneſs and true hol. 
neſs, in juſtice, mercy, and truth. This implics all 
Holy, and heavenly tempers, and by conſequence all ho- 
lineſs of converſation, 


* Rom. iii. 25, + Rom. iv. 5, &c. Þ* Luke vi. 43. 
Q Heb. x11. 14. || Mark i. 15. J Matt. iii. 5. 
Matt. vi. 14, 13. . Luke iii. 4, 9, Kc. r Matt. 
vn. 7. 5 Matt, xxv. 29. 4 


Now 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 35 


"Now, if by ſalvation we mean a preſent ſalvation 

from fin, we cannot ſay, holineſs is the condition of it. 
For it is the thing itſelf. Salvation, in this ſenſe, and 
holineſs are ſynonimous terms. We mult therefore ſay, 
% Me are ſaved by Faith, Faith is the ſole condition of 
_—_ this Salvation. For without Faith we cannot be thus 
ſaved. But wholoever believeth, is ſaved already. 
. Without Faith we cannot be thus ſaved. For we 
= cannot rightly ſerve God, unleſs we love him. And 
| we cannot love him, unleſs we know him ; neither can. 
we know God, unleſs by ſaith. Therefore Salvation 
by Faith, is only in other words, the love of God by 
the knowledge of God: or, the recovery of the image 
of God, by a true ſpiritual acquaintance with him. 

4. Faith, in general, is, a divine, ſupernatural #[xor,* 
of things not ſeen, not diſcoverable by our bodily ſenſes, 
as being either paſt, future or ſpiritual. Juſtifying 
Faith implies, not only a divine #ſyo,* that God was 
in Chriit, reconciling the world unto himſelf, but a ſure. 
truſt and confidence, that Chriſt died for my fins, that 
he loved me and gave himſelf for me. And the mo- 
ment a penitent ſinner believes this, God pardons and 
abſolves him. 

And as ſoon as his pardon or juſtification is witneſt 
to him by the Holy Ghoſt, he is ſaved. He loves 
God and all mankind. He has the mind that was in 
Chriſt, and power to walk as he alſo walked, From that 
time (unleſs he make ſhipwreck of the faith) ſalvation 
gradually increaſes in his ſoul. For fo ts the kingdom of 
God, as if a man ſhould caſt feed into the ground—And 
it ſpringeth up, firſt the blade, then the ear, after that 
the full corn in the ear. 

5. The firſt ſowing of this ſeed, I cannot conceive 
to be other than inſtantaneous : whether I conſider ex- 
perience, or the word of God, or the very nature of 
the thing. However I contend not for a circumſtance, 
but the ſubſtance ; if you can attain it another way, do. 
Only ſee that you do attain it; for if you fall ſhort, 
you periſh everlaſtingly. 


n _ 
3 = F - 4x. * ” 
I SOS. ” _ 3 7 + 
CF [5 ""% 4 


* Evidence or Conviction. 
F 2 This 


56 A raxruex APPEAL, Part I. 


1  _ This beginning of that vaſt, inward change, is uſu- 
3 ally termed, The New Birth, Baptiſm is the outward 
ſign of this inward grace, which is ſuppoſed by our 
Church, to be given with and through that ſign to all 
infants, and to thoſe of riper years, if they repent and 
believe the goſpel, But how extremety idle are the 
common diſputes on this head? I tell a finner, © You 
muſt be born again.” No, ſay you, he was born 
again in baptiſm. Therefore he cannot be born again 
now.” Alas! What trifling is this? What if he was 
then a child of God ? He is now manifeſtly a child of 
the devil, For the works of his father he doth. 
iherefore do not play upon words. He. muſt go 
through an entire change of heart. In one not yet 
baptized, you yourſelf would call that change, The 
New Birth. In him, call it what you will; but re- 
member mean time, that if either he or you die without 
it, your baptiſm will be fo far from profiting you, that 
u will greatly increaſe your damnation. | 
6. Ihe Author of faith and falvation is God alone. 
It is he that works in us both to will and to do. He 
is the ſole giver of every good gift, and the ſole author 
of every good work. There is no more of power than 
of merit in man; but as all merit is in the Son of God, 
in what he has done and ſuffered for us, fo all power is 
in the Spirit of God. And therefore every man, in 
order to believe unto falvation, muſt receive the Holy 
Ghoſt. This is eſſentially neceſſary to every chriſtian, 
not in order to his working miracles, but in order to 
faith, peace, joy, and love, the ordinary fruits of the 
Spirit. 
Although no man on earth can explain the particular 
manner, wherein the Spirit of God works on the ſoul, 
yet whoſoever has theſe fruits, cannot but know and 
feel that God has wrought them in his heart. 
Sometimes, he acts more particularly on the under- 
ſtanding, opening or enlightening it, (as the Scripture 
ſpeaks) and revealing, unveiling, diſcovering to us % 
deep things of God. | 
Sometimes he acts on the wills and affections of men: 
withdrawing them from evil, inclining them to good, 
| | inſpiring, 


8 ö + 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 57 


: inſpiring, (breathing, as it were) good thoughts into 


them : ſo it has frequently been expreſt, by an eaſy, 
natural metaphor, ſtrictly analogous to 1, Tivpa, Sa- 
ritus, and the words uſed in moſt modern tongues alſo, 
to denote the Third Perſon in the Ever-blefſed Trinity. 
But however it be expreſt, it is certain, all true Faith, 
and the whole work of Salvation, every good thought, 
word and work, is altogether by the operation of the 
Spirit of God. | 


II. 1. I come now to conſider the principal ob- 
jeftions, which have lately been made againſt theſe 
Doctrines. 

I know nothing material which has been objected, as 
to the nature of Juſtification ; but many perſons ſeem ' 
to be very confuſed in their thoughts concerning it, and 
ſpeak as if they had never heard of any Juſtification, 
antecedent to that of the laſt day. To clear up this, 
there needs only a cloſer inſpection of our Articles and 
Homilies ; wherein Juſtification is always taken, for the 
preſent remiſſion of our ſins. | 

But many are the objections which: have been warm 
ly urged, againſt the condition of Juſtification, Faith 
alone: particularly in two Treatiſes, the former entitled, 
The Notions of the Methodiſts fully difproved : the ſecond, 
The Notions of the Methodiſts farther diſproved, . In both 
of which it is vehemently affirmed, 1. That this is not 
a ſcriptural Doctrine. 2. That it is not the Doctrine 
of the Church of England. | 

It will not be needful to name the former of theſe 
any more; ſeeing there is neither one text produced 
therein, to prove this Doctrine unſcriptural, nor one 


ſentence from the Articles or Homilies, to prove it con- 


trary to the Doctrine of the Church. But ſo much of 
the latter as relates to the merits of the cauſe, I will en- 
deavour to conſider calmly. As to what is perſonal,” I. 
leave it as it is. God be merciful to me, a. ſinner ! 

2, To prove this Doctrine unſcriptural, that“ Faith 
alone is the condition of Juſtification,” you alledge, 
that * Sandtiſication, according to Scripture, muſt go 
before it:“ to evince which, you quote the following 

2 | texts, 


88 A raxTHex APPEAL, Part l. - 


texts, which I leave as I find them: * Go, diſciple all 
nations teaching them to obſerve all things, tohatſoever I 
have commanded them, + He that believeth and is bap- 
. tized ſhall be ſaved, Þf Preach repentance and remaffuon 
of jms. FI Repent and be baptized every one of you, for 
the remiſſion of fins, || Repent and be converted, that 
your, fens may be blotted out. A By one offering, he hath 
perfected for ever them that are ſanctiſied. You add, 
St. Paul taught * Repentance toward God, and Faith 
toward our Lord Jeſus Chriſt ; and calls ++ Repentance 
from dead works, and Faith toward God, firft principles.” 

You ſubjoin, But ye are waſhed, lays he, but ye 
are ſanctiſted, but ye are juſtified. By waſhed is meant 
their baptiſm ; and by their baptiſm is meant, firſt their 
Sanctification, and then their Juſtification.”” This is a 
flat begging the queſtion ; you take for granted, the 
very point which you ought to prove, St. Peter 
alſo, you ſay, affirms, that baptifm does ſave us or juſtify 
us.” Again, you beg the queſtion : you take for grant- 
ed what I utterly deny, viz. that fave and juftify are 
here ſynonimous terms. Till this is proved, you can 
draw no inference at all; for you have no foundation 
whereon to build. 

I conceive theſe and all the Scriptures which can be 
quoted to prove SanRtification antecedent to Juſtifica- 
tion, (if they do not relate to our final Juſtification) 
prove only (what I have never denied) that repentance, 
or conviction of fin, and fruits meet for repentance, 
precede that Faith whereby we are juſtified : but by no 
means, that the love of God, or any branch of true ho- 
lineſs, muſt or can precede Faith, 

3. It is objected, ſecondly, That Juſtification by 
Faith alone, is not the Doctrine of the Church of 

England. | 

Jou believe, ſays the Writer above-mentioned, 
that no good work can be previous to Juſtification, nor 
conſequently a condition of it, But God be praiſed, 


Matt. xxxiti. 19, 20. + Mark xvi. 16. f Luke 
xxiv. 47. Acts ii. g8. || Chap. iii. 19, 1 Heb, 
x. +4, ** Acts xx. 21, Tt Heb. vi. 1. 

* ; | our 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 59 


our Church has no where delivered ſuch abominable 
Doctrine.“ Page 14. 

The Clergy contend for Inward Holineſs, as pre- 
vious to the firſt Juſtification..—This is the Dofrine 
they univerſally inculcate, and which you cannot op- 
— without contradicting the Doctrine of our Church.“ 

26. 

All your ſtrongeſt perſuaſives to the love of God, 
will not blanch over the deformity of that Doctrine, 
that men may be juſtified---by faith alone unleſs you 
publickly recant this horrid Doctrine, your faith is 
vain.“ Page 27. 

% If you will vouchſafe to purge out this venomous 
part of your principles, in which the wide, eſſential, fun- 
damental, irreconcileable difference, as you very juſtly 
term it, mainly conſiſts, then there will be found ſo 
far no diſagreement between you and the Clergy of the 
Church of England.“ ibid. 

4. In order to be clearly and fully ſatisfied, what the 
Doctrine of the Church of England is (as it ſtands op- 
pots to the Doctrine of the Antinomians, on the one 

d, and to that of Juſtification by works on the other) 
I will ſimply ſet down what occurs on this head, either 
in her Liturgy, Articles or Homilies. 

* Spare thou them, O God, which confeſs their 
faults : reſtore thou them that are penitent, accordin 
to thy promiſes declared unto mankind in Chriſt Jeſu, 
our Lord. 

6« He pardoneth and abſolveth all them that wy re- 
bent and unfeignedly believe his holy goſpel.” | 

* Almighty God, who doſt forgive the fins of them 
that are penitent, create and make in us new and con- 
trite hearts; that we worthily lamenting our ſins, __ 
acknowledging our wretchedneſs, may obtain of thee 
fect remiſſion and forgiveneſs, through Jeſus Chriſt — 
Lord,” Collect for Aſh-Wedneſday. 

* Almighty God---hath promiſed forgiveneſs of fins 
to all them that with hearty repentance and true faith 
turn unto him,” ,Commumon-Otkee. _ 

* Our Lord Jeſus Chriſt hath left power to abſolve 
all finners who truly repent ag: believe in him.“ Viſita- 
ton of the ſick. 


« Give 


60 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part I. 


$ Give him unfeigned repentance and ſtedfaſt faith, 

that his fins may be blotted out. ibid. | 

He is a merciful receiver of all true, penitent ſin- 
ners, and 1s ready to pardon us, if we come unto him 
with faithful repentance.” Commination Office. 

Infants indeed, our Church ſuppoſes to be juſtified 
in baptiſm, although they cannot then either believe or 
repent, But ſhe expreſsly requires both Repentance 
and Faith, in thole who come to be baptized when they 
are of riper years. | 

As earneſtly therefore as our Church inculcates, 
Tuſtification by Faith alone, ſhe neverthelels ſuppoſes 
Repentance to be previous to Faith, and fruits meet for 
repentance : yea, and Univerſal Holineſs to be previous 
to final Juſtification, as evidently appears from the fol. 
lowing words : 

Let us beſeech him---that the reſt of our life may 
be pure and holy, ſo that at the laſt we may come to 
his eternal joy.” Abſolution. 

« May we ſeriouſly apply our hearts to that holy and 
heavenly wiſdom here, which may in the end bring us 
to life everlaſting.” Viſitation of the ſick. 

© Raiſe us from the death of fin unto the life of 
righteouſnels,---that at the laſt day we may be found ac- 
ceptable in thy ſight.” Burial Office. 

„If we from henceforth walk in his ways,---ſeeking 
always his glory, Chriſt will ſet us on his right hand.“ 
Commination Office; 

5, We come next to the Articles of our Church: 
the former part of the ninth runs thus: 


Of Orrginal or Burth-Sin, 


% Original fin---1s the fault and corruption of the 
nature of every man---whereby man is very far gone 
from Original Righteouſneſs, and is of his own nature 


mclined to evil, ſo that the fleſh luſteth always con- 


trary to the ſpirit : and therefore in every perſon born 


into this world, it deſerveth God's . wrath and damna- 
tion.“ 8 2 8927 4 | 


ART, 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. | 61 


AR T. x. Of Free- Mill. 


© The condition of man after the fall of Adam is 
fuch, that he cannot turn and' prepare himſelf by his 
own natural ſtrength and good works to faith and cal- 
ling upon God, Wherefore we have no power to do 
good works, pleaſant and acceptable to God, without 
the grace of God by Chriſt ety us, that we may 
have a good will, and working with us when we have 
that good will.” | 


ART. XI. Of. the Juſtification of Man. 


«© We are accounted righteous before God, only for 
the merit of our Lord and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt by faith, 
and not for our own works or deſervings. Wherefore 
that we are juſtified by Faith only, is a moſt wholeſome 
Doctrine, and very full of comfort, as more largely is 
expreſſed in the Homily of Juſtification,” | 

I believe this Article relates to the meritorious cauſe 
of Juſtification, rather than to the condition of it. On 
this therefore I do not build any thing concerning it, 
but on thoſe that follow. 


ART. XII. Of Good Works. 


& Albeit that good works, which are the fruits of 
Faith, and follow after Juſtification, cannot put away 
our fins---yet are they plealing and acceptable to God 
in Chriſt, and do ſpring out neceſſarily of a true and 
lively Faith: inſomuch that by them a lively Faith may 
5 as evidently known, as a tree may be known by the 
ruit.“ | | 

We are taught here, 1. That good works in general, 
follow after Juſtihcation. 2. That they ſpring out of 
a true and lively Faith, that faith whereby we are juſ- 
tified, g. That true, juſtifying Faith may be as evidently 
known by them, as a tree diſcerned by the fruit. 

Does it not follow, That the ſuppoſing any good 
work to go before Juſtification, is full as abſurd as the 


ſuppoſing an apple or any other fruit to grow before 
the tree ? 
Rs _ 


62 A raxtyzex APPEAL, Part I. 


But let us hear the Church, ſpeaking yet more 
plainly. 


ART. XIII. Of Works done before Juſtification. 


& Works done before the grace of Chriſt, and the 
Inſpiration of his Spirit, (i. e. before Juſtification, as 
the title expreſles it) are not pleaſant to God, foraſmuch 
as they ſpring not of Faith in Jeſus Chriſt— yea rather, 
for that they are not done as God hath willed and com- 
manded them to be done, we doubt not they have the 
nature of ſin.” | : | | 

Now, if all works done before Juſtification, have the 
nature of ſin, (both becauſe they ſpring not of faith in 
Chriſt, and becauſe they are not done as God hath wil- 
led and commanded them to be done) what becomes of 
Sanctification previous to Juſtification ? It is utterly 
excluded: ſeeing whatever is previous to Juſtification, 
is not good or holy, but evil and ſinful. | 

Although therefore our Church does frequently aſ- 
ſert, that we ought to repent and bring forth fruits meet 
for repentance, if ever we would attain to that faith, 
whereby alone. we are juſtified ; yet ſhe never aſſerts 
{and here the hinge of the queſtion turns) that theſe are 
good words, ſo long as they are previous to Juſtification, 
Nay ſhe expreſsly aſſerts the direct contrary, viz. That 
they have all the nature of fin. So that this Horrid, 
ſcandalous, wicked, abominable, venomous, blaſphe- 
mous doctrine,“ is nevertheleſs the doctrine of the 
Church of England. | 

6. It remains, to conſider what occurs in the Ho- 
milies, firſt with regard to the meritorious cauſe of our 
Juſtification, agreeable to the 11th, and then with re- 
gard to the condition of it, agreeable to the 12th and 
2 3th Articles. 

« Theſe things muſt go together in our Juſtification ; 
upon God's part, his great mercy and grace; upon 
Chriſt's part, the ſatisfaction of God's juſtice ; and 
upon our part, true and lively faith in the mercies of. 
Jeſus Chriſt.” Homily on Salvation, Part I. 

& So that the grace of God doth not ſhut out the 
juſtice (or righteouſneſs) of God in our JEN] 

ut 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 653 


but only ſhutteth out the righteouſneſs of man —as to 
deſerving our juſtification.” 

„ And therefore St. Paul declareth nothing on the 
behalf of man, concerning his Juſtification, but only a 
true faith.” | | 

And yet that faith doth not ſhut out repentance, 
hope, love, to be joined with faith (that is, afterwards ; 
ſee below) in every man that is juſtified—Neither doth 
faith ſhut out the r1ghteouſnels of our good works, ne- 
ceſſarily to be done afterwards, But it excludeth them 
fo, that we may not do them to this intent, to be made 
Juſt (or, to be juſtified) by doing them.” 

“% That we are jufttfied by faith alone, is ſpoken, to 
take away clearly all merit of our works, and wholl 
to aſcribe the merit and deferving of our Juſtification 
unto Chriſt only.” Ibid. Part II. 

The true meaning of this ſaying, We be juſtified 
by faith only, is this, We be juſtified by the merits of 
Chriſt only, and not of our own works,” Ibid. 
Part III. 

7. Thus far touching the meritorious cauſe of our 
Juſtification ; referred to in the 11th Article. The 
12th and 19th are a ſummary of what now follows, 
with regard to the condition of it, 

« Of (juſtifying) true faith, three things are ſpecially 
to be noted, 1. That it bringeth forth good works. 
2. That without it can no good works be done, g. 
What good works it doth bring forth.” Sermon on 
Faith. Part I. 

„% Without Faith can no good work be done, accep- 
table and pleaſant unto God, For as, a branch cannot 
bear fruit of itſelf, faith our Saviour Chriſt, except jt 
abide in the vine, ſo cannot you except you abide in 
me. Faith giveth life to the oul; and they be as much 
dead to God that lack faith, as they be to the world, 
whole bodies lack fouls, Without faith all that is done 
of us, is but dead before God. Even as a picture is but 
a dead repreſentation of the thing itſelf, ſo be the works 
of all unfaithful { unbeheving) perſons before God. 
They be but ſhadows of lively and good: things, and 
not good things indeed, For true faith doth give life 
to 


64 A rAR TRE APPEAL, Part I, 


to the works, and without faith no work is good be- 
fore God.“ Ibid. Part III. | 
We mult ſet no good works before faith, nor 
think that before faith a man may do any good works, 
For ſuch works are as the courſe of a horſe that run- 
neth out of the way, which taketh great labour, but 
to no purpoſe.” Ibid, 

Without faith we have no virtues, but only the 
ſhadows of them. All the life of them that lack the 
true faith is fin.” Ibid, 
As men fiſt have life, and after be nouriſhed, fo 
muſt our faith go before, and after be nouriſhed with 
good works. And life may be without nouriſhment, | 
but nouriſhment cannot be without life.” Homily of | 
Works annexed to Faith, Part I. 

* I can ſhew a man, that by faith without works 
lived and came to heaven, But without faith never 
man had life. The Thief on the croſs only believed, 
and the moſt merciful God juſtified him. Truth it is, 

if he had lived and not regarded faith and the works 
thereof, he ſhould have loſt his ſalvation again. But 
this I fay, faith by itſelf ſaved him, But works by 
themſelves never juſtified any man.” 

„Good works go not before, in him which ſhall 
afterwards be juſtified. But good works do follow 
after, when a man is firſt juſtified. Homily on Faſt- 
ing. Part J. 
38. From the whole tenor then of her Liturgy, Arti- 
cles and Homilies, the Doctrine of the Church of Eng- 
land, appears to be this: 

1. That no good work properly ſo called, can go be- 
fore Juſtification : 

2. That no degree of true ſanctification can be pre- 
vious to it. 

. That as the meritorious cauſe of Juſtification is, 
the life and death of Chriſt ; ſo the condition of it is 
faith, Faith alone; and 

4. That. both inward and outward holineſs, are con- 

ſequent on this faith, and are the ordinary, ſtated con- 
dition, of final juſtification, 


az 


— — TIE , . 
* c 1 0 o ” = 
Sonar bag. ad a dd Ade RS * 3 
* - : f ” " » 1 . 7 363 
j ͤœw ß ̃ d 
* . 9 I n r . q 1 


een hh * 


1 


r 
— al Iz EL, = * 4 % -— T „ wi. 


9. And 


nm. 
1 13% Aa. 445 2231 0 . * * 

To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 63 
9. And'what more can you delire, who tive hither. 
to oppoſed Juſtification by Faith-alone, merely upon a 
rinciple conſcience ; becauſe you was zealous for 

inc and good works? Do I not effectually ſecure 
theſe from contempt, at the ſame time that I defend 
the doftrines of the Church ? I not only allow, but 
vehemently contend, that none ſhall ever enter into 
glory, who is not holy on earth, as well in heart, as in 
all manner of converſation. I cry aloud, Let all that / 
have believed, be careful to maintain 725 works : and,” £25 
Let every one that nameth, the * riſt, dep ert from 
all iniquity. I exhort even thoſe who are conſcious 
they do not believe, Ceaſe to do evil, learn to do well ++ 
the kingdom of heaven is at hand: therefore repent, and 
bring forth fruits meet for repentance. Are not theſe” 
directions the very ſame in ſubſtance, which you your- 
ſelf would give to perions ſo ertumftanced? What” 
means then the endleſs ſtriſe f -words Or, what doth” 


10. Many of thoſe who are 2 zealous of 
good works, as you, think I have allowed you too 
much. -Nay, my brethren, but how can we ft "alk 
lowing it, if we allow the ſcriptures to be from God ? 
For is it not written, and do not yourſelves believe, 
without holineſs no man ſhall fee the Lords And har 
then, without fighting about words, can we deny, that 
holineſs is a condition of final acceptance? And, as td 
the firſt acceptance of pardon, does not all experience * 
as well as ſcripture prove, that no man ever yet truly 
believed the goſpel, who did not firſt repent ? That 
none was ever yet truly convinced of righteouſneſs, * 
obo was not firſt convinced of fin? Repentance' there- 
ore in this ſenſe, we cannot deny to be neceſſarily pre- 

vious to faith. Is it not equally undeniable, that the 
running back into known, wilful ſin, (ſuppoſe it were 
adrunkenneſs or uncleanneſs) ſtiſles that repentance” or 
conviction? And can that repentance come to any 
good iſſue in his ſoul, Who reſolves not to forgive his 
other? Or who obſtinately refrains from what God ' 
convinces him is right, whether it be prayet or hearing 
is word? Would you ſcruple yourlelf to tell one o 
heſe, Why if you will thus drink away all convie- 
0 tion, 


| _—_ * wa 
4 4 - wh. 4 * Var — W £4 . 
4. pn » 2 . 4 ® 
1 4 > 4 . 1 * — x = * I: y 
7 Y 4 * 4 0 


SIE» 


wa” 
o 7 f 
eee * 


your arguing reproue ? 


n N — = . E 
ed ka of Beoggr 
3 - 


* Pg 1 
ee og, AFL: on dn dat AI Es. 


"wx 


66 A raxtHtR APPEAL, Part I. 


tivn, how ſhould you ever truly know your want of 
| Chriſt? Or conſequently, believe in him P. If you 
| will not forgive your brother his treſpaſſes, neither will 
your heavenly Father forgive you your treſpaſſes.---If 
| ou will not aſk, how can you expect to receive P- If 
you will not hear, how can Faith come by hearing ? It 
is plain, you grieve the Spirit of God; you will not 
1. have him to reign over you. For wnto him that hath, 
| ſhall be given but from him that hath not, i. e. uſes it 
not, be talen away even that which he hath.” 
Would you ſcruple on a proper occaſion to ſay this ? 
Lou could not ſcruple it, if you believe the Bible. 
But in ſaying this, you allow all which I have faid, 
viz. That previous to juſtifying Faith, there muſt be 
Repentance, and if opportunity permit, Fruits meet for 
Repentance. nene 
11. And yet I allow you this, that although both 
Repentance and the Fruits thereof are in ſome ſenſe ne- 
ceſſary before Juſtification, yet neither the one nor the 
other is neceſſary in the ſame ſenſe or in the ſame degree 
with Faith. Not in the ſame degree. For in what- 
ever moment a man believes (in the chriſtian ſenſe of 
the word) he is juſtified, his fins are blotted out, his 
Faith is counted to him for Righteouſneſs, But it is 
not ſo, at whatever moment he repents, or brings forth 
any or all the Fruits of Repemtance. Faith alone there- 
fore juſtifies ; which Repentance alone does not ; much 
leſs any outward work. And conſequently, none of 
theſe are neceſſary to Juſtification, in the ſame degres 
with Faith, | | 
Nor in the ſame ſenſe. For none of theſe has ſo di- 
reft, immediate a relation to Juſtification as Faith. This 
is proximately neceſſary thereto; Repentance, remotely, 
as it is neceſſary to the increaſe or continuance of Faith, 
And even in this ſenſe, theſe are only neceſſary, on ſup- 
fition---if there be time and opportunity for them: 
or in many inſtances there is not ; but God cuts ſhort 
- his work, and Faith prevents the Fruits of Repentance, 
So that the general propoſition is not overthrown, but 
clearly eſtabliſhed by theſe conceſſions; and we con- 
clude ſtill, both on the authority of Scripture and the 
h FE hes Church, 


| . 


* 


| To Men of Reaſon and Religion A 
Church, that Faith alone is the proximate condition of 


III. 1. I was once inclined to believe that none 
would openly object, againſt what I had any where 
ſaid of the Nature of Salvation, How greatly then was 
I ſurpriſed ſome months ago, when I was ſhewn a kind 
of Circular Letter, which one of thoſe whom the Holy 
Ghoſt hath made Overſeers of his Church, I was in- 
formed had ſent to all the Clergy of his Diocele ! 


Part of it ran (nearly, if not exactly) thus: 


© There is great indiſcretion in preaching up a ſort 
of Religion, as the True and Only Chriſtianity, which 
in their own account of it, conſiſts in an Enthuſiaſtic 
Ardor, to be underſtood or attained by very few, and 


not to be practiſed without breaking in upon the com- 
mon duties of life,” 


O my Lord, what manner of words are theſe ! Sup- 
poling candor and love out of the queſtion, are they 
words of truth? I dare ſtake my life upon it, there 18 
not one true clauſe in all this paragraph. | 


The propoſitions contained therein, are theſe: ' + 5 


1. That the Religion I preach conſiſts in an Enthu- 
Hate Ang 1 2 ors 
2. That it can be attained by very few: ' 

g. That it can be underſtood by very few: 

4. That it cannot be practiſed without breaking in 

upon the common duties of life. 

5. And that all this may be proved by my own 'ac- 
count of it, | bs oy Eno ff 


I earneſtly intreat your Grace to review my own 
account of it, as it ſtands in any of my former writings : 
or to conſider the ſhort account which is given in this, 
And if you can thence make good any one of thoſe pro- 
poſitions, I do hereby promiſe before God and the 
world, that I will never preach more, 


2 At 


% 


68 A ranru APPEAL, Part 1. 


At preſent I do not well underſtand what your 
Grace means by An Enthuſiaſtic 'Ardor,”” Surely 
you do not mean, the love of God! No, not though 
a poor, pardoned finner ſhoul-l carry it fo far, as to 
love the Lord his God; with all his heart, and with all 
his ſoul, and with all his ſtrength ! But this alone is 
the Ardor which I preach up, as the foundation of the 
True and Only Chriſtianity, I pray God fo to fill your 
whole heart therewith, that you may praiſe him for 


= os n 


* 


. 
e 


- 


ever and ever. | | 
But why ſhould your Grace believe, that the love of 
God, can be attained by very few? Or, that it can 
be underſtood by very few ? All who attain it, under- 
ſtand it well. And did not he who is loving to every 
man deſign, that every man ſhould'.attain true love? 
O that all would know in this their day, the things that 
make for their peace! : RAY TERS | 
And cannot the love both of God and our neighbour 
be praftiſed, without breaking in upon the common 
duties of life? Nay, can any of the common duties 
of life, be rightly practiſed without them? I appre- 


her nab 4 -—_— =— wow ITS —— 41.85 Lido 99. & wo< 4 =» 
„ 4_OPPLCHCHU a alu Livni anyarg HIT LI UT, ne 


— 

only foundation for all thoſe duties, when I preach, 
Thou ſhalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and 
thy neighbour as thyſelf. 

2. With this Letter was ſent (I believe to every 
Clergyman in the Dioceſe) the Pamphlet entitled, 06- 
fServations on the Conduct and Behaviour f a certain Sect, 
aſually diftinguiſhed by the name of Methodiſts. It has 
been generally ſuppoſed "to be wrote by a perſon, who 
is every way my ſuperior. Perhaps one reaſon why he 
did not inſcribe his name was, that his greatneſs might 
not make me afraid: and that I might have liberty to 
r as it were, on gven ground, while I anſwer for 

in conſidering, therefore, ſuch parts of theſe Obſer- 
vations, as naturally fall in my way, I will take that 
method Which, 1 believe, that Author deſires, uſing 
no ceremdny at all but | eaking as to an Equal, that 
it may the more eaſily be lcerned, where the Truth 


The 


NT ON 


— n 
* 9 


. ; Po , * r 2 N * N * * * = ' 6 8 
8 r ; J< + 418 - fd. ALT 2 r * 4 i L YL 
1 mY 1 = irons e 2 * a 1 7 f 8 8 bd es 1 * — * 1 
F r e 3 Fd. © 1 oC SAS 1 TS g - —_z „ 8 


— 


* 


To Men of Reaſon and "Religion: 


6g 
The firſt Query relating to Doctrine, is this? : 
« Whether Notions in Religion may not be height- 
ened to ſuch extremes, as to lead ſome into a diſregard 
of Religion itſelf, through deſpair of attaining ſuch ex- 
alted heights? And whether others who have imbibed 
thoſe ' Notions, may not be led by them, into a diſre- 
gard and diſeſteem of the common duties and offices of 
life ? To ſuch a degree, atleaſt, as is inconſiſtent with 
that attention to them, and that diligence in them, which 
Providence has made neceſſary to the well-being of pri- 
vate families and public ſocieties, and which Chriſtianity 
does not only require in all ſtations, and in all conditions, 
but declares at the ſame time, that the performance even 
of the loweſt offices in life, as unto God, (whoſe Provi- 
dence has placed people in their ſeveral ſtations) is truly 
= a {crving of Chril, and will not fail of its reward in the 
next world?“ 12 
1 You have interwoven ſo many particulars in this ge- 
neral Queſtion, that I muſt divide and anfwer them one 
by one. 23 | 
2. 1. Whether Notions in Religion may not be 
heightened to ſuch extremes as to lead ſome into a diſ- 
regard of Religion itſelf? OT Ne, 
A. They may. But that I have fo heightened them, 
lies upon you to prove. 5 | 
Q. 2. Whether others may not be led into a difre- 
WT g2rd of Religion, through deſpair of attaining ſuch ex- 
= alted heights ? | | 155 8 
A. What heights? The loving God with all our 
heart? I believe, this is the moſt exalted height in man 
or angel. But I have not heard, that any have been 
led into a diſregard of Religion, through Nee of at- 
Weaining this. | ee 
2. 3. Whether others who have imbibed theſe No- 
tions, may not be led by them, into a diſregard and 
diſeſteem, of the common duties and offices of life? * 
A. My Notions are, © True Religion is the loving 
WG od with all our heart, and our neighbour as ourſetyes ; 
end in that love abſtaining from all evil, and doing all 
Sp oſfible good to all men.” Now, it is not poſſible in 
the nature of things, that any. ſhould be led by theſe 
_ WS. Notions, 


«+ xs 
, 


VV — AMEN» Bath, 
nn D 


i 1 ad cc 0 Woes of 


a be lec 
2 \& 4 at leaſt 5 1 A e e into hgh 


fe, as is in nſiſtent wit t attention to them, 
" 8 mn wag Ke ron has made ra 


uite the reverſe. They lead men to diſ- 


charge . bo uties with the firifteſt, diligence and 
le — 40 


2. 5- Does not Chriſtianity require this attention 
ren ence in all ſtations and in all conditions? 


Q. 6. 1 it not 4 that the ren 


even of the loweſt offices of life, as wy „is trul 
a ſer rving of Chriſt ?, And wall. not fail — 


mn the next world ꝰ 

A. It does, But whom are you. confuting ? Not 
me. For this is the Doctrine I preach continually. 

3. Query the ſecond. * Whether the enemy of 
Chriſtianity may not find, his account, in carrying 
Chriſtianity, which was deſigned for a rule to all ſta- 
tions, and all conditions, to ſuch heights as make it 
fairly. practicable by a very few, in compariſon, or ra- 
ther by none? 

I anſwer, 1. The height to which we carry. Chriſ- 
tianity (as was but now obſerved) is this, thou ſhalt love 
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbour 

thyſelf, 2. The Enemy of 8 cannot find 
bis account, in our carrying it to this height. g. You 
will not ſay, on reflection, that Chriſtianity, even in 
is -height, is practicable by very few, or rather by 
none: 700 yourſelf-will confeſs, this is a rule (as God 
Whgne0 it ſhould) for all ſtations, and all conditions. 
the third. Whether, in particular, the 
carrying the Doctrine of Juſtification, by Faith alone 
to ſuch a height, as not to allow. that a careful and fin- 
cer obſervance of moral duties is ſo much as a condition 
of Qur acceptance with God, and of our being juſtified 
14 fight : whether this, 1 ſay, does not naturally 


perde ie Fans of uk kurs and a low 
1 eſteem 


To Men of Reaſon add Religion. 7 
eſteem of them; or rather to think them no part of the 
Chriſtian Religion ? | | | 1 
I truſt Juſtification by Faith alone, has been ſo ex- 

lained above, as to ſecure, not only a high eſteem, 
but alſo a careful and ſincere obſervance of all moral 
duties. | 

4. Query the fourth, © Whether a due and regu- 
lar attendance on the public offices of Religion, paid 
by good men in a ſerious and compoſed way, does not 
better anſwer the true ends of devotion, and is not a 
better evidence of the co-operation of the Holy Spirit, 
than thoſe ſudden agonies, roarings and ſcreamings, 
tremblings, droppings down, —— and madneſſes, 


into which their hearers have been caſt ? “ 
1 muſt anſwer this Query likewiſe, part by part. 
Q. 1. Whether a due and regular attendance on the 
public offices of Religion, paid in a ſerious and compoſed 
way, by good (i. e. well-meaning) men, does not anſwer” 
the true ends of Devotion ? | | | 
A. I ſuppoſe by Devotion you mean public worſhip z 
by the true ends of it, the love of God and man: and 
by a due and regular attendance on the public offices of 
Religion, paid in a ſerious and compoſed way, the going 
a5 often as we have opportunity to our Panſh Church, 
and to the Sacrament there adminiſtered, If fo, the 
ueſtion is, Whether this attendance on thoſe offices, 
not produce the love of God and man?” I an- 
ſwer, ſometimes it does; and ſometimes it does not, I 
myſelf thus attended them for many years; and yet am, 
conſcious to myſelf, that during that whole-time, I had. 
no more of I of God than a r Bee I know 
many hun rhaps thouſands of ſerious ons, 
who are ready to leſtifp the ſame thing. po * 
2. 2. But is not this a better evidence of the co- 
operation of the Holy Spirit, than thoſe ſudden agonies ? 
A. All theſe: perſons, as well as I, can teſtify alſo, 
that this is no evidence at all of the co-operation of the 
Holy Spirit. For ſome years I attended theſe public 
offices, becauſe I would not be puniſhed for non-atten- 
dance. And many 'of theſe attended them, becauſe their, 
parents did before them, or becauſe they would not loſe 
thein character. Many more, becauſe they r ak 


N. Anne APPEAL, Part], 
bd 1 . di | . 
otions, into either a eee of the 


common duties and offices 


- O. 4. But may they not. be led. by them into ſuch 
a degree at leaſt, of 5 SI for the common Nitin af 
1s ineonkNent with that aptentips to thetws 2s 

igence in them, which Providence has made nec 


A. No. Quite the reverſe. They lead men to diſ. 
go ll hole Gur with the ſtricteſt diligence and 


© ©. 5: Does not Chriſtianity require this attention 

and ence in all ſtations and in all conditions? 
Ves. - 

2. 6. Does it not declare, that the performance 

= of the Joel. gfices of tie, as 2 God, is trul 

a ſerving of rt 7 At U not faul OL 1tS reward 

en 1 15 

A. It does. But whom are you confuting? Not 

me. For this is the Doctrine I preach continually. 

3. Query the ſecond. *© Whether the enemy of 
Chriſtianity may not find, his account, in carrying 
Chriſtianity, which was deſigned for a rule to all ſta- 
tions, and all conditions, to fuch heights as make it 
fairly pratticable by a very few, in compariſon, | or ra- 
ther by none? 2 
IL anſwer, 1. The height to Which we carry Chriſ- 
tianity (as was but now obſerved) is this, thou alt love 
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbour 

thyſelf, 2. The Enemy of Chriſtianity cannot find 

his account, in our carrying it to this height, g. You 
will not ſay on reflection, that Chriſtianity, even in 
this height, is practicable by very few, or rather by 
none: you yourſelf-will confeſs, this is a rule (as God 
deſigned it ſhould) for all ſtations, and all conditions. 
Query the third. Whether, in particular, the 
carrying, the Doctrine of Juſtification, by Faith alone 
to ſuch, a height, as not to allow that a careful and fin- 
cers obſervance of moral duties is ſo much as a condition 
of qur acceptance with God, and of our being juſtified 
a bis fight : whether this, 1 fay, does not naturally 
people te a diſregard of hoſe duties, and a low 


* 99 y * 
s 1 0 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion, 7 
eſteem of them; or rather to think them no part of the 
Chriſtian Religion ? '” ; CONE ITE 7, 1 

I truſt Juſtification by Faith alone, has been ſo ex- 
lained above, as to ſecure, not only a high eſteem, 
alſo a careful and ſincere obſervance of all moral 
duties. N 
4. Query the fourth, © Whether a due and regu- 
— — on the public offices of Religion, paid 
by good men in a ſerious and compoſed way, does not 
better anſwer the true ends of devotion, and is not a 
better evidence of the co-operation of the Holy Spirit, 
than thoſe ſudden agonies, roarings and ſcreamings, 
tremblings, droppings down, ravings and madneſſes, 
into which their hearers have been caſt * x 
1 muſt anſwer this Query likewiſe, part by part. 
2. 1. Whether a due and regular attendance on the 
public offices of Religion, paid in a ſerious and compoſed 
way, by good (i. e. well-meaning) men, does not anſwer 
the true ends of Devotion ? : | | «oh 
A. I ſuppoſe by Devotion you mean public worſhip z 
by the true ends of it, the love of God and man: and 
by a due and regular attendance on the public offices of 
Religion, paid in a ſerious and compoſed way, the going 
as often as we have opportunity to our Panſh Church, 
and to the Sacrament there adminiſtered, If fo, the 
ueſtion is, Whether this attendance on thoſe offices, 
þ na not produce the love of God and man?” I an- 
ſwer, ſometimes it does; and ſometimes it does not. I 
myſelf thus attended them for many years; and yet am 
conſcious to myſelf, that during that whole-time, I had 
no more of the love of God than a eee I know 
many hundreds, perhaps thouſands of ſerious ons, 
who are ready to teſtify the ſame thing. 1 0 
2. 2. But is not this a better evidence of the co- 
operation of the Holy Spirit, than thoſe ſudden agonies ? 
A. All theſe: perſons, as well as I, can teſtify alſo, 
that this is no evidence at all of the co-operation of the 
Holy Spirit. For ſome years I attended theſe public 
offices, becauſe I would not be puniſhed for *non-atten» 
dance. And many 'of theſe attended them, becauſe their, 
parents did before them, or becauſe they would not loſe 
rhein character. Many more, becauſe they e 6s 


7 A, FARTHER. APPEAL, Part I. 


the means with the end, and fancied this opus operatum 
would bring them to heaven. How many thouſands 
are now under this ſtrong deluſion ? Beware, you 
bring not their blood on your own head ? Ban- beg 
2. 3. However, does not this attendance better an- 
ſwer thoſe ends, than thoſe roarings, ſcreamings, &c p 
I ſuppoſe you mean, Better than an attendance on 
that preaching, which has often been accompanied with 


theſe,” 


I anſwer. 1, There is no manner of need to ſet the 
one in oppoſition to the other: ſeeing we continually 
exhort all who attend on our preaching, to attend the 
offices of the Church. And they do pay a more re- 
gular attendance there, than ever they did before. 2. 
Their attending the Church did not, in fact, anſwer 
thoſe ends at all, till they attended this preaching alſo. 

It is the preaching remiſſion of ſins through Jeſus 

hriſt, which alone anſwers the true ends of Devotion, 
And this will always be accompanied with the co-opera- 
tion of the Holy Spirit ; though not always with ſud- 
den agonies, roarings, ſcreamings, tremblings, or drop- 
pings down. Indeed, if God is pleaſed at any time to 
permit any of theſe, I cannot hinder it. Neither can 
this hinder the work of his Spirit in the ſoul : which 
may be carried on either with or without them, But, 
4. 1 cannot apprehend it to be any reaſonable proof, 
that this is not the work of God,” that a convinced 
ſinner ſhould fall into an extreme agony, both of body 
and ſoul, (Journal g. p. 26.) That another ſhould roar 
for the diſquietneſs of her heart (p. 40.) that others 
ſhould ſcream or cty with a loud and bitter cry, © What 
muſt we do to be ſaved?” (p. 50.) that others ſhould 
exceedingly tremble and quake (p. 58.) And others, 
in a deep ſenſe of the majeſty of God, ſhould fall proſ- 
trate upon the ground. (p. 39.) 5 1 ttf 

Indeed by picking out one ſingle word from a ſen- 
tence, and then putting together what you had gleaned 
in ſixty or ſeventy pages, you have drawn a terrible 
groupe, for them who look no farther. than thoſe two 

ines, in the Obſervations. But the bare addition of 
half a line to each word, juſt as it ſtands in the place 


1 1 
— „ 0 


— 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 79 


from which you quoted it, reconciles all both to Scrip- 
ture and Reaſon, and the ſpectre- form vaniſhes away. 
You have taken into your account, ravings and mad- 
neſſes too. As inſtances of the former, you refer to the 
caſe of John Haydon, p. 44. and of Thomas Maxfield, 
P- 30. I with you would calmly conſider, his reaſon- 
ing on that head, who is not prejudiced in my favour. 
What influence ſudden and ſharp awakenings may 
have upon the body, I pretend not to explain. But I 
make no queſtion Satan, ſo far as he gets power, may 
exert himſelf on ſuch occaſions, partly to hinder the 
good work in the . who are thus touched with 
the — arrows of conviction, and partly to diſparage 
the work of God, as if it tended to lead people to. diſ- 
traction.“ | 
For inſtances of madneſs you may refer to page 88. 
90, 91, 92, 93: 'The words in page 88, are theſe : 
El could not but be under ſome concern, with re- 
gard to one or two perſons, who were tormented in an 
unaccountable manner, and ſeemed to be indeed lunatic 
as well as ſore-vexed, —Soon after I was ſent ſor t 676 


sf 1h = 2 — fa ... 5 ..M aw . * 
2 — — 2 ths avs az 08 Y torn Of rae Devil, that 1 | 


almoſt wondered her relations did not ſay much religion 
hath made thee mad. We prayed God to bruife Satan 
under her feet. Immediately we had the petition we aſt- 
ed of him. She cried out vehemently, ** He is gone, he 
is gone,” and was filled with the ſpirit of Love, and of 
a ſound mind, I have ſeen her many times ſince ſtrong 
in the Lord. When I afked abruptly, 4 What do you - 
deſire now ? ” She anſwered, © Heaven,” I aſked, 
What is in your heart ? ”” She replied, God.“ I 
aſked, ** But how is your heart when any thing pro- 
vokes you? She ſaid, © By the grace of God, I am 
not r at any thing. All the things of this 
world paſs by me as ſhadows.” Are theſe the words 
Nadge that is beſide herſelf ? Let any man of reaſon 
judge Foy 5 | 
Your next inſtance, p. 60, ſtand thus: 

AD owner I came to Uſk, where 1 og 
a ſmall company of r le, on, © The 
Man is come, to Garmin — is loſt. ' One grey 
headed man wept and trembled exceedingly: and 

* | another 


74 


| A raxruen APPEAL, Part . 


another who was there (I have ſince heard) as well as 
two or three who were at the Devauden are gone quite 


 diſtrafled ; that is, (my expreſs words are that immedi- 


ately follow, ſpecifying what it was which ſome account- 
ed diftraftion) ** They mourn and refuſe to be comforted, 
till they have Redemption through his blood,” 

If you think the caſe mentioned, p. 92, 93, to be 
another inſtance of madneſs, I contend not. It was 
becauſe I did not underſtand that uncommon caſe, that 
J prefaced it with this reflection. The fact I nakedly 
relate, and leave every man to his own judgment upon 
it.” Only be pleaſed to obſerve, that this madnels, if 
fuch it was, is no more chargeable upon me than upon 
you. For the ſubjeQ of it had no relation to, or com- 
_ with me, nor had I ever ſeen her before that 

r. 
35. Query the fifth, © Whether thoſe exalted ſtrains 
in religion, and an imagination of being already in a ſtate 
of perfection, are not apt to lead men to ſpiritual pride, 
wid to a contempt of their fellow chriſtians ; while they 
'eonſfider them as only going on in what they call the 
low and imperfect way, (i. e. as growing in grace and 
goodneſs only by degrees) even though it appeared by 
the lives of thoſe who are conſidered by them as in that 
low and imperfett way, that they are perſons who are 
gradually working out their falvation, by their own 


' Honeſt endeavours, and through the ordinary aſſiſtance 


of God's grace; with an humble reliance upon the 
merits of Chriſt for pardon of their ſins, and the accep- 
tance of their ſincere, though imperfett ſervices ? 


Il I muſt divide this Query too, but firſt permit me to 


aſk, What do you mean by thoſe exalted ſtrains in reli- 
gion ? I have ſaid again and again, I know of no more 
exalted ſtrain, than I will love thee, O Lord, my 
God: eſpecially, according to the propriety of Da- 
vid's expreſſion Tv mars. Ex intimis viſceribus 
diligam te, Domine, This premiſed, let us go on ſtep 

2. 1. Whether the | preaching of loving God 
from our inmoſt bowels,” is not apt to lead men to 


ſpiritual pride, and to contempt of their fellow Chriſ- 
A. No: 


Te Men of Reaſon and Religion. 75 


A. No: But ſo far as it takes place, it will humble 
them to the duſt. | 51 

2. 2. Whether an imagination of being already in a 
ſtate of perfection, is not apt to lead men into this ſpi- 
ritual pride ? 7 $9:4-0 | | 

A. 1. If it be a falſe imagination, it is ſpiritual pride. 
2, But true Chriſtian Perfection is no than hum- 
ble love. 

2. 3. Do not men who imagine they have attained 
this, deſpiſe others, as only going on in what they ac- 
count the low and imperfett way, that is, as growing 
in grace and goodneſs, by degrees ? 

A. 1. Men who only imagine they have attained 
this, may probably deſpiſe thoſe that are going on in any 
way. 2. But the growing in grace and goodneſs by 
degrees, is no mark of a low and imperfect way. Thoſe 
who are fathers in Chriſt, grow in grace, by degrees as 
well as the new-born babes. 

2. 4. Do they not deſpiſe thoſe who are working 
out their ſalvation, with an humble reliance upon the 
merits of Chriſt for the pardon of their fins, and the 
acceptance of their ſincere though imperfett ſervices? _ 

A. 1. They who really love God, deſpiſe no man. 
But 2. They grieve to hear many talk of thus relying 
on Chriſt, who though perhaps they are grave, honeſt, 
moral men, yet by their own words appear not to love 
God at all; whoſe ſouls cleave to the duſt, who love 
the -_ who have no part of the mind that was in 
Chriſt. ; | | 

6. Query the ſixth. Whether the fame exalted 
ſtrains and notions, do not tend to weaken the natural 
and civil relations among men, by leading the inferiors 
into whoſe heads thoſe notions are infuſed to a diſeſteem 
of their ſuperiors ; while they conſider them as in a 
much lower diſpenſation than themſelves ; though thoſe 
ſuperiors are otherwiſe ſober and good men, and regular 
attendants on the ordinances of Religion? 

I have mentioned before, what thoſe exalted notions 
are: theſe do not tend to weaken either the natural or 
civil relations among men; or to lead inferiors to a dif- 
eſteem of their ſuperiors, even where thoſe ſuperiors - 
are neither good nor ſober men. 6 

Query 


76 A raf APPEAL, Part 1. 
Query the ſeventh; | © Whether a gradual improve. 
ment in grace and goodneſs is not a better foundation of 

| rt, and of an aſſutunce of à goſpel new-birth, 
than that which is founded on the of a og int 
and inſtantaneous change; which, if there be l 
things is not caſily diſtinguiſned from fancy and imagi- 
nation; the workings whereof we may well ſuppoſe to 
be more ſtrong powerful, whe the perſon con- 
ſiders himſelf in the ſtate of one who is Ad as a 
candidate for wares Paſeo, and is taught in due time 


to ex 
r go one ſtep at a time. 


1. Whether a 1 improvement in grace and 
neſs, is not a good foundation of comfort 
A. Doubtleſs it is, if by grace and goodneſs be meant 
the knowledge and love of God through Chriſt ? 
. Whether it be not a good foundation of an 
aſſurance of a Goſpel New-Birth'? 
2 If 3 grow in this knowledge and love, it 
proof that we are born of the Spirit. But 
— in no wiſe ſuperſede the previous witneſs of 
God's Spirit with ours, that we are the children of 
God. And this is properly the foundation of the aſſu- 
rance of faith.” 
Q. 3. Whether this improvement is not a beter | 
foundation of comfort, and of an aſſurance of a gof 
New Birth, than that which is founded on the dofrme 
of a ſudden and inſtantaheous change? 
A. A better foundation than that — That / What ? 
To nvhat ſubſtantive does this refer? According to 
the Rules of Grammar, (for all the other ſubſtantives 
are in the Genitive oy and/ conſequently to be con- 
ſidered as only parts of that which governs them) you 
muſt mean, A —.— foundation than that foundation 
which is founded on this doctrine.““ As ſoon as 1 un- 
derſtand the queſtion, I will endeavour tb anſwer it. 
Q. 4. Can that ſudden and inſtantariedus change be 
eaſily diſtinguiſhed from fancy and imagination ? 
A. Juſt as eaſily as light from darkneſs: ſeeing it 
brings ſorth with it a peace that Pannen all underſtand- 
ing, Joy -aniſpeakable and full of glory, the ore of 


f 
o Men of Reaſon and Religion. 77 
God and all mankind filling the heart, and power over 
all fn. | | 4 

Q. 5. May we not well ſuppoſe the workings of 
imagination to be more ſtrong and powerful in one who 
is taught to expect ſuch a change? 

A. Perhaps we may — But {till the tree is known by 
its fruits. ſuch fruits as thoſe Sow matt 
imagination was never yet ſtrong enough to produce, 
nor any power, fave that of the Almighty. 

7. There is only one clauſe in the eighth Query, 
which falls under our preſent enquiry. | 

They make it their principal employ, wherever 
they go, to inſtil into people a few favourite tenets of 
their on; and this with — diligence and zeal as if 
the whole of chriſtianity depended upon them, and all 
efforts toward the true chriſtian life, without a belief 
of thoſe tenets, were vain and ineffectual.“ 

I plead guilty to this charge. I do make it my _ 
cipal, nay, my whole employ, and that wherever I go, 
to inſtil into the people, a few favourite tenets, (Only 
be it obſerved, they are not my own, but his that ſent 
me.) And it is undoubtedly true, that this I do, 
{though deeply conſcious of my want, both of zeal 
and diligence) as if the whole of chriſtianity depended 
upon them, and all efforts without them were void and 
vain, 

I frequently ſum them all up in one. © In Chriſt 
Jeſus, (i. e. according to his goſpel) neither circum- 
ciſion availeth any thing nor uncircumciſion, but faith 
which worketh by love.” But many times I inſt 
them one by one, under theſe, or the like expreſſions, 
© Thou ſhalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
and with all thy mind, and with all thy ſoul, and with 
all thy ſtrength : thou ſhalt love thy neighbour as thy- 
ſelf ; ”” as thy own ſoul: as Chriſt loved us. God 
is Love: and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in 
God, and God in him. Love worketh no ill to his 
neighbour : therefore love is the fulhlling of the law. 
While we have time let us do good unto all men; eſpe- 
cially unto them that are of the houſchold of faith. 
Whatſoever ye would that men ſhould do unto you, 
even ſo do unto them.“ 


'; Theſe 


78 A rARTUER APPEAL, Part I.” 


Theſe are my favourite tenets, and have been for 
many years. O that I could inſtil them into every 
foul throughout the land! Ought they not to be in- 
Killed with ſuch diligence and zeal, as if the whole of 
chriſtianity depended upon them? For, who can 
deny, that all efforts toward a chriſtian life, without 
more than a bare belief, without a thorough Cx pe- 


rience and practice of theſe, are utterly vain and in- 
effetual ? 2 


8. Part of your ninth Query is to the ſame eſſect: 

„% A few young heads ſet up their own Schemes, as 
the great ſtandard of chriſtianity ; and indulge their 
own notions to ſuch a degree, as to perplex, unhinge, 
terrify and diſtratt the minds of multitudes of) people, 
who have lived from their infancy under a Golpel. 
Miniſtry, and in the regular exerciſe of a Goſpel-wor- 
Mip. And all this, by perſuading them, that they 
neither are, nor can be true chriſtians, but by adhering 
to their doctrines.“ 

What do you mean by their own ſchemes? Their 
own notions? Their dottrines? Are they not yours 
too? Are they not the {chemes, the notions, the 
doctrines of Jeſus Chriſt ? The great, fundamental 
truths of his goſpel ? Can you deny one of them, 
without denying the Bible ?—It is hard for you to kick 
againſt the pricks! 

They perſuade (you ſay) multitudes of people, 
that they cannot be true chriſtians, but by adhering to 
their doctrines. Why, who ſays they can? Wholo- 
ever he be, I will prove him to be an infidel, Do you 
ſay, that any man can be a true chriſtian, without lov- 
ing God and his neighbour ? Surely you have not ſo 
learned Chriſt! It is your doctrine, as well as mine, 
and St. Paul's, Though I ſpeak with the tongue of 
men and angels, though I have all knowledge, and all 
faith; though I give all my goods to feed the poor, 
yea, my body to be burned, and have not love, I am 
nothing.“ | 

| Whatever public worſhip, therefore, people may 
have attended, or whatever Miniſtry they have lived 
under from thew infancy, they muſt at all hazards, be 


convinced 


: 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 79 


convinced of this, or they periſh for ever: yea, though 
that conviction at firſt unhinge them ever ſo much; 
though it ſhould, in a manner diſtratt them for a ſea- 
ſon. For it is better that they ſhould be perplexed and 


terrified now, than they ſhould ſleep on and awake in 
hell. ? 


9. In the 16th, 12th, and 19th Queries I am not 
concerned. But you include me alſo, when you ſay in 
the 11th, © They abſolutely deny, that recreations of 
any kind, conſidered as ſuch, are or can be innocent.“ 

I cannot find any ſuch aſſertion of mine, either in 
the place you refer to, or any other. But what kinds 
of recreation are innocent, it is caſy to determine by 
that plain rule, Whether ye eat or drink, or what- 
ever ye do, do all to the glory of God.” | 

I am now to take my leave of you for the preſent. 
But firſt I would earneſtly intreat you to acquaint your- 
ſelf what our doctrines are, before you make any farther 
obſervations upon them. Surely, touching the nature 
of ſalvation we agree, that “pure 1eligion and unde- 
fled is this, to viſit the fatherleſs and widow in their 
affliction,” to do all poſſible good from a principle of 
Love to God and man: and to keep ourſelves unſpotted 


from the world, inwardly and outwardly to abſtain from 
all evil. 


10. With regard to the condition of falvation, it may 
be remembered, that I allow, not only faith, but like- 
wile holineſs or univerſal obedience, to be the ordinary 
condition of final ſalvation : and that when I ſay, faith 
alone is the condition of preſent ſalvation, what I would 
allert is this; 1. That without faith no man can be 
ſaved from his fins, can be either inwardly or outwardly 
holy. And 2. That at what time; ſoever faith is given, 
holineſs. commences in the foul. For that inſtant, the 
love of God, (which is the ſource of holinels) is ſhed 
abroad in the heart. 1 

But it is objected by the Author of. © The Notions of 
the Met hodiſts diſproved,” St. James ſays, Can faith 
ave him ?“ I anſwer, Such a ſaith as is without works 

— 11 H 2 cannot 


= 


* 
% 


80 A raRT ER APPEAL, Part I. 


cannot bring a man to heaven. But this is quite beſide 
the preſent queſtion. | 

You obj 2. © St. Paul ſays, That faith made per- 
fe by love, St. James, That faith made perfect by works, 
is the condition of ſalvation,” You mean final ſalva- 
tion. I fay ſo too: but this alſo is beſide the queſtion. 

You object, g. That the Belief of the Goſpel, is called 
the obedience of faith, Rom. i. 3. And 4. That what 
Ilaiah terms Believing, St. Paul terms Obeying. Sup- 
pole I grant you both the one and the other, what will 

u inferr 

You object, 5. That in one Scripture our Lord is 
{tiled © The Saviour of them that believe: and 
m another, The Author of eternal ſalvation, to all 
them that obey him.“ 6., That to the Galatians St. 
Paul writes,“ Neither circumciſion availeth any thing, 
nor uncircumciſion, but faith which worketh by love ; ”” 
and to the Corinthians, ** circumciſion is nothing, and 
uncircumcifion is nothing, but the keeping the com- 
mandments of God.” And hence you conclude, 
© There are ſeveral texts of Scripture, wherein unbe- 
lief and diſobedience are equivalently uſed,” Very 
true : but can you conclude from thence, that we are 
not Saved by faith alone ? 


11. You proceed to anſwer ſome texts which I had 
quoted. The firſt is Epheſians ii. 8. By grace ye are 
laved through faith.” * But (ſay you) faith does not 
mean here, that grace eſpecially ſo called, but includes 
alſo obedience,” But how do you prove this? That 
circumſtance you had forgot: and ſo run off with a 
comment upon the context : to which I have no other 
objettion, than that it is nothing at all to the queſtion, 

Indeed ſome time after you add, It is plain then 
that good works are always, in St. Paul's judgment, 
joined with faith.” (So undoubtedly they are, that is, 
as an effect is always joined with its cauſe) * And there- 
fore we are not ſaved by faith alone. I cannot poſſibly 
allow the conſequence. 

You afterwards cite two more texts, and add, . You 
ſee mere faith cannot be a condition of juſtification,” 

| You 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 81 


You are out of your way. We are no more talking 
now of juſtification than of final ſalvation. | 

In conſidering Acts xvi. g1. * Believe in the Lord 
Jeſus and thou ſhalt be ſaved.” You ſay again, Here 
the word believe does not ſignify faith only,—Faith ne- 
ceſſarily produces charity and repentance ; therefore, 
theſe are expreſſed by the word believe,” 1. e. Faith 
neceſſarily 1 7 holineſs. Therefore holineſs is a 
condition of holineſs, I want farther proof. That 
Paul and Silas ſpake unto him the word of the Lord; 
and that his faith did in the ſame hour work by love, 
I take to be no proof at all. | 

You then undertake to ſhew, that confeſſing our 
ſins is a condition of juſtification, and that a confidence 
in the love of Goa, is not a condition. Some of your 
words are, This, good Sir, give me leave to ſay, is 
the greateſt nonſenſe and contradiction poſſible, It is 
impoſſible you can underſtand this jargon yourſelf, and. 
therefore you labour in vain to make it intelligible to 
others. You ſoar aloft on eagle's wings, and leave the 
poor people to gape and ſtare after you.“ 

This is very pretty, and very lively. But it is no- 
thing to the purpoſe. For we are not now ſpeaking of 
juſtification : neither have I faid one word of * The 
condition of juſtification.”” in the whole Tract to which. 
you here refer. 

In the next place (ſay you) if we are ſaved (finally 

ou mean) only by a confidence in the love of Gd 
Here I muſt ſtop you again ; you are now running be- 
fide the queſtion, on the other hand. The ſole poſition. 
which I here advance is this: True believers are ſaved. 
from mward and outward fin by faith. By faith alone- 
the love of God and all mankind is ſhed abroad in their 
hearts, bringing with it the mind that was in Chriſt, 
and producing all holinels of converſation. 


IV. 1. I am now to conſider, What has been lately 
objected, with regard to the nature of ſaving faith. 


The Author laſt mentioned “ cannot underſtand how 
thoſe texts of St. John are at all to the purpoſe,” 2 
John. ui. 1. Behold what manner of love the Fathen 


II 3. | hath. 


a 
— — —  — ů ů = SLA —4 9 — 
_ 


82 A r ATEN APPEAL, Part I. 


hath beſtowed upon us, that we ſhould be called the 
ſons of God,” And chap. iv. 19. We love him, be- 
cauſe he firſt loved us,” I anſwer 1. Theſe texts were 
not produced, in the Appeal, by way of proof, but of 
illuſtration only. But 2. I apprehend they may be 
produced as a proof, both that chriſtian faith implies a 
confidence. in the love of God, and that ſuch a con- 
fidence has a direct tendency to ſalvation, to holineſs 
both of heart and life. 

% Behold what manner of love the Father hath be- 
ſtowed upon us, that we ſhould be called the ſons of 
God!” Are not theſe words an expreſſion of chriſtian 
faith? As dire& an one as can well be conceived ? 
And I appeal to every man, whether they do not ex- 
2 the ſtrongeſt confidence of the love of God ? 

our own comment puts this beyond diſpute. * Let 
us conſider attentively and with grateful hearts, the 
great love and mercy of God, in calling us to be his 
ſons, and beſtowing on us the privileges belonging to 
ſuch.” Do you not perceive, that you have given up 
the cauſe? You have yourſelf taught us, that theſe 
words imply * A ſenſe of. the great love and mercy of 
God, in beſtowing upon us the privileges belonging to 


huis ſons,” 


The Apoſtle adds, Beloved, now are we the ſons 
of God; and it doth not yet appear what we fhall be: 


but we know that when he ſhall appear, we ſhall be 


like him; for we ſhall ſee him as he is. 
I ſuppoſe no one will ſay, either that theſe words are 
not expreſſive of chriſtian faith; or, that they do not 


imply the ſtrongeſt confidence in the love of God, It 


follows, © And every man that hath this hope in him, 
purifieth himſelf even as he is pure.” = 
Hence it appears, That this faith is a ſaving faith, 


that there is the cloſeſt connection between this faith 


and holineſs, This text therefore is directly to the pur- 
Pole, in reſpect of both the cee to be proved. 
The other is, We love him, becauſe he firſt loved 
us.“ And here alſo, for fear I ſhould fail in the proof, 
you have drawn it up ready to my hands. 
6 God ſent his only Son---to redeem us from fin, by 
purchaſing for us grace and faluation.. By which grace 
; we 


1 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 83 


we through faith and repentance have our fins par- 
doned— And therefore we are bound to return the tri- 
bute of our love and gratitude, and to obey him faith- 
fully, as long as we live,” 

Now, though we have our fins pardoned, if we do 
not know they are pardoned, this cannot bind us either 
to love or obedience. But if we do know it, and by 
that very knowledge, or confidence in the pardoning 
love of God, are both bound and enabled to love ax 
obey him, this is the whole of what I contend for. 

2. You afterwards object againſt ſome other texts 
which I had cited, to illuſtrate the nature of ſavin 
faith. My words were, „Hear believing Job, de- 
claring his faith, I know that my Redeemer livelh, I 
here affirm two things, 1. That Job was then a be- 
lever, 2. That he declared his faith in theſe words. 
And all I affirm, you allow. Your own words are, 
God was pleaſed to beſtow upon him a ſtrong aſſu- 
rance of his favour---to inſpire him with a prophecy 
of the reſurrection, and that he ſhould have a ſhare 
in it.“ 

I went on, ©* Hear Thomas, when having ſeen he 
believed, crying out, My Lord, and my God.” Here- 
on you comment thus, The meaning of which is that 
St. Thomas makes a confeſhon both of his faith and re- 

entance,” I agree with you. But you add, “ In. 

t. Thomas's confeſſion there is not implied an aſſurance 
of pardon.” You cannot agree with yourſelf in this; 
but immediately ſubjoin, If it did imply ſuch an 
. aſſurance, he might well have it, ſince he had an im- 
mediate revelation of it from God himſelf.” 

Yet a little before you endeavoured to prove that one 
who was not a whit behind the very chief Apoſtles had 
not ſuch an aſfurance : where, in order to ſhew that 
faith does not imply this, you ſaid, ** St. Paul methinks 
has fully determined this point (1 Cor. iv. 4.) © I know 
nothing by myſelf, ſays he, yet am I not hereby juſti- 
fied.” ---* And if an Apoſtle ſo illuminated, does not 
think himſelf juſtified **--- Then I grant, he has fully 
determined the point. But before you abfolutely fix 
upon that concluſion, be pleaſed to remember your 
own comment that follows, on thoſe other words of St.. 

Paul, 


$4 A rAATUEN APPEAL, Part J. 


Paul, The life I now live, I live by faith in the Son 
of God, who loved me and gave himſelf for me.“ 
. Your words are, And no queſtion a perſon endowed 
with ſuch extraordinary gifts, might arrive at a very 
eminent degree of aſſurance.“-So he did arrive at a 
very eminent degree of aſſurance, though he did not 
think himſelf juſtified ! | 

I can ſcarce think you have read over that chapter 
to the Coloſſians : elſe ſurely you would not aſſert, that 
thoſe words on which the ſtreſs lies, (viz. © Who hath 
delivered us from the power of darkneſs, and hath tran- 
. Nlated us into the kingdom of his dear Son: in whom 
we have redemption through his blood, even the for- 
givenels of ſins,)“ do not relate to Paul and Timothy 
who wrote the Epiſtle, but to the Coloſſians, to whom 
they wrote.” I need be at no pains to anſwer this; 
for preſently after your own words are, He hath 
made us, meaning the Coloſſians as well as himſelf, 
meet to be Inheritors.” — 

3. You may eaſily obſerve, that I quoted the Coun- 
cil of Trent by memory, not having the book then by 
me. I own, and thank you for correcting my miſtake : 
but in correcting one, you make another, For the 
decrees of the ſixth ſeſſion were not * publiſhed on 
the r gth of January: but the ſeſhon itſelf began on 
that day. 

I . help reciting your words, although they are 
not exactly to the preſent queſtion. 

* The words of the 12th Canon of the Council of 
Trent are, | | 
lf any man ſhall ſay that juſtifying Faith is no- 
thing elſe, but a confidence in the Divine Mercy, re- 
mitting ſins for Chriſt's fake, and that this confidence 
is that alone by which we are juſtified, let him be ac- 
curſed.” You add, 
This, Sir, I am ſure is True Doctrine, and per- 
ſectly agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church. And 
ſo you are not only anathematized by the Council. of 
Trent, but alſo condemned by our own Church.” 

Our Church holds no ſuch ſcandalous and diſgrace- 
ful opinion. - According to our Church, no man can 
have © the True Faith, who has not a loving heart.” 


— Therefore Faith is not a confidence that any man's 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 8 


fins are actually forgiven, and he reconciled to God.“ 
_ (What have the | egg to do with the concluſion ]) 

4- To decide this, Let our Church ſpeak for herſelf. 
Whether ſhe does not ſuppoſe and teach, that every 
particular Believer knows that his fins are forgiven, 
and he himſelf is reconciled to God. 

Firſt then, Our Church ſuppoſes and teaches every 

rticular Believer, to ſay concerning himſelf, * In 
my baptiſm I was made a member of Chriſt, a child of 
God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven. And 
I thank God who hath called me to that ſtate of ſalva- 
tion. And I pray God that I may continue in the 
ſame, to my life's end.“ 

Now does this perſon know what he ſays to be true ? 
Tf not, it is the ſſeſt hypocriſy. But if he does, 
_ he knows, he in particular is reconciled to 
God, 

The next words I ſhall quote may be a comment on 
theſe : may God write them in our hearts! ; 
A true chriſtian man is not afraid to die, who is 
the very Member of Chriſt, the Temple of the Holy 
Ghoſt, the Son of God, and the very inheritor of the 
everlaſting kingdom of heaven. But plainly contrary, 
he not only puts away the fear of death, but wiſhes, 
deſires and longs heartily for it. Sermon againſt the fear 

Death. I. Part. 

Can this be, unleſs he has a ſure confidence that he, 
in particular, is reconciled to God? 

Men commonly fear Death, firſt becauſe of leav- 
ing their worldly goods and pleaſures. 2. For Fear of 
the Pains of Death; and, g. For Fear of perpetuat 
Damnation. But none of theſe cauſes trouble good 
men, becauſe they ſtay themſelves by true faith, perfect 
charity, and ſure hope of endleſs joy and bliſs everlaſt- 
ing.“ Ibid. II. Part. 

All theſe therefore have great cauſe to be full of 
Joy, and not to fear Death nor everlaſting Damnation, 
For Death cannot deprive them of Jeſus Chriſt, Death 
cannot take him from us, nor us from him. Death not 
only cannot harm us, but alſo ſhall profit us aad join 
us to God more perfectly. And thereof a chriſtian 
heart may be ſurely certified, It is God, gs #4 

: wic 


86 A rANT EN APPEAL, Part I. 


which hath given us an earneſt of his Spirit. As long as 
we be in the body, we are in a ſtrange country. But 
we have a delire rather to be at home with God.” Ibid. 
He that runneth may read in all theſe words, the 
confidence which -our Church ſuppoſes, every parti- 
ert Believer to have, that he himſelf is reconciled to 
od. | 
To proceed, The only Inſtrument of Salvation re- 
quired on our parts is Faith, that is, a ſure truſt and 
confidence, that God both hath and will forgive our 
ſins, that he hath —_— us again into his favour, for 


the merits of Chriſt's death and paſſion.” Second Ser- 
mon on the Paſſion. os 


| & 

„ But here, we muſt take heed that we do not halt 
with God, through an unconſtgat wavering Faith. 
Peter coming to Chriſt upon tie water, becauſe he 
fainted in Faith was in danger of drowning. So we, if 
we begin to wave or doubt, it is to be feared leſt we 
ſhould fink as Peter did: not into the water, but into 
the bottomleſs pit of hell-fire. Therefore I ſay unto 
vou, that we muſt apprehend the merits of Chrilt's 
death by Faith, and that with a ſtrong and ſtedfaſt 
Faith: nothing doubting, but that Chriſt by his own 
oblation hath taken away our fins, and hath reſtored 
us again to God's favour.” Ibid. 

5. If it be ſtill ſaid, That the Church ſpeaks only 
of men in general, but not of the confidence of this or 
that particular perſon : even this laſt, poor ſubterfuge, 
is utterly cut off by the following words: 

Thou, O man, haſt received the body of Chriſt 
which was once broken, and his blood which was ſhed 
for the remiſſion of thy fin. Thou haſt received his 
body, to have within thee. the Father, the Son, and 
the Holy Ghoſt, for to endow thee with grace, and to 
comfort thee with their preſence. Thou haſt received 
his body, to endow thee with everlaſting righteouinels, 
and to aſſure thee of everlaſting bliſs.” Sermon on the 
Reſurrection. 

I ſhall add but one paſſage more, from the firſt part 
of the Sermon on the Sacrament. 

Have a ſure and conſtant Faith, not only that the 
death of Chriſt is available tor all the world, but that 


he 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 87 


He hath made a full and ſufficient ſacrifice for thee, a 
perfect cleanſing of thy fins, ſo that thou mayeſt ſay 
with the Apoſtle, he loved thee and gave hunſelf for 
thee, For this is, to make (Chriſt thme own, and to 
apply his merits unto thyſelf.” | . 

Let every reaſonable man now judge for himſelf, 
which is the ſenſe of our Church as to the nature of 
ſaving Faith. Does it not abundantly appear, that the 
Church of England ſuppoſes every particular Believer, 
to have a ſure confidence, that his fins are forgiven, and 
he himſelf reconciled to God? Yea, and how can the 
abſolute neceſſity of this Faith, this unwavering con fi- 
dence, be more ſtrongly or peremptorily aſſerted, than 
it is in thoſe words: & If we begin to waver or doubt, 
it is to be feared, leſt we fink as Peter did: not into the 
water; but into the bottomleſs pit of hell- fire?“ 

6. I would willingly diſmiſs this Writer here. I had 

{aid in the Earneſt Appeal (what I am daily more and 
more confirmed in) that this Faith is uſually given in a 
moment, This you greatly diſlike. Your argument 
againſt it, if put into form, will run thus: 
They who firſt apprehended the meaning of the 
words delivered, then gave their aſſent to them, then 
had confidence in the promiſes to which they aſſented, 
and laſtly, loved God, did not receive Faith in a mo- 
ment.“ 8 

But the Believers mentioned in the Acts, firſt appre- 
hended the meaning of the words, then gave their aſſent, 
then had confidence in the promiſes, and laſtly, loved 
God : therefore 5 
„The Believers mentioned in the Acts, did not re- 
ceive Faith in a moment.“ 

I deny the major. They might firſt apprehend, then 
aſſent, then confide, then love, and yet receive Faith 
mi a moment: in that moment, wherein their general 
confidence became particular, ſo that each could ſay, 
„My Lord, and my God.” | 

One paragraph more I will be at the pains to tran- 
ſcribe. © You inſinuate, that the Sacraments are only 
requiſite to the well-being of a viſible Church: whereas 
the Church declares, that the due admmiſtration of 
them, is an eſſential property thereof, I. fuppole 

| you 


88 A rAR THEN APPEAL, Part I. 


you hinted this to gratify your loving diſciples the 
Quakers.” 

This is flat and plain. Here is a fact poſitively aver- 
red; and a reaſon alſo aſſigned for it. Now, do you 
take yourſelf to be a man of candor, I had almoſt faid, 
of common honeſty ? My very words in the place re- 
ferred to, are, A viſible Church is a company of 
faithful people. This is the eſſence of it. And the 

roperties thereof are, that the pure Word of God 
bo preached therein, and the Sacraments duly adminiſ- 
tered.” 

7. Before I take my leave, I cannot but recommend 
to ou that advice of a wile and good Man, 

% Be calm in arguing ; for fierceneſs makes 

| Error a fault, and truth diſcourteſy.“ 

1 am grieved at your extreme warmth: you are in a 
thorough ill-humour from the very beginning of your 
book to the end. This cannot hurt me: but it may 
yourſelf, And it does not at all help your Cauſe, If 
you denounce againſt me all the curſes from Geneſis to 
the Revelation, they will not amount to one argument. 
I am willing (fo far as I know myſelf) to be reproved 
either by you or any other. But whatever you do, let 
it be done in love, in patience, in meekneſs of wiſdom, 


V. 1, With regard to the Author of Faith and 
Salvation, abundance of objections have been made: it 
being a current opinion, that Chriſtians are not now 
to receive the Holy Ghoſt.” | 

Accordingly, whenever we ſpeak of the Spirit of 
God, of his operations in the ſouls of men, of his re- 
vealing unto us the things of God, or inſpiring us with 

ood deſires or tempers; whenever we mention the 
eeling his mighty power, working in us, according to 
his good pleaſure : the general anſwer we have to ex- 
pett is, © This is all rank Enthuſiaſm.” So it was with 
the Apoſtles and firſt Chriſtians, But only Enthuſiaſts 
retend to this now. | 

Thus all the Scriptures, abundance of which might 
be produced, are ſet aſide at one ſtroke. And who- 
ever cites them, as belonging to all Chriſtians, is let 
down for an Enthuſiaſt. 
| The fitſt Tract I have ſeen, wrote expreſsly on this 
head, is remarkably entitled, „The 


- 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 89 
© The Operations of the Holy Spirit imperceptible, 


and how men may know, when they are under the 
guidance and influence of the Spirit.” 

You begin, As we have ſome among us who pre- 
tend, to a more than ordinary guidance by the Spirit— 
(indeed I do not : I pretend to no other guidance, than 
is ordinarily given to all Chriſtians) it may not be im- 
proper to diſcourſe, on the operations of God's Holy 
Spirit.“ — 

ff To this end, be thou pleaſed, O gracious Fountain 
of Truth, to aſſiſt me with thy heavenly direction in 
ſpeaking of thee.” 

Alas, Sir, what need have you to ſpeak any more ? 
You have already granted all I deſire, viz. That © we 
may all now enjoy, and know that we do enjoy, the 
heavenly direction of God's Spirit.“ | 

However, you go on, and obſerve that the extra- 
ordinary gifts of the Holy Ghoſt, were granted to the 
firſt Chriſtians only, but his ordinary graces to all 
Chriſtians in all ages: both which you then attempt to 
enumerate : only ſuſpending your diſcourſe a little, 
when * ſome conceited Enthuſiaſts '”” come in your 
Way. 

— You next enquire, © After what manner theſe 
graces are raiſed in our ſouls?” And anſwer, © How 
to diſtinguiſh theſe heavenly motions, from the natural 
operations of our minds, we have no light to diſcover : 
the Scriptures — declaring that the operations of the 
Holy Spirit, are not ſubject to any ſenlible feelings or 

rceptions. For what communication can there be 
. feelings which are properties peculiar to mat- 
ter, and the ſuggeſtion of the Spirit ?. All reaſonable 
Chriſtians believe, that he works his graces in us in an 
imperceptible manner; and that there is no ſenible dif- 
ference between his and the natural operations of our 
minds.“ 

I conceive this to be the ſtrength of your Cauſe. To 
ſupport that concluſion, that the operations of the Spi— 
rit are imperceptible, you here alledge, 1. That all 
reaſonable Chriſtians believe this.” So you fay. But 
I want proof. 2. * That there can be no commun- 
cations (1 fear, you miſtook the word) between the 


ſuggeſtions 


* —— — — 


1 
—— * 
4 — a — 


ec” -— -- _ 
- - 
* E — 


— 


3 v 


CASIES ts - 
Pr 


— 


3 
* 
8 
j 
g 
0 
5 


—— 


2 — — * — — ny. 


— 


90 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part J. 


ſuggeſtions of the Spirit, and feelings which are pro- 
perties peculiar to matter.“ How! Are the feelings 
now in queition, properties peculiar to matter? The 
feeling of peace, joy, love? Or any feelings at all ? 
I can no more underſtand the philoſophy than the di- 
vinity of this. g. That the Scriptures declare, the 
operations of the Spirit are not ſubject to any ſenſible 
ſeclings.” You are here diſproving, as you ſuppole, a 
propoſition of mine. But are you ſure you 9 9 
it? By feeling, I mean, being inwardly conſcious of, 
By the operations of the Spirit, I do not mean the 
manner in which he operates, but the graces which he 
operates in a Chriſtian, Now be pleaſed to produce 
thoſe Scriptures which declare, That a Chriſtian cari- 
not feel or perceive theſe operations.“ 

3. Are you not convinced, Sir, that you have laid 
to my charge things which I know not? 1 do not. 
_ gravely tell you (as much an Enthuſiaſt as you over and 
over athrm me to be) * That I ſenſibly feel (in your 
ſenſe) the motions of the Holy Spirit.” Much leſs do 
1 © make this, any more than convulſions, agonies, 
howlings, roarings, and violent contorſions of the body,” 
either“ Certain ſigns of men's being in a ſtate of ſalva- 
tion,” or © neceſſary in order thereto.” You might 
with equal juſtice and truth inform the world, and the 
\\ orihipful the Magiſtrates of Newcaſtle, that I make 
{eciny the wind or feeling the light, neceſſary to ſalva- 
tion. 

Neither do I ** confounra the extraordinary with the 
ordinary operations of the Spirit.” And as to your laſt 
enquiry, © What is the beſt, proof of our being led by 
the Spirit? I have no exception to that juſt and 
ſcriptural anſwer, which you yourſelf have given, © A 
thorough change and renovation of mind and heart, 
and the leading a new and holy life.“ 

4. * That 1 confound the extraordinary with the 
ordinary r of the Spirit, and therefore am an 
Enthußiaſt,“ is allo ſtrongly urged in a Charge delivered 
to his Clergy, and lately publiſhed by the Lord Biſhop 
of Litchheld and Coventry. 

An extract of the former part of this, I ſubjoin, in 
his Lordſhip's words, 


I can- 


1 * 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 91 


© 1 cannot think it improper to obviate the conta- 
gion, of thoſe enthuſiaſtical pretenſions, that have lately 
betrayed whole multitudes, either into preſumption or 
melancholy. Enthuſiaſm indeed, when detected, is apt 
to create infidelity ; and Infidelity is fo ſhocking a thing, 
that many rather run into the other extreme, and take 
refuge in Enthuſiaſm. But Infidelity and Enthuſiaſm 


leem now to att in concert againſt our eſtabliſhed Re- 


ligion. As Infidelity has been ſufficiently oppoſed, I 
{hall now lay before you the weaknels of thole enthu- 
ſiaſtical pretenſions,” Page 1, 2. | 

Now to confute effectually, and ſtrike at the root of 
thole enthuſiaſtical pretenſions, 

“ Firſt, I ſhall ſhew, that it is neceſſary to lay down 
ſome method for diſtinguiſhing real from pretended In- 
{ſpiration.” Page g. 5. 

„% Many expreſſions occur in the New Teſtament 
concerning the operations of the Holy Spirit. But 
men of an enthuſiaſtical temper, have confounded paſ- 
fages of a quite different nature, and have jumbled to- 


gether thoſe that relate to the extraordinary operations 


of the Spirit, with thoſe that relate to his ordinary in- 
ſluences. It is therefore neceſſary to uſe ſome method 
for ſeparating thoſe paſſages, relating to the operations 
of the Spirit, that have been ſo miſapplied to the ſer- 
vice of Enthuſiaſtical Pretenders,” Page 5, 6, 7. 

] proceed therefore to ſhew, 

„ Secondly, That a diſtinction is to be made between 
thoſe paſſages of Scripture about the bleſſed Spirit that 
peculiarly belong to the Primitive Church, and thoſe 
that relate to Chriſtians in all ages.“ Page 7. 

The exigencies of the apoſtolical age required the 
miraculous gifts of the Spirit. But thele ſoon ceaſed. 
When therefore we meet in the Scripture with an ac- 
count of thoſe extraordinary gifts, and likewiſe with an 
account of his ordinary operations, we mult diſtinguiſh 
the one from the other, And that not only for our 
own ſatisfaction, but as a means to ſtop the growth of 
Enthuſiaſm.” Page 8, 9, 10. 

* And ſuch a diſtinction ought to be made, by the 
beit methods of interpreting the Scriptures : which moſt 
certainly are an attentive conſideration of the occaſion 


I 2 and 


-_ IF . Py 


* K — —— — — — 


ag — 4 


— — 


| 
$ 


— — 
s 


San 


SE _ 


Fg 


92 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part I, 


and ſcope of thole paſſages, in concurrence with the 
general ſenſe of the Primitive Church.” Page 11. 

„I propole, thirdly, to ſpecify ſome of the chief 
paſſages of Scripture that are miſapplied by modern 
Enthuſiaſts, and to ſhew that they are to be interpreted 
chiefly, if not only, of the apoſtolical Church ; and 
that they very little, if at all relate, to the preſent ſtate 
of Chriſtians.” Page 12. 

I begin, ſays your Lordſhip, with the original pro- 
miſe of the Spirit. as made by our Lord a little before 
he left the world.“ 

I muſt take the liberty to ſtop your-Lordſhip on the 
threſhold, I deny that this is the original promiſe of 
the Spirit, I expect his aſſiſtance, in virtue of many 

romiles, ſome hundred years prior to this. 

If you fay, © However this is the original or firſt 
promiſe of the Spirit, in the New Teſtament.” No, 
my Lord; thoſe words were ſpoken long before : he 
fall baptize you with the Holy Ghoft, and with fire. 

Will you reply? „ Well, but this is the original 
promiſe made by our Lord,” I anſwer, not ſo neither. 
For it was before this, Jeſus himſelf ſtood and cried, 
„If any man thirſt, let him come unto me and drink, 
he thet believeth on me, as the Scripture hath ſaid, out 
of his belly ſhall flow rivers of living water. And this 
he ſpake of the Spirit, which they ſhould receive who 
believed on him,“ ( 3cAAov Aajuf3avery 6s mrigevoblts dg avtor). 
If I miſtake not, this may more juſtly be termed our 
Lord's original promile of the Spirit, And who will 
aſſert, that this is to be interpreted chiefly, if not only, 
of the apoſtolical Church ? 

5. Your Lordſhip proceeds: It occurs in the 14th 
and 16th chapters of St. John's Goſpel; in which he 
uſes theſe / words.” In what verſes, my Lord ? 
* Why 1s not this ſpecified? Unleſs to furniſh your 
Lordfhip with an opportunity of doing the very thing 
whereof you before complained, of “ confounding paſ- 
ſages of a quite contrary natnre, and jumbling together 


*I take it for granted, that the citation of texts in the margin, 
which is totally wiong, is a blunder of the Printer's, 


thole 


Cd 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion, 93 
thoſe that relate to the extraordinary operations of the 
Spirit, with thoſe that relate to his W influences?“ 

You cite the words thus; When the Spirit of Truth ts 
come he will guide you into all Truth and 15 will fhew you 
things to come, ('Thele are nearly the words that occur, 
Chap. xvi. ver. 13. 

And again, The Comforter, which is the Toly Choft, 
whom the Father will fend in my name, he hall teach you 
all things, and bring all things to your remembrance what- 
ſoever I have jaid unto you. Theſe words occur in the 
14th chapter, at the 26th verſe.“ 

But, my Lord, I want the original promiſe ſtill; the 

original (I mean) of thoſe made in this very diſcourſe. 
Indeed your margin tells us, where it is, (chap. xiv. 
ver. 16.) but the words appear not. Taken together 
with the context they run thus : 

F ye love me, keep my commandments, 

Ang I will pray the Father, and he will give yu ano- 
ther Comforter, that he may abide with you for ev 

Even tne Spirit of 1ruth, whom the world 8 re- 
ceive, becauſe it feeth, him not, neither knoweth him, Chap. 

XiV. ver. 13, 18, 1 

My Lord, haffer 1 me to enquire, why you flipt over 
this text ? Was it not (J appeal to the Scarcher of 
your heart ) becauſe you was conlcious to yourſelf, thaꝝ 
it would neceſſarily drive you to that unhappy dilemma, 
either to aſſert that for ever, is 7% 4wyz, meant only 
ſixty or ſeventy years; or to allow that the text muſt 
be interpreted of the ordinary operations of the Spirit, 
in all future ages of the Church, 

And indeed that the promiſe in this text belongs to 
all Chriſtians, evidently appears, not only from vour 
Lordſhip's own conceſſion, and from the text itſelf, (for 
who can deny, that this Comforter or Paraclete s now 
given to all them that believe?) but alſo from the pre- 
ceding, as well as following, words. The preceding 
are, If ye love me, keep my commandments... An 
I wilt pray the Father,” — None ſurely can doubt, but 
thele belong to all Chriſtians in all ages. The folluwimng 
words are, Even the Spirit of Truth, . whom the world. 
cannot receive. True; the world cannot; but all Chriſ- 

tans can, and will receive him for ever. 


1 3 6. The: 


94 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part I. 


6. The ſecond promiſe of the Comforter, made in 
this chapter, together with its context, ſtands thus: 

Judas faith unto him, (not Iſcariot) Lord, how 1s 
it that thou wilt manifeſt thyſelf unto us, and not unto 
the world ? ” ver. 22. 

* Jeſus anſwered and ſaid unto him, if any man love 
me, he will keep my word. And my Father will love 
him, and we will come unto him, and make our aboge 
with him,” ver. 29. 

* He that loveth me not, keepeth not my word: and 
the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's 
which ſent me,“ ver. 24. | 

„ Theſe things have I ſpoken unto you, being yet 
with you,” ver. 25. | 

* But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghoſt, 
whom the Father will ſend in my name, he will teach 
you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, 
whatſoever I have ſaid unto you,” ver. 26. 

Now, how does your Lordſhip prove that this pro- 
mile belongs only to the Primitive Church? Why, 
1. You ſay, © It is very clear from the bare recital of 
the words,” I apprehend not. But this 1s the very 
queſtion, which is not to be begged, but proved. 2. 
You ſay, The Spirit's bringing all things to their remem- 
brance, whatſoever he had faid unto them, cannot poſſibly 
be applied to any other perſons but the Apoſtles.” 
Cannot be applied!“ This is a flat begging the 
queſtion again, which I cannot give up without better 
reaſons, g. The gifts of prophecy and of being guided 
into all truth, and taught all things, can be apphed only 
to the Apoſtles, and thoſe of that age who were imme- 
diately inſpired,” Here your Lordſhip, in order the 
more plauſibly to beg the queſt:on again, ; jumbles to- 
gether the extraordinary with the ordinary operations 
of the Spirit.” The gift of prophecy, we know, 1s 
dne of his extraordinary operations; but there is not a 
word of it in this text: nor, therefore ought it to be 
© confounded with his ordinary operations,“ ſuch as the 
being guided into all truth, (all that is neceſſary to 
{alvation) and taught all (neceſſary) things, in a due uſe 
of the means he hath ordained, ver. 26. * 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 95 


In the ſame manner, namely, in a ſerious and con- 
ſtant uſe of proper means, I believe the aſſiſtance of 
the Holy Ghoſt is given to all Chriſtians, to bring all 
things needful to their remembrance, whatſoever Chriſt 
hath ſpoken to them in his word. So that I ſee no ac- . 
caſion to grant, without ſome kind of proof, (eſpecially 
conſidering the occaſion of this, and the ſcope of the 
preceding verſes) that even * this promiſe cannot poſ- 
ſibly be applied to any other perſons but the Apoſtles.” 

7. In the ſame Diſcourſe of our Lord we have a 
third promiſe of the Comforter. The whole clauſe 


runs thus : | | 


[ 


«© If I go not away, the Comforter will not come 
unto you; but if I go, I will ſend him unto you, chap, 
xvi. ver. 7. | 

And when he is come, he will reprove (or con- 
vince) the world of ſin, and of righteouſneſs, and of 
Judgment, ver. 8, 

Of fin, becauſe they believe not on me: 

„ Of righteouſneſs, becauſe I go to my Father, and 
ye lee me no more ; 

+ Of judgment, becauſe the Prince of this World is 
judged, ver. 9, 10, 11. 

I have yet many things to ſay unto you; but ye 
cannot bear them now : (ver. 12.) But when he ſhall 
come, the Spirit of Truth, he will guide you into all 
truth—And he will ſhew you things to come, ver. 13. 

There is only one ſentence here which has not already 
been conſidered, He wil! ſhew you things to come. 
And this, it is granted, relates to the gift of prophecy, 
one of the extraordinary operations of the Spirit. 

The general concluſion which your Lordſhip draws, 
is expreſt in theſe words. Conſequently all preten- 
ſions to the Spirit, in the proper ſenſe of the words of 
this promiſe . e. of theſe ſeveral texts of St. John) 
are vain and inſignificant, as they are claimed by mo- 
dern Enthuſiaſts.” And in the end of the ſame para- 
graph you add, None but the ordinary operations of 
the Spirit are to be now expected, ſince thoſe that are 
of a miraculous (or extraordinary) kind are not pretend- 


ed to, even by modern Enthuhalts,” 
My 


er - — 


— — 


96 A rAR TER APPEAL, Part J. 


My Lord, this is ſurpriſing. I read it over and over, 
before I could credit my own eyes. I verily believe 
this one clauſe, with unprejudiced perſons, will be an 
anſwer to the whole book. You have been vehe- 
mently crying out all along againſt thoſe Enthuſiaſtical 
Pretenders ; nay, the very deſign of your book, as you 
openly declare, was * to ſtop the growth of their en- 
thuſiaſm: who have had aſſurance (as you poſitively 
affirm, page 6,) to claim to themſelves the extraordinary 
operations of the Holy Spirit.” And here you as 
poſitively affirm, that thoſe extraordinary operations 
are not pretended to by them at all!“ 

8. Yet your Lordſhip proceeds, . The next paſſage 
of Scripture I ſhall mention as peculiarly belonging to 
the primitive times, though milapplied to the preſent 
ſtate of Chriſtians by modern Enthuſiaſts, is what re- 
lates to the teſtimony of the Spirit, and praying by the 
Spirit, in the 8th chapter of the Epiſtle to the Ro- 
mans. Page 16. 

I believe it incumbent upon me thoroughly to weigh 
the force of your Lordſhip's reaſoning on this head. 
You begin, © After St. Paul had treated of that ſpi- 
ritual principle in Chriſtians, which enables them to 
mortify the deeds of the body he ſays, © If any man 
have not the Spirit of Chriſt, he is none of his.” This 
makes the diſtinction of a true Chriſtian, particularly 
in oppoſition to the Jews.” I apprehend it is juſt - 
here, that your Lordſhip turns out of the way, when 
you ſay, © Particularly in oppoſition to the Jews.” 
Such a particular oppofition I cannot allow, till ſome 
ſtronger proof is produced, than St. Paul's occaſionally 
mentioning ſix verles before, © the imperfettion of the 

ewiſh law.“ a 

Vet your Lordſhip's mind is ſo full of this, that 
after repeating the 14th and 1th verſes (* as many as 
are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God: 
for ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to 
fear : but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, 
whereby we cry, Abba, Father !**) you add, © In the 
former part of this verſe, the Apoſtle ſhews again the 
imperfettion of the Jewiſh law.” This allo calls for 
proc: otherwile, it will not be allowed, that he here 

{peaks 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion, 97 


ſpeaks of the Jewiſh law at all: not, though we grant 
that © the Jews were ſubject to the fear of death, and 
lived, in conſequence of it, in a ſtate of bondage.“ 
For are not all Unbelievers, as well as the Jews, more 
or leſs, in the ſame fear and bondage ? 
Your Lordſhip goes on, In the latter part of the 
verſe he ſhews the ſuperiority of the Chriſtian law to 
that of the Jews.” Page 18, Where is the proof, my 
Lord? How does it appear, that he is ſpeaking either 
of the Chriſtian or Jewiſh law, in thoſe words, Ve 
have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, 
Abba, Father?“ However, you infer, © Chriſtians 
then are the adopted Sons of God, in contradiſtinction 
to the Jews, as the former had the gifts of the Holy 
Ghoſt, which none of the latter had at that time : and 
the body of the Jews never had.” No, nor the body 
of the Chriſtians neither, So that if this be a proof 
againſt the Jews, it is the very ſame againſt the Chriſ- 
tlans. 
I muſt obſerve farther on the preceding words, 1. 
That your Lordſhip begins here, to take the word Chriſ- 
tians in a new and peculiar ſenſe, for the whole body of 
the then Chriſtian Church: 2. That it 1s a bad infer- 
ence, * as, or becauſe they had the gifts of the Holy 
Ghoſt, therefore they were the Sons of God.“ On the 
one hand, if they were the children of God, it was not, 
becauſe they had thoſe gifts. On the other, a man 
may have all thoſe giſts, and yet be a child of the devil. 
9. I conceive, not only that your Lordſhip has 
proved nothing hitherto, not one point that has any re- 
lation to the queſtion ; but that, ſtrictly ſpeaking, you 
have not attempted to prove any thing, having taken 
for granted whatever came in your way, In the ſame 
manner you proceed, The Apoſtle goes on, The 
Spirit itſelf beareth witneſs with our Spirit, that we 
are the children of God.” This paſſage, as it is con- 
netted with the preceding one, relates to the general 
adoption of Chriſtians, or their becoming the ſons of 
God inſtead of the Jews.“ This paſſage relates 
How is that proved? By its connexion with the pre- 
ceding ? In nowiſe, unleſs it be good arguing to prove 
| ignotum 


98 A ranTutrR APPEAL, Part I. 


ignotum per ignotius. It has not yet been proved, that 
the preceding paſlage itſelf has any relation to this matter. 

Your Lordſhip adds, But what was the ground of 
this preference that was given to chriſtians? It was 
plainly the (miraculous) gifts of the ſpirit, which they 
had, and which the Jews had not.” This preference 
given to chriſtians, was juſt before expreſt by their be- 
coming the Sons of God inſtead of the Jews. Were 
the gifts of the ſpirit then the ground of this preference ? 
The ground of their becoming the Sons of God? What 
an aſſertion is this! And how little is it mended, though 
I allow, that * theſe miraculous gifts of the ſpirit, were 
a teſtimony that God acknowledged the chriſtians to be 
his people and not the Jews: (fince the chriſtians who 
worked miracles, did it not by the works of the law, 
but by the hearing of faith ? ”) 

Your Lordſhip concludes, From theſe paſſages of 
St. Paul, compared together, it clearly follows, that the 
forementioned teſtimony of the Spirit, was the public 
teſtimony of miraculous l conſequently, the 
witneſs of the Spirit that we are the children of God, 
cannot poſlibly be applied, to the private teſtimony of 
the Spirit given to our own conſciences, as is pretended 
by modern Enthuſiaſts.” Page 20. 

If your concluſion, my Lord, will ſtand without the 
premiſes it may : but that it has no manner of connec- 
tion with them, I truit it does partly, and will more 
fully appear, when we view the whole paſſage to which 
you refer. And I believe that paſlage, with very little 
comment, will prove, in direct oppoſition to that con- 
cluſion, that the teſtimony of the Spirit there mentioned, 
is not the public tcitimony of miraculous gifts, but muſt 
be applied to the private teſtimony of the Spirit, given 
to our own conſciences. 

10. St. Paul begins the eighth chapter of his Epiſtle 
to the Romans, with the great privilege of every chriſ- 
tian believer, (whether Jew or Gentile before) There 
is now no condemnation for them that are in Chriſt 
Jetus,” engrafted into him by faith, who walk not 
after the fleſh, but after the ſpirit.” For now every 
one of them may truly ſay, The law (or power) of the 
ſpirit of life in Chriſt Jeſus (given unto me for his fake) 

hath 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 99 


hath made me free from the law (or power) of fin and 
death. For that which the law could not do, in that 
it was weak through the fleſh, God ſending his own 
Son, in the likeneſs of ſinful ne :{h, and for ſin,” did; 

when he © condemned,” (crucihed, put to death, deſtroy- 
ed) © fin in the fleſh : That the righteouſneſs of the 
law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the 
fleſh, but after the ſpirit. For they that are after the 
fleſh, mind the things of the fleſh ; but they that ars 
after the ſpirit, the things of the ſpirit,” Verle 1—g, 

Is it not evident, that the Apoſtle is here deſcribing 
a true chriſtian, a holy belicver? In oppoſition, not 
particularly to a Jew, much leſs to the Jewiſh law; 
but to every unholy man, to all, whether Jews or 
Gentiles, who walk after the fleſh ? He goes on, 

* For, to be carnally-minded is death; but to be 
ſpiritually-minded 3 is life and peace. Becauſe the carnal 
mind is enmity againſt God; for it is not ſubject to the 
law of God ; neither indeed can be. So then they that 
are in the fleſh, cannot pleaſe God. Verſe 6, 7, 8. 

The oppoſition between a holy and unholy man, 1s 
{till glaring and undeniable, But can any man diſcern, 
the leaſt glimmering of oppoſition, between the Chrif- 
tian and the Jewiſh law ? 

The Apoſtle goes on, * But ye are not in the fleſh, 
but m the ſpirit, if fo be that the Spirit of God dwell 
in you. Now if any man have not the ſpirit of Chriſt, 
he is none of his. But if Chriſt be in you, the body 
is dead, becauſe of (or with regard to) fin, but the ſpi- 
rit is life becauſe of righteouſneſs. But if the ſpirit of 
him that raiſed up Jeſus from the dead dwell in you, 
He that raiſed up Chriſt from the dead ſhall alſo quicken 
your mortal bodies by his ſpirit which dwelleth in you. 
Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the fleſh, 
to live after the fleſh, For if ye live after the fleſh ye 
ſhall die; but if ye through the ſpirit do mortify the 
deeds of the body, ye ſhall live. For as many as are 
led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.“ 
Verſe 9—14. 

Ils there one word here, is there any the leaſt intima- 
tion of miraculous gifts, or of the Jewiſh law ? 


* It 


200 A 'raxtures APPEAL. Part I. 

It follows, For ye have not received the ſpirit of 
bondage again, to fear (ſuch as all ſinners have, when 
they are firſt ſtirred up to ſeek God, and begin to ſerve 
him from a ſlaviſh fear of puniſhment) But ye have re- 
ceived the ſpirit of adoption (of free love) whereby we 
cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itſelf (which God hath 
ſent forth into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father,) bear- 
eth witneſs with our Spirit, that we are the children of 
God.” Verſe 15, 16. g 

I am now willing to leave it, without farther com- 
ment, to the judgment of every impartial reader, whe- 
ther it does not appear from the whole ſcope and tenor 
of the text and context taken together, that this paſſage 
does not refer to the Jewiſh law, and to the public teſ- 
timony of miracles: neither of which can be dragged 
in, without putting the utmoſt force on the natural 
meaning of the words. And if ſo, it will follow, that 
this witneſs of the Spirit is the private teſtimony given 
to our own conſciences: which, conſequently, all 
ſober Chriſtians may claim, without any danger of en- 
thuſiaſm. 

11. But I go on (ſays your Lordſhip, page 21, 
to the conſideration of the other paſſages in the ſame 
chapter, relating to our praying by the Spirit, namely 
at verſe 26 and 27, which runs thus, Likewiſe the 
ſpirit alſo helpeth our infirmities: for we know not 
what we ſhould pray for as we ought ; but the ſpirit it- 
ſelf maketh interceſhon for us, with groanings which 
cannot he uttered, And he that ſearcheth the hearts, 
knoweth what is the mind of the ſpirit, becauſe he 
maketh interceſſion for the ſaints, according to the will 
of God.” 

Here is a circumſtance highly needful to be obſerved, 
before we enter upon this queſtion, Your Lordſhip 
undertakes to fix the meaning of an expreſſion uſed by 
St. Paul, in the fourteenth chapter of his firſt epiſtle to 
the Corinthians. And in order thereto, you laboriouſly 
explain part of the eighth chapter to the Romans. My 
Lord, how is this? Will it be ſaid, Why this is 

often alledged to prove the wrong ſenſe of that Scrip- 
ture? JI conceive, this will not ſalve the matter at 
all, Your Lordſhip had before laid down a particular 


method, 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 10t 
method, as the only ſure one whereby to diſtinguiſn 
what Scriptures belong to all chriſtians, and what do 
not. This method is, the conſidering the occaſion and 
ſcope of thoſe paſſages, by comparing the text and con- 
text together, You then propoſe, by the uſe of this 
method, to ſhew, that ſeveral texts have been miſap- 
plied by Enthuſiaſts, One of theſe is the 15th verſe of 
the 14th chapter of the firſt epiſtle to the Corinthians. 
And to ſhew, that Enthuſiaſts have miſapplied this, you 
comment on the eighth chapter to the Romans ! 

However, let us weigh the comment itſelf, The 
material part of it begins thus: (p. 22.) „Now he 
adds another proof of the truth of Chriſtianity: like- 
wiſe the ſpirit helpeth our infirmities (or our diſtreſſes, 
for @Yuriaiy eſigniſies both,” I doubt that: I require 
authority for it.) © And then he mentions, in what 
' inſtances he does ſo, viz. In prayers to God about 
afflictions ——” (In nothing elſe, my Lord? Did he 
help their infirmities, in no other inſtance than this?) 
© We know not, ſays he, what we ſhould pray for as 
we ought. That is, whether it be beſt for us to bear 
afflictions, or to be delivered from them. But the ſpi- 
rit, or the gift of the Spirit, inſtrufts us how to pray 
in a manner agreeable to the will of God.” The Spi- 
rit, or the gift of the Spirit! What marvellous reaſon- 
ing is this? If theſe “ are often put for each other,“ 
what then? How 1s that evinced to be the caſe here ? 

12, The Apoſtle goes on, The Spirit itſelf (p. 23.) 
maketh interceſſion for us, with groanings which cannot be 
uttered e that is, the ſpiritual or inſpired perſon prayed 
in that capacity for the whole aſſembly.” „That is!“ 
Nay, that is again the very point to be proved, elſe we 
get not one ſtep farther, 

The Apoſtle goes on thus, verſe 27. And he that 
(p. 24.) « fearcheth the hearts, *hnoweth what is the mind 
of the ſpirit (that 1s, of the ſpiritual or inſpired perſon) 
becauſe he maketh interceſſion for the ſaints according to 
the Mill of God.” That is, God knows the intention 
of the ſpiritual perſon, who has the gift of prayer, 
which he uſes for the benefit of the whole aſſembly; 
he, I ſay, leaves it entirely to God, whether it be beſt 

K 


that 


102 A rARTUTR APPEAL, Part I. 


that they ſhould ſuffer afflictions, or be delivered from 
them.“ Page 25. ; CRE 

My Lord, this is more aſtoniſhing than all the reſt ! 
I was expecting all along in reading the preceding pages 
(and fo I ſuppoſe, was every thinking reader) when 
your Lordſhip would mention, that the perſon miracu- 
louſly inſpired for that intent, and praying x, Os%» 
either for the ſupport or deliverance of the people, 
ſhould have the very petition which he aſked of him. 
Whereas you intended no ſuch thing! But ſhut up 
the whole with that lame and impotent concluſion, 
He leaves it to God, whether it be beſt they ſhould 
ſuffer aſſlictions, or be delivered from them.” 

Had he then that miraculous gift of God, that he 
might do what any common chriſtian might have done 
without it? Why, any perſon in the congregation 
might have prayed thus: nay, could not pray other- 
wile, if he had the ordinary grace of God: Leaving 
it to God, whether he ſhould ſuffer afflictions ſtill, or 
be delivered from them.” Was it only in the Apoſto- 
lical age, that * the Spirit inſtrufted chriſtians thus to 
pray? Cannot a man pray thus, either for himſelf 
or others, unlels he have the miraculous gift of prayer! 
— Ho, according to your Lordſhip's judgment, To 
pray in ſuch a manner, as in the event to leave the con- 
tinuance of our ſufferings, or our deliverance from them, 
with a due ſubmiſhon, to the good pleaſure of God,” 
is one of thole extraordinary operations of the Spi- 
rit, which none now pretend to but “ modern En- 
thuſiaſts!“ 

I IT beleech your Lordſhip to conſider. Can you coolly 
maintain, that * the praying with a due ſubmiſſion to 
the Will of God,”” even in heavy affliction, is a miracu- 
lous gift? An extraordinary operation of the Holy 
Ghoſt? Is this peculiar to the primitive times ? Is 
it what none but Enthuſiaſts now pretend to? If not, 
then your Lordſhip's own account of praying by the 
Spirit indiſputably proves that this is one of the ordi- 
nary privileges of all chriſtians, to the end of the world. 

13. I go on (your Lordſhip adds) to another pal- 
ſage of Scripture, that has been entirely (p. 27.) milap- 
plied by modern Enthuſiaſts, 1 Cor, ii. 4, 5. * And 


ny 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 103 


my ſpeech and my preaching were not with enticmg 
words of man's wiſdom, but in demonſtration of the 
Ipirit and of power; that your faith ſhould not ſtand 
in the wiſdom of man, but in the power of God.“ 
Page 29. 

« It is only neceſſary to evince, that by the demon- 
ſtration of the Spirit and of power is meant the demon- 
ſtration of the truth of Chriſtianity, that ariſes from the 
prophecies of the Old Teſtament and the miracles of 
Chriſt and his Apoſtles,” Yes, it is neceflary farther 
to evince, that theſe words have no other meaning. 
But firſt, How will you evince, that they bear this? 
In order thereto, your Lordſhip argues thus: 

„The former ſeems to be the demonſtration of the 

Spirit, with regard to the prophetical teſtimonies of him. 

[And the demonſtration of power, muſt fignify the 

ower of God, exerted in miracles.” (p. go.) © Muſt;” 

hy ſo? That 9p often fignifies miraculous power, 

is allowed—But what follows? That it muſt mean fo 
in this place ? That till remains to be proved. 

Indeed your Lordſhip ſays, this © appears from the 
following verſe, in which is aſſigned the reaſon for 
uſing this method of proving Chriſtianity to be true, 


viz. That your faith ſhould not ſtand in the wiſdom of _. 


man, but in the power of God, By the power of God 
therefore muſt neceſſarily be underſtood, the miracles 
performed-by Chriſt and his Apoſtles.” By the illative 
particle, therefore, this propoſition ſhould be an infer- 
ence from ſome other: but what other I cannot yet 
diſcern, So that, for the preſent I can only look upon 
it, as a freſh inſtance of begging the queſtion. 

* He goes on in the 5th, 10th and following verſes, 
to explain this demonſtration of the Spirit and of 
power.” But he does not ſay one ſyllable therein, 
either of the ancient prophecies, or of miracles. Nor 
will it be eafily proved, that he ſpeaks either of one or 
the other, from the beginning of the chapter to the end. 

After tranſcribing the 1gth verſe, © which things 
allo we ſpeak, not in the words which man's wiſdom 
teacheth, but which the Holy Ghoſt teacheth, com- 
paring ſpiritual things with ſpiritual,” your Lordſhip 
adds, „From which laſt paſſage it appears, that the 

K 2 


wor 


104 nA rarxTHER APPEAL, Part J. 


words which the Holy Ghoſt is faid to teach, muſt be 
the prophetical revelations of the Old Teſtament, which 
were diſcovered to the Apoſtles by the ſame Spirit. 1 
cannot apprehend, how this appears. I cannot as yet 
ſee any connection at all between the premiſes and the 
concluſion. - 

Upon the whole, I defire any calm and ſerious man, 
to read over this whole chapter ; and then he will eafily 
judge, what is the natural meaning of the words in 
queſtion : and whether (although it be allowed, that 
they were peculiarly fulfilled in the Apoſtles, yet) they 
do not manifeſtly belong, in a lower ſenſe, to every true 
Miniſter of Chriſt ? For what can be more undeniable 
than this, that our preaching alſo is vain, unleſs it be 
attended with the power of that Spirit, who alone 
Picrorth the heart? And that your hearing is vain, 
unleſs the ſame power be preſent to heal your ſoul, and 
to give you a Faith which ſtandeth nat in the wiſdom 

of man, but in the power of God ? 3 

14. Another paſſage that (your Lordſhip thinks) 
has been miſapplied by Enthuſiaſts, but was really pe- 
culiar to the times of the Apoſtles, is 1 John ii. 20, and 
27, (p. 35-) © Ye have en Unction from the Ely 
. — yo A 0 21! tumgs. — But the Anointing 
which ye have received of him abideth in you: and 
ye need not that any man teach you, but as the ſame 
Anomting teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and 
is no lie. And even as it hath taught vou, ye ſhall 
abide in him.“ „Here the Apoſtle arms the true 
Chriſtians againſt Seducers, by an argument drawn from 
the Unction, from the Holy One, that was in or rather 
among them: that is, from the immediate inſpiration of 
ſome of their Teachers.“ Page 37. 

Hexe it reſts upon your Lordihip, to prove (as well 
as afhrm) 1. That i ſhould be tranſlated among: 2. 
That this Unction from the Holy One means, © The 
inſpiration of ſome of their Teachers,” | 

The latter your Lordſhip attempts to prove thus: 
„The Inſpired Teachers of old were ſet apart for 


that office, by an extraordinary effuſion of the Holy 
Ghoſt: therefore (p. 38.) ER 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 105, 
© The Unction from the Holy One here, means ſuch 


an effuſion.” I deny the COnQUEnce ; lo the queſtion 


is ſtill to be proved. 

Your Lordſhip's ſecond argument is drawn from the 

26th verſe of the 14th chapter of St. John's goſpel, 
Propoſed in form, it will ſtand thus: 

11 thoſe words, he ſhall teach you all things, re- 
late only to a miraculous gift of the Holy Ghoſt, then 
theſe words, the ſame Anointing teacheth you of all 
things, relate to the ſame miraculous gift : 

But thoſe words relate only to a miraculous gift : 

Therefore, theſe relate to the Tame.” 

I conceive, it will not be very ealy to make good the 
conſequence in the firſt propoſition. But I deny the 
minor alſo: the contradictory whereto, I truſt, has ap- 
peared to be true, 

I grant indeed, that theſe words were more eminently 
fulfilled, in the age of the Apoſtles. But this is alto- 
gether conſiſtent with their belonging in a lower ſenſe, 
to all Chriſtians, in all ages: ſeeing they have all need 
of an Unction from the Holy One, a ſupernatural aſl:it- 
ance from the Holy Ghoſt, that they may know in the 
due ule of all proper means, all things needful for 
their ſouls health. Therefore it is no enthuſiaſm, to 
teach that the Unction f em the Holy One, belongs to 
all Chriſtians in all ages. 

15. There is one topic of your Lordſhip's yet un- 
touched; that is, authority: one you have very fre- 
quently made uſe of, and wherein, probably, the gene- 
rality of readers ſuppoſe your Lordſhip's great ſtreugth 
lies. And indeed when your Lordſhip firſt mentioned, 
(p- 11.) © The general ſenſe of the primitive Church,“ 
I preſumed you would have produced ſo numerous au- 
thorities, that I ſhould not caſily be able to con{ult Fan 
all. But I ſoon found my miſtake; your Lordih:; 
ire only Chryloſtom, Jerom, Origen, and oa 
naſius. 


However, though theſe four can no more be me 


the Primitive Church, than the Church Univer'(:!, 


L conlent to abide by their ſuffrage. Nay, I will go a 

ſtep farther ſtill. If any two ot thele aftirm, that thode. 

wann belong only to the Apoſtolical age, and not. 
| "i 


3 i” 


oO RO EEE. „„ •?P—4?Cͥ2. 


_ — 6 # — 
— ACA. — - 
=_ — - — 


„ 


106 A ranrurk APPEAL, Part I. 


to the Chriſtians of ſucceeding times, I will give up the 
whole cauſe. 125 | 

But let it be obſerved: if they ſhould affirm, that 
theſe primarily belong to the Chriſtians of the apoſtoli- 
cal age, that does not prove the point, becaule my 
may in a ſecondary ſenſe belong to others not withſtand- 
ing : nor does any of them ſpeak home to the queſtion, 
unleſs he maintain in expreſs terms, that theſe texts re- 
fer only to the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, and not 
at all to the ſtate of ordinary Chriſtians, 

16. Concerning thoſe three texts, John xiv. ver. 16, 
and 26; and John xvi. ver. 13, © I could eafily add 
{fays your Lordſhip,*) the authorities of Chryſoſtom 
and the other Commentators,” St. Chryſoſtom's au- 
thority I will confider now, and that of the others, 
when they are produced, 

It is granted, that he interprets not only John xvi. 
13, but alſo both the paſlages in the 14th chapter, as 
primarily belonging to the Apoſtles. Yet part of his 
comment on the 26th verſe, 1s as follows. 

Such is that grace (of the Comforter) that if it 
finds ſadneſs, it takes it away; if evil defire, it conſumes 
it. It caſts out fear, and ſuffers him that receives it to 
be man no longer, but tranſlates him, as it were, into 
heaven, Hence none of them counted any thing his 
own, but continued in prayer, with gladneſs and ſingle- 
neſs of heart, For this chiefly is there need of the 
Holy Ghoſt, For the fruit of the Spirit 1s joy, peace, 
faith, meekneſs. Indeed ſpiritual men often grieve ; 
but that grief is ſweeter than joy. For whatever is of 
the Spirit, is the greateſt gain, as Whatever is of the 
world, is the greateſt loſs. Let us therefore in keeping 
the commandmentsꝰ (according to our Lord's exhorta- 
tion, ver. 15.) * ſecure the unconquerable aſhſtance of 
the Spirit, and we ſhall be nothing inferior to angels.“ 

St, Chryſoſtom here, after he had fhewn, that the 
promiſe of the Comforter primarily belonged to the 
Apoſtles : (and who ever 8 it ?) undeniably 
teaches, that in a ſecondary ſenſe, it belongs to all Chril- | 
tians: to all ſpiritual men, all who keep the commend- 
ments. I appeal therefore to all mankind, whether his 
. | * Page 15. : 1 40 i 

5 authority 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 107 
authority touching the promiſe of our Lord in theſe 
texts, does not overthrow the propoſition it was cited 
to prove ? 

Although your Lordſhip names no other author here, 
yet page 42, you ſay, The aſſigned ſenſe of theſe paſ- 
fages was confirmed by the 4uthority of Origen.” It is 
needful therefore to add, what occurs in his works, 
with regard to the preſent queſtion. | 

He occaſionally mentions this promiſe of our Lord, 
in four ſeveral places. But it is in one only that he 
ſpeaks pertinently to the point in hand, (vol, II, p- 
40g. edit. bened.) where his words are theſe: 

When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide 
you into all truth, and he will teach you all things.“ 
„The ſum of all good things conſiſts in this, that a 
man be found worthy to receive the grace of the Hol 
Ghoſt. Otherwiſe, nothing will be accounted 
in him, who hath not the Holy Spirit.“ | 

Do theſe words confirm that © Senſe of thoſe paſ- 
ſages which your Lordſhip had aſſigned ? ” Rather do 
they not utterly overturn it? And prove, (as above) 
that although this Rn of our Lord, primarily be- 
longs to the Apoſtles, yet in the ſecondary ſenſe, it 
belongs (according to Origen's judgment) to all Chriſ- 
tians in all ages? 

1. The fourth text mentioned as belonging to the 
firſt Chriſtians only, is Rom. viii. 15, 16, and p. 26, it 
is ſaid, This interpretation is confirmed by the autho- 
rity of the moſt eminent Fathers.” The Reader is par- 
ticularly referred to Origen and 7eron: in locum. But 
here ſeems to be a miſtake of the name. Ferom in lo- 
cum ſhould mean, Jerom upon the place, upon Rom. 
vii. 15, 16, But I cannot perceive, that there is one 
word upon that place, in all St. Jerom's Works. 

Nor indeed has Origin commented upon it any more 
than Jerom. But he occaſionally mentions it in thele 
words: 

„He is a babe who is fed with milk- but if he ſeeks 
the things that are above- Without doubt he will be of 
the number of thoſe, who receive not the Spirit of Bon- 
dage again unto fear, but the Spirit of Adoption, through 
whom they cry, Abba, Father.“ Vol. I. p. 79. 

9 a Again, 


10 A rART AER APPEAL, Part I. 


Again, The fulneſs of time is come when they 
who are willing, receive the Adoption, as Paul teaches 
in theſe words, Ye have not received the Spirit of 
Bondage again unto Fear; but ye have received the 
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father!“ 
And it is written in the goſpel according to St. John, 
& To as many as received him, to them gave he power 
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe 
in his name.“ Vol. I. p. 231, 232. 

Yet again, Every one that is born of God, and 
doth not commit fin, by his very actions faith, Our 
Father which art in heaven, the Spirit itſelf bearin 
witneſs with their Spirit, that they are the Children o 
God.“ - Ibid. f | 

According to Origen therefore, this teſtimony of the 
Spirit, is not any publick teſtimony by miracles, pecu- 
lar to the firſt times, but an inward teſtimony, belong- 
ing in common to all that are born of God. And con- 
ſequently the authority of Origen does not confirm 
that interpretation neither; but abſolutely deſtroy it. . 

18. The laſt authority your Lordſhip appeals to. on 
this text is, That of the great John Chryſoſtom, who 
reckons the teſtimony of the Spirit of Adoption by 
which we cry Abba, Father! among the miraculous 
gifts of the Spirit.” “I rather chuſe (your Lordſhip 
adds, p. 26.) to refer you to the words of St. Chryſo- 
ſtom, than to tranſcribe them here, as having almoſt 
tranſlated them in the preſent account of the teſtimony 
of the Spirit.“ | : 

However, I believe it will not be labour loſt, to 
tranſcribe a few of thoſe words, | 

It is in his comment on the 14th verſe, that he firſt 
mentions, St, Paul's compariſon between a Jew and a 
Chriſtian, How fairly your Lordſhip has repreſented 
this, let every Reader judge, _ | 

« As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the 
Sons of God.”'——* Whereas the ſame title had been 
given of old to the Jews alfo,--- he ſhews in the ſequel, 
how great a difference there is, between that honour 
and this. For though, ſays he, the titles are the ſame, 
yet the things are not, And he plainly proves it, by 
comparing both what they had received, and 2 


Te Men of Reaſon and Religion. 109 


looked for. And firſt he ſhews what they had received» 
viz. A Spirit of Bondage. Therefore he adds, Ye 
have not received the Spirit of Bondage again unto 
Fear: but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption.“ 
What means the Spirit of Fear ? — Obſerve their 
Whole life, and you will know clearly, For puniſh- 
ments were at their heels, and much fear was on every 
ſide, and before their face——But with us it is not ſo. 
For our mind and conſcience are cleanſed, ſo that we 
do all things well, not for fear of preſent puniſhment, 
but through our love of God, BE an habit of virtue. 
They therefore, though they were called ſons, yet were 
as ſlaves ; but we, being made free, have received the 
Adoption, and look not for a land of milk and honey, 
but for heaven.“ 
He brings alſo another proof, that we have the Spi- 
Tit of Adoption, by which, ſays he, we cry, Abba, Father. 
—— THis is the firſt word we utter, aur T&; Vavpads 
dag meirag, xa} Tor Etvoy xa Taxa Aoxeuuatur viyuer 2 
after thoſe amazing thracs {or birth pangs) and that 
. ſtrange and wonderful manner of bringing forth.“ | 
© He brings yet another proof of the ſuperiority of 
thoſe who had this Spi- of Adoption. The Spirit 
n witnels with our Spirit that we are the 
Children of God,” I prove this, ſays he, not only 
from the voice itſelf, but alſo from the cauſe whence 
that voice proceeds, For the Spirit ſuggeſts the words 
while we thus ſpeak, which he hath elſewhere expreſt 
more plainly, * God hath ſent forth the Spirit of has 
Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father ! But what 
is, The Spirit bearing witneſs with our Spirit“ He 
means, the Paraclete by the gift given unto us.“ 
(But that this was an extraordinary gift, we have no 
intimation at all, neither before nor after) And when 
the Spirit beareth witnels, what doubt is left? If a 
man or an angel ſpake, ſome might doubt. But when 
the Moſt High — witnels to us, who can doubt 
any longer ? 

Now let any reaſonable man judge how far your 
Lordſhip has © tranſlated the words of St. Chryſoſtom ? 
And whether he reckons the teſtimony of the Spirit 
among the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghoſt ? ”” Or 

among 


110 A rAR TUR APPEAL, Part I. 


among thoſe ordinary gifts of the Spirit of Chriſt, 
which if a man have not, he is none of his? 

19. The fifth text your Lordſhip quotes, as deſcrib- 
ing a miraculous gift of the Spirit, is 1 Cor. xiv. 15: 
to prove which, you comment on the 8th chapter to 
the Romans, particularly the 26th verſe: and here 
again it is ſaid, That the interpretation aſſigned, is 
confirmed by ſeveral of the moſt eminent Fathers, more 
eſpecially the great John Chryſoſtom as well as by Ori- 
gen and Jerom upon the place,” | 

I cannot find St. Jerom to have writ one line upon 
the place. And it is obvious, that St. Chryſoſtom ſup- 
poſes, the whole context from the 14th to the 25th 
verle, to relate to all Chriſtians in all ages. How this 
can be faid to © confirm the interpretation aſſigned, 
J cannot conjecture. Nay, it is remarkable that he ex- 
pounds the former part of the 26th verſe, as deſcribing 
the ordinary privilege of all Chriſtians. Thus far, 
therefore, he does not confirm, but overthrow ** the 
interpretation before aſſigned.” But in the middle of 
the verſe he breaks off, and expounds the latter part, 
as deſcribing one of the miraculous gifts. | 

Yet I muſt do the juſtice to this venerable man to 
obſerve, he does not ſuppoſe that miraculous gift was 
given, only that the inſpired might do what any ordi- 
nary Chriſtian might have done without it. (This in- 
terpretation even of the latter part of the verſe, he does 
in no wiſe confirm.) But that he might aſk in every 
particular circumſtance, the determinate thing which it 
was the will of God to give. 

20. The third Father by whom it is ſaid this inter- 
rages is confirmed, is Origin. The firſt paſſage of 

is which relates to Romans viii. 26. runs thus: Vol. 
„ RES 

% Paul perceiving how far he was, after all theſe 
things, from knowing to pray for what he ought as he 
ought, ſays, We know not what we ſhould pray for as we 

| ought, But he adds, whence what is wanting may be 
bad by one who indeed does not know, but labours to 
be found worthy of having the defect ſupplied. For 
he ſays, Likewiſe the Spirit alſo helpeth our inſirmi- 
ties, For we know not what we ſhould pray for as 
| we 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 111 


as we ought, But the Spirit itſelf maketh interceſſion 
for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. And 
he that ſcarcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind 
of the Spirit ; becauſe he maketh interceſſion for the 
ſaints, according to the will of God.” The Spirit 
which crieth Abba, Father, in the hearts of the ſaints, 
knoweth well our groanings in this tabernacle, making 
interceſſion for us to God, with groanings which can- 
not be uttered, . Lo the {ame effect it that Scripture, 1 
Cor. xiv. 15, © I will pray with the ſpirit, I will pray 
with the underſtanding allo.” For our underſtanding 
or mind & „e) cannot pray, if the ſpirit do not pray 

fore it, and the underitanding, as it were, liſten 
to it.“ 

Again (Vol. II. p. 146.) “ I would know, how the 
ſaints cry to God without a voice, The Apoſtle ſhews, 
“God hath ſent forth the Spirit of his Son into your 
hearts, crying, Abba, Father!“ And he adds, The 
Spirit itſelf maketh interceſſion for us, with groanings 
which cannot be uttered.” And again, 4 He that 
ſearcheth the hearts, knoweth what is the mind of the 
ſpirit, becauſe he maketh interceſſion for the ſaints, ac- 
cording to the Will of God.” Thus therefore, the 
Spirit making interceſſion for us with God, the cry of 
the ſaints is heard without a voice.” 

Once more in his Homily on Joſhua, (Vol. II. 

r 

F. Jeſus our Lord, doth not forſake us; but although 
when we would pray, we know not what to pray for 
as we ought, yet the Spirit itſelf maketh interceſſion for 
us with groanings which cannot be uttered. Now the 
Lord is that Spirit: the Spirit aſſiſts our prayers, and 
offers them to God with groanings which we cannot 
expreſs in words,” 3 

I believe all rational men will obſerve from hence, 
that Origen is ſo far from confirming, that he quite 
overturns your Lordſhip's interpretation of the 16th as 
well as the 26th verſe of this chapter: ſeeing, in his 
judgment, both that teſtimony of the Spirit, and this 
prayer belong to all chriſtians in all ages. | 

21. The ſixth Scripture which your Lordſhip has 
undertaken to ſhew, ©. relates only to the Apoſtolical 

W , * times,“ 


110 A rART HER APPEAL, Part TI, 
among thoſe ordinary gifts of the Spirit of Chriſt, 
which if a man have not, he is none of his? 

19. The fifth text your Lordſhip quotes, as deſcrib- 
ing a miraculous gift of the Spirit, is 1 Cor. xiv. 15: 
to prove which, you comment on the 8th chapter to 
the Romans, particularly the 26th verſe: and here 
again it is ſaid, That the interpretation aſſigned, is 
confirmed by ſeveral of the moſt eminent Fathers, more 
eſpecially the great John Chryſoſtom as well as by Ori- 
gen and Jerom upon the place.“ | 

I cannot find St. Jerom to have writ one line upon 
the place. And it is obvious, that St. Chryſoſtom ſup- 
poſes, the whole context from the 14th to the 25th 
verle, to relate to all Chriſtians in all ages. How this 
can be faid to ©& confirm the interpretation aſſigned, 
I cannot conjecture. Nay, it is remarkable that he ex- 
pounds the former part of the 26th verſe, as deſcribing 
the ordinary privilege of all Chriſtians. Thus far, 
therefore, he does not confirm, but overthrow * the 
interpretation before aſſigned.” But in the middle of 
the verſe he breaks off, and expounds the latter part, 
as deſcribing one of the miraculous gifts. | 

Yet I muſt do the juſtice to this venerable man to 
obſerve, he does not ſuppoſe that miraculous gift was 
given, wy that the inſpired might do what any ordi- 
nary Chriſtian might have done without it. (This in- 
terpretation even of the latter part of the verſe, he does 
in no wiſe confirm.) But that he might aſk in every 
particular circumſtance, the determinate thing which it 
was the will of God to give. 

20. The third Father by whom it is ſaid this inter- 
3 is confirmed, is Origin. The firſt paſſage of 

is which relates to Romans viii, 26. runs thus: Vol. 
I. p. 199.) 3 

“ Paul perceiving how far he was, after all theſe 
things, from knowing to pray for what he ought as he 
ought, ſays, We know not what we ſhould pray for as we 
ought, But he adds, whence what is wanting may be 
had by one who indeed does not know, but labours to 
be found worthy of having the defect ſupplied. For 
he fays, © Likewiſe the Spirit alſo helpeth our infirmi- 
ties, For we know not what we ſhould pray for as 

A we 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 111 


as we ought, But the Spirit itſelf maketh interceſſion 
for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. And 
he that ſearcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind 
of the Spirit ; becauſe he maketh interceſſion for the 
ſaints, according to the will of God.” The Spirit 
which crieth Abba, Father, in the hearts of the ſaints, 
knoweth well our groanings in this tabernacle, makin 
interceſſion for us to God, with groanings which can- 
not be uttered. . To the ſame effect it that Scripture, 1 
Cor. xiv. 15, © I will pray with the ſpirit, I will pray 
with the underſtanding al{o.” For our underſtanding 
or mind 6 »;) cannot pray, if the ſpirit do not pray 

fore it, and the underitanding, as it were, liſten 
to it.“ 

Again (Vol. II. p. 146.) “ I would know, how the 
ſaints cry to God without a voice. The Apoſtle ſhews, 
“God hath ſent forth the Spirit of his Son into your 
hearts, crying, Abba, Father!“ And he adds, The 
Spirit itſelf maketh interceſſion for us, with groanings 
which cannot be uttered.” And again, le that 
ſearcheth the hearts, knoweth what is the mind of the 
ſpirit, becauſe he maketh interceſſion for the ſaints, ac- 
cording to the Will of God.” Thus therefore, the 
Spirit making interceſſion for us with God, the cry of 
the ſaints is heard without a voice.” 

Once more in his Homily on Joſhua, (Vol. II, 
gs HOG 
« Jeſus our Lord, doth not forſake us; but although 
when we would pray, we know not what to pray for 
as we ought, yet the Spirit itſelf maketh interceſſion for 
us with groanings which cannot be uttered. Now the 
Lord is that Spirit: the Spirit aſſiſts our prayers, and 
offers them to God with groanings which we cannot 
expreſs in words.“ 8 

I believe all rational men will obſerve from hence, 
that Origen is ſo far from confirming, that he quite 
overturns your Lordſhip's interpretation of the 16th as 
well as the 26th verſe of this chapter: ſeeing, in his 
judgment, both that teſtimony of the Spirit, and this 
prayer belong to all chriſtians in all ages. TEES: 

21. The ſixth Scripture which your Lordſhip has 
undertaken to ſhew, ©. relates only to the Apoſtolical 

\ : . times,“ 


2 
* 
© T 
” 4 


1141 A vaAAT AER APPEAL, Part I. 


times,” is 1 Cor. ii. 4, 3. And „ this interpretation 
alſo, (it is aid) is confirmed by the authority of Chry- 
foſtom, Origen, and other ancient Writers.” (p. 33.) 
With thoſe other © Ancient Writers I have no con- 
cern yet. St. Chryſoſtom fo far confirms this interpre- 
tation, as to explam that whole phraſe, the demonſtra- 
tion of the Spirit and of power, of © the power of the 
Spirit ſhewn by miracles,” But he ſays not one word, 
ob any Proof of the Chriſtian Religion, ariſing from 
the types and ane 7s of the Old Teſtament.” 
Origen has theſe words (Vol, I. p. g21.) 

* Our word has a certain peculiar demonſtration, 
more divine than the Grecian, Logical demonſtration, 
This the Apoſtle terms, The demonſtration of the Spi- 
rit and of power: of the Spirit, becauſe of the pro- 
phecies, ſufficient to convince any one, eſpecially of 
the things that relate'to Chriſt ; of power, becau of 
the miraculous powers, ſome footſteps of which till 
remain,” 

Hence we may doubtleſs infer. That Origen judged 
this text to relate, in its primary ſenſe to the Apoſtles : 
but can we thence infer, that he did not judge it to be- 
long, in a lower ſenſe, to all true Miniſters of Chriſt ? 

Let us hear him ſpeaking for himſelf in the ſame 
Treatiſe (p. 377 ) 8 

« And my ſpeech and my preaching were not with 
enticing words of man's wiſdom, but in demonſtration 
of the Spirit and of power : that your faith ſhould not 
ſtand in the wiſdom of men, but in the power of God. 
Thoſe who hear the word preached with power, are 
themſelves filled with power,” (N. B. Not the power 
of working miracles) which they demonſtrate both in 
their diſpoſition, and in their life, and in their ſtriving 
for the truth unto death. But ſome, although they 

rofeſs to believe, have not this power of God in them, 
but are empty thereof.“ 

(Did Origen then believe, that the power mentioned 
in this text, belonged only to the Apoſtolical age 7) 

See the force of the word, conquering believers by 
a perſuaſiveneſs attended with the power of God! 1 
{peak this to ſhew the meaning of him that ſaid, And 
my ſpeech and my preaching were not with the — 

8 wo 


— 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 113 
words of man's wiſdom, but in demonſtration of the 
Spirit and of power; that your faith ſhould not ſtand 
in the wiſdom of men, hut in the power of God.“ 
This divine ſaying means, That what is ſpoken is not 
ſufficient of itſelf (although it be true and moſt worthy, 
to be believed) to pierce a man's ſoul, if there be nat. 
alſo a certain power from God given to the ſpeaker, 
and grace bloom upan what is ſpoken, and this grace 
cannot be but from God.” | 

After obſerving, That this is the very paſſage which 
your Lordſhip mentions at the cloſe of the other (but 
does not cite it) I deſire every unprejudiced perſon to 
judge, whether Origen does not clearly determine, that 
the power, ſpoken of in this text, is in ſome meaſure 
given to all true Miniſters in all ages? E 

22, The laſt Scripture which your Lordſhip affirms 
© to be peculiar to the times of the Apoſtles,” is that 
in the firſt epiſtle of St. Jobn, concerning the Unction 
of the Holy One. 1 

To confirm this interpretation, we are referred to the 
authority of Origen and Chryſoſtom, on the parallel 
paſſages in St. John's goſpel, p. 42. + * 

But it has appeared, That both theſe Fathers ſuppoſe 
thoſe paſſages to belong to all chriſtians, And conſe- 


uently their authority (if theſe are parallel paſſages) 
Gands full againſt this wnterpretation. | | 


" Your Lordſhip ſubjoins, „ I ſhall here only add tha 
of the great Athanaſius, who (in his epiſtle to Serapiq! 
interprets, the Unction from the Holy One, not merely 
of divine grace, but of the extraordinary gifts of , the 
Holy Spirit.” e 
Nay, it is enough, if he interprets it at all of ardi- 
nary grage, ſuch as is common to all chriſtians. - 
And this your Lordſhip allows he does. But I can- 
not allow that he interprets it of any thing elſe, I cannot 
perceive, that he interprets it at all, © of the extraordi- 
nary gifts of the Holy Spirit.“ : 
His words are, The Holy Spirit is called, and is, 
the. UnQtion and the Seal, For John writes, The 
anointing which ye have received of him, #ideth in 
Jos. and ye need not that any man ſhould teach. you, 
ut as this anointing, | his Spirit,] teacheth you of 
all things,” Again, it is written in the prophet Iſaiah, 
| Þ ia | The 


alſo, in a 


things of God, and revealeth them to the ſons of men, 


* 


114 A rAR TRR APPEAL, Part I. 
* The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, becauſe he hath 


anointed me.” And Paul writes thus; “ In whom 
alſo ye were ſealed.” And again, Grieve not the 
Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are ſealed unto tho 
day of redemption.” This anointing is the breath of 
the Son, fo that he who hath the Spirit may ſay, We 
are the ſweet ſmelling ſavour of Chriſt.” Becauſe we 
are partakers of the Holy Spirit, we have the Son: 
and having the Son, we have the Spirit, crying in our 
hearts, Abba, Father.” - 

And fo, in his Oration againſt the Arians. 

He ſendeth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, 
crying, Abba, Father. His Son in us, invoking the 
Father, makes him to be called our Father. Certainly 
God cannot be called their Father, who have not the 
Son m their hearts.” 

Is it not eaſy to be obſerved here, 1. That Athana- 
ſius makes that teſtimony of the Spirit, common to all 
the children of God: 2. That he joins the anointing of 
the Holy One, with that ſeal of the Spirit wherewith 
all that org are ſealed to the day of redemption : 
and g. That he does not, throughout this paſſage, ſpeak 
of the extraordinary gifts at all ? 

Therefore, upon the whole, the ſenſe of the Primi- 
tive Church, ſo far as it can be gathered from the au- 
thors above cited, is, That although ſome of theſe 
Sc1ip: ures primarily refer, to thoſe extraordinary gifts 
of the Spirit, which were given tothe Apoſtles and a 
few other 3 in the Apoſtolical age: yet they refer 

econdary ſenſe, to thoſe ordinary operations 
of the Holy Spirit, which all the children of God do 
and will experience, even to the end of the world.” 

23. What I mean by the ordinary operations of the 
Holy Ghoſt, I ſum up in the words of a modern 
Writer : | | 

& Sanctification being oppoſed to our corruption, 
and anſwering fully to the latitude thereof, whatſoever 
of holineſs and 8 is wanting in our nature, 
muſt be ſupplied by the Spirit of God, Wherefore by 
nature we are totally, void of knowing the Will of God; 
this Spirit ſearcheth all things, yea, even the deep 


ſo 


# 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 115 


ſo that thereby the darkneſs of their underſtanding is 
expelled, and they are enlightened with the knowledge 
of God. The ſame ſpirit which revealeth the object of 
faith, generally to the univerſal Church, doth alſo illu- 
minate the underſtanding of ſuch as believe, that 3 
may receive the truth. For faith is the gift of God, 

not only in the object, but alſo in the act. And this 
gift is a gift of the Holy Ghoſt working within us 
And as the increaſe of perfection, ſo the original of 
faith is from the Spirit of God, by an internal illumina- 
tion of the ſoul,” 

The ſecond part of the office of the Holy Ghoſt 
is, the renewing of man in all the parts and faculties of 
hisfoul. For our natural corruption conliſting in an 
averſation of our wills, and a depravation of our affec- 
tions, an inclination of them to the Will of God, is 
wrought within us by the Spirit of God.” 

+ The third part of this office is, To lead, direct and 
govern us in our actions and converſations, If we live 
in the Spirit, quickened by his renovation, we- muſt 
alſo walk in the Spirit, following his direction, led by 
his manuduction. We are alſo animated and acted by 
the Spirit of God, who giveth both to will and 'to do : 
and * as many as are thus led by the Spirit of God, are 
the Sons of God. Moreover, that this direction may 
prove more effectual, we are guided in our prayers by 
the ſame Spirit: according to the promiſe, I will 
pour upon the houſe of David, and upon the inhabi- 
tants of Jeruſalem the Spirit of grace and ſupplication,”” 
(Zech. xii. 10.) Whereas then * this is the confidence 
which we have in him, that if we aſk any thing ac- 
cording to his will, he heareth us:“ and whereas © we 
know not what we ſhould pray for as we ought, + the 
Spirit itſelf maketh RATE he for us with groanings 
which cannot be uttered ;*” and 4 he that ſearcheth 
the hearts, knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, be- 
cauſe he maketh interceſſion for the ſaints according to 
the Will of God.” From which interceſſion (made 
for all true chriſtians) * he hath the h name of the Pa- 
raclete given him by Chriſt, who ſaid, I will pray the 

x * Father, 
* Rom. viii. 14, f Ver. 26. f Ver. 27. { John 
xiv. 16. 26, * L 2 | 


— ⏑— _ . _ 


2] 


116 A raxrntR APPEAL, Part I. 


| Father, and he will give you another Paraclete. For f 
any man fin, we have a Paraclete with the Father, Teſus 
Chrift the righteous, ſaith St. John: who maketh inter- 


"ceffion for us, ſaith St. Paul, (Rom. viii. 94.) And * 
| whic 


have “ another Paraclete, faith our Saviour : + 

allo maketh interceſſion for us, ſaith St. Paul. A 
Paraclete then, in the notion of the Scriptures, is an 
Interceſſor.“ 

* It is alſo the office of the Holy Ghoſt, to aſſure 
us of the adoption of Sons, to create in us a Tenſe of the 
paternal love of God towards us, to-give us an earneſt 
of our everlaſting inheritance, * The love of God is 
ſhed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghoſt which is 
oe unto us. For as many as are led by the Spigit of 

od, they are the Sons of God. And becauſe we are 
Sons, God hath ſent forth the Spirit of his Son into 
our hearts, crying Abba, Father, 4 For we have not re- 
ceived the Spirit of bondage again to fear, hut we have 
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, 
Father: the Spirit itſelf bearing witneſs with our Spirit, 
that we are the children of God.“ 5 5 

& As therefore we are born again by the Spirit, and 
receive from him our regeneration, fo we are alſo 
the ſame Spirit aſſured of our Adoption. Becauſe be- 
ing Sons we are alſo hers, heirs of God and joint heirs 
with Chriſt, by the ſame Spirit we have the pledge, or 
rather the earneſt of our inheritance. For he which 
eſtabliſheth us in Chriſt, and hath anointed us is God; 
who hath alſo ſealed us, and hath given us the earneſt 
of his Spirit in our hearts: ſo that we are ſealed with 
that Holy Spirit of promiſe, which is the earneſt of 
our inheritance. The Spirit of God, as given unto us 
in this life, is to be looked upon as an earneſt, being 

art of that reward which is promiſed, and upon per- 
ance of the covenant which God hath made with 
us, certainly to be received.” 

Your Lordſhip obſerved, that © the interpretation of 
thoſe paſſages, which relate to the untton from the Holy 
One, depends on the ſenſe of thole other paſſages of holy 
Scripture, particularly, thoſe in St. John's Goſpel.” 


4 
* John xiv. 16. + Rom. vi. 27. f Ver. 15, 16. 
Now 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 117 


Now if ſo, then theſe words fix the ſenſe of ſix out of 
the ſeven texts in queſtion : and every one of them, in 
the judgment of this writer, delcribes the ordinary gifts 
beſtowed on all Chriſtians, | 

It now reſts with your Lordſhip, to take your choice 
either to condemn or acquit both. Either your Lord- 
ſhip muſt condemn Biſhop Pearſon for an Enthuſiaſt, 
(a man no ways inferior to Biſhop Chryſoſtom :): or you 
muſt acquit me: for I have his expreſs authority on 
my fide, concerning every text which I affirm to belong 
to all Chriſtians, 2 

24. But I have greater authority than his, and ſuch 
as I reverence, only leſs than that of the Oracles of 
God, I mean that of our own Church. I ſhall cloſe 
this head, by ſetting down what occurs in her authentic 
records, concerning either our receiving the Holy Ghoſt, 
or his ordinary operations in all true Chriſtians. 

In her daily ſervice, ſhe teaches us all to beſeech 
God, « to grant us his Holy Spirit, that thoſe things 
may pleaſe him which we do at this preſent, and that 
the reſt of our life may be pure and holy: to pray 
for our Sovereign Lord the King, that God would re- 
pleniſh him with the Grace of his Holy Spirit ; for all 
the Royal Family, that they may be Als E. with lis 
Holy Spirit, and enriched with his Heavenly Grace : 
for all the Clergy and people, that he would ſend dow:s 
upon them the healthful Spixit of his Grace; for the 
Catholick Church, that it may be guided and governed 
by his good Spirit : and for all therein who at any time 
make their common ſupplications unto him, that the 
fellowſhip or communion of the Holy Ghoſt may be 
with them all evermore. 

Her collects are full of petitions to the ſame effect: 
* Grant that we may daily be renewed by the Holy 
Spirit,---+ Grant that in all our ſufferings here, for the 
teſtimony of thy truth, we may by faith behold the 
glory that ſhall be revealed, and being filled with the 
Holy Ghoſt, may love and bleſs our perlecutors. Send 
thy Holy Ghoſt and pour into our hearts that moſt excels 


* Colleft for Cbrimas Day, + St. Stephen's Day. 
} Quinquagelima Sunday. Wy ih 25 (Rat 
L 2 lent 


248 A txkturr APPEAL, Part I. 


lent gift of charity. O Lord, from whom all goo@ 
ings do come, grant to us thy humble fervants, that 
by thy holy inſpiration, we may think thoſe things that 
are good, an by thy merciful guidance may perform 
" ; "4 + We beſeech thee leave us not comfortleſs, 
but ſend to us the Holy Ghoſt to comfort us. 2 Grant 
us by the ſame ſpirit to have a right judgment in all 
things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy comfort. 
(N. B. The Church here teaches all Chriſtians to claim 
tie Comforter, in virtue of the promiſe made, John xiv.) 
5 Grant us, Lord we beſeech thee, the Spint to think 
and do always ſuch things as be rightfal. || O God, 
foraſmuch as without thee, we are not able to pleaſe 
thee, mercifully grant that thy Holy Spirit may in all 
things direct and rule our hearts. I Cleanſe the thoughts 
of our hearts by the inſpiration of thy Holy Spirit, that 
we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy 
Holy Name.“ 

„Ge thy Holy Spirit to this infant (or this perſon) 
chat he may be born again. Give thy Holy Spirit to 
theſe perſons (N. B. already baptized) that they may 
continue thy ſervants,” | 

* Almighty God, who haſt vouchlafed to regenerate 
theſe perſons by water and the Holy Ghoſt---Streogthen 
them with the Holy Ghoſt the Comforter, and daily 
, increaſe in them the manifold gifts of * grace,” 
Office of Confirmation. @, 

From theſe paſſages it may ſufficiently appear, for 
what purpoſes every Chriſtian, according to the doc- 
trine of the Church of England, does now receive the 
.. Holy Choft. But this will be ſtill more clear g rom thoſe 
that follow : wherein the reader may likewiſe obſerve, 
bo ain, rational ſenſe of God's revealing himſelf to us, 
the inſpiration of the Holy Ghoſt, and of a Believ- 
er's feeling in himſelf the mighty working of the Spirit 
of Chriſt. 
25. God gave them of old, grace to be his, chil- 
|. tidy, as he doth us now. But now, by the caming of 


85: * * 2 5 . 


* Fifth Sunday afier Eaſter. + Sunday after 3 Day. 
Whitſunday 6 Ninth Sunday after Trinity, | 4-26 "<p 
unday after Trinity. 1 Commutgns Office. .. 


= = 
27 1 - our 
&* # . f g 


To Men of Reaforr and Religion. 119 
tir Saviour Chriſt, we have rectived more abundantly 
the Spirit of God in our hearts.“ Homily on Faith, 
Part II. | 5 

„He died to deftroy the rule of the Devil in w, 
and he roſe again to fend down his Holy Spirit, to rule 
in our hearts.” FHomely on the Reſurrection. 

We have the Holy Spirit in our hearts, as a ſeal and 
pledge of our everlaſting inheritance. J1bt:d. 

* The Holy Ghoſt fat upon each of them, like as it 
had been gloven tongues of fire: to teach, that it is he 
that giveth eloquence and utterance in preaching the 
goſpel ; which engendereth a burning zeal 0. 2- 
God's word, and giveth all men a tongue, yea, a fiery 

e. (N. B. Whatever occurs in any of the Jour- 
nals, of God's © giving me utterance,” or enabling 
me to fpeak with power,“ cannot therefore be quoted 
as Enthuſiafm, without wounding the Church thr 
my fide) So that if any man be a dumb Chriſtian, 
not profeſſing his faith openly, he giveth men occaſion 
-to doubt, left he have not the grace of the Holy Ghoſt 
within hm.” Homily on Whitſunday. Part I. | 
It is the office of the Holy Ghoſt to ſanctify; 
which the more it is hid from our underſtanding,” 
(i. e. the particular manner of his working) © the more 
it ought. to move all men, to wonder at the ſecret and 
mighty workings of God's holy Spirit which is within 
us. For it is the Holy Ghoſt that doth quicker: the 
minds of men, ſtirring up godly motions in their hearts. 
Neither doth he think it ſuncient inwardly to work 
the new birth of man, unlefs he doth alſo dwel and 
abide in him. Know ye not, faith St. Paul, that ye 

are the Temple of God, and that his Spirit dwelleth in 
you ? Know ye not, that your bodies are the Temples 
of the Holy Ghoſt which is within you?” Again he 
ſaith, Ye are not in the fleſh but in the Spirit; ” 18 
why? © The Spirit of God dwelleth in you.” To 
this, agreeth St. John, © The anointing which ye 
have received he meaneth the Holy Ghoſt] abideth 
in you.“ And St. Peter faith the fame, The Spirit 
of glory and of- God reſteth upon you.“ O what 

comfort is this to the heart of a true Chriſtian, to think 
that the Holy Ghoſt dwelleth in him! If God be 


* 1 John ji. 27. with 


* 


——ñ—ͤ— — — — H —— = 


120 A raxrurn APPEAL, Fart I. 
with us, as the Apoſtle faith, who can be againſt us? ” 
He giveth patience and joyfulneſs of heart, in tempta- 
tion and affliction, and is therefore worthily called * the 
Comforter, He doth inſtruct the hearts the ſimple, 
in the knowledge of God and his word; therefore he is 
juſtly termed + The Spirit of Truth. And where the 
Holy Ghoſt doth inſtruct and teach, there is no delay 
at all in learning.” Ibid. 

(From this paſſage I learn, 1. That every true Chriſ- 
tian now receives the Holy Ghoſt, as the Paraclete or Com- 


forter promiſed by our Lord, John xiv. 13. Secondly, 


that every Chriſtian receives him as the Spirit of truth 
(promiſed John xvi.) to teach all things : And, g. That 


the anointing, mentioned in the firſt Epiſtle of St. John, - 


abides in every Chriſtian.) 

26. * In reading of God's word, he profiteth moſt, 
that is moſt inſpired with the Holy Ghoſt.” Homily on 
reading the Scripture, Part I. © | 

«© Human and worldly wiſdom is not needful to the 
underſtanding of Scripture, but the revelation of the 
Holy Ghoſt, who inſpireth the true meaning unto 


them that with humility and diligence ſearch for it.“ 


Ibid. Part II. ** 

„% Make him know and ſeel, that there is no other 
name under heaven given unto men, whereby we can 
be ſaved.“ 

„If we feel our conſcience at peace with God, 
through remiſſion of our ſins, —all is of God.“ Homily 
on Rogation Week, Part II. 1 

If you feel ſuch a faith in you, rejoice in it, and 
let it be daily increaſing by well-working.” Homily on 
Faith. Part III. | | 9 

„The faithful may feel wreught tranquility of con- 
ſcience, the increale of faith and hope, with many other 
graces of God,” Homily on the Sacrament. Part 1. 

«© Godly men feel inwardly God's Holy Spirit, in- 
flaming their hearts with love. Homily on certain places 
of Scripture, Part I. 

God give us grace, to know thele things, and to 
feel them in our hearts ! this knowledge and feeling is 


* John xiv, 16, + John xvi. 13. | 
$ | | not 


” - * 
To Men of Reafon and Religion. 124 


not of ourſelves. Let us therefore meekly call upon 
the bountiful Spirit, the Holy Ghoſt, to inſpire us with 
his 8 that we may be able to hear the 

of God to our ſalvation, For without his lively inſpi 
ration, can we not ſo much as ſpeak the name of 
Mediator. No man can fay that Jeſus is the Lord, 
but by. the Holy Ghoſt.” Much leſs ſhould we be 
able to believe and know theſe great myſteries, that be 
opened to us by Chriſt, © But we have received, ſaith 
St. Paul, not the ſpirit of the world, but the Spirit 
which is of God; “ for this purpoſe, © that we may 
know the things which are freely given to us of God.“ 
In the power of the Holy Ghoſt reſteth all ability to 
know God and to pleaſe him. It is he that purifieth 
the mind by his ſecret working. He enlighteneth the 
heart, to conceive worthy thoughts of almighty God. 
He ſitteth in the tongue of man, to ſtir him to ſpeak 
his honour, He only miniſtereth ſpiritual ſtrength to 
the powers of the ſoul and body. And if we have any 
gift, whereby we may profit our neighbour, all s 
wrought by this one and the felf-fame Spirit,” Homily 
for Rogation Week, Part III. 

27. Every propoſition which I have any where ad- 
vanced, concerning thoſe operations of the Holy Ghoſt, 
which I believe are common to all Chriſtians in all ages, 
is here clearly maintained by our own Church. 

Under a full ſenſe of this, I could not well under- 
ſtand for many years, how it was, that on the mention- 
ing any of theſe great truths, even among men of edu- 
cation, the cry, immediately aroſe, an Enthuhaſt, an 
Enthuſiaſt! but I now plainly perceive, this is only 
an old fallacy in a new ſhape. To object Enthuſiaſm 
to any perſon or doctrine, is but a decent method of 
begging the queſtion, It generally ſpares the objector 
the trouble of reaſoning, and is a ſhorter and catier way 
of carrying his cauſe, 

For %, nay I affert that till a man receives the 
Holy Ghoſt, he is without God in the world; that he 
cannot know the things of God, unleſs God reveal them 
unto him by his Spirit: no, nor have even one hoty, 
or heavenly temper, without the infpiration of the —1 | 
One,” Now ſhould one who is conſcious to 1 

at | 


- O_— — — oe O_o 


1 


— — ——— OE — 6 2 — a — 


— —— 


122 + A raxTHeR APPEAL, Part I. 

that he has experienced none of theſe things, attempt 
to confute theſe propoſitions, either from ſcripture or 
antiquity, it might prove a difficult taſk, What then 
ſhall he do? Why, cry out, © Enthuſiaſm ! Enthu- 
fiaſm !”” and the work is done, 

But what does he mean by Enthuſiaſm ? perhaps no- 
thing at all: few have any diſtin idea of its meaning. 
Perhaps, ſomething very bad,” or, * ſomething I 
never experienced and do not underſtand.” Shall I 
tell you then, what that * terrible ſomething” is? I 
believe, thinking men mean by Enthuſiaſm, a ſort of 
religious madneſs ; a falſe imagination of being inſpired 
by God : and by an Enthuſiaſt, one that fancies him- 
ſelf under the influence of the Holy Ghoſt, when in 
fact he is nt. nd | 

Let him prove me guilty of this, who can, I will 
tell you once more the. whole of my belief on thele 
heads. And if any man will ſhew me (by arguments, 
r hard names) what is wrong, I will thank God and 

im. | 

28, Every good gift is from God, and 1s given. to 
man by the Holy Ghoſt, - By nature there is in us no 
good thing. And there can be none, but ſo far, as it is 
wrought in us by that good Spirit, Have we any true 
knowledge of what is good ? this is not the reſult of 
our natural underſtanding. * The natural man dif- 
cerneth not the things of the Spirit of God:“ fo that 
we never can diſcern them, until God “ reveals them 
unto us by his Spirit.” Reveals, that is, unveils, un- 
covers gives us to know what we did not know before. 
Have we love? „ It is ſhed abroad in our hearts, by 
the Holy Ghoſt which is given unto us.” He inſpires, 
breathes, infuſes into our ſoul, what of ourſelves we 
could not have. Does our ſpirit rejoice in God our 
Saviour? It is Foy in (or by) the Holy Ghoſt, Have 
we true inward peace? It is the peace of God, wrought 
in us by the ſame Spirit. Faith, peace, joy, love, are 
all his fruits. And as we are. figuratively ſaid, to ſee 
the light of faith, ſo by a like figure of ſpeech we are 
ſaid to feel, this peace and joy and love: that is, we 
have an inward experience of them, which we cannot 


find any fitter word to expreſs, 
The 


| To Men of Reiſon and Retigion. , 12g 
The reaſons why in ſpeaking of theſe things I uſe , 


thoſe terms, (inſpiration particularly) are, 1. Becauſe 
they are ſcriptural. 2. Becauſe they are uſed by our 
Church. g. Becauſe know none better. The word 
„ influence of the Holy Ghoſt,” Which I ſuppoſe you 
uſe, is both a far ſtrowger and a leſs natural term than 
inſpiration. It is far ſtronger ; even as far as flowing 
into the ſoul **is a ſtronger expreſſion than * breathing 
upon it.” And leſs natural; as breathing bears a near 
relation to ſpirit ; to which flowing in, has only a diſ- 
tant relation. \ 89851 
« But you thought I had meant immediate inſpira- 
tion.“ So I do, or I mean nothing at all. Not in- 
deed ſuch inſpiration as is fine medizs, But all inſpira- 
tion, though by means, is immediate. Suppoſe, for 
inſtance, you are employed in private prayer, and God 
pours his love into your heart. God then acts immedi- 
ately on your foul : and the love of him which you 
then experience, is as immediately breathed into you 
by the Holy Ghoſt, as if you had lived 1700 years ago. 
Change the term. Say, God then aſliſts you to love 


him? Well, and is not this immediate aſſiſtance 7 


Say, © His Spirit concurs with yours.“ You gain no 
ground. It 1s immediate concurrence or none at all, 
God, a Spirit, acts upon your ſpirit, Make it out any 
otherwiſe if you can. 

1 cannot conceive, how that harmleſs word, imme- 
diate, came to be fuch a bugbear in the world: © why, 
I thought you meant ſuch inſpiration as the Apoſtles 
had ; and ſuch receiving the Holy Ghoſt as that was at 
the day of Pentecoſt.” I do, in part: indeed I do not 
mean, that Chriſtians now receive the Holy Ghoſt, in 
order to work miracles: but they do doubtleſs now re- 
'ceive, yea, are filled with the Holy Ghojt, in order to 
be filled with the fruits of that bleſſed Spirit. And he 
inſpires into all true believers now, a degree of the ſame 
peace and joy and love, which the Apoſtles felt in 
themſel ves on that day, when they were firſt filled with 
the Holy Ghoſt, 

29. I have now conſidered the moſt material objec- 
tions I know, which have been lately made againſt the 
great doctrines I teach, I have produced, ſo far as in 


me 


A ranrien APPEAL, Part I. 


$24 
me lay, the ſtrength of thoſe .objeftions, and then an- 
— on I hope, in the. ſpirit of meekneſs. And 
now I truſt it appears, that theſę doctrines are no other 
than the doctrines of Jeſus Chrift : that they are all 
evidently contained in the word of God, by which 
alone I deſire to ſtand or fall; that they are funda- 
wentally the fame with the doctrines of che Church of 
England, of which I do, and ever did Profeſs myſelf a 
Member. 
ZBut there remains one objeftion, which though 
relating to the head of doctrine, yet is independent 
on all that went before, And that is, ® Yau cannot 
agree in your doctrines yourſelves. One holds 
one thing and one another, r. Whitfield anathema- 
tizes Mr, Weſley; and Mr. Weſley anathematizes Mr. 
Whitfield, And yet each pretends to be led by the 
Holy Ghoſt, by the mfallible Spirit of God! Every 
reaſonable man muſt conclude from hence, that neither 
one nor the other is led by that Spirit.“ 
F need not ſay, how continually this has been urged, 
both in common converſation and from the preſs: (I 
am grieved to add, and from the pulpit too; for if the 
argument were good, it would overturn the Bible.) 
Nor, how great ſtreſs has been continually laid upon 
it: whoever propoſes it, propoſes it as demonſtration, 
and generally claps his wings, as bevy quite aſſured, it 
will admit of no anſwer. o& S 
And indeed I am in doubt, whether it does admit 
(L am ſure, it does not require) any other anſwer, than 
that coarſe one of the countryman to the Romiſh 
Champion, Bellarmine, thou lieſt.“ For every 
propoſition contained herein, is groſsly, ſhameleſsly 
falſe. 1. © You cannot agree in your doctrines amon 
yourſelves” ——— Who told you ſo? All our funda- 
mental doctrines, I have recited above. And in every 
one of theſe we do, and have agreed for ſeveral years. 
In theſe, we hold one and the ſame thing. In ſmaller 
23 each of us thinks, and lets think. 2. Mr, 
hitefield anathematizes Mr. Weſley.“ Another 
ſhameleſs untruth. Let any one read what Mr. White- 
field wrote, even in the heat of controverſy, and he 
will be convinced af the contrary, g. And Mr. 
Weſley 


To Men of Neaſon and Religion. s 
Weftey znathemiatizes Mr. Whitefield.” This is equall 
falſe and ſcandalous, ' 1 reverence” Mr. Whitefiel 
both as à child of God, and true Miniſter of Jeſus 
Chriſt. 4. And yet each pteterids to be Ted'by the 
Holy Ghoft, by the mfallible Spirit of God.” Not in 
our private opinions: not does either of us pretend to 
be any farther led by the Spirit of God, than every 
chriſtian muſt pretend to be, unleſs he will deny the 
Bible. For only as many as are led by the Spirit of God, 
are the Sons of God. Therefore, if you do not pre- 
tend to be led by him too, yea, if it be not ſo va 
you are none of quis, 

And now, what is become of your gemortbraddn # 
Leave it to the carmen and porters its juſt proprietors 
to the zealous apple-women that ery after me in the 
ſtreet, © This is he that rails at the Whole Dutyful of 
Man,” But let every one that pretends to ann or 
reaſon, be aſhamed to mention it any more. 

30. The firſt imferertce, eafily deduced from whitt 
has been faid, is, That we are not falſe Prophets.“ 
In one ſenſe of the word, we are no Prophets at all; 
for we do not foretel things to come, But in another 
(wherem every Miniſter is a Prophet) we are. For 
we do ſpeak in the name of God. Now a falſe Pro- 
phet (in this ſenſe of the word) 15 one, who declares ay 
the Will of God, what is not fo. But we declare (as 
has been ſhewn at large) nothing elfe as the Will of 


Goa, but what 1s evidently contamed in his written 


word, as explained by our own church. Therefore, 
unleſs you can prove the Bible to be a falſe book, vo 
cannot poſſibly prove us to be falſe Prophets. 

The dert Which is generally cited on this ceo! is 
Matthew, vii. ver. 15. But how unhappily choſen? 
In the receding chapters, our Lord had been deſcribing 
that righteouſneſs which exceeds the rightebuſneſs of 
the Scribes andÞPhariſees, and without which we can- 
not enter into the kingdom of Heaven: even the life of 
God in the foul ; holineſs of Heart, producing all holi- 
nefs'6f conver fations In this, he cloſes that rule which 
lums up..the whole with thoſe ſolemn w ords, „Enter 
ye mat Fe ſtrait gate: (ſuch indeed is chat f uni- 
verſal line For wide is the gate, and broad is the 

M way 


— — — — CO 


2 WET 3 


126 A rarTHEeR APPEAL, Part J. 


way that leadeth to deſtruRtion,” The gate of hell is 
wide as the whole earth; the way of unholineſs is broad 
as the great deep. And many there be which go in 
thereat; yea, and excuſe themſelves in ſo doing. 
« Becauſe ſtraight is the gate and narrow the way that 
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.” It 
follows, ** Beware of falſe Prophets; of thoſe who 
| ſpeak as from God, what God hath not ſpoken ; thoſe 
who ſhew you any other way to life, than that which 
I have now ſhewn. So that the falſe Prophets, here 
ſpoken of, are thoſe who point out any other way to 
heaven than this; who teach men to find a wider gate, 
a hroader way, than that deſcribed in the foregoing 
chapters. But it has been abundantly ſhewn, that we 
do not. Therefore (whatever we are beſide) we are 
not falſe Prophets. 
Neither are we (as has been frequently and vehe- 
mently affirmed) deceivers of the people. If we teach 
the truth as it is in Jeſus, if we ſpeak as the oracles of 
God, it follows, that we do not deceive thoſe that hear, 
though they ſhould believe whatever we ſpeak. Let 
God be true and every man a liar : every man that con- 
tradicts his truth. But he will be juſtified in his ſaying, 
and clear when he is judged. 
One thing more I infer, © That we are not Enthu- 
fiaſts,” This accuſation has been confidered at large: 
and the main arguments hitherto brought to ſupport it, 
have been weighed in the balance and found wanting : 
particularly this, * That none but Enthuſiaſts ſuppoſe 
either that * promiſe of the Comforter, or the + witneſs 
of the Spirit, or | that unutterable prayer, or 5 the 
Unction from the Holy One, to belong, in common, to 
all chriſtians,”  O my Lord, how deeply have you 
condemned the generation of God's children! Whom 
have you. repreſented as rank, dreaming Enthuſiaſts ? 
As either, deluded or deſigning men? Not only Biſhop 
Pearſon, a man hitherto accounted both ſound in heart, 
and of good underſtanding ; but likewiſe Archbiſhop 
Cranmer, Biſhop Ridley, Biſhop Latimer, Biſhop 


2 John iv. 16. 26. xvi. 43. I Rom. viii, 153 16. 
Rom, viu, 26, 27. 1 John ii. 20. 2. 
y ' 5 V, Hooper; 


| 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 127 
Hooper; and all the venerable compilers of our Litur- 
gy and 'Homilies : all the members of both the Houles 
of Convocation, by whom they were reviſed and ap- 
Yroved : yea, King Edward, and all his Lords and 
Cominions together, by whole authority they were 
eſtabliſhed! And, with theſe modern Enthuſiaſts, 
Origen, Chryſoſtom and Athanaſius are comprehended 
in the ſame cenſure ! "LL 
I grant, a Deiſt might rank both us and them, in th 
number of religious madmen : nay, ought ſo to do, on 
his ſuppoſition, that the goſpel is but a Cunningly-de- 
viſed Fable. And on this ground, ſome of them have 
done ſo in fact. One of them was aſking me, ſome years 
ſince, What! are you one of the Knight-Errants P 
How, T'pray, got Quixotiſm into your head? You 
want nothing : you have a good proviſion for life ; and 
are in a way of preferment ; and muſt you leave all, to 
hght windmills : to convert ſavages in America?” I 
could only reply, ** Sir, if the Bible is a lie, I am as 
very a madman as you can conceive, But if it be true, 
Jam in my ſenſes. I am neither madman nor Enthu- 
flaſt,” For there is no man who hath left father or 
mother, or wife, or houſe, or land for the goſpel's fake; 
but he ſhall receive an hundred fold, in this world, 
—_ perſecution, and in the world to come, eternal 
e.“ F 3 ; 
Nominal, outſide chriſtians too, men of form may 
paſs the fame judgment. For we give up all our pre- 
tenſions to what they account happineſs, for what they 
(with the Deiſts) believe to be a mere dream. We ex- 
pet, therefore, to paſs for Enthuſiaſts with theſe alſo. 
But wiſdom is juſtified of all her children. 
32. I cannot conclude this head without one obvi- 
ous remark, Suppoſe we really were Enthuſiaſts : 
ſuppoſe our doctrines were falſe and unſupported either 
by Reaſon, Scripture or Authority: then, why hath 
not ſome- one, who is a wiſe man, and endued with 
knowledge among you, attempted, at leaſt, to ſhew us 
our fault in love nd meekneſs of wiſdom ? © Brethren, 
if ye have” bit zeal in your hearts, your wiſdom 
deſcendeth not from above. The wiſdom that is from 
above, is pure, peaceable, gentle, eaſy to be intreated, 
— M 2 full 


128 A raxzTuer APPEAL, Part I. 


full of mexcy or pity» Does this ſpirit a r in 
hngle Trag, of rad thoſe, which 1555 3 apÞ bliſhed 
againſt us? Is there one Writer that has NT us 
m love ? Bring it to a ſingle point. Love hopeth all 
things. If you had loved us in any degree, you would 
bave hoped, that God would ſome time give us the 
knowledge of his truth. But where ſhall we find even 
this lender inſtance of love ? Has not every one who 
bas wrote at all (I do not remember ſo much as one 
exception) treated us as incorrigible? Brethren, how 
is this? Why do ye labour to teach us an evil leſſon 
againſt yourſelves? O may God never ſuffer W to 
deab with yau, ye have gant W. Hel n ob 


VI. 1. Before I enter upon the Pre.” TT of 
thoſe objettions, which have been made to the manner 
of our preaching, I believe it may be ſatisfactory to 
ſome readers if I relate how I began to provels4 in n 
manner. 

I was ordained Deacon in 1726, 5 Prieſt, i in. the 
year following. But it was many years after this, be- 
fare I was convinced of the great truths above recited, 
During all that time I was utterly ignorant, of the na- 
tare and condition of juſtification. Sometimes I con- 
founded it with ſanctificatiom (particularly When I was 
in Georgia.) At other times I had ſome confuled- no- 
tion about the for givenels of ſins: but then 1 took it 
for granted, the time of this muſt be, either the hour 
of death, or the day of judgment. 

4 was equally ignorant of the nature of dving faith ; 
apprchending it to mean no more, than a © Firm aſſent 
to all the propaktiqns contained-in the Old and New 
Teftament.'*: 

2. As ſoon as, by the great bleſſing of God, I had a 
clearer view of theſe. things, I began to declare them 
to others alſo. I believed, and therefore 1 ſpake. 
Wherever I was now. defired to preach, ſalvation by 
faith was my only theme. My conſtant ſubjetts were, 
Believe in the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, and thou ſhalt be 
ſaved. Him hath God exalted to be a Prince and a 
Saviour, to give repentance and remiſſion of fins.” 

* I explained + _ 5 with all my os 


To Men of Resſon and Religion. 129 


both in every Church where I was aſked to preach, 
and occaſionally in the Religious Societies of don 
and; Weſtminſter ;:to ſome or other of which I was 
continually preſſed to 895 by the Stewards: or other. 
Members of them. 

Things were in this poſture, — Twas told, « I 
muſt preach no more in this, and this, and another 
Church: the reaſon was uſually added; without 1e. 
ſerve, 5 Becauſe you-preach ſuch doctrine.” So much 
the more thoſe who could not hear me there, flocked. 
together when I was at any of the Societies; where 1 
ſpoke more or leſs, though with much inconvenience, - 
to as many as the room I was in would contain. 

g. But after a time, finding thoſe rooms could not 
contain a tenth part of the people that were earneſt to 
hear, I determined to do the ſame thing in England, 
which I had often done in a warmer climate: namely, 
when the houſe would not contain the congregation to 
preach in open air. This I accordingly did, firſt at 
Briſtol, where the Society- rooms were exceeding {mall, 
and at Kingſwood, where we had no room at all ; after. 
wards in or near London. | | 

And I. cannot fay, I have ever ſeen a more awful 
ſight, than when on Roſe-Green, or the top of Han- 
nam-Mount, ſome thouſands of people were calmly 
Joined together in ſolemn waiting upon God, While 

* They ſtood and under open air ador'd 

The God who made both air, earth, heavery 
and ſky.“ 

And whether they were liſtening to his word, With 
attention {till as night; or were lifting up their voice 
in praiſe, as the ſound of many waters; many a time 
have Ii been conſtrained to ſay in my heart, * How 
dreadfyl is this place!“ this alſo is no other than (he. 
Houſe of God this is the Gate of Heaven | 

Be pleaſed to obſerve. 1. That I was forbidden, 
by a general conlent, to preach in any Church (been 
not by any judicial ſentence) “for preaching iuch doc- 
tine,” This. was the open, avowed cause: there Was 
at that time no other, either real or pretended ; 2. That 
J had no dere or deſign to preach in the open air, till 
long after this prohibitzon ; 3. Fhat when I did, as it 

M 3 Was 


—— — — 


r — — —— 


130 A raerues APPEAL, Part J. 


was no matter of choice, ſo neither of premeditation. 
There was no ſcheme at alk previouſly! formed, which 
was to be ſupported thereby; nor had E any other end 
in view than this, to ſave ab many ſouls-as I u. 4 
Field. preaching was therefore a ſudden expedient, a thing 


ſubmitted to, rather than choſery 5 and therefore ſubmit- 


ted to, becauſe I thought preaching even thus, better 

than not preaching at all: ' Firſt, in regard to my own 

foul, becauſe, a diſpenſation of the goſpel commit- 
ted to me, 1 did not dare, not to preach the goſpel; 

Secondly, in regard to the fouls of others, whom I every 

Where ſaw, ſeeking death in the error of their life, 
4. But the Author of the Obſervations and of the Cafe 

of the Methodiſts braefty: ſtated,” mare Particularly in. the 

Point ef fietd-preaching, thinks field-preaching wor ſe than 

1 at all, “ becauſe it is legal. 

Your Argument, in form, runs thus: 
- © That preaching which is contrary to the hws bf 
che land, is worſe than not preaching at all: 

Ee field preaching is contrary to the hows of the 
Therefore, it is worſe than not preaching at-all,” 
The firſt: propoſition is not ſelf-evident, nor indeed 

umverſally true. For the preaching” of all the primi- 

tive: Chriſtians was contrary to the whole tenor of the 

Roman laws; the worſtap' of their devil gods being 

eſtabliſhed by the ſtrongeſt} laws then in being. Nor 

is it ever true, but on {uppelition, that the preaching 
in queſtion 1s an indifferent thing. 

ut waving this, I deny the ſecond p propoſition ; 1 7 
as that Jeld-preaching i is contra che aws of our 


— o prove which, you begin thus, It does not ap- 
pear, that any of the Preachers among the Methodiſts, - 
have qualified the:nfelves and the places of their aſſean- 
bling, according to the Att of Toleration.“ 

I anſwer, 1. That act grants toleration to thoſe who 
diſſent from the eſtabliſhed Church, But we do not 
diſſent from it. ere we cannot make uſe of that 
act. 2. That act exempts Diſſenters from penalties 
rn on e breach of Ig _ * 

e. 


Te Men of Reaſen and Religion, 13 
ve are not eonſeious of breaking any law at an. There- 
fore we need not take uſe of it. 

In the next ſection you ſay, They heve brite 

through alF theſe proviſions, in open defiance of govern- 
ment: and have met not orily in houſes, but in the 
frefds, notwithſtanding the ſtatute (22. Car. II. c. 1. 1. 
whict' forbids this by name.“ 

J anſwer, 1. We do nothing in ae of 
ment, We reverence Magiſtrates, as the miniſters 1 
God. 2. Although we have met im the fields, yet we 
do not coriceive that ſtatute at all affefts us: not only 
becauſe that act points wholly at Diſſenters; whereas 
we are members of the eſtabliſhed Church; but alſo: 
becauſe (they are your own words} it was evidently i in 
tended to ſuppreſs and prevent ſedition: whereas no 
ſedition, nor any the leaſt approach thereto, car witty 
any colour be laid to our charge. 

In your gd ſection you affirm, © That the aft of 
Toleration itſelf cannot ſecure us in field-preachmg, 
from the penalties of former laws,” We have no de- 
fire it ſhould; as not apprehending ourſelves to be 
condemned by any former law whatever. Nor does 
what you add, © That the act of Toleration forbids any 
aſſembly of perſons diſſenting from the Church of Eng- 
land, to Goh with the doors locked,“ affect as at all; 
becauſe we do not diſſent from it. 

In the caſe of the Methodiſts briefly ſtated, your 
art obſervation is, The act of Toleration leaves them 
liable to the penalties of ſeveral ſtatutes made againſt 
unlawful aſſemblies.““ | 

I ſuppoſe then theſe ſeveral ſtatutes fpectfy what 
thoſe-unlawful aſſemblies are; and whether unlawful, 
as being condemned by previous laws, or made unlawy- 
ful by thoſe ſtarutes. 

And it {tilt remains to be proved, that our aſſemblies 
are unlawful, in one or other of theſe ſenſes. 

You next obſerve, that,  * the diſſenters of all deno- 
minations, qualify themſelves: according to the act of 
Toleration; otherwiſe, they are liable to the penalties 
of all the laws recited in this act. 

F anfwer, as before, all this ſtrikes wide It- relates. 
wholly. to, if « perſons diſſenting from the ay; 120 

ut 


- 


132 A raxrntnr. APPEAL, Part I. 


But, we are not the men. We do not diſſent from 
the Church. Whoever ons it, 1 him to the 
roof. 239] 7 rt ul 

J You go on, 10 One of thoſe laws ſo, — (viz. 422. 
Car. II. c. 1. ) is that Which forbids n by, 
name; and was evidently intended, not only to ſuppreſs, 

but alſo to prevent ſedition. As the title of the at 
declares, _ as the preamble expreſſes it, to provide far- 
ther and more ſpeedy remedies againſt it.“ 

Was this then, in your own judgment, the evident. 
intention. of that act, viz. To provide remedies againſt. 
ſedition? Does the very title of the act declare this ? 
And the preamble alſo exprels i it? With what juſtice 
then, with what, ingenuity or candor, with what ſha- 
dow of truth or reaſon, can any man cite this act againſt 

us? Whom you yourlelf no more ſuſpect of a deſign to 
raiſe, ſedition (I appeal to your own conſcience in, the 


fight of God) than of a deſign to blow up the city of 


London! 

6. Hitherto therefore it hath not been made to ap- 
ear, that field-preaching is contrary to any law 5 
8 However, It is dangerous.” This you. 
ſtrongly inſiſt on. It may be attended with mil. 
chievous conſequences. It may give advantages to the 
enemies of the eſtabliſned government. It is big with 
miſchief.” (Obſervations, ſect. I. and II.) f 

With what miſchief? Why, evil-minded men, by 
meeting together in the fields, under pretence of reli- 
gion, may raiſe riots and tumults; or by meeting ſe- 
cretly, may carry on private cabals againſt the ſlate,” 


(Cafe of the Methodiſts, p. 2.) 


« And if the Methodiſts themſelves are a harmleſs 
and loyal people, it is nothing to the point in hand. 
For difloyal and ſeditious perſons, may ule ſuch an op- 
portunity of getting together, in order to execute ariy 
private deſign. Mr. Whitefield ſays, 30, 50 or 80,000. 
have attended his preaching at once. Now, 1. He 
cannot know one tenth part of ſuch a congregation. 
2. All people may come and carry on what deſigns 
they will: therefore 3. This is a great opportunit 
put, into the hands 6-11 ſeclitious Paſons to raile a. 
e 1111 % N 

2 e With 


N 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 13g 


% With what ſafety to the public theſe ficld-preach. 
ings may be continued, let the world judge.” Vue 


May 1 peak without e d I cannot think, you 
are in earneſt. You do not mean what. you ſay. Do 
you believe Mr. Whitefield had eighty thouſand, hearers 
at once? No more than you believe he had eight 
million g. Is not all. this talk of danger, mere fineſſe ? 
Thrown in purely ad movendum inuidiam ? Vou know 
governments generally are ſuſpicious; eſpecialli in time 
of war : and therefore. apply, 3s you, ſuppale, -to thei 
weak ſide; in hopes, if pollible to deliver, over theſe 
hereticks to the ſecular arm. However, 1 will anſwery 
as if you, ſpoke from Yaur heut. For J la dan, 
. you are not. 

Firſt, The . cannot know, a 1 part ol 

is congregation.” Let us come to the preſent ſtate of 
things. The largeſt congregations thai no attend the 
preaching of any Methodiſt, are thoſe (God be merciful 
to me I) that attend mine. And cannot I know a tenth 
art of one of theſe congregations, either at Briſtol, 
e Newcaſtle, or London? As ſtrange as it 
may ſeem, I generally know two thirds of the congre- 
oye in . place even on Sunday cvennig: and 
nine in ten of thoſe who; attend at moſt other times. 
. „„ people may come and carry on what deſigus 
they will.“ Not ſo. All field-preaching is now in 
the open day. And were only ten perſons, to come to 
luch an. ent with arms, it would ſoon be enquired, 
with what deſign, they came. This is therefore; 3. No 
great opportunity put into the hands of ſeditious per- 
ſons to raiſe diſturbances. And if ever any diſturbanco 
has been raiſed, it was quite of another kind. 

The public then is entirely ſafe, if it be in no > other 
danger than ariſes from field-preaching. 

7. There is one other ſentence. belonging to the head, 
in the eighth ſection of the Obſervations. ** The reli- 
g10us ſocieties, you ſay, in London and Weſtmmiter, 

r many years paſt, have received no diſcouragements, 
but on the contrary have been countenanced and en- 
couraged both by Biſhops and Clergy.” How is this? 
Ave FO then; 6 qualified themſelves and the * 


0 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


places, This is undoubtedly true. 


134 A raxTits APPEAL, Part I. 
of their aſſembling according to the att of Toleration p 
Have they © embraced the protettion which "that" act 


might give them, in caſe they complied with the con- 
ditions of it? If not, are they not all -* liable to the 


penalties of the ſeveral ſtatutes made before that time 


— 4 
13 vY 


againſt unlawful aſſemblies ? 
How can they eſcape ? Habe they quialifec 
themſelves for holding theſe ſeparate aſſemblies, accord- 
ing to the tenor of that act ? . Have then the feve- 
ral members thereof taken the oaths to the government?” 
And are the Doors of the places'Wherein' they meet, 
always open àt the time of ſuch meeting? I pre- 
ſume, you know they are not; and that neither the 
perſons nor places are ſo qualified ds that act diretts. 
How then come © the Biſhops and Clergy, to 
countenance and encourage unlawful afſemblies? 1 
it be ſaid, © they meet in a private, inoffenſive way; 
that is nothing to the point in hand. If thoſe meetings 
are unlawful in themſelves, - all their inoffenfivenels 
will not make them lawful. „O, but they behave 
with modeſty and decency.” Very well; but the law! 
What is that to the law? There can be no ſolid defence 
but this: they are not diſſenters from the Church; 
therefore they cannot uſe, and they do not need the 
act of Toleration. And their meetings are not ſeditious; 
therefore the ſtatute againſt ſeditious meetings does not 
affect them. | 
The application is obvious. If our meetings are 
illegal, fo are theirs alſo. But if this plea be good (as 
doubt leſs it is) in one caſe, it is good in the other alſo. 
9. You propole another objection to our manner of 
preaching; in the ſecond part of the Obſervations, ' The 
N of it 71 will mpfer and anſwer. as briefly as 
can 1 
They run | wh and d m mare to place and 
from county to county: that is, ney Fn in ſeveral 
draw after 
them confuſed multitudes of people: 4 is, many 
come to hear them.“ This is true alſo. But they 
would do well to remember, God is not the author of 
conſuſion or of tumult, but of peace.” I truſt: we do; 
nor is there any confuſion” or tumult aj all, in our 
largeſt 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 135 


largeſt congregations: unleſs at ſome rare times when the 
ſons of Babel mois therewith, on purpoſe to diſturb the 
peaceable worſhippers of Gd. 

* But our Church has provided againſt this preach- 
ing up and down, in the ordination of a Prieſt, by ex- 
preſsly limiting the exerciſe of the powers then confer- 
red upon him, to the congregation where he ſhall be 
lawfully appointed thereunto,”” _ i ' 

I 0 Jad 1. Your argument proves, too much, If 
it be allowed juſt as you propole it, it proves, that no 
Prieſt has authority, either to preach or miniſter the 
ſacraments, in any other than his own congregation. . .. 

2. Had the powers conferred been ſo limitted when 
I was ordained Prieſt, my ordination would have ſigni- 
fied juſt nothing. For I was not appointed to any 
congregation at all: but was ordained as a member of 
that © College of Divines,”” (ſo our ſtatutes expreſs it) 
% founded to overturn all hereſies, and defend the Ca- 
tholic Faith.“ . 

3. For many years after I was ordained Prieſt, this 
limitation was never heard of. I heard not one ſyllable 
of it, by way of objection, to my preaching up and 
down, in Oxford or London, or the parts adjacent, in 
Glouceſterſhire, or Worceſterſhire ; in Lancaſhire, 
Yorkſhire or Lincolnſhire. Nor did the ſtricteſt Di- 
ciplinarian ſcruple ſuffering me to exerciſe thoſe powers 
wherever I came, X 

4. And in fat, Is it not univerſally allowed, that 
every Prieſt, as ſuch, has a power, in virtue of his or- 
dination, either to preach or adminiſter the ſacrament, 
in any congregation, wherever the Rector or, Curate 
deſires his [et e ? Does not every one then ſee 
through this thin pretence ? OTE KY ob N 

10. The Biſhops, and Univerſities indeed have 
Power to grant Licences to Itinerants. But the Church 

as provided in that caſe ; they are not to preach in 
any church (Canon 50) till they ſhew their Licence.“ 

The Church has well provided in that caſe. But 
what has that caſe to do with the caſe of common 
Clergymen ? Only ſo much, as: to ſhew, how grolsly 
this Canon has been abuſed : at Iſlington in particular, 
where the Churchwardens were inſtructed to * 

Y 


„ . 


236 A raxritex APPEAL, Part I. 


by main force, the Prieſt whom the Vicar Himſelf had 
appointed; from'preaching, and to quote 'this' Canon; 
—— as you plainly ſhew, belongs to quite another 
G4 2007 Jiotegr 13D 009 Et TIO (1D de | 
3 15 the note you add, « Mr. Wefley being afked, by 
5 he preached, replied; By tlie author 
of Jefus Chriſt, conveyed to me by the (now) Arch- 
biſhop of Canterbury, when he laid his hands upon me 
and ſaid, Take thou Authority to preach, the Goſpel, 
In this reply he thought fit, for a plain reaſon, to leave 
out this latter patt of the Commiſſion : for that would 
have ſhewn his reader, the reſtraint and limitation, un- 
der which the exerciſe of the powet is granted.“ Nay, 
1 did not print the latter part of the words, for a plainer 
reaſon, becauſe I did not ſpeak them. And I did not 
ſpeak them then, becaufe they did not come into my 
mind. Though probably if they had, I ſhould not 
have ſpoken them: it being my only concern, to an- 
fwer the queſtion propoſed, in as few words as I could. 
But before thoſe words, which you ſuppole to imply 
ſuch a reſtraint, as would condemn all the Bifhops and 
Clergy in the nation, were thoſe ſpoken without any 
reſtraint or limitation at all, which | apprehend to con- 
vey an indelible character, . Receive the Holy Ghoſt, 
for the office and work of a Prieſt m the church of 
God, now committed unto thee, by the impoſition of 
our hands, Whoſe ſins thou doſt forgive, they are for- 
given, and whoſe fins thou doſt retain, they are retained, 
And be thou a faithful diſpenſer of the word of God, 
and of his holy Sacraments, in the name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghoſt.” 
Lou proceed, In the ſame Journal he declares, 
That he looks upon all the world as his pariſh, and ex- 
plains his meaning as follows; © In whatever part of it 
1 am, I judge it meet, right, and my bounden duty, to 
declare unto all that are willing to hear, the glad tidings 
of ſalvation, This is the work which I know God 
hath called me to.” Namely, by the laying on of the 
hands of the Preſbytery : which directs me how to obey 
that general command, „While we have time, let us 
do good unto all men.“ , 11999 e Bork « 


">. 


11. Von 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 137 
11. You object farther, “ That the Methodiſts do 


not obſerve the Rubric before the Communion Service; 
which dire&s, ſo many as deſire to partake of the holy 
Communion, to ſignify their names to the Curate the 
day before.” What Curate deſires they ſhould ? 
Whenever any Miniſter will give but one week's no- 
tice of this, I undertake, all that have any relation to 
me, ſhall ſignify their names within the time appointed. 

You objett allo, that they break through the twenty- 
eighth Canon, which requires, “ That if ſtrangers come 
to any church from other pariſhes, they ſhould be res 
mitted to their own churches, there to receive the 
Communion with their neigbours.”” 

But what if there be no Communion there? Then 
this Canon does not touch the cafe, nor does any one 
break it, by coming to another church purely becaule 
there is no Communion at his own. 

As to your next advice, To have a greater regard 
to the rules and orders of the church.” I cannot, for 
I now regard them, next to the word of Cod. And 
as to your laſt, * To renounce Communion with the 
Church,” I dare not, Nay, but let them thruſt us 
out. We will not leave the ſhip : if you caſt us out 
of it, then our Lord will take us up. 

12. To the ſame head may be referred the objection 
ſome time urged, by a friendly and candid man, viz. 
„That it was unlawful to uſe extemporary prayer, be- 
cauſe there was a Canon againſt it.“ 

It was not quite clear to me, that the Canon he 
cited was againſt extemporary prayer. But ſuppoſing 
it were, my plain anſwer would be, That Canon I 
dare not obey : becauſe the law of man binds only ſo 
far as is conſiſtent with the word of God.“ | 

The fame perſon objected, my not obeying the 
Biſhops and Governors of the Church. I anſwer, I 
both do and will obey them, in whatſoever I can with 
a clear conſcience. So that there is no juſt ground for 
that charge, that I deſpiſe either the Rules or the Go- 
vernors of the Church. I obey them in all things 
where I do not apprehend there is ſome particular law }_ 
of God to the contrary. Even in that caſe, J ſhew all 
the deference I can; I endeavour to act as inoffenſively 

N as 


138 A fFakTutR APPEAL, Part I. 


as poſſible: and am ready to ſubmit to any penalty, 
which can by law be inflicted upon me. Would to 
God every Miniſter and member of the Church, were 
herein altogether as I am! 


VII. 1. I have been conſidering the chief objections 
that have lately been urged againſt the Do&rines I teach. 
The main arguments brought againſt this manner of 
teaching, have been conſidered alſo, It remains, to 
examine the moſt current objections, concerning the 
effects of this teaching. h 
Many affirm, *© That it does abundance of hurt; 
that it has had very bad effects; inſomuch that if any 
good at all has been done, yet it bears no proportion to 
the evil.“ 

But come to particulars, . Firſt then, you are diſ- 
turbers of the public peace.“ "HS 

What, do we either teach or raiſe ſedition ? Do we 
ſpeak evil of the Ruler of our people? Or do we ſtir 
them up againſt any of thoſe that are put in authority 
under him? Do we directly or indirectly promote 
faction, mutiny or rebellion ? I have not found any 
man in his ſenſes yet, that would affirm this. 

« But it is plain, peace is broke and diſturbances do 
ariſe, in conſequence of your preaching.” I grant it, 
But what would you infer? Have you never read the 
Bible? Have you not read, that the Prince of Peace 
himſelf was, in this ſenſe, a diſturber of the public 
peace? When he came into Jeruſalem (Matt. xxi. 10.) 
all the city was moved, (ichen) ſhaken as with an 
earthquake. And the diſturbance aroſe higher and 
higher, till the whole multitude cried out together, 
« Away with him, away with him ; crucify him, cru- 
cify him : and Pilate gave ſentence it ſhould be done.” 
Such another diſturber of the public peace, was that 
Stephen, even from the time he began diſputing with 
the Libertines and Cyrenians, till the people ſtopped 
their ears, and ran upon him with one accord, and caſt 
him out of the city and ſtoned him. Such diſturbers 
of the peace were all thoſe ringleaders of the ſect of the 
Nazarenes, (commonly called Apoſtles) who wherever 
they came, turned the world upſide down, And hos 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 139 


all the reſt, that Paul of Tarſus, who occaſioned fo 
much diſturbance at Damaſcus, (Acts ix.) at Antioch 
in Piſidia (chap. x11.) at Iconium (chap. xiv.) at Lyſtra 
(ver. 19.) at Philippi (chap. xvi.) at Theſſalonica (chap: 
xvii.) and particularly at Epheſus. The conſequence 
of his preaching there was, That © the whole city was 
filled with confuſion. And they all ran together with 
one accord, ſome crying one thing, ſome another: inal- 
much as the greater part of them knew not wherefore 
they were come together.” 

2. And can we expett it to be any otherwiſe now ? 
Although what we preach 15 the goſpel of peace, yet 
if you will violently and illegally hinder our preaching, 
muſt not this create diſturbance? But obſerve, the 
diſturbance begins on your part. All is peace, till you 
raiſe that diſturbance. And then you very modeſtly 

impute it to us, and lay your own riot at our door! 
gut of all this, our Lord hath told us before. Think 
not that I am come to fend peace upon earth: that 
this will be the immediate effect, wherever my goſpel is 
3 with power. I am not come to ſend peace, 
ut a ſword: this (ſo far as the wiſdom of God permits, 
by whom the hairs of your head are all numbered) will 
be the firſt conſequence of my coming, whenever my 
word turns finners from darkneſs to light, from the 
power of Satan unto God, | 

I would wiſh all you who ſee this Scripture fulfilled, 
by diſturbance following the preaching the goſpel, to 
remember the behaviour of that wiſe Magiſtrate at 
Epheſus on the like occaſion. He did not lay the dif- 
turbance to the Preacher's charge, but beckoned to the- 
multitude and ſaid, © Ye men of Epheſus—Ye ought to 
be quiet, and to do nothing raſhly, For ye have 
brought theſe men, who are neither robbers of temples, 
nor yet blaſphemers of your goddels :” (not convicted of 
any ſuch notorious crime, as can at all excuſe this law- 
leſs violence.) “ But if Demetrius hath a matter againſt 
any, the Law 1s open, and there are Deputies {or Pro- 
conſuls, capable of hearing and deciding the cauſe) let 
them implead one another. But if ye enquire any thing 
concerning other things, it ſhall be determined in a law- 
ful Aſſembly,” 


N 2 2. But 


— — — 
RFC —O'— — — 


—__— — ————_ 


— — 
!— — — — —— 


Ay ——— - — — 
— — —˙ e —＋[⁰] . m 1 .wtc ⁰-«‚—iL 
———— —— 
_ - - 


— 


— 


s —— — 
ths - - — — 
— _— KKK ˙ a ——ñ ͤ—üdʒʃzʃz w a— kækæ ——Uö— — — 7 —˙ß — — 
” - i = * 2 — _—_ — — ” 


o 
— — — — 
* — > IS — — 72 


— — — 
—— 


- — — - 


- — - 


| 
i 
I 


140 A raxtTutr APPEAL, Part J. 


3. But you create diviſions in private families.“ 
Accidentally, we do. For inſtance, ſuppoſe an entire 
family to have the form, but not the power of godli- 
neſs; or to have neither the form nor the power; in 
cither cale, they may in ſome ſort agree together. But 
iuppole, when theſe hear the plain word of God, one 
or two of them are convinced, „This is the truth. 
And I have been all this time in the broad way that 
leadeth to deſtruttion : ** theſe then will begin to mourn 
after God ; while the reſt remain as they were, Will 
they not therefore of conſequence divide, and form 
themſelves into ſeparate parties? Muſt it not be ſo, in 
the very nature of things? And how exactly docs 
this agree with the words of our Lord? “ Suppolc 
ye that I came to ſend peace upon earth? I tell you 
nay: but rather diviſion, For from henceforth there 
ſhall be five divided in one houle, three againſt two, 
and two againſt three, The father ſhall be divided 


" againſt the jon, and the ſon againſt the father: the mo- 


ther againſt her daughter, and the daughter againſt the 


mother; the mother-in-law againſt the daughter-in-law, 


and the daughter-in-law againſt the mother-in-law, 
Luke xu. 51, 52, 53.) And the foes of a man, ſhall 

they of his own houſchold,“ (Matt. x. 36.) 

Thus it was from the very beginning. For is it to 
be fuppoſed, that a heathen parent, would long endure 
a chriſtian child? Or that a heathen huſband would 
agree with a chiiſtian wife? Unlels either the believ- 
ing wife could' gain her huibana ; or the unbelieving 
huſband prevailed on the wife to renounce her way of 
worſhipping God: at leaſt, unleſs ſhe would obey him 
in going no more to thoſe Societies or Conventicles, 
(irawpias) as they termed the Chriſtian Aſſemblies, 

4. Do you think now, I have an eye to your caſe? 
Doubtleſs I have; for I do not fight as one that beateth 
the air. Why have not I a right to hinder my own 
wife or child, from going to a Conventicle? And is 
it not the duty of wives to obey their huſbands? And 
of children to obey their parents?” Only ſet the caſe 
ſeventeen hundred years back, and your own conlci- 
ence gives you the anſwer, What would St. Paul have 
faid to one whoſe huſband forbade her, to follow this 

| way 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 141 


way any more? What direction would our Saviour 
have given to him whoſe father enjoined him, not to 
hear the goſpel? His words are extant ſtill, “ He 
that loveth father or mother more than me, is not wor- 
thy of me. And he that loveth ſon or daughter more 
than me, is not worthy of me, (Matt. x. 37, 38.) 
Nay more, If any man cometh to me, and hateth not 
(in compariſon of me) his father and mother and wife 
and children, yea and his own life, he cannot be my 
diſciple.” (Luke xiv. 26.) 

* O, but this is not a parallel caſe, For they were 
Heathens ; but I am a Chriſtian.” _ A Chriſtian! Are 
you fo? Do you underſtand the word? Do you 
know what a Chriſtian is? If you are a Chriſtian, you 
have the mind that was in Chriſt; and you ſo walk as 
he allo walked. You are holy as he is holy both in 
heart, and in all manner of converſation, Have you 
then the mind that was in Chriſt? And do you walk 
as Chriſt walked? Are you inwardly and outwardly 
holy? I fear, not even outwardly. No; you live 
in known ſin. Alas! How then are you a Chriſtian ? 
What a railer, a Chriſtian? A common {wearer, a 
Chriſtian ? A ſabbath-breaker, a Chriſtian ? A drunk- 
ard or whoremwnger, a Chriſtian ? Thou art a Heathen 
barefaced ; the wrath of God is on thy head, and the 
curſe of God upon thy back. Thy camnation ſlum- 
bereth not. By reaſon of ſuch Chriſtians it is that the. 
holy name of Chriſt is blaſphemed. Such as thou they 
ere, that cauſe the very ſavages in the Indian woods to 
cry out, * Chriſtian much drunk, Chriſtian beat men, 
Chriſtian tell lies, Devil-Chriſtian ! Me no Chriſtian.” 

And ſo thou wilt direct thy wife and children in the 
way of ſalvation !——Woe unto thee, thou Devil- 
Chriſtian! Woe unto thee, thou blind leader of the 
blind! What wilt thou make them? Two-fold more 
the children of hell than thyſelf ? Be aſhamed, 
Bluſh, if thou canſt bluſh. Hide thy face. Lay thee 
in the duſt, Out of the deep cry unto God, if haply 
he may hear thy voice. Inſtantly ſmite upon thy 
breaſt, Who knoweth but God may take thee out of 
the belly of hell ? 


N 3 5. But 


—— — — — —— * 
— — — * = 
- 


142 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part I. 


5. © But you are not one of theſe. You fear God, 
and labour to have a conſcience void of offence. And 
it 15 from a principle of conſcience, that you reſtrain 
your wife or children from hearing falſe doctrine. But 
how do you know it is falſe doctrine ? Have you heard 
for yourſelf? Or, if you have not heard, have you 
carefully read what we occaſionally anſwered for our- 
ſelves? A man of conſcience cannot condemn any 
one unheard, This is not common humanity. Nor 
will he refrain from hearing what may be the truth, 
for no better reaſon than fear of his reputation. Pray 
obſerve, I do not fay, every man (or any man) is ob- 
liged in conſcience to hear us. But I do ſay, every 
man in England who c ndemns us, is obliged to hear 
us firſt. This is only common juſtice, ſuch as is not 
denied to a thief or a murderer. Take your choice 
therefore. Either hear us, or condemn us not. Either 
ipeak nothing at all, or hear before you ſpeak. 

But ſuppoſe you have both read and heard more 
than you liked? Did you read and hear fairly? Was 
not you loaded with prejudice? Did you not read or 
hear, expecting no good; perhaps deſiring to find fault? 
If fo, what wonder you judge as you doi? What a poor 
mock-trial is this? You had decided the cauſe in your 
own breaſt, before you heard one word of the evidence. 
And ſtill do you talk of acting out of conſcience? Yea, 
a conſcience void of offence ? 

We will put the caſe farther yet. Suppoſe your 
cenſure was juſt, and this was actually falſe doctrine. 
Still every one muſt give an account of himſelf to God: 
and you cannot force the conſcience of any one, You 
cannot compel another, to ſee as you ſee. You ought 
not to attempt it. Reaſon and perſuaſion are the only 
weapons you ought to uſe, even toward your own wife 
and children. Nay, and it is impoſſible to ſtarve them 
into conviction, or to beat even truth into their head. 
'Y ou may deſtroy them, in this way, but cannot convert 
them. Remember what our own Poet has ſaid, 

By force beaſts aft and are by force reſtrain'd ; 
The human mind by gentle means is gain'd. 
Thou canſt not take, what I refuſe to yield : 
Nor reap the harveſt, tho' thou ipoilſt the field.“ 
6, Every 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 143 


6. Every reaſonable man is convinced of this. And 
perhaps you do not concern yourſelf ſo much about the 
doctrine, but the miſchief that is done. How many 

oor families are ſtarved, ruined, brought to beggary! 
By what ? Not by contributing a penny a week (the 
uſual contribution in our Societies) and letting that 
alone, when they pleaſe, when there is any ſhadow of 
reaſon to ſuppoſe they cannot afford it. You will not 
| fay, any are brought to beggary by this. Not by gifts 
to me: for I receive none; ſave (ſometimes) the food 
I eat. And public collections are nothing to me. That 
it may evidently appear they are not, when any ſuch 
collection is made, to clothe the poor, or for any other 


determinate purpoſe, the money is both received and 


expended before many witneſſes, without ever going 
through my hands at all. And then likewiſe all poſſi- 
ble regard is had, to the circumſtances of thoſe who 
contribute any thing. And they are told over and 
over, if there be a willing mind, it is accepted accord- 
ing to that a man hath, | 

But where are all theſe families that have been brought 
to beggary? How 1s it that none of them 1s forth 
coming? Are they all out of town? Then indeed I 
am in no danger of clearing mylelf from their indict- 
ment. It is the eaſieſt thing of a thouſand, for one at 
Newcaſtle to ſay, that I have beggared him and all his 
kindred. If one of the long-bearded men on Tyne- 
bridge, were to ſay ſo juſt now, I could not readily 
confute him, But why will not you bring a few of 
theſe to tell me ſo to my face? I have not found one 
that would do this yet. They pray, you would have 
them excuſed, 

I remember a man coming to me with a doleful coun. 
tenance, putting himſelf into many lamentable poſtures, 
gaping as wide as he could, and pointing to his mouth, 
as who would ſay, “he could not ſpeak.” I enquired 
of his companion, what was the matter? And was in- 
formed, © he had fallen into the hands of Turks, who 
had uſed him in a barbarous manner, and cut out his 
tongue by the roots.” I believed him. But when the 
man had had a chearfal cup, he could find his tongue 
as well as another, I reflected, how is it that I 8 

| Q 


* 


144 | A rann APPEAL, Part I. 


ſo readily believe that tale? The anſwer was eaſy, 
«© Becauſe it was told of a Turk.” My friend, take 
knowledge of your own caſe. If you had not firſt 
took me for a Turk, or ſomething. equally bad, you 
could not ſo readily, have believed that tale! 

7. But can it be, that there is no ground at all 
for a report, which is in every ones mouth? I will 
ſimply tell you, all the ground which I can conceive. 
I believe many of thoſe who attend on my miniſtry, 
have leſs of this world's goods than they had before, or 
at leaſt, might have had, if they did not attend it. 
This fact I allow; and it may be eafily accounted for, 
in one or other of the following ways. 

Firſt, I frequently preach on ſuch texts as thele : 
© having food and raiment, let us be content therewith. 
They who deſire to be rich fall into temptation and a 
ſnare, and many fooliſh and hurtful luſts, which drown 
men in deſtruction and perdition. Lay not up for 
yourſelves treaſures upon earth, where the ruſt and 
moth doth corrupt, and where thieves break through 
and ſteal. But lay up for yourſelves treaſures in hea- 
ven, where neither ruſt nor moth doth corrupt, and 
where thieves do not break through and ſteal.” 

Now ſhould any of thoſe who are labouring by all 
poſſible means, to lay up treaſure upon earth, feel theſe 
words, they would not enlarge their deſires as hell; but 
be content with ſuch things as they had. They then 
probably might not heap up ſo much for their heirs, 
as otherwiſe they would have done. ITheſe would 
therefore have leſs than if they had not heard me : be- 
cauſe they would graſp at leſs, | 

Secondly, Wherever the goſpel takes eſſect, the foes 
of a man will be thoſe of his own houſehold, By this 
means then {ome who hear and receive it with joy, will 
be poorer than they were before. Their domeſtic foes 
will, in many caſes, hinder, embroil, and diſturb the 
courſe of their affairs. And their relations, who aſhſt- 


ed them before, or promiled at leaſt ſo to do, will pro- 


bably withdraw or deny that aſſiſtance, unleſs they will 
be adviled by them. Perhaps their neareſt relations: 
it being no new thing, for parents to diſown their chil- 


_ dren, if after the way which they call hereſy, theſe 


worſhip 


To Men of Rezfon and Religion. 145 


worſhip the God of their fathers. Hence therefore 
ſome have leſs of this world's goods than they had in 
times paſt, either becauſe they earn leſs, or becauſe they 
receive leſs from them on whom they depend, 

Thirdly, It is written, that ** Thoſe who received 
not the mark of the beaſt, either on their foreheads, or 
in their right hands,” either openly or ſecretly, were 
not permitted to buy or ſell any more. Now whatever 
the myſtery contained herein may be, I apprehend the 
plain mark of the bcaſt is wickedneſs ; inward and out- 
ward unholineſs, whatever is ſecretly or openly con- 
trary to juſtice, mercy or truth. And certain it is, the 
time 1s well nigh come, when thofe who have not this 
mark, can neither buy nor ſell, can ſcarce follow any 
profeſſion, ſo as to gain a ſubſiſtence thereby. There- 
fore, many of thoſe who attend on my miniſtry, are by 
this means poorer than before. They will not recave 
the mark of the beaſt, either on their forehead or in 
their hand : or if they had received it before, they rid 
themſelves of it as ſoon as poſſible. Some cannot fol- 
low their former way of life at all; (as pawnbrokers, 
ſmugglers, buyers or ſellers of uncuſtomed goods) others 
cannot follow it as they did before. For they cannot 
opprels, cheat or defraud their neighbour : they cannot 
le, or ſay what they do not mean; they mult now 
ſpeak the truth from their heart. On all theſe accounts, 
they have leſs of this world's goods; becauſe they gain 
leis inan they did before. 

Fourthly, All that will live godly in Chriſt Jeſus 
ſhall ſuffer perſecution : ” if in no other way, yet at 
leaſt in this, that“ men will by revilings perlecute 
them ; ana fay all manner of evil againſt them falſely, 
for his ſake,” One unavoidable effect of this will be, 
that men whoſe ſubſiſtence depends on their daily la- 
bour, will be often in want, for few will care to em- 
ploy thoſe of ſo bad a character. And even thoſe who 
did employ them before, perhaps for many years, will 
employ them no more ; ſo that hereby ſome may be 
brought to beggary. | | 

8, What does this touch you ? Are you one of thoſe, 
* who will have nothing to do with thoſe ſcandalous 
wretches 2” Perhaps you will fay, © And who can 

blame 


— - - 8 
—— — 2 —— 


— 


———— 


—— — — -_ ax — 


8 © 
— — — —— 
- 


— — 
- — — I 2 - = — 
— —— — . •NA— CC - — 


not an imaginary ſcene. 
too late to remedy it. 


146 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part I. 


blame me for it: may I not employ whom I pleaſe ? ” 
We will weigh this. You employed A. B. for ſeveral 
years. By your own account, he was an honeſt, dili- 
gent man. You had no objeftion to him but his fol- 
lowing this way. For this reaſon you turn him off. 
In a ſhort time, having ſpent his little all, and having 
no ſupply, he wants bread. So does his family too as 
well as himſelf. Before he can get into other buſineſs 
to procure it, through want of convenient food to eat, 
and raiment to put on, he ſickens and dies. This is 
I Have known the caſe ; tho? 


„% And what then? ” Why then you are a mur- 
derer. O earth, cover not thou his Hood No, it doth 
not. The cry thereof hath entered in the ears of the Lord 
God of Sabbaoth, And God requireth it at your hands: 
and will require it in an hour when you think not. 
For you have as effectually murdered that man, as if 
you had ſtabbed him to the heart. | 

It is not I then who ruin and ſtarve that family ; it 
is you; you who call yourſelf a Proteſtant ! You who 
cry out againſt the 5 ſpirit of the Papiſts ! 
Ye fools and blind! What are ye better than they ? 
Why, Edmund Bonner would have ſtarved the here- 
ticks in priſon ; whereas ye ſtarve them in their own 
houſes. | 

And all this time you talk of liberty of conſcience ; 
yes, liberty for ſuch a conſcience as your own : a con- 
ſcience paſt feeling; (for ſure it had ſome once) a con- 
ſcience, ſeared with a hot iron. Liberty to ferve the 
devil, according to your poor, hardened conſcience, 
you allow; but not liberty to ſerve God. 

Nay, and what marvel? Whoſoever thou art that 
readeſt this, and feeleſt in thy heart a real deſire to ſerve 
God, I warn thee, expect no liberty for thy conſcience, 
from him that hath no conſcience at all. All ungodly, 


unthankful, unholy men; all villains of whatever de- 


nomination, will have liberty indeed all the world over, 
as long as their maſter is god of this world. But ex- 
pett not liberty to worſhip God in ſpirit and in truth, 
to practiſe pure and undefiled religion (unleſs the * 
ſhout: 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 147 


ſhould work a new thing in the earth) from any but 
thoſe who themſelves love and ſerve God. | 

9. © However, it is plain, you make men idle. And 
this tends to begger their families.” This objection 
having been continually urged for ſome years, I will 
trace it from the foundation. 

Two or three years after my return from America, 
one Captain Robert Williams of Briſtol, made afhdavit 
before the (then) Mayor of the city, that © it was a 
common report in Georgia, Mr. Weſley took people 
off from their work and made them idle, by preaching 
ſo much.“ 

The fact ſtood thus: At my firſt coming to Savan- 
nah, the generality of the people roſe at ſeven or eight 
in the morning. And that part of them who were ac- 
cuſtomed to work, uſually worked till ſix in the even- 
ing. A few of them ſometimes worked till ſeven ; 
which is the time of ſun-ſet there at Midſummer, 

I immediately began reading prayers and expounding. 
the ſecond leſſon, both in the morning and evening. 
The morning ſervice began at five, and ended at, or 
before fix : The evening lervice began at ſeven, 

Now ſuppoſing all the grown perſons in the town, 
had been preſent every morning and evening, would 
this have made them idle? Would they oy have 
had leſs, or conſiderably more time for working 

10. The ſame rule I follow now, both at London, 
Briſtol and Newcaſtle-upon-Tyne : concluding the ſer- 
vice at every place, winter and ſummer, before fix in 
the morning : and not ordinarily beg'nning to preach, 
till near ſeven in the evening. 

Now do you, who make this objectiou, work longer, 
through the year, than from fix to ſix ? Do you de- 
fre, that the generality of people ſhould ? Or, can you 
count them idle, that work ſo long? 

Some few are indeed accuſtomed to work longer. 
Theſe I adviſe not to come on week-days. And it is 
apparent, that they take this advice, unleſs on ſome rare 
and extraordinary occaſion. | 

But I hope, none of you who turn them out of 
their employment, have the confidence to talk of my 

; making 


148 A rARTRERN APPEAL, Part I. 


making them idle! Do you (as the homely phraſe is) 
cry wh—— firſt? I admire your cunning, but not 
your modeſty, 

So far am I from either cauſing or encouraging idle- 
nels, than an idle perſon known to be ſuch, is not ſuf- 
fered to remain in any of our ſocieties : we drive him 
out, as we would a thief or a murderer. * To ſhew 
all poſlible diligence,” (as well as frugality) is one of 
our ſtanding rules: and one, concerning the obſervance 
of which, we continually make the ſtricteſt enquiry. 

11. But you drive them out of their ſenſes, You 
make them mad.” Nay, then they are idle with a 
vengeance. This objection therefore being of the ut- 
moſt importance, deſerves our deepeſt conſideration. 

And firſt, I grant, it is my earneſt deſire to drive all 
the world, into what you probably call madneſs : (I 
mean, inward religion) to make them juſt as mad, as 
Paul was when he was ſo accounted by Feſtus. _ 

The counting all things on earth but dung and droſs, 
ſo we may win Chriſt ; the trampling under foot all 
the pleaſures of the world, the ſecking no treaſure but 
in heaven; the having no deſire of the praiſe of men, 
a good character, a fair reputation; the being exceed- 
ing glad when men revile us, nd perſecute us, and ſay 
all manner of evil againſt us falſely ; the giving God 
thanks when our father or mother forſake us, when we 
have neither food to eat, nor raiment to put on, nor a 
friend but what ſhoots out bitter words, nor a place 
where to lay our head: this is utter diſtraction in your 
account: but in God's it is ſober, rational religion: the 
genuine fruit, not of a diſtempered brain, not of a 
hckly imagination, but of the power of God in the 
heart, of victorious love, and of a found mind. 

12, I grant, ſecondly, it is my endeavour to drive 
all I can, into what you term another ſpecies of mad- 
nefs, which is uſually preparatory to this, and which I 
term repentance or conviction. | 

I cannot deſcribe this better than a writer of our own 
has done. I will therefore tranſcr:he h s words, 

When men feel in themſelves the heavy burden of 
| fin, ſee damnation to be the reward of it, and behold 
with the eye of their mind the horror of hell ; they 

; tremble, 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 149 


tremble, they quake and are inwardly touched with 
ſorrowfulneſs of heart, and cannot but accuſe them- 
ſelves, and open their grief unto Almighty God, and 
call unto him for mercy. This being done ſeriouſly, 
their mind is ſo occupied, partly with ſorrow and hea- 
vineſs, partly with an earneſt defire to be delivered 
from this danger of hell and damnation, that all deſire 
of meat and drink is laid apart, and loathſomeneſs (or, 
loathing) of all worldly things and pleaſure, cometh in 
place. So that nothing then liketh them, more than 
to weep, to lament, to mourn, and both words and 
behaviour of body to ſhew themſelves weary of life.“ 

Now what if your wife, or daughter, or acquain— 
tance, after hearing one of theſe field-preachers, Gould 
come and tell you, that they {aw e before 
them, and beheld with the eye of their mind the horror 
of hell? What if they ſhould tremble and quake, and 
be fo taken up partly with ſorrow and heavineſs, parthy 
with an earneſt deſire to be delivered from this dee 
of hell and damnation, as to weep, to lament, to 
mourn, and both with words and behaviour to ſhew 
themſelves weary of life: would you {cruple to ſay that 
they were ſtark mad ? that theſe fellows had driven 
them out of their ſenſes? And that whatever writer it 
was, that talked at this rate, he was fitter for Bedlam 
than any other place ? 

You have overſhot yourſelf now to ſome purpoſe. 
Theſe are the very words of our own Church. You 
may read them, if you are fo inclined, in the firſt part 
of the Homily on Faſting. And conſequently what 
you have peremptorily determined to be mere luna 
and diſtraction, is that repentance unto life, which in 
the judgment both of the Chutch and of St. Paul, is 
never to be repented of. 

13. I grant, thirdly, that extraordinary circum- 
ſtances have attended this conviction in ſome inſtances; 
A particular account of theſe I have frequently given, 
While the word of God was preached, ſome perſons 
have dropped down as dead; ſome have been, as it 
were, in ſtrong convulſions ; ſome have roared aloud, 
though not with an articulate voice; and others ſpoke 
the anguiſh of their ſouls. 

; Thus, 


— 


—— 
— —— 
— — 2 — —— — 


— — — 
— 2 
1 
3 
— — 


8 - * Er Fe 
2 £ . = _ — __ 4 — 2 — — 
— — — —V 2 


150 A ranrnzR APPEAL, Part I. 


This, I ſuppoſe, you believe to be perfect madneſs. 
But it is eaſily accounted for, either on principles of 
Reaſon or Scripture, | wy 
Firſt, on principles of Reaſon. For how eaſy is it 
to ſuppoſe, that a 33 lively and ſudden apprehen- 
ſion bt the heinouſneſs of ſin, the wrath of Goc, and 
the bitter pains of eternal death, ſhould affect the body 
as well as the ſoul, during the preſent laws of vital 
umon; ſhould interrupt or diſturb the ordinary circu- 
lations, and put nature out of its courſe ? Yea, we may 
ueſtion, whether while this union ſubſiſts, it be poſſi- 
ble for the mind to be affected, in ſo violent a degree, 
without ſome or other of thoſe bodily ſymptoms fol- 
lowing ? | 
It is hkewiſe ealy to account for theſe things, on 
principles of Scripture. For when we take a view of 
them in this light, we are to add to the conſideration of 
natural cauſes, the agency of thoſe ſpirits who ſtill ex- 
cel in ſtrength, and as far as they have leave from God, 
will not fail to torment whom they cannot deſtroy ; to 
tear thoſe that are coming to Chriſt, It is alſo remark- 
able, that there 1s plain ſcripture-precedent of every 
ſymptom Which has lately appeared. So that we can- 
not allow even the conviction attended with theſe 
to be madneſs, without giving up both Reaſon and 
Scripture. | 
14. I grant, fourthly, That touches of extravagance, 
bordering on madneſs may ſometime attend ſevere con- 


viction. And this allo is eaſy to be accounted for, by 


the preſent laws of the animal ceconomy. For we 
know, fear or grief, from a temporal cauſe, may oc- 
caſion a fever and thereby a delirium. 
It is not ſtrange then that ſome, while under ſtrong 
impreſſions of grief or fear, from a ſenſe of the wrath 
of God, ſhould for a ſeaſon forget almoſt all things elle, 
and ſcarce be able to anſwer a common queſtion : that 
ſome ſhould fancy they ſee the flames of hell, or the 
devil and his angels around them : or that others, for a 
ſpace, ſhould be afraid, ike Cain, whoſoever meeteth me 
will lay me. All theſe, and whatever leſs common 
effects may ſometimes accompany this conviction, are 
ealily known from the natural diſtemper of madneſs, 
b Fo. were 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 151 


were it only by this one circumſtance, that whenever the 
perſon convinced, taſtes the pardoning love of God, 
they all vaniſh away in a moment. 

Laſtly, I have ſeen one inſtance (I pray God I may 
ſee no more ſuch !) of real, laſting madnels, 

Two or three years ſince, I took one with me to 
Briſtol, who was under deep convictions; but of as 
ſound an underſtanding in all reſpects, as ever he had 
been in his life, I went a ſhort journey, and when L 
came to Briſtol again, found him really diſtracted. I 
enquired particularly, at what time and place, and in 
what manner this diſorder began? And I believe there 
are, at leaſt, threeſcore witneſſes, alive and ready to 
teſtify what follows. When I went from Briſtol, he 
contracted an acquaintance with ſome perſons, who 
were not of the ſame judgment with me. He was ſoon 
Prejudiced againſt me: quickly after, when our ſo- 
ciety were met together in Kingſwood-houſe, he began 
a vehement invective both againſt my perſon and doc- 
trines. In the midſt of this, he was ſtruck raving mad. 
And ſo he continued till his friends put him into Bed- 
lam: and probably, aid his madneſs too to my charge. 

15. 1 fear, there may allo be ſome inſtances of real 
' madneſs, proceeding from a different cauſe. 

Suppole, for inſtance, a perfon, hearing me, 1s 
ſtrongly convinced, that a liar cannot enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. He comes home, and relates this 
to his parents or friends, and appears to be very uneaſy. 
Thefe good Chriſtians are diſturbed at this, and afraid 
he is running mad too, They are refolved, he ſhall 
never hear any of thoſe fellows more; and keep to it 
in ſpite of all his intreaties. They will not ſuffer him, 
when at home, to be alone, for fear he ſhould read or 
pray. And perhaps in awhile they will conſtrain him, 
at leaſt by ted, importunities, to do again the very 
thing, for which he was convinced the wrath of God 
cometh upon the children of diſobedience. 

What is the event of this? Sometimes the Spirit 
of God is quenched and departs from him.” Now you 
have carried the point. The man is eaſy as ever, and 
ſins on without any remorſe. But in other inſtances, 
Where thoſe — — ſink deep, and the arrows of 

| O 2 the 


132 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part J. 


.the Almighty ſtick faſt in the ſoul, you will drive that 
perſon into real, ſettled madneſs, before you can quench 
the Spirit of God, I am afraid, there have been ſeve- 
Tal inſtances of this, You have forced the man's con- 
ſcience, till he is ſtark mad. But then, pray do not 
impute that madneſs to me, Had you left him to my 
direction, or rather to the direction of the Spirit of 
God, he would have been filled with love and a ſound 
mind. But you have taken the matter out of God's 
hand. And now you have brought it to a fair con- 
claſion ! 

16. How frequent this caſe may be, I know 'not. 

But doubtleſs moſt of thoſe who make this objection, 
of our driving men mad, had never met with ſuch an 
inſtance in their lives. The common cry is occaſioned, 
either by thoſe who are convinced of fin, or thoſe who 
are inwardly converted to God : mere madneſs both 
{as was obſerved before) to thoſe who are without God 
in the world. Yet I do not deny, but you may have 
ſeen one in Bedlam, who ſaid he had followed me. But 
obſerve, a madman's ſaying this, is no proof of the fact: 
nay, and if he really had, it ſhould be farther con- 
ſidered, that his being in Bedlam, is no ſure proof of 
his being mad. Witneſs the well-known caſe of Mr. 
Periam; and I doubt more ſuch are to be found. Yea, 
it is well if ſome have not been ſent thither, for no 
other reaſon, but becauſe they followed me : their kind 
relations either concluding, that they muſt be diſtracted, 
'before they could do this: or, perhaps hoping, that 
Bedlam would make them wa 5 if it did not find 
them ſo. 

17. And it muſt be owned, a confinement of ſuch a 
ſort, is as fit to cauſe as to cure diſtraction. For what 
ſcene of diſtreſs is to be compared to it? To be ſepa- 
rated at once from all who are near and dear to you : 
to be cut off from all reaſonable converſation, to be le- 
cluded from all buſineſs, from all reading, from every 
innocent entertainment of the mind, which is left to 
prey wholly upon itſelf, and. day and night to pore 
over your misfortunes : to be ſhut up day by day in a 
gloomy cell, with only the walls to employ your heavy 
eyes, in the midſt either of melancholly ſilence, or 44 

ri 


[1 
, 
* : 
. 
0 U 
„ 


—_ , . . * £4 - 0 
uy ww © — 2 —— © * 
122... „„ K„ĩ We AA a, EE 


p » es 
1 = 
SAC» 
. * 


yo "© PS. — 
—— 2 - © — 
AA 
- oy — 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 153 


rid cries, groans and laughter intermixt: to be forced 
by the main ſtrength of thoſe 

«© Who laugh at human nature and compaſſion, A 
to take drenches of nauſeous, perhaps torturing medi- 
cines, which you know you have no need of now, but. 
know not how {con you may, poſſibly by the operation 
of theſe very drugs on a weak or tender conſtitution : 
here is diſtreſs! It is an aſtoniſhing thing, a ſignal proof 
of the power of God, if any creature who has his ſen- 
ſes when that confinement begins, does not loſe them, 
before it is at an end |! 

How muſt it heighten the diſtreſs, if ſuch a poor 
wretch, being deeply convinced of fin, and growing 
worle and worſe (as he probably will, ſeeing there 1s 
no medicine here for his ſickneſs, no ſuch Phyſician as 
his caſe requires) be ſoon placed among the incurables ! 
Can imagination itſelf paint ſuch a hell upon earth ? 
Where even “ Hope never comes, that comes to all!“ 
For what remedy ? If a man of ſenſe and human- 

ity, ſhould happen to viſit that houſe of woe, would 
he give the hearing to a madman's tale? Or if he did, 
would he credit it? * Do we not know, might he 
ſay, how well any of theſe will talk in their lucid in- 
tervals ? So that a thouſand to one he would con- 
cern himſelf no more about it, but leave the weary to 
wait for reſt in the grave! 

18. I have now anſwered moſt of the current objec- 
tions, particularly ſuch as have appcarcd of weight to 
religious or reaſonable men. I have endeavoured to 
ſhew, Firſt, That the doctrines I teach are no other 

than the great truths of the goſpel. 2. That though I 
teach them, not as I would, but as I can, yet it is in a 
manner not contrary to aw; and Thirdly, That the 
effects of thus preaching the goſpel, have not been ſuch 
as was weakly or wickedly reported : thoſe reports be- 
ing mere artifices of the Devil, to hinder the work of 
God. Whoſoever therefore ye are, who look for God 
to revive his work in the midſt of the years, cry aloud, 
that he may finiſh it nevertheleſs, may cut it ſhort in 
righteouſneſs, Cry to Meſſiah the Prince, that he may 
ſoon end the tranſgreſſion, that he may lift up his ſtand- 
ard upon carth, lending by whom he will ſend, and 
O 3 working 


3 A -raxTizx APPEAL, Part 1. &c. 
working his own work, when he pleaſeth, and as he 
pleaſeth, till all the kindreds of the people worſhip be- 


fore him, and the earth be full of the knowledge of the 
glory of the Lord ! 


L 


An ACT of DEVOTION, 


2 EHOLD the ſervant of the Lord! 
I wait thy guiding hand to feel, 
To hear, and keep thine ev'ry word, 

To prove, and do thy perfect will; 
Joyful from all my works to ceaſe, 
Glad to fulfil all righteouſneſs. 


2 Me if thy grace vouchſafe to uſe, 
Meaneſt of all thy creatures me, 
Phe deed, the time, the manner chuſe; 

Let all my fruit be found of thee, 
Let all my works in thee be wrought, 
By thee to full perfection brought. 


3 My ev'ry weak though good, deſign, 
O'er-rule, or change as ſeems thee meet, 
Jeſus, let all the work be thine ; 
Thy work, O Lord, is all compleat, 
And pleaſing in thy Father's fight ; 
Thou only haſt done all things right. 


4 Here then to thee thine own I leave, 
Mould as thon wilt the paſſive clay ; 
But let me all thy ſtamp receive, 
But let me all thy words obey, 
Serve with a fingle heart and eye, 
And to thy glory live and die, 


T 166 J 


A 
FARTHER APPEAL 


REASON AN D RELIGION. 


R 


I. 1. 1 is not my preſent deſign to touch on any 
1 particular Opinions, whether they are right 
or wrong: nor on any of thoſe ſmaller points of prac- 
tice, which are variouſly held by men of different per- 
ſuaſions: but firſt, to point out ſome things which on 
common principles are condemned by men of ev 
denomination, and yet found in all; and ſecondly, 
ſome wherein thoſe of each denomination, are more par- 
ticularly inconſiſtent with their own principles, 

And, firſt, it is my deſign, abſtracting from Opi- 
nions of every kind, as well as from diſputable points 
of practice, to mention ſuch of thoſe things as occur to 
my mind, which are on common principles condemned, 
and notwithſtanding found, more or leſs, among men 
of every denomination. : 

2, But before I enter on this unpleafing taſk, I be- 
ſeech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, by what. 
ever love you bear to God, to your country, to your 
own fouls; do not conſider who ſpeaks, but what is 
ſpoken, If it be poſſible, for one hour lay prejudice 
alide ; give what is advanced a fair hearing. Conſider 

SE Bled. | imply 


+44 4% 


2. — 2 
—— — 


- q — — 


— - 


Rr 


. — : — 
— — , ‚—⏑ w———_ 
— - 
=> \ 


2 2 —— * 
— — 


| 
: 
} 
4 
. 


s V 


Again, when he had juſt brought them through the 


156 A raxtuer APPEAL, Part II. 


ſimply on each head, is this true, or is it falſe? Is it 
1 or is it not? If you aſk, © But in whoſe. 
judgment? I anſwer, In your own; I appeal to 
the light of your own mind. Is there not a faithful 
witneſs in your own breaſt? By this you muſt ſtand 
or fall, You cannot be judged by another man's con- 
ſcience. - Judge for yourſelſ by the beſt light you have. 
And the merciful God teach me and thee whatſoever 
we know not ! 

Now, as I ſpeak chiefly to thoſe who believe the 
ſcriptures, the method I propoſe is this, firſt, To ob- 
ſerve what account is given therein of the Jews, the 
ancient church of God, inaſmuch as all theſe things 
were written for our inſtruftion, who ſay, we are now 
the viſible church of the God of Iſrael, Secondly, 
To appeal to all who profeſs to be members thereof, to 
every one who is called a Chriſtian, How far, in each 
inſtance, the parallel holds? And how much we are 
better than they ? 

g. Firſt, I am to obſerve what account the ſcrip- 
tures give of the 45 the antient church of God. I 
mean, with regard to their moral character; their tem- 
pers and out ward behaviour. | 

No ſooner were they brought out of Egypt, than we 
find them murmuring againſt God, (Exod. xiv. 12.) 


Red Sea with a mighty hand and a ſtretched out arm, 
(ch. xv. 24.) And yet again, quickly after, in the 
wilderneſs of Zin, your murmurings (faith Moſes) are 
not againſt us, but againſt the Lord, (ch. xvi. 8.) Nay, 
even while he was giving them bread from heaven, 
they were {till murmuring and tempting God, (ch. xvin. 
2, g.) and their amazing language at that ſeaſon was, I. 
the Lord among us or not ? (ch. xvil. 4.) 

The ſame ſpirit they ſhewed, during the whole forty 
years that he bore their manners in the wilderneſs: a 
ſolemn teſtimony whereof, Moſes ſpake in the ears of 
all the congregation of Iſrael, when God was about to 
take him away from their head: They have corrup- 
ted themſelves (faith he) their ſpot was not of his chil- 
dren ; they are a perverſe and crooked generation. 
"The Lord led Jacob about; he inſtructed him; he kept 


him 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 157 


him as the apple of his eye, (Deut. xxxii. 5.10.) He 
made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he 
might eat the increaſe of the fields: then he forſook 
God which made him, and lightly eſteemed the Rock 
of his ſalvation,” (ch. v. 11, 13, 15.) 

In like manner God complains long after this, Hear 
O heavens, and give ear, O earth! I have nouriſhed 
and brought up children, and they have rebelled againſt 
me. The ox N his owner, and the als his maſ- 
ter's crib ; but Iſrael doth not know, my people do 
not conſider. Ah ſinful nation, a people laden with 
iniquity, a ſeed of evil doers, children that are corrup- 
ters, they have forſaken the Lord, they have provoked 
the Holy One of Iſrael,” (Iſa. i. 2, g, 4.) Can a 
maid forget her ornaments, and a bride her attire ? 
Yet my people have forgotten me, days without num- 
ber,“ (Jer. ii. 32. 

4. And as they did not like to retain God in their 
knowledge, ſo they had ſmall regard to the ordinances 
of God, Even from the days of your fathers, (ſaid 
God by his \prophen) ye are gone away from my ordi- 
nances, and have not kept them, (Mal. iii. 7.) Ye 
have ſaid; It is in vain to ſerve God; and what profit 
is it that we have kept his ordinances? ”? (ver. 1g.) 
„Thou haſt not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou 
haſt been weary of me, O Iſrael : thou haſt not brought 
me thy burnt-offerings, neither haſt thou honoured me 
with thy ſacrifices,” (Iſa. xliv. 22. 29.) And fo the 
prophet himſelf confeſſes, © Thou meeteſt thofe that 
remember Thee in thy ways——But there is none that 
calleth upon thy name, that ſtirreth up himſelf to take 
hold of Thee,” (Iſa. Ixiv. 5, J.) 

5. But they called upon his name by vain oaths, by 
exjury and blaſphemy. So Jeremiah, © Becauſe of 
wearing the land mourneth, (ch. xxiii. 10.) And 

though they ſay, The Lord liveth, ſurely they ſwear 
falſely,” (ch. v. 2.) So Hoſea, „They have ſpoken 
words, ſwearing falſely in making a covenant : ”” fo 
Ezekiel, © They ſay the Lord ſeeth us not, the Lord 
hath forſaken the earth.“ So Iſaiah, Their tongue 
and their doings are againſt the Lord, to provoke the 
eyes of his glory, (ch, iii 8.) They ſay, Let him 


make 


\ 
' £1 
= 
1 1 
_ 


a — - * 
- - _—_ - 
—-—_—_— —_—___— ⏑ 


= 


138 © Aranxturx APPEAL, Part II. 


make ſpeed and haſten his work that we may ſee it, 
and let the counſel of the Holy One draw nigh and 
come that we may know it,” (ch. v. 19.) And fo 
Malachi, ( Ye have wearied the Lord with your words; 
ye ſay, Every one that doeth evil, is good in the ſight of 
the Lord, and he delighteth in them; and, where is the 
God of judgment? (ch. ii. 17.) 

6. And as they deſpiſed his holy things, fo they pro- 


phaned his ſabbaths, (Ezek. xxii. 8.) Yea, when God 
ſent unto them, ſaying, „Take heed unto yourlelves, 


and bear no burden on the ſabbath day, neither do ye 


any work, but hallow ye the ſabbath day, as I com- 
manded your fathers : — yet they obeyed not, neither 


inclined their ear, but made their neck ſtiff, that they 
might not hear, nor receive inſtruction.“ (Jer. xvu. 
21, 22, 23.) 

Neither did they honour their parents, or thoſe whom 
God, from time to time, appointed to be rulers over 
them. * In thee (in Jeruſalem, ſaid the prophet) they 
have ſet light by father and mother,” (Ezek. xxii. J.) 


And from the very day when God brought them up 
out of the land of Egypt, their murmurings, chiding, 


rebellion and diſobedience; againſt thoſe whom he had 
choſen to go before them, make the moſt conſiderable 
part of their hiſtory. So that had not Moſes ſtood in 
the gap, he had even deſtroyed«them from the face of 


the earth. | 


7. How much more did they afterwards provoke 
God, by drunkenneſs, ſloth, and luxury? *© They 
have erred through wine, (faith the prophet Iſaiah) and 
through ſtrong drink they are gone out of the way; 
(ch. xxviii. J.) which occaſioned thoſe vehement and 
repeated warnings, againſt that reigning ſin ; * Woe to 


the drunkards of Ephraim, them that are overcome 


with wine, (ver. 1.) the drunkards of Ephraim ſhall be 


trodden under foot: (ver. g.) woe unto them that riſe 


up early that they may follow ſtrong drink ; that con- 
tinue until night, till wine inflames them. But they 
regard not the work of the Lord, neither conſider the 
operation of his hands, (ch. v. 11, 12.) woe unto them 
that are mighty to drink wine, and men of ſtrength to 
mingle ſtrong drink; (ver. 22.) woe to them that are 

5 8 ; at 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 159, 


at eaſe in Zion, — that lie upon beds of ivory, and 
ſtretch themſelves upon their couches, and eat the 
lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the 
midſt of the ſtall, that chant to the ſound of the viol, 
and invent to themſelves inſtruments of muſick, — that 
drink wine in bowls, and anoint themſelves with the 
chief ointments ; but they are not grieved for the afflic- 
tion of Joſeph,” (Amos vi. 1, 4, 5, 6.) © Behold this 
(faith Ezekiel to Jeruſalem) was the iniquity of thy 
ſiſter Sodom: fulneſs of brcad and abundance of idle- 
neſs was in her and in her daughters,“ (ch. xvi. 49.) 

8. From ſloth and fulneſs of bread, lewdneſs natu- 
rally followed, It was even while Moſes was with 
them, that the people began to commit whoredom with 
the daughters of Moab : yea, of the daughters of Zion, 
Ifaiah complains, „they walk with ſtretched- forth 
necks and wanton eyes,” (ch. iii. 16.) And of his 
people in general God complains by Jeremiah, When 
I had fed them to the full, they aſſembled themſelves 
by troops in the harlot's houſe. They were as fed 
horſes in the morning, every one neighed after his 
neighbour's wife, (ch. v. 7, 8.) they be all adulterers, 
an aſſembly of treacherous men, (ch. ix. 2.) the land 1s 
full of adulterers,” (ch. xxiii. 10.) | 

Yea, and ſome of them were given up to unnatural 
luſts. Thus we read, Judges xix. 22, The men of 
Gibeah beſet the houſe, wherein the ſtranger was, and 
beat at the door, and ſpake to the maſter of the houſe, 
laymg, bring forth the man that came into thine houſe, 
that we may know him.” And there were alſo long 
after, Sodomites in the land, in the days of Rehoboam 
and of the following kings: The very ſhew of whoſe 
countenance witneſſed againſt them, and they declared 
their ſin as Sodom, they hid it not.” (Iſa. in. 9.) | 

9. This was accompanied with injuſtice in all its 
forms, Thus all the prophets teſtify againſt them, 
* The Lord looked for judgment, but behold oppreſ- 
hon ; for righteouſneſs, but behold a cry,” (Iſa. v. 3.) 
Thou haſt taken uſury and increaſe ; thou haſt gree- 
dily gained of thy neighbour by extortion.—Behold, 1 
have ſmitten my hand, at thy. diſhoneſt gain which 
thou haſt made, (Ezzk, xxil, 12, 13.) * The 2 EE 

| n | of © 


160 A rAATUEN APPEAL, Part IT. 


of deceit are in Jacob's hand ; he loveth to opprels,” 
(Hoſ. xii. J.) „Are there not yet the ſcant meaſure 
that is abominable ; the wicked balances, and the bag 
of deceitful weights? (Micah vi. 10, 11.) © He 
that departeth from evil, maketh himſelf a prey,“ (Iſa. 
lix. 15.) And the Lord faw it, and it diſpleaſed him, 
that there was no judgment. The wicked devoureth 
the man that is more righteous than he. They take u 
all of them with the angle, they catch them in their 
net, and gather them in their drag, (Hab. i. 13, 14, 15.) 
They covet fields and take them by violence, and — 2 
and take them away, (Mic. ii. 2.) they pull off the 
robe with the garment, from them that paſs by ſecurely, 
(ver. 8.) they have dealt by oppreſſion with the ſtran- 
ger; they have vexed the fatherleſs and the widow, 
(Ezek. xxii. J.) the people of the land have uſed op- 
preſſion and exerciſed robbery; and have vexed the 
poor and needy, yea, they have oppreſſed the ſtranger 
wrongfully, (ver. 29.) their works are works of ini- 
quity, and the acts of violence is in their hands, (Iſaiah 
lix. 6.) Judgment is turned away backward, and jus 
tice ſtandeth afar off; for truth is fallen in the ſtreet, 
and equity cannot enter, (ver. 14.) 
10. Truth indeed was fallen, as well as juſtice, 
% Every mouth, faith Iſaiah, ſpeaketh folly, (ch. ix. 
17.) this is a rebellious people, lying children, (ch. 
XXX. 9.) their lips have {poken lies and muttered per- 
verſeneſs. None calleth for juſtice, nor any pleadeth 
for truth; they truſt in vanity and ſpeak lies, (ch. lix. 
3: 4-) This occaſioned that caution of Jeremiah, Take 
ye heed every one of his neighbour, and truſt ye not 
in any brother; for every brother will utterly ſupplant, 
and every neighbour will walk with landers. And 
they will deceive every one his neighbour, and will not 
2 the truth; they have taught their tongues to 
peak lies, and weary themſelves to commit iniquity,” 
(ch. ix. 4, f-) | | 
11. And even thoſe who abſtained from theſe grols 
outward fins, were {till inwardly corrupt and abomina- 
ble. The whole head was ſick, and the whole heart 
was faint ; yea, from the ſole of the foot even unto the 
head there was no ſoundneſs, but wounds and N 
an 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 161 


and putrifying ſores, (Iſa. i. 3, 6.) All theſe nations 
(faith God) are uncircumciſed; and all the houſe of 
Iſracl are uncircumciſed in heart, (Jer. ix. 26.) Their 
heart is divided, (Hol. x. 2.) They have ſet up their 
idols in their heart; they are all eſtranged from me 
through their idols,” (Ezek. xiv. g, 4.) a 

Their ſoul till clave unto the duſt. They laid up 
treaſures upon earth. From the leaſt of them, ſait 
Jeremiah, even unto the greateſt, every one is given to 
covetoulneſs, (ch. vi. 19.) They panted after the duſt 
of the earth, (Amos ii. 7.) They laded themſel ves with 
thick clay, (Hab. iii. 6.) They joined houſe to houſe, 
and laid field to field, until there was no place, (Iſaiah 
v. 8.) Vea, they enlarged their deſires as hell: they 
were as death, and could not be ſatisfied,” (Hab. ii. 5.) 

12. And not only for their covetouſneſs, but for 
their pride of heart were they an abomination to the 
Lord. The pride of Iſrael, ſaith Hoſea, doth teſtify 
to his face, (ch. vii. 10.) Hear ye, give ear, faith Jere- 
miah, be not proud — Give glory to the Lord your 
God, (ch. xii. 15.) But they would not be reproved ;; 
they were ſtill wile in their own eyes, and prudent in 
their own light, (Iſa. v. 21.) and continually ſaying to 
their neighbour, Stand by thyſelf, come not near to me 3 
for I am holier than thou!“ (Ta, Ixv. 5.) WT | 

They added hypocriſy to their pride. This peo- 
ple, faith God himlelf, draw near me with their mouth, 
and with their lips do honour me, but have removed 
their heart far from me, (Iſa. xxix. 13.) They have 
not cried unto me with their hearts, when they howled 
upon their beds, (Hof. vii. 14.) They return, but not 
to the Moſt High; they are like a decenful bow, (ver. 
16.) They did but flatter him with their mouth, and 
diſſemble with him in their tongue,“ (Pſal. lxxviii. 36.) 
ſo that herein they only prophaned the holineſs of the 
Lord. © And this have ye done again, faith Malachi, 
covering the altar of the Lord with tears, with weep- 
ing, and with crying out, inſomuch that he regarded 
not the offering any more, (ch. ii. 11. 1g. 

1. This God continually declared to thoſe formal 
worſhippers. That their outſide religion was but vain, 
** 10 what purpole is the multitude of your ſacrifices, 

P lait 


\ 


162 A zarTHeR APPEAL, Part II. 


faith the Lord ? I am full of the burnt-offerings of 
rams, and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of 
lambs, or of he-goats. Bring no more vain oblations : 
incenſe is an abomination unto me; the new moons and 
ſabbaths, the calling of aſſemblies, I cannot away with 
it is iniquity, even the folemn meeting. When you 
ſpread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from 
you ; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not 
hear, (Iſa. i. 11, 13, 15.) He that killeth an ox is as 
if he ſlew a man; he that ſacrificeth a lamb, as if he 
cut off a dog's neck, (ch. Ixvi. 3.) When they faſt, I 
will not hear their cry ; and when they offer an obla- 
tion, I will not accept it, (Jer. xiv. 12.) Go ye, ſerve 
Hon idols, if ye will not'hcarken unto me ; but pol- 
ute ye my holy Name no more with your gifts,” (Ezek, 
xx. 39. 
14. Vet all this time they were utterly careleſs and 
ſecure; nay, confident of being in the favour of God. 
They were at eaſe; they put far ay the evil day, 
(Amos vi. 1. 3.) Even when God had poured his an- 
ger upon Iſrael, it ſet him on fire round ahout, yet he 
knew eit not: it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart, 
(Ifa. xlii. 25.) A deeeived heart had turned him afide, 
that he could not ſay, Is there not a lie in my right- 
hand ? (ch. xliv. 10.) So far from it, that at this ve 
time they ſaid, We are innocent, we have not ſinned, 
(Jer. ü. 35, 37.) We are wiſe, and the law of the 
Lord is with us, (ch. viii. 8.) The temple of the 
Lord! the temple of the Lord are we,” (ch. vii. 4.) 
15. Thus it was that they hardened themſelves in 
their wickedneſs. * They are impudent children, 
faith God, and ſtiff-hearted, (Ezek. ii. 4.) Were they 
aſhamed when they had committed abomination ? Nay 
they were not at all aſhamed, neither could they bluſh, 
(Jer. vi. 15.) I have ſpread out my hand all the day 
to a rebellious people, that provoketh me to anger con- 
tinually to my face, (Iſa. lxv. 2, g.) They will not 
hearken unto me, ſaith the Lord, for all the houſe of 
Iſrael are impudent and hard-hearted, (Ezek. iii. J.) 
Since the day that their fathers came forth out of the 
land of Egypt unto this day, I have ſent unto them all 
wy ſervants the prophets, riſing up early * 
e 3 tnem; 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 163 


them; yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined 
their ear, but hardened their neck; they did worſe than 
their fathers, (Jer. vi. 25, 26.) 7 
| They were equally hardened againſt mercies and 
judgments, When he gave them rain, both the former 
and the latter in his ſeaſon ; when he reſerved unto 
them the appointed weeks of the harveſt, filling their 
hearts with food and gladneſs, {till none of this revolt- 
mg and rebellious people ſaid, Let us now fear the 
Lord our God,” (Jer. v. 29, 24.) © Nor yet did they 
turn unto him when he imote them, (ch. ix. 9. 13.) 
„ In that day did the Lord call to weeping and to 
mourning : and behold joy and gladneſs, eating fleſh 
and drinking wine : Let us eat and drink, for to-mor- 
row we ſhall die,“ (ch. xxii. 11, 12.) © Although he 
conſumed them, yet they refuſed to receive inſtruction ; 
they made their faces harder than a rock — None re- 
1 him, but every one turned to his courſe, as a 
orſe ruſheth into the battle,“ (Jer. v. g. ch. viii. 6.) 
„ have given you want of bread in al your places, 
yet have ye not returned unto me, faith the Lord. 1 
have alſo with-holden the rain from you when there 
were yet three months unto the harveſt I have 
{mitten you with blaſting and mildew ; your gardens 
and your vineyards the palmer worm devoured. I 
have ſent among you the peſtilence after the manner of 
Egypt; your young men have I ſlain with the ſword 
I have overthrown ſome of you, as God overthrew 
Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand 
plucked out of the burning ; yet have ye not returned 
unto me, faith the Lord,” (Amos iv. 6—11.) 
16. In conſequence of their reſolution not to return, 
they would not endure ſtrong doctrine, or thoſe that 
ſpake it. They “ faid to the ſeers, See not, and to the 
prophets, propheſy not unto us right things—Speak 
unto us ſmooth things—Cauſe the Holy One of Lfſrael 
to ceaſe from before us, (Iſa. xxx. 10, 11.) But they 
hated him that rebuked in the gate, and they abhorred 
him that ſpake uprightly, (Amos v. 10.) Accordingly, 
*thy prope: (ſaid God to Ezekiel) ſtill are talking againſt 
thee, by the walls, and in the doors of the houles, (ch. 
 XXXU1, 30.) And Amaziah the prieſt {ent to Jereboam, 


P 2 king 


164 A Arn APPEAL, Part IT. 


king of Iſtael, ſaying, Amos hath conſpired againſt thes 
in the midſt of the houſe of Iſrael ; the land is not able 
to bear all his words. Alſo Amaziah ſaid unto Amos, 
Go, flee thee away into the land of Judah, and propheſy 
there. But prophely not again any more at Bethel, 
for it is the king's chapel, and it is the king's court,” 
(ch. vii. 10, 12, 13.) From the ſame ſpirit it was that 
they faid of Jeremiah, „Come, and let us deviſe de- 
vices againſt him——-Come and let ns ſmite him with 
the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his 
words,” (ch. xvi. 18.) Hence it was that he was con- 
ſtrained to cry out, O Lord, I am in deriſion daily; 
every one mocketh me. Since I ſpake, the word of 
the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a deriſion 
daily: for I heard the 3 of many, fear on every 
ide : Report, ſay they, and we will report it: all my 
familiars watched for my halting ; ſaying, Peradventure 
he will be enticed, and we ſhall prevail againſt him, 
and we ſhall take our revenge on him,” (ch. xx. 7, 8, 
10.) And elſewhere, © Woe is me, my mother, that 
thou haſt borne me a man of ſtrife, and a man of con- 
tention to the whole earth. I have neither lent on 
uſury, nor men have lent to me on ulury : yet every 
one of them doth curſe me, (ch. xv. 19. 

17. But if a man walking in the ſpirit of falſe. 
hood, do lie (ſaid the prophet Micah) ſaying, I will 
propheſy unto thee of wine and ſtrong drink, he ſhall 
even be the prophet of this people,” (ch. ii. 11.) And 
God gave them paſtors after their own hearts: ſuch 
were thoſe ſons of Eli, ſons of Belial, who knew not 
the Lord, (1 Sam. ii. 12.) rapacious, covetous, violent 
men, (ver. 14, 15, 16.) by reaſon of whom men abhor- 
xed the offering of the Lord, (ver. 17.) who not only 
made themſelves vile, (ch. iii. 1g.) but alſo made the 
Lord's people to tranſgreſs, (ch. ii. 24.) while they 
made themſelves fat with the chiefeſt of all the offer- 
_ ings of Iſrael, (ver. 29.) Such were thoſe of whom 
Iſaiah ſays, the prieſt and the prophet have erred thro' 
ſtrong drink ; they are ſwallowed up of wine, (ch. 
xxviii. 7.) Come ye, ſay they, I will fetch wine, and 
we will fill ourſelves with ſtrong drink : and to-mor- 
xow ſhall be as. this day, and much more oo” 

ch, lvi. 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 163 


(ch. lvi. 12.) Therefore, ſaith he, the Lord hath 
poured out upon you the ſpirit of deep ** and hath 
cloſed your eyes: the prophets and the ſeers hath he 
5 and the viſion of all is become unto you, as 
the words of a book that is ſealed, (ch. xxix. 10, 11.) 
Such alſo were thoſe of whom he ſaid, His watchmen 
are blind, they are all ignorant : they are all dumb dogs; 
they cannot bark, ſleeping, lying down, loving to 
ſlumber. Greedy dogs, which can never have enough, 
and they are ſhepherds that cannot underſtand, They 
all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from 
his quarter, (ch. lvi. 10, 11.) | 

Little better were thoſe of whom the prophets that 
followed have left us ſo dreadful an account; “ both 

rophet and prieſt are profane ; yea, in my houſe have 
3 their wickedneſs, ſaith the Lord. And from 
the prophets of Jeruſalem, is profaneneſs gone forth 
into all the land, Jer. xxiii. 11, 15. Her prieſts have 
violated my law, and have profaned my holy things : 
they have put no difference between the holy and the 
profane, and I am profancd among them, Ezek. xxii. 
26. If I be a father, where is mine honour ; and if I 
be a maſter, where is my fear ? ſaith the Lord of Hoiſts 
unto you, O prieſts, that deſpiſe my Name,” Mal. i. 6. 
Lea ſome of them were fallen into the groſſeſt ſins, 
© The company of prieſts, ſaid Hoſea, commit lewd- 
neſs: there is whoredom in Ephraim, Iſrael is dehled, 
ch. vi. 9, 10. I have ſeen allo in the prophets of Je- 
ruſalem (faith God by Jeremiah) a horrible thing; they 
commit adultery and walk in hes,” ch. xxili. 14. 

18. And thoſe who were clear of this were deeply 
covetous. Who is there among you that would ſhut 
the doors for nought ? Neither do ye Kindle fire on 
my altar for nought, I have no pleaſure in you, faith 
the Lord of Hoſts, Mal. i. 10. The pricſts of Zion 
preach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for 
money, Yet will they lean upon the Lord, and ſay, 
Is not the Lord among us? Mic. iii. 11. Thus faith 
the Lord, The prophets bite with their teeth, and cry 
peace : and he that putteth not into their mouths, they 
even prepare war againſt him, ch. iii. 5. Therefore 
the word of the Lord came unto Ezekiel, ſaying, Pro- 


P 3 phely 


156 A ranTHER APPEAL, Part II. 


pheſy againſt the ſhepherds of Iſrael, and ſay, Woe 
to the ſhepherds of Iſrael that do feed themſelves : 
ſhould not the ſhepherds feed the flocks? Ye cat the 
fat, and ye clothe you with the wool ; but ye feed not 
the flock. The diſeaſed have ye not ſtrengthened, nei- 
ther have ye healed that which was fick ; -neither have 
e bound up that which was broken, neither have ye 
rought again that which was driven away, neither have 
ye ſought that which was loſt ; but with force and with 
cruelty have ye ruled them. And they were ſcattered 
becauſe there is no ſhepherd,” and they became meat to 
all the beaſte of the field, Yea, my flock was ſcattered 
pon all the face of the earth, and none did ſearch and 
ſeek after them,” ch. xxxiv. 1—6. 

19. To the fame effect do the other prophets declare, 
Ve are departed out of the way, ye have cauſed many 
to ſtumble, Therefore have I alſo made you con- 
temptible and baſe before all the people, Mal. ii. 8, g. 
From the prophet even unto the prieſt, every one 
dealeth falſely. They have healed alſo the hurt of the 
daughter of my people ſlightly, ſaying, Peace, peace, 
when there is no peace, Jer. vi. 13, 14. They pro- 
pheſy lies in my name, ch. xiv. 14. They fay {till 
unto them that deſpiſe me, The Lord hath ſaid, Ve ſhall 
have peace; and they ſay unto every man that walketh 
after the imagination of his own heart, No evil ſhall 
come upon you, ch. xxui. 17. The prophets of Jeru- 
falem ſtrengthen the hands of the evil-doers, that none 
doth.return from. his wickedneſs, ver. 14. They have 
ſeduced my people; and one built up a wall, and lo, 
others daubed it with untempered mortar, Ezek. Xii. 
10. With lies they have made the hearts of the righ- 
teous ſad, whom I have not made fad ; and ſtrengthened 
the hands of the wicked, that he ſhould not return from 
his wicked way, by promiſing him life, ver. 22. Many 
paſtors have deſtroyed my vineyard, they have trodden 
my portion under foot; they have made my pleaſant 
portion a deſolate wilderneſs, Jer. xxii. 10. There is a 
conſpiracy of her prophets in the midſt of her, like a 
roaring lion, ravening the prey. They have devoured 
fouls, Ezek. xxii. 25, Thus faith the Lord, Feed the 
flock of the laughter :. whoſe poſſeſſors ſlay a _ 


; 
? 
J 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 1267 


Hold themſelves not guilty ; and they that ſell them fay | 


Bleſſed be the Lord, for I am rich; and their own 


ſhepherds pitied them not,” Zach. xi. 4, 5. 


II. 1. Such is the general account which the ſerip- 
tures give of the Jews, the antient church of God, 
And fince all theſe things were written for our inftruc- 
tion, who are now the viſible church of the God of 
Iſrael, I ſhall in the next place appeal to all who pro- 
feſs this, to every one who calls himſelf a Chriſttan, 
how far in each inſtance the parallel holds? and how 
much we are better than they ? 


And firſt, Were they diſcontented ? Did they repine 
at the providence of God? Did they lay, Is the Lord 
among us or not ? when they were in imminent danger, 
or preſſing want, and ſaw no way to eſcape? And 
which of us can fay, I am clear from this ne I have 
waſhed my hand and my heart in innocency? Have 
not we who judge others, done the ſame things ? mur- 
mured and repined times without number ? yea, and 
that when we were not in preſſing want, nor diſtreſſed 


with imminent danger? Are we not in general, (our 


own writers being the judges) have we not ever been 
from the earlieſt ages, a repining, murmuring, difcon- 
tented people, never long ſatished either with God or 
man? Surely in this we have great need to humble 


. ourſelves before God; for we are in nowiſe better than 


they. 
But Fefturon forſook God which made him, and lightly 
efteemed the Rock of his ſalvation. And did not Eng- 
land too? Ak ye of the generations of old, enquife 
from the riſing of the ſun to the going down theled, 
whether there was ever a people called by his name, 
which had leſs of God in all their thoughts? Who in 
the whole tenor of their behaviour ſhewed ſo light an 
efleem for the Rock of our ſalvation & 
Could there ever be ſtronger cauſe for God to cry 
out, Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O earth ! For ha 
he not nouriſhed and brought us up as his children? And 
yet, how have we rebelled againſt him ! If Vyrael of bid 
did not know God ;. if his ancient people did not confider';; 
| WAS 


268 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part II. 


was this peculiar to them? Are not we alſo under the 
very ſame condemnation? Do we, as a people, know 
God ? Do we conſider him as God ? Do we tremble 
at the preſence of his power? Do we revere his ex- 
cellent Majeſty? Do we remember at all times, God 
is here? He is now reading my heart: he ſpieth out 
all my ways: there is not a word in my tongue but he 
knoweth it altogether : is this the character of us Eng- 
liſh Chriſtians? The mark whereby we are known 
from the Heathen? Do-we, thus know God ? Thus 
confider his power, his love, his all-ſeeing eye? Ra- 
ther, are we not likewiſe a finful nation, who have for- 
gotten ham days without number A people laden with 
iniquity, continually forſaking the Lord, and provoking. 
the Holy One of Ifracl, 


2. There is indeed a wide difference, in this reſpect, 
between the Jews and us; they happened (if I may ſo 
ſpeak) to forget God, becauſe other things- came in 
their way: but we delign to forget him; we do it of 
ſet purpoſe, becauſe we do not like to remember him. 
From the accounts given by Jeremia'1, we have reaſon 
to beheve, that when that people was moſt deeply cor- 
rupted, yet the greateſt men in the nation, the miniſters 
of ſtate, the nobles and princes of Judah, talked of 
God ſometimes, perhaps, as frequently as upon any 
other ſubject. But is it fo among us! Rather, is it 
not a point of good breeding to put God far away, out 
of their ſight ? Is he talked of at all among the great? 
The nobles or miniſters of ſtate in England? Among 
any perſons of rank or figure in the world? Do they 
allow God any place in their converſation? From day 
to day, from year to year, do you diſcourſe one hour 
of the wonders he doth for the children of men? If 
one at a gentleman or a nobleman's table was to begin a 
diſcourle, of the wiſdom, greatneſs, or power of God, 
would it not occaſion (at leaſt) as much aſtoniſhment, 
as if he had begun to talk blaſphemy ? And if the 
unbred man perſiſted therein, would it not put all the 
company into confuſion? And what do you fincerely 
believe the more favourable part would ſay of him when 
he was gone? But that — © He 1s a little touched 


„2 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 169 


in his head! or, Poor man! he has not ſeen the 
world.“ | , 

You know, this is the naked truth. But how terri- 
ble is the thought to every ſerious mind! Into what a 
Rate is this Chriſtian nation fallen! Nay the men of 
eminence, of fortune, of education! Would not a 
thinking foreigner, who ſhould be preſent at ſuch an 
interview, be apt to conclude, that the men of quality 
in England were Atheiſts ? That they did not believe 
there was any God at all ; or, at beſt only an Epicu- 
rean God, who fat at eaſe upon the circle of the hea- 
vens, and did not concern himſelf about us worms of 
the earth? Nay, but he underſtands every thought 
now riſing in your heart, And how long can pou put 
him out of your fight? Only till this veil of fleſh 1s 
rent in ſunder. For your pomp will not then follow 
you. Will not your body be mingled with common 
duſt? And your ſoul ſtand naked before God? O 
that you would now argquaint yourſelf with God, that 
you may then be clothed with glory and immortality ! 

3- Did God complain of the Jews, even from the 
days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordi- 
nances, and have not kept them? And how juſtly may 
he make the ſame complaint of us? For how exceed- 
ing ſmall a proportion do we find of thoſe in any place 
who call themſelves Chriſtians, that make a conſcience 
of attending them ? Does one third of the mhabitants 
in any one pariſh throughout this great city, conſtantly 
attend public prayer and the miniſtry of his word, as of 
conſcience towards God? Does one tenth of thoſe 
who acknowledge it 1s an inſtitution of Chriſt, duly 
attend the Lord's Supper? Does a fiftieth part of the 

nominal members of the Church of England obſerve 
the Faſts of the Church, or ſo much as the forty days 
of Lent, and all Fridays in the year? Who of theſe 
then can caſt. the firſt ſtone at the Jews, for negletting 
the ordinances of God ? 

Nay, how many thouſands are found among us, who 
have never partook of the Supper of the Lord! How 
many thouſands are there, that live and die in this un- 
repented diſobedience? What multitudes, even in 


this Chriſtian city, do not attend any public worſhip | 
| at 


170 A ATEX APPEAL, Part II. 


at all? No, nor ſpend x ſingle hour from one year to 
another in privately pouring out their hearts before 
God? Whether God meeteth him that remembereth him 
in nis ways or not, is no concern of theirs : ſo the man 


eats and drinks, and dies as a beaſt dieth, | 
% Drops into the dark and diſappears.” 


It was not therefore of the children of Iſrael alone, 
that the meſſenger of God might ſay, There ts none 
(comparatively) that calleth upon thy name, that ſtryreth 
himſelf up to take hold of Thee, 


4. Ye have heard, that it was faid to them of old 
times, becaufe of ſwearing the land mourneth, But if 
this might be ſaid of the land of Canaan, how much 
more of this land? In what city or town, in what mar- 
ket or exchange, in what ſtreet or place of public re- 
fort, is not the holy Name whereby we are called taken 
in vain, day by day? From the noble to the peaſant, 
who fails to call upon God, in this, if in no other 
way? Whither can you turn, where can you go, 
without hearing ſome praying to God for damnation, 
either on his neighbour or himſelf ? Curling thoſe, 
without either fear or remoxſe, whom Chriſt hath 
bought to inherit a bleſſing! | 

Are you one of theſe ſtupid, ſenſeleſs, ſhameleſs 
wretches, that call ſo earneſtly for damnation on your 
own foul? What if God ſhould take you at your 
word? Are you able to dwell with everlaſting burnings ? 
If you are, why ſhould you be in haſte, to be in the 
lake of fire burning with brimſtone ? God help you, or 
you will be there ſoon enough, and long enough; for 
that fire is not quenched But the ſmoke thereof aſcend- 
&th up, day _ night, for ever and ever. 

And what is that important affair, concerning which 
you was but now appealing to God? Was you calling 
God to record upon your foul, touching your everlaſting 
ſalvation ? No; but touching the beauty of your 
horſe, the ſwiftneſs of your dog, or the goodneſs of 
your drink! How is this? What notion have you 
of God? What do you take him to be? 
| Idcirco ſtolidam prabet tibi vellere barbam 


1 bite ? | 
; Jus What 


To' Men of Reaſon and Religion. 171 


What ſtupidity, what infatuation is this! Thus with- 
out either pleaſure, or profit, or praiſe, to ict at nought 
him that hath all power both in heaven and earth ! Wan- 
tonly to provoke the eyes of hes glory / | 
Are you a man of letters, who are ſunk fo low ? I 
will not ſend you to the inſpired writers (fo called: 
rhaps you diſdain to receive inſtruction by them) but 
to the old, blind heathen. Could you only fix in your 
mind the idea he had of God, (though it is not ſtrictly 
juſt, unleſs we refer it to God made man) you would 
never thus affront him more, 


H, na} xvarinow in" ogvor vevot K polo 
Agb, dg Nd, ime” 6 wonile Lis. 

Kare. a abararouo piyar ννν Ohvuror = 

Shall not the very heathen then vie up in judgment 
againſt this generation, and condemn it? Yea, and not 
only the learned heathens of Greece and Rome, but the 
ſavages of America. For I never remember to have 
heard a wild Indian name the name of Sootaleicatee, 
(him that ſitteth in heaven) without either laying his 
hand upon his breaſt, or caſting his eyes down to the 
ground, And you are a Chriſtian! O how do you 
caule the very name of Chriſtianity to be blaſphemed 
among the heathen ! | 

5. But is it ligt ſwearing only, (inexcuſable as that 
is) becauſe of which our land mourneth ? May it not 
alſo be ſaid of us, Though they ſay the Lord liveth, ſurely 
they ſwear falſely? Yea, to ſuch a degree, that there 
is hardly the like in any nation under heaven ; that al- 
moſt every corner of the land is fillea with wilful, de- 
liberate perjury. . 

I ſpeak not now of the perjuries which every com- 

mon {wearer cannot but run into day by day. (And 
indeed common “ {wearing notoriouſly contributes to 
the growth of perjury. For oaths are little minded 
when common uſe has ſullied them, and every minute's 
repetition has made them cheap and vulgar.””) Nor of 
thoſe which are continually committed and often de- 
tected in our open courts of juſtice. Only with regard 
to the latter T muſt remark, that they are a natural con- 
ſequence, of that monſtrous, ſhocking manner, wherein 


oaths 


172 A rARTUER APPEAL, Part II. 


oaths are uſually adminiſtered therein: without any de- 
cency or ſeriouſneſs at all; much leſs with that awful 
ſolemnity, which a rational heathen would expect, in 
an immediate appeal to the great God of heaven. 

I had once deſigned to conſider all the oaths which 
are cuſtomarily taken by any ſet of men among us. 
But I ſoon found this was a work too weighty for me: 
fo almoſt in infinitum are oaths multiplied in England: 
I ſuppole to a degree Which is not known in any other 
nation in Europe. 

What I now propoſe is, to inſtance only in a few, 
{but thoſe not of ſmall importance) and to ſhew, how 
amazingly little regard is had, to what is ſolemnly pro- 
miſed or affirmed before God, 

6. This is done, in part, to my hands by a late au- 
thor. So far as he goes, I ſhall little more than tranſ- 
cribe his words. (Mr. Diſney's firſt Eſſay, p. 30.) 

When a Juſtice of the Peace is {worn into the 
commiſſion, he makes oath — That he ſhall do 
equal right to the poor and to the rich, after his cun- 
ning, wit and power, and after the laws and- cuſtoms 
of the realm and ſtatutes thereof made, in all articles iii 
the king's commiſſion to him direftted.,—W hat thoſe 
articles are, you will find in the firſt Aſſignavimus of 
the Commiſſion : © we have aſſigned you and every 
one of you, jointly and ſeverally—to keep and cauſe to 
be kept, all ordinances and ſtatutes, made for—the quiet, 
rule, and government of our people, in all and every 
the articles thereof, according to the force, form, and 
effect of the ſame, and to chaſtiſe and puniſh all per- 
ſons, offending againſt any of them, according to the 
form of thoſe ſtatutes and ordinances.” So that he is 
ſolemnly ſworn to the execution of all ſuch ſtatutes, as 
the legiſlative power of the nation has thought fit to 
throw upon his care, Such are all thoſe (among others) 
made againſt drunkenneſs, tipling, profane ſwearing, 
blaſphemy ; lewd and dyorderly practices, and profana- 
tion of the Hord's day.” And it is hard to imagine how 
a Juſtice of Peace can think himſelf more concerned, 
to ſuppreſs riots, or private quarrels, than he is to levy 
twelve pence on a profane ſwearer, five ſhillings on a 


«runkard, ten ſhillings on a public-houſe that ſuffers 
tipling, 


— 


+ 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 173 


tipling, or any other penalty which the law exacts of 
vice and immorality. The ſame oath binds him both to 
one and the other, laying an equal obligation upon his 
conſcience, How a magiſtrate, who neglects to puniſh 
excels, profaneneſs and impiety, can excuſe himſelf from 
the guilt of perjury, I do not pretend to know. If he 
reaſons fairly, he will find himſelf as much forſworn, as 
an evidence who being upon oath, to declare the whole 
truth, nevertheleſs conceals the moſt confederable part of 
it. And his perjury is ſo much the more infamous, as 
the ill — and effects of it will be miſchievous.“ 

7. The ſame author (in the preface to his ſecond eſſay) 
goes on: 

„VV ou gentlemen of the grand juries, take a ſolemn 
oath, That you will diligently enquire, and true pre- 
ſentment make, of all ſuch articles, matters, and things 
as ſhall be given you in charge: as alſo, that you will 
(not only preſent no perſon for envy, hatred, or malice, 
but) not leave any unpreſented, for fear, favour, or af- 
feftion, Now, are not the laws againſt immorality and 
profaneneſs given you in charge, as well as thoſe againſt 
riots, felony, and treaſon ? Are not preſentment and 
indiẽtment one method expreſsly appointed by the ſta- 
tutes, for the puniſhment of drunkenneſs and tipling ? 
Are not the houſes of bawdry and gaming, puniſhable in 
the ſame courts, and conſequently prefentable by you? 
Is not the proclamation for the puniſhing of vice, pro- 
faneneſs, and immorality, always read before you as ſoon 
as you are ſworn? And does not the judge of aſſize, or 
chairman of the bench, in the charge given immediately 
after the reading it, either recite to you the particular 
laws againſt ſuch offences, or refer you for them to that 

roclamation ? It 1s plain from all this, that you are 
und upon your oaths, to preſent all vice and immorality, 

as well as other crimes, that fall within your knowledge, 
becauſe they are expreſsly given you in charge. And this 
you are to do, not only when evidence 15 offered before 
you by the information of others, but with regard to all 
{uch offences as you, or any of you are able of your own 
© perſonal knowledge to preſent : all which you have ſworn 
to do impartially, without fear, favour, or affection.“ 
I leave it now with all reaſonable men to conſider, 

«0 how 


174 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part II. 


how few grand juries perform this? And conſequently, 
what multitudes of them, throughout the nation, fall 
under the guilt of wilful perjury ! 

8. The author proceeds, p. 8. * I ſhall next addreſs 
_ myſelf to you that are conſtables. And to you I muſt 
needs ſay, That if you know your duty, it is no thanks 
to us that are juſtices, For the oath we uſually give 
you is ſo ſhort, and in ſuch general terms, that it leaves 
with you no manner of inſtruction in the particulars of 
the office to which you are ſworn, But that which 
ought to be given you, recites part of your duty in the 
following words : 8 

* You ſhall do your beſt endeavour, that rogues, 

vagabonds, 'and night-walkers, be apprehended ; and that 
the ſtatutes made for their puniſhment, be duly put in 
execution : you ſhall have a watchful eye to ſuch as ſhall 
keep any houſe or place where any unlawful game 1s 
uſed: as alſo to fach as ſhall frequent ſuch places, or 
ſhall uſe any unlawful games, there or eHewhere, You 
ſhall preſent all and every the offences contrary to the 
ſtatutes made to reſtrain tipling in inns, alehouſes, and 
other victualling houſes, and for repreſſing of drunken- 
neſs, You ſhall once in the year, during your office, 
preſent all popiſh recuſants. You ſhall well and duly 
execute all precepts and warrants to you directed. And 
you ſhall well and duly, according to your knowledge, 
power, and ability, do and execute all other things be- 
longing to the office of a conſtable, ſo long as you ſhall 
continue therein.“ | 
Upon this, I would obſerve firſt, That actors of 
plays are expreſſed by name within the ſtatute, to be 
taken up for vagabonds, and puniſhed accordingly ; and 
that though a ſtatute of queen Elizabeth's excepts ſuch 
companies as have a licenſe under the hand and ſeal of a 
nobleman, yet a later ſtatute in the reign of king James 
I. has taken away that protection from them; by declar- 
ing, That from henceforth no authority to be given by, any 
peer of the realm, ſhall be available to free or diſcharge 
them from the pains and puniſhments of that former ſta- 
tute. Every conitable therefore in thoſe pariſhes, where 
any of thele ſtroling players come, is bound by his oath, 
to ſeize upon, corrett, and ſend them packing without 
delay.” 6 The 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 273 


“ The next part of your oath obliges 7 to an A 
watchful eye, on fuch houſes as keep, and ſuch perſons 
as uſe unlawful gaming. The ſtatute directs you weekly, 
or at leaſt monthly, to ſearch within your liberties, all 
houſes or places ſuſpected of this offence, and upon diſ- 
covering, to bring them to puniſhment. be e this ar- 
ticle, I would oblerve, 1. That the law makes ſome al- 
lowance for artificers, huſbandmen, apprentices, labour- 
ers and ſervants, to play in Chriſtmas, but at no other 
time of the year; and 2. That ſports and paſtimes what- 
ſoever are made unlawful upon the Lord's day, by a 
ſtatute of king Charles II. You are therefore bound 
upon oath, to bring to puniſhment {ſuch as are guilty 
of profaning that day by any ſports or paſtimes what- 
ſoever.“ 

The following parts of your oath are, 1. That you 
ſhall preſent all and every the offences of tipling 
and drunkenneſs that come to your knowledge ; 
2. That you ſhall once in the year preſent all poprſa 
recuſants, Nay, and by the ſtatutes on which your 
oath is grounded, you are obliged once a year to pre- 
ſent in feffion, all thoſe within your pariſhes, who (not 
being Diſſenters) come not once in a month, at leaſt, 
to Church. And g. That you ſhall well and duly 
execute all precepts and warrants to you directed. 1 
believe no conſtable will pretend to be ignorant of this. 
How 1s it then, that when we ſend out warrants, to 
levy on offenders for ſwearing, drunkenneſs, and the 
like, thoſe warrants are ſo ill obeyed? Are you not 
{worn to execute theſe as well as any other, and that 
duly too, according to the tenor of your precept ? 
Your precept tells you, you ſhall demand ſuch a ſum; 
and if the offender will not pay, you ſhall levy it by 
diſtreſs of his goods: and if no diſtreſs can be taken, 
you are then only to ſet him in the ftocks ; otherwile 
you have no authority ſo to do: nor is the ſetting him 
in the ſtocks, when you might have diſtrained, any 
execution of you precept.“ 

The laſt part of your oath is in genetal terms, 
That you ſhall well and duly, according to your know- 
ledge, power, and ability, do and execute all other 
things belonging to the office of a conſtable. I ſhall 

| Q 2 inſtance 


176 A raxTHER APPEAL, Part II. 

inſtance in. ſome things which certainly belong to your 
office, becauſe you, and none elſe, can do them. 1. A 
conſtable may, without x warrant, apprehend any per- 
ſons, and carry them before a Juſtice,. who are driving 
carts and horſes, or cattle on the Lord's day: 2. He 
may, do the fame, without a warrant, to ſuch as he 
may find at ſports or paſtimes on that day. g. To ſuch 
as he ſhall find tippling in the public houſes: 4. Shop- 
keepers ſelling or expoſing goods to ſale on the Lord's 
day; and laſtly, to ſuch as he ſhall find drunk or blaſ- 
pheming, or profanely ſwearing or curſing.” 

Thus I have ſhewn you, in part, what belongs to your 
office it is well, if according to the tenor of your oath, 
you duly to the beſt of your knowledge and ability, do and 
execute all theſe things, But remember, that, if you 
do not, if you neglect any of them, you are forſworn. 

Now let all men judge, how many conſtables in Eng- 
land are clear of wilful perjury ! 

9. I will now (he goes on) addreſs myſelf to 
church-wardens, Your oath is, That you ſhall well 
and truly execute the office of à church-warden, for 


the enſuing year; and to the beſt. of your ſkill and 


knowledge, preſent ſuch perſons and things, as are pre- 
ſentable, by the eccleſiaſtical laws of this realm.“ I 
ſhall ſet down only a few of theſe. | 

% The ſtatute of king James I. obliges you to pre. 
ſent:once a year, all monthly Abſenters from Church.“ 

„The goth Canon. enjoins you, firſt to admoniſh 
and then, if they reform not, to preſent all your pari- 
ſhioners who do not duly reſort to Church on Sun- 
days, and there continue the whole time of divine ſervice. 
On this Article obſerve, 1. That a perſon's being abſent 
from Church, is ground ſufficient for you to proceed. 
2. That you are not only to preſent, thoſe who do not 
come to Church, but alſo thole that behave irreverently 
or indecently there, either walking about or talking ; 
all who do not abide there orderly and. foberly, the whole 
time of Service and Sermon, and all that loiter away 
any part of that time in the church-yard or in the 
fields.” | 
„ The 112th Canon enjoins you, within 40 days 
after Eaſter, to exhibit to the Biſhop or ax (pon. 

8 ceuar, 


— nar ITE: >. 
o l wy 
a AK ad . - 


i — —„— 
4 


em 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 177 
cellor, the names of all above the age of ſixteen, with- 
in your pariſh that did not receive the Communion.” 

% Other ſtatutes oblige you to preſent drunkenneſs, 
tippling, and public houſes ſuffering perſons to tipple 
in them.“ | 

« And the 109th Canon binds you to preſent all 
manner of Vice, Profaneneſs and Debauchery, re- 
quiring you faithfully to preſent all and every the of- 
fenders in Adultery, Whoredom, Drunkenneſs, pro- 
fane Swearing, or any other Uncleanneſs and wicket 
neſs of life.“ It is therefore a part of that office to 
which you are ſolemnly ſworn, to prevent not only 
Drunkenneſs and Tippling, but profane Swearing, 
Lewdneſs, and whatſoever elſe is contrary to Chriſtian 
Piety, So that if you know any of your pariſhioners, 
be his quality or circumſtances what they will, that is 
guilty of any of theſe, you are obliged to preſent him 
at the next Viſitation, or you are yourſelves guilty of 
Perjury. And the 26th Canon expreſles ſuch an ab- 
horrence of a church-warden's negle& in this matter, 
that it forbids the Miniſter, in anywiſe, to admit you 
to the holy communion, who (as the words of the 
Canon are) having taken your oaths to preſent all ſuch 
offence in your ſeveral pariſhes, ſhall notwithſtanding your 
faid oath, either in neglecting or refuſing to preſent, wit- 
tingly and willingly, deſperately and irreligiouſly incur, 
the horrid guilt of perjury.” 

And who. is clear? I appeal to every Miniſter of a 
pariſh, from one end. of England to the other, How 
many church-wardens have you known, in twenty, 
thirty, forty years, who did not thus deſperately and 
irreg iouſly incur, the horried guilt of perjury ? 

10. I proceed. to perjuries of another kind, The 
Oath. taken by all Captains of ſhips, every time they 
return from a trading voyage, runs in theſe terms: 

* I do ſwear, that the entry above written, now 
tendered and ſubſcribed by me, is a juſt report of the 
name of my ſhip, its burthen, built, property, num- 
ber and country of mariners,. the preſent Maſter. and: 
voyage: and that it doth farther contain a true account 
of my lading, with the particular marks, numbers, 
quantity, quality and conſignment, of all the goods 

Q 3 and 


— ͤA— . 


ä—n]UNT—ñ ———— ꝑꝗ́ —ęZA·— — ...a—_*— 
- 


18 A rARTuE R APPEAL, Part II. 
and merchandizes in my ſaid ſhip, to the beſt of my 
knowledge; and that I have not broke bulk, or de- 
livered any goods out of my ſaid ſhip, ſince her loading 
in. 80 help me God.“ 
Theſe words are ſo clear, expreſs, and unambiguous, 

that they require no explanation. But who takes this 

lam oath without being knowingly and deliberately 
Een f Does one captain in fifty? Does one in 
five hundred? May we not go farther yet? Are 
there five captains of veſſels now in London, who have 
not at one time or another, by this very oath, which 
they knew to be falſe when they took it, incurred the 
guilt of wilful perjury ? 

11. The oath which all officers of his Majeſty's 
cuſtoms, take at their admiſſion into their office, runs 
thas : | 

« do ſwear to be true and faithful in the execution, 

to the beſt of my knowledge and power, of the truſt 
committed to my charge and inſpection, in the ſervice 
of his Majeſty's Cuſtoms: and that I will not take or 
receive, any reward or gratuity, directly or indirectly, 
other than my falary, or what is or ſhall be allowed 
me from the Crown, or the regular fees eſtabliſhed by 
law, for any ſervice done or to be done in the execution 


of my employment in the Cuſtoms, on any account 


whatſoever, So help me God.“ 

On this it may be oblerved, 1. That there are regular 
fees, eſtabliſhed by law, for ſome of theſe Officers ; 
2, That the reſt - hereby engage, not to take or re- 
ceiye any reward or gratuity, directly or indirectly, 
other than their ſalary or allowance from the Crown, 
on any account whatſoever, | 

How do the former keep this ſolemn engagement ? 
They whoſe fees are eſtabliſhed by law? Do they take 
thoſe eſtabliſhed fees and no more? Do they not re- 
ceive any farther gratuity? Not on any account what- 
foever? If they do they are undeniably guilty of 
wilful perjury. | 

And do the latter take no fees at all? Do they re- 
ceive no reward or gratuity, for any ſervice done, or 


to be done, in the execution of their e ae: F 


mp 
irectly, ap 


Do they not take any money, directly or i 
| any 


2 

= bs eos Y * *˖ 1 4 — 

* a as is " * = 2 
5 Wl - N * F <a. q 
2 * 1 * . ** 1 4 b . E * 1 — 
y L * 1 191 0 . . * . an E * 2 * 8 5 — 

x vi ap RY 26 3 Mo. 83 1 oh 8 * ve * 1 * 9 ws NOTES , oP r SE N * 5 . 
N | ok A . 5 2 F OR . a Per, ee c i; . 1 | o Sc at - ane? 
* \ 38 Go HS TORRE” > 26 n 82 re 3 r. ö . r 


uam nt 
a or tn be p FEY 2 4a - 
Nn 8 | 


7 1 K * ds OY 


e * 
tf. 
3 3 
4 + 
r 


* 
8 


W 7 "YO 
"Mad 


3 
L - S * 4 
le * » (gh 
44 | * "ys 
mas Uh Fi 


k 
a 


1 4 14.4 


” 4 „ B - 
> 96 7 St Foe To «4s 
% \. "x TR 
% » 
1 2 N 
8 


by 
1 * 4 * 1 ns . 

n ON FD 

Bag 5 * We F > 


= W 2 


Lac 


p jr ©$4Y 3 


, 
* « o 
* 3 n 
* f . *” 2 2 * 
mY £9 I» o p 
* = 


—— — —-—-—̃— 
2 22 E 
\ 
— 1 * 


4 
4 ao. * 
* 
5 V. 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 199: 
any account whatſoever? Every time they do receive 
either more or leſs, they alſo are flatly forſworn. — 

Vet who ſcruples either the one or the other? 
Either taking a larger fee than the law appoints? Op 
the taking any fee, large or ſmall, which is off 
even where the law appoints none at all? IF ty 

What innumerable Perjuries then are here committed, 
over and over, day by day! And without any re- 
morſe; without any ſhame! Without any fear either 
of God or Man! | 

12, I will produce but one inſtance more. The 


oath of one who votes for a Member of Parliament is 


this : 

&« do ſwear, I have not received or had, by my- 
ſelf, or of any perſon whatſoever in truſt for me, or 
for my uſe and benefit, directly or indirettly, any ſum 
or ſums of money, office, place or employment, gift 
or reward, or any promiſe or ſecurity for any money, 
office, employment or gift, in order to give my Vote 
at this Election, and that I have not before been polled 
at this Election. So help me God.” 

We may obſerve here, 1. That this Oath is taken, 


once in even years (if not oftner) by all the Free- 


holders, in every county throughout England and 

Wales, as well as all the Freemen in every City and 

Borough-Town; and 2, That hereby every Voter 

ſwears, in words liable to no evaſion, That he has not 

received, directly or indirectly, any gift or reward, or 
romiſe of any. 

But (to paſs over thoſe godleſs and fhameleſs wretches, 
who frequently vote twice at one Elettion) How few 
are there, who can take this Oath with a Conſcience 
void of offence? Who have not received, directly or 
indirectly any gift or promiſe of any? No! have net 
you? If you have received nothing elſe, have not 
you received meat or drink? and did you pay for 
the meat or drink you received? If not, that was a 
gift; and conſequently, you are as really perjured, as 
the man that has received a hundred pounds. 

What a melancholy proſpect is then before us! 
Here are almoſt all the common people of any ſub- 
Nance throughout the land, both in the city and 

| country 


| 
| 
| 


fincerity ? And is not that very appeal an acknow- 


laying your hand 7 the Goſpel, declare, That you 


this heavy curſe, by kiffing the Book? How then dare 


ing to whoſe minute Philoſophy, the particular. Pro- 
vidence of Cod is utterly exploded, the hair of our 


280 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part II. 
country, calling God to record, to known, wilful falſe. 
hoods ! / ITE" | = 

1g. I ſhall conclude this head in the weighty words 
of the Author before cited. ogy 

% Moſt of theſe, I am afraid, look upon their Oaths 
as things of courſe, and little to be regarded, But can 
there be any thing in the world more ſacred than an 
Oath? Is it not a ſolemn Appeal to God for your 


ledgement, that he will ſurely, puniſh falſchood ? Nay 
farther, is it not a calling down the vengeance of God 
upon yourſelves if you are falſe? Do you not, by 


hope for no Salvation by Chrift, if you perform not what 
you then promiſe, or, if what you then affirm, is not 
true? And do not the words, So help me God, ſuffici- 
ently prove, that the intention of your oath is ſo? 
And that if you {wear falſe, you are to expect no mercy 
from God, either in this world or the next? And do 
you not perſonally and expreſsly give your conſent to 


any of you to venture to play with ſo awful an en- 
gagement? Is it that you think the oath of a Grand 
Jury- man, or Pariſh-Officer, (of a Captain, an Officer 
of the Cuſtoms, or a Voter in Elections) © is not as 
acred and binding as that of an Evidence at the Bar ? 
What is it can make the difference? Both of them 
are equally Appeals to God, and Imprecations of his. 
Vengeance upon wilful Perjury.” | 

14. If there be then a God that is not mocked, what 
a weight of ſin lies on this nation? And fin of no 
common dye ; for Perjury has always been. accounted 
one of the deepeſt ſtain, And how will any one at- 
tempt to excuſe this? By adding Blaſphemy thereto.? 
So indeed ſome have done; ſaying, like thoſe of old, 
Tuſh, thou God careſt not for it. The Lord ſeeth Ci. e. 
regardeth us not. The Lord hath forſaken the earth. 
He hath left ſecond cauſes to take their courſe, and man 
in the hand of his own counſel. 

How many are they who now ſpeak. thus; accord- 


heads 


r * 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 181 


heads are no longer numbered: and not only a fparrow, 
but a city, an empire, may fall to the ground, without 
the will or care of our heavenly Father, You allow then 
only a general Providence, I do not underſtand the 
term. Be ſo kind as to let me know, what you mean 
by a © General Providence, contradiſtinguiſhed from a 
particular one?” 1 doubt you are at a loſs for an 
anſwer ; unleſs you mean ſome huge, unwelldy thing, 
(1 ſuppoſe reſembling the Primum Mobile in the Ptole« 
maick Syſtem) which continually whirls the whole 
Univerſe round, without affecting one thing more than 
another, I doubt this Hypotheſis will demand more 
proof, than you are at preſent able to produce; beſide 
that it is attended with a thouſand difcultics, ſuch as 
you cannot readily ſolve. It may be therefore your 
wiſeſt way for once to think with the vulgar, to ac- 
quieſce in the plain, ſcriptural account. This informs 
us, that although God dwelleth in heaven, yet he {till 
ruleth over all : That his Providence extends to every 
individual in the whole ſyſtem of Beings which he 
hath made: that all natural Caules of every kind, de- 
pend wholly upon his will; and he increaſes, leſſens, 
luſpends or deſtroys their efficacy, according to his own 
good pleaſure: that he uſes preternatural Cauſes at his 


will, the miniſtry of good or of evil Angels: and that 


he hath never yet precluded himſelf from exerting his 
own immediate power, from ſpeaking: life or death into 
any of his creatures : from looking a world into being, 
or into nothing. 

4 Thinkeſt thou then, O man, that thou ſhalt eſcape 
the judgment of this great God?” O no longer 
© treaſure up unto thyſelf wrath, againſt the day of 
wrath!” Thou canſt not recal what is paſt ; but now 
keep thyſelf pure, even were it at the price of all that 
thou haſt ; and acknowledge the goodneſs of God, in 
that he did not long ſince cut thee off, and ſend thee 
to thy own place. | 

15. The Jews of old were charged by God, with 
profaning his Sabbaths alſo. And do we Chriſtians 
come behind them herein? (1 ſpeak of thoſe wha 
acknowledge the obligation.) Do we * call the ſabbath 


2 Delight, the holy ot the Lord, honourable? Not do- 


ing 


182 A rARTER APPEAL, Part II. 


ing our own ways, not finding our own pleaſure, nor 
ſpeaking our own words?” Do our © men-ſervants and 
maid-ſervants reſt” thereon? And the “ ſtranger that 
is within our gates?” Is no buſineſs, but what is 
really neceſſary, done within our houſe? You know 
in your own conſcience, and God knoweth, that the 
very reverſe of this is true. | 
But fetting aſide theſe things which are done as it 
were by ſtealth, whether by mean or honourable men ; 
how many are they, in every city, as well as in this, 
who profane the Sabbath with a high hand? How 
many in this, that openly defy both God and the King, 
that break the laws both divine and human, by work- 
ing at their trade, delivering their goods, receiving their 
pay, or following their ordinary buſineſs, in one branch 
or another, and wiping their mouth and ſaying, 1 do 
no evil? How many buy and fell on the Day of the 
Lord, even in the open ſtreets of this city? How 
many open or (with ſome modeſty) half open their 
ſhops? And when they have not the pretence of 
periſhable goods ; without any pretence at all, money 
15 their god, and gain their godlinels, But what 
are all theſe droves in the ſkirts of the town, that well 
nigh cover the face of the earth ? Till they drop one 
after another into the numerous receptacles prepared 
for them in every corner. What are theſe to gain 
by profaning the Day of the Lord? Nothing at all. 
They drink in iniquity like water. Nay many of them 
pay for their fin; perhaps great part of what ſhould 
ſuſtain their family the enſuing week. I know not 
what is finding our own pleaſure, or doing our own ways, 
if this is not. What then ſhall we plead in your ex- 
cuſe? That Many others do it as well as you?” 
Nay number is ſo far from extenuating your fault, that 
it aggravates it above meaſure. For this is open war 
againſt God. A whole army of you join together, 
and with one conſent, in the face of the Sun, run up- 
on the thick boſſes of his buckler. 
16. It is once mentioned in the Prophets, In thee 
( Jeruſalem) they have ſet light by father and mother.” 
But frequent mention is made of their ſetting light by 
their civil parents, of their murmurings and rebellings 
agaznſt 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion.“ 18g 


againſt their governors. Yet ſurely our boaſting againſt 
them is excluded, even in this reſpeft. For do not all 
our hiſtories witneſs ſuch a ſeries of mutinies, ſeditions, 
factions and rebellions, as are ſcarce to be paralleled in 
any other kingdom, ſince the world ed And has 
not the wild, turbulent, ungovernable ſpirit of our 
countrymen, been continually acknowledged and la- 
mented, (as abundance of their writings teſtify to this 
day) by the cool, rational part of the nation? Ter- 
rible effects whereof bave been ſeen and felt, more or 
' lefs, in every generation. 

But did this ſpirit exiſt only in times paſt ? Bleſſed 
be God, it is now reſtrained it does not break out ;* 
but the traces thereof are {till eaſy to be found. For 
whence ſprings this continual ſpeaking evil of dignitzes ? 
Of all whe are at the helm of public affairs? Whence . 
this ſpeaking evil of the ruler of our people, fo common 
among all orders of men? I do not include thoſe 
whoſe province it is to inſpect all the public adminiſtera- 
tions. But 1s not almoſt every private Gentleman in 
the land, every Clergyman, every Tradeſman; yea 
every Man or Woman that has a Tongue, a Politician, 
a Setler of the State? Is not every Carman and 
Porter abundantly more knowing than the King, Lords 
and Commons together? Able to tell you all their 
foibles, to point out their faults and miſtakes, and how 
they ought to proceed, if they will fave the nation? 
Now all this has a natural, undeniable tendency to 
mutiny and rebellion, O what need have we above 
any nation. on earth, of his continual care and pro- 
tection, who alone is able to rule the raging of the ſea, 
and ftill the madneſs of the people ! | 

17. But to proceed. Were there © drunkards in 
Ephraim, mighty to drink wine, men of {ſtrength to 
mingle ſtrong drink?“ And are there not in England ? 
Are they not the growth of every county, city and 
town therein? Theſe do not indeed, or not often 
« rife up early, that they may follow ſtrong drink ;” 
and fo “ continue till night, till wine inflame them,” 
They have found a readier way! namely, to begin at 
night, and continue following their wine or ſtrong 


N. B. This was wrote a year ago. 


drink 


184 A rAATEEN APPEAL, Part 11. 


drink till the morning: And what numbers are there 
of theſe throughout the land? Loſt to Reafon and 
Humanity, as well as to Religion: ſo that no wonder 
© they regard not the work of the Lord, neither con- 
ſider the operation of his hands.“ 

Nor indeed have our drunkards need to continue 
from morning to night, until wine inflame them: ſee- 


ing they have found a far more compendious method 


of caſting aſide all ſenſe and reaſon, and diſencum- 
bering themſelves from all remains, either of Con- 
{ſcience or Underſtanding. So that whatever work of 
darkneſs is ſpeedily to be done, and that without any 
danger of being mterrupted, either by Fear, Com- 
8 or Remorſe, they may be in a few moments, 
by one draught as effectually qualified for it, as if they 
could {wallow a legion of devils. Or, (if that be all 
their concern) they may at a moderate expence, deſtroy 
their own body as well as foul, and plunge through 


this liquid fire, into that “' prepared for the devil and 


his angels.“ 

Friend! Stop! you have the form of a man ſtill. 
And perhaps ſome remains of underſtanding. O may 
the merciful God lay hold of that! Unto him all 
things are poſſible. Think a little for once. What 
is it you are doing? Why ſhould you deſtroy your- 
felf? I could not uſe the worſt enemy I have in the 
world, as you uſe yourſelf, Why ſhould you murder 
yourſelf inch by inch? Why ſhould you burn your- 
ſelf alive? O {pare your own body at leaſt, if you 
have no pity for your ſoul! But have you a foul then? 
Do you really believe it? What, a ſoul that muſt 
live for ever! O ſpare thy foul! Do not deſtroy thy 
own ſoul with an everlaſting deſtruction! It was made 
for God, Do not give it into the hands of that old 
murderer of men! Thou canſt not ſtupify it long. 
When at leaves the body, it will awake and ſleep no 
more. Yet a little while, and it launches out into the 
great deep, to live and think, and feel for ever. And 
what will cheer thy ſpirit there, if thou haſt not“ a 
drop of water to cool thy tongue? But the dye is 
not yet caſt, Now cry to God, „and iniquity ſhall 
not be thy ruin,” 

18, Of 


r — 
„** _ — 


* ing ere y 6 * x" —_—— 
_, 1 2 . * * W & 
Iz” S's +1 
* 2 * 
* 


Gr 4 

2 * * oc . | 
3 4 * 1 - » U 1 * d ” 
e 


"re = E 


ö 
* 
1 
N 
7 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion, 183 


18. Of old time there were alſo thoſe that were at 
eaſe in Zion, that lay upon beds of ivory, and ſtretched 
themſelves upon their couches, that eat the lambs out of the 
flock, and calues out of the 1 But how inelegant 
were theſe ancient Epicures! Lambs out of the flock, 
and calves out of the fl Were theſe the beſt dainties 
they could procure? How have we improved, ſince 
Jeroboam's time? Who can number the varieties of 
our tables; or the arts we have *© To enlarge the plea- 
ſure of taſting ?” And what are their couches, or 
beds of ivory, to the furniture of our apartments ? 
Or their chains and bracelets, and mantles, and changeable 
ſuits of apparel, to the ornaments of our eng ? 
What compariſon is there between their diverſions and 
ours? Look at Solomon in all his glory : and yet may 
we not queſtion, whether he was not an utter ſtranger 
to the pleaſures of the Chaſe? And notwithſtanding 
his 40,000 horſes, did he ever ſee a Race in his life ? 
He made gardens and orchards, and pools of water ; 
he planted vineyards and built houſes. But had he one 
theatre among them all? No. This is the glory of 
later times. Or had he any conception of a Ball, an 
Aſſembly, a Maſquerade, or a Ridotto? And who 
imagines that all his inſtruments of muſic put together, 
were any more to be compared to ours, than his or his 
father's rumbling Hebrew verſes, 


* To the ſoft Sing-ſong of Italian lays.” 


In all theſe points our pre-eminence over the Jews, is 
much every way! | 

Vea, and over our own anceſtors as well as theirs. 
But 1s this our glory or our ſhame? Were Edward 
the IIId, or Henry the Vth to come among us now, 
what would they think of the change in their people ? 
Would they applaud the elegant variety at the Old 
Baron's table ? or the coſtly delicacy of his furniture 
and apparel ? Would they liſten to theſe inſtruments 
of muſic ? Or find pleaſure in thoſe diverſions ? 
Would they rejoice to Ee the Nobles and Gentry of 
the land, lying at eaſe, ſtretching themſelves on beds 
of down ? Too delicate to uſe their own limbs, even 
in the ſtreets of the city: to bear the touch of the 

Gigs R people, 


* 


186 A ranT EN APPEAL, Part II. 


people, the blowing of the wind, or the ſhining of 
the fun! O how would their hearts burn within 
them! What indignation, ſorrow, ſhame, muſt they 
feel, to ſee the ancient hardineſs loſt, the Britiſh tem- 
perance, ar. and ſcorn of ſuperfluities, the rough, 
indefatigable induſtry, exchanged for ſoftneſs, idleneſs, 
and fulneſs of bread ! Well for them, that they were 
esel unto their fathers, before this exchange was 
made | 
19. To prove at large, That the luxury and ſenſu- 
ality, the ſloth and indolence, the ſoftneſs and idleneſs, 
the effeminacy and falſe delicacy of our nation are with- 
out a parallel. would but be loſt labour, I fear we 
may ſay, the lewdneſs too; for if the Jews, as the Pro- 
phet ſpeaks, ** aſſembled themſelves y troops in the 
| can he houſes,“ ſo do the Engliſh, and much more abun- 
dantly. Indeed, where is male chaſtity to be found? 
Among the Nobility? Among the Gentry ? Among 
the Tradeſmen ? or among the common people of Eng- 
land? How few lay any claim to it at all? How few 
deſire ſo much as the reputation of it? Would you 
yourlelf account it an honour or a reproach to be 
ranked among thoſe of whom it is ſaid, ** Theſe are they 
which were not defiled with women; for they are vir- 
gins?” And how numerous are they now, even among 
tuch as are accounted men of honour. and probity, 
« who are as fed horſes, every one neighing after his 
neighbour's wife? U 301 | 
But, as if this were not enough, is not the ſin of 
Sodom too, more commen among us than ever it was 
in Jeruſalem? Are not our ſtreets beſet with thoſe 
monſters of uncleanneſs, who * burn in their Iuſt one 
toward another,” whom God hath * given up to a re- 
robate mind, to do thoſe things which are not conve- 
ment ?” O Lord, thy compaſſions fail not: therefore 
we are not conſumed, Kg | 
20. Neither do we yield to them in injuſtice any more 
than in wncleanneſs. How frequent are open robberies 
among us? Is not the act of violence even in our 
ſtreets? And what laws are ſufficient to prevent it? 
Does not 4eft of various kinds abound in all parts of 
the land, even though death be the puniſhment of it ? 


And 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 187 
And are there not among us, who * take uſury and in- 
creaſe,” who © greedily gain of their neighbour by ex- 
tortion ? Yea, whole trades which ſubſiſt by ſuch ex- 
tortion, as was not named either among the Jews or Hea- 
thens 7 *© Is there not yet the ſcant meaſure, the 
wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful weights P“ 
Beſide the thouſand nameleſs ways of over-reaching and 
defrauding, the craft and myſtery of every trade and ; 
profeſſion. It were an endleſs taſk to deſcend to porii- 
culars, to point out in every circumſtance, how not 
only ſharpers and gameſters, {thoſe public nuiſances, 
thoſe ſcandals to the Engliſh nation) but high and low, 
rich and poor, men of character and men of note, in 
every ſtation of public or private life, have corrupted 
i themſelves, and generally applaud themſelves and count 
| it policy and wiſdom ſo to do: ſo that if gain be at 
| hand, they care not, though zuftice ſtand afar of : fo 
| that he © which departeth from evil,” which cometh. 
not into their ſecret, ſtill “ maketh himſelf a prey; 
and “ the wicked {till devoureth the man that is more 
righteous than he,” Ft | | 
And what redreſs? Suppoſe a great man to oppreſs 
the needy? Suppoſe the rich grinds the face of the 
oor : what remedy againſt ſuch oppreſſion can he find 
in this Chriſtian country ? If the one is rich and the 
other poor, doth not juſtice ſtand afar off? And is 
not the poor under the utmoſt improbability, (if not 
impoſſibility) of obtaining it ? Perhaps the hazard is 
greater among us, than either among Jews, Turks, or 
Heathens. | | 
For Example. Suppoſe a great man, with or with- 
out form of law, does wrong to his poor neighhour. 
What will he do? Sue his Lordſhip at common law? 
Have the cauſe tried at the next Seſſions or Aſſizes ? 
Alas! your own neighbours, thoſe who know the 
Whole caſe, will tell you, + You are out of your 
ſenſes.” © But twelve good men and true will do me 
Juſtice.” Very well: but where will you find them: 
men unbiaſſed, incapable of corruption, ſuperior both 
to fear and favour, to every view whether of gain or 
loſs? But this is not all; they muſt not only be good 
and true, but wiſe and underſtanding men, Elſe how 
R 2 caly 


A FARTHER APPEAL, Part II. 


wy is it for a, ſkilful pleader to throw, a. miſt before 
eir eyes ? 1 ſu Tuppoſing too the judge to be quite 
impartial, and p againſt all corruption. And 
ſhould all theſe be Rode ont concur, (of which I fear 
there are not many precedents) ſuppoſing a verdift is 
given in your favour, ſtill you have gained nothing. 
The ſuit is removed into a higher Court, and you have 
all your work to begin again. Here you have to 
ſtruggle with all the fame difficulties as before, aud 
perhaps many new ones too. However, if you have 
money enough, you may ſucceed : but if that fails, 
your cauſe is gone. Without money, you can have 
no more law; poverty alone utterly ſhuts out juſtice. 

But, * cannot an honeſt Attorney procure me juſ- 
tice?” An honeſt Attorney! Where will you find 
one ? Of thole who are called exceeding A Attor- 
nies, Who is there that makes any ſcruple, | 

1. To promote and encourage needleſs ſuits, if not 
unjuſt ones too? _ | 

2. To defend a bad Cauſe, knowing it ſo to be :. 

By making a Demur, and then withdrawing it : 

By pleading ſome falle Plea, to the Plaintiff's Decla- 
ration: 

By putting an evaſive Anſwer to his Bill : 

By 0 the Suit, if poſſible, till the plaintiff 
is ruined: 

To carry a Cauſe not amounting to ten ſhillings 
into Weſtminſter-Hall, by layiug it in his Declaration 
as above forty : 

4. To delay his own Client's Syit knowingly and 
wilfully, in order to gain thereby: 

. To draw himſelf the Pleadings or Conveyances 
of his Client, inſtead of giving them to be drawn. by 
able Counſel. 

6. To charge his Client with the Fees which ſhould 
have been given to ſuch Counſel, although they were 
not given : 

J. To charge for drawing fair Copies, where none 
were drawn : 

8. To charge Fees for expedition given to Clerks, 


when not one farthing has been given them 
9. To 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 189 


9. To fend his Clerk a journey (longer or ſhorter,) 
to do buſineſs with or for different perſons ; and to 
charge the horſe-hire and expence of that journey to 
every perſon ſeverally : 

10. To ſend his Clerk to Weſtminſter, on the bu- 
ſineſs of ten (it may be) or twenty perſons, and to charge 
each of thoſe twenty for his attendance, as if he had 
been fent on account of one only : 

11. To charge his own Attendance in like manner : 
And, { 
12, To fill up his Bill with Attendances, Fees, and 
Term-fees, though his Client is no whit forwarder in 
his cauſe. | 

This is he that is called an honeſt Attorney ! How 
much honeſter is a pick-pocket ? 

But there is a Magiſtrate whoſe peculiar office it is, 
to redreſs the injured and oppreſſed. Go then, and 
make trial of this remedy ; go, and tell your caſe to 
the Lord Chancellor. Hold; you muſt go on regu» 
larly : you muſt tell him your caſe, in form of law, 
or not at all. You mult therefore file a Bill in Chan- 
cery, and retain a Lawyer belonging to that Court, 
« But you have already ſpent all you have ; you have 
no money.“ Then I fear you will have no juſtice, 
You ſtumble at the threſhold. If you have either loſt. 
or ſpent all, your Cauſe is naught : it will not even 
come to a hearing. So, if the oppreſſor has ſecured 
all that you had, he is as ſafe as if you was under the 
earth. | 
21. Now what an amazing thing is this! The ver 
N of the villainy makes it beyond redreſs But 

ppoſe he that is oppreſt, has ſome ſubſtance left, and 
can go through all the Courts of Juſtice, what parallel 
can we find among Jews, Turks, or Heathens, for 
either the delays: or the expences attending it? With 
regard to the former, how monſtrous is it, that in a ſuit 
relating to that inheritance, which is to furniſh you and 
your family with food and raiment, you muſt wait 
month after-month, perhaps year after year, before it is 
determined, whether it be yours or not? And what 
are you to eat, or to wear in the mean time 7 Of that 
the Court takes no cognizance! Is not this very delay, 

err R 3 ſuppoſe 


. 


mo A raxtutr APPEAL, Part II. 
(ſuppoſe there were no other grievance attending the 
Engliſh courſe of law) wrong beyond all expreſſion ? 
Contrary to all Senſe, Reaſon, Juſtice, and Equity ? 
A capital Cauſe is tried in one day; and finally decided 
at once. And, is the life leſs than meat? Or the 
body of leſs concern than raiment ? What a ſhame- 
ful mockery of Juſtice then, is this putting off Pe- 
/ _—_ Cauſes from Term to Term, yea, from Year to 

car | 

With regard to the latter. A man has wronged 
me of a' hundred pounds, I appeal to a Judge for 
the recovery of it. How aſtoniſhing is it, that this 
Judge himſelf cannot give me what is my right, and 
what evidently appears ſo to be, unleſs I firſt give, per- 
haps one half of the ſum, to men I never ſaw before in 
my life ! ph 155 

22, I have hitherto ſuppoſed, that all Cauſes when 
they are decided, are decided according to juſtice and 
equity. But is it fo? Ye Learned in the Law, is no 
unjuſt ſentence given in your Courts? Have not the 
ſame Cauſes been decided quite oppoſite ways? One 
© way, this Term, juſt the contrary, the next? Perhaps 
one way in the morning (this I remember an inſtance 
of) and another way in the afternoon : How is this ? 
Is there no Juſtice left on earth ? No regard for right 
or wrong? Or have Cauſes been -puzzled fo long, 
that you know not now what is either wrong or right? 
What is agreeable to law or contrary to it? I have 
heard ſome of you frankly declare, that it is in many 
cales next to impoſſible to know, what is law, and 
what is not. So are your Folios of Law multiplied 
upon you, that no human brain is able to contain 
them: no; nor any conſiſtent Scheme, or Abſt ract of 
them all. | | 1 13 n 9, 
; But is it really owmg to ignorance of the Law, (this 
is the moſt fayourable ſuppoſition) that fo few of you 
{cruple taking Fees on either fide, of almoſt any Cauſe 
that can be conceived ? And that you generally plead 
in the manner you do on any ſide of any Cauſe ? 
Rambling to and fro, in a way ſo abhorrent from 
common ſenſe, and ſo utterly - foreigi to the: queſtion ? 

1 have been amazed at hearing the pleadings of ſome 

| | | Eminent 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 291 
eminent Counſel : and when it has fallen out that the 
Pleader on the other fide underſtood only the common 
Rules of Logic, he has made thoſe eminent men appear, 
either ſuch egregious knaves, if they could help it, or 
ſuch egregious block heads, if they could not, that one 
would have believed, they would ſhew their face 
there no - par au: time, * _ be a God that 
1 th righteouſly, what horrid inſults upon him are 
d « Shall Tot viſit for theſe 8 ſaith the 
Lord? Shall not my foul be avenged on ſuch a nation 
as this? 

There is one inſtance more of (I know not what to 
term it) injuſtice, oppreſſion, ſacrilege, which hath long 
cried aloud in the ears of God. For among men who 
doth hear ? I mean the management of many of thoſe 
who are intruſted with our Public Charities. By the 
pious munificence of our forefathers, we have abun- 
dance of theſe, of various kinds. But is it not glar- 
angly true, (to touch only on a few generals) that the 
managers of many of them, either 1. Do not apply 
the benefattion to that uſe for which it was deſigned by 
the bene factor, or 2. Do not apply it with fuch care 
and -frugality, as in ſuch a cafe are indiſpenſibly re- 

uired ; Or 3. Do not apply the whole of the bene- 
faction to any charitable uſe at all; but ſecrete part 
thereof, from time to time, for the uſe of themſelves 
and their families. Or, laſtly, by plain, barefaced op- 

reſſion, exclude thoſe from having any part in ſuch 
— who dare (though with all poſſible tender- 
neſs and reſpett) ſet before them the things that they 
have done: — 1 | 


Vet Brutus is an honourable man: | 
Ss are they all: all honourable men!“ 


And ſome of them, had in eſteem for religion; ac- 
counted patterns both of honeſty and piety! But God 
eth not as man feeth.. He fhall repay them to their 
face. Perhaps, even in the preſent world. For that 
{cripture is often ſtill ſul filled, „This is the curſe that 
goeth forth over the face of the whole earth.” I will 
bring it forth, ſaith the Lord of Hoſts, and it ſnall 
atuct into the hauſe of the thick, (ach is he and no 
( 1637 e 300 Ill way 3h! To ; Naw! en 


ob 


192 A rAR TER APPEAL, Part II. 
better, in the eyes of God, no whit honeſter than 2 


highwayman) and it ſhall remain in the midſt of the 
houſe, and ſhall conſume it, with the timber thereof, 
and the ſtones thereof (555 ten 
224. And is not Truth, as well as Juſtice, fallen in 
our ſtreets ? For who fſpeaketh the truth from his heart f 
Who is there, that makes a conſcience of ſpeaking the 
thing as it is, whenever he ſpeaks at all? Who ſcru. 
ples the telling of officious lies? The varying from 
truth, in order to do good? How ſtrange dots that 
ſaying of the ancient Fathers ſound in modern ears, I 
would not tell a lie, no not to ſave the ſouls of the 
whole world.“ Yet is this ſtrictly agreeable to the 
word of God; to that of St. Paul in particular, if any 
ſay, Let us do evil that good may come, their dam= 
nation is juſt,” ' © „AN, in G's 
But how many of us do this evil, without ever con- 
ſidering whether good will come or no? Speaki 
what we do not mean, merely out of cuſtom, — 
it is faſhionable ſo to do? What an immenſe quantity 
of falſchood does this ungodly faſhion occafion day by 
day ? For hath it not over-run every part of the na- 
tion? How is all our language ſwoln with compli- 
ment ? So that a well-bred perſon is not expected to 
ſpeak as he thinks: we do not look for it at his hands; 
nay, who would thank him for it? How few. would 
ſuffer it? It was ſaid of old, even by a Warrior and 
a King, He that telleth lies ſhall not tarry in my 
ſight: but are we not of another mind? Do not 
we rather ſay, He that telleth not lies ſhall not tarry 
in my fight ? ” Indeed the trial ſeldom comes; far 
both ſpeakers and hearegs are agreed, that Form and 
Ceremony, Flattery and Compliment, ſhould. take 
place, and Truth be baniſhed from all that know the 
world, ot mood: ai ben mod! de de bk 
And if the rich and great bave ſo ſmall regard for 
truth, as to lie even for lying-ſake, what wonder can it 
te that men of lower rank will do the fame thing or 
gain? What wonder that it ſhould obtain, as by com- 
mon conſent in all kinds of buying and ſelling ? ls it 
not an adjudged caſe, that it is no harm to tell hes in the 
way of Trade? Ty ſay, that is the loweſt price which 
is got the loweſt ; or that you will not take * 


wwe —  * 


Te Men of Reaſon and Religion. 193 
do take immediately ? Inſomuch that it is a proverh 
even among the Turks, when aſked to abate of they 
price, What do you take me to be a Chriſtian 7 
So that never was that caution more needful than it is 
at this day, © Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, 
and truſt ye not in any brother; for every brother will 
utterly ſupplant, and they will deceive every one. his 
neighbour.” r f 2 

25. And as for thoſe few who abſtain from outward 
ſins, is their heart right with God? May he not ſay 
to us alſo (as of the Jews) © This people is uncircum- 
ciſed in heart? Are not you? Do you then, © love 
the Lord your God, with all your heart, and with all 
your ſtrength?” Is he your God and your all? The 
deſire of your eyes? The joy of your very heart ? 
Rather, do you not ſet up your idols in your heart ? 
Is not your belly your god? Or your diverhons ? Or 
your fair reputation? Or your friend? Or wife? 
Or child? That is plainly, do not you delight in ſome 
of theſe earthly g more than in the God of hea- 
ven? Nay; perhaps you are one of thoſe grovelling 
ſouls that pant after the duſt of the earth! Indeed, 
who does not? Who does not get as much as he can? 
Who of thoſe that are not accounted covetous, yet does 
not gather all the money he can fairly, and perha 
much more? For are they thoſe only whom the world 
rank among miſers, that uſe every art to increaſe their 
fortune? Ioiling early and late, ſpending all their 
ſtrength in loading themſelves with thick clay ? How 
= Until the very hour when God calleth them; 
when he ſaith unto each of them, Thou fool ! this 
night ſhall thy ſoul be required of thee! And whoſe 
ſhall thoſe things be which thou haſt prepared?“ 

26. And yet doth not our Pride, even the pride of 
thoſe whole ſoul cleaves to the duit, teſtify againſt us ? 
Are they not wiſe in their own eyes, and prudent in 
their own conceit ? Have not writers of our own re- 
marked, That there is not upon earth a more ſelf- con- 
ceited nation than the Engliſh ; more opinionated both 
of their own national and perſonal wiſdom, and ftrength ? 
And indeed, if we may judge by the inhabitants of 
London, this is evident to a demonſtration : for, are 

5 N not 


294 A raxrturk APPEAL, Part II. 


not the very meaneſt of them able to inſtru both the 


King and all his Counſellors? What Cobler in Lon- 
don is not wiſer than the Principal Secretary of State ? 


What Coffee-houle diſputant is not an abler divine than 


his Grace of Canterbury? And how deep a contempt 


of others is joined with this high opinion of ourſelves? 
] know not whether the people of all other nations are 
greater maſters of diſſimulation; but there does not 


appear in any nation whatever, ſuch a proneneſs to de- 


ſpiſe their neighbour : to deſpiſe not only foreigners, 


(near two thouſand years ago they remarked, Britannos 
Hofpitibus feros ) but their own countrymen ; and that 
very often for ſuch ſurpriſing reaſons, as nothing but 
undeniable fact could make credible, How often does 
the gentleman in his coach deſpiſe thoſe dirty fellows 
that go on foot? And theſe, on the other hand, de- 
ſpiſe full as much thoſe lazy fellows that loll in their 


coaches ? No wonder then that thoſe who have the. 


Form of Godlineſs ſhould deſpiſe them that have not: 


that the faint of the world fo frequently ſays to the 
groſs finner, in effect, if not in terms, Stand by thy- 


ſelf z come not near unto me; for I am holier than 
thou! R | 


Vet what kind of holineſs is this? May not 
God juſtly declare of us alſo, This people draw near 
to me with their mouth, but they have removed their 
hearts far from me. They do but flatter me with their 


mouth, and difſemble with me in their tongue.” Is it 
not ſo with you? When you yt to God do your 
lips and your hearts go together? Do you not often 
utter words by which you mean juſt nothing? Do 
not you ſay and unſay ? Or, fay one thing to God, 


and another to man? For inſtance, you ſay to God, 


* Vouchlafe, O Lord to keep me this day without fin.” 
But you ſay to man, This cannot be done; it is all folly 
and madneſs to expect it. You aſk of God, That you 


% may perfectly love, and worthily magnify” his holy 


Name: But you tell man, There is no perfect Love 


upon earth; it is only a madman's dream. 'You pray 
God, to © cleanſe the thoughts of your heart, by the 
inſpiration of his Holy Spirit.” But you aſſure your 


neighbour, There is no ſuch thing as Inſpiration 5 


ä 


n * 
he * - 
_— Sie es . 
k 3 — 
—_— 1 


- N 74 hu * 4 %” 2 — 


_ n * r 
9 n pd bo > n Ra 


8 I a” 
. 
0 


ro IT 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 193 
and that none pretend to it but Enthuſiaſts, What 
groſs hy pocriſy is this! Surely you think there is no 
& knowledge in tlie Moſt High. O be not deceived, 
God is not mocked. But whatſoever ye ſow, that alſo 
ſhall ye reap!“ dee 9 | 

28. Such at preſent is the Religion of this Chriſtian 


nation! - So do we honour. Him by whoſe Name we 


are called! And yet was theie ever a nation more 
careleſs and ſecure? More unapprehenſive of the 
wrath of God! How can a man more effectually ex- 
pole himſelf to the ridicule of thoſe who are eſteemed 
men of underſtanding, than by ſhewing any concern, 
as if the judgments of God were hanging over our 
heads? -* Surely then, a deceived heat hath turned 
us aſide, that we caannot ſay, Is there not a lie in my 
right-hand ? Surely this our confidence is not of 
God : It is rather a judicial infatuation ; a ſtupid in- 
ſenſibility ; a deep ſleep, the forerunner of heavy ven- 
geance, | "ot 


« Ruin behind it ſtalks, an empty Deſolation.” 


Surely never was any people more fitted for deſtruc- 
tion! © Impudent children are they, and ſtiff-hearted, 
Are they aſhamed when they have committed abomina- 
tion ? When they have openly prophaned the day 
of the Lord? When they have committed lewdneſs ? 
Or when they have uttered ſuch curles and blaſphemies, 
as are not heard of among the heathens? Nay, © They 
are not at all aſhamed, neither can they bluſh,” And 
though God ſend unto them all his ſervants, rifing up 
early and ſending them, yet will they not hear; 
they harden their neck! They do worſe than their 
fathers.”* - . | | | + | 

What then can God “ do more for his Vineyard 
which he hath not done?“ He hath long tried us 
with mercies, © giving rain and fruitful ſeaſons, filling us 
with the flour of wheat.” We have had plenty of 
all things; and while War roared around, * Peace has 
been in all our borders.” But ſtill “ this revolting and 


* N. B. This was wrote 3 year ago, but 1 am afraid it js too 
true, even at this day, n a 


tebellious 


196 A rAATNER APPEAL, Part II. 
rebellious people ſay not, Let us now fear the Lord our 
God.“ ihe. they gave him no thanks for all his mer- 
cies; they did not even acknowledge them to be his 
gift. They did not ſee the hand of God in ariy of 
theſe things; they could account for them another way. 
O ye unwiſe, when will ye underſtand? Know ye 
not yet, there is a God that ruleth the world ? What 
did ye ſee with your eyes? Was the race to the ſwift, 
or the battle to the ſtrong ? Have ye forgotten Det- 
tingen already? Does not England know that God 
was there ? — Or ſuppoſe your_ continuance in peace, 
or ſucceſs in war, be the mere reſult of your own 
wiſdom and ſtrength; do ye command the ſun and 
he clouds alſo? Can ye pour out or ſtay the bottles 
of heaven? But let all be Nature, Chance, any 
thing——ſo God may have no hand in governing the 
earth ! | ah | | 
29. Will his judgments bring us to a better mind? 
Do we * hear the rod, and him that has appointed 
it ?”” Let us obſerve: What fruit do we find in thoſe 
who are even conſume> by means of his heavy 
hand? Let any that deſires to be clearly fatisfied 
herein, viſit the Hoſpitals of this City. Let him judge 
for himſelf, how the patients there receive God's fa- 
therly viſitation ; eſpecially there, becauſe mercy alſo 
is mixed with judgment; fo that it is evident that the 
Lord loveth whom he chaſteneth.“ Go into any ward, 
either of men or women, look narrowly from one end 
to the other: are they humbling themſelves under 2 
ſenſe of his anger? Are they praiſing him for his 
love? Are they exhorting one another not to faint 
when they are rebuked of him? How do nine in ten 
of them ſpend the time, that important time from morn- 
ing to evening? Why m ſuch a manner, that you 
would not eaſily learn, from thence, whether they were 

Chriſtians, Pagans, or Mahometans, 
© Is there any deeper diſtreſs than this to be found? 
Is there a greater affliction than the loſs of health“ 
Perhaps there is, the loſs of liberty, eſpecially as it is 
ſometimes circumſtanced. You may ealily be convinced 
of this, by going into either Ludgate or Newgatc. 
What a ſcene appears, as ſoon as you enter! Ihe very 
place 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 197 
place ſtrikes horror into your ſoul. How dark and 
dreary! How unhealthy and unclean! How void of 
all that might miniſter comfort! But this is little, 
compared to the circumſtances that attend the being 
confined in this ſhadow of death. See that 
wretch, who was formerly in want of nothing, and 
encompaſſed with friends and acquaintance, now cut 
off, perhaps by an unexpected ſtroke, from all the 
cheerful ways of men; ruined, forſaken of all, and 
delivered into the hands of ſuch maſters and ſuch com- 
panions! I know not, if to one of a thinking, ſen- 
ible turn of mind, there could be any thing like it on 
this fide hell. 5 

What eſſect then has this heavy viſitation of God, 
on thoſe who lie under it for any time? There 1s per- 
2 haps an exception here and there; but in general, they 
| are abandoned to all wickednels, utterly diveſted of all 
z fear of God, and all reverence to man: inſomuch, that 
| they commonly go out of that ſchool compleatly fitted 
| for any kind or degree of villainy, perfectly brutal and 
deviliſh, thoroughly furniſhed for every evil word and: 
| work, 
£ 30. Are your countrymen more eſſectually reclaimed 
when danger and diſtreſs are joined? If fo, the Army, 
eſpecially in time of war, muſt be the moſt religious 
part of the nation. But is it ſo indeed? Do the Sol- 
diery walk as thoſe who ſee themſelves on the brink of 
eternity? Redeeming every opportunity of glorifying 
God, and doing good to men, becauſe they know not 
the hour in which their Lord will require their ſouls 
of them? So far from it, that a ſoldier's religion is 2 
by-word, even with thoſe who have no religion at all!; 
that vice and prophanenels in every ſhape reign among 
them without control; and that the whole tenor of their 
behaviour ſpeaks, ** Let us eat and drink, for to- moi row 
we die.“ | 
Have thoſe who are expoſed to ſtill more danger, the 
Engliſh ſea- forces, more religion than thoſe at land ? 
It 1s faid they were once remarkable for this : and it 1s 
certain Sir Francis Drake feared God, as did moſt off 
his Commanders; and we have reaſon to believe, his 
mariners and ſailors too. But what ſhall we fay of the 
8 Navy 


_ 
CE CEL e ̃ͤ ! TO ee — 


thing, in ſome of the Prophets of this land alſo, even, 


198 A raxTueR APPEAL Part II. 
Navy. that now is, more particularly of the ſhips of 
war? Is religion there? Either the power or the 
form ? Is not almoſt every ſingle man of war a mere 
floating hell? Where is there to be found more con- 
ſummate wickedneſs, a more full, daring contempt of 
God, and all his laws, except in the bottomleſs pit ? 
But here deſcription fails: and the goedneſs of God 
endureth yet daily! But “ ſhall I not viſit for theſe 
things, faith the Lord? Shall not my ſoul be avenged 
on ſuch a nation as this? O that the proſpect of na- 
tional judgments may ſuffice! That we may remember 
ourlelves, and turn unto the Lord our God, before his 
long-ſuffering mercy is at an end, and he pours out the 
vials of his wrath upon us ! 

But how ſmall ground have we as yet to hope for 
this? For who will now ſuffer the word of exhortation ? 
How few will endure found doctrine, and the honeſt, 
cloſe application of it? Do they not “ ſay unto the 
ſeers, ſee not; and unto the prophets, prophely {mooth 
things?” And if a man will do thus, if he will “ ſew 

illows to all arm-holes, and cauſe the Holy One of 4 

ſrael to ceaſe from before them; if he will propheſy Ml 
of wine and ſtrong drink, he ſhall even be the prophet al 
of this people.” 

31. J am ſenſible how nice a ſubject this is, and how 
extremely diflicult it is to ſpeak, as neither to ſay too 
little nor too much, neither more nor leſs than the cauſe 
of God requires. I know allo, that it is abſolutely im- 
poſſible ſo to ſpeak as not to give offence. But who- 
{ocver is offended I dare not to be ſilent ; neither may I 
refrain from plainneſs of ſpeech : only I will endeavour 
to uſe all the tenderneſs I. can conſiſtently with that 
plainneſs. 2 

In tender love then, I aſk, Are there none among us 
(1 ipcak to you, my brethren, who are prieſts and pro- 
phets of the Lord, ſet apart to miniſter in holy things, 
and to declare the word of the Lord) are there none 
among us who commit lewdnels, as did thoſe by whom 


Tjfrael was defiled ? Hath not the Lord ſeen a horrible 


4 
7 
4 
* 
3 
”m 
% 


J C \ 

= 

E. 

E 
7 4 
L : l * 
ff 1 » 
8 *s 

CI 

_— 

by a 1 

— 


that they commit adultery, and (to conceal it) walk in 
lies? Cod forbid that I ſhould affirm this. I only 
E pPropoſe 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 199 


propoſe (not maintain) the queſtion, If there be ſuch 
awretch, I pray God to ſtrike him to the heart, and to 
lay, Thou art the man! I's 

Are there none of you like them, mighty to drink 
wine, men of ſtrength to mingle ſtrong drink? Yea, 
are there none that err through ſtrong drink, that are 
{wallowed up of wine?” Are there not found thoſe 
who fay, I will fetch wine, and we will 61! ourſelves 
with ſtrong drink : and to-morrow ſhall be as this day, 
and much more abundant ? ” 

Alas, my brother ! - Is this the voice of a Miniſter 
of Chriſt? A Steward of the myſteries of God ? Sup- 
poſe you find at any time trouble and heavinels, is there 
no help for you in your God Is not the God whom 
you ſerve able to deliver you from any plague or trou- 
ble? Is the being drunk with wine a vetter relief, 
than being filled with his Spirit? Do you not under- 
ſtand this? Do you not know the Lord? Take 
heed you do not deſtroy both your own ſoul and them 
that hear you ! O beware! If you know not his 
love, fear his power! Make haſte to flee from the 
wrath to come, leſt he {mite you with a curſe great as 
your fin, and {weep you away from the face of the 
earth, ; ts 

32. Can ſuch as you be ſaid to honour or fear Cod, 
any more than thoſe ſpoken of by Malach ? May 
not God complain, ** ihele prieſts have violated m 
law and prophaned my holy things? Yea, Whenſo- 
ever you preſume with thoſe unballowed hands, to 
touch the myſteries of God: Whenſoever you utter his 
name or his word with thoſe unhallowed lips! But is 
it on this account only that God may lay, Both prophet 
and prieſt are prophane ? May he not add, © They 
have put no difference between the holy and the pro- 
phane ; therefore I am prophaned among them,” For 
15 it not ſo? Do you put a difference between the holy 
and the prophane, him that feareth God, and him that 
feareth him not? Do you put an eſlectual difference 
between them, even in the molt folemn office of your 
religion? At the table of the Lord, do you take care 
to ſeparate the precious from the vile? To receive all 
thole who (as you may reaſonably believe) draw near 
8 2 with 


＋ꝙ— I a : = 
CO” —ů CO RG ꝗ q. — 
1 


200 AraxTHeEeR APPEAL, Part IT, 


with penitent hearts, and lively faith, and utterly to re- 
zett thole who teſtify againſt themſelves. that they are 
without hope and without God in the world ? 

Nay, who dares repel one of the great men in his 
pariſh from the Lord's table? Even though he be a 
drunkard or a common {wearer ?. Yea, though he 
openty deny the Lord that bought him ? Mr. Stone- 
Houſe did this once. But what was the event? The 

entleman brought an action againft him, for the terror 
of all ſuch inſolent fellows, in ſucceeding times. And 
who was able and willing to eſpouſe the cauſe? He 
alone who took it into his own hand: and before the 
day when it ſhould have heen tried here, called the 
plaintiff to anſwer at a higher bar, 

33. O my brethren, is it not for want of your mak- 
ing this difference, as well as for many other abomina- 
tions, that, with regard to ſome among us, (how ma 
God knoweth !) that ſcripture is now alſo fulfill 
« His watchmen are blind, they are ignorant, they are 
ſhepherds that cannot underſtand, — The Lord hath 

ured out upon them the ſpirit of deep fleep, and 
hath cloſed their eyes : the prophets and the ſeers hath 
he covered. And the vifion of all is become unto 
you as the words of a book that is ſealed, which men 
deliver to one that is learned, ſaying, Read this, I pray 
thee ; and he faith, I cannot; for it is ſealed.” 

If you aſk what thoſe other abominations are ? I will 
fpeak in love and in the ſpirit of meekneſs. There are 
found among us covetous men, men who mind earthly 
things, who ſeek themſelves and not Chrift crucified, 
who love the world, and the things of the world men in 
whom theſe words are {till fulfilled, * Who is there 
among you that would ſhut the doors for nought ? 
Neither do ye kindle fire on my altar for nought. I 
have no pleaſure in you, faith the Lord of Hoſts.” 
Yea, are there not thoſe at this day, (O that I might 
be found to fear where no fear is!) who © make them- 
ſelves fat with the chiefeſt of all the offerings of Iſrael ? ” 
Are there not thoſe, who now *© enlarge their defires as 
hell, who are as death and cannot be fſatished ?*” Who 
though they want neither food to eat nor raiment to 


put on, yet ſeek more and more preferment ? Who 
are 


1 
* * * 


| 
| 
| 
| 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 201 
are continually ſtudying to “ join houſe to ,houſe, and 
to lay field to field? To grow rich in the ſervice of 


that Maſter, who himſelf had not where to lay his 
head ?”” Is it not to theſe that thoſe dreadſul words 


belong, enough to cauſe the ears of him that heareth 
to tingle, They are greedy dogs which can never 


have enough ; they all look to their own way, (not the 
way of their Lord) every one for his gain, from his 
quarter.“ 

Is it ſtrange, if among theſe, there ſhould be ſome 
who are cruel, oppreſſive men? Inaſmuch as cove— 
touſneſs knows no mercy, nor can a lover ef money be 
a lover of his neighbour. Have not ſome been known 
even to grind the face of the poor? To ſtrip, rather 
than clothe the naked? Some, who while they cried 
out, as the horſe-leech, give, give, would take, if it was 
not given; like thoſe of old, who ſaid, © Thou ſhalt 
give it me now, and if not I will take it by force: 
Or thoſe ſpoken of by Micah, „The Prophets bite 
with their teeth, and cry peace: and he that putteth 
not into their mouths, they even declare war agaiunſt 
him.“ Very great is the lin of theſe men before the 
Lord. If there be ten ſuch now in the land, may God 
{mite them this day with terror and aſtoniſhment, that 
they may have no reſt in their bones till their fin is done 
away! 

34. Are you as watchful and zealous to gain ſouls, 
as thole are to gain the gold that periſheth ? Do you 
know, by experience, what that meaneth, “The 
zeal of thine houſe hath eaten me up? Or are you 
one of thoſe watchmen who do rot watch at all ?P 
Who neither know nor care when the {word cometh ? 
Of whom the prophet ſaith, ** They are dumb dogs 
that cannot bark, fleeping, lying down, loving. to 
ſlumber.” | | 

Can it be ſuppoſed, that ſuch ſhepherds will * feed 
the flock ?” Will © give to every one his portion of 
meat in due ſeaſon? Will thele warn every man, 
that they may preſent every man perfect in Chriſt 
Jelus??? Will they take care to know all their flock 
by name, not forgetting the men-lervants and the wo- 
men ſervants 7 Will they enquire into the ſtate of 


8 3 every 


12 


„ 


202 ArAAN THEN APPEAL, Part II. : 


every ſoul committed to their charge ? And watch 
over each with all tenderneſs and long-fuffering, as they 
that muſt give account? Marking how they either fall 
or riſe? How theſe wax weary and faint in their mind ; 
and thoſe grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our 
Lord and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt ? Who can do this, 
unleſs his whole heart be in the work ? Unleſs he de- 
fire nothing but to ſpend and be ſpent for them; and 
count not his life dear unto himſelf, ſo he may preſent them 
blameleſs in the day of the Lord Jeſus, 

Can any ſhepherd do this (and if he do it not, he 
will never give an account with joy) who imagines, he 
has little more to do, than to preach once or twice a 
week ? That this is the main point, the chief part of 
that office, which he hath taken upon himſelf before 
God? What grols ignorance is this? What a total 
miſtake of the truth? What a miſerable blunder 
touching the whole nature of his office? It is indeed 
a very great thing, to ſpeak in the name of God; it 
might make him that 1s the ſtouteſt of heart tremble, 
if he conſidered, that every time he ſpeaks to others, 
his own ſoul is at ſtake, But great, inexpreſſibly great 
as this is, it is perhaps the leaſt part of our work. To 
ſeek and to ſave that which is loſt,” to bring ſouls from 
Satan to God, to inſtruct the ignorant, to reclaim the 
wicked, to convince the gainſayer; to direct their feet 
mto the way of peace, and then keep them therein ; to 
follow them ſtep by ſtep, leſt they turn out of the way, 
and adviſe them in their doubts and temptations; to lift 
up them that fall, to refreſh them that are faint, and to 
comfort the weak-hearted ; to adminiſter various helps, 
as the variety of occaſions require, according to their 
ſeveral neceſſities. Theſe are parts of our office; all 
this we have undertaken at the peril of our own ſoul, 
A ſenſe of this made that holy man of old cry out, I 
marvel if any Ruler in the Church ſhall be faved : ” 
and a greater than him ſays, in the fulneſs of his heart, 
% Who is ſufficient for theſe things ?“ 

35. But who is not ſufficient for theſe things, for the 
taking care of a pariſh, though it contain twenty thou- 
fand ſouls, if this implies no more than the taking care 
to preach there, once or twice a week ; and to procure 

one 


% 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 20g 
one to read prayers on the other days, and do what is 
called the pariſh-duty ? Is any trade in the nation ſo | 
ealy as this ? Is not any man ſufficient for it, without | 
any more talents, either of nature or of grace, than a 
ſmall degree of common underſtanding ? But O! 
what manner of ſhepherds are thoſe, who look no far- 
| ther into the nature of their office, who fink no deeper | 
1 into the importance of it than this! Were they not 
| ſuch as theſe concerning whom the word of the Lord 

came unto Ezekiel, ſaying, ** Woe be to the Shepherds 
that do feed themſelves : ſhould not the ſhepherds feed 
the flock ? Ye cat the fat, and ye clothe you with the 
wool ; but ye feed not the flock. The diſeaſed have ye | 
not ſtrengthened, neither have ye healed that which 
Was ſick, neither have ye bound up that which was | 
broken, neither have ye brought again that which was 
driven away, neither have ye ſought that which was 
loſt. And they were ſcattered, becauſe there was no 
ſhepherd, and they became meat to all the beaſts of 
the field. Yea, my flock was ſcattered upon all the 
face of the earth, and none did ſearch or ſeek after them.” 

I conjure you, brethren, in the name of the Lord 
Jeſus, the great Shepherd of the ſheep, who hath bought 
them and us with his own blood, apply this each to his 
own ſoul. Let every man look unto God and ſay, 
Lord, 1s it 1? Am J one of- theſe idle, careleſs, in- 
dolent ſhepherds, that feed mylelf, not the flock? Am 
1 one that cannot bark, ſlothful, ſleeping, lying down, 
loving to {lumber ? One of thole who have not 
ſtrengthened that which was diſeaſed, neither healed 
that which was fick ? © Search me, O Lord, and 

rove me; try out my reins and my heart. Look well 
if there be any way of wickedneſs in me, and lead me 
in the way everlaſting ? ”? 

36. Have I not, at leaſt, healed the hurt of thy peo- 
ple ſlightly? Have I not ſaid, Peace, Peace, when there 
was no peace ?*—— How many are they alſo that do this ? 
Who do not {tudy to ſpeak. what is true, eſpecially to 
the rich and great, ſo much as what is pleaſing? Who 

flatter honourable finners, inſtead of telling them plain, 

6 How can ye eſcape the damnation of hell?” O 

What an account have you to make, if there be a God 
that 


—_— — e ne or 


204 A raxTHeR APPEAL, Part II. 


that judgeth the earth? Will he not require at your 
hands the blood of all theſe ſouls, of whom ye are the 


betrayers and murderers? Well ſpake the prophets of 


your fathers, in whoſe ſteps ye now tread, ** They 
have. ſeduced my people, and one built up a wall, 
and another daubed it with untempered mortar. They 
ſtrengthen the hands of the evil-doers, that none doth 
return from his wickedneſs. They prophely lies in my 


name, faith the Lord. They ſay unto them that deſpiſe 


me, ye ſhall have peace, and unto them that walk after 
the imagination of their own heart, no evil ſhall come 
upon you. AN 
How great will your damnation be, who deſtroy 
ſouls, inſtead of ſaving them? Where will you ap- 
ear, or how will you ſtand, in that great and terrible 
day of the Lord ! How will ye lift up your head, 
when “ the Lord ſhall deſcend from heaven in flaming 
fire, to take vengeance on his adverſaries !*” More el- 
pecially on thoſe who have ſo betrayed his cauſe, and 
done Satan's work under the banner of Chriſt! With 
what voice wilt thou ſay, * Behold me, Lord, and the 


theep whom thou hadſt given me, whom I gave to the 


Devil, and told them they were in the way to heaven, 
till they dropped into hell?“ 

Were they not juſt ſuch ſhepherds of ſouls as you 
are, concerning whom God ſpake by Jeremiah ? © Ma- 
ny paſtors have deſtroyed my vineyard, they have trod- 
den my portion under foot; they have made my plea- 
ſant portion, a deſolate wilderneſs:“ by Ezekiel,“ There 
is a conſpiracy of her prophets, like a roaring lion, ra- 
vening the prey, they have devoured fouls : * and by 
Z7.cchariah, ** Thus faith the Lord, feed the flock of the 
{laughter, whole poſſeſſors flay them, and hold them- 
ſelves not guilty ! and they that flay them ſay, Bleſſed 
be the Lord, for I am rich; and their own ſhepherds 
pity them not.” 

37. Is not this the real ground, the principal reaſon, 
of the preſent contempt of the Clergy? And long 
fince was it aſſigned as ſuch, by Him who cannot lie. 
The fame men of old, who made the Lord's people to 
tranſgrels, thereby made themſelves vile. They were 
deſpiſed both as the natural effect, and the judicial pu- 
nillment of their wickednels, And the ſame caule 

the 


* s . 
. 4 „ %o 
4 LS. 1 


— 
s N N — | F 
* 1 oY TORS , WY a 3 . * 9 me. 1 * 
* ha 4 : wap p 1 - TS” 
s «ot 1d A. 5 d Et 22 TELE LT * A an a T 
+ yy Fd I a * eee : 4 8 
* 5 2 2 a.” n : n 
— _ g £ 4 * e E b 2 X © #5 1 - 


* . nn 
8 kts W 


1 a *. Wy " k 1 4 
IX KY AS on St; OE e e 
r W Pre, N 


> L * *\4 2 
e 


1 as A 


8 


4 3-4, — 10 p ” — 1 
= * * E 3 22 L * 
* 3 A 8 * % wu 4 q - 2 
0000 


— — * 
RT ot e 
4 8 a 
— 834 * Jy a, 
\ g N * 2 * & 


2 1 v * —— 


FH 
l 
: * 
| 
1 
7 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion, 205 


the prophet obſerves to have produced the ſame effect, 
many hundred years after this. Ye are departed out of 
the way, faith the Lord: ye have cauſed many to ſtum- 
ble—Therefore have I alſo made you contemptible, and 
baſe before all the people.“ | 

I have now, brethren, delivered my own ſoul, and in 
ſo doing, I have (as I propoſed at firſt) uſed great plain- 
neſs of ſpeech, as not ſtudying to pleaſe men, but the 
Lord. Ihe event I leave to him in whoſe name I have 
ſpoken, and who hath the hearts of all men in his hand. 

I have brought you heavy tidmgs this day, and yet I 
cannot but be perſuaded, that ſome of you will not 
count me your Enemy, becaule I tell you the Truth. 
O that all of us may taſte the good word which we de- 
clare! May receive that knowledge of ſalvation, which 
we are commanded to preach unto every creature, thro? 
the remiſſion of fins! My heart's defire is, That all of 
us to whom is committed the miniſtry of reconciliation, 
may ourſelves be reconciled to God, through the Blood 
of the everlaſting Covenant : That he may be hence- 
forth unto us a God, and we may be unto him a poop'ey 
that we may all know as well as preach the Lord, from 
the leaſt unto the greateſt : even by that token, „I am 
merciful to thy unrighteouſneſs : thy fins 1 remember 
no more!“ 

III. 1. I have hitherto ſpoken more immediately to 
thoſe, who profels themſelves members of the Church 
of England. But inaſmuch as I am a debtor allo to 
thoſe who do not, my deſign is now to apply to them 
alſo ; and briefly to ſhew, wherein (1 fear) they are 
ſeverally inconſiſtent with their own principles. 

I begin with thoſe who are at the imalleſt diſtance 
from us, whether they are termed Preſbyterians or In- 
dependants. Of whom in general I cannot but have a 
widely different opinion, from that I entertained ſome 
years ago: as having ſince then converſed with many 
among them, in whom, the Root of the Matter is undeni- 
ably found : and who labour © to keep a conſcience void 
of offence both towards God and towards man,” 1 


cannot therefore doubt, but every ſerious man, of either 


one or the other denomination, does utterly condemn 


all that inward as well as outward unholinels, which has 
been above deſcribed, But 


206 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part II. 2 


But do you, as a people, avoid What you condemn ꝰ 

Are no Whoremongers or adulterers found among you 9 
No children diſobedient to their parents? No ſervants 
that are ſlothful or careleſs? That a» ſwer again? That 
do not honour their maſters as is meet in the Lord? Are 
there none among you that cenſure or ſpeak cuil of the 
Ruler of their people ? Are there. no Drunkards, no 
Gluttons, no luxurious men, no regular Epicures, none 
whoſe belly is their god, who, as their fortune permits, 
fare ſumptuouſly every day? Have you no difhoneſt 
dealers, no unfair Traders, no Uſurers, or Extortioners ? 
Have you no Liars, either for gain or for good man- 
ners, ſo called? Are you clear of Ceremony and Com- 
pliment? Alas, you are ſenſible, in moſt, if not in 
all theſe reſpects, you have but ſmall nee 
over us. 

How much more ſenſible muſt you be of this, if 
Gn do not reſt on the ſurface, but enquire into the 

ottom of Religion, the religion of the heart ? - For, 
what inward unholineſs, what evil tempers are among 
us, which have not a place among you alſo? You 
likewiſe bewail that ignorance of God, that want of 
faith and of the love of God and man, that inward 
idolatry of various kinds, that Pride, Ambition and Va- 
nity, which rule in the hearts even of thoſe who {till 
have the form of godlineſs. You lament before God, 
the deep covetoulneſs that rats fo many Jouls as doth a 
gangrene ; and perhaps are ſometimes ready to cry out, 
„ Help, Lord, for there is ſcarce one godly man left,” 
Lay to thine hand; “ for the faithful are miniſhed 
from the children of men ! ” 

2. And yet you, retain the truth that is after god!i. 

neſs, at leaſt, as to the ſubſtance of it. You own what 
is laid wn. in {cripture, both touching the nature and 
condition of Fuſftification and Salvation. And with re- 
gard to the Author of Faith and Salvation, you have al- 
ways avowed, even in the face of your enemies, That 
& it is God which worketh in us, both to will and to do, 
of his good pleaſure: That it is his Spirit alone who 
teacheth us all things, all we know of the deep things of 
God: That every true believer has an Unction from the 


Holy One to lead him into all neceſſary Truth : That 
6 becauic 


Py » hit, 
< a .& me « 0 
nf 8 5 7 7 n 2 ; 
W a 
* 22 E . ba _ 
ATSC A. * al ao S nn * ER. 2 


— 
* 


- 4 1 * 
— 
Nx ORE Cd 
Sun. © x 0 i * 


1 1 1 
1+ dra 


r 


. . . 1 
5 e 1 A 
ad * [4 

Net Ke * 


Een 
$3.4 1 a 2 PX 
33 


'Y 
9 
* 
8 
=» 
AY 
* 


ES, 
We 


e 


* * =y 
A, * 
. e a 
4 4 
* . 
* at 


Pal Log i od” 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 207 
«-becauſe we are ſons, God hath ſent forth the Spirit of 
his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father; and 
that this Spirit “ beareth witneſs with our ſpirit, that 
we are the children of God.” 2 11 

How 1s it then, my brethren, (ſo I cen call you now, 
although 4 could not have done it heretofore ;) how is 
it, that the generality of you alſo are fallen from your 
ſtedfaſtneſs? In the times of perſecution ye ſtood as a 
rock, though all the waves and ſtorms went over you. 
But who can bear eaſe and fulneſs of "bread! How are 
you changed, fince theſe came upon you! Do not 
many of you now (practically I mean) put ſomething 
elſe, in the room of Faith that worketh by love? Do 
not ſome of you ſuppole that gravity and compoſedneſs 
of behaviour, are the main parts of Chriſtianity? Ef- 
pecially, provided they neither ſwear nor take the Name 
of God in vain, Do not others imagine, that to ab- 


lain from idle ſongs, and thoſe faſhionable diverſions 


commonly uſed by perſons of their fortune, is almoſt 
the whole of religion? To which if they add family 
prayer, and a ſlrict obſervance of the Sabbath, then 
doubtleſs all is well! Nay, my brethren, this is well, 
lo far as it goes: hut how little a way does it go toward 
Chriſtianity ? All theſe things, you cannot but fee, are 
merely external; whereas Chriſtianity is an inward 
thing ; without which the moſt beautiful outward form 
is lighter than vanity, EO I 

Do not others of you reſt in Conviction? Or good 
Deſires? Alas what do theſe avail ? A man may be 
convinced he is ſick, yea deeply convinced, and yet 
never recover. He may deſire food, yea, with earneſt 
deſire, and nevertheleſs periſh with hunger. And thus 
I may be convinced I am a ſinner ; but this will not 
Juitify me -before God. And I may defire ſalvation 
(perhaps by fits and ſtarts for many years) and yet be 
loſt for ever. Come cloſe then to the point, and keep 
to your principles. Have you received the Holy Ghoſt ; 
the Spirit which is of God, and is beſtowed by him on 
all believers, “that we may know the things which re 
freely given to us of God? The time is ſhort. Do 
you experience now that Unction from the Holy One p 
Without which you confels outward religion, whether 

| | negative 


— Ä — i _ 
© Ce . — We _— - oct welt — —— — —— —— — 


gregations alſo: men that profane either the Name or 


then neither ought any who has them not, to continue, 


208 A raxTHER APPEAL, Part II. 


negative or poſitive, is nothing, Nay, and inward 
Conviction of our wants is nothing, unleſs thoſe wants 
are in fact ſupplied. Good deſires alſo are nothing, un- | 
leſs we actually attain what we are ſtirred up to deſire. 
For ſtill, if any man have not the Spirit of Chriſt, 
whatever he deſires, he is none of his. O my brother, 
beware you ſtop not ſhort ! Beware you never account 
yourſelf a Chriſtian, no not in the loweſt degree, till 
God “ hath ſent forth the Spirit of Chriſt into your 
heart,” and that Spirit bear witnels with your ſpirit, 
that you are a child of God.” | 

3. One ſtep farther from us, are you who are called 
(though not by your own choice) Anabaptiſts. The 
ſmallneſs of your number, compared to that either of 
the Preſbyterians, or thoſe of the Church, makes it 
eaſier for you to have an exact knowledge of the beha- 
viour of all your members, and to put away from among 
you every one that © walketh not according to the doc- 
trine you have received.” | 

But is this done? Do all your members adorn the 
golpel? Are they all © holy as he who hath called us 
is holy ?“ I fear not. I have known ſome inſtances 
to the contrary : and doubtleſs you know many more. 
There are unholy, outwardly unholy men in your con- 


the Day of the Lord ; that do not honour their natural 
or civil parents; that know not haw to poſleſs their bo- 
dies in ſanctifcation and honour ; that are mtemperate 
either in meat or drink, gluttonous, ſenſual, luxurious ; 
that variouſly offend againſt Juſtice, Mercy, or Truth, 
in their intercourſe with their neighbour, and do not 
walk by that royal Law, © Thou ſhalt love thy neigh- 
bour as thyſelf.!“ | 

But how 1s this conſiſtent with your leading princi- 
ples, that no men ought to be admitted to baptiſm, 
till he has repentance whereby we forſake fin, and 
living faith in God through Chriſt ? ”? 

For if no man ought to be admitted into a Church or 
Congregation, who has not attual Faith and repentance, 


in any congregation. And conlequently an open ſin- 
ner cannot remain among you, unleſs you practically 
renounce your main principle. I refer 


„ 


* 4 8 
. KKK „ 


— 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 209 


4. U refer it to your own ſerious conſideration, he- 
ther one reaſon, Why unholy men are ſtill ſuffered to 
remain among you, may not be this: that many of you 
have unawares put Opinion in the room of Faith and 


Repentance ? But how fatal a miſtake is this ? Sup- 


poſing your opinion to be true, yet a true opinion con- 
cerning repentance is wholly different from the thing 
itſelf, And you may all your life have a true opinion 
concerning faith, and yet die an unbeliever. 

Suppoſing then the 1 of Particular Redemp- 
tion true, yet how little does it avail towards ſalvation ? 
Nay were we to ſuppoſe, That none can be ſaved who 
do not hold it, it does not follow that all will be ſaved 
who do. So that if the one proved a man to be in 
ever ſo bad a ſtate, the other would not prove him to 
be in a good one. And conſequently, whoſoever 
leans on this opinion, leans on the ſtaff of a broken reec, 
' Would to God that ye would mind this one thing, to 
make your calling and election ſure! That every one 
of you (leaving the reſt of the world to him that made 
it) would himſelf repent and believe the goſpel! Not 
repent alone, (for then you know only the baptiſm of 
John) but believe, and be © baptized with the Holy 
Ghoſt and with fire.“ Are you ſtill a ſtranger to that 
inward baptiſm, wherewith all true believers are bap- 
tized? May the Lord conſtrain you to cry out, © How 
am I ſtraitened till it be accompliſhed ? ”” Even till the 
love of God inflame your heart, and conſume all your 
vile affections. Be not content with any thing leſs than 
this! It is this loving faith alone which opens our way 
into * the general church of the firſt-born whoſe names 
are written in heaven!“ Which giveth us to © enter 
within the veil, where Jeſus our Forerunner is gone be- 
fore us!“ F 

5. There is ſtill a wider difference in ſome points, 
between us and the people uſually termed Quakers, 
But not in theſe points. You, as well as we, con- 
demn * all ungodlineſs and unrighteouſneſs of men; 


all thoſe works of the devil which were recited above, 


and all thoſe tempers from which they ſpring. 
You agree, that we are all to be taught of God ; 
and to be led by his Spirit: that the Spirit alone reveals 
T 


all 


ö 
| 
: 


— 


— 
— — pv O—W—U— —U—)ꝗ —— —— q 
7 


— — 
Fas AN 


— —U— U —ð —— ꝛ E — TEES _ 


- 2 : I- 1 — 


. — — Tz 


——— 


210 A FARTHER APPEAL; Part II. 
all Truth, and inſpires all Holineſs : that by his inſpi- 
ration men attain perfect love, the love which purihes 


them as he is pure: and that through this knowledge 


and love of God, they have power to do always ſuch 
things as pleaſe him ; to worſhip God, a Spirit, 
according to his own will, that is, in ſpirit and in 
truth, 

Hence you infer, that formal Worſhip is not accept- 
able to God, but that alone that ſprings from God in 
the heart: you infer alſo, that they who are led by him, 
will uſe great plainnels of ſpeech, and great plainneſs of 
dreſs, lecking no outward adorning, but only the or- 
nament of a meek and quiet ſpirit.” | 

I will look no farther now, than ſimply to enquire, 
whether you are conſiſtent with theſe principles ? 

To begin with the latter; © He that is led by the 


Spirit will uſe great plainneſs of ſpeech.” 


You would have ſaid, “will uſe the plain language.” 
But that term, * the plain language,” naturally leads 
vou to think of one particular way of ſpeaking ; as if 
plainneſs of ſpeech implied no mote than the ule of that 
particular form, | 

Ales! my brethren! Know ye not that your an- 

ceſtors deſigned this, only as a ſpecimen of plain lan- 
guage? And is it poſlible that you ſhould miſtake the 
lample for the whole bale of cloth? 
Conſult the light God has given you, and you muſt 
ſee that plainnels of ſpeech does not he in a ſingle point, 
but implies an open, undiſguiſed fincerity, a child-like 
ſimplicity in all we ſpeak. 

I co not defire you to refrain from ſaying thou or thee, 
1 would not ſpend ten words avout it. But I deſire 
vou, whenever you ſpcak at all, to ſpeak the truth, and 
nothing but the truth. I deſire your words may be 
always the picture of your heart, This is truly plain 
language. 

Either do not pretend to plain ſpeech at all, or be 
uniformly plain. Are you ſo ? I pray, conſider. Do 
you never compliment? I do not ſuppoſe you lay, 
« Sir, your very humble ſervant.” But do you ſay no 
civil things? Do you never flatter? Do you not 


commend any man or woman to their face? Perhaps 
farthcr 


"a - 2 G 
2 S Lo 3 . 
\ 44 NS * — * 
Y & * 7 . * 3 1 
ET ION IT TSS 
4 . „ * * LO? 1b . Wu . 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 211 


farther than you do behind their back. Is this plainnefs 
of ſpeech? Do you never diſſemble? Do you ſpeak 
to all perſons, high or low, rich or poor, juſt what you 
think, neither more nor leſs, and in the ſhorteſt and 
cleareſt manner you can? If not, what a mere jeſt is 
your plain language ? You carry your condemnation in 
your own breaſt, 

6. You hold alſo, That “ he which is led by the 
Spirit, will uſe great plainneſs of dreſs, ſeeking no out- 
ward adorning, but only the ornament of a meek and 
quiet ſpirit.” 

And that, in particular, “ he will leave gold and coſſly 
apparel to thoſe who know not God,” 

Now I appeal to every ſerious, reaſonable man among 
you, Do your people act conſiſtently with this princi- 
ple? Do not many of your women wear gold upon 
their very feet? And many of your men uſe orna- 
ments of gold? Are you a ſtranger to thele things ? 
Have you not ſeen with your eyes (ſuch trifles as will 
ſcarce bear the naming) their canes and ſnuff- boxes 
glitter, even in your ſolemn aſſembly, while ye were 
Waiting together upon God? Surely, they are not yet 
ſo loſt to modeſty, as to pretend, That they do not uſe 
them by way of ornament. If they do not, if it be 
only out of neceſlity, a plain oaken-ſtick will ſupply 
the place of the one; and a piece of horn or tin will 
unexceptionably anſwer all the reafonable ends of the 
other, | 

To ſpeak freely, (and do not count me your enemy 
for this) you cannot but obſerve upon cool reflection, 
That you retain juſt ſo much of your ancient practice, 
as leaves your prelent without excuſe; as makes the in- 
conſiſtency between the one and the other, glaring and 
undeniable, For mſtance : this woman is too ſtrict a 
Quaker, to lay out a ſhilling in a Necklace. Very 
well!: but ſhe is not too ſtrict to lay out fourſcore gui- 
neas in a Repeating Watch. Another would not for 
the world wear any Lace, no, not an Edging round her 
cap. But ſhe will wear Point: and fees no harm in it 
at all, though it ſhould be of twelve times the price. 
In one kind of Apron or Handkerchief ſhe dares not 
lay out twenty ſhillings ; but in another ſort, lays out 

T 2 twenty 


212 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part IT. 


twenty pounds. And what multitudes of you are very 
Jealous, as to the colour and form of your apparel, the 
leaſt important of all the circumſtances that relate to it, 
while in the moſt important, the expence, they are 
without any concern at all? They will not put on a 
Scarlet or Crimſon Stuff, but the richeſt Velvet, ſo it 
be black or grave, They will not touch a coloured 
Ribband ; but will cover themſelves with a {tiff Silk 
from head to foot. They cannot bear Purple: but 
make no {cruple at all of being clothed in fine Linen; 


yea, to ſuch a degree, that the Linen of the Quakers is 


grown almoſt into a proverb. 

Surely you cannot be ignorant, that the ſinfulneſs of 
fine apparel hes chiefly in the ex penſiveneſs. In that it 
is robbing God and the Poor; it is defrauding the father- 
leſs and widow ; it is waſting the food of the hungry, 
and with-holding his raiment from the naked, to con- 
ſame it on our own luſts, 

7. Let it not be ſaid, That this affects only a few 
among you, and thoſe of the younger and lighter ſort, 
Yes at does; your whole body : for why do you, who 
are elder and graver, ſuffer ſuch things? Why do ye 
not vehemently reprove them ? And if they repent 
not, in ſpite of all worldly conſiderations, expel them 
out of your Society? In conniving at their ſin, you 
make it your own ; you, eſpecially who are Preachers, 
Do you ſay, They cannot bear it; they will not 
hear: alas, into what ſtate then are ye fallen! But 
whether, they will bear it or not, what is that to thee ? 
Thou art to ſpeak, Whether they will hear, or whe- 
ther they will forbear.” To ſay the very truth, I am 
afraid you rather ſtrengthen their hands in their wick- 
edneſs. For you not only “ do not teſtify againſt it in 
the congregation, but even ſit at their table and reprove 

them 


® You ſay, „We do teſtify againſt it in the congregation.” 
Againſt what ? „ Againſt gay and gaudy apparel.” I grant it. But 
this is not the thing I forek of, You quite miſtake my mark, 
Do you teſtify againit the Coſtlineſs of their Apparel, however 
plain and grave it may be? Againſt the price of the Velvet, the 
Linen, the Silk, or Raiment of whatever kind ? If you do this 
frequently and explicitly, you are clear. If not, own and amend 
the fault. | | = 


10 b 
* 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 213 
them not. Why then, thou alſo art one of * the dumb 


dogs that cannot bark, ſleeping, lying down, loving to 


ſlumber.” | Eb rn | 
I fix this charge upon every Preacher, in particular 
upon thoſe who ſaw a young woman, daughter to one 
of the Quakers in London, going to be married in ap- 
parel ſuitable to her diamond buckle, which coſt'a hun- 
dred guineas, Could you ſee this, and not call heaven 
ard earth to witneſs againſt it? Then I witneſs againſt 
thee, in the Name of the Lord, Thou art a blind Leader 
of the Blind : thou ſtraineſt at a gnat, and ſwalloweſt a 
cam:l, 

Verily the ſin both of teachers and hearers is herein 
exceeding great, And the little attempts towards plain- 
neſs of apparel which are {ſtill oblervable among you, 


(I mean in the colour and form of your clothes, and the 


manner of putting them on) only teſtify againſt you, 
that you were once, what you know in your hearts you 
are not now. . 

8. I come now to your main Principle, © We are all 
to be taught of God, to be inſpired and led by his Spirit. 
And then we ſhall worſhip him, not with dead form, 
but in ſpirit and in truth.“ 

Theſe are deep and weighty words. But many hold 
faſt the words, and are utterly ignorant of their mean- 
ing. Is not this an exceeding common cale ? Are not 
you conſcious, abundance of your friends have done 


ſo? With whom the being taught of God and led by 


It is eaſy to diſcern how your people {ell into this ſnare of the 
devil. You were at firſt a poor, deſpiſed, afflicted people. Then, 
what ſome of you had to ſpare, was litile enongh to relieve the 
needy members of your own Society, In a few years you increaſe d 
in goods, and were able to relieve more than your own poor, 
But you did not beſtow all that you had to ſpare from them, on the 
poor belonging to other Societies. It remained either to lay it up, 
m to expend it in ſuperfluitics. Some choſe one way, and ſome the 
other. | 

Lay this deeply to heart, ye who are now a poor, deſpiſed, af- 
Iicied people. Hithento ye are not able to relieve your own poor. 
But it ever your ſubſtance wicreaſe, fee that ye be not ſtraitenéd in 
your own bowels, that ye fall not into the ſame ſnare of the devil. 


Before any of you either lay up treaſures or earth, or indulge need- 


lels expence of any kind, I pray the Lord God to ſcatter you to. 
the corners of the earth, and blot out your name from under heaven | 


3-3 | his 


214 A rARTHERX APPEAL, Part II. 


his Spirit are mere words of courſe, that mean juſt no- 
thing. And their crude and indigeſted accounts, of the 
things they did not underſtand, have raiſed that deep 
prejudice againſt theſe great Truths, which we find in 
the generality of men. 

Do ſome of you aſk, © but doſt thou acknowledge 


would to God every one of you acknowledged it as 
much. I fay, all Religion is either empty Shew, or 
Perfection by Inſpiration ; in other words, the obedient 
Love of God, by the ſupernatural knowledge of God : 
yea, all that which is not of Faith, is fin : all which 
does not fpring from this loving knowledge of God ; 
which knowledge cannot begin, or ſubſiſt one moment, 
without immediate inſpiration : not only all public wor- 
ſhip, and all private prayer, but every thought, in com- 
mon life, and word and work, What think you of 
this? Do you not ſtagger ? Dare you carry the in- 
ward Principle ſo far? Do you acknowledge it to be 
the very Truth? But alas! what is the acknowledging 
it; doſt thou experience this principle in thyſelf; what 
faith thy heart? Does God dwell therein? And doth 
it now echo to the voice of God? Haſt thou the con- 
tinual inſpiration of his Spirit, filling thy heart with 
his love, as with a well of water, ſpringing up into 
everlaſting life ? 

9. Art thou acquainted with the leading of his Spirit, 
not by notion only, but by living experience ? I ſear 
very many of you talk of this, who do not ſo much as 
know what it means. How does the Spirit of God 
lead his children, to this or that particular action? Do 
you imagine, it is by blind impulſe only? By moving 
you to do it, you know not why? Not ſo, He leads us 
by our Eye, at leait as much as by the Hand ; and by 
Light as well as by Heat. He ſhews us the way wherein 
we ſhould go, as well as incites us to walk therein. 
For example, Here is a man ready to periſh with hun- 
ger. How am I led by the Spirit to relieve him ? 
Firſt, by his convincing me, it is the Will of God I 
ſhould : and ſecondly, by his filling my heart with love 
towards him. Both this light and this heat are the gift 
of God; are wrought in me by the ſame Spirit; * 

leads 


the Inward Principle? I do, my friends: and I 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 213 
| leads me, by this Conviction as well as Love, to go and 
feed that man. This is the plain, rational account of 
the ordinary leading of the Spirit, But how far from 
4 that which ſome have given! 

E Art thou thus led by the Spirit to every good word 
| and work? Till God hath thereby made thy faith 
perfect? Doſt thou know what Faith is? It is a 
Ri. obedient ſight of a preſent and reconciled 
God. Now, where this is, there is no dead form; 
neither can be, ſo long as it continues. But all that is 
laid or done is full of God, full of ſpirit, and life, and 
power. | 

10. But perhaps, as much as you talk of them, you 
do not know the difference between Form and Spirit; 
or between worſhipping God in a formal way, and wor- 
ſhipping him in ſpirit and in truth. | 

The Lord is that Spirit. The ſeeing, and feeling, and 
loving him is ſpiritual Life. And whatever is ſaid or 
-Y done in the fight and love of God, that is full of ſpirit 
£ and life. All beſide this is form, mere dead form ; 
- whether it be in our public addreſſes to God, or in our 
private ; or in our worldly buſineſs, or in our daily 
converſation, 

But if ſo, how poor, and mean, and narrow have 
your views and conceptions been! You was afraid of 
formality in public worſhip. And reaſon good. But 
was you afraid of it no where elſe? Did not you con- 
ſider, that formality in common life, is alſo an abomi- 
nation to the Lord ? And that it can have no place in 
any thing we ſay or do, but lo far as we forget God P 
O watch againſt it in every place, every moment, that 
you may every moment ſee and love God; and conſe- 

uently, at all times and in all places, worſhip him in 
Hit and in truth. | 

My brethren, permit me to add a few words, in tender 
love to your fouls. Do not you lean too much on the 
ſpirit and power which you believe reſted on your 
| ; forefathers? Suppoſe it did ; will that avail you, if 
| you do not drink into the fame ſpirit ? And how evi- 
2 dent is this! That whatever ye once were, ye are 
| now ſhorn of your ſtrength. Ye are weak and become 

like other men. The Lord is well nigh departed from 
you. 


216 | A raxTHER APPEAL, Part II. 


you. Where is now the ſpirit, the life, the power ? 
Be not offended with my plain dealing, when I beſeech 
you who are able to weigh things calmly, to open your 
eyes and ſee multitudes even in the Church, purſuing, 
yea, and attaining the ſubſtance of ſpiritual life, and 
leaving unto you the ſhadow, Nay, a {till greater evil 
is before you; for if ye find not ſome effectual means to 
prevent it, your riſing generation will utterly caſt off 
the ſhadow as well as the ſubſtance. 

11. There is an abundantly greater difference ſtill, 
according to your own account, between us who pro- 
feſs ourſelves members of the Church of England, and 
you who are members of the Church of Rome. But 
notwithſtanding this, do you not agree with us in con- 
demning the vices above recited? Profaneneſs, Drunk- 
enneſs, Whoredom, Adultery, Theft, Diſobedience to 
Parents, and ſuch like? And how unhappily do you 
agree with us in prattziing the very vices which you 
condemn ? | 

And yet you acknowledge, (nay, and frequently con- 
tend for this with a peculiar earneſtnels) that every 
Chriſtian is called to be zealous of good works, as well 
as to deny himſelf and take up his croſs daily, How 
then do you depart from your own principles, when 
you are gluttons, drunkards, or epicures? When you 
live at your eaſe, in all the elegance and voluptuouſnels 
of a plentiful fortune! How will you reconcile the 
being adorned with gold, arrayed in purple and fine 
linen, and faring ſumptuouſly every day, with the de- 
nying yourſelf and taking up your croſs daily? Surely, 
while you indulge the dere of the fleſh, the deſire of 
the eye, and the pride of life, the excellent Rules of 
Self-denial that abound in your own W riters, leave you 
of all men moſt inexcuſable. 

12. Neither can this ſelf-indulgence be reconciled 
with the being zcalous of good works, For by this 
needleſs and continual expence, you diſable Yourſelf 
from doing good. You bind your own hands. You 
make it impoſſible for you to do that good which other- 
wile you might. So that you injure the poor in the 
ſame proportion as you poiſon your own ſoul. You 
might have clothed the naked ; but what was due to 

| them, 


* 

$ 
4 
4 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 217 
them, was thrown away on your coſtly apparel. Vou 
might have fed the hungry, entertained the ſtranger, 
relieved them that were ſick or in priſon. But the ſu- 
perfluities of your own table ſwallowed up that where- 
by they ſhould have been profited. And ſo this waſt- 
ing of thy Lord's goods, is an inſtance of complicated 
wickedneſs ; ſince hereby thy poor brother periſheth for 
whom Chriſt died. | 

I will not recommend to you either the writings or 
examples of thoſe whom you account Heretics, (altho' 
ſome of theſe, if you could view them with impartial 
eyes, might provoke you to jealouſy.) But O ! that 
God would write in your hearts the rules of ſelf-denial 
and love, laid down by Thomas a Kempis ! Or that 
you would follow, both in this and in good works, that 
burning and ſhining light of your own Church, the 
Marquis de Renty! Then would all who knew and 
loved the Lord, rejoice to acknowledge you as the 
Church of the living God : when ye were zealous of 
every good word and work, and abſtained from all ap- 
pearance of evil: when it was hereby ſhewn that you 
were filled with the Holy Ghoſt, delivered from all 
unholy tempers : when ye were all © unblameable and 
unrebukable, without ſpot or wrinkle, or any ſuch 
thing ; a choſen generation, a royal prieſthood, a holy 
nation, a peculiar people, ſhewing forth *”” | to all, 
Jews, Infidels, and Heretics, by your active, patient, 
ſpotleſs love of God and man, ]“ the praiſes of him 
oo had called you out of darkneſs into his marvellous 
ight.” 

13. Men and brethren, children of the ſtock of 
Abraham, ſuffer me to ſpeak a few words to you allo ; 
you who do not allow, That Meſſiah the Prince 1s al- 


ready come and cut off. However you fo far hear 


Moſes and the Prophets, as to allow, 1. That * it is 
the inſpiration of the Holy One, which giveth man 
underſtanding,” and that all the true children of God, 


are taught of God. 2. That the ſubſtance both of the 


Law and the Prophets, is contained in that one word, 


Thou ſhalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 


heart, and with all thy ſoul, and with all thy ſtrength, 
and thy neighbour as thyſelf,” And g. That the fure 
h fruit 


218 A TAARATHER APPEAL, Part HM. 
fruit of love is obedience, „ ceaſing from evil, and do- 
ing good.” 5 | Bes. 

And do you walk by this Rule? Have you your- 
ſelf that inſpiration of the Holy One? Are you taught 
of God? Hath he opened your underſtanding? Have 
you the inward knowledge of the Moſt High ? I fear 
not, Perhaps you know little more, even of the mean- 
ing of the words than a Mahometan. 

Let us go a little farther. | Do you © love the Lord 
your God with all your heart, with all your ſoul, with 
all your ſtrength ? *”* Can you fay, © Whom have I in 
heaven but thee ; and there is none upon earth that 1 
deſire heſides thee ? Do you deſire God at all? Do 
you deſire to have any thing to do with him, till you 
can keep the world no longer ? Are you not content, 
io you enjoy the good things of the earth, to let God 
ſtand afar off? Only calling upon him now and then, 
when you cannot do well without him. Why then 
you do not love God at all, though you will ſometimes 
condeſcend to uſe him. You love the world. This 
poſſeſſes your heart. This therefore is your god. 
You renounce the God of your fathers, the God of If- 
Tael ; you are ſtill uncircumciſed in heart. Your 
own conſcience bears witneſs, you in this no more 
hear Moſes and the Prophets, than you do Jeſus of 
Nazareth. | 

14. From Moſes and the Prophets it has been ſhewn, 
that your forefathers were a faithleſs and ſtubborn ge- 
neration; a generation which ſet not their hearts aright, 
and whoſe ſpirit cleaved not ſtedfaſtly unto God.” 
And this you acknowledge yourſelves. If you are 
aſked, how is it that the promiſe is not fulfilled ?2 See- 
ing the ſceptre is long ſince departed from Judah, why 
is not Shiloh come? Tour ulual anſwer is, © Becauſe 
of the ſins of our Fathers, God hath delayed his com- 
ing.” Have you then reformed from the fins of your 
fathers? Are you turned unto the Lord your God ? 
Nay, do ye not tread in the ſame ſteps? Except that 
ſingle point of outward idolatry, what abomination 
did they ever commit, which you have not committed 
alſo? Which the generality. of you do not commit 
All, according to your power ? If therefore the 

NI. coming 


* 
. 
: 
k 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion, 219 


coming of the Meſſiah was hindered by the fins of your 
fo:efathers, then by the ſame rule, your continuance 
therein will hinder his coming to the end of the 
world. | 

*- Brethren, my heart's defire, and prayer to God 
15, that he would gather the outcaſls of Iſrael. And J 
doubt not, but when the fulnels of the Gentiles is come 
in, then all Iſrael ſhall be ſaved, But mean time, is 
there not great cauſe that ye ſhould ſay with Daniel, 
© O Lord, righteouſneſs belongeth unto thee, but unto 
us confuſion of face, as at this day, to the men of Ju- 
dah, and unto all Iſrael. O Lord we have ſinned, we 
have rebelled againſt thee, neither have we obeyed the 
voice of the Lord our God. Yet O our God, incline 


thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold 


our deſolations; for we do not prelent our ſupplica- 


tions before thee for our righteouſneſſes, but for thy 
great mercies. O Lord hear! O Lord forgive! O 
Lord, hearken and do! Defer not, for thine own 
fake; for thy city and thy people that are called by thy 
name.” | 

15. I cannot conclude without addreſſing myſelf to you 
alſo, who do not admit either the Jewiſh or Chriſtian 
Revelation. But ſtill you deſire to be happy: you 
own the eſſential difference between Vice and Virtue : 
and acknowledge, (as did all the wifer Greeks and Ro- 
mans) that Vice cannot conſiſt with Happineſs. You 
allow likewiſe, that gratitude and benevolence, ſelf- 
knowledge and modeſty, mildneſs, temperance, pati- 
ence, and generoſity, are juſtly numbered among Vir- 
tues : and that ingratitude and malice, envy and ill- 
nature, pride, inſolence and vanity, gluttony and lux- 
ury, covetouſneſs and diſcontent, are Vices of the high- 
eſt kind. | 

Now let us calmly enquire, how far your life is con- 
ſiſtent with your principles. 

You ſeek happineſs. But you find it not. You 
come no nearer it with all your labours. You are not 
happier than you was a year ago. Nay, I doubt you 
are more unhappy. Why is this, but becauſe you 
look for happinels there, where you own it cannot be 
found? Indecd, what is there on earth which can 


long 


220 A TARTHER APPEAL, Part II. 


long ſatisfy a man of underſtanding ? His foul is 
too large for the world he lives'in, He wants more 
room. 


AHſtuat infelix anguſto limite Mundi, 
Ut brevibus clauſes Gyaris, parvaque Seripho, 


He has already travelled through all which is called 
Ie | ; diverſions and entertainments of every kind, 

ut among theſe he can find no enjoyment of any 
depth ; they are empty, ſhallow, ſuperficial things : 
they pleaſed for a while, but the gloſs is gone ; and 
now they are dull and. taſteleſs, And what has he 
next? Only the fame things again. For this world 
affords nothing more. It can ſupply him with no 
change. Go, feed again: but it is upon one diſh ſtill. 
Thus, 


Occidit miſeros crambe repetita. 


Yet what remedy under the Sun! 

16. The ſounder judgment, the ſtronger under- 
ſtanding you have. The ſooner you are ſated with the 
world, And the more deeply convinced, all that 
cometh is vanity ; fooliſh, inſipid, nauſeous. You 
ſee the foibles of men in ſo much clearer a light, and 
have the keener ſenſe of the emptineſs of life. Here 
you are, a poor, unſatisfied inhabitant of an _ 
world ; turning your weary eyes on this lide, and on 
that fide ; ſeeking reſt, but finding none. You ſeem 
to be out of your place: Neither the perſons nor 
things that ſurround you are ſuch as you want. You 
have a confuſed idea of ſomething better than all 
this; but you know not where to find it, You are 
always graſping for ſomething which you cannot at- 
tain, no, not if you range to the uttermoſt parts of the 
earth. 

But this 1s not all. You are not only negatively un- 
happy, as finding nothing whereon to {tay the weight 
of your ſoul ; but 2 ſo, becauſe you are un- 
holy: you are miſerable, becauſe you are vicious. 
Are you not vicious? Are you then full of gratitude 
to him, who giveth you life and breath, and all 


| things? Not ſo; you rather ſpurn his gifts, and mur- 
mur 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 221 


mur at him that gave them. How often has your 
heart ſaid, God did not uſe you well? How often 
have you queſtioned either his wiſdom or goodneſs P 
Was this well done? What kind of gratitude is 
this? It is the beſt you are maſter of. Then take 
knowledge of yourſelf. Black ingratitude is rooted in 
your inmoſt frame. You can no more love God tha 
you can ſee him; or than you can be happy without 
that love. * 
Neither (how much ſoever you may pique yourſelf 
upon it) are you a lover of mankind, Can love and 
malice conſiſt ? Benevolence and Envy? O do not, 
put out your own eyes. And are not theſe horrid tem- 
s in you? Do not you envy one man, and bear 
malice or ill will to another ? I know you call theſe 
diſpoſitions by ſofter names; but names change not the 
nature of things. You are pained that one ſhould en- 
joy what you cannot enjoy yourſelf, Call this what 
you pleaſe, it is rank Envy. You are grieved, that a 
ſecond enjoys even what you have yourſelf ; you re- 
Joice in ſeeing a third unhappy. Do not flatter ybur- 
ſelf: this is malice, venemous malice, and nothing elſe, 
And how could you ever think of being hap y, with 
malice and envy in your heart? Juſt as well might” 
you expett to be at eaſe, while you held burning coals 
in your boſom, n IFN 
17. I intreat you to refleF, whether there are not 
other inhabitants in your breaſt, which leave no room 
for happineſs there. May you not diſcover through a 
thouſand diſguiſes, Pride? Too high an opinion of 
yourlelf ? Vanity, thirſt of praiſe, even (who would, 
believe it ?) of the applauſe of knaves and fools? Un- 
evennels or ſoreneſs of temper ? Pronenels to anger or 
revenge? Peeviſhnels, fretfulnefs, or pining diſcon- 
tent? Nay, perhaps, even covetouſneſs. — And did 
you ever think happineſs could dwell with thele p 
Awake out of that ſenſeleſs dream. Think not of re- 
conciling things incompatible, All theſe tempers are 
eſſential miſcety, So long as anv of thele are harboured 
in your breaſt, you muſt be a flranger to mward peace. 
What avails it you, if there be no other hell? When. 
U EVET 


222 AxrARTHERN APPEAL, Part II. 


ever theſe fiends are let looſe upon you, you will be 
conſtrained to own, | 


Hell is where'er I am: myſelf am hell!” 


And can the Supreme Being love thoſe tempers, 
which you yourſelf abhor in all but yourſelf ? If not, 
they imply guilt as well as miſery. Doubtleſs they do. 

nly enquire of your own heart. How often in the 
mid career of your vice have you felt a ſecret reproof, 


which you knew not how to bear, and therefore ſtifled 


as ſoon as poſſible ? | 
18. And did not even this point at an hereafter ! a 
future ſtate of exiſtence? The more reaſonable among 
you have no doubt of this! you hardly ſuppoſe the ſoul 
once diſengaged, will dwell again in a houſe of clay. 
But how will your ſoul ſubſiſt without it? How are 
you quahfied for a ſeparate ſtate? Suppoſe this earthly 
covering, this vehicle of organized matter, whereby you 
hold commerce with the material world, were now to 
drop off! Now, what would you do in the regions of 
immortality? You cannot eat or drink there, You 
cannot indulge either the deſire of the fleſh, the defire 
of the eye, or the pride of life, You love only worldly 
things ; and they are gone, fled as {moke, driven away 
for ever. Here is no poſſibility of ſenſual enjoyments ; 
and you have a reliſh for nothing elſe, O what a ſepa- 
ration is this, from all that you hold dear! What a 
breach is made, never to be healed ! 
But beſide this, you are unholy : full of evil tem- 
3: for you did not put off theſe with the body, 
You did not leave Pride, Revenge, Malice, Envy, 
Difcontent behind you, when you left the world. And 
now you are no longer chcered by the light of the ſun, 
nor diverted by the various objects: but thoſe dogs of 
hell are let looſe to prey upon your ſoul, with their whole, 
unrebated ſtrength. Nor 1s there any hope that your 
tpirit will now ever be reſtored to its original purity : 
not even that poor hope of a purging fire, ſo elegantly 
deſcribed by the Heathen Poet ſome ages before the 
notion was revived among the doctrines of the Romiſh 


Church. 
Aliæ 


N. 4 - ru 

0 n " 8 f EET... 
— s * * " a oy 8 
4.7 3 * A 4 - a 


To Men of Resſon and Religion, 223 


Aliæ tenduntur inanes 

Suppen ſæ ad ventos ; aliis ſub gurgite vaſto 
Infectuni eluitur ſcelus, aut exuritur igui 
Donec longa dies, exacto temports orbe, 
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit 
Athereum ſenſum atque aurai ſimplicis ignem. 


19. What a great gulph then is fixed between you 
and happineſs, both in this world and that which 1s to 
come 7 Well may you ſhudder at the thought! More 
eſpecially when you are about to enter on that untried 
ſtate of exiſtence, For what a proſpect is this, when 
you ſtand on the verge of life, ready to launch out into 
eternity ? What can you then think ? You fee nothing 
before you. All is dark and dreary. On the very beſt 
fuppoſition, how well may you addreſs your parting 
foul in the words of dying Adrian : 


% Poor, little, pretty, fluttering thing, 
Muſt we no longer live together ? 
And doſt thou prune thy trembling wing, 
| To take thy flight thou know'!t not whither ? 


Thy pleaſing vein, thy hum'rous folly 
Is all negleQed, all forgot ; 
And penſive, wavering, melancholy, 
Thou hop'ft, and fear'ſt thou know'ſt not what,” 


„Thou knoweſt not what!“ Here is the ſting, 
ſuppoſe there were no other. To be thou knoweſt not 
what! Not for a month, or year, but through the 
countleſs ages of eternity! What a tormenting un- 
certainty muſt this be? What racking unwillingneſs 
muſt it occaſion, to exchange even this known vale 
of tears, for the unknown valley of the ſhadow of 
death ? 

% And is there no cure for this ? ” Indeed there is 
an effectual cure; even the knowledge and love of God. 
There is a knowledge of God which unveils eternity, 
and a love of God which endears it. That knowledge 
makes the great abyſs viſible; and uncertainty vaniſhes 
away. That love makes it amiable to the ſoul, ſo that 

U 2 fear 


224 A rarTHER APPEAL, Part II. 


fear has no more place]! But the moment God ſays, 
by the welcome Angel of Death, (Come up hither,” 
She 


N Claps the glad wing and towers away, 
And mingles with the blaze of day.“ 


20. See ye not, what advantage every way, a Chriſ- 
tian has over you? Probably the reaſon you ſaw it 
not before was, becaule you knew none but nominal 
Chriſtians ; men who profeſs to believe more (in their 
way of believing) but had no more of the know ledge 
and love of God than yourſelves. So that with regard 
to real, inward Religion, you ſtood upon even ground, 
And, perhaps, in many branches of inward Religion, 
the advantage was on your fide, 

May the Lord, the God of the Chriſtians, either re- 
form theſe wretches, or take them away from the earth! 
That lay this grand ſtumbling-block in the way of thoſe 
who deſite to know the will of God! 

O ye who deſire to know his will, regard ihein 
not! If it be poſſible blot them out of your remem- 
brance, 

They neither can nor will do you any good. O 
ſuffer them not to do you harm. Be not prejudiced 
againſt Chriſtianity by thoſe who know nothing at all 
of it, Nay, they condemn it, all real, ſubſtantial Chri!- 
tianity ; they ſpeak evil of the thing they know not, 
They have a kind of cant word for the whole Religion 
of the heart. They call it Enthuſiaſm. 

I will briefly lay before you the ground of the mat- 
ter, and appeal to you yourſelves for the reafonablenels 
of it. 

21, What a miſerable drudgery 1s the ſervice of God, 
unleſs I love the God whom I ferve ? But I cannot 
love one whom 1 know not, How then can I love 
God till I know him? And how is it poſſible I ſhould 
know God, unleſs he makes himſelf known unto me? 


By Analogy or Proportion? Very good. But where 


is that proportion to be found? What proportion 
does a creature bear to his Creator ? What 1s the pro- 


portion between Finite and Infinite ? 
I grant 


a As. * . 
9 F 5 . 1 2 * , _ | 
GH —_ 1 ä 22 - 2 Z FF ma nA" 


n 


«V3 
a” 


14 : ——_— IT I 

* 2 N 
8 11285 8 % 
yd dc... 


* 1 bY 
The. FYT 
Safes 


* 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 225 


I grant the exiſtence of the creatures demonſtratively 
ſhews the exiſtence of their Creator. The whole cre- 
ation ſpeaks, that there is a God, But that is not the 

oint in queſtion, I know there is a God. Thus far 
is clear. But who will ſhew me what that God 1s ? 
The more I reflect, the more convinced I am, that it 
is not poſſible for any or all of the creatures, to take 
off the vail which is on my heart, that I might diſcern 
this unknown God ; to draw the curtain back which 
now hangs between, that I might ſee him which is in- 
viſible. 

This vail of fleſh now hides him from my ſight. And 
who is able to make it tranſparent ? So that I may 

erceive through this glaſs, God always before me, till 
I fee him face to face, | 

I want to know this great God who filleth heaven 
and earth: who is above, beneath, and on every fide, 
in all places of his dominion, who juſt now beſets me 
behind and before, and lays his hand upon me. And 
yet I am no more acquainted with him, than with one 
of the inhabitants of Jupiter or Saturn. 

O my friend, how will you get one ſtep farther, 
unleſs God reveal himſelf to your ſoul ? 

22, And why ſhould this ſeem a thing incredible to 
you? That God, a Spirit, and the Father of the ſpirits 
of all fleſh, ſhould diſcover himſelf to your irit, 
which is itſelf the breath of God. Drvine Particula 
Aura Any more than that material things ſhould 
diſcover themſelves to your material eye. Is it any 
more 1 to Reaſon, that ſpirit ſhould influence 
ſpirit, than that matter ſhould influence matter ? Nay, 
is not the former the more eaſily intelligible of the two p 
For there 15 the utmoſt difficulty in conceiving, how 
matter ſhould influence matter at all. How that which 
is totally paſſive ſhould act. Neither can we rationally 
account either for Gravitation, Attraction, or any na- 
tural motion whatſoever, but by ſuppoſing in all the 
Finger of God, who alone conquers that Vis inertiæ 
which 1s eſſential to every particle of Matter and work- 
eth in all, | | | 

Now if God ſhould ever open the eyes of your un- 
derſtanding, muſt not the Love of God be the imme- 
U 3 diate 


226 A rARTER APPEAL, Part II. 


diate conſequence ? Do you imagine you can ſee God 
without loving him? Is it poſlible in the nature of 
things? Si virtus conſpiceretur oculis, ſaid the old Hea- 
then, mirabiles amores excitaret ſui, How much more 
if you ſee him who is the original Fountain, the great 
Archetype of all Virtue, will that ſight raiſe in you a 
love that is wonderful, ſuch as the gay and buſy world 
know not of ! 

23. What benevolence alſo, what tender love to 
the whole of human kind, will you drink in, together 
with the love of God, from the unexhauſted ſource of 
love? And how ealy 1s it to conceive, that more and 
more of his Image will be then transfuſed into your 
foul ? That from diſintereſted love, all other divine 
tempers will, as it were, naturally ſpring? Mild- 
nels, gentleneſs, patience, temperance, juſtice, ſince- 
rity, contempt of the world ; yea, whatſoever things 
are venerable and lovely, whatſoever are juſtly of good 
report, | 

And when you thus love God and all mankind, and 
are transformed into his likeneſs, then the command- 
ments of God will not be grievous ; you will no more 
complain, that they deſtroy the comfort of life, So 
far from it, that they will be the very joy of your 
heart; ways of pleaſantneſs, paths of peace! You 
will experience here that ſolid happineſs, which you had 
elſe where {ought in vain, Without ſervile fear or anx> 
ious care, ſo long as you continue on earth you will 

ladly do the will of God here, as the angels do it in 
1 And when the time is come that you ſhoulg 
depart hence, when God ſays, © Ariſe, and come 
away,” you will paſs with joy unſpeakable out of the 
body, into all the fulneſs of God. 3 

Now does not your awn heart condemn you, if you 
call this religion Enthuſiaſm ? O leave that to thoſe 
blind zealots, Who tack together a ſet of Opinions and 
an outſide worſhip, and call this poor, Full lifeleſs 
thing, by the ſacred name of Chriſttanity, Well might 
you account ſuch Chriſtianity as this, a mere piece of 
empty pageantry, fit indeed to keep the vulgar in awe, 
but beneath the regard of a man of eo Pang. | 

| Ty ut 


; & 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 22 
But in how different a light does it now appear? If 
there be ſuch a religion as I have ſketched out, muſt 
not every reaſonable man ſee, there is nothing on earth 
to be deſired in compariſon of it? — But if any man 
deſire this, let him aſk of Cod: he giveth to all men 
liberally and upbraideth not. 

24. May you not aſk, quite conſiſtently with your 

rinciples, in ſome manner reſembling this ? 

O thou Being of Beings, thou Cauſe of All, thou 
ſeeſt my heart ; thou underſtandeſt all my thoughts, 
But how ſmall a part of thy ways do I underſtand ! 
I know not what is above, beneath, on every fide, 
I know not my own foul. Only this I know, 1 am 
not what I ought to be, I ſee and approve the Vir- 
tue which I have not. I do not love thee, neither 
am I thankful, I commend the love of mankind ; 
but I feel it not. Thou haſt ſeen hatred, malice, 
envy in my heart. Thou haſt ſeen anger, murmuring, 
diſcontent. Theſe uneaſy paſſions harrow up my ſoul, 
I cannot reſt, while I am under this yoke. Nor am I 
able to ſhake it off, I am unhappy, and that thou 
knowelt, 

Have compaſſion upon me, thou whole years do not 
fail! On me, who have but a ſhort time to live. I riſe 
up, and am cut down as a flower, I flee as it were a 
ſhadow. Yet a little while, and I return to duſt, and 
have no more place under the ſun. 

Yet I know thou haſt made my ſoul to live for ever. 
But I know not where ; and I am unwilling to try, 
I tremble, I am afraid to go thither, whence I ſhall not 
return, I ſtand quivering on the edge of the gulph ; 
for clouds and darkneſs reſt upon it. O God! Muſt 
I go always * creeping with terrors, and plunge into 
eternity with a peradventure ! ”? 

O thou Lover of men, is there no help in thee? I 
haye heard (what indeed my heart cannot _— 
that thou revealeſt thyſelf to thole that ſeek thee, an 
2 thy love into their hearts: and that they who 
know and love thee, walk through the ſhadow of death 
and fear no evil. O that this were ſo! That there 
were ſuch an unſpeakable gift, given to the children of 
men! For then might I hope for it, O God, if 

there 


228 A raxzTHeR APPEAL, Part II. 


there be, give it unto me! Speak that I may ſee thee ! 
Make thyſelf known unto me alſo in the manner that 
thou knoweſt! In any wiſe let me know thee and 
love thee, that I may be formed after thy likeneſs ! 
That I may be love, as thou art love ; that I may now 
be happy in thee ; and when thou wilt, fall into the 
abyſs of thy love, and enjoy thee through the ages of 
eternity ! | 


END or PART II. 


A FARTHER 


( 229 ) 


: A 
FARTHER APPEAL 
TO MEN OF 
REASON AND RELIGION. 


EA M&M III. 


—— . NSN 


1. N OW, what can an impartial prov think 

concerning the preſent ſtate of Religion in 
England? Is there a nation under the ſun which is ſo 
deeply fallen from the very firſt principles of all Reli- 
gion? Where is the country, in which is found ſo 
utter a diſregard to even Heathen Morality ? Such 
a thorough contempt of Juſtice and Truth, and all 
that ſhould be dear and honourable to rational crea- 
tures ? 

What ſpecies of Vice can poſſibly be named, even of 
thoſe that Nature itſelf abhors, of which we have not 
had for many years, a plentiful and ſtill increaſing har- 
veſt? What ſin remains either in Rome or Conſtan- 
tinople, which we have not imported long ago (if it 
was not of our own native growth) and improved upon 
ever fince? Such a complication of villanies of every 
kind, conſidered with all their aggravations, ſuch a 
ſcorn of whatever bears the face of Virtue, ſuch in- 
tice, fraud, and falſehood ; above all, ſuch perjury, and 
ſuch a method of law, we may defy the whole world to 

roduce, Sha ; 

What multitudes are found throughout our land, 
who do not even profeſs any Religion at all? And 
what numbers of thoſe who profeſs much, confute 


their 


* 


230 ArARTRER APPEAL, Part III. 
their profeſſion by their practice? Yea, and perhaps, 


by their exorbitant pride, vanity, covetouſneſs, rapaci- 
ouſneſs, or oppreſſion, cauſe the very name of Religion 
to * in the noſtrils of many (otherwiſe) reaſonable 
men 
2. However we have many thouſands ſtill, of 
truly virtuous and religious men.” Wherein does their 
pig pu conſt ? In Righteouſneſs and true Holineſs ? 
In Love ſtronger than Death ? Fervent Gratitude to 
God? And tender Action to all his Creatures? Is 
their Religion, the Religion of the Heart? A Re- 
newal of the Soul in the Image of God? Do they 
reſemble him they worſhip ? Are they free from Pride, 
from Vanity, from Malice and Envy, from Ambition 
and Avarice, from Paſſion and Luft; from every 
unealy and unlovely Temper ? Alas, I fear neither 
they (the greater part at leaſt) nor you, know what 
this Religion means; or have any more notion of it, 
than the peaſant that holds the plough, of the Rebgion 
of a Gymnoſophiſt. 
It is well if the genuine Religion of Chriſt has any 
more alliance with what you call Religion, than with 
the Turkiſh Pilgrimages to Mecca, or the Popiſh wor- 
ſhip of our Lady of Loretto. Have not you ſubſti- 
tuted in the place of the Religion of the Heart, ſome- 
thing (I do not fay equally ſinful, but) equally vain, 
and foreign to the worſhipping of God in ſpirit and in 
truth 2 What elſe can be ſaid even of Prayer (public 
or private in the manner wherein you generally per- 
form it? As a thing of cour/e, running round and 
round, in the ſame dull track, without either the know- 
ledge or love of God? Without one heavenly temper, 
either attained or improved? O what mockery of 
God is this! 
And yet even this Religion, which can do you no 
good may do you much harm. Nay, it is plain it 
oes : it daily increaſes your Pride, as you meaſure your 
goodneſs by the number and length of your performances, 
It gives you a deep contempt for thole who do not come 
up to the full Tale of your Virtues, It inſpires men 
with a zeal, which is the very fire of hell, furious, 
bitter, implacable, unmerciful ; often to a degree that 
1 extinguiſhes 


— K4„ ——ů 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 231 


extinguiſhes all comp ſſion, all good nature and huma- 
nity. Inſomuch that the cxecrable feercenefs of ſpirit, 


Which is the natural fruit of ſuch a Religion, hath many 


times, in {pite of all ties, divine and human, broke out. 
into open violence, into rapine, murder, edition, re- 
bellion, civil war, to the deſolation of whole cities and 
countries. 


Tantum hæc Religio potuit ſuadere mdlorum ! 


3. Now if there be a God, and one that is not a 
mere idle ſpectator of the things that are done upon 
earth, but a Rewarder of men and nations according to 
their works, what can the event of theſe things be ? 
It was reaſonable to believe, that he would have riſen 
long ago, and maintained his own cauſe, either by. 
{ending the Famine or Peſtilence among us, or by 
pouring out his fury in blood. And many wile and 

oly men have frequently declared, that. they daily 
expected this; that they daily looked for the patience 
of God to give place, and judgment to' rejoice over 
mercy. 

4. Juſt at this time, when we wanted little of filling 
up the meaſure of our intquittes, two or three Clergy- 
men of the Church of England began vehemently to 
cad Sinners to Repentance. In two or three years they 
had ſounded the alarm, to the utmoſt borders of the 
land. Many thouſands gathered together to hear them; 
and in every place where they came, many began to. 
ſhew luch a concern for Religion, as they never had 


Gone before. A ſtronger imp reſſon was made on their 


minds, of the importance of things eternal, and they 
had more earneſt defures of ſerving God, than they had 
ever had from their carlieſt childhood. Thus did God 
begin to draw them toward himſelf with the cords of , 
love, with the bands of a man. 

Many of theſe were in a ſhort time deeply convinced 
of the number and keinoufneſs of their fins, They were 
alſo made thoroughly ſenſible of thole Tempers, Which 
are juſtly hateful to God and man, and of their utter 
z2norance of God, and entire inability, either to know, 
love, or {erve him. At the ſame time, they {aw in the 
trongeſt light, the infigntficancy of their outfide Reti- 

gion 2 


232 A raxTHeER APPEAL Part III. 


gion : nay, and often confeſſed it before God, as the 
moſt abominable hypocriſy. Thus did they fink deeper 
and deeper into that Repentance, which muſt ever pre- 
cede Faith in the Son of God. 
And from hence ſprung Fruits meet for Repentance. 
The drunkard commenced ſober and temperate ; the 
whoremonger abſtained from adultery and fornication ; 
the unjuſt from oppreſſion and wrong, He that had 
been accuſtomed to curſe and to ſwear, for many years, 
now {wore no more. The ſluggard began to work with 
his hands, that he might eat his own bread, The miſer 
learned to deal his bread to the hungry, and to cover 
the naked with a garment. Indeed the whole form of 
their life was changed. They had left off doing evil and 
learned to do well, | 
5. But this was not all, Over and above this out- 
ward change, they began to experience inward religion. 
The love of God was ſhed abroad in their hearts, which 
they continue to enjoy to this day. They love him, 
becauſe he firſt loved us, and with-held not from us his 
Son, his only Son. And this love conſtrains them to 
love all mankind, all the children of the Father of hea- 
ven and earth, and inſpires them with every holy and 
heavenly temper, the whole mind that was in Chriſt. 
Hence it is that they are now uniform in their beha- 
viour, unblameable in all manner of converſation. And 
in whatſoever ſtate they are, they have learned there- 
with to be content: inſomuch that now they can in 
every thing give thanks they more than patiently ac- 
quieſce, they rejoice and are cxceeding glad in all God's 
diſpenſations towards. them. For as long as they love 
God (and that love no man taketh from them) they 
are always happy in God. Thus they calmly travel on 
through life, being never weary nor faint in their minds, 
never repining, murmuring, nor dilatisfied, caſting all 
their care upon God, till the hour comes that they 
ſhould drop this covering of earth and return unto the 
great Father of Spirits. Then eſpecially it is, that they 
rejoice with joy unſpeakable and full of glory, You 
who credit it not, come and ſee, See thele living, dy- 
ing Chriſtians. | 
% Happy 


N 
N 
; 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 233 
© Happy while on earth they breathe ; ö 
Migntier joys ordained to know, 
Trampling on Sin, Hell, and Death, 
To the third heaven they go? 


| Now if theſe things are ſo, what reaſonable man can 
deny (ſuppoſing the Scriptures to be true) that God is 
now viliting this nation, in a far other manner than we 


had cauſe to expect? Inſtead of pouring out his fierce 


diſpleaſure upon us, he hath made us yet another tender 
of mercy: ſo that even when Sin did moſt abound, Grace 
hath much more abounded. 

6. Yea, the Grace of God which bringeth ſalvation, 
preſent ſalvation from inward and outward fin, hath 
abounded of late years in ſuch a degree, as neither we 
nor our fathers had known. How extenſive is the 
change which has been wrought on the minds and lives 
of the people! Know ye not that the ſound 1s gone 
forth into all the land? That there is ſcarce a city or 
conſiderable town to be found, where ſome have not 
been rouſed out of the ſleep of Death, and conſtrained 
to cry out, in the bitterneſs of their fouls, What muſt 7 
do to be ſaved? That this religious concern has ſpread 
to every age and ſex ! to moſt orders and degrees of 
men? To abundance of thoſe in particular, who in 
time paſt, were accounted monſters of wickednels, 
drinking in iniquity like water, and committing all un- 
cleanneſs with greedineſs, | 

7. In what age has ſuch a work been wrought, con- 
ſidering the ſwiftneſs as well as the extent of it? When 
have ſuch numbers of ſinners, in ſo ſhort a time, been 
recovered from the error of their ways? When hath 
Religion, I will not ſay ſince the Reformation, but ſince 
the days of Conſtantine the Great, made ſo large a pro- 
greſs in any nation, within ſo {mail a ſpace? I believe, 
hardly can either ancient or modern Hiſtory, ſupply us 
with a parallel inſtance, 


8. Let underſtanding men obſerve alſo the depth of 


the work, ſo extenfively and ſwiftly wrought. It is not 


a {hight or ſuperhcial thing: but multitudes of men 

have been ſo thoroughly convinced of n, that their bones 

were ſmitten aſunder, as it were with a ſword dividing th: 
| x very 


— — - N - — 
N — | — — 6 - * — 
3 >. amd 2 go ey 6＋— — — — — 4 ee - — — — 
” © * 1 5 —— > — - — — — 


234 A TARTUER APPEAL; Part III. 


very joints and marrow. Many of theſe have been 
ſhortly after 4o filled with peace and joy in believing, 
that whether they were iu the body, or out of the body 
they could ſcarcely tell, And in the power-of this 
faith they have trampled under foot whatever the world 
accounts either terrible or deſirable; Having evidenced 
in the ſevereſt trials, ſo fervent a love to God, ſo inva- 
riable and tender a good-will to mankind, particularly 
to their enemies, and ſuch a meaſure of all the fruits of 
holineſs, as were not unworthy the Apoſtolic Age. 
Now ſo deep a repentance, ſo firm a faith, fo fervent 
love and unblemiſhed holineſs, wrought in ſo many per- 
ſons, within ſo ſhort a timg, the world has not ſeen for 
many ages, | 

9. No lels remarkable is the Purity of the Religion 
which has extended itſelf fo deeply and ſwiftly, I ſpeak 
particularly, with regard to the dottrines held by thoſe, 
among whom it is ſo extended. Thoſe of the Church 
of England, at leaſt, muſt acknowledge this. For 
where is there a body of people in the Realm, who, 
number for number, ſo cloſely adhere to what our 
Church delivers as pure dottrine ? Where are there 
thoſe who have approved and do approve themſelves 
more orthodox, more ſound in their opinions? Is there 
a Socinian or Arian among them all? Nay, ESI 
to recite the whole catalogue of Hereſies, enumerated by 
Biſhop Pearſon, it might be aſked, Who can lay any 
one of theſe to their charge? 

Nor 1s their Religion more pure from hereſy, than it 
is from ſuperſtition, In former times, wherever an un- 
uſual concern for the things of God had appeared, on 
the one hand, ſtrange and enormous Opinions continually 
ſprung up with it; on the other, a Zeal for things 
which were no part of Religion, as though they had 
been eſſential branches of it. And many have laid as 
great (if not greater) ſtreſs on trifles, as on the weigh- 
tier matters of the law. But it has not been ſo in the 
preſent caſe. No ſtreſs has been laid on any thing, as 
tho? it were neceſſary to ſalvation, but what is undeni- 
ably. contained in the word of God. And of the things 
contained therein, the ſtreſs laid on each, has been in 


proportion to the nearneſs of its relation; to what 3 
there 


; 


—— IS 


| 


— — ——— nr Ce, — — 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion, 234 


there laid down as the ſum of all, the love of God and 
our neighbour. So pure ſrom ſuperſtition, ſo thoroughly 


feriptural is that Religion, which has lately ſpread in 


this nation. | 
10. It is likewiſe rational as well as ſcriptural ; it is 
ITT from Enthuftaſm, as from Superſtition. It is 
e, the contrary has been continually armed. But 
to afirm is one thing, to prove is another. Who will 
prove, that it is Enthuſiaſim to love God? Even though 
we love him with all our heart? To vejoice in the ſenſe 
of his love to us? To praiſe him, even with all our 
ſtrength ? Who is able to make good this charge, 
againſt the love of all mankind ? Or, laying Rheto- 
rical flouriſhes aſide, to come cloſe to the Queſtion, 
and demonſtrate, that it is Enthufiaſm, in every ſtate we 
are in, therewith to be content? I do but juſt touch 
on the general heads, Ye men of reaſon, give me a 
man, who, ſetting raillery and ill names apart, will 
maintain this by dint of Argument, If not, own this 
Religion is the thing you ſeek ; ſober, manly, ratt- 
onal, divine : however expoſed to the cenſure of thole, 
who are accuſtomed to revite what they underſtand 
not. | | | 
11. It may be farther obſerved, the Religion of thoſe 
we now ſpeak of, is entirely clear from Bigotry. (Per- 
haps this might have been ranked with Superſtition, of 
which it ſeems to be only a particular ſpecies.) They 
are in no wiſe bigotted to Opinions. They do indeed 
hold right opinions. But they are peculizrly cautious, 
not to reſt the weight of Chriſtianity there. They 
have no ſuch overgrown fondneſs for any opinions, as 
to think thoſe alone wil make them Chriſtians, or to 
confine their affeftion and eſtcem to thoſe who agree 
with them therein. There is nothing they are more 
fearful of than this, leſt it ſhonld ſteal upon them un- 
awares, Nor are they 6:gotted to any particular branch 
even of practical Religion. They detire indeed to be 
exact in every jot and tittle, in the very ſmalleſt points 


of Chriſtian Practice. But they are not attached to one 


point more than another ; they aim at uniform, univerſal 

Obedience. They contend for nothing tri/{ing, as if it 

was important; for nothing circumſtantial, as if it were 
X 2 ellential 


236 A TAN TEX APPEAL, Part III. 
eſſential to Chriſtianity; but for every thing in its own 


order. , 5 : 
12. Above all let it be obſerved, that this Religion 
has no mixture of Vice or Unholineſs, It gives no, man 
of any rank or profeſſion, the leaſt licence to fin, It 
makes no allowance to any perſon for ungodlineſs of 
any kind, Not that all who follow after, have attained 
this, either are already perfect. But however that be, 
they plead for no ſin, either inward or outward, 
They condemn every kind and degree thereof, in them- 
ſelves, as well as in other men. Indeed moſt in them- 
ſelves; it being their conſtant care, to bring thoſe 
words home to their own caſe, Whoſoever ſhall keep 
the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty 
of all.” | 

113+. Yet there is not found among them that bitter 
Zeal, in points either of ſmall or of great importance, 
that ſpirit of Perſecution, which has ſo often accompa- 
nied the ſpirit of Reformation. It. is an idle conceit, 
that the ſpirit of perſecution is among the Papiſts only ; 
it is whereloever the devil, that old murderer works; 
and he ſtill worketh in all the, children of diſobedience. 
Of conſequence, all the children of diſobedience, will 
on a thouſand different pretences, and in a thouſand 
different ways, ſo far as God permits, perſecute the 
children of God. But what is ſtill more to be lamented 
is, that the children of God themſelves, have ſo often 
uſed the ſame weapons and perſecuted others, when the 
power was in their own hands. be 3-4 

Can we wholly excuſe thoſe venerable men, our great 
Reformers themſelves, from this charge ? I fear not, 
if we impartially read over any Hiſtory of the Refor- 
mation, What wonder is it then, that when the tables 
were turned, Biſhop Bonner or Gardiner ſhould make 
repriſals? That they ſhould meaſure to others (indeed 
good meaſure, ſhaken together) what had before been 
meaſured to them? Nor is it ſtrange, when we conſider 
the ſingle caſe of Joan Boucher, that God ſhould ſuffer 
thoſe (otherwiſe) holy men, Archbiſhop Cranmer, Bi- 
ſhop Ridley, and Biſhop Latimer, to drink of the lame 
cup with her, 

14. But 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion, 237 

14. But can you find any tincture of this in the caſe 
before us? Do not all who have known the love of 
God, know what ſpirit they are of ? And that the Son 
of Man is not come to deſtroy men's lives but to ſuve them? 
Do they approve of the uſing any kind or degree of 
violence, on any account or pretence whatſoever in mat- 
ters of Religion? Do they not hold the right every 
man has to judge for himſelf, to be ſacred and invi- 
olable ? Do they allow any method of bringing even 
thoſe who are the fartheſt out of the way, who are in 
the groſſeſt errors, to the knowledge of the truth, ex- 
cept the methods of Reaſon and Perſuaſion ? Of Love, 
Patience, Gentleneſs, Long-ſuffering? Is there any 
thing in their practice which is inconfiſtent with this 
their conſtant profeion / Do they in fact hinder their 
own relations or dependents from worſhipping God ac- 
cording to their own conſcience © When they believe 
them to be in error, do they uſe force of any kind, in 
order to bring them out of it? Let the inſtances, if 
there are ſuch, be produced. But if no ſuch are to be 
found, then let all reaſonable men, who believe the 
Bible, own, that a work of God 1s wrought in our 
land: and ſuch a work (if we ſurvey in one view the 
extent of it, the ſwiftneſs with which it is ſpread, the 
depth of that Religion which was fo ſwiftly diffuſed, and 
its purity from all corrupt mixtures,) as it muſt be ac- 
knowledged, cannot eaſily be parallelled, in all theſe 
concurrent circumſtances, by any thing that is found in 
the Engliſh Annals, ſince Chriſtianity was firſt planted 
in this iſland. 
* H. 1. And yet thoſe who can diſcern the face of the 
fy, cannot difcern the figns 1 times. Yet thoſe who 
are eſtcemed wiſe men, do Hot know that God is now- 
reviving his work upon earth. Indeed concerning fome 
of theſe the reaſon is plain; they know not, becauſe 
they think not of it. Their thoughts are otherwiſe em- 
ployed ; their minds are taken up with things of quite 
a different nature. Or, perhaps they may think of it' 
a little now and then, when they have nothing. elle to 
do!] but not ſeriouſly, or deeply; not with any cloſe- 
nels or attention of thought, They are too much in 
haſte to weigh the facts whereof we ſpeak, and to draw 
| A 3 | the 


238 A raxTazR APPEAL, Part III. 
the juſt inference therefrom 5 nor is the conviction 
which they may ſometimes feel ſuffered to fink into their 
hearts ; but things that have a larger ſhare in their affec- 
tions ſoon deſtroy the very traces of it. | 
2. True it is, that there are ſome who think more 
deeply, who are accuſtomed to conſider things from the 
foundation, and to lay circumſtances together, that they 
may judge of nothing before they have full evidence : 
and yet even ſome of theſe appear to be in doubt, con- 
cerning the preſent work. Now, ſuppoſing it to be a 
work of God, how can this be accounted for? That 
they who ſo diligently enquire concerning it, do not 
know the time of their viſitation? Perhaps becauſe of 
the deeply rooted prejudice which they brought with 
them to the enquiry ; and which ſtill hangs on their 
minds, makes it ſcarce poſhble for them to form an im- 
partial judgment. Perhaps, even a ſlight prepofſefion 
might occaſion their ſtumbling on ſome of thoſe rocks 
of offence, which by the wiſe permiſſion of God, al- 
ways did and always will attend any Revival of his 
Work. Nay, it may be, their very caution was 
carried to exceſs, They would not judge before they 
had ſuch evidence as the nature of the thing would not 
admit, or, at leaſt, God did not think fit to give. 

g. All this is very eaſy to conceive, But it may at 
firſt appear ſurpriſing, to find men of renown, men 
luppoſed to be endowed with knowledge, and with abi- 
lities of every kind, flatly, openly, peremptorily deny- 
ing, that there has been any unuſual work of God at 
all! Yea, a late eminent Writer goes farther yet, ac- 
counts it an inſtance of downright Enthuſiaſm, to ima- 
gine, that there is an extraordinary work now wrought 
upon the earth,* _ by 
It avails not to ſay, „No he does not deny this, 
but he denies it to be the work of God.” This is 
palpably trifling : for the work under conſideration, 
is of ſuch: a nature (namely, the converſion of men 
from all manner of fin, to holineſs of heart and life) 
that if it be at any time wrought at all, it muſt be 
the work of God: ſeeing it is God alone, and not 


| * Obſervation, Part III. 


any 


— — ' 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion, 239 


any child of man, who is able to deſtroy the 'works of 
the Devil. 5 | | » 

Vet neither is this difficult to be accounted for, if 
we conſider things more cloſely : tor the ſame prejudice 
which keeps ſome in doubt, may eafily be conceived ſo 


to influence others, as to make them wholly deny the 


work of God. And this it may do in ſeveral ways: it 
may either bring to queſtion the facts related, and hinder 
their endeavouring to be more fully informed ; or pre- 
vent their drawing the inferences from thoſe facts, as 
they would otherwiſe ſee to be plain and undeniable. 
Yea, and it will give ten-fold weight to the offences 


which muſt come, ſo as to over-balance all evidence 


whatſoever. | 
4. This alſo may account for the behaviour of thoſe, 


who not content to ſuſpend their judgment, or to deny 
the work of God, go farther ſtill, even to the length 
of contradicting and blaſpheming, Nay, ſome of theſe 
have expreſſed a deeper abhorrence, and ſhewn a ſtronger 
enmity againſt this, than they were ever known to do 
againſt Popery, Infidelity, or any Hereſy whatſoever. 
Some have perſecuted the Inſtruments whom it pleaſed 
God to ule herein, only not to the death and others 


have treated in the ſame manner, all thoſe whom they 


termed their Followers. A few inſtances of this it may 
be proper to mention, out of the very many which 
might be recited, | 

5. On the 20th of June, 174, a great multitude of 
people gathered together, chiefly from Walſal, Darleſ- 
ton, and Bilſton, in Wenſbury Church-yard, Stafford» 
ſhire, They went from thence (after by ſounding a 
horn they had gathered their whole company together) 
to Mr, Eaton's houſe,: in the middle of the town, who 
was at that time Conſtable, He went to the door with 
his Conſtable's ſtaff, and began reading the Act of Par- 
lament againſt Riots; but the ſtones flew fo thick about 
his head, that he was forced to leave off reading and 
retire, They broke all his windows, the door of his 
houſe, and a large clock in pieces. They went then to 
above fourſcore other houſes, in many of which there 


were not three panes of glals left, 


„ n 
„ 


240 A TrARTRER APPEAL, Part III. 

6. About Whitſuntide, 1743, a mob aroſe at Darlef- 
ton, (near Wenſbury) and broke all the windows (be- 
ſides ſpoiling many of their goods) of Joſhua Coriſtable, 
John Cotterel, Thomas Butler, Thomas Wilkinſon, 

Aaron Longmore, William Powell, Ann Evans, Walter 
Carter, Samuel Carter, and Thomas Wilks. 

Edward .Martin, Ann Low, Joan Fletcher, Edward 
Horton, Mumford Wilks, Joſhua Yardly, and Robert 
Deacon, had all their windows broke twice. 

James Foſter, Widow Hires, and Jonathan Jones 
had their windows broke, and money | extorted to fave 
their houſes, 

James Foſter and Joice Wood had their windows 
broken, and their goods broken and ſpoiled. 

Joſ. Spittle had his windows broke, his houſe broken 
open, ſome goods ſpoiled, and ſome taken away. 

William Woods had his windows: broke twice, and 
himſelf compelled to go along with the rabble. 

Elizabeth Lingham, a widow with five children, had 
her goods ſpoiled, her ſpinning wheel (the ſupport of 
her family) broke ; and her Pariſh Allowance reduced 
from 25s. and 6d. to 1s. and 6d. a week. 

Valentine Amberſley had his windows broke twice; 
and his wife, big with child, beaten with clubs. 

George Wynn had his windows and goods broken, 
and to fave his houſe, was forced to give them drink. 

Thomas Day had his windows and goods broken, and 
was forced to remove from the town. 

Joſeph Stubbs had his windows broke twice, and his 
wife ſo frightened, that ſhe miſcarried, 

J. On June 20, 1743, John Baker, at the head of 
a large mob came to the houſe of Jonas Turner, at 
Weſt-Bramwick, near Wedneſbury, and aſked him, 
« whether he would keep from theſe men that went 
preaching about, and go to the Church? He an- 
{wered, I do go to the Church. But I never ſee any 
of you there.” Preſently ene Daniel Oniens with a 
great club, broke great Dare of the' window at one 


blow, Others laid hold of him, and dragged” him 
about ſixty yards, before he could get looſe from 
— his windows, and 

threw. 


them, N e they brok 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 241 
thre into his houſe abundance of ſtones, to break his 
, About four in the afternoon they came to the houſe 
of Widow Turner of Weſt-Bramwick. They threw 
in the bricks and ſtones ſo faſt, that ſhe was forced to 
open the door and run out among them. One of the 
daughters cried out, my mother will be killed!” On 
which they fell to throwing ſtones at her. She ran in- 
| to a neighbour's houſe, but before ſhe could ſhut the 
| door, they broke the bottom off with a brick end. 

They followed her other daughters with ſtones, and one 
with a great ſtake, She ran into another houſe much 
frightened, expecting to. be murdered. The Widow 
aſked, © How can you come and abuſe us thus? On 
which, one came with a large club, and ſwore, if ſhe” 
ſpoke another word, he would knock her on the head, 
and bury her in the ditch.” Then he went and broke 
all the glaſs that was left. The ſame they did to many 
of the neighbouring houſes, 7 
8. On the 19th of June, James Yeaman, of Walſal 
ſaw Mary Bird in her father's houſe at Wenſbury, and 
ſwore, by G— you are there now, but we will kill 
you to-morrow.” Accordingly he came with a mob 
the next day; and after they had broken all the win- 
dows, he took up a ſtone, and ſaid, © Now by G—1I 
will kill you,” He threw it, and ſtruck her on the 
ſide of the head. The blood guſhed out, and ſhe drop- 
| ped down immediately, rs ee? aer 
| The ſame day they came to John Turner's houſe, and 
| after they had broke the windows, caſements, and ciel- 
| ing, one of them cried out, © I ſuppoſe now you will 
go to your dear Jeſus's wounds and ſee them opened for 
you.“ | N 
Another of them took Mr. Hands of Wenſbury, by 
the throat, ſwore he would be the death of him, gave 
| him a ſwing round, and. threw him upon the ground, 
| As ſoon as he roſe, one Equal Baker gave him a blow 
| on the eye, and knocked him down again. In about 
; half an hour the mob came to his houſe, and broke all 
the windows, except about twenty panes. The kitchen 
windows they cleared, lead, bars and all, broke the 
window-poſts, and threw them into the . The 
op 


. 
| 
ö 
| 
— 


24% A'ranrnex APPEAL, Part III. 


ſhop way ſhut up (he being an Apothecary :) but they 
quickly? roke it open, broke all the pots and bottles in 
pieces, and deſtroyed all his medicines. They broke 
alſo the ſhelves and drawers in the ſhop to pieces, and 
many of his houſehold' goods, 
In the latter end of June, John Griffiths, of Wenſ- 
bury, and Francis Ward, went to Mr. D. Juſtice of 
the Peace. They told him the condition they and their 
neighbours were in, their houſes broken, and their 
goods ſpoiled. He replied, © I ſuppoſe you follow 
theſe parſons that come about, I will neither meddle 
nor make,” 

g. On January 13, 1743-4, the 250 roſe again at 
Dalleſton, broke all the windows of all who followed 
thts Way, (except two or three who bought themſelves 
off) broke open ſeveral houſes, and took what they 
liked, the people belonging to them having fled for 
their lives. 

About the ſame time, the Rev. Mr. E. — came to 
Darleſton; and meeting ſome others at Thomas For- 
ſhew's they drew up a writing, and Nicholas Winſpur, 
the Crier of the town, gave public notice, “that all the 
people of the Society muſt come to Mr. Forſhew's, and 
ſign it; or elſe their houſes would be pulled down im- 
mediately.“ It was to this effect, © that they would 
never read, or ſing, or pray together, or hear theſe Par- 
ſons any more. 

Several ſigned this through fear. They made every 
one who did, lay down a penny — To make the moo 
drink,” 

About Candlemas, the wife of Joſhua Conſtable, of 
Darleſton, was going to Wenfbury, when a mob met 
her in the road, threw her down ſeveral times, and 
abuſed her in a manner too horrible to write. A War- 
rant was procured for ſome of theſe. But one of them 
only was carried before Mr, G , who came back 
and told his companions, that the Juſtice ſaid, “ that 
they might go home about their buſineſs.“ On this the 
mob role again, came to Joſhua's ' houſe, and deſtroyed 
all the goods therein. They likewiſe broke and ſpoiled 
all his ſhop tools, threw the tiles off the roof of the 
Houle, and pulled down one room, the joiſts of _ 

oy 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion? 24%, 
they carried away with them, All his gunlocks they 
took away; they tore in pieces all his wife's linen, cut 
the bed and bedſtead, ſo that it was good for nothing, 
and tore her Bible and Common-Prayer Book all to 
pieces. .She and her huſband retired to another houſe, 
But one telling the mob they were there, they ſwore, 
„ they would tear it down immediately, if the man 
let them ſtay any longer.“ So they went out into 
Move nd and ſnow, not knowing where to lay their 
hea 

10. On Tueſday, January g, 1743-4, Henry Old 
came to John Griffith's houſe, ſaying, * If he did not 
leave following this Way, he had a hundred men at 
his command, who ſhould come and pull his houſe 
down.” Soon after he brought ſome with him, but 
the neighbours gave him money, and ſent him away for 
that time, | | 
Monday Feb. 6. Between ſeven and eight at night, 
came part of the ſame company. Hearing them afar 
off, John and his wife faſtened the door, and left the 
houſe, Some of the neighbours going in ſoon after, 
found them deſtroying all they could, Two chairs 
and ſeveral bundles of linen were laid upon the fire, 
After they had deſtroyed what they could, they loaded 
themſelves with cloaths and meat, and went their 
Way. ; 

The ſame day public Notice was given at Walſal 
by a paper fixt up there, That all who deſigned 
to aſſiſt in breaking the windows, and plunderin 
the houles of the Methodiſts at Wenſbury, ſhould be 
ready at ten o'clock, the next morning, on the Church- 
Hill.” | 

11. The next morning, February 7, (being Shrove- 
Tueſday) about half an hour after ten, great number 
of men were gathered together on the Church-Hill. 
Ihence they marched down, {ume armed with {words, 
{ome with clubs, and ſome with axes. They firſt fel] 
upon Benjamin Watſon's houſe, and broke many of the 
tiles, and all the windows. Next they came to Mr, 
Addingbrook's, broke a fine clock, with many of his 
goods, and ſtole all the things they could carry away. 
Ihe next houle was Jane Smith's, whoſe windows they 

e 


7 


#14 Aranrursx APPEAL, Part III. 


broke, with what little goods ſhe had. The next was 
Mr. Bird's, where they deſtroyed every thing th 
found, except what they carried away; cutting the beds 
in pieces, as they did all the beds which they could any 
where find, Thence they went to Mr. Edge's houſe : 
he was ill of a fever; ſo, for a ſum of money, they 
aſt it over. The next houſe was Mr, Hand's. They 
broke all his counters, boxes and drawers, and all 
(except ſome bedſteads) that axe or hammer could 
break. They ſpilt all his drugs and chymical medi- 
cines, and ſtole every thing they could carry, even all 
his and his wife's wearing apparel, beſide what they 
had on, TY 
12. Mr. Eaton's houſe was next. They broke all 
his windows, and all his inſide doors in pieces, cut the 
lead off his houſe, deſtroyed or ſtole whatever they 
could lay their hands on. Some Gentlemen offered to 
ſtop them, if he would ſign a paper implying, 4 That 
he would never hear theſe Parſons more. But he told 
them, He had felt already what a wounded conſcience 
was; and by the grace of God he would wound his 
conſcience no more.” 

After they had done at Mr, Eaton's, they plundered 
ſeveral other houſes in Wenſbury and Weſt-Bram- 
wick. It is ſcarce poſſible to deſcribe the outrages 
they committed, Only they left them they plundered 
alive. 

While they were plundering John Turner's houſe, 
he waded through the brook, to try if he could fave 
ſome of his goods, which one David Garrington was 
carrying away. Upon which Garrington told him, © It 
would the ſame here as it was in Ireland, for there 
would be a Maſlacre very quickly, And he wiſhed it 
Was now.“ 

13. About eleven o' clock, Sarah, the wife of John 
Sheldon, being told, the mob was coming to her houſe, 
went and met them at the gate. She aſked John Baker, 
their Captain, What they were come for ? He 
anſwered, if ſhe would have nothing to do with thoſe 
People, not a pennyworth of her goods ſhould be hurt.” 

he made no reply. Then they broke the door open, 
and began breaking and plundering the goods. One 

e coming 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 245 


eoming out with a fire-ſhovel, ſhe begged him, © not to 
take that away.“ He (wore, * if ſhe ſpoke another Word 
he would beat her brains out.“ | 
John Sheldon was this while helping Thomas Parkes 
to hide his goods, though he knew by the noiſe. they 
were breaking his own to pieces. Between two and 
three he came to his houſe with William Sitch. Wil- 
liam aſked Sarah, How ſhe did? Saying, © For his 
part, he took joyfully the ſpoiling of his goods, 'She 
anſwered, that © ſeeing ſo much wickednels, ſhe could 
not rejoice ; but ſhe bleſſed God ſhe could bear it pa- 
tiently, and ſound not the leaſt . in her.“ John 
Sheldon ſeeing the ſpoil they had made, ſmiled and 
faid, „Here is ſtrange work.” His wife told him, “if 
ſhe had complied with their terms, not one penny- 
worth would have deen hurt.“ He replied, © That if 
ſhe had complied to deny the Truth, and he had found 
his goods whole on that account, he ſhould never have 
been eaſy as long as he lived 5 but he bleſſed God that 
ſhe had rather choſen to ſuffer wrong.“ 
The mob continued to riſe for fix days together, The 
damage they did in and about Wenſbury, at the very 
loweſt computation, amounted to five hundred and four 
pounds, ſeventeen ſhillings. | 
Wedneſday, October 19, 1743, I came to Birming- 
ham, in my way to Newcaſtle. Thurſday, October 
20. ſeveral perſons from Wenſbury earneſtly deſired 
me to call there, I yielded to their importunity, and, 
went, I was fitting and writing at Francis Ward's, in 
the afternoon ; when the cry aroſe, © That the Darlef- 
ton mob had beſet the houſe.” 1 called together thoſe 
that were in the houſe, and prayed, that God would 
ſcatter the people that delight in war, And it was fos 
one went one way, and one another ; ſo that in half an 
hour the houſe was clear on every ſide. But before five, 
they returned with greater numbers, The cry of all. 
was, “Bring out the Miniſter ! ?? 
1 defired one to bring the Captain of the mob into 
the houſe, After a few words mterchanged, the lion 
was as a lamb. I then deſired him to bring in one or twa 
more of the moſt angry of his companions.” Tlediditoi; 
aud, in twe ming, their mind was, changed too. I. 
| * theu. 


2:6 A raxTner APPEAL, Part III. 


then bade them who were in the room make way, that 
I might go out among the people. As ſoon as I was 
in the midſt of them, I faid, © Here I am: what do 
you want with me?” Many cried out, We want 
you to go with us to the Juſtice,” I told them, 
„ That I will with all my heart.“ So I walked be- 
fore, and two or three hundred of them followed, to 
Bentley-Hall, two miles from Wenſbury. But a ſer- 
vant came out, and told them, “ Juſtice Lane was not 
to be ſpoken with.” Here they were at a ſtand, till 
one adviſed to go to Juſtice Perſehouſe, at Wallſal. 
About ſeven we came to his houſe; but he alſo ſent 
word, “ That he was in bed, and could not be ſpoken 
with.!“ | | 5 
All the company were now pretty well agreed, to 
make the beſt of their way home ; but we had not gone 
a hundred yards, when the mob of Walſal came pour- 
ing in like a flood, The Darleſton mob ſtood agaiuft 
them for awhile ; but, in a ſhort time, ſome being 
knocked down, and others much hurt, the reſt ran 
away, and left me in their hands. | 
Io attempt to ſpeak was vain, the noiſe being like 
that of taking a city by ſtorm : ſo they dragged me along 
till they came to the town, at a few hundred yards dil. 
tance ; where, ſeeing the door of a large bout Bpen, I 
endeavoured to go in: but a man catching me by the 
hair, (my hat having been caught away at the beginning) 
pulled me back into the middle of the mob; who were 
as ſo many ramping and roaring lions. They hurried 
me from thence, through the main ſtreet, from one end 
of the town to the other. I continued ſpeaking all 
the time to thole within hearing, feeling no pain or 
wearinels, : 
At the weſt end of the town, ſeeing a door half 
open, I made towards it, and would have gone in, but 
a gentleman in the ſhop would not ſuffer me, ſaying, 
„They would pull the houſe down, if I did.“ How- 
ever, here I ſtood, and aſked, © Are you willing to 
hear me ſpeak ? Many cried out, No, no; knock 
His brains out.” Others ſaid, © Nay ; but we will 
hear ham ſpeak. firſt.“ I began aſking, * What hurt 
have I done you?. Whom among you have I wronged 
Es os in 


*Y - 


[| 
| 
| 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 247 


in word or deed ? ** And continued ſpeaking till my 
voice failed, Then the floods hfted up their voice 
again; many crying out, Bring him away, bring him 
away!“ 

Feeling my ſtrength. renewed, I ſpoke again, and 
broke out aloud into prayer. And now, one of the 
men who had headed the mob before, turned, and ſaid, 
ie Sir, follow me: not a man ſhall touch the hair of 
your head.” Two or three more confirmed his words. 
At the ſame time the Mayor (for it was he that ſtood in 
the ſhop) cried out, © For ſhame, for ſhame 5; let him 
go.” An honeſt butcher ſpoke to the ſame effect: and 
ſeconded his words by laying hold of four or five one 
after another, who were running on, the moſt fiercely. 
The people then dividing to the right and left, thoſe 
three or four men who had ſpoken before, took me be- 
tween them, and carried me through the midſt ; bit- 
terly proteſting, © They would knock down any that 
touched him.” But on the bridge the mob rallied 
again: we therefore went on one ſide, over a Mill-dam, 
and thence through the meadows, till a little after ten, 
God brought me lafe to Wenſbury, having loſt only a 
put * my waiſtcoat, and a little {kin from one of my 

ands. | | 

I believe every reaſonable man will allow, that nothing 
can poſſibly excuſe theſe proceedings; ſeeing they are 
open, bare-faced violations, both of juſtice and mercy, 
and of all laws divine and human. 4 


III. I ſuppoſe no Proteſtant will undertake to defend 
ſuch proceedings, even towards the vileſt miſcreants. 
But abundance of excuſes have been made, if not for 
oppofing it thus, yet for denying this work to be of God, 
and for not acknowledging the time of our viſitation. 

1. Some alledge, that the Dofrines of theſe men are 
falſe, erroneous, and enthufiaſiic ; that they are new, and 


unheard of till of late; that they are Quakeriſm, Fa- 


naticiſm, Popery, 


This whole pretence has been already cut up by the 
roots; it having been ſhewn at large, that every branch, 


of this Doctrine, is the plain Doctrine of Scripture, "2 
interpreted by our own Church, Thereſoge, it cannot 


JF 


\ 1 
s 5 . © 
* l 1 
Y mm 
% 
33 
7 i 
C : ; 
ä : 
7 N 
L . 
by * 


Fry 1 * 
+ «>» f 
928 ö 


248 A rARAT NEX APPEAL, Paſt III. 
either falſe or erronegus, provided the Scripture be true. 
Neither can it be enthufiaſtic, unleſs the ſame epithet 
belongs to our Articles, Homilies, and Liturgy. Nor 
yet can theſe Doctrines be termed new no newer, at 
leaſt than the reign' of Queen Elizabeth; not even 
with regard to the way of expreſſion, or the manner 
wherein they are propoſed. And as to the ſubſtance, 
they are more ancient ſtill ;\ as ancient not only as the 
Goſpel, as the times of Iſaiah, or David, or Moſes, 
but as the firſt Revelation of God to man, If therefore 
they were unheard of till of late, in any that is termed 
a Chriſtian country, the greater guilt is on thoſe, who, 
2 Ambaſſadors of Chriſt, ought to publiſh them day 
day. | | 
" Renakicifin if it means any thing at all, means the 
fame with enthufraſm, or religious madneſs, from which 
was oblerved before) theſe doctrines are diſtant as 
far as the Eaſt from the Weſt. However, it is a conve- 
nient word to be thrown out, upon any thing we do not 
like; becauſe ſcarce one reader in a thouſand, has any 
idea of what it means. If any part of this doctrine 
is held by the Quakers, there is the more reaſon to re- 
jvice. I would to God they held it all: though the 
Doctrine itſelf, would be neither better nor worſe for 
this. 

Popery, m the mouth of many men, means juſt no- 
ching; or at moſt, © Something very horrid and bad.“ 
But Popery, properly ſpeaking, is, the diſtinguiſhing 
Doctrines of the Church of Rome. They are ſummed 
up in the Twelve Articles which the Council of Trent 
added to the Nicene Creed. Now who can find the 
leaſt connexion between any of theſe, and the doctrines 
whereof we are ſpeaking ? | 

2. Others alledge, Tr Doctrine is too ſtrict. 
They make the way to heaven too narrow.” And this 
is in truth the original objection, (as it was almoſt the 
only one for ſome time) and is ſecretly at the bottom 
of a thouſand more, which appear in various forms. 
But do they make the way to heaven any narrower, 
than our Lord and his Apoftles made it ? Is their 
Doctrine ſtricter than that ef the Bible? Confider 


B only a few plain texts, © Thou ſhalt love the Lord thy 


God 


ere » 002, 6364 — = — 


— 28 


ö 
| 
. 


ſaved, but thoſe of their own way,” Moſt ſurely they 
do. For as there is but one heaven, ſo there is but one 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 249 


God with all thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with 
all thy ſoul, and with all thy ſtrength.— For every idle 
word which men ſhall ſpeak, they ſhall give an account 
in the day of judgment. Whether ye cat or drink, or. 
whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God.“ If 
their Doctrine is ſtricter than this, they are to blame. 
But you know in your conſcience, it is not. And 
who can be one jot leſs ſtrift, without corrupting the 
word of God ? Can any Steward of the Myſteries of 
God be found faithful, if he change any part of that 
ſacred Depoſitum No. He can abate nothing; 
he can ſojten nothing. He is conſtrained to declare 
to all men, I may not bring down the Scripture to. 
your taſte; You muſt come up to it, or periſh for 
ever,” 15 | 
g. This is the real ground of that other popular cry, 
concerning the Uncharitableneſs of theſe men.” Un- 
charitable are they? In what reſpect? Do they not 
feed the hungry and clothe the naked? No, that is not 
the thing. They are not wanting in this. But they 
are ſo uncharitable in judging ! They think none can 
be ſaved, but thoſe of their own way. They damn all 
the world beſide themſelves, | . 
What do you mean?; They think none can be 


way to it: even the way of faith in Chriſt, (for we 

ſpeak not of Opinions, or outward modes of worſhip, - 

the way of love to God and man, the Highway of Ho- 
lineſs. And is it uncharitable, to think or ſay, that 
none can be ſaved, but thoſe who walk in this way ? A 
Was he then uncharitable, who declared, * He that be- 
lieveth not ſhall be damned? Or he that ſaid, „Fol- 

low holineſs, without which no man ſhall fee the 
Lord ?” And again: © Tho? I beſtow all my goods 


to feed the poor, and tho' I give my body to be burned, 


yet if I have not (ayamy,) Charity, Love, all this pro- 
fiteth me nothing.“ . | | 

But they damn all,“ you ſay, © beſide themſelves.” . 
Damn all! What kind of word is this? They damn 
no man. None is able to damn any man, but the Lord 
and Judge of all, What you probably mean by this 
| Y 3 ſtrange 


250 AvARTUurx APPEAL, Part III. 
ſtrange expreſſion is, they declare that God condemns 
all, beſide thoſe who believe in Jeſus Chriſt, and love 
him, and keep his commandments. And ſo muſt you 
alſo, or you fin againſt God, and your neighbour, and 
your own ſoul. But is there any uncharitableneſs in 
this? In warning finners to flee from the wrath to 
come? On the contrary, not to warn a poor, blind, 
ſtupid wretch, that he is hanging over the mouth of 
hell, would be ſo inexcuſable a want of charity, as 
would bring his blood upon our head. 

4. But there is no room ſor diſpute, touching theſe 
doctrines in general, ſeeing our Lord gives you ſo plain 
a rule, by which you may eaſily and infallibly know, 
whether they be of God. The tree is known by its 
fruit ; either therefore make the tree good, and its fruit 
good; or elſe make the tree corrupt, and its fruit cor- 
rupt,” (Matt. xii. 3g.) Now what fruit does the tree 
before us bring forth? Look and ſee ; believe your 
own eyes and ears. Sinners leave their ſins, The ſer. 
vants of the devil become the ſervants of God. Is this 
good or evil fruit? That Vice loſes ground, and Vir. 
tue, practical Religion, gains? O diſpute no more, 
Know the tree by its fruit. Bow, and own the finger 

5. But many who on theſe doctrines to be of God, 

et cannot be reconciled to the inſtruments he hath 
made uſe of, A very common exception taken againſt 
theſe is (and was from the beginning) © that they are fo 
young.” Therefore (abundance of men have readily 
inferred) © This work cannot be of God,” | 

Perhaps they are not ſo young as you conceive, Mr, 
Whitekeld is now upwards of thirty; my brother is 
thirty-ſeven years of age. I have lived above forty-two 
years. And a gentleman in Cornwall, for whom I often 
preach, has the merit of having lived threeſcore and 
ſeventeen years. EN ITS bs 

But, ſuppoſing the antecedent true, what a conſe- 

uence is this? What ſhadow of Scripture have you 
to lupport it p Doth not God ſend by whom he will 
fend? And who ſhall fay to him, What doeſt thou f 
Thele are too young; fend elder men.” What ſha- 
dow! of reaſon ? Is it not pollible, that a perſon of 


thirty 
/ 1 f 


— Ig > * * — 
— — 


— 


— — 2 — 
— r 


— 


= — 
oo — 


— 


% 


Wy / 


—_— 
— 


7. 
* 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 251 
thirty or forty may have as true a judgment in the 
things of God, and as great a bleſſing attending his 
preaching, as one of fifty or fourſcore ? 

I wiſh you would explain yourſelf a little on this 
head 3 | 7+) 


Scire velim, verbo, pretium quotus arroget annus ? 


How old do you require a man to be, before God ſhall 
have leave to ſpeak by his mouth P—O my ' brethren, 
who could have believed any ſerious man would once 
bave named ſuch an argument as this? Seeing both 
- Scripture and Reaſon teach, that God herein giveth ac- 
count to none of his ways. But he worketh by whom- 
ſoever he will work; he ſheweth mercy by whom he 
will ſhew mercy, e 

6. But there are only a few young heads.” I 
cannot but obizrve here, what great pains have been 
taken, what diligence ſhewn, to make and to keep them 
few. What arts have not been uled, to keep back 
thoſe of the Clergy in particular, who have been clearly 
convinced from time to time, that they ought to join 
hearts and hands in the work? On this occaſion, it 
has been accounted meritorious to ſay all manner of evil 
of us fallcly : to promiſe them whatever their hearts 
deſired, if they would refrain from theſe men: and, 
on the other hand, to threaten them with heavy things, 
if ever they went among them- more. So that how 
fully ſoever they were convinced, they could not act 
according to their conviction, unleſs they could give 
up at once all thought of preferment, either in Church 
or State, nay, all hope of even a Fellowſhip, or poor 
Scholarſhip in either Univerſity, Many allo bave in 
threatened, that if they went on in this way, what 
| Jittle they had ſhould be taken from them. And many 
have, on this very account, been difowned by their 
deareſt friends and ncareſt relations. So that there was 
no poſſibility the number of theſe labourers ſhould ever 
be increaſed at all, unleſs by thoſe who could break 
through all theſe ties, who deſired nothing in the pre- 
ient world, who counted neither their fortunes, nor 
friends, nor lives, dear unto themſelves, ſo they might 
only keep a conſcience void of offence towards G 
and towards men. 


7. But 


ES, yy b 
8 * <n—_rs 
=> ——_— 
* 


ff E La 
= <= * —— 


— — — . * 


— 
— — _ 


o — 
> — 


Bom ED TH ˙ 2 


_ — 
. 


2 


—Z— — — ,  __ ⁵égl! — 


= * — =. > 
* 


N 
5 
* 2 
6 * 
* ö 
4 : : 
' = 
. 
* : 
* 
£ 
\ * 
U 
. 
- 
i" 9 
4 
— 4 6 * 
= n 
| 
: 
"i | 
1 
0 
LE 
: 
bn f 
: 
if 
. 
it 
F 


— 


282 A rART HTR APPEAL, Part III. 
7. But what do you infer from their fewneſs? That 
becauſe they are few, therefore God cannot work by 
them? Upon what Scripture do you ground this? I 
thought it was the ſame to him to ſave by many or by 
few. Upon what reaſon? Why cannot God fave ten 
thouſand ſouls by one man, as well as by ten thouſand ? 
How little, how inconſiderable a circumſtance is number 
before God? Nay, is there not reaſon to believe, that 
whenſoever God is pleaſed to work a great deliverance, . 
ſpiritual or temporal, he may firſt ſay, as of old, . The 
people are too many for me to give the Midianites into 
their hands P' May he not purpoſely chuſe few as well 
as inconſiderable inſtruments, for the greater manifeſta- 
tion of his own glory ? Very few, I grant, are the 
inſtruments now employed ; yet a great work is wrought, 
already, And the fewer they are by whom this large 
harveſt hath hitherto been gathered in, the more evi- 


dent muſt it appear to unprejudiced minds, That the 


work is not of man, but of God. t 
8. But they are not only few, but unlearned alſo.“ 
This is another grievous offence ; and is by many eſ- 
teemed a ſufficient excuſe, for not acknowledging the 
work to be of God. | 3 
The ground of this offence is partly true. Some of 
thoſe who now preach are unlearned. They neither 
underſtand the ancient languages, nor any. of the 
branches of philoſophy. And yet this objection might 
have been ſpared, by many of thoſe who have frequently 
made it: becauſe they are unlearned too (tho? accounted - 
otherwiſe.) They have not themſelves the very thing 
*they require 1n others, 8 5 
Men in general are under a great miſtake with regard 
to what is called, The Learned World.” They do 
not know, they cannot eaſily imagine, how little learn- 
ing there is among them. I do not ſpeak of abſtruſe 
learning; but of what all Divines, at leaſt of any note, 
are ſuppoſed to have, viz, The knowledge of the 
Tongues, at leaſt Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and. of 
the common Arts and Sciences. | 
How few men of learning, ſo called, underſtand 
Hebrew? Even ſo far as to read a plain chapter in 
Genelis? Nay, how few underitand Greek? Make 
an 


a - 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion, 238 


an eaſy experiment. Deſire that grave man, who 1s 
urging this objection, only to tell you the Engliſh of 
the firſt paragraph that occurs in one of Plato's Dia- 
logues ? I am afraid we may go farther ſtill, How 
few underſtand Latin? Give one of them an Epiſtle 
of Tully, and fee how readily he will explain it with- 
out his Dictionary. If he can hobble through that, tis 
odds but a Georgick in Virgil, or a Satire of Perſius 
ſets him faſt, 

And with regard to the Arts and Sciences : how few 
underſtand ſo much as the general principles of Logic ? 
Can one in ten of the Clergy (O grief of heart !) Or 
of the Maſters of Arts in either Univerſity, when an 
argument is brought, tell you even the Mood and Fi- 
gure wherein it is propoled ? Or compleat an Enthy- 
meme ? Perhaps, you do not ſo much as underſtand 
the term: ſupply the premiſs which is wanting, in 
order to make it a full Categorical Syllogiſm. Can one 
in ten of them demonltrate a Problem or Theorem in 
Euclid's Elements? Or define the common terms uſed 
in Metaphyſics ? Or intelligibly explain the firſt Prin- 
ciples of it? Why then will they pretend to that 
learning, which they are conſcious to themſelves they 
have not? Nay, and cenſure others who have it not, 
and do not pretend to it ? Where are Sincerity and 
Candour fled ? 

It will eaſily be obſerved, that I do not depreciate 
Learning of any kind. The knowledge of the Lan- 
guages is a valuable talent; ſo is the knowledge of the 
Arts and Sciences. Both the one and the other may 
be employed to the glory of God, and the good of men. 
But yet I aſk, Where hath God declared in his Word, 
that he cannot, or will not make uſe of men that have 
it not? Has Moſes, or any of the Prophets affirmed 
this? Or our Lord? Or any of his Apoſtles? You 
are ſenſible all theſe are againſt you. You know the 
Apoltles themlelves, all except St. Paul, were argperg 
afEZuꝛm i xa anwru common, unphiloſphical, unlet- 
* terred men. | 
9. © What! Then you make yourſelves like the 
Apoſtles.” Becauſe this filly objection has ſo often 
been urged, I will for once ſpend a few words upon it, 


though 


4 


% AAT APPEAL, Part III. 


- © though it does not deſerve that honour, Why, muſt 
not every man, whether Clergyman or Layman, be in 
ſome reſpects, like the Apoſtles, or go to hell? Can 
any man be ſaved, if he be not holy, like the Apoſtles ? 
A follower of them, as they were of Chriſt? And 
ought not every Preacher of the Goſpel, to be in a 
peculiar manner like the Apoſtles, both in holy tem- 
3 in exemplarineſs of life, and in his indefatigable 
abours for the good of fouls? Woe unto every Am- 
baſſador of Chriſt, who is not like the Apoſtles in this! 
In holineſs; in making full. proof of his miniſtry ; in 
ſpending and being ſpent for Chriſt! We cannot, and 
therefore we need not be like them in working outward 
miracles. But we may and ought, in working together 
with God for the ſalvation of men. And the ſame 
God who was always ready to help their infirmities, is 
ready to help ours alſo. He who made them workmen 
that needed not to be aſhamed, will teach us alſo rightly 
to divide the word of truth. In this reſpett likewiſe, 
in reſpect of his having help from God, for the work 
whereunto he is called, every Preacher of the Goſpel 
is like the Apoſtles, Otherwile he is of all men moſt 
miſerable. 3 e . 
10. And I am bold to affirm, that theſe unlettered 
men have help from God for that great work, the ſav- 
ing ſouls from death; ſeeing he hath enabled, and doth 
enable them ſtill, to turn many to righteouſneſs. 'Thus 
hath he * deſtroyed the wiſdom of the wiſe, and brought 
to.nought the underſtanding of the prudent.” When 
they imagined they had effectually ſhut the door, and 
locked up every paſſage, whereby any help could come 
to two or three Preachers, weak m body as well as 
ſoul ; who they might reaſonably believe would, hu- 
manly ſpeaking, wear themſelves out in a ſhort time: 
when they had gained tbeir point, by ſecuring (as they 
fuppoled) all the men of learning in the nation; © He 
that ſitteth in heaven laughed them to ſcorn,” and 
came upon them by a way they thought not of. Out 
of the ſtones he raiſed up thoſe who ſhould beget children 
to Abraham, We had no more foreſight of this than 
you. Nay, we had the deepeſt prejudices againſt it: 
untill we could not but own, that God gave wildom 
| | from 


ſinners were daily converted to God. 


1 
| 


— 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 25% 
from above to theſe unlearned and ignorant men; fo 
that the work of the Lord proſpered in their hand, and 

Indeed in the one thing which they profels to know, 
they are not ignorant men. I truſt there is not one of 
them who is not able to go through ſuch an examina- 
tion, in ſubſtantial, practical, experimental Divinity, 
as few of our Candidates for Holy Orders, even in the 
Univerſity, (I ſpeak it with ſorrow and ſhame, and in 
tender love) are able to do. But oh | what manner of 
examination do moſt of thoſe Candidates go through ? 
And what proof are the Teſtimonials commonly 
brought (as ſolemn as the form is wherein they run,) 
either of their piety or knowledge, to whom are in- 
truſted thoſe ſheep which God hath purchaſed with his 
own blood ! 

11. + But they are Laymen. You ſeem to be ſen- 
ſible yourſelf of the ſtrength of this objection. For as 
many as you have anſwered, I obſerve you have never 
once ſo much as touched on this.“ 

I have not. Yet it was not diſtruſt of my cauſe, 

but tenderneſs to you which occaſioned my ſilence. I 
had ſomething to advance on this head alſo : but I was 
afraid you could not bear it. I was conſcious to my- 
ſelf, that ſome years ſince, to touch this point, was to 
touch the apple of my eye. And this makes me almoſt 
unwilling to ſpeak now ; leſt 1 ſhould ſhock the preju- 
dices I cannot remove. 
Suffer me, however, juſt to intimate to you ſome 
things, which I would leave to your farther conſider- 
ation, The Scribes of old, who were the ordinary 
Preachers among the Jews, were not Prieſts; they were 
not better than Laymen. Yea, many of them were in- 
capable of the Prieſthood, being of the tribe of Simeon, 
not of Levi. 

Hence probably it was, that the Jews themſelves 
never urge it as an objettion to our Lord's preaching, 
(even thoſe who did not acknowledge or believe, that 


he was ſent of God in an extraordinary: character) thas 


he was no Prieſt after the Order of Aaron, Nor in- 
deed could be ; ſeeing he was of the tribe of Judah. 
| Nor 


266 A ranrnst APPEAL, Part III. 


Nor does it appear, that any objefed this to the 
- Apoſtles. So far from it, that at Antioch in Pifidia, 
we find the Ruler of the Synagogue lending to Paul 
end Barnabas, ſtrangers juſt come into the city, faving, 
Men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhorta- 
tion for the people, ſay on,“ Acts xin. 15. | 
If we conſider theſe things, we. ſhall be leſs ſurpriſed 
at what occurs in the 8th chapter of the Acts: © At 
that time there was a great perſecution againſt the 
Church, and they were all ſcattered abroad: (i. e. all 
the Church, all the Believers in Jeſus throughout the 
regions of Judea and Samaria, (ver. 1.) * Therefore 
they that were ſrattered abroad, went every where 
preaching the word,” (ver. 4.) Now, what ſhadow 
of reaſon have we to fay, or think, that all theſe were 
ordained before they preached ? 
12, If we come to later times: Was Mr. Calvin or- 
dained ? Was he either Prieſt or Deacon? And were 
not moſt of thoſe whom it pleaſed God to employ in 
promoting the Reformation abroad, Laymen alſo ? 
Could that great work have been promoted at all in 
many places, if Laymen had not preached? And yet 
how ſeldom do the very Papiſts urge this, as an objec- 
tion againſt the Reformation ? Nay, as'rigorous as 
they are in things of this kind, they themſelves ap- 
point, even in ſome of their ſtricteſt Orders, that * if 
any Lay-brother believes himſelf called of God, to 
3 as a Miſhonary, the Superior of the Order, 
ing informed thereof, ſhall immediately ſend him 
away.“ | 
15 all Proteſtant Churches it is ſtill more evident, 
that Ordination is not held a neceſſary pre-requiſite of 
preaching : for m Sweden, in Germany, in Holland, 
and, I beheve, in every reformed Church in Europe, 
it is not only permitted, but required, that before any 
one is i (before he is admited even into Dea- 
con's Orders, where-ever the diſtinction between Prieſts 
and Deacons is retained,) he ſhould publicly preach a 
year or more, ad probandum facultatem, And for this 
practice, they believe they have the authority of an ex- 
preſs command of God ; Let theſe firſt be proved: 
then 


. —— Ade OG EAI ID OE 


* 


10 Men of Reaſon and Religion. 257 
men let them uſe the oſſice of a Deacon, being found 
blameleſs, 1 Tim. iii. 10. 

13. * In England, however, there is nothing of this 
kind : no Layman is permitted to ſpeak in public.” No! 
Can you be ignorant, that in a hundred Churches they 
do it continually? In how many (particularly in the 
Weſt of England) does the Pariſh-Clerk read one of 
the leſſons? (In ſome he reads the whole ſervice of the 
Church, perhaps, every Lord's-day.) And do not 
other Laymen conftantly do the ſame thing, yea, in our 
very Cathedrals? Which being under the more imme- 
diate inſpettion of the Biſhops, ſhould be patterns to 
all other Churches. | 
Perhaps it will be ſaid, But this is not preaching.” 
Yes, but it is, eſſentially ſuch. For what is it to 
preach, but predicare Verbum Dei? To publiſh the 
Word of God? And this Laymen do all over Eng- 
land ; particularly under the eye of every Biſhop in 
the nation, 

Nay, is it not done in the Univerſities themſelves ? 
Who ordained that ſinging man at Chrilt-Church ? 
Who is likewiſe utterly unquallified for the work, 
murdering every leſſon he reads? Not even endea- 
vouring to read it as the word of God, but rather as 
an old ſong? Such a Layman as this, meddling at all 
with the word of God, I grant is a ſcandal to the Eng- 
liſh nation. 

To go a ſtep farther. —Do not the fundamental Con- 
ſtitutions of the Univerſity of Oxford, the Statutes, 
even as reviſed by Archbiſhop Laud, require every 
Batchelor of Arts, nine in ten of whom are Laymen, 
to read three public Lectures in Moral Philoſophy, on 
whatever ſubject he chuſes? My ſubject, I well re- 
member, was the Love of God. Now, what was this 
but Preaching ? 

Nay, may not a man be a Dottor of Divinity, even 
in Oxford, though he never was ordained at all? The 


inſtance of Dr. Atwell, (late) Rector of Exeter Col- 


lege, is freſh in every one's memory. 
Theſe are a few of the conſiderations that may readily 
occur to any thinking man on this head, But I did: 


YA not 


258 A FARTHER APPEAL, Part III. 
not reſt the cauſe on theſe, I believe it may be defended 


a ſhorter way. | 

14. It pleaſed God by two or three Miniſters of the 
Church of England, to call many ſinners to repentance ; 
who, in ſeveral parts, were undeniably turned from a 
courſe of ſin, to a courſe of holineſs. 

The Miniſters of the places where this was done, 
ought to have received thoſe Miniſters with open arms; 
50 to have taken them who had juſt begun to ſerve 
God, into their peculiar care ; watching over them in 
tender love, leſt they ſhould fall back into the ſnare of 
the Devil, T 

Inſtead of this, the greater part ſpoke of thoſe Mi- 
niſters, as if the devil, not God had ſent them. Some 
repelled them from the Lord's Table : others ſtirred 
up the people againſt them, repreſenting them, even in 
their public diſcourſes, as Fellows not fit to live: Papiſts, 
Heretics, Traitors Conſpirators againſt their King and 
Country. 

And how did they watch over the ſinners lately re- 
formed ? Even as a Leopard watcheth over his prey, 
Thev drove lome of them allo from the Lord's Table; 
to which, till now, they had no deſire to approach, 
They preached all manner of evil concerning them, 
openly curſing them in the Name of the Lord. They 
turned many out of their work; perſuaded others to do 
lo too, and haraſſed them all manner of ways. 

The event was, that ſome were wearied out, and fo 
turned back to their vomit again. And then theſe good 
Paſtors gloried over them, and endeavoured to ſhake 
others by their example. 

13. When the Miniſters by whom God had helped 
them before, came again to thoſe places, great part of 
their work was to begin again ; if it could be begun 
egain : but the relapſers were often ſo hardened in ſin. 
that no impreſſion could be made upon them. 

What could they do in a caſe of ſo extreme neceſlity ? 
Where ſo many fouls lay at flake ? 

No Clergyman would aſſiſt at all. The expedient 
that remained was, to find ſome one among themſelves, 
who was upright of heart, and of ſound judgment in 
the things of God: and to deſire him to meet the reſt 


4s 


es A 2 _ 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 259 

25 often as he could, in order to confirm them, as he 
was able, in the ways of God, either by reading to them, 
or by prayer, or by exhortation. 
| God immediately gave a bleſſing hereto. In ſeveral 
places, by means of theſe plain men, not only thoſe 
who had already begun to run well, were hindered from 
drawing back to perdition; but other ſinners alſo, from 
time to time, were converted from the error of their 
Ways. 
This plain account of the whole proceeding, I take 
to be the beſt defence of it. I know no Scripture 
which forbids making uſe of ſuch help, in a caſe of ſuch 
neceſſity. And I praiſe God, who has given even this 
help to thoſe poor ſheep, when therr own Shepherds pre 
tied them not. | | 

% But does not the ws wats ſay, No man taketh this 
honour to himfelf, but he that is called of God, as was 


Aaron? Nor do theſe. The honour here mentioned 


is the Prieſthood. But they no more take upon them to 
be Prieſts than to be Kings. They take not upon them 
to adminiſter the Sacraments, an honour peculiar to 
the Prieſts of God. Only, aecording to their power, 
they exhort their brethren, to continue in the grace of 
God. 


“ But for theſe Laymen to exhort at all is a violation 


| of all Order.“ 


What is this Order of which you ſpeak? Will it 
ſerve inſtead of the knowledge and love of God? Will 
this order reſcue them fiom the ſnare of the devil, who 
are now taken captive at his will? Will it keep them 
who are eſcaped a little way, from turning back into 
Egypt? If not, how ſhould I anſwer it to God, if 
rather than violate I know not what Order, I ſhould 


| ſacrifice thouſands of ſouls thereto ?*£>a I dare not do it. 


It is at the peril of my own ſeul. 
If indeed by Order were meant, True Chriſtian Dif- 
cipline, whereby all the living members of Chriſt are 


| knit together in one, and all that are putrid and dead 


immediately cut off from the body : this Order I reve- 
rence ; for it is of God. But where is it to be found ? 
In what dioceſe? In what town or pariſh in England 


or Wales? Are you Rector of a pariſh? Then let 


Z 2 us 


— 


to Auyarrnin APPEAL, Part III. 


us go no farther. Does this Order obtain there? No- 
thing leſs. Your pariſhioners are a rope of ſand, As 
few (if any) of them are alive to God; ſo they have 
no connection with each other, unleſs ſuch as might be 
among Turks or Heathens, Neither have you any 
power to cut off from that body, were it alive, the 
dead and putrid members. Perhaps you have no deſire: 
but all are jumbled together without any care or con- 
cern of yours. | 1 
It is plain then, that what Order is to be found, is 
not among you, who ſo loudly contend, for it, but 
among that very people whom you continually blame, 
for their violation and contempt of it. The flock you 
condemn 1s united together in one body, by one ſpirit : 
ſo that, „if one member ſuffers, all the members ſuffer 
with it, if one be honoured, all rejoice with it.“ Nor 
does any dead member long remain ; but as ſoon as the 
hope of recovering it is pail, it is cut off, 

Now, ſuppoſe we were willing to relinquiſh our 
charge, and to give up this flock into your hands; 
would you obſerve the ſame Order, as we do now, with 
them and the other ſouls under your care? You dare 
not; becauſe you have reſpe& of perſons. You fear 
the faces of men. You cannot; becauſe you have not 
overcome the world. You are not above the deſire of 
earthly things. And it is impoſſible you ſhould ever 
have any true Order, or exerciſe any Chriflian Diſci- 
pline, till you are wholly crucified to the world, till you 
deſire nothing more but God, 

Conſider this matter, I entreat you, a little farther, Here 
are ſeven thouſand perſons (perhaps ſome what more) of 
whom I take care, watching over their fouls ae he that 
muſt give account, In order hereto it lies upon me, 
(lo I judge) at the peril of my own ſalvation, to know 
not only their names, but their outward and inward 
ſtates, their difficulties and dangers. Otherwiſe how 
can I know either how to guide them aright, or to com- 
mend them to God in prayer? Now if I am willing 
to make theſe over to you, will you watch over them 
in the ſame manner? Will you take the ſame care (or 
as much more as you pleaſe) of each ſoul as I have hi- 
therto done? Not ſuch Curam Animarum as you have 


taken * 


— — _ 


| __ » To Men of Revſon and Religion. 261 
taken theſe ten years in your own pariſh. Poor empty 
name! Has not your pariſh been, in fact, as much a 
Sinecure to you as your Prebend ? Oh what account 
have you to give to the great Shepherd and Biſhop of 


Souls! 


18, There is one more excuſe for denying this 


work of God, taken from the Inſtruments employed 
therein: that is, © That they are wicked men.” 


And a thouſand ſtories have been handed about to 
prove it. 

But you may obſerve, their wickedneſs was not 
heard of, till after they went about doing good. Their 
reputation for hopeſty was till then unblemiſhed. But 


it was impoſhble it ſhould continue ſo, when they 


were publicly employed in * teſtifying of the world, 


that its deeds. were evil.“ It could not be but the 
Scriptures ſhould be, fulfilled. © The ſervant is not 
above his Maſter. If they had called the Maſter df the 
houſe Beelzebub, how much more them of his houſe- 
hold ? ” 

Yet I cannot but remind conſiderate men, in how 
remarkable a manner the wiſdom of God has for many 
years guarded agaiaſt this pretence, with reſpett to my 
Brother and me u particular, Scarce any two men in 
Great Britain, of our rank, have been ſo held out, as 
it were to all the world : eſpecially of thoſe who from 
their childhood had always — and ſtudiouſly ſought 


retirement. And I had procured what I ſought. I 


was quite ſafe, as I Ae in a little country town, 
when I was required to return to Oxford, without 


delay, to take the charge of ſome young gentlemen, 


by Dr. Morley, the only man then in England to 
whom I could deny nothing, From that time both my 
Brother and I (utterly againſt our will) came to be more 
and more obſerved and known, till we were more 
ſpoken of, than, perhaps, two ſo inconſiderable perſons 
ever were before in the nation, To make us more 
public ſtill, as honeſt madmen at leaſt, by a ſtrange: 
concurrence of Providences, overturning all our pre- 
ceding reſolutions, we were hurried away to America. 
However at our return from thence, we were relolved 
to retire out of the world at once: being ſated with 


- noiſe, hurry and fatigue, and ſecking nothing but to be: 


2 3 at. 


— in — 2 
— 


— . _ Tv} az 


262 A raxTutR APPEAL, Part III. 


at reſt, Indeed for a long ſeaſon, the greateſt pleaſure 
I had deſired, on this fide eternity, was | 


Tacitum Sylvas inter reptare ſalubres, 
Quæ rentem quicguid dignum ſapiente bonoque, 
And we had attained our deſire. We wanted nothing. 


We looked for nothing more in this world, when we 


were dragged out again, by earneſt importunity, to 


preach at one place and another, and another, and fo 


carried on, we knew not how, without any deſign but 
the general one, of ſaving ſouls, into a ſituation, which 
had it been named to us at firſt, would have appeared 
far worſe than death. Mgt 

19. What a ſurpriſing apparatus of Providence was 
here! And what ſtronger demonſtrations could have 
been given, of men's afting from a zeal for God, whe- 
ther it were according to knowledge or no? What 
perſons cou}d, in the nature of things, have been (an- 
tecedently) leſs liable to exception, with regard to their 
moral character, at leaſt, than thoſe the All-wiſe God 


had employed? Indeed I cannot deviſe what manner 


of men could have been more unexceptionable on all 
accounts, Had God indued us with greater natural or 
acquired abilities, that very thing might have been 
turned into an objection. Had we been remarkably 


defective, it would have been matter of objection, on the 
other hand. Had we been Diſſenters of any kind, or 


even Low-Church Men, (ſo called) it would have been 
a great ſtumbling-block in the way of thoſe who are 
zealous for the Church. And yet had we continued 
in the impetuolity of our High-Church zeal, neither 
ſhould we have been willing to converſe with Diſſen- 


ters, nor they to receive any good at our hands. Some 


objeftions were kept out of the way, by our known 
contempt of money and preferment : and others, hy 
that rigorous ſtrictneſs of life, which we exatted, not 
of others, but ourſelves only. Inſomuch, that twelve 
or fourteen years ago, the cenſure of one who had nar- 
rowly obſerved us, (me, in particular) went no farther 
than this : 
« Does John beyond his ſtrength perſiſt to go, 
To his frail carcaſe literally foe ? | 
Carclcſs 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 263 


Careleſs of health, as if in haſte to die, 
And laviſh time to' inſure eternity?“ 


So that upon the whole, I ſee not what God could 
have done more in this reſpect, which he hath not 
done. Or what Inſtruments he could have employed 
in ſuch a work, who would have been leſs liable to 
exception. 

20. Neither can I conceive how it was poſſible to 
do that work, the doing of which, we are ſtill under 
the ſtrongeſt conviftion, is bound upon us at the peril 
of our own ſouls, in a leſs exceptionable manner. We 
have, by the grace of. God, behaved not only with 
meeknels, but with all tenderneſs towards all men ; 
with all the tenderneſs which we conceived it was pof- 
ſible to uſe without betraying their ſouls. And from 
the very firſt, it has been our ſpecial care, to deal ten- 
derly with our brethren of the Clergy. We have not 
willingly provoked them at any time; neither any ſin- 
gle Clergyman, We have not ſought occahon to pot 
liſh their faults; we have not uſed a thouſand occaſions 
that offered. When we were conſtrained to ſpeak 
ſomething, we ſpake as little as we beheved we could, 
without offending God: and that little, though in plain 
and ſtrong 9 yet as mildly and lovingly as we 
were able. And in the ſame courſe we have ſteadily 
perſevered (as well as in earneſtly adviſing others to 
tread in our ſteps) even tho? we ſaw that with regard: 
to them, by all this we profited nothing; tho” we knew 
we were {till continually repreſented as implacable ene- 
mies to the Clergy, as railers againſt them, as flanderers. 
of them, as ſeeking all opportunities to blacken and 
aſperſe them. When a Clergyman himſelf has vehe- 
mently accuſed me of doing this, I bleſs God he could. 
not provoke me to do it. I {till kept my mouth as it 
were with a bridle, and committed my caule to a. higher, 
hand. | 

21. The truth is, you impute that hatred to us, 
Which is in your own breaſt, (I ſpeak not this of all 
the Clergy ; God forbid ? But let it fall on whom it 
concerns.) You, it is certain, have ſhewn the utmoſt 
hatred. to us, and in every poſlible way, unleſs you 

were 


* 


264 A rARTHER APPEAL, Part III. 
were actually to beat us, (of which alſo we ate not 
without precedent) or to ſhoot us thro? the head. And 
if you could prevail upon others to do this, I ſuppoſe 
you would think you did God ſervice. I do not ſpeak 
without ground, I have heard with my own ears ſuch 
ſermons, (in Staffordſhire particularly) that I ſhould * 
not have wondered if as ſoon as we came out of the 
Church, the people had ſtoned me with ſtones. And 
It was a natural conſequence of what that poor Miniſter 
had lately heard at the Biſhop's Viſitation : as it was 
one great cauſe of the miſerable riots and outrages which 
ſoon followed, | 

It is this, my brethren, it is your own preaching, 
and not ours, which ſets the people againſt you. The 
very ſame perſons, who are diverted with thoſe ſermons, 
cannot but deſpiſe you for them in their hearts : even 
thoſe who on your authority believe moſt of the aſſer- 
tions which you advance, What then muſt they think 
of you, who know the greateſt part of what you aſſert 
to be utterly falle? They may pity and pray for you; 
but they can eſteem you no other, than falſe witneſſes 
againſt God and your brethren. 

22. But what need is there (ſay even ſome of a 
milder ſpirit) of this preaching in fields and ftreets ? 
Are there not Churches enough to preach in ?*” No, 
my friend, there are not; not for us to preach in. You 
forget: we are not ſuffered to preach there; elſe we 
ſhould prefer them to any places whatever. Well, 
there are Miniſters enough without you,” Miniſters 
enough, and Churches enough ; for what? To re- 
claim all the ſinners within the four ſeas? If there 
were, they would all be reclaimed. But they are not 
reclaimed. Therefore it is evident, there are not 
Churches enough. And one plain reaſon why, not- 
withſtanding all theſe Churches, they are no nearer be- 
ing reclaimed is this: they never come into a Church; 
perhaps not once in a twelve-month, perhaps not for 
many years together. Will you ſay (as I have known 
fome tender-hearted Chriſtians) © then it is their own 
fault, let them die and be damned.“ I grant it is their 
own fault. And ſo it was my fault and yours, when 
we went aſtray, like ſheep that were loſt. Yet the 

Shepherd. 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion, 265 


Shepherd of Souls ſought after us, and went after us 
into the wilderneſs. And © oughteſt not thou to have 
compaſſion on thy fellow ſervants, as he had pity on 
thee?” Ought not we alſo to ſeek, as far as in us lies, 
and to ſave that which is loſt ? | 85 
N HBchold the amazing love of God to the outcaſts of 
] men! His tender condeſcenſion to their folly ! They 
would regard nothing done in the uſual way. All this 
was loſt upon them. The ordinary preaching of the 
word of God, they would not even deign to hear. So 
the devil made ſure of theſe careleſs ones. For who 
ſhould pluck them out of his hand? Then God was 
noved to jealouſy, and went out of the uſual way to 
a the ſouls which he had made, Then over and 


„ 4 9 oo. 


above what was ordinarily ſpoken in his Name, in all 
the houſes of God in the land, he commanded a voice 
to cry in the wilderneſs, ** Prepare ye the way of the 
Lord. The time is fulfilled, The kingdom of heaven 
15 at hand. Repent ye and believe the goſpel.” | 
2g. Conſider coolly, if it was not highly expedient, 
that ſomething of this kind ſhould be? How expe» 
dient, were it only on the account of thoſe poor ſin- 
ners againſt their own ſouls, who (to all human appear- 
ance) were utterly inacceſſible every other way? And 
what numbers of theſe are {till to be found, even in or 
near our moſt populous cities? What multitudes. of 
them were ſome years ſince, both in Kingſwood, and the 
Fells about Newcaſtle ? Who, week after week, ſpent 
the Lord's day, either in the ale-houſe, or in idle diver- 
ſions, and never troubled themſelves about going to 
Church, or to any public worſhip at all? Now, 
would you really have deſired that theſe poor wretches 
ſhould have ſinned on, till they dropped into hell ? 
Surely you would not. But by what other means was 
it poſſible they ſhould have been plucked out of the 
fire? Had the Miniſter of the pariſh preached like an 
angel, it had profited them nothing; for they heard 
him not. But when one came and ſaid, Vonder is a 
man preaching on the top of the mountain, they ran in 
droves to hear what he would ſay. And God ſpoke 
to their hearts. It is hard to conceive any thing elſe 
which could have reached them, Had it not been for 
8 3 Field- 


266 A rAATREN APPEAL, Part 117, 

Field-preaching, the uncommonneſs of 'which was the 
very circumſtance that recommended it, they muſt have 
—414 in the error of their way, and periſhed in their 
. 24. But ſuppoſe Aer THe, to be in a caſe of 
this kind, ever ſo expedient, or even neceſſary, yet 
who will conteſt with us for this province ?—May we 


not enjoy this quiet and unmoleſted? Unmoleſted, 1 


mean, by any competitors.— For who is there among 
you, brethren, that is willing (examme your own 
earts) even to fave ſouls from death at this price? 
Would not you let a thouſand ſouls periſh, rather than 
you woutd. be the inſtrument of reſcuing them thus? J 
do not ſpeak now with regard to conſcience, but to the 
inconveniences that muſt accompany it. Can you ſuſ- 
tain them, if you would ? Can you bear the fummer 
ſun to beat upon your naked head? Can you ſuffer 
the wintry rain or wind, from whatever quarter it 
blows? Are you able to ſtand in the open air, with- 
out any covering or defence, when God caſteth abroad 
his ſnow like wool, or ſcattereth his hoar-froſt like 
aſhes? And yet theſe are ſome of the ſmalleſt incon- 
veniences which accompany Field preaching. For be- 
yond all theſe, are the contradiftion of ſinners, the 
ſcoffs both of the great vulgar, and the ſmall ; con- 
tempt and reproach of every kind ; often more than 
verbal affronts, ſtupid, brutal violence, ſometimes to 
the hazard of health, or limbs, or life, Brethren, do 
ou envy us this honour? What, I pray, would 
y you to be a Field-Preacher ? Or, what think 
you, could induce any man of common ſenſe to con- 
tinue therein one year, unleſs he had a full conviction 
an himſelf, that it was the will of God concerning 
im P | | 
Upon this conviction it is (were we to ſubmit to theſe 
things on any other motive whatſoever, it would fur- 
miſh you with a better proof of our diſtraction than any 
that has yet been found,) that we now do, for the good 
of poor ſouls, what you cannot, will not, dare not do. 
And we deſire not that you ſhould ; but this one thing 
we may reaſonably defire of you; do not increaſe the 
_ difficulties which are already ſo great, that without the 
ao mighty 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion 2869 
mighty power of God, we muſt fink under them, Do 
not aK in trampling down a little handful of men, 
who for the preſent ſtand in the gap between ten thou- 
ſand poor wetches and deſtruftion, till you find ſome 
others to take their places. 3 VLA, 

25. Highly needful it is, that ſome ſhould do this, 
left thoſe poor ſouls be loſt without remedy. And it 
ſhould rejoice the hearts of all who defire the kingdom 
of God ſhould come, that ſo many of them have been 
{natched already from the mouth of the lion, by an un- 
common (though not, unlawful) way. This circum» 
Nance therefore is no juſt excule, for not acknowledg- 
ing the work of God. Eſpecially, if we conſider, that 
whenever it has pleaſed God to work any great work 
upon the earth, even from the earlieſt times, he hath 
ſept more or leſs out of the common way: whether tq 
excite the attention of a greater number of people, than 
might otherwiſe have regarded it; or to ſeparate the 
Proud and haughty of heart, from thoſe of an humble, 
child-like ſpirit ; the former of whom he foreſaw, 
truſting in their own wiſdom, would fall on that ſtone 
and be broken; while the latter, enquiring with ſim- 
plicity, would ſoon know of the work, that it was of 
God, 

26. Nay, (ſome ſay) but God is a God of wiſdom, 
And it is his work to give underſtanding. Whereas 
this man is one of them, and he is a fool. You ſee the 
fruits of their preaching.” No, my friend, you do 
not, That is your miſtake. A fool very poſſibly he 
may be. So it appears by his talking, perhaps writing 
too, But this is none of the fruits of our preaching. 
He was a fool before ever he heard us. We found and 
are likely to leave him ſo. Therefore his folly is not to 
be imputed to us, even if it continue to the day of his 
death. As we are not the cauſe, ſo we undertake not 
the cure of diſorders of this kind. No fair man there- 
fore can excuſe himlelf thus, from acknowledging the 
work of God. 

Perhaps you will ſay, “ He is not a natural fool neither. 
But he is ſo ignorant! He knows not the firlt prin- 
ciples of Religion.“ It is very poſſible. But have pa- 
tence with him, and he will know them by and by, 
SN Yea, 


588 A*vaxrute APPEAL, Part III. 
Yea, if he be in earneſt to fave his ſoul, far ſooner than 
you can conceive, And ini the mean time; neither is 
this an objeftion of any weight. Many when they, be. 
gin to hear us, may, without any fault of ours, be utter 
ſtrangers to the whole of Religion. But this is no 
incurable diſeaſe. Vet a little while and they may be 
wiſe unto ſalvation. n | pu 
ls the ignorance you complain of among this people 
(you who object to the people more than to their 
Teachers) of another kind? Do not they “ know, 
how in meekneſs to reprove or inſtruct thoſe that op- 
* themſelves?” I believe what you ſay: all of them 
o not: they have not put on gentleneſs and long-ſuf- 
fermg. I wiſh they had : pray for them that they 
may ; that they may be mild and patient toward all 
men. But what if they are not! Sure you do not 
make this an argument that God hath not ſent us? 
Our Lord came, and we come, not to call the righteous, 
but ſenners to repentance : paſſfonate ſinners, (ſuch as 
theſe whereof you complain) as well as thoſe of every 
other kind. Nor can it be expected they ſhould be 
wholly delivered from their fin, as ſoon as they begin to 
hear his word. | 
27. A greater ſtumbling-block than this is laid before 
you, by thoſe that ſay and do not. Such I take it for 
granted will be among us, although we purge them ont 
as faſt as we can : perſons that talk much of Religion, 
that commend the Preachers, perhaps are diligent in 
hearing them: it may be, read all their books, and ſing 
their hymns; and yet no change is wrought in their 


Hearts, Were they of old time as lions in their houſes ? 


They are the ſame ſtill, Were they (in low life) ſloth- 
ful or intemperate? Were they tricking or diſhoneſt ? 
over-reaching or oppreſhve ? Or did they ule to bor- 
row and not pay? The Ethiopian hath not changed his 


in. Were they (in high life) delicate, tender, ſelf- 


indulgent? Were they mice in furniture or appare! ? 
Were they fond of trifles, or of their own dear per- 
ſons? The Leopard hath not changed her ſpots. Vet 
their being with us for a time proves no more, than 
that we have not the miraculous diſcernment of ſpirits. 
| | Others 


p 
: 


n 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 269 


Others you may find in whom there was a real 
change. But it was only for a ſeaſon. They are now 
turned back, and are two-fold more the children of hell 
than before. Yet neither is this any manner of proof, 
that the former work was not of God. No, not tho? 
theſe apoſtates ſhould, with the utmoſt confidence, ſay 
all manner of evil againſt us. I expect they ſhould. 
For every other injury hath been forgiven, and will be 
to the end of the world. But hardly ſhall any one 
forgive the intolerable injury, of almoſt perſuading him 
ta be a Chriſtian, When theſe men therefore who were 
with us, but went out from among us, aſſert things that 
may cauſe your ears to tingle, if you conſider either 
the Scripture, or the nature of man, it will not ſtagger 
you at all, Much leſs will it excuſe you, for not ac- 
knowledging the work in general to be of God, 

28. But to all this it may poſſibly be replied, © When 
you bring your credentials with you, when you provg 
by miracles what you affert, then we will acknowledge 
that God hath ſent you.“ 

What is it you would have us prove by miracles P 
That the Doctrines we preach are true? This is nos 
the way to prove that; (as our firſt Reformers replied 
to thoſe of the Church of Rome, who, you may pra- 
bably remember, were continually urging them with 
this very demand.) We prove the Doctrines we 
preach, by Scripture and Reaſon ; and, if need be, by 
Antiquity, | 

What elſe is it then we are to prove by Miracles ? 

Is it, 1. That A. B. was for many years without God 
in the world, a common ſwearer, a drunkard, a ſabbath- 
breaker? 

Or, 2. That he is not ſo now ? 

Or, 3. That he continued ſo till he heard us preach, 
and from that time was another man ? 

Not ſo. The proper way to prove theſe fafts, is by 
the teſtimony of competent witneſſes: and theſe wit- 
neſſes are ready, whenever required, to give full evi- 
dence of them, | 7 

Or would you have us prove by miracles, 
4. That this was not done by our own power or ho. 
lineſs ? That God only is able to raiſe the dead, thoſe 


Aa who 


270 A rARNTHER APPEAL, Part III. 


who are dead in treſpaſſes and fins? Nay, if you hear 
not Moſes and the Prophets and Apoſtles on this head, 
2 would you believe though one roſe from the 
dead. | | 

It is therefore utterly unreaſonable and abſurd, to re- 
2 or 2 the proof of miracles, in queſtions of 
ſuch a kind, as are always decided by proofs of quite 
another nature. | 

29. © But you relate them yourſelf.” I relate juſt 
what I ſaw, from time to time: and this is true, that 
ſome of thoſe circumſtances ſeem to go beyond the or- 
dinary courſe of nature. But I do not peremptorily 
determine, whether they were ſupernatural, or no, 
Much leſs do I reſt upon them, either the proof of 
other facts, or thoſe of the doftrines which I preach. 
I prove theſe in the ordinary way ; the one by Teſti- 
mony, the other by Scripture and Reaſon, 

% But if you can work miracles when you pleaſe, is 
not this the ſureſt way of proving them? This would 
put the matter out of diſpute at once, and ſuperſede all 
other proof.” f 

You ſeem to lie under an entire miſtake, both of the 
nature and uſe of miracles, It may reaſonably be queſ- 
tioned, whether there ever was that man living upon 
earth, except the man Chriſt Jeſus, that could work 
miracles when he pleaſed. God only, when he pleaſed, 
exerted that power, and by whomſoever it pleaſed 
him. 

But if a man could work miracles when he pleaſed, 
yet is there no Scripture-authority, nor even example 
for doing it, in order to ſatisfy ſuch a demand as this, I 
do not read, that either our Lord or any of his Apoſ- 
tles, wrought any miracle on ſuch an occaſion. Nay, 
how ſharply does our Lord rebuke thoſe who made a 
demand of this kind? When certain of the Scribes 
and Phariſees anſwered, ſaying, Maſter, we would ſee 
a fign from thee ;*” (obſerve, this was their method of 
anſwering the ſtrong reaſons whereby he had juſt proved 
the works in queſtion to be of God!) He anſwered 
and ſaid to them, an evil and adulterous generation 
ſeeketh after a ſign. But there ſhall no ſign be given 
to it, but the ſign of the prophet Jonas,“ Tl 

| 88, 


* 1 n os ab 


. * r 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 271 


93, 939. An evil and adulterous generation!“ Elſe 
they would not have needed ſuch a kind of proof. 
Had they been willing to do his will, they would, 
without this, have known that the doctrine was of 
God, 
Miracles therefore are quite needleſs in ſuch a caſe. 
Nor are they ſo concluſive a proof as you imagine. If 
a man could and did work them, in defence of any 
doftrine, yet this would not ſuperſede other proof. For 
there may be vregaga Yevdzc, lying Wonders, miracles 
wrought in ſupport of falſchood. Still therefore this 
dotrine would remain to be proved, from the proper 
topics of Scripture and Reaſon. And theſe even with- 
out miracles are ſufficient. But miracles without theſe 
are not. Accordingly our Saviour and all his Apoſtles, 
in the mid{t of their greateſt miracles, never failed to 
prove every doctrine they taught, by clear Scripture 
and cogent Reaſon. 

30. I preſume, by this time you may perceive the 
groſs abſurdity of demanding Miracles in the preſent 
Cale : ſeeing one of the propoſitions in queſtion, (over 
and above our general doctrines) viz. That ſinners 
are reformed,” can only be proved by Teſtimony : and 
the other, © "This cannot be done but by the power of 
God, needs no proof, being ſelf-evident. 

„ Why, | did once mylelf rejoice to hear, (ſays a 
grave citizen, with an air of great importance) that fo 
many ſinners were reformed, till I found they were only 
turned from one wickednels to another; that they were 
turned from curſing or ſwearing, or drunkenneſs, into 
the no leis damnable fin of Schiſm.“ | 

Do you know what you ſay? You have, I am 
afraid, a confuſed huddle of ideas in your head, And 
I doubt, you have not capacity to clear them up 
you : nor coolneſs enough, to receive help from 
Others. 


However I will try. What is Schiſm £ Have you 


any determinate idea of it? I aſk the rather, becauſe 


I have found, by repeated experiments, that a common 
Engliſh tradeſman receives no more light, when he 
hears or reads, „This is Schiſm,” than if he heard or 
read, 
| A a 2 Bombalio, 


— — — A—A—Z— 


272 A rART HER APPEAL, part III. 
Bombalio, ſtridor, clangor, taratantara, murmur. 


Honeſt neighbour do not be angry. Lay down your 
hammer, and let us talk a little on this head. 

You ſay, We are in the damnable fin of Schiſm, 
and therefore in as bad a ſtate as Adulterers and Mur- 
derers.“ 

I aſk once more, What do you mean by Schiſm ? 
„ Schiim! Schiſm! Why, it is ſeparating from the 
Church.” Ay, ſo it is. And yet every ſeparating 
from the Church to which we once belonged, is not 
Schiſm. Elſe you will make all the Engliſh to be 
Schiſmatics, in ſeparating from the Church of Rome, 
* But we had juſt cauſe.” So doubtleſs we had: 
whereas Schiſm is a cauleleſs ſeparation from the Church 
of Chriſt, So far ſo good. But you have many ſteps 
to take before you can make good that concluſion, that 
a ſeparation from a particular National Church, ſuch as 
the Church of England is, whether with ſufficient 
cauſe or without, comes under the ſcriptural notion of 
Schiſm, 

However, taking this for granted, will you aver in 
cool blood, That every one who dies a Quaker, a Bap- 
tiſt, an Independant, or a Preſbyterian, is as infallibly 
damned as if he died in the act of murder or adultery ? 
Surely you ſtart at the thought! It makes even nature 
recoil, How then can you reconcile it to the Love that 
hopeth all things? | 

31. But whatever ſtate they are in, who cauſeleſsly 
ſeparate from the Church of England, it affects not 
thoſe of whom we are ſpeaking ; for they do not ſeparate 
From it at all. a 

Vou may eaſily be convinced of this, if you will only 
weigh the particulars following. 

1. A great part of theſe went to no Church at all, 


before they heard us preach. They no more pretended 


to belong to the Church of England, than to the Church 
of Muſcovy. If therefore they went to no Church 
now, they would be no farther from the Church than 
they were before, ; 
2. Thoſe who did ſometimes go to Church before, go 
three times as often now. Thetc therefore do not * 
g | rate 


OY EOS TO e VII A IRIS” I > 


| 
| 


| 
| 
* 
ö 
N 


as a drunken Proteſtant ? 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 273 


rate from the Church. Nay, they are united to it more 
cloſely than before, | Re 

3. Thoſe who never went to Church at all before, 
do now go at all opportunities. Will common ſenſe 
allow any one to ſay, that thele are ſeparated from the 
Church ? | | 

4. The main queſtion is, Are they turned from doing 
the works of the devil, to do the works of God? 
Do they now live ſoberly, righteouſly, and godly, in 
the preſent world ? If they do, if they live according 
to the Directions of the Church, believe her Doctrines, 
and join in her Ordinances: with what face can you 
1% that theſe men ſeparate from the Church of Eng- 
land ? 

32, But in what ſtate are they whom the Clergy and 
Gentry (and perhaps you for one) have ſucceſsfully la- 
boured to preſerve from this damnable ſin of Schilm P 
Whom you have kept from hearing theſe men, and ſe- 
parating from the Church ? | 

Is not the drunkard that was, a drunkard till ? 
Enquire of his poor wiſe and family. Is not the com- 
mon ſwearer {till horribly crying to God for dainna- 
tion upon his own ſoul ? Is not the ſinner in every 
other kind, exactly the ſame man ſtill ? Not better 
at leaſt, if he be not worſe, than he was. ten years 
ago. | 

Now conſider, 1. Does the Church of England gain. 
either honour, or {trength, or bleſſing, by ſuch wretches. 
as theſe calling themſelves her Members? By ten 
thouſand Drunkards, or Whoremongers, or Common. 
Swearers? Nay, ought ſhe not immediately to ſpew 
them out? To renounce all fellowſhip with them P 
Would ſhe not be far better without them than. with 
them ? Let any man of reaſon judge. 

2. Is this Drunkard's calling himſelf of the Church 
of England, of any more uſe to him than to the Church ? 
Will this ſave him from hell, if he die in his fin? Will 


it not rather increaſe his-damnation ? | 


3. Is not a Drunkard of any other Church, juſt as 
good as a drunkard of the Church of England ? Yea, 
is not a drunken Papiſt as much in the favour of God, 


A a 3 4 


274 A raxTHER APPEAL, Part III. 


4. Is not a curling, ſwearing Turk, (if there be ſuch 
z one to be found) full as acceptable to God, as a curſ- 
ing, ſwearing Chriſtian ? | 

Nay, 5. If there be any advantage, does it not lie on 
the fide of the former ? Is he not the leſs excuſable of 
the two? As ſinning againſt leſs light ? 

O why will you fink theſe poor ſouls deeper into 
perdition, than they are ſunk already? Why will 
you prophely unto them, Peace, Peace; when there 
is no Peace? Why, if you do it not yourſelf, (whe- 
ther you cannot, or will not ; God knoweth,) ſhould 
ou hinder us from guiding them into the way of 
Peace ? | 

33- Will you endeavour to excuſe yourſelf by ſaying, 
* there are not many who are the better for your preach- 
ing: and theſe by and by will be as bad as ever; as ſuch 
and ſuch a one is already ? 

L would to God I could ſet this in a juſt light! But 
J cannot, All language fails. 

God begins a glorious work in our land. You ſet 
yourſelf againſt it with all your might; to prevent its 
beginning where it does not yet appear, and to deſtroy 
it wherever it does, In part you prevail. You keep 
many from hearing the word that is able to ſave their 
ſouls. Others who had heard it, you induce to turn 
back from God, and to liſt under the devil's banner 
again. Then you make the ſucceſs of your own wick- 
edneſs an excuſe for not acknowledging the work 
of God! You urge, that not many ſinners were 
reformed! And that ſome of thoſe are now as bad as 
ever!“ N 

Whoſe fault is this? Is it ours, or your own ? 
Why have not thouſands more been reformed ? Yea, 
for every one who is now turned to God, why are there 
not ten thouſand ?£ Becauſe you and your aſſociates 
laboured ſo heartily in the cauſe of hell; beeauſe you 
and they ſpared no pains, either to prevent or to de- 
{troy the work of God! By uſing all the power and 
wiſdom you had, you hindered thouſands from hearing 
the Goſpel, which they might have found to be the 
power of God unto ſalvation. Their blood is upon 
your hcads, By inventing, or countenaneing, or re- 


tailing 


Y „ 
. 


3 
| 

3 
3 


N 


* 
” 
. 
7 
* 
> | 
. 
. = 
» 
* 
' 
4 
473 
r. 
2 
1 
ft 
* 
. 
1 
* 
_ 
7 19 
3 
1 
"4 
5, 
E 
* 
„ 
* 
4 * 
* 
2 
Gt 
Þ 
„ 
= 
x 
1 
= 
* 
* 
A 


rey 


© 
: 


n 


——— 


move us, whem will you find to ſupply our p 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 275 


g lies, ſome refined, ſome groſs and palpable, you 
hindered#others from profiting by what they did hear. 
Yoware anſwerable to God for theſe ſouls alſo. Many 
who began to taſte the good word, and to run the way 


of God's commandments, you, by various methods, 


revailed on to hear it no more, So they ſoon drew 
bark to perdition. But know, that for every one of 
theſe alſo, God will require an account of you in the 
day of judgment, ; 

34. And yet, in ſpite of all the malice, and wiſdom, 
and ſtrength, not only of men, but of Principalities 
and Powers, of the Rulers of the darkneſs of this world, 
of the wicked Spirits in high places ; there are thouſands 
ound, who are turned from dumb idols, to ſerve the 
living and true God, What a harveſt then we might 
have ſeen before now, if all who ſay, they are on the 
Lord's fide, had come, as in all reaſon they ought, to 
the help of the Lord againſt the Mighty ? Yea, had 
they only not oppoſed the work of God, had they 
only refrained from his Meſlengers ; might not the 
trumpet of God have been heard long ſince in every 
corner of the land? And thouſands of ſinners in 
every, county been brought to fear God and honour the 
Kung. 

Today of what immenſe ſervice we might have been, 
even in this ſingle point, both to our King and Coun. 
try. All who hear, and regard the word we preach, 
honour the King for God's ſake, They render unto 
Ceſar the things that are Cajar's, as well as unto God 
the things that are God's, — They have no conception of 
piety without loyalty ; knowing the powers that be, are 
ordained of God, I pray God to ſtrengthen all that are 
of this mind, how many ſoever they be, But might 
there not have been at this day, a hundred thouſand in 
England, thus minded, more than are now? Vea, ve- 
rily ; even by our mmiſtry, had not they who ſhould 
have ſtrengthened us, weakened our hands, 

35- Surely you are not wiſe! What advantages do- 
you throw away! What opportunities do you loſe ? 
Such as another day you may earneſtly ſeek, and never. 
theleſs may not find them, For if it pleaſe Cod to re- 
lace e 
We 


276 A rarTRER, APPEAL, Part III. 


We are in all things your ſervants for Jeſus” ſake z; tho 
the more we love you, the leſs we are loved. Let us 
be employed not in the higheſt, but in the meaneſt ; 
and not in the eaſieſt, but in the hotteſt ſervice, Eaſe 
and plenty we leave to thoſe that wank them. Let us 
go on an toil, in wearinels, in painfulneſs, in cold or 
hunger, ſo we may but teſtify the Goſpel of the grace 
of God. The rich, the honourable, the great, we are 
thoroughly willing (if it be the will of our Lord) to 
leave to you. Only let us alone with the poor, the 
vulgar, the baſe, the outcaſts of men. — Take alſo to 
yourſelves the Saints of the world; but ſuffer us to 
call ſinners to repentance ; even the moſt vile, the 
moſt ignorant, the moſt abandoned, the moſt fierce and 
favage of whom we can hear, To theſe we will go 
forth in the name of our Lord, deſiring nothing, re- 
ceiving nothing of any man (ſave the bread we eat, 
while we are under his roof) and let it be ſeen whether 
God hath ſent us. Only, let not your hands, who fear 
the Lord, be upon us. Why ſhould we be {ſtricken of 
you any more ? 


IV. 1. Surely ye are without excuſe, all who do 
not yet know the day of your viſitation! The day, 
wherein the great God, who hath been forgotten among 
us, days without number, is ariſing at once to be avenged 
of his adverſaries, and to viſit and redeem his people. 
And are not his judgments and mercies. both broad p 
And ſtill, will ye not learn righteouſneſs? Is not the 
Lord paſſing by? Doth not a great and ſtrong wind 
already begin to rend the mountains, and to break in. 
pieces the rocks before the Lord? Is not the earth- 
quake alſo felt already? And a fire hath begun to burn 
in his anger. Who knoweth what will be the end. 
thereof? But at the ſame time, he is ſpeaking to man 
in a ſtill, ſmall voice. He that hath ears to hear, let 
him hear, leſt he be ſuddenly deſtroyed, and that with- 
out remedy ! | 

2. What excuſe can poſſibly be made for thoſe, who 
are regardleſs of ſuch a ſeaſon as this? Who are at 
ſuch a criſis, ſtupid, ſenſeleſs, unapprehenſive; caring 
for none of theſe things? Who do no give — 

Ho = 


4 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 277 


the pains to think about them, but are ſtill eaſy and un- 
concerned? What! Can there ever be a point, on 
which it more behoves you to think 7 And that with 
the cooleſt and deepeſt attention ? As long as the hea- 
ven and the earth remain, can there be any thing of fo 
vaſt importance, as God's Laſt Call to a guilty Land, 
juſt periſhing in its iniquity ! 

You, with thoſe round about you, deſerved long 
ago to have drank the dregs of the cup of trembling : 
yea, to have been “ puniſhed with everlaſting deſtruc- 
tion, from the preſence of the Lord, and from the 
glory of his power.” But he hath not dealt with you 
according to your fins, neither rewarded you after 
your iniquities. And once more he is mixing mercy 
with judgment. Once more he is crying aloud, “ Turn 
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for Why wall ye die, 
O Houſe of Iſrael ;” and will you not deign to give 
him the hearing ? If you are not careful to anſwer 
him in this matter, do you ſtill ſhut your eyes, and 
ſtop your ears, and harden your ſtubborn heart? 
Oh beware, leſt God laugh at your calamity, and 
mock when your fear cometh ! 

3- Will you plead that you have other concerns to 
mind? That other buſineſs engages your thoughts ? 
It does ſo indeed; but this is your fooliſhnels ; this 18 
the very thing that leaves you without excule,. 
For what buſineſs can be of equal moment? The 
mariner may have many concerns to mind, and 
many buſineſſes to engage his thoughts: but not 
when the ſhip is ſinking. In ſuch a circumſtance (it 
is your own) you have but one thing to think of. 
Save the ſhip and your own life together! And the 
higher poſt you are in, the more deeply intent ſhould 
you be on this point. Is this a time for diverſions ? 
For eating and drinking, and rifing up to play? 
Keep the ſhip above water, Let all elſe go, and mind 


{has ane thing! | 


4. Perhaps you will fay, © So I do. I do mind 
this one thing, how to fave the ſinking nation. And 
therefore now I muſt think of Arms and Provihons, 
J have no time now to think of Religion.” This is 


exactly as if the mariner ſhould fay, Now I muſt 


think 


278 A FaxTUERX APPEAL, Part III. 


think of my Guns and Stores. I have no time now to 
think of the Hold.” Why man, you muſt think of 
this, or periſh, It is there the Leak is ſprung. Stop 
that, or you and all your Stores will go together to the 
bottom of the ſea, | 

Is not this your very caſe? Then, whatever you 
do, ſtop the Leak: elſe you go to the bottom! I do 
not ſpeak againſt your Stores, They are good in their 
kind; and it may be well they are laid in, —But all 
your Stores will not fave the finking ſhip, unleſs you 
can ſtop the Leak. Unleſs you can ſome way keep 
out theſe floods of ungodlineſs, that are ſtill contin- 
ually pouring in, you muſt ſoon be ſwallowed up in 
the great deep, in the Abyſs of God's judgments. 
This, this is the deſtruftion of the Engliſh nation. It 
is vice burſting in on every ſide, that is juſt ready to 
fink us into flavery firſt, and then into the nether- 
moſt hell. © Who is a wiſe man, and endued with 
knowledge among you?” Let him think of this, 
Think of this, all that love your country, or care for 
your own fouls, If now eſpecially you do not think 
of this one thing, you have no excuſe before God or 
man. | 
5. Little more excuſe have you, who are ſtill in 
doubt concerning this day of your viſitation. For you 
have all the proof that you can reaſonably expect or 
deſire, all that the nature of the thing requires. That 
in many places, abundance of notorious ſinners are 
totally reformed, is declared by a thouſand eye and 
ear-witneſſes, both of their preſent and paſt behaviour. 1 
And you are ſenſible, the proof of ſuch a point as this 9 
muſt, in the nature of things, reſt upon teſtimony. 5 
And that God alone is able to work ſuch a reforma- 13 
tion, you know all the Scriptures teſtify, What 
would you have more? What pretence can you have, 
for doubting any longer? You have not the leaſt 
room to expect or deſire any other or any ſtronger 
evidence, 

I truſt, you are not of thoſe who fortify themſelves 
againſt conviction ; who are “ reſolved they will never 
believe this.“ They aſk, © who are theſe men?” We 
tell them plainly : but they credit us not. "aa 

an 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 279 


and another of their own friends is convinced, and 
tells them the ſame thing. But their aniwer is ready, 

« Are you turned Methodiſt too? So their teſti- 
mony likewiſe goes for nothing. Now how is it poſ- 
ſible theſe ſhould ever be convinced? For they will 
believe none but thoſe who ſpeak on one ſide. 

6. Do you delay fixing your judgment, till you fee 
a work of God, without any ſtumbling-block attend- 
ing it? That neither is yet, nor. ever will. „It 
muſt needs be, that offences will come. And ſcarce 
ever was there ſuch a work of God before, with ſo 

jew as have attended this, 

When the Reformation began, what mountainous 
offences lay in the way, of even the ſincere Members 
of the Church of Rome? They ſaw ſuch failings in 
thoſe great men, Luther and Calvin! Their vehement 
tenaciouſneſs of their opinions; their bitterneſs towards 
all who differed from them; their impatience of con- 
tradiction, and utter want of forbearance, even with 
their own brethren, 

But the grand ſtumbling-block of all, was, their 
opened avowed ſeparation from the Church ; their 
rejefting ſo many of the doctrines and practices, which 
the others accounted the moſt ſacred; and their con- 
tinual invettives againſt the Church they. ſeparated 
from, ſo much ſharper than Michael's reproof of 
Satan. | 

Were there fewer ſtumbling-blocks attending the 
Reformation in England? Surely no; for what was 
Henry the Eighth? Conſider, either his character, 
his motives to the work, or manner of purſuing it ! 
And even King Edward's Miniſtry we cannot clear of 
perſecuting in their turns, yea, and burning Heretics, 
The main ſtumbling-block alſo ftill remained, viz, 
open ſeparation from the Church. 

7. Full as many were the offences that lay in the 
way of even the ſincere Members of the Church of 
England, when the people called Quakers firſt pro- 
felled, that they were ſent of God to reform the land, 
Whether they were or no, is beſide our queſtion : it 
ſuffices for the preſent purpoſe to obſerve, that over 
and above their open, avowed, total ſeparation — 

the 


the Church, and their vehement invectives againſk 


42 1 1 - 


280 A raxtizr APPEAL, Part III. 


many of her Doctrines, and the whole frame of her 
Diſcipline ; they ſpent their main ſtrength in diſputing 
about Opinions and Externals, rather than in preach- 
ing faith, mercy, and the love of God. 

In theſe reſpects, the calc was nearly the fame when 
the Baptiſts firft appeared in England. They imme- 
diately . commenced a warm difpute, not econeerning 
the vitals of Chriſtianity, but concerning the manner 
and time of adminiſtring one of the external Ordi- 
nances of it, And as their Opinion hereof totally 
differed from that of all the other Members of the 
Church of England, ſo they ſoon openly declared 
their ſeparation from it, not without ſharp cenſures of 
thoſe that continued therein, N 

8. The fame occaſion of offence was, in a ſmaller 
degree, given by the Preſbyterians and Independants: 
for they alſo ſpent great part of their time and ſtrength, 
in oppoſing the commonly received Opinions con- 
cerning {ome of the circumſtantials of Religion ; and 
for the fake of theſe, ſeparated from the Church. 

But I do not include that venerable man, Mr. 
Philip Henry, nor any that were of his ſpirit, in this 
number. I know they abhorred contending about Ex- 
ternals. Neither did they ſeparate themſelves from 
the Church. They continued therein, till they were 
driven out, whether they would or no. I cannot but 
tenderly ſympathize with theſe; and the more, be- 
cauſe this is, in part, our own caſe, Warm men ſpare 
no pains, at this very day, to drive us out of the 
Church. They cry out to the people, wherever one 
of us comes, * a Mad Dog, a Mad Dog!” if haply 
we might fly for our lives, as many have done before 
us. And ſure it is, we ſhould have complied with 
their defire, we ſhould merely for peace and quietneſs 
have left the Church long 3 now, but that we = 
could not in conſcience do it. And it is on this 15 
fingle motive, it is for conſcience ſake that we ſtill . 


continue therein; and ſhall continue (God being our % 


helper) unleſs they by violence thruſt us out, 
9. But to return, What are the ſtumbling blocks 


in the preſent caſe, compared to thole in any of the 


preceding p We 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 281 


We do not diſpute concerning any of the externals 
or circumſtantials of Religion, There is no room; 
for we agree with you therein, We approve of, and 
adhere to them all; all that we learned together when 
we were children, in our Catechiſm and Common- 
Prayer Book. We were born and bred up in your 
own Church, and deſire to die therein. We always 
were, and are now, zealous for the Church ; only 
not with a blind, angry zeal, We hold, and ever 
have done, the ſame opinions, which you and we re- 
ceived from our forefathers. But we do not lay the 
main ſtreſs of our Religion on any Opinion, right or 
wrong: neither do we ever begin, or willingly join in 
any diſpute concerning them. The weight of all Re- 
ligion, we apprehend, reſts on IIolineſs of Heart and 
Life. And conſequently, wherever we come, we 
preſs this with all our might. How wide then is the 
difference between our caſe and the caſe of any of 
thoſe that are above-mentioned? They avowedly ſe- 
parated from the Church: we utterly diſavow an 
ſuch deſign. They ſeverely, and almoit continually, 
inveighed againſt the Doctrines and Diſcipline of the 
Church they left. We approve both the Doctrines 
and Diſcipline of our Church, and inveigh only 
againſt Ungodlineſs and Unrighteouſneſs. They ſpent 
great part of their time and ſtrength in contending 
about Externals and Circumſtantials. We agree with 
you in both; ſo that having no room to ſpend 
any time m ſuch vain Contention, we have our Fefre 
of ſpending and being ſpent, m promoting plain, prac- 
tical Religion, How many ſtumbling-blocks are re- 
moved out of your way? Why do not you acknow- 
ledge the work of God, 

10. If you ſay, * Becauſe you hold Opinions which 
1 cannot believe are true :” I anſwer, believe them 
true or falſe; I will not quarrel with you about any 
Opinion. Only ſee that your heart be right towards 
God, that you know and love the Lord Jeſus Chrift ; 
that you love your Neighbour, and walk as your 
Maſter walked, and I deſire no more. I am ſick of 
Opinions: I am weary to bear them. My ſoul loaths 
this frothy food. Give me ſolid and ſubſtantial Re- 


b i B b ligion. 


282 A rAR TER APPEAL, Part III. 


ligion. Give me an humble, gentle Lover of God and 
Man; a man full of Mercy and good Fruits, without 
partiality, and without hypocriſy: a man laying him- 
ſelf out in the Work of Faith, the Patience of Hope, 
the Labour of Love, Let my foul be with theſe 
Chriſtians, whereſoever they are, and whatſoever 
Opinion they are of. Whoſeever [thus] doth the 
will of my Father which is in heaven, the ſame is my 
Brother, and Siſter, and Mother. $72 | 

11, Inexcuſably infatuated muſt you be, if you can 
even doubt whether the propagation of this Religion 
be of God! Only more inexcuſable are thoſe un- 
happy men, who oppoſe, contradict and blaſpheme it. 

How long will you ſtop your ears againſt him, that 
ſtill crieth, Why perlecuteſt thou me? It is hard 
for thee to kick againſt the pricks;*” for a man to con- 
tend with his Maker, IIow long will you deſpiſe the 
well-known advice of a great and learned man, *“ Re- 
frain from theſe men, and let them alone. If this 
| work be of man, it will come to nought. But if it 
be of God, ye cannot overthrow it.” And why 
| ſhould you be found even to fight againſt God? If a 
man fight with God, ſhall he prevail? “ Canſt thou 
thunder with a voice like hin? Make haſte! Fall 
down! Humble thyſelf before him. Leſt he put forth 
his hand, and thou periſh. 

12. How long will you fight under the banner of 
the great Enemy of God and man? You are now in 
his ſervice: you are taking part with the Devil againſt 
God, Even ſuppoſing there were no other proof, 
this would undeniably appear, from the goodly com- 
pany among whom you are enliſted, and who war one 
and the ſame warfare, I have heard ſome affirm, that 
the molt bitter enemies to the preſent work of God, 
were Phariſees, They meant, men who had the form 
of godlineſs, but denied the power of it. But I can- 
not fay ſo. The ſharpeſt adverſaries thereof whom J 
have hitherto known (unleſs one might except a few 
honourable men, whom I may be excuſed from nam- 
ing) were the Scum of Cornwall, the Rabble of Bill- 
ton and Darleſton ; the wild Beaſts of Walſal, and the 
Turnkeys of Newgate, | ; 

13. Might 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 283 


1g. Might not the very ſight of theſe Troops, ſhew 
any reaſonable man, to what General they belonged p 
As well as the weapons they never fail to uſe; the 
moſt horrid Oaths and Execrations, and lawleſs V1o- 
lence, carrying away as a flood whatſoever it is which 
ſtands before it: having no eyes, nor ears, no regard 
to the loudeſt cries of Reaſon, Juſtice or Humanity: 
can you join heart or hands with thele any longer? 
With ſuch an infamous, {candalous Rabble-rout, roar- 
ing and raging as if they were juſt broke looſe, with 
their Captain Apollyon, from the bottomleſs pit? 
Does it not rather concern you, and that in the higheſt 
degree, as well as every friend to his King and Coun- 
try, every lover of Peace, Juilice and Mercy, im- 
mediately to join and ſtop any ſuch godleſs crews, as 
they would join to ſtop a fire juſt beginning to ſpread, 
or an inundation of the ſea ? 

24. If on the contrary, you join with that godleſs 
crew, and ſtrengthen their hands in their wickednels, 
mult not you, in all reaſon, be accounted, (like them) 
a public enemy of mankind? And indeed fuch muſt 
every one appear, in the eye of unprejudiced Reaſon, 
who oppoles directly or indirectly, the Reformation of 
mankind, By Reformation I mean, the bringing them 
back (not to this or that ſyſlem of Opinions, or to 
this or that ſet of Rites and Ceremonies, how decent 
and fignificant ſoever; but) to the calm love of God 
and one another, to an uniform practice of Juſtice, 
Mercy and Truth. With what colour can you lay 
any claim to Humanity, to Benevolence, to public 
Spirit, if you can once open your mouth, or ſtir one 
finger, againſt ſuch a Reformation as this ? 

It is a poor excule to ſay, O, but the people are 
brought into ſeveral erroneous Opinions.” It matters 
not a ſtraw, whether they are or no: (I ſpeak of 
ſuch Opinions as do not touch the foundation) it is 
ſcarce worth while to ſpend ten words about it. Whe- 
ther they embrace this religious Opinion or that, is no 
more concern to me, than whether they embrace this 
or that ſyſtem of Aſtronomy. Are they brought to 
holy Tempers and holy Lives? This is mine, and 
{ſhould be your enquiry ; ſince on this, both ſocial and 

B b. 2 perſonal 


* 


284 A rART UR APPEAL, Part III. 
perſonal. happi neſs depend: happineſs, temporal and 


eternal. Are they brought to the Love of God and 


the Love of their Neighbour? Pure Religion and 
undefiled is this, how long then will you darken 
counſel, by words without knowledge? The plain 
Religion now propagated is Love, And can you op- 
poſe this, without being an enemy to mankind ? | 

15. No; nor without being an enemy to your King 
and Country: eſpecially at ſuch a time as this. For 
however men of no thought may not ſee or regard it, 
or hectoring cowards may brave it out; it is evident to 
every man of calm reflection, that our nation ſtands 
on the very brink of deſtruction. And why are we 
thus, but becauſe © the cry of our wickedneſs is gone 
up to heaven?” Becauſe we have ſo exceedingly, 
abundantly, - beyond meaſure, corrupted our ways be- 
fore the Lord. And becauſe, to all our other abomi- 
nations we have added, the open fighting againſt God; 
he not only rejetting, but even denying, yea, blaſ- 


pheming his laſt offers of mercy; the hindering others 


who were-defirous to cloſe therewith ; the deſpitefully 
uhtng bis Mefſengers, and the varioully troubling and 
&pproiing thole who did-accept of his grace, break off 
thor fins, and turn to him with their whole heart. 

16, I cannot but believe, it is chiefly on thisaccount, 
that God hath now a controverſy with our land. And 


muſt not any conitderate men be inclined to form the. 


fame judgment, if he reviews the ſtate of public 
affairs, for only a few years laſt paſt? 1 will not enter 
into particulars, But, in general, can vou poſſibly 
help obſerving, that whenever there has been any 
thing like a public attempt, to ſuppreis this new Sect, 
(for ſo it was 2:tfully repreſented) another and another 
pub. e trouble acoſe. This has been repeated io often, 
that it is ſurpriſu g any man of ienſe can avoid taking 
notice of :t, My we turn at length © to him that 
ſmacth us, hear the Rod, and him that appointeth it!“ 
May we © Lumble ourſelves under the mighty hand of 
God,” before the great deep ſwallow us up! 

17. Juſt now, viz. on the 4th of this inſtant De- 


cember, the Reverend Mr, Henry Wickham, one of 
113 


n 


- 
< ww v4. Og PF 4 % ”. — es A , 
I — 3 = p 4 1 2 N A wx % _ , 1 * 1 — N - q — 1 
- "ey wo TY 1 - as a ry 2 lx % * 4 d 4 «3 % 2 - ” , VL ö 3 - 1 7 * you — 1 . 
" dn . * © o - EE, 7 _ "I a _ of 2 bis 2 \ 1 4 1 » * x i% Io" 8 1 a * 1 * 5 7 PR, & 5 
* * * 1 9 n N. * > : , ; 2 ' " * 1 3 e : wm | & 
* £ - * 5 5 nw +.» CUP As 4% LS, * - > „ 1 4, A >, _ LY l a > 0 l Y 4 « AS * * 4 [ALA 7% N 4 A, by 
A 54 . 3 W 18 NW . * 4 4 "4+ = Ln * . 7 „ : . **% 3 as. KA 


4 


1 


2 2 — yy 15 * 4h 


Cs r 
* "i he ASL At LR 2 . 
2 0 — * * 3 


oo 


Wp 2; * * > 
P 


* 7 RT; os 3» 


To Men of Reaſon and Religion. 283 
his Mzjeſty's Jultices of Peace for the Weſt. Riding of 
York {hire writes an order, | FR | 

To the Conſtable of Kighley, commanding him, “ to 
convey the body of Jonathan Reeves, (whoſe real 
crime is, the calling Sinners to repentance) to his 
Majeſty's Goal and Caſtle of Vork; ſuſpected (faith 
the Precept) of being a Spy among us, and a dan- 
gerous man to the perſon and government of his Ma- 
jeſty King George.” | 

God avert the Omen! I fear this is no preſage 
either of the repentance or deliverance of our poor. 
Nation! 

18, If we will not turn and repent, if we will har- 
den our hearts, and acknowledge neither his Judg- 
ments nor Mercies; what remains but the fulfilling of 
that dreadful word, which God ſpake by the Prophet 
Ezekiel; Son of man, when the land ſinneth againſt. 
me, by treſpaſſing grievoully; then will 1 ſtretch 
forth my hand upon it, and break the ſtaff of the 
bread thereof. Though theſe three men, Noah, 
Daniel, and Job, were in it, they ſhould deliver but 
their own ſouls. Or if I bring a ſword upon that 
land, and fay, „Sword, go through the land : ”” 
Or if I fend a Peſtilence into that land, and pour out 
my fury upon it in blood: Though Noah, Daniel, 
and Job were in it, as I live, ſaith the Lord God, 
they ſhall deliver neither ſon nor daughter ; they ſhall 
but deliver their own ſouls by their righteouſneſs,” 
Chap. xiv. ver. 1g, 14, 17. 19. 20. 

«© Yet behold, therein ſhall be left a Remnant, that 
ſhall be brought forth, both ſons and daughtcrs,— — 
And ye ſhall be comforted concerning the ev:l that I 
have brought upon Jerufalem,—---And ye inall know 
that I have not done without caule, all that 1 have 
done in it, {aith the Lord God.” Ver, 22, 23. 


Lox bo, Dec. 18, 1745. 


. 


BOOKS 
Publiſhed by the late Rev. Mr. WesLsy, 
And ſold at the New Chapel, City-Road, London. 


— 


1. HE Life of Mr. THOMAS WALSH, of 


Bally-Linn, in Ireland; compoſed chiefly 


from his own papers, by Mr. JAMES MORGAN. 


Mr. Wals was educated in the principles of the 
Church of Rome, but being convinced of the errors 
and pernicious Doctrines of that Church, he em- 
braced the Proteſtant Religion. Soon after he was 
inſtrutted more perfectly in the truth as it is in Jeſus, 
and became an Itinerant Preacher in the Methodiſt 
Connection. This Narrative contains a. particular 
account of his remarkable Convittions and Conver- 
ſion; his deep experience, inward ſufferings, per- 
ſecutions afflictions, and temptations : his almoſt 
unexampled zeal for the converſion of ſinners, and 
indefatigable labours in the miniſtry, both in Eng- 
land and Ireland. Bound 1s; 6d. ſewed 1s. 


2. The Life of the pious and venerable Mr, 
JOHN FLETCHER, Vicar of Madeley, Author 
of the Checks againſt Antinomianiſm, and many 
other valuable pieces of polemical and practical 
Divinity, For the Character of Mr. Fletcher ſee 
the Arminian Magazine for the year 1793. Price 
bound 2s. 6d. ſewed 25s, 

3. Extract of the Life of Madam GUION, The 


account of this extraordinary perſon abounds with 


many excellent things, tending to promote the. 


ſpiritual advantage of the children of God. She 


was often favoured with uncommon influences of 


the. Holy Spirit; and, notwithſtanding her educa» 
tion among a dark, degenerate people, the attained 
through Grace, a lai1ge meaſure of the Mind that 
was in Chriſt Jeſus: of righteouſneſs, peace, and 
joy in the Holy Ghoſt: tew inſtances are to be 
found of fuch exalted love to God and nr neigh« 
our; 


2 os "nd * 
= 4. WW * 
1 


HWY ou 49 
war 2 


N 


» 
* 
* 
„ 
F 
= 
C 
Sy 
N. 
$77 
4 
t 
1 
yas 
7 
c & 
W 
* 
_ 
x 
1 
1 
1 * 
*X 
* 
. 
* 
4 
* 
? - 
kc 
"x 4 1 1 
* 
o VJ 
= 4 
> 
* 
. + 
© q 
* in 
"4 
a7 
\ + 
*Y 
\ — 
On 
2 
4 
TY 
* 
$53 
4 
i. 
* 
6 
a 
* 
* 


. 


| B O OK 8, &r, 
bour ; of genuine humility, invincible meekneſs, 


and unbounded reſignation, Price bound 25, 6a, 
ſcwed 28. | 


4. The Life of Mr. THOMAS HALIBUR- 
TON, Profeſſor of Divinity in the Univerſity of 
St. Andrews, Scotland, In this Narrative is de- 
ſcribed the Work of God in the Soul of Man, in 
a way ſo clear and inſtrutting, as is rarely to be met 
with either in ancient or modern Writings, Mr, 
Haliburton went through deep convictions and dif. 
treſſing temptations, for ſeveral years; he was 
particularly exerciſed with perplexing doubts con- 
cerning the Being of Gop, and the Veracity of the 
Holy Scriptures; and was happily and powerfully 
delivered from all his fears and anxicties, Lis la- 
bours in the Miniſtry were ſucceſsful, and he 
finiſhed his courle with holy triumph in the Lord, 
Price 6d, R 


5. The Life of M. De NENTY, a French N 
bleman, of exemplary piety and devotedneſs to 
GOD. Some years before his death he could teſtify 
6& I carry about with me ordinarily, an experimen- 
tal verity, and a plenitude of the preſence of the 
Holy Trinity; and this in lo lively a manner, that 
my outward employments create me no dilturbance 
at all,” Price 6d. 


6. An Account of Gop's Dealings with Mr, 
JOHN HAIME. He was brought to the know- 
ledge of the Truth when a ſoldier in the Qucen's 
Regiment of Dragoons, and preached the Goſpel to 
the Britiſh Army in Flanders, in the years 1744 
and 45. This Narrative includes ſome account of 
the Methodiſt Soldiers who were killed at the bat- 
tle of Fontenoy. 4d. 

. The Journal and Chriſtian Experience of Mrs. 
ELIZABLLTIII HARPER, of Redruth in Cornwall. 
Price 4d. 

8, The Life of Mr, JOHN. JANEWAY, Fel- 
low of King's College, Cambridge. gd. 

9. A ſhort Account of the happy Death of Mrs. 
HANNAH RICHARDSON ; by Mr, Charles 
Wefley, 1d. | 
