The Ninth Part, Section One

Introduction

In the Colman Collection is a Sermon Register and manuscript hymn-book which Wesley used from 1747 to 1762. The earlier entries in the Register are in the handwriting of a secretary; the later entries Wesley has made himself. A study of the Register reveals interesting facts. I. On his journeys, Wesley took with him a collection of sermons and expository notes. 2. He did not win pulpit popularity on the strength of a comparatively small handful of sermons. Certain sermons useful as manifestoes, as expositions of doctrine, or as means of effectual appeal, .were preached frequently. But these were supplemented by a large number of sermons new or newly remade. In this Register he has summarized the preaching of fifteen years thus: The services held are grouped in forty-three sets varying from 40 to 234 set vices in each, giving a total of sermons preached between 1747 and (sl. A pencil note,partly obliterated, analyses the texts: Old Testament, 266; New Testament, 1,088-0 total of 1,354. 3. The Journal minimizes the actual work done. He preached on every possible occasion, and never held a society-class or band-meeting without an exposition. The Journal says ' Preached We compare the date in the Register, and find three texts or more, the explanation being that he stayed the night, preaching on arrival, in the evening, expounding in a society-meeting, preaching at five the following morning, and again in the open air before leaving. The earliest entries in the year 1752 may be quoted in illustration. On Wednesday, Jan. I, he was at West Street, and used twelve texts. Even if we assume that 'Wed. fan. I,' in the Register, also covers Thursday and Friday, it is a fair amount of preaching for a delicate man in the depth of a bitter winter. Saturday hi devotes to Snowsftelds with nine texts; Sunday, fan. 5, to Spitalfields with six; Monday to the Foundery with eleven. It is evident that Wesley did not limit his visitation of societies to the quarterly renewal of tickets, and that he never visited a class without expounding the Scriptures. Probably also pastoral visitation in tht homes of members was accompanied by exposition.

THE JOURNAL

From November 2, 1751, to October 28, 1754

1751. Nov. 2, Sat.-Mr. Arvin, according to my desire, informed Mr. M-----that I was willing to give him twenty pounds a year for assisting me once a week. He refused it with the utmost indignation, and from that time spoke all manner of evil.[ 'Sun. Nov. 3, Spitalfields' (five sermons or expositions). This was not the ' Eglise Neuve, Church Street,' the lease of which afterwards came into the possession of the Methodists, but another 'dissolved ' French church. In the Registrar-General's Lists six (additional to Church Street) are named. This does not exhaust the eighteenth-century list of French Protestant congregations in Spitalfields. There is reason to believe that through the Religious Societies, or by the temporary occupancy of disused or partially used buildings, early Methodism came into close contact with the Huguenot exiles or their descendants in both East and West London.]

Mon. II.-I rode to Rochester,[ In the Sermon Register there is no record of preaching during this journey at Rochester, Chatham, or Brompton.]

and the next day to Canterbury, where I preached, morning and evening, in what was lately the French church.[ Canterbury Cathedral gave the hospitality of its crypt to French Protestant refugees from very early times. A Huguenot service is still held there. A French church, using the English Liturgy, met in the ' Malthouse.' This may have heen the church of which for a while Edward Perronet became pastor, and in which Wesley preached on this occasion. The Perronets were a Huguenot family.] We had not any disturbance from first to last, the Court of King's Bench having broke the spirits of the rioters.

Sat. 16.-I set out early in a clear, calm morning, and in the afternoon came to London.[ 'Sun. Nov. 17, The Foundery1 (6 texts).]

Tues. 19.-I began writing a letter to the Comparer of the Papists and Methodists.[ Dr. George Lavington, bishop of Exeter (1683-1762), was one of Wesley's bitterest opponents. Bishop Lavington's Enthusiasm of Methodists and Papists Compared was published in three parts -1749-51-and republished in two volumes. ' Enthusiasm' was the stand ing libel on earnestness and spirituality in religion. To brand as ' Papists' was, in that age, to cry ' Mad dog!' To prove that Methodist clergymen held Romanist principles was, in effect, to prove that they were plotting with the enemies of their country for the restoration of the Stuarts and of papal domination. Bishop Lavington must have known that the keynote of Methodist preaching in the parishes of Shoreham and Haworth, of Bexley and Great St. Bartholomew's, was Justification by Faith -the doctrine of the Reformation, of the Thirty-nine Articles, of the Homilies, and of Wesley's manifesto-sermon in St. Mary's, Oxford. No doctrine was more absolutely opposed to the first principles of Romanism, and no doctrine more frequently sounded its trumpet-note in the Foundery and the Tabernacle. Bishop Lavington's attack was as preposterous as it was unfair. Whitefield, Wesley, Vincent Perronet and others replied. Wesley's letters, addressed directly to the bishop of Exeter, are included in the Works, vol. ix. See also below, p. 526; W.H.S. Proceedings, vol. iv. p. 79, and Green's Wesley Bibliography, pp. 67, 76; also Green's Anti-Methodist Publications, No. 213, &c. Wesley's letter to Bishop Lavington, we now learn, must have been written in his Newington retreat, for the Sermon Register shows that he was there on Nov. 21, also on Wednesday, Nov. 27. See also W.H.S. vol. iii. p. 23, where the Rev. T. E. Brigden shows that John Fursman, Chancellor, and William Hole, archdeacon, accompanied the bishop in his visitation to Cornwall, and evidently busied themselves in collecting the garbled tales about the Methodists and their sayings of which Lavington made such scurrilous use.]

Heavy work, such as I should never choose; but sometimes it must be done. Well might the ancient say, ' God made practical divinity necessary, the devil controversial.' But it is necessary: we must ' resist the devil, or he will not' flee from us.'[The Sermon Register shows he preached as follows: 'Sun. Dec. I, Snowsfields' (8 texts); ' Mon. Dec. 2, Mill HUP (10 texts); 'Mon. Dec. 16, Chapel' (West Street, 6 texts); ' Mon. 23, Westminster' (2 texts); ' Wed. 25, Spitalfields' (2 texts); ' Thur. and Fri. 26 and 27, Leigh,' Essex (4 texts). In November and December he wrote four letters to John Downes - preacher, mathematician, engraver, printer-one of Wesley's intimate friends. The letters ( Works, vol. xii. pp. 193-6) incidentally flash light on the early societies, and on Wesley's personal relations with his preachers.]

DEC. 21, Sat.-Being informed that Mr. K------,[ An examination of the Hutton Lists of Moravian Brethren strengthens the belief that this was William Peter Knolton (fan-maker, corner of Star Alley, Fenchurch Street), described as 'an important man,' who went to Pennsylvania and then left the Brethren. Thomas M'Cullagh had no doubt as to the identification. He suggested the omission of the whole story as irrelevant; but, however useless the account may be in itself, its presence in the text illustrates Wesley's attitude (which may or may not be defensible) towards the Moravians, an historical note that cannot be ignored.] for some years zealously attached to the Brethren, had now burst his chain, I had a desire to hear, from his own mouth, how he was delivered. So a day or two after I talked with him at large, and wrote down the substance of his account, that I might make no mistake. After a few days I called upon him; I read over to him what I had written, and desired him to tell me if I had misunderstood him in anything. And this account alone may be abundantly sufficient to pull off the mask from those cruel and deceitful men. I do not speak this of all, but of them with whom he had to do.

1. I was (said he) one of the first members of the society at the Foundery; and continued there till William Oxlee, about the latter end of the year 1740, persuaded me to join the Brethren. It was not long before I was admitted to most of their Conferences, and my love for them increased more and more, till, in the year 1741, I went over to Heerendyk.

2. Here I saw several things I did not approve, particularly the arbitrary power with which the heads of the Church governed, and the vast respect they showed to the rich, while the poor were little regarded; but I forgot all this when I returned to England, and gave myself up to

their disposal.

3. I was soon after employed to collect money for repairing the chapel in Fetter Lane. The manner of the Brethren was, to write to each of those who were accustomed to hear the preaching, and desire them, if they found their hearts free, to send five or ten guineas. As many of these were not at all awakened, I thought this was quite wrong. So I told Mr. Molther; but he answered me short, ' That does not

concern you.'

4. I saw several other things which I could not approve; and I spoke of them, but without effect. Some months after, Mr. Spangenberg told me, ' My brother, we are going to settle an economy of children at Lamb's Inn [A Moravian boarding school at Broad Oaks, in Essex, chiefly for children of members of the London Society (Memoirs of Hutton, p. 88).]; and it is the Saviour's will that you should go there and be the physician of the house.' I thought it strange, for I did not understand physic. However, I did not dare to reason; so I went.

5. The management here gave me a great shock. Without any regard to the rules laid down, Richard Utley and his wife, the directors of the economy, behaved in the most haughty and tyrannical manner.[ He married a widow who, before her first marriage, was Hutton's maid-servant (Sarah Morgan). Mr. and Mrs. Utley went to Pennsylvania.] Those who were set over the children had no gifts for the work, and some of them little care for their own souls. Several of the children were whipped without cause, and sometimes out of measure; by which ill management, one of mine was utterly ruined, and has had no fear of God ever since. As for me, I might give advice if I would; but none regarded it. And when I rose one night and covered the children, who had thrown the clothes off in their sleep, Mr. Utley sharply reproved me before the whole family, telling me I had done what I had no business to do, adding that I was the most useless person in the whole house. I desired that, if so, I might return to London. With much difficulty they consented, and I made all haste back to my own house.

6. But I grew more and more uneasy at their management, which, the Brethren perceiving, sent me to Yorkshire. When I had been there a few days one of them told me I was to go to Great Horton in the morning, it being made out to the Brethren that I was to preach there. I was amazed, having never had one thought of preaching. Yet I did not dare to refuse, and from that time they employed me to preach, and to visit all the souls through that circuit.

7. At Holbeck we had an economy of young men. When I visited them, and examined them strictly, they declared to me so much of their onanism, whoredoms, and other abominations, that I was utterly astonished. I was constrained to rebuke them sharply; for which, in a few days, I received a severe letter from Mr. Spfangenberg, telling me I was destroying God's dear children instead of building them up; and that therefore I was neither to preach nor labour any more in Yorkshire.

8. In a little while I was sent for to London, to accompany Mrs. St------into Germany; but the letter being delayed, although I ode post, she was gone before I came.[ Probably Mrs. Stonehouse, who was at Marienborn in 1743-4, an(l was now a deaconess of the congregation in Germany (Memoirs of Hulton, p. 230).] Some time after I was appointed a member of the Committee of Six, to whom an account was to be transmitted by all the Labourers of all the steps which they took, either at home or abroad.

One of our fundamental rules was, not to run in debt above thirty pounds; therefore, when Mr. Spfangenberg brought in a bill of more than three hundred, I was exceedingly startled, and moved that the particulars of it might be given in, and that all our accounts might be clearly and fairly stated. Wenzel Neisser, being present (though not one of our members), took me up for this very severely, telling me they were servants of the Saviour, and would give no account to men.

9. I was more and more uneasy at their way of proceeding till, one day, Mr. SI------[ This probably was Mr. Schlicht, who about this time was ' ordinary or pastor' at Lamb's Hill, several of whose hymns are in the first English Moravian Hymn-

book, and who set hymns to muHc-a quaint, shadowy, scholarly Brother of the Anglo-German community in England. He probably edited the 1746 ed. of the English Moravian book. See Index of 1912 ed. He is associated with Spangenberg, Toltschig, Neisser, and Hutton on occasions of importance.] came to me, and asked me if I was willing to go to Bedford for six or eight days.

I told him I was; and in a day or two set out. But Mr. Br------[ Probably Mrs. James Hutton's brother, Abraham Lewis Brandt, the artist of the early Anglo-German community, to whom we are indebted for Moravian portraits and engravings, several of which, including those of John Cennick and Bishop Gambold, were published by J. West, 10 Nevill's Court, Fetter Lane (Memoirs of Hutton, p. 375, note; also above, vol. ii. p. 10).] told me, ' Brother K------, you must not expect to do much good here; for there is the hidden curse among the souls, which I believe arises chiefly from the practice of procuring abortion, which is so common among the women.' Nevertheless, I did find a great blessing during the two or three months that I laboured there; but I could not stay, having a strong impression on my mind that I was to labour in Jamaica.

10. Upon my mentioning this to the Brethren they said I should go thither as soon as possible; but it would be proper for me to go to Pennsylvania first, and spend a little time at Bethlehem. I believed they knew best; so, in the year 1744, I quitted my shop, left all my affairs unsettled, and sailed to Pennsylvania.

11. I had full employ at Bethlehem, being appointed General Preacher, and expected to bear a part in all the Conferences; but it was not long before I was troubled more than ever, seeing so much craft and subtlety, and withal so much pride, stateliness, and tyranny in those that governed the Church. One instance, out of very many, was this: W. Harding, who came over some time before me, and was a stated preacher, had spoken to them freely and warmly of several things which he thought reprovable. Upon this he was put out of all his offices, and all the Brethren were forbid to speak . to him. Being forsaken of all, he was more uneasy still; on which the Brethren said he was mad. As such he was confined, and food was brought to him once or twice a day by two or three young men, who likewise many times beat him very severely. At length he watched his opportunity, and made his escape; but they followed after, and took him, and a wooden house was built for him, not a quarter of a mile from the town, about ten feet square, and very dark. I was walking along near the place when they were bringing him thither. His cries and entreaties might have pierced a heart of stone. He begged that he might clean shoes, fetch them water, cleave wood, or whatever they pleased, in the open air. But it availed not; he was shut up. About six weeks after, as they opened the door one day in order to give him some meat, he rushed out, got by them, and made toward Philadelphia with all the speed he could. Being close pursued, he ran to the river (being an excellent swimmer), leaped in, sank, and rose no more.

12. I was then at New York, whence I returned to Bethlehem in January 1746; but I had no rest in my spirit, till, after three weeks, I removed to Philadelphia. Here two of the Brethren and a widow woman lived in the Brethren's house. I hired a room in it, and desired the widow, as I had not convenience myself, to boil me a little water in the morning for my tea. Meantime all the Brethren in Philadelphia were charged not to converse with me. And not long after the two Brethren wrote Mr. Spangenberg word that I lived in adultery with the widow. When I was informed of this, I went straight to Bethlehem, and told Mr. Spangenberg the whole affair; who immediately wrote back to them in Philadelphia that I had confessed the charge.

13. Being now thoroughly weary of mankind, I procured a little house in a wood, at some miles distant from any town, and resolved to spend the remainder of my days by myself. Here I stayed about four years, till one afternoon Mr. Spangenberg and the Count's sonin-law called upon me. We talked together till two in the morning. They acknowledged many things that had been wrong, promised they should be amended without delay, and persuaded me to join with them once more. But nothing was amended; so that, after a few months, I was constrained to leave them again. I followed my business in Philadelphia till I had earned money for my passage, and a year ago returned to London.

Was there ever so melancholy an account Oh what is human nature! How low are they fallen who were once burning and shining lights, spreading blessings wherever they came! But what infatuation is it which makes this very man attend their preaching still, and his wife (though she believes most of what her husband says)[ The 1st ed. reads: ' Though she cannot believe all her husband says.'

2 Between Dec. 21,1751, and March 15, 1752, an interval occurs which may now be partially rilled from three sources:

I. The Sermon Register described in the prefatory note, p. 2, and published in extenso in a later volume of this edition, enables us to fill many of Wesley's preaching appointments during the interval.

On Tuesday, Jan. 7, he was in retreat at Newington. Four texts are given. Tuesday seems to have been a regular preaching-day at this mysterious spot. Wednesday, 15, West Street (6 texts); Tuesday, 28, Deptford (2); Wednesday, 29, West Street (4). Also.Jn January he visits Hayes, preaching Mwice; but we do not know the exact one.

On Wednesday, Feb. 5, he is in Bristol (9 texts). During this month, but on days not known, he visited Sarum (3) and Reading (i). Sunday, March 8, he was at Snowsfields doing the usual full day's work.] to remain in close connexion with them![ On January 29, 1752, an Agreement was written by John Wesley and signed by certain of the preachers. A facsimile of this will he found on p. 9. On March 16 a second Agreement was drawn up in the handwriting of Charles Wesley. Thomas Marriott published this document from the original in his possession (see Meth. Mag. 1847, p. 869; also Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol. ii. pp. 137, 138). The following is the text, with the signatures:

We whose names are under-written, being clearly and fully convinced, i. That the success of the present work of God does in great measure depend on ttte entire union of all the labourers employed therein; 2. That our present call is chiefly to the members of that Church wherein we have been brought up; are absolutely determined, by the grace of God, i. To abide in the closest union with each other, and never knowingly or willingly to hear, speak, do, or suffer anything which tends to weaken that union j 2. Never to leave the communion of the Church of England without the consent of all whose names are subjoined: CHARLES WESLEY, JOHN JONES, WILLIAM SHENT, JOHN DOWNES, JOHN WESLEY, JOHN NELSON.

Similar Agreements were made at the Conferences of 1755 and 1756. See Jackson's Lip of C. Wesley, vol. ii. p. 104.

3. The Commonplace Book of Mrs. Maria Frances Cecilia Cowper yields one incident that belongs (if the weather is a reliable clue) to the earlier portion of this hitherto vacant period. Her mother, Mrs. Madan, was one of Wesley's converts. Her sister, Penelope, married General Maitland. Her brother Martin, rich, musical, brilliant, a mimic, on his way to legal distinction, was converted as the result of a frolic. His companions in a coffee-house asked him to hear Wesley and take off ' the old Methodist.' As he entered the preaching-place Wesley was announcing his text, ' Prepare to meet thy God.' Returning to the coffee-house, Madan told his comrades, ' No, gentlemen, but he has taken me off.' Ordained through the influence of Lady Huntingdon, he became one of the leaders in the Evangelical Revival. As minister at the Lock Hospital he compiled a Collection of Psalms and Hymn-tunes, to which we are indebted for the once popular setting to ' Before Jehovah's awful throne,' ' Hotham,' the recognized Methodist tune for 'Jesu, Lover of my soul,' until Dykes's ' Hollingside ' superseded it, ' Olivers' or ' Helmsley,' 'Moscow ' and other permanent favourites. His younger brother was Bishop Spencer Madan. Among the letters and family memoranda in Mrs. Cowper's Commonplace Book are two entries that bring her mother into renewed correspondence, and her father, Colonel Madan, into intimate pastoral friendship, with Wesley. In spiritual perplexity arising out of the exigencies of her social duties, Mrs. Madan consulted Wesley. His reply, which will be found in the new issue of Wesley letters now preparing for publication, ranks among the finest examples of pastoral instruction on record. The other entry falls into the vacant space between Jan. I and March 15, 1752. Her husband, Mr. Madan, had held deistical views; but, on the occasion of a great illness at Hertingfordbury Park in 1752, he was led back to orthodox belief, and, ' having received the Blessed Sacrament with great awe and devotion,' he bade his wife write to their son Martin, who was gone to town for a few days, to procure him a visit from Mr. John Westley. Mrs. Madan said, ' On his repeated commands I did this: and he (Wesley), notwithstanding the severity of the weather (being frost and snow), set immediately out, and arrived in the morning at the Park House.' Wesley remained the rest of the day with the family, conversing and praying with the sick man repeatedly, and overcoming the prejudice of some who happened to be present by his truly Christian tenderness.

Mr. Westley being obliged to go again early in the day... was up before daybreak, and I went down to breakfast with him(and one who had accompanied him in this journey) and made such acknowledgements as I thought justly due for his great goodness and humanity, in every instance so strongly impressed, through the course of this short but edifying visit-which many would have thought the unusual severity of the weather a sufficient reason at least to have delayed But ' the faith that worketh by love' finds no difficulties in the path that leads to Christian charity.

Mr. Madan recovered. For a time his religious impressions seemed to decrease, but in his last illness in 1756 earnestness returned, and his wife buried him in sure and certain hope. See W.H.S. vol. v. pp. 142-5 (which was indebted to Rev. F. H. Benson and Prof. J. E. B. Mayor, of Cambridge) for these valuable extracts.

A long letter, written on Dec. 20, to 'A Friend' (Arm. Mag. 1779, p. 31017), belongs to this interval; also the Preface to the Works of Mr. John Smith (Works, vol. xiv. p. 230, in 1831 ed. p. 245), written on March 10.]

FACSIMILE OF THE AGREEMENT SIGNED BY JOHN AND CHARLES WESLEY AND THE PREACHERS, JANUARY 29, 175 (see OPPOSITE).

March 1762

At West Street in a Storm

1752. MARCH 15, Sun.-While I was preaching at West Street[On the same day he preached at Snowsfields.] in the afternoon there was one of the most violent storms I ever remember. In the midst of the sermon great part of a house opposite to the chapel was blown down. We heard a huge noise, but knew not the cause; so much the more did God speak to our hearts; and great was the rejoicing of many in confidence of His protection. Between four and five I took horse, with my wife and daughter. The tiles were rattling from the houses on both sides; but they hurt not us. We reached Hayes about seven in the evening, and Oxford the next day.

Tues. 17.-The rain continued without intermission till we came to Enstone. Soon after we set out from thence it was succeeded by so vehement a wind as on Broadway Hill often drove us clear out of the path, and was ready to carry away both horse and rider. But our strength was as our day, and before six in the evening we came unhurt to Evesham.

I preached in the evening at the Town Hall, where several of the clergy and gentry were present.

March 1752., Revisiting Old Scenes

Wed. 18.-I rode over with Mr. -----to his house,[ The extreme probability is that the Mr.------with whom Wesley ' rode over to his house' was his old friend the Rev. Robert Kirkham, who succeeded his father (Lionel Kirkham) in the family living of Stanton, though he does not appear (for some not very clearly defined reason) to have taken actual possession of the living until January 1754. That the rectory remained in the possession of the Kirkham family after the father's death we know f|m Charles Wesley's Journal, March 3't|i737. Whether the 'aunt' referred toft the text was aunt or sister to Robert we have no means of ascertaining; or whether she is to be identified with the ' Mrs. S. K.' whose wedding Wesley attended in 1725-6 we cannot say. See above, vol. i. p. 53; also, for the Kirkham family, W.H.S. vol. v. p. 54: cf. notice of Dr. A. Leger on this edition ofWesley's Journal.vol. viii.p. 147.] which I had not seen for upwards of twenty years.

The place I found, but not the inhabitants. Most of them were gone to their long home. I saw not one whom I knew but Mr.------'s aunt, who could not long forbear telling me how sorry she was that I should leave all my friends to lead this vagabond life. Why, indeed it is not pleasing to flesh and blood; and I would not do it if I did not believe there was another world. Our dispute did not continue long, and ended in much love. Mr.------rode back with me to Evesham, attended the preaching both at seven and at five in the morning, and walked with me from the room after sermon; but it was some time before he could speak. He then broke out, ' I am to take care of two thousand souls, and I never yet knew how to take care of my own!' I left him full of conviction and good resolutions. How many days will they continue

Thur. 19.-I rode to Birmingham, and, from the behaviour of the people, both this and the following evening, found reason to hope that some of the seed which has been sown here will bear lasting fruit.

Sat. 21.-I rode to Wednesbury, where Mr. ------, Vicar of------, had appointed to meet me.[ The society, by this time, had succeeded in renting a large room near to the present Bell Inn, Church Street, which they continued to use till 1760. At this time, and until 1782, the Rev. Edward Best was vicar of Wednesbury and incumbent of Bilston, a Christian gentleman and county justice, who ' scorned to arouse the brutal passions of his parishioners against' Wesley (Meth. Rec. March 21, 1901)] I rejoiced to find so great a change. Since he has known the pardoning love of God he has been swiftly going on from faith to faith, and growing not in knowledge only, but in love.

Sun. 22.-After preaching at five I returned to Birmingham.[ The society, still in Steelhouse Lane, had enlarged its borders from a room in a dwelling-house to an independent outbuilding. Fears of mischief were doubtless based on recent hostilities, when an attack was made upon the room, the pulpit and many seats being taken and burned. ' Some of the principal inhabitants' assisted the constable in dispersing the rioters (Early Meth. in Birmingham, p. 18).] Many were much afraid of my preaching in the street, expecting I know not what mischief to be done. Vain fear! I saw not one person behave amiss while I declared, ' There is joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth.'

At one I preached at Tipton Green to a large congregation, though the wind was ready to cut us in two; and about five to a much larger at Wednesbury, where, in spite of all the wiles of Satan and the cunning craftiness of men, the plain, genuine gospel runs and is glorified.

Mon. 23.-I spent an agreeable hour with Mr.------, curate of W------[ There seems to be a misprint here. W-----is probably to be construed as ' Dudley,' in which case the ' curate' would be the Rev. Benjamin Clement, B A., who was in other ways indebted to Wesley's teaching. In 1752 he was head master of Dudley Grammar School, and curate of St. Edmund's Church. He afterwards became head master of Wolverhampton Grammar School and vicar of St. John's Church in that town, where, according to tradition, Wesley preached. The data as to Mr. Clement are due to the courtesy of Mr. A. A. Rollason.]; an honest, upright man, I verily believe, and willing to know the whole counsel of God. In the evening I preached to a small, serious congregation at Bilbrook. The storm of wind, snow, and hail was ready for us in the morning, almost as soon as we set out, and continued most part of the day. When we had heaths or commons to cross, it was not easy to sit a horse, especially as the wind was full in our teeth. However, we reached Poole (two miles from Nantwich) in the evening, and found a congregation gathered from many miles round, several of whom sat up all night for fear of losing the morning sermon.

Wed. 25.-After preaching at five and at nine, I rode on to Alpraham, where a large congregation of serious, sensible people attended, both at one and at seven in the evening.[ On the 25th he wrote a letter to the society at Monyash. John Bennet, who had left him, was troubling the Derbyshire societies {Works, vol. xii. p. 267).]

Thur. 26[On this day he also preached at Booth Bank.]-We rode on through wind and snow, and reached Manchester. At night I was grieved to hear, in all places, from my coming into Cheshire till now, that John Bennet was still speaking all manner of evil; averring, wherever he came, that Mr. Wesley preached nothing but Popery, denying justification by faith, and making nothing of Christ. Lord, lay not this sin to his charge!

Fri. 27 (being Good Friday).-I went to the old church, where Mr. Clayton read prayers; I think the most distinctly, solemnly, and gracefully of any man I have ever heard; and the behaviour of the whole congregation was serious and solemn in every part of the service. But I was surprised to see such a change in the greater part of them as soon as ever the sacrament was over.[ May we infer that Wesley administered the sacrament, or assisted his old friend]

They were then bowing, courtesying, and talking to each other, just as if they were going from a play.

On Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday I spoke severally to each member of the society; and found reason, after the strictest search, to believe that there was not one disorderly walker therein.

Tues. 31.-Thomas Mitchell gave me a full account of John Bennet's [John Bennet had been continued by Wesley in the itinerant work. See Minutes, vol. i. p. 79 Of the Conference beginning March 8, 1750, we have no detailed account; but there can be no doubt as to Bennet's reappointment. Not long after, he wrote to Whitefield, complaining of Wesley's discipline and doctrines, probably in the hope that Whitefield would invite his co-operation. Whitefield's reply (June 27, 1750) gave him good advice but no encouragement (Whitefield's Works, vol. ii. p. S^2)Bennet was present at a meeting of preachers convened in Leeds by Charles Wesley in September 1751.

The following notices of Bennet are given by Jackson in his Charles Wesley, taken from his manuscript Journal:

Sept. ii, I75I.-I began to speak on the work and trials of a preacher.... This conversation lasted till one. I carried Mr. Grims,haw, Milner, and Bennet to dinner at Miss Norton's.... Sept. iz.-I took horse with Mr. Grimshaw, Milner, Shent, Bennet for Birstall.... and concluded the happy day with John Bennet in prayer. Sept. 13.- I let him preach in the morning, which he did to the satisfaction of all.... Sept. 14.- I heard John Bennet again. He spake sound words that could not be reproved.

These sentences are selected from a

much longer fragment of Charles Wesley's ' private Journal,' the MS. of which was in Thomas Jackson's possession when he wrote Charles Wesley's biography, and is there printed in full, but has now disappeared. See the new edition of Charles Wesley's Journal, in which Jackson's version of the missing fragment is published. Charles does not appear to have been aware of Bennet's disaffection. Thomas Mitchell, one of the preachers, was present at the meeting in Bolton when Bennet renounced his connexion with Wesley, and drew after him the larger part of the society. Two years after his secession he settled as an independent minister at Warburton, a small village near Warrington. There he died in 1759, aged forty-five years. Grace, his widow, after several years, rejoined the Methodists. For many years she lived a saintly and useful life among her own people, and left a family name which has been held in honour not only among the Methodists but also in the Church of England.] renouncing all connexion with me; adding, ' On the 30th of December last, after he had said many bitter things of you to the congregation at Bolton, he spread out his arms, and cried, three times " Popery! popery! popery! I have not been in connexion with him these three years, neither will I be any more." And the same thing he said to all the stewards, at the Quarterly Meeting on New Year's Day.'[On April 2 Wesley preached three times in Bolton. In John Bennet's Journal, under April I, he records an interview with Wesley concerning the deeds of the new house at Bolton. See Musgrave's Bolton Methodism, p. 16; also below, p. 32.]

APRIL 3, Fri.-I rode to Bank House,[ Bank House farm at Bagslate, two miles north of Rochdale. ' Blomley's Barn' was the preaching-house - an illustrious place in the history of early Methodism in Rochdale. See Meth. Rec. Aug. 24, 1905, Jan. 18, 1906, Mar. 10, 1910.] near Rochdale, where Thomas Mitchell gave me the following account:

On Sunday, August 4 last, I preached at Wrangle,[ Also spelt ' Rangdale.' This, obviously, is another version of the tragic story of Thomas Mitchell's encounter with ' the lions of Wrangle.' Their leader was the Rev. Richard Bailey, to whom Wesley wrote a remarkable letter in which he claimed redress and religious freedom (see above, vol. iii. p. 533). The Court of King's Bench, on appeal, gave protection to the persecuted Methodists.] at five in the morning, as usual. About six two constables came, and carried me to a public-house, where I was kept till near four in the afternoon. Then one of them said he would go and ask the minister whether they might not let me go. Upon his return they brought me out to a large mob, who carried me and threw me into a standing water; and as often as I tried to come out, they pitched me in again. At last some of them said I should come out, and kept the others off till I got up the bank. I found myself very happy all the time, for I knew I was in the Lord's hand. I got back to the house where I lodged, and went to bed. But in less than an hour the mob came again, broke open the doors of the house and the chamber, and dragged me away with them. They carried me to a great pond, which was railed round, being ten or twelve feet deep. Then four men took me up by my legs and arms. I felt the flesh shrink a little at first; but it was soon over, and I did not care whether I lived or died, just as pleased the Lord. They swung me backward and forward two or three times, and then threw me as far as they could into the water. The fall took away my senses, so that I felt nothing more . but some that did not care to have me drowned, when I came above water, catching hold of my clothes with a long pole, pulled me out. I lay senseless for some time. When I came to myself I saw many people about me. One of them helped me up and bade me go with him. He brought me to a little house, and put me to bed; but I had not laid long before the mob came again, pulled me out of bed, and drove me before them, almost naked, to the end of the parish, where they left me. I made shift to get on to a place three miles off, where I got to bed again, and slept in peace.[ The Sermon Register gives Leek in April, at which he preached, apparently early in the month; also Mirfield, Halifax, Haworth, Leeds, Fersley, Bradford, Ferry.]

Sun. 5.-About one I preached at Birstall. Observing that several sat on the side of the opposite hill,[ Called Brown Hill. ] I afterward

desired one to measure the ground; and we found it was seven score yards from the place where I had stood. Yet the people there heard perfectly well. I did not think any human voice could have reached so far.

Between four and five I preached in our new house [In May 1751 he had preached within the walls. See above, vol. iii. p. 526.] at Leeds; but it was so full, consequently so hot, and my voice was so damped by the breath of the people, that I suppose many could not hear.[ On April 7 he preached at Halifax and Haworth, and at Mirfield on the 10th.]

April 1762, In the West Riding

Wed. 8.-We rode to Hepton stall, a little town on the round top of a very high mountain, with a steep descent on every side. I preached in a vacant place on the brow of the hill. A captain who came from the minister's house labored much to divert the attention of the people, but none regarded him at all. When we went away he followed us down the hill. One took him by the hand, and spoke a few words; on which he shook like a leaf, and said he hoped this would be a happy day for him, and that he should think more than he had done in time past.

fn\ to.-I preached at Dewsbury,[ Dewsbury Methodism has been well served by its chroniclers. This is the more fortunate because from early times it became a strong centre of Yorkshire Methodism. For studies of early Methodist life and other reliable information sec J. Riley Robinson's Dewsbury, pp. 39i 4r> 45; Historical and Biographical Notices, by G. G. Waddington, Dewsbury, 1886;&\vaLifeofC.of Huntingdon, vol. i, pp 276, 291, 301, 378, 428; vol.

ii. pp. 21-2, 143. The story of the vicars and curates of Dewsbury has interesting points of contact with the history of Methodism m the town. Wesley is said to have preached Robson's funeral sermon. Matthew Powley, vicar from 1777 to 1806, was presented to the living by the King at the desire of Lord Dartmouth. He was denied all college preferment at Oxford because of his evangelical views. He married Miss Unwin, of Huntingdon, and is menJioned in Cowper's Letters. For Charles Wesley's visits to Dewsbury and contact with the clergy see his Journal, Oct. 21, 1746, and Oct. 12, 1756.] where the case of the vicar and his curate will not soon be forgotten. After a conversation I had with the vicar, above three years ago, he was deeply serious, till he conversed again with rich and honorable men, who soon cured him of that distraction. Yet in a while he relapsed, and was more serious than ever, till he was taken ill. The physician made light of his illness, and said he would do well enough if they did but keep those Methodists from him.

They did so. However, in a few days he died,[ April 14, 1749] and, according to his own express order, was carried to the grave at seven in the morning by eight poor men (whom he had named), and buried on the north side of the church. The curate who buried him,[ ' Rev. James Medley, curate Dewsbury, died May 2, I749 aged twentyeight.]'sickening the same week, insisted that the Methodists should not be kept from him. About ten days after, he died, and, according to his desire, was, about the same hour, carried also by eight poor men, and laid in a grave close to that of Mr. Robson.[ Wesley preached at Skircoat Green in April. Cf. above, vol. iii. p. 368.]

Sat. 11.-I preached at R---------, once a place of furious riot and persecution; but quiet and calm since the bitter rector is gone to give an account of himself to God.[ The Sermon Register gives 'April 11, Leeds,' with two texts. But Wesley's secretary may have omitted to insert ' R------,' or possibly this entry refers to early morning preaching in Leeds and to a service later in the day at R-----. Wesley often preached twice in the early morning, at five and eight.]

Sun. 12.-I came to Wakefield as the bells were ringing in, and went directly to Mr. Wilson[Rev. Benjamin Wilson, M.A., vicar.] in the vestry. The behaviour of the congregation surprised me. I saw none light, none careless or unaffected, while I enforced ' What is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul' Hath not God the hearts of all men in His hand Who would have expected to see me preaching in Wakefield Church to so attentive a congregation a few years ago, when all the people were as roaring lions, and the honest man [Francis Scott. See above, vol. iii. p. 368.]

did not dare to let me preach in his yard lest the mob should pull down his houses!

Mon. 13.-In the evening I preached at Sheffield, in the shell of the new house. All is peace here now, since the trial at York, at which the magistrates were sentenced to rebuild the house which the mob had pulled down. Surely the magistrate has been the minister of God to us for good!

Tues. 14.-I went to B------,[ According to the Sermon Register, about this time he preached at Ewood, Grimshaw's home.] whence the vicar, Mr. Drake,

had sent a messenger on purpose to desire he might see me. I found him in deep distress for the loss of his wife, mixed with strong desires after God. Hearing I was going to preach at Rotherham,[ See Everett's Meth. in Sheffield, p. 89.] he offered to go with me. He seemed to stagger at nothing; though as yet his understanding is not opened. Oh that he may not rest till it is!

April 1782, In and Around Epworth

Wed. 15.-I rode on toward Epworth.[ The Sermon Register gives 'Bunham' and Belton for April 15. Probably this should be April 16 and 18.] But I was nigh shipwrecked in sight of the port. Attempting to ride over the common the nearest way, my mare was quickly imbogged. But being lively and strong, she made a shift to get out, and I was glad to go round by Torne Bank.

Thur. 16.-I walked over to Burnham.[ His brother-in-law, R. Ellison, was now reduced to poverty. On the l6th VOL. IVWesley wrote to Blackwell from Epworth: ' All his cows are dead, and all his horses but one; and all his meadow land has been under water these two years' (Works, vol. xii. p. 176).] I had no thought of preaching there, doubting if my strength would allow of preaching always thrice a day, as I had done most days since I came from Evesham; but, finding a house full of people, I could not refrain. Still, the more I use my strength, the more I have. I am often much tired the first time I preach in a day; a little the second time; but, after the third or fourth, I rarely feel either weakness or weariness.

Fri. 17.-I called on the gentleman who told me he was 'sinner enough,'[See above, vol. iii. p. 23.] when I preached first at Epworth on my father's tomb, and was agreeably surprised to find him strong in faith, though exceeding weak in body. For some years, he told me, he had been rejoicing in God, without either doubt or fear; and was now waiting for the welcome hour when he should ' depart and be with Christ."

Sat. 18.-I preached at Belton, and felt an uncommon degree of the presence of God among a handful of poor, despised people. Oh how precious is the least of these in His sight who bought them with His own blood!

Sun. 19.-At eight I preached at Clay worth, where, a year ago, the mob carried all before them. But an honest Justice quelled them at once; so that they are now glad to be quiet and mind their own business.

At one I preached at Misterton to a deeply attentive congregation assembled from all parts, and between four and five at Epworth Cross. The congregation here was somewhat lessened by a burial at Belton, that of poor Mr. Richard Popplewell[His mural tablet is in Belton Church. See W.H.S. vol. v. p. 197.]; emphatically poor,[ See W.H.S. vol. v. p. 115. ] though, while he lived, he possessed (not enjoyed) at least a thousand pounds a year.

Mon. 20.-I rode by Hainton [But he preached there.] to Coningsby. The next day I preached at Wrangle, where we expected some disturbance, but found none. The light punishment inflicted on the late rioters (though their expense was not great, as they submitted before the trial), has secured peace ever since. Such a mercy it is to execute the penalty of the law on those who will not regard its precepts! So many inconveniences to the innocent does it prevent, and so much sin in the guilty.

Wed. 22.-I rode to Grimsby. The crowd was so great in the evening that the room was like an oven. The next night I preached at the end of the town, whither almost all the people, rich and poor, followed me, and I had a fair opportunity of closely applying that weighty question, ' Lord, are there few that be saved'[This illustrates the extent of his work outside the Journal limits. He preached at Grimsby four sermons, not two.]

Fri. 24.-We rode by a fine seat,[ Probably he refers to Brockesby.] the owner of which (not much above fourscore years old) says he desires only to live thirty years longer: ten to hunt, ten to get money (having at present but twenty thousand pounds a year), and ten years to repent. Oh that God may not say unto him, ' Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee!'

When I landed at the quay in Hull,[ The pioneer of Hull Methodism was Mrs. Elizabeth Blow, who crossed the Humber from Grimsby (see W.M. Mag. 1898, p. 483; also Memoirs of Mrs. Sarah Snowden, by W. L. Thornton, Meth. Mag. 1837, pp. 885 sqq., where a full account of the early history of Hull Methodism is given. See below, pp. 330, 331). When John Pawson was eighteen (:7SS) he found the Methodists in an ' obscure place' in Hull (E.M.P. vol. ii. p. 3). A chapel was built in 1760, and teu years later it was superseded by a larger building. In 1771 Manor Alley Chapel was built, it is said, on the site of the gateway tower of the town house of De la Poles.] it was covered with people inquiring,' Which is he Which is he' But they only stared and laughed; and we walked unmolested to Mr. A------'s house.

April 1752, Persecution at Hull

I was quite surprised at the miserable condition of the fortifications, far more ruinous and decayed than those at Newcastle, even before the rebellion. It is well there is no enemy near.

I went to prayers at three in the old church [Holy Trinity, the vicar of which was the Rev. William Mason, father of Mason the poet, whom Wesley regarded as ' full as good a poet' as Gray.]-a grand and venerable structure. Between five and six the coach called, and took me to Myton Car,[ The unenclosed lands stretched from the town in the direction of what is now known as ' Pottery ' (Hall Methodism, PP. 7, 8),] about half a mile from the town. A huge multitude, rich and poor, horse and foot, with several coaches, were soon gathered together; to whom I cried with a loud voice and a composed spirit, 'What shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul ' Some thousands of the people seriously attended, but many behaved as if possessed by Moloch. Clods and stones flew about on every side, but they neither touched nor disturbed me. When I had finished my discourse, I went to take coach; but the coachman had driven clear away. We were at a loss till a gentlewoman invited my wife and me to come into her coach. She brought some inconveniences on herself thereby, not only as there were nine of us in the coach, three on each side, and three in the middle, but also as the mob closely attended us, throwing in at the windows (which we did not think it prudent to shut) whatever came next to hand. But a large gentlewoman who sat in my lap screened me, so that nothing came near me.

The mob, who were increased to several thousands, when I stepped out of the coach into Mr. A------'s house, perceiving I was escaped out of their hands, revenged themselves on the windows with many showers of stones, which they poured in, even into the rooms four stories high. Mr. A----- walked

through them to the mayor's house, who gave him fair words but no assistance-probably not knowing that himself (the mayor) might be compelled to make good all the damage which should be done. He then went in quest of constables, and brought two with him about nine o'clock. With their help he so thoroughly dispersed the mob that no two of them were left together; but they rallied about twelve, and gave one charge more, with oaths, and curses, and bricks, and stones. After this all was calm, and I slept sound till near four in the morning.

About five, Saturday the 25th, we took horse, and made to Pocklington.[ For Methodism in Pocklington see Meth Rec. Feb. 18, 1909.] I was sorry, when I found it was the fair-day, that notice had been given of my preaching; especially when I heard there was no society, and scarce any one awakened in the town. The unusual bitterness of several who met us in the street made the prospect still more unpromising. However, I went to see the room provided for preaching, but found it was not above five yards square. I then looked at a yard which was proposed; but one circumstance of this I did not like. It was plentifully furnished with stones- artillery ready at hand for the devil's drunken companions. Just then it began to rain, upon which a gentleman offered a large, commodious barn. Thither I went without delay, and began preaching to a few, who increased continually. I have known no such time since we left London. Their tears fell as the rain. None opposed or mocked, so that these made full amends for the behaviour of those at Hull.

The man and his wife at whose house we dined had been bitterly persecuted both by his and her mother. These were some of the first whose hearts were touched. Immediately after preaching they came up into the room where we were, and confessed, with many tears, how eagerly they had opposed the truth of God, and troubled their children for adhering to it. How wise are all the ways of God! Had it not been fair-day, these had not been here.

Yet some of our company had dreadful forebodings of what was to be at York. A worthy Justice of the Peace (doubtless to quiet the mob there) had just caused to be cried about the streets, stuck up in public places, and even thrown into many houses, part of the Comparison between the Papists and Methodists [Lavington's attack, originally published in three parts. See above, p. 3.] Perhaps this might be the occasion of some bitter curses which were given us almost as soon as we entered the gates; but the vain words of those Rabshakehs returned into their own bosoms.

April 1762, In the North Riding

I began preaching at six. The chapel [In College Street, near the Bedern. It belonged to the Countess of Huntingdon, and was only borrowed by Wesley on this occasion.]

was filled with hearers, and with the presence of God. The opposers opened not their mouths. The mourners blessed God for the consolation.[ On March 25 he also preached at Poppleton.]

Sun. 26.-At seven God was with us as before, and His word brake the rocks in pieces. We left York about nine, as quietly as we came, and rode to Acomb.[ The place where the ' gentlemen' of York so brutally treated John Nelson. See above, vol. iii. p. 290.]

Mon. 27.-We reached Osmotherley. After preaching in the evening I was desired to visit a person who had been an eminent scoffer at all religion, but was now, they said, 'in a strange way." I found her in a strange way indeed, either raving mad or possessed of the devil. The woman herself affirmed that the devil had appeared to her the day before, and, after talking some time, leaped upon and grievously tormented her ever since. We prayed with her. Her agonies ceased; she fell asleep, and awakened in the morning calm and easy.[ Tradition calls her Elizabeth Whitfield. See Wesley Studies, p. 224. In the Osmotherley Stewards' Book, under date April 28, 1752, appears the follow-

ing: ' Laid out for Mr. John Wesley, Wife, daughter, William Shent and John Haime, $s. zd.' See p. 25. For an interesting account of this, the oldest Stewards' Book in existence, see W.H.S. vol. iii. p. 89.]

Tues. 28.-About noon we reached Stokesley, where I found none had ever yet preached abroad. Samuel Larwood [See below, p. 140. He was at the Bristol Conference of 1745 (Works, vol. viii. p. 281). For his work in Ireland see Crookshank, vol. i., Index, especially p. 25. Atmore is brief (Memorial, p. 239; see also E.M.P, vol. i. p. 246, vol. ii. p. 10).] had attempted it, but in vain; and so had Mr. William Roberts, some time after; but a clergyman came at the head of a large mob and obliged him to desist. About one the person in whose house we were came in trembling, and told us what threatenings were breathed out. I answered, 'Then there is no time to lose,' and went out immediately. I suppose the mob expected to hear us sing; but they were disappointed, for I began preaching without delay. By this means, missing their signal, they came, not in a body, but two or three at a time; and as fast as they came their minds were changed, so that all were quiet from the beginning to the end.

It rained all the way we rode to Stockton; but was fair all the time I stood in the main street, and explained to a listening multitude the joy that is in heaven 'over one sinner that repenteth.'

Wed. 29.-I preached at Durham to a quiet, stupid congregation, and the next day went on to Newcastle.[ The Sermon Register also gives for April, Sheephill, Warda, ' Kighley' (Keighley), Swalwell (apparently en route); and, on Thursday, April 30, Newcastle.]

On Friday and Saturday we enjoyed a little respite from labour, and were refreshed both in soul and body.

MAY 3, Sun.-We had the best-dressed congregation that ever I saw in this place. I spoke very plain, yet all were patient, and looked as if they understood what was said.[ Fourteen texts are entered under May 3 for Newcastle. They represent his work in Newcastle during this visit, filling the gap between May 3 and 9. On May 8 he wrote to Lavington,bishop of Exeter ( Works, vol. ix. p. 61). On May 5 he preached at Morpeth.]

Sat. 9.-I rode to Sunderland,[ The services were held in the northwest corner of a lane adjoining Ettrick Garth, or Chipchase Street. See Meth. Rec. March 13, 1902; W.M. Mag. 1910, p. 885. The Sermon Register has no reference to Sunderland in 1752] where I found one of the liveliest societies in the north of England. This is the effect of their being so much ' under the law' as to scruple, one and all, the buying even milk on a Sunday. The house hardly contained the people at five the next morning. At eight and at twelve I preached in the street, none opposing or interrupting. About four I began at Newcastle, near the Keelmen's Hospital. It was just as I expected. Many who had turned back from the holy commandment once delivered to them flocked together, and seemed convinced that God was still ready to return and leave a blessing behind Him.

Mon. 11.-After preaching at Morpeth in my way, though with little present effect, I rode on to Alnwick, and preached at the Cross[But not there alone. Five texts are entered.]to a far more numerous and more serious congregation.

Wed. 13.-I rode to Berwick; and, after preaching, desired all who had been of the society to meet me. I spoke to seventeen, who were thoroughly willing to unite again; and (what was remarkable) all of them still retained a sense of the pardoning love of God, although they were convinced they had suffered great loss by a famine of the word.

Page 25. IV

Two of the earliest entries in the osmotherley society book (see p. 23).

Thur. 14.-At five the soldiers made a considerable part of the congregation. At noon they came again in troops. One of them, T------W------, came last year from the Highlands, and went through Westmorland to beat up for recruits. He had been earnestly warned, before he left Scotland, on no account to go near the Methodists. But in Kendal he lighted on two or three; from which time they were not one day asunder. It was not long before God clearly assured him of His pardoning love. A fortnight after he was ordered to follow the regiment to Berwick, where he is continually exhorting his comrades to be ' good soldiers of Jesus Christ.1 And many already have listed under His banner.

Fri. 15.- In the afternoon I preached at Alnmouth. How plain an evidence have we here that even our outward work, even the societies, are not of man's building! With all our labour and skill, we cannot, in nine years' time, form a society in this place; even though there is none that opposes, poor or rich: nay, though the two richest men in the town, and the only gentlemen there, have done all which was in their power to further it.

Sat. 16.-I rode on to the poor colliers at Plessey.[ Seaton, Gateshead Fell, Gateshead, Garth Heads, and Barnard Castle, are also in the Sermon Register.] When we came hither first, John Lane, then nine or ten years old, was one of the first who found peace with God. From that hour he continued to walk day and night in the light of His countenance. I saw him last year, longing to be with Christ; but he was detained here a little longer, that he might witness ' a good confession' in death as well as in life. He praised God as long as he had breath, and was buried a day or two before I came.

Sun. 17 (being Whit Sunday.-I preached in the morning at Gateshead to a huge congregation, on our Lord's words, 'If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink.' About five I began near the Keelmen's Hospital, many thousands standing round or sitting on the grass. The wind was high just before, but scarce a breath was felt all the time we were assembled before God. I praised God for this also. Is it enthusiasm to see God in every benefit which we receive

Mon. 18.-I preached at Newlands, and endeavoured to remove the offences which had crept in among the simple people. In the evening I preached at Sheep Hill.[ The Sermon Register gives Widdrington for May.]

It rained all the time, but that little disturbed either the congregation or me.

Tues, 19.-I preached at Whickham, before Mrs. Armstrong's door. I was a little surprised at the account she gave of God's late dealings with her. When her ancient husband, with whom she had lived from her youth, was, on account of a debt contracted by his son, hurried away, and thrown into Durham Jail-which soon put an end to his life; when she was likely to lose all she had, and to be turned out of doors at fourscore years of age; still the oracles of God, which she had loved from a child, were her delight and her counsellors. But one day, when she put on her spectacles to read, she could not see a word. She was startled at first; but soon said,' It is the Lord; let Him do what seemeth Him good.' She laid her spectacles down, and casting her eye on the corner of the Bible, thought she could discern some letters. Taking up the book, she read as well as her daughter could, and from that hour she could not only read without spectacles, but sew, or thread the finest needle, with the same ease as when she was thirty years of age.

Wed. 20.-I preached at Biddick to a multitude of colliers, though it rained hard all the time. They seemed all, even some who had long drawn back, to be melted down as wax before the fire. So strong and general an influence on a congregation I do not remember to have seen for some years.[ On May 21 he returned to Newcastle, and on the 23rd preached at Gateshead Fell and wrote a letter to Blackwell (Works, vol. xii. p. 177). He consults the leading layman in London Methodism on his Book affairs. The Newcastle Methodists, he says, 'are plain, artless, and simple of heart.']

Sun. 24.-The congregation at the Keelmen's Hospital was far too large for my voice to command. I doubt not more than two-thirds could hear, but all were still till I commended them to the grace of God.

Mon. 25.-We rode to Durham, and thence, through very rough roads and as rough weather, to Barnard Castle.[ He preached at Chester-le-Street en route. In 1747 Joseph Cheeseborough, a native of Barnard Castle, became acquainted with the Methodists in Leeds, where he was then residing. On his removal to his native town he began to tell his neighbours of the new life. He found a helper in Mrs. Catherine Graves, who had travelled with Whitefield in Scotland, and settled in Barnard Castle. See Mtth, Kec. Winter No., 1900, p. 84. ] I was exceeding faint when we came in; however, the time being come, I went into the street, and would have preached, but the mob was so numerous and so loud that it was not possible for many to hear. Nevertheless, I spoke on, and those who were near listened with huge attention. To prevent this, some of the rabble fetched the engine, and threw a good deal of water on the congregation; but not a drop fell on me. After about three-quarters of an hour, I returned into the house.[ John Monkhouse, grandfather of the Rev. Thomas S. Monkhouse, seized the nozzle and diverted the stream of water from Wesley (Life of T. S. Monkhouse, p. 4). In May Wesley preached at Miller Barn (see below, p. 32, which may have been a second visit).]

Tues. 26.-At five the preaching-house would not contain one half of the congregation. Many stood at the door and windows -far more than could hear. When I come again, perhaps they will hear while they may.

We rode hence to Weardale. I had been out of order all night, and found myself now much weaker. However, I trusted in the Strong for strength, and began preaching to a numerous congregation; and I did not want strength till I had finished my discourse, nor did the people want a blessing.

In the evening we came to Allendale, and found the poor society wellnigh shattered in pieces. Slackness and offence had eaten them up. When I came into the room I was just like one of them, having neither life nor strength, and being scarce able either to speak or to stand. But immediately we had a token for good. In a moment I was well. My voice and strength were entirely restored, and I cried aloud, ' How shall I give thee up, Ephraim ' The mountains again flowed down at His presence, and the rocks were once more broken in pieces.

Wed. 27.-I preached at Clifton, near Penrith, to a civil people, who looked just as if I had been talking Greek. The next day we went on to Lorton,[ See Wordsworth's poem, 'Yewtrees': There is a yew-tree, pride of Lorton Vale, Which to this day stands single, in the midst Of its own darkness, as it stood of yore.] a little village lying in a green, fruitful valley, surrounded by high mountains, the sides of which are covered with grass and woods, and the bottom watered by two small rivers. Here I found myself much out of order again. However, at six I preached to a very large and serious congregation. The ministers of Lorton and of the next parish were among them, that they might hear and judge for themselves.

Fri. 29.-v I preached at noon to a very different congregation, in the Castleyard at Cockermouth. However, they behaved with decency, none interrupting or making any noise.

About five we reached Whitehaven. After a little rest, I went to the room; but it was rather to be seen than heard. However, I spoke as I could for about half an hour, and then immediately went to bed. But I could not sleep, having a violent flux, with a fever, and continual pain in my stomach. Yet at twelve I fell into a doze, and from that time began to recover.

On Sunday, in the afternoon, I ventured to church, and in the evening preached as I was able.[ The Sermon Register adds Seaton for May, and Oldfield Brow for June.]

JUNE I, Mon.-I examined the society, and praised God on their behalf.

Tues. 2.-I rode to Seaton, a town of colliers, ten measured miles from Whitehaven. The poor people had prepared a kind of pulpit for me, covered at the top and on both sides, and had placed a cushion to kneel upon of the greenest turf in the country. But my voice was still so low that I fear not half of those who were present could hear.

Wed. 3.-I was able to preach again in the morning. One of our friends, who was master of a ship, purposing to set sail on Thursday the 4th for Dublin, I knew not but it would be well to go over with him, supposing the wind should turn fair. It did turn fair that very morning; but, being suddenly called on board, he sailed without us. In about six hours the wind turned foul. So I suppose he came back the next morning.

In the afternoon we rode to Mr. Blencowe's, about fifteen miles from Whitehaven. We took a walk in the evening to a little town called Drigg, about a mile from his house, where I preached to a small company of plain, serious people; but I fear they understood very little of what they heard.

June 1752, In Lancashire

Fri 5.-I went on with Mr. Milner[Rev. J. Milner, vicar of Chipping. See above, vol. iii. p. 521; also Laycock's Methodist fferoet,pp. 77-83. Milner retained the living till his death in 1777.]

to Ulverston. Here a very convenient place for preaching was offered; but few people had any desire to hear, so I went quietly back to

my inn.

Sat. 6.-We reached Chipping, and were immediately informed that several there were consulting together how to hinder me from preaching. Mr. Milner, hearing they were met at the next house, went thither, and brought them all with him, who were the churchwardens and three or four persons more. I spent about a quarter of an hour with them in calm and friendly debate; and they went away much cooler than they came.

Sun. 7.-Understanding some designed to go out of church when I went into the pulpit, I thought it would be better for them to go out sooner; and to read prayers as well as preach. Such a congregation was present as I believe was never seen there before; and a solemn awe seemed to rest on the whole congregation, from the beginning of the service to the end.

I preached in the afternoon on the conclusion of the Second Lesson,' God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto Himself.' The people were all attention. Surely there is no counsel or strength against the Lord.

Mon. 8.-We rode to Roughlee, and found a large, serious, and quiet congregation. There have been no tumults since Mr. White was removed.[ See above, vol. iii. p. 370. White had been educated at Douay. He recanted, and, on the recommendation of Archbishop Potter, was presented to Colne and Marsden by the vicar of Whalley. See Moore's Burnley, p. 16; W.H.S. vol. iii. p. 53; Life of C. of Huntingdon, vol. i. pp. 259, 261.] He was for some years a Popish priest. Then he called himself a Protestant, and had the living of Colne. It was his manner first to hire, and then head the mob, when they and he were tolerably drunk. But he drank himself first into a jail, and then into his grave.

In the evening I preached at Heptonstall. An attorney who happened to be in the town endeavoured to interrupt, relating some low, threadbare stories with a very audible voice. But some of the people cut him short in the midst by carrying him quietly away.

Tues 9.-I preached at six to abundance of people near Ewood, and with an uncommon blessing. Hence we rode to Todmorden. The minister was slowly recovering from a violent fit of a palsy, with which he was struck immediately after he had been preaching a virulent sermon against the Methodists.

I preached on the side of a mountain to a large and earnest congregation, and then went on to Miller Barn. I preached at six in the town, and I suppose all the inhabitants, young and old, were present. Nor have I often seen so large a congregation so universally and deeply affected.

My lodging was not such as I should have chosen, but what Providence chooses is always good. My bed was considerably under ground, the room serving both for a bed-chamber and a cellar. The closeness was more troublesome at first than the coolness, but I let in a little fresh air by breaking a pane of paper (put by way of glass) in the window, and then slept sound till the morning.

Fri. 12.-I rode to Bolton.[ Musgrave's Early Methodism in Bolton, p. 16. ] So hot a day as this I do not remember to have felt in England. The congregation seemed to forget the heat, though the room was like an oven. For it was a comfortable hour-God refreshing many souls with the multitude of peace.

Sat. 13.-The house was fuller this evening than the last, while I enforced that gracious invitation, 'Come unto Me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden.'

Sun. 14.-After preaching in the evening I took occasion to tell the whole congregation that there had been a mistake concerning the house, which John Bennet imagined I had contrived to make my own property[The 'house' was See above, p. 15.]; but Mr. Grimshaw had now cleared it up, having assured Mr. Bennet (i) that I knew nothing of the deed relating to the house till after it was made; (2) that I had no property in it still; only a clause was inserted whereby Mr. Grimshaw, my brother, and I were empowered to appoint the preachers therein.

Mon. 15.-I had many little trials in this journey of a kind I had not known before. I had borrowed a young, strong mare when I set out from Manchester; but she fell lame before I got to Grimsby. I procured another, but was dismounted again between Newcastle and Berwick. At my return to Manchester I took my own; but she had lamed herself in the pasture. I thought, nevertheless, to ride her four or five miles to-day; but she was gone out of the ground, and we could hear nothing of her. However, I comforted myself that I had another at Manchester which I had lately bought; but when I came thither I found one had borrowed her too, and rode her away to Chester.

June 1752, An 'Account'

About noon I preached near Shackerley, at an old man's house who was groaning for redemption. We walked together a little way after preaching, and almost as soon as we parted the power of God fell upon him, so that he hardly knew whether he was on earth or in heaven. From that hour he has been continually filled with peace and joy in believing.

At my return to Bolton I wrote down a particular account of one that lately adorned the gospel. It was as follows:

In April 1746, Catherine Whitaker went to Halifax to hear John Nelson. She was before convinced of the truth by reading, and from that time grew more and more serious. The next year John H-- called at our house. As he was going he turned back, took her by the hand, and said, ' You must believe, whether you can or no.' As soon as he was gone she began crying to God, and ceased not till she knew she did believe in Christ. She never afterward lost the sense of His love, nor could she rest, if she found the least cloud, till it was wholly removed, and the clear light shone again upon her soul.

In May 1750 she removed to Bolton, and soon after appeared to be consumptive. But she did not spare herself on that account, still rising at five, four, or three in the morning, and continuing to teach her scholars as usual, till about Christmas 1751. From that time her bodily strength failed, though she did not keep her room till March. She was then afraid lest she should live to be a burden to her relations; but that fear soon vanished away, and she said, ' Now I can leave it all to God. Let me die sooner or later, it is all one.' But she had still some struggle concerning her husband before she was thoroughly willing to give him up.

The next Friday but one before she died one of her sisters, sitting by her, began singing:

' Oh happy, happy day, That calls the exiles home

She immediately joined with her, and sung on to the end of the hymn. The Thursday after she looked round upon us, and said, 'Oh how I love you all! I am all love. I love every soul God has made.' Her husband asked, ' Are you happy' She said, ' Oh yes:

'I cannot fear, I cannot doubt,

I feel the sprinkled blood,'

' Sing on, sing on;

' Let every soul with me cry out,

"Thou art my Lord, my God.'

At breakfast she desired a little cold water, on receiving which she looked up and said, ' In a little while I shall drink new wine in the kingdom of my Father.' About ten o'clock she broke out:

' My God is reconciled,'

His pard'nmg voice I hear,

He owns me for His child,

I can no longer fear.'

One asking her how she did, she said, ' I long to be with Him whom my soul loveth.' On Friday and Saturday, being extremely weak, she spake very little. On Sunday morning she said, ' So the Lord hath brought us to another Sabbath. " Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin."' She then partly sung, and partly repeated, that hymn:

' Oh when shall I sweetly remove,

Oh when shall I enter my rest

Return to the Sion above,

The mother of spirits distressed'

She then said, ' Who is in the house Oh, I do not love the staying at home on a Sunday. Desire them all to go to church. When I was most diligent in going to church I always found the greatest blessings.' At night she said, ' Swelled legs. For a little time: there will be no swelled legs in heaven.' About five on Monday morning, March 23, her husband asked, ' Do you know me ' She said, ' Yes, I do'; and, putting her arm round his neck, quickly began to slumber. Waking soon after, she said, ' I must make haste and dress myself for the Bridegroom.' She then dozed afresh; but, waking in a few minutes, said, ' I arn going to Christ'; and fell asleep.[ On June 17, according to the Sermon Register, he returned to Manchester and preached two days, but he does not say where. There seems to be an allusion to this return visit on p. 33.]

Sat, 20.-I rode to Chester,[ For the introduction of Methodism into Chester see Bretherton's Early Metho dism in Chester, p. 26; Janion's Methodism in Chester, p. 16; Meth. Rtc, March 23> '899; and W.M. Mag. 1904, p. 207.] and preached at six in the accustomed place, a little without the gates, near St. John's Church. One single man, a poor alehouse keeper, seemed disgusted, spoke a harmless word, and ran away with all speed. All the rest behaved with the utmost seriousness while I declared ' the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.'

June 1782, The Walls and Rows of Chester

Sun. 21.-I preached at seven in a much larger house, which was just taken near St. Martin's Church-as eminent a part of the town as Drury Lane is in London, or as the Horsefair

was in Bristol. At church Mr. L------preached a strong, plain,

useful sermon upon the faith of Abraham. At one I began preaching again on ' We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord'; but, the house not containing half the congregation, I was obliged to stand at the door, on one side of a kind of square, large enough to contain ten or twelve thousand people. 1 had a few hours before spoken to the captain of a vessel, with whom I proposed to sail for Dublin; and, the wind being fair, I knew not whether I should stay to preach another sermon in Chester. I find it useful to be in such a state of suspense, wherein I know not what will be the next hour, but lean absolutely on His disposal, who knows and rules all things well.

At four I preached in the Square to a much larger congregation, among whom were abundance of gentry. One man screamed and hallooed as loud as he could, but none seconded or regarded him. The rest of the congregation were steadily serious from the beginning to the end.

Mon. 22.-We walked round the walls of the city, which are something more than a mile and three quarters in circumference; but there are many vacant spaces within the walls, many gardens, and a good deal of pasture ground; so that I believe Newcastle-upon-Tyne, within the walls, contains at least a third more houses than Chester.

The greatest convenience here is what they call 'the Rows'; that is, covered galleries, which run through the main streets on each side, from east to west, and from north to south, by which means one may walk both clean and dry in any weather from one end of the city to the other.

I preached at six in the evening in the Square to a vast multitude, rich and poor. The far greater part, the gentry inparticular, were seriously and deeply attentive, though a few of the rabble, most of them drunk, laboured much to make a disturbance. One might already perceive a great increase of earnestness in the generality of the hearers. So is God able to cut short His work, to wound or heal, in whatever time it pleaseth Him.

Tues. 23.-Having received letters which made me judge it necessary to be at Bristol as soon as possible, about ten I set out, dined at Birmingham the next day, and thence rode to Redditch.

Thur. 25.-Finding the congregation waiting, I began preaching between three and four. I preached at Wallbridge, near Stroud, in the evening, and the next day, before noon, reached Kingswood.[ In June he preached at Thompson's Cross, and at Bristol on June 27 and 29.]

JULY1, Wed.-Having finished my business at Bristol, I took horse again, and preached that evening at Evesham.

Thur. 2.-I reached Bilbrook and Chester.

Fri. 3.-I was saying in the morning to Mr. Parker,' Considering the good which has been done there already, I wonder the people of Chester are so quiet.' He answered, ' You must not expect they will be so always.' Accordingly, one of the first things I heard after I came into the town was that for two nights before the mob had been employed in pulling down the house where I had preached. I asked, ' Were there no magistrates in the city' Several answered me, ' We went to the mayor after the first riot, and desired a warrant to bring the rioters before him; but he positively refused to grant any, or to take any informations about it." So, being undisturbed, they assembled again the next night, and finished their work.

Sat. 4.-I preached in our old room.[ He preached also, during this visit,

at Tattenhall]

Sun. 5.-I stood, at seven in the morning, near the ruins of the house, and explained the principles and practice of that sect which is ' everywhere spoken against.' I went afterwards to St. Martin's Church, which stands close to the place. The gentleman who officiated [Probably the Rev. John Baldwin, M.A., vicar from 1739-93 (Bietherton's Early Methodism in Chester, p. 34).] seemed to be extremely moved at several passages of the Second Lesson, Luke xvii.; particularly, ' It is impossible but that offences will come; but woe unto him through whom they come. It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these little ones.'

July 1752., Chester, Bolton, Whitehaven

He began his sermon nearly in these words: ' The last Lord's Day I preached on " Doing as you would be done to," in hopes of preventing such proceedings as are contrary to all justice, mercy, and humanity. As I could not do that, I have chosen these words for your present consideration, " Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them."'

He concluded nearly thus: ' I am sorry any such outrage should be committed, particularly in this parish, where I have been teaching so many years. And to how little purpose! I will remove, as soon as possibly I can, from a place where I can do so little good. Oh what an account have they to make, who have either occasioned or encouraged these proceedings! May God grant that they may repent in time! That they may know what spirit they are of! That they may, before it is too late, acknowledge and love the truth as it is in Jesus!'

I preached again in the same place at one and at four, and the whole congregation were quiet and serious.

Mon. 6.-Finding no ship ready to sail, I determined to return to Whitehaven; so I took horse with my wife between nine and ten, and in the evening preached at Manchester.

Tues. 7.-We rode to Bolton; on Wednesday, to Chipping; and on Friday the 10th reached Whitehaven.[ On July 10 he preached at Wallbridge; he also preached at the Gins, near Whitehaven, during this month, and at Passage, in Ireland.]

Sun. 12.-I took my old stand in the market-place, about seven in the morning, and proclaimed ' The Lord God, gracious and merciful, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin.1 In the afternoon we had an awakening sermon at the new church on 'One thing is needful.' At five I preached in the room on ' To fear the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding.'

Mon. 13.-I bespoke the cabin in a ship bound for Dublin, which only waited for a wind. About ten at night word was

brought that she was ready to sail. We went down to the quay immediately, and found she had sailed out a quarter of an hour before, and was then off at sea; but as another ship had just weighed anchor, we went on board, and sailed without delay. But having contrary winds, it was Friday the 17th, in the evening, before we reached Dublin.

The house [The new chapel in Whitefriar Street. See Crookshank, Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. p. 88; below, p. 375.] here is nearly of the same size, and of the same form, with that at Newcastle; but, having deep galleries on three sides, it will contain a larger number of people.

Sun. 19.-I preached at five and eight, but not to so large a congregation as I expected. 1 was greatly shocked at the behaviour of the congregation in St. Patrick's Church. But all their carelessness and indecency did not prevent my finding an uncommon blessing. Between five and six our house was nearly filled, but great part of the hearers seemed utterly unawakened. I marvel how it is that, after all our labour here, there should still be so little fruit.

Mon. 20.-I learned the particulars of the late riot. Some weeks ago a large mob assembled one evening, broke many of the windows, and had just broke into the house, when a guard of soldiers came. The chief rioters were apprehended and tried; but ten or eleven of the jurymen, being Papists, frightened the twelfth, so that he did not contradict when they brought in their fellows ' Not guilty.' [On this day he wrote to Blackwell, on the voyage, on Book Affairs, on the trial of the rioters, and on a nonhelpful companionship (Works, vol. xii. p. 178).]

Tues. 21.- I inquired into the state of the society, still consisting of about four hundred and twenty members, though many had been much shaken, chiefly by various opinions, which some even of our own preachers had propagated.

Thur. 23.-We went to see a friend a few miles from Dublin. Before dinner Mr. Joseph Cownley and I took a walk on the sea-shore. Being somewhat tired, we thought to return a shorter way, by climbing over the rocks. We found little difficulty at first, the ascent not being steep toward the bottom; but, as we went higher, it grew steeper and steeper, till we would gladly have gone back if we could. But we could neither go nor look back; so that we had only this choice-to get quite to the top, or to make one step to the bottom. The stones, likewise, on which we stood, or which we took hold of, frequently gave way, and tumbled; so that I know not whether we were ever in so much danger on the sea as we were now on the shore. But in half an hour, I know not how, we got upon firm, even ground.