THE ELEVENTH PART

THE JOURNAL FROM JUNE 17, 1758, TO MAY 5, 1760

VOL. IV

To understand Wesley we must understand Wesley's Veterans. They are the contributory streams which, to so large an extent, made the main river of Methodism. Their influence extended far beyond the localities in which they were best known, John Nelson in the West Riding, Christopher Hopper in the Dales, John Haime in the Army, Thomas Walsh in Ireland, Howell Harris in Wales, and Richard Rodda in Cornwall, left indelible marks not only upon their own people, but also in wider spheres. Gradually these early Preachers became an order of lay brethren, with a sprinkling of ordained clergy, and in process of time an ordered ministry itinerating throughout the country.

During the period covered by this volume they were an increasingly powerful body of men. They had a right wing and a left wing. The former included the ordained leaders of the Evangelical Revival. They were all men of God, and, with few exceptions, men of war. Even the saintly and gentle Hervey died fighting his old college tutor and friend of other days. They fought, as did Wesley himself, with tongue and pen, believing they were set for the defense of the truth as well as for the reformation of manners and the conversion of sinners. To understand the Wesley type of Methodism we must also understand Whitefield, Ferionet, Walker, Hodges, Grimshaw, Venn, Madan, Hervey, Sellon, Shirley, Berridge, Romaine, and John Fletcher. The left wing consisted of men who eventually forsook Wesley, while their work drifted into other channels, forming inland seas or losing itself in sands and morasses. Few things in this circle of study are more needed than a just estimate of men like Benjamin Ingham, James Hutton, William Darney, John Bennet, David Taylor, Howell Harris, Thomas Maxfield, and even James Wheatley. For these all, in the heyday of their first love, played a great part among the highlands and moorlands of Methodist history : as also did certain elect women, of whom Lady Huntingdon, Grace Murray, Sarah Ryan, and Mary Bosanquet were but types.

THE JOURNAL

From June 17, 1758, to May 5, 1760

1758. JUNE 17, Sat.-I met Thomas Walsh[Walsh landed at Cork from England in the middle of April, with all the symptoms of consumption (E.M.P. vol. iii. p. 262; also above, p. 179, and Wesley Studies, pp. 131-4).] once more in Limerick, alive, and but just alive. Three of the best physicians in these parts have attended him, and all agree that it is a lost case-that, by violent straining of his voice, added to frequent colds, he has contracted a pulmonary consumption, which is now in the last stage, and consequently beyond the reach of any human help. Oh what a man, to be snatched away in the strength of his years! Surely Thy judgements are a great deep!

Wed. 21.-Our little Conference began, at which fourteen preachers were present. We settled all things here which we judged would be of use to the preachers or the societies, and consulted how to remove whatever might be an hindrance to the work of God.[ The third Irish Conference (see Met A. Mag, Dublin, 1804, p. 517). Among the preachers was Thomas Walsh. His last official service for Irish Methodism was a plea for a good man, against whose doctrinal opinions objection had been raised. Walsh's defence should be preserved as a memorial of him, and as a motto for Methodist disciplinary courts : ' Brother Davis is a wise and good man, and these objections to his phraseology will soon be done away when he becomes more acquainted with the writings of the Methodists.' Wesley, who presided, heard and approved. So did the Conference. And Mark Davis obtained his circuit.]

Fri. 23.-I rode over to Courtmatrix, a colony of Germans, whose parents came out of the Palatinate about fifty years ago. Twenty families of them settled here, twenty more at Killeheen, a mile off, fifty at Ballingarrane, about two miles eastward, and twenty at Pallas, four miles farther.

Each family had a few acres of ground, on which they built as many little houses. They are since considerably increased in number of souls, though decreased in number of families. Having no minister, they were become eminent for drunkenness, cursing, swearing, and an utter neglect of religion. But they are washed since they heard and received the truth which is able to save their souls. An oath is now rarely heard among them, or a drunkard seen in their borders. Courtmatrix is built in the form of a square, in the middle of which they have placed a pretty large preaching-house[Erected through the zeal of Philip Embury, who worked on the building with his own hands. In the November following Embury married Mary Switzer,] 'the honored partner of his struggles and victories,'; but it would not contain onehalf of the congregation, so I stood in a large yard. The wind kept off the rain while I was preaching. As soon as I ended it began.

Sun. 25.-About six I preached in the island in a square green enclosure, which was formerly Oliver Cromwell's camp. I have not seen such a congregation since we left London. To how much better purpose is this ground employed than it was in the last century!

Thur. 29.-I rode to Clare, and at six preached in the street to many poor Papists and rich Protestants, almost all the gentry in the country being assembled together. Thence I went on to Ennis, and at ten the next morning had another genteel congregation in the court-house. In Ennis many suppose there are not less than fifty Papists to one Protestant. They would have been

very ready to show their good-will, but the sight of Mr. B------[ Probably Mr. Bindon, over against whose house he preached May 27, 1762.] kept them in awe. A report, however, was spread of some terrible things they were to do in the evening, and many were surprised to observe that more than nine in ten of the congregation were Papists; but none spoke an unkind or uncivil word, either while I preached or after I had done.

How unspeakable is the advantage, in point of common sense, which middling people have over the rich! There is so much paint and affectation, so many unmeaning words and senseless customs among people of rank, as fully justify the remark made seventeen hundred years ago :

Rarus enim ferme sensus communis in ilia Fortuna.[ 'For in such an elevated condition of Crefeld he won a signal victory. His life, common sense is generally very rare' purely German army was now reinforced (Juvenal, Sat. vin. 73) See note on by a British contingent of six squadrons Wesley's use of sensus communis (' a of cavalry and six infantry battalions, sense held in common with others ') under the Duke of Marlborough. Their (W.H.S vol. v. p. 47). dispatch showed that the Ministry fully]

JULY 2, Sun.-I preached in the island near Limerick, both morning and evening, standing on the side of a large hollow adjoining to the old camp. The ground on the sides of it sloped upward, so that the people sat on the grass, row above row. Such an amphitheatre I never saw before, in which thousands of hearers were so commodiously placed, and they seemed earnestly to attend to our Lord's invitation,' Come, for all things

are now ready!'

I did not then observe that I strained myself, but in the morning I was extremely hoarse. This increased all day, together with a load and stoppage in my breast. On Tuesday morning I began spitting blood, found a pain in my left side, a sensible decay of strength, and a deep wheezing cough, just the symptoms which I had some years since. I immediately applied a brimstone plaster to my side and used a linctus of roasted lemon and honey.

Wed. 5.-My side was quite easy, and my hoarseness much abated, so in the evening I made shift to preach again, though not without difficulty. I had purposed preaching the next day at Shronell (about twenty-four English miles from Limerick), and at Clonmel, about the same distance from Shronell; but, perceiving my strength would not suffice, and yielding to the advice of my friends, I rested another day.

Thur. 6.-The news of Prince Ferdinand's victory [Professor Oman, in his History of the recognized the importance of enabling Hanoverian Period, says: ' The tide in Ferdinand to act as a true containing America had turned. . . . Pitt was force to work in concert with Frederick learning from events. For generals who and protect Hanover, Brunswick, and blundered Great Britain had no use, and Hesse, if possible, against the army of . . . Ferdinand, however, had justified the Rhine under Contades and the army his appointment. By skilful operations of the Main under Soubise. By the end he drove the French back behind the of 1758 Ferdinand occupied a line from Aller and then across the Rhine. At Munster to Paderborn.'] had half turned the heads of most of the Protestants, till they were brought to themselves by news of another kind, which rani through the city as in an instant. One who was well known I therein, a great curser and blasphemer, and eminently ' without *God in the world,' went a-fishing a little way from his own door, and stood with his angling-rod on the edge of the water. Many were looking on when, his foot slipping, he fell forward and sunk. As help was at hand he was soon drawn out, but it was too late; there were no remains of life-his soul was gone to give its account.

Fri. 7,-I rode in a chaise to Charleville, and thence on an easy horse to Cork. James Massiot died in peace the morning before, so I was just in time to perform the last office for him.[ The first Irish Methodist preacher who entered into his rest.]

Sat. 8.-The congregation was large, but my voice was so weak that many could not hear.

Sun. g.-After the burial of James Massiot I preached to a multitude of people on 'Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord,' and the longer I spoke the more my voice was strengthened.

Tues. n.-I rode with James Morgan[Thomas Walsh's biographer. For James Morgan see Atmore's Memorial, p. 282. On the title-page of Walsh's Life Morgan calls himself a ' member of the Church of England.' Yet he was a recognized Methodist preacher.]to Bandon, and preached in the market-house to a listening multitude.[ Wesley refers on the next page to the ' shell' of the new preachinghouse here. In a corner of the gallery, erected a little later, a room with removable partitions was constructed, which served alike as a lodging for the itinerant preachers and for an

overflow of the congregation. Both in Ireland and England provision had to be made at ' the room' for man and beast.]

Wed. 12.-I read over the Analysis of Lord Bolingbroke's Works.[ The Rev. Thomas Church, M.A., published this Analysis anonymously in '755Church was vicar of Battersea, and an early but not discourteous critic of Whitefield and Wesley. The Bolingbrokes held the manor of Chelsea, and several of them are buried in the church.] Surely never did any man so flatly contradict and so fully answer himself.[ For part of a letter to Blackwell on this date see Works, vol. xii. p. 186. It appears in full in the new edition of Wesley Letters.]

Thur. 13.-About noon I preached in the Exchange at Kinsale.[ The Sermon Register is blank in July until now, because of Wesley's illness; but, apart from this, entries are irregular because there is no longer a secretary to make them (see above, p. 3)] The townsfolks ' care for none of these things.' But we had a large congregation of soldiers, many of whom are good soldiers of Jesus Christ.

In the evening I preached in the main street at Bandon. Having now need of all my voice, it was given me again, only with a little pain in my side, which ceased while I was speaking.

Sat. 15.-I preached about noon at Inishannon, and returned to Bandon. A fortnight since they laid the foundation of their preaching-house.[ On Kilbrogan Hill.] This evening I preached in the shell of it, but it would not contain the congregation. Truly these are ' swift to hear,' though not' slow to speak.'

Sun. 16.-I preached again in the shell of the house at eight, and in the main street at six in the evening. Observing many of the French officers there, I could not but pray for them in particular. Some of them were deeply attentive. Perhaps it was not for nothing that God brought them into a strange land.

Mon. 17.-I returned to Cork.

Wed. 19.-I began speaking severally to the members of the society. Many of them, I found, were truly alive to God. Old misunderstandings were removed, and I had the satisfaction of seeing them so united together as they had not been for many years.

Fri. 21.-I met with a tract which utterly confounded all my philosophy. I had long believed that microscopic animals were generated, like all other animals, by parents of the same species; but Mr. Needham makes it highly probable that they constitute a peculiar class of animals, differing from all others in this, that they neither are generated or generate, nor subsist by food, in the ordinary way.[ See W.H.S, vol. iv. p. 134.]

Tues. 25.- In the evening I assisted the society in renewing their covenant with God. It was to many a season of great refreshment, and the fear of God was upon all.

Sun. 30.-I began meeting the children in the afternoon, though with little hopes of doing them good. But I had not spoke long on our natural state before many of them were in tears, and five or six so affected that they could not refrain from crying aloud to God. When I began to pray their cries increased, so that my voice was soon lost. I have seen no such work among children for eighteen or nineteen years.

Mon. 31.-I finished the Glasgow Abridgement of Mr. Hutchinson's Works.[ See above, pp. 190-1.] He was doubtless a man of uncommon understanding, and indefatigable application. Yet the more I consider it, the less can I subscribe to his system either of divinity or philosophy, as I am more and more convinced that they have no foundation in Scripture or sound reason.

AUG. 1, Tues.-The captain with whom we were to sail was in great haste to have our things on board; but I would not send them while the wind was against us. On Wednesday he sent message after message: so in the evening we went down to the ship, near Passage [West]; but there was nothing ready or near ready for sailing. Hence I learned two or three rules, very needful for those who sail between England and Ireland: (i) Never pay till you set sail; (2) Go not on board till the captain goes on board; (3) Send not your baggage on board till you go yourself.

Thur. 3.-I returned to Cork. On Saturday the 5th we were called on board in all haste; but, the captain being in no haste to sail, I preached at Cork again on Sunday at five, and then returned to Passage. He now said he would fall down to Cove [Now called Queenstown.] directly; so we took boat and went down thither; but no captain appeared either this day or the next. So that I might not lie idle, I went down to the beach, and began preaching to as wild, unpromising a congregation as ever I saw in this kingdom. However, they performed more than they promised, for they grew more and more quiet and attentive, and some of them appeared to be deeply affected.

Mon. 7.-Hearing nothing of our captain yet, in the afternoon I went to the middle of the town. Abundance of people ran together, but they were far too wild and noisy to admit of my giving out a psalm or naming a text in the usual way; so I fell abruptly upon as many as could hear, in a free and familiar manner. In a few minutes the whole body were quiet, and tolerably attentive. They were more and more serious, till I concluded with a hymn and a short prayer.

Aug. 1758.

The Fifteenth Conference

Immediately after preaching I was sent for to a gentleman who was struck with the palsy. I found the house full of his friends and relations, to whom I spoke freely and largely. They seemed to be more than ordinarily affected. Perhaps for this also we were detained at Cove.

Tues. 8.-I preached, not far from the beach, to a very decent and serious congregation. Presently after, a vessel sailed by, bound for Wales. We went on board without delay, got out of the harbour by eleven, and by Wednesday noon were abreast of the Isle of Lundy. But we had not yet done our work, for the wind fell, and we did not get into the river till near sunset. Observing three or four sailors standing together, I began explaining to them the nature of religion. In a few minutes all within the ship came together, and, without the ceremony of naming a text, I enlarged on 'The kingdom of heaven is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.' About eleven we landed at Penclawdd,[ See Meth. Rec. Winter No., 1900, p 17. ]and in the morning rode to Swansea.

Thur. 10.-We rode through a pleasant country to Pyle. We were setting out from thence when a violent shower drove us into the house again, and constrained us to talk with two or three travelers. I believe our labor was not lost, for they appeared to be greatly affected. I preached at Cardiff in the evening and the next morning. We reached the New Passage about noon. But they did not tell us till half-hour after five that the boat would not pass that night. With much difficulty I procured a small boat to carry us over, leaving our horses behind. Landing soon after six, we walked on, and between nine and ten came to Bristol.

Here I met with a trial of another kind[This probably refers to his relations with Mrs. Wesley, which were becoming more and more strained. See his corp. respondence with Blackwell.]; but this also shall be for good. On the following days was our yearly Conference, begun and ended in perfect harmony.[ The Fifteenth Yearly Conference commenced in Bristol on Aug. 12. John and Charles Wesley, Francis Okeley, and thirty-four preachers were present. Kingswood School, the membeiship of children, a severe discipline for the bands, and the doctrine of Christian Perfection were the chief topics of conversation. (Tyerman, vol. ii. pp. 306-8.)]

Aug. 1758.

In Wales

Thur. 17. [The Sermon Register records preaching at Bristol on Aug. 13, 15, and 17.]-I went to the cathedral to hear Mr. Handel's Messiah. I doubt if that congregation was ever so serious at a sermon as they were during this performance. In many parts, especially several of the choruses, it exceeded my expectation.

Having promised to take a little journey into Wales, on. Monday the 21st I set out with Joseph Jones.[ See Atmore's Memorial, p. 225. ] We were in the boat before nine, but did not land our horses till a quarter before three. However, I reached Cardiff time enough to preach in the room,[ In St. John the Baptist Street, now Church Street.] though not in the Castle.

Tues. 22.-I-gathered up, as well as I could, the fragments of the society. At six in the evening I preached in the Castle.

Wed. 23.-We rode to Fonmon. The behaviour of Mr. Jones surprised me. It seemed as if he inherited the spirit of his father.[ Unhappily for himself, he did not inherit the spirit of his father. He was a spendthrift, and greatly reduced the estates.] I preached at seven to a deeply serious congregation, and to a good part of them at five in the morning.

In Bristol

October 1758

Thur. 24.-I wrote a second letter to Dr. Free,[ See above, pp. 262-3 > a'so Green's Bibliography, No. 187.]the warmest opponent I have had for many years. I leave him now to laugh, and scold, and witticize, and call names just as he pleases; for I have done.

Fri. 25.-I rode to Cowbridge, and preached at three in the afternoon, in the new assembly room. I observed no trifler there, though there were several of the better rank. About six I preached in a green court at Llanmaes, to a company of right old simple Christians. I could not get from them so soon as I designed; so that we did not reach Fonmon till near nine.

Sat. 26.-One undertook to guide me the nearest way into the main road; but in five or six miles he lost his way, so that for some time we wandered upon the mountains. About noon, however, we got into the road, and an hour and half after to 1'yle. Before we left it I spoke a few words to the woman of the house. She seemed quite struck. How few words suffice, when God applies them to the heart!

I knew not where to go at Neath; but, as we entered the town, a man fixed his eyes upon me (though he had never seen me before) and said, ' Sir, that is the house where the preachers put up their horses.' I had been there only a few minutes when another came in and said, ' Sir, Mrs. Morgan expects you. I will show you the way.' To Mrs. Morgan's we went, and were as cordially received as if she had known us twenty years. It was market-day; so I preached about five in the room, a large, commodious place. I believe most that were present (several of whom were backsliders) felt that God was there.

Sun. 27.-We reached Swansea at seven, and were met by one who conducted us to his house, and thence to a kind of castle,[ The castle in part may still he seen, but the ' green court' has been built upon. See Meth. Rec. Winter No., 1900, p. 18.] in which was a green court, surrounded by high old walls. A large congregation assembled soon, and behaved with the utmost decency. A very uncommon blessing was among them, as uses to be among them that are simple of heart.

The congregation was considerably more than doubled at five in the afternoon. Many gay and well-dressed persons were among them; but they were as serious as the poorest. Peter Jaco, who was driven to us by contrary winds, was agreeably

surprised at them.

Mon. 28.-I scarce ever saw such a rain in Europe as we had for considerable part of this morning. In one of the main streets the water ran with a stream capable of turning a mill. However, having appointed to preach at noon, in Newton, about six miles from Swansea, I was determined not to break my word, though I supposed but few would attend. But I was mistaken; such a number of people came together as no house in the town could contain. A barn was soon prepared; and it pleased God to send a gracious rain upon their hearts.

After preaching at Swansea in the evening I met those who desired to join in a society, and explained to them the nature | and design of it, with which they were quite unacquainted.

Tues. 29.-I rode back to Neath, in order to put the society there (an unlicked mass) into some form. This on Saturday they had begged me to do; but they seemed now to have quite forgotten it. Mr. Evans, the Presbyterian minister, had turned them upside down. They looked as if they had never seen me before; all but five or six, who were much ashamed of their brethren.[ On Tuesday, Aug. 29, he preached at ' Lanceston,' and on the same day John Newton wrote to him from Liverpool.]

Wed. 30-I rode on to Margam. There used to be preaching here, till Lord Mansell,[ Or rather, Sir Thomas Mansell, Bart., who died Nov. 29, 1750, and left the fine estate to his son-in-law, Mr. John Talbot, of Laycock Abbey.]dying without children, left the estate to Mr. Talbot. He forbad all his tenants to receive the preachers, and so effectually put a stop to it. But he did not glory in it long. A few months after God called him home.

At noon I preached again in the assembly-room at Cow-1 bridge; in the castle at Cardiff in the evening.

Thur. 31.-I talked with several of the people, and found the old spirit swiftly reviving. In the evening I preached in the town hall. Several eminent sinners were present; and God was present in an uncommon manner, as also at the meeting of the society.

Sept. 1, Fri.-After a busy and comfortable day, I preached once more in the Castle. The word seemed to sink deep into the hearers, though many of them were of the genteeler sort. In the society we were much refreshed. Many followed me to Thomas Glascot's house,[ One of the overseers of the poor. He entertained Charles Wesley on his first visit to Cardiff {W.H.S. vol. iii. p. 176).] where-two or three were cut to the heart, particularly both his daughters, and cried to God with strong cries and tears.

Sat. 2.-We rode to the New Passage, crossed over in half an hour, and about five came to Bristol.[ On Sunday the 3rd he preached at Bristol and Kingswood; on Sunday the loth at Bristol; and, without date, at Paulton.]

Sat. 9.-I wrote the account of an extraordinary monument of divine mercy-Nathaniel Othen, who was shot for desertion at Dover Castle, in October 1757.[ See Green's Bibliography, No. 188.] In the following week I met Mr. Fletcher and the other preachers that were in the house, and spent a considerable time in close conversation on the head of Christian Perfection. I afterwards wrote down the general propositions wherein we all agreed.

Thur. 14.-I rode to Coleford, and was much refreshed among the simple, zealous colliers.

Sat. 16.-In the evening I preached at Bradford, as also at five and eight on Sunday morning. At two, as soon as we were in the house at Freshford, it poured down with rain; so that, after as many as could had crowded in, the rest were constrained to go away. But the rain ceased as soon as we took horse, and we had a pleasant ride to Bristol.

Wed. 20.-I rode over to Bath; but the room would ill contain the congregation, so I encouraged them in their design of taking a piece of ground, and building without delay. In the evening I preached at Shepton; and several of the rich and honourable took it into their mind to come. But they came too late, for the house was already thoroughly filled with the poor.

Thur. 21.-As we rode homeward we saw a sight indeed [This case is almost exactly parallel to the one described Sept. 2, 1754. Both incidents occurred at or near Shepton.]-a woman in the extremity of pain, rotting away piecemeal by the King's evil, full of sores from head to foot, with several of her bones appearing through the skin, and continually praising God with tears of joy for dealing ' so mercifully' with

her.[ On Saturday the 23rd he preached at Bristol and Kingswood; also on Sunday,

Sept. 24, at Kingswood, and on Sunday, Oct. I, at 'Lanceston.']

Sun. 24.-The famous Roger Ball[Or rather, ' infamous Roger Ball,' who for years plagued Wesley so much. See W. C. Sheldon's Early Methodism in Birmingham, p. 7.]had planted himself in Stokes Croft before I came. However, as there was a large congregation, I did not think it right to leave them to him, but began as usual, and preached till near six o'clock, without paying any regard to him.

Oct. 1, Sun.-I took my leave of the congregation and of the children in

Kingswood, and God gave us a parting blessing.

Mon. 2.-I preached at Bradford [On Monday, October 2, he is also entered as preaching at Bristol.] (noon and night), and met the stewards of the Wiltshire and Somersetshire societies. In the evening I baptized a young woman, deeply convinced of sin. We all found the power of God was present to heal, and she herself felt what she had not words to express.

Tues. 3.-One of Warminster who was at Bristol last week had desired me to call at his house. I did so this morning,[ This was Wesley's first and last visit. Some time afterwards a class was formed. Amidst the bitterest persecution it held on its way. (Tyerman, vol. ii. p. 308. See also W.M. Mag. 1835, p. 810; and Tuck's Hist, of Meth. in Frame, p. 41.)]and preached in his yard, to a numerous congregation of saints and sinners, rich and poor, Churchmen, Quakers, and Presbyterians, both of the old and new way.[ Tradition says in Mr. Bowden's tan-yard (City Road Mag. 1876, p. 297).]

Some disturbance was expected, but there was none. The whole assembly behaved well; and, instead of curses or stones, we had many blessings as we rode through the town for Salisbury.

Wed. 4.-I rested there.

Thur. 5.-I rode by Redbridge and Fareham to Portsmouth, where at seven I preached in Mr. Whitefield's Tabernacle to a small, serious congregation.

Fri. 6.-I designed to go in a wherry to the Isle of Wight; but the watermen were so extravagant in their demands that I changed my mind, and went in the hoy. And it was well I did, for the sea was so high it would not have been easy for a small boat to keep above water. We landed at two, and walked on, five little miles, to Newport. The neighbouring camp had filled the town with soldiers, the most abandoned wretches whom I ever yet saw. Their whole glorying was in cursing, swearing, drunkenness, and lewdness. How gracious is God, that He does not yet send those monsters to their own place! [In October Wesley wrote to the Rev. S. Walker of Truro an instructive letter showing to what extent he at this time sympathized with those who, whilst not wishful to separate from the Church of England, allowed the force of several objections. Among other things he says, referring to the Liturgy: ' I should not dare to declare my assent and consent to that book in the terms prescribed. Indeed, they are so strong that I think they cannot safely be used with regard to any book but the Bible. Neither dare I confine myself wholly to forms of prayer, not even in the church. I use indeed all the forms; but I frequently add extemporary prayer, either before or after sermon." (Works, vol. xiii. p. 206 j also above, pp. 137 and 236.)]

Oct. 1758

The Story of a Siege

At five I preached in the corn-market, and at six in the rnorning. A few even of the soldiers attended. One of these, Benjamin Lawrence, walked with us to Wootton Bridge, where we intended to take boat. He was in St. Philip's Fort during the whole siege,[ For an account ot the capture ot Port Mahon and its citadel Fort St. Philip, with uiap of fortification, see Gentleman's Mag. 1756, p. 374. ] concerning which I asked him many questions. He said: '(i) Abundance of cattle was left in the fields, till the French (long expected) came and took them. (2) Abundance of wine was left in the town, even more than the French could use; and there was not enough in the Castle even for the sick men. (3) A large, strong, stone house was left standing, within a small distance of the Fort. Behind this the French often formed themselves, particularly before the last assault. (4) This might easily be accounted for. We had few officers of any experience; and the governor never came out of his house. (5) The French made two general assaults, and were repulsed, and many blown up by our mines. But the mines having never been looked after till just when we wanted them, most of them were utterly useless; so that only two, out of threescore, did any execution. (6) In their third assault (which they were very hardly persuaded to make)

Captain------, who commanded the guard of a hundred men

at the sally port, ran away before he was attacked; and his men, having none to command them, went after. I was left alone, till I retired also; and the French, having none to oppose them, came in. (7) In the morning our men were mad to drive them out, and would have done it in an hour, but that they were told the Fort was given up, and ordered to cease firing. (8) We had, at the approach of the enemy, three thousand eight hundred and thirty-three effective men; and we had very near as many when we surrendered, with plenty of provision and ammunition.' O human justice! One great man is shot,[ Byng.] and another is made a lord!

We hired a small fisher-boat at Wootton Bridge, there being scarce any wind; but it increased more and more when we were on the sea, which was seven miles over. Our cock-boat danced on the waves, and must have sunk if one large wave had come over her; but God suffered it not. We landed in two hours, and walked away to Gosport.

Sun. 8.-The wind and rain drove us into the Tabernacle.[ At Portsmouth.]

In the afternoon I preached in the main street at Fareham. A wild multitude was present, yet a few only mocked. The greater part were soon deeply attentive.

Mon. 9.-I set out for Sussex, and in the evening reached Rottingdean, a village four miles east of Brighthelmstone.[ The Brighton of to-dmy.] The next day we rode over the Downs to Rye, lying on the top of a round, fruitful hill. I preached at seven to a crowded audience, with great enlargement of spirit.

Wed. 11.-I rode to Rolvenden, about ten miles from Rye, and preached at five to a large, serious congregation. A few drunkards stood in the road at some distance, and took some pains to divert their attention; but it was labor lost.

Thur. 12.-It was a rainy morning, so that the house contained the congregation. Many of them were in tears, being deeply convinced that they were as yet' without God in the world.' About one I preached at Northiam. The house was stowed as full as possible, but still many were constrained to stand without, though it rained much. About five in the evening I preached again at Rye.

Fri. 13.-In the evening we had a solemn season. After I had concluded my sermon I read over the Rules of the Society in the open congregation. The number of those who came at five in the morning showed that God had touched many hearts. On Saturday evening many were obliged to stand without, though the wind was high and extremely cold.

Sun. 15.-After preaching at eight I rode again to Northiam, and preached in Mr. Stonestreet's orchard, to far the largest congregation I have seen in Sussex. One of Rye, in our

return thither, gave us a remarkable account[On Nov. 3, 1767, the same man, apparently, is ' exceeding drunk." ]: ' Mr.------, one

most eminent for profaneness, drunkenness, and all manner of wickedness, when you met the society on Thursday evening at your lodgings, was curious to listen at the window. The next day he surprised his company by crying out, " I am the greatest sinner on the whole earth." On Friday evening he was wounded more deeply still, and was at the preaching at five in the morning.' Surely thus far God has helped him; but, a thousand to one, he will ' return as a dog to his vomit.'

Oct. 1758

Canterbury to Colchester

Mon. 16.-I rode to Canterbury. As we came into the city a stone flew out of the pavement and struck my mare upon the leg with such violence that she dropped down at once. I kept my seat till, in struggling to arise, she fell again and rolled over me. When she arose I endeavoured to rise too, but found I had no use of my right leg or thigh; but an honest barber came out, lifted me up, and helped me into his shop. Feeling myself very sick, I desired a glass of cold water, which instantly gave me ease.

Tues. 17.-I found reason to rejoice over this little flock, now free from all divisions and offences. And on Saturday I cheerfully returned to London, after an absence of near eight months. Here I rested four days,[ But according to the Sermon Register preached at Snowsfields, at some unnamed place in London, and at West Street. On the 26th he preached at Wappmg, probably on his way to Maldon. VOL. IV] and on Wednesday the 25th went, partly by coach, partly on horseback, to Maldon.

Fri. 27.-I rode on, through an extremely pleasant and fruitful country, to Colchester. I have seen very few such towns in England. It lies on the ridge of a hill, with other hills on each side which run parallel with it, at a small distance. The two main streets, one running east and west, the other north and south, are quite straight, the whole length of the town, and full as broad as Cheapside.

I preached at four on St. John's Green, at the side of a high old wall (a place that seemed to be made on purpose),[ In a letter to the Countess of Huntingdon he adds: ' The people stood on a smooth sloping ground, sheltered by the walls of an old castle' {Life and Times, vol. i. p. 399).] to an extremely attentive audience; and again at eight in the morning on Saturday the 28th, and at four in the afternoon. In the hours between I took the opportunity of speaking to the members of the society. In three months here are joined together a hundred and twenty persons. A few of these know in whom they have believed, and many are sensible of their wants.

Sun. 29.-At eight the congregation was very large, and I believe God made His word quick and powerful. At four in the afternoon we had a Moorfields congregation. Many of the baser sort stood at a distance; but they made no disturbance, knowing the magistrates are determined to suffer no riot at Colchester.

Mon, 30.-Though I was not quite recovered from the lameness occasioned by the fall of my horse, I made shift to ride to Norwich, where, on the following days, I had the satisfaction to observe that the society had not lessened (as I had feared), but rather increased, since I left them. And there is a probability they will increase still, as they are far more established in grace.[ He preached in Norwich on the 31st.]

Nov. 3, Fri.-James Wheatley called upon me, and offered me the Tabernacle.[ A detailed account of the Tabernacle at Norwich is given in Lady Huntingdon's Life, vol. ii. chapters xlv. and xlvi. Wheatley, expelled by the Wesleys for immorality (see above, vol. iii. p. 532)i repented, and preached in Norwich so successfully that the Tabernacle was built for him. Later Whitefield appeared on the scene. Wheatley, whohad passed from the extreme of contempt to the extreme of popularity-a sinner turned saint-again fell into contempt. John and Charles Wesley, Lady Huntingdon, Cudworth, Robinson, Madan, students trained at Trevecca, John Hook (grandfather of Dr. Hook and Theodore Hook), Toplady, and other leaders in the Evangelical movement preached, often with great success, in the Tabernacle. For many years Methodism in the ' Foundery' and Calvinistic Methodism in the Tabernacle ran together or side by side. James Wheatley finally leased the Tabernacle to Lady Huntingdon in February 1775, and died in the May following.] But whether to accept the offer or not I cannot tell; this must be maturely considered. I found all this week great liberty of spirit; and the congregations were large and attentive. It seems the time is come when our labor even at Norwich will not be in vain.[ On Nov. 4, whilst still in Norwich, he began a letter to the Rev. Mr. Potter, in reply to his sermon on ' The Pretended Inspiration of the Methodists." See Green's Bibliography, No. 189, and Anti-Methodist Publications, No. 272.]

Sun, 5.-We went to St. Peter's church, the Lord's Supper being administered there. I scarcely ever remember to have seen a more beautiful parish church [With the exception of St. Mary Redcliffe at Bristol, St. Peter's, Norwich, was regarded as the finest parish church in England.]; the more so because its beauty results not from foreign ornaments, but from the very form and structure of it. It is very large, and of an uncommon height, and the sides are almost all window; so that it has an awful and venerable look, and, at the same time, surprisingly

cheerful.

NOV. 1758

With Mr. Betridge

Mon. 6.-A large congregation attended between four and five in the morning. I set out at six with much comfort, leaving a settled and well-united society. I preached at Kenninghall about ten, and at Lakenheath in the evening. After resting a day, on Wednesday the 8th I went on a hard day's journey to Bedford.[ John Walsh, the sometime Deist of Bedford, wrote a letter to Wesley (see Arm. Mag. 1780, p. 103), describing Bedford Methodism. He had visited Everton from Bedford on June 2, 1758 (the letter is dated June 21, 1758). This letter gives an account of Berridge, ' who,' says Walsh, ' has read several of your works, and greatly longs to see you.' Walsh is probably the writer of the second account ot the Everton revival, July 29, 1759 (see below, p. 333).]

I had designed to spend two evenings here, but Mr. Parker informing me that Mr. Berridge desired I would come to him as soon as possible, I set out for Everton on Thursday the 9th. I found Mr. B. just taking horse, with whom I rode on, and in the evening preached at Wrestlingworth, in a large church, well filled with serious hearers.

We lodged at Mr. Hicks's, the vicar, a witness of the faith which once he persecuted. The next morning I preached in his church again. In the middle of the sermon a woman before me dropped down as dead, as one had done the night before. In a short time she came to herself, and remained deeply sensible of her want of Christ.

Hence we rode to Mr. Berridge's at Everton.[ Berridge, whose labors were inti mately associated with the Methodist revival, supplied an epitaph for himself which compresses into a few words the details of his career: ' I was horn in sin, February 1716, remained ignorant of my fallen state till 1730. Lived piously on Faith and Works for Salvation till 1754. Admitted to Everton Vicarage, 1755. Fled to Jesus alone for Refuge, 1756. Fell asleep in Christ [Feb. 22, 1793].' See W. M. Mag. 1906, p. 388.] For many years he was seeking to be justified by his works; but a few months ago he was thoroughly convinced that ' by grace' we ' are saved through faith.' Immediately he began to proclaim aloud the redemption that is in Jesus; and God confirmed His own word exactly as He did at Bristol, in the beginning, by working repentance and faith in the hearers, and with the same violent outward symptoms.

I preached at six in the evening and five in the morning, and some were struck, just as at Wrestlingworth. One of these was brought into the house, with whom we spent a considerable time in prayer. I then hastened forward, and, a little before it | was dark, reached the Foundery,[ The record of preaching for this period in the Sermon Register is as follows : Thur., Nov. 9, Wrestlingworth; Sat. the nth, Everton and Bull-andMouth; Fri. the I7th, Spitalfields; Mon. the aoth, Zoar; Sat. the 25th, Bull-andMouth, Snowsfields, and Foundery.]

Sun. 26[On Sun. the 26th he preached in ' London.']

-I was well pleased to have some conversation with Mrs. A------1, lately come from Barbadoes. She gave me an account of her poor husband (first a red-hot Predestinarian, talking of God's ' blowing whole worlds to hell,' then a Quaker, now a Deist); as also of the narrow escape which Mr. H. lately | had : ' Ten negroes broke into his house; one of whom was upon the point of cutting his throat when E. R. knocked him down with a pewter pot; which put the rest into such confusion that she had time to secure herself and her children, and Mr. H. to leap out of a balcony.'[On Tues. the 28th he preached at Wapping, on Thur the 3Oth at Wandsworth, and on Friday, Dec. I, at Zoar. The references to ' Mr. H.' and 'E. R.' are to Westley Hall and ' E. R., his chief favourite.' The latter died in the West Indies. Hall returned to England in 176-, in some degree humbled. For H. J. Foster's Notes on this sordid but in many respects remarkable case see W.H.S. vol. v. pp. 146, 211, 239.]

Wed. 29.-I rode to Wandsworth, and baptized two negroes belonging to Mr. Gilbert, a gentleman lately come from Antigua.[ See above, p. 247] One of these is deeply convinced of sin, the other rejoices in God her Saviour, and is the first African Christian I have known. But shall not our Lord, in due time, have these heathens also ' for His inheritance '

Dec. 4, Mon.-I was desired to step into the little church behind the Mansion House, commonly called St. Stephen's, Walbrook.[ An example of Sir Christopher Wren's work at his best.]It is nothing grand, but neat and elegant beyond expression. So that I do not wonder at the speech of the famous Italian architect, who met Lord Burlington in Italy: ' My lord, go back and see St. Stephen's in London. We have not so fine a piece of architecture in Rome.'[On Tues. the $th he preached at the Bull-and-Mouth, on Fri. the 8th at Bishop Bonner's, and on Sat. the 9th at West Street.]

The justificaton for this extreme act of daphne " found m one of Charles esle^ = unpubhshed shorthand Journal notes Michael Fenmck was later reinstated

Dec. 1758

From Everton to Norwich

Fri. 8.-Poor Mr. Goudicheau called upon me, formerly a Romish priest, now ready to perish for want of bread, though of an unblemished character. Can any one wonder that we have not many converts from the Church of Rome[ At this period Wesley was corresponding with Toplady, who was at Trinity College, Dublin. In September Wesley received a letter from him (Tyerman, vol. ii. p. 315), and on Dec. 9 Wesley wrote to Toplady (W.H.S. vol. viii. p. 12).]

Mon. 11.-Most of this week I spent in preparing materials for A Survey of the Wisdom, of God in the Creation or, a full, plain, and correct system of Natural Philosophy.[ It was first published in 1763, in

two volumes, afterwards expanded to three, and finally to five. See Green's Bibliography, No. 22O, &c.]

Mon. 18.-I rode to Everton. The church was well filled soon after six in the evening. God gave me great liberty of speech, and applied His word to the hearts of the hearers, many of whom were not able to contain themselves, but cried aloud for mercy.

Tues. 19.-I rode on to Lakenheath. How surprising a providence has been over this little village! Forty years ago a poor man lived here who walked with God, and was the means of awakening a few others. When these were nearly extinct Charles Skelton came, awakened a few more, and forsook them.[ See above, p. 93; vol. iii. p. 403.]

A year ago, one of Lakenheath, seeing me pass through Thetford, desired me to come and preach there. I did so; and occasionally mentioned to them Mr. Madan, then at Thetford.[ See Arm. Mag. 1779, p. 536-a letter written to Wesley by Mr. Madan on the occasion of the increase of his fortune.]

They went over, and invited him to Lakenheath, where, soon after, he preached in the church. The rector desired he would help him to a curate : so now they have one that both preaches and lives the gospel.

Wed. 20.-I rode to Norwich. James Wheatley now repeated his offer of the Tabernacle. But I was in no haste. I wanted to consult my friends, and consider the thing thoroughly. One glaring objection to it was, ' The congregation there will not hear me.' He replied,' Sir, you cannot tell that, unless you will make the trial.' I consented so to do, on Thursday, the 2ist. But many declared, ' No, he shall never come into that pulpit'; and planted themselves in the way to prevent it. Hitherto only

could they go. I went up and preached to a large congregation, without any let or hindrance. I preached there again on Saturday evening, and again God stopped the mouths of the lions.

Sun. 24.-I preached in the Tabernacle at eight, to a very serious congregation, and at the Foundery between four and five. About six the Tabernacle was thoroughly filled, and mostly with quiet hearers. I saw none who behaved amiss but two soldiers, who struck some that desired them to be silent. But they were seized and carried to the commanding officer, who ordered them to be soundly whipped.

Mon. 25.-Our service began in the Foundery at four; in the Tabernacle at eight. God was now especially pleased to make bare His arm. There was a great cry among the people. Stony hearts were broke; many mourners comforted; many believers strengthened. Prejudice vanished away; a few only kept their fierceness till the afternoon. One of these, still vehemently angry, planted himself just over against me. But before I concluded, he cried out,' I am overcome! I am overcome!'

Having now weighed the matter thoroughly, I yielded to the importunity of our brethren. So in the evening the copy of the lease was perfected, which was executed the next morning. A whole train of providences so plainly concurred thereto, that all might clearly see the hand of God.

Tues. 26.- I took my leave of Norwich for the present; about noon preached at Kenninghall, and in the evening came to Lakenheath. Being informed some of the gentry in the town were very desirous to hear me preach if I would preach in the church, I sent them word I had designed to be at Colchester the next day; but, as they desired it, I would delay my journey, and preach at ten the next morning.

Wed. 27.-I was so much out of order that I knew not how I should get to church. Between nine and ten I was informed that some hot men in the parish would not consent to my preaching there. I saw the hand of God, and was thankful, having now a little more time to rest. In the afternoon the sun broke out through the fog, and we had a pleasant ride to Bury; but I was so extremely sick, soon after I came in, that I knew not how I should be able to preach. An hour's sleep, however' refreshed me much; so that I found no want of strength in preaching. Indeed my disorder increased during the night; but while I was preaching in the morning I felt myself well, and I found no more sickness or complaint of any kind. In the evening I reached Colchester.

Dec. 1758

In Essex

Fri. 29.-I found the society had decreased since Lawrence Coughlan [This Irish preacher dates from an early period. Atmore describes him as ' a deeply pious man, and a very lively, zealous preacher . . . owned of God, especially at Colchester.' In 1764 he was ' ordained, with some other Methodist preachers, by a Greek bishop . . . on which account, I am informed,' says Atmore, ' he was put away from the Methodist connexion.' In 1768 ' he procured ordination from the Bishop of London, and was sent as a missionary to Newfoundland.' In 1772 he wrote a remarkable letter to Wesley describing his work, claiming to be & ' Methodist,' announcing his return to England, and

asking Wesley's advice as to his future. For a short time he was minister of the chapel at Holywell Mount, London. He earnestly desired to resume his place as an itinerant preacher; but one day, whilst conversing with Wesley in his study, he was seized with paralysis, and so ended his useful life. His biography would be an interesting study from the ecclesiastical, pioneer missionary, and experimental points of view.] went away; and yet they had had full as good preachers. But that is not sufficient. By repeated experiments we learn that, though a man preach like an angel, he will neither collect, nor preserve a society which is collected, without visiting them from house to house.

Today I walked all over the famous castle, perhaps the most ancient building in England. A considerable part of it is, without question, fourteen or fifteen hundred years old. It was mostly built with Roman bricks, each of which is about two inches thick, seven broad, and thirteen or fourteen long. Seat of ancient kings, British and Roman, once dreaded far and near! But what are they now Is not ' a living dog better than a dead lion ' And what is it wherein they prided themselves, as do the present great ones of the earth

A little pomp, a little sway,

A sunbeam in a winter's day,

Is all the great and mighty have

Between the cradle and the grave![ From John Dyer's Grongar Hill. In line I ' pomp ' should be ' rule', in line 3 'great' should be 'proud' (W.H.S. vol. v. p. li 6). Also quoted, and again inexactly, Aug. 19, 1760.]

Sat. 30.-I returned to London, and received a pressing letter from Bristol, in consequence of which I took horse on Monday morning, [On Sun. Dec. 31, he preached at Spitalfields, Snowsfields, the Bull-andMouth, and the Foundery.] JANUARY 1, 1759, and came thither the next evening. After resting two days (only preaching morning and evening) I examined severally the members of the society. This was one great end of my coming down. Another was, to provide for the poor.[ He does not say that these were the only reasons for this sudden journey to Bristol. Probably the letter summoning him was from Lady Huntingdon, who was staying at Bath with Lady Fanny Shirley and Lady Selina Hastings. ' On the 4th of January the Countess went to Bristol to meet Mr. Wesley, who accompanied her to Bath, and, after preaching to several of the nobility at her house, proceeded to Salisbury, on his way to London.' It was at this time that Lady Huntingdon 'felt a particular call in Providence to wrestle mightily with God on behalf of our nation." It is not unreasonable to suppose that her letter to Wesley and their consultation referred to the scheme of prayer-meetings held during February. (See below, Feb. 27.)]Accordingly, on Sunday the 7th I preached a sermon for them, to which God was pleased to give His blessing; so that the collection was a great deal more than double of what it used to be.[ The Sermon Register gives Bristol and Kingswood as his appointments for Sunday, Jan. 7.]

Wed. 10.-Having finished my work at Bristol, I rode to Salisbury, and advised our brethren concerning the preachinghouse which they are about to build.[ And preached there.] On Friday the I2th I went on to Whitchurch, and preached at one to a large and serious congregation. In the afternoon we rode to Basingstoke, where the people put me in mind of the wild beasts at Ephesus. Yet they were unusually attentive in the evening, although many of them could not hear.

Sat. 13.-After preaching to a small, serious company, I went on to London.[ Where, on Sunday, Jan. 14, he preached at the Foundery and West Street,and on Mon. the isth at Wapping; on Thur. the iSth at the Bull-and-Mouth and Zoar; Fri. the igth again at the Bull-and-Mouth; Sat. the aoth, Spitalfields; Sun. the 2ist, at the Foundery and Spitalfields; Tues. the Z3rd, at Deptford and Welling; and Thur. the 25th, at Bishop Bonner's.]

Sat. 27.-I began reading, with huge expectation, a tract wrote by a son-in-law of the great Bengelius, Mr. Oetinger, De Sensu Communi et Ratione.[ On Common Sense and Season. The author, F. C. Oetinger, or Ottinger, was a German Pietist theologian, who wrote commentaries on the Scriptures, &c. He translated several of the works of Swedenborg, and was a friend of Zinzendorf. (Vaughan's Hours with the Mystics, vol. ii. p. 305; W.H,S. vol. iv. p. 134.] But how was I disappointed!

So obscure a writer I scarce ever saw before; I think he goes beyond Persius himself. When I had with huge labor read fifty or sixty pages, finding the sense did by no means make amends for the time and pains bestowed in searching it out, I took my leave of him for ever.[ On Wednesday, Jan. 31, he preached at the Bull-and-Mouth; on Saturday, Feb. 3, he was preaching at Spitalfields; on Monday the 5th at the Bull-andMouth; and Tuesday the 6th at Westminster.]

FEB. 3, Sat.-I spent an hour with one who, by the loss of his sight, his fortune, and his liberty (for he has been a prisoner some time), is likely to gain more than all the world can give.

Tues. 6.-I took much pains to convince Mr. S------n[Probably his old friend, Mr. Simpson.] that

he was not the wisest man in the world; but I could not change the Ethiopian's skin. Yet even this is not too hard for God.

Fri. 9.-I felt suddenly as if a needle had been run into the side of my face. I supposed it would be well by the morning, but found it abundantly worse, the tonsil being come down (as they term it), and the side of my face much swelled. It grew worse all day, so that it was with great difficulty I preached at Snowsfields in the evening; but on Sunday the nth it went away as unaccountably as it came. In the afternoon I called on Elisabeth Harland in St. George's Hospital. Many there had been greatly prejudiced against me; but it was now vanished away. Her behaviour had reconciled them quite; and all in the ward (sixty or seventy persons) seemed hardly to breathe all the time I was speaking and praying by her bedside.

Tues. 13.-I preached at Deptford and Welling, and in the morning rode to Wandsworth.[ The Sermon Register enters Wandsworth as his appointments for Wednesday the I4th and Thursday the I5th; and on Friday the i6th Spitalfields and the Foundery, also on Sunday the i8th.] I preached, Wednesday and Thursday evening, in the town; in the mornings at Mr. Gilbert's. Will this barren tree bear fruit at last How long has God had patience with it!

Fri. 16.-Being the Public Fast,[ It was a time of national panic. A French invasion was threatened. Charles Wesley, writing to his wife, expressed the general belief. His brother John was ' alarmed by false intelligence that we have only eleven thousand soldiers in all England.' Charles Wesley wrote eight hymns for use in the meetings held for prayer. One only has survived: ' Come, Thou Conqueror of the Nations.' Lady Huntingdon held prayer-meetings in her own house (see above, Feb. 27). Hawke's signal victory on Nov. 20 ended the panic.]

I preached at five in Wandsworth; at nine and three in the church at Spitalfields; and at half-hour past eight in the Foundery.[ Lady Huntingdon (who had been to the Tabernacle in the morning, where Whitefield addressed an immense congregation), was at this Foundery service.] Every place of public worship was crowded on this, as on the two preceding fast-days; and it is plain even outward humiliation has been a means of outward blessings.

Fri, 23.-I saw a surprising spectacle : one who, by a blow, first lost her nose, then one eye, and then the other, with most of the roof of her mouth, and yet, instead of murmuring, acknowledges the love of God in all, and praises Him continually.[ On Saturday the 24th he preached at Spitalfields.]

Tues. 27.-I walked with my brother and Mr. Maxfield to Lady Huntingdon's. After breakfast came in Mr. Whitefield, Madan, Romaine, Jones, Downing, and Venn, with some persons of quality, and a few others. Mr. Whitefield, I found, was to have administered the sacrament; but he insisted upon my doing it. After which, at the request of Lady Huntingdon, I preached on 1 Cor. xiii. 13. Oh what are the greatest men to the great God! As the small dust of the balance.[ ' On Wednesday evening (the 28th) the usual prayer-meeting was held at her ladyship's house, when Mr. Wesley, Mr. Venn, and Mr. Madan engaged in the solemn service, which was closed by a short exhortation from Mr. Whitefield.' Charles Wesley gave the address on Friday evening (C. of Huntingdon, vol. i. p. 396). See Charles Wesley's graphic account of this piayer-meeting in a letter to his wife (Journal, vol. 11. p. 219).]

MARCH, Thur. i.-I reached Everton about four in the afternoon; but Mr. Berridge did not expect me till the next day, so he thought it best I should preach in his house. The next evening the church was well filled, and my mouth was filled with arguments, which I trust God applied for the conviction of some and the consolation of others.[ A week later, apparently, Wesley wrote to the Countess. The letter is published in her Life (vol. i. pp. 398-9). He refers to the ' instruments God lately raised up '-Romaine, Madan, Berridge, &c. 'But still there is-I know not what-in them whom we have known from the beginning . . . which we do not find in those who have but lately come into the harvest.' He describes Berridge, whom he has just left: ' He speaks as plain and home as John Nelson, but with all the propriety of Mr. Romaine and the tenderness of Mr. Hervey.' On March 2 he also wrote to Mr. Blackwell (see new edition of Wesley Letters, where several additional letters will be found).]

March 1769

The Norwich Society

Sat. 3.-We had a mild, delightful day, and a pleasant ride to Colchester. In the evening, and on Sunday morning, the house contained the congregation tolerably well; but in the afternoon I was obliged to go out, and I suppose we had on St. John's Green five or six times as many as the room would contain. Such is the advantage of field-preaching.

Mon. 5.-On examining the society I found that, out of the hundred and twenty-six members I had left in October, we had lost only twelve, in the place of whom we have gained forty; and many of these whom we left in sorrow and heaviness are now rejoicing in God their Saviour.

Tues. 6.-I rode to Norwich.

Wed. 7.-I inquired into the state of affairs at the Tabernacle, and found the society, once consisting of many hundred members, was mouldered into nothing. Of the fifteen or sixteen hundred subscribers, not twenty, not one, was left; but every one that pleased went into the galleries without any questions asked. So that everything was to be wrought out of the ore, or rather out of the cinders. Surely whatever help is done here, God must do it Himself.

In the evening I desired that those who were willing to join in a society would speak with me the next evening. About twenty did so; but the greater part of these appeared like frightened sheep; and no marvel, when they had been so long accustomed to hear all manner of evil of me.

Fri 9.-I preached morning and evening at the Foundery.[ i.e. the Foundery in Norwich. See above, pp. 197, 290.] How pleasing would it be to flesh and blood to remain in this little quiet place, where we have at length weathered the storm! Nay, I am not to consult my own ease, but the advancing the kingdom of God.

On Saturday and Sunday about forty more gave in their names. On Sunday, in the afternoon, I met the society, after ordering the doors to be shut, which they had not been for two years before. Thirty or forty more spoke to me on Monday. I think two-thirds of those I have yet seen have had a clear sense of God's pardoning love. Doth He not' send by whom He will send'[ On Monday the 12th he wrote to Blackwell concerning his wife, with whom for the present he was upon fairly good terms; also respecting his work in Norwich-'the most critical' he had ever had. ' I am endeavouring to gather up those who were once gathered together, and afterwards scattered, by James Wheatley' (Works, vol. xii. p. 187).]

302

John Wesley's Journal

March 1759.

Sun. 18.-I administered the Lord's Supper to near two hundred communicants. So solemn a season I never remember to have known in the city of Norwich. As a considerable part of them were Dissenters, I desired every one to use what posture he judged best. Had I required them to kneel, probably half would have sat. Now all but one kneeled down.

Finding it was needful to see them once more at Colchester, I took horse between four and five in the morning. The frost was extremely sharp for some hours; it was then a fair, mild day. About two in the afternoon it began to rain; but we reached Colchester before we were wet through. The room was more than filled in the evening, so that many were obliged to go away.

Wed. 21.-I baptized seven adults, two of them by immersion; and in the evening (their own ministers having cast them out for going to hear the Methodists) I administered the Lord's Supper to them, and many others, whom their several teachers had repelled for the same reason.

Thur. 22.-Before we set out the rough north wind fell and we had a calm, sunshiny day. I preached in the Tabernacle at Norwich in the evening.

Sun. 25.-I rode to Forncett, twelve miles from Norwich, where also was a building of James Wheatley's, which, without my desire, he had included in the lease. We found William Cud worth [Wesley's opinion of Cudworth was diametrically opposed to Lady Huntingdon's. See Lady Huntingdon's Life, vol. ii. p. 338, and Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol. i. p. 482. As Stevens, in his History of Methodism (vol. i. p. 372), truly says 'William Cudworth . . . was chiefly responsible for Hervey's alienation from the Wesleys. It was at his instigation that the unfortunate Eleven Letters were published. Hervey died in 1758. As his end approached he directed that the MS. of this work should be destroyed. His brother, however, judged that it would be a desirable pecuniary speculation to publish it, and placed it in the hands of Cudworth to be finished, giving him liberty ' to put out and put in' whatever he judged expedient. Cudworth's Antinomian sentiments led him to abhor Wesley's opinions. He caricatured them relentlessly by his interpolations of Hervey's pages, and sent forth in Hervey's name the first and most reckless and odious caveat against Methodism that ever emanated from anyone who had sustained friendly relations to him.'] had preached there in the morning. It was exceeding good for my sense of honour to come just after him. The people looked as direful upon me as if it had been Satan in person. However, they flocked from all parts, so that the Tabernacle would not near contain them. I preached about two. God bare witness to His truth, and many were cut to the heart. After preaching I found Mr. Cudworth sitting in the pulpit behind me, whom I quietly and silently passed by. About six I preached at the Tabernacle in Norwich, crowded with attentive hearers. Perhaps these too will be brought into order by-and-by; hitherto there has been no king in Israel.

Monday and Tuesday I spoke to as many of both societies,[ That is, this Tabernacle and the Foundery. See above, p. 290.] now united together, as had leisure and inclination to come. The whole number is about four hundred and twenty; of whom I do not think it improbable two hundred may continue together.

April 1759

Interview with Cudworth

Tues. 27.-I had an interview with Mr. Cudworth. I observed upon the whole (i) that his opinions are all his own, quite new, and his phrases as new as his opinions; (2) that all these opinions, yea, and phrases too, he affirms to be necessary to salvation; maintaining that all who do not receive them worship another God; and (3) that he is as incapable as a brute beast of being convinced even in the smallest point.

Wed. 28.-I rode over to Forncett again, and preached to a large congregation. A Great part of them were now exceedingly softened; but some were still bitter as wormwood. In the evening we had another kind of congregation at the Foundery, by whom I was much comforted; but much more in meeting the bands, when all our hearts were melted down by the power of God.

Thur. 29.-I divided the Norwich society into classes, without any distinction between them wJio had belonged to the Foundery or the Tabernacle.[ This is the date of an interesting letter to W. Alwood concerning the Peaseholme Green chapel at York, then in course of erection-first published, with notes, in W.H.S. vol. iii. p. 181.]

APRIL I, Sun.-I met them all at six, requiring every one to show his ticket when he came in-a thing they had never heard of before. I likewise insisted on another strange regulation, that the men and women should sit apart. A third was made the same day. It had been a custom, ever since the Tabernacle was built, to have the galleries full of spectators while the Lord's Supper was administered. This I judged highly improper, and therefore ordered none to be admitted but those who desired to communicate. And I found far less difficulty than I expected in bringing them to submit to this also.

The society now contained above five hundred and seventy members, a hundred and three of whom were in no society before, although many of them had found peace with God. I believe they would have increased to a thousand if I could have stayed a fortnight longer. Which of these will hold fast their profession The fowls of the air will devour some, the sun will scorch more, and others will be choked by the thorns springing up. I wonder we should ever expect that half of those who 1 hear the word with joy' will bring forth fruit unto perfection.

Mon. 2.-I left Norwich, and about seven o'clock came to Cross-keys Wash. They would fain have persuaded us we could not pass; but, finding we were resolved to try, our guide put forward, and brought us over in half an hour; so that about eight we reached Sutton, and found a quiet, civil house, with everything we wanted.

Tues. 3.-We came to Fossdyke Wash just time enough to pass. At three in the afternoon I preached at Boston. A rude multitude quickly ran together to a paddock adjoining to the town. A more unawakened congregation I have not seen for some years. However, the far greater part were attentive, nor did any interrupt or offer the least rudeness.

At seven I met the little society in the house, but they were the least part of the company. People crowded in from all sides; and I believe God touched most of their hearts.

Wed. 4.-At six, finding the house would not contain onefourth of the congregation, I was constrained to stand in the street Abundance of people assembled together, whom I exhorted to ' repent and believe the gospel.' The word of God fell heavy upon them, and, I trust, broke some of the stony hearts.

April 1759.

In Lincolnshire

Hence we rode over the Fens, fifteen miles broad and near thirty miles long, to Coningsby, where we found a numerous congregation of a far different spirit. Scarce one of these but had tasted, more or less, ' of the powers of the world to come.' After a comfortable opportunity here we rode on to Horncastle.[ Mr. Marshall, of Kirkby-on-theBain, stood by Wesley in the town street of Horncastle when the mob was violent, but whether on this or another early visit we do not know. See notices of his grandson in Church Record, Jan.1895; letter of Erasmus Middleton to John Wesley, Horncastle, Feb. 27, 1762 (Arm. Mag. 1781, p 338). ] We were but roughly saluted at our entrance, and the mob increased more and more till six. 1 then began to preach in a yard near the market-place to a large concourse of people. But their behaviour quite disappointed us; for there was no tumult, no noise, but an earnest attention through the whole congregation.

Thur. 5.-I preached again at seven to nearly the same congregation, and was again refreshed by the remarkable decency and seriousness of their behaviour. At four in the afternoon I preached at Mareham-on-the-hill, two miles from Horncastle. The number of people constrained me to preach without, and the rain to shorten my sermon; though none went away. Indeed I believe none were present who had not known some work of grace in their hearts.

Fri. 6.-We rode over the Wolds (a chain of hills) to North Elkington, three miles from Louth. The congregation was large, notwithstanding the rain, which drove full in our face till we came to Grimsby.

Sun. 8.-The house was pretty well filled at eight. At two I was obliged to go into the old churchyard, where was such a concourse of people as had hardly ever, they said, been seen at Grimsby before. As many as the room would well contain were present at the watch-night, and at seven in the morning. I then commended them to the grace of God.

Mon. 9.-I preached in the evening at Laceby, the next afternoon at Ferry (after riding through much water and continued rain), and in the evening in the new house at Epworth.[ He had preached in the ' shell of the new house' on March 13, 1758, when, as now, there was a ' great rain]

Fri. 13.-Having appointed to preach at Alkborough at one, I set out between seven and eight. I was in hopes of coming thither before church began; but I did not consider the Lincolnshire roads. With some difficulty we reached it before noon, and found there was no service at the church. I preached in the churchyard at one to a listening multitude, most of whom, I suppose, had never heard this kind of preaching before. Many of them were in tears, and pressed after me into the house where we met the society. I could not but hope that some of these will press into the kingdom of heaven.

Returning thence, I called on Mr. Romley,[ The father of the curate who refused Wesley the sacrament in Epworth Church.] of Burton, one of my former parishioners, a lively, sensible man of eightythree years old, by whom I was much comforted. An hour or two after we took boat, but could not cross over. The violence of the stream, swollen by the late rains, bore us down in spite of all we could do. Having striven against it a considerable time, we were obliged to cast anchor. After waiting some time, we got near the shore and were towed up to the place of landing. A toilsome day was followed by a comfortable night. At half-hour after eight the house at Epworth was well filled, and most of the congregation stayed till the whole service was concluded.

It was on this day that, after the battle of Bergen, in Germany[The account which .'follows was written by Dr. Fresenius, who was senior of the clergy at Frankfort, for whom see above, vol. iii. p. 273.]

April 1759

A Narrative

Among the many wounded who were brought into Frankfort-on-the-Main, there was the Right Honourable George Charles Dykern, Baron, Lieutenant-General of the Saxon troops in the service of the King of France. He was born of an ancient and noble family in Silesia on April 10, 1710, so that it was just on his birthday he received his wound. He was of equal abilities as a minister in the closet and a general in the field. In his younger years he had gone through a regular course of study in the University, and made great proficiency in philosophy, especially in mathematics. Afterwards he studied polemic divinity till he reasoned himself into an infidel. During his illness he showed not the least desire of pious company or serious discourse till the surgeon let his valet de chamber know that he could not live long. The man then asked his master whether he did not choose to be visited by a clergy Mon. He answered with warmth, ' I shall not trouble those gentlemen; I know well myself what to believe and do.' His man, not discouraged, continued thus: ' My lord, have you ever found me wanting in my duty all the time I have been in your service' He answered, ' No.' ' Then,' replied he, ' I will not be wanting now. The surgeons count you past hopes of recovery, but every one is afraid to tell you so. You stand upon the brink of eternity. Pray, sir, order a clergyman to be called.' He paused a little, but soon gave his hand to his servant, thanked him for his honesty, and ordered him to send for me.[ Dr. Fresenius. ] When I came the man told me plainly the general was a professed infidel. I went in, and, after a short compliment, said: ' I am told, my lord, your life is near an end; therefore I presume, without any ceremony, to ask you one plain question: Is the state of your soul such that you can entertain a solid hope of salvation' He answered, ' Yes.' ' On what do you ground this hope' He replied, ' I never committed any wilful sin. I have been liable to frailties, but I trust in God's mercy, and the merits of His Son, that He will have mercy upon me.' These words he uttered very slowly, especially 'the merits of His Son.' I made the following reply: ' I am apt to believe you are not tainted with the grossest vices, but I fear you a little too presumptuously boast of never having committed wilful sin. If you would be saved you must acknowledge your being utterly corrupted by sin, and consequently deserving the curse of God and eternal damnation. As for your hoping for God's mercy, through the merits of His Son, I beg leave to ask, Do you believe God has a Son; that His Son assumed our nature in order to be our Saviour; that, in the execution of His office, He was humbled unto death, even the death upon the cross; and that hereby He has given an ample satisfaction for us and recovered our title to heaven' He answered, ' I cannot now avoid a more minute description of the true state of my soul. Let me tell you, doctor, I have some knowledge of philosophy, by which I have chosen for myself a way of salvation. I have always endeavoured to live a sober life to the uttermost of my power, not doubting but the Being of all beings would then graciously accept me. In this way I stood in no need of Christ, and therefore did not believe on Him. But if I take the Scriptures to be a divine revelation, this way of mine, I perceive, is not the right one; I must believe in Christ, and through Him come to God.' I replied, 'You say, if you take the Scriptures to be a divine revelation' He fetched a deep sigh, and said, ' O God, Thou wilt make me say, Because I take the Scriptures to be Thy word.' I said, 'There are grounds and reasons enough to demonstrate the divine origin of Christianity, as I could show from its most essential principles, were not the period of your life so short; but we need not now that diffusive method, faith being the gift of God. A poor sinner tottering on the brink of eternity has not time to inquire about grounds and reasons; rather betake yourself to earnest prayer for faith, which, if you do, I doubt not but God will give it you.' I had no sooner spoken these words but, pulling off his cap and lifting up his eyes and hands, he cried out, ' O Almighty God, I am a poor cursed sinner, worthy of damnation; but, Lord Jesus, eternal Son of God, Thou diedst for my sins also. It is through Thee alone I can be saved. Oh give me faith, and strengthen that faith!' Being extremely weak, he was obliged to stop here. A little after he asked, ' Is faith enough for salvation' ' Yes, sir,' said I, ' if it be living faith.' ' Methinks,' said he, ' it is so already, and it will be more so by-and-by; let us pray for it.' Perceiving he was very weak, to give him some rest I retired into the next room, but he soon sent to call me. I found him praying, and Jesus was all he prayed for. I reminded him of some scriptures treating of faith in Christ, and he was much delighted with them. Indeed, he was quite swallowed up by the grace of Jesus, and would hear of nothing but ' Jesus Christ, and Him crucified.' He cried out, ' I do not know how it is with me. I never in my life felt such a change. I have power to love Jesus, and to believe in Him whom I so long rejected. O my Jesus, how merciful art Thou to me!'

About noon I stepped home, but he sent for me directly, so that I could scarce eat my dinner. We were both filled with joy, as partakers of the same grace which is in Jesus Christ, and that in such a manner as if we had been acquainted together for many years. Many officers of the army came to see him continually, to all of whom he talked freely of Jesus, of the grace of the Father in Him, and of the power of the Holy Ghost through Him, wondering without ceasing at his having found Jesus, and at the happy change by which all things on this side eternity were become indifferent to him.

In the afternoon he desired to partake of the Lord's Supper, which he received with a melting, praising, rejoicing heart. All the rest of the day he continued in the same state of soul. Toward evening he desired that if his end should approach I would come to him, which I promised; but he did not send for me till the next morning. I was told by his valet that he slept well for some hours, and then, awaking, prayed for a considerable time, continually mentioning the name of our Lord and His precious blood, and that he had desired several of the officers to make his conversion known to his Court (that of the King of Poland). After some discourse I asked, ' Has your view of Christ and His redemption been neither altered nor obscured since yesterday' He answered, 'Neither altered nor obscured. I have no doubt, not even a remote one. It is just the same with me as if I had always thus believed and never doubted, so gracious is the Lord Jesus to me, a sinner.'

This second day he was unwearied in prayer and exercises of faith. Toward evening he sent for me in haste. When I came I found him dying, and in a kind of delirium, so I could do no more than give him now and then a word of comfort. I prayed afterwards for him and those that were present, some of whom were of high birth and rank. I then, by imposition of hands as usual, gave him a blessing, which being done he expired immediately. A Royal Prince who was there (Prince Xavier of Saxony) could not forbear weeping. The rest of the officers bewailed the loss of their general, yet praised God for having shown such mercy toward him.

I wrote an account of it without delay to his mother, and had an immediate answer. She was a lady of seventy-two, of exemplary piety. She praised God for His mercy, adding that He had now answered the prayers which she had never ceased to offer on his behalf for eleven years.

April 1709.

York Castle

Sun. 15 (being Easter Day).-I preached at Epworth at eight, and then rode to Haxey church, where I was much refreshed by the decency and seriousness of the congregation. Between one and two I began preaching. So large a congregation was never seen here before. About five I preached at the market-place in Epworth. I was drawing to a conclusion when the rain began, but it drove away only a few careless hearers: the bulk of the people did not stir till I concluded.[ On Tuesday, April 17, he preached at Belton and Bawdrip.]

Wed. 18.-I set out for Selby. We were in hopes the roads would now be passable, and they were tolerable till we came near the town, but here the late flood had carried away the bank over which we were to ride, and left a great hole in its place. However, we made shift to lead our horses over a narrow path, where the water was fordable. The congregation at Selby obliged me to stand in the garden, though the north wind was exceeding high. At seven in the evening I preached [In Pump Yard, in a room which held about one hundred and twenty persons (Lyth's Hist/try of Methodism in York, p. 92).] at York.

Thur. 19.-I visited two prisoners in the Castle, which is, I suppose, the most commodious prison in Europe. Both of them seemed to be much convinced, and not far from the kingdom of God. At six I preached in the shell of the new house [In Peaseholme Green (ibid.). See above, p. 22 \.] to a numerous and serious audience.

Fri. 20.-The master of the inn at Tadcaster [On Friday the aoth the Sermon Register has Leeds and Tadcaster. The inn at Tadcaster was probably the White Horse. For the beginning of Methodism in Tadcaster see memoir of Thomas Ellis in Meth. Mag. 1805, p. 221.] offering us the use of his garden, I preached to a well-behaved congregation, and about five found Mr. Grimshaw and many of our brethren at Leeds.

Sat. 21.-At half-hour past ten we reached Stainland chapel,[ Erected in 1755, probably as a chapel-of-ease {Methodism in Halifax, p. 102).] near Elland. It is a handsome building, near the top of a mountain, and surrounded with mountains on all sides. It was filled from end to end. Mr. Grimshaw read prayers, and I preached on part of the Second Lesson. In the room where I dressed myself were a young man and his sister, both ill of a fever. I know not that ever they' heard the preaching. However, I desired we might go to prayers; they presently melted into tears. Oh may God preach His gospel to their hearts!

I preached at Manchester in the evening, where we had at length a quiet audience. Wretched magistrates, who, by refusing to suppress, encouraged the rioters, had long occasioned continual tumults here. But some are now of a better spirit; and whenever magistrates desire to preserve the peace they have sufficient power to do it.

Tues. 24.-I rode over to Macclesfield.[ See Methodism in Macclesfield, p. 51, for a tradition as to Wesley having been struck in the face by a stone on this occasion. For the origin of Methodism in Macclesfield (or Maxfield, as it was then called) see above, vol. iii. pp. 175 and 224. Since 1747, Nelson, Hopper, and other preachers had visited Macclesfield. In 1750 George Pearson and Elizabeth Clulow took a cottage larger than the room at Shrigley Fold. This

was 'gutted,' by-and-by galleried, and filled (see Smith's Methodism in Macclesfield, pp. 44-6). Mrs. Ryle was the greatgrandmother of Dr. J. C. Ryle, the first Bishop of Liverpool, whose son, Bishop of Winchester till 1911, then became Dean of Westminster. She (Mrs. Ryle) joined the society here during the occupation of this room. Her son John, banker, afterwards alderman and mayor of the borough, and friend of Wesley, was one of the first trustees of Sunderland Street chapel (1779). Another person who afterwards became notable was Hester Ann Roe, whose father, a Macclesfield vicar, refused his church to Wesley, though he did not actively oppose. She was born in 1756, and became the wife of James Rogers, one of Wesley's preachers.] Abundance of people ran together, but wild as colts untamed. Their noise quite drowned my voice at first; but in a while they were tolerably quiet, and before I had done all but four or five lubberly men seemed almost persuaded to be Christians.

May 1759

In Cheshire

Sun. 29.-I rode to Stockport, designing to preach at one o'clock; but we were at a loss for a place. We fixed at length on a green near the town's end, and we had a quiet and solemn

opportunity.

In my return I called to see a girl about thirteen years of age. She had been in violent pain all over, with little intermission, for near twenty months. After I 'had spoke a few words she said,' When I saw you before I did not know the Lord; but now I know Him, and am known of Him. I am His, and He is mine.' I asked, ' Do you never repine at your pain' She said, ' No; I have not a murmuring thought: I am happy, always happy. I would not change this bed of affliction for the palace of King George.' I asked, ' Are you not proud of this Is pride taken out of your heart' She answered,' I do not know; but I feel no pride. I feel that God is all.' ' But do you feel no fretfulness or peevishness' 'I cannot tell that I do. Pain sometimes makes me cry out when they stir me; but I do not fret at anything.' ' Do you find no self-will' ' Not that I know. I desire nothing but that the will of God be done.' ' Do not you desire life or death' ' No; I leave all to Him. But, if it was His will, I should be glad to die. The world is full of danger: I should be glad to leave it, and to be with Christ.' Oh why was she then not taken to Paradise I fear she has now no religion at all! [The last two sentences are not in the original edition.]

Mon. 3O.[ The entries in the Sermon Register ate: Wed. April 25, Manchester; Thur.26, Booth Bank; Friday 27, Manchester; Sun. 29, Stockport; Mon. 30, Acton Bridge (named in the text), and Altrincham (not named).]-We had a numerous congregation at Acton Bridge, two or three miles from Northwich. Some large trees screened us both from the sun and wind. In the afternoon I rode on to Chester. It was well the wind was pretty high; for the sun shone as hot as it uses to do in the dog-days.

MAY 2, Wed.-I rode over to Mold, in Flintshire, about twelve miles from Chester. The sun was very hot and the wind very cold; but, as the place they had chose for me was exposed both to the sun and the wind, the one balanced the other. And, notwithstanding the Chester races, which had drawn the rich away, and the market-day, which detained many of the poor, we had a multitude of people, the serious part of whom soon influenced the rest; so that all but two or three remained uncovered, and kneeled down as soon as I began to pray.

May 1759

The Millom Sands

Thur. 3.-We crossed over from Chester to Liverpool. The congregations here were exceeding large, but many of them seemed to be like wild asses' colts. Yet God is able to make them wise unto salvation.

Sun. 6.-I received much comfort at the old church [St. Nicholas. For St. Thomas's see above, p. 203.] in the morning, and at St. Thomas's in the afternoon. It was as if both the sermons had been made for me. I pity those who can find no good at church. But how should they, if prejudice come between, an effectual bar to the grace of God

Wed. 9.-I rode to Downall Green,[ See Meth. Rec. Nov. 27, 1902.] near Wigan, a town wicked to a proverb. We had a specimen of the manners of its inhabitants in the behaviour of a man that met us, and accosted us with such language as would have become an inhabitant of the bottomless pit. One would have thought, from their looks, that a good part of the congregation was of the same spirit; but in a short time the word of God prevailed, and all their fierceness melted away.

In the evening I preached at Bolton, and on Friday the nth, about nine, at Lower Darwen, a small village near Blackburn. At Lancaster we were informed it was too late to cross the sands.[ See James T. Lightwood's description of these sands, which are formed

from the estuaries of the rivers Kent, Crake, and Duddon. They are almost dry at low water, offering a sand highway, alluring but dangerous. (IV.H.S. vol. iv. p. 120 )] However, we resolved to make the trial. We passed the seven-mile sand without difficulty, and reached Flookborough about sunset.

Sat. 12.-Setting out early, we came to Bootle, about twenty-four measured miles from Flookborough, soon after eight, having crossed the Millom Sands without either guide or difficulty. Here we were informed that we could not pass at Ravenglass before one or two o'clock; whereas, had we gone on (as we afterward found) we might have passed immediately.

About eleven we were directed to a ford near Muncaster Hall, which they said we might cross at noon. When we came thither they told us we could not cross, so we sat still till about one. We then found we could have crossed at noon. However, we reached Whitehaven before night. But I have taken my leave of the sand-road. I believe it is ten measured miles shorter than the other; but there are four sands to pass, so far from each other that it is scarce possible to pass them all in a day-especially as you have all the way to do with a generation of liars, who detain all strangers as long as they can, either for their own gain or their neighbours'. I can advise no stranger to go this way: he may go round by Kendal and Keswick, often in less time, always with less expense, and far less trial of his patience.[ At Hest Bank, the first stage from Lancaster, he would probably engage the guide, whose office is an ancient institution, originally established by the neighbouring Priory of Cartmel, but now maintained by the Duchy of Lancaster. After Flookborough, where he slept, he would probably go to Cark, and thence on to the Sands, and round the south of Holker Hall, past Park Head, thence to Ulverston Sands, Kirby Ireleth, Millom Sands, and Bootle. It is calculated that he must have left Flookborough between 2 and 3 a.m. At Ravenglass he crossed the Esk estuary. The difficulties of his journey were increased by the lies told about the tides. (W.M. Mag. 1912, p. 47.)]

Reflecting to-day on the case of a poor woman who had continual pain in her stomach, I could not but remark the inexcusable negligence of most physicians in cases of this nature. They prescribe drug upon drug, without knowing a jot of the matter concerning the root of the disorder. And without knowing this they cannot cure, though they can murder, the patient. Whence came this woman's pain (which she would never have told had she never been questioned about it) From fretting for the death of her son. And what availed medicines while that fretting continued Why, then, do not all physicians consider how far bodily disorders are caused or influenced by the mind, and in those cases which are utterly out of their sphere call in the assistance of a minister; as ministers, when they find the mind disordered by the body, call in the assistance of a physician But why are these cases out of their sphere Because they know not God. It follows, no man can be a thorough physician without being an experienced Christian.

May 1769

A Scotch Tour

Tues. 15.-I rode over to Lorton,[ See above, p. 29] a little village at the foot of a high mountain. Many came from a considerable distance, and I believe did not repent of their labor; for they found God to be a God both of the hills and valleys, and nowhere more present than in the mountains of Cumberland.[ On May 16, being then in Cumberland, he wrote to a friend of rank and education on Worldly and Christian Prudence. Probably this is one of a series of letters to Sir James Lowther referred to above, Oct. 28, 1754. See Works, vol. xii. p. 231.]

Thur. 17.-I inquired into a signal instance of providence. When a coal-pit runs far under the ground, it is customary here to build a partition-wall, nearly from the shaft to within three or four yards of the end, in order to make the air circulate, which then moves down one side of the wall, turns at the end, and then moves briskly up on the other side. In a pit two miles from the town, which ran full four hundred yards under the ground, and had been long neglected, several parts of this wall were fallen down. Four men were sent down to repair it. They were about three hundred yards from the shaft, when the foul air took fire. In a moment it tore down the wall from end to end; and, burning on till it came to the shaft, it then burst and went off like a large cannon. The men instantly fell on their faces, or they would have been burned to death in a few moments. One of them, who once knew the love of God (Andrew English), began crying aloud for mercy; but in a very short time his breath was stopped. The other three crept on their hands and knees, till two got to the shaft and were drawn up; but one of them died in a few minutes. John M'Combe was drawn up next, burned from head to foot, but rejoicing and praising God. They then went down for Andrew, whom they found senseless: the very circumstance which saved his life. For, losing his senses, he lay flat on the ground, and the greatest part of the fire went over him; whereas, had he gone forward on his hands and knees, he would undoubtedly have been burned to death. But life or death was welcome, for God had restored the light of His countenance.[ On the 17th he preached again at Whitehaven.]

Sat. 19.-One was showing us the improvements begun by Sir William Lowther.[ The cousin of Rev. Sir William Lowther, Prebendary of York and rector of Swillington, to whom he left his estate. The second wife of the Sir William of the text was Lady Huntingdon's friend, of whom Henry Venn wrote, 'an honour to her Christian profession. The Rev. Sir William's son James, who ultimately inherited the estates, was

created Earl of Lonsdale. ] He had marked out places for new walks and for tufts of trees, laid out a new plan for his gardens, begun to alter the house, and was preparing to make a little paradise round about it. But death came between. And how little loss was this, if it removed him to the paradise of God!

Sun. 20.-I preached at eight in an open place at the Gins, a village on one side of the town. Many were there who never did and never would come to the room. Oh what a victory would Satan gain if he could put an end to field-preaching! But that, I trust, he never will; at least not till my head is laid.

After preaching again at two, I took my leave of Whitehaven, and rode to Cockermouth. At six I preached at the end of the market-house. High and low, rich and poor, attended; and by far the greater part of the audience seemed to be conscious that God was there.

Mon. 21.-I preached at ten in the market-place at Wigton, and came to Solway Frith, just as the water was fordable. At some times it is so three hours in twelve; at other times, barely one.

After making a short bait at Ruthwell, we came to Dumfries before six o'clock. Having time to spare, we took a walk in the churchyard, one of the pleasantest places I ever saw. A single tomb I observed there, which was about a hundred and thirty years old; but the inscription was very hardly legible:

Quandoquidem remanent ipsis quoque fata sepulchris![ Juvenal, Sat. x. 146. Quoted freely: remanent substituted for data sunt.For sepulchres themselves must crumbling fall In times abyss, the common grave of all.

Dryden's translation (W.H.S. vol. v. p. 48).]

So soon do even our sepulchres die! Strange that men should be so careful about them! But are not many self-condemned therein They see the folly, while they run into it. So poor Mr. Prior, speaking of his own tomb, has those melancholy words, ' For this last piece of human vanity, I bequeath five hundred pounds.'

Tues. 22.-We rode through a pleasant country to Thornhill, near which is the grand seat of the Duke of Queensberry. How little did the late Duke imagine that his son would plough up his park and let his house run to ruin! But let it go! In a little time the earth itself, and all the works of it, shall be burned up.

Hence we rode through and over huge mountains, green to the very top, to Leadhills, a village containing five hundred families, who have had no minister for these four years. So, in Scotland, the poor have not the gospel preached! Who shall answer for the blood of these men

Early in the evening we came to Lesmahagow, a village not so large as Leadhills. It has, however, two ministers. Here also we walked down to the churchyard, by the side of which a little clear river runs, near the foot of a high and steep mountain. The wood which covers this makes the walks that run on its sides pleasant beyond imagination. But what taste have the good people of the town for this As much as the animals that graze on the river-bank.

May 1759, The Everton Revival

Wed. 23.-We took horse soon after four, and did not stop before we came to Glasgow, having hardly seen a cloud in the sky since we set out from Whitehaven.

I preached at seven in the Poor House, and at seven in the morning, Thursday the 24th. But in the evening we were obliged to be abroad, and I used great plainness of speech. All suffered the word of exhortation; some seemed to be a little affected.

Sat. 26.-I found the little society which I had joined here two years since had soon split in pieces. In the afternoon I met several of the members of the praying societies and showed them what Christian fellowship was, and what need they had of it. About forty of them met me on Sunday the 27th, in Mr. Gillies's kirk,[ For Mr. Gillies and his friendship with Wesley see above, pp. 62, 117.] immediately after evening service. I left them determined to meet Mr. Gillies weekly, at the same time and place. If this be done, I shall try to see Glasgow again; if not, I can employ my time better.[ This is a noteworthy illustration of a fact which marked Wesley's work throughout. He attached supreme importance to Christian fellowship as a means of guarding and edifying the converts. The Sermon Register shows that he preached in Glasgow on the day of his arrival, on the 25th, and the 27th.]

At seven in the morning we had a numerous congregation, though small compared to that in the evening. Yet my voice was so strengthened that I believe all could hear. I spoke very plain on ' Ye must be born again.' Now I am clear of the blood of this people. I have delivered my own soul.

Mon. 28.-I rode through Edinburgh to Musselburgh, and preached in the evening to a deeply attentive congregation.

Wed. 30.-I rode on to Dunbar, and at six in the evening preached in a large, open place. (As also the next day.) Both poor and rich quietly attended, though most of them shivering with cold; for the weather was so changed within a few days that it seemed more like December than May.

Lodging with a sensible man, I inquired particularly into the present discipline of the Scotch parishes. In one parish it seems there are twelve ruling elders; in another there are fourteen. And what are these Men of great sense and deep experience Neither one nor the other. But they are the richest men in the parish. And are the richest, of course, the best and the wisest men Does the Bible teach this I fear not. What manner of governors, then, will these be Why, they are generally just as capable of governing a parish as of commanding an army.

About this time the work of God exceedingly increased under the Rev. Mr. Berridge, near Everton. I cannot give a clearer view of this than by transcribing part of the Journal of an eye-witness [The story of the Everton Revival, obviously, is a composite document, three, probably four, possibly five Journals or letters being quoted, Berridge, Hicks, Mrs. Blackwell, John Walsh, and, it may be, Mr. Blackwell, contributing. H. J. Foster suggests a theory that disposes of most, if not all, of the difficulties. He points out that there are two reports, and attributes them to two distinct sources: 'For the first I suggest Mrs. Elizabeth Blackwell, of Lewisham.' Mr. Foster then works out an extremely interesting argument based on the fact that Mrs. Blackwell, being in doubtful health, found early rising wellnigh impossible, and that this infirmity is more than once referred to in the text. See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 22 (No. 213 in Notes and Queries). Mrs. Blackwell's story closes with a quotation from Mr. Berridge's Journal. It is this that has misled the maker of the index to Wesley's Works, who attributes the whole to Berridge.For a note accounting for the authorship of the second narrative see below, P333]:

Sunday, May 20.-Being with Mr. Blackwell at Everton, I was much fatigued and did not rise. But Mr. B. did, and observed several fainting and crying out while Mr. Berridge was preaching.[ See like effects under Wesley's preaching at Everton, above, p. 292.] Afterward, at church, I heard many cry out, especially children, whose agonies were amazing. One of the eldest, a girl ten or twelve years old, was full in my view, in violent contortions of body, and weeping aloud, I think incessantly during the whole service. And several much younger children were in Mr. Blackwell's view, agonizing as this did. The church was equally crowded in the afternoon, the windows being filled within and without, and even the outside of the pulpit to the very top; so that Mr. Berridge seemed almost stifled by their breath. Yet, feeble and sickly as he is, he was continually strengthened, and his voice for the most part distinguishable, in the midst of all the outcries. I believe there were present three times more men than women, a great part of whom came from far; thirty of them having set out, at two in the morning, from a place thirteen miles off. The text was, ' Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.' When the power of religion began to be spoke of, the presence of God really filled the place. And while poor sinners felt the sentence of death in their souls, what sounds of distress did I hear! The greatest number of them who cried or fell were men; but some women, and several children, felt the power of the same almighty Spirit, and seemed just sinking into hell. This occasioned a mixture of various sounds, some shrieking, some roaring aloud. The most general was a loud breathing, like that of people half strangled and gasping for life. And indeed almost all the cries were like those of human creatures dying in bitter anguish. Great numbers wept without any noise; others fell down as dead; some sinking in silence, some with extreme noise and violent agitation. I stood on the pew-seat, as did a young man in the opposite pew, an able-bodied, fresh, healthy country man. But in a moment, while he seemed to think of nothing less, down he dropped, with a violence inconceivable. The adjoining pews seemed shook with his fall. I heard afterward the stamping of his feet, ready to break the boards, as he lay in strong convulsions at the bottom of the pew. Among several that were struck down in the next pew was a girl who was as violently seized as him. When he fell, Blackwell and I felt our souls thrilled with a momentary dread; as when one man is killed by a cannon-ball, another often feels the wind of it.

Among the children who felt the arrows of the Almighty I saw a sturdy boy, about eight years old, who roared above his fellows, and seemed, in his agony, to struggle with the strength of a grown Mon. His face was red as scarlet; and almost all on whom God laid His hand turned either very red or almost black. When I returned, after a little walk, to Mr. Berridge's house, I found it full of people. He was fatigued, but said he would nevertheless give them a word of exhortation. I stayed in the next room, and saw the girl whom I had observed so particularly distressed in the church lying on the floor as one dead; but without any ghastliness in her face. In a few minutes we were informed of a woman filled with peace and joy, who was crying out just before. She had come thirteen miles, and is the same person who dreamed Mr. Berridge would come to her village on that very day whereon he did come, though without either knowing the place or the way to it. She was convinced at that time. Just as we heard of her deliverance the girl on the floor began to stir. She was then set in a chair, and, after sighing a while, suddenly rose up, rejoicing in God. Her face was covered with the most beautiful smile I ever saw. She frequently fell on her knees, but was generally running to and fro, speaking these and the like words, ' Oh what can Jesus do for lost sinners He has forgiven all my sins! I am in heaven! I am in heaven! Oh how He loves me! And how I love Him!' Meantime I saw a thin, pale girl, weeping with sorrow for herself and joy for her companion. Quickly the smiles of Heaven came likewise on her, and her praises joined with those of the other. I also then laughed with extreme joy; so did Mr. Blackwell (who said it was more than he could well bear); so did all who knew the Lord, and some of those who were waiting for salvation; till the cries of them who were struck with the arrows of conviction were almost lost in the sounds of joy.

Two or three well-dressed young women, who seemed careless before, now felt the power of God, and cried out with a loud and bitter

cry. Mr. Berridge about this time retired, and the Duke of M------,

with Mr. A------II,[ Probably the Duke of Manchester and Mr. Astell.] came in. They seemed inclined to make a disturbance, but were restrained, and in a short time quietly retired. We continued praising God with all our might, and His work went on as when Mr. Berridge was exhorting. I had for some time observed a young woman all in tears; but now her countenance changed. The unspeakable joy appeared in her face, which quick as lightning was filled with smiles and became of a crimson colour. About the same time John Keeling, of Potton, fell into an agony; but he grew calm in about a quarter of an hour, though without a clear sense of pardon.

Immediately after, a stranger, well dressed, who stood facing me, fell backward to the wall, then forward on his knees, wringing his hands and roaring like a bull. His face at first turned quite red, then almost black. He rose and ran against the wall, till Mr. Keeling and another held him. He screamed out, ' Oh what shall I do what shall I do Oh for one drop of the blood of Christ!'[See W.H.S. vol. v. p. 181.] As he spoke, God set his soul at liberty; he knew his sins were blotted out, and the rapture he was in seemed too great for human nature to bear. He had come forty miles to hear Mr. Berridge, and was to leave him the next morning; which he did with a glad heart, telling all who came in his way what God had done for his soul.

I observed about the time that Mr. Coe (that was his name) began to rejoice, a girl, eleven or twelve years old, exceeding poorly dressed, who appeared to be as deeply wounded and as desirous of salvation as any. But I lost sight of her, till I heard the joyful sound of another born in Sion; and found, upon inquiry, it was her, the poor, disconsolate, gipsy-looking child. And now did I see such a sight as I do not expect again on this side eternity. The faces of the three justified children, and I think of all the believers present, did really shine; and such a beauty, such a look of extreme happiness, and at the same time of divine love and simplicity, did I never see in human faces till now. The newly justified eagerly embraced one another, weeping on each other's necks for joy. Then they saluted all of their own sex, and besought both men and women to help them in praising God.

I have mentioned only one man, two women, and three children at this time justified in the house, but have perhaps omitted some. And it is probable there was more than one justified at the church, though but one came to speak of it; for all are not equally free to glorify God in the midst of His people. I wish all who find the same salvation with Mr. Coe were as ready to proclaim redeeming love!

Thur. 24.-Mr. Blackwell and I went to hear Mr. Hicks, at Wrestlingworth, four miles from Everton. We discoursed with him first, and were glad to hear he had wholly given himself up to the,| glorious work of God, and that the power of the Highest fell upon his hearers as upon Mr. Berridge's. While he was preaching, fifteen or sixteen persons felt the arrows of the Lord, and dropped down. A few of these cried out with the utmost violence, and little intermission, for some hours; while the rest made no great noise, but continued struggling, j as in the pangs of death. I observed, besides these, one little girl, deeply convinced, and a boy, nine or ten years old. Both these, and several others, when carried into the parsonage-house, either lay as dead, or struggled with all their might. But in a short time their cries increased beyond measure, so that the loudest singing could scarce be heard. Some at last called on me to pray, which I did; and for a time all were calm. But the storm soon began again. Mr. Hicks then prayed, and afterward Mr. Berridge. But still, though some received consolation, others remained in deep sorrow of heart.

Upon the whole I remark, that few ancient people experience anything of this work of God; and scarce any of the rich. These generally show either an utter contempt of or enmity to it. Indeed, so did Mr. Hicks himself some time since, having so deep an aversion to it that he denied the sacrament to those of his parish who went to hear Mr. Berridge. Neither of these gentlemen have much eloquence, but seem rather weak in speech, the Lord hereby more clearly showing that this is His own work. It extends into Cambridgeshire, to within a mile of the University, and about as far into Huntingdonshire; but flourishes most of all in the eastern and northern parts of Bedfordshire.

There were three farmers, in three several villages, who violently set themselves to oppose it, and for a time they kept many from going to hear; but all three died in about a month. One of them owned the hand of the Lord was upon him, and besought Him, in the bitterness of his soul, to prolong his life, vowing to hear Mr. Berridge himself. But the Lord would not be entreated.

The violent struggling of many in the above-mentioned churches has broke several pews and benches. Yet it is common for people to remain unaffected there, and afterward drop down in their way home. Some have been found lying as dead in the road; others, in Mr. Berridge's garden, not being able to walk from the church to his house, though it is not two hundred yards.

I have since received a letter from Mr. Berridge, an extract of which I send you:

On Sunday se'nnight a man of Wyboston, a Nathanael indeed, was so filled with the love of God during morning prayer that he dropped down, and lay as one dead for two hours. He had been so filled with love all the week before that he was often for a time unable to work.

On Sunday night last, as I was speaking in my house, there was a violent outcry. One soul was set at liberty. We sung near an hour, and the Lord released three more out of captivity.

On Monday se'nnight Mr. Hicks accompanied me to Meldreth. On the way we called at a farmer's house. After dinner I went into his yard, and, seeing near a hundred and fifty people, I called for a table, and preached, for the first time, in the open air. Two persons were seized with strong convictions, fell down, and cried out most bitterly. We then went to Meldreth, where I preached in a field to about four thousand people. In the morning, at five, Mr. Hicks preached in the same field to about a thousand. And now the presence of the Lord was wonderfully among us. There was abundance of weeping and strong crying, and, I trust, beside many that were slightly wounded, near thirty received true heart-felt conviction. At ten we returned and called again at the farmer's house. Seeing about a dozen people in the brewhouse, I spoke a few words. Immediately the farmer's daughter dropped down in strong convictions. Another also was miserably torn by Satan, but set at liberty before I had done prayer. At four I preached in my own house, and God gave the Spirit of adoption to another mourner.

On Monday last I went to Shelford, four miles from Cambridge, near twenty from Everton. The journey made me quite ill, being so weary with riding that I was obliged to walk part of the way. When I came thither a table was set for me on the Common, and, to my great surprise, I found near ten thousand people round it, among whom were many gownsmen from Cambridge. I was hardly able to stand on my feet, and extremely hoarse with a cold. When I lifted up my foot to get on the table, a horrible dread overwhelmed me; but the moment I was fixed thereon I seemed as unconcerned as a statue. I gave out my text (Gal. iii. 10, 11), and made a pause, to think of something pretty to set off with; but the Lord so confounded me (as indeed it was meet, for I was seeking not His glory, but my own), that I was in a perfect labyrinth; and found, if I did not begin immediately, I must go down without speaking. So I broke out with the first word that occurred, not knowing whether I should be able to add any more. Then the Lord opened my mouth, enabling me to speak near an hour, without any kind of perplexity; and so loud that every one might hear. The audience behaved with great decency. When sermon was over, I found -myself so cool and easy, so cheerful in spirit, and wonderfully strengthened in body, I went into a house, and spoke again near an hour to about two hundred people. In the morning I preached again to about a thousand. Mr. Hicks engaged to preach in Orwell Field on Tuesday evening. I gave notice that I designed to preach on Monday at Grantchester, a mile from Cambridge.

Mr. Hicks and I have agreed to go into Hertfordshire; afterwards to separate, and go round the neighbourhood, preaching in the fields, wherever a door is opened, three or four days in every week. Believe me

Your affectionate servant,

JOHN BERRIDGE.

JUNE 1759, Through Northumbria

JUNE I, Fri.-The rain began when we took horse, and attended us all the way to Berwick. When I was tolerably dry I sent to the mayor, who readily granted the use of the town hall. Here I preached about seven to a drowsy congregation on ' Why will ye die, O house of Israel' And again, a little after seven in the morning, on ' I would thou wert either cold or hot.' In the evening I preached in the court-house at Alnwick to a people quite of another spirit, having the power as well as the form of godliness, and panting after the whole image of God.

Sun. 3 (being Whit Sunday).-I preached at eight in the courthouse; but it was much crowded, and exceeding hot. So in the afternoon I went to the Cross, and cried aloud, in the name of my Master,' If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink.',

Mon. 4.-I preached in Plessey Square at one to an earnest, loving congregation, and inquired of one of them, James Gillies, concerning a report I had heard the day before. He informed me that when he was a little child he had just learned his Christ-cross row[That is to say, the alphabet, the beginning of which was marked in the old horn-book with a cross. They never drew a look or motion of intelligence From infant-conning of the Christ-cross Row.WORDSWORTH, Excursion, viii].; but this he soon forgot. Between twenty and thirty he was deeply convinced of sin, at which time, feeling a strong persuasion he could read, he went into a neighbour's house, took up a Bible, and read distinctly, which he has done ever since.

After preaching, I rode on to Newcastle. Certainly, if I did not believe there was another world, I should spend all my summers here, as I know no place in Great Britain comparable to it for pleasantness. But I seek another country, and therefore am content to be a wanderer upon earth.

Wed. 6.-I preached at Gateshead Fell to a numerous congregation. In earnestness the colliers of Gateshead utterly shame the colliers of Kingswood, scarce thirty of whom think it worth while to hear the word of God on a week-day, not even when I preach; and here the house will scarce contain the week-day congregation of a local preacher.

Sat. 9.-I rode to Sunderland, and preached in the shell of their house.[ This was the fourth meeting-house of the Methodists in Sunderland. Previously they had worshipped in a small room at the top of Swine Alley; then in a house in Ettrick's Garth (where, for the first time, they had space for a pulpit). The third place was a barn in Society Lane. Sans Street Chapel was built in 1793, and was opened by Dr. Coke. See Tyerman, vol. ii. p. 329; Meth. Rec. March 13, 1902; and W.M. Mag. (article on ' Sunderland Methodism in the Eighteenth Century1) 1910, p.165.] The people of this town likewise are hungry for the word, and receive it with all gladness.

Sun. 10.-The house contained us at eight, but at one I was obliged to stand in the great street and declare to an attentive multitude,' Ye must be born again.' In the evening I preached to some thousands at Newcastle, near the Keelmen's Hospital; if haply God might bring back some of them who ran well many years ago.

Wed. 13.-After preaching at the Fell, I rode to Chester-le-Street. The congregation was deeply serious, both in the evening and at five in the morning. Thence we crossed the country to Newlands, where I was met by poor John Brown,[ For his conversion see above, vol. iii. p. 53 His family found fault with him for neglecting his farm. ] who has refrained from preaching till he is fallen into deep despair. I preached on ' I will heal their backsliding'; but the word did not reach his heart.

I never saw near so large a congregation at Sheephill as we had at six in the evening. What is wanting in this whole country Only more laborers.[ On Friday the I5th he preached at Gateshead]

Sat. 16.-I rode to Widdrington, and preached at one to a congregation gathered from all parts. The court-house at Alnwick was pretty well filled in the evening; and in the morning, Sunday the i/th, we had a sound, useful sermon at church, and a serious, well-behaved congregation. I preached in the market-place about five, and I trust God applied the word, ' Ye must be born again.'

Mon. 18.-Having an uneasy horse, I was tired enough when we came into Morpeth. But, after resting a while, I was strengthened to preach ' Christ crucified' in the market-place, to such a congregation as was never seen there before; and a solemn awe seemed to sit on every face, officers and gentlemen, as well as common people. After preaching at Plessey in the evening, I rode back to Newcastle.

Wed. 20.-I endeavoured to compose the little differences which had much hurt the poor people at Gateshead Fell. Oh what zeal, what prudence and patience, are requisite to bear the manners of an untoward people, and to train them up in Christian discipline till they come to the full stature of Christ![ On June 21 he wrote the Preface to Hopkins's Exposition of the Ten Commandments-a fine example of Wesley's skill (Works, vol. xiv. p. 240; Green's Bibliography, No. 193).]

Thur. 21.-I preached at Nafferton [Seven and a half miles north-east of Hexham] at one. As I was riding thence one stopped me on the road and said, ' Sir, do not you remember, when you was at Prudhoe two years since, you breakfasted at Thomas Newton's I am his sister. You looked upon me as you was going out, and said, " Be in earnest." I knew not then what earnestness meant, nor had any thought about it; but the words sunk into my heart, so that I could never rest any more till I sought and found Christ.'

Fri. 22.-I rode to Saltwick and preached to my old congregation of colliers on ' Why will ye die, O house of Israel' After preaching, a servant of Mr. -----came and

said, ' Sir, my master discharges you from preaching any more on his ground, not out of any disrespect to you; but he will stand by the Church.' ' Simple Master Shallow!' as Shakespeare has it.[ See W.H.S. vol. v. p. 116. ] ' Wise master Rector, his counsellor.'

Sat. 23.-I spoke to each of the society in Sunderland. Most of the robbers, commonly called smugglers, have left us; but more than twice the number of honest people are already come in their place. And if none had come, yet should I not dare to keep those who steal either from the King or subject.

Sun. 24.-I preached in the street at eight, about one at South Shields, and at five in North Shields. The greatest part of them seemed to hear as for their lives. So are these lions also become lambs. Oh for zealous, active, faithful laborers! How white are the fields unto the harvest!

On Monday and Tuesday evening[On Tuesday the 26th he also preached at Gateshead. ] I preached abroad, near the Keelmen's Hospital, to twice the people we should have had at the house. What marvel the devil does not love fieldpreaching! Neither do I: I love a commodious room, a soft cushion, a handsome pulpit. But where is my zeal, if I do not trample all these underfoot in order to save one more soul

Thur. 28.-We had the general meeting of the stewards, by whom I found the societies in this circuit still contain about eighteen hundred members. I hope not many of these will be choked by the thorns.

Fri. 29.-About eleven I set out for Swalwell,[ See Meth. Rec. Winter No., 1904, p. 37, for picture of the Presbyterian Meeting here, built in 1750, and lent to Wesley when he visited the town It is said to be one of the few buildings in England not restored in which Wesley is known to have preached.] in a fair, mild morning; but in half an hour the rain poured down, so that in a few minutes I was wet from head to foot; and when I came thither, where to preach I knew not, for the house would not contain a third of the people. Just then the Dissenting minister sent to offer me the use of his meetinghouse.[ See Rev. R. Butterworth's article on the Dissenters (W.H.S. vol. viii. pp. 25-29).] I went thither without delay. There was a large congregation, and a blessing in the midst of them.

Sat. 30.-I preached in Winlaton Mill at noon. The sun was very hot, and shone full upon my head; but the wind was very high and very cold, so that the one tempered the other while I was declaring the grace of God to a well-meaning multitude, who know little as yet, but are willing to know ' the truth as it is in Jesus.' I preached at Sheephill in the evening, and returned to Newcastle as fresh as I was in the morning.

JULY 1,[ On this date he wrote to an unnamed friend (Works, vol. xii. p. 230).] Sun.-Between eight and nine I preached to a quiet multitude in Gateshead. At two I preached in the Fell, to the largest congregation which had ever been seen there; and in the evening, near the Keelmen's Hospital, to full as many as my voice would reach. It was a season of love; and God caused the mountains to flow down at His presence.

While the society was gathering I went to a young woman who was, some days since, suddenly struck with what they called madness; and so it was, but a diabolical madness, as plainly appeared from numerous circumstances. However, after we had been at prayer she fell asleep, and never raged or blasphemed after.

Mon. 2.-I rode to Durham, and went at one to the meadow by the river-side, where I preached two years ago.[ See above, p. 222.] The congregation was now larger by one-half; but the sun was so scorching hot upon my head that I was scarce able to speak. I paused a little, and desired God would provide us a covering, if it was for His glory. In a moment it was done: a cloud covered the sun, which troubled us no more. Ought voluntary humility to conceal these palpable proofs that God still heareth the prayer

Between two and three we took horse. The sun now shone again, and with so intense a heat that I know not how we could have endured it but that the wind came in our face, by the help of which we got pretty well to Hartlepool. I suppose we had all the town with us in the evening, either in the street or the adjoining houses. And God was pleased to touch the hearts of many, even among this dull, heavy, sleepy people.

JULY 1759, Original Sin

Tues. 3.-I wrote to Dr. Taylor as follows [This letter appears in Works, vol. ix. p. 465.]:

HARTLEPOOL, July 3, 1759.

REV. SIR,

I esteem you as a person of uncommon sense and learning; but your doctrine I cannot esteem. And some time since I believed it my duty to speak my sentiments at large concerning your doctrine of Original Sin.[ Wesley's treatise on Original Sin has always been regarded as the ablest refutation of the Socinian errors respecting original sin. The controversy was at no time bitter. The respectful challenge of this letter was not accepted, but before his death Taylor wrote A Reply to the Rev. John Wesley's Remarks on the Scripture Doctrine of Original Sin. This pamphlet was published posthumously, and a copy is in the library of the Wesleyan Book-Room. Dr. Taylor died in 1761. Writing to Sir Harry Trelawney, Wesley says: ' I have reason to believe he was convinced of his mistake before he died, but to acknowledge this publicly was too hard a task for him.' See Tyerman's Life, vol. ii. p. 294; Moore's Life, vol. ii. p. 408; Works, vol. xiii. p. 146; Green's Wesley Bibliography, No. 182; W.H.S. vol. viii. p. 53.] When Mr. Newton,[ Rev. John Newton, afterwards of Olney; cf. above, p. 256; below, p. 373.] of Liverpool, mentioned this, and asked whether you designed to answer, you said you thought not; for it would only be a personal controversy between John Wesley and John Taylor. How gladly, if I durst, would I accept of this discharge from so unequal a contest! For I am thoroughly sensible, humanly speaking, it is formica contra leonem.[ ' An ant opposed to a hon.' Probably a saying in proverbial use. (W. ff. S. vol. v. p. 48.)] How gladly were it indeed no other than a personal controversy! But certainly it is not: it is a controversy de re, if ever there was one in the world. Indeed, concerning a thing of the highest importance; nay, all the things that concern our eternal peace. It is Christianity or Heathenism! For take away the scriptural doctrine of redemption, or justification, and that of the new birth, the beginning of sanctification; or, which amounts to the same, explain them as you do, suitably to your doctrine of Original Sin; and what is Christianity better than Heathenism Wherein (save in rectifying some of our notions) has the religion of St. Paul any pre-eminence over that of Socrates or Epictetus

This is therefore, to my apprehension, the least a personal controversy of any in the world. Your person and mine are out of the question. The point is, Are those things that have been believed for many ages throughout the Christian world real solid truths, or monkish dreams and vain imaginations

But farther, it is certain between you and me there need be no personal controversy at all. For we may agree to leave each other's person and character absolutely untouched, while we sum up and answer the several arguments advanced, as plainly and closely as we can.

Either I or you mistake the whole of Christianity from the beginning to the end. Either my scheme or yours is as contrary to the scriptural as the Koran is. Is it mine, or yours Yours has gone through all England, and made numerous converts. I attack it from end to end; let all England judge whether it can be defended or not.

Earnestly praying that God may give you and me a right understanding in all things, I am, reverend sir,

Your servant for Christ's sake,

JOHN WESLEY.

Wed. 4.-Mr. Joseph Jones[For whom see Atmore's Memorial, p. 225.] preached at five, I at eight. Toward the close of the sermon a queer, dirty, clumsy man, I suppose a country wit, took a great deal of pains to disturb the congregation. When I had done, fearing he might hurt those who were gathered about him, I desired two or three of our brethren to go to him, one after the other, and not say much themselves, but let him talk till he was weary. They did so, but without effect, as his fund of ribaldry seemed inexhaustible. William Alwood [He entered the itinerancy in 1756, and left it in 1764. See above, p. 282, and Everett's Methodism in Sheffield, pp. 107, 120.] then tried another way. He got into the circle close to him, and, listening awhile, said, ' That is pretty; pray say it over again." ' What! are you deaf' ' No; but for the entertainment of the people. Come; we are all attention.' After repeating this twice or thrice, the wag could not stand it; but, with two or three curses, walked clear off.

In the evening I began near Stockton market-place as usual. I had hardly finished the hymn when I observed the people in great confusion, which was occasioned by a lieutenant of a manof-war, who had chosen that time to bring his press-gang, and ordered them to take Joseph Jones and William Alwood. Joseph Jones telling him,' Sir, I belong to Mr. Wesley,' after a few words he let him go, as he did likewise William Alwood after a few hours, understanding he was a licensed preacher. He likewise seized upon a young man of the town; but the women rescued him by main strength. They also broke the lieutenant's head, and so stoned both him and his men that they ran away with all speed.

JULY 1759, In the North Riding

Fri. 6.-I rode on to Yarm.[ For three years service here was conducted in a hay-loft. A chapel was then substituted (1763), and Yarm, which has had a momentous place in eighteenth and nineteenth century Methodism, became the head of a circuit, comprising Stockton, Hartlepool, Guisborough, Stokesley, Whitby, Thirsk, Ripon, Northallerton, and thirty other places. In the Missionary Report for 1912 the figures for the circuits covered by these names show at least 200 places. Wesley's home in Yarm was always with Mr. Merryweather (see letters to him in Works, vol. xii. pp. 269-271-seven letters that throw light on Yarm and

its Methodism and on Wesley's methods and principles). See 'John Wesley in

the North Riding,' Wesley Studies, pp. 220-6. An old Methodist who lived in the town, and who well remembered Wesley, thus describes his appearance-' his cassock, his black silk stockings, his large silver buckles, and his lumbering old carriage, with a bookcase inside it.' She and another little girl, while playing, ran the pole of the carriage through Mr. Merryweather's window, for which they received a scolding. She further stated that on one occasion, when Mr. Merryweather's servant entered Wesley's room, she found his coachman rolling himself vigorously up and down the feather-bed, because Wesley would not sleep on it until it was made as hard as possible.] The heat of the day was hardly to be borne; but in the evening it was extremely pleasant, and the whole congregation were deeply serious.

Sat. 7.-At one I was at Hutton Rudby,[ An ancient village, eight miles from Osmotherley. The houses stand far back from a tree-shaded green. Cardinal Wolsey was once rector of the parish, and a monastery stood in the meadows by the river. In the days of Wesley the place was the centre of a great linen trade, carried on in the cottages on hand-looms. When two or three webs were finished they were placed on each side of a pony's back and carried to Newcastle.] six miles south of Yarm, where they have just built a preaching-house, but it would not contain a fourth of the congregation; and what place to choose I could not tell, no shade being at hand and the sun shining near as hot as it used to do in Georgia. Finding no other way, I stood in the street, near an house, which sheltered some of the people; the rest seemed not to know whether it was hot or cold, God so plenteously refreshed their souls. Much the same congregation was at Potto in the evening, and with the same blessing.

Having preached considerably longer, both at noon and night, than I am accustomed to do, I was so hoarse in the morning, Sunday the 8th, that I knew not what I should do to go through the work of the day. However, I began it by preaching on the Green at Stokesley to a multitude of people. Thence I rode to Guisborough, at the foot of the mountains. The sun would have been insupportable but that we had a strong wind full in our face for the greatest part of the day. At twelve we had a lovely congregation in a meadow near the town, who drank in every word that was spoken, as the thirsty earth the showers. The sixteen miles, so called, from hence to Robin Hood's Bay, took us between five and six hours' riding, so that when I came thither I was quite exhausted. However, I went to the quay, where a large congregation was waiting; and all behaved well but an honest tar, who was much disturbed at my saying, ' No man is delivered from the fear of death but he that fears God.'