Oct 1761

Bristol and Kingswood

Here likewise I had the satisfaction to observe a considerable increase of the work of God. The congregations were exceeding large, and the people hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and every day afforded us fresh instances of persons convinced of sin or converted to God. So that it seems God was pleased to pour out His Spirit this year on every part both of England and Ireland, perhaps in a manner we have never seen before, certainly not for twenty years. Oh what pity that so many, even of the children of God, did not know the day of their visitation!

OCT. 4, Sun.-I preached at Kingswood morning and afternoon, but not, as I designed, under the sycamore-tree, because of the rain. In the ensuing week I visited the societies in Somersetshire.

Sun. 11.-I observed God is reviving His work in Kingswood, the society, which had much decreased, being now increased again to near three hundred members, many of whom are now athirst for full redemption, which for some years they had almost forgot.

Tues. 13.-I preached at Newgate, at Kingswood in the afternoon, and in the evening at North Common. Here a people are sprung up, as it were, out of the earth, most of them employed in the neighboring brass-works. We took a view of these the next day, and one thing I learned here, the propriety of that expression, Rev. i. 15, 'His feet were as fine brass, burning in a furnace.' The brightness of this cannot easily be conceived; I have seen nothing like it but clear white lightning.

Mon. 19.-I desired all those to meet me who believed they were saved from sin. There were seventeen or eighteen. I examined them severally as exactly as I could, and I could not find anything in their tempers (supposing they spoke true) any way contrary to their profession.

Wed. 21.-I was desired by the condemned prisoners to give them one sermon more.1 And on Thursday Patrick Ward,[ A poacher hanged for murdftr; the other was John Cope, hanged for returning from transportation (Latimer's Bristol).] who was to die on that day, sent to request I would administer the sacrament to him. He was one-and-twenty years of age, and had scarce ever had a serious thought till he shot the man who went to take away his gun. From that instant he felt a turn within, and never swore an oath more. His whole behaviour in prison was serious and composed. He read, prayed, and wept much; especially after one of his fellow prisoners had found peace with God. His hope gradually increased till this day, and was much strengthened at the Lord's Supper; but still he complained,' I am not afraid, but I am not desirous, to die. I do not find that warmth in my heart. I am not sure my sins are forgiven.' He went into the cart, about twelve, in calmness, but mixed with sadness; but in a quarter of an hour, while he was wrestling with God in prayer (not seeming to know that any one was near him), ' the Holy Ghost,' said he, ' came upon me, and I knew that Christ was mine.' From that moment his whole deportment breathed a peace and joy beyond all utterance, till, after having spent about ten minutes in private prayer, he gave the sign.[ On Oct. 22 Wesley preached at Pensford, and on the 26th at Hambrook, on Sunday, Nov. I, at West Street, on the 3rd at the Foundery, on the 6th at West Street, on the 7th at Wapping, and on the gth at West Street-at this time a specially important centre.]

Sun. 25.-I took a comfortable leave of Kingswood, leaving both the society and school in a flourishing state; and the next morning, of Bristol, leaving the society larger than it had been for many years. Now, let zeal as well as 'brotherly love continue,' and it will not decrease any more. Having travelled slowly through the intermediate societies, on Saturday the 31st I came to London.

Nov. I, Sun.-I found the same spirit which I left here, both in the morning and evening service.

Mon. 2.-At five I began a course of sermons on Christian Perfection[These, doubtless, prepared the way for the publication of Farther Thoughts on Christian Perfection. See below, Dec. 21.]; at seven \ began meeting the classes.

Tues. 10.-I found the society at Deptford more alive than ever, a sure consequence of which is their increasing in number.[ On Nov. ii he preached at the Foundery. His appointment on the I3th is given as ' London.' On the I4th he preached at Snowsfields as well as Grosvenor Market.]

Thur. 12.-I rode to Brentford. Here likewise God is at work, and sinners are converted to Him.

Sat. 14.-I spent an hour with a little company near Grosvenor Square. For many years this has been the darkest, driest spot of all in or near London; but God has now watered the barren wilderness, and it is become a fruitful field.

Mon. 16.-I retired to Lewisham,[ To Mr. Blackweh s.] having many things to write.

Fri. 20.-I spent an hour at St. George's Hospital. The behaviour of two or three patients there had done unspeakable good. Deep prejudice was torn up by the roots, and much goodwill to the truth had succeeded it. Oh what may not a single believer do, who seeks nothing but the glory of God[ On Nov. 15 he preached at some unnamed place in London; on the i6th at Lewisham, and again on the 22nd.]

Mon. 23.-I went to Canterbury. The congregations were larger than I ever remember, and many found a deeper work of God in their hearts than ever they had known before.

Thur. 26.- I was desired to read part of Bishop Pontoppidan's Natural History oj Norway.[ Eric Pontoppidan, a Dane, was bishop of Bergen, in Norway (1698-1764). His Natural History of Norway took a wide range, from the temperature of the air to the manners of living of the inhabitants. A translation from the Danish, with plates, was published in London, 1755, 2 vols. folio.] I soon found he was a man of sense, yet credulous to an extreme; and therefore I was the less surprised when I came to his craken and sea-serpent.[ See Gentleman's Mag, 1821, p. 55.] Of the animal a mile round, to which a poor whale is no a gudgeon) he gives no proof, or shadow of proof; former (an more than nothing but vague, uncertain hearsays. ' Two sailors,' he says, 'made oath of seeing part of the latter, seven or eight folds of his back. But I did not talk with them myself; so I can lay little stress on their evidence.' They might be weak men; they might be frighted (yea, they were, by their own confession^); or they might be men of no conscience. On any of whii suppositions their testimony is nothing worth.

Sat. 28.-We returned to London.

Sun. 29.-We had a comfortable lovefeast, at which several" declared the blessings they had found lately. We need not be careful by what name to call them, while the thing is beyond dispute. Many have, and many do daily experience an unspeakable change. After being deeply convinced of inbred sin, particularly of pride, anger, self-will, and unbelief, in a moment they feel all faith and love-no pride, no self-will, or anger; and from that moment they have continual fellowship with God, always rejoicing, praying, and giving thanks. Whoever ascribes such a change to the devil, I ascribe it to the Spirit of God. And I say, let whoever feels it wrought, cry to God that it may continue; which it will, if he walks closely with God; otherwise it will not.

Preaching at Deptford, Welling, and Sevenoaks, in my way, on Thursday, DECEMBER 3,1 came to Shoreham. There I read the celebrated Life of St. Katherine of Genoa [See Baring-Gould's Lives of the Saints, Sept. 15. This saint must be distinguished from St. Catharine of Sienna (April 30), a very different person.] Mr. Lesley calls one a devil of a saint; I am sure this was a fool of a saint; that is, if it was not the folly of her historian, who has aggrandized her into a mere idiot. Indeed we seldom find a saint of God's making sainted by the Bishop of Rome. I preached at five to a small, serious company, and the next day returned to London.

Mon. 7.-I rode to Colchester, and had the satisfaction to find many of our brethren much alive to God. After confirming them, as I could, in the ways of God, on Thursday I returned home.[ On Dec. 10 he preached at the Foundery, also on the i6th; on the 2ist he preached at West Street, the Foundery, and Lewisham.]

Sunday the I3th was a comfortable day, wherein several prisoners were set at liberty.

Sat. 19.-I visited many near Oxford Market and Grosvenor Square,[ SeeTelford's Two West End Chapels, pp. 86-8, and Curnock's Hindt Street,] and found God was still enlarging His work. More and more were convinced, converted to God, and built up, day by day; and that notwithstanding the weakness of the instruments by whom God was pleased to work.

Mon. 21.-I retired again to Lewisham, and wrote Farther Thoughts on Christian Perfection.[ See Green's Wesley Bibliography, No. 219. It was published without name of printer in 1763.] Had the cautions given herein been observed, how much scandal had been prevented. And why were they not Because my own familiar friend [Thomas Maxfield, Wesley's convert and one of his first lay assistants, for whom he obtained episcopal ordination from Bishop Barnard of Derry.] was even now forming a party against me.

Fri. 25.-We began, as usual, at four, A few days since, one who lived in known sin, finding heavy conviction, broke away, and ran out she knew not whither. She met one who offered her a shilling a week to come and take care of her child. She went gladly. The woman's husband, hearing her stir between three and four,[ To go to the four o'clock service at the Foundery.] began cursing and swearing bitterly. His wife said, ' I wish thou wouldst go with her, and see if anything will do thee good.' He did so. In the first hymn God broke his heart; and he was in tears all the rest of the service. How soon did God recompense this poor woman for taking the stranger in![ On the 25th he preached at West Street and the Foundery.]

Sat. 26.-I made a particular inquiry into the case of Mary Special, a young woman then in Tottenham Court Road. She said: ' Four years since I found much pain in my breasts, and afterwards hard lumps. Four months ago my left breast broke, and kept running continually. Growing worse and worse, after some time I was recommended to St. George's Hospital. I was let blood many times, and took hemlock thrice a day. But I was no better; the pain and the lumps were the same, and both my breasts were quite hard, and black as soot; when, yesterday se'nnight I went to Mr. Owen's,[ A silk-weaver who resided in New Inn Yard, Shoreditch. See Stevenson's City Road Chapel, p. 578; also pp. 182 and 183.] where there was a meeting for prayer. Mr. Bell [See H. Moore's Life of Wesley, vol. ii. p. 222; Tyerman's Life oj Wesley, vol. ii. p. 433; see also one of Bell's letters in Arm. Mag. 1780, p. 674.] saw me, and asked, " Have you faith to be healed" I said, " Yes." He prayed for me, and in a moment all my pain was gone. But the next day I felt a little pain again; I clapped my hands on my breasts, and cried out, " Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me whole." It was gone; and from that hour I have had no pain, no soreness, no lumps or swelling; but both my breasts were perfectly well, and have been so ever since.'

Now here are plain facts: (i) She was ill; (2) she is well; (3) she became so in a moment. Which of these can with any modesty be denied[ On Dec. 26 he wrote from London to C. Wesley (Works, vol. xii. p. 121) and to Miss Hardy {Works, vol. xii. P. 235)]

Tues. 29.-In order to remove some misunderstandings, I desired all parties concerned to meet me. They did so, all but Thomas Maxfield,[ Maxfield, who headed a division in the London society. See Wesley's letter to his brother, Jan. 5, 1762: ' If Thomas Maxfield continues as he is it is impossible he should long continue with us. But I live in hope of better things. Meantime, festma lente!' (Works, vol. xii. p. 122).] who flatly refused to come. Is this only the first step toward a separation Alas, for the man! Alas, for the people![ Wesley's note: ' These were the words I wrote at the time.']

Thur. 31.-We concluded the year, as usual, with a solemn watch-night. Oh may we conclude our lives in the same manner, blessing and praising God!

1762. JAN. I, Fri.-We had, I believe, pretty near two thousand of the society at Spitalfields in the evening, where Mr. Berridge, Maxfield,[ Was it wise to employ a man who, as he knew, was undermining his influence and authority] and Colley[Rev. Benjamin Colley, of Tollerton, Yorkshire. He united himself to the Methodists in 1761, received Episcopal ordination, and was invited by Wesley to London, where he officiated as a clergyman in Methodist chapels. For a time he was ensnared by Bell and Maxfield, but restored and employed by Wesley at Newcastle-on-Tyne (Atmore's Memorial', see also below, Nov. 8, 1767; Nov. 5, 1768; and Arm. Mag, 1797, p. 408).] assisted me. And we found God was in the midst, while we devoted ourselves to Him in the most solemn and explicit manner.

Jan. 1762

The Everton District

Sat. 2.-I set out for Everton in order to supply Mr. Berridge's church in his absence. In my way I preached at Road Farm,[ Near Biggleswade, on the road going

to Potton.] five-and-forty miles from London. Afterwards, the moon shining bright, we had a pleasant ride to Everton.

Sun, 3.-I read prayers and preached, morning and evening, to a numerous and lively congregation. I found the people in general were more settled than when I was here before, but they were in danger of running from east to west. Instead of thinking, as many then did, that none can possibly have true faith but those that have trances or visions, they were now ready to think that whoever had anything of this kind had no faith.

Mon. 4.-After preaching to a large congregation at Wrestlingworth we rode on to Harston. I never preached a whole sermon by moonlight before. However, it was a solemn season, a season of holy mourning to some, to others of joy unspeakable.

Tues. 5.-I preached in Harston at nine, and about eleven at Whittlesford, three miles farther, to a people just ripe for ' Come unto Me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden.' In the afternoon we set out for Stoke, on the edge of Suffolk.[ And Essex. Here was a Benedictine Priory founded by Edward the Confessor.] As we rode through Haverhill we were saluted with one huzza, the mob of that town having no kindness for Methodists. But all was quiet at Stoke, for Sir Henry Archer [Henry Archer, Kt, mentioned in Wotton Musgrave's Obit,; Henry Archer of Saffron Walden, June II, 1770. Gentleman's Mag. 1770, p. 279; Scots Mag. 1770, p. 385.] will suffer no disturbance there. The congregation came from many miles round, and God was in the midst of them. Their hearty prayers went up on every side, and many felt the answer to them.

Wed. 6.-The largeness of the congregation at five showed they were not forgetful hearers. I preached longer than I am accustomed to do, but still they were not satisfied. Many crowded after me into the dwelling-house. After speaking a few words I went to prayer. A cry began, and soon spread through the whole company, so that my voice was lost. Two seemed to be distressed above all the rest. We continued wrestling with God till one of them had a good hope and the other was ' filled with joy and peace in believing.'

In the afternoon it blew a storm, by the favour of which we came into Haverhill quite unmolested. But, notwithstanding wind and rain, the people crowded so fast into the preachinghouse that I judged it best to begin half an hour before the time, by which means it contained the greater part of them. Although they that could not come in made a little noise, it was a solemn and a happy season.

Thur. 7.-Abundance of them came again at five and drank in every word. Here also many followed me into the house, and hardly knew how to part. At nine I preached at Steeple Bumpstead, three miles from Haverhill, to a considerably larger congregation; and all were serious. Hence we rode for Barkway, four miles from Royston. The preaching-place was exceeding large, yet it was well filled, and the people were wedged in as close as possible. And many of them found that God was there, to their unspeakable comfort.

Hence we rode to Barley, where I preached at one. A middle-aged woman dropped down at my side and cried aloud for mercy. It was not long before God put a new song in her mouth. At six in the evening I preached at Melbourne. Here too God both wounded and healed. I laid hold, after preaching, on a poor backslider, who quickly melted into tears, and determined to return once more to Him from whom she had deeply revolted.

Here I talked at large with one who thinks he is renewed in love. Perhaps he is; but his understanding is so small, his experience so peculiar, and his expressions so uncouth, that I doubt very few will receive his testimony.

Sat. 9.-I rode to Potton. What has God wrought here since I saw this town twenty years ago! I could not then find a living Christian therein, but wild beasts in abundance. Now here are many who know in whom they have believed, and no one gives us an uncivil word! I preached at six to a very numerous and serious congregation. What have we to do to despair of any person or people

Sun. 10.-I preached at six in the morning to nearly the same congregation. I read prayers and preached morning and afternoon at Everton, and gave the sacrament to a large number of communicants. At four we took horse, and reached Grantchester a little before seven. Finding a little company met together, I spent half an hour with them exceedingly comfortably, and, through the blessing of God, I was no more tired when I went to bed than when I arose in the morning.

Mon. 11.-The house was thoroughly filled at five, and that with serious and sensible hearers. I was sorry I had no more time at this place, especially as it was so near Cambridge, from whence many gentlemen used to come when any clergyman preached. But my work was fixed, so I took horse soon after preaching and rode to a village called Bottishamlode, seven miles from Cambridge.[ Wesley seems never to have preached at Cambridge] Here a large congregation was soon assembled, and I had no sooner named my text,' When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both,' than a murmur ran through the whole people, and many of them were in tears. This concern increased as I went on, so that none appeared to be unmoved. One just by me cried with a bitter cry, but in a short time she shouted for joy. So did several others, so that it was not easy to tell whether more were wounded or comforted. Hence we rode to Lakenheath and passed a comfortable night.

Tues. 12.-Just as we set out, the storm, which had been very high all night, brought on impetuous rain. It was a good providence (i) that we had now firm, sandy road, not clay and miry fields, as yesterday; (2) that the wind was behind us, otherwise I believe it would have been impossible to go on. It was often ready to bear away man and beast. However, in the afternoon we came safe to Norwich.

Wed. 13.-We rested from our labor. How can they who never labor taste the sweetness of rest Fri. 15.-I preached at Yarmouth.

Sat. 16.-I transcribed the society at Norwich; but two hundred of them I made no account of, as they met no class. About four hundred remained, half of whom appeared to be in earnest.[ On Jan. 18, he wrote from Norwich to C. Hopper (Works, vol. xii. p. 305); he refers to public affairs ' which look exceedingly dark.' He urges the necessity of establishing good order in the Orphan House. 'Do just as I would do in every instance.... I hereby give it under my hands, I will stand by you with all my might'; and, referring to Thomas Olivers, he says, ' There is good in him, though he is a rough stick of wood.']

Tues. 19.-I rode to Bury [St. Edmunds], and was glad to find a little serious company still. But there cannot be much done here till we preach abroad, or at least in the heart of the town. We are now quite at one end; and people will not come from the other till they have first ' tasted the good word.'

Thur. 21.-I rode to Colchester, and found a quiet, lovin regular society. After spending a day with them, on Saturday the 23rd I cheerfully returned to London.[ On Jan. 25 he wrote to the Rev. S. Furly (see W. M. Mag. 1865, p. 984).]

Wed. 27.-I had a striking proof that God can teach by whom He will teach. A man full of words, but not of understanding, convinced me of what I could never see before, that anima est ex traduce; that all the souls of his posterity, as well as their bodies, were in our first parent.[ On Jan. 30 he wrote to 'Miss J. C. M.' on the direct witness of sins forgiven {Works, vol. xiii. p. 48). On Traducianism see note in W.H.S. vol. v. p. 49. ' The soul is derived from the propagator,' i.e. is not immediately created by God at every birth or conception. ' Creationism denotes one of the three theories of the origin of the human spirit; Traducianism and pre-existence are the two others' (Schaff-Herzog). John Wesley subsequently inserts a lengthy extract from a letter received about Oct. 25, 1763, arguing strongly in favour of Traducianism, in opposition to his own exposition of Heb. xii. 9, which seemed to lean towards Creationism.]

FEB. 5, Fri.-I met at noon, as usual, those who believe they are saved from sin, and warned them of the enthusiasm which was breaking in, by means of two or three weak though good men, who, from a misconstrued text in the Revelation, inferred that they should not die. They received the warning in much love. However, this gave great occasion of triumph to those who sought occasion, so that they rejoiced as though they had found great spoil.

After preaching at Deptford, Welling, and Sevenoaks, on Tuesday and Wednesday I rode on to Sir Thomas I'Anson's, near Tunbridge,[ There are several references in the Journals to New or Little Bounds and the I'Anson family. See Feb. 10, 1762, Feb. 23, 1764, Dec. 14, 1769, Dec. 13, 1774. New Bounds is a seat in the parish of Southborough, and is so called to distinguish it from Old Bounds, in the next parish of Bidborough. The house was built by Lord Chief Baron Bury. Sir Thomas I'Anson and his father, who are buried in the church at Tonbridge, are styled Baronets on the church monument. Wesley's friend, Sir Thomas, was gentleman porter of the Tower of London. He died in 1773. There seems to be some uncertainty as to the identity of the Mr. I'Anson who figures in the Journal, Dec. 14, 1769, and Dec. 13, 1774, also in Charles Wesley's Journal and Letters. It is quite evident (see, for example, C. W., Dec. 3, 1753, J. W., Feb. 21, 1761) that ' Mr. I'Anson' acted as legal adviser to the Wesleys, in conjunction, apparently, with Mr. Lloyd. Blackwell approved Mr. Lloyd as ' security' in Mrs. Charles Wesley's affairs. In the John and Charles Wesley correspondence, Mr. I'Anson, of New Palace Yard, Westminster, figures frequently. The whole subject was exhaustively investigated hy the Rev. H. J. Foster and by Rev. F. F. Bretherton. See the latter's Early Methodism in and around Chester, p 45, and W.H.S. vol. v. pp. 230-7. The conclusion arrived at is that the second Sir Thomas I'Anson and his brother Bryan I'Anson are the two with whom the Wesleys are concerned, and that possibly John I'Anson also came into the circle of their intimacies. See also Met A. Rec. June 16,1904. 1 On Oct. 24, 1789, Wesley wrote from Wallingford to Richard Rodda. ' Some years since we wanted a preaching-place near Coleford, in Somersetshire. A neighboring gentleman, Mr. Salmon, gave us ground to build on, and timber for the house, and desired me to use his house as my own. He is now by wicked men reduced to want. I am informed a master for a poor-house is wanted at Manchester. Pray inquire, and, if it be so, leave no means untried to procuie the place for him.' He gives a number of names, and urges Mr. Rodda to leave no stone unturned. 'Join hands with God, and make a good man live.' If this Mr. Salmon may be identified with a person of the same name at Nantwich, as the Rev. H. J. Foster suggested, an interesting link is discovered between Wesley's early Oxford friendships and his later work Salmon, a member of the Holy Club, is frequently named in the First Diary. Fifty years later Wesley described him as ' one of the loveliest young men I knew.' It is quite probable that Thomas Salmon, whom he buried on Feb. 14, 1762, was a member of the same family. See Works, vol. xii. p. 511; see also below, April 6, 1779.]

and, between six and seven, preached in his

The octagon Chapel, Rotherham (see. P. 474)

large parlour, which opens likewise into the hall. The plain people were all attention. If the seed be watered, surely there will be some fruit.

Sun. 14.-I buried the remains of Thomas Salmon, a good and useful Mon. What was peculiar in his experience was, he did not know when he was justified; but he did know when he was renewed in love, that work being wrought in a most distinct manner. After this he continued about a year in constant love, joy, and peace; then, after an illness of a few days, he cheerfully went to God.

Monday the 15th, and the following days, I spent in transcribing the list of the society. It never came up before to two thousand four hundred: now it contains above two thousand seven hundred members.[ On Feb. 20 he wrote to T. Rankin (Works, vol. xii. p. 320). 'Be exact in observing and enforcing all the rules '.]

Sun, 28.-We had a peculiar blessing at Spitalfields while I was enforcing ' Now is the day of salvation.' Indeed, there is always a blessing when we cut off all delay, and come to God now by simple faith.

MARCH 5, Fri.-I had a long conversation with Joseph Rule, commonly called the White Quaker.[ In early life a waterman on the Thames. He afterwards associated himself with the Society of Friends; wore white, or undyed clothing, and lived in a white cottage. He frequently preached in the streets of London, carrying a small white Bible. See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 165.] He appeared to be a calm, loving, sensible man, and much devoted to God.

Mon. 8.-I retired to Lewisham, to answer Dr. Home's [Now a young man of thirty-two years of age. He subsequently became chaplain to George III, Vice-Chancellor of Oxford, Dean of Canterbury, and, in 1790, Bibhop of Norwich. See Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol. ii. p. 457. As a pamphleteer he supported the views of

Hutchinson as against Sir Isaac Newton. His fame, however, rests exclusively on his Commentary on the Psalms, published in 1776, a work with which Wesley was greatly pleased. His controversy with Home related to a University sermon. See Green's Anti-Methodist Publications, No. 330.] ingenious ' Sermon on Justification by Works.' Oh that I might dispute with no man! But if I must dispute, let it be with men of sense.

Thur. 11.-I buried the remains of Mary Ramsey,[ See Stevenson's City Roaa Chapel, p. 35 (Single Women Band, 12).] a true daughter of affliction, worn out by a cancer in her breast, with a variety of other disorders. To these was added, for a time, great darkness of mind, the body pressing down the soul. Yet she did not murmur or repine, much less charge God foolishly. It was not long before He restored the light of His countenance, and shortly after she fell asleep.

Fri. 12.-The National Fast was observed all over London with great solemnity. Surely God is well pleased even with this acknowledgement that He governs the world; and even the outward humiliation of a nation may be rewarded with outward blessings.

Mon. 15.-I left London, though not without regret, and went slowly through the societies to Bristol.

Sat. 27.-I heard a large account of the children near Lawford's Gate, which has made so much noise here.[ H. Durbin of Bristol wrote a posthumous account of these, the children of Mr. Giles, the carrier at the Lamb Inn in West Street. He believed it to be a case of demoniacal possession.] The facts are too glaring to be denied; but how are they to be accounted for By natural or supernatural agency Contend who list about this.

Mon. 29.-I came to the New Passage a little before nine. The rain and wind increased much while we were on the water; however, we were safe on shore at ten. I preached about twelve in the new room at Chepstow. One of the congregation was a neighboring clergyman, who lived in the same staircase with me at Christ Church, and was then far more serious than me. Blessed be God, who has looked upon me at last! Now let me redeem the time!

In the afternoon we had such a storm of hail as I scarce ever saw in my life. The roads likewise were so extremely bad that we did not reach Hereford till past eight. Having been well battered both by hail, rain, and wind, I got to bed as soon as I could, but was waked many times by the clattering of the curtains. In the morning I found the casement wide open; but I was never the worse. 1 took horse at six, with William Crane and Francis Walker. The wind was piercing cold, and we had many showers of snow and rain; but the worst was, part of the road was scarce passable; so that at Church Stretton one of our horses lay down and would go no farther. However, William Crane and I pushed on, and before seven reached Shrewsbury.

A large company quickly gathered together. Many of them were wild enough, but the far greater part were calm and attentive, and came again at five in the morning.

Wed. 31.-Having been invited to preach at Wem, Mrs. Glynne [See Mrs. Glynne's reply to Lord Hereford respecting his treatment ot Thomas Olivers and the Methodists (E.M.P. vol. ii. pp. 68-71, reprinted as tVeslejfs Veterans). 'Mrs. Glynne of Shrewsbury, whose love to the children of God does not grow cold' (Moore's Life oj Mrs. Fletcher, p. 155). She was ' cousin' to Lord Hereford. See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 217; letter of Fletcher to Mrs. Glynne in Arm. Mag. 1795, p. 150.] desired she might take me thither in a post-chaise; but in little more than an hour we were fast enough. However, the horses pulled till the traces broke. I should then have walked on had I been alone, though the mud was deep, and the snow drove impetuously; but I could not leave my friend, so I waited patiently till the man had made shift to mend the traces; and the horses pulled a main; so that with much ado, not long after the time appointed, I came to Wem.

I came; but the person who invited me was gone-gone out of town at four in the morning, and I could find no one who seemed either to expect or desire my company. I inquired after the place where Mr. Mather preached; but it was filled with hemp. It remained only to go into the market-house; but neither any man, woman, nor child cared to follow us; the north wind roared so loud on every side, and poured in from every quarter. However, before I had done singing, two or three crept in, and, after them, two or three hundred; and the power of God was so present among them that I believe many forgot the storm.

The wind grew still higher in the afternoon, so that it was difficult to sit our horses; and it blew full in our face, but could not prevent our reaching Chester in the evening. Though the warning was short, the room was full; and full of serious, earnest hearers, many of whom expressed a longing desire of the whole salvation of God. Here I rested on Thursday.

APRIL 2, Fri.-I rode to Parkgate and found several ships, but the wind was contrary. I preached at five in the small house they have just built,[ Probably the dismantled chapel, now devoted to outhouse purposes, on the hill between the old town of Neston and the once prosperous packet-station of Parkgate (F. F. Bretherton). ] and the hearers were remarkably serious. I gave notice of preaching at five in the morning; but at half-hour after four one brought us word that the wind was come fair and Captain Jordan [Captain of the Nonpareil (see above, p. 402). Wesley's companions in the

journey were William Crane and Francis Walker. In W.H.S. vol. v. p. 76, there is an interesting account of the vessels in which Wesley sailed to Ireland.] would sail in less than an hour. We were soon in the ship, wherein we found about threescore passengers. The sun shone bright, the wind was moderate, the sea smooth, and we wanted nothing but room to stir ourselves-the cabin being filled with hops, so that we could not get into it but by climbing over them on our hands and knees. In the afternoon we were abreast of Holyhead. But the scene was quickly changed; the wind rose higher and higher, and by seven o'clock blew a storm.

April 1762

Death of William Grimshaw

The sea broke over us continually, and sometimes covered the ship, which both pitched and rolled in an uncommon manner; so I was informed, for, being a little sick, I lay down at six and slept, with little intermission, till near six in the morning. We were then near Dublin Bay, where we went into a boat, which carried us to Dunleary.[ Now Kingstown. For this visit to Dublin (April 4 to 14) see Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. pp, 155-6.] There we met with a chaise just ready, in which we went to Dublin.

I found much liberty of spirit in the evening while I was enforcing ' Now is the day of salvation.' The congregation was uncommonly large in the morning, and seemed to be much alive. Many children, I find, are ' brought to the birth.' And shall there not be strength to bring forth

It was at this time that Mr. Grimshaw [Vincent Perronet, vicar of Shoreham, John Fletcher, vicar of Madeley, and William Grimshaw, incumbent of Haworth, were Wesley's closest friends among the clergy of the English Church. In activity, ardour, and intrepidity Grimshaw was chief. Wesley, writing of him to Blackwell, says: ' A few such as him would make a nation tremble; he carries fire wherever he goes' (Works, vol. xii. p. 190)-. The relation of Grimshaw to Wesley was so close that he built a little chapel at Haworth for the society and took charge of the ' round' in which his parish church was situated. He became practically what is now called ' the superintendent minister of the circuit.' In a letter to Jonathan Maskew Wesley mentions ' Mr. Grimshaw's circuit' ( Works, vol. xii. p. 255). In the deed of the Bolton preaching house ' a clause was inserted,' says Wesley, ' where Mr. Grimshaw, my brother, and I were empowered to appoint the preachers therein' (see above, p. 32; see also the trust-deeds of Market Street Lane, Manchester, in the Large Minutes, 1763) The appointment of preachers was vested in 'John Wesley... after his decease the trustees... shall permit William Grimshaw, clerk, and such other persons as he shall appoint, and no others, to have and enjoy the said premises for the purposes aforesaid.' It was not until after the death of the last survivor of these three that the power of appointing ministers and " preachers under this trust was to be exercised by the ' yearly conference of the people called Methodists." See the Octavo Minutes, vol. i. pp. 604, 606, 608, 610, in the column of Large Minutes headed 1763.] fell asleep. He was born September 3, 1708, at Brindle, six miles south of Preston, in Lancashire, and educated at the schools of Blackburn and Heskin, in the same county. Even then the thoughts of death and judgement made some impression upon him. At eighteen he was admitted at Christ's College, in Cambridge. Here bad example so carried him away that for more than two years he seemed utterly to have lost all sense of seriousness, which did not revive till the day he was ordained deacon, in the year 1731. On that day he was much affected with the sense of the importance of the ministerial office, and this was increased by his conversing with some at Rochdale, who met once a week to read and sing and pray. But on his removal to Todmorden soon after he quite dropped his pious acquaintance, conformed to the world, followed all its diversions, and contented himself with ' doing his duty ' on Sundays.

But about the year 1734 he began to think seriously again. He left off all his diversions, he began to catechize the young people, to preach the absolute necessity of a devout life, and to visit his people, not in order to be merry with them as before, but to press them to seek the salvation of their souls.

At this period also he began himself to pray in secret four times a day, and the God of all grace, who prepared his heart to pray, soon gave the answer to his prayer. Not, indeed, as he expected; not in joy or peace, but by bringing upon him very strong and painful convictions of his own guilt and helplessness and misery, by discovering to him what he did not suspect before, that his heart was deceitful and desperately wicked; and, what was more afflicting still, that all his duties and labors could not procure him pardon or gain him a title to eternal life. In this trouble he continued more than three years, not acquainting any one with the distress he suffered, till one day (in 1742), being in the utmost agony of mind, there was clearly represented to him Jesus Christ pleading for him with God the Father and gaining a free pardon for him. In that moment all his fears vanished away, and he was filled with joy unspeakable. ' I was now,' says he, ' willing to renounce myself and to embrace Christ for my all in all. Oh what light and comfort did I enjoy in my own soul, and what a taste of the pardoning love of God!'

All this time he was an entire stranger to the people called Methodists, whom afterwards he thought it his duty to countenance, and to labor with them in his neighborhood. He was an entire stranger also to all their writings till he came to Haworth, May 26 of this year. And the good effects of his preaching soon became visible. Many of his flock were brought into deep concern for salvation, were in a little time after filled with peace and joy through believing, and (as in ancient times) the whole congregation have been often seen in tears on aqcount of their provocations against God, and under a sense of His goodness in yet sparing them.

His lively manner of representing the truths of God could not fail of being much talked of and bringing many hundreds out of curiosity to Haworth church, who received so much benefit by what they heard that, when the novelty was long over, the church continued to be full of people, many of whom came from far, and this for twenty years together.

Mr. Grimshaw was now too happy himself in the knowledge of Christ to rest satisfied without taking every method he thought likely to spread the knowledge of his God and Saviour. And as the very indigent constantly made their want of better clothes to appear in an excuse for not going to church in the daytime, he contrived, for them chiefly, a lecture on Sunday evenings, though he had preached twice in the day before. God was pleased to give great success to these attempts, which animated him still more to spend and be spent for Christ. So the next year he began a method, which was continued by him for ever after, of preaching in each of the four hamlets he had under his care three times every month. By this means the old and infirm who could not attend the church had the truth of God brought to their houses, and many who were so profane as to make the distance fiom the house of God a reason for scarce ever coming to it were allured to hear. By this time the great labor with which he instructed his own people, the holiness of his conversation, and the benefit which very many from the neighboring parishes had obtained by attending his ministry, concurred to bring upon him many earnest entreaties to come to their houses, who lived in neighboring parishes, and expound the word of God to souls as ignorant as they had been themselves. This request he did not dare to refuse, so that, while he provided abundantly for his own flock, he annually found opportunity of preaching near three hundred times to congregations in other parts.

And for a course of fifteen years or upwards he used to preach every week fifteen, twenty, and sometimes thirty times, besides visiting the sick and other occasional duties of his function. It is not easy to ascribe such unwearied diligence, chiefly among the poor, to any motive but the real one. He thought he would never keep silence while he could speak to the honour of that God who had done so much for his soul. And while he saw sinners perishing for lack of knowledge, and no one breaking to them the bread of life, he was constrained, notwithstanding the reluctance he felt within, to give up his name to still greater reproach, as well as all his time and strength, to the work of the

ministry.

During this intense application to what was the delight of his heart, God was exceeding favourable to him. In sixteen years he was only once suspended from his labor by sickness; though he dared all weathers upon the bleak mountains, and used his body with less compassion than a merciful man would use his beast. His soul at various times enjoyed large manifestations of God's love, and he drank deep into His Spirit. His cup ran over; and at some seasons his faith was so strong, and his hope so abundant, that higher degrees of spiritual delight would have overpowered his mortal frame.

In this manner Mr. Grimshaw employed all his powers and talents, even to his last illness; and his labors were not in vain in the Lord. He saw an effectual change take place in many of his flock; and a restraint from the commission of sin brought upon the parish in general. He saw the name of Jesus exalted, and many souls happy in the knowledge of Him, and walking as became the gospel. Happy he was himself, in being kept by the power of God, unblameable in his conversation; happy in being beloved, in several of the last years of his life, by every one in his parish; who, whether they would be persuaded by him to forsake the evil of their ways or no, had no doubt that Mr. Grimshaw was their cordial friend. Hence at his departure a general concern was visible through his parish; hence his body was interred with what is more ennobling than all the pomp of a royal funeral, for he was followed to the grave by a great multitude, with affectionate sighs and many tears, who cannot still hear his much loved name without weeping for the guide of their souls, to whom each of them was dear as children to their father.

His behavior throughout his last sickness was of a piece with the last twenty years of his life. From the very first attack of his fever, he welcomed its approach. His intimate knowledge of Christ abolished all the reluctance nature feels to a dissolution; and, triumphing in Him who is the resurrection and the life, he departed, April the 7th, in the fifty-fifth year of his age, and the twenty-first of his eminent usefulness.[ Although this account is inserted under 1762, Grimshaw did not die until 1763, as Wesley's 'fifty-fifth' shows. Until Sept. 3, 1762, Grimshaw would only be in his fifty-fourth year. For a clear and decisive statement of all the facts which throw light upon this disputed date see W.H.S. vol. v. pp. 59, 6o. In Mr. J. G. Wright's collection of old class-tickets he noted one with the name of the member in Grimshaw's handwriting. At the back was a written memorandum, ' W. Grimshaw, died April 7, 1761' (.W.H.S. vol. v. p. 96).]

It may not be unacceptable to subjoin here one of his plain, rough letters to the society in London:

HAWORTH, January 9, 1760.

MY DEAR BRETHREN,

Grace, mercy, and peace be to you from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus. It is well with four sorts of people that you have had, or now have, to do with. It is well with those of you in Christ who are gone to God; it is well with those of you in Christ who are not gone to God; it is well with those who earnestly long to be in Christ, that they may go to God; it is well with those who neither desire to be in Christ nor to go to God. And it is only bad with such who, being out of Christ, are gone to the devil. These it is best to let alone, and say no more about them.

But, to be sure, it is well with the other four. It is well with those of you who, being in Christ, are gone to God. You ministers and members of Christ have no more doubt or pain about them. They are now, and for ever, out of the reach of the world, flesh, and devil. They are gone ' where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary are at rest.' They are sweetly reposed in Abraham's bosom. They dwell in His presence who hath redeemed them, where 'there is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore.' They are waiting the joyful morning of the resurrection, when their vile bodies shall be made like unto His glorious body, shall be reunited to their souls, shall receive the joyful sentence, and inherit the kingdom prepared for them from the foundation of the world.

It is well also with those of you who are in Christ, though not gone to God. You live next door to them. Heaven is begun with you too. The kingdom of God is within you. You feel it. This is a kingdom of righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. It is begun in grace, and shall terminate in glory. Yea, it is ' Christ within you, the hope of glory.' Christ the rock, the foundation, laid in your hearts. Hope in the middle, and glory at the top. Christ, hope, glory; Christ, hope, glory. You are washed in the blood of the Lamb, justified, sanctified, and shall shortly be glorified. Yea, your lives are already ' hid with Christ in God.' You have your conversation already in heaven. Already you ' sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.' What heavenly sentences are these! What can come nearer Paradise Bless the Lord, O ye happy souls, and let all that is within you bless His holy name. Sing unto the Lord so long as you live, and praise your God while you have your being. And how long will that be Through the endless ages of a glorious eternity.

Oh my dear brothers and sisters, this is my hope, and this is my purpose. But to whom and to what are we indebted for all this, and infinitely more than all the tongues and hearts of men or angels can tell or conceive To our Redeemer only, and to His merits. Christ within us is Jesus to us. We were poor, lost, helpless sinners, ' aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,' and ' children of wrath'; but Jesus lived and Jesus died, the just for the unjust, to bring us to the enjoyment of it.

And what does all this require at our hands Why, infinitely more than we can render Him to all eternity. However, let us praise and glorify God in the best manner, and with the best member that we have. Let us do it constantly, cordially, cheerfully, so long as we live; and then, no doubt, we shall do it in heaven for ever.

Keep close, I beseech you, to every means of grace. Strive to walk in all the ordinances and commandments of God blameless, 'giving all diligence to make your calling and election sure. Add to your faith virtue; to virtue knowledge; to knowledge temperance; to temperance patience; to patience godliness; to godliness brotherly kindness; to brotherly kindness charity.' For if these things,' says St. Peter, 'be in you, and abound, they make you that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.' Thus you will give the best token of your thankfulness to Him for what He hath done for your souls; and you shall, not long hence, in heaven sing His praise with your happy brethren, gone thither before you.

It is well, likewise, with all those of you who do truly desire to be in Christ, that you may go to God. Surely He owns you; your desires are from Him; you shall enjoy His favour. By-and-by you shall have peace with Him through our Lord Jesus Christ. Go forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed ye by the Shepherd's tents. Be constant in every means of grace. He will be found of them that diligently seek Him. ' Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.' Though your sins be never so many, never so monstrous, all shall be forgiven. He will have mercy upon you, and will abundantly pardon. For where sin hath abounded, grace doth much more abound. He who hath begun this good work in you will accomplish it to your eternal good and His eternal glory. Therefore, doubt not, fear not. A broken and a contrite heart God will not despise. The deeper is your sorrow, the nearer is your joy. Your extremity is God's opportunity. It is usually darkest before daybreak. You shall shortly find pardon, peace, and plenteous redemption, and at last rejoice in the common and glorious salvation of His saints.

And lastly, it is well for you who neither truly desire to be in Christ nor to go to God; for it is well for you that you are out of hell; it is well your day of grace is not utterly past. Behold, now is your accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation! Oh that you may employ the remainder of it in working out your salvation with fear and trembling! Now is faith to be had, saving faith; now you may be washed from all your sins in the Redeemer's blood, justified, sanctified, and prepared for heaven. Take, I beseech you, the time while the time is. You have now the means of grace to use; the ordinances of God to enjoy; His word to read and hear; His ministers to instruct you; and His members to converse with. You know not what a day may bring forth; you may die suddenly. As death leaves you, judgement will find you. And if you die as you are, out of Christ, void of true faith, unregenerate, unsanctified, snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, God will rain upon you (Ps. xi. 6), as your eternal, intolerable portion to drink.

Suffer me, therefore, thus far, one and all of you. God's glory and your everlasting welfare is all I aim at. What I look for in return from you is, I confess, much more than I deserve-your prayers. Pray for me, and I will pray for you, who am

Your affectionate brother,

W. GRIMSHAW.

Fri. 9 (being Good Friday).-I had almost lost my voice by a cold; however, I spoke as I could till, before twelve (it being a watch-night), I could speak near as well as ever.

On Easier Day we had uncommon congregations, as indeed we have had all the week; and I observed a more staid and solid behaviour in most than is usual in this kingdom. Monday and Tuesday I was employed in visiting the classes, and I was much comforted among them; there was such a hunger and thirst in all who had tasted of the grace of God after a full renewal in His image.

Sun. 18.-As often as I have been here I never saw the house thoroughly filled before. And the multitude did not come together in vain. I think many will remember this day.

Mon. 19.-I left Dublin, and I could look back with satisfaction on the days I had spent therein. I had reason to believe that God had been at work in a very uncommon manner. Many of those who once contradicted and blasphemed were now convinced of 'the truth as it is in Jesus.' Many who had long revolted from God had returned to Him with full purpose of heart. Several mourners had found peace with God, and some believe He has saved them from all sin; many more are all on fire for this salvation, and a spirit of love runs through the whole people.

I came in the evening to Newry, where I found a far different face of things. Offences had broke the society in pieces, only two-and-thirty being left of near a hundred. But God has a few names left here also. Let these stand firm, and God will maintain His own cause.

Wed. 21.-I rode to Carrickfergus. The violent rain kept away the delicate and curious hearers. For the sake of these I delayed the morning preaching till a quarter before nine, but it was too early still for a great part of the town, who could not possibly rise before ten. I added a few members to the society, and left them in peace and love.

Where to preach in Belfast I did not know. It was too wet to preach abroad, and a dancing-master was busily employed in the upper part of the market-house, till at twelve the sovereign put him out by holding his court there. While he was above, I began below to a very serious and attentive audience. But they were all poor; the rich of Belfast' cared for none of these things.'

After dinner we rode to Newtown[ards] and found another poor, shattered society, reduced from fifty to eighteen members, and most of those cold enough. In the evening I preached to a large congregation in the market-house on ' I will heal their backsliding.' God fulfilled His word; many were healed, and many more deeply wounded. I had full employment among them the next day, and on Saturday the 24th I left between thirty and forty members, full of desire and hope and earnest resolutions not to be almost, but altogether, Christians.

About ten I preached at Comber, and then rode to Lisburn, where, in the evening, I had many rich and genteel hearers.

Sun. 25.-The congregation was larger in the morning than the evening before, and many appeared to be deeply wounded Oh may none heal their wound slightly! But far the largest congregation of all met in the evening; and yet I saw not a scoffer, no, nor trifler, among them.

Mon. 26.-In the evening I preached to a large congregation in the market-house at Lurgan. I now embraced the opportunity which I had long desired, of talking with Mr. Miller, the contriver of that statue which was in Lurgan when I was there before.[ See below, June 14, 1773, and Meth. Mag. 1827, p. 801.] It was the figure of an old man standing in a case, with a curtain drawn before him, over against a clock which stood on the other side of the room. Every time the clock struck he opened the door with one hand, drew back the curtain with the other, turned his head as if looking round on the company, and then said, with a clear, loud, articulate voice: ' Past one, two, three,' and so on. But so many came to see this (the like of which all allowed was not to be seen in Europe) that Mr. Miller was in danger of being ruined, not having time to attend his own business; so, as none offered to purchase it or to reward him for his pains, he took the whole machine in pieces; nor has he any thought of ever making anything of the kind again.

Tues. 27.-I preached in Lurgan at five, in Terryhoogan at ten, and at two in the market-house at Richhill.[ See Meth. Mag. Dublin, 1817, p. 319.] I have rarely seen so serious a congregation at a new place. At six I preached in the new preaching-house at Clonmain, the largest in the north of Ireland; and the people were all alive, being stirred up by Mr. Ryan,[ Mr. Thomas Ryan, who subsequently travelled for a time as a preacher. See Myles's Chrtm. Hist. p. 453.] once an attorney, but now living upon his own estate.

Wed. 28.-The rain kept off the curious hearers, so that we had few in the evening but earnest souls; after sermon we had a lovefeast. It was a wonderful time. God poured out His Spirit abundantly. Many were filled with consolation, particularly two who had come from Lisburn (three-and-twenty Irish miles), one a lifeless backslider, the other a girl of sixteen, who had been some time slightly convinced of sin. God restored him to the light of His countenance, and gave her a clear evidence of His love, and, indeed, in so uncommon a manner that it seemed her soul was all love. One of our brethren was constrained openly to declare he believed God had wrought this change in him. I trust he will not lightly cast away the gift which God has given him. In the morning I left them rejoicing and praising God, and rode to Monaghan.

The commotions in Munster [Recently the first rising of the Whiteboys had taken place in the province of Munster and alarmed the whole country (see Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. p. 157; also below, p. 507). On April 12, 1762, the Irish House of Commons appointed a committee to inquire into the causes of the Popish insurrection of Munster. The insurgents were really gangs of midnight marauders known as ' Whiteboys.' Their object was understood to be agrarian, but evidence was given at the trial of Father Nicholas Sheehy to show that it was more largely Jacobite and religious, and that one of the oaths sworn by the Whiteboys was 'to be faithful to the King of France and Prince Charles.' See Froude's The English in Ireland, vol. ii.] having now alarmed all Ireland, we had hardly alighted when some wise persons informed the provost there were three strange sort of men come to the King's Arms. So the provost with his officers came without delay to secure the north from so imminent a danger. I was just come out when I was required to return into the house. The provost asked me many questions, and perhaps the affair might have turned serious had I not had two letters with me which I had lately received, one from the Bishop of Londonderry,[ An undated letter, of quite a cordial nature, from Dr Barnard, Bishop of Derry, is printed by Whitehead (JLife of Wesley, vol. ii. p. 289). This may have been the letter that helped to save Wesley from arrest as a suspected person. Cf. Crookshank, Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. p. 148.] the other from the Earl of Moira. Upon reading these he excused himself for the trouble he had given, and wished me a good journey. Between six and seven I preached at Cootehill, and in the morning rode on to Enniskillen, the situation of which is both pleasant and strong, as it is surrounded by a deep and broad river [The Erne, connecting the upper and lower lakes.]; but fortifications it has none, no, nor so much as an old castle.[ The round tower on Devenish Island is but two miles away.] The inhabitants glory that they have no Papist in the town.

After riding round and round, we came in the evening to a lone house called Carrickbeg.[ Or Black Lion Inn.] It lay in the midst of horrid mountains,[ See Wesley's curious remarks in his sermon on God's approbation of His work, and on the effect of the Deluge. He did not agree with Thomas Burnet, who held that the earth was flat before the Deluge (Sermon LVI. vol. vi. p. 206).] and had no very promising appearance. However, it afforded corn for our horses and potatoes for ourselves. So we made a hearty supper, called in as many as pleased of the family to prayers, and, though we had no fastening either for our door or our windows, slept in peace.

MAY 1, Sat.-We took horse at five. The north-east wind would have suited the first of January, and we had soaking rain on the black mountains. However, before noon we came well to Sligo.

None in Sligo, when I was there last,[ See above, p. 394. For Wesley's faithful letter to Mr. Knox, of Sligo, see Works, vol. xii. p. 255 (written from Sligo May 30, 1765). For the other Knox family, of Derry, parents of Alexander Knox, see below, May II, 1765, and Crookshank, Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. pp. 180, 183.] professed so much love to me as Mr. Knox's family. They would willingly have had me with them morning, noon, and night, and omitted no possible mark of affection. But what a change! Mrs. K[nox] went into the country the day before I came, her brother and his wife set out for Dublin at the same time, he himself and the rest of his family saw me, that is at church, because they could not help it,

But wonder'd at the strange man's face,

As one they ne'er had known.

I am sorry for their sake, not my own. Perhaps they may wish to see me when it is too late.[ Crookshank, Methodism in Ireland, \ vol. i. p. 158; also below, May II, 1765.]

Sun. 2.-I preached in the market-house, morning and evening. Abundance of the dragoons were there; so were many of the officers, who behaved with uncommon seriousness.

Mon. 3.-In the evening a company of players began acting in the upper part of the market-house just as we began singing in the lower. The case of these is remarkable. The Presbyterians for a long time had their public worship here; but when the strollers came to town they were turned out, and from that time had no public worship at all. On Tuesday evening the lower part too was occupied by buyers and sellers of oatmeal, but as soon as I began the people quitted their sacks and listened to business of greater importance.

On the following days I preached at Carrick-on-Shannon,[ See W.M. Mag. 1832, p. 465. He was the guest of Mr. Glover Laird, whose descendants to the third and fourth generation are identified with Methodism. His daughter Mary married Caleb Shera, grandfather of Dr. H. M. Shera, for many years head master of Wesley College, Sheffield (Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. p. 159).] Drummersnave, Cleggill, Longford, and Abbeyderg.

Sat. 8.-Calling on a friend in our way, we had not sat down before several of the neighbors, Papists as well as Protestants, came in, supposing I was to preach. I was not willing to disappoint them, and they all listened with deep attention.

Hence I rode to Athlone. I intended on Sunday the gth to preach abroad as usual, but the sharp wind made it impracticable, and obliged me to keep in the house. The congregations, however, were large both morning and evening, and I found a little fruit of my labor.

Thur. 13.[ On this day he wrote to a ' Member ot the Society' on wandering thoughts, dreams, and how to deal with ' the earnest and the slack' members of her band (Works, vol. xii. p. 277).]-I was in hopes even the Papists here had at length a shepherd who cared for their souls. He was stricter than any of his predecessors, and was esteemed a man of piety as well as learning. Accordingly, he had given them strict orders not to work on the Lord's Day, but I found he allowed them to play as much as they pleased, at cards in particular; nay, and averred it was their duty so to do, to refresh both their bodies and minds. Alas, for the blind leader of the blind! Has

not he the greater sin

Sun. 16.-I had observed to the society last week that I had not seen one congregation ever in Ireland behave so ill at church as that at Athlone, laughing, talking, and staring about during the whole service. I had added,' This is your fault, for, if you had attended the church as you ought to have done, your presence and example would not have failed to influence the whole congregation.' And so it appeared; I saw not one to-day either laughing, talking, or staring about, but a remarkable seriousness was spread from the one end of the church to

the other.

Mon. 17.-I preached at Ahascragh to all the Protestants in or near the town. But their priests would not suffer the Papists to come. What could a magistrate do in this case Doubtless he might tell the priest: ' Sir, as you enjoy liberty of conscience, you shall allow it to others. You are not persecuted yourself; you shall not persecute them.'

Tues. 18.-I preached at Ballinasloe [He was the guest of Mr. Knight, for whom see Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. p. 159.] about ten in the morning, and in the evening at Aughrim.

Thur. 20.-I rode on to Hollymount. The sun was extremely hot, so that I was much exhausted; but after a little rest I preached in the churchyard without any weariness.

Fri. 21.-I preached at Burriscarra church at ten to a deeply serious congregation, and in the court-house at Castlebar in the evening.

Sun. 23.-The chief family in the town[That of Sir Charles Bingham, afterwards Earl of Lucan.] made a part of our congregation. And whether they received any benefit thereby or no, their example may bring others who will receive it.

Mon. 24.-I went with two friends to see one of the greatest natural wonders in Ireland, Mount Eagle, vulgarly called CroaghPatrick.[ It is 2,510 feet high, and is famous for its religious pilgrimages.] The foot of it is fourteen miles from Castlebar. There we left our horses and procured a guide. It was just twelve when we alighted; the sun was burning hot, and we had not a breath of wind. Part of the ascent was a good deal steeper than an ordinary pair of stairs. About two we gained the top, which is an oval, grassy plain about a hundred and fifty yards in length and seventy or eighty in breadth. The upper part of the mountain much resembles the Peak of Teneriffe. I think it cannot rise much less than a mile perpendicular from the plain below. There is an immense prospect on one side toward the sea, and on the other over the land. But as most of it is waste and uncultivated, the prospect is not very pleasing.

At seven in the evening I preached at Newport, and at six in the morning. I then returned to Westport, and began reading prayers at ten. After sermon I had a little conversation with Lord Westport,[ Lord Mounteagle was created Viscount Westport in 1767.] an extremely sensible man, and would gladly have stayed with him longer but that I had promised to be at Castlebar, where, in the evening, I preached my farewell sermon to a numerous congregation.

Wed. 26.-We took horse at four, to enjoy the cool of the morning. At seven the sun was warm enough; I verily think as warm as in Georgia. We could not have borne it, but the wind was in our face. However, in the afternoon we got well to Gal way. There was a small society here, and (what is not common) all of them were young women. Between seven and eight I began preaching in the court-house to a mixed multitude of Papists and Protestants, rich and poor, who appeared to be utterly astonished. At five in the morning I preached again, and spoke as plain as I possibly could; but to the far greater part it seemed to be only ' as the sound of many waters.'

Thur. 27.-We had another Georgian day, but, having the wind again full in our faces, after riding about fifty English miles we got well to Ennis in the afternoon. Many being ready to make a disturbance at the court-house, I left them to themselves, and preached over against Mr. Bindon's1 house

in great quietness.

Fri. 28.-I was informed that, a few days before, two of Mr. Bindon's maids went to bathe (as the women here frequently do) in the river near his house. The water was not above a yard deep, but there was a deep hole at a little distance. As one of them dashed water at the other, she, endeavoring to avoid it, slipped into the hole, and the first, striving to help her, slipped in too; nor was either of them seen any more till their bodies floated upon the water. Yet after some hours one of them was brought to life, but the other could not be recovered.

The violent heat, which had continued for eight days, was now at an end, the wind turning north; so on Saturday the 29th we had a pleasant ride to Limerick.

Sun. 30.-I preached in the old camp. The pleasantness of the place, the calmness of the evening, and the convenient distance from the town, all conspired to draw the people together, who flocked from every quarter. Many officers, as well as abundance of soldiers, were among them,[ John Dillon, a drum-major, who a few years previously, in Cork, had become a member of the society, was present. He became remarkable for devotion and zeal. Wesley preached on ' Now is the day of salvation,' emphasizing holiness (Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. pp. 16, 16'), and promised the Limerick society that if they could procure ground for building while he was at Cork, and send him word, he would come back and spend four days with them. See below, p. 509; also Account of John Dillon, referred to in Green's Bibliography, No. 271, and inserted in Wesley's Edition of his Works, vol. xxiii.] and behaved with the utmost decency. I preached the following evenings at the same place, and that in great measure for the sake of the soldiers, it being within a musket-shot of the place where they were exercising. Nay, two evenings an officer ordered a large body to exercise on the very spot; but the moment I began they laid down their arms and joined the rest of the congregation.

JUNE 4, Fri.-I preached at noon in Ballingarrane to a large congregation, chiefly of Palatines1; and so at Newmarket in the evening and the morning following.[ Wesley's ministry at this time in extended from May 29 to June 14. Ballingarrane and Newmarket were excursions made from Limerick Limerick during this period.] These have quite a different look from the natives of the country, as well as a different temper. They are a serious, thinking people, and their diligence turns all their land into a garden.

Mon. 7.-I met a large number of children, just as much acquainted with God, and with the things of God, as ' a wild ass's cf!t,' and just as much concerned about them. And yet who can believe that these pretty little creatures have ' the wrath of God abiding on them'

Numberless crowds ran together about this time to see the execution of a poor deserter. And I believe some of them retained serious impressions for near four-and-twenty hours! But it was not so with the soldiers; although they walked one by one, close to the bleeding, mangled carcase, most of them were as merry within six hours as if they had only seen a puppet-show.

Tues. 8.-I visited the classes, and wondered to find no witness of the great salvation. Surely the flame which is kindled in Dublin will not stop there. The next evening God did indeed kindle it here; a cry went up on every side; and the lively believers seemed all on fire to be ' cleansed from all unrighteousness.'

On Friday and Saturday I had much conversation with a very noted person; but I found none in town who expected that any good could be done to such a sinner as him! Such a sinner Why, were we not all such We were dead in sin. And is he more than dead

Sun. 13.-Being informed I had shot over the heads of the soldiers, who did not 'understand anything but hell and damnation,' I took my leave of them this evening by strongly applying the story of Dives and Lazarus. They seemed to understand this, and all but two or three boy-officers behaved as men fearing God.

Mon. 14.-I rode to Cork. Here I procured an exact account of the late commotions. About the beginning of December last, a few men met by night near Nenagh, in the county of Limerick, and threw down the fences of some commons, which had been lately enclosed. Near the same time others met in the county of Tipperary, of Waterford, and of Cork. As no one offered to suppress or hinder them, they increased in number continually, and called themselves Whiteboys, wearing white cockades and white linen frocks. In February there were five or six parties of them, two or three hundred men in each, who moved up and down, chiefly in the night; but for what end did not appear. Only they levelled a few fences, dug up some grounds, and hamstrung some cattle, perhaps fifty or sixty in all. One body of them came into Clogheen, of about five hundred foot and two hundred horse. They moved as exactly as regular troops, and appeared to be thoroughly disciplined. They now sent letters to several gentlemen, threatening to pull down their houses. They compelled every one they met to take an oath to be true to Queen Sive (whatever that meant) and the Whiteboys; not to reveal their secrets; and to join them when called upon. It was supposed eight or ten thousand were now actually risen, many of them well armed, and that a far greater number were ready to rise whenever they should be called upon. Those who refused to swear they threatened to bury alive. Two or three they did bury up to the neck, and left them; where they must quickly have perished had they not been found in time by some travelling by. At length, toward Easter, a body of troops, chiefly light horse, were sent against them. Many were apprehended and committed to jail; the rest of them disappeared. This is the plain, naked fact, which has been so variously represented.

Thur. 17.-I rode about thirty English miles, through a pleasant and well-cultivated country, to Youghal.[ An old engraving of Youghal, dated 1750, shows that the walls extended a long way in the ridge of the hill above the town.] It is finely situated on the side of a hill, so as to command a wide sea prospect. I preached in the evening at the Exchange. Abundance of people attended, as did the far greater part of them at five o'clock in the morning. I returned to Cork on Friday.[ On June 18 he wrote from Cork to Christopher Hopper (Works, vol. xii. p. 306).]

Sun. 20.-At the desire of Captain Taylor, I went to Passage West, and preached to many of the townspeople, and as many of the sailors as could attend. On Monday and Tuesday I visited the classes, and observed what was very uncommon-in two years there was neither any increase nor any decrease in this society. Two hundred and thirty-three members I left, and two hundred and thirty-three I find.[ This was in Cork, not Passage West.]

Thur. 24.-I rode to Kinsale, and preached in the Exchange to a considerable number of attentive hearers. In the afternoon I rode to Bandon, and found the society much lessened, and dead enough. Yet the congregation in the main street was remarkably large, as well as deeply attentive. So it was on Friday.[ On the 25tk he wrote to Matthew Lowes.]

Sat. 26.-I visited the classes, and exhorted them to ' be zealous and repent.' The word sunk into their hearts, so that when we met in the evening they did not seem to be the same persons. They appeared to breathe quite another spirit, every one stirring up his neighbor. I know not when I have seen so deep and general an impression made in so short a time.

Sun. 27.-I returned to Cork, and in the afternoon preached on the Barrack Hill. The congregation was such as I had not seen at Cork for at least twelve years. One soldier made some noise, but the commanding officer soon ordered him into custody. The top of the walls, being covered with soldiers, made a solemn appearance. Let this preaching be continued, and the work of God will quickly revive at Cork.

On Monday and Tuesday the congregation at the house was far larger than on any week-day before, and there was much life among the people, which perhaps was increased by the epidemic disorder. This generally attacked first the head, afterward the throat and the breast. Mr. Jones, who had been drooping for some time, was seized with this three weeks since. While I was at Youghal he sent for a physician, who applied a blister to his head. In two or three days a second physician was called in, who told his relations he was better and better. Returning from Bandon, and observing what was prescribed, I could not help saying, ' When a fever neither intermits nor remits, the bark is no better than poison.' At hearing this, the doctors were much displeased, and declared again he was a great deal better. On Wednesday morning, a little before two, his spirit returned to God.

So died honest Thomas Jones,[ See above, vol. iii. pp. 409 and 471; also below, April 14, 1771. ] secundum artem! A man whom God raised from nothing, by a blessing on his unwearied diligence, to a plentiful fortune. Yet, when riches increased on every side, he did not set his heart upon them. Some years since he retired from business, but was still fully employed in building and in doing good. His natural temper was rough, and so was his speech, which occasioned him many trials. But notwithstanding this, he was generous and compassionate, and never weary of well-doing. From the beginning of his illness he was continually in prayer, for some time with much fear and distress. But I saw no signs of this after I came from Bandon: I believe his fears were then all scattered, and he waited with calm though earnest desire for the salvation of God.

Wed. 30.-I rode to Limerick. I had promised to come again, if our brethren found a convenient place to build a preaching-house. One now offered, proper in all respects.[ They obtained a piece of ground near the old Courthouse (Crookshank's

Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. p. 160).]

JULY 3, Sat.-I met the society, and inquired what each was willing to subscribe. A considerable sum was subscribed immediately.