Aug. 1762., An Irish Tour

Sun. 26.-I met one whom I had formerly seen at Bristol heaping up money with both hands; and he has now all that the world can give. But he enjoys nothing; having such a continual lowness of spirits, as they call it, that his very life is a burden. He seems partly to understand his own case. May the great Physician heal his sickness!

Mon. 27.-I preached in Edenderry at one, and at Closeland in the evening.

Tues. 28.-I preached at Portarlington, though I was extremely ill, and it was a pain to me to speak; but it was a comfortable pain. I could from my heart praise God for His fatherly visitation.

Wed. 29.-I rode to Mountmellick, but was so hoarse and weak that I could only preach in the house.

Fri. 31.-Being not well able to ride, I borrowed Mr. P------'s chair to Tullamore; and on Saturday reached Coolalough,[ This was probably the beginning of the quarterly meetings which for many years were held at Coolalough, and to which the Methodists resorted from far and near. See also below, p. 175.] and met many of my friends from all parts. I now found my strength increasing daily. It must be as my day is.

AUG. 2, Sun-I baptized Joseph English (late a Quaker), and two of his children. Abundance of people were at Tyrrell's Pass in the evening, many more than the house could contain. At five in the morning one who had tasted of the love of God but had afterwards relapsed into his former sins, nay, and sunk into Deism, if not Atheism, was once more cut to the heart. At six in the evening I preached at Drumcree, where many now know in whom they have believed. Mr. Booker,[ Rev. Moore Booker, of Drumcree, vicar of Delvin. See Meth. Mag, Dublin, 1810, pp. 81-3, and Crookshank's Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. p. 90.] the minister of Delvin, met me here-the last man I should have expected. But it cannot last. The same person cannot long admire both John Wesley and John Taylor.[ Dr. John Taylor of Norwich.]

Tues. 4.-I preached about noon at Street to a civil, unconcerned congregation, and about six in the evening at Abbeyderg, a mile short of Keenagh. Many Romanists being present, I found much concern for them, and could not but address myself to them in particular, and exhort them wholly to rely on the one Mediator between God and Mon. Wed. 5.-We rode to Athlone.[ At Athlone he preached eleven sermons.]

Thur. 6.-I preached in a large open space near the house, to many of the rich as well as poor.

Sat. 8.-I called on a lively man, who is just married in the ninety-second year of his age. He served as an officer both in King William's and Queen Anne's wars, and a year or two ago began to serve the Prince of Peace. He has all his faculties of body and mind entire, works in his garden some hours every day, and praises God who has prolonged his life to so good a purpose.[ On Aug. 8 he wrote to his brothei Charles (Works, vol. xii. p. 114); he revises his belief on unconditional election]

Sun. 9.-At eight we had the usual congregation in the market-house, and the usual blessing. Mr. Grueber preached an excellent sermon at church on the necessity of the religion of the heart. At five I preached on the Connaught side of the river to abundance of Romanists as well as Protestants, all of whom seemed convinced that they ought not any longer to ' halt between two opinions.' .

Here I learned, from her husband, that-

Rose Longworth found peace with God in June 1749. This she never lost, and often rejoiced with joy unspeakable. From that time she was always remarkably serious, and walked closely with God.

About Easter 1751 she found a great decay of her bodily strength, but of this she never complained, being only concerned lest her soul should suffer loss. In July following she was removed into the country, but still continued walking in the light. Toward the latter end of the month, apprehending her time was short, she desired to return to Athlone. On Saturday the 21st she returned, extremely weak, but continually praising God, and all the following week expressing a strong ' desire to depart and be with Christ.'

Mr. -----[ Probably Mr. Grueber. ] administered the sacrament to her on Sunday. She could speak little, but said she had no doubt of her salvation. He was deeply affected, and said he believed her, but could scarce speak for tears. When she could not be heard she had her eyes constantly fixed upward and her lips moving. In the afternoon she fainted away. Coming to herself she said, ' Ah! I was disappointed; I thought I had escaped.' She then prayed for her husband, for her parents, for the society, the Church, and the whole world. Fainting again, and coming to herself, she cried out, ' See my Redeemer! See my Redeemer! See how His blood streams! I see the Lamb in glory. I see the Lamb in glory. Fare ye well. God be with you. Fare ye well.' She then ceased to speak, and went to God.

Mon. 10.-I preached at Aughrim, and found the people much alive to God.

Tues. 11.-I rode over to Mr. M------'s. How gracious has God been to this family! Three years ago his youngest daughter, after she had received a clear sense of the love of God, was brought to the gates of death, and continues still just on the wing for eternity. His other daughter was suddenly struck last year, and, after having witnessed a good confession to all that were round about her, went to God in the full triumph

of faith. Some months since Mr. M------'s brother began to

decline, and two or three weeks ago, full of unutterable peace and joy, went to Him whom his soul loved.

Wed. 12.-In the evening I preached at Birr. I scarce ever saw so large, so genteel, and so serious a congregation there before. The next evening I reached Limerick.

I spent Friday and Saturday in conference with our preachers, and the next week spake with each of the members of the society, many of whom, I now found, were ' rooted and grounded in love' and ' zealous of good works.'

Fri, 21.-I rode through heavy rain to Shronell, and to Cork the next day.

Sun. 23.-At eight the house would not near contain the congregation, yet I judged a small congregation with peace preferable to a large one with noise and tumult.

On Monday and Tuesday I carefully examined the society, put away those who did not walk according to the gospel, and found about three hundred who still strive to have ' a conscience void of offence toward God and toward Mon.'[The Sermon Register records a Urge number of sermons preached during the fifteen days from August 10. It was the seed-sowing time in Cork, Limerick, and also in many other Irish towns and villages, American Methodism being the most extraordinary among many results.]

Tues. 25.-I preached in the market-place at Kinsale. The next morning, at eight, I walked to the Fort. On the hill above it we found a large, deep hollow, capable of containing two or three thousand people. On one side of this the soldiers soon cut a place with their swords for me to stand, where I was screened both from the wind and sun, while the congregation sat on the grass before me. Many eminent sinners were present, particularly of the army, and I believe God gave them a loud call to repentance.

In the evening I called sinners to repentance in the main street at Bandon. On Thursday and Friday the rain drove us into the market-house. Indeed, I hardly remember two dry days together since I landed in Ireland.

Sat. 29.-I returned to Cork and spent a comfortable day, having a strong hope that God will ' lift up the hands that hang down."

Mon. 31.-I rode to Clonmel. A wide door was opened here a year ago, but one evening, just after sermon was ended, the room in which the preaching had been, fell. Two or three persons were hurt thereby, for which reason (could one desire a better) the people of the town vowed that no Methodists should ever more preach in Clonmel.[ The Sermon Register shows him at Bandon in September as well as in October, but does not fix the day.]

SEPT.1, Tues.-I preached at Waterford. Only one poor man behaved amiss; his case is really to be pitied. Some time since he had strong desires to serve God, and had broke off his outward sins, when Mr.------., one of the prebendaries, told him

he did very wrong to go after those fellows, and made him promise to hear them no more. He kept his word, and turned back as a dog to his vomit, wallowing in sin as he did before. But he does not go to the Methodists, so all is well; he may go to the devil and welcome.

Wed. 2.-At eleven Mr. Thomas Walsh began preaching in Irish in the market-house. It being market-day, the people flocked from all sides. Many of them seriously attended. A few of the rabble cursed and swore, but did not make a considerable interruption.[ This was the last day of the Old Style Calendar. Eleven days are dropped between Wednesday, the 2nd of September, 1752, and Thursday, the I4th. One of the wonders of the day is the fact that in his Journal John Wesley-not the least observant man either in England or Ireland-lets the day pass with a mere parenthesis. He rides to the bog of Boira, enters 'an effectual door," and preaches on the Royal Law and the works that make faith perfect.]

At five I went to the court-house and began preaching, but the mob was so numerous and noisy that few could hear. Perceiving the noise increase more and more, I walked through the midst of the mob to my lodgings. They hallooed, and shouted, and cursed amain; hitherto could they come, but no further.

Thur. 14.-(So we must call it now, seeing the New Style now takes place.) I rode to the bog of Boira,[ Parish of Kiltnsk.] where a great and effectual door is opened. On Friday evening we rode on to Gorey, and the next day to Dublin.

Sun. 17.-I made an end of Mr. Villette's Essay on the Happiness of the Life to come[Essai sur la felicite.de la vie a venir, en dialogues. Dublin, 1748, afterward translated into English (1793).] I am glad it is wrote in French; probably not many in Ireland will be at the pains of reading it He is a lively, sensible writer, but I cannot believe his hypothesis while I believe the Bible.

Mon. 18.-We had our first watch-night in the new house, and it was a night that will not soon be forgotten. On Tuesday I rode to Portarlington, and the next day to Birr, through so violent a storm that my strength was utterly exhausted, and how I should preach I knew not. But God soon renewed my strength, and on Thursday the 2ist I arose lively and well, and in the afternoon, through continued rain, came, very wet, but not tired, to Limerick.[ The Sermon Register has no record of preaching at Limerick in September. He was worn down with incessant work, and with travel in wind and rain and fog. Nevertheless, he boldly faces eight days of work in the chief centre of brutal persecution, preaches eighteen sermons, starts a new preaching-house scheme, buys a site, raises 200, and visits all his people.]

Sat. 23.-We reached Cork.

Sun. 24.-In the evening I proposed to the society the building a preaching-house.[ On Hammond's Marsh, Cork.] The next day ten persons subscribed an hundred pounds; another hundred was subscribed in three or four days, and a piece of ground taken. I saw a double providence now in our not sailing last week. If we had, probably this house had never been built, and it is most likely we should have been cast away. Above thirty ships, we were informed, have been lost on these coasts in the late storm.[ On the 26th, 28th, and 29th he preached in Cork.]

OCT. 1, Sun.-We had in the morning at St. Paul's a strong, close, practical sermon; and another at our own church in the afternoon, delivered in an earnest, affectionate manner. We had a solemn season likewise at the room, so that this day was a day of joy and thanksgiving.

The wind being contrary still, on Monday the 2nd I rode once more to Bandon. But though I came unexpected, the house was too small to contain one half of the congregation, so I preached in the street, both this evening and at five on Tuesday morning, the moon giving us as much light as we wanted till the sun supplied her place. I then returned to Cork. On Friday the 6th, the ship being under sail, we took boat and came to Cove [Now Queenstown.] in the evening. All the inns being full, we lodged at a private house; but we found one inconvenience herein: we had nothing to eat, for our provisions were on board, and there was nothing to be bought in the town-neither flesh, nor fish, nor butter, nor cheese. At length we procured some eggs and bread, and were well contented.

Sun. 8.-We were called early by the pilot, and told we must rise and go on board. We did so, and found a large number of passengers; but the wind turning, most of them went on shore. At eleven I preached to those that were left. About six it blew a storm, but we were anchored in a safe harbor, so it neither hurt nor disturbed us.

Oct 1752., From Cork to Bristol

Mon. 9.-Finding there was no probability of sailing soon, we went up to Mr. Parson's, near Passage. I preached there in the street, about four, to most of the inhabitants of the town. They behaved very quietly, but very few seemed either convinced or affected.[ He also preached at ' Balligarne.' Barbara Ruckle's home was at Ballingarrane, among the Palatines; it was also Philip Embury's birthplace.]

Tues. 10.-We had another violent storm. It made Mr. Parson's house rock to and fro, though it was a new, strong house, and covered on all sides with hills as well as with trees. We afterwards heard that several ships were lost on the coast. Only one got into the harbour, but grievously shattered, her rigging torn in pieces, and her mainmast gone by the board.

Wed. 11.- I rode to Cork once more, and was very fully employed all the day. The next morning we returned to Cove, and about noon got out of the harbor. We immediately found the effects of the late storm, the sea still boiling like a pot. The moon set about eight, but the Northern Lights abundantly supplied her place. Soon after God smoothed the face of the deep, and gave us a small, fair wind.

Fri. 13.-I read over Pascal's Thoughts[Pensfcs surla religion et sur quelques autrcs sujets. First appeared in 1669. Voltaire said that ' the best comedies of Moliere have not more wit than the first Provincial Letters.' See W.H.S. vol. iv. pp. 79, 80; vol. vii. p. 86.] What could possibly induce such a creature as Voltaire to 'give such an author as this a good word, unless it was that he once wrote a satire And so his being a satirist might atone even for his being a Christian.

Sat. 14.-About seven we sailed into Kingroad, and happily concluded our little voyage. I now rested a week at Bristol and Kingswood, preaching only morning and evening.[ Many authorities (e.g. Myles, Smith, and Crowther) report a Conference in Bristol on October 16, at which it was agreed that each preacher should receive 12 per annum, 'in order to provide himself with necessaries." Myles's Chronological History, p. 76; Smith's History of Methodism, vol. i. p. 258; Crowther's Portraiture of Methodism, P57]

Sun. 22.-Having heard grievous complaints of the society in Kingswood, as if there were many disorderly walkers therein,

I made a particular inquiry, and I found there was one member who drank too much in January or February last. But I could not find one who at this time lived in any outward sin whatever. When shall we be aware of the accuser of the brethren How long shall we be ignorant of his devices, and suffer him, by these loose, indeterminate accusations, to make our minds evil-affected toward each other

Wed. 25.-I rode to Wick, and rejoiced over a people who have run well from the beginning. The person at whose house I preached was supposed to be at the point of death. But ease or pain, life or death, was welcome to her. She desired, indeed, ' to depart and to be with Christ'; but it was with perfect resignation, her will being swallowed up in the will of Him whom her soul loved.

Thur. 26.-The remains of Elizabeth Man being brought to the Room, I preached on ' Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.' How plain an instance is here of grace so changing the heart as to leave no trace of the natural temper! I remember her fretful, peevish, murmuring, discontented with everything. But for more than a year before she died God laid the axe to the root of the tree; all her peevishness and fretfulness were gone; she was always content, always thankful. She was not only constant in prayer and in all the ordinances of God, but abundant in praise and thanksgiving. Often her soul was so filled with love and praise that her body was quite overpowered. On Sunday morning she said, 'I am struck with death.' Her pains were violent all the day, but they interrupted not her prayer and praise and exhortation to those about her; till, about three in the morning, having finished her work, she was set at liberty.

Sunday the 29th was a useful day to my soul. I found more than once trouble and heaviness, but I called upon the name of the Lord, and He gave me a clear, full approbation of His way, and a calm, thankful acquiescence in His will.[ We may safely assume that the sorrows of his married life are becoming acute.]

I cannot but stand amazed at the goodness of God. Others are most assaulted on the weak side of their soul, but with me it is quite otherwise. If I have any strength at all (and I have none but what I have received}, it is in forgiving injuries. And on this very side am I assaulted more frequently than on any other. Yet leave me not here one hour to myself, or I shall betray myself and Thee!

Nov. 1762., The Sermon Register

Mon. 30.-I rode to Salisbury, and in the two following days examined severally the members of the society; and on Thursday left them determined to stand in the good old way, in all the ordinances and commandments of God. In the evening I endeavoured to reunite the little scattered flock at Winterbourne.[ He also preached here. In October he preached again at Sarum. Wilton is also named. From the Sermon Register we find that during November he spent at least three days in Canterbury.]

Nov. 3, Fri.-I rode to Reading, and on Saturday to London.[ On the day of his arrival in London (but where we do not know) he preached three times. The entries (in the Sermon Register) that follow are almost incredible:

Sunday Nov. 5.-i Tim. vi. 17; Mai. iii. a j Lu. ix. 55; a Thess. i. ult.; John iv. 14. Foundery: Col. in. and iv.; Lu. ix. 55; i Pet. iv. 12 j t Pet. i. 13. West Street Chapel: Col. iii. n; iii. 16; iii. 18; Rom. xih. ii. Spitalfields: Col. iii. 15; Heb. ii. 3; Acts iv. 12; xvii. 23. Westminster; Heb. x. 36.

We are not to assume that these places were visited in this order. A comparison of Journal and Register shows that the all-important details in this particular record were the visits on specified days, and the texts from which sermons or expositions were given. The Register was kept solely to enable Wesley to avoid repetition. What happened, probably, was the following: (i) Devotional exercises with the Foundery family and classes, or bands, together with one or more sermons. For Wesley the day began at 4 a.m. (2) Visits to all the Foundery classes, and one or two preaching services. (3) A similar visit and exercises, but much shorter, at Spitalfields. (4) At West Street, which is always ' the Chapel," the visit would be much longer. It is open to question whether in this London Sunday itinerary West Street, with Holy Communion, should not be placed second. If so, Westminster would have its rapid visit immediately after. Tradition says that either now or later the preaching-room at Westminster was on, or near, the site of the Wesleyan Methodist Central Hall opposite Westminster Abbey, dedicated Oct. 3, 1912.]

Mon 6.[ Deptford must be fitted into this busy, but scantily reported period; also the following, each with its equipment of sermons and expositions: Shorehanr On Nov. 19, Snowsfields and Foundery. Christmas Day, Foundery, West Street, and Spitalfields. Dec. 26, London (probably Foundery), and Snowsfields. In Dec. he preached at Fernhall, also at Mill Hill. It may be thought that wherever, in the Sermon Register, an almost impossible number of sermons and expositions are concentrated on one day, as, for instance, on Nov. 5, 1752 (see above), the date named, being a Sunday, is intended, as on a modern English Methodist Plan, to include all the days of that week. It may be so. But this explanation, though providing relief from a difficulty, does not fit in with all the facts. Such an explanation does not, for instance, help us with Christmas Day of this year 1752, also a crowded day-a day standing by itself, and followed by a day (Dec. 26) fairly occupied.]_A remarkable note was given me in the evening. It ran in these words: James Thompson, sailor on board the George and Mary, a Sunderland collier, bound for Middelburgh, in September last, met with a gale of wind, which wrecked her on the Baynard Sands, off the coast of Zealand. Here every soul perished save himself, who was for three days and three nights floating on a piece of the wreck, with another man dead by his side, in which time the poor sufferer had lost his senses. At length he was taken up by the Dolphin packet, and escaped safe to land. He is now willing to return hearty thanks to God, and to proclaim his deliverance to the world, that all who hear it may ' praise the Lord for His goodness, and declare the wonders that He doeth for the children of men.'

In the remaining part of this, and in the following month, I prepared the rest of the books for The Christian Library, a work by which I have lost above two hundred pounds. Perhaps the next generation may know the value of it.

1753. Jan. I, Mon.-A large congregation met at four, and praised Him with joyful hearts and lips who had given us to see another year.[ The number of appointments for New Year's Day, 1753, is not, even as compared with many modern engagement lists, excessive-Foundery, Spitalfields, Westminster. But when it is discovered that Wesley, beginning at four o'clock in the morning, gave nineteen sermons or expositions, we wonder. On January 8th, or more probably (cf. Journal) 28th, he was at West Street with the more moderate provision of ten texts.]

Tues. 2.-I breakfasted at Ephraim Bedder's. How strangely diversified is the scene of his life! How often had he been, both outwardly and inwardly, in the deep! But at length God has lifted up his head.

Thur. 4.-I visited one on the borders of eternity, who did not know his interest in Christ. Oh how melancholy is it to leave all below, unless we have an earnest of a better inheritance! How can any reasonable man bear the thoughts of death till he has a prospect beyond the grave[ On Jan. 6 he wrote a Preface to Whateley's Directions for Married Persons (Works, vol. xiv. p. 231).]

WESLEY'S ELECTRICAL MACHINE (see p. Now in the Mission House Museum. Formerly at Woodhouse Grove School, where it wab used to illustrate lectures on natural science, and to amuse the boys.

Jan. 1763., Ministry in London

Sun. 7.-I breakfasted with M-----Y------, an uncommon monument of mercy. For a. long time he was ' turned back as a dog to his vomit,' and wallowed in all manner of wickedness. Yet his wife could never give him up, nor could he ever escape from the hell within, till she said to him one day, ' Go upstairs and ask of God, and you know not but He may yet bless you.' He went, but with a dull, heavy heart, and stayed about two hours. When he came down she stared upon him, and said,' What is the matter now What is come to you You do not look as you did.' He answered, ' No, for I have found the Lord.' And from that hour he has endeavoured to walk worthy of God, who has again called him ' to His kingdom and glory.'[On the 9th of this mouth he was at Shoreham.]

Tues. 9.-I talked largely with Mr. ------, and pressed him

much to come and see me. He spoke as if he would. But Mrs.------told me frankly ' he never designed it.' This separation likewise of chief friends I ascribe entirely to the good offices of Mr. M------n.[ Probably Meriton.]

Mon. 15.-We had our first watch-night at Snowsfields.

Scarce any went away till between twelve and one. How is it

hat never any one, in England or Ireland, has been hurt for all

these years in going to all parts at the dead of night Are not

the hairs of our head all numbered

Sat. 20.-I advised one who had been troubled many years with a stubborn paralytic disorder to try a new remedy. Accordingly she was electrified, and found immediate help. By the same means I have known two persons cured of an inveterate pain in the stomach, and another of a pain in his side, which he had had ever since he was a child. Nevertheless, who can wonder that many gentlemen of the faculty, as well as their good friends the apothecaries, decry a medicine so shockingly cheap and easy, as much as they do quicksilver and tar-water

Sun. 28.-A solemn awe spread over the whole congregation while I was explaining at West Street the parable of the Ten Virgins, more especially those who knew they had not' oil in their lamps.'

FEB. 3, Sat.-I visited one in the Marshalsea Prison-a nursery of all manner of wickedness. Oh shame to man that there should be such a place, such a picture of hell upon earth! And shame to those who bear the name of Christ that there should need any prison at all in Christendom![ On Tuesday, Feb. 6, he preached at Deptford.]

Thur. 8.-A proposal was made for devolving all temporal business, books and all, entirely on the stewards,[ For an account of the stewards, their appointment, business, rules, the manner of their work, see Works, vol. viii. pp. 261, 262. The Latin quotation ' In me shall no delay occur' is taken from Virgil, Ed. iii. 52: Quin age, si quid habes: in me mora non erit ulla. (W.H.S. vol. v. p. 29.) Cf. Tyerman's account, Life, vol. ii. p. 176. The appointment about this time of T. Butts and W. Briggs as ' book stewards ' was part of the general plan of devolution. It seems probable that these two honest and capable business men conceived the plan which Wesley cheerfully adopted.] so that I might have no care upon me (in London at least) but that of the souls committed to my charge. Oh when shall it once be! From this day In me mora non erit ulla.

In the afternoon I visited many of the sick; but such scenes, who could see unmoved There are none such to be found in a pagan country. If any of the Indians in Georgia were sick (which, indeed, exceeding rarely happened till they learned gluttony and drunkenness from the Christians), those that were near him gave him whatever he wanted.[ But see his description of the Chicsaws and Creeks, Dec. 2, 1737, above, vol. i. pp. 407, 409.] Oh who will convert the English into honest heathens!

On Friday and Saturday I visited as many more as I could. I found some in their cells under ground, others in their garrets, half starved both with cold and hunger, added to weakness and pain. But I found not one of them unemployed who was able to crawl about the room. So wickedly, devilishly false is that common objection,' They are poor only because they are idle.' If you saw these things with your own eyes, could you lay out money in ornaments or superfluities

Sun. 11.-I preached at Hayes. Here we have a fair instance of overcoming evil with good. All but the gentry of the parish patiently hear the truth. Many approve of, and some experience it.

Thur. 15.[ At the Foundery he preached and expounded five times.]-I visited Mr. S------, slowly recovering from a severe illness. He expressed much love, and did not doubt, he said, inasmuch as I meant well, but that God would convince me of my great sin in writing books; seeing men ought to read no book but the Bible. I judged it quite needless to enter into a dispute with a sea-captain, seventy-five years old.

Feb. 1753, Benjamin Franklin

This day Mr. Steward [See Life of C. of Huntingdon, vol. 5. PP-!93, 194The Mr. Steward of this paragraph must not be confounded withthe'Mr. S-----'above. See also letter of Whitefield to Charles Wesley, in Tyerman's Lift of Whitefield, vol. ii. p. 298. ] was released. For two or three years he had been ' instant in season, out of season, doing the work of an evangelist, and making full proof of his ministry.' Three or four weeks ago he fell ill of a fever, and was for a while in heaviness of soul. Last week all his doubts and fears vanished; and, as he grew weaker in body, he grew stronger in faith. This morning he expressed a hope full of immortality, and in the afternoon went to God.

Sat. 17.-From Dr. Franklin's Letters [Benjamin Franklin. Experiments and Observations on Electricity, first published in Gentleman's Mag. See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 80; Tyerman, vol. ii. pp. 161, 162; also below, p. 190.] I learned (i) that electrical fire (or ether) is a species of fire, infinitely finer than any other yet known; (2) that it is diffused, and in nearly equal proportions, through almost all substances; (3) that, as long as it is thus diffused, it has no discernible effect; (4) that if any quantity of it be collected together, whether by art or nature, it then becomes visible in the form of fire, and inexpressibly powerful; (5) that it is essentially different from the light of the sun, for it pervades a thousand bodies which light cannot penetrate, and yet cannot penetrate glass, which light pervades so freely; (6) that lightning is no other than electrical fire, collected by one or more clouds; (7) that all the effects of lightning may be performed by the artificial electric fire; (8) that anything pointed, as a spire or tree, attracts the lightning, just as a needle does the electrical fire; (9) that the electrical fire, discharged on a rat or a fowl, will kill it instantly, but discharged on one dipped in water, will slide off, and do it no hurt at all. In like manner the lightning which will kill a man in a moment will not hurt him if he be thoroughly wet. What an amazing scene is here opened for after-ages to improve upon![ Sunday, Feb. 18, he spent at Spitalfields, and Saturday 24th at Snowsfields. On Thursday the 22nd he wrote to J. Maskew, who had remained longer in Newcastle than the terms of his appointment justified. But Wesley's letter must have cheered the good man: . You are still wanted there; but you are wanted more elsewhere' ( Works, vol. xii. P254)]

Wed. 21.-I visited more of the poor sick. The industry of many of them surprised me. Several who were ill able to walk were nevertheless at work, some without any fire (bitterly cold as it was), and some, I doubt, without any food; yet not without that' meat which endureth to everlasting life.'

Mon. 26.-I set out in the machine [i.e. stage-coach. See W.H.S. vol. vii. P-Si-] for Bristol; and onTuesday evening preached at Bath.

Wed. 28.-We rode to Bristol. I now looked over Mr.

Prince's Christian History [Thomas Prince, the younger (172248), edited the earliest American periodical, The Christian History: containing accounts of the revival of religion in Great Britain and America in 1743. Boston, 1744-5, 2 vols. published. See W.H.S. vol iv. p. So.] .What an amazing difference is there in the manner wherein God has carried on His work in England and in America! There, above a hundred of the established . clergy, men of age and experience, and of the greatest note for sense and learning in those parts, are zealously engaged in the work. Here almost the whole body of the aged, experienced, learned clergy are zealously engaged against it; and few, but a handful of raw young men, engaged in it, without name, learning, or eminent sense. And yet by that large number of honourable men the work seldom flourished above six months at a time, and then followed a lamentable and general decay before the next revival of it; whereas that which God hath wrought by these despised instruments has continually increased for fifteen years together; and at whatever time it has declined in any one place, has more eminently flourished in others.[ On Thursday, Maich I, he preached at Bristol, and on the 3rd at Kmgswood.]

MARCH 5, Mon.-I called on Mr. Farley,[ His death is announced in Felix Farley's Journal, April 28, 1753. See Latimer's Bristol, p. 292.] and saw a plain confutation of that vulgar error that consumptions are not catching. He caught the consumption from his son, whereby he soon followed him to the grave.

March 1753., A Northern Journey

Wed. 14.-I preached at Frome,[ For early Methodism in Frome see Meth. Rec., Nov. 30, 1899. ] a dry, barren, uncomfortable place. The congregation at Shaftesbury in the evening were of a more excellent spirit.

Thur. 15.-I met the stewards of the neighbouring societies at Bearfield, and was much refreshed among them.

Fri. 16.-I returned to Bristol, and on Monday the igth set out with my wife for the north. I preached in the evening at Wallbridge, near Stroud. The house being too small, many stood without; but neither before nor after preaching (much less while I was speaking), did I hear the sound of any voice; no, nor of any foot; in so deep a silence did they both come, hear, and go away.

Tues. 20.-I preached in the town hall at Evesham. At the upper end of the room a large body of people were still and attentive. Meantime, at the lower end, many were walking to and fro, laughing and talking, as if they had been in Westminster Abbey.

Wed. 21,-After dinner abundance of rabble gathered near the town hall, having procured an engine, which they exercised on all that came in their way. So I gave them the ground and preached at our own room in great quietness.

Thur. 22.-I rode to Birmingham. A few poor wretches, I found, had occasioned fresh disturbance here. The chief was

Sarah B------, with whom I talked at large.

Sat. 24.-She said,' I am in heaven in the spirit; but I can speak in the flesh. I am not that which appears, but that which disappears. I always pray, and yet I never pray: for what can I pray for I have all.' I asked,' Do not you pray for sinners' She said,' No; I know no sinners but one. I know but two in the world: God is one, and the devil is the other.' I asked, ' Did not Adam sin of old; and do not adulterers and murderers sin now' She replied, ' No; Adam never sinned; and no man sins now: it is only the devil." ' And will no man ever be damned ' ' No man ever will.' ' Nor the devil' 'I am not sure; but I believe not.' ' Do you receive the sacrament' ' No; I do not want it.' ' Is the word of God your rule' ' Yes, the Word made flesh; but not the letter. I am in the spirit."

Sun. 25.-Upon inquiry, I found these wild enthusiasts were six in all-four men and two women, They had first run into the height of Antinomianism, and then were given up to the spirit of pride and blasphemy.

We reached Bilbrook in the evening, and a little before six, on Monday the 26th, Poole, near Nantwich. I was pretty much tired, but soon recovered my strength, and explained to a serious people, ' I determined not to know anything but Jesus Christ and Him crucified.'

Tues. 27.-We rode to Chester, where we found the scene quite changed since I was here before. There is now no talk of pulling down houses. The present mayor,[ Thomas Broster.] being a man of courage as well as honesty, will suffer no riot of any kind; so that there is peace through all the city.

Wed, 28.-The house was full of serious hearers at five. In the evening some gay young men made a little disturbance, and a large mob was gathered about the door; but in a short time they dispersed of themselves. However, we thought it best to acquaint the mayor with what had passed; on which he ordered the city crier to go down the next evening, and proclaim that all riots should be severely punished; and promised, if need were, to come down himself and read the Act of Parliament. But it needed not; after his mind was known, none was so hardy as to make a disturbance.

I did not expect the mob at Nantwich (whither I was now much pressed to go) would be so quiet as that at Chester. We were saluted with curses and hard names as soon as we entered the town. But from the time I alighted from my horse, I heard no one give us an ill word; and I had as quiet and attentive an audience as we used to have at Bristol, while I exhorted the ' wicked to forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts.'

Sat. 31.-I preached at Booth Bank,[ The house at which Mr. C------served as head gardener would probably be Dunham Hall. George Booth, Earlof Warrington, the last Earl, died in 1759. The title was revived for his daughter's son, George Henry Grey, 5th Earl of Stamford, in 1796. Mr. C------ we may possibly identify as Mr. Cross. But David Cross, great-grandson of John and Alice Cross, who figure so honourably in the history of early Methodism in one of its most remarkable centres, assured the Rev. Henry J. Fosterthat he never heard it suggested that his great-grandfather was 'turned off' for hearing the Methodists. Wesley himself seems to have been incredulous. The Crosses, in personal character and ability were pure gold.] where I met Mr. C------, late gardener to the Earl of W------. Surely it cannot be! Is it possible the Earl should turn off an honest, diligent, well-tried servant, who had been in the family above fifty years, for no other fault than hearing the Methodists

TYPICAL OPEN-AIR PREACHING of WESLEY

1. OXWICH

2 BOLTON CROSS (FROM A RECONSTRUCTED MODEL)

3. THE OLD HORSE BLOCK IN THE HIGH BULLLEN, WEDNESBURY

In the evening I preached at Manchester, and on Monday, APRIL 2, at Davyhulme. Here I found (what I had never heard of in England) a whole clan of infidel peasants. A neighbouring alehouse-keeper drinks, and laughs, and argues into Deism all the ploughmen and dairymen he can light on. But no mob rises against him; and reason good: Satan is not divided against himself.

Wed. 4.-I made an end of examining the society at Manchester, among whom were seventeen of the Dragoons. It is remarkable that these were in the same regiment with John Haime in Flanders; but they utterly despised both him and his Master till they removed to Manchester: here it was that one and another dropped in, he scarce knew why, to hear the preaching. And they now are a pattern of seriousness, zeal, and all holy conversation.

Thur. 5.-I rode to Bolton, and found the society just double to what it was when I was here last; and they are increased in grace no less than in number, walking closely with God, lovingly and circumspectly with one another, and wisely toward those that are without.

Sat. 7.-I rode to Chipping.

Sun. 8.-As soon as we came into the aisle of the church from the vestry a man (since dead) thrust himself between Mr. Milner and me and said,' You shall not go into the pulpit.' I told him,' I am only going into the desk.' He said,' But you shall not go there neither'; and pushed me back by main strength. Eight or ten noisy men joined with him quickly, and set themselves in battle-array. Fearing some might take fire on the other side, I desired Mr. Milner to begin the service. After prayers (for he had no sermon with him) great part of the congregation followed us to the vicarage. They came thither again after the evening service, and God made them large amends for their little disappointment in the morning.

Mon. 9.-Mr. Milner rode with us to Kendal. I preached there in a large, convenient room (the weather not allowing me to preach abroad), where Mr. Ingham's society used to meet. I was a little disgusted at their manner of coming in and sitting down, without any pretence to any previous prayer or ejaculation; as well as at their sitting during the hymn, which indeed not one (though they knew the tune) sung with me. But it was far otherwise after sermon, for God spake in His word. At the second hymn every person stood up, and most of them sang very audibly; and the greatest part of the society followed us to our inn, nor did they leave us till we went to rest.

Tues. 10.-We breakfasted at Ambleside, where our landlord [Of the Salutation Inn.] appeared quite open to conviction. We spoke plainly to him, prayed with and left him full of desire and thankfulness. Soon after, we lost our way in a vehement shower of snow; but recovered it in about an hour, and got over the mountains safe. The woman of the house where we dined seemed to be one that feared God greatly; yet when I spake of being saved by faith, she appeared to be utterly astonished. About six, after several heavy showers, we came, moderately weary, to Whitehaven.

Wed. 11.-Upon examining the society, I found that'the love of many' was ' waxed cold.' Nevertheless, I found a considerable number who appeared to be growing in grace. But surely here, above any other place in England, ' God hath chosen the poor of this world.' In comparison of these, the society at Newcastle are a rich and elegant people. It is enough that they are ' rich in faith,' and in the ' labor of love.'

April 1753., A Northern Journey

Sun. 15.-I preached in the afternoon at Cockermouth, to wellnigh all the inhabitants of the town. Intending to go from thence into Scotland, I inquired concerning the road, and was informed I could not pass the arm of the sea which parts the two kingdoms, unless I was at Bowness, about thirty miles from Cockermouth, soon after five in the morning. At first I thought of taking an hour or two's sleep, and setting out at eleven or twelve. But, upon further consideration, we chose to take our journey first, and rest afterward. So we took horse about seven, and, having a calm, moonshiny night, reached Bowness before one. After two or three hours' sleep we set out again without any faintness or drowsiness.

Our landlord, as he was guiding us over the Firth, very innocently asked how much a year we got by preaching thus. This gave me an opportunity of explaining to him that kind of gain which he seemed utterly a stranger to. He appeared to be quite amazed; and spake not one word, good or bad, till he took his leave.

Presently, after he went, my mare stuck fast in a quagmire, which was in the midst of the high-road. But we could well excuse this; for the road all along, for near fifty miles after, was such as I never saw any natural road either in England or Ireland: nay, far better, notwithstanding the continued rain, than the turnpike road between London and Canterbury.

We dined at Dumfries, a clean, well-built town, having two of the most elegant churches (one at each end of the town) that I have seen. We reached Thornhill in the evening. What miserable accounts pass current in England of the inns in Scotland! Yet here, as well as wherever we called in our whole journey, we had not only everything we wanted, but everything readily and in good order, and as clean as I ever desire.

Tues. 17.-We set out about four, and rode over several high but extremely pleasant mountains, to Lead Hill; a village of miners, resembling Plessey, near Newcastle. We dined at a village called Lesmahagow, and, about eight in the evening, reached Glasgow. A gentleman who had overtaken us on the road sent one with us to Mr. Gillies's house.[ For an account of Wesley's friendship with Dr. Gillies, the introduction of hymns into the College Kirk, Wesley's work on Dr. Gillies' Historical Col lections, their correspondence on religious experience, &c., see Tyerman's Life of Wesley,vo\. ii. pp. 164, 165; Meth.Mag. 1797, p. 511. See also Butler's Wesley and Whitefield in Scotland, pp. 123-7,for a short account of Dr. Gillies.]

Wed. 18.-I walked over the city, which I take to be as large as Cork or Newcastle-upon-Tyne. The University (like that of Dublin) is only one college, consisting of two small squares; I think not larger, nor at all handsomer, than those of Lincoln College, in Oxford. The habit of the students gave me surprise. They wear scarlet gowns, reaching only to their knees. Most I saw were very dirty, some very ragged, and all of very coarse cloth. The high church is a fine building. The outside is equal to that of most cathedrals in England; but it is miserably defaced within, having no form, beauty, or symmetry left.

At seven in the evening Mr. Gillies began the service, at his own (the college) church. It was so full before I came that I could not get in without a good deal of difficulty. After singing and prayer he explained a part of the Catechism, which he strongly and affectionately applied. After sermon he prayed and sung again, and concluded with the blessing. He then gave out, one after another, four hymns, which about a dozen young men sung. He had before desired those who were so minded to go away; but scarce any stirred till all was ended.

Thur. 19.-At seven I preached about a quarter of a mile from the town; but it was an extremely rough and blustering morning, and few people came either at the time or place of my preaching: the natural consequence of which was that I had but a small congregation. About four in the afternoon a tent, as they term it, was prepared: a kind of moving pulpit, covered with canvas at the top, behind, and on the sides. In this I preached near the place where I was in the morning, to near six times as many people as before; and I am persuaded what was spoken came to some of their hearts,' not in word only, but in power.'

April 1753, With Dr. Gillies in Glasgow

Fri. 20.-I had designed to preach at the same place, but the rain made it impracticable. So Mr. Gillies desired me to preach in his church, where I began between seven and eight. Surely with God nothing is impossible! Who would have believed, five-and-twenty years ago, either that the minister would have desired it or that I should have consented to preach in a Scotch kirk

We had a far larger congregation at four in the afternoon than the church could have contained. At seven Mr. Gillies preached another plain, home, affectionate sermon. Has not God still a favour for this city It was long eminent for serious religion; and He is able to repair what is now decayed, and to build up the waste places.

Sat. 21.-I had designed to ride to Edinburgh; but, at the desire of many, I deferred my journey till Monday. Here was now an open and effectual door, and not many adversaries. I could hear of none but a poor Seceder, who went up and down, and took much pains. But he did not see much fruit of his labor; the people would come and hear for themselves, both in the morning, when I explained (without touching the controversy),' Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect ' and in the afternoon, when I enforced ' Seek ye the Lord while He may be found.'

Sun. 22.-It rained much: nevertheless, upwards (I suppose) of a thousand people stayed with all willingness while I explained and applied ' This is life eternal, to know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent.' I was desired to preach afterwards at the prison, which I did about nine o'clock. All the felons, as well as debtors, behaved with such reverence as I never saw at any prison in England. It may be some even of these sinners will occasion joy in heaven.

The behavior of the people at church, both morning and afternoon, was beyond anything I ever saw but in our congregations. None bowed or courtesied to each other, either before or after the service; from the beginning to the end of which none talked or looked at any but the minister. Surely much of the power of godliness was here, when there is so much of the form still.

The meadow where I stood in the afternoon was filled from side to side. I spoke as closely as ever in my life. Many of the students and many of the soldiers were there; and I bear them witness they could bear ' sound doctrine.'

Mon. 23.-I had a great desire to go round by Kilsyth, in order to see that venerable man, Mr. Robe,[ The parish minister of Kilsyth, about twelve miles north-east of Glasgow,through whose earnest preaching are markable revival of religion took place, an account of which Mr. Robe published in the year 1742. See above,vol. iii.p. 178]. who was every day expecting (what his soul longed for) ' to depart and be with Christ.' But the continual rains had made it impracticable for us to add so many miles to our day's journey; so we rode on, straight by the Kirk o' Shots; reached Edinburgh by five in the afternoon; lodged at Tranent; and on Tuesday the 24th came to Berwick in good time, where I preached on the bowling-green at six. The wind was extremely sharp, and we had several showers while I was speaking; but I believe scarce five persons went away.

Wed. 25.-We came to Alnwick on the day[St. Mark's Day. See Stamp's Orphan House, p. 102.] whereon those who have gone through their apprenticeship are made free of the corporation. Sixteen or seventeen, we were informed, were to receive their freedom this day; and, in order thereto (such is the unparalleled wisdom of the present corporation, as well as of their forefathers), to walk through a great bog (purposely preserved for the occasion, otherwise it might have been drained long ago), which takes up some of them to the neck, and many of them to the breast

Thur. 26.-I spoke severally to those of the society,[ Of this society Jenny Keith was one (WHS. vol. vii. p. 65).] and found they had been harassed above measure by a few violent Predestinarians, who had at length separated themselves from us. It was well they saved me the trouble, for I can have no connexion with those who will be contentious. These I reject, not for their opinion, but for their sin; for their unchristian temper and unchristian practice; for being haters of reproof, haters of peace, haters of their brethren, and, consequently, of God.

May 1753., A Northern Journey

Sat. 28.-I returned to Newcastle.

Sun. 29.-I preached at Sunderland at eight and at twelve. As we were riding back the wind was exceeding high; but as we entered Newcastle a shower began, which laid the wind and then gave place to clear sunshine. I was extremely weary when we came in, having preached four times on Saturday. But my strength soon returned, so that the whole congregation near the Keelmen's Hospital could distinctly hear the entire sermon. And great was the Lord in the midst of us.

MAY 3, Thur.-I preached at Gateshead Fell to many more than the house[This, Tyerman says, was the second chapel built by the Methodists in the neighbourhood of Newcastle.]would contain. The society here was increased when I met them last from nine or ten to sixty members. They are now double the number, and, I trust, will ere long overtake their brethren in Kingswood.

Fri. 4.-We had the first General Quarterly Meeting of all the stewards round Newcastle, in order thoroughly to understand both the spiritual and temporal state of every society.

Mon. 7.-After preaching in Durham at noon I rode on to Stockton, and took my usual stand in the High Street about six in the evening.

Tues. 8.-I rode to Robin Hood's Bay, near Whitby. The town is very remarkably situated: it stands close to the sea, and is in great part built on craggy and steep rocks, some of which rise perpendicular from the water; and yet the land both on the north, south, and west is fruitful and well cultivated. I stood on a little rising near the quay, in a warm, still evening, and exhorted a multitude of people from all parts to ' seek the Lord while He may be found.' They were all attention, and most of them met me again at half an hour after four in the morning. I could gladly have spent some days here; but my stages were fixed, so on Wednesday the 9th I rode on to York.

We had a rough salute, as I went to preach, from a company of poor creatures in the way; but they were tolerably quiet during the preaching. The greatest inconvenience arose from the number of people, by reason of which the room [In Pump Yard. See Lyth's Early Methodism in York, p. 77.] (though unusually high) felt as hot as an oven.

Fri. 11.-I rode over to Rufforth [Mrs. Martha Thompson, who possessed a considerable estate at Rufforth, two miles and a half from Acomb, had 'opened her house to receive the Methodist preachers, and appears to have used her influence to obtain their admission into York." See Lyth's Early Methodism in York, pp. 53, 54-] and preached at one to an earnest congregation. A young man, remarkably serious and well-behaved, and rejoicing in his first love, who set out but a few minutes before me, was thrown by his horse, and (as it is termed) broke his neck. Just at the instant a person going by who understood the case took hold of him and pulled it into its place. Oh mystery of Providence! Why did not this man die when he was full of humble, holy love Why did he live to ' turn from the holy commandment' which was then written in his heart

Sat. 12.-I observed a remarkable change in the behaviour of almost all I met. The very rabble were grown civil, scarce any one now speaking a rude or an angry word.

Sun. 13.-I began preaching at seven, and God applied it to the hearts of the hearers.[ Thomas Mitchell, who accompanied Wesley on this visit, describes the effect of his preaching (EM.P. vol. i. p. 252).] Tears and groans were on every side, among high and low. God, as it were, bowed the heavens and came down. The flame of love went before Him; the rocks were broken in pieces, and the mountains flowed down at His presence.

I had designed to set out for Lincolnshire this morning; but, finding that a day of God's power was come, I sent one [Thomas Mitchell.] thither in my place, and, after preaching (as I had appointed) at Stamford Bridge [Tradition says in an old barn of one Robert Dilcock {Meth. Welcome, 1902, p. 245).] and at Pocklington, returned to York in the evening. Let us work together with Him, when, and where, and as He pleases!

Every night, while I stayed, many of the rich and honourable crowded in among us. And is not 'God able, even of these stones, to raise up children to Abraham'[ On May 16, and again on the 28th, he wrote to Blackwell, with greetings from his wife, who accompanied him on this journey, and a joyful assurance of a 'plentiful harvest' in all the North of England. (Works, vol. xii. pp. 179, 180.)]

May 1753, A Northern Journey

Sat. 19.-I preached at Pocklington again, and rode on to Whitgift Ferry. It rained a great part of the way, and just as we got to the water a furious shower began, which continued above half an hour, while we were striving to get John Haime's horse into the boat; but we were forced, after all, to leave him behind. We set out from Whitgift soon after four; but the violent rain which attended us till after seven made the road so dirty and slippery that our horses could hardly keep their feet, so that it was nine before we reached Epworth.

Sun. 20.-We had, as usual, most of the inhabitants of the town at the Cross in the afternoon. I called afterwards on

Mr. M------[ Probably Mr. Maw. See above, vol. lii. p. 135, and references.] and his wife, a venerable pair, calmly hastening into eternity. If those in Paradise know what passes on earth, I doubt not but my father is rejoicing and praising God, who has, in His own manner and time, accomplished what he had so often attempted in vain.[ Wesley Studies, p. 74-the'postscript of Samuel Wesley's last letter to his son John.]

Mon. 21.-I rode to Sykehouse, and preached about noon, and then went on for Leeds. In the afternoon we called at a house where a company of rough, butcherly men, exceeding drunk, were cursing and swearing at an unusual rate. I spoke to them, in spite of German prudence, and they were not only patient but exceeding thankful.

Tues. 22.-Most of our preachers met [The tenth Conference, at which Wesley, Grimshaw, Milner, twentysix itinerants, and sixteen local preachers were present (see Tyerman, vol. u. p. 166). The Minutes of this Conference, taken by Jacob Rowell, were published in an appendix to vol. i. of the Octavo Edition. At this Conference John Edwards, one of the preachers, asked for a permanent appointment to Leeds. This was refused, and he was appointed for six months only. When his appointed time expired he refused to give up the preacher's house or the chapel. Ejected, he drew part of the society with him, embraced Calvimstic opinions, built the White Chapel, and ministered usefully in Leeds for thirty years. See Methodist Heroes in the Great Haiaorth Round, chap. xiii. During this Conference the brethren entered complaint respecting some allegations made by Whitefield with reference to the preachers, the societies, and the general discipline. In a friendly letter Wesley conveyed these complaints to Whitefield.] and conversed freely together, as we did, morning and afternoon, to the end of the week, when our Conference ended with the same blessing as it began, God giving us all to be not only of one heart but of one judgement.

This week I read over Mr. Rimius's Candid Narrative.[ Henry Rimius (W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 80). A Candid Narrative of the Rise and Progress of the Herrnhuters, commonly called Moravians, tr Unitas Fratrum; London, 1753See Gentleman: s Mag. 1753, p 236; also references in Tyerman's Wesley, vol. ii. p. 156,and Whitefield, vol. ii. p. 301] It informed me of nothing new. I still think several of the inconsiderable members of that community are upright; but I fear their governors ' wax worse and worse, having their conscience seared as with a hot iron.'

Sun. 27.-I was afraid many of the congregation at Birstall would not be able to hear; but my fear was needless, for my voice was so strengthened that even those who sat in John Nelson's windows, a hundred yards off, could (as they afterwards told me) distinctly hear every word.

Tues. 29.-I preached at Keighley, where the loving spirit and exemplary behavior of one young man[Probably Thomas Colbeck, one of the most amiable characters in Yorkshire. See above, vol. iii. p. 369, and Laycock's Methodist Heroes, p.: 39.] has been a means of convincing almost all the town, except those of his own household.

Wed. 30.-I rode to Haworth, where Mr. Grimshaw read prayers, and I preached to a crowded congregation; but, having preached ten or eleven times in three days, besides meeting the societies, my voice began to fail. Not that I was hoarse at all, but I had not strength to speak. However, it was restored at Heptonstall in the afternoon, so that the whole congregation could hear. When shall we learn to take thought only for the present hour Is it not enough that God gives help when we want it

Thur. 31.-I rode through a delightful vale to General Wood,[ A farmstead. See W.H.S. vol. vi. P79] near Todmorden. The sun was burning hot, but they set up a little tent for me, resembling that I had at Glasgow. The people stood or sat on the grass round about. The afternoon was the hottest I ever remember in England, so that by the time we came to Bolton I was fit for nothing but to lie down. However, in the evening my strength was renewed, and we rejoiced together in God our Savior.

June 1783., An ' Odd Story'

JUNE 2, Sat.-Hardly knowing how to give credit to an odd story which I had heard, that one of our preachers [Jonathan Catlow. See, on the case, Watson's Reply to Southey, p. 197 n.: ' a peculiarity known in the family.' For Catlow, see Everett's Manchester, pp. 93, 94; Meth. Rec. Winter No., 1904, p. 86; and Atmore's Methodist Memorial, p. 73.] was accustomed to preach in his sleep, I inquired more particularly concerning it, and received the following account:

On Friday, May 25, about one in the morning, being then fast asleep, he began to speak. There were present, in two or three minutes, William, Mary, Amelia Shent, John Haime, John Hampson, Joseph Jones, Thomas Mitchell, and Ann Foghill.

He first exhorted the congregation to ' sing with the spirit and the understanding also,' and gave them directions how to do it. He then gave out that hymn, line by line-

Come, Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove,

With all Thy quick'ning powers;

pitching the tune, and singing it to the end. He added an exhortation to take heed how they heard; then he named his text, i John v. 19: 'We know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedness.' He divided his discourse into six parts, undertaking to show (i) that all true believers are of God; (2) that they know they are of God; (3) that the world lieth in wickedness; (4) that every individual who is of the world is in this condition; (5) the dreadful end of such. He (6) closed with an exhortation to those who were of God and those who were of the world.

After he had gone through two or three heads he broke off, and began to speak to a clergyman, who came in and interrupted him. He disputed with him for some time, leaving him space to propose his objections, and then answering them one by one. Afterwards he desired the congregation, now the disturber was gone, to return thanks to God, and so gave out and sang-

Praise God, from whom pure blessings flow!

When he had done preaching he desired the society to meet, to whom he first gave out a hymn, as before, and then exhorted them to love one another: (i) because they had one Creator, Preserver, and Father; (2) because they had all one Redeemer; (3) because they had all one Sanctifier; (4) because they were walking in one way of holiness; and (5) because they were all going to one heaven.

Having sung a parting verse, he said (as shaking each by the hand), ' Good-night, brother; good-night, sister.' This lasted till about a quarter after two, he being fast asleep all the time. In the morning he knew nothing of all this, having, as he apprehended, slept from night to morning without dreaming at all.

By what principles of philosophy can we account for this

Mon. 4.-I rode from Manchester to Chelmorton in-the Peak,[For Bennet's invitation to Chelmorton by the Marsdens and the grandfather of Robert Lomas see Memoir of J. Marsden, Meth. Mag. 1808, p. 32.] where I preached in a little meadow, and reached Sheffield in the evening.

Tues. 5.-I rode over to Jonathan Booth's at Woodseats, whose daughter had been ill in a very uncommon manner. The account her parents gave of it was as follows:

About the middle of December 1752 Elizabeth Booth,[ See Methodism in Sheffield, p. 89; Arm. Mag. 1783, p. 412; and especially Seed's History of Norfolk Street Chapel, p. 20.] junior, near ten years old, began to complain of a pain in her breast, which continued three days. On the fourth day, in a moment, without any provocation, she began to be in a vehement rage, reviling her mother, and throwing at the maid what came next to hand. This fit continued near an hour; then in an instant she was quite calm. The next morning she fell into a fit of another kind-being stretched out, and stiff as a dead carcase. Thus she lay about an hour. In the afternoon she was suddenly seized with violent involuntary laughter; and she had some or other of these fits several times a day for about a month. In the intervals of them she was in great heaviness of soul, and continually crying for mercy, till one Saturday, as she lay stretched out on the bed, she broke out, ' I know that my Redeemer liveth.' Her faith and love increased from that time; but so did the violence of her fits also. And often while she was rejoicing and praising God she would cry out, 10 Lord!' and, losing her senses at once, lie as dead, or laugh violently, or rave and blaspheme.

In the middle of February she grew more outrageous than ever. She frequently strove to throw herself into the fire or out of the window. Often she attempted to tear the Bible, cursing it in the bitterest manner; and many times she uttered oaths and blasphemies too horrid to be repeated. Next to the Bible, her greatest rage was against the Methodists-Mr. Wesley in particular. She frequently told us where he was and what he was then doing, adding, ' He will be here soon'; and at another time, ' Now he is galloping down the lane, and two men with him." In the intervals of her fits she was unusually stupid, and moped, as if void of common understanding; and yet sometimes broke out into vehement prayer, to the amazement of all that heard.

June 1703., The Case of Elizabeth Booth

Sometimes she would strip herself stark naked and run up and down the house, screaming and crying, ' Save me! Save me! He will tear me in pieces.' At other times she cried out, ' He is tearing off my breasts; he is pouring melted lead down my throat. Now I suffer what the martyrs suffered; but I have not the martyrs' faith.'

She frequently spoke as if she was another person, saying to her father, ' This girl is not thine, but mine. I have got possession of her, and I will keep her," with many expressions of the same kind.

She often seemed to be in a trance, and said she saw many visions- sometimes of heaven or hell or judgement, sometimes of things which she said would shortly come to pass.

In the beginning of March Mrs. Green came over to Rotherham, who herself gave me the following account: ' Soon after I came in she fell into a raging fit, blaspheming and cursing her father and me. She added, " It was I that made Green's horse so bad the other day " (which had been taken ill in a most unaccountable manner as soon as he was put into the stable). " I did it that thou mightest have the preaching no more; and I had almost persuaded thee to it. It was I that made thee bad last night." She was then taken in an unusual way. All the time she spoke she was violently convulsed, and appeared to be in strong agony. After about a quarter of an hour she brake out into prayer, and then came to herself, only still dull and heavy.'

John Thorpe, of Rotherham,[ Methodism in Sheffield, p. 15; Life of C. of Huntingdon, vol. i. pp. 148, 266. Mr. Thorpe, after his conversion, joined the Methodists, and Wesley stationed him at Rotherham. Later he became pastor of an Independent congregation. His son, the Rev. William Thorpe, was minister of Castle Green Chapel, Bristol, in which the Ellisons and some of the Whereats worshipped.

A letter from J. Wesley to his greatniece, Patience Whereat (formerly Ellison) brings him, in extreme old age, again into contact with this circle. W. Thorpe's ministry was remarkably powerful.] had often a desire to pray for her in the congregation; but he was as often hindered by a strong and sudden impression on his mind that she was dead. When he came to Woodseats and began to mention what a desire he had had, the girl, being then in a raging fit, cried out, ' I have made a fool of Thorpe!' and burst out into a loud laughter.

In the beginning of May all these symptoms ceased, and she continues in health both of soul and body.[ The girl was afterwards married to John Oliver, one of the preachers, who left the work in 1784 (Methodism in Sheffield, p. 92).]

Wed. 6.-It being still sultry hot, I preached under a shady tree at Barley Hall, and in an open place at Rotherham in the evening. On Friday the 8th we reached Nottingham. Mr. S. met us here, and gave us a pleasing account of his congregation at S------, continually increasing, and growing more earnest and more scandalous every day. At Nottingham also God is greatly reviving His work, and pouring water upon the dry ground.

In the afternoon I rode to Markfield,[ Methodism in this village was the mother church in these parts (W.M. Mag. 1834, p. 102). Mr. Ellis, the vicar, was very favourable to Methodism. See above, vol. ii. pp. 462-3.]where I carefully read over Mr. Stinstra's tract upon Fanaticism.[ See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 80; Benham's Memoirs of James Button, p. 343; Abbey and Overton's English Church, vol. i. p. 593.] He is doubtless a well-meaning man, but deeply ignorant of the subject he treats of; and his arguments are of no force at all, for they prove abundantly too much. They utterly overthrow many of the grand arguments for Christianity; and every man may, on those principles, prove the Apostles to have been fanatics to a Mon.

Sun. 10 (being Whit Sunday).-The church contained the congregation tolerably well. After dinner a gentleman who came from Leicester, eight miles off, invited me thither.[ Some have thought that this was Mr. ColtMon. See Catherine Hutton and her Friends, pp. 62, 87; above,vol. ii. p. 463; Meth. Rec. Nov. I, 1900.] About eight I preached there, in a place near the walls, called the Butt Close. The people came running together from all parts, high and low, rich and poor; and their behaviour surprised me; they were so serious and attentive, not one offering any interruption.

Mon. 11.-We rode to Woburn.

Tuesday the I2th promised to be an exceeding hot day; but the clouds rose as soon as we set out, and continued till we were near Markyate Street. The sun was then burning hot, so that how my fellow travellers would get forward I knew not. But God knew. As soon as we set out a cloud arose and covered us again. The wind then came about and blew in our faces, so that we had a tolerable cool ride to London.

I found the town much alarmed with Mr. Rimius's Narrative[Heber, in his Bampton Lecture, says: ' The calumnies of Rimius and Stinstra against the Moravian Brethren are cases in point. No one now believes them. Yet they could deceive even Warburton.' (Quoted in D'Israeli's Curiosities of Literature, vol. iii. p. 145.)] and Mr. Whitefield's Letter to Count Zinzendorf [G. Whitefield's Expostulatory Letter to Count Zinzendorf, &c. See Tyerman's Whitefield, vol. ii. p. 301.]. It seems, indeed, that God is hastening to bring to light those hidden works of darkness. And undoubtedly none who reads those tracts with any degree of impartiality will ever more (unless he be himself under a strong delusion) go near the tents of those wicked men.

July 1753., In London

Tues. 19.-Mr. Whitefield showed me the letters he had lately received from the Count, Cossart,[ Henry Frederick Cossart, a Moravian pioneer. See W.H.S. vol. iii. p. 149; Moravian Messenger, 1876, p. 247.] P. Bohler, and James Hutton.[ For their letters see Memoirs o4James Hutton, pp. 304, 305.] I was amazed. Either furious anger or settled contempt breathed in every one of them.[ ' Method with the chief in any sect is -to treat with a sovereign contempt or VOL. IV to attack so that their hearts quake" (Memoirs of James Hutton, p. 568, No. ix)] Were they ashamed after all the abominations they had committed No; they were not ashamed: they turned the tables upon Mr. Whitefield. Cossart protested before God he had never made Lynde any offer at all. The Count blustered, like himself, and roundly averred he could say something if he would. James Hutton said flat,' You have more than diabolical impudence: I believe the devil himself has not so much."

Sun. 24.-Mr. Walsh preached at Short's Gardens in Irish. Abundance of his countrymen flocked to hear, and some were cut to the heart. How many means does God use to bring poor wanderers back to Himself!

JULY 1, Sun.-He preached in Irish in Moorfields. The congregation was exceeding large, and behaved seriously, though probably many of them came purely to hear what manner of language it was. For the sake of these he preached afterwards in English, if by any means he might gain some.

Tues. 3.-I rode over to Mr. K------'s, at Teddington, ' an Israelite indeed.' Dr. Hales[The celebrated scientist and philosopher. See ' Wesley's Interviews with Famous People,' Wesley Studies, p. 182. Known to C. Wesley, and Pope's friend and neighbor.] sent after dinner to desire our company, and showed us several experiments. How well do philosophy and religion agree in a man of sound understanding!

Sun. 8.-After preaching at the chapel, morning and afternoon, I took horse with Mr. P------. We had designed to ride only two or three hours, in order to shorten the next day's journey. But a young man who overtook us near Kingston induced us to change our purpose. So we only rested about half an hour at Cobham; and, leaving it between nine and ten, rode on softly in a calm, moonshiny night, and about twelve came to Godalming. We took horse again at half an hour past four, and reached Portsmouth about one.

I was surprised to find so little fruit here, after so much preaching. That accursed itch of disputing had wellnigh destroyed all the seed which had been sown.[ See Memoir of Mr. Joseph Webb, Meth. Mag 1819, p. 881; Rev. H. Smith's Wesleyan Methodism in Portsmouth; article in Meth. Rec. Jan. 1,1903. Whitefield had spent a fortnight here in 1749-] And this ' vain jangling' they called ' contending for the faith.' I doubt the whole faith of these poor wretches is but an opinion.[ The society belonged, not to Wesley, but to the Countess of Huntingdon (Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol. ii. p 170).]

After a little rest we took a walk round the town, which is regularly fortified, and is, I suppose, the only regular fortification in Great Britain or Ireland. Gosport, Portsmouth, and the Common (which is now all turned into streets), may probably contain half as many people as Bristol; and so civil a people I never saw before in any seaport town in England.

I preached at half an hour after six in an open part of the Common adjoining to the new church.[ St. George's.] The congregation was large and well-behaved; not one scoffer did I see, nor one trifler. In the morning, Tuesday the xoth, I went on board a hoy, and in three hours landed at Cowes, in the Isle of Wight: as far exceeding the Isle of Anglesey, both in pleasantness and fruitfulness, as that exceeds the rocks of Scilly.

We rode straight to Newport, the chief town in the Isle,[ ' One of the preachers had been there for some time' ( Works, vol. xiii. p. 336).] and found a little society in tolerable order. Several of them had found peace with God. One informed me it was about eight years ago since she first knew her interest in Christ, by means of one who called there in his way to Pennsylvania; but, having none to speak to, or advise with, she was long tormented with doubts and fears. After some years she received a fresh manifestation of His love, and could not doubt or fear any more. She is now (and has been long) confined to her bed, and consuming away with pining sickness; but all is good to her, for she has learned in everything to give thanks.

July 1753, In the Isle of Wight

At half an hour after six I preached in the market-place to a numerous congregation, but they were not so serious as those at Portsmouth. Many children made much noise, and many grown persons were talking aloud, almost all the time I was preaching. It was quite otherwise at five in the morning. There was a large congregation again, and every person therein seemed to know this was the word whereby God would judge them in the last day.

In the afternoon I walked to Carisbrooke Castle; or rather, the poor remains of it. It stands upon a solid rock on the top of a hill, and commands a beautiful prospect. There is a well in it, cut quite through the rock, said to be seventy-two yards deep; and another in the citadel, near a hundred. They drew up the water by an ass, which they assured us was sixty years old. But all the stately apartments lie in ruins. Only just enough of them is left to show the chamber where poor King Charles was confined, and the window through which he attempted to escape.

In the evening the congregation at Newport was more numerous and more serious than the night before. Only one drunken man made a little disturbance. But the mayor ordered him to be taken away.[ He makes no allusion to his earlier visit to the island in 1735.]

Thur. 12.-We set out early from Newport, and crossed over from Cowes to Southampton. In the afternoon we came to Salisbury, and on Saturday rode on to Shaftesbury.[ He preached at Bradford, Sarum, Frome, and Freshford in July.]

I preached in the new house in the evening, on Sunday afternoon at Longbridge Deverill; and on Monday the i6th, before noon, praised God with our brethren at Bristol.

Tues. 17.-At their earnest desire, I preached to the poor colliers confined in Newgate on account of the late riot.[ Provoked by the dearness of bread, the colliers arose. The riot was quelled by the Scots Greys. (Latimer's History, p. 303; Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol. ii. p. 171; Pawlyn's Bristol Methodism, p. 48.)] They would not hear the gospel while they were at liberty. God grant they may profit by it now!

Wed. 18.-We set out for the west, and on Friday the 2Oth came to Plymouth Dock. I found much hurt had been done here by the bitter zeal of two or three bigots for their opinion. Two years ago they promised, in the most solemn manner, to let all controversy alone; but quickly after the fire broke out anew, and has been devouring ever since.

Sat. 21.-I endeavoured to convince them that they were destroying, not promoting, the work of God; and on Sunday, when I spake to the society one by one, they seemed once more aware of Satan's devices.

Mon. 23.-I rode to Launceston, and had the first general meeting of the stewards for the eastern part of Cornwall. In the evening I preached in perfect peace-a great blessing, if it be not bought too dear: if the world does not begin to love us because we love the world.

Tues. 24.-In the road to Camelford I was taken with such a bleeding at the nose as I have not had since my return from Georgia. For a mile or two it increased more and more, and then at once stopped of itself; so I rode on comfortably (though the day was extremely hot), and reached St. Agnes in the evening.

On Wednesday the 25th the stewards met at St. Ives from the western part of Cornwall. The next day I began examining the society, but I was soon obliged to stop short. I found an accursed thing among them: wellnigh one and all bought or sold uncustomed goods. I therefore delayed speaking to any more till I had met them all together. This I did in the evening, and told them plain, either they must put this abomination away, or they would see my face no more.

Fri. 27.-They severally promised so to do. So I trust this plague is stayed.[ On Friday, July 27, he preached at Besore.]

Sat. 28.-After preaching to the little flock at Zennor, we rode on to St. Just; and found such a congregation at six in the evening as we used to have ten years since. I did not find any society in the county so much alive to God as this. Fifty or threescore have been added to it lately, and many children filled with peace and joy in believing.

Aug. 1753., In Cornwall

Sun. 29.-I preached at eight to a still larger congregation; and in Morvah at one, to near the same number. Many back sliders were among them; to whom I cried,' How shall I give thee up, Ephraim ' Few of the congregation were unmoved, and when we wrestled with God in prayer we had a strong hope He would not cast them off for ever.[ In July he preached also at St. Agnes.]

About five I began preaching at Newlyn on part of the Gospel for the day: ' Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.' In the morning I waked between two and three. I had had a looseness for several days.

On Sunday it increased every hour; but I was resolved, with God's help, to preach where I had appointed. I had now, with the flux, a continual headache, violent vomitings, and, several times in an hour, the cramp in my feet or legs; sometimes in both legs and both thighs together. But God enabled me to be thoroughly content, and thankfully resigned to Him. I desired one to preach in my place in Ludgvan at noon, and at Helston in the evening; and another on Tuesday noon at Porkellis; promising, if I was able, to meet them in the evening.

Tues. 31.-After living a day and a half on claret and water, I found myself so easy that I thought I could ride to Crowan. I found no inconvenience the first hour, but in the second my disorder returned. However, I rode on, being unwilling to disappoint the congregation, and preached on 'Be careful for nothing.' I then rode straight, as fast as I conveniently could, to Mr. Harris's in Camborne.[ In July he preached at Besore thrice. Sir George Smith, whose house (Trehske) is within two miles of Besore, notes the curious fact that, whereas Wesley is only known to have preached once in Truro, he frequently preached in Besore, the reason doubtless being that Truro at this time was amply served with evangelical preaching by the Rev. Samuel Walker, the vicar, who was one of Wesley's trusted friends. He went where he was most needed.]

Aug. 1, Wed.-At half an hour after two in the morning my disorder came with more violence than ever. The cramp likewise returned-sometimes in my feet or hand, sometimes in my thighs, my side, or my throat. I had also a continual sickness, and a sensation of fullness at my stomach, as if it were ready to burst. I took a vomit, but it hardly wrought at all; nor did anything I took make any alteration. Thus I continued all day, and all the following night; yet this I could not but particularly observe-I had no headache, no colic, nor any pain (only the cramp), from first to last.

Thur. 2.-Perceiving I gained no ground, but rather grew weaker and weaker, my stomach being drawn downward, so that I could not stand nor lie but on my right side, I sent to Redruth for Mr. Carter, who came without delay. Here again I saw the gracious providence of God in casting me on so sensible and skilful a Mon. He advised me to persist in the same regimen I was in, and prescribed no physic, except a small dose of rhubarb. But even this (as I expected it would) was thrown up again immediately.

I was now well satisfied, having had the best advice which could be procured, though my disorder continued much as before. But about five in the afternoon it ceased at once, without any visible cause. The cramp also was gone, my stomach was easy, and I laid down and slept till six in the morning.

Fri, 3.-I began to recover my strength, so that I could sit up near two hours together. And from this time I felt no inconvenience; only that I could not talk, nor stand long without resting.

Sun. 5.-In the afternoon I rode to Redruth, and preached to a large congregation in an open part of the street. My voice was low, but, the day being calm, I believe all could hear; and after I had done, I felt myself considerably stronger than when I begun.

Mon. 6.-1 preached at Gwennap at five, and afterwards saw a strange sight-a man that is old and rich, and yet not covetous. In the evening I preached at Penryn, and found my strength so restored that I could speak loud enough to be heard by a numerous congregation; and thrice the next day, at Penryn, Besore [In the Ordnance Map it appears as Bezoar See above, p. 77.] (near Truro), and St. Ewe.[ In August he preached also at ' Mary Week,' St. Mewan, and Sand.]

Wed. 8.-We were invited to Mevagissey, a small town on the south sea. As soon as we entered the town many ran together, crying, 'See, the Methodees are come.' But they only gaped and stared; so that we returned unmolested to the house I was to preach at, a mile from the town. Many serious people were waiting for us, but most of them deeply ignorant. While I was showing them the first principles of Christianity many of the rabble from the town came up. They looked as fierce as lions, but in a few minutes changed their countenance and stood still. Toward the close some began to laugh and talk, who grew more boisterous after I had concluded. But I walked straight through the midst of them, and took horse without any interruption.

Aug. 1753., In North Cornwall

On Thursday the gth I rode to Port Isaac, and the next day to Trewalder. The little society here meet every night and morning, with a preacher or without; and whoever comes among them quickly feels what spirit they are of.

Sat. 11.-The rain stopped at twelve, and gave me an opportunity of preaching in the market-place at Camelford. I saw only one person in the congregation who was not deeply serious. That one (which I was sorry to hear) was the curate of the parish.

Almost as soon as we set out we were met by such a shower of rain as I never saw before in Europe. But it did us no hurt; we came very well, though very wet, to St. Gennys.

Sun. 12.-I never saw so many people in this church; nor did I ever before speak so plainly to them. They hear; but when will they feel Oh what can man do toward raising either dead bodies or dead souls!

Mon. 13.-The rain attended us all the way to Launceston. I preached at noon, but was not dry till the evening. Yet I did not catch any cold at all. What can hurt, without leave from God

Tues. 14.-I willingly accepted the offer of preaching in the house lately built for Mr. Whitefield at Plymouth Dock. Thus it behoveth us to trample on bigotry and party zeal. Ought not all who love God to love one another [At this time Whitefield was visiting and preaching in Wesley's societies in the north, and on the 14th was at Newcastle.]

Thur. 16.-I rode to Cullompton, but could not reach it till it was too late to preach.[ But the Sermon Register indicates preaching, probably the day following m

the early morning and later in the day,giving three texts]

Sun. 19.-I preached thrice at Tiverton, rode to Middlezoy the next day, and on Tuesday to Bristol.

Fri. 24.-I endeavoured once more to bring Kingswood School into order. Surely the importance of this design is apparent, even from the difficulties that attend it. I have spent more money and time and care on this than almost any design I ever had; and still it exercises all the patience I have. But it is worth all the labour.

Mon. 27.-I came early to the New Passage; but the wind, shifting, obliged me to wait near six hours. When we were almost over it shifted again, so that we could not land till between six and seven.

Tues. 28.-I reached Cardiff. Finding I had all here to begin anew, I set out as at first, by preaching in the Castle Yard on ' Lord, are there few that be saved' I afterwards met what was once a society, and in the morning spoke severally to a few who were still desirous to join together, and build up, not devour, one another.

I preached in the evening at Fonmon, and on Thursday the 3<Dth spake to many at Cardiff who were resolved to set out once more in the Bible-way and strengthen each other's hands in God.

Fri. 31.-We had a pleasant ride and a ready passage; so that we reached Bristol in the afternoon. I preached in the evening over the remains of Mary Henley, a good soldier of Jesus Christ, who died rejoicing in His love the same day I set out for Cardiff.

SEPT. 3, Mon.-I began visiting the little societies in Somersetshire and Wiltshire. This evening I preached at Shepton Mallet, and found much life among the poor, plain people. It was not so at Oakhill the next day, where many once alive have drawn back to perdition. But at Coleford, in the evening, I found many living souls, though joined with some who did not adorn the gospel.

Wed. 5.-I rode over to Kingswood, a little town near

Wotton-under-Edge.[ Kingswood junior it is called in the Sermon Register, preached at Road and Westbury.]

Some weeks since W----- S----- was invited to preach at Wotton; which he did once, in great peace. But the next time he went the mob was so turbulent that he could not finish his sermon, upon which one desired him to come to Kingswood; which he did, and many people heard him gladly. Soon after I came in, a multitude of people was gathered from all parts. A large congregation was there at five in the morning, and a larger than ever in the evening. The next morning I accepted of Mr. Baylis's offer; and, after reading prayers, preached at the church. All the people expressed huge good-will, but none appeared to be deeply affected.

At half an hour after twelve I preached in the street at Wickwar, about four miles from Kingswood, where there has been a small society for some years, many of whom can rejoice in God. The rest of the audience gave a civil attention, and seemed little pleased or displeased at the matter.

Mon. 10.-I preached to the condemned malefactors in Newgate, but I could make little impression upon them.[ See Latimer's History, p. 305. Probably in connexion with the Bristol riots, but no actual executions are referred to in Latimer's Histoiy.] I then took horse for Paulton, where I called on Stephen Plummer, once of our society, but now a zealous Quaker. He was much pleased with my calling, and came to hear me preach. Being straitened for time, I concluded sooner than usual; but as soon as I had done Stephen began. After I had listened half an hour, finding he was no nearer the end, I rose up to go away. His sister then begged him to leave off, on which he flew into a violent rage, and roared louder and louder, till an honest man took him in his arms and gently carried him away.

What a wise providence was it that this poor young man turned Quaker some years before he ran mad! So the honour of turning his brain now rests upon them, which otherwise must have fallen upon the Methodists.

I preached at six in the evening at Buckland, about two miles from Frome, in a meadow of Mr. Jeremiah Emblem's,[ See Tuck's Methodism in Frome,

pp. 35-40 (Society Rolls of Frome and four other places, 1759-62). Mr. Emblem seems to have removed to Bristol, where Wesley's Roll for 1783 gives names that support this view.] a wonderful monument of the grace of God, who, from the day he received peace (being then acquainted with no Methodist), has continually walked in the light of God's countenance. The curate had provided a mob, with horns and other things convenient, to prevent the congregation's hearing me. But the better half of the mob soon left their fellows, and listened with great attention. The rest did no harm, so that we had a comfortable opportunity, and another at five in the morning.

Tues. 11.-I rode once more to New Kingswood. The hearers were more numerous than ever. As I did not expect to see them soon again, I used once more all possible plainness of speech, and their behaviour seemed to show that the word of God found its way into their hearts.[ On Wednesday, Sept. 12, he preached at Bath, and on the 22nd at Bearfield.]

Fri. 14.-I read with great attention the Chevalier Ramsay's Philosophical Principles of Religion. [See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 80.] He undertakes to solve all the difficulties in the Christian revelation, allowing him only a few postulata: (i) That human souls all existed, and personally sinned in Paradise; (2) that the souls of brutes are fallen angels; (3) that pain is the only possible means whereby God Himself can cure sin; and (4) that He will in the end, by the pains of purgatory, purify and restore all men and all devils. Amazing work this!

Mon. 17.-I began visiting the societies in Wiltshire, and found much cause to praise God on their behalf.[ In Sept. he preached in Bristol, Road, Melksham, and Freshford. On the 24th he wrote to Dr. Robertson ( Works, vol. xii. p. 210). See below, p. 99.]

Thur. 27.-I was desired by Lady F.[ Lady Fitzmaurice (Mary Fitzmaurice of Gallane), who married her first cousin John, Earl of Shelburne. Her son, born in 1737, was first Marquis of Lansdowne, Prime Minister in 1782. She led her husband to leave Ireland and buy the Bowood property. Her husband's sister was Lady Arabella Denny (see below, May 5, 1783).] to visit her daughter, ill of a consumption. I found much pity, both for the parent and the child, pining away in the bloom of youth, and yet not without joy, as she was already much convinced of sin, and seemed to be on the very brink of deliverance. I saw her once more on Saturday the 29th, and left her patiently waiting for God. Not long after my brother spent some time with her in prayer, and was constrained, to the surprise of all that were present, to ask of God again and again that He would perfect His work in her soul, and take her to Himself. Almost as soon as he had done, she stretched out her hands, said,' Come, Lord

Jesus,' and died.

Oct. 1763., In the Isle of Wight

OCT. I, Mon.-I rode to Salisbury, and the next day to a village in the New Forest, eight miles wide of Southampton,[ The village may have been Ower, near Castle Malwood.] where I preached in the evening to a well-meaning, serious

congregation.

Wed. 3.-We rode to Southampton, thence crossed over to Cowes, and reached Newport before eleven.

At five in the afternoon I went to the market-place. The congregation was large and deeply attentive. It was near the same at six in the evening, and all seemed to drink in the exhortation to ' present themselves a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God.'

aA little before noon we set out for Shorwell, a village six miles south from Newport. I never saw a more fruitful or a more pleasant country than the inland part of this island. About one I preached at Shorwell to (I suppose) all the poor and middling people of the town. I believe some of the rich also designed to come, but something of more importance-a dinner-came between.

At five I preached again at Newport to most of the town, and many who came from the neighbouring villages. Surely, if there was any here to preach the word of God with power, a multitude would soon be obedient to the faith.

Fri. 5.-After preaching at six, I left this humane, loving people, rode to Cowes, and crossed over to Portsmouth. Here I found another kind of people, who had disputed themselves out of the power, and wellnigh the form, of religion. However, I laboured (and not altogether in vain) to soften and compose their jarring spirits, both this evening and the next day.

On Sunday noon I preached in the street at Fareham. Many gave great attention, but seemed neither to feel nor understand anything. At five I began on Portsmouth Common. I admired not so much the immense number of people as the uncommon decency of behaviour which ran through the whole congregation. After sermon I explained to them at large the nature and design of our societies, and desired that, if any of them were willing to join therein, they would call on me, either that evening or in the morning. I made no account of that shadow of a society which was before, without classes, without order or rules, having never seen, read, or heard the printed rules which ought to have been given them at their very first meeting.[ The Sermon Register in October has also Sarum, Shaftesbury, and Wick.]

Mon. 8.-I rode to Godalming, and the next day to London. After resting there five days,[ His ideas as to ' rest' were peculiar. On October 9 he expounded seven chapters and preached six sermons.] on Monday the isth I rode to Bedford. The melancholy account which I received here was as follows:

1. In the year 1739 Mr. Ingham and Wfilliam Dfelamotte came to Bedford.[ On the invitation of Mr. Francis Okeley and the Rev. Jacob Rogers, excurate o fSt. Paul's (see below, Oct. 16). The work of Mr. Rogers was the occasion of the invitation. The Moravians first met for worship at the house of Mrs. Okeley, in High Street, and chiefly at her expense the first Moravian chapel was built in 1751. (J. A. Sharp, Bedford Meth. Mag. Jan. 1894.) A Mr. Francis Okeley was Mayor of Bedford in 171920.] By them I was convinced that I was in a state of damnation, though I was outwardly unblamable. Some of the Germans came down in 1741, and engaged (i) to draw no one from the Church; (2) to hold a meeting on Sunday nights for us that were of the Church. On these conditions I joined with them. But in the beginning of 1742 they dropped the Sunday-night preaching, and required us to attend their meeting at the same hour that we used to go to church. I was much troubled at this, and wrote to Mr. John Wesley, entreating him to come down and help us.

2. When the Brethren learned this they gave me abundance of fair words, and persuaded me to write again, and desire Mr. Wesley not to come. I was then made servant at the lovefeast. I still received the sacrament at the church once a year, but I regarded the church less and less, and, being continually taught that works signified nothing, and that we could not do them without trusting in them, I, in a while, left off all works of charity, as well as reading the Bible and private prayer.

3. Their first church was settled here in the beginning of the year 1744. On February 18 I was received into the congregation at London, and likewise into the Helpers' Conference. In 1746 Heckenwalder, the Chief Labourer,[ Minister of the congregation. For his appointment to Bedford see Huttotfs Memoirs, p. 101.]

insisted on my putting myself out of the corporation.[ This points to W-----P-----(seebelow, par. 9) being none other than William Parker, afterwards mayor (Journal, April 12, 1757; Feb. 3, 1758; Feb. 5, 1761; Oct. 16, 1772; Nov. 30,1784). His son-in-law, E-----C------,his successor in the mayoralty (Oct. 16, '772), is, as the identification requires, Edward ChapMon. Doubtless the original document is in the Fetter Lane Archives. Possibly also Parker's conflict of mind is traceable in the entries.

See Nov. 14, 1757; March 9, 1758. This last reference may be to Okeley. See Telford's John Wesley, p. 210; cf. W.M. Mag. 1833, p. 51.]

Oct. 17030, A 'Melancholy Account'

I was in much doubt whether it was right so to do, but he commanded, and I obeyed. The next year he went to London, and, at his return to Bedford, spoke to this effect: ' My brethren, we have received new orders. In London, Yorkshire, and all other places no person is to go out of the town without the leave of the Chief Labourer. So it must be here. Observe, no one must go out of the town, no, not a mile, without leave from me.' [A somewhat forced extension of Order No. 19 of Bohler's Societies (see Hutton's version of these Orders, p. 29 ff., and cf. above, vol. i. p. 458). Under this rule Wesley's proposed first visit to Bristol was debated (see above, vol. ii. p. 157).]

4. In spring 1750 they began building the chapel, for which they collected near two hundred pounds, and borrowed eight hundred more, for which eight of the English brethren were engaged. Two of the English were bound for a hundred more, but none of the ten have any security at all. They promised, indeed, to lodge the writings of the house in their hands, but it was never done.

5. About this time a relation left me two houses near that wherein the single men lived. The Brethren advised me to rebuild them and add another, for a marriage plan, promising to let me have whatever ground I wanted behind the houses. This promise they renewed over and over. About Michaelmas I began, and followed their direction in the whole building; but the night before I began I went to Anton,[ Anton Seifart.] the Chief Laborer, and told him ' the workmen were ready. If I am to have ground I will go on, but not else.' He said, ' Go on, you shall have ground.' Soon after he set out the ground, for which I was to give eight pounds; but, just as the houses were finished, Anton and Schlicht sent for me and told me they had received a letter from London, and I must have no ground, neither would they use the houses for a marriage plan. They were too near the single men, some of whom might perhaps see a woman sometimes in the yard. At the same time they desired I would stop up my doors and windows on that side; if I would, they would either buy the houses or take a lease of them.

I did as they desired. We then made several agreements, one after another; but they would stand to none of them. I offered them to lose thirty pounds, nay, at last fifty, out of my pocket; but in vain. So at this day I have but three pounds a year rent in all, out of which the land-tax is to be paid.

6. It is a general observation in Bedford that the Brethren are the worst paymasters in the town. They contract debts, and take no care or thought about discharging them. I have too much proof of this in my own case; for many of them are in my debt, and never come near me.

7. Most of the English who are with them, that are of any trade, now trade for the Saviour; that is, they work for the Germans, who take all the profits, and use them as their journeymen. As such they punctually give in their accounts and cash; and if they want a coat, or anything, ask it of the Brethren.

Mr. -----traded for and lent money to the Savior till he was

absolutely ruined. After he had sunk above seven hundred pounds, he begged to have forty or fifty repaid; but in vain. But, at length, by vehement importunity, he procured eighteen pounds.

8. Mr. Rimius [See above, p. 72.] has said nothing to what might have been said concerning their marriage economy. I know a hundred times more than he has written; but the particulars are too shocking to relate. I believe no such things were ever practiced before; no, not among the most barbarous heathens.

9. A fortnight before Christmas last a young man of their congregation having married my daughter without having first obtained the leave of their Head Laborer, one of the Laborers came to my house, and read to me nearly these words:

' We, the Elders of the congregation of the Brethren, declare to you, William Parker, M-----Pfarker, your wife, Edward Chapman, and E------, your daughter, are utterly cut off from all church communion, from all fellowship and connexion whatsoever, with the Brethren, and that for ever and ever.'

In the evening I met the little society,[ Possibly meeting in Parker's house. Later William Parker lived in Angel (i.e. Harpur) Street, in a large brick house next to the oldest building of the Preparatory Council School.] just escaped with the skin of their teeth. From the account which each of these likewise gave, it appeared clear to a demonstration (i) that their Elders usurped a more absolute authority over the conscience than the Bishop of Rome himself does; (2) that to gain and secure this they use a continued train of guile, fraud, and falsehood of every kind; (3) that they scrape their votaries to the bone as to their worldly substance, leaving little to any, to some nothing, or less than nothing; (4) that still they are so infatuated as to believe that theirs is the only true Church upon earth.

Oct 1753., Bedford to Canterbury

Tues. 16.- I preached on St. Peter's Green at seven in the morning and at five in the evening. It is amazing that any congregation should be found here, considering what stumblingblocks have been thrown in their way. Above fourteen years ago Mr. Rogers,[ See Life of C. of Huntingdon, vol. i. pp. 245, &c.] then curate of St. Paul's, preached the pure gospel with general acceptance. A great awakening began, and continually increased, till the poor weathercock turned Baptist. He then preached the absolute decrees with all his might; but in a while the wind changed again, and he turned and sunk into the German whirlpool. How many souls has this unhappy man to answer for!

Fri. 19.-I returned to London.

Sat. 20.[ He wrote to his brother (Works, vol. xii. p. 114; see Tyerman, vol. ii. p. 172). The unhappiness resulting from a hasty and ill-assorted marriage affected not only Mr. and Mrs. Wesley, but also Charles and his wife. The trouble was now becoming acute. We cannot, without a condensation of facts that might beunjust to all parties concerned, enter into details. We must content ouiselves here with the quotation of references.]-I found myself out of order, but believed it would go off. On Sunday the 2ist I was considerably worse, but could not think of sparing myself on that day.

Mon. 22.-I rose extremely sick, yet I determined, if it were possible, to keep my word, and accordingly set out soon after four for Canterbury. At Welling I was obliged to stop; after resting an hour, I was much better; but soon after 1 took horse my sickness returned, and accompanied me to Brompton, near Chatham. In the evening I preached to a serious congregation,[ In the house of Mr. Millen, belonging to the Dockyard (Meth. Mag, 1816, p. 202). He died about 1760 or 1761, and the services were for a while suspended.] and at five in the morning. We came to Canterbury about one, when I was presently seized with the cold fit of an ague. About twelve I fell fast asleep, and waked well at seven in the morning.[ In October he preached at Chatham and Canterbury.]

Wed. 24.-I preached in the evening without any inconvenience, and at five in the morning; but about nine I began shivering again. After the hot fit, I lay in a profuse sweat till eight. I then gradually cooled till I fell fast asleep, and rested sweetly till the morning.

Fri. 26,-Being determined to use that interval of health, I procured a chaise, and reached Brompton in the evening. I spoke, as I was able, in the evening; and God bore witness to the word of His grace.

Sat. 27.- I came to London, having received no hurt, but rather benefit, by the journey.[ On Oct. 31 he wrote to his brother Charles from London (Works, vol. xii. p. 116). The original, in the Thursfield Smith collection, adds a remarkable expostulation to this letter, on which Charles has written the following endorsement: ' Trying to bring me under his yoke.' See W.H.S. vol. vi. pp. 94, 95.]

Nov. 1, Thur.-I began visiting the classes, though I found, by the loss of my voice, that my bodily strength was not so far recovered as I before imagined.

Sat. 3.-I read over Andrew Frey's [See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 81; Tyerman's Oxford Meth. p. 136; Whitefield,vol. ii. p. 308.] reasons for leaving the Brethren. Most of what he says I knew before; yet I cannot speak of them in the manner which he does. I pity them too much to be bitter against them.

Sun. 4.-I rode to Hayes, because I had promised, though I was much out of order. It was with the utmost difficulty that I read prayers,[ In the church of his friend, Charles Manning, where some think he was married]. and preached, and administered the sacrament. I went through the evening service with more ease; but at night my strength quite failed. I should have taken some rhubarb the next day, but I had no time, having classes to meet from morning to night.

Thur. 8.-In the night my disorder returned more violent than it had been since I left Cornwall. I should have taken some ipecacuanha in the morning, but had no time to spare, my business being fixed for every hour till four in the afternoon; and by that time all my complaints were gone, so that I needed only a little food and rest.

Mon. 12.-I set out in a chaise for Leigh, having delayed my journey as long as I could. I preached at seven, but was extremely cold all the time, the wind coming strong from a door behind, and another on one side; so that my feet felt just as if I had stood in cold water.

Nov. 1753., In a ' Consumption '

Tues. 13.-The chamber wherein I sat, though with a large fire, was much colder than the garden; so that I could not keep myself tolerably warm, even when I was close to the chimney. As we rode home on Wednesday the I4th, the wind was high and piercing cold, and blew just in our faces, so that the open chaise was no defence, but my feet were quite chilled. When 1 came home I had a settled pain in my left breast, a violent cough, and a slow fever; but in a day or two, by following Dr. Fothergill's [Tyerman (vol. ii. p. 174) gives an interesting account of this clever though eccentric Quaker physician, who in this crisis saved Wesley's life. He prescribed ' country air, with rest, asses' milk, and riding daily,' anticipating the most apVOL. IVproved modern treatment for consumption, of which all his friends believed Wesley was actually dying. At Leigh he lodged with Dr. Cook.] prescriptions, I found much alteration for the better; and on Sunday the 18th, I preached at Spitalfields, and administered the sacrament to a large congregation.[ In November he preached at Fernhall (Sermon Register).]

Mon. 19.-I retired to Shoreham, and gained strength continually; till about eleven at night, on Wednesday the aist, I was obliged by the cramp to leap out of bed, and continue, for some time, walking up and down the room, though it was a sharp frost. My cough now returned with greater violence, and that by day as well as by night.

Sat. 24.-I rode home, and was pretty well till night; but my cough was then worse than ever. My fever returned at the same time, together with the pain in my left breast; so that I should probably have stayed at home on Sunday the 25th, had it not been advertised in the public papers that I would preach a charity sermon at the chapel, both morning and afternoon. My cough did not interrupt me while I preached in the morning; but it was extremely troublesome while I administered the sacrament. In the afternoon I consulted my friends whether I should attempt to preach again or no. They thought I should, as it had been advertised. I did so; but very few could hear. My fever increased much while I was preaching; however, I ventured to meet the society, and for near an hour my voice and strength were restored, so that I felt neither pain nor weakness.[ The texts from which he preached on this memorable Sunday, when it was believed his career was closing, are pathetic. ' For our conversation is in heaven,' &c. (Phil. iii. 20), and in the afternoon, ' Who shall change this vile body ' (Phil. iii. 21). Charles did not reach London until Dec. I. On the 2nd he writes: ' I attended my brother while he rode out for the air, and was surprised to see him hold out for three quarters of an hour, and even gallop back the whole way' (C. Wesley's Journal, Dec. 2, 1753). 'Mrs. Gallatin assured us she thought he would have expired at the altar last Sunday' (C. Wesley's Journal, Nov. 29, 1753.) On the evening of Tuesday Charles writes, 'All last Tuesday they expected his death every hour.' His last request was that Mrs. Wesley and Charles might be reconciled.]

Mon. 26. - Dr. Fothergill told me plain, I must not stay in town a day longer; adding, 'If anything does thee good, it must be the country air, with rest, asses' milk, and riding daily.' So (not being able to sit a horse) about noon I took coach for Lewisham.

In the evening (not knowing how it might please God to dispose of me), to prevent vile panegyric, I wrote as follows:

'

Here Lieth the Body

OF

JOHN WESLEY,

A BRAND [Charles Wesley adds, 'not once only' (Journal, vol. ii. p. 97).] PLUCKED OUT OF THE BURNING:

WHO DIED OF A CONSUMPTION IN THE FIFTY-FIRST YEAR OF HIS AGE,

NOT LEAVING, AFTER HIS DEBTS ARE PAID,

TEN POUNDS BEHIND HIM: PRAYING,

GOD BE MERCIFUL TO ME, AN UNPROFITABLE SERVANT!

He ordered that this, if any, inscription should be placed on his tombstone.

Wed. 28. - I found no change for the better, the medicines which had helped me before now taking no effect. About noon (the time that some of our brethren in London had set apart for joining in prayer) a thought came into my mind to make an experiment. So I ordered some stone brimstone to be powdered, mixed with the white of an egg, and spread on brown paper, which I applied to my side. The pain ceased in five minutes, the fever in half an hour, and from this hour I began to recover strength. The next day I was able to ride, which I continued to do every day till January i. Nor did the weather hinder me once, it being always tolerably fair (however it was before) between twelve and one o'clock.[ Charles Wesley's letters (xxii., xxiii.) and Journal, vol. ii. pp. 95-100, 192, 193, help to fill up December. His brother is ' considerably better,' but still ' in imminent danger, being far gone, and very suddenly, in a consumption.']

DEC. 14, Fri.-Having finished all the books which I designed to insert in The Christian Library, I broke through the doctor's order not to write, and began transcribing a Journal for the press; and in the evening I went to prayers with the family without finding any inconvenience.[ On the I4th he journeyed up to the Foundery 'for a few minutes,'and on the 18th Whitefield called to see him. See Tyerman's Whitefield, vol. ii. pp. 321, 322.]

Thur. 20.- I felt a gradual increase of strength till I took a decoction of the bark, which I do not find (such is the peculiarity of my constitution) will agree with me in any form whatever. This immediately threw me into a purging, which brought me down again in a few days, and quite disappointed me in my design of going out on Christmas Day.

1754. JAN. i, Tues-I returned once more to London.

On Wednesday the 2nd I set out in the machine, and the next afternoon came to Chippenham. Here I took a post-chaise, in which I reached Bristol about eight in the evening.

Fri. 4.-I began drinking the water at the Hot Well, having a lodging at a small distance from it [On Jan. 5 he wrote to Blackwell, full of gratitude for his friend's kindness, and contrasting the fine air of Lewisham and its comfort with ' this cold, bleak place.... Nor have I any place to ride, but either by the river-side or over the

Downs, where the wind is ready to carry me away' (Works, vol. xii. p. 180). Tradition says he lodged in the Colonnade.]; and on Sunday the 6th I began writing Notes on the New Testament-a work which I should scarce ever have attempted had I not been so ill as not to be able to travel or preach, and yet so well as to be able to read and write.[ The notes were founded on Bengel's Gnomon (see Preface), and were therefore concise in the extreme. They were intended for the use of the preachers, with the four volumes of sermons serving as a body of divinity-in fact a doctrinal standard, still accepted by the Methodists. We know, from letters and the deciphered shorthand diary, that Charles Wesley assisted his brother in transcribing the Notes for the press. The First Edition quarto included a fine copy of the ' Williams' portrait. See also below.p. 137.]

Mon. 7.-I went on now in a regular method, rising at my hour, and writing from five to nine at night; except the time of riding, half an hour for each meal, and the hour between five and six in the evening.

Sun. 13.-I went in a coach to Bristol, and gave a short! exhortation to the society.

Mon, 14.-In the evening one or two of our neighbours desired to join in our family prayers; a few more soon made the same request, so that I had a little congregation every night. After a few nights I began to add a short exhortation, so preparing myself for a larger congregation.

Sat. 19.-Mr. Bruce came with Mr. Milner, who had been' for some time melancholy, even to madness; but by proper application to his mind, as well as body, the disorder sensibly abated in a short time.

Thur. 31.-My wife, desiring to pay the last office to her poor dying child, set out for London, and came a few days before he went home, rejoicing and praising God.

FEB. 3, Sun.-I went in a chaise to Kingswood, and administered the sacrament to a small congregation. I expected Mr. Milner to assist; but he slipped away, and hid himself till I had done.

Wed. 13.-I was sent for by one of my neighbours,[ In Bristol.] dying of a consumption. She seemed full of good desires: but who does not, when death stands at the door

Wed. 27.-My brother came down from London, and we spent several days together in comparing the translation of the Evangelists with the original, and reading Dr. Heylyn's Lectures[Theological Lectures at Westminstei Abbey, &c., by Dr. John Heylyn, rector of St. Mary-le-Strand. See W.H.S. vol.iv. p. 18; also above, vol. iii. p. 241. ]

and Dr. Doddridge's Family Expositor.

MARCH 10, Sun.-I took my leave of the Hot Well, and removed to Bristol.

Tues. 19.-Having finished the rough draft, I began transcribing the Notes on the Gospels.

Tues. 26.-I preached for the first time,[ The Sermon Register entry shows that he preached or expounded more than once.] after an intermission of four months. What reason have I to praise God that He does not take the word of His truth utterly out of my mouth!

April 1754, Writing at Paddington

Sat. 30.-I took my leave of a venerable monument of divine mercy, Colonel T------d[Possibly Colonel Trapand (W.H.S. vol. iii. p. 180). But see an account of Col. Townsend in Arm. Mag. 1786, p. 37. On March 30 he wrote to Samuel Furly (Tyerman, Life of Wesley, vol. ii. p. 187).]; who, after wandering from God fourscore years, has at length found the way of peace, and is continually panting after God.[ In March he also preached in Bearfield.]

APRIL I, Mon.-We set out in the machine, and the next evening reached the Foundery.

Wed. 3.-I settled all the business I could, and the next morning retired to Paddington. Here I spent some weeks in writing; only going to town on Saturday evenings, and leaving it again on Monday morning.[ On April 7 he preached at West Street, and also on the I4th, when his sermon was the means of the conversion of Alexander Mather (E.M.P. vol. ii. p. 167, reprinted as Wesley's Veterans, vol. ii. p. 88; Telford's Two West End Chapels, p. 19).]

In my hours of walking I read Dr. Calamy's Abridgement of Mr. Baxter's Life [See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 107.] What a scene is opened here! In spite of all the prejudices of education, I could not but see that the poor Nonconformists had been used without either justice or mercy; and that many of the Protestant Bishops of King Charles had neither more religion, nor humanity, than the Popish Bishops of Queen Mary.

Sun. 21[On April 21 he preached at Spitalfields; April 22 at the Foundery; April 25 at Westminster; May 3 at West Street.].-Mr. Charles Skelton told me, 'Sir, I intend, on Friday next, to go down to Bury, and settle there.' Finding he was fully determined, I said nothing against it. So we parted civilly.

Mon. 29.-I preached at Sadler's the New Wells,[ The ' New Wells' was a place of entertainment not far from Sadler's Wells, in what is now Lower Rosoman Street; and it seems certain that this, and not ' Sadler's Wells,' as in former editions, is the place referred to. The Gentleman's Mag. of May 1752 says: 'The theatrical edifice called the New Wells, near the London Spaw, was preached in on May 17 for the first time by a clergyman methodist, it being taken by the Rev. John Wesley for a tabernacle.' It had been closed since 1750. Sadler's Wells, however, was in continuous use as a place of entertainment throughout the eighteenth century. Confusion has often arisen respecting the identity of the numerous ' Wells' in this vicinity. See Wroth's London Pleasure Gardens of the Eighteenth Century.] in what was formerly a play-house. I am glad when it pleases God to take possession of what Satan esteemed his own ground. The place, though large, was extremely crowded, and deep attention sat on every face.

Tues. 30.-I rode to Sundon, with one to whom a large estate is fallen, by her uncle's dying without a will. It is a miracle if it does not drown her soul in everlasting perdition.[ But it did not. The person referred to was Mrs. Cole, wife of Wesley's friend, William Cole (magistrate and sheriff in 1757), and niece of Lord Sundon, from whom she inherited the Manor House, where the Coles resided from 1753 to 1771 (W.M. Mag. 1901, p. 922; 1886, p. 59). See also below, Nov. 30, 1780.]

MAY 12, Sun.-I laboured to convince Mr. Green[See Life of C. of Huntingdon, vol. i. pp. 217, 358, 388; vol. li. p. 35-] that he had not done well in confuting (as he termed it) the sermon I had preached the Sunday before in the morning, from the same pulpit in the afternoon; but he was absolutely above conviction. I then asked, 'Will you meet me half-way I will never preach publicly against you: will not you against me' But he disclaimed any such agreement, and walked away, as one who did not design to come any more. He told all he met I had put him away. Indeed, not I; but I adore the providence of God. He has put himself away; nor shall I desire him to come again till he has a more sound judgement, or a more teachable spirit.[ On the 12th he was at Snowsfields.]

Mon. 13.-I began explaining to the morning congregation Bolton's Directions for Comfortable Walking with God[Robert Bolton (1572-1631), Fellow of Brasenose College, and rector of Broughton, Northamptonshire. Wesley inserted his Life and some of his writings, including the ' Directions,' in The Christian Library. See vol. iv. (1827 ed.) pp. 231-330.] I wish all our preachers, both in England and Ireland, would herein follow my example, and frequently read in public and enforce select portions of The Christian Library.[ On Wednesday, May 15, he preached at Deptford.]

Wed. 22.-Our Conference[This was the eleventh Conference. See Myles's Chronological History of Methodism.] began, and the spirit of peace and love was in the midst of us.

Before we parted, we all willingly signed an agreement not to act independently on each other; so that the breach lately made [This refers to the following cases: Jonathan Reeves, who obtained Episcopal ordination, and became minister of Magdalen Hospital; Samuel Larwood, who settled as an Independent minister at Southwark; J. Edwards (see Crookshank's Meth. in Ireland, vol. i. pp. 97, 98), who settled at Leeds, where he formed an Independent church, of which he became pastor; Charles Skelton, who settled at Southwark, and J. Whitford at Bolton. See also W.M. Mag. 1855, p. 223.] has only united us more closely together than ever.

June 1764., Convalescence

Sun. 26.-I rode to Hillingdon, and preached to a very genteel congregation, who behaved with abundantly more decency and seriousness than I expected. This is the church to which many of Mr. Manning's parishioners have gone, ever since he preached salvation by faith.[ See Feb. 12, 1758. During May he preached at Fernhall, and on May 6 at Wapping.] And how has God overtaken them, who, by the long illness of the curate, has brought Mr. Manning to preach at this very place!

JUNE 2 (being Whit Sunday}.-I preached at the Foundery, which I had not done before in the evening. Still I have not recovered my whole voice or strength; perhaps I never may. But let me use what I have.[ On June IJ he preached at Snowsfields; June 16 at West Street; June 23 at Spitalfields and the Foundery; July 6 at Snowsfields.]

Tues. 11.-I rode to Cookham. The next evening I preached in a magnificent apartment[Sir George Young's 'elegant seat,' built on Grounan's Eyot.] to a suitable congregation. How seldom is the gospel heard in a palace! But what is too hard for God

Mon. 17.-I took another ride to Sundon, and on the road read Strada [Famianus Strada, a Roman Jesuit. See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 107.] De Bella Belgico, an historian scarce inferior in any respect either to Livy or Tacitus. As to his religion, I should rather compare him to the former, for Tacitus was no friend either to superstition or cruelty.

Thur. 20.-We spent some hours at Wrest,[ Wrest Park, near Sitsoe, Beds. Mrs. Delany (vol. i. p. 608) and Wesley both spell it ' Rest.'] a seat of the late Duke of Kent, who was forty years laying out and improving the gardens, which I cannot but prefer even before Lord Cobham's.[ At Stowe.] But how little did the place answer its name! How little rest did its miserable master enjoy! Thou, O God, hast made our heart for Thyself, and it cannot rest till it rests in Thee.

Wed. 26.-I read one of the prettiest trifles which perhaps is extant in the English tongue-Mr. Hay On Deformity[By William Hay, M.P. See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 107.] Surely such a writer deserves a better subject.

JULY 6, Sat.-I spent two hours in the gardens at Kensington. They are just fit for a king, far more grand than pleasant; and yet nothing so grand as many parts of the Peak in Derbyshire.

Mon. 8.-I set out with my brother,[ See C. Wesley's account of the ' leisurely travelling' for his brother's sake-' God in the weather favoured us,' and see also the new and enlarged edition of C. Wesley's Journal, July1754- ]and on Wednesday the loth reached Lakenham,[ Here he was entertained by Capt. Gallatin.] near Norwich. Here we had a full account of that wretched man, James Wheatley, for whom, I fear, it had been good if he had not been born. All Norwich was in an uproar concerning him, so that it did not appear we could have any place there. However, on Sunday the I4th, at seven in the morning, my brother took his stand in the street.[ John Wesley stood by him, but could take no part (H. Moore's Life of Wesley, vol. ii. p. 186).] A multitude of people quickly gathered together, and were tolerably quiet, all things considered. I would willingly have taken his place in the evening, but had neither voice nor strength. However, on Thursday the i8th, being a little recovered from the illness which had attended me for several days, after my brother had done, I spoke to the congregation for a few minutes, and promised to see them again, if God should restore my strength, at the first opportunity.

Fri. 19.-I rode to Newmarket, and the next day to Bedford.

Sun. 21.-I preached near St. Peter's Green, having never preached abroad since I was there before.

Mon. 22.6-I returned to London.[ C. Wesley's Journal, July 22. An old brewhouse was offered at Norwich for a preaching-room." On July 30 he preached at the Foundery in London.]

AUG. 5, Mon.-I set out for Canterbury. On the way I read Mr. Baxter's History of the Councils.[ Published in London in 1680. See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 107.] It is utterly astonishing, and would be wholly incredible but that his vouchers are beyond all exception. What a company of execrable wretches have they been (one cannot justly give them a milder title) who have almost in every age, since St Cyprian, taken upon them to govern the Church! How has one Council been perpetually cursing another, and delivering all over to Satan, whether predecessors or contemporaries, who did not implicitly receive their determinations, though generally trifling, sometimes false, and frequently unintelligible or self-contradictory! Surely Mahometanism was let loose to reform the Christians! I know not but Constantinople has gained by the change.

Tues. 6.-I was much out of order; however, I preached in the evening, but could do nothing the next day. On Thursday I hastened back to London, and came pretty well to the Foundery. I consulted Dr. Fothergill the next morning, who advised me to return to the Hot Well without delay.

Aug. 1754, At the New Hot Well

Sun. 11.-I buried the body of Mary Doxsey,[ See Stevenson's City Road lists of members; also the Colman lists. He also preached at West Street.] long a pattern of patience and gentleness.

Mon. 12.-I set out in the machine, and on Tuesday night (taking horses at Bath) came to Bristol.[ The Sermon Register for August gives Bristol (Weaver's Hall may have been the place intended); alsoKingswood.

]

Wed. 14.-I took a lodging at the New Hot Well, where I was free both from noise and hurry, and had an opportunity of drinking the water late in the evening and early in the morning. But my course of physic was near being cut short the next day by a large stone which was hung up as the weight of a jack. I applied to my head cloths dipped in cold water, which presently stopped the bleeding, and so abated the swelling that in a few hours I found no further inconvenience.[ On Wednesday, Aug. 21, he preached at Westbury.]

Sat. 31.-After preaching at Weaver's Hall, one of the audience, a clergyman (who had then a parish near Bridgwater, but is now, I trust, in Abraham's bosom), desired to have some conversation with me, and spoke without reserve. His experience was of a peculiar kind, much resembling that of Gregory Lopez. But he soon determined to seek Christ for the time to come, not in a desert, but in the congregation of His people.[ On Sunday, Sept. I, he preached at Bristol.]

SEPT. 2, Mon.-I set out for the west. About eleven one stopped me on the road and earnestly desired me to turn aside and pray with one who was near death. I found her worn away to a skeleton and rotting in pieces with the King's evil.[ For similar cases in the same neighbourhood see below, p. 285.] But her greatest trouble seemed to be that she was not so alive to God as formerly. After prayer her mind was more composed, and she could trust God both with her soul and body.

At noon I met the little, loving society at Shepton, and in the evening preached at Middlezoy. My work to-day was full enough for my strength.

Tues. 3.-We rode easily to Taunton. After we had rested a while one desired me to step to his father, who was dying of a consumption. He had been always a very honest, moral man, but now found this was not the one thing needful, and appeared earnestly desirous of knowing Christ and the power of His resurrection.

A little before twelve we set out from Taunton. The sun shone exceeding hot, so that I was almost worn out when we called at the house of a friend on Maiden Down. But after a little rest my strength returned, and I went on, not much tired, to Tiverton.[ And preached there.]

Wed. 4.-We took horse early, and rode to Okehampton. Our landlord here informed us he was upwards of ninety, yet had not lost either his sight, hearing, or teeth. Nor had he found that for which he was born. Indeed, he did not seem to have any more thought about it than a child of six years old.

We could not but observe that, although the sky appeared continually between the clouds, which drove to and fro, yet the sun scarce shone upon us for six minutes together, from six in the morning to six in the evening. Soon after six I preached at Launceston and met the society.

Thur. 5.-At noon I preached at the town hall to a very wild yet civil congregation. At two the stewards, not only from the upper part of Cornwall, but several from the western societies, met. At six I preached in the town hall again, and for the sake of this hour only (had no other end been answered) I should have thought all the labour of my journey well bestowed

Sept. 1754., From Devon to Bristol

Fri. 6.-I rode to Plymouth Dock, and preached in the room lately built; but, though it was three or four times as large as the old, it would not contain the congregation. Is the time come when even this barren soil shall bring forth ' fruits of righteousness'

Sat. 7.-I set out at three, reached Cullompton by six in the evening, and, after half an hour's rest, was enabled to preach in the little meadow, without any faintness or weariness.

Sun. 8.-In the evening I preached at Tiverton, in the garden which adjoins to the preaching-house. It was a refreshing season.

Mon. 9.-I preached at Charlton, a village six miles from Taunton, to a large congregation gathered from the towns and country for many miles round. All the farmers here had, some time before, entered into a joint engagement to turn all out of their service and give no work to any who went to hear a Methodist preacher. But there is no counsel against the Lord. One ot the chief of them, Mr. G------, was not long after convinced of the truth, and desired those very men to preach at his house. Many of the other confederates came to hear, whom their servants and labourers gladly followed. So the whole device of Satan fell to the ground, and the word of God grew and prevailed.

Tues. 10.-I rode to Dr. Robertson's, at Pitcombe,[ John Robertson, M.0. On Sept. 24, '753, Wesley wrote him a long letter criticizing Ramsay's Principles of Religion (see above, p. 82), which Robertson had annotated. {Works, vol. xii. pp. 210-16; W.H.S. vol. v. p. 15; see his letter to Wesley in Arm. Mag. 1779, p. 89; also 1780, p. 552.)] and, after spending a few agreeable and useful hours in that delightful recess, went forward, about four miles, to West Combe. I preached on a green place in the town, about eight in the morning, to a deeply attentive congregation, and came in the afternoon to Bristol, at least as well as when I set out.[ On Sept. 15 he preached at Kingswood, and on the i6th in Bristol.]

Tues. 17.-I rode to Trowbridge, where one [The person referred to by Wesley in the text seems to have been Laurence Oliphant. who had been one of John Haime's flock in Flanders. The room was in Waldron Square, Frog Lane. Dyer (1862) says, ' Procured at his own expense.' Oliphant was a member of the first class, formed by John Mason (1781), 'Oliphant, Knapp, Welby, and their wives.' See articles on Trowbridge Methodism in Meth. Rec. March 6, 1902, and May n, 1905; and W.H.S. vol. vi. p. 115 (Notes and Queries, No. 381, with illustrations).] who found people from their cruel and lawless oppressors. But so much the more am I obliged to say (though I judge not, God is the judge), I fear you are covetous; that you love the world. And if you do, as sure as the Word of God is true, you are not in a state of salvation.

The substance of your answer was : 'That many people exhort others to charity from self-interest; that men of fortune must mind their fortune; that you cannot go about to look for poor people; that when you have seen them yourself, and relieved them, they were scarce ever satisfied; that many make an ill use of what you give them ; that you cannot trust the account people give of themselves by letters; that, nevertheless, you do give to private persons, by the hands of Colonel Hudson and others; that you have also given to several hospitals a hundred pounds at a time; but that you must support your family; that the Lowther family has continued above four hundred years; that you are for great things-for public charities, and for saving the nation from ruin; and that others may think as they please, but this is your way of thinking, and has been for many years.'

To this I replied: '(1) Sir, I have no self-interest in this matter; I consult your interest, not my own ; I want nothing from you, I desire nothing from you, I expect nothing from you. But I am concerned for your immortal spirit, which must so soon launch into eternity. (2) It is true, men of fortune must mind their fortune; but they must not love the world. If any man loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him. (3) It is true, likewise, you cannot go about to look for poor people; but you may be sufficiently informed of them by those that can. (4) And if some of these are never satisfied, this is no reason for not relieving others. (5) Suppose, too, that some make an ill use of what you give, the loss falls on their own head; you will not lose your reward for their fault; what you laid out, God will pay you again. (6) Yet certainly you do well to have all the assurance you can that those to whom you give are likely to make a good use of it; and therefore to expect a stronger recommendation of them than their own, whether by letter or otherwise. (7) I rejoice that you have given to many by so worthy a man as Colonel Hudson, whose word is certainly a sufficient recommendation. (8) I rejoice likewise that you have given some hundreds of pounds to the hospitals, and wish it had been ten thousand. (9) To the support of the family I did not object; but begged leave to ask whether this could not be done without giving ten thousand a year to one who had as much already And whether you could answer this to God, in the day wherein He shall judge the world (10) I likewise granted that the family had continued above four hundred years ; but observed, meantime, that God regarded it not one jot the more for this; and that four hundred or one thousand years are but a moment, compared to eternity, (n) I observed, likewise, that great things may be done, and little things not left undone. (12) And that if this or any other way of thinking be according to Scripture, then it is sound and good; whereas, if it be contrary to Scripture, it is not good, and the longer we are in it, so much the worse.'

Upon the whole, I must once more earnestly entreat you to consider yourself, and God, and eternity, (1) As to yourself, you are not the proprietor of anything ; no, not of one shilling in the world. You are only a steward of what another entrusts you with, to be laid out, not according to your will, but His. And what would you think of your steward, if he laid out what is called your money according to his own will and pleasure (2) Is not God the sole proprietor of all things And are not you to give an account to Him for every part of His goods And oh how dreadful an account, if you have expended any part of them not according to His will, but your own (3) Is not death at hand And are not you and I just stepping into eternity Are we not just going to appear in the presence of God; and that naked of all worldly goods Will you then rejoice in the money you have left behind you Or in that you have given to support a family, as it is called-that is, in truth, to support the pride, and vanity, and luxury which you have yourself despised all your life long Oh sir, I beseech you, for the sake of God, for the sake of your own immortal soul, examine yourself, whether you do not love money If so, you cannot love God. And if we die without the fear of God, what remains Only to be banished from Him for ever and ever! I am, with true respect, sir,

Your servant, for Christ's sake.[ During the interval between Oct. 28, 1754, and Feb. 16, 1755, Wesley's leisure was partly occupied in studying and criticizing the earlier portion of Hervey's Theron and Aspasio. Early in 1755 '^'b> the largest and most important of Hervey's works, was published. It consisted of a series of dialogues in which scenic descriptions were used to make more attractive grave discussions on theological questions. The writer, in frail health, was abnormally sensitive to opinion. He consulted a large number of literary and evangelical friends, sending them sections of his work in manuscript or in proof-sheets. Wesley returned the first three dialogues sent to him with ' a few inconsiderable corrections.'

Hervey craved more drastic treatment of his work. Wesley consented. But now Hervey was offended, and a breach took place which was never repaired. Hervey's views on the doctrine of the ' Imputed Righteousness of Christ' alarmed Wesley. He thought their tendency was towards Antinomianism- the greatest moral peril of the times, especially among the imperfectly instructed new converts of the Evangelical Revival. For a full description of this once popular work and of the painful controversy which clouded the closing months of Hervey's beautiful life, see Tyerman's Oxford Methodists, pp. 285333; see also below, pp. 302-3, and Works, vol. x. pp. 316-35.]