Sept. 1756, In London

Mon. 6.-I set out in the machine, and on Tuesday evening came to London.[ He went to London intending to print a new edition of his Notes (letter of Charles Wesley to Walker of Truro-see the latter's Life, p. 228).]

Wednesday and Thursday [On Sept. 9 he wrote his first lettei to the Monthly Reviewers (Works, vol. x11i. p. 382).] I settled my temporal business. It is now about eighteen years since I began writing and printing books ; and how much in that time have I gained by printing Why, on summing up my accounts, I found that on March I, 1756 (the day I left London last), I had gained by printing and preaching together, a debt of twelve hundred and thirty-six pounds.

Fri. 10.-I preached at a famous place, commonly called 'The Bull-and-Mouth Meeting,'[Bull-and-Mouth Street is a crossstreet leading from St. Martin's-le-Grand to Butcher Hall Lane. Here stood for many years a meeting-house built originally for the Quakers, who occupied it as early as the reign of Charles 11. They relinquished it in 1760, when the Sandemanians removed there, and Mr. Pike united with them. (Wilson's History and Antiquities of Dissenting Churches in London, vol. 11i. p. 364.) Wesley ceased preaching there Dec. 21, 1763. Neale's History of the Puritans mentions this famous place.] which had belonged, I suppose, near a hundred years, to the people called Quakers. As much of real religion as was ever preached there, I trust will be preached there still; and perhaps in a more rational scriptural, and intelligible manner.[ On Sept. 10 he wrote his second letter to Rev. Mr. Clark (Works, vol. x11i. p. 212). See above, p. 171.]

Sat. 11.-I read over Mr. Fry's Case of Marriage between Near Relations Considered.[ The title is 'John Fry: Marriage between near Kindred! London, 1756. Second ed. in 1773. See Gentleman's Magazine, 1788, pp. 882, 965 ; Monthly Review, vol. xv. p. 174.] It is the best tract I ever read upon the subject; I suppose the best that is extant. And two points, I think, he has fully proved: (I) that many marriages commonly supposed to be unlawful are neither contrary to the law of nature, nor the revealed law of God, nor the law of the land; (2) that Ecclesiastical Courts have no right to meddle with any case of this kind.[ On Sunday, Sept. 12, he preached at West Street, Snowsfields, and Moorfields ; and on Monday the I3th at Wapping. Other preaching engagements not mentioned in the Journal during this month are : Sunday the igth, Bull-andMouth, Foundery; and Friday, 24, Zoar.]

Thur. 16.-I walked over to Bishop Bonner's,[ On Sunday, Sept. 12, he preached at West Street, Snowsfields, and Moorfields ; and on Monday the I3th at Wapping. Other preaching engagements not mentioned in the Journal during this month are : Sunday the igth, Bull-andMouth, Foundery; and Friday, 24, Zoar.] and preached to a large and serious congregation. I found some faintness, the sun being extremely hot; but more in walking from thence to Westminster, where I preached at seven. In the night my old disorder returned, and gradually increased, in spite of all medicines. However, on Sunday and Monday it was so far suspended that I abated nothing of my usual employment.

Wed. 22.-I was considering I had not yet asked help of the Great Physician; and I resolved to delay no longer. In that hour I felt a change. I slept sound that night, and was well the next day.

OCT. 3, Sun.-My disorder returned as violent as ever; but I regarded it not while I was performing the service at Snowsfields in the morning, or afterward at Spitalfields; till I went to the Lord's Table in order to administer. A thought then came into my mind,' Why do I not apply to God in the beginning rather than the end of an illness' I did so, and found immediate relief; so that I needed no further medicines.

Tues. 5.-I wrote a second letter to the authors of The Monthly Review[Works, vol. x11i. p. 384 Foote ridicules this Review in his plays]-ingenious men, but no friends to the Godhead of Christ. Yet, upon further consideration, I judged it best to drop the controversy. It is enough that I have delivered my own soul; if they scorn, they alone shall bear it.

Sun. 10.-I preached to a huge multitude in Moorfields on 'Why will ye die, O house of Israel' It is field-preaching which does the execution still; for usefulness there is none comparable to it.

Mon. 11.-I went to Leigh. Where we dined, a poor woman came to the door with two little children. They seemed to be half-starved, as well as their mother, who was also shivering with an ague. She was extremely thankful for a little food, and still more so for a few pills which seldom fail to cure that disorder.

In this little journey I read over a curiosity indeed-a French heroic poem, Voltaire's Henriade.[ Voltaire, Francois Mane Arouet de (1694-1778). La Henriade: first pub-

lished in French, London, 1728, 8vo. See Ruskin's Fors Clavigcra, letter 34, p. 7 (' most prosaic '); John Morley's Voltaire, p. 145] He is a very lively writer, of a fine imagination; and allowed, I suppose, by all competent judges, to be a perfect master of the French language ; and by him I was more than ever convinced that the French is the poorest, meanest language in Europe; that it is no more comparable to the German or Spanish than a bag-pipe is to an organ ; and that, with regard to poetry in particular, considering the incorrigible uncouthness of their measure, and their always writing in rhyme (to say nothing of their vile double rhymes, nay, and frequent false rhymes), it is as impossible to write a fine poem in French as to make fine music upon a jews'-harp.

Sat. 16.-I baptized Hannah C------, late a Quaker. God,

as usual, bore witness to His ordinance. A solemn awe spread over the whole congregation, and many could not refrain from tears.[ On the 16th he began a long letter to James Hervey concerning his recently published Theron and Asfasio (Works, vol. x p. 317-35). See above, p. 103.]

Wed. 20.-I received the following letter :

REV. SIR,

The glory of God and the good of mankind are the motives that induce me to write the following. As it is our duty to do all we can to make all around us happy, I think there is one thing that may be done to promote so blessed an end, which will at the same time be very advantageous to them that practise it; namely, to efface all the obscene words which are written on houses, doors, or walls by evil-minded men. This, which I recommend to others, I constantly practise myself; and if ever I omit doing it, I am severely checked, unless I can produce some good reason for that omission. I do it with a sponge, which for that purpose I carry in my pocket. The advantages I reap from hence are : (I) peace of conscience in doing my duty; (2) it helps me to conquer the fear of man, which is one of my greatest trials ; (3) it is matter of joy that I can do any the least service to any one : and as all persons, especially the young, are liable to temptations to impurity, I cannot do too much to remove such temptations, either from myself or others. Perhaps, too, when the unhappy writers pass by, and see their bad labors soon effaced, they may be discouraged from pursuing so shameful a work; yea, and brought to a better mind.

Perhaps in some places it might not be amiss, in the room of what is effaced, to write some serious sentence, or short text of Scripture; and, wherever we do this, would it not be well to lift up our heart to God, in behalf of those sinners, in this or the like manner : ' Lord, lay not this sin to their charge! Father, forgive them ; for they know not what they do!'

Mon. 25.-I began reading that excellent book, The Gospel Glass,[ Stuckley [Stukely], Lewis, preacher in Exeter Cathedral; ejected for Nonconformity, 1662. A Gospel Class, representing the Miscarriages of English Professots, &c., London, 1667. See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 109.] to the morning congregation : a method which I find more profitable for ' instruction in righteousness' than any other manner of preaching.

Tues. 26.-I began reading over, with the preachers that were in town, Mr. Pike's Philosophia Sacra.[ See Tyerman, vol. 11. p 260 . W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 108 : Works, vol. xu. p. 464. Why he should apparently waste time by reading with his London preachers an author in whose teaching he had no confidence can only be explained on the supposition that this and similar books were being read, and he judged it prudent to guide, and if necessary correct, the reading. Thomas Walsh, whose extraordinary knowledge of Hebrew he notes in his letter to Dean D., was a powerful intellectual force at this time, and was now with Wesley. The letter to Dean

D. (Works, vol. x11. p. 464) should be read. Incidentally, this is one of many proofs that Wesley bestowed all the time he could spare from other and still more pressing duties, and his best thought, on the training of his preachers. He made the itinerancy a peripatetic school of learning.] It contains the marrow of Mr. Hutchinson's philosophy clearly and modestly proposed ; but, upon a close examination, I found the proofs were grievously defective. I shall never receive Mr. Hutchinson's creed, unless ipse dixit pass for evidence.

Sat. 30.-I yielded to importunity, and spent an hour with poor Mr. V------, who was awakened and found peace in attending our preaching, and soon after turned Quaker. I did wonder at it once, but I do not now. One so full of himself might turn Papist or Mahometan.[ During October he preached at Clapham, and in November at West Street, The Bull-and-Mouth, and Snowsfields.]

Nov. 1, Monday, was a day of triumphant joy, as All-Saints' Day generally is.[ It was always observed by Wesley. See below, Nov. I, 1766, and 1767.] How superstitious are they who scruple giving God solemn thanks for the lives and deaths of His saints!

Tues. 9.-Having procured an apparatus on purpose, I ordered several persons to be electrified, who were ill of various disorders ; some of whom found an immediate, some a gradual, cure. From this time I appointed, first some hours in every week, and afterward an hour in every day, wherein any that desired it might try the virtue of this surprising medicine. Two or three years after, our patients were so numerous that we were obliged to divide them; so part were electrified in Southwark, part at the Foundery, others near St. Paul's, and the rest near the Seven Dials. The same method we have taken

ever since ; and to this day, while hundreds, perhaps thousands, have received unspeakable good, I have not known one man, woman, or child, who has received any hurt thereby. So that, when I hear any talk of the danger of being electrified (especially if they are medical men who talk so), I cannot but impute it to great want either of sense or honesty.

Fri. 12.-I read over Leusden's Dissertation in Defence of the Hebrew Points [Jan Leusden, Dutch Orientalist, (1624-99) 5 Dissertation in Defence of the Hebrew Points (W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 109).] and was fully convinced there is at least as much to be said on this as on the other side of the question ; but how is it that men are so positive on both sides while demonstration is to be had on neither Certainly to be peremptory and dogmatical can never be so inexcusable as in a point so doubtful as this.

Mon. 22.-I read with the preachers this week the Glasgow Abridgement of Mr. Hutchinson's Works [W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 109 ; below, p. 280.] wherein the abridgers have expressed, with surprising exactness, not only his sense, but his very spirit. But, in truth, I cannot admire either; nay, I admire his hypothesis less and less, as I see the whole is unsupported by Scripture. Very ingenious, but quite precarious.[ Nov. 30, at Lewisham: Preface to The Doctrine of Original Sin ( Works, vol. ix. p. 192). In December he wrote a letter to ' a friend ' (Whitehead's Life, vol. 11. p. 286).]

Dec. 1, Wed.-One or two remarkable letters were put into my hands. Part of the first ran thus :

Blessed be God, who desireth not the death of a sinner! It pleased Him not to cut off my son in his sins. He gave him time to repent; and not only so, but a heart to repent. He showed him his lost estate by nature, and that, unless he was reconciled to God by His Son, and washed in His blood from all his sins, he could never be saved. After he was condemned at York for a robbery on the highway I attended him in the condemned room; and, blessed be God, He enabled me to preach the everlasting gospel to him. It was on Saturday he was condemned. It was on the Saturday following the Lord touched his heart. He then began to wrestle with God in prayer, and left not off till Sunday in the afternoon, when God, who is rich in mercy, applied the blood of His Son, and convinced him He had forgiven him all his sins. He felt his soul at peace with God, and longed to depart and to be with Christ. The following week his peace increased daily, till on Saturday, the day he was to die, he came out of the condemned room clothed in his shroud, and went into the cart.1 As he went on, the cheerfulness and composure of his countenance were amazing to all the spectators. At the place of execution, after he had spent some time in prayer, he rose up, took a cheerful leave of his friends, and said, ' Glory be to God for free grace!' His last words were, ' Lord Jesus, receive my soul.'

Part of the other letter, wrote by himself to his wife, was as follows :

MY DEAR,

Righteous is the Lord, and just are His judgments! His hand of justice cuts my life short, but His hand of mercy saves my soul. You, for one, are a witness of the course of life I led. Were it in my power, I would gladly make amends to you and every one else that I have wronged. But, seeing it is not, I hope that God and you, and every one else, will accept of my willing mind. In a few hours I shall be delivered out of this miserable world. But, glory be to God, He has given repentance and remission of sins to me, the worst of sinners; He has taken away the sting of death, and I am prepared to meet my God. Let my example encourage every sinner to forsake sin and come unto God through Jesus Christ. As a dying man I give you this advice: give yourself wholly up to God. Pray to Him, and never rest till you have secured an interest in the blood of Christ. Live in His fear, and you (as well as I) shall die in His favor. So no more from

Your dying husband,

RICHARD VARLEY. YORK CASTLE, Aug. 20.

Mon. 6.-I began reading to our preachers the late Bishop of Cork's excellent Treatise on Human Understanding [Nov. 30, at Lewisham: Preface to The Doctrine of Original Sin ( Works, vol. ix. p. 192). In December he wrote a letter to ' a friend ' (Whitehead's Life, vol. 11. p. 286).] in most points far clearer and more judicious than Mr. Locke's, as well as designed to advance a better cause.

Fri. 10.-A person who was dying of a cancer in her breast, and deeply convinced of sin, sent a post-chaise, in which I went to her at Epsom. I left her on Saturday morning in strong hope she should not go hence till her eyes had seen His salvation.

In my fragments of time, in the following week, I read Mr. Hanway's accurate History of Shah Nadir, commonly called Kouli Khan,[ See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 109. Apparently he did not read the trading section of the work, but only the history of Nadir Kouli.] A scourge of God indeed! A prodigy of valor and conduct, but an unparalleled monster of rapine and cruelty. Alexander the Great, yea, Nero or Domitian, was an innocent in comparison of him.

Sun. 26.[ On the 22nd he wrote to Miss Furly (Works, vol. x11. p. 196).]-I buried the remains of Joseph Yarner, an Israelite indeed. The peace which filled his heart during his last hours gave such a bloom to his very countenance as remained after death, to the surprise of all who remembered the cloud that used to hang upon it.

1757. JAN. 3, Mon.-I visited a poor dying backslider, full of good resolutions; but who can tell when these imply a real change of heart And when they do not, when they spring from fear only, what will they avail before God[ The Sermon Register gives, for Mon. Jan. 3, texts used at the Foundery,West Street Chapel, and Bull-and-Mouth.]

Mon. 10.-I walked to Bishop Bonner's with Mr. D------,

lately entered at Cambridge, full of good resolutions. May God continue him humble and simple of heart! Then his sense and learning will do him good; but how great are the odds against him![ The date at end of one of the sections in Part 11. of Wesley's Doctrine of Original Sin (see below, p. 327) is Jan. 18, 1757, and Part 11. itself is signed ' Lewisham,' Jan. 25.]

Sat. 22.-I called upon one who did run well for several years, but for a considerable time he had cast off the very form of religion. Yet his heart was not utterly hardened. He determined to set out once more, and since that time he has been more confirmed in walking suitably to the gospel.[ In January Wesley also preached at Lewisham, Leigh, and Lambeth.]

Fri. 28.-Mr. Meier, chaplain to one of the Hanoverian regiments, called and spent an hour with me. I am surprised at the seriousness of all the German ministers with whom I

have had occasion to converse ; entirely different from that pertness and affectation of wit which is too common in our own country.[ Cf. another statement to the same effect, Jan. I, 1778.]

The following letter (which I received two or three months after) was dated on this day [His correspondence with the Rev. Samuel Davies, of Virginia, interested him, as did everything relating to the country in which he so painfully, yet for the sake of his real life-work so providentially, failed. Cf. above, pp. 125, 149.]:

Though you and I may differ in some little things, I have long loved you and your brother, and wished and prayed for your success, as zealous revivers of experimental Christianity. If I differ from you in temper and design, or in the essentials of religion, I am sure the error must lie on my side. Blessed be God for hearts to love one another!

As I knew your correspondence must be very extensive, and your labors various and incessant, I intended to have kept my peculiar love for you a secret till we arrived where seas shall no more roll between us. But your late pious charity [He refers to the books Wesley had sent.] constrains me to give you the trouble of a letter. I am confident God will attend it with His blessing, and render you useful at the distance of near four thousand miles.

How great is the honor God has conferred upon you in making you a restorer of declining religion! And after struggling through so much opposition, and standing almost single, with what pleasure must you behold so many raised up, zealous in the same cause, though perhaps not ranked under the same name, nor openly connected with you!

I am endeavoring, in my poor manner, to promote the same cause in this part of our guilty globe. My success is not equal to my wishes, but it vastly surpasses both my deserts and my expectation. I have baptized near one hundred and fifty adult negroes, of whom about sixty [The 1st ed. says ' fifty.'] are communicants. Unpolished as they are, I find some of them have the art to dissemble. But, blessed be God, the generality of them, as far as I can learn, are real Christians, and I have no doubt but sundry of them are genuine children of Abraham. Among them in the first place, and then among the poor white people, I have distributed the books you sent me.

I desire you to communicate this to your brother, as equally intended for him. And let me and my congregation, particularly my poor negro converts, be favored with your prayers. In return for which I hope neither you nor your cause will be forgotten by, Reverend sir,

Your affectionate fellow laborer '

And obliged servant,

SAMUEL DAVIES. HANOVER (in VIRGINIA), Jan. 28, 1757.

Sun. 30.-Knowing God was able to strengthen me for His own work, I officiated at Snowsfields as usual before I went to West Street, where the service took me up between four and five hours. I preached in the evening, and met the society, and my strength was as my day. I felt no more weariness at night than at eight in the morning.

FEB. 6, Sun.-The number of communicants at Spitalfields made this Lord's Day a little more laborious than the former. But God added proportionally to my strength, so I felt no difference,

Thur. 10.-At the request of the author, I took some pains in correcting an ingenious book, shortly to be published. But the more I consider them, the more I doubt of all systems of astronomy. I doubt whether we can certainly know either the distance or magnitude of any star in the firmament. Else why do astronomers so immensely differ, even with regard to the distance of the sun from the earth-some affirming it to be only three,[ The 1st ed. has ' twelve.'] others ninety, millions of miles!

About this time the following note was given into my hand at Wapping:

John White, master-at-arms aboard his Majesty's ship Tartar, now at Plymouth, desires to return Almighty God thanks for himself and all the ship's company for their preservation in four different engagements they have had with four privateers which they have taken, particularly the last, wherein the enemy first boarded them. They cleared the deck, boarded in their turn, and took the ship, thirty of the enemy being killed, and fifty more wounded. Only two of our crew were wounded, who, it is hoped, will recover.

Wed. 16.-Calling on a friend, I found him just seized with all the symptoms of a pleurisy.[ Cf. above, p. 156. He lost no opportunity of practising his ' primitive physic,' in the value of which he firmly believed, both for himself and his people.] I advised him to apply a brimstone plaster, and in a few hours he was perfectly well. Now to what end should this patient have taken a heap of drugs and lost twenty ounces of blood To what end Why, to oblige the doctor and apothecary. Enough! Reason good![ On Feb. 18 he preached at the Bulland-Mouth.]

Tues. 22.-I preached at Deptford. Even this wilderness does at length ' blossom and bud as the rose.' Never was there such life in this little flock before, nor such an increase in the number of hearers.[ See E.M.P. vol. iv. p. 139.]

The following letter was wrote on Saturday the 28th [For the remarkable family of Kitchens-father and four sons-see Green's Bibliography, Nos. 89 and 102 ; Works, vol. x11i. p. 341, where this letter is given in shorter form, and the

writer is described as ' one of our preachers'; also above, vol. 11i. p. 263.]:

REVEREND AND DEAR SIR,

When I was at Freshford, on January 30, in the morning I scrupled singing those words,

Ye now afflicted are,

And hated for His name,

And in your bodies bear

The tokens of the Lamb.

I thought I was not afflicted or hated for the name of Christ. But this scruple was soon removed, for at Bradford,[ In Wiltshire. Thomas Mitchell says: ' I went into Wiltshire, where Mr. Pearce, of Bradford, was a father to me.' So he was to Thomas Olivers in the horrors of small-pox and in a terror of debt. E.M-P. vol. I. p. 252 ; vol. 11. pp. 65, 72 ; also above, July 1751 ; and W.H.S. vol. vi. p. 116.] in the evening, I was pressed for a soldier, and carried to an inn where the gentlemen were. Mr. Pearce, hearing of it, came and offered bail for my appearance the next day. They said they would take his word for ten thousand pounds, but not for me ; I must go to the Round-house [Still standing. See W.H.S. vol. vi. p. 115.] (the little stone room on the side of the bridge); so thither I was conveyed by five soldiers. There I found nothing to sit on but a stone, and nothing to lie on but a little straw. But soon after a friend sent me a chair, on which I sat all night. I had a double guard, twelve soldiers in all-two without, one in the door, and the rest within. I passed the night without sleep, but not without rest; for, blessed be God, my peace was not broken a moment. My body was in prison, but I was Christ's freeman ; my soul was at liberty. And even there I found some work to do for God: I had fair opportunity of speaking to them who durst not leave me. And I hope it was not in vain.

In the morning I had leave to go to a private house with only one soldier to guard me. About three in the afternoon I was carried before the Commissioners, and part of the Act read, which empowered them to take such able-bodied men as followed no business and had no lawful or sufficient maintenance. Then I said, ' If these are the men you are to take, I am not a proper person, for I do follow a lawful calling in partnership with my brother, and have also an estate.' The Justice said, ' If you will make oath of that, I think we must let you go.' But the Commissioners said no man could swear for himself. 1 said, ' Gentlemen, give me time, and you shall have full proof.' After a long debate they took a fifty-pound bond for my appearance on that day three weeks. All the time I could bless God that He counted me worthy to suffer for His name's sake.

The next day I set out for Cornwall. I tarried at home four days, and then, setting out with my brother James, came to Bradford last Saturday. On Monday, in the afternoon, I appeared before the Commissioners with the writings of my estate. When the Justice had perused them, and my brother had taken his oath, I was set at liberty. So the fierceness of man turns to God's praise, and all this is for the furtherance of the gospel. I hope you will return God thanks for my deliverance out of the hands of unreasonable and

wicked men.

William Hitchens.[ He was an itinerant preacher from 1745 to 1758.]

Sun. 27.-After the service at Snowsfields I found myself much weaker than usual, and feared I should not be able to go through the work of the day, which is equal to preaching eight times. I therefore prayed that God would send me help, and as soon as I had done preaching at West Street, a clergyman who was come to town for a few days came and offered me his service. So when I asked for strength, God gave me strength; when for help, He gave this also.

I had been long desired to see the little flock at Norwich, but this I could not decently do till I was able to rebuild part of the Foundery there, to which I was engaged by my lease. A sum sufficient for that end was now unexpectedly given me by one of whom I had no personal knowledge. So I set out on Monday the 28th, and preached in Norwich on Tuesday evening, MARCH I. Mr. Walsh had been there twelve or fourteen days, and not without a blessing. After preaching I entered into contract with a builder, and gave him part of the money in hand. On Wednesday and Thursday I settled all our spiritual and temporal business, and on Friday and Saturday returned with Mr. Walsh to London.

Sun. 6.-I had no help, and I wanted none, for God renewed my strength. But on Sunday the I3th, finding myself weak at Snowsfields, I prayed (if He saw good) that God would send me help at the chapel, and I had it. A clergyman whom I never saw before came and offered me his assistance, and as soon as I had done preaching, Mr. Fletcher[Rev. John Fletcher. John William de la Flechere, born at Nyon, Switzerland, in 1729. A military officer, in 1752 he came to England and obtained a tutorship in the family of Thomas Hill, M.P., Tern Hall, Shropshire. In the parliamentary season he accompanied the family to London, heard the Methodists, and joined the society (probably at West Street). After consulting Wesley, he took orders in the Church of England. He was ordained at Whitehall and hastened to West Street to help Wesley. From this time onward he became Wesley's close ally in personal friendship, work, and controversy-his confidential adviser. For Fletcher's correspondence with Wesley in 1756 with respect to his acceptance of a title to ordination, and, a month later, with reference to ' the sacrament in your chapels,' see Collection of Letters on

Sacred Subjects, Dublin, 1784, p. 17; Meth. Mag. 1798, p. 92 (quoted in Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol. 11. p. 263). See also, and especially, Wesley's ' Short Account of the Life and Death of Rev. John Fletcher' (Works, vol. xi. PP273-36S) and Tyerman's Wesley's Designated Successor. In Wesley's Sermon Register ' C,' the Chapel, is always West Street. Dr. George Smith (Hist, of Methodism, vol. I. p. 276) says that Fletcher came to the Foundery; Tyerman says that he came to Snowsfields ; but both are wrong. 11 the absence of proof to the contrary, Wesley's statement in the text holds field. Moreover, it was physically im-l probable, if not impossible, that Fletchi could have reached either the Foundei or Snowsfields in time for the com' munion service so quickly after his ordt nation at Whitehall.] came, who had just then been ordained priest, and hastened to the chapel on purpose to assist, as he supposed me to be alone.

Mon. 14.-I went with T[homas] Walsh to Canterbury, where I preached in the evening with great enlargement of spirit, but with greater in the morning, being much refreshed at the sight of so large a number of soldiers. And is not God able to kindle the same fire in the fleet which He has already begun to kindle in the army

Wed. 16.-I had the satisfaction to find an old stout-hearted sinner, who had been defying God for near fourscore years, now become as a little child, and complaining'-of his own ignorance and ingratitude to God.

Fri. 18.-I returned to London.[ And preached at Snowsfields.]

Sun. 20.-Mr. Fletcher helped me again. How wonderful are the ways of God! When my bodily strength failed, and none in England were able and willing to assist me, He sent me help from the mountains of Switzerland, and an helpmeet for me in every respect. Where could I have found such another[ On March 24, from London, he wrote to Thomas Olivers (Meth. Sec. Sept. 23, 1881, p. 717).]

Fri. 25.-After I had read to a serious clergyman the conclusion of The Doctrine of Original Sin, [March 23 is the date at the end of Part IV. See Green's Bibliography, No. 182; Works, vol. ix. pp. 196-464; W.H.S. vol. v11i. p. 53.] he moved that we might spend some time in prayer. And I found great liberty of spirit in praying for Dr. Taylor, and a strong hope that God would show him ' the truth as it is in Jesus.'

About this time many of the children of God rested from their labors.

On Sunday the 13th I buried Elizabeth Langdon, who, after severe inward trials, was for several days in great pain, but in great peace. On Sunday the 2oth I buried Hannah Lee, a pattern of industry, meekness, and patience. And on Sunday the 27th I buried Mary Naylor,[ March 23 is the date at the end of Part IV. See Green's Bibliography, No. 182; Works, vol. ix. pp. 196-464; W.H.S. vol. v11i. p. 53.] who for several years was a most eminent pattern of truly Christian courage, plainness of speech, and plainness of apparel. A week before I had an opportunity of telling her all that was in my heart concerning her change (not for the better) in all these particulars. In the beginning of her illness she was in great darkness and distress of soul, but while prayer was made for her her bodily pain ceased and her soul received comfort; and on Monday the 21st, just at midnight, she fell asleep.

April 1757

In Liverpool

In the afternoon I rode to Dudley, where the work of God increases greatly, notwithstanding the immense scandal which has been given by those who once rejoiced in the love of God. One of these has lately killed his own child by a blow upon the head. After preaching I talked with M. B., who has been long ' a mother in Israel.'

I was under strong convictions [said she] when twelve or thirteen years old, and soon after found peace with God. But I lost it by degrees, and then contented myself with living a quiet, harmless life till Mr. Charles Wesley came to Wednesbury in the year 1742. Soon after this my convictions returned, though not with terror, as before, but with strong hope, and in a little time I recovered peace and joy in believing. This I never lost since, but for forty-eight hours (by speaking angrily to my child). Not long after Mr. Jones talked particularly with me about the wickedness of my heart. I went home in great trouble, which did not cease, till one day, sitting in my house, I heard a voice say, in my inmost soul, ' Be ye holy; for I am holy.' From that hour for a year and a quarter (though I never lost my peace) I did nothing but long and weep and pray for inward holiness. I was then sitting one day, Aug. 23, 1744, about eight in the morning, musing and praying as usual, when I seemed to hear a loud voice, saying at once to my heart and to my outward ears, ' This day shall salvation come to this house.' I ran upstairs, and presently the power of God came upon me, so that I shook all over like a leaf. Then a voice said, ' This day is salvation come to this house.' At the instant I felt an entire change. I was full of love and full of God. I had the witness in myself that He had made an end of sin and taken my whole heart for ever. And from that moment I have never lost the witness nor felt anything in my heart but pure love.

Sun. 17.-The rain constrained me to preach within at eight, though the house would ill contain the congregation; but we prayed that God, if He saw good, would 'stay the bottles of heaven' for the sake of those at Wednesbury. And before we came thither the rain stayed, so that I proclaimed Christ crucified in the open air to such a congregation as no house could have contained. At five I preached to a still larger congregation on ' He that believeth shall be saved.'

As soon as I had done the rain returned, and continued great part of the night.

Mon. 18.-In the evening I preached at Bilbrook to an earnest congregation, and joined twenty of them in a society, one of whom had Christ clearly revealed in him thirty years ago; but he could find none who understood what he said till the Methodists (so called) came. He clave to them immediately, rejoicing with them, and over them, who were partakers of like precious faith.[ He preached at Alpraham probably on the i8th (Sermon Register); also, in April, at Dewsbury.]

Tues. 19.-Between Nantwich and Poole a thick, black cloud came across us, out of which issued such a violent wind as was ready to bear us off our horses; but in five minutes' time the wind fell, and the cloud bore clear away.

Wed. 20.-The congregation at Chester in the evening was as quiet and serious as that at the Foundery, and the society was near a third part larger than when I was here in autumn.

Thur. 21.-I rode to Liverpool,[ See Tyerman, vol. ii. p. 274; W.H.S. vol. ii. p. 67; Myles's Chron. Hist. p. 448. 'James Schofield' appears in the account-book of the Manchester Round. Wesley preached in and around Liverpool from the 2ist to the 3Oth.] where I found about half of those I left in the society. James S[cholefie]ld had swept away the rest, in order to which he had told lies innumerable. But none who make lies their refuge will prosper. A little while and his building will moulder away.

Sun. 24.-We had two very useful sermons at St. Thomas's church[' Our parish church,' Wesley calls it; see May 6, 1759, April 5, 1761, March 22, 1778. It stood about midway between the Custom House and Pitt Street Chapel. It was consecrated in 1750. the year of the erection of the first Pitt Street, and demolished in 1906. This was not the 'Old Church,' which was named St. Nicholas.]: the one on counting the cost before we begin to build, the other on ' Be ye angry, and sin not.' And both of them were exactly suitable to the present case of many in the congregation.

The upper part of the high spire of the church was blown down in the late storm. The stones, being bound together by strong iron cramps, hung waving in the air for some time. Then they broke through roof, gallery, pews, and pavement, and made a deep dint in the ground.

Mon. 25.-I walked to the Infirmary, standing on a hill, at the north end of the town. The Seamen's Hospital is joined to it on each side by semicircular piazzas. All is extremely clean and neat, at least equal to anything in London. The old seamen have smaller or larger allowance, according to their families; so that nothing is wanting to make their lives easy and comfortable-but the love of God.

I afterwards spent an hour with Mr. Peter Whitefield,[ See W.HS. vol. iv. pp. no, 151.] a man of strong understanding and various learning. His Dissertation in Defence of the Hebrew Points (which he sent me the next morning) is far more satisfactory than anything which I ever heard or read upon the subject.

Thur. 28.-I talked with one who, by the advice of his pastor, had, very calmly and deliberately, beat his wife with a large stick till she was black and blue almost from head to foot. And he insisted it was his duty so to do, because she was surly and ill-natured; and that he was full of faith all the time he was doing it, and had been so ever since.

Sat. 30.-I took a view of the Free School, a truly noble benefaction. Here seventy boys and thirty girls are entirely provided for. The building forms three sides of a square, and is rather elegant than magnificent. The children are taught to work, in their several ways, as well as to read and write. The school, the dining-rooms, and the lodgings are all plain and clean. The whole was the gift of one man, Mr. Blundell, a merchant of Liverpool.

MAY 2, Mon.-\ preached at Warrington about noon to a wild, staring people (very few excepted), who seemed just ripe for mischief. But the bridle was in their jaws. In the evening I preached at Manchester.[ Early in May he preached at Bolton.]

Wed. 4.-I rode over to Hayfield, and preached at one in the church to a congregation gathered from all parts.

Thur. 5.-I inquired of John Johnson concerning Miss Beresford.[ ' Miss Judith Beresford-a sweet, but short-lived flower.' See above, p. 110]

The sum of his account was this:

She was always an innocent, sober young woman, having the form of godliness, till she was convinced of sin, and soon after justified. She was a pattern both of piety and industry. Notwithstanding her fortune and her sickliness, she was never unemployed; when she had no other work, working for the poor. And the whole tenor of her conversation was such that it is still a common saying,' If Miss Beresford is not gone to heaven, nobody ever will.'

She had a vehement love to the word of God, and spared no pains in order to hear it. Frequently she would not go to bed all night lest she should miss the morning preaching. She lost no opportunity of meeting with her brethren, to whom her heart was closely united : nor was she afraid or ashamed to own the poorest of them, wherever she met them, and whatever company she was in. The very sight of them occasioned a joy in her soul which she neither could nor desired to hide.

When her weakness confined her to her room she rejoiced with joy unspeakable; more especially when she was delivered from all her doubts concerning Christian perfection. Never was any one more athirst for this, for the whole mind that was in Christ. And she earnestly exhorted all her brethren vehemently to press after it.

The more her bodily strength decayed, the more she was strengthened in spirit. She called upon all that were with her, ' Help me to rejoice; help me to praise God'; having no fear, but a jealousy over herself lest she should exceed in her desire to be with Christ.

As soon as I came to Ashbourne she sent for me, and broke out, ' I am just at my journey's end. What a mercy that I, who have done so little for God, should be so soon taken up to Him! Oh, I am full of the love of God! I dare not exercise my faith fully upon God. The glory of the Lord is so great that I cannot bear it; I am overwhelmed; my natural life is almost gone with the brightness of His presence. Sometimes I am even forced to cry out, Lord, stay Thy hand till I come into glory I asked, 'Have you lately felt any remains of sin in you' She said, ' I felt pride some weeks ago.' And it seems this was the last time. She added,' I have now no will; the will of God is mine. I can bring my dearest friends before the Lord; and, while I am praying for them, the glory of the Lord so overpowers me that I am lost, and adore in silence the God of heaven.' She cried out, ' Tell all from me that perfection is attainable; and exhort all to press after it. What a blessing is it that I have no weary hours; though I am confined to my bed night and day, and can take scarce anything but water to refresh me, yet I am like a giant refreshed with wine.'

Afterward she broke out, ' If I had lived in what the world calls pleasure, what a miserable creature should I have been now! What should I be if I had no God on my side When the fire has made me bright, then I shall go to my God.' She prayed largely for all states of mankind; but particularly for the prosperity of the Church, and for the society at Ashbourne, that God would continue and increase His work among them.

When she altered for death, she called for her mother and brothers, to each of whom she gave an earnest exhortation. Then she said, ' Now I have no more to do here; I am ready to die. Send to Mr. Wesley, and tell him I am sorry I did not sooner believe the doctrine of perfect holiness. Blessed be God, I now know it to be the truth!' .After greatly rejoicing in God for two days more, she said one morning,' I dreamed last night I heard a voice, Christ will come to-day for His bride. It is for me. He will come for me to-day.' And a few hours after, without one struggle, or sigh, or groan, she sweetly fell asleep.

One who was intimately acquainted with her writes thus:

Glory be to God for the blessed privilege I enjoyed of being with her, night and day, for a month before she died! When I went to her first, she had kept her bed some days, and was extremely weak. And yet she spoke considerably plainer than ever I heard her in my life. She called as soon as I entered the room, 'My dear friend, give me your hand. Let us rejoice that my time is so near approaching. Do not mourn; you know it is what we expected.' I was soon brought to wish her safe on the happy shore. She said,' This is true friendship. But how is it-that I do not feel greater transports of love, now I am so near the time of seeing my Lord face to face Indeed I am ashamed to approach Him before whom the angels veil their faces!' She often said,' I take it as a fresh token of His love that He sent you to me at this time.' Her pains were great; but she bore all with invincible patience and resignation, and often said, ' I find it good for me to be afflicted; in His time I shall come out thoroughly purified.' Afterward she said, ' I experience more upon this bed of my own nothingness, and the free grace of God in Christ, than ever I did in all my life. The best of my performances would be damnable without Christ.'

Several days before her death her love was so great that she cried, ' I am overcome, I am overcome, I am overcome!' And when she had scarce strength to speak she praised God in a wonderful manner. Even when she was light-headed her talk was wholly concerning the things of God. She called to Mr. Wesley, as if he had been by her, and said, ' O sir, how hard it is for the rich to enter into the kingdom of heaven! I am saved; but I am but just saved.' When her fever abated she told me she had dreamed that she was with him. And sometimes I could scarce persuade her but he had been there.

She after asked if I saw no more appearance of death in her face yet. When I told her there was, she begged I would indulge her with a looking-glass; and, looking earnestly into it, she said with transport, ' I never saw myself with so much pleasure in my life.'

On Saturday morning at six she said, ' My Savior will come today and fetch His bride.' Yet about eight she said, ' If you had felt what I have done this morning, it would have killed you. I had lost sight of God.' (Perhaps in the last conflict ' with principalities and powers.') From this time she was filled with joy, but spoke little. Her eyes were still lifted up to heaven, till her soul was released, with so much ease that I did not know when she drew her last breath.

So died Judith Beresford, as it were a hundred years old, at the age of twenty four. A little more of her life and of her spirit may be learned from one or two of her letters.

How can you love me, since there is still such a mixture of evil in all I say and do But why should I ask this question The Lord Himself loves me; and in the late dispensation of His providence He has mercifully discovered to me some sins of a refined nature, which before I was almost ignorant of, and now wait and pray to be delivered from. And I can joyfully add, the Lord is nigh to all that call upon Him. He will fulfill my desire, though not as I desired; His way and His will are best. But how long shall I acknowledge this without implicitly submitting to it My own will I am apt to think good in such cases, and to grieve when it is crossed. So that I easily discern how needful it is for me to be tried, and made to sacrifice to the Lord of that which costs me something. I need not say-for the above, alas! will tell you-that I cannot answer all your questions in the affirmative; for did I continually find God present with me, and always walk in the light of His countenance, most surely there could be no part dark in me. Yet this I can say, that I see His hand stretched out to save and to deliver; and my trust is that before I go hence I shall behold all His salvation; and if it can serve any good purpose, He will open my lips to declare His praise, and let a poor creature glorify Him in her death. For this I pray, and rejoice in hope, knowing the God whom I serve is able to fulfill in me all the good pleasure of His will, and the work of faith with power.

As to the shadows of this world, I think I may truly say they are as nothing to me. The evil (for certainly it must be some) that at times interposes between God and my soul is, I believe, of a more spiritual nature. The stirrings of pride I sometimes feel, and, I trust, shall bewail as long as one spark remains.

My dear friend, adieu! I trust we shall have a happy meeting at last. In the meantime, I am persuaded a few lines from you would add greatly to my peace and comfort. I am your very loving, and (I hope) obedient child,

J. B., September 7, 1756

In answer to a letter wherein I desired some account of her experience she wrote as follows:

How does it add to the glory of the Almighty Saviour that, from my very infancy, this rebel heart has felt the drawings of His love! Therefore since you desire to know how I was first convinced that I was a poor guilty sinner, I must begin with saying that goodness and mercy have followed me all my days. But I know not how to proceed; the workings of sin and grace that I have felt are beyond description. Yet out of the mouth of babes and sucklings the Lord can perfect praise.

My childhood was spent in much simplicity and peace. The Lord drew me to Himself with the cords of love, and I found great joy in pouring out my soul before Him. Original sin I was quite ignorant of; but actual sins I felt and bewailed; and after some time spent in weeping for them, I felt peace, and renewed my resolutions. But they could not last long; for pride, envy, and all manner of evil now sprung up in my heart. Yet at times I had strong convictions, and often resolved to be very serious when I was older.

So I went on from eight or ten years old till seventeen; then I was indeed as bad as bad could be, desired nothing but to be admired, and was filled with all that foolish vanity which poor young women are most prone to. Christmas 1750, I was advised to partake of the Lord's Supper. I knew it was right, but was conscious of my ignorance and unfitness for it. However, I endeavored to prepare myself, and was pretty well satisfied, after I had made a formal confession of my sins, and shed some tears for them.

About this time there was a great talk of Methodism, and a cousin of mine was brought to seek the Lord. I went to visit her in January 1751, and told her, before I came away, I knew I was not what I ought to be, and should be glad to be instructed. From this time we carried on a correspondence, and by degrees light broke in upon my heart. But, alas! Though I well knew that in me was no good thing, and seemed to disclaim my own righteousness, yet the idol lurked within, and I really trusted in my own prayers and other duties. In this manner I went on that whole year, toward the end of which my corruptions were more violent. Sin took occasion by the commandment, and I was often ready to be carried away by the torrent.

February 1752, it pleased God to take my dear friend. This appeared to me a heavy judgment; yet I afterwards saw how it was tempered with mercy, as it taught me to trust in none but the everlasting arm. Her death happily proved the occasion of her elder sister's conversion. The blessing of a Christian friend was restored to me, and we received each other as from the Lord.

In 1753 and 1754 I had great outward afflictions, and at times strong inward conflicts; though, blessed be God, I generally found comfort in pouring out my complaints before Him. But towards the end of 1754 I began to feel my hope decline; and for several nights in secret prayer I was in strong agony of spirit. The Lord then, while I was upon my knees, stripped off all my fig-leaves. At the same time He showed me the all-sufficiency of Jesus Christ to save sinners, to save me, the chief; and I was enabled to cry out, ' My Lord and my God! I have redemption in Thy blood.' From this happy time I went on my way rejoicing, though I was at times grievously assaulted, both by the stirrings of my old corruptions, and temptations from the devil, blasphemous thoughts in particular. I always experienced something of this before the sacrament; but the Lord made a way for me to escape.

In the beginning of the year 1755 we had preaching near Ashbourne. This I had wished for long; and now I was honored with suffering a little for the name of Christ. At first I was rather ashamed, but the Lord strengthened me; and so great a blessing did I find by conversing with these dear people that I feared none of those things which I did or might suffer. My acquaintances were now less fond of my company, and they that looked upon me shaked their heads. This proved an unspeakable blessing; for often had I cause to fear the love of men.

From the time of my becoming serious, or rather beginning to aim at it, my health visibly declined. This at first occasioned me some trouble, because all cried out it was being too religious; but afterwards I saw great mercy in this chastisement, and the consequences of it; one of which was that I had a just excuse, even in the judgment of others, for refraining from many things which in my circumstances could not otherwise have been avoided without great opposition from those who were near and dear unto me. Not that I ever fasted : God knows I have been deficient in this as well as every other duty; but I had a happy liberty of using some little self-denial, for which the Lord be praised!

Oh how has He led me and carried me in His bosom! Is it not wonderful And yet I have not told you a tenth part; but the time fails, and my strength fails. Praise God with me, and let us magnify His name together.

I believe this was one of the last letters she wrote. Shortly after she was called hence.

So unaffected, so composed a mind,

So firm yet soft, so strong yet so refined,

Heaven, as its purest gold, with torture tried;

The saint sustained it-but the woman died.[ From Pope's epitaph on Mrs. Corbet.]

An account of a widely different nature I received about] this time from Ireland:

Thomas B., about three miles from Tyrrell's Pass, was at the point of death by a violent rupture. While they were praying for him in the society he was at once restored to perfect health. He continued in health for several years, and in the knowledge and love of God; but no sooner did he return to folly than his disorder returned, and in some months it put an end to his life. He died as stupid as an ox.

May 1757

In Yorkshire

Mon. 9.-I rode over the mountains to Huddersfield. A wilder people I never saw in England. The men, women, and children filled the street as we rode along, and appeared just ready to devour us. They were, however, tolerably quiet while I preached; only a few pieces of dirt were thrown, and the bellman came in the middle of the sermon, but was stopped by a gentleman of the town. I had almost done when they began to ring the bells; so that it did us small disservice. How intolerable a thing is the gospel of Christ to them who are resolved to serve the devil!

Wed. 11.-I preached, about one, at Wakefield, in a small meadow[The meadow is mentioned again on] near the town. When I began the sun shone exceeding hot, but in a few minutes it was covered with clouds. The congregation was more quiet and serious than ever I saw there before. Almost as soon as I had done speaking the sun broke out again.

Thur. 12.-I finished Dr. Roger's Essay on the Learning of the Ancients I think he has clearly proved that they had microscopes and telescopes, and knew all that is valuable in the modern astronomy; but, indeed, he has fully shown the whole frame of this to be quite uncertain, if not self-contradictory.

The latter end of the week I spent at Bradford.[ See Stamp's Methodism in Bradford, pp. 36-8.]

Sun. 15.-At five the house[An old cock-pit near the junction of Bond Street with Aldermanbury, taken by the Society in 1756. See Dickons's Kirkgatt Chapel, pp. 30-32, with illustration of the building.] contained the congregation, but at eight they covered the plain adjoining to it. The sun was hot till the clouds interposed; it was a solemn and comfortable season. As soon as the service of the church was ended I began at the end of the house again, and exhorted a willing multitude to ' follow after charity.' A shower of rain and hail fell as I drew to a conclusion, but it did not disturb the congregation.

Soon after I took horse for Birstall. The congregation here was treble to that at Bradford, but, as they stood one above another on the circular slope of the hill, my voice commanded them all. Though I spoke longer than I usually do, I found no weariness or weakness. Shall not ' they that trust in the Lord renew their strength' Yea, as long as the sun and

moon endures.

On Monday and Tuesday I preached in the neighboring

towns.[ During May he preached at Cleckheaton, Leeds, Redhill, Wigton, Wycombe, Warton, and Wednesbury. From ' Bristol' (see Works, vol. xii. p. 196- this should probably read ' Birstall') he wrote to Miss Furly (May 18).]

Wed. 18.-I rode in the afternoon, from Halifax, over the huge, but extremely pleasant and fruitful, mountains to Heptonstall. A large congregation was waiting for us, not only on the ground, but on the side and tops of the neighbouring houses. But no scoffer or trifler was seen among them. It rained in the adjoining valley all or most of the time that I was preaching, but it was fair with us on the top of the mountain. What an emblem of God's taking up His people into a place of safety while the storm falls on all below!

Here I was informed of the earthquake the day before. On Tuesday, May 17, many persons in several parts, within five or six miles, heard a strange noise under the ground, which some compared to thunder, others to the rumbling of carts. Quickly after they felt the earth rock under them and wave to and fro. Many who were within doors heard their pewter and glass clatter; many in the fields felt the ground shake under their feet; and all agreed as to the time, though they knew nothing of each other's account.

Thur. 19.-I preached at Ewood about seven, not intending to preach again till the evening; but Mr. Grimshaw begged I would give them one sermon at Gaulksholme, after which we climbed up the enormous mountain, I think equal to any I saw in Germany, on the brow of which we were saluted by a severe shower, which a high wind drove full in our faces almost till we came to Haslingden.[ Near Todmorden, where, in 1744, William Darney had preached and formed a society, as soon after he did at Heap Barn and Miller Barn (B. Moore, Burnley Methodism) One of the earliest converts was Mrs Sarah Fielden, mother of Rev. Joshua Fielden, who wrote her memoir (Meth Mag 1815, p. 443) T. E. Bngden {W.HS. vol. in. p 199) quotes details from John Stott's Notices of Methodism in Haslingden.For Gaulksholme see also below, p 332] Here I learned that the earthquake observed near Heptonstall had been sensibly felt by very many persons from Bingley, three miles eastward of Keighley, to the neighborhood of Preston. It was everywhere preceded by a hoarse rumbling about thiee o'clock, so that in a few minutes it had run from east to west, between fifty and sixty miles.

Fri. 20-I preached near Padiham at eight to a large, wild congregation [One of his ' wild' hearers was Robert Worsick, whose grandmother ran after Wesley brandishing an axe and threatening to kill him A year later a chapel was built, the trustees of which were William Grimshaw and two weavers, James Hunter and James Moor See Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol 11. p. 275; B Moore's Burnley Methodism, p. 20; and Meth Kec. Feb. 14, 1907]; about noon at Roughlee, where those who stood firm in the storm had melted away in the calm. At Keighley I had neither voice nor strength left, but while I was preaching my strength returned.

Sat. 21.-I had a little conference with our preachers. In the afternoon I preached at Bingley. I have not lately seen so genteel a congregation, yet the word of God fell heavy upon them.

Sun. 22.-After preaching at five, I took horse for Haworth. A December storm met us upon the mountain, but this did not hinder such a congregation as the church could not contain. I suppose we had near a thousand communicants, and scarce a trifler among them. In the afternoon, the church not containing

1 THE PARISH CHURCH HAWORTH IN GRIMSHAW S TIME

2 THE OLD PARSONAGE HAWORTH

3 WILLIAM GRIMSHAW

4 THE PULPIT NEAR THE WINDOW OF HAWORTH CHURCH

more than a third of the people, I was constrained to be in the churchyard. The rain began as soon as I began to speak, but they regarded it not, for God sent into their hearts-

The former and the latter rain;

The love of God, and love of Mon.[ From Charles Wesley's Version of Ps. cxxxiii.]

May 1757

In Cumberland

Mon. 23.-I took horse at four. It rained till noon without any intermission, and we had heavy showers in the afternoon; however, we reached Ambleside in the evening.

Tues. 24.-We rode by Keswick[He breakfasted at Keswick ( Works, vol. xii. p. 185).] to Whitehaven. Within a few miles of the town I was so tired that I could scarce either ride or walk, but all weariness was gone before I had preached a quarter of an hour.

Wed. 25.-I was surprised to see not only hedges and shrubs without a green leaf upon them, but abundance of trees likewise naked as in the depth of winter. Upon inquiring, I found that, some time before, a violent wind had gone through all these parts, which not only threw down chimneys, walls, and barns, and tore up trees by the roots, but scorched every green thing it touched as with fire, so that all the leaves immediately fell off, and not only bushes and fruit-trees, but elms, oaks, and firs withered away to the very roots.

Fri. 27.-I preached at Branthwaite about noon. Many of the congregation came from far. The rain was suspended from ten till evening, so that they had opportunity both of coming and returning. This also was an answer to prayer; and is any such too little to be remembered[ On May 28, from Whitehaven, he wrote a letter to Blackwell-one of his most comforting letters (Works, vol. xii. p. 185).]

Sun. 29 (being Whit Sunday).-After preaching at eight and at two, I hastened to Cockermouth. I began without delay, and cried to a listening multitude,' If any man thirst, let htm come unto Me and drink.' The word had free course. Even the gentry seemed desirous to drink of the ' living water.'

Mon. 30.-I rode to Wigton,[ See article in Meth. Rec. Nov. 12, 1903, for Methodism in Wigton.] a neat, well-built town on the edge of Cumberland. I preached in the market-place at twelve.

The congregation was large and heavily attentive. Between four and five we crossed Solway Frith, and before seven reached an ill-looking house called the Brow, which we came to by mistake, having passed the house we were directed to. I believe God directed us better than Mon. Two young women, we found, kept the house, who had lost both their parents, their mother very lately. I had great liberty in praying with them and for them. Who knows but God will fasten something upon them which they will not easily shake off

Tues. 31.-I breakfasted at Dumfries, and spent an hour with a poor backslider of London, who had been for some years settled there. We then rode through an uncommonly pleasant country (so widely distant is common report from truth) to Thornhill, two or three miles from the Duke of Queensberry's seat-an ancient and noble pile of building, delightfully situated on the side of a pleasant and fruitful hill. But it gives no pleasure to its owner, for he does not even behold it with his eyes. Surely this is a sore evil under the sun: a man has all things and enjoys nothing.

We rode afterward partly over and partly between some of the finest mountains, I believe, in Europe-higher than most, if not than any, in England, and clothed with grass to the very top. Soon after four we came to Leadhills, a little town at the foot of the mountains, wholly inhabited by miners.

June 1, Wed.-We rode on to Glasgow, a mile short of which we met Mr. Gillies1 riding out to meet us.

In the evening the tent (so they called a covered pulpit) was placed in the yard of the poorhouse, a very large and commodious place. Fronting the pulpit was the infirmary, with most of the patients at or near the windows. Adjoining to this was the hospital for lunatics; several of them gave deep attention. And cannot God give them also the spirit of a sound mind After sermon they brought four children to baptize. I was at the kirk in the morning while the minister baptized several immediately after sermon, so I was not at a loss as to their manner of baptizing. I believe this removed much prejudice.

Fri. 3.-At seven the congregation was increased, and earnest attention sat on every face. In the afternoon we walked to the College and saw the new library, with the collection of pictures. Many of them are by Raphael, Rubens, Van Dyck, and other eminent hands; but they have not room to place them to advantage, their whole building being very small.

Sat. 4.-I walked through all parts of the old cathedral, a very large and once beautiful structure-I think more lofty than that at Canterbury, and nearly the same length and breadth. We then went up the main steeple, which gave us a fine prospect both of the city and the adjacent country. A more fruitful and better cultivated plain is scarce to be seen in England. Indeed, nothing is wanting but more trade (which would naturally bring more people) to make a great part of Scotland no way inferior to the best counties in England.

I was much pleased with the seriousness of the people in the evening, but still I prefer the English congregation. I cannot be reconciled to men sitting at prayer or covering their heads while they are singing praise to God.

Sun. 5.-At seven the congregation was just as large as my voice could reach, and I did not spare them at all. So, if any will deceive himself, I am clear of his blood. In the afternoon it was judged two thousand at least went away not being able to hear, but several thousands heard very distinctly, the evening being calm and still. After preaching I met as many as desired it of the members of the praying societies. I earnestly advised them to meet Mr. Gillies every week, and at their other meetings not to talk loosely and in general (as their manner had been) on some head of religion, but to examine each other's hearts and lives.

Mon. 6.-We took horse early, and in three hours reached the Kirk o' Shots, where the landlord seemed to be unusually affected by a few minutes' conversation, as did also the woman of the house where we dined. We came to Musselburgh at five. I went to an inn, and sent for Mr. Bailiff Lindsey, whom I had seen several years ago. He came immediately, and desired me to make his house my home. At seven I preached in the Poorhouse to a large and deeply attentive congregation; but, the number of people making the room extremely hot, I preached in the morning before the door. Speaking afterwards to the

members of the society, I was agreeably surprised to find more than two-thirds knew in whom they had believed. And the tree was known by its fruits. The national shyness and stubbornness were gone, and they were as open and teachable as little children. At seven five or six and forty of the fifty Dragoons, and multitudes of the town's-people, attended. Is the time come that even these wise Scots shall become fools for Christ's sake

Wed. 8.-I rode to Dunbar.[ See Rankin's autobiography in E.M.P. (vol. v.) for account of early Methodism in Dunbar, especially pp. 140-2, 156-9. Andrew Affleck {Meth. Mag. 1813, p. 73) had been awakened before the Methodist preachers visited Dunbar by attending the prayer-meetings of some pious English Dragoons.] Here also I found a little society, most of them rejoicing in God their Savior. At eleven I went out into the main street, and began speaking to a congregation of two men and two women. These were soon joined by above twenty little children, and not long after by a large number of young and old. On a sudden the sun broke out and shone full in my face, but in a few moments I felt it not. In the afternoon I rode to Berwick-upon-Tweed. They did not expect me till the next day. However, a congregation quickly assembled, and one as large, if not larger, at five in the morning.

Thur. 9.-To-day Douglas[The play was written by the Rev.John Home, a minister of the Kirk. It was first performed Dec. 14, 1755. The author and certain ministers who attended the performance were cited by the Kirk. Home resigned June 7, 1757. About the objectionable lines pamphlets were written. See W.H.S. vol. iv. pp. 240, 241; also Dublin Univ. Mag. 1868, P659, quoted in W.H.S. above.] the play which has made so much noise, was put into my hands. I was astonished to find it is one of the finest tragedies I ever read. What pity that a few lines were not left out, and that it was ever acted at Edinburgh!

Fri. 10.-I found myself much out of order, till the flux stopped at once without any medicine; but being still weak, and the sun shining extremely hot, I was afraid I should not be able to go round by Kelso. Vain fear! God took care for this also. The wind, which had been full east for several days, turned this morning full west, and blew just in our face; and about ten the clouds rose, and kept us cool till we came to Kelso.

At six William Coward and I went to the market-house.[ Tyerman, Life of Wesley, vol. ii. p. 276.]

We stayed some time, and neither man, woman, nor child came near us. At length I began singing a Scotch psalm, and fifteen or twenty people came within hearing, but with great circumspection, keeping their distance as though they knew not what might follow. But while I prayed their number increased, so that in a few minutes there was a pretty large congregation. I suppose the chief men of the town were there, and I spared neither rich nor poor. I almost wondered at myself, it not being usual with me to use so keen and cutting expressions, and I believe many felt that, for all their form, they were but heathens still.

Sat. 11.-Near as many were present at five, to whom I spoke full as plain as before. Many looked as if they would look us through; but the shyness peculiar to this nation prevented their saying anything to me, good or bad, while I walked through them to our inn.

June 1757

In Northumberland

About noon I preached at Wooler, a pretty large town eighteen miles from Kelso. I stood on one side of the main street, near the middle of the town. And I might stand, for no creature came near me till I had sung part of a psalm. Then a row of children stood before me, and in some time about a hundred men and women. I spoke full as plain as I did at Kelso; and Pharisees themselves are not out of God's reach.

In the afternoon we came to Alnwick, and at six I preached in the court-house to a congregation of another spirit.[ During this journey he preached at Berwick.]

Sun. 12.-At seven they were gathered from all parts, and I was greatly refreshed among them. At five, the court-house being too small, I was obliged to go out into the market-place. Oh what a difference is there between these living stones and the dead, unfeeling multitudes in Scotland!

Mon. 13.-I proclaimed the love of Christ to sinners in the market-place at Morpeth. Thence we rode to Plessey. The society of colliers here may be a pattern to all the societies in England. No person ever misses his band or class, they have no jar of any kind among them, but with one heart and one

Mind "provoke one another to love and to good works." After preaching I met the society in a room as warm as any in Georgia. This, with the scorching heat of the sun when we rode on, quite exhausted my strength; but after we came to Newcastle I soon recovered, and preached with as much ease as in the morning.[ On June 14, from Newcastle, he wrote to Miss Furly (vol. xii. p. 197). and to Mrs. Crosby (vol. xii. P353). On the 18th he again wrote to Miss Furly (vol. xii.p . 198)]

Thur. 16.-In the evening I preached at Sunderland. I then met the society, and told them plain none could stay with us unless he would part with all sin-particularly, robbing the King, selling or buying run goods, which I could no more suffer than robbing on the highway. This I enforced on every member the next day. A few would not promise to refrain, so these I was forced to cut off. About two hundred and fifty were of a better mind.

Sat. 18.-The desk was placed in the evening just opposite the sun, which, when I began, was covered with a cloud; but it broke out in a few minutes, and shone full in my face for three-quarters of an hour. But it was no inconvenience at all, nor were my eyes any more dazzled than if it had been under the earth.

July 1757

Tyneside

Sun. 19.-I preached at eight to the usual congregation, and hastened to Shields,[ See above, vol. iii. p. 170.] lest I should be too late for the church. Between twelve and one I preached in a kind of square. But here we had a new kind of inconvenience-every four or five minutes a strong wind covered us over with a shower of dust, so that it was not easy to look up or to keep one's eyes open. But not long after the rain began, which constrained me to preach within, at Newcastle. I took the opportunity of making a collection for the poor, many of whom can very hardly support life in the present scarcity.

Wed. 22.-In the evening and the following morning I preached at Chester-le-Street. Observing some very fine but not very modest pictures in the parlor where we supped, I desired my companion, when the company was gone, to put them where they could do no hurt. He piled them on a heap in a corner of the room, and they have not appeared since.

Thur. 23.-I preached at South Biddick about noon on ' I will heal thy backsliding.' God was with us at Sunderland in the evening in an uncommon manner, and the next day I left the people there more in earnest than they have been for some years.

Sat. 25.-We walked to Swalwell about noon. The sun was scorching hot, and there was no wind or cloud; but it did us no hurt. The congregation was such as I never saw there before, and I believe God blessed His word to them that were nigh, and them that had been far from Him.

Sun. 26.-I preached at Gateshead at eight, at Sheephill about noon, and at five in the evening at Newcastle, near Pandon Gate. The rain only threatened till I had done, but soon after poured down. How well does God time great and small events for the furtherance of His kingdom!

Mon. 27.-I preached at Horsley, and found some life even there. Thence we rode across the Tyne to Prudhoe, a little town on the top of a high hill. I preached at the side of Mr. H.'s house, and I suppose all the town who could get out. were present, and most of them at five in the morning. At both times it pleased God to make bare His arm, not only to wound but to heal.

Tues, 28.-I returned to Newcastle hoarse and weak; but who can be spent in a better cause

Thur. 30.-I read Mr. Baxter's account of his own Life and Times. It seems to be the most impartial account of those times which has yet ever appeared. And none that I have seen so accurately points out the real springs of those public calamities.[ July i (or, more probably, July n), from York, letter to Miss Furly (Works, vol. xii. p. 199).]

July 3, Sun.-The high wind obliged me to stand on the western side of Gateshead. By this means the sun was just in my face. But it was not long before the clouds covered it. As I began speaking in the afternoon, near Pandon Gate, the rain began, scattered the careless hearers, and ceased. An earnest, attentive multitude remained, to whom I explained part of the Second Lesson for the day, concerning the 'joy' which is 'in heaven over one sinner that repents.'

July 1757

North-East Yorkshire

Mon. 4.-I took my leave of Newcastle, and about noon preached at Durham in a pleasant meadow, near the river's side. The congregation was large, and wild enough, yet in a short time they were deeply attentive. Only three or four gentlemen put me in mind of the honest man at London, who was so gay and unconcerned while Dr. Sherlock was preaching concerning the Day of Judgment. One asked, ' Do you not hear what the doctor says' He answered, ' Yes; but I am not of this parish!' Toward the close I was constrained to mention the gross ignorance I had observed in the rich and genteel people throughout the nation. On this they drew near, and showed as serious an attention as if they had been poor colliers.

We took horse at two. The clouds and wind in our face kept us cool till we came to Hartlepool. Mr. Romaine [Rev. William Romaine, who was a native of Hartlepool, and whose father died here in this year (1757).] has been an instrument of awakening several here; but for want of help they soon slept again. I preached in the main street to near all the town, and they behaved with seriousness.

Tues. 5.-At seven in the evening I preached in the main street at Stockton. None but two or three gentlemen seemed unconcerned. I went thence to meet the society; but many others begged to stay with them, and so earnestly that I could not refuse. And indeed it was a day of God's power; I scarce know when we have found the like.

Wed. 6.-At eleven I preached near the market-place in Yarm. Many gentry were there, and all serious. I find in all these parts a solid, serious people, quite simple of heart, strangers to various opinions, and seeking only the faith that works by love; and most of the believers are waiting and longing for the fullness of the promises.

One young woman, late a Papist, I talked with at large, who last night took leave of her priest. Instead of staying to be sent for, she sent for him, and, after asking him several questions, frankly told him she had now found the true religion, and by the grace of God, would continue therein. She has been concerned for her soul from thirteen years of age. About two years ago she began to hear our preachers: soon after she found the peace of God, and has never lost it since.

About seven I preached at Osmotherley.[ Society Book : ' Laid out for Mr. John Wesley, Wm. Fugill, and Mich. Phenick [Fenwick] 2/6.' (Tyerman, vol. ii. p. 277.)]

Thur. 7.-I rode through one of the pleasantest parts of England to Hawnby.[ The circumstances mentioned make it clear that it was Hawnby Wesley visited, not Hornhy, the feet being familiar to the Hawnby villagers to this day. The scattered Methodist members about Snailesworth met in class at Hawnby, where a society was early formed.] Here the zealous landlord turned all the Methodists out of their houses. This proved a singular kindness, for they built some little houses at the end of the town, in which forty or fifty of them live together. Hence, with much ado, I found my way to Robin Hood's Bay, and preached on the quay to the greatest part of the town. All (except one or two, who were very wise in their own eyes) seemed to receive the truth in love.

This day, between Helmsley and Kirby Moorside, we rode over a little river, which suddenly disappears, and, after running a mile underground, rises again and pursues its course.[ See note on ' The Sinking River ' in W.H.S. vol. v. p. 129.]

Sun. 10.-I preached at seven on ' Repent and believe the gospel.' At the church, which stands on the hill, a mile from the town, we had a sound, useful sermon. Afterwards I preached at a little village called Normanby, and about five on the quay. In the evening, talking with the society, I saw more than ever the care of God over them that fear Him. What was it which stopped their growing in grace Why, they had a well-meaning preacher among them, who was inflaming them more and more against the clergy. Nor could he advise them to attend the public ordinances, for he never went either to church or sacrament himself. This I knew not; but God did, and by His wise providence prevented the consequences which would naturally have ensued. William Manuel was pressed for a soldier,[ In the hands of a local solicitor is the following official document: 18th Dec. 1756.I acknowledge to have received from the hands of the Commissioners of the Land Tax for the Liberty of Whitby Strand in the North Riding of Yorkshire, who are likewise Commissioners for putting in execution an Act instituted for the speedy and effectual recruiting of His Majesty's Land Forces and Marines, John Gilbert, William Petts, and James Plane alias Daniel, who were pressed by the Constables according to the directions of the said Act, I say received by me the day and year above.-ISA. ANTROBUS, Lieut, in Major-General Holland's nth Reg. of Foot.

24/A Dec. 1756.I acknowledge to have received this day from the hands of the above Commissioners the persons hereinafter mentioned, that is to say, William Thompson and William Manuel, pursuant to the directions of the abovementioned Act. Witness my hand the day and year above.-ISA. ANTROBUS.See W.H.S. vol. vii. p. 70. Cf. Atmore's Memorial on William Thompson, who was the first President of the Conference subsequent to Wesley's death.] so the people go to church and sacrament as before.

Mon. 11.-We set out early. This and the three next days were the hottest I ever knew in England. A gentleman who formerly traded to Guinea assured me that the spirits in his thermometer (the same he had when abroad) rose as high as they did within a few degrees of the Line. About nine we should have been glad to bait; but, there being no inn to be found, we laj down for a quarter of an hour under some trees, and then rode on to Slingsby. The minister, an old acquaintance of my" father's, having desired to see me, I called at his house before I preached; and I could gladly have stayed longer with him, but I knew the congregation waited. One poor drunkard made a little disturbance, but after he was silenced all were still and steadily attentive.

It continued intensely hot; but, having the wind in our faces (as we generally had, all along from Newcastle, and that which way soever we rode), we received no hurt till we came to York. But the difficulty was how to preach there in a room which in winter used to be as hot as an oven. I cut the knot by preaching in Blake's Square, where (the mob not being aware of us) I began and ended my discourse to a numerous congregation without the least disturbance.

Tues. 12.- I set a subscription on foot for building a more commodious room.[ The chapel in Peaseholme Green (still standing as cottages, &c.) Land for this was not secured until 1759, when also the chapel was opened. Lyth (Early Methodism in York) gives an engraving and lists of first trustees.] In the evening I preached at Acomb, to a calm, solid congregation. The next evening I preached at Poppleton, where the poor gladly received the gospel. The rich heard it,[ See Lyth's Methodism in York, p. 293. Two of Wesley's 'rich' hearers became trustees of Peaseholme Green.] and even seemed to approve. God give them to understand and practice it!

SPECIMEN PAGE OF SERMON REGISTER, PARTLY IN JOHN WESLEY'S HANDWRITING.

IV]

July 1757

In Lincolnshire

Thur. 14.-I resolved to preach in the Square once more, knowing God has the hearts of all men in His hands. One egg was thrown, and some bits of dirt; but this did not hinder a large congregation from taking earnest heed to what was spoken, of Christ,' the power of God, and the wisdom of God.'

Fri. 15.-At three in the morning there were all the probable signs of a violent hot day; but about four God sent a cooling rain. It ceased about seven; but the clouds continued, and shaded us to Pocklington. Yet it was too hot to bear the house; so I stood in the main street and cried, ' If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink.' A large mob soon gathered on the other side; and, for fear they should not make noise enough, the good churchwardens hired men to ring the bells. But it was lost labor, for still the bulk of the congregation heard, till I quietly finished my discourse.

Before seven I reached Epworth, and preached in the market-place to a listening multitude.

Sat. 16.-I rode on to Laceby, about thirty measured miles.[ Measured miles, i.e. versus computed. Previous to 1675, when the great roads were measured by Ogilby, distances were computed, and though always (sometimes as much as 30 per cent.) less than measured miles, postmasters were for more than a century afterwards paid by the computed distance.See above, vol. iii. p. 161, and Itincrarium Angliae, or a Book of Roads, 1675.]

After so many long journeys which I hardly felt, this short one quite exhausted my strength. However, I quickly recovered, so as to preach at three in a meadow to a large congregation. They all kneeled when I prayed, and showed such a genuine simplicity as greatly revived my spirit. At seven I preached in the new room [In the yard of William Blow, erected largely through the exertions of Mr. Thomas Capiter (see below, July 22, 1772). (Meth. Rec. Dec. 8, 1898.)] which they have just finished at Grimsby.

Sun. 17.-At seven in the morning the house just contained the people. I designed to preach abroad in the afternoon, but the rain drove us into the house again. As many as could crowded in. The rest stood without, though many, I fear, were wet to the skin.[ He preached also on the 18th at Grimsby.]

Tues. 19.-Before I left Newcastle I heard a strange relation, which I knew not what to think of. I then desired Thomas Lee, who was going to the place, to inquire particularly concerning it.

He did so, and in consequence of that inquiry wrote me the following account:

R------J------lived about twelve miles from Newcastle. His son, some time since, married without his consent. At this he was so enraged that he wished his right arm might ,burn off if ever he gave or left him sixpence.

However, in March last, being taken ill, he made his will, and left him all his estate. The same evening he died. On Thursday the loth his widow, laying her hand on his back, found it warm. In the evening those who were with him went into the next room to take a little refreshment. As they were eating they observed a disagreeable smell, but could find nothing in the room to cause it. Returning into the room where the corpse lay, they found it full of smoke. Removing the sheet which covered the corpse, they saw (to their no small amazement) the body so burnt that the entrails were bare, and might be seen through the ribs. His right arm was nearly burnt off, his head so burnt that the brains appeared, and a smoke came out of the crown of his head, like the steam of boiling water. When they cast water upon his body it hissed just as if cast on red-hot iron. Yet the sheet which was upon him was not singed; but that under him, with the pillow-bier[i.e. pillow-case]

and pillow, and the plank on which he lay, were all burned, and looked as black as charcoal.

They hastened to put what was left of him into the coffin, leaving some to watch by it; but, after it was nailed up, a noise of burning and crackling was heard therein. None was permitted to look into it till it was carried to Abchester churchyard. It was buried near the steeple. As soon as it was brought to the grave the steeple was observed to shake. The people hastened away; and it was well they did, for presently part of the steeple fell. So that, had they stayed two minutes longer, they must have been crushed in pieces. All these circumstances were related to me and my wife by those who were . eye and ear witnesses.[ See Charles Dickens's Preface to Bleak House.]

I preached in a ground adjoining to the house.[ In Grimsby.] Toward the conclusion of my sermon the person with whom I lodged was much offended at one who sunk down and cried aloud for mercy. Herself dropped down next, and cried as loud as her; | so did several others quickly after. When prayer was made for them, one was presently filled with peace and joy in believing.

In the morning I left the rest refusing to be comforted till Christ should be revealed in their hearts.

Wed. 20.-I preached at Ferry in my way, and in Epworth market-place about seven. The rain began just as I began speaking; but God heard the prayer, and it was stayed.

Sat. 23.-I preached at Westwoodside, where the breach of fifteen years[Harrison and R. Ridley's Moravian Quietism (see above, vol. iii. p. 19). He preached on the 21st at Epworth, and on the 23rd at Haxey.] is now healed, all the wanderers being returned to the fold, with him who led them astray.

Sun, 24.-As we rode over Haxey Car towards Misterton one was relating a surprising thing that happened lately:

A woman of Stockwith told her sister who lived with her, ' I do not think to go to market to-day, for I dreamed that I was drowned in riding across one of the drains on Haxey Car.' But she was soon laughed out of it, and went. She rode over the Car with many other market-folks, and, in crossing one of the drains, where the water was scarce a yard deep, slipped off her horse. Several looked on, but none once thought of pulling her out till she was past recovery.

At one I preached to the largest congregation I have seen since I left Newcastle. All behaved with deep seriousness but one man, whom I afterward learned to be a Baptist preacher. Just as I was taking horse he came again, and labored hard to begin a dispute; but, having neither time nor strength to spare, I gave him the ground and rode away.

The congregation at Epworth was full as large, if not larger, than that at Misterton. Among them was a poor greyheaded sinner, a mocker at all religion. But his mocking is past. He was in tears most of the time, and is now ' feeling

after God.'

Mon. 25.-I left Epworth with great satisfaction, and about one preached at Clayworth. I think none was unmoved but Michael Fenwick, who fell fast asleep under an adjoining hayrick.[ The vanity of Michael Fenwick was troubled because hitherto he had not

been named in the Journal. On this occasion Wesley gratified his desire. See also Atmore's Memorial, pp. 123-5; and, for Fenwick in his old age, with \2& year to live on, most of which he ga-ve to the poor, W.H.S. vol. v. pp. 185-6.] From thence we rode to Rotherham. When I came in I had no strength and no voice left. However, in an hour I was able to preach to the largest congregation that I suppose was ever seen there.

Tues. 26.-I was not able to sit up above two or three hours together. However, I preached in the morning and evening, and spoke severally to the members of the society.

Wed. 27.-I preached about noon at Barley Hall, and in the evening at Sheffield. After spending a short time with the society, I lay down as soon as possible. But I could not sleep before twelve o'clock; and not long together after. Yet I felt no faintness in the morning, but rose lively and well, and had my voice more clear and strong in preaching than it had been for several days.

Thur. 28.-I received a strange account from Edward Bennett's[Everett's Methodism in Sheffield, pp. 34, 43.] eldest daughter:

'On Tuesday, the izth of this month, I told my husband in the morning, " I desire you will not go into the water to-day; at least, not into the deep water, on the far side of the town; for I dreamed I saw you there out of your depth, and only your head came up just above the water." He promised me he would not, and went to work.' Soon after four in the afternoon, being at John Hanson's, his partner's house, she was on a sudden extremely sick, so that for some minutes she seemed just ready to expire. Then she was well in a moment. Just at that time John Hanson, who was an excellent swimmer, persuaded her husband to go into the water on the far side of the town. He objected, the water was deep, and he could not swim; and, being much importuned to go in, stood some time after he was undressed, and then, kneeling down, prayed with an earnest and loud voice. When he rose from his knees, John, who was swimming, called him again, and, treading the water, said, ' See, it is only breast-high.' He stepped in, and sunk. A man who was near, cutting fern, and had observed him for some time, ran to the bank, and saw his head come up just above the water. The second or third time he rose, he clasped his hands, and cried aloud, ' Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.' Immediately he sunk, and rose no more.

One might naturally inquire, what became of John Hanson As soon as he saw his partner sink he swam from him to the other side, put on his clothes, and went straight home.

In Leicestershire

August 1757

About noon I preached at Woodseats; in the evening at Sheffield.[ In a house in Mulberry Street, which in 1757 was converted into a chapel W.M. Mag. 1835, p. 606).] I do indeed live by preaching!

How quiet is this country now, since the chief persecutors are no more seen! How many of them have been snatched away in an hour when they looked not for it! Some time since a woman of Thorpe often swore she would wash her hands in the heart's blood of the next preacher that came; but before the next preacher came she was carried to her long home. A little before John Johnson settled at Wentworth a stout, healthy man who lived there told his neighbours, 'After May Day we shall have nothing but praying and preaching; but I will make noise enough to stop it.' But before May Day he was silent in his grave. A servant of Lord R[ockingham] was as bitter as him, and told many lies purposely to make mischief; but before this was done, his mouth was stopped. He was drowned in one of the fishponds.[ For other chief opponents see Everett's Methodism in Sheffield, p. 109.]

Fri. 29.-I preached at Nottingham.[ In Matthew Bagshaw's house in Crosland Yard, Narrow Marsh. Harwood's Methodism in Nottingham, p. 32.]

We want nothing here

but a large house.

Sat. 30.-I preached in the evening at Leicester to a large

congregation.

Sun. 31.-I rode over to Markfield. The church contained us tolerably well in the morning; but in the afternoon, though many stayed without, it was much crowded and sultry hot. I was quite faint and weary while I read prayers; but in preaching my strength was restored. At six I preached once more at Leicester, and delivered my own soul.

AUG.1, Mon.-I had much conversation with Mr. [Simpson]; whom, against a thousand appearances, I will believe to be an honest though irresolute Mon. ' While I was very uneasy,' said he, 'in the year 1741, my brother brought me to Mr. Spangenberg, and then to others of the German Brethren, to whom I was more and more attached till, in the year 1743, I went over to Marienborn. There I saw many things which I could not approve; and was more and more uneasy till I returned to England. I was afterward much employed by the Brethren.

A Western Journey

September 1757

I was ordained Deacon. But still I had a sore and burdened conscience, and gained no ground in my spiritual warfare: rather, having laid aside prayer and searching the Scripture, I was more and more dead to God. But in 1750 I awoke again, and was under great agonies of mind. And from this time I wrote to the Count again and again, and to most of the Laborers; but to no purpose. Andrew Frey's account is true. The spirit of levity and frolicsomeness, which he justly describes, broke in about 1746, and is not purged out yet. In May last I wrote and delivered a declaration to the Brethren met in Conference at Lindsey House,[ In Chelsea. Leased to Zinzendorf hi 1750 for a Moravian settlement. Formerly the property of the Duke of Ancaster. See Memoirs of Hutton, pp. 256,257; W.M. Mag. 1912, p. 689.]

that I did not dare to remain in their connection any longer. The same declaration I made to them here a few days ago. What further I am to do, I know not; but I trust God will direct me.' [See C. of Huntingdon's Lift, vol. i. pp. 47, 48.]

Tues. 2.-On his expressing a desire to be present at our Conference, I invited him to it; and on Wednesday the 3rd, in the evening, he came to the Foundery. Our Conference [Aug. 4. The fourteenth Conference. See vol. i. of reprinted Minutes. No minutes have been preserved. We know from letters published by Tyerman, in his Life of Wesley, vol. ii. pp. 279-83, that the Church question was discussed.] began the next morning, and continued till the Thursday following. From the first hour to the last there was no jarring string, but all was harmony and love.[ On Sunday the 7th he preached at West Street, I7th, probably at Westminster, and 18th, Zoar.]

Mon. 8.-I took a walk in the Charterhouse. I wondered that all the squares and buildings, and especially the schoolboys, looked so little. But this is easily accounted for. I was little myself when I was at school, and measured all about me by myself. Accordingly, the upper boys, being then bigger than myself, seemed to me very big and tall; quite contrary to what they appear now, when I am taller and bigger than them. I question if this is not the real ground of the common imagination that our forefathers, and in general men in past ages, were much larger than now-an imagination current in the world eighteen hundred years ago. So Virgil supposes his warrior to throw a stone that could scarce be wielded by twelve men :

Qualia nunc hominum producit corpora tellus.[ ' Men that, in size of body, are like those whom the earth now produces.' See W.H.S. vol. v. p. 31.]

So Homer, long before :

Oioi nun brotoi eisi[' Such as are the men of these our days' (ibid.).]

Whereas, in reality, men have been, at least ever since the Deluge, very nearly the same as we find them now, both for stature and understanding.[ On the 14th he preached at Spitalfields. Between the 8th and the 22nd he finished his treatise on Original Sin.]

Mon. 22.-I set out in the machine, and the next evening

reached Bristol.

Fri. 26.-I preached at nine to a small congregation of earnest people at Glutton; and in the evening at Middlezoy. On Saturday the 27th we rode on to Tiverton.

Sun. 28.-I preached in the market-house to as large a congregation as ever I saw here; and all were quiet. So can God make, when it is best, all our enemies to be at peace

with us.

Mon. 29.-We rode through vehement wind and many hard showers to Launceston. This gave me a violent fit of the toothache, which, however, did not hinder my preaching. Such a night I never remember to have passed before; but all is good which lies in the way to glory.

Tues. 30.-We rode to Camelford, where my toothache was cured by rubbing treacle upon my cheek. At six I preached in the market-place. How are the lions in this town also become

lambs!

Wed. 31.-I preached about noon at Trewalder, and in the evening at Port Isaac. This was long a barren soil; but is at length likely to bring forth much fruit.

Sept. 2, Fri.-I rode to St. Agnes. We found the great man, Mr. Donnithorne,[ Eldest son of Nicholas Donnithorne, Sheriff of Cornwall in 1731. See W.H.S, vol. iv. p. 190.] was dead. His mother and sister sent to invite me to their house. After preaching I went there, and was received into a comfortable lodging with the most free and cordial affection. So in this place the knowledge of God has already travelled ' from the least unto the greatest.'

In Cornwall

September 1757

Sat. 3.-Some who live here gave me an account of the earthquake on July 15. There was first a rumbling noise under the ground, hoarser and deeper than common thunder. Then followed a trembling of the, earth, which afterward waved once or twice to and fro so violently that one said he was obliged to take a back-step, or he should have fallen down; and another that the wall against which he was leaning seemed to be shrinking from him.

This morning I talked at large with old Mrs. Donnithorne, who has her understanding entire, reads without spectacles, walks without a staff, and has scarce a wrinkle, at ninety years of age. But what is more than all this, she is teachable as a child, and groaning for salvation. In the afternoon I spent an hour with Mr. Vowler,[ See W.H.S. vol. iv. pp. 52, 190. Vowler was a friend of Samuel Walker, rector of Truro. He died July 30, 1758. ] curate of the parish, who rejoices in the love of God, and both preaches and lives the gospel.

Sun. 4.-I------T------preached at five. I could scarce have

believed, if I had not heard it, that few men of learning write so correctly as an unlearned tinner speaks extempore.[ Cf. W. Kitchens and his brothers, sons of a tinner, above, vol. iii. p. 263.] Mr. Vowler preached two such thundering sermons at church as I have scarce heard these twenty years. Oh how gracious is God to the poor sinners of St. Agnes! In the church and out of the church they ' hear the same great truths of the wrath of God against sin, and His love to those that are in Christ Jesus!

Mon. 5.-I rode on to Illogan, but not to the house where I used to preach; indeed, his wife promised Mr. P. before he died that she would always receive the preachers, but she soon changed her mind. God has just taken her only son, suddenly killed by a pit falling upon him; and on Tuesday last a young, strong man, riding to his burial, dropped off his horse stone dead. The concurrence of these awful providences added considerably to our congregation.

Tues. 6.[ He wrote a letter from Tremeneare to Miss Furly ( Works, vol. xii. p. 199)

on this date.]-I went on to Camborne, and rejoiced to hear that the gentleman who ' pressed ' Mr. Maxfield[June 19, 1745. See above, vol. iii. p. 182.] no longer persecutes the Methodists, nor will suffer any one else to do it; and in the late dearth he relieved great numbers of the poor and saved many families from perishing. I preached at six on ' I will heal their backsliding,' and God applied His word. Several who had left the society for some years came after sermon and desired to be readmitted. Oh how should our bowels yearn over all that did once run well! This is the very thing we want, or how many souls might we yet pluck out of the jaws of the lion!

Wed. 7.-I observed more and more the effects of that burning wind which was in these parts on Sunday, the 28th of last month. It not only scorched all the leaves of the trees, so as to bring mid-winter upon them in two hours, but burned up all the leaves of potatoes and cabbage, and every green thing which it touched. What a mercy that it did not come a month sooner! Then it would have left little work for the reapers.

Thur. 8.-As we rode through Gwithian parish Mr. Harris pointed out the place where his father and many of his ancestors lived. It is now only a mountain of sand. Within a few years this so increased as to bury both the church and the whole town.

I preached at six to a numerous congregation in Ludgvan. Some years since, when there was a flourishing society in Gulval (the parish adjoining), there was none at all here. But how is the scene changed! In Gulval not one class, not one member, remains; in Ludgvan there is a lively society!

Fri. 9.-I preached in the new house at St. Just, the largest and most commodious in the county.

Sat. 10.-We rode to the Land's End. I know no natural curiosity like this. The vast, ragged stones rise on every side when you are near the point of land, with green turf between, as level and smooth as if it were the effect of art. And the rocks which terminate the land are so torn by the sea that they appear like great heaps of ruins.

Sun. 11.-I preached at St. Just at nine. At one the congregation in Morvah stood on a sloping ground, rank above rank, as in a theatre. Many of them bewailed their want of God, and many tasted how gracious He is.

At five I preached in Newlyn to a huge multitude, and one only seemed to be offended-a very good sort of woman, who took great pains to get away, crying aloud, ' Nay, if going to church and sacrament will not put us to heaven, I know not what will.'

Mon. 12.-I preached in Lelant at one. Many from St. Ives were present, from whom I learned that Mr. Swindells would have preached abroad the day before, but was hindered. It is well he was, for this occasioned the offer of a meadow near the town, far more convenient than the street. At six I stood at the bottom of it, the people rising higher and higher before me. I believe not many were left in the town, and all behaved as in the presence of God. The next evening the congregation was enlarged by the addition of many from the country, and Wednesday the I4th their number was larger still. We did not open the door of the room till just half-hour past eight, by which means the heat was not intolerable till I had done preaching. I then retired, and left the other preachers to perform the rest of the service.

Thur. 15.-As we rode toward Helston I think the sun was near as hot as it was at midsummer, yet all along the trees looked as in the depth of winter, that scorching wind having destroyed all it touched.

Fri. 16.-I looked over Mr. Borlase's Antiquities of Cornwall.[ Borlase, William, LL.D. (16951772) : Antiquities, Historical and Monumental, of the County of Cornwall. Oxford, 1754, folio; 2nd ed. 1769. Dr. Borlase was the old opposer and peisecutor of the Methodists. See above, vol. iii. p. 129.] He is a fine writer, and quite master of his subject, who has distinguished with amazing accuracy the ancient Saxon monuments from the more ancient Roman, and from those of the Druids, the most ancient of all.[ On the 16th he wrote to the Rev. Samuel Walker, of Truro (Works, vol. xiii. p. 201). This letter was one of a series of attempts to bring the evangelical clergy of the Church of England and the Methodists into closer association. See Moore's Life of Wesley, vol. ii. pp. 196205. The above reference includes this letter and the Circular Letter written from Scarborough April 29, 1764, to such clergymen as he believed to be in sympathy with the general belief and aims of Methodism. The attempt failed, rendering the continued use of lay preachers and organized societies essential.]

Sat. 17.-I preached at Porkellis at one, and at Redruth in the evening.

Sun. 18.-At eight many of the French prisoners were mixed with the usual congregation. This was doubled at one, but still came nothing near to that which assembled at Gwennap in the evening. It rained all the time I preached, but none went away. A shower of rain will not fright experienced soldiers.

Here I learned a remarkable occurrence: A few days ago some hundred English, who had been prisoners in France, were landed at Penzance by a cartel ship. Many of these passed through Redruth going home, but in a most forlorn condition. None showed more compassion to them than the French. They gave them food, clothes, or money, and told them, 'We wish we could do more, but we have little for ourselves here.' Several who had only two shirts gave a naked Englishman one. A French boy, meeting an English boy, who was half naked, took hold of him and stopped him, cried over him a while, and then pulled off his own coat and put it upon him!

Mon. 19.-In the evening both the house and court at Penryn were more than filled, so that I willingly embraced the offer of Mr. H., and preached before his door at twelve on Tuesday It was an extremely pleasant place on the side of a hill, commanding a fruitful vale, the opposite hills, and Falmouth Harbour. Tall trees hung over me, and surrounded a bowlinggreen which was behind me. A wide door is now open at Penryn also. Oh that none may shut it!

At six in the evening I reached Besore and began preaching immediately. It was a season of uncommon refreshment, particularly to some of Truro. Afterwards I met the society in the house. A young man was cut to the heart, and cried aloud, then another and another, till my voice was quite lost. But I continued crying to God, and He heard, and gave an answer of peace. Many were filled with consolation, and four who had wandered for some years resolved to set out anew.

Yet I was not quite reconciled to my lodging. Not but the grotto itself was very venerable, but I did not like the circumstance of having a man and his wife in the same room. I therefore willingly accepted an invitation from Mr. Painter, and walked over with him to Truro.

Wed.21.-I walked to Besore and preached at five. Afterwards I spoke to each member of the society. They surprised me much. So lively and tender-hearted a people I have not lately seen. After spending an hour with a few friends in Truro I rode forward to Grampound-a mean, inconsiderable, dirty village. However, it is a borough town! Between twelve and one I began preaching in a meadow to a numerous congregation. While we were singing I observed a person in black on the far side of the meadow, who said,' Come down, you have no business there.' Some boys who were on a wall, taking it for granted that he spoke to them, got down quickly. I went on, and he walked away. I afterwards understood that he was the minister and the mayor of Grampound. Soon after two constables came and said, ' Sir, the mayor says you shall not preach within his borough.' I answered,' The mayor has no authority to hinder me; but it is a point not worth contesting.' So I went about a musket-shot farther, and left the borough to Mr. Mayor's disposal.

A large congregation was at St. Ewe in the evening, many of whom were in Mr. Walker's societies. Some of them came from St. Columb, twelve miles off. And they did not come in vain. The flame of love ran from heart to heart, and scarce any remained unmoved.

Thur. 22.--I rode to Mevagissey, which lies on the south sea just opposite to Port Isaac on the north. When I was here last we had no place in the town; I could only preach about half a mile from it. But things are altered now: I preached just over the town to almost all the inhabitants, and all were still as night. The next evening a drunken man made some noise behind me, but after a few words were spoken to him he quietly listened to the rest of the discourse.

On the south side of the town there is an extremely fine walk, broad and smooth, over the top of high rocks, from whence is a view of the main sea at a vast distance below, and all the coast east and west.[ The view extends from the Ram's Head in the east to the Dead Man in the west.]

Sat. 24.-At half hour after twelve I preached once more and took my leave of them. All the time I stayed the wind blew from the sea, so that no boat could stir out. By this means all the fishermen (who are the chief part of the town) had opportunity of hearing.

At six I preached at St. Austell, a neat little town on the side of a fruitful hill.

Sun. 25.-The whole church service was performed by a clergyman, above ninety years of age. His name is Stephen Hugo.[ Or Hewgoe, or Hugoe. Canon Hammond, in his Account of St. Austell, refers to ' the attenuated amounts which his congregations contributed to charities.' (W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 191.)] He has been vicar of St. Austell between sixty and seventy years. Oh what might a man full of faith and zeal have done for God in such a course of time! [From St. Austell he wrote a letter to Miss Fuily (Works, vol. xii. p. 200). From December 1756 until November 1783 he corresponded with Miss Furly, who about 1763 married John Downes, one of Wesley's most trusted and admired preachers.]

At two I preached in St. Stephen's-in-Branwell,[ The Rev. S. Yelland Richards, a descendant of Wesley's host during this visit Qohn Yelland], writes: St. Stephen'sin-Branwell is the name of a large parish adjoining St. Austell. This visit, however, was paid, not to St. Stephen's Churchtown, but to St. Stephen's Coombe -a village a mile and a half away, and over four miles from St. Austell. Wesley reached the village by riding over the Downs, which makes him speak of a ' barren mountain.' The spot where he preached is still pointed out on the Hardhead Road, and the house in which he was entertained is still standing.] near a lone house on the side of a barren mountain; but neither the house nor the court could contain the people; so we went into a meadow, where all might kneel (which they generally do in Cornwall), as well as stand and hear. And they did hear, and sing, and pray, as for life. I saw none careless or inattentive among them.

About five I preached at St. Austell to an exceeding civil people. But when will they be wounded, that they may be healed

Bristol and Kingswood

October 1757

Mon. 26.-I rode to Medrose in Luxulyan parish.[ Medrose, or Methrose. The mansion originally belonged to the Kendalls, one of whom (Nicholas) built it. The carved chimney-piece has the armorial bearings of many distinguished families. In Wesley's day the mansion was a farmhouse occupied by a Mr. Meager. (W.H.S. vol. iv. p.91.)]

I have not seen so stately a room in Cornwall as either this hall or the chamber over it. The place likewise where the gardens were, the remains of the terrace-walk, the stately trees still left, with many other tokens, show that grand men lived here once. But they are vanished like smoke, their estates torn in pieces, and wellnigh their memory perished.

Tues. 27.-We rode to Liskeard,[ See Meth. Mag. 1834, p. 630, for notices of John Phillips of Liskeard, a convert of Samuel Furly.] I think one of the largest and pleasantest towns in Cornwall. I preached about the middle of the town, in a broad, convenient place. No person made any noise at all. At six in the morning I had nearly the same congregation. Afterwards I examined the society, and was agreeably surprised to hear that every one of them had found peace with God; and (what was still more remarkable) that none of them has left their first love; that at this day not one is in darkness!

Wed. 28.-We rode on to the Dock, which gave us a very different prospect. Of those whom I joined several years ago, hardly one half remained. Such is the fruit of disputing! And yet the congregations are more numerous than ever; and as deeply attentive as any in the kingdom. So there is hope God will yet revive His work.[ He preached also during September at Barford and Bedford.]

Oct. 1, Sat.-I preached at Launceston.[ In October he wrote another letter to Mr. Walker {Arm. Mag. 1782, p. 269).]

In Bristol

November 1757

Sun. 2.-I rode to Week 6 St. Mary. A large congregation was gathered there, many of whom came seven or eight miles. The house stands in the midst of orchards and meadows, surrounded by gently rising hills. I preached on the side of a meadow newly mown, to a deeply attentive people.

Mon. 3.-I rode to Bideford, but did not reach it till after five, the hour appointed for my preaching. So I began without delay, in an open part of the street, where we alighted. One man made a little noise at first, but he was easily silenced. All the rest (a large number) quietly attended, though the wind was piercing cold, while I opened and applied ' God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.'

Tues. 4.-Between twelve and one I reached North Molton, and, finding the congregation ready, began immediately. There have been great tumults here since I saw them before; but God has now rebuked the storm. When the gentry would neither head nor pay the mob any more, the poor rabble were

quiet as lambs.

We rode on to Tiverton in the afternoon. On the three following days I saw as many of the societies as I could.

Sat. 8.-We had heavy rain for some miles; then it cleared up, and we had a pleasant ride to Bristol.

Mon. 10.- I rose at my usual hour; but the soreness and swelling of my face, occasioned by my taking cold on Saturday, made it impracticable for me to preach. In the evening I applied boiled nettles. They took away the pain in a moment, and the swelling in a few hours.

Sun, 16.-I began visiting the classes at Kingswood : steady but not zealous. It is impossible they should stand here long; they must go on, or go back.

Mon. 17.-About two I preached at Paulton; but no house could contain us, so that I was forced to stand in the open air, though the wind was very high and very cold. Thence we rode to the honest colliers at Coleford. These have the zeal which their brethren at Kingswood want; in consequence of which they are the most numerous as well as the most lively society in Somersetshire.

Tues. 18.-I preached to a very different congregation at Bradford, well-dressed and well-bred : and yet of the very same spirit, hungering and thirsting after righteousness.

Wed. 19.-After preaching at Freshford, I rode on to Kingswood.

Fri. 2 [From Bristol he wrote a letter to Miss Furly. (Works, vol. xii. p. 201.)]-Being at dinner, in a moment I felt as if a small bone had stuck in the palate of my mouth. Nothing was to be seen, but the swelling and inflammation increased till toward evening (notwithstanding all means that could be used), and then spread to both the tonsils, tin the morning I was rather worse than better, till about half an hour after eight. Then, as the disorder came in a moment, it went in a moment, and I was as well as ever.

Mon. 24.-I preached about noon at Bath, and in the evening at Eastcott, near Lavington.

Tues. 25.-In my return, a man met me near Hanham, and told me the school-house[i.e. the school opened in 1748, not the original Colliers' Children's School.] at Kingswood was burned down. I felt not one moment's pain, knowing that God does all things well. When I came thither I received a fuller account. About eight on Monday evening two or three boys went into the gallery, up two pair of stairs. One of them heard a strange crackling in the room above. Opening the stair-case door, he was beat back by smoke, on which he cried out, ' Fire! Murder! Fire!' Mr. Baynes,[ William Baynes was at Kingswood until 1760. He itinerated until 1771, and died in 1777. {History ofKmgswood School, pp. 47, 48.)] hearing this, ran immediately down, and brought up a pail of water. But I when he went into the room, and saw the blaze, he had not presence of mind to go up to it, but threw the water upon the' floor. Meantime one of the boys rung the bell; another called John Madden [An itinerant preacher from 1749-56; English master at Kingswood until 1760. ]

from the next house, who ran up, as did James Surges quickly after, and found the room all in a flame. The deal partitions took fire immediately, which spread to the roof of the house. Plenty of water was now brought; but they could not come nigh the place where it was wanted, the room being so filled with flame and smoke that none could go into it. At last a long ladder, which lay in the garden, was reared up against the wall of the house. But it was then observed that one of the sides of it was broke in two, and the other quite rotten. However, John How (a young man who lived next door) [Son of the John How mentioned Oct. 16, 1751. Wesley's parish clerk and first leader in Savannah bore the same name. A letter from Wesley about the burning of his house in Savannah is in the State Paper Office.] ran up it, with an axe in his hand.

But he then found the ladder was so short that, as he stood on the top of it, he could but just lay one hand over the battlements. How he got over to the leads none can tell, but he did so, and quickly broke through the roof, on which, a vent being made, the smoke and flame issued out as from a furnace. Those who were at the foot of the stairs with water, being able to go no farther, then went through the smoke to the door of the leads, and poured it down through the tiling. By this means the fire was quickly quenched, having only consumed a part of the partition, with a box of clothes, and a little damaged the roof and the floor beneath.

It is amazing that so little hurt was done; for the fire, which began in the middle of the long room (none can imagine how, for no person had been there for several hours before), was so violent that it broke every pane of glass but two in the window, both at the east and west end. What was more amazing still was that it did not hurt either the beds (which when James Burges came in, seemed all covered with flame), nor the deal partitions on the other side of the room, though it beat against them for a considerable time. What can we say to these things but that God had fixed the bounds which it could not pass

We observed Friday the 28th as a solemn fast; and from this time the work of God revived in Bristol. We were indeed brought very low. A society of nine hundred members was shrunk to little more than half the number. But God now began to turn our captivity, and put a new song in our mouth.[ Nov. I is the date at the beginning of A Sufficient Answer to 'Letters ie the Author of "Theron and Asfasio."' (.Works, vol. x. p. 298.)]

Nov. 3, Thur.-I preached in the new preaching-house at Pill.[ Now the Salvation Army Hall.] How is the face of things changed here! Such a sink of sin was scarce to be found; and now how many are rejoicing in God their Saviour!

Mon. 7.-Leaving the flame just kindling in Bristol, I rode to Newbury,[ He wrote to Mrs. Ryan the first of a series of letters ( Works, vol. xii. pp. 216-

222). At an earlier date she lived in Christopher Alley, Moorfields, with Mary Clark and Mrs. Crosby, a house which became the resort of saintly Methodist women. Here Mary Bosanquet lodged when from home. Wesley made Mrs. Ryan housekeeper in Bristol and Kingswood, to the annoyance of Mrs. Wesley. But Sarah Ryan proved herself worthy of Wesley's confidence. Returning to London, she devoted the rest of her life to the service of Mary Bosanquet, who wrote 'The Lord gave her to me as a mother." Henry Moore, who, as the biographer of Wesley and of Mrs. Fletcher, knew intimately the inner life of Methodism,called Sarah Ryan Mary Bosanquet's ' twin soul," and declared that ' she proved the whole of the eight beatitudes.' At her death Mary Bosanquet wrote of her, ' My invaluable friend . . .Who lived and died a Christian. See Arm. Mag: 1779, p. 296; Life of Mrs. Fletcher, pp. 29, 31, 43, 44, 60, 61, 67, 74, 75-] and on Tuesday to London. I found the same fire kindled here also, and increasing more and more.[ The Sermon Register gives his appointments : 17th and 19th, Norwich; 2Ist and 23rd, Norwich; 24th, Lakenheath. On Nov. 22 he wrote to Mrs. Ryan (Works, vol. xii. p. 217).]

Mon. 14.-I rode to Bedford, and talked largely with Mr. ------, whom God had set at liberty; but his feet are again in the net. He did not indeed deny, nor much extenuate, any of the things he had often related; but at length he told me in terms,' There are such things among the Brethren that I can never join them more; yet I dare not speak against them and join any other people, for fear of grieving the Savior.' O Lord, when shall this witchcraft come to an end When wilt Thou maintain Thine own cause

Wed. 16.-We rode to Newmarket, and the next day to Norwich, where I now found a prospect of doing good. The congregation daily increased, and grew more and more serious. I spoke to many who were deeply convinced of sin, and some who were rejoicing in God and walking in the light of His countenance.[ It was opened in 1756. It cost 5,000, a rare sum to be expended in those days.]

Wed. 23.-I was shown Dr. Taylor's new meeting-house,[It was opened in 1756.] perhaps the most elegant one in Europe. It is eight-square, built of the finest brick, with sixteen sash-windows below, as many above, and eight skylights in the dome, which, indeed, are purely ornamental. The inside is finished in the highest taste, and is as clean as any nobleman's saloon. The communiontable is fine mahogany; the very latches of the pew-doors are polished brass. How can it be thought that the old, coarse gospel should find admission here

Thur. 24.-A man had spoken to me the last week as I was going through Thetford, and desired me to preach at Lakenheath, near Mildenhall, in Suffolk. I now purposed so to do, and rode thither from Thetford. One Mr. Evans had lately built a large and convenient preaching-house there at his own expense. It was more than filled at six o'clock, many standing at the door. At five in the morning (as uncommon a thing as this was in those parts) the house was nearly filled again with earnest, loving, simple people. Several of them came in to Mr. Evans's house afterward, stood a while, and then burst into tears. I promised to call upon them again, and left them much comforted.

Return to London

December 1757

Sat. 26.-I returned to London. Much confusion had been, in my absence, occasioned by some imprudent words spoken by one who seemed to be strong in the faith.

Mon. 28.-I heard all who were concerned face to face, but was utterly unable to judge whether there was wilful sin, lying on either side, or only human infirmity. For the present I leave it to the Searcher of hearts, who will bring all things to light in

due season.

Wed. 30.-I had another long hearing of the same intricate cause, but with no more success; one side flatly affirmed, the other flatly denied. This is strange; but it is more strange that those who seem so strong in faith should have no union of spirit with each other.[ On Dec. I he wrote to Walter Sellon ( Works, vol. xiii. p. 43).]

Dec. 5, Mon.-I baptized Henriquez Judah Seniore, a Portuguese Jew more than sixty years of age. He seemed to have no confidence in himself, but to be waiting for ' the consolation of Israel.'[On Dec. 3 he preached in ' London," on the 4th at the Foundery, and on the 7th in ' London' (Sermon Register).]

Sun. 11.-In the evening I retired to Lewisham, and spent the following days in finishing A Preservative against Unsettled Notions in Religion [See Green's Bibhograthy, No. 191. A collection of original and adapted pamphlets containing arguments against various false doctrines at this time widely prevalent. See also Tyerman, vol. ii. p. 319 : ' My design is not to reclaim, but to preserve.'] designed for the use of all those who are under my care, but chiefly of the young preachers.[ On Dec. 14 he again wrote to Mrs. Ryan {Works, vol. xii. p. 219).]

Sun. 18.-I had an opportunity (which I had long desired) of spending an hour or two with the Rev. Mr.------. I would have appointed a time for our meeting weekly, but he declined it-why I cannot tell.[ During his retirement in Lewisham he fulfilled London appointments. For instance, on the 25th and 26th, according to the Sermon Register, he preached at the Fonndery.]

Fri. 23.-John Nelson wrote me a letter, part of which I have subjoined:

We have had four triumphant deaths lately of three men and one woMon. The woman was Hannah Richardson, of Briestfield.[ This was not the person of that name so often mentioned by Charles Wesley, and in whose memory he composed a hymn. In Ryley Robinson's Dewsbury, pp. 32, 34, &c., are interesting details respecting the earliest Methodists at Briestfield.] When Enoch Williams preached there she was the bitterest persecutor in the town, and vowed, if ever he preached there again, she would help to stone him to death; but he never went to try. The only one of ' this way ' in the town was Ruth Blacker. Against her she was violently enraged till Ruth went to her house, reasoned the case, and at length persuaded her to go to Dewsbury to hear Mr. Charles Wesley. That day God begot her by His word, so that she could never rest till she found Christ in her own heart; and for two years she has been a steady follower of Him. By her zeal and circumspect walking many have been since stirred up to seek the Lord. As soon as she was taken ill she began to praise God more than ever for the work He had wrought in her soul. She said: ' At first I thought I had no will, and that God's love was all that was in my heart. But when my little child gave a sudden shriek I found my heart was not free, and it damped the love of God in my soul for two hours. But the Lord is come again, and now I am fully assured He does take up all the room in my heart. He has sanctified me throughout, body, soul, and spirit. I am a witness for Jesus Christ that He is a greater Saviour than Adam was a sinner. Oh watch and pray, and ye shall not be overcome in the hour of temptation! Keep close to your meetings, and the Lord will meet you. If you neglect these, or private prayer, you will become barren in your own souls, and the god of this world will get an advantage over you. But if you keep close to God and one another you will find Jesus a Saviour to the uttermost, as I, the most unworthy of mankind, do.' For some time before she died her prayer was turned into praise. All her prayer then was,

' Thy will be done.' We have one by us that we think will hardly live till to-morrow, who is above seventy, and is as a shock of corn full ripe, crying out, ' Come, Lord Jesus!'

In London

January 1757

In the Christmas week I rode down to Bristol, where, Sunday, JAN. 1, 1758, we began the year with the great congregation at four, rejoicing and praising God.[ The Sermon Register shows that he preached also at Kingswood.]

Tues. 3.-At the request of several of my friends, I wrote A Letter to a Gentleman of Bristol[There is nothing in the letter that would lead to this gentleman's identification ( Works, vol. x. pp. 306-12; Green's Bibliography, No. 184).] in order to guard them from seeking salvation by works on one hand, and Antinomianism on the other. From those who lean to either extreme I shall have no thanks; but' wisdom is justified of her children.'

Wed. 4.-I rode to Kingswood, and rejoiced over the school, which is at length what I have so long wished it to be-a blessing to all that are therein and an honor to the whole body of Methodists.

Mon. 9.-I began a letter to Mr. Towgood, author of The Dissenting Gentleman's Reasons-I think the most saucy and virulent satire on the Church of England that ever my eyes beheld.[ Dr. Stoughton (History, vol. vi. p 439) says that, to the end of the century, this book took the lead in defending the principles of Nonconformity.] How much rather would I write practically than controversially! But even this talent I dare not bury in the earth.[ See also above, p. 114.]

Fri. 13.-Having ended my business at Bristol, I rode to Newbury, and the next day to London. Now, if it be the will of God, I should be glad of a little rest; if not, let me rejoice to be without it.[ On the loth he preached in Bristol, and on the 15* in London; also on the 16th, the same day writing one of his terse, peremptory letters to Mr. Merryweather, of Yarm (Works, vol. xii. p. 269).]

Tues. 17.-I preached at Wandsworth. A gentleman, come from America, has again opened a door in this desolate place. In the morning I preached in Mr. Gilbert's house.[ Nathaniel Gilbert, a descendant of Sir Humphrey Gilbert, the illustrious English navigator, and half-brother of Sir Walter Raleigh, was the pioneer of Methodism in the West Indies. A man of education and estate, he was for some years Speaker of the House of Assembly in Antigua. His brother Francis, through gaiety and misfortune, was reduced to poverty. He sought concealment in England, where he came under the influence of Vincent Perronet first, and afterwards of Wesley, whose society he joined. He sent his brother Nathaniel Wesley's Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion, which altered his opinion of Wesley. After two years Francis returned to Antigua. He invited John Fletcher to accompany him as missionary to the Africans, but he declined, doubting his fitness for such work. Nathaniel Gilbert himself became an evangelist. His brother joined him. Francis Gilbert returned to England and became, with Mary Fletcher and George Perks (greatgrandfather of Sir Robert Perks, Bart., see W.M. Mag. 1906, p. 94), a member of the class led by the vicar of Madeley. A great-grandson of Nathaniel Gilbert was vicar of Madeley in 1864. See Arm. Mag. 1780, p 387. and 1783, pp. 329, 330; W.M. Mag. 1854, p. 58; Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol. ii. pp. 297-302.]

Two negro servants of his and a mulatto appear to be much awakened. Shall not His saving health be made known to all nations

Sat. 28.[ On Jan. 20 and 27, he wrote to Sarah Ryan ( Works, vol. xii. p. 220).]-I was inquiring of William Hurd who discharged him from the army, and he might fairly say God discharged him, his officers being determined not to do it. Nevertheless, he stood among the men whom they had picked out for that purpose, and when he came in his turn his discharge was written, and no man gainsaid.

Sun. 29.-We had an uncommon blessing at West Street, and a still greater at Spitalfields. Some could not refrain from crying aloud to God; and He did not cast out their prayers. Many thanksgivings have since been offered to God for the blessings of that hour.

Feb. 1, Wed.-I talked with a gentlewoman who had been a mighty good Christian for near seventy years,[ This, probably, was at West Street, where he was preaching, according to the Sermon Register.] but she now found herself out, and began to cry with many tears to the Friend of sinners for pardoning mercy.

Fri. 3.-Mr. Parker (last year mayor of Bedford) preached at the Foundery.[ See above, p. 201. On the nth Wesley preached at Snowsfields.] A more artless preacher I never heard, but not destitute of pathos. I doubt not he may be of much use among honest, simple-hearted people.[ Wesley himself was preaching at the ' Bull-and-Mouth' (see Sermon Register) On Feb. 9, from Lewisham, he wrote to Miss Fully ( Works, vol. xii. p. 202), and on Feb 10 to Mrs. Ryan (ibid p. 221).]

Sun. 12.-At the request of the vicar, Mr. J.,[ We are informed by the Rev. G. C. Battiscombe, vicar of Uxbridge, that Richard Mills was vicar in 1758, and Edward Jennings churchwarden.] I rode over to Uxbridge. I preached for him, both morning and afternoon, to a large and serious congregation. How uncommon a providence is this! The gospel was preached in the church at Hayes.[ See the Sermon Register for the texts from which he preached at Uxbndge.] Several of the parishioners ran from it and took pews at Hillingdon. It followed them into Hillingdon church, where I preached twice in one day. Some of them went to Uxbridge. And now it is come to torment them at Uxbridge also.

Wed. 15.-I read over the Memoirs of the House of Brandenburg Quanta de spe decidi! [ Terence, Heaut. II. iii. 9. Literally, from how high an expectation have I fallen down!' ( W.H.S vol. v. p. 31).] It is hard to determine, from his writing, whether the author be a Mahometan or a Christian. I suppose he is as near one as the other.

On Friday the I7th, the Public Fast, I preached at West Street in the morning, at Spitalfields in the afternoon, and Bulland-Mouth in the evening,[ None of these sermons are recorded in the Sermon Register, we may surmise because they were special for the day and in no danger of repetition on a future occasion. The Register seems to have been kept solely to guard against the unconscious selection of sermons already used in places visited.] O everywhere to a crowded audience. Indeed, every place of worship throughout the city was extremely crowded all the day long. Surely all the prayers which have been offered up this day will not fall to the ground.

Mon. 20.-I rode through much rain to Maldon, in Essex.[ In the face of opposition Methodism here was introduced by Mrs. Denny, who died a few months after the place was opened {W.M. Mag. 1843, p. 1033). From Maldon he wrote to Mrs. Ryan {Works, vol. xii. p. 222).] Their new preaching-house is large, but it would in no wise contain the congregation which flocked together in the evening. For a time there was much persecution here, but all is now calm and quiet, and probably good will be done if those who now run well do not draw back to perdition. We had a large congregation at five in the morning, and more than we had room for in the evening. Fair blossoms! But which of these will bring forth fruit O Lord, Thou knowest!

Wed. 22.-It rained without ceasing till we came to a small inn, nineteen miles from Maldon. Here we dried our clothes. Soon after the rain ceased, and we had a pleasant ride to London.[ On Saturday, Feb. 25, he preached at Snowsfields, and on Sunday the 26th in London, probably at the Foundery.]

Feb. 1708.

A Strange Story

Thur. 23.[ The following account is a fragment of another version of the Journal in the handwriting of Wesley. This narrative, and also another given above, pp. 148-9, were discovered among Wesley letters in the Colman Collection.]-R----West, a serious woman, the wife of Joseph West, a weaver, living in Hunt Street, Spitalfields (both of whom I had known for many years), came and told me a strange story concerning her child, desiring me to go and pray with her. Being full of business, I could not spare time myself; but I desired two of the preachers, John Haime and Joseph Manners, to go and inquire into the case, and then proceed as they should find occasion. They found her exceedingly tormented of the devil, and in a manner very uncommon. Words came from her mouth, without any motion of her lips. She was convulsed to a strange degree, and appeared to be in the sharpest agonies, both of body and mind. Many other circumstances there were, which could be no way accounted for but by diabolical agency. After some time spent in prayer she was much relieved; but the next day she was worse than ever. They again wrestled with God in prayer, and she was entirely delivered.

Sat. 25.-I was much importuned to go to her, which I did about eleven o'clock. She lay without motion, and it seemed without sense. I desired we might all join in prayer, and soon after I began to pray she began to sing. She sung five or six times, sometimes two or three, sometimes seven or eight stanzas at once. The lines were each of eight syllables: only once, when she was triumphing over the devil, she suddenly changed both the tune and the measure. The matter was good: it was partly prayer, but chiefly praise and exhortation. The verse not bad, often better than most men of learning could speak extempore. She intermixed hallelujahs, sung in a pleasing tone, much like the general chorus of an anthem. While she sung she appeared to be wholly insensible of everything in this world. After half an hour she opened her eyes. I then asked, 'Do you know me' 'Yes, sir.' 'Is it inconvenient for so many persons to be present' ' No.' ' Had the devil possession of your body a day or two since' ' Yes, and of my soul too.' ' When did he depart from you' ' Yesterday.' ' Will he trouble you again' 'No, never more.' 'Do you think, then, you shall die soon' ' I do not know.' ' Do you desire it ' ' No; I desire nothing : I have no will but God's.' ' Do you feel nothing in you but the love of God' ' No, nothing but love.' ' Are you always happy' 'Oh yes.' ' Shall you never sin more' ' Not if I watch and pray.' ' Do you fear nothing ' ' No, no. I cannot fear.' ' Have you been in heaven' ' Yes, and in hell too. When I sing I am in heaven. I am with angels and archangels before the throne of God.' ' Has He shown you things to come' ' Yes, He has.' ' Can you tell the things that you saw in heaven' ' No; they are too great to be told.' Can you tell us those things that are to come' 'I must not; no one could bear to hear them.' ' Will the troubles that are coming be in part of the kingdom or all of it' ' They will be over all England.' ' Will they come soon' 'A part ot them will.' ' But will not the righteous escape ' 'If they put their trust in God.' 'What will be the end of all these things' ' Praise to God.'

A bystander asked,' Are not you troubled when you think of these things' She said, ' No, I am not troubled, because I know whatever God does is good.' ' Nay, but our Savior wept over Jerusalem.' ' Yes; He was grieved for the hardness of men's hearts. And so am I; but I am not sorry that troubles will come. For God would not let them come if they were not good.'

In the afternoon I talked with her again. ' When did you know your sins were forgiven' ' Yesterday, between three and four in the afternoon, while Mr. Manners was at prayer.' ' When was you so filled with the love of God' ' About eight in the evening. I was then taken away by the angels and carried where I saw a great lake of fire, and I saw abundance of people chained down in it, and I heard their groans. Then they took me into heaven; and I saw all the holy angels round the throne of God. And I heard them all singing praise to God; and I sung with them. And I saw God. I did not see Him like a man, but as a glorious brightness. I cannot tell you how it was: but it was three and one. And Jesus Christ told me of the trouble to come; but the angels told me not to reveal what He said. I stayed there till between two and three in the morning; but I am as in heaven still.' ' Do not these things make you proud' 'No, I cannot be proud; for it is God, not I, that does all. And the angels are better than me; yet they are not proud. I am only afraid that people should think too much of me.' 'Do you feel no pride at all' 'No. I am in heaven, and there is no pride in heaven.' 'What keeps you humble' 'The grace of God.'

On Sunday the 26th, about two, I went again. When I came in she was quite senseless, nor could I discern any motion of her throat or breast or even pulse in the temporal arteries. After a while she broke out into singing hallelujahs, and then stanzas, two or more at a time. They were, as the day before, chiefly praise, but mixed with strong invitation to sinners. Some who stood by were deeply affected. In about three-quarters of an hour she came to herself. I then said, ' We have been returning thanks on your account." ' I know you have.' ' Who told you so ' ' God.' ' Have you, then, been in heaven again' 'I have.' ' What did you see there ' ' Jesus Christ and God, surrounded with angels.' 'Do you see Him always' 'Yes.' 'Is there never any cloud between God and your soul 'No, never.'

One saying, ' What a wonderful child is this!' she said short,' Don't praise me: praise God. If you would praise God more He would bless you more. All being, all power, all life, all light is from God.' 'You said a while ago it would be a sin to reveal the troubles that are to come to some persons. May you not, then, reveal them to some others' ' God will reveal them to whom it pleases Him.' ' Are you in pain now' ' I was; but love takes away pain: death is swallowed up in victory.' 'Do you choose life or death' 'I choose nothing. Let God do as seems Him good.' 'But do you not ask God to show you whether you shall live or die' ' No, I can't. Perhaps it is not good that I should know.'

Abundance of people came to see her the following week, who were much divided in their judgment concerning her. Many acknowledged it must be the work of God; others were sure it was all a cheat. On Saturday, March 4, being convinced it was not expedient for her to be gazed at by such multitudes of people, I removed her to the house of a serious woman, where she might have a little privacy. On Sunday morning I asked,' Do you see God still ' ' Yes; as clear as ever." ' Do you never find any cloud between Him and you ' No, not for a moment.' ' Do you pray all the time you are awake' ' Yes. I pray without ceasing.' ' What do you commonly dream of' ' Till very lately I did not use to dream at all. But I have lately dreamed several times of going in a chariot; and it went heavily, for it was without wheels. But last night I dreamed I saw a great chariot that had wheels. And I was taken up in it. And God was

there.'

In the afternoon she was removed to the Foundery. In the evening I came in while Mr. Fletcher was talking to her. The sum of his questions, and her answers (in her own words) were as follows:

' Whom did you see when you was in heaven' ' God and His angels and glorified saints.' ' Did you know any of them ' ' Yes, several j in particular, I knew Moses and Elias.' ' How did you know them' 'God showed me. But I can't tell you how.' 'Did they take notice of you ' ' No; they did not mind the creature : they were wholly taken up with the Creator.' ' How where they employed What were they doing ' ' They were singing praise to God.' ' Did they sing low or loud' ' They sung louder than anything I heard in my life.' ' Had they any instruments of music' ' They had trumpets. But not like our trumpets in this world.' ' Were they glorious ' ' Yes, they were like naming fire; they were a deal brighter than the sun, and they could see through [one] another.' ' Did any of them cast themselves down upon the ground before God' 'Yes, the four-and-twenty elders.' ' Were there many of the saints and angels' ' Oh yes; but they were all like one family. All of us that were there were at home.' I Was you willing to stay there' 'I should have been very unwilling to come back, but that it was God's will.' ' Do you think you shall sin any more' 'I believe not; I believe God will keep me.' ' Have you one particular guardian angel' ' Yes; I saw him by my bedside when I was at home.' ' Did you ever see the devil ' ' Yes, I saw him last night as I lay in bed. But I did not care; I did not fear him. I knew he could not hurt me.' ' Do you find any temptations ' ' Yes; he tempted me this afternoon not to pray and not to sing. But I did not give way, and I believe I shall find that temptation no more.' ' Are you as happy when you are singing our hymns as when you sing in your trance' ' No; while I sing these hymns I am upon earth; but while I sing those I am in

Mon. 27.-Having a sermon to write against the Assizes at Bedford, I retired for a few days to Lewisham.

March 3, Fri.-I returned to London.[ And also preached at the Bull-andMouth.]

Mon. 6.-I took horse about seven o'clock. The wind being east, I was pleasing myself that we should have it on our back; but in a quarter of an hour it shifted to the north-west, and blew the rain full in our face; and both increased, so that when we came to Finchley Common it was hard work to sit our horses. The rain continued all the way to Dunstable, where we exchanged the main road for the fields, which, having been just ploughed, were deep enough. However, before three we came to Sundon.

Hence, on Thursday the 4th I rode to Bedford," and found the sermon was not to be preached till Friday. Had I known this in time, I should never have thought of preaching it, having engaged to be at Epworth on Saturday.

Mr. Francis Okeley came to me in the evening and said he could not remain as he was any longer [Of Bedford. See Charles Wesley's Journal, July 10, 1739, &c.; Memoirs of Hutton, p. 240. He figured in the somewhat intricate negotiations between Zinzendorf and Archbishop Potter by which at one time it was thought that

a quasi-union, or working understanding, might have been brought about between English Moravianism and the Anglican Church. But Sherlock,Bishop of London, refused Okeley ordination.]; that he had no rest in his spirit while he was thus halting between two; and therefore desired to go with me without delay. I answered, if he was so resolved he was welcome to set out with me for Epworth the next day. He said he would. We spent some time in prayer, and parted for the present.

Fri. 10.--The congregation at St. Paul's was very large and very attentive. The Judge,[ Sir Edward Clive. The sermon was published at the request of the High Sheriff, William Cole (Tyerman's Life and Times of Weslty, vol. ii. p. 300). The text is " We shall all stand before the judgement-seat of Christ' (Rom. xiv. 10). It is No. xv. in the 'Fiftythree Sermons.' Its title is, ' The Great Assize.' See below, p. 403.] immediately after sermon, sent me an invitation to dine with him; but, having no time, I was obliged to send my excuse, and set out between one and two.

March 1758.

A Northern Journey

The north-east wind was piercing cold, and, blowing exactly in our face, soon brought a heavy shower of snow, then of sleet, and afterwards of hail. However, we reached Stilton at seven, about thirty miles from Bedford.

Rest was now the more sweet because both our horses were lame. However, resolving to reach Epworth at the time appointed, I set out in a post-chaise between four and five in the morning; but the frost made it so bad driving that my companion came with the lame horses into Stamford as soon as me. The next stage I went on horseback; but I was then obliged to leave my mare and take another post-chaise. I came to Bawtry about six. Some from Epworth had come to meet me, but were gone half an hour before I came. I knew no chaise could go the rest of the road, so it remained only to hire horses and a guide. We set out about seven, but I soon found my guide knew no more of the way than myself. However, we got pretty well to Idlestop, about four miles from Bawtry, where we had just light to discern the river at our side and the country covered with water. I had heard that one Richard Wright lived thereabouts, who knew the road over the moor perfectly well. Hearing one speak (for we could not see him), I called, 'Who is there' He answered,' Richard Wright.' I soon agreed with him, and he quickly mounted his horse and rode boldly forward. The north-east wind blew full in our face, and I heard them say, ' It is very cold!' But neither my face, nor hands, nor feet were cold, till between nine and ten we came to Epworth. After traveling more than ninety miles, I was little more tired than when I rose in the morning.

Sun. 12.-I was much comforted at church, both morning and afternoon, by the serious behavior of the whole congregation- so different from what it was formerly. After evening service I took my stand in the market-place, with a multitude of people from all parts. Toward the end of the sermon the rain was heavy, but it neither lessened nor disturbed the congregation.

Mon. 13.-I preached in the shell of the new house, and then set out for York. The banks over which we crept along were ready to swallow up man and beast. However, we came safe to York in the afternoon.[ Where he preached.] After settling the little affairs, on Wednesday the 15th I rode to Leeds, where, in the evening, a multitude of people were present. I never before saw things in so good order here, and took knowledge the assistant had not been idle.

I was apprehensive, having been at an uncommon expense, of being a little straitened for money; but, after preaching, one with whom I had never exchanged a word put a letter into my hand, in which was a bill for ten pounds. Is not' the earth the Lord's, and the fullness thereof

Sailing for Dublin

March 1758

Thur. 16.-I rode through heavy rain to Manchester. I was scarce set down, when Mr. Francis Okeley came from Bedford.[ For Okeley's letter describing Wesley's preaching in Liverpool, the unfinished room, a dinner ' at the house of one Mr. Newton,' afterwards John Newton of Olney, see W.M Mag 1863, p. noi.] If he comes sincerely, (as I believe), God will bless him; but if not, ego in portu navigo.[ ' I ride [safe] in harbour.']

He can find out nothing with regard to me; I have no secrets.

Fri. 17.-In riding fiom Manchester to Bolton I read The Life of Theodore, King of Corsica : a great man, both as a general and as a prince; and one who, if he had not been sacrificed to the French, might have made a shining figure in history.

Sat. 18.-We rode to Liverpool.[ Okeley says : ' During our stay at Liverpool, he [Wesley] preached morning and evening, as usual, to crowded auditories, consisting of all sorts, especially in the evening at seven o'clock.']

Thur 23.-I walked over to Mr. E.'s, a gentleman who had little thought of God till his favourite child lay at the point of death. It then came into his mind to pray for his life. He did so, and the child recovered. This struck him to the heart, and he rested no more till his own soul was healed.

I never saw the house so crowded as it was on Easter Day, March 26, especially with rich and genteel people, whom I did not at all spare. They are now warned to flee from the wrath to come. God grant they may remember the warning!

Tues. 28.-We went on board, and set sail for Dublin. The wind was fair, and the day extremely fine. Seven or eight miles from the town a small boat overtook us, which brought me letters from London. Some of these earnestly pressed me to return to London, or, however, not to go to Ireland. I consulted my friends, and, just as we began our little debate, the wind, which till then was fair and small, turned from east to west, and blew harder and harder. But the point was soon decided. For, upon inquiry, we found the boat was gone back, and no other was to be had. Presently after the wind returned to the east, and we saw the hand of God.

The Liverpool boat went away in such haste that it left a young man, James Glassbrook, behind; so we were five in all. We had seven more cabin passengers, and many common ones. So good-natured a company I never met with in a ship before. The sea was as smooth as glass, the sun shone without a cloud, and the wind was small and quite fair. So we glided on till, about nine, I went to prayers with them, and then quietly lay down.

Wed. 29.-We were even with the great Welsh mountain, Penmaenmawr,[ The question has been raised whether Wesley is not here mistaking the Great Orme's Head, which on such a voyage would be visible, for Penmaenmawr, which he knew from the road, but which from the sea at that date and hour would not be visible Unless we knew the condition of wind, tide, and atmosphere at the time it would be impossible to express a definite opinion.VOL. IV] at five in the morning. But it then fell calm, so that we were scarce abreast of Holyhead in the evening. This gave us time to speak to all our fellow passengers. And some fruit quickly appeared; for no oath, no immodest or passionate word, was any more heard in the ship while we were on board.[ Okeley accompanied him, and in a letter (WM. Mag 1863, p. 1103) describes the voyage, Wesley's preaching on the quarter-deck, in Dublin his house to-house visiting with Wesley, and the ' agreeable and pretty people ' he thus met]

Thur. 30.-Having no wind still, I desired our brethren to come upon the quarter-deck; where we no sooner began singing a hymn than both passengers and sailors gladly assembled. The wind sprung up almost as soon as I began, and about nine the next day we entered Dublin Bay, after so smooth and pleasant a passage as the captain declared he had not had at that time of year for forty years.[ On Friday the 31st he preached in Dublin; also on April 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 14, 17, 20, 22, and 24.]

In Dublin

April 1758

Considering the shortness of the warning, we had a large congregation in the evening; but a very small one in the morning, April 1. At this I did not wonder when I was informed that the preaching at five had been discontinued for near a year and a half. At eight likewise, Sunday the 2nd, the congregation was small. I took knowledge that the people of Dublin had neither seen nor heard much of self-denial since T. Walsh left the kingdom.[ On April 4, from Dublin, he wrote to Mrs. Ryan ( Works, vol. xii. p. 222);

and on April 5 to Miss H------( Works,vol. xii. p. 227), the latter an interesting discussion of Christian Perfection.]

All the evenings of the following week we had numerous congregations. Nothing is wanting here but rigorous discipline, which is more needful in this than in any other nation, the people in general being so soft and delicate that the least slackness utterly destroys them.

Thur. 6.-We walked round the College,[ The west fi^ade, opposite College Green, was not completed in its present form till 1759. It was erected at a cost of over .45,000, the funds being provided by the Irish Parliament (W.H.S. vol. v. p. 71).] and saw what was accounted most worthy of observation. The new front is exceeding grand, and the whole square (about as large as Peckwater in Christ Church) would be beautiful were not the windows too small, as every one will see when the present fashion is out of date.

Fri. 7.-I preached in the evening on Reuben's character, ' unstable as water,' so applicable to most of this nation. Some were deeply convinced, and resolved not to rest till they were established in grace.

Sun. 9.-I exhorted the society to follow the example of their English brethren by jointly renewing their covenant with God. On Tuesday evening I read the letters, by one of which a poor backslider, who had been wandering near eleven years, was cut to the heart and determined to return to Him from whom he had so deeply revolted.

Thur. 13.-I explained at large the nature and manner of entering into covenant with God, and desired all who were purposed so to do to set Friday apart for solemn fasting and prayer. Many did so, and met both at five in the morning, at noon, and in the evening.[ On this day he wrote to Miss Furly, advising as to her residence and health (Works, ]

Sun. 16.-I was much grieved at St. Peter's Church at such a sight as I never saw in England, communicants as well as others behaving in a manner that shocked common sense as well as religion. Oh who has the courage to speak plain to these rich and honourable sinners! If they perish in their iniquity, will not their blood be on the watchman's head

Mon. 17.-We met in the evening to renew our covenant with God. It was a glorious season. I believe all that were present found that God was there.

Tues. 18.-Among the letters I read in public last week was one from Mr. Gillies, giving an account of a society lately formed at Glasgow for promoting Christian Knowledge among the poor, chiefly by distributing Bibles among them and other religious books. I could not then help expressing my amazement that nothing of this kind had been attempted in Ireland, and inquiring if it was not high time that such a society should be formed in Dublin. This morning Dr. Tisdale showed me a paper which the Archbishop[Dr. Charles Cobbe.] had just sent to each of his clergy, exhorting them to erect a society for the distribution of books among the poor. Thanks be to God for this! Whether we or they, it is all one, so God be known, loved, and obeyed.

Thur. 20.-In the evening I met all the married men and women of the society. I believe it was high time. For many of them seemed to know very little of relative duties : so that I brought strange things to their ears when I enlarged on the duties of husbands, and wives, and parents.

Fri. 21.-I dined at Lady------'s.[ The Rev. H J. Foster suggests, but without naming an authority, Lady Arabella Denny. See W.HS. vol. v. p. 73.] We need great grace to

converse with great people! From which, therefore (unless in some rare instances), I am glad to be excused. Horae fugiunt et imputantur![ Martial, Epigr. v. 2O, 13. Not a

verbatim quotation. Lawrence Ford suggests that Wesley gave the proverbial form frequently inscubed on sundials: ' The hours are flying, and are being put to our account.' (W.H.S. vol. v. p. 47.)] Of these two hours I can give no good

account.

Sun. 23.-I was much concerned to see two gentlemen, who were close to me at St. Patrick's church, fall a-talking together, in the most trifling manner, immediately after they had received the Lord's Supper. Indeed, one who sat by could not but reprove them, whom I seconded in strong terms. And so far (at least) we gained: they talked no more till the service was ended.

In Ireland

April 1758

Mon. 24.-I left Dublin; but our chaise-horse tired before we had drove eight miles. So I went into another chaise, and reached Kilcock between eleven and twelve. We were agreeably surprised to hear the maid of the inn singing one of our hymns, and to find that her mistress had, the evening before, been at the preaching in Dublin. This accounted for the profound civility with which all the servants behaved. About one I took horse, and rode on with Robert Swindells to Edenderry.[ Where he preached. Okeley and Swindells were his travelling companions during the journey.]

On the road I read Mr. Walker's Account of the Siege of Londonderry, and the relation of that of Drogheda, by Dr. Bernard-a vain, childish, affected writer. Sir Henry Tichburn's account of this siege [Sir Henry Tichburn was governor of Drogheda during the siege, of which he wrote the history, as also did Dr. Bernard.] is wrote in a strong and masculine manner, and is worthy to be joined with Mr. Walker's [George Walker was rector of Donaghmore when James II landed in Kinsale, and raised a regiment in the defence of Irish Protestantism. It was his True Account of the Siege of Londonderry which supplied Macaulay with materials for his description of the famous siege (History of England, chap. xii.).] plain and clear account of that other amazing scene of Providence.

Tues. 25.-I read an account of the Irish Rebellion,[ See above, vol. iii. p. 314; below, p. 399; also W.H.S. vol. iv. p. HI.] wrote by Dr. Curry, a Papist, of Dublin, who labors to wash the Ethiop white by numberless falsehoods and prevarications. But he is treated according to his merit by Mr. Harris, in a tract entitled, Fiction Unmasked.

In the evening I preached under the castle wall to a very numerous congregation, though some of the Quakers (so called) had labored much to dissuade their people from coming; and one poor man, lately reclaimed, by hearing our preachers, from a course of open, scandalous sin they did persuade to stay at home. When he turns back to his vomit, who shall answer for his blood

Wed. 26.-I walked round the poor remains of the Castle. The situation is extremely fine. It stands on the top of a gently rising hill, commanding the prospect all four ways, and having rows of tall trees reaching down to the vale on three sides, with a grove covering it on the north-east. But the house, as well as the gardens round about it, are now utterly run to ruin. I wonder none has rebuilt it, unless there is a curse on the place for the sins of its former inhabitants!

Thur. 27.-I finished Mr. Spearman's Inquiry[An Inquiry after Philosophy and Theology, by Robert Spearman, Edinburgh, 1755. See below, Feb. 13, 1770; also W.H.S. vol. iv. p. HI.]

an ingenious, sensible book; but I cannot at all agree with his scheme. I still think Mr. Hutchinson's[A System of Moral Philosophy ( W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 109). See also above, p. 191, and below, p. 280.] whole system is not only quite unsupported by Scripture, but loaded with insuperable difficulties. I cannot yet see the possibility of any motion, without so much as a vacuum disseminatum.[ This, it is suggested, is a technical term, the meaning of which is obvious. It does not seem to be quoted from any author in particular. (W.H.S. vol. v.P. 47-) ] Is it not flatly impossible, if all be full, and all matter be impenetrable Much less can I conceive how the streams of light and air can move continually in opposite directions and that in space absolutely full, without jostling with each other!

In the evening I preached at Portarlington. Both this day and the next I was much concerned for my rich, gay hearers; and God gave me such a word for them as I scarce ever had before.

Hence, at his earnest request, I rode over to Mr. L------y,[ Apparently Mr. Laborde, of Closeland, who died shortly after.] who said he could not die in peace till he had seen me. For some time he had been quite distracted; but he spoke quite sensibly yesterday, while Mr. Swindells was there, saying, with many tears, he had never prospered in anything since he used Mr. Wesley so ill. That night he had sound and refreshing sleep, which he had not had for many weeks before; and, when we called, most of what he said was reasonable and connected. Perhaps God may put an end to the troubles which have lately encompassed him on every side.

Sat. 29.-I preached in the market-place at Mountmellick in the evening, and at eight in the morning. At eleven I went to church. Soon after, seven or eight troopers came into the same pew. Several were in the next pew, and others scattered up and down the church. In the middle of the service a person came in and whispered to one of them in our pew; soon after another person came in, and whispered to the corporal. Several of them then whispered together; after which four went out, but quickly returned with many swords and pistols. After whispering together again, they all rose up from all parts, and went out of the church in a body. This put the whole congregation in an uproar, and many ran out in all haste. Afterwards the secret appeared to be this: Three weeks ago a man of the town grossly abused a trooper, whose patience at length being worn out, he gave him a cut across the head. A report now came that the man was dead. On this the mob gathered to seize the trooper; but the others resolved not to give him up to a mob, but to the peace-officer.

I suppose most of the Protestants in the town were present at the evening sermon. Many Papists also stood in the skirts of the congregation, though liable to heavy penance for it. I preached much longer than I am accustomed, finding it an acceptable time. Well might Kempis say, ' He rides easily whom the grace of God carries.'

MAY I, Mon.-I strove to put an end to the bitter contentions which had wellnigh torn the society in pieces. I heard the contending parties face to face, and desired them to speak at large. God gave His blessing therewith; the snare was broken, and they were cordially reconciled. Only one person was out of all patience, and formally renounced us all. But within an hour God broke her heart also, and she asked pardon with many tears. So there is reason to hope they will, for the time to come,' bear one another's burdens.'

In the evening I preached at Tullamore, not only to a large number of Protestants, but to many Papists, and almost all the troopers in the town.

Tues. 2.-I wrote a short answer to Dr. Free's weak, bitter, scurrilous invective against the people called Methodists.[ Dr. Free was a native of Oxford, at his time forty-seven years of age, vicar of East Coker, Somerset, lecturer of St. Mary-at-Hill, London, and of Newington, Surrey. He died in distress and penury in 1791. He was one of the most prolific and scurrilous of Wesley's assailants. For a list of his pamphlets, &c., see Green's Anti-Methodist Publications, pp. 273-7; see also Green's Bibliography, No. 187.]

But I doubt whether I shall meddle with him any more[But see below, p. 282. ]; he is too dirty a writer for me to touch.

Wed. 3.-I preached at four in the afternoon at Coolalough, and at eight in the morning; after which I rode on to Tyrrell's Pass. The letters which I received here were seasonable as rain in drought. I had before found much weariness; but God thereby gave a check to my faintness of spirit, and enabled me to ' gird up the loins of my mind.'

In the evening, the weather being calm and mild, I preached on the side of a meadow, the people standing before me, one above another, on the side of a gently rising hill. And many did, indeed, at that hour, ' taste and see that the Lord is gracious.'

Fri. 5.-In the evening I preached at Drumcree, in the new room, built in the taste of the country. The roof is thatch, the walls mud, on which a ladder was suspended by ropes of straw. Hence we rode to Rosmead. The congregation here was not large, but deeply serious.[ The Sermon Register gives the following appointments: Fri. May 5, Carrickfergus (this is probably an error for the i Jth, see below); Sat. the

6th, Drumcree; Sun. the yth, Rosmead.]

Sun. 7.-I preached at eight and at five. Afterward I was desired to make a collection for a distressed family. Mr. Booker,[ Rev. Moore Booker. During the summer of 1759 he embarked at Parkgate in the Chester Trader, which foundered, and all on board perished (Crookshank, Methodism in Ireland, vol. i. pp. 80-2; see also above, pp. 39 and 177).] the minister of the parish, willingly stood at the door to receive it, and encouraged all that went by to be merciful after their

power.

Mon. 8.- I rode to Newry, and preached at seven to a large

and serious congregation.[ The Sermon Register dates the Newry preaching Tues.May 9. This may be quite correct. He usually preached in the early morning before leaving.]

Tues. 9.-We rode by the side of the canal, through a pleasant vale, to Terryhoogan. The room, built on purpose for us here, is three yards long, two and a quarter broad, and six foot high. The walls, floor, and ceiling are mud; and we had a clean chaff bed. At seven I preached in a neighbouring ground, having a rock behind me and a large congregation sitting on the grass before me. Thence we retired to our hut, and found it true-

Licet sub paupere tecto Reges et regum vita praecurrere amicos.[ ' Under a lowly roof a poor man may have more real enjoyment of life than even monarchs and their friends' (Hor. Epist. I. x. 32). Jackson's free translation above gives the sense.]

Wed. 10.-I suppose all the inhabitants of the village, with many others, were present at five in the morning. Among these was a poor woman, brought to bed ten days before, who had walked four Irish miles (seven English) with her child in her arms to have it baptized by me. Another, who lived at Terryhoogan, had earnestly desired the same thing if she was delivered before I left the country. She was delivered two or three hours before the preaching. So God gave her what she asked of Him.

In riding to Lisburn I read Mr. Rollin's Ancient History.[ Charles Rollin, The Ancient History of the Egyptians, Carthaginians, &c. First published in 13 vols. in Paris in 1731. First published in English in 12 vols. in 1734.] Could so masterly a writer make so palpable blunders! Or are they owing to the translator I have observed many as gross as that in the fourth volume: ' A revered old age was the fruit of Gelon's wisdom. . . . He was succeeded by Hiero, his eldest brother. This young prince'------How, if Gelon enjoyed revered old age, could his eldest brother be young after his death Abundance of people attended the preaching in the evening as well as in the morning.

Fri. 12.-I preached about noon at Comber,[ See Primitive Wesleyan Meth, Mag. 1823, p. 333, for particulars of an unrecorded visit to Clonmain. A lad, George Gainer, saw him preaching from a table-a man 'of venerable appearance ' For the story of Margaret Davidson, of Comber-poor, blind, persecuted, reputed mad, but one of the Irish Methodist heroines-see Crookshank, vol. i. pp. 124, 151, 165, &c.] and then rode on to Newtownards. This seems to have been a place of strength, large fragments of walls still remaining. I preached at seven on the Green to the largest congregation I have seen since I came into the kingdom. All were quietly attentive, and, when I had done, went away in deep silence.

Sat. 13.-We went into the church, the burial-place of Mr. Colvin's father and ancestors. The choir, turned into a chapel many years ago, is grand and finely finished; but as no man cares for it, since the estate was sold it is swiftly running to ruin.

In the evening we had a larger congregation than before. I was afraid my voice would not reach them all; but God gave me strength, so that I believe every one present might hear distinctly.

Sun. 14.-I preached in the market-house at Belfast about one, and in the court-house at Carrickfergus in the evening.

Mon. 15.-I rode over the mountains to Larne,[ He was the guest of Mr. and Mrs. John Lee, whose youngest daughter, Jane Esther, was subsequently one of his correspondents (W.H.S. vol. viii. pp. 98, 168).] a small seaport ten miles north of Carrickfergus. The sun shone bright and exceeding hot, and the wind was pretty high. They fixed the table just fronting the midday sun, and where an eddy of wind poured in continually. And it was well they did, for the sun tempered the wind so that I could bear both better than either. I suppose most of the town were present, rich and poor, and I believe the word of God did not return empty.

In the evening I preached at Carrickfergus again. The old Earl of Donegal, one of the richest peers in Ireland, took much pleasure here in his stately house surrounded by large and elegant gardens. But his only son proved an idiot, and the present heir regards them not. So the roof of the house is fallen in, and the horses and sheep, which feed in the gardens, make wild work with the parterres and curious trees which the old lord so carefully planted![ Arthur, third earl, killed at Fort Monjuich in 1706. Arthur, fourth earl, succeeded in 1706 and died without (acknowledged) issue in 1757, and was succeeded by his nephew, Arthur, fifth earl, in the same year.]

Tues. 16.-We rode to Lurgan. In the morning I walked to Lough Neagh, the most beautiful lake I ever saw. On the south-east shore stands a small mount, supposed to be raised by the Danes, on the top of which is a kind of arbor, benched round with turf, which might contain twenty or thirty people.

This was the hottest day I ever felt in Ireland, near as hot as any I remember in Georgia. The next morning I was desired to see the house of an eminent scholar [It is suggested that this was probably Mr. Cook. See below, p. 374.] near the town. The door into the yard we found nailed up, but we got in at a gap which was stopped with thorns. I took the house at first for a very old barn, but was assured he had built it within five years, not indeed by any old, vulgar model, but purely to his own taste. The walls were part mud, part brick, part stone, and part bones and wood. There were four windows, but no glass in any, lest the pure air should be kept out. The house had two stories, but no staircase and no door. Into the upper floor we went by a ladder through one of the windows, through one of the lower windows into the lower floor, which was about four foot high. This floor had three rooms-one three square, the second had five sides, the third I know not how many. I give a particular description of this wonderful edifice to illustrate t that great truth, There is no folly too great, even for a man of J sense, if he resolve to follow his own imagination!

I spent Friday and Saturday at Newry, a town risen out of| its ashes within these twenty years.

Sun. 21.-I was much pleased with the seriousness and decency of the congregation at church, but they were a little hurried in the middle of the service-a young man dropped down as dead. In a little time, however, he came to himself, and was led out of church.

Mon. 22.-I rode through a barren, dreary country, and by a miserable road, to Castleblayney. The morning was extremely hot, but we had a cooler ride in the afternoon to Cootehill. I preached at seven, in an open place near the street, to a tolerably serious congregation. At six in the morning there were more rather than fewer, who then seemed to feel as well as hear. I walked afterward to the German house, about as large as the chapel in Snowsfields. They have pitched upon a delightful situation, laid out a garden by it, planted trees round the ground, and every way approved themselves ' wise in their generation.' They often put me in mind of the monks of old, who had picked out the pleasantest spots in our nation; but when their time was come God swept them away in an hour they looked not for it.

In the evening I preached at Dingins, in the county of Cavan, on the very edge of Ulster. Many came from far, a few of whom have tasted that the Lord is gracious.

Wed. 24.-I preached in the morning at Granard, in the barrack-yard. I have rarely seen a congregation in a new place so much affected. About one I preached at Edgeworthstown to a very genteel congregation, extremely different from that which gathered at Longford, in the yard of the great inn-the rudest, surliest, wildest people that I have found since I came into the kingdom. However, they stood pretty quiet till some pieces of turf were thrown among them over the houses, and when they had recovered from the hurry it put them into they behaved decently till I concluded.

Thur. 25.-I preached at Cleggill about one, and then rode on to Drummersnave. Wood, water, fruitful land, and gently rising hills contribute to make this place a little paradise. Mr. Campbell, the proprietor of the whole, resolved to make it such; so he planted groves, laid out walks, formed the plan of a new town, with a barrack at one end and his own seat at the other. But, alas! death stepped in between, and all his plan fell to the ground.[ The Sermon Register adds Granard on Friday, May 26.] I lodged at the only gentleman's house in the town, whose wife adorns the gospel.

Sat. 27.-I rode through Jamestown, once a strong place, now a heap of ruins, and through [Through Ballymote, Collooney, and Ballysodare.] Carrick-on-Shannon and Boyle, both enclosed by a pleasant and fruitful country. Soon after we entered the county of Sligo,[ An opening had been given in Sligo the year before probably through one of the Drummersnave members, who, removing to Sligo, invited the preacher

from the Castlebar round. The curate arrested the preacher and brought him before the magistrate. The rector, the Rev. Eubel Ormsby, rebuked his curate, saying, ' Andrew, Andrew, let these men alone. Remember the advice of Gamaliel.' Methodism from that day has had little opposition in Sligo.] the best peopled that I have seen in the kingdom. Eight villages we counted within seven miles. The town itself, I think, is little less than Limerick. The country round it is fertile and well improved, even the mountains, to the very top. It lies two miles from the sea, having a large harbour, covered by mountains on each side.

The mob had been in motion all the day; but their business was only with the forestallers of the market, who had bought up all the corn far and near to starve the poor, and load a Dutch ship, which lay at the quay; but the mob brought it all out into the market, and sold it for the owners at the common price. And this they did with all the calmness and composure imaginable, and without striking or hurting any one.

I preached in the evening, near the main street, to a small, quiet, serious company; at nine, Sunday the 28th, in the market-house, to a numerous congregation. But they were doubled at five in the afternoon, and God made His word quick and powerful. Even the rich and genteel part of the audience appeared to be deeply affected. Oh for laborers, for a few gnesia tekna ,[ Phil. ii. 20; I Tim. i. 2 : timoqw gnesiw tekno en pistei ; also Titus i. 4 : ' My true child in the faith' (R.V.)] desirous only to spend and be spent for their brethren!

Mon. 29.-I rode to Castlebar.

June 1, Thur.-I went to Newport. I believe all the Protestants in the town gladly attended the evening preaching; and few of them were wanting at five in the morning. How white are these fields to the harvest!

Fri, 2.-I rode to Hollymount, and preached in the churchyard. I then visited my antagonist, Mr. Clark, who was lying extremely ill.[ See above, pp, 171-3; Crookshank, Methodism at Ireland, vol. i. pp. 111,112.]

Sat. 3.-I preached at Manulla, a village four miles from Castlebar. I was surprised to find how little the Irish Papists are changed in a hundred years. Most of them retain the same bitterness, yea, and thirst for blood, as ever, and would as freely now cut the throats of all the Protestants as they did in the last century.

Sun. 4.-As they have the Lord's Supper here but four times a year, I administered it in the evening to about sixty persons. Scarce one of them went away empty. Many were filled with consolation.[ From Castlehar, where, according to the Sermon Register, he again preached, he wrote to Blackwell (Works, vol. xii. p. 186). The letters written at this time to his confidential friend relate in part to public affairs, but also in part to those private affairs of his domestic life which were veiled in obscurity by Henry Moore, Joseph Benson, Thomas Jackson, and other prudent editors, but which now ought to be published. They are necessarily ex parte statements, but every reader will understand that, however unwise and exasperating Mrs. Wesley may have been, she also suffered, and the faults of a marriage-in-haste that ought never to have been were not exclusively on one side. Only the second half of the letter from Castlebar appears in the Works. It will be found in full in the new edition of the Wesley Letters.]

Tues. 6.-I set out at four (the hour I had appointed) on foot, the horse brought for me having neither bridle nor saddle. After a time one galloped after me full speed, till, just as he overtook me, horse and man came down together. The horse's knee spouted out blood, as if an artery had been cut; but on a sudden the blood stopped, nor did he bleed any more all the way to Aughrim.[ The Hon. and Rev. Walter Shirley had recently been appointed rector of Loughrea. He was cousin to the Countess of Huntingdon. Three of his brothers were successively Earls Ferrers. He was a typical hunting parson of the day. Henry Moore attributes his conversion in part to John Wesley. At Aughrim Wesley would be within easy reach of Loughrea. (Crookshank, vol. i. p. 130; cf. pp. 137-9, where the opposition of his own curate is described.)]

I found a few here, and left more,' striving to enter in at the strait gate.'

Fri. 9.-About eight I preached at Ahascragh to a congregation of whom four-fifths were Papists. Would to God the Government would ensure to all the Papists in the land so much liberty of conscience that none might hinder them from hearing the true word of God! Then, as they hear, so let them judge. In the evening I preached at Athlone.

Sun. 11.-We had an excellent sermon at church on the intercession of Christ. In the afternoon abundance of Papists as well as Protestants were present on the Connaught side of the river while I explained the joy that ' is in heaven over one sinner that repenteth.' Toward the close two or three eggs were thrown, and, not long after, two stones. One of them fell on a gentleman's servant, the other on a drummer, which so enraged the dragoons (many of whom were in the congregation) that as soon as I concluded they ran all ways to find the man that threw. The spirit they showed did much good by striking a terror into the rabble. But I was glad they did not discover the offender. I believe his fright was punishment enough.

In Ireland

June 1758.

Tues. 13.-I met the preachers and stewards at Coolalough. The congregation at noon was the largest I ever saw there. In the afternoon the perplexed case of I. C. and I. A. was referred to Mr. S. and Mr. H.,[ Probably to Mrt Simpson and Mr. Samuel Handy.] who, after a long hearing, judged (as did all present) ' that I. C. had acted wrong in seizing and selling I. A.'s goods for rent when no rent was due.'

After preaching in the evening, I talked with Kath. Shea, of Athlone, concerning a strange account which I had heard. There are many now living who attest, on their personal knowledge, most of the particulars of it. She said:

When I was ten years old the preaching began at Athlone. I liked and often heard it, though my parents were zealous Papists, till they removed into the country. I then grew as zealous as them, and was diligent in reading the Popish prayers, till I was about thirteen, when, taking the Mass Book one day to read my prayers, I could not see one word. I continued blind, just able to discern light from darkness, but not to read or do any work; till, after three months, casting my eye on a New Testament, I could read clearly. I said to myself, ' I won't read this Protestant book; I will read my own book.' Accordingly I opened the Mass Book, but could not see one word; it appeared all dark and black. I made the trial thrice over, holding the Mass Book in one hand and the Testament in the other. I could not see anything in the Mass Book, but could read the Testament as well as ever. On this I threw away the Mass Book, fully resolved to meddle with it no more.

Afterwards my parents returned to Athlone. Then I heard the preaching at all opportunities. For this they beat me many times, and at last turned me out of doors. Yet after this my father brought me to the priest, who disputed with me very warmly. At length my father said, ' I think the girl is in the right.' And he opposed me no more to the day of his death.

Wed. 14.-I preached at Tullamore about eleven; and at Birr in the evening.

Fri. 16-I set out for Limerick. I was wet through from head to foot before I came thither, but received no hurt. Here I had a particular account of the melancholy affair which was in the mouths of all men. On Sunday evening last two officers were playing at dice, when they quarreled about a lewd woman. This occasioned a challenge from Mr. I., which the other would fain have declined; but he would not be denied, and was so bent upon it that he would not go to bed. About three in the morning they went out with their seconds to the island. Mr. B. proposed firing at twelve yards' distance, but Mr. I. said, 'No, no; six is enough.' So they kissed one another (poor farce!); and, before they were five paces asunder, both fired at the same instant. The ball went into Mr. I.'s breast, who turned round twice or thrice, and fell. He was carried home, made his will, and about three in the afternoon died like a man of honor!

How are ' the judgments of the Lord abroad in the earth'! About Easter last Mr. Beauchamp was at a gentleman's house in the county of Clare, when a gentleman who was occasionally there, finding they were going to family prayers, ran away in all haste, swearing he would have none of their swaddling1 prayers. Two or three weeks after he imagined himself to be not very well. A physician was called, who, for three or four days successively, affirmed there was no danger at all. On the fifth day a second physician was called, who, feeling his pulse, said, ' Why do you send for me I can do nothing He is a dead Mon.' Hearing this, he cried out, ' Doctor, you have deceived me. I leave money enough. But my soul is lost!' He caught hold of one and another, crying,' Save me; save me!' He endeavored to throw himself into the fire. Being hindered from doing this, he seized upon his own arm and tore it with his teeth; and, after a short time, in all the agony of rage, despair, and horror, expired!