The Twelfth Part, Section Two

'To THE EDITOR OF ' THE LONDON CHRONICLE '

February 19, 1761.

SIR,

Is it not surprising that every person of understanding does not discern, at the very first view, that the tract entitled, A Caveat against the Methodists [Published anonymously; written by Richard Challoner, a bishop of the Roman Catholic Church. See Green's Anti-Methodist Publications, No. 311, and Dictionary of National Biography.] is, in reality, a Caveat against the Protestants Do not the arguments conclude (if they conclude at all), not against the Methodists only, but against the whole body of Protestants The names, indeed, of Mr. Whitefield and Mr. Wesley are used; but this is mere finesse! Greater men are designed, and all along are wounded through our sides.

I was long in hopes of seeing an answer to this artful performance from some one of more leisure as well as abilities; and some whose name would have recommended his work. For that thought has something of truth in it-

Oh what a tuneful wonder seized the throng

When Marlbro's conquering name alarmed the foe[In 1668 the ex-Queen, Christina of Sweden, was a candidate for the elective crown of Poland. But the Poles, who wished for a weak king, elected Duke Michael Whiznowiski-' infirm in body and weak in mind, without influence, because without courage and riches'- ' an object of somewhat contemptuous homage." See quotations in W.H.S. vol. vii. pp. 115, ll 6.]

Had Whiznowisky' led the armies on,

The General's scarecrow name had foiled each blow.

However, who knows but reason, for once, may be stronger than prejudice And many may forget my scarecrow name, and mind not who speaks, but what is spoken. I am pleading now not for the Methodists only, but for the whole body of Protestants; first for the Church of England, then for the Protestants of every denomination; in doing which I shall first give the substance of each section of the Romish tract; secondly, answer, and retort it upon the members of the Church of Rome. Oh that this may incite some more skilful advocate to supply my lack of service!

SECTION I

'The Methodists ' (Protestants) ' are not the people of God; they are not true gospel Christians; nor is their new-raised society the true Church of Christ, nor any part of it' (p. 3).

'This is demonstrated by the Word of God marking out the people of God, the true church of Christ, by such characters as cannot agree to the Methodists, or any other new-raised sect or community' (ibid.).

' The Old Testament is full of prophecies relating to the Church; and the New Testament makes glorious promises to it, and gives glorious characters of it' (p. 4).

'Now all those prophecies, promises, and characters point out a society founded by Christ Himself, and by His commission propagated throughout the world, which should nourish till time should end, ever one, ever holy, ever orthodox; secured against error by the perpetual presence of Christ; ever directed by the Spirit of Truth; having a

perpetual succession of pastors and teachers, divinely appointed and divinely assisted. But no part of this character is applicable to any new-raised sect, who have no succession from, or connexion with, that one holy society; therefore no modern sect can be any part of the people of God' (p. 5).

I answer, It is true, ' all these promises, prophecies, and characters, point out a society founded by Christ Himself, and by His commission propagated throughout the world, which should flourish till time should end.' And such is the Catholic Church, that is, the whole body of men, endued with faith working by love, dis'persed over the whole earth, in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. And this Church is ' ever one.' In all ages and nations it is the one body of Christ. It is ' ever holy'; for no unholy man can possibly be a member of it. It is ' ever orthodox'; so is every holy man, in all things necessary to salvation; ' secured against error,' in things essential, ' by the perpetual presence of Christ; and ever directed by the Spirit of Truth,' in the truth that is after godliness. This Church has ' a perpetual succession of pastors and teachers, divinely appointed, and divinely assisted.' And there has never been wanting in the Reformed Churches such a succession of pastors and teachers; men both divinely appointed and divinely assisted; for they convert sinners to God-a work none can do unless God Himself doth appoint them thereto, and assist them therein; therefore every part of this character is applicable to them. Their teachers are the proper successors of those who have delivered down, through all generations, the faith once delivered to the saints; and their members have true spiritual communion with the ' one holy' society of true believers. Consequently, although they are not the whole 'people of God,' yet are they an undeniable part of His people.

On the contrary, the Church of Rome, in its present form, was not ' founded by Christ Himself.' All the doctrines and practices wherein she differs from us were not instituted by Christ-they were unknown to the ancient Church of Christ--they are unscriptural, novel corruptions; neither is that Church 'propagated throughout the world.' Therefore, if either antiquity or universality be essential thereto, the Church of Rome cannot be ' the true Church of Christ.'

Nor is the Church of Rome one; it is not in unity with itself; it is to this day torn with numberless divisions. And it is impossible it should be ' the one Church,' unless a part can be the whole; seeing the Asiatic, the African, and the Muscovite Churches (to name no more), never were contained in it.

Neither is it holy. The generality of its members are no holier, than Turks or Heathens. You need not go far for proof of this. Look at the Romanists in London or Dublin. Are these the holy, the only holy Church Just such holiness is in the bottomless pit.

Nor is it ' secured against error,' either ' by Christ' or ' His Spirit'; witness Pope against Pope, Council against Council, contradicting, anathematizing each other. The instances are too numerous to be recited.

Neither are the generality of her ' pastors and teachers' either 'divinely appointed' or 'divinely assisted.' If God had sent them, He would confirm the word of His messengers. But He does not; they convert no sinners to God; they convert many to their own opinion, but not to the knowledge or love of God. He that was a drunkard is a drunkard still; he that was filthy is filthy still; therefore neither are they ' assisted' by Him; so they and their flocks wallow in sin together. Consequently (whatever may be the case of some particular souls), it must be said, if your own marks be true, the Roman Catholics in general are not ' the people of God.'

It may be proper to add here the second section, which is all I had leisure to write, though it was not published till the following week:

SECTION II

' The Methodist' (Protestant) ' teachers are not the true ministers of Christ; nor are they called or sent by Him ' (p. 6).

' This appears from what has been already demonstrated. For if the Protestants are not the true people of Christ, their ministers cannot be the true ministers of Christ' (ibid.).

Farther, ' The true ministers came down by succession from the apostles. But the Protestant teachers do not. Therefore they are not the true ministers of Christ' (ibid.).

' All power in the Church of Christ comes from Him; so that whoever, without a commission from Him, intrudes into the pastoral office, is a thief and a robber. Now, the commission can be conveyed but two ways: either immediately from God Himself, as it was to the apostles, or from men who have the authority handed down to them from the apostles.

' But this commission has not been conveyed to Protestant preachers either of these ways. Not immediately from God Himself; for how do they prove it By what miracles Neither by men deriving authority from the apostles, through the channel of the Church. And they stand divided in communion from all Churches that have any pretensions to antiquity. Their doctrine of justification by faith alone was anathematized at its first appearance by the undoubted heirs of the apostles, the pastors of the apostolic churches; consequently they are sent by no other but him who sent all the false prophets from the beginning' (pp. 8, 9).

I answer, 'from what has been already demonstrated,' that nothing will follow; for you have demonstrated just nothing.

Now for your ' farther' proof. ' The true ministers came down by succession from the apostles.' So do the Protestant ministers, if the Romish do; the English in particular; as even one of yourselves, F. Courayer,[ Pierre Francois le Courayer, Defence of the Validity of the English Ordinations and of the Succession of Bishops in the Church of England. A divine of the Church of Rome long resident in England. (W.H.S. vol. .iv.p. 135 )] has irrefragably proved.

' All power in the Church of Christ comes from Him; either immediately from Himself, or from men who have the authority handed down to them from the apostles. But this commission has not been conveyed to the Protestant preachers either of these ways: not immediately; for by what miracles do they prove it' So said Cardinal Bellarmine long ago. Neither ' by men deriving authority from the apostles.' Read F. Courayer, and know better. Neither are the Protestants 'divided from' any 'Churches' who have true 'pretensions to antiquity.' But 'their doctrine of justification by faith alone was anathematized, at its first appearance, by the undoubted heirs of the apostles, the pastors of the apostolic church.' By the prelates at the Council of Trent it was; who thereby anathematized the Apostle Paul, to all intents and purposes. Here you throw off the mask; otherwise you might have passed for a Protestant a little longer. ' Consequently they are sent by no other but him who sent all the false prophets from the beginning.' Sir, we thank you. This is really a very modest assertion for the subject of a Protestant king.

But to turn the tables: I said, ' If the Romish bishops do.' For this I absolutely deny. I deny that the Romish bishops came down by uninterrupted succession from the apostles. I never could see it proved; and, I am persuaded, I never shall. But unless this is proved, your own pastors, on your principles, are no pastors at all.

But farther: it is a doctrine of your Church that the intention of the administrator is essential to the validity of the sacraments which are administered by him. Now, are you assured of the intention of every priest from whom you have received the Host If not, you do not know but what you received as the sacrament of the altar was no sacrament at all. Are you assured of the intention of the priest who baptized you If not, perhaps you are not baptized at all. To come close to the point in hand: if you pass for a priest, are you assured of the intention of the bishop that ordained you If not, you may happen to be no priest, and so all your ministry is nothing worth: nay, by the same rule, he may happen to be no bishop. And who can tell how often this has been the case But if there has been only one instance in a thousand years, what becomes of your uninterrupted succession

This ad hominem. But I have a word more ad rtm. Can a man teach what he does not know Is it possible a man should teach others what he does not know himself Certainly it is not. Can a priest, then, teach his hearers the way to heaven, marked out in our Lord's Sermon on the Mount, if he does not know or understand the way himself Nothing is more impossible. But how many of your priests know nothing about it! What avails, then, their commission to teach what they cannot teach, because they know it not Did God, then, send these men on a fool's errand send them to do what they cannot do Oh say not so! And what will be the event of their attempting to teach they know not what Why, ' if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the pit.'

Sat. 21.-I spent some hours with Mr. L[loyd] and Mr. I'Anson, in order to prevent another Chancery suit.[ See, for interesting discussion respecting the acquisition of Kingswood School property, W.H.S. vol. iii. pp. 70-2.] And though the matter could not then be fully adjusted, yet the suit did not go on.[ On Sunday, Feb. 22, he preached at the Foundery and West Street; and on Tuesday the 24th at West Street and Lewisham.]

Tues. 24.-I retired to Lewisham, and transcribed the list of the society. About a hundred and sixty I left out, to whom I can do no good at present. The number of those which now remain is two thousand three hundred and seventy-five.

Fri. 27.-At twelve I met about thirty persons who had experienced a deep work of God; and I appointed an hour for meeting them every week. Whether they are saved from sin or no, they are certainly full of faith and love, and peculiarly helpful to my soul.

March 1, Sun.-We had a happy lovefeast at the chapel. Many of our brethren spoke plainly and artlessly what God had done for their souls. I think none were offended; but many were strengthened and comforted.[ On March 2 he preached at Spitalfields, and on the 3rd wrote to Sarah Moor {Methodism in Sheffield, p. 156).]

Wed. 4.-I was scarce come into the room where a few believers were met together when one began to tremble exceedingly, and soon after sunk to the floor. After a violent struggle she burst out into prayer, which was quickly changed into praise. She then declared, ' The Lamb of God has taken away all my sins.' She spoke many strong words to the same effect, rejoicing with joy unspeakable.

Fri. 6.-I met again with those who believe God has delivered them from the root of bitterness. Their number increases daily. I know not if fifteen or sixteen have not received the blessing this week.[ On Sunday, March 8, he preached at ley's death. See Telford's Two West End West Street.]

Mon. 9.-I set out early, and about noon preached at High Wycombe, where the dry bones began to shake again. In the afternoon I rode on to Oxford, and spent an agreeable evening with Mr. H. His openness and frankness of behavior were both pleasing and profitable. Such conversation I want; but I do not wonder it is offensive to men of nice ears.

Tues. 10.-We rode to Evesham, where I found the poor shattered society almost sunk into nothing. And no wonder, since they have been almost without help, till Mr. Alexander Mather [Born at Brechin (N.B.) in 1733, converted under Wesley's ministry in London; entered the itinerancy in 1757. He was the second President after Wesley's death. See Telford's Two West End Chapels. Pp. 19-21; E.M.P. vol. ii. pp 58-239! above, p. 93.] came. In the evening I preached in the town hall. Both at this time and at five in the morning God applied His word, and many found a desire to ' strengthen the things that remained.' I designed to have rested on Wednesday, but finding that notice had been given of my preaching at Stanley,[ This is doubtless Stanley Pontlarg in Gloucestershire, nine miles south Evesham.] we got thither, through roads almost impassable, about noon, and found more people than the house could contain; so I stood in the yard, and proclaimed free salvation to a loving, simple people. Several were in tears, and all of them so thankful that I could not repent of my labor.

The congregation at Evesham in the evening was thrice as large as the night before. Indeed many of them did not design to hear, or to let any one else hear; but they were overruled, and behaved with tolerable decency till the service was over.

March 1761

In the Midlands

Then they roared amain; but I walked straight through them, and none offered the least rudeness.

Thur. 12.-About one I preached at Redditch to a deeply serious congregation; about seven, in the room [They were still in Steelhouse Lane. But Alexander Mather came in 1760, and his work led to the 'hiring of a large building.' This was a disused ' play-house' in a court leading from Moor Street to Park Street. It was in use till 1782. See W. C. Sheldon's Early Methodism in Birmingham, p. 20.] at Birmingham, now far too small for the congregation.

Fri. 13.- Many flocked together at five, and far more than the room would contain in the evening. Perhaps the time is come for the gospel to take root even in this barren soil.

Sat. 14.-I rode to Wednesbury.

Sun. 15.-I made a shift to preach within at eight in the morning; but in the afternoon I knew not what to do, having a pain in my side and a sore throat. However, I resolved to speak as long as I could. I stood at one end of the house,[ In Meeting Street, completed and opened in 1760 (MeiA. Rec. April 25, 1901).] and the people (supposed to be eight or ten thousand) in the field adjoining. I spoke from ' I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.' When I had done speaking, my complaints were gone. At the lovefeast in the evening many, both men and women, spoke their experience in a manner which affected all that heard. One in particular said,' For seventeen or eighteen years I thought God had forgotten me. Neither I nor any under my roof could believe. But now, blessed be His name, He has taken me dfid all my house; and given me, and my wife, and our seven children, to rejoice together in God our Saviour.'

Mon. 16.-I intended to rest two or three days; but, being pressed to visit Shrewsbury, and having no other time, I rode over to-day, though upon a miserable beast. When I came in my head ached as well as my side. I found the door of the place where I was to preach [Tradition says this was No. I, Fish Street.] surrounded by a numerous mob. But they seemed met only to stare. Yet part of them came in; almost all that did (a large number) behaved quietly and seriously.[ For early Methodism in Shrewsbury see Meth. Times, Nov. 5, 1908; also W.H.S. vol. iv. pp. 217-23, where W. Phillips's Early Methodism in Shropshire (1896) is freely quoted.]

Tues. 17.-At five the congregation was large, and appeared not a little affected. The difficulty now was, how to get back,[ See W.H.S vol. vii. p. 6.] for I could not ride the horse on which I came; but this, too, was provided for. We met in the street with one who lent me his horse, which was so easy that I grew better and better till I came to Wolverhampton. None had yet preached abroad in this furious town [But see Whitefield's letter from Wolverhampton, Oct. 27, 1753: ' Last night I preached here in the dark' (Whitefield's Works, vol. in. p. 34).]; but I was resolved, with God's help, to make a trial, and ordered a table to be set in the inn-yard.[ The yard of the Angel Inn, at the north-east angle of Queen Square and Lichfield Street, is now occupied by a bank (Mtth. Rec. Feb. 13, 1902).] Such a number of wild men I have seldom seen; but they gave me no disturbance, either while I preached or when I afterwards walked through the midst of them.

About five I preached to a far larger congregation at Dudley, and all as quiet as at London. The scene is changed since the dirt and stones of this town were flying about me on every side.[ See above, vol. iii. p. 444.]

Wed. 18.-By talking with several at Wednesbury, I found God is carrying on His work here as at London. We have ground to hope one prisoner was set at full liberty under the sermon on Saturday morning; another under that on Saturday evening. One or more received remission of sins on Sunday; on Monday morning another, and on Wednesday yet another believed the blood of Jesus Christ had cleansed him from all sin. In"* the evening I could scarce think but more than one heard Him say,' I will; be thou clean!' Indeed, so wonderfully was He present till near midnight, as if He would have healed the whole congregation.

Thur. 19.-After preaching at Bilbrook I rode on to Burslem, and preached at half-hour past five, in an open place on the top of the hill, to a large and attentive congregation, though it rained almost all the time and the air was extremely cold. The next morning (being Good Friday) I did not preach till eight. But even then, as well as in the evening, the cold considerably lessened the congregation. Such is human wisdom! So small are the things which divert mankind from what might be the means of their eternal salvation!

COTTAGE PREACHING-PLACES.

1 FRANCIS WARD'S COTTAGE, BRIDGE STREET, WEDNESBURY.

2 AND 3 INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR OF JOHN CLARKE S COTTAGE AT OXWICH, IN WHICH WESLEY PREACHED MORE THAN ONCE.

March 1761

The Yorkshire and Lincolnshire Societies

Sat. 21.-About ten I preached at Biddulph,[ Wesley's host was Mr. William Stonier (or Stanier), The Hurst, Biddulph, chief trustee of Congleton chapel, a zealous local preacher, a man of wealth, who used to relate the following anecdote of Wesley (see Dyson's Hist, of Methodism in the Congleton Circuit, p. 69): The journey from The Hurst to Congleton was performed on foot. At that time the hills over which their path lay were much more wooded than now. Divine influence had attended the word spoken on the preceding evening, while a gracious effect remained in a high degree on Wesley's own mind. This was evinced by his animated conversation. Nor did the beautiful scenery through which they were passing escape his notice or fail to affect his fine sense of the beauties of nature, for when he found himself in the midst of the wooded hills and valleys he suddenly stood still, gazed upon the lovely scenery, and then, in his fine clear voice, gave out, altering the words to suit the occasion: Break forth into singing, ye trees of the wood, For Jesus is bringing Biddulph sinners to God. Quoted in W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 30.] and about six at Congleton.

Sun. 22.-About one I preached at Macclesfield, near the preaching-house.[ It could scarcely contain a hundred people (Meth.. in Macclesfield, pp. 53-4).] The congregation was large, though the wind was sharp. But it was more than doubled after the evening service, while I opened and enforced the solemn declaration, ' Him hath God exalted with His own right hand, to be a Prince and a Saviour.' In the evening I rode on to Manchester.

Mon. 23.-After preaching at five, I hastened forward, and reached Leeds about five in the evening, where I had desired all the preachers in those parts to meet me,[ This was not the annual Conference, which met in September. To this Conference of Yorkshire preachers Grims>haw was invited, but did not attend. He wrote to Wesley explaining the cause of his absence. He objected to the wild and unscriptural views on Christian Perfection which some of the preachers held. It was to correct these errors and to instruct the preachers that this special Conference was called. See below, p. 469.] and a happy meeting we had both in the evening and morning. I afterwards inquired into the state of the societies in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire. I find the work of God increases on every side, but particularly in Lincolnshire, where there has been no work like this since the time I preached at Epworth on my father's tomb.

In the afternoon I talked with several of those who believe they are saved from sin, and, after a close examination, I found reason to hope that fourteen of them were not deceived. In the evening I expounded the thirteenth chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and exhorted all to weigh themselves in that balance and see if they were not' found wanting.'[On March 24 he wrote from Leeds to Christopher Hopper ( Works, vol. xii. P305)]

Wed. 25.-I took horse early, breakfasted with Mr. Venn,[ Rev. Henry Venn, the recently appointed vicar of Huddersfield.] and about four in the afternoon came to Stockport. Finding the congregation waiting, I preached immediately, and then rode on to Manchester, where I rested on Thursday.

Fri. 27.-I rode to Bridgefield,[ In a secluded, now often visited, spot just outside the town of Glossop (Mcth. Rec. March 3, 1904).] in the midst of the Derby, shire mountains, and cried to a large congregation: ' If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink.1 And they did indeed drink in the word as the thirsty earth the showers. About six I preached at Stockport. Here I inquired after a young man who was some time since much in earnest for salvation. But it was not long before he grew quite cold, and left the society. Within a few months after he left the world, and that by his own hand! The next day I returned to Manchester.[ During this visit Wesley and Mr. Philips spent two hours with Byrom, who reports the conversation {W.M. Mag. 1863, p. 1104). He preached in Manchester on the 29th.]

Sun. 29.-We had an uncommon blessing, both morning and afternoon. In the evening I met the believers, and strongly exhorted them to ' go on unto perfection.' To many of them it seemed a new doctrine. However, they all received it in love, and a flame was kindled which I trust neither men nor devils shall ever be able to quench.

Tues. 31.-I rode to Altrincham. We had four rooms which opened into each other, but they would not near contain the congregation, so that many were obliged to stand without. I believe many were wounded, and some much comforted. Perhaps this town will not be quite so furious as it has been.

In the evening we had abundance of genteel people at Manchester while I described faith as ' the evidence of things not seen.' I left Manchester in the morning, APRIL I, in a better condition than ever I knew it before; such is the shaking, not only among the dry bones, but likewise among the living souls. About noon I preached at Little Leigh, and at Chester [See W.M. Mag. 1863, pp. 1104-6.] in the evening.

Thur. 2.-I rode over to Tattenhall, eight or nine miles from Chester.[ On April 2 he wrote to the Rev. Mr. G-----disavowing the ' nickname ' Methodist (Works, vol. xii. p. 262).] When we came the town seemed to be all in an uproar, yet when I began preaching (in the open air, the house not being large enough to contain one quarter of the congregation) none opposed or made the least disturbance, the fear of God falling upon them. I think Tattenhall will be less bitter for the time to come. Well may Satan be angry with field preaching!

April 1761

A Northern Journey

Fri, 3.-I preached about one at Mold, in Flintshire, and was again obliged to preach abroad, though the wind was exceeding rough. All were deeply attentive. I preached in the evening at Chester, and in the morning set out for Liverpool; I came thither (preaching at Warrington by the way) in the evening. The election seemed to have driven the common sort of people out of their senses. But on Sunday they were tolerably recovered, and the town looked like itself. I heard two useful sermons at our parish church,[ St. Thomas's. ] one upon ' Follow peace with all men, and holiness,' the other on ' Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.' I pity those who ' can learn nothing at church.' [On April 6 he wrote from Liverpool to the Rev. Mr. D------(Works, vol. xii. p. 264), and on the 10th to ' A Friend' on the relation of the Methodist clergy to the Ch. of Eng. (Works, vol. xiii. p. 232).]

Mon. 13.-I left them at Liverpool, a little increased in number, but very considerably in strength, being now entirely united together in judgement as well as in affection.

About noon I preached to a serious congregation at Downall Green, near Wigan, but to a far more serious one in the evening at Bolton. I find few places like this; all disputes are forgot, and the Christians do indeed love one another. When I visited the classes on Wednesday the 15th, I did not find a disorderly walker among them; no, nor a trifler. They appeared to be one and all seriously seeking salvation.

Thur. 16.-After preaching at noon, I rode to Lower Darwen, near Blackburn, where a large congregation behaved with deep seriousness. Leaving honest Mr. Grimshaw to preach in the morning [Fri. 17], I set out early, and in the evening reached a little quiet house a few miles beyond Kendal, to which, I believe, we did not come in vain. The man of the house, having been long ill, was thankful for advice with regard to his bodily disorder, and his guests appeared right willing to receive some advice with respect to their souls.

Sat. 18.-We were soon lost on the mountains, but in an hour we found a cottage and a good woman, who bade her son 1 take the galloway and guide them to the fell foot.' There we met a poor man just coming from a doctor, who, I think, had quite mistaken his case. Perhaps his meeting us may save his life. He piloted us over the next mountain, the like to which I never beheld either in Wales or Germany. As we were climbing the third a man overtook us who was going the same road. So he accompanied us till we were in a plain, level way, which in three hours brought us to Whitehaven.[ We can only surmise the exact route. It may have been from Kendal to Staveley, where there is a small inn, The Fat Lamb, which, from its age, was no doubt in existence in 1761. Thence to Ambleside, Keswick, Braithwayte (Braithwaite and Branthwaite, which he visited on the 22nd, are both in the same district), Lorton, Cockermouth. But Mr. Chris. Graham, of Kendal, suggests Windermere, Ambleside, Langdale, over Wrynose, Hard Knott, to Boot and Whitehaven-' a wild and mountainous road.' See also W.H.S. voL vi. pp. 33-4.]

Sun. i9.-I preached morning and evening at the Gins,[ Once a small village, it is now a street in Whitehaven, spelt ' Ginns.'] to far more people than the house would have contained. At one I preached in the assembly-room at Workington. The whole congregation behaved well, though I could not perceive that the greater part of them understood anything of the matter.

Wed. 22.-About noon I preached at Branthwaite, and in the evening at Lorton. Who would imagine that Deism should find its way into the heart of these enormous mountains Yet so it is. Yea, and one who once knew the love of God is a strenuous advocate for it.

Sat. 25.-As the people at Whitehaven are usually full of zeal, right or wrong, I this evening showed them the nature of Christian zeal. Perhaps some of them may now distinguish the flame of love from a fire kindled in hell.

Sun. 26.-I preached in the morning at the Gins, in the room at one, and about five at Cockermouth, on the steps of the market-house. Even the genteel hearers were decent; many of the rest seemed deeply affected. The people of the town have never been uncivil. Surely they will not always be unfruitful.

Mon. 27.-I preached at eight in the market-place at Wigton. The congregation, when I began, consisted of one woman, two boys, and three or four little girls, but in a quarter of an hour we had most of the town. I was a good deal moved at the exquisite self-sufficiency which was visible in the countenance, air, and whole deportment of a considerable part of them. This constrained me to use a very uncommon plainness of speech. They bore it well. Who knows but some may profit

Before noon we came to Solway Firth. The guide told us it was not passable, but I resolved to try, and got over well. Having lost ourselves but twice or thrice, in one of the most difficult roads I ever saw, we came to Moffat in the evening.[ For the crossing of Solway Firth see also April 15, 1753, and June 24, 1766.]

Tues. 28.-We rode partly over the mountains, partly with mountains on either hand, between which was a clear, winding river, and about four in the afternoon reached Edinburgh. Here I met Mr. Hopper, who had promised to preach in the evening, in a large room, lately an episcopal meeting-house.[ See E.M.P. vol. i. p. 211 (reprinted as Wesley's Veterans, vol. i. p. 143).]

Wed. 29.-It being extremely cold, I preached in the same room at seven. Some of the reputable hearers cried out in amaze: ' Why, this is sound doctrine! Is this he of whom Mr. Wh[itefield] used to talk so ' Talk as he will, I shall not retaliate.

I preached again in the evening, and the next day rode round by the Queen's Ferry to Dundee [Catherine Lions was one of the earliest Methodists in Dundee (Arm. Mag. 1786, p. 137).]; but, the wind being high, the boatmen could not, at least would not, pass. Nor could we pass the next day till between nine and ten. We then rode on through Montrose to Stonehaven. Here Mr. Memyss met us, and on Saturday morning brought us to his house at Aberdeen.[ ' Dr. Memyss, who had attached himself to the Methodists in Wrexhatn, settled in Aberdeen about 1747, and became a member of the congregation under the charge of the Rev. John Bisset, an evangelical minister of one of the town's churches. Soon after the. death of Mrs Bisset, in 1756, Dr. Memyss had occasion to go to London, and represented to Mr. Wesley the pressing need... for evangelical preaching in Aberdeen, and requested assistance. In response to Dr. M.'s request, Christopher Hopper, who had been with Wesley in Edinburgh on Wesley's first visit to Scotland, 1751, was sent. After forming a society in Dundee, Hopper came to Aberdeen and Peterhead. He remained in Aberdeen during the years 1759-60' (Sketch of Meth. in Aberdeen, by C. D., 1901). Dr. Memyss, when a journeyman to an apothecary in Wiexham, had visited, without fee or reward, Thomas Olivers when he was in danger of death from fever, and saved his life. (E.M.P. vol. ii. pp. 52, 82, 83, reprinted as Wesley's Veterans, vol. i. pp. 201, 235.) For an account of Wesley in Aberdeen-more caricature than sober fact-see the Scots Magazine, August 1763, quoted in W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 159.]

In the afternoon I sent to the Principal and Regent to desire leave to preach in the College Close. [ Marischal College, founded in 1593 by George, Earl Marischal, in New Aberdeen, on the north side of the Dee.] This was readily granted but, as it began to rain, I was desired to go into the hall. \ suppose this is full a hundred feet long, and seated all around. The congregation was large, notwithstanding the rain, and full as large at five in the morning.

MAY 3, Sun.-I heard two useful sermons at the kirk, one preached by the Principal of the College, the other by the Divinity Professor. A huge multitude afterwards gathered together in the College Close, and all that could hear seemed to receive the truth in love. I then added about twenty to the little society. Fair blossoms! But how many of these will bring forth fruit

Mon. 4.-We had another large congregation at five. Before noon twenty more came to me desiring to cast in their lot with us, and appearing to be cut to the heart.

About noon I took a walk to the King's College, in Old Aberdeen. It has three sides of a square, handsomely built, not unlike Queen's College in Oxford. Going up to see the hall, we found a large company of ladies, with several gentlemen. They looked and spoke to one another, after which one of the gentlemen took courage and came to me. He said: ' We came last night to the College Close, but could not hear, and should be extremely obliged if you would give us a short discourse here." I knew not what God might have to do, and so began without delay on ' God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto Himself.' I believe the word was not lost; it fell as dew on the tender grass.

In the afternoon I was walking in the library of the Marischal College when the Principal and the Divinity Professor came to me, [Principal George Campbell, author of A Dissertation on Miracles, &c. Divinity Professor Alexander Gerard, D D., author of Essay on Taste. Wesley refers to him below, Nov. i, 1787, and Works, vol. xiii. pp. 477, 478. See BosvtAVsJoumal of a Tour in the Hebrides with Dr. Johnson, Aug. 23, 1773, where Dr. Gerard and other Professors figure pi eminently in conversations with 'our Socrates.'] and the latter invited me to his lodgings, where I spent an hour very agreeably. In the evening the eagerness of the people made them ready to trample each other underfoot. It was some time before they were still enough to hear, but then they devoured every word. After preaching, Sir Archibald Grant (whom business had called to town) sent and desired to speak to me. I could not then, but promised to wait upon him, with God's leave, in my return to Edinburgh.

Tues. 5.-I accepted the Principal's invitation, and spent an hour with him at his house. I observed no stiffness at all, but the easy good-breeding of a man of sense and learning. I suppose both he and all the professors, with some of the magistrates, attended in the evening. I set all the windows open, but the hall, notwithstanding, was as hot as a bagnio. But this did not hinder either the attention of the people or the blessing of God.

Wed. 6.-We dined at Mr. Ogilvie's, one of the ministers between whom the city is divided. A more open-hearted, friendly man I know not that I ever saw. And indeed I have scarce seen such a set of ministers in any town of Great Britain or Ireland.

At half-hour after six I stood in the College Close and proclaimed Christ crucified. My voice was so strengthened that all could hear, and all were earnestly attentive. I have now ' cast1 my ' bread upon the waters'; may I ' find it again after many days'!

Thur. 7.-Leaving near ninety members in the society, I rode over to Sir A. Grant's, near Monymusk, about twenty miles north-west from Aberdeen. It lies in a fruitful and pleasant valley, much of which is owing to Sir Archibald's improvements,[ See below, June 7,1764. Sir Archibald Grant ' is said to have planted about 48,000,000 trees on the property;... he was the 6rst to engage in those agricultural improvements that may be said to have almost changed the face of the North of Scotland ' {Church and Priory of Monymusk, by the Rev. W. M. Macpherson, B.D., pp. 275, 277, quoted in Rev. D. Butler's Wesley and Whitefield in Scotland, p. 134).] who has ploughed up abundance of waste ground and planted some millions of trees. His stately old house is surrounded by gardens and rows of trees, with a clear river on one side. And about a mile from his house he has laid out a small valley into walks and gardens, on one side of which the river runs. On each side rises a steep mountain, one rocky and bare, the other covered with trees, row above row, to the very top.

About six we went to the church. It was pretty well filled with such persons as we did not look for so near the Highlands. But if we were surprised at their appearance, we were much more so at their singing. Thirty or forty sung an anthem after sermon, with such voices as well as judgement that I doubt whether they could have been excelled at any cathedral in England.

Fri. 8.-We rode to Glamis, about sixty-four measured miles, and on Saturday the pth about sixty-six more, to Edinburgh. I was tired; however, I would not disappoint the congregation, and God gave me strength according to my day.

Sun. 10.-I had designed to preach near the Infirmary, but some of the managers would not suffer it. So I preached in our room morning and evening, even to the rich and honourable. And I bear them witness they will endure plain dealing, whether they profit by it or not.

Mon. 11.-I took my leave of Edinburgh for the present. The situation of the city, on a hill shelving down on both sides, as well as to the east, with the stately castle upon a craggy rock on the west, is inexpressibly fine.[ Only the old town was as yet built. A few years later, Aug. 14, 1773, Dr. Johnson walked the streets of old Edinburgh, 'pretty perilous, and a goodj deal odoriferous' ( Tour in the Hebrides, Percy Fitzgerald's Ed. p. 540).] And the main street, so broad and finely paved, with the lofty houses on either hand (many of them seven or eight stories high), is far beyond any in Great Britain. But how can it be suffered that all manner of filth should still be thrown even into this street continually Where are the magistracy, the gentry, the nobility of the land Have they no concern for the honour of their nation How long shall the capital city of Scotland, yea, and the chief street of it, stink worse than a common sewer Will no lover of his country, or of decency and common sense, find a remedy for this

Holyrood House, at the entrance of Edinburgh, the ancient palace of the Scottish kings, is a noble structure. It was rebuilt and furnished by King Charles the Second. One side of it is a picture-gallery, wherein are pictures of all the Scottish kings and an original one of the celebrated Queen Mary. It is scarce possible for any who looks at this to think her such a monster as some have painted her, nor indeed for any who considers the circumstances of her death, equal to that of an ancient martyr.

SPECIMEN PAGE OF THE EARLIER OF TWO MANUSCRIPT HYMN-BOOKS USED BY WESLEY FOR AT LEAST FIFTEEN YEARS. THE VOLUME REVERSED FORMED \ SERMON REGISTER. (FrOW COLMAN COLLECTION.)

IV]

453

I preached in the evening at Musselburgh, and at five in the morning. Then we rode on to Haddington, where (the rain driving me in) I preached between nine and ten in Provost Dickson's parlour. About one I preached at North Berwick, a pretty large town close to the sea-shore, and at seven in the evening (the rain continuing) in the house at Dunbar.

Wed. 13.-It being a fair, mild evening, I preached near the quay to most of the inhabitants of the town, and spoke full as plain as the evening before. Every one seemed to receive it in love; probably if there was regular preaching here much good might be done.

Thur. 14.-I set out early, and preached at noon on the bowling-green at Berwick-upon-Tweed. In the evening I preached at Alnwick.[ See ahove, vol. iii. p. 362.]

Fri. 15.-Abundance of soldiers came in, on their way to Germany. Many of these attended the preaching, to whom I could not but make a particular application. And who knows but what they have now heard may stand them in stead in a day of trial

Sat. 16.-One of our friends importuned me much to give them a sermon at Warkworth. And a post-chaise came for me to the door, in which I found one waiting for me whom, in the bloom of youth, mere anguish of soul had brought to the gates of death. She told me the troubles which held her in on every side, from which she saw no way to escape. I told her ' The way lies straight before you. What you want is the pure love of God. I believe God will give it you shortly. Perhaps it is His good pleasure to make you, a poor bruised reed, the first witness here of that great salvation. Look for it just as you are, unfit, unworthy, unholy, by simple faith, every day, every hour.' She did feel the next day something she could not comprehend, and knew not what to call it. In one of the trials which used to sink her to the earth she was all calm, all peace and love, enjoying so deep a communion with God as nothing external could interrupt. Ah! Thou child of affliction, of sorrow and pain, hath Jesus found out thee also And He is able to find and bring back thy husband, as far as he is wandered out of the way.

About noon I preached at Warkworth to a congregation as quiet and attentive as that at Alnwick. How long shall we forget that God can raise the dead Were not we dead till He quickened us

A little above the town, on one side of the river, stands the remains of a magnificent castle. On the other side, toward the bottom of a steep hill, covered with wood, is an ancient chapel, with several apartments adjoining to it, hewn in the solid rock. The windows, the pillars, the communion-table, and several other parts are entire. But where are the inhabitants Gathered to their fathers, some of them, I hope, in Abraham's bosom, till rocks, and rivers, and mountains flee away, and the dead, small and great, stand before God!

Sun. 17.-I preached at eight in Alnwick, and about one at Alnmouth-a poor, barren place, where as yet there Is no fruit of all the seed which has been sown. But there may be, since many are still willing to hear.

In the evening a multitude of people and a little army of | soldiers were gathered in the market-place at Alnwick. In the morning they were to march for Germany. I hope some of them have put their armour on.

Mon. 18.-At nine I preached to a large and serious congregation at Widdrington.[ ... The tower of Widderington [sic] Mother of many a valiant son.

Then did the Alne attention claim, And Warkworth. proud of Percy's name. Marmion, Canto II. St. viii.] Thence we rode to Morpeth.[ Thomas Rankin gives an account of this service (Arm. Mag_ 1779 pp I93,194)] As it was a rainy day, they expected me to preach in the room, but, observing a large covered place in the marketplace, I went thither without delay. It was soon more than filled; and many, soldiers and others, stood on the outside, notwithstanding the rain. Why should we despair of doing good in any place because we do not see present fruit At five I preached to the honest, simple-hearted colliers at Plessey, and before sunset reached Newcastle.

Tuesday the 19th was a day of rest. In the evening God was with us of a truth, and many felt their hearts burn with fervent desire of being renewed in the whole image of God. The same flame was kindled at Gateshead Fell while I was opening and applying those words,' Every one that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as He is pure.' [He preached also on the same day at Newcastle.]

Thur. 21.-I was much struck with a story told by Ephrem Syrus. I wonder it was never translated into English. It is as follows:

My beloved brethren, I have a desire to relate to you what our brother Abraham did in his old age. This blessed man had a brother according to the flesh, who had an only child. When her father fell asleep she remained an orphan. Her friends brought her to him, being six years old. He ordered her to be placed in the outer cell: he himself abode in the inner. A little door was between them. He taught her the Psalms and the other scriptures, and watched and sang with her. And, as he lived an austere life, so did she, willingly profiting in every exercise, and laboring to excel in all virtues. The holy man often besought God for her with tears, that her heart might be fixed on God, and not entangled with the care of worldly things; for her father had left her much wealth, which by his advice she gave to the poor. And she entreated him, saying, ' Pray for me, that I may be delivered from evil thoughts, and from all the wiles and snares of the devil.' The blessed man rejoiced, seeing her good conversation, and forwardness, and tears; her lowliness, meekness, quietness of spirit, and earnest love to God. And for twenty years she thus exercised herself with him, as a fair lamb, a spotless dove.

When the twentieth year was fulfilled, the devil was mad against her, and lay in wait to get her into his net. There was a man, in name religious, but not in truth, who frequently came to consult Abraham. He saw the maid, and his heart burned within him. He lay in wait for her a whole year, till her heart was inflamed also; and, opening the door of her cell, she went out to him and consented to his will. But no sooner had she committed wickedness than she rent her clothes, smote her breast, and thought of putting an end to her own life; for she said in herself, ' Now I am dead, and I have lost all my time and all my labor, and my austerity and my tears are perished, and I have destroyed my own soul, and I have brought sorrow upon the man of God, and am become a laughing-stock to the devil: why do I live any longer

Ah me! What have I done! Ah me! from whence, how low am I fallen! How shall I be hid Where shall I go Into what pit shall I cast myself Where is the exhortation of the blessed man, Keep thy soul spotless for thy immortal Bridegroom I dare no more look up to heaven! I am lost both to God and men. I dare not approach that holy man, sinner as I am, and full of uncleanness. Were I to make such an attempt, surely fire would come out of that door and consume me. It is better for me to go where none knows me; for I am undone, and there is no salvation for me!' And, rising up, she went straight to another city and became servant at an inn.

A little before this Abraham saw a vision-a dragon, great and terrible, rising out of his place; and, coming to his cell, he found a dove, and devoured it, and then returned to his place. The holy man, coming to himself, was much troubled, and wept bitterly, and said, ' Thou, Lord, knowest all things; and Thou only knowest what this vision meaneth.' After two days he saw the same dragon again; and he came out of his place to the blessed man, and, laying his head Under Abraham's feet, burst asunder, and the dove was found alive in the dragon's belly.

Coming to himself, he called once and again, saying, ' Child, where art thou Behold, here are two days that thou hast not opened thy mouth in the praise of God.' Finding that none answered, and that she was not there, he perceived the vision related to her; and he groaned in spirit, and said, ' O Saviour of the world, bring back this , lamb into Thy fold, that my grey hairs come not down with sorrow to the grave! Lord, despise not my supplication; but send down Thy hand and take her out of the mouth of the dragon that hath devoured her!'

After a season he heard where she was, and, having learned all things concerning her, he called one of his friends, and said to him, ' Bring me a horse and the habit of a soldier.' And, having put it on, with a large cap on his head, he left his cell and rode away. Being come to the place, he alighted, and went in; and, after a time, said to the inn-keeper, ' Friend, I have heard thou hast a beautiful damsel here; call her to me, that I may rejoice with her.' Being called, she came. When the holy man saw her in her harlot's attire he was melting into tears; but he refrained himself, that she might not perceive it. After they sat down, she embraced him, and kissed his neck; and she smelled the smell of his cell, and called to mind past things; and, groaning deeply, said, ' Woe is me! What am I' The inn-keeper, being astonished, said, ' Mary, thou hast now been with us two years, and I never heard thee groan before, or heard such a word from thee. What is come to thee' She answered, ' Would I had died three years since; then I had been happy.'

Immediately Abraham said to him, ' Prepare us a supper, that we may rejoice together; for I am come from far for her sake.' After supper she said to him, ' Let us go into the chamber.' And, when they were come in, he saw a bed made ready; and he sat upon it, and said, ' Make fast the door.' She made it fast and came to him. Having taken hold of her, so that she could not run away, he took off his cap and said to her, weeping, ' My child, Mary, dost thou not know me Am not I he that brought thee up Mary, what is come to thee Who hath destroyed thee, my daughter Where are thy prayers and thy tears, thy watching and holy exercise My child, when thou hadst sinned, why didst thou not tell me, that I might have humbled myself for thee My daughter, why hast thou done this Why hast thou forsaken thy father' She remained in his hands as a lifeless stone, till he said to her with tears, ' Dost thou not speak to me, my child, Mary Dost thou not speak to me Am I not come hither for thy sake I have besought the Lord concerning thee." Till midnight he continued exhorting and comforting her. Then, coming a little to herself, she said to him, weeping, ' I cannot look at thee, for I am defiled with sin.' The blessed man replied, ' On me be thy sin; only come, let us go to our place.1 She said to him, ' If it be possible for me to repent, and if God can accept my repentance, I come, and I fall down, and kiss thy steps, wetting them with my tears, that thou hast thus had compassion on me, a forlorn wretch, and art come hither to draw me out of the mire of sin.' And, laying her head at his feet, she wept bitterly all the night; saying, ' What shall I render thee for all thy benefits'

Early in the morning he set her upon the horse, and went before her with great joy. And, being come to his place, he put her in the inner cell; where she gladly resumed her former exercise, with sackcloth and ashes, and much humiliation, with mourning, and watching, and ceaseless calling upon God: and the merciful Lord gave her a sign that He accepted her repentance, healing many that were sick through

her prayers.

Holy Abraham lived ten years after, beholding her good conversation, and blessing, and praising, and magnifying God. Then, having lived seventy years, he slept in peace. Mary survived him thirty and five years, calling upon God night and day; insomuch that all who passed by glorified God, who saveth them that were gone astray.

Among the believers, who met in the evening, God had kindled a vehement desire of His full salvation.

Inquiring how it was that, in all these parts, we have scarce one living witness of this, I constantly received, from every person, one and the same answer:' We see now, we sought it by our works; we thought it was to come gradually; we never expected to receive it in a moment, by faith, as we did justification.' What wonder is it, then, that you have been fighting all these years as one that beats the air

Fri. 22.-I earnestly exhorted all [At Newcastle.] who were sensible of their wants, and athirst for holiness, to look unto Jesus, to come to Him just as they were, and receive all His promises. And surely it will not be long before some of these also are fully saved by simple faith.

Sat. 23.-I rode over to Plessey. I was wet through both going and coming, but I did not repent of my journey; such a number gathered together, a great part of whom could rejoice in God. These were quite ripe for all the great and precious promises, which they received with all gladness.

Mon. 25.-I rode to Shields and preached in an open place to a listening multitude. Many of them followed me to South Shields, where I preached in the evening to almost double the congregation. How ripe for the gospel are these also! What is wanting but more laborers

More! Why, is there not here (as in every parish in England) a particular minister who takes care of all their souls There is one here who takes charge of all their souls; what care of them he takes is another question. It may be he neither knows nor cares whether they are going to heaven or hell. Does he ask man, woman, or child any question about it from one Christmas to the next Oh, what account will such a pastor give to the Great Shepherd in that day

Tues. 26.-I went on to Sunderland, and in the evening preached in the new house. The next evening I preached at Monk wearmouth.[ And on the 27th. On May 29 he wrote from Sunderland to Elizabeth Booth (Methodism in Sheffield, p. 159).]

Thur. 28.-About noon I preached at Biddick, and the power of God was in the midst of His people, and more eminently at Sunderland in the evening. After preaching, I met the believers and exhorted them to ' go on unto perfection.'[Rankin was present, and was cheered when Wesley read some of the letters.]

It pleased God to apply the plain words which were spoken, so that all were athirst for Him; objections vanished away, and a flame was kindled almost in every heart.

Sun. 31.-I preached again, both morning and evening, in Monkwearmouth church,[ The Rev. Thomas Goodday, the vicar, lived next the preaching-house, to which he had a private entrance, and was never absent from the services of even the plainest preacher. For the early history of Methodism in Monkwearmouth see Memoir of John Robinson (W.M. Mag. 1829, p. 793), Tyerman's Wesley, vol. ii. p. 335; and Arm. VOL. IV

Mag. 1780, p. 168. The adjoining preaching-room was given up when Whitburn Street Chapel, the oldest in Sunderland, was built in 1766.] but it would not near contain the people, many of whom were constrained to go away. After evening service I hastened to Newcastle and exhorted a willing multitude to ' stand in the ways and see' and ' ask for the old paths' and ' walk therein.' In the week following I preached at many little places round Newcastle.[ Perhaps, amongst others, in a field near Durham (E.M P. vol. i. p. 211).]

JUNE 5, Fri.-I went to Prudhoe, where there had been some jar in the society, occasioned by a few who had lately espoused and warmly defended a new opinion. I said not one word about it, but preached on ' There is joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons who need no repentance.' Afterwards, perceiving their hearts were much softened, I met the society and exhorted them to beware of bitter zeal, and to ' walk in love, as Christ also loved us.' They were ashamed before God, and (for the present at least) their contentions were at an end.

In the evening I preached at Nafferton, and the next morning rode to Winlaton, where I had appointed to be between twelve and one. They placed the stand exactly fronting the sun, which shone very warm and very bright, but almost as soon as I began the clouds rose and shadowed us till I concluded. I preached at Swalwell at five to such a congregation as was never seen there before.[ On June 7 he wrote from Newcastle to Mr. Hosmer on the perfect law (Works, vol. xii. p. 238).]

Mon. 8.-I rode to Hexham and preached at noon in an open place near the church Some expected there would be much disturbance, but there was none at all. We rode thence over the mountains to Allendale, where I had not been for several years.[ This was his last visit (Mtth. Mag. 1872, p. 7I5)-] After preaching and meeting the society I took horse again, and, crossing another chain of mountains, reached Weardale before eleven.

Tues. 9.-I preached at nine, but was obliged to stand abroad because of the multitude of people. The sun shone full in my face, but after having spent a short time in prayer I regarded it not. I then met the society, and came just in time to prevent their all turning Dissenters, which they were on the point of doing, being quite disgusted at the curate, whose life was no better than his doctrine.

At noon I preached in Teesdale. Most of the men are leadminers, who a while ago were turned out of their work for following 'this way.' By this means many of them got into far better work, and, some time after, their old master was glad to employ them again.

We had a long stage from hence to Swaledale,[ Several small societies had been formed here, numbering about forty souls. The first cause was established at Low Row, between Reeth and Gunnerside (Meth. Rec. Winter No., 1900, p. 25). The Spensleys, of Blades, above Low Row, were Wesley's hosts in Swaledale. They fitted up a cottage for preaching adjoining their house. ] where I found an earnest, loving, simple people, whom I likewise exhorted not to leave the Church, though they had not the best of ministers. I then baptized a man and two women who had been bred among the Anabaptists, and I believe all of them received such a blessing therein as they were not able to express.

Wed. 10.-I took horse at half-hour past three, and reached Barnard Castle soon after six. I preached at eight in a ground adjoining to the town. Are these the people that a few years ago [See above, p. 29.] were like roaring lions They were now quiet as lambs; nor could several showers drive them away till I concluded. In the evening I preached at Brancepeth, near Bishop Auckland. Most of the congregation, though I stood in the street, were deeply attentive; only one, a kind of gentleman, seemed displeased, but he had none to second him.

Fri. 12.-We had one of the most solemn watch-nights at Newcastle which we have had for several years.

Sat. 13.-I rode once more to Sunderland and preached, as usual, to a numerous congregation.

Sun. 14.-After Mr. Goodday had read prayers I spoke exceeding plain to as many as could crowd into the church. And out of so many that are called, will not some be chosen

About three I preached at Gateshead Fell; about five at the Garth Heads, at each place to a larger congregation than I ever saw there before. What a change is wrought in this whole country! And will it not be wrought in the whole kingdom[ On June 14 he wrote to his sister, Mrs. Martha Hall (W.M. Mag. 1846, p. 1188).]

Mon. 15.-I rode to Durham, having appointed to preach there at noon. The meadow [He preached here several times, on this occasion ' to a very large auditory.' See E.M.P. vol. i. p. 211 for Hopper's serio-comic account.] near the river-side was quite convenient, and the small rain neither disturbed me nor the congregation. In the afternoon I rode to Hartlepool, but I had much ado to preach; my strength was gone as well as my voice; and, indeed, they generally go together. Three days in a week I can preach thrice a day without hurting myself, but I had now far exceeded this, besides meeting classes and exhorting the societies. I was obliged to lie down good part of Tuesday: however, in the afternoon I preached at Cherington,[ Probably now Sheraton (Meth. Rec. Feb. 27, 1902).] and in the evening at Hartlepool again, though not without difficulty.

Wed. 17.-I rode to Stockton, where, a little before the time of preaching, my voice and strength were restored at once.[ On June 17 he wrote to ' a Member' (Works, vol. xii. p. 277).] The next evening it began to rain just as I began to preach, but it was suspended till the service was over. It then rained again till eight in the morning.

Fri. 19.-It was hard work to ride eight miles (so called) in two hours and a half, the rain beating upon us and the by-road being exceeding slippery. But we forgot all this when we came to the Grange, so greatly was God present with His people. Thence we rode to Darlington.[ John Manners names Mr. Oswald, of Darlington {Arm. Mag. 1782, p. 126). Wesley mentions Darlington before this, but he does not seem to have preached there until this date. See Meth. Rec. Aug. 16, 1906, for the beginning of the work in Darlington.]

Here we were under a difficulty again; not half the people could come in, and the rain forbade my preaching without. But at one (the hour of preaching) the rain stopped, and did not begin again till past two; so the people stood very conveniently in the yard, and many did not care to go away. When I went in they crowded to the door and windows and stayed till I took horse. At seven I preached at Yarm,[ Where he was the guest of Mr. George Merryweather (Tyerman, vol. ii. p. 408). See also above, p. 329, and Weslcyan Methodism in Darlington.] and desired one of our brethren to take my plaee in the morning.

Sat. 20.-At noon I applied those words,' Now abide faith, hope, love; but the greatest of these is love.'

This evening also it rained at Hutton Rudby till seven, the hour of preaching. But God heard the prayer, and from the time I began we had only some scattering drops. After sermon the society alone filled the new preaching-house, so mightily has the word of God prevailed since Alexander Mather labored here.[ See E.M.P. (reprinted as Wesley's Veterans, vol. ii. p. 100).]

Sun. 21.-I preached to a larger congregation than in the evening on ' Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of God!' I then rodeto Osmotherley, where the minister read prayers seriously and preached a useful sermon. After service I began in the churchyard; I believe many were wounded and many comforted. After dinner I called on Mr. Adams,[ See above, vol. iii. p. 169] who first invited me to Osmotherley. He was reading the strange account of the two missionaries who have lately made such a figure-in the newspapers. I suppose the whole account is just such another gross imposition upon the public as the man's gathering the people together to see him go into the quart bottle.[ For extracts from the public prints of 1749 re this hoax, see W.M. Mag. Feb. 1909, p. 133. 'Two men arrived at Cologne who say they come from Damascus, are 700 years old, and are sent by heaven to call men to repentance. They foretell the dissolution of the world in 1771, understand Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and Chaldaic, and are sent to Rome for further examination' {Gcnt.'s Mag. April 17, 1761). An entry of this, with other details, is in the Osmotherley Society book. James Hunton, the steward who makes the entry, adds: ' I believe it not.']. ' Men seven hundred years old!' And why not seven yards high He that can believe it let him believe it.

At five I preached at Potto, a mile from Hutton. When I began I was extremely weak, but God renewed my strength, and so applied His word that it seemed as if every one must believe it. But the Scripture cannot be broken; some seed will still fall 'by the wayside' and some 'on stony ground.'

Mon. 22.-I spoke, one by one, to the society at Hutton Rudby. They were about eighty in number, of whom near seventy were believers and sixteen (probably) renewed in love. Here were two bands of children, one of boys and one of girls, most of whom were walking in the light. Four of those who seemed to be saved from sin were of one family, and all of them walked holy and unblameable, adorning the doctrine of God their Saviour.

At eleven I preached once more, though in great weakness of body, and met the stewards of all the societies. I then rode to Stokesley, and, having examined the little society, went on for Guisborough.[ For extracts from the public prints of 1749 re this hoax, see W.M. Mag. Feb. 1909, p. 133. 'Two men arrived at Cologne who say they come from Damascus, are 700 years old, and are sent by heaven to call men to repentance. They foretell the dissolution of the world in 1771, understand Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and Chaldaic, and are sent to Rome for further examination' {Gcnt.'s Mag. April 17, 1761). An entry of this, with other details, is in the Osmotherley Society book. James Hunton, the steward who makes the entry, adds: ' I believe it not.'] The sun was burning hot, but in a quarter of an hour a cloud interposed, and he troubled us no more. I was desired by a gentleman of the town to preach in the marketplace, and there a table was placed for me, but it was in a bad neighborhood, for there was so vehement a stench of stinking fish as was ready to suffocate me, and the people roared like the waves of the sea; but the voice of the Lord was mightier, and in a few minutes the whole multitude was still, and seriously attended while I proclaimed ' Jesus Christ, made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.'

Tues. 23.-I began about five near the same place, and had a great part of the same audience; yet they were not the same. The change might easily be read in their countenance. When we took horse, and just faced the sun, it was hard work for man' and beast; but about eight the wind shifted, and, blowing in our face, kept us cool till we came to Whitby.

In the evening I preached on the top of the hill, to which you ascend by a hundred, ninety, and one steps. The congregation was exceeding large, and ninety-nine in a hundred were attentive. When I began the sun shone full in my face; but he was soon clouded, and shone no more till I had done.

After meeting the society I talked with a sensible woman whose experience seemed peculiar. She said: ' A few days before Easter last I was deeply convinced of sin; and in Easter week I knew my sins were forgiven, and was filled with "joy and peace in believing." But in about eighteen days I was convinced, in a dream, of the necessity of a higher salvation; and I mourned day and night, in agony of desire to be thoroughly sanctified, till, on the twenty-third day after my justification, I found a total change, together with a clear witness that the blood of Jesus had cleansed me from all unrighteousness.'

Wed. 24.-I walked round the old Abbey, which, both with regard to its size (being, I judge, a hundred yards long), and the workmanship of it, is one of the finest, if not the finest, ruin in the kingdom.[ Some of the arches fell afterwards: so it is much smaller now than when Wesley saw it.] Hence we rode to Robin Hood's Bay, where I preached at six in the Lower Street, near the quay. In the midst of the sermon a large cat, frightened out of a chamber, leaped down upon a woman's head, and ran over the heads or shoulders of many more; but none of them moved or cried out, any more than if it had been a butterfly.

Thur. 25.-I had a pleasant ride to Scarborough, the wind tempering the heat of the sun. I had designed to preach abroad in the evening; but the thunder, lightning, and rain prevented. However, I stood on a balcony, and several hundreds of people stood below; and, notwithstanding the heavy rain, would not stir till I concluded.

Fri. 26.-I rode to Hull, and had there also the comfort of finding some witnesses of the great salvation. I was constrained to leave them early in the morning on Saturday the 27th. At seven I preached in Beverley; about one in Pocklington; and at York,[ In Peaseholme Green Chapel. ] in the evening, to the far genteelest audience I have had since I left Edinburgh.

Mon. 29.-I met the classes, and found many therein who were much alive to God; but many others were utterly dead, which sufficiently accounts for the society's not increasing.[ From the old society-books we learn that the seat-rents amounted to 8 a year, the monthly collections to 5s. 8d. each, and the class-moneys to 6s. 6d. weekly. The members numbered eighty.(Tyerman's Wesley, vol. ii. p. 410.)]

July 1761.1

An 'Execrable Villany'

JULY I, Wed.-The stewards met from the societies in the country. In the evening we all wrestled with God for the revival of His work. Many found their hearts much enlarged herein, and had confidence He would answer the prayer.

Thur. 2.-I set out early for North Cave, twenty computed miles from York. I preached there at nine to a deeply serious congregation, and was much refreshed. At two I preached to such another congregation at Thorpe, and concluded the day by preaching and meeting the society at Pocklington.

Fri. 3.-We returned to York, where I was desired to call upon a poor prisoner in the Castle. I had formerly occasion to take notice of a hideous monster called a Chancery Bill; I now saw the fellow to it, called a Declaration. The plain fact was this. Some time since a man who lived near Yarm assisted others in running some brandy. His share was worth near four pounds. After he had wholly left off that bad work, and was following his own business, that of a weaver, he was arrested and sent to York jail; and, not long after, comes down a Declaration ' that Jac. Wh------had landed a vessel, laded with

brandy and Geneva, at the port of London and sold them there, whereby he was indebted to His Majesty five hundred and seventy-seven pounds and upwards.1 And, to tell this worthy story, the lawyer takes up thirteen or fourteen sheets of treble stamped paper.

O England, England! will this reproach never be rolled away from thee Is there anything like this to be found, either among Papists, Turks, or heathens In the name of truth, justice, mercy, and common sense, I ask: (i) Why do men lie for lying sake Is it only to keep their hands in What need, else, of saying it was the port of London, when every one knew the brandy was landed above three hundred miles from thence What a monstrous contempt of truth does this show, or rather hatred to it! (2) Where is the justice of swelling four pounds into five hundred and seventy-seven (3) Where is the common sense of taking up fourteen sheets to tell a story that may be told in ten lines (4) Where is the mercy of thus grinding the face of the poor Thus sucking the blood of a poor, beggared prisoner Would not this be execrable villainy if the paper and writing together were only sixpence a sheet, when they have stripped him already of his little all, and not left him fourteen groats in the world

Sun. 5.-Believing one hindrance of the work of God in York was the neglect of field-preaching, I preached this morning, at eight, in an open place near the city walls. Abundance of people ran together, most of whom were deeply attentive. One or two only were angry, and threw a few stones; but it was labor lost, for none regarded them.

Mon. 6.-I rode to Tadcaster, and preached within, the rain not suffering us to be abroad, as I intended. In the evening I preached at Otley,[ Where the Ritchie family lived.] and afterwards talked with many of the society. There is reason to believe that ten or twelve of these are filled with the love of God. I found one or two more the next day at Fewston, a few miles north of Otley (where I preached at noon), whom God had raised up to witness the same good confession. And, indeed, the whole congregation seemed just ripe for receiving all the promises.[ On July 7 he wrote an admonitory letter to Alexander Coates from Otley (Works, vol. xii. p. 239). For Coates see Atmore's Memorial, p. 75.]

Wed. 8.-I rode to Knaresborough, where it was expected we should not meet with so friendly a reception; but the Lord is King. Our own house being too small, I preached in the assembly-room. Most of the people looked wild enough when they came in; but they were tame before they went out, and behaved as decently and seriously as the congregation at Otley.

Indeed, the mob never was so furious here as they were formerly at Otley, where the good magistrates directed, ' Do what you will to them, so you break no bones.' But may not a man cut his neighbor's throat without breaking his bones

The remaining part of this week I preached at Guiseley, Bingley, and Keighley.

Sun. 12.-I had appointed to be at Haworth; but the church would not near contain the people who came from all sides; however, Mr. Grimshaw had provided for this by fixing a scaffold on the outside of one of the windows, through which

I went after prayers, and the people likewise all went out into the churchyard. The afternoon congregation was larger still. What has God wrought in the midst of those rough mountains!

Mon. 13.-At five I preached on the manner of waiting for ' perfect love'; the rather to satisfy Mr. Grimshaw, whom many had labored to puzzle and perplex about it.[ Grimshaw had written Wesley apologizing for not attending the Leeds Conference, and stating the two most material points that threatened to sever his ' happy relation' with the Methodist connexion-' imputed righteousness ' and ' Christian Perfection.' On both points, so far as Wesley and the Conference were concerned, he had received satisfaction. ' Sinless perfection,' a term used by some of the preachers but never by Wesley, Grimshaw said, was ' a grating term-even to those who are desirous to be truly holy in heart and life.' He pleads against 'strange, fulsome, offensive, unscriptural expressions and representations.' But he declares his determination to continue in close connexion with Wesley even unto death; ' and,' he adds,' to be as useful as I am able, or is consistent with my parochial and other indispensable obligations; chiefly in this round [circuit] and at times abroad." (Whitehead's Life of Wesley, vol. ii. pp. 291-3.) See above, p. 419.] So once more their bad labor was lost, and we were more united both in heart and judgement than ever.

At noon I preached in Colne, once inaccessible to the gospel; but now the yard I was in would not contain the people. I believe I might have preached at the Cross without

the least interruption.

About five I preached at Padiham, another place eminent for all manner of wickedness. The multitude of people obliged me to stand in the yard of the preaching-house.[ For the ' stealthy' building of this in 1758 see B. Moore's Burnley Methodism,

pp. 20, 21. It is now a dwelling-house. John and Charles Wesley and William

Grimshaw were among the original trustees.] Over against me, at a little distance, sat some of the most impudent women I ever saw. Yet I am not sure that God did not reach their hearts; for

They roared, and would have blushed, if capable of shame.[ Altered from Samuel Wesley junr.'s Battle oj the Sexes, stanza xxv.]

In the morning I preeched at Bentley Wood Green [Mr. W. Lightfoot Bunting, of Crawshawbooth, queries this place-name. He has never heard of it. He also speaks of an Ewood near Ramsbottom.] on ' Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.' Mr. G[rimshaw] afterwards told me that this perfection he firmly believed and daily prayed for, namely, the love of God and man producing all those fruits which are described in our Lord's Sermon upon the Mount.

About noon I preached at Bacup, a village in Rossendale. The new preaching-house is large, but not large enough to contain the congregation. Soon after five I preached at Heptonstall. The society here had been greatly hurt by two leaders getting into new opinions. One of them fell upon me directly for ' denying the righteousness of Christ.' On this we discoursed about an hour. The issue was, one of them was quite convinced, and the other (to my no small satisfaction) desired me to put a new leader in his place.

Wed. 15.-About seven I preached at Ewood, and about noon at Halifax. New opinions had done harm here also; but at this time all was quiet. I rode over to Bradford in the afternoon, where I found an Anabaptist teacher [The Rev. W. Crabtree, minister of the General Baptist Church, Scruton (Old Bradford, p 64). He was a rigid Calvinist, and stoutly opposed the Arminian interpretation of Holy Scripture. To his own subsequent regret, he was drawn into a public controversy with Wesley's preachers in the town. He claimed the victory and actually captured one of his opponents; but this, even in his opinion, was no compensation for the bitterness engendered.] had perplexed and unsettled the minds of several; but they are now less ignorant of Satan's devices.[ On July 16 he preached at Bradford, and wrote to Blackwell (Works, vol. xii.

p. 189), alluding to the approaching wedding and Coronation of George III. The Rev. Henry Venn, vicar of Huddersfield, had spent the previous evening with him. A ' tender point' had arisen in Huddersfield. ' Where there is a gospel ministry already, we do not desire to preach; but whether we can leave off preaching because such a one comes after is another question, especially when those who were awakened and convinced by us beg and require the continuance of our assistance.' See John Pawson in E.M.P. vol. iv. p. 34.]

Fri. 17.-I rode to Birstall, and was much comforted to find many of our first children in this county who are not yet weary of the good old way. May they continue therein unto the day of the Lord Jesus!

Sat. 18.-At one I preached at South Royd. The good people had placed the stand so that the sun, which was very hot, shone upon my head, and the wind, which was very cold, blew in my neck. But it was all one: I was on my Master's business; and great was our rejoicing in Him.

Sun. 19.-I preached in Birstall room at eight. At one we had thousands, the greatest part of whom were persons ' fearing God and working righteousness.' I rode thence to Leeds, in order to preach a funeral sermon for Mary Shent, who, after many severe conflicts, died in great peace. It was one of the largest congregations which has been seen at Leeds; to whom I spoke very plain from part of the Gospel for the day,' Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou mayest be no longer

steward."

I hastened back to the lovefeast at Birstall.[ See Stamp's Methodism in Bradford, p. 42.] It was the first of the kind which had been there. Many were surprised when I told them,' The very design of a lovefeast is free and familiar conversation, in which every man, yea, and woman, has liberty to speak whatever may be to the glory of God.' Several then did speak, and not in vain; the flame ran from heart to heart, especially while one was declaring, with all simplicity, the manner wherein God, during the morning sermon (on those words,' I will, be thou clean,') had set her soul at full liberty. Two men also spoke to the same effect; and two others who had found peace with God. We then joyfully poured out our souls before God, and praised Him for His marvellous works.

Mon. 20.-I came to a full explanation with that good man Mr. V[enn].[ Writing to Blackwell on August 15, 1761 (Works, vol. xii. p. 190), he says: ' We have amicably compromised the affair of preaching. He is well pleased that the preachers should come once a month.] Lord, if I must dispute, let it be with the children of the devil! Let me be at peace with Thy children!

On Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday I preached at the neighboring towns.

Fri. 24.-In speaking from those words,' In many things we offend all,' I observed (i) as long as we live, our soul is connected with the body; (2) as long as it is thus connected it cannot think but by the help of bodily organs; (3) as long as these organs are imperfect we are liable to mistakes, both speculative and practical; (4) yea, and a mistake may occasion my loving a good man less than I ought; which is a defective, that is, a wrong temper; (5) for all these we need the atoning blood, as indeed for every defect or omission. Therefore (6) all men have need to say daily,' Forgive us our trespasses.'

About one I preached at Bramley, where Jonas Rushford, about fourteen years old, gave me the following relation:

About this time last year I was desired by two of our neighbors to go with them to Mr. Crowther's at Skipton, who would not speak to them, about a man that had been missing twenty days, but bid them bring a boy twelve or thirteen years old. When we came in, he stood reading a book. He put me into a bed, with a looking-glass in my hand, and covered me all over. Then he asked me whom I had a mind to see; and I said, ' My mother.' I presently saw her with a lock of wool in her hand, standing just in the place, and the clothes she was in, as she told me afterwards. Then he bid me look again for the man that was missing, who was one of our neighbors. And I looked and saw him riding towards Idle, but he was very drunk; and he stopped at the alehouse and drank two pints more, and he pulled out a guinea to change. Two men stood by, a big man and a little man; and they went on before him, and got two hedge-stakes; and when he came up, on Windle Common, at the top of the hill, they pulled him off his horse, and killed h* n, and threw him into a coal-pit. And I saw it all as plain as if I was close to them. And if I saw the men, I should know them again.

We went back to Bradford that night; and the next day I went with our neighbors and showed them the spot where he was killed, and the pit he was thrown into; and a man went down and brought him up. And it was as I had told them: his handkerchief was tied about his mouth and fastened behind his neck.

Is it improbable only, or flatly impossible, when all the circumstances are considered, that this should all be pure fiction They that can believe this may believe a man's getting into a bottle.[ See above, p. 464. One of his difficulties was the credulity of the people.]

From Bramley I rode to Kippax.[ Mrs. Medhurst, Lady Huntingdon's friend, lived here: hence, probably, the presence 'jf thrre clergymen. The vicar of Kippax, the Rev. Edward Buckley, was favourable to Methodism and helped to provide a society-house at Pontefract. See Meth. Rec. Dec. 17, 1908 (article on Castleford Methodism).]Mr. Venn came a little after we were gone 'Into the church. Mr. Romaine read prayers. I preached on ' Cnrist crucified, to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks foolishness.' Oh why should they who agree in this great point fall out about smaller things

Sat. 2$.-About one I preached at Seacroft, and found several who believed God had saved them from sin. In the evening I talked with twelve or fourteen of these particularly; but I found not one who presumed to say that he did not need the atoning blood: nor could I hear of any more than two persons that ever spoke in this manner; and these were soon after, for that reason, expelled out of Otley society.

Sun. 26.-I preached at seven on ' Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean.' And oh what a flame did God kindle! Many were ' on fire to be dissolved in love.'

About one I preached to the usual congregation at Birstall. What a work is God working here also! Six in one class have, within this week, found peace with God; two this morning in meeting the class. While I was praying on Sunday evening that God would give us a token for good, James Eastwood [He appears to have entered the itinerancy for a year or two. See Everett's Methodism in Sheffield, p. 186.] was set at full liberty; as were William Wilson and Elizabeth his wife before, and Martha his daughter, with Agnes Gooddel, on the Wednesday after. To these were added Joseph Newsarn, and Richard Hellewell, sixteen years of age. So that the oldest of our believers now cry out,' We never saw it before on this

fashion!'

Mon. 27.-I preached at Staincross about eleven; about five at Barley Hall [For Barley Hall see W.H.S. vol. v. p. 97; also above, vo iii. p. 25. 1 Derwent and the High Tor.]; the next morning at Sheffield. In the afternoon I rode on to Matlock Bath. The valley which reaches from the town to the bath is pleasant beyond expression. In the bottom of this runs a little river, close to which a mountain rises, almost perpendicular, to an enormous height, part covered with green, part with ragged and naked rocks.3 On the other side, the mountain rises gradually, with tufts of trees here and there. The brow on both sides is fringed with trees, which seem to answer each other.

Many of our friends were come from various parts. At six I preached standing under the hollow of a rock, on one side of a small plain, on the other side of which was a tall mountain. There were many well-dressed hearers, this being the high season, and all of them behaved well; but as I walked back, a gentleman-like man asked me, ' Why do you talk thus of faith Stuff, nonsense!' Upon inquiry, I found he was an eminent deist. What, has the plague crept into the Peak of Derbyshire[ Cf. above, p. 448 (April 22).]

Wed. 29.-I preached at five near the Bath,[ Matlock Bath.] in Woodseats at two, and in the evening at the end of the house in Sheffield, to thrice as many people as it would have contained. Thursday and Friday I preached at Rotherham in the shell of the new house, which is an octagon.[ It cost ^235 i6s. 3|rf.; the subscriptions amounted to 68 14*., of which 20 was given by Valentine Radley, a currier. Tyerman tells an amusing story, on the authority of ' a manuscript,' of an ass driven into the chapel by the rabble. The creature stood in the aisle gazing up into Wesley's face until the sermon closed, and then quietly walked away. See Rev. S. J. Russell's Methodism in Rotherham, pp. 20 and 21; Meth. Recorder, Jan. 30, 1902, and below, p. 487.] Pity our houses, where the ground will admit of it, should be built in any other form. The congregation was larger than ever; the society well united, and much alive to God.

AUG. i, Sat,- I rode to Clay worth, and, after preaching, labored all I could to reconcile two brothers, who had long been quarrelling about their inheritance; but it was labor lost. Indeed, the reason of the thing was clear, but passion is ever too hard for reason.

Hence I went on to Misterton, and, both in the evening and morning, spoke to a lifeless, money-getting people in a sharper manner than ever I did before, and (I heard afterward) with good effect.

Sun. 2.-I had the satisfaction of hearing Mr. Madan [For a description of Mr. Madan's preaching see Life of the C. of Huntingdon, vol. i. p. 167.] preach an excellent sermon at Haxey. At two I preached at Westwood Side to the largest congregation I ever saw in the Isle of Axholme,[ The isle is about seventeen miles in length and five in breadth. It contains eight parishes, with about thirty hamlets. It is now only an island in name, though once surrounded by four rivers.] and to nearly the same at Epworth Cross as soon as the church service was ended.[ On Monday the 3rd he preached at North Scarle.] After spending two days here, on Wednesday the 5th I preached about nine at Ferry and then rode on to Gainsborough. I preached in the old hall [See W.H.S. vol. iv. p. 177, and vol. vi. p. 67; also above, p. 343.] to a mixed multitude, part civil, part rude as bears. We rode home through heavy rain, joined with much thunder and lightning, part of which was j'ust over our heads. But ' the Lord sitteth above the water-floods.' So we came safe, only very wet, to Epworth.

Thur. 6.-I preached about nine at Hatfield Woodhouse, and about one at Sykehouse to far the largest congregation which has been seen there for many years. Boast who will that Methodism (the revival of true religion) is just coming to nothing; we know better things, and are thankful to God for its continual increase.

Sat. 8.-I preached at Winterton to such a congregation as I suppose never met there before.[ The Rev. Canon J. T. Fowler, of Durham University, recorded this service on a stone tablet affixed to the cottage of John Glover, in Winterton, North Lincolnshire, under whose window Wesley preached. Mr. Fowler's grandfather was a class-leader in the village- an ingenious and laborious draughtsman and engraver whose work introduced him to the Scotch and English Universities and to the Court. See W.H.S. vol. i. p. 85 and (illustrated) vol. viii, p. 129; Meth. Mag. 1834, p. 312. The deed of the first Methodist preaching-house in Barton-on-Humber was signed by William Fowler and by the father of Richard Watson (W.H.S. vol. i. P139)] From thence we rode on to Barrow, where the mob was in readiness to receive us; but their hearts failed, so they gave only two or three huzzas and let us pass by unmolested.

As soon as I came out to preach we had another huzza; but, as more and more of the angry ones came within hearing they lost all their fierceness and sank into calmness and attention. So I concluded my discourse with quietness and satisfaction. In the evening I preached at Grimsby, where I spent Sunday and Monday.

Tues. 11.-I preached at two in Ludborough; in the evening at Elkington. The next morning we rode to Horncastle, where Satan's children had threatened terrible things; but they could go no farther than to give one feeble shout as we entered into the town. As the house would not contain the congregation, I preached on the outside of it, and there was no disturbance. Indeed, a silly, pert man spoke twice or thrice, but none regarded him.

About one I preached at Sibsey, on the edge of the Fens. There were a few wild colts here also, but all the rest (and they were not a few) were serious and deeply attentive. So were most of the congregation even at Boston, though much astonished, as not being used to field-preaching.

Thur. 13.-I took a walk through the town. I think it is not much smaller than Leeds, but in general it is far better built. The church is indeed a fine building. It is larger, loftier, nay, and rather more lightsome than even St. Peter's at Norwich, and the steeple is, I suppose, the highest tower in England, nor less remarkable for the architecture than the height.[ Boston (anciently St. Botolph's town) church is said to be the third largest in England The tower, 282 ft. in height, with octagonal lantern, is a well-known landmark for mariners in the treacherous waters of the Wash, and is said to have been built in imitation of that of Antwerp Cathedral. Wesley ascended it on June 16, 1780. The ascent is by 364 steps. Here Foxe (the martyrologist) was born in 1516.] The congregation in the evening was far more numerous than the day before, and I trust God fixed the arrows of conviction in not a few of their hearts.

We went forward after preaching at a friend's house about nine miles from Boston.

Fri. 14.-We rode to Billingford, and on Saturday to Norwich.[ On Aug. 15 he wrote from Norwich to Blackwell referring to his interview and satisfactory discussion with Mr. Venn (Works, vol. xii. p. 190).] After spending a few days here and a few more at Yarmouth and Colchester, on Saturday the 22nd I returned to London.

I found the work of God swiftly increasing here. The congregations in every place were larger than they had been for several years. Many were from day to day convinced of sin; many found peace with God; many backsliders were healed, yea, filled with joy unspeakable; and many believers entered into such a rest as it had not before entered into their hearts to conceive. Meantime, the enemy was not wanting in his endeavors to sow tares among the good seed. I saw this clearly, but durst not use violence, lest in plucking up the tares I should root up the wheat also.

SEPT. I, Tues.-Our Conference began,[ The eighteenth Conference. Minutes seem to have been taken by Thomas Johnson and John Jones, but both versions are lost. John Manners, writing to Merryweather, of Yarm, describes it as 'the most satisfactory and solemn conference' held for several years. Whitefield and other clergy came several times; but more interesting to him than the Conference was the 'glorious work in London," where ' many scores praise God from Monday morning till Saturday night.' Charles Wesley, who was not present, received a letter from his brother (written on the 8th) with ' a secret.1 ' I do not at all think that the work will ever be destroyed, Church or no Church.' He ends with a pathetic appeal for liberty of conscience, and with love, as usual, to ' Sally' (Tyerman's Life of Wesley, vol. ii. p. 416; Works, vol. xii. p. 121). On Sept. 8 he wrote to Mr. Lowes at the Orphan House (W.H.S. vol. ii. p. 125). On Sept. 27 he preached at Kingswood, on Oct. I at Bristol, on the 3rd at Kingswood and Bristol, 7th at Shepton Mallet, 9th and nth at Kingswood, I2th at Bradford, ith at Winterbourne, i6th again at Winterbourne and at Westbury, and on the i8th at Bristol.] and ended on Saturday.

After spending a fortnight more in London,[ On Sept 15 he preached at Deptford] and guarding both the preachers and people against running into extremes on the one hand or the other, on Sunday the 2Oth, at night, I took the machine, and on Monday the 21st came to Bristol.[ And preached there and at Kingswood the same day.]