THE 

PRINCIPLES  OF  A  METHODIST 

FARTHER  EXPLAINED: 

OCCASIONED  BT 

THE  REV.  MR.  CHURCH'S  SECOND  LETTER  TO  MR.  WESLEY. 

IN  A  SECOND  LETTER  TO  THAT  GENTLEMAN 


Reverend  Sir, — 1 .  At  the  lime  that  I  was  reading  your  former  letter, 
I  expected  to  hear  from  you  again.  And  I  was  not  displeased  with  the 
expectation ;  believing  it  would  give  me  a  fresh  opportunity  of  weighing 
the  sentiments  I  might  have  too  lightly  espoused^  and  the  actions  which 
perhaps  I  had  not  enough  considered.  Viewing  things  in  this  light,  I 
•cannot  but  esteem  you,  not  an  enemy,  but  a  friend ;  and  one,  in  some 
respects,  better  qualified  to  do  me  real  service  than  those  whom  the 
world  accounts  so ;  who  may  be  hindered  by  their  prejudice  in  my 
favour,  either  from  observing  what  is  reprovable,  or  from  using  thai 
freedom  and  plainness  of  speech  which  are  requisite  to  convince  me  of  it. 

2.  It  is,  at  least,  as  much  with  a  view  to  learn  myself,  as  to  show 
others  (what  I  think)  the  truth,  that  I  intend  to  set  down  a  few  reflections 
on  some  parts  of  the  tract  you  have  lately  published.  I  say  some  parts; 
for  it  is  not  my  design  to  answer  every  sentence  in  this,  any  more 
than  in  the  former.  Many  things  I  pass  over,  because  I  think  them 
true ;  many  more,  because  I  think  them  not  material ;  and  some,  be- 
cause I  am  determined  not  to  engage  in  a  useless,  if  not  hurtful,  con- 
troversy. 

3.  Fear,  indeed,  is  one  cause  of  my  declining  this ;  fear,  as  I  said 
elsewhere,  (in  the  preface  to  the  answer  to  Mr.  Tucker,)  not  of  my 
adversary,  but  of  myself.  I  fear  my  own  spirit,  lest  **  I  fall  where  many 
mightier  have  been  slain."  I  never  knew  one  (or  but  one)  man  write 
controversy  with  what  I  thought  a  right  spirit  Every  disputant  seems 
to  think,  as  every  soldier,  that  he  may  hurt  his  opponent  as  much  as  he 
can ;  nay.  that  he  ought  to  do  his  worst  to  him,  or  he  cannot  make  the 
best  of  his  own  cause ;  that  so  he  do  not  belie,  or  wilfully  misrepresent, 
him,  he  must  expose  him  as  much  as  he  is  able.  It  is  enough,  we  sup- 
pose, if  we  do  not  show  heat  or  passion  against  our  adversary.  But 
not  to  despise  him,  or  endeavour  to  make  others  do  so,  is  quite  a  work 
of  supererogation. 

4.  But  ought  these  things  to  be  so?  (I  speak  on  the  Christian 
scheme. )  Ought  we  not  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves  ?  And 
docs  a  man  cease  to  be  our  neighbour,  because  he  is  of  a  different 
opinion  7  nay,  and  declares  himself  so  to  be  1  Ought  we  not,  for  all 
this,  to  do  to  him  as  we  would  he  should  do  to  us  1  But  do  we  our- 
selves love  to  be  exposed,  or  set  in  the  worst  light  ?  Would  we  willingly 
be  treated  with  contempt?  If  not,  why  do  we  treat  others  thus  ?  And 
yei^  who  scruples  it?  Who  does  not  hit  every  blot  he  can,  however 
foreign  to  the  merits  of  the  cause?    Who,  in  controversy,  casts  the 


FmniciPLxa  oy  a  mbtbodist  farther  explained.        993 

mantie  of  Ioto  oyer  the  nakedness  of  his  brother?  Who  keeps  steadily 
and  uniformly  to  the  question,  without  ever  striking  at  the  person? 
Who  shows  in  every  sentence  that  he  loves  his  brother  only  less  than, 
the  truth? 

5.  I  fear  neither  you  nor  I  have  attained  to  this.  I  believe  brotherly 
love  might  have  found  a  better  construction  than  that  of  unfairness,  art, 
or  disingenuity,  to  have  put  either  on  my  not  answering  every  part  of 
jour  book,  (a  thing  which  never  once  entered  my  thoughts,)  or  on  my 
not  reciting  all  the  words  of  those  parts  which  I  did  answer.  I  cannot 
yet  perceive  any  blame  herein.  I  still  account  it  fair  and  ingenuous  to 
pass  over  both  what  I  beUeve  is  right,  and  what  I  believe  is  not  danger- 
ously wrong.  Neither  can  I  see  any  disingenuity  at  all  in  quoting  only 
that  part  of  any  sentence,  against  which  I  conceive^  the  objection  Ues ; 
nor  in  abridging  any  part  of  any  treatise  to  which  I  reply,  whether  in 
the  author's  or  in  my  own  words. 

6*  If,  indeed,  it  were  so  abridged  as  to  alter  the  sense,  this  would  be 
unfair.  And  if  this  were  designedly  done,  it  would  be  artful  and  disin- 
genuous. But  I  am  not  conscious  of  having  done  this  at  all ;  although 
you  speak  as  if  I  had  done  it  a  thousand  times.  And  yet  I  cannot 
undertake  now  either  to  transcribe  your  whole  book,  or  every  page  or 
paragraph  which  I  answer.  But  I  must  generally  abridge  before  J 
reply;  and  that  not  only  to  save  time,  (of  which  I  have  none  to  spare,) 
but  often  to  make  the  argument  clearer,  which  is  best  understood  when 
couched  in  few  words. 

7.  You  complain  also  of  my  mentioning  all  at  once  sentences  which 
you  placed  at  a  distance  from  each  other.  I  do  so ;  and  I  think  it  quite 
fair  and  ingenuous  to  lay  togetlier  what  was  before  scattered  abroad.  * 
For  instance :  you  now  speak  of  the  conditions  of  justification,  in  the 
eighteenth  and  following  pages;  again,  from  the  eighty-ninth  to  the 
hundred  and  second ;  and  yet  again,  in  the  hundred  and  twenty-seventh 
page.  Now,  I  have  not  leisure  to  follow  you  to  and  fro.  Therefor^ 
what  I  say  on  one  head,  I  set  in  one  place. 

I.  1.  This  premised,  I  come  to  the  letter  itself.  I  begin,  as  before, 
with  the  case  of  the  Moravians ;  of  whom  you  say,  **  I  collected  toge- 
ther the  character  which  you  had  given  of  these  men ;  the  errors  and 
vices  which  you  had  charged  upon  them,  and  the  mischiefs — they  had 
done  among  your  followers.  And  I  proved  that,  in  seveml  respects, 
you  had  been  the  occasion  of  this  mischief;  and  are  therefore,  in  some 
measure,  accountable  for  it.  Let  us  see  what  answer  you  give  to  alf 
this. 

"  *  With  regard  to  the  denying  degrees  in  iiiith,  you  mentioned,  that 
the  Moravian  Church  was  cleared  from  this  mistake.'  But  did  you  not 
mention  this  as  one  of  the  tenets  of  the  Moravians  ?  Do  you  not  say,  that 
you  '  could  not  agree  with  Mr.  Spangenberg,  that  none  has  any  faith  so 
•  long  as  he  is  liable  to  any  doubt  or  fear  ?'  Do  you  not  represent  Mr. 
Molther,  and  other  Moravians  in  England,  as  teaching  the  same  ?  In 
short,  I  have  not  charged  the  Moravian  Church  with  any  thing;  but  only 
repeat  after  you.  And  if  you  have  accused  Ihcm  when  you  knew  them 
to  be  guiltless,  you  must  bear  the  blame. 

"  *  They  do  use  the  ordinances  of  God  with  reverence  and  godly  fear.' 
You  have  charged  Mr.  Spangenberg  and  Mr.  Molther  with  teaching  that 
we  ought  to  abstain  from  them.    And  the  same  you  say  in  general  of  the 


/ 
294      '  PRINCIPLES  OP  A  XBTBODMT 

Moravian  brethren,  in  your  letter  to  them.  *  But  Mr.  Molther  was  quick- 
ly after  recalled  into  Germany.'  This  might  be  on  other  accounts.  You 
do  not  say  it  was  out  of  any  dislike  of  his  doctrines  or  proceedings.  Nor 
indeed  can  you,  consistently  with  your  next  words:  *  The  great  fault  of 
the  Moravian  Church  seems  to  lie,  in  not  openly  disclaiming  all  he  had 
said ;  which,  in  all  probability,  they  would  have  done,  had  they  not  lean 
ed  to  the  same  opinion.' 

"  You  *  never  knew  but  one  of  the  Moravian  Church  affirm,  that  a 
believer  does  not  grow  in  holiness.'  But  who  was  this.^  No  less  a  person 
than  Count  Zinzendorf,  their  great  bishop  and  patron,  whose  authority 
is  very  high,  all  in  all  with  them,  and  to  whom  you  think  they  pay  too 
much  regard."    {Second  Letter^  p.  79.) 

2.  This  is  the  whole  of  your  reply  to  this  part  of  my  answer.  I 
will  now  consider  it,  part  by  part 

First  '*  With  regard  to  the  denying  degrees  in  faith,  yon  mentioned, 
*  that  the  Moravian  Church  was  cleared  from  this  mistake.'  But  did 
you  not  mention  this  as  one  of  the  tenets  of  the  Moravians  ?"  No ;  not 
of  the  Moravians  in  general.  '^  Do  you  not  say,  that  you  *  could  not 
Hgree  with  Mr.  Spangenberg,  that  none  has  any  faith,  so  long  as  he  is 
liable  to  any  doubt  or  fear  V  "  I  do  say  so  still.  But  Spangenberg  is 
not  the  Moravian  Church.  *'  Do  you  not  represent  Mr.  Molther,  and 
other  Moravians  in  £ngland,  as  teaching  the  same  ?"  I  do ;  three  or 
four  in  all.  But  neither  are  these  the  Moravian  Church.  *'  In  short, 
I  have  not  charged  the  Moravian  Church  with  any  thing;  but  only 
repeat  after  you."  Indeed  you  have,  in  the  very  case  before  us.  You 
charge  them  with  denying  degrees  in  faith.  I  do  not  charge  them  here^ 
with.  I  openly  cleared  them  from  any  such  charge  near  six  years  ago. 
^  If,  therefore,  you  have  accused  them  when  you  knew  them  to  be  guilt* 
less,  you  must  bear  the  blame."  In  this  case  I  must  entreat  you  to  bear 
it  in  my  stead :  for  I  have  not  accused  them, — the  Moravian  Church. 
It  is  you  that  have  accused  them.  I  have  again  and  again  declared  they 
ye  not  guilty. 

Secondly.  "  *  They  do  use  the  ordinances  of  God  with  reverence  and 
godly  fear.'  You  have  charged  Mr.  Spangenberg  and  Mr.  Molther  with 
teaching,  that  wo  ought  to  abstain  from  them."  That  wel  No.  That 
unbelievers  ought.  The  assertion  relates  to  them  only.  ^*  And  the 
same  you  say  in  general  of  the  Moravian  brethren,  in  your  letter."  I 
say,  they  hold  that  unbelievers  ought  to  abstain  from  them.  But  yet  I 
know  and  bear  witness,  they  use  them  themselves,  and  that  *^  with  reve-> 
rence  and  godly  fear."  "  *  Mr.  Molther  was  quickly  after  recalled  to 
Germany.'  This  might  be  on  other  accounts.  You  do  not  say  it  was 
out  of  any  dislike  of  his  doctrines  or  proceedings."  I  do  not  say  so ; 
because  I  am  not  sure ;  but  I  believe  it  was  out  of  a  dislike  to  some  <  f 
his  proceedings,  if  not  of  his  doctrines  too.  "  Nor  indeed  can  you,  con- 
sistently with  your  next  words  :  *  The  great  fault  of  the  Moravian  Church 
seems  to  lie,  in  not  openly  disclaiming  all  he  had  said' "  relating  to  this  * 
head.  They  did  privately  disclaim  what  he  had  said  of  degrees  in  faith. 
But  I  think  that  was  not  enough.  And  I  still  believe  they  would  have 
done  more,  "  had  they  not  leaned  themselves  to  the  same  opinion," 
touching  the  ordinances. 

Thirdly.  "  You  '  never  knew  but  one  of  the  Moravian  Church  affirm^ 
that  a  believer  does  not  grow  in  holiness.'  But  who  was  this  ?  No  less 


a  person  tfian  Count  Zinzendorf,  their  great  bishop  and  patron,  whose 
authority  is  very  high,  all  in  all  with  them,  and  to  whom  you  think  thoy 
pay  *  too  much  regard.' "  Do  you  apprdiend  where  the  stress  of  the 
argument  lies  ?  I  never  heard  one  Moravian  affirm  this,  but  the  Count 
alone ;  and  him  only  once ;  and  tliat  once  was  in  the  heat  of  dispute. 
And  hence  I  inferred,  it  is  not  a  doctrine  of  the  Moravian  Church ;  nay, 
I  doubt  whether  it  be  the  Count's  own  settled  judgment 

3.  But  I  may  not  dismiss  this  passage  yet  It  is  now  my  turn  to 
complain  of  unfair  usage ;  of  the  exceeding  lame,  broken,  imperfect 
manner  wherein  you  cite  my  words.  For  instance,  your  citation  runs 
thus :  you  **  never  knew  but  one  of  the  Moravian  Church  affirm,  that  a 
belierer  does  not  grow  in  holiness."  Whereas  my  words  are  these : 
M I  never  knew  one  of  the  Moravian  Church,  but  that  single  person, 
affirm,  that  a  believer  does  not  grow  in  holiness ;  and  perhaps  he  would 
not  affirm  it  on  reflection."  Now,  why  was  the  former  part  of  the  sen- 
tence changed,  and  the  latter  quite  lef^  out?  Had  the  whole  stood  in 
your  tract  just  as  it  does  in  mine,  it  must  have  appeared  I  do  not  here 
charge  the  Moravian  Church. 

I  comphun  also  of  your  manner  of  replying  to  the  first  article  of  this 
very  paragraph.  For  you  do  not  cite  so  much  as  one  line  of  that  answer 
to  which  you  profess  to  reply.  My  words  are,  ^'  You  ought  not  to  charge 
the  Moravian  Church  with  the  first  of  these"  errors,  **  since  in  the  very 
page  from  which  you  quote  those  words,  *  There  is  no  justifying  faith 
where  there  ever  is  any  doubt,'  that  note  occurs,  (viz.  vol.  iii,  p.  223,) 
*  In  the  preface  to  the  Second  Journal,  the  Moravian  Church  is  cleared 
from  this  mistake.' "  If  you  had  cited  these  words,  could  you  possibly 
have  subjoined,  ^  I  have  not  charged  the  Moravian  Church  with  any 
thing ;  but  only  repeat  after  you  1" 

4.  I  have  now  considered  one  page  of  your  reply,  in  the  manner  you 
seem  to  require.  But  sure  you  cannot  expect  I  should  follow  you  thus, 
step  by  step,  through  a  hundred  and  forty  pages  !  If  you  should  then 
think  it  worth  while  to  make  a  second  reply,  and  to  follow  me  in  the 
same  manner,  wc  might  write  indeed,  but  who  would  read  ?  I  return 
therefore  to  what  I  proposed  at  first,  viz.  to  touch  only  on  what  seems 
of  the  most  importance,  and  leave  the  rest  just  as  it  lies.  * 

5.  You  say,  *^  With  regard  to  subtlety,  evasion,  and  disguise,  you  now 
would  have  it  thought,  that  you  only  found  this  *  in  many  of  them ;  not 
ia  all,  nor  in  most.'  "  (p.  80.)  **  You  now  would  have  it  thought!" 
Yes,  and  always,  as  well  as  now.  For  my  original  charge  was,  ^  I  have 
foimd  this  in  many  of  you ;  that  is,  much  subtlety,  much  evasion  and 
disguise."  (Vol.  iii,  p.  223.)  But  you  add,  **  Let  the  reader  judge  from 
the  following  passages,  whether  you  did  not  charge  the  Moravians  in 
general  with  these  crimes :  *  I  had  a  long  conference  with  those  whom  I 
esteem  very  highly  in  love ;  but  I  could  not  yet  understand  them  in  one 
point.  Christian  opennoss  and  plainness  of  speech.  They  pleaded  for 
such  a  reservedness  and  closeness  of  conversation.  Yet  I  scarce  know 
what  to  think,  considering  they  had  the  practice  of  the  whole  Moravian 
Church  on  their  side.'  "  True,  in  pleading  for  such  a  reservedness  of 
conversation  as  I  could  not  in  anywise  approve  of;  but  not  in  using  much 
subtlety,  much  evasion  and  disguise :  this  I  dare  not  charge  on  the  whole 
Moravian  Church.     Those  words  also,  "  There  is  darkness  and  close* 


296  PRINCIPLES  OP  A  METHODIST 

ness  in  all  their  behaviour,  and  guile  in  almost  all  their  words,"  I  spoke^ 
not  of  all  the  Moravians,  nor  of  most ;  but  of  those  who  were  then  in 
England.  I  could  not  speak  it  of  them  all ;  for  I  never  found  any  guile 
in  Christian  David,  Michael  Linner,  and  many  others. 

6.  "  We  are  next  to  see  how  you  get  over  the  objection  I  made  good, 
in  three  several  particulars,  that  you  have  prepared  the  way  for  spread- 
ing of  these  tenets.  The  iirst  you  say  nothing  to  here ;  the  second  you 
quote  very  partially  thus  :  *  By  countenancing  and  commending  them.' 
And  why  would  you  not  add,  '  And  being  the  occasion  of  so  many  of 
them  coming  over  among  us?' "  Because  I  was  not  the  occasion,  I  was 
indeed  the  ^rst  Englishman  that  ever  was  at  Hemhuth.  But  before  I 
was  at  Hemhuth,  (I  find  on  later  inquiry,)  the  Count  himself  had  been 
in  England. 

*^  You  *•  still  think,  that  next  to  some  thousands  in  our  own  Church, 
the  body  of  the  Moravian  Church,  however  mistaken  some  of  them  are, 
arc,  in  the  main,  the  best  Christians  in  the  world.' "  (p.  81.)  I  do,  **  of 
all  whom  I  have  seen ;" — ^you  should  not  omit  these  words.  **  Those 
dreadful  errors  and  crimes  are  here  softened  into'  mistakes."  I  term 
them  ^*  errors  of  judgment  and  practice."  ^I  have  proved,  that  you 
have  charged  the  body  with  such."  At  present,  the  proof  does  not 
amount  to  demonstration.  There  needs  a  little  farther  proof,  that  I 
charge  any  "  dreadful  crimes"  on  the  body  of  the  Moravians. 

I  see  no  manner  of  inconsistency  still,  in  those  accounts  of  my  inter- 
course with  the  Moravians,  which  you  suppose  irreconcilable  with  each 
other.     Let  any  one  read  them  in  the  Journal,  and  judge. 

7.  "  You  had  said,  your '  objections  then  were  nearly  the  same  as  now.' 
You  now  add,  ^  only  with  this  difference;  I  was  not  then  assured  that  the 
facts  were  as  I  supposed ;  I  did  not  dare  to  determine  any  thing.'  No  \ 
Not  when  by  conversing  among  them  you  saw  these  things  ?  As  indeed 
the  facts  are  of  such  a  nature,  that  you  could  not  but  be  assured  of  them, 
if  they  were  true.  Nor  do  the  questions  in  your  Letter  really  imply  any 
doubt  of  their  truth ;  but  are  so  many  appeals  to  their  consciences,  ana 
equivalent  to  strong  assertions.  And  if  you  had  not  been  assured,  if  yon 
did  not  dare  to  determine  any  thing  concerning  what  you  saw,  your 
writing  bare  suspicions  to  a  body  of  men  in  such  a  manner  was  inexcusa- 
ble.   This  excuse,  therefore,  will  not  serve  you."  (p  83.) 

I  apprehend  it  wiU.  *^  I  was  not  then,"  in  September,  1738,  **  assured 
that  the  facts  were  as  I  supposed."  Therefore,  **  I  did  not"  then  **  dare 
to  determine  any  thing."  Be  pleased  to  add  the  immediately  following 
words :  "  But  from  November  1,"  1739,  "  I  saw  more  and  more  things 
which  I  could  not  reconcile  with  the  Gospel." 

If  you  had  not  omitted  these  words,  you  could  have  had  no  colour  to 
remark,  on  my  saying,  "  I  did  not  dare  to  determine  any  thing :"  "  No! 
Not  when  by  conversing  among  them  you  saw  these  things  ?"  No,  I 
did  not  "dare  to  determine,"  in  September,  1738,  from  what  I  saw  id 
November,  1739.  "  But  the  facts  are  of  such  a  nature,  that  you  could 
not  but  bo  assured  of  them,  if  they  were  true."  I  cannot  think  so.  **  Is 
not  the  Coimt  all  in  all  among  you  ?  Do  not  you  magnify  your  own 
Church  too  much  1  Do  you  not  use  guile  and  dissimulation  in  many 
cases  ?"  These  facts  are  by  no  means  of  such  a  nature,  as  that  whoever 
converses  (even  intimately)  among  the  Moravians  cannot  but  be  assured 
of  them.     «^  Nor  do  the  questions  in  your  Letter  really  imply  any  doubl 


FARTHER  RXPLAINE0.  297 

of  their  tnitik''  No!  Are  not  my  very  words  prefixed  to  those  questions? 
— ^*  Ot'flome  other  things  I  stand  in  doubt.  And  I  wish  that,  in  order 
to  remove  those  doubts,  you  would  plainly  answer,  whether  the  fact  be 
as  I  suppose."  "  But"  these  questions  **  are  so  many  appeals  to  their 
consciences."  True.  "And  equivalent  to  strong  assertions."  Utterly 
fiilse.  "  If  you  had  not  been  assured,  if  you  did  not  dare  to  determine 
any  thing  concerning  what  you  saw,"  (fifteen  months  after,)  "  your 
writing  bare  suspicions  to  a  body  of  men,  in  such  a  manner,  was  inex- 
cusable." They  were  strong  presumptions  then ;  which  yet  I  did  not 
write  to  a  body  of  men,  whom  I  so  highly  esteemed ;  no,  not  even  in  the 
tenderest  manner,  till  I  was  assured  they  were  not  groundless. 

7.  **  In  a  note  at  the  bottom  of  page  8,  you  observe,  *  The  Band 
society  in  London  began  May  1,  some  time  before  I  set  out  for  Ger- 
many.^ Would  you  insinuate  here,  that  you  did  not  set  it  up  in  imitation 
of  the  Moravians?"  Sir,  I  will  tell  you  the  naked  truth.  You  had 
remarked  thus :  "  You  took  the  trouble  of  a  journey  to  Germany  to 
them;  and  were  so  much  in  love  with  their  methods,  that,  at  your 
return  hither,  you  set  up  their  bands  among  your  disciples."  (p.  17.) 
This  was  an  entire  mistSLke;  for  that  society  was, set  up,  not  only  before 
I  returned,  but  before  I  set  out  And  I  designed  that  note  to  insinuate 
this  to  you,  without  telling  your  mistake  to  all  the  world. 

''  I  imagined,  that,  supposing  your  account  of  the  Moravians  true,  it 
would  be  impossible  for  any  serious  Christian  to  doubt  of  their  being 
very  wicked  people."  I  know  many  serious  Christians  who  suppose  it 
true,  and  yet  believe  they  are,  in  the  main,  good  men.  "  A  much  worse 
character,  take  the  whole  body  together,  carmot  be  given  of  a  body  of 
men."  Let  us  try:  '*  Here  is  a  body  of  men  who  have  not  one  spark 
either  of  justice,  mercy,  or  truth  among  them ;  who  are  lost  to  all  sense 
of  right  and  wrong ;  who  have  neither  so'briety,  temperance,  nor  chastity; 
who  are,  in  general,  liars,  drunkards,  gluttons,  thieves,  adulterers,  mur- 
derers." I  cannot  but  think,  that  this  is  a  much  worse  character  than 
that  of  the  Moravians,  take  it  how  you  will.  "  Let  the  reader  judge  ^ 
how  hr  you  are  now  able  to  defend  them."  Just  as  far  as  I  did  at  first. 
Still  I  dare  not  condemn  what  is  good  among  them;  and  I  will  not 
excuse  what  is  evil. 

9.  **  *  The  Moravians  excel  in  sweetness  of  behaviour.'  What,  though 
they  use  guile  and  dissimulation  ?"  Yes.  '*  ^  Where  is  their  multitude 
of  errors  V  In  your  own  Journal.  I  have  taken  the  pains  to  place  them 
in  one  view  in  my  Retnarks ;  the  justness  of  which,  with  all  your  art, 
you  cannot  disprove."  You  have  taken  the  pains  to  transcribe  many 
words ;  all  which  together  amount  to  this,  that  they,  generally,  hold 
universal  salvation,  and  are  partly  Antinomians,  (in  opinion,)  partly 
Quietists.  The  justness  of  some  of  your  remarks,  if  I  mistake  not,  has 
been  pretty  fully  disproved.  As  to  what  you  speak  of  my  art,  subdety, 
and  so  on,  in  this  and  many  other  places,  I  look  upon  it  as  neither  better 
nor  worse  than  a  civil  way  of  calling  names. 

"  *  To  this  multitude  of  crimes  I  am  also  an  utter  stranger.'  Then 
you  have  charged  them  wrongfully.  What  do  you  account  guile  ?"  &c. 
{Second  Letter^  p.  S4.)  I  account  guile,  despising  self  denial  even  in 
the  smallest  points,  and  teaching  that  those  who  have  not  the  assurance 
of  faith  may  not  use  the  ordinances  of  God|  the  Lord's  Supper  in  par« 


298  PRIlfCfFLfeS  OF  ▲  BnSTRODTST 

ticular;  (this  is  the  real,  unaggrava|ed  charge,)  to  be  faults  which  cannot 
be  excused.  But  I  do  not  account  them  all  together  **  a  multitude  ot 
crimes."     I  conceive  this  is  a  vehement  hyperbole. 

*'  The  honour  of  religion,"  said  you,  •*  and  virtue  trampled  upon  :"  I 
answered,  "  By  whom  ?  Not  by  the  Moravians."  You  reply,  **  And  yet 
you  have  accused  some  of  these  as  decrying  all  the  means  of  grace." 
No.  What  1  accused  them  of,  was,  teaching  that  an  unbeliever  (in  their 
sense)  ought  to  abstain  from  them.  "  *  Neither  did  I  know,  or  think, 
or  say,  they  were  desperately  wicked  people.'  Your  Journal  is  before 
the  world ;  to  whom  I  appeal  whether  this  has  not  so  represented  them." 
But  how  do  you  here  represent  your  remark,  and  my  answer?  My 
paragraph  runs  thus : — 

'*  You  go  on,  ^  How  could  you  so  long,  and  so  intimately,  converse 
with  such  desperately  wicked  people  as  the  Moravians,  according  to 
your  own  account,  were  known  by  you  to  be?'  O  sir,  what  another 
assertion  is  this!  *The  Moravians,  according 'to  your  own  account, 
were  known  by  you  to  be  desperately  wicked  people,  while  you  intimately 
conversed  with  them !'  Utterly  false  and  injurious !  I  never  gave  any  such 
account  I  conversed  with  them  intimately  both  at  Savannah  and  Hem- 
huth.  But  neither  then,  nor  at  any  other  time,  did  I  know,  or  think,  or 
say  they  were  desperately  wicked  people :  I  think  and  say  just  the 
reverse ;  viz.  that  though  I  soon '  found  among  them  a  few  things  which 
I  could  not  approve,  yet  I  believe  they  are,  in  the  main,  some  of  the  best 
Christians  in  the  worid.'  After  this,  are  you  the  persoti  who  complains 
of  me  for  imperfect  and  partial  quotations?"  (p.  10.) 

I  added,  "  You  surprise  me  yet  more  in  going  on  thus :  *  In  God'« 
name,  sir,  is  the  contempt  of  almost  the  whole  of  our  duty,  of  every 
Christian  ordinance,  to  be  so  very  gently  touched  V  Sir,  this  is  not  the 
case.  This  charge  no  more  belongs  to  the  Moravians  than  that  of 
murder."  (p.  11.) 

You  reply,  "  Mr.  Sp and  Mr.  Molther  are  accused  by  name.    11 

« falsely,  I  am  sorry  both  for  them  and  you."  Accused  ?  True.  But  of 
what?  of  the  contempt  of  every  Christian  ordinance,  of  almost  the  whole 
of  our  duty  ?  By  no  means.  The  plain  case  is,  I  accuse  them  o{  one 
thing,  viz.  teaching  that  an  unbeliever  should  abstain  from  the  ordi- 
nances. You  accuse  them  of  another,— contemning  every  Christian 
ordinance,  and  almost  the  whole  of  our  duty.  And  this  you  would 
father  upon  me.     I  desire  to  be  excused. 

9.  As  to  what  I  said  in  my  letter  to  the  Moravian  Church,  **  You  can 
hinder  this  if  you  will ;  therefore,  if  you  do  not  prevent  their  speakins 
thus,  you  do,  in  effect,  speak  thus  yourselves," — it  may  be  observed, 
(1.)  That  this  letter  is  dated  August  8,  1741.  (2.)  That  from  that 
time  the  Moravian  Church  did  in  great  measure  prevent  any  of  their 
members  speaking  thus. 

You  proceed :  "  You  distinguish  between  the  English  brethren  and 
the  Moravians.  These  English  brethren,  I  presume,  were  your  follow- 
ers. Afterward  you  represent  them  as  perverted  by  the  Moravians : 
*  Before  they  had  spoke  these  wicked  things,'  you  say,  •  they  had  joined 
these  men,  and  acted  under  their  direction.'  If  they  did  not  learn  them 
from  these  new  teachers,  from  whom  did  they  learn  them  ?  Not,  suret 
^m  yourself,  or  any  other  Methodists.    You  cannot,  therefore*  bring 


PA&T&ftm  BXFLAfNBD.  Mt 

mrians  without  condemning  your  own  people.  Here,  diere- 
have  certainly  overshot  yourself."  (p.  85.)  Perhaps  not. 
Inglish  brethren  were,  I  presume,  your  followers."  No  ;  this 
tt  mistake.  I  was  but  a  single,  private  member  of  that  soci- 
lerward  you  represent  them  as  perverted  by  the  Moravians." 

not  yet  connected  with  them.  ^  Before  they  spoke  these 
ngs,  they  had  joined  these  men,  and  acted  under  their  direc- 
lis  is  another  mistake.  They  did  not  join  these  men,  nor  act 
"ection,  till  long  after.  **  If  they  did  not  learn  them  from  these 
ers,  from  whom  did  they  learn  them  ?  Tou  cannot  bring  off 
lans  without  condemning  your  own  people."  They  learned 
Mr.  Molther  chiefly ;  whom  I  am  not  at  all  concerned  to  biiiag 
'  let  all  men  judge  which  of  us  two  has  overshot  himself. 

answer  to  my  objections  against  the  inconsistent  accounts 
given  of  the  Moravians,  you  say,  *  They  are,  I  believe,  the 
nconsistent  people  under  the  sun.'  Would  not  one  imagine, 
ire  speak  of  the  same  persons,  or  of  the  whole  body  of  them 
f"  I  do,  thus  far :  I  ascribe  the  good  to  the  body  of  them  in 
he  evil  to  part  only  of  that  body,  to  some  of  those  same 

nethod  of  getting  over  the  contradictions  I  had  charged  upon 
sh  the  same, — ^to  distinguish  either  between  the  Moravians 
nglish  brethren,  though  these  had  been  their  disciples," — 
ten  abundantly  answered, — **  or  between  some  of  the  Mora- 
others."  (p.  86.)  I  think  a  very  good  method  ;  for  pro- 
ire  not  contradictory  unless  they  both  speak  of  the  same 

r,  since  you  persist  to  affirm  that  I  am  guilty  of  the  contra- ' 
lU  charged  upon  me,  (p.  87,)  I  think  there  cannot  be  a  suf^ 
y  without  reciting  the  several  instances, 
t.  **  You  commend  them  (the  Moravians)  for  loving  one  ano- 
yet  charge  them  with  biting  and  devouring  one  another."  I 
•*  Th^m !  Whom  ?  Not  the  Moravians,  but  the  English  bre- 
etter-lane,  before  their  union  with  the  Moravians.  Herein, 
shadow  of  contradiction ;  for  the  two  sentences  do  not  relate 
B  persons." 

ly,  ''  Would  you  then  have  us  to  think  that  so  much  anger 
diction  reigned  among  your  Methodists  ?"  I  "  would  have 
this  is  nothing  to  the  purpose.  Prove  the  contradiction,  and 
to  the  point  "  It  is  plain  they  had  before  this  been  perverted 
ravians  ;  and  that  they  were  unwilling  to  be  taught  by  any 
rkty ;  that  is,  nearly  half  of  the  society.  But  here  is  no  proof 
radiction  still. 

1  say,  *  They  had  well  nigh  destroyed  brotherly  love  from 
partly  by  cautions  against  natural  love,  partly  by  occasioning 
tinual  disputes.'  "  So  they  had  ;  but  we  had  then  no  con- 
h  them.  Neither,  therefore,  does  this  contradict  their  loving 
r.  You  reply,  "As  if  they  can  truly  love  each  other,  who 
not  to  do  it,  and  stir  up  divisions  and  disturbances  among 
u  should  say,  if  you  would  repeat  after  me,  "  Who  caution 
It  naturallove,  and  occasion  many  disputes  among  you." 


800  PRINCIPLX8  OF  A  METHODIST 

Well ;  allowing  they  do  this,  (which  is  utterly  wrong,)  yet  where  is  the 
contradiction  ?  Yet  they  may  love  one  another. 

3.  ^^  You  praise  them  Tor  using  no  diversions,  but  such  as  become 
saints;  and  yet  say,"  (I  recite  the  whole  sentence,)  "*I  have  heard 
some  of  you  affirm  that  Christian  salvation  implies  hberty  to  conform  to 
the  world,  by  joining  in  worldly  diversions  in  order  to  do  good-' "  And 
both  these  are  true.  The  Moravians,  in  general,  use  no  diversions  but 
such  as  become  saints.  And  yet  I  have  heard  some  of  them  affirm,  in 
contradiction  to  their  oiiv-n  practice,  that  '^  one  then  mentioned  did  weM 
when  he  joined  in  playing  at  tennis  in  order  to  do  good."  To  this  you 
make  no  reply.  Silence  then  consents,  that  there  is  no  contradictioi 
here. 

4.  «*  You  '  praise  them  for  not  regarding  outward  adorning.' "  So  I 
do,  the  bulk  of  the  congregation.  **  And  yet  you  say,"  (I  again  recite 
the  whole  sentence,)  **  *  I  have  heard  some  of  you  affirm  that  Christian 
salvation  implies  hberty  to  conform  to  the  world,  by  putting  on  gold  and 
costly  apparel.' "  I  have  so ;  and  I  blame  them  the  more,  because  ^^  thej 
are  condenmed  by  the  general  practice  of  their  own  Church."  To  this 
also  you  reply  not  So  I  must  count  this  the  fourth  contradiction  whiol 
you  have  charged  upon  me,  but  have  not  proved. 

5.  ^*  You  call  their  discipline,  in  most  respects,  truly  excellent  I 
could  wish  you  had  more  fully  explained  yourself.  ^  I  have,  in  the 
Second  Journal,'  vol.  iii,  pp.  83--103.  It  is  no  sign  of  good  discipline 
to  permit  such  abominations ;  that  is,  error  in  opinion,  and  guile  in 
practice.  ^  True ;  it  is  not ;  nor  is  it  any  demonstration  against  it :  for 
there  may  be  good  discipline  even  in  a  college  of  Jesuits.  Another 
fault  is,  too  great  a  deference  to  the  Count.  And  yet,  in  most  respect^i 
their  discipline  is  truly  excellent' " 

You  reply,  *•*•  Such  excellent  discipline,  for  all  that  I  know,  they  maj 
have  ;"  (that  is,  as  the  Jesuits ;)  *^  but  I  cannot  agree  that  this  is  scarce 
inferior  to  that  of  the  apostoUcal  age."  It  may  be,  for  any  thing  you 
advance  to  the  contrary.  **  Here  I  cited  some  words  of  yours,  con- 
demning  their  subordination,  (p.  88,)  which  you  prudently  take  do 
notice  of."  Yes ;  I  had  just  before  taken  notice  of  their  too  great 
deference  to  the  Count.  But,  the  contradiction!  Where  is  the  con- 
tradiction 1 

6.  "  You  mention  it  as  a  good  effect  of  their  discipline,  that  *  every 
one  knows  and  keeps  his  proper  rank.'  Soon  after,  as  it  were  with  a 
design  to  confute  yourself,  you  say,  •  Our  brethren  have  neither  wisdom 
enough  to  guide,  nor  prudence  enough  to  let  it  alone.' "  I  answered, 
*^  Pardon  me,  sir,  I  have  no  design  either  to  confute  or  contradict  myself 
in  these  words.  The  former  sentence  is  spoken  of  the  Moravian  bre- 
thren ;  the  latter  of  the  English  brethren  of  Fetter-lane,  not  then  united 
with  the  Moravians,  neither  acting  by  their  direction."  To  this  likewise 
you  do  not  reply.  Here  is  then  a  sixth  contradiction,  alleged  agaiost 
me,  but  not  proved. 

12.  However,  you  add,  *^  Had  you  shown  me  mistaken  in  any  point 
you  have  attempted  to  reply  to,  still  you  confess  errors  and  wickedneii 
enough  among  the  Moravians,  to  render  your  account  of  them  veij 
inconsistent.  But  you  have  not  succeeded  in  any  one  answer.  Ton 
have  not  shown  that  I  have,  in  any  one  instance,  misquoted  yoUy  or  nwh 


FARTHEE  BXPLAINBD.  801 

inderatodd  the  chanu;ter  you  had  given  of  them,  or  argued  falsely  from 
Mrhat  you  had  said  of  them.  And  truly,  sir,  all  you  have  done  has  been 
»viliing  at  a  few  particulars.  But  the  argument  I  was  urging  all  this 
rrhile  you  quite  forgot." 

Sir,  if  it  be  so,  you  do  me  too  much  honour,  in  setting  pen  to  paper 
igaio.  But  is  it  so  ?  Have  I  all  this  while  quite  forgot  the  argument 
foa  was  urging  ?  I-hope  not  I  seem  to  remember  you  was  urging  some 
irgument  to  prove,  that  I  ^'  fall  not  only  into  inconsistencies,  but  direct 
iontradictions ;"  {Remarks,  p.  21 ;)  and  that  I  showed  you  mistaken, 
lot  only  in  one,  but  in  every  point  which  you  advanced  as  such ;  that  I 
Lid  not  confess  any  such  errors  or  wickedness  of  the  Moravians,  as 
«ndered  my  account  of  them  self-inconsistent ;  that  I '« succeeded"  in 
norc  than  "  one  answer"  to  the  objections  you  had  urged  against  it ; 
ind  that  I  showed,  you  had  '*  misquoted  or  misunderstood  the  character 

had  given  of  them,"  or  **  argued  falsely  from  it,"  not  properly  *'  in  one 
utance,"  but  from  the  beginning  to  the  end. 

Yet  this  I  think  it  incumbent  upon  me  to  say,  that  whereinsoever  I 
AYe  contributed,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  the  spreading  of  any  thing  evil, 
rluch  is  or  has  been  among  the  Moravians,  I  am  sorry  for  it,  and  hereby 
sk  pardon  both  of  God  and  all  the  world. 

II.  1. 1  think  it  appears,  by  what  you  have  yourself  observed,  that,  on  the 
econd  head,  justification  by  faith,  i  allow,  in  the  beginning  of  the  *'Far- 
her  Appeal,"  almost  as  much  as  you  contend  for. 

I  desire  leave  to  cite  part  of  that  passage  again,  that  we  may  come  as 
tear  each  other  as  possible.  I  would  just  subjoin  a  few  words  on  each 
leadt  which  I  hope  may  remove  more  difficulties  put  of  the  way : — 

**  That  justification,  whereof  our  Articles  and  Homilies  speak,  means 
iresent  pardon,  and  acceptance  with  Crod;  who  therein  *  declares  his 
ighteousness,'  or  mercy,  'by,'  or  'for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are 
•at.'" 

I  sayt  past :  for  I  cannot  find  any  thing  in  the  Bible  of  the  remission 
itma  past,  present,  and  to  come. 

**  I  believe  the  condition  of  this  is  faith ;  I  mean,  not  only  that  without 
lith  we  cannot  be  justified,  but  also,  that,  as  soon  as  any  one  has  true 
lith,  in  that  moment  he  is  justified."  # 

Tou  take  the  word  condition  in  the  former  sense  only,  as  that  without 
^faich  we  cannot  be  justified.  In  this  sense  of  the  word,  I  think  we 
my  allow,  that  there  are  several  conditions  of  justification. 

^  Good  works  follow  this  faith,  but  cannot  go  before  it.  Much  less  can 
anctification ;  which  implies  a  continued  course  of  good  works,  spring- 
ig  from  holiness  of  heart." 

Tet  such  a  course  is,  without  doubt,  absolutely  necessary  to  our  con- 
iouance  in  a  state  of  justification. 

**  It  is  flowed,  that  repentance  and  *  fruits  meet  for  repentance'  go  be- 
ore  faith.  Repentance  absolutely  must  go  before  faith ;  fruits  meet  for 
t,  if  there  be  opportimity.  By  repentance  I  mean  conviction  of  sin,  pro- 
Locinff  real  desires  and  sincere  resolutions  of  amendment ;  and  by  *  fruits 
Beet  for  repentance,'  forgiving  our  brother,  ceasing  from  evil,  doins  good, 
istng  the  ordinances  of  God,  and,  in  general,  obeying  him  according  to 
he  measure  of  grace  which  we  have  received.  But  these  I  cannot  as  yet 
tenn  good  worlu,  because  they  do  not  spring  from  faith  and  the  lore  of 


302  PRINCIPLES  OF  A  MBTH0DI8T 

God."  Although  the  same  works  are  then  good,  when  they  are  performed 
by  "  those  who  have  believed." 

"Faith,  in  general,  is  a  divine  supernatural  sXsfyof  ([evidence  or  convic- 
tion) of  things  not  seen,  not  discoverable  by  our  bodily  senses,  as  being 
either  past,  future,  or  spiritual.  Justifying  faith  implies,  not  onl^  a  di- 
vine eXefytig,  that  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  himsell^ 
but  a  sure  trust  and  confidence  that  Christ  died  for  my  sins,  that  he  loved 
me,  and  gave  himself  for  me.  And  the  moment  a  penitent  sinner  thus 
believes,  God  pardons  and  absolves  him." 

I  say  a  penitent  sinner ;  because  justifying  faith  cannot  exist  without 
previous  repentance. 

"Yet,  although  both  repentance,  and  the  fruits  thereof,  are  in  some 
sense  necessary  before  justification,  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  is  neces- 
sary in  the  same  sense,  or  in  the  same  degree,  with  faith.  Not  in  the 
same  degree.  For  in  whatever  moment  a  man  believes,  Hn  the  Christian 
sense  of  the  word,)  he  is  justified.  But  it  is  not  so  at  whatever  moment 
he  repents,  or  brings  forth  any,  or  all,  the  fruits  of  repentance.  Conse- 
quently, none  of  these  are  nebessary  to  justification,  in  the  same  degree 
with  faith. 

"Nor  in  the  same  sense.  For  none  of  these  has  so  direct,  immediate  i 
relation  to  justification  as  faith.  This  is  proximately  necessary  thereto; 
repentance  remotely,  as  it  is  necessary  to  faith."  (So  the  error  of  the  press 
is  to  be  corrected.)  "  And  the  fruits  of  repentance  still  more  remotely, 
as  they  are  necessary  to  the  increase  or  continuance  of  repentance.  And 
even  in  this  sense,  thev  are  only  necessary  on  supposition, — if  there  be 
time  and  opportunity  for  them.  For  in  many  instances  there  is  not ;  bnt 
God  cuts  short  his  work,  and  faith  prevents  the  fruits  of  repentance." 

2.  Thus  for  I  believe  we  are  nearly  agreed.  But  on  those  words, 
*'  Far  other  qualifications  are  required,  in  order  to  our  standing  before 
God  in  glory,  than  were  required,  in  order  to  his  giving  us  &th  and 
pardon ;  in  order  to  this,  nothing  is  indispensably  required,  but  repenl- 
a'nce,  or  conviction  of  sin  ;  but  in  order  to  the  other,  it  is  indispensably 
required,  that  we  be  fully  cleansed  from  all  sin  ;"  you  remark,  "Here,  I 
apprehend,  are  two  great  mistakes :  (1.)  You  make  too  little  necessaiy 
before  pardon.  (2.)  Too  much  afterward.  You  confine  repentance 
within  too  narrow  limits,  and  extend  holiness  beyond  its  just  bounds. 

"  First.  By  repentance  you  mean  only  conviction  of  sin.  But  this  is  i 
very  partial  accsunt  of  it.  Every  child  that  has  learned  his  cateehisa 
can  tell,  that  forsaking  of  sin  is  included  in  it ;  living  in  obedience  to  God^s 
will,  when  there  is  opportunity ;  and,  even  when  there  is  not,  a  sincere 
desire  and  purpose  to  do  so,  and  a  faith  in  God's  mercies  through  Christ 
Jesus."    (p.  92.) 

I  had  said,  '*  In  order  to  God's  giving  us  faith  and  pardon,  nothing  is 
indispensably  required  but  repentance,"  that  is,  **  conviction  of  sin,  pro- 
ducing real  desires  and  sincere  resolutions  of  amendment"  But  yoQ 
"  apprehend  that  I  am  here  in  a  great  mistake;"  that  I  give  a  "veiy  partial 
account  of  repentance  ;"  that  I  ought  to  ''include  therein  a  sincere  desffe 
and  purpose"  to  obey  God.  I  do :  I  have  said  so  expressly ;  and  '^  living 
in  obedience  to  God's  will,  when  there  is  opportunity."  Very  wcU; 
but  I  here  speak  of  what  is  indispensably  required,  that  is,  whether  there 
is  opportunity  of  actual  obedience  or  no;  *'and  a  faith  in  GxmI's  merdei 
through  Christ  Jesus."  A  very  great  mistake  indeed !— -  my  not  inchrf- 
ing  faith  in  that  repentance  which  I  say  is  indispensably  required  A 
order  to  faith  I 


FAETHER  EXPLAINED.  808 

**Secood]j.  You  make  sinless  perfection  necessary  after  justification^ 
m  order  to  make  us  meet  for  glory."  And  who  does  not?  Indeed  men 
do  not  agree  in  the  time.  Some  believe  it  is  attained  before  death  ; 
some,  in  the  article  of  death ;  some,  in  an  after-state,  in  the  Mystic  or  the 
Popish  purgatory.  But  all  writers,  whom  I  have  ever  seen  till  now,  (the 
Romish  themselves  not  excepted,)  agree,  that  we  must  be  '*  fully  cleanisod 
from  aD  sin"  before  we  can  enter  into  glory. 

3.  After  what  has  already  been  allowed,  I  cannot  think  it  needful  to 
dispute  farther,  on  the  head  of  justification.  Rather  suffer' me  to  close 
this  part  of  our  debate,  by  transcribing  what  I  assent  to,  from  that  clear 
recapitulation  of  your  sentiments  which  you  have  given  in  pages  45 
and  46:— 

**(!.)  Justification  is  the  act  of  God,  pardoning  our  sins,  and  receiving 
OS  again  to  his  favour.  This  was  free  in  him,  because  undeserved  by  us ; 
andeaerved,  because  we  had  transgressed  his  law,  and  could  not,  nor  even 
can  now,  perfectly  fulfil  it. 

**(2,)  \Ve  cannot,  therefore,  be  justified  by  our  works ;  because  this 
would  be,  to  be  justified  by  some  merit  of  our  own.  Much  less  can  we 
be  justified  by  an  external  show  of  religion,  or  by  any  superstitious  ob- 
Krvances." 

"(8.)  The  life  and  death  of  our  Lord  is  the  sole  meritorious  cause  of 
this  mercy,  which  must  be  firmly  believed  and  trusted  in  by  us.  Our  faith 
therefore  in  him,  though  not  more  meritorious  than  any  of  our  actions, 
yet  has  a  nearer  relation  to  the  promises  of  pardon  through  him,  and  is 
the  mean  and  instrument  whereby  we  embrace  and  receive  them. 

"  (4.)  True  faith  must  be  lively  and  productive  of  good  works,  which 
are  its  proper  fruits,  the  marks  whereby  it  is  known. 

"(5.)  Works  really  good  are  such  as  are  commanded  by  God,  (spring- 
ing from  faith,)  done  by  the  aid  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  with  good  designs,  and 
to  good  ends.    These  may  be  considered  as  internal  or  extefnal. 

^(6.)  The  inward  ones,  such  as  hope,  trust,  fear,  and  love  of  Qod  and 
oor  neighbour,  (which  may  be  more  properly  termed  good  dispontions, 
and  [are  branches  of]  sanctification,)  must  always  be  joined  with  faith, 
and  consequently  be  conditions  present  in  justification,  though  they  are 
not  the  means  or  instruments  of  receiving  it. 

**  (7.)  The  outward,"  (which  are  more  properly  termed  good  works,) 
"though  tliere  be  no  immediate  opportunity  of  practising  them,  and  there- 
fore a  sincere  desire  and  resolution  to  perform  them  be  sufiicient  for  the 
present ;  yet  must  follow  after  as  soon  as  occasion  offers,  and  will  then 
K  necessary  conditions  of  preserving  our  justification. 

"(8.)  There  is  a  justification  conveyed  to  us  in  our  baptism,  or,  properly, 
this  state  is  then  begun.  But,  should  we  fall  into  sins,  we  cannot  regain 
it  without  true  faith  and  repentance,  which  implies  fas  its  fruits)  a  for- 
■king  of  our  sins,  and  amendment  of  our  whole  life." 

I  have  only  one  circumstance  farther  to  add,  namely,  that  I  am  not 
newlj  convinced  of  these  things.  For  this  is  the  doctrine  which  I  have 
eootiniially  taught  for  eight  or  nine  years  last  past ;  only,  I  abstained 
fipom  the  word  condition^  perhaps  more  scrupulously  than  was  needfuL 

4.  With  regard  to  the  consequences  of  my  teaching  this  doctrine,  I 
doaire  aoj  who  will  not  account  it  lost  labour,  to  consult  with  his  own 
ejeSy  seriously  and  in  the  fear  of  God,  the  Third  and  Fourth  Journals. 
Attd  if  he  pleases,  he  may  farther  read  over  and  compare,  from  the  279th 
to  the  381st  page  of  mv  answer ;  with  your  reply,  from  the  one  himdred 
and  first  iiiclu8ive«  to  ue  one  hundred  and  fourth  page. 


804        '  PRINCIPLES  OF  A  METHODIST 

Among  the  consequences  you  reckoned,  (in  your  Remarks,)  besides, 
**  introducing  predestination,  confusion,  presumption,  and  despair,  many 
very  shocking  instances  of  all  which"  (your  words  are)  "  you  give  us 
among  your  followers."  (pp.  52,  55.)  I  answered,  "You  should  have 
specified  a  few  of  those  instances,  at  least  the  pages  where  they  occur. 
(Suppose,  only  three  of  each  sort,  out  of  any  or  all  the  Four  Journals.) 
Till  this  is  done,  I  can  look  upon  this  assertion  as  no  other  than  a 
flourish  of  your  pen." 

Upon  this  you  exclaim :  (p.  Ill :)  "I  must  beg  the  reader  to  ob- 
serve your  method  of  citing  my  words.  Many  instances  of  omissions 
he  has  had  already.  But  here  is  such  a  one,  as  I  bcUeve  few  contro> 
vcrsies  can  parallel.  Would  not  any  one  imagine  from  the  view  of  these 
words,  [predestination,  confusion,  presumption,  and  despair,]  that  they 
occurred  all  together  in  page  fif\y-two,  of  my  Remarhi,  and  that  I  ob- 
served nothing  farther  concerning  this  point  1  Could  it  be  thought  that 
any  thing  intervened  between  the  page  referred  to,  and  the  last  sentence? 
And  yet  so  it  is,  that  near  three  pages  intervene !'  Ha !  do  near  three 
pages  intervene  !  Prodigious  indeed !  **  And  this  is  called  an  answer!" 
So  it  is,  for  want  of  a  better. 

"  Your  business  was  to  show,  that  the  Calvinistical  notions  have  not 
prevailed  among  the  Methodists,  or  that  they  were  no  consequences  of 
unconditional  justification."  No,  sir,  it  was  not  my  business  to  show 
this.  It  was  not  my  business  to  prove  the  negative ;  but  yours,  to  prove 
the  afRrmativc.  Mr.  Whitefield  is  himself  a  Calvinist  Such  therefore 
doubtless  are  many  of  his  followers.  But  Calvinism  has  not  prevailed 
at  all  among  any  other  of  the  Methodists,  (so  called,)  nor  is  it  to  this 
day  any  consequence  of  unconditional  justification,  in  the  maimer  wherein 
I  preach  it.  ' 

5.  You  next  "  take  the  pains  to  lay  before  the  reader  an  instance  or 
two  of  confusion,"  &c.     The  first  I  read  thus : — 

"  While  we  were  at  the  room,  Mrs.  J.,  sitting  at  home,  took  the  Bible 
to  read ;  but  on  a  sudden  threw  it  away,  saying,  '  I  am  good  enough.  I 
will  never  read  or  pray  more.'  She  was  in  the  same  mind  when  I  came; 
often  repeating,  '  I  used  to  think  I  was  full  of  sin,  and  that  I  sinned  in 
every  thing  I  did.  But  now  I  know  better.;  I  am  a  good  Christian;  I 
never  did  any  harm  in  my  life ;  I  do  not  desire  to  be  any  better  than  I  am.' 
She  spake  many  things  to  tlie  same  effect,  plainly  showing  that  the  spirit 
of  pride  and  of  lies  had  the  full  dominion  over  her.  I  asked,  '  Do  you 
desire  to  be  healed  ?'  She  said, '  I  am  whole.'  *  But  do  you  desire  to  be 
saved  ?'    She  replied,  *  I  am  saved,  I  ail  nothing,  I  am  happy.' 

"  This  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  the  present  salvation  and  smless  perfection 
taught  by  you  among  the  weak  and  ignorant."  (p.  11.) 

I  should  wonder  if  the  scarecrow  of  sinless  perfection  was  not  brought 
in  some  way  or  other.  But  to  the  point:  You  here  repeat  a  relation  aa 
from  me,  and  that  "  in  confirmation,"  you  say,  "  of  your  own  veracity,* 
and  yet  leave  out  both  the  beginning  of  that  relation,  part  of  the  middle, 
and  the  end  of  it. 

I  begin  thus:  **  Sun.  11. — I  met  widi  a  surprising  instance  of  the 
power  of  the  devil."  (Vol.  iii,  p.  200.)  These  woiids,  of  all  other8» 
should  not  have  been  lefl  out,  being  a  key  to  all  that  follows.  In  the 
middle  of  the  relation,  inm:iediately  after  the  words,  **  I  am  happy,"  I  add, 
*'  Yet  it  was  easy  to  discern  she  was  in  the  most  violent  ag<my  both  of 


FARTHER  EXPLAINED.  305 

body  and  mind;  sweating  exceedingly,  noth withstanding  die  severe 
frost,  and  not  continuing  in  the  same  posture  a  moment :" — a  plain 
proof  that  this  was  no  instance  of  presumption,  nor  a  natural  fruit  of  any 
teaching  whatever. 

It  ends  thus :  **  Ahout  a  quarter  before  six  the  next  morning,  after 
Unng  qaiet  a  while,  she  broke  out,  *  Peace  be  unto  thee ;'  (her  husband;) 
"  peace  be  unto  this  house ;  the  peace  of  God  is  come  to  my  soul ;  I 
know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth.^  And  for  several  days  her  mouth  was 
filled  with  his  praise,  and  her  talk  was  wholly  of  his  wondrous  works." 
Had  not  these  words  been  left  out,  neither  could  this  have  passed  for 
an  instance  of  despair.  Though  still  I  do  not  know  but  it  might  have 
stood  for  an  instance  of  confusion,  &c. 

I  must  not  forget  that  this  was  cited  at  first  as  a  proof  of  my  enthu- 
siasm ;  as  an  instance  of  a  private  revelation,  *'  which,"  you  say,  "  I 
seem  to  paj  great  credit  to, — representing  the  conjectures  of  a  woman, 
whose  brain  appears  to  have  been  too  much  heated,  as  if  they  had  been 
owing  to  a  paiticular  and  miraculous  spirit  of  prophecy."  {Remarks^ 
p.  64.)  I  answered,  "  Descant,  sir,  as  you  please  on  this  enthusiasm  ; 
00  the  credit  I  paid  to  this  private  revelation ;  ard  my  representing  the 
conjectures  of  this  brain-sick  woman  as  owing  to  a  miraculous  power  of 
the  Spirit  of  prophecy :  and  when  you  have  done,  I  vnil  desire  you  to 
read  the  passage  once  more ;  where  you  will  find  ray  express  words 
are,  introducing  this  account :  •  Sun.  1 1 .  I  met  with  a  surprising  instance 
of  the  power  of  the  devil.'  Such  was  the  credit  I  paid  to  this  revelation! 
AU  which  I  ascribe  to  the  Spirit  of  God  is,  the  enabling  her  to  strive 
aninst  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  at  length  restoring  peace  to  her  soul." 
(Jjitirer,  p.  288.) 

I  was  in  hopes  you  had  done  with  this  instance.  But  I  am  disap- 
pointed :  for  in  your  Second  Letter  I  read  thus :— - 

••  The  instances  of  enthusiasm  and  presumption  which  your  last 
Journal  had  furnished  me  with  remain  now  to  be  reviewed.  The  first 
was  of  a  private  revelation,  which  you  appeared  to  pay  great  credit  to. 
You  bad  represented  every  thing  the  woman  had  spoke  in  her  agony  as 
coming  to  pass."  (p.  130.)  But  I  had  not  represented  any  tlmig  she 
ipoke  then*  whether  it  came  to  pass  or  no,  as  coming  from  the  Spirit  of 
God,  but  trom  the  devil. 

Tou  say,  ^  When  I  read  this  first,  I  was  amazed,  and  impatient  to 
look  again  into  your  JoumaL  But  I  had  no  sooner  done  this,  but  I 
was  still  more  astomshed.  For  you  have  very  grievously  misrepre- 
senced  the  case."  If  I  have,  then  I  will  bear  the  blame  ;  but  if  not,  it 
mil  light  on  your  head. 

"  It  is  not  thii  account  which  you  had  thus  introduced ;  but  another, 
and  a  very  different  one,  of  what  happened  a  day  or  two  before.  Sun- 
day, you  mention  her  as  beinff  guilty  of  gross  presumption,  which  you 
auribute  to  the  power  of  the  devil.  But  on  Monday  and  Tuesday  the 
opposite  revelauons  happened,  which  you  relate  without  the  least  mark 
of  diffidence  or  blame."  {Ibid.  p.  131.) 

I  am  grieved  that  you  constrain  me  to  say  any  more.  In  the  sixty- 
sixth  and  sixtj-eeventh  pages  of  the  last  Journal,  [YoL  iii,  p.  200,  of 
this  edition,]  I  gave  an  account  of  Mrs.  Jones,  which  I  term  '*  a  smv 
Tirinng  instance  of  the  power  of  the  deviL"    It  includes  the  oconrrencee 

Vol.  T.  20 


306  PRINCIPLES  07  ▲  METHODIST 

of  three  days.  This  you  brought  as  a  proof  of  my  enthusiasm.  I 
answer,  "  The  very  words  that  introduce  this  account,"  prove  it  is  no 
instance  of  enthusiasm  ;  meaning  by  this  (ucount^  (as  I  suppose  is  plain 
to  every  reader,)  the  following  account  of  Mrs.  Jones.  You  reply,  '*  It  is 
not  this  account,  which  you  had  thus  introduced,  but  another,  and  a  veiy 
different  one,  of  what  happened  a  day  or  two  before."  Sir,  it  is  the 
whole  account  of  Mrs.  Jones  which  I  thus  introduce ;  and  not  another, 
not  a  very  different  one.  And  I  attribute  the  agony  which  she  (Mrs. 
Jones)  was  in,  and  most  of  the  words  which  she  spoke,  both  on  Sunday, 
Monday,  and  Tuesday,  not  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  but  to  the  power  of 
the  devil. 

6.  The  next  instance  which  you  relate  as  an  instance  of  despair,  is 
that  of  a  young  woman  of  Eongswood;  which  you  break  off  with, ''  Take 
me  away,  &c."  (p.  112.)  But  why  did  you  not  decypher  that  &c] 
Why  did  you  not  add  the  rest  of  the  paragraph  ?  Because  it  would  have 
spoiled  your  whole  argument.  It  would  have  shown  what  the  end  of 
the  Lord  was,  in  permitting  that  severe  visitation.  The  words  are,  "TTe 
interrupted  her  by  calling  again  upon  God,  on  which  she  sunk  down  as 
before,  (as  one  asleep,)  and  another  young  woman  began  to  roar  as 
loud  as  she  had  done.  My  brother  now  came  in,  it  being  about  nine 
o'clock.  We  continued  in  prayer  till  past  eleven ;  when  God  in  a  mo- 
ment spoke  peace  into  the  soul,  first,  of  the  first  tormented,  and  then  of 
the  other.  And  they  both  joined  in  singing  praises  to  Him  who  had 
stilled  the  enemy  and  the  avenger."  (Vol.  iii,  p.  161.) 

7.  I  am  sorry  to  find  you  still  affirm,  that,  with  regard  to  the  Lord's 
Supper  also,  I  **  advance  many  injudicious,  false,  and  dangerous  things. 
Such  as,  (1.)  That  *  a  man  ought  to  conmiunicate,  without  a  sure  trust 
in  God's  mercy  through  Christ.'"  (p.  117.)     You  mark  these  as  my 
words  ;  but  I  laiow  them  not.     (2.)  "  That  there  is  no  previous  pre- 
|>aration  indbpensably  necessary,  but  a  desire  to  receive  whatsoever 
God  pleases  to  give."     But  I  include  abundantly  more  in  that  desire 
than  you  seem  to  apprehend ;  even  a  willingness  to  know  and  do  the 
whole  wiH  of  God.     (3.)  "  That  no  fitness  is  required  at  the  time  of 
communicating,"  (I  recite  the  whole  sentence,)  **  but  a  sense  df  our. 
state,  of  our  utter  sinfulness  and  helplessness !     Every  one  who  knows 
he  is  fit  for  hell,  being  just  fit  to  come  to  Christ,  in  this,  as  well  as  in  all 
other  ways  of  his  appointment"     But  neither  can  this  sense  of  our  utter 
sinfulness  and  helplessness  subsist,  without  earnest  desires  of  universal 
hohness.     "  There  was  another  passage,"  you  say,  "  which  you  chose 
to  omit."  (p.  118.)     Which  this  was  I  do  not  understand.     Nor  do 
[  perceive  any  one  of  these  dreadful  positions  (as  you  style  them)  to  be 
contraiy  to  the  word  of  God.  ^ 

8.  I  ou  will  likewise,  at  all  hazards,  stand  your  ground,  as  to  the  | 
charge  of  stoical  insensibility.     I  answered  before,  "How  do  you  sup-  , 
port  the  charge  1    Why  thus  :  •  You  say.  The  aervanU  of  Cfvd  $ufftr 
nothing.^    And  can  you  possibly  misunderstand  these  words,  if  yoa. 
read  those  that  immediately  follow  1 — *  His  body  was  weUnoi^  torn 
asunder  with  pain.    But  God  made  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness.    So  tint  \ 
he  was  continually  giving  thanks  to  God,  and  making  his  boast  of  his 
praise.' "  (p.  285.) 

You  reply, "  If  you  meant  no  more  thaA  that  a  maA  under  the  ahaipeit 


FARTHER  EXPLAINED.  807 

pains  may  be  dnnkful  to  God,  why  did  you  call  this  a  strange  truth  V* 
(p.  118.)  Because  I  think  it  is  so.  I  think  it  exceeding  strange, 
that  one  in  such  a  degree  of  pain  should  be  continually  giving  thanks 
to  God.  Not  that  I  suppose  him  *4nsensible  of  his  torments."  **  His 
body,"  I  say,  *'  was  well-nigh  torn  asunder  with  pain."  But  the  love 
of  God  so  abundantly  overbalanced  all  pain,  that  it  was  as  nothing 
to  bim. 

**  The  next  instance  is  as  follows :  One  told  you,  *  Sir,  I  thought  last 
week  there  could  be  no  such  rest  as  you  describe ;  none  in  this  world 
wbereia  we  should  be  so  free  as  not  to  desire  ease  in  pain.  But  God 
has  taught  me  better.  For  on  Friday  and  Saturday,  when  I  was  in  the 
strongest  pain,  I  never  once  had  one  moment's  desire  of  ease.' "  Add, 
**  But  only  that  the  ¥rill  of  God  might  be  done." 

Neither  has  this  any  resemblance  of'*  stoical  insensibility."  I  never 
supposed  that  this  person  did  not  feel  pain ;  (nor  indeed  that  there  is 
any  stale  on  earth  wherein  we  shall  not  feel  it ;)  but  that  her  soul  was 
filled  with  the  love  of  God,  and  thankfully  resigned  to  his  wilL 

'*  Another  instance  is  taken  from  one  of  your  hymns,  where  are  these 
lines: — (p.  119.) 

'  Doom,'  if  thou  canst,  to  endless  pains, 
And  drive  me  from  thy  face  :*** 

(Add, 

''But  if  thy  stronger  love  constrains, 
Let  me  saved  oy  grace.") 

**  This  I  thou^t  the  height  of  insensibility,  extravagance,  and  presump- 
tioii.  You  see  nothing  of  these  in  it  And  yet  you  explain  yourself 
tinis  :  *  If  thou  canst  deny  thyself,  if  thou  canst  forget  to  be  gracious, 
if  thou  canst  cease  to  be  truth  and  love :'  all  which,  in  my  opinion,  is 
fixing  the  charge  most  strongly  upon  you.  For  the  supposition  that 
Christ  can  do  these  things." — Are  you  in  earnest,  sir  ?    Are  you  really 

rirant,  that  expressions  of  this  kind  do  not  suppose  he  can^  but  quite 
reverse  1  that  they  are  one  of  the  strongest  forms  of  obtestation,  of 
Myuring  God  to  show  mercy,  by  all  his  grace,  and  truth,  and  love  1  So 
iar  is  this  also  from  proving  the  charge  of  '*  stoical  insensibility." 

IIL  1.  I  come  now  to  consider  the  point  of  Church  communion,  of 
which  yon  have  spoke  in  the  beginning  of  your  treatise.  In  the  entrance, 
j«m  say,  '^  We  teach  no  other  doctrine  than  has  always  been  taught  in 
our  Church.  Our  sentiments  concerning  justification  are  reconcilable 
to  oar  Articles,  Homilies,  and  Service.  This  I  apprehend  several  of  the 
Methodists  have  been  convinced  of,  and  have  Uierefore  led  our  com- 
munion entirely.  Tou  give  us  more  instances  than  one  of  this  in  your 
last  JoumaL"  (p.  2.)  No,  not  one.  Nor  did  I  ever  yet  know  one  man 
who  **  therefore  lefl  the  communion  of  the  Church,"  because  he  was 
convinced  that  either  her  Articles,  Homilies,  or  Liturgy,  opposed  his 
sentiments  concerning  justification.  Poor  Mr.  St —  and  Mr.  Simpson 
were  induced  to  leave  it  by  reasons  of  quite  another  kind. 
'  Ton  add,  *'  We  cannot  wonder  that  some  Methodists  have  withdrawn 
from  her,  while  they  have  been  used  to  hear  doctrines  which  they  must 
have  been  sensible  have  no  place  in  her  Articles  and  Service."  So  far 
fimn  itf  that  all  I  know  of  them  are  deeply  sensible,  the  **  doctrines  they 


808  PRI1CCIPLE8  OF  A  BTBTHODIST 

have  been  used  to  hear"  daily,  are  no  other  than  the  genuine  doctrines 
of  the  Church,  as  expressed  both  in  her  Articles  and  Service. 

2.  But  our  present  question  turns  not  on  doctrine  but  discipline. 
"  My  first  business,"  you  say,  "  is  to  consider  some  very  lax  notions  of 
Church  comipunion  which  I  find  in  your  last  Journal.  VoL  iii,  p.  177, 
you  say,  *  Our  Twentieth  Article  defines  a  true  Church,  a  congregatioQ 
of  faithful  people,  wherein  the  true  word  of  God  is  preached,  and  the 
sacraments  duly  administered.' "  (p.  3.)  The  use  I  would  willingly 
make  of  this  definition,  (which,  observe,  is  not  mine,  be  it  good  or  bad,) 
is  to  stop  the  boasting  of  ungodly  men,  by  cutting  off  dieir  pretence  to 
call  themselves  of  the  Church.  But  you  think  they  may  call  themselres 
so  still.     Then  let  them.     I  wiU  not  contend  about  it. 

But  you  cannot  infer  from  hence,  that  my  notions  of  Chnrcb  com- 
munion are  either  lax  or  otherwise.  The  definition  which  I  occasionally 
cite  shows  nothing  of  my  sentiments  on  that  head.  And  for  any  thing 
which  occurs  in  this  page,  they  may  be  strict  or  loose,  right  or  wrong. 

You  add,  ^  It  will  be  requisite,  in  order  to  approve  yourself  a  minister 
of  our  Church,  that  you  follow  her  rules  and  orders ;  that  you  constantly 
conform  to  the  method  of  worship  she  has  prescribed,  and  study  to  pro- 
mote her  peace."  (p.  5.)  Ail  this  is  good  and  fit  to  be  done.  But  it 
properiy  belongs  to  the  following"  question : — 

**  What  led  you  into  such  very  loose  notions  of  Church  communioo, 
I  imagine,  might  be,  your  being  conscious  to  yourself,  that,  according 
to  the  strict,  just  account  of  the  Church  of  England,  you  could  not,  with 
any  grace,  maintain  your  pretensions  to  belong  still  to  her."  Sir,  I  hare 
never  told  you  yet  what  my  notions  of  Church  communion  are.  They 
may  be  wrong,  or  they  may  be  right,  for  all  you  know.  Therefore,  when 
you  are  first  supposing  that  I  have  told  you  my  notions,  and  then  as- 
signing the  reasons  of  them,  What  can  be  said,  but  that  you  imagine  the 
whole  matter  ? 

3.  How  far  I  have  acted  agreeably  to  the  rules  and  orders  of  our 
Church,  is  a  farther  question.  You  think  I  have  acted  contrary  thereto. 
First,  by  using  extemporary  prayer  in  public.  '*  The  Church,"  you  eay,  i 
"  has  strongly  declared  her  mind  on  this  point,  by  appointing  her  excel- 
lent Liturgy,  which  you  have  solemnly  promised  to  use,  and  no  other." 
I  know  not  when  or  where.  "  And  whoever  does  not  worship  God  in 
the  manner  she  prescribes  must  be  supposed  to  slight  and  contenm  her 
ofiices  and  rules  ;  and  therefore  can  be  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  her 
minister."  (Ibid,  p.  7.) 

I  do  not  "  slight  or  contemn  the  offices"  of  the  Church :  I  esteem 
tiiem  very  highly.  And  yet  I  do  not,  at  all  times,  worship  God,  even  in 
public,  in  the  very  terms  of  those  offices.  Nor  yet  do  I  knowingly 
**  slight  or  contemn  her  rules :"  for  it  is  not  clear  to  my  apprehension, 
that  she  has  any  rule  which  forbids  using  extemporary  prayer,  suppose 
between  the  morning  and  evening  service.  And  if  I  am  "  not  worthy 
to  be  called  her  minister,"  (which  I  dare  by  no  means  affirm  mjrself  to 
be,)  yet  her  minister  I  am,  and  must  always  be,  unless  I  should  be 
judicially  deposed  from  my  ministry. 

Your  second  argument  is  this :  "  If  you  suppose  the  Scripture  enjoins 
you  to  use  extemporary  prayer,  then  you  must  suppose  our  Liturgy  to 
be  inconsistent  with  Scripture ;  and,  consequently,  tmlawful  to  be  used  ** 


FARTHER  EXPLAINED.  809 

That  does  not  follow ;  unless  I  supposed  the  Scripture  to  enjoin  to  use 
ejLtemporary  prayer  and  no  other.  Then  it  would  follow,  that  a  form  of 
ivayer  was  inconsistent  with  Scripture.     But  this  I  never  did  suppose. 

Your  third  argument  is  to  this  effect :  **  You  act  contrary  to  the  rule 
of  the  Church.  Allow  she  is  in  the  wrong;  yet,  while  you  break  her 
rule,  how  do  you  act  as  her  minister?'  It  ought  to  be  expressed,  <*  How 
are  you  her  minister?"  for  the  conclusion  to  be  proved  is,  that  I  am  not 
her  minister. 

I  answer,  (1.)  I  am  not  convinced,  as  I  observed  before,  that  I  do 
h«eby  break  her  rule.  (2.)  If  I  did,  yet  should  I  not  cease  to  be  her 
minister,  unless  I  were  formally  deprived.  (3.)  I  now  actually  do  con- 
tinue in  her  communion,  and  hope  that  I  always  shall. 

4.  You  object  farther,  that  I  '*  disobey  the  governors  of  the  Church.'' 
I  jaswer,  I  both  do,  and  will,  obey  them  in  all  things,  where  I  do  not 
apprehend  there  is  some  particular  law  of  God  to  the  contrary.  *^Here," 
jrou  say,  **  you  confess  that  in  some  things  you  do  not,  and  cannot,  obey 
your  governors."  (p.  8.)  Did  I  confess  this  ?  Then  I  spoke  rashly  and 
foolishly;  for  I  granted  more  than  I  can  make  good.  I  do  certainly 
apprehend  that  the  law  of  God  requires  me,  both  to  preach,  and,  some- 
times, to  pray  extempore.  Yet  I  do  not  know  that  I  disobey  the  governors 
of  the  Church  herein :  for  I  do  not  know  that  they  have  forbidden  me 
to  do  either. 

But  your  **  behaviour  and  method  of  teaching  is  irregular.  Have 
you  any  warrant  from  Scripture  for  preaching"  up  and  down  thus  ?  I 
diink  I  have ;  I  think  God  hath  called  me  to  this  work  **  by  the  laying 
on  of  the  hands  of  the  Presbytery,"  which  directs  me  how  to  obey  that 
general  command, ''  While  we  have  time,  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men." 

'*  But  we  ought  to  do  this  agreeably  to  our  respective  situations,  and 
not  break  in  upon  each  other's  provinces.  Every  private  man  may  take 
upon  himself  the  office  of  a  magistrate,  and  quote  this  text  as  justly  as 
you  have  done."  (p.  9.)  No ;  the  private  man  is  not  called  to  ^e  office 
of  a  magistrate ;  but  I  am  to  the  office  of  a  preacher.  ^  You  was,  in- 
deed, authorized  to  preach  the  Gospel ;  but  it  was  in  the  congregation 
to  which  you  should  be  lawfully  appointed.  Whereas  you  have  many 
years  preached  in  places  whereunto  you  was  not  lawfully  appointed ; 
nay,  which  were  entrusted  to  others,  who  neither  wanted  nor  desired 
your  assistance." 

Many  of  them  wanted  it  enough,  whether  they  desired  it  or  no.  But 
I  shall  not  now  debate  that  point  I  rather  follow  you  to  the  First  Part 
of  the  *♦  Farther  Appeal,"  where  this  objection  is  considered. 

6.  **  Our  Church,"  it  was  said,  "  has  provided  against  this  preaching 
up  and  down,  in  the  ordination  of  a  priest,  by  expressly  limiting  the 
exercise  of  the  powers  then  conferred  upon  him  to  the  congregation 
where  he  shall  be  lawfully  appointed  thereunto." 

I  answered,  (1.)  "  Your  argument  proves  too  much.  If  it  be  allowed 
just  as  you  propose  it,  it  proves  that  no  priest  has  authority  either  to 
|>reach  or  administer  the  sacrament  in  any  other  than  his  own  congre- 
gation." {Farther  Appeal,  p.  84.) 

You  reply,  "  Is  there  no  difference  between  a  thing's  being  done 
<iccasionally,  and  its  bdng  done  for  years  together  I"  Yes,  a  great  one; 
and  more  inconveniences  may  arise  firom  the  latter  than  fitmi  the  former. 


310  PRIIfCIPLES  OF  A  MBTH0DI8T 

But  this  is  all  wide  :  it  does  not  touch  the  point  Still,  if  our  Church 
does  expressly  limit  the  exercise  of  the  sacerdotal  powers  to  that  con- 
gregation whereunto  each  priest  shall  be  appointed,  this  precludes  him 
from  exercising  those  powers  at  all,  in  any  other  than  that  congregation. 

I  answered,  (2.)  "  Had  the  powers  conferred  been  so  limited  when  I 
was  ordained  priest,  my  ordmation  would  have  signified  just  nothing. 
For  I  was  not  appointed  to  any  congregation  at  all ;  but  was  ordained 
as  a  member  of  that '  college  of  divines,'  (so  our  statutes  eiqiresa  it,) 
^  founded  to  overturn  all  heresies,  and  defend  the  catholic  faith.'  '* 

You  reply,  *'  I  presume  it  was  expected  you  should  either  continue  at 
your  college,  or  enter  upon  some  regular  cure."  Perhaps  so ;  but  I 
must  still  insist,  that  if  my  sacerdotal  powers  had  been  then  expressly 
limited  to  that  congregation  whereunto  I  should  be  appointed,  my  ordi- 
nation would  have  signified  nothing.  I  mean,  I  could  never,  in  virtue 
of  that  ordination,  have  exercised  those  powers  at  all ;  seeing  I  never 
was  appointed  to  any  single  congregation,  at  least  not  till  I  went  to 
Georgia. 

I  answered,  (3.)  **  For  many  years  afller  I  was  ordained  priest,  this 
limittition  was  never  heard  of.  I  heard  not  one  syllable  of  it,  by  way  of 
objection  to  my  preaching  up  and  down  in  Oxford  or  London,  or  the 
parts  adjacent ;  in  Gloucestershire  or  Worcestershire ;  in  Lancashire, 
Yorkshire,  or  Lincolnshire.  Nor  did  the  strictest  disciplinarian  scruple 
sufix^ring  me  to  exercise  those  powers  wherever  I  came." 

You  reply,  **  There  is  great  difference  between  preaching  occasion- 
ally, with  the  leave  of  the  incumbents,  and  doing  it  constantly  without 
their  leave."  I  grant  there  is ;  and  there  are  objections  ta  the  latter, 
which  do  not  reach  the  former  case.  But  they  do  not  belong  to  this 
head.  They  do  not  in  the  least  affect  this  consequence, — ^^  If  eveiy 
priest,  when  ordained,  is  expressly  limited,  touching  the  exercise  of  the 
power  then  received,  to  that  congregation  to  which  he  shall  be  appointed; 
then  is  he  precluded  by  this  express  limitation  from  preaching,  with  or 
without  the  incumbent's  leave,  in  any  other  congregation  whatever." 

I  answered,  (4.)  ^*  Is  it  not,  in  fact,  universally  allowed,  that  every 
priest,  as  such,  has  a  power,  in  virtue  of  his  ordination,  to  preach  in  any 
congregation,  where  the  curate  desires  his  assistance  ?" 

You  reply  to  this  by  what  you  judge  a  parallel  case.  But  it  does  not 
touch  the  restriction  in  question.  Either  this  does,  or  does  not,  expressly 
limit  the  exercise  of  the  powers  conferred  upon  a  priest  in  his  ordination 
to  that  coilgregation  whereunto  he  shall  be  appointed.  If  it  does  not,  I 
am  not  condemned  by  this,  however  faulty  I  may  be  on  a  thousand 
other  accounts.  If  it  does,  then  is  every  priest  condemned  whoever 
preaches  out  of  the  congregation  to  which  he  is  appointed. 

Your  parallel  case  is  this :  **  Because  a  man  does  not  offend  against 
the  law  of  the*  land,  when  I  prevail  upon  him  to  teach  my  children ;" 
therefore  **  he  is  impowered  to  seize"  (read,  he  does  not  offend  against 
the  law  of  the  land  in  seizing,)  **  an  apartment  in  my  house,  and  against 
my  will  and  approbation  to  continue  therein,  and  to  direct  and  dictate  to 
my  family!"   (p.  11.) 

An  exact  parallel  indeed!  When,  therefore,  I  came  to  live  in  St. 
Luke's  parish,  was  ^it  just  the  same  thmg  as  if  I  had  seized  an  apartment 
in  Dr.  Buckley's  house  ?    And  was  the  continuing  therein  against  hift 


FARTHER  EXPLAINED.  811 

wiH  and  approbation  (supposing  it  were  so)  precisely  the  same,  as  if  I 
bad  continued  in  his  house,  whether  he  would  or  no  ?  Ts  the  one  exactly 
the  same  offence  against  the  law  of  the  land  as  the  other  ?  Once  more. 
Is  the  warning  sinners  in  Moorfields  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,  the 
▼cry  same  with  directing  the  Doctor's  family  under  his  own  roof?  I 
should  not  have  answered  this,  but  that  I  was  afraid  you  would  conclude 
it  was  unanswerable. 

I  answered  the  former  objector,  (5.)  "  Before  those  words  which  you 
suppose  to  imply  such  a  restraint,  were  those  words  spoken  without  any 
restraint  or  limitation  at  all,  which  I  apprehend  to  convey  an  indelible 
character,  *  Receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  the  office  and  work  of  a  priest 
in  the  church  of  God,  now  committed  unto  thee,  by  the  imposition  of  our 
hands.'  ^  You  reply,  "  The  question  is  not,  whether  you  are  in  orders 
or  not"  {Ibid.  p.  12.)  I  am  glad  to  hear  it.  I  really  thought  it  was. 
**  But  whether  you  have  acted  suitably  to  the  directions  or  rules  of  the 
Church  of  England."  Not  suitably  to  that  rule,  if  it  were  strictiy  to  be 
interpreted,  of  preaching  only  in  a  single  congregation.  But  I  have 
given  my  reasons  why  I  think  it  cannot  be  so  interpreted.  And  those 
reasons  I  do  not  see  that  you  have  invah'dated. 

I  would  only  add.  If  I  am  in  orders,  if  I  am  a  minister  still,  and  yet 
not  a  minister  of  the  Church  of  England,  of  what  church  am  I  a  minister? 
Whoever  is  a  minister  at  all,  is  a  minister  of  some  particular  church. 
Neither  can  he  cease  to  be  a  minister  of  that  church,  till  he  is  cast  out 
of  it  by  a  judicial  sentence.  Till,  therefore,  I  am  so  cast  out,  (which  I 
trust  will  never  be,)  I  must  style  myself  a  minister  of  the  Church  of 
England. 

6.  Your  next  objection  is,  •*  You  not  only  erect  bands,  which  af\er 
the  Moravians,  you  call  the  United  Society,  but  also  give  out  tickets  to 
those  that  continue  therein."  These  bands,  you  think,  "  have  had  very 
hid  consequences,  as  was  to  be  expected,  when  weak  people  are  made 
leaders  of  their  brethren,  and  are  set  upon  expounding  Scripture."  {Ibid,) 

You  are  in  some  mistake;?  here.  For,  (1.)  The  bands  are  not  called 
die  United  Society.  (2.)  The  United  Society  was  originally  so  called, 
not  aflter  the  Moravians,  but  because  it  consisted  of  several  smaller 
societies  united  together.  (3.)  Neither  the  bands  nor  the  leaders  of 
them,  as  such,  are  ^*  set  upon  expounding  Scripture."  (4.)  The  good 
consequences  of  their  meeting  together  in  bands,  I  know  ;  but  the  very 
bad  consequences,  I  know  not. 

When  any  members  of  these,  or  of  the  United  Society,  are  proved  to 
live  in  known  sin,  we  then  mark  and  avoid  them ;  we  separate  ourselves 
fiom  every  one  that  walks  disorderly.  Sometimes,  if  the  case  be  judged 
infectious,  (though  rarely,)  this  is  openly  declared.  And  this  you  s^lc 
^excommunication;"  and  say,  **  Does  not  every  one  see  a  separate 
ecclesiastical  society  or  communion?"  (p.  13.)  No.  This  society 
does  not  separate  from  the  communion  of  the  rest  of  the  Church  of 
England.  They  continue  steadfastly  with  them,  both  "  in  the  apostoli- 
cal doctrine,  and  in  the  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayers."  (Which 
neither  Mr.  St —  nor  Mr.  Simpson  does,  nor  the  gentieman  who  writes 
to  you  in  favour  of  the  Moravians,  who  also  writes  pressingly  to  me  to 
separate  myself  from  the  Church.)  A  society  **  over  which  you  had 
appointed  vourself  a  governor."   No :  so  far  as  I  governed  them,  it  was 


312  PRINCIPLES  OF  ▲  MBTH0DI8T 

t 

at  their  own  entreaty.  **  And  took  upon  you  all  the  spiritual  authority 
which  the  very  highest  church  governor  could  claim."  What !  at  Kings- 
wood,  in  February  1740-1 1  Not  so.  I  took  upon  me  no  other  authority 
(then  and  there  at  least)  than  any  steward  of  a  society  exerts  by  the 
consent  of  the  other  members.  I  did  neither  more  nor  less  than  declare, 
that  they  who  had  broken  our  rules  were  no  longer  of  our  society. 

*^  Can  you  pretend  that  you  received  thi? authority  from  our  Church?" 
Not  by  ordination ;  for  I  did  not  exert  it  as  a  priest ;  but  as  one  whom 
that  society  had  voluntarily  chosen  to  be  at  the  head  of  them.  '^  Or  thai 
you  exercised  it  in  subjection  or  subordination  to  her  lawful  governors  ?" 
i  think  so ;  I  am  sure  I  did  not  exercise  it  in  any  designed  opposition  to 
them.  ^'  Did  you  ever  think  proper  to  consult  or  advise  with  them, 
about  fixing  the  terms  of  your  communion  ?"  If  you  mean,  about  fixing 
the  rules  of  admitting  or  excluding  from  our  society,  1  never  did  think  it 
cither  needful  or  proper.     Nor  do  I  at  this  day. 

**  How  then  will  you  vindicate  all  these  powers?"  Ail  these  are, 
*'  declaring  those  are  no  longer  of  our  society."  ''  Here  is  a  manifi^sl 
congregation.  Either  it  belonged  to  the  Church  of  England,  or  not 
If  it  did  not,  you  set  up  a  separate  communion  against  her.  And  how 
then  are  you  injured,  in  being  thought  to  have  withdrawn  from  her  ?"  I 
have  nothing  to  do  with  this.  The  antecedent  is  false :  therefore  the 
consequent  falb  of  course.  **  If  it  did  belong  to  the  Church,  show  where 
the  Church  gave  you  such  authority  of  controlling  and  regulating  it  ?" 
Authority  of  (mtting  disorderly  members  out  of  that  society  ?  The  society 
itself  gave  me  that  authority.  *'  What  private  clerg3rman  can  plead  lK»r 
commission  to  be  thus  a  judge  and  ordinary,  even  in  his  own  parish  ?" 
Any  clergyman  or  layman,  without  pleading  her  commission,  may  be 
thus  a  judge  and  ordinary.  ^*  Are  not  these  powers  inherent  in  her 
governors,  and  committed  to  the  higher  order  of  her  clergy  ?"  No ;  not 
file  power  of  excluding  members  from  a  private  society, — unless  on 
supposition  of  some  such  rule  as  ours  is,  viz.  **  That  if  any  man  separate 
from  the  Church,  he  is  no  longer  a  member  of  our  socie^." 

7.  But  you  have  more  proof  yet :  "  The  grand  jury  in  Georgia  found, 
that  you  had  called  yourself  ordinary  of  Savannah.  Nor  was  this  fact 
contradicted  even  by  those  of  the  jury  who,  you  say,  wrote  in  your  fa- 
vour :  so  that  it  appears,  you  have  long  had  an  inclination  to  be  inde- 
pendent and  uncontrolled."  This  argument  ought  to  be  good ;  for  it  is 
far  fetched.  The  plain  case  was  this  :  that  grand  jury  did  assert,  that, 
in  Mr.  Causton's  hearing,  I  had  called  myself  ordinary  of  Savannah. 
The  minority  of  the  jury,  in  their  letter  to  the  trustees,  refuted  the  other 
allegations  particularly ;  but  thought  this  so  idle  a  one,  that  they  did 
not  deign  to  give  it  any  farther  reply,  than, 

"  As  to  the  eighth  bill  we  are  in  doubt,  as  not  well  knowing  the  mean- 
ing of  the  word  ordinary."     See  vol.  iii,  p.  44. 

You  add,  ^*  I  appeal  to  any  reasonable  man,  whether  you  have  not 
acted  as  an  ordinary,  nay,  a  bishop,  in  Kingswood."  If  you  mean,  in 
^*  declaring  those  disorderly  members  were  no  longer  of  that  society ;" 
I  admit  your  appeal,  whether  I  therein  acted  as  a  bishop,  or  as  any 
Fleward  of  a  society  may.  "  Nay,  you  have  gone  far  beyond  the  gene- 
rality of  the  Dissenters  themselves ;  who  do  not  commit  the  power  of 
exconmiunication,  and  appointing  to  preach,"  (that  is  another  questioin) 


FAATHXB  KXPLAIKKD.  dl3 

'  to  the  handi  of  any  private  minister."  The  powers  of  excommuntcO' 
IMA.  Tiue ;  but  this  was  not  excommunication^  but  a  quite  different 
thing. 

How  far,  in  what  circumstances,  and  in  what  sense,  I  have  *'  appointed 
men  to  preach,"  I  have  explained  at  large  in  the  third  part  of  the  ''  Far- 
ther AppeaL"  But  I  wait  for  farther  light ;  and  am  ready  to  consider, 
as  I  am  able,  whatever  shall  be  replied  to  what  is  there  advanced. 

8.  Your  general  conclusion  is,  '*  Whatever  jour  pretences  or  pro- 
fessions may  be,  you  can  be  looked  upon  by  serious  and  impartial 
persona,  not  as  a  member,  much  less  a  minister,  of  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land, but  as  no  other  than  an  enemy  to  her  constitution,  worship,  and 
doctrine,  raising  divisions  and  disturbances  in  her  communion."  {Ibid* 
p.  76.)  M  And  yet  you  say,  *•  I  cannot  have  greater  regard  to  her  rules/ 
*1  dare  not  renounce  communion  with  her.' "  {Ibid*  p.  15.) 

1  do  say  so  stilL  I  cannot  have  a  greater  regard  to  any  human  rules, 
than  to  follow  Uiem  in  all  things,  unless  where  I  apprehend  there  is  a 
divine  rule  to  the  contrary.  I  dare  not  renounce  communion  with  the 
Church  of  England.  As  a  minister,  I  teach  her  doctrines ;  I  use  her 
offices ;  I  confmrn  to  her  rubrics ;  I  suffer  reproach  for  my  attachment 
to  her.  As  a  private  member,  I  hold  her  doctrines ;  I  join  in  her  offices, 
in  prayer,  in  hearing,  in  communicating.  1  expect  every  reasonable 
man,  touching  these  facts,  to  behove  his  own  eyes  and  ears.  But  if 
these  facts  are  so,  how  dare  any  man  of  common  sense  charge  me  with 
raxHmcing  the  Church  of  England  1 

9.  Use  ever  so  many  exaggerations,  still  the  whole  of  this  matter  is, 
(1.)  I  oStoa  use  extemporary  prayer.  (2.)  Wherever  I  can,  I  preach 
the  GospeL  (3.)  Those  who  desire  to  live  the  Gospel,  I  advise  how 
to  watch  over  each  other,  and  to  put  from  them  such  as  walk  disorderly. 
Now,  whether  these  things  are,  on  other  considerations,  right  or  wrong, 
this  single  point  I  must  still  insist  on :  *'  All  this  does  not  prove,  either 
that  I  am  no  member,  or  that  I  am  no  minister,  of  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land." Nay,  nothing  can  prove,  I  am  no  member  of  the  Church,  till  I 
either  am  excommunicated,  or  renounce  her  communion,  and  no  longer 
join  in  her  doctrine,  and  in  the  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayer.  Nor 
can  any  thing  prove,  I  am  no  minister  of  the  Church,  till  I  either  am 
deposed  from  n^  ministry,  or  voluntarily  renounce  her,  and  wholly  cease 
to  teach  her  doctrines,  use  her  offices,  and  obey  her  rubrics  for  con- 
science' sake. 

However,  I  grant,  that  whatsoever  is  **  urged  on  this  head  deserves 
my  most  serious  consideration."  And  whensoever  I  am  convinced, 
tlat  by  taking  any  methods,  more  or  less  different  from  those  I  now  take, 
I  may  better  *^  consult  the  honour  of  religion,  and  be  able  to  do  more 
good  in  the  world,"  by  the  grace  of  God  I  shall  not  persist  in  these  one 
hour,  but  instantly  cttoose  the  more  excellent  way. 

lY.  1.  What  you  urge  on  the  he€ul  of  enthusiasm  also,  I  think,  "  de- 
serves my  most  serious  consideration."  You  may  add,  *^  and  presump- 
tion." I  let  it  drop  once  more ;  because  I  do  not  love  tautology ;  and 
because  I  look  upon  presumption  to  be  essential  to  enthusiasm,  and, 
consequently,  contained  therein.  I  will  therefore  weigh  what  you  ad- 
vance concerning  it,  and  explain  myself  something  more  at  large. 

**  I  am  to  examine,"  you  say,  **  how  far  you  have  cleared  yourself  o^ 


814  PRIlfCIPLES  OF  A  METHODIST 

enthusiasm.  My  account  of  this  you  set  down,  making  as  many  alter 
tions  and  omissions  as  there  are  lines."  (p.  120.)  Perhaps  more ;  f 
I  never  designed  to  recite  the  whole,  hut  only  the  material  part  of 
»*  If  you  did  not  wholly  approve  of  it,  why  would  you  not  let  me  kno 
what  you  disliked  in  it  ]"  Because  I  do  not  love  many  words.  Thef 
fore,  when  the  argument  stood  thus,  *'  He  that  does  this  is  an  enth 
siast ;  but  you  do  this ;"  I  was  generally  content  with  answering  tj 
second  proposition,  and  leaving  the  first  as  I  found  it. 

"  I  laid  this  charge  against  you  and  the  Methodists  in  general ;  b 
tWeen  you  every  part  of  the  character  has  been  verified."  I  answer  I 
one ;  let  the  rest  answer  for  themselves,  if  they  have  not  better  ei 
ployraent. 

That  the  question  between  us  may  be  the  more  fully  understood, 
shall  briefly  compare  together,  (1.)  Your  remarks.  (2.)  My  answc 
(3.)  Your  r^ly ;  though  ^tili  I  cannot  promise  to  repeat  your  words 
length. 

2.  You  remark,  "  Though  you  would  be  thought  an  enemy  to  endi 
siasm  and  presumption,  yet  in  both  you  are  far  from  being  inferior 
the  Moravians,  or  indeed  to  any  others."  (p.  60.)  Strong  assertion 
JVof  inferior  to  any  others  ?  not  to  the  French  prophets,  or  John 
Leyden!  '*(1.)  Enthusiasm  is  a  false  persuasion  of  an  extraordina 
divine  assistance,  which  leads  men  to  such  conduct  as  is  only  to  1 
justified  by  the  supposition  of  such  assistance."  I  answer,  **•  Befbi 
this  touches  me,  you  are  to  prove  (which  I  conceive  you  have  not  doi 
yet)  that  my  conduct  is  such  as  is  only  to  be  justified  by  the  suppositic 
of  such  assistance."  (p.  286.)  You  reply,  "  This,  I  think,  is  proved 
the  preceding  tract"  (p.  120.)  I  think  not  Let  men  of  candoi 
judge.  Yet  I  am  persuaded,  there  was  such  an  assistance  at  son 
times.     You  have  also  to  prove,  that  this  was  a  false  persuasion. 

You  remark,  (2.)  **  An  enthusiast  is,  then,  sincere,  but  mistaken. 
(p.  61.)  I  answered,  *'  That  I  am  mistaken  remains  to  be  proved."  Y< 
reply,  "  The  world  must  judge."  Agreed,  if  by  the  vjorld  you  met 
men  of  reason  and  religion. 

You  remark,  (3.)  '*  His  intentions  must  be  good ;  but  his  actions  w 
be  most  abominable."  I  answered,  "  What  actions  of  mine  are  mo 
abominable  1"  You  reply,  "The  world  must  be  judge,  whether  yo< 
public  actions  have  not  been,  in  fnany  respects,  abominable."  I  a 
glad  the  charge  softens.  I  hope  by  and  by  you  will  think  they  are  oil 
abominable  in  some  respects. 

You  remark,  (4.)  "  Instead  of  making  the  word  of  God  the  rule  of  li 
actions,  he  follows  only  secret  persuasion  or  impulse."  I  answered :  ** 
have  declared  again  and  again,  that  I  make  the  word  of  God  the  m 
of  all  my  actions ;  and  that  I  no  more  follow  any  secret  impulse  instei 
thereof,  than  I  follow  Mohammed  or  Confucius."  You  reply :  "  You  fi 
again  into  your  strain  of  boasting,  as  if  declaratiops  could  have  ai 
weight  against  facts ;  assert,  that  *you  make  the  word  of  God  the  m 
of  ail  your  actions,'  and  that  I  'peiiiaps  do  not  know  many  persons.'  "• 
(p.  121.)  Stop,  sir :  you  are  stepping  over  one  or  two  points  which 
have  not  done  with. 

You  remark,  (5.)  "Instead  of  judging  of  his  spiritual  estate  by  tl 
improvement  of  his  heart,  he  rests  only  on  ecstasies,"  &c.  I  answerec 


FARTHER  KZPLAINED.  B16 

**  Neither  is  this  my  case.  I  rest  not  on  them  at  all.  I  judge  of  my 
spiritual  estate  by  the  improvement  of  my  heart  and  the  tenor  of  my  life 
conjointly."  To  this  I  do  not  perceive  you  reply  one  word.  Herein, 
then,  I  am  not  an  enthusiast 

You  remark,  (6.)  '*Ho  is  very  liable  to  err,  not  considering  things 
coolly  and  carefully."  I  answered :  **'  So  indeed  I  am ;  I  find  it  every 
day  more  and  more.  But  I  do  not  yet  find  that  this  is  owing  to  my 
want  of  *  considering  things  coolly  and  carefblly.'  Perhaps  you  do  not 
know  many  persons  (excuse  my  simplicity  in  speaking  it)  who  more 
carefully  consider  every  step  they  take.  Yet  I  know  I  am  not  cool  or 
careful  enough.  May  God  supply  this  and  all  my  wants !"  (p.  287.) 
You  reply,  "  Your  private  life  I  have  nothing  to  do  with ;"  and  then 
enlarge  on  my  **  method  of  consultmg  Scripture,"  and  of  using  lots ; — 
of  both  which  by  and  by.  But,  meantime,  observe,  this  does  not  affect 
the  question :  for  I  neither  cast  lots,  nor  use  that  method  at  all,  till  I 
have  considered  things  with  all  the  care  I  can.  So  that,  be  this  right  or 
wrong,  it  is  no  manner  of  proof  that  I  do  not  *^  carefully  consider  every 
•t^I  take." 

But  how  little  did  I  profit  by  begging  your  excuse,  suppose  I  had 
spoken  a  word  unguardedly!  0  sir,  you  put  me  in  mind  of  him  who 
•aid,  ^  I  know  not  how  to  show  mercy !"  You  have  need  never  to  fight 
but  when  you  are  sure  to  conquer ;  seeing  you  are  resolved  neither  to 
give  nor  take  quarter. 

You  remark,  (7.)  **  He  is  very  difficult  to  be  convinced  by  reason  and 
argument,  as  he  acts  upon  a  supposed  principle  superior  to  it, — ^the 
direction  of  God's  Spirit"  I  answered,  '*  I  am  very  difficult  to  be 
convinced  by  dry  blows  or  hard  names,  but  not  by  reason  or  argu- 
ment At  least  that  difficulty  cannot  spring  from  the  cause  you  mention : 
for  I  claim  no  other  direction  of  God's  Spirit  than  is  common  to  all 
Wievers." 

You  reply,  (1.)  **I  fear  this  will  not  be  easily  reconcilable  to  your 
post  pretenses  and  behaviour."  (p.  124.)  I  believe  it  will;  in  par- 
ticular, to  what  I  speak  of  the  light  I  received  from  God  in  that 
important  affair.  (Yol.  iii,  p.  234.)  But  as  to  the  directions  in  general, 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  we  very  probably  differ  in  this :  you  apprehend 
diose  dii^ections  to  be  extraordinary,  which  I  suppose  to  be  common  to 
all  believers. 

You  remark,  (8.)  **  Whoever  opposes  him  will  be  charged  with  resist- 
ing or  rejecting  the  Spirit"  I  answered,  **  What !  whoever  opposes 
Bie,  John  Wesley?  Do  I  charge  every  such  peraon  with  *  rejecting  the 
Spirit  V  No  more  than  I  charge  him  with  robbing  on  the  highway.  Do 
I  charge  you  with  rejecting  the  Spirit  ?"  You  reply,  "  You  deny  that 
yea  charge  the  opposers  with  rejecting  the  Spirit,  and  affirm,  that  you 
never  said  or  thought  that  what  you  do  is  to  be  accounted  the  work  of 
Crod.**  Here  you  blend  different  sentences  together,  which  I  must  con- 
nder  afnut,  as  they  were  written.  And,  first,  where  do  I  charge  you 
with  rejecting  the  Spirit  ?  If  I  charge  whoever  opposes  me  with  this, 
undoubtedly  I  charge  you.  If  I  do  not  charge  you,  that  proposition  is 
ftlse ;  I  do  not  so  charge  whoever  opposes  me.  Your  next  words  are, 
**  You  affirm  that  you  never  said  or  thought  that  what  you  do  is  to  be 
■oeounted  the  work  of  God.     If  it  be  the  work  of  God,  you  need  not 


816  PRINCIPLES  OF  ▲  METHODIST 

deny  the  other  point"    Tes,  sir ;  whether  it  be  or  no,  I  must  still  den} 
that  I  ever  charged  you  with  rejecting  the  Spirit  in  opposing  me. 

You  remark,  (9.)  *'  His  own  dreams  must  be  regarded  as  oracles.'* 
I  answered,  "  Whose  ?  I  desire  neither  my  dreams  nor  my  waking 
thoughts  may  be  regarded  at  all,  unless  just  so  far  as  they  agree  with 
the  oracles  of  Grod."     To  this  also  you  make  no  reply. 

You  remark,  (10.)  **  However  wild  his  behaviour  may  be«  whatever 
he  does  is  to  bo  accounted  the  work  of  God."  It  was  to  this  I  an- 
swered, '^  I  never  said  so  of  what  1  do ;  I  never  thought  so."  This 
answer  was  ill  expressed.  And  I  might  have  foreseen  you  would  hardly 
fail  to  make  your  advantage  of  it.  I  must  therefore  explain  myself  upon 
it  a  little  farther.  You  said,  *^  An  enthusiast  accounts  whatever  he  does 
to  be  the  work  of  God."  I  should  have  said,  **  But  I  do  not  account  what- 
ever I  do  to  be  the  work  of  God."  What  that  is  which  I  do  account  his 
vrork  will  be  considered  by  and  by. 

You  remark,  (11.)  ^*He  talks  in  the  style  of  inspired  persons."  I 
answered,  '*No  otherwise  inspired  than  you  are,  if  you  love  God." 
You  reply,  "  The  point  was  not,  whether  you  are  actually  inspired,  but 
whether  you  have  talked  in  the  style  of  those  who  were  so."  (p.  126.) 
That  was  so  much  the  point,  that,  if  it  were  allowed,  it  would  overturn 
your  whole  argument  For  if  I  was  inspired,  (in  your  sense,)  you  could 
not  term  that  inspiration  enthusiasm  without  blasphemy ;  but  you  again 
mistake  my  words.  The  plain  meaning  of  them  is,  that  I  talk  in  the 
style  of  those  persons  who  are  '*  no  otherwise  inspired  than  you  are,  if 
you  love  God." 

You  remark,  (12.)  ^  He  applies  Scripture  phrases  to  himself,  without 
attending  to  their  original  meaning,  or  once  considering  the  difference 
of  times  and  circumstances."  (p.  62.)  I  answered,  '^  I  am  not  con- 
scious  of  any  thing  Uke  this.  I  apply  no  Scripture  phrase  either  to 
myself  or  any  other,  without  carefully  considering  both  the  original 
meaning,  and  the  secondary  sense,  wherein,  allowing  for  difierent  times 
and  circumstances,  it  may  be  applied  to  ordinary  Christians."  (p.  287.) 
You  reply,  '*  This  also  you  deny  to  have  done ;  holding,  however,  some 
secondary  sense,  (what  it  is,  you  have  not  told  us,)  in  which  Scripture 
phrases  may  be  applied  to  ordinary  Christians."  I  have  largely  told  you 
what  I  mean  by  a  secondary  sense,  in  the  First  Fart  of  the  "  Fartfier 
Appeal."  You  add :  '^  Many  things  which  were  truly  written  of  the 
preaching  of  Christianity  at  first,  you  have  vainly  apphed  to  yourselves." 
Sir,  I  am  to  answer  only  for  myself;  as  I  will  for  that  expression,  ^*  Be- 
hold, the  day  of  the  Lord  is  come ;  he  is  again  visiting  and  redeeming 
his  people !" 

3.  I  come  now  to  what  you  expatiate  upon  at  large,  as  the  two  grand 
instances  of  my  enthusiasm.  The  fh^t  is  plainly  this :  at  some  rare 
times,  when  I  have  been  in  great  distress  of  soul,  or  in  utter  uncer- 
tainty how  to  act  in  an  important  case  which  required  a  speedy  deter- 
mination, af\cr  using  all  other  means  that  occurred,  1  have  cast  lots,  or 
opened  the  Bible.  And  by  this  means  I  have  been  relieved  from  that 
distress,  or  directed  in  that  uncertainty. 

Instances  of  this  kind  occur  in  pages  12,  14,  15,  28,  and  88  of  the 
third  Journal ;  as  also  in  pages  27,  28,  and  80  of  the  last  JoumaL  [Y oL 
iii,  pp.  112, 113, 121, 158, 178,  208,  of  this  edition.]  I  desire  any  who 


FARTHER  EXPLAINED.  817 

would  imderatand  diis  matter  throughly,  to  read  those  passages  as  they 
stand  at  length. 

As  to  the  particular  instances,  I  would  observe,  (1.)  That  with  regard 
to  my  first  journey  to  Bristol,  you  should,  in  any  wise,  have  set  down 
diose  words  that  preface  the  scriptures  there  recited :  *'  I  was  entreated, 
in  the  most  pressing  manner,  to  come  to  Bristol  without  delay.  This  I 
was  not  at  all  forward  to  do ;  and  perhaps  a  little  the  less  inclined  to  it, 
because  of  the  remarkable  scriptures  which  offered,  as  oflon  as  we 
inquired,  touching  the  consequence  of  this  removal ;  though  whether 
lias  was  permitted  only  for  the  trial  of  our  faith,  God  knoweSi,  and  the 
event  will  show."  From  the  scriptures  afterward  recited,  some  inferred 
tiiat  die  event  they  apprehended  was  yet  afar  off.  I  infer  nothing  at  all. 
I  sdBi  know  not  how  to  judge ;  but  leave  the  whole  to  God.  Tlus  only 
1  know,  that  the  continual  expectation  of  death  was  then  an  unspeakable 
blessing  to  me ;  that  I  did  not  dare,  knowingly,  to  waste  a  moment, 
neither  to  throw  away  one  desire  on  earthly  things ;  those  words  being 
ever  iqypermost  in  my  thoughts,  and  indeed  frequendy  on  my  tcmgue : — 

Ere  long,  when  sovereign  wisdom  wills, 

My  soul  an  unknown  path  shall  tread, 
Shall  strangely  leave,  who  strangely  fills 

This  frame,  and  waft  me  to  the  oead. 

O,  what  is  death  7  'Tis  life's  last  shore, 
Where  vanities  are  vain  no  more ; 
Where  all  pursuits  their  goal  obtain, 
And  life  is  all  retouch'd  again. 

1  observe,  (2.)  That  in  two  other  of  those  instances,  (vol.  iii,  pp.  112, 
113,)  it  is  particularly  mentioned,  that "  I  was  troubled ;"  and  that,  by  the 
seasonable  application  of  those  scriptures,  that  trouble  was  entirely  r^ 
moved.  The  same  blessing  I  received  (so  I  must  term  it  still)  from  the 
words  set  down  in  page  158 ;  and  in  a  yet  higher  degree,  from  that 
eiceeding  apposite  scripture  mentioned  in  vol.  iii,  p.  208. 

I  obeenre,  (3.)  That  at  the  times  to  which  your  other  citations  refer, 
I  was  utterly  uncertain  how  to  act  in  points  of  great  importance,  and 
raeh  as  required  a  speedy  determination ;  and  tlut,  by  tlus  means,  my 
QDoertain^  was  removed,  and  I  went  on  my  way  rejmcing.  (YoL  iiif  pp. 
112,113,  178.) 

My  own  experience,  therefore,  vrhich  you  think  should  discourage  me 
for  the  future  from  any  thing  of  this  kind,  does,  on  the  contrary,  greatly 
encourage  me  herein ;  since  I  have  found  much  benefit,  and  no  incon- 
venience ;  unless,  perhaps,  this  be  one,  that  you  ^  cannot  acquit  me  of 
enthusiasm  ;^  add,  if  you  please,  and  presumption. 

But  you  ask,  **  Has  God  ever  commanded  us  to  do  thus  1**  I  believe 
he  has  neither  commanded  nor  forbidden  it  in  Scripture.  But  then 
remember,  ^  that  Scripture"  (to  use  the  words  which  you  cite  from  ^  our 
leanied  and  judicious  Hookei^')  **  is  not  the  only  rule  of  all  things,  which, 
in  this  life,  may  be  done  by  men."  All  I  affirm  concerning  tfaos  is,  that 
it  may  be  done ;  and  that  I  have,  in  fact,  received  assistance  and  direc- 
tioo  thereby. 

4.  I  give  the  same  answer  to  your  assertion,  that  we  are  not  ordered 
in  Scripture  to  decide  any  points  in  question  by  lots.  {Remarks^  p.  128.) 
Tou  allow,  indeed,  there  are  instances  of  this  in  Scripture ;  but  affirm) 
** These  were  miraculous;  nor  can  we,  without  presumption,"  (a  sp^ 


318  PRINCIPLES  OF  ▲  METHODIST 

cies  of  enthusiasm,)  '^  apply  this  method.^  I  want  proof  of  this :  bmig 
one  plain  text  of  Scripture,  and  I  am  satisfied.  **  This,  I  apprehend 
you  learned  from  the  Moravians."  I  did ;  though,  it  is  true,  Mr.  White- 
field  thought  1  went  too  far  therein.  ^*  Instances  of  the  same  occur  in 
your  Journals.  I  will  mention  only  one.  It  being  debated,  when  yoa 
should  go  to  Bristol,  you  say,  *  We  at  length  all  agreed  to  decide  it  by 
lot  And  by  this  it  was  determined  I  should  go.'  (Vol.  iii,  p.  121.)  Is 
tliis  your  way  of  carefully  considering  every  step  you  take  ?  Can  there 
be  greater  rashness  and  extravagance  1  Reason  is  thus,  in  a  inanntf« 
rendered  useless,  prudence  is  set  aside,  and  affairs  of  moment  left  to  be 
determined  by  chance !"  {Remarka^  p.  124.) 

So  this  you  give  as  a  genuine  instance  of  my  proceedings ;  and,  I 
suppose,  of  your  own  fairness  and  candour !  *^  We  agreed,  at  length,  to 
decide  it  by  lot"  True,  at  length ;  after  a  debate  of  some  hours ;  after 
carefully  hearing  and  weighing  coolly  all  the  reasons  which  could  be 
alleged  on  either  side ;  our  brethren  still  continuing  the  dispute,  without 
any  probability  of  their  coming  to  one  conclusion,  we,  at  length,  (the 
night  being  now  far  spent,)  all  agreed  to  this.  "  Can  there  be  greater 
rashness  and  extravagance  I"  I  cannot  but  think  there  can.  **  Reason 
is  thus,  in  a  manner,  rendered  useless."  No ;  we  had  used  it  as  &r  as 
it  could  go ;  from  Saturday,  March  17,  (when  I  received  the  first  letter,) 
to  Wednesday,  28,  when  the  case  was  laid  before  the  society.  *'  Pru- 
dence is  set  aside."  Not  so  :  but  the  arguments  here  were  so  equal, 
that  she  saw  not  how  to  determine.  **  And  affairs  of  moment  left  to  be 
determined  by  chance !"  By  chance  !  What  a  blunder,  then,  is  that, 
**  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap ;  but  the  whole  disposal  thereof  is  of  the 
Lord!" 

This,  I  firmly  believe,  is  truth  and  reason,  and  will  be  to  the  end  of 
the  world.  And  I  therefore  still  subscribe  to  that  declaration  oi  the 
Moravian  Churchy  laid  before  the  whole  body  of  divines  in  the  University 
of  Wirtemberg,  and  not  by  them  accounted  enthusiasm:  *^We  have  a 
peculiar  esteem  for  lots,  and  accordingly  use  them,  both  in  public  and 
private,  to  decide  points  of  importance^  when  the  reasons  brought  on 
each  aide  appear  to  be  of  equal  weight  And  we  believe  this  to  be  then 
the  only  way  of  wholly  setting  aside  our  own  will,  of  acquitting  our- 
selves of  all  blame,  and  clearly  knowing  what  is  the  will  of  God."— 
(Vol.  iii,  p.  102.) 

5.  You  next  remarked  several  instances  of  my  enthustasm.  The  first 
was  that  of  Mrs.  Jones.  The  next  ran  thus :  **  Again,  you  say,  *I  ex- 
pounded out  of  the  fukiess  that  was  given  me.' "  {HemarkSf  p.  64.)  I 
answered,  **  I  mean,  I  had  then  a  fuller,  deeper  sense  of  what  I  spoke 
than  I  ordinarily  have."  (p.  288.)  But  if  you  stiU  think,  ^*  it  would  have 
been  more  decent  to  have  said,  *  According  to  the  best  of  my  power 
and  ability,  with  God's  assistance,  I  expounded ;'  "  1  will  say  so  ano- 
ther time. 

With  regard  to  the  third  instance  of  enthusiasm,  you  remarked,  *^  If 
you  would  not  have  us  look  on  this  as  miraculous,  there  is  nothiqg  in  it 
worthy  of  being  related."  (JRemorAv,  p.  64.)  I  answered,  '*  It  may  be 
so.  Let  it  pass,  then,  as  a  trifle  not  worth  relating ;  but  still  it  is  no 
proof  of  enthusiasm.  For  I  would  not  have  you  look  upon  it  as  miiSp 
culous,  but  as  a  signal  instance  of  God's  particular  provideiice."  (p.  2^9*) 


FABTHKR  EXPLAINED.  319 

How  friendlj  and  generous  is  your  reply ! — **  Tou  seem  ashamed  of  it 
I  am  glad  you  give  this  fooling  up,  and  hope  for  the  future  you  will 
treat  your  readers  better.^  {Secoiul  Letter ^  p.  131.)  Sir,  I  am  not 
ashamed  of  it ;  nor  shall  I  ever  give  this  fooling  up,  till  I  give  up  the 
Bible.  I  still  look  upon  this  ^*  as  a  signal  instance  of  God's  particular 
providence."  But  ^*how  is  this  consistent  with  yielding  it  to  be  a  trifle?" 
{Ibid,  p.  132.)  My  words  do  not  imply,  that  I  yield  it  so  to  be.  Being 
uiged  with  the  dilemma,  "  Either  this  is  related  as  miraculous,"  (and 
then  it  is  enthusiasm,)  "  or  it  is  not  worth  relating ;"  I  answered,  (to 
avoid  drawing  the  saw  of  controversy,)  **  Let  it  pass,  then,  as  a  trifle 
Dot  worth  relating.  But  still "  (if  it  be  a  trifle,  which  I  suppose,  not  grant) 
**  it  18  DO  proof  of  enthusiasm.  For  I  would  not  have  you  look  upon  it 
as  miraculous." 

And  yet  I  believe  I  yielded  too  much,  and  what  might  too  much 
fevour  your  assertion,  that  *'  there  is  a  great  diflcrence  between  particu- 
lar provideDces  and  such  extraordinary  interpositions."  Pray,  sir,  show 
me  what  this  difierence  is.  It  is  a  subject  that  deserves  your  coolest 
thoughts.  "  I  know  no  ground  to  hope  or  pray  for  sucn  immediate 
relieb.  These  things  must  be  represented  either  as  common  accidents 
or  as  miracles."  I  do  not  throughly  understand  your  terms.  What  is 
a  common  accident  1  that  a  sparrow  falls  to  the  ground,  or  something 
more  inconsiderable  than  the  hairs  of  your  head?  Is  there  no  medium 
between  accident  and  miracle  ?  If  there  be,  what  is  that  medium  ? 
When  we  are  agreed  with  regard  to  these  few  points,  I  shall  be  glad  to 
resume  the  subject 

6.  The  fourth  instance  of  my  enthusiasm  was  this,  that  I  *^  related 
jadgmenta  inflicted  on  my  opposers."  As  to  Mr.  Molther,  I  must  ob- 
serve once  more,  that  I  ao  believe  there  was  a  particular  providence  in 
his  sickness.  But  I  do  not  believe,  (nor  did  I  design  to  insinuate,)  that 
it  was  a  judgment  for  opposing  me. 

Tou  go  on :  *'  Again  you  mention,  *•  as  an  awful  providence,  the  case 
trf'a  poor  wretch  who  was  last  week  cursing  and  blaspheming,  and 
had  boasted  to  many  that  he  would  come  again  on  Sunday,  and  no  man 
should  stop  his  mouth  then.  But  on  Friday  God  laid  his  hand  upon 
him,  and  on  Sunday  he  was  buried.' "  {Remarks,  p.  66.)  I  answered, 
**I  look  on  this  as  a  manifest  judgment  of  God  on  a  hardened  sinner, 
for  his  complicated  wickedness."  (p.  289,)  You  reply,  **  Add,  if  you 
please,  *  His  labouring  with  all  his  might  to  hinder  the  word  of  God.' 
Here  therefore  is  a  confessed  judgment  for  his  opposition  to  you." 
{Second  Letter^  p.  133.)  There  is,  fbr  his  thus  opposing  with  curses 
and  blasphemy.  This  was  part  of  his  complicated  wickedness.  Here 
then  you  "  think  I  plead  guilty."  Not  of  enthusiasm,  till  you  prove  this 
was  not  "  an  awful  providence." 

*«  Again :  *  One  was  just  going  to  beat  his  wife,  (which  he  frequently 
did,)  when  God  smote  him  in  a  moment,  so  that  his  hand  dropped,  and 
he  fell  down  upon  the  ground,  having  no  more  strength  than  a  new-born 
child.'  Have  we  any  warrant  either  from  Scripture,  or  the  common 
dispensations  of  providence,  to  interpret  misfortunes  of  this  nature  as 
judgments?"  ( JBemarib,  p.  67. )  I  answered,  **  Can  you,  sir,  consider  this 
as  one  of  the  common  dispensations  of  providence  ?  Have  you  known 
a  parallel  one  in.  your  life?    But  it  was  never  cited  by  moi  (as  it  is  by 


320  PRINCIPLES  OF  ▲  MKTUODI8T. 

you,)  as  an  immediate  punishment  on  a  man  for  opposing  meJ*  (p.  289.) 
You  reply,  *'  As  if  what  is  not  common,  or  what  I  have  not  known,  must 
be  a  miraculous  judgment."  I  believe  it  was,  whether  miraculous  or  no, 
a  judgment  mixed  with  mercy. 

You  now  add  to  the  rest  the  following  instance :  '*  One  John  Haydoo, 
a  man  of  a  regular  life  and  conversation,  being  informed  that  people  feO 
into  strange  fits  at  the  societies,  came  to  see  and  judge  for  himself.  But 
he  was  still  less  satisfied  than  before ;  insomuch  that  he  went  about  to 
his  acquaintance  one  af\er  another,  and  laboured  above  measure  to  coin 
vince  them  it  was  a  delusion  of  the  devil.  We  were  going  home,  wfaea 
one  met  us  in  the  street,  and  informed  us  that  J.  H.  was  fallen  rtfOff 
mad.  It  seems  he  had  sat  down  to  dinner,  but  hoA  a  mind  first  to  cm 
the  sermon  on  *  Salvation  by  Faith. '  In  reading  the  last  page,  he  changed 
colour,  fell  off  his  chair,  and  began  screaming  terribly,  and  beating  Irnn- 
self  against  the  ground.  The  neighbours  were  alarmed,  and  flocked 
into  the  house.  I  came  in  and  found  him  upon  the  floor,  the  room  beiiig 
full  of  people,  whom  his  wife  would  have  kept  without,  but  he  cried 
aloud,  *  No ;  lot  them  all  come ;  let  all  the  world  see  the  just  judgment 
of  God.'  Two  or  three  men  were  holding  him  as  well  as  they  coukL 
He  immediately  fixed  his  eyes  upon  me,  anid  cried, '  Ay,  this  is  he,  who 
I  said  was  a  dcMceiver  of  the  people.  But  God  has  overtaken  me.  I  said 
it  was  all  a  delusion.  But  this  is  no  delusion.*  He  then  roared  out, 
*  0  thou  devil !  Thou  cursed  devil !  Yea,  thou  legion  of  devils !  Tkoa 
canst  not  stay !  Christ  will  cast  thee  out  I  know  his  work  is  begun. 
Tear  me  to  pieces  if  thou  wilt^  but  thou  canst  not  hurt  me.'  He  then  beat 
himself  against  the  ground  again,  his  breast  heaving  at  the  same  time,  u 
in  the  pangs  of  death,  and  great  drops  of  sweat  trickling  down  hia  fitce. 
We  all  betook  ourselves  to  prayer.  His  pangs  ceased,  and  both  hit 
body  and  soul  were  set  at  liberty."  (Vol.  iii,  130.) 

If  you  had  pleased,  you  might  have  added  from  the  next  paragraplii 
''  Returning  to.  J  H.,  we  found  his  voice  was  lost,  and  his  body  weak 
as  that  of  an  infant.  But  his  soul  was  in  peace,  full  of  love,  and  rejoica( 
in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God." 

You  subjoin,  *'  This  you  may  desire,  for  aught  I  know,  to  pass  u  t 
trifle  too."  {Rtmarks^  p.  134.)  No ;  it  is  so  terrible  an  instance  of  die 
judgment  of  God,  (though  at  length  **  mercy  rejoiced  over  judgment,") 
as  ought  never  to  be  forgotten  by  those  who  fear  God,  so  long  as  the 
sun  or  moon  endureth. 

7.  The  account  of  people  falling  down  in  fits  you  cite  as  a  fitt 
instance  of  my  enthusiasm ;  it  being  **  plain,"  you  say,  that  I  *^  look 
upon  both  the  disorders,  and  the  removals  of  them,  to  be  supematmaL" 
{Remarks.,  p.  67.)  I  answered,  **  It  is  not  quite  plain.  I  look  upon 
some  of  these  cases  as  wholly  natural ;  on  the  rest,  as  mixed ;  bofli  die 
disorders  and  the  removals  being  partly  natural,  and  partly  not"  (p.  289.) 
You  reply,  *^  It  would  have  been  kind  to  have  let  us  know  your  rulet  bf 
which  you  distinguish  these."  I  wiU.  I  distinguish  them  by  the  circum- 
stances that  precede,  accompany,  and  follow.  '*  However,  some  of 
these  you  here  allow  to  be  in  part  supernatural.  Miracles,  tfaertfoiei  ' 
are  not  wholly  ceased."  Can  you  prove  they  are,  by  Scripture  or 
reason  ?  You  then  refer  to  two  or  three  cases,  related  in  vol  Si 
p.  129.    I  believe  there  was  a  supernatural  power  on  the  tosniM^ 


FABTBKR  SXPLAIMliD.  821 

siwma  there  mentioiied,  which  occasioned  their  bodies  to  be  so 
d  by  the  natural  laws  of  the  vital  union.  This  point,  therefore, 
iTB  to  prove,  or  here  is  no  enthusiasm ;  that  there  was  no  supers 
I  power  in  the  case. 

«on  you  remarked,  **  You  leave  no  room  to  doubt  that  you  would 
hese  cases  considered  as  those  of  the  demoniacs  in  the  New 
sent,  in  order,  I  suppose,  to  parallel  your  supposed  cures  of  them, 
lose  highest  miracles  of  Christ  and  his  disciples,  the  casting  out 
"  {Remarks^  p.  68.)  I  answered,  '*  I  should  once  have  won- 
it  your  making  such  a  supposition.  But  I  now  wonder  at  nothing 
kind."  You  reply,  '^  Why  so  ?  What  have  I  done  lately,  to  take 
w  surprise  ?  Have  I  forfeited  my  character  for  ingenuous  and  fair 
I  -with  youl"  (Second  Letter,  p.  135.)  Since  you  ask  me  the 
n,  I  will  answer  it;  I  hope,  in  love,  and  in  the  spirit  of  meekness* 
ce  know,  of  all  who  have  wrote  against  me,  a  less  ingenuous 
;  or  one  who  has  shown  a  more  steady,  invariable  disposition  to 
ill  construction  on  whatever  I  say. 

It  why  would  you  not  particulariy  explain  these  cases  ?"  I  will 
1  myself  upon  them  once  for  all.  For  more  than  three  hundred 
after  Christ,  you  know,  demoniacs  were  common  in  the  Church ; 
nippose  you  are  not  unapprized,  that  during  this  period,  (if  not 
kinger,)  they  were  continually  reUeved  by  the  prayers  of  the  faith- 
Wor  can  I  doubt,  but  demoniacs  will  remain,  so  long  as  Satan  is 
|od  of  this  world."  I  doubt  not,  but  there  are  such  at  this  day. 
believe  John  Haydon  was  one.  But  of  whatever  sort  his  disorder 
mt  it  was  removed  by  prayer  is  undeniable.  Now,  sir,  you  have 
fo  points  to  prove,  and  then  your  argument  will  be  conclusive : 
liat  to  think  or  say,  **  There  are  demoniacs  now,  and  they  are 
lieved  by  prayer,"  is  enthusiasm.  (2.)  That  to  say,  '*  Demoniacs 
T  are  relieved,  on  prayer  made  by  Cyprian,  or  their  parish  minis- 
I  to  parallel  the  actions  of  Cyprian  or  that  minister  with  the  highest 
68  of  Christ  and  his  disciples. 

Tou  remarked,  '*  It  will  be  difficult  to  persuade  any  sober  person, 
lere  is  any  thing  supernatural  in  these  disorders."  (Remarksj 
'  The  remainder  of  that  paragraph  I  abridged  thus:  You  attempt 
Mmt  for  those  fits,  by  ^*  obstructions  or  irregularities  of  the  blood 
irhs;  hysterical  disoiders;  watchings,  fastings,  closeness  of  rooms, 
crowds,  violent  heat ;"  and  lastly  by  ^^  terrors,  perplexities,  and 
Y  in  weak  and  well-meaning  men ;  which,"  you  think,  *^  in  many 
cases  before  us,  have  quite  overset  their  understandings."  (Ae- 

» p.  43.) 

iswered,  **  As  to  each  of  the  rest,  let  it  go  as  far  as  it  can  go." 
i  be  supposed  to  have  some  influence  in  some  cases ;  pei£aps 
>  account  for  one  in  a  thousand.)  *'  But  I  require  proof  of  the 
ly  whereby  you  would  account  for  those  disorders."  Why,  **  the 
ces,"  you  say,  *'  of  religious  madness  have  much  increased  since 
9gan  to  disturb  the  world."  I  doubt  the  fact  You  reply,  **  This  no 
■proves  it"  (Second  Letter,  p.  137.)  Yes,  it  does,  till  you  produce 
proof.  For  a  bare  negation  is  the  proper  and  sufiicient  answer  to 
affirmation.  I  add,  ^  If  those  instances  had  increased  da^,  it  is 
9  account  for  them  another  way,"  as  is  done  in  the  First  fart  of 


S2S  PRIlfCIPLKS  or  A  METHODIST 

die  Farther  Appeal^  at  the  nintj-fourth  and  following  pages.  Too 
say,  ^  Most  have  heard  of  or  known  several  of  the  Methodists  thus 
driven  to  distraction."  I  answered,  **  Tou  may  have  heard  of  five 
hundred.  But  how  many  have  you  known  ?  Be  pleased  to  name  eight 
or  ten  of  them.  I  cannot  find  them,  no,  not  one  of  them  to  this  day, 
either  man,  woman,  or  child."  (p.  290.)  Tou  reply,  **  This"  (the 
naming  them)  **  wquld  be  very  improper  and  unnecessary."  {Second 
Letter  J  p.  ISS.)  However,  sir,  it  is  extremely  necessary  that  yon 
should  name  them  to  me  in  private.  I  will  then,  if  required,  excuse  yoa 
to  the  public ;  which  till  then  I  cannot  do. 

The  person  I  mentioned,  whom  you  threw  into  much  doubt  and  per- 
plexity, then  hved  in  the  parish  of  St.  Ann,  Westminster.  I  related  die 
case  just  as  she  related  it  to  me.  But  she  is  able  and  ready  to  answer 
for  herself. 

9.  You  go  on :  '*  It  is  the  most  charitable  supposition  we  can  make, 
that  many  of  the  cases  you  have  mentioned  in  your  Journals,  and  some 
of  which  have'been  represented  above,  are  of  this  kind,"  that  is,  instances 
of  madness.  {Second  Letter^  p.  IdS,)  O  tender  charity  I  But  cannot 
your  charity  reach  one  hair's  breadth  farther  than  this?  No:  for 
**  otherwise"  (that  is,  if  those  persons  were  not  mad,)  **the  presumption 
and  despair  are  terrible  indeed."  But  what,  if  you  were  to  suppose 
John  Haydon  (to  instance  in  one)  was  not  mad,  but  under  a  temporary 
possession ;  and  that  others  were  deeply  convinced  of  sin,  and  of  the 
wrath  of  God  abiding  on  them  ?  I  should  think  this  su|^[>osition  (be  it 
true  or  false)  was  full  as  charitable  as  the  other. 

I  said,  '^  I  cannot  find  one  such  instance  to  this  day."  You  reply,  **  Yet 
once  you  could  not  but  be  under  some  concern  with  regard  to  one  or  two 
persons,  who  seemed  to  be  indeed  lunatic,  as  well  as  sore  Texed.**  So 
they  seemed ;  but  it  soon  appeared  they  were  not  The  very  next 
paragraph  mentions,  that  one  of  these,  within  a  few  hours,  was  **  filled 
with  the  spirit  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind."  (Vol.  iii«  p.  158.) 

But  you  are  resolved,  come  what  will,  to  carry  this  point ;  and  so  add« 
**  Toward  the  end  of  your  Farther  Appeal^  (First  Part,  p.  94,)  you  say, 
you  have  seen  one  instance  of  real,  lasting  madness.  This  was  one 
whom  you  took  widi  you  to  Bristol,  who  was  afterward  prejudiced 
against  you,  and  began  a  vehement  invective  both  against  yom*  person 
and  doctrines.  In  the  midst  of  this  he  was  struck  raving  mad."  Add, 
^  And  so  he  continued  till  his  friends  put  him  into  Bedlam ;  and  probabljr 
laid  his  madness  to  my  charge."  If  they  did  not,  it  is  now  done  to  their 
hands. 

10.  **  As  to  the  cure  of  these  fits,  I  observed,"  (so  you,  p.  139,  pro* 
ceed,)  **  that  you  had  frequently  represented  them  as  miraculous,  as  the 
instantaneous  consequences  of  your  prayers."  My  former  answer  to 
this  was,  **  I  have  set  down  the  facts  just  as  they  were,  passing  no 
judgment  upon  them  myself,  and  leaving  every  man  else  to  judge  as  he 
pleases." 

I  am  glad  yon  give  me  an  occasion  of  reviewing  this  answer ;  for, 
upon  reflection,  I  do  not  like  it  at  alL  It  grants  you  more  than  I  can  in 
conscience  do.  As  it  can  be  proved  by  abundaoce  of  witnesses,  that 
these  cures  were  frequendy  (indeed  almost  always)  the  instantaneous 
consequences  of  prajrer,  your  inference  is  just  I  cannot,  dare  not  sffiiiDi 


FARTHKR  KXPLAINfcD.  823 

Aat  thej  were  purely  natural.  I  believe  they  were  not  I  believe  many 
of  them  were  wrou^t  by  the  supernatural  power  of  God  ;  that  of  John 
Haydon  in  particular ;  (I  fix  on  this,  and  will  join  issue  with  you  upon 
It  when  you  please ;)  and  yet  this  is  not  barefaced  enthusiasm.  Nor 
can  you  prove  it  any  enthusiasm  at  all,  unless  you  can  prove,  that  this 
if  falsely  ascribed  to  a  supernatural  power. 

**  The  next  case,"  you  say,  ^*  relates  to  the  spotted  fever,  which  you 
represent  as  being  extremely  mortal ;  but  you  believe  there  was  not  one 
with  whom  you  were  but  recovered.     I  allowed  that  here  is  no  intima- 
tion of  any  thing  miraculous."   {Remarks,  p.  72.)     *^  You  ask,  *  Why 
then  is  this  cited  as  an  instance  of  my  enthusiasm?'  (p.  290.)     You 
I     sure  cannot  think,  that  false  pretences  to  miracles  are  the  whole  of 
I     enthusiasm."    No ;  but  I  think  they  are  that  part  of  enthusiasm  which  you 
here  undertook  to  prove  upon  me.  You  are  here  to  prove,  that  I  *'  boast 
of  curing  bodily  distempers  by  prayer,  without  the  use  of  other  means." 
(Remarks^  p.  71.)     But  if  there  is  no  intimation  in  my  account  of  any 
thing  miraculous,  or  that  proper  remedies  had  not  been  applied ;  how  is 
this  a  proof,  that  I  boast  of  curing  bodily  distempers,  without  applying 
iny  remedies  at  all  t 

"  But  you  seem  to  desire  to  have  it  believed,  that  an  extraordinary 
blessing  attended  your  prayers.  Whereas,  if  the  circumstances  could  be 
particuTarly  inquired  into,  most  probably  it  would  appear,  that  either  the 
fury  of  the  distemper  was  abated,  or  the  persons  you  visited  were  seized 
with  it  in  a  more  favourable  degree,  or  were,  by  reason  of  a  good  consti- 
tution, more  capable  of  going  through  it.  Neither  do  I  believe  that  they 
would  have  failed  of  an  equal  blessing  and  success  had  they  had  the 
asistance  and  prayers  of  their  own  parish  ministers." 

There,  sir ;  now  I  have  done  as  you  require ;  I  have  quoted  your 
whole  remark.  But  does  all  this  prove,  that  I  ^*  boast  of  curing  bodily 
distempers  by  prayer,  without  the  use  of  any  other  means  ?"  If  you 
fty.  Although  it  does  not  prove  this,  it  proves  that  '^  you  seem  to  desire 
ID  have  it  believed,  that  an  extraordinary  blessing  attended  your  prayers ;" 
and  this  is  another  sort  of  enthusiasm :  it  is  very  well :  so  it  does  not 
prove  the  conclusion  you  designed ;  but  it  proves  another,  which  is  as 
good! 

11.  The  two  last  instances  of  my  enthusiasm  which  you  bring, 
{EUmarks^  pp.  72,  73,)  I  had  summed  up  in  two  linos,  thus :  *'  At  two 
several  times,  being  ill  and  in  violent  pain,  I  prayed  to  God,  and  found 
immediate  ease."  (Answer,  p.  291.)  But  since  you  say,  I  <^  must  not 
hope  to  escape  so ;  these  instances  must  once  more  be  laid  before  me 
particularly;"  {Second  Letter,  p.  140 ;)  I  must  yield  to  necessity,  and 
set  them  down  from  the  beginning  to  the  end : — 

"  Saturday,  March  21. — I  explained  in  the  evening  the  thirty-third 
chapter  of  E^kiel ;  in  applying  which,  I  was  seized  with  such  a  pain  in 
my  side,  I  could  not  speak.  I  knew  my  remedy,  and  immediately  kneeled 
down.    In  a  moment  the  pain  was  gone."  (Vol.  iii,  p.  206.) 

"  Friday,  May  8. — I  found  myself  much  out  of  order :  however,  I  made 
shift  to  preach  in  the  evening.  But  on  Saturday  my  bodily  strength  failed, 
10  that  for  several  hours  I  could  scarce  lift  up  my  head.  Sunday,  10. — I 
was  obliged  to  lie  down  most  part  of  the  day,  being  easy  only  in  that 
posture.  In  the  evening,  bc»ide  the  pain  in  my  back  and  head,  and  the 
fever  which  still  continued  upon  me,  just  as  I  beffan  to  pray  I  was  seized 
with  such  a  cough  that  I  could  hardly  speak.    At  the  same  time  came 


324  PRINCIPLES  OF  ▲  MSTHODI8T 

strongly  into  my  mind :  '  These  signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe.'  I 
called  on  Jesus  aloud,  to  *  increase  my  faith,'  and  to  '  confirm  the  word 
of  his  grace.'  While  I  was  speaking,  my  pain  ranished  away,  the  fever 
left  me,  my  bodily  strength  returned,  and  for  many  weeks  I  felt  neither 
weakness  nor  pain.   Unto  thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  give  thanks."  {Ibid.  p.  200.) 

When  you  first  cited  these  as  proofs  of  enthusiasm,  I  answered  ^^  I 
will  put  your  argument  into  form : — 

**  He  that  believes  those  are  miraculous  cures  which  are  not  so,  is  a 
rank  enthusiast ;  but 

"  You  believe  those  are  miraculous  cures  which  are  not  so :  therefore, 
you  are  a  rank  enthusiast. 

"  What  do  you  mean  by  miraculous  ?  If  you  term  every  thing  so, 
which  is  *  not  strictly  accountable  for  by  the  ordinary  course  of  natural 
causes,'  then  I  deny  the  latter  part  of  the  minor  proposition.  And  unless 
you  can  make  this  good,  unless  you  can  prove  the  effects  in  question  are 
•  strictly  accountable  for  by  the  ordinary  course  of  natural  causes,'  your 
argument  is  nothing  worth." 

You  reply,  '*  Your  answer  to  the  objection  is  very  evasive,  though  you 
pretend  to  put  my  argument  in  form.  You  mistake  the  major  proposi- 
tion, which  should  have  been : 

"  He  that  represents  those  cures  as  the  immediate  effects  of  his  own 
prayers,  and  as  miraculous,  which  are  not  so,  is  a  rank  enthusiast,  if  sincere : 

"  *  But,  this  you  have  done :  Ergo,  &c.' " 

To  this  clumsy  syllogism  I  rejoin,  (1.)  That  the  words,  ^*  if  sincere," 
are  utterly  impertinent ;  for  if  insincerity  be  supposed,  enthusiasm  ^ill 
be  out  of  the  question.  (2.)  That  those  words,  '*as  the  effects  of  his 
own  prayers,"  may  Ukewise  be  pared  off;  for  they  are  unnecessary  and 
cumbersome,  the  argument  being  complete  without  them.  (3.)  That, 
with  or  without  them,  the  proposition  is  false ;  unless  so  fiir  as  it  coiih 
cides  with  that  you  reject.  For  it  is  the  believing  those  to  be  miracles 
which  are  not,  that  constitutes  an  enthusiast ;  not  the  representing  them 
one  way  or  the  other ;  unless  so  far  as  it  implies  such  a  belief. 

12.  Upon  my  answer  to  the  syllogism  first  proposed,  yon  observe, 
*•  Thus"  (by  denying  the  latter  part  of  the  minor)  •'  you  clear  yourself 
from  the  charge  of  enthusiasm,  by  acknowledging  the  cures  to  be  super- 
natural and  miraculous.  Wliy  then  would  you  not  speak  out,  and 
directly  say,  that  you  can  work  real  and  undoubted  miracles?  This 
would  put  the  controversy  between  you  and  your  opposers  on  a  short 
foot,  and  be  an  effectual  proof  of  the  truth  of  your  pretences.''  {Second 
Letter^  p.  142.) 

y.  1.  I  have  in  some  measure  explained  myself  on  the  head  of  mira- 
cles, in  the  third  part  of  the  Farther  Appeal.  But  since  you  repeat  the 
demand,  (though  without  taking  any  notice  of  the  arguments  fhere 
advanced,)  I  will  endeavour  once  more  to  give  you  a  distinct,  fuU,  and 
determinate  answer. 

And,  (1.)  I  acknowledge  that  I  have  seen  with  my  eyes,  and  heard 
with  my  ears,  several  things,  which,  to  the  best  of  my  judgment,  cannot 
be  accounted  for  by  the  ordinary  course  of  natural  causes ;  and  which 
I  therefore  believe  ought  to  be  ''  ascribed  to  the  extraordinary  interposi- 
tion of  God."  If  any  man  choose  to  style  these  tniracUs,  I  reclaim  not 
I  have  diligently  inquired  into  the  facts.  I  have  weighed  the  preceding 
and  following  circumstances.  I  have  strove  to  account  for  them  in  a 
natural  way.    I  could  not,  without  doing  violence  to  my  reason*     Not 


FARTHER  EXPLAINED.  825 

>  go  far  back,  I  am  clearly  persuaded,  that  the  sudden  deliverance  of 
ohn  Haydon  was  one  instance  of  this  kind ;  and  my  own  recovery,  on 
lay  lOtb,  another.     I  cannot  account  for  either  of  these  in  a  natural  ^ 
my.     Therefore  I  believe  they  were  both  supernatural. 

I  must  (2.)  Observe,  that  the  truth  of  these  facts  is  supported  by  the 
une  kind  of  proof,  as  that  of  all  other  facts  is  wont  to  be,  namely,  the 
astimony  of  competent  witnesses ;  and  that  the  testimony  here  is  in  as 
igfa  a  degree  as  any  reasonable  man  can  desire.  Those  witnesses  were 
lany  in  number :  they  could  not  be  deceived  themselves ;  for  the  facts 
i  question  they  saw  with  their  own  eyes,  and  heard  with  their  own 
ITS :  nor  is  it  credible,  that  so  many  of  them  would  combine  together 
ith  a  view  of  deceiving  others ;  the  greater  part  being  men  that  feared 
rod ;  as  appeared  by  the  general  tenor  of  their  lives.  Thus  in  the 
ise  of  John  Haydon,  this  thing  was  not  contrived  and  executed  in  a 
>mer,  and  in  the  presence  of  his  own  family  only,  or  three  or  four 
arsons  prepared  for  the  purpose :  no,  it  was  in  an  open  street  of  the 
ty  of  Bristol,  at  one  or  two  in  the  aflemoon ;  and,  the  doors  being  all 
len  from  the  beginning,  not  only  many  of  the  neighbours  from  every 
ie,  but  several  others,  (indeed  whosoever  desired  it,)  went  in,  till  the 
luse  could  contain  no  more.  Nor  yet  does  the  account  of  my  own 
aess  and  recovery  depend,  as  you  suppose,  on  my  bare  word.  There 
sre  many  witnesses  both  of  my  disorder  on  Friday  and  Saturday,  and 
'  my  lying  down  most  part  of  Sunday,  a  thing  which  they  were  well 
tisfied  could  not  be  the  effect  of  a  slight  indisposition ;  and  all  who 
w  me  that  evening  plainly  discerned,  (what  I  could  not  wholly  con- 
ial,)  that  I  was  in  pain  v  about  two  hundred  of  whom  were  present 
den  I  was  seized  with  that  cough,  which  cut  me  short,  so  that  I  could 
•eak  no  more  ;  till  I  cried  out  aloud,  ^*  Lord,  increase  my  faith !  Lord, 
infirm  the  word  of  thy  grace !"  The  same  persons  saw  and  heard, 
at  at  that  instant  I  changed  my  posture,  and  broke  out  into  thanks- 
ving ;  that  quickly  afler  I  stood  upright,  (which  I  could  not  before,) 
id  showed  no  more  sign  either  of  sickness  or  pain. 
Yet  I  must  desire  you  well  to  observe,  Thirdly,  that  my  will,  or  choice, 
'  desire,  had  no  place  either  in  this,  or  any  case  of  this  kind,  that  has 
rer  fallen  under  my  notice.  Five  minutes  before,  I  had  no  thought  of 
is.  I  expected  nothing  less.  I  was  willing  to  wait  for  a  gradual 
covery,  in  the  ordinary  use  of  outward  means.  I  did  not  look  for  any 
her  cure,  till  the  moment  before  I  found  it.  And  it  is  my  belief  that 
16  case  was  always  the  same  with  regard  to  the  most  '*  real  and  un- 
Mibted  miracles."  I  believe  God  never  interposed  his  miraculous 
>wer,  but  according  to  his  own  sovereign  will ;  not  according  to  the 
ill  of  man  ;  neither  of  him  by  whom  he  wrought,  nor  of  any  other  man 
faatsoever.  The  wisdom  as  well  as  the  power  are  his ;  nor  can  I  find 
tat  ever,  from  the  beginning  of  the  worid,  he  lodged  this  power  in  any 
«re  man,  to  be  used  whenever  that  man  saw  good.  Suppose,  there- 
►re,  there  was  a  man  now  on  earth  who  did  work  "real  and  undoubted 
oracles ;"  I  would  ask.  By  whose  power  doth  he  work  these  1  and  at 
hose  pleasure  ?  his  own,  or  God's  ?  Not  his  own ;  but  God's.  But 
'so,  then  your  demand  is  not  made  on  man,  but  on  God.  I  cannot  say 
is  modest,  thus  to  challenge  God ;  or  well  suiting  the  relation  of  a 
"esture  to  his  Creator. 


326  PRIlfCIPLES  OP  A  METHODIST 

2.  However,  I  cannot  but  think,  there  have  been  already  so  nrnoj 
plain  interpositions  of  Divine  power,  as  will  shortly  leave  you  without 
excuse,  if  you  either  deny  or  despise  them.  We  desire  no  favour,  but 
the  justice  that  diligent  inquiry  may  be  mode  concerning  them.  We  are 
ready  to  name  the  persons  on  whom  that  power  was  shown,  which  be- 
longeth  to  none  but  God ;  (not  one  or  two,  or  ten  or  twelve  only ;)  to 
point  out  their  places  of  abode ;  and  we  engage  they  shall  answer  every 
pertinent  question,  fairly  and  directly ;  and,  if  required,  shall  give  all 
those  answers  upon  oath,  before  any  who  are  empowered  so  to  receive 
them.  It  is  our  particular  request  that  the  circumstances  which  went 
before,  which  accompanied,  and  which  followed  after,  the  facts  under 
consideration,  may  be  thoroughly  examined,  and  punctually  noted  down. 
Let  but  this  be  done,  (and  is  it  not  highly  needful  it  should  ?  at  least,  by 
those  who  would  form  an  exact  judgment,)  and  we  have  no  fear  that  any 
reasonable  man  should  scruple  to  say,  '*  This  hath  God  wrought !" 

As  there  have  been  already  so  many  instances  of  diis  kind,  ^  beyond 
what  we  had  dared  to  ask  or  think,  I  cannot  take  upon  me  to  say  whether 
or  no  it  will  please  God  to  add  to  their  number.  I  have  not  herein 
*'  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord,"  neither  am  I  **  his  counsellor."  He 
may,  or  he  may  not ;  I  cannot  affirm  or  deny.  I  have  no  light,  and  I 
have  no  desire  either  way.  *'  It  is  the  Lord :  let  him  do  what  secmeth 
him  good."     I  desire  oi^y  to  be  as  clay  in  his  hand. 

But  what,  if  there  were  now  to  be  wrought  ever  so  many  ^real  and 
undoubted  miracles  ?"  (I  suppose  you  mean  by  undoubted^  such  as, 
being  sufficiently  attested,  ought  not  to  be  doubted  of.)  Why,  "  This," 
you  say,  ^'  would  put  the  controversy  on  a  short  foot,  and  be  an  efiectual 
proof  of  the  truth  of  your  pretences."  By  no  means.  As  common  as 
this  assertion  is,  there  is  none  upon  earth  more  false.  Suppose  a  teach- 
er were  now,  on  this  very  day,  to  work  "  real  and  undoubted  miracles ;" 
this  would  extremely  little  **•  shorten  the  controversy"  between  him  and 
the  greater  part  of  his  opposers :  for  all  this  would  not  force  them  to 
beUeve ;  but  many  would  still  stand  just  where  they  did  before ;  seeing 
men  may  **  harden  their  hearts"  against  miracles,  as  well  as  against 
arguments. 

So  men  have  done  from  the  beginning  of  the  world ;  even  against 
such  signal,  glorious  miracles,  against  such  interpositions  of  the  power 
of  God,  as  may  not  be  again  till  die  consummation  of  all  things.  Per- 
mit me  to  remind  you  oidy  of  a  few  instances ;  and  to  observe,  that  the 
argument  holds  a  fortiori :  for  who  will  ever  be  empowered  of  God 
again  to  work  such  miracles  as  these  were  ?  Did  Pharaoh  look  on  all 
that  Moses  and  Aaron  wrought  as  an  '*  effectual  proof  of  the  truth  of 
their  pretences  ]"  even  when  *'  the  Lord  made  the  sea  dry  land,  and  the 
waters  were  divided ;"  when  **  the  children  of  Israel  went  into  the  midst 
of  the  sea,  and  the  waters  were  a  wall  unto  them  on  the  right  hand,  and 
on  the  left?"  Exod.  xiv,  21,  22.     Nay, 

The  wounded  dragon  raged  in  vain ; 

And,  fierce  the  utmost  plague  to  brave, 
Madly  he  dared  the  parted  main, 

And  sunk  beneath  the  overwhelming  wave. 

Was  all  this  **an  effectual  proof  of  the  truth  of  their  pretences,"  to  the 
Israelites  themselves  1  It  was  not     *'  They  were"  still  ^  ditobedieat  al 


FAETH£E  SZPULIKSD*  827 

Ae  sea ;  etv&k  at  Ae  Red  Sea !''  Was  the  giving  them  day  by  day 
^  bread  from  heaven,"  **an  effectual  prooP'  to  £ose  '*two  hundred  and 
fifty  princes  of  the  assembly,  famous  in  the  congregation,  men  of  renown,'' 
who  said,  with  Dathan  and  Abiram,  **  Wilt  thou  put  out  the  eyes  of 
these  ment  We  will  not  come  up?"  Numbers  zvi,  14;  nay,  ^'when 
tiie  ground  clave  asunder  that  was  under  them ;  and  the  earth  qpened 
her  mouth  and  swallowed  them  up  ?"  verse  32.  Neither  was  this  an 
^'efiectual  proof  to  those  who  saw  it  with  their  eyes,  and  heard  the  cry 
cf  dioae  that  went  down  into  the  pit ;  but,  the  very  next  day,  they  **  mur- 
mured asainst  Moses  and  against  Aaron,  saying,  Ye  have  killed  the 
people  of  the  Lord !"  verse  41. 

Was  not  die  case  generally  the  same  with  regard  to  the  Prophets  that 
followed  t  several  of  whom  '^  stopped  the  mouths  of  lions,  quenched  the 
violence  of  fire,"  did  many  mighty  works ;  yet  their  own  people  received 
them  not.  Yet  '^  they  were  stoned,  they  were  sawn  asunder,  they  were 
slain  with  the  sword ;"  they  were  **  destitute,  afflicted,  tormented !"  ut- 
terly contrary  to  the  commonly  received  supposition,  that  the  working 
real,  undoubted  miracles  must  bring  all  controversy  to  an  end,  and  con- 
vince every  gainsayer. 

Let  us  come  nearer  yet  How  stood  the  case  between  our  Lord 
himself  and  his  opposers?  Did  he  not  work  *'real  and  undoubted  mira- 
cles 7"  And  what  was  the  effect  ?  Still,  when  '*  he  came  to  his  own,  his 
own  received  him  not."  Still  *'  he  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men." 
Still  it  was  a  challenge  not  to  be  answered:  '^  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or 
of  the  Pharisees  believed  on  him?"  After  this,  how  can  you  imagine, 
that  whoever  works  miracles  must  convince  '*  all  men  of  the  truth  of  hia 
pretences  I" 

I  would  just  remind  you  of  only  one  instance  more :  **  There  sat  a 
certain  man  at  Lystra,  impotent  in  his  feet,  being  a  cripple  from  his 
mother's  womb,  who  never  had  walked.  The  same  heard  Paul  speak; 
who  steadfastly  beholding  him,  and  perceiving  that  he  had  faith  to  be 
liealed,  said  with  a  loud  voice,  Stand  upright  on  thy  feet  And  he 
leaped  and  walked."  Here  was  so  undoubted  a  miracle,  that  the  people 
"* lifted  up  their  voices,  saying.  The  gods  are  come  down  in  the  likeness 
of  men."  But  how  long  were  even  these  convinced  of  the  truth  of  his 
pretences  1  Only  till  **  there  came  thither  certain  Jews  from  Antioch 
and  Iconium ;"  and  then  they  stoned  him  (as  they  supposed)  to  death  I 
Acts  xiv,  1,  &c.  So  certain  it  is,  that  no  miracles  whatever,  which 
were  ever  yet  wrought  in  the  world,  were  effectual  to  prove  the  most 
glaring  truth,  to  those  that  hardened  their  hearts  against  it 

4.  And  it  will  equally  hold  in  every  age  and  nation.  *'  If  they  hear 
not  Moses  and  the  Prophets,  neither  will  they  be  convinced"  of  what 
they  desire  not  to  believe,  **  though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  Without 
a  miracle,  without  one  rising  from  the  dead,  sav  rig  AiKji  ro  AsKr^iua,  aurou 
v'oifiv,  ^^  if  any  man  be  willing  to  do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doc* 
trine,  whether  it  be  of  God."  But  if  he  is  not  willing  to  do  his  will,  he 
will  never  want  an  excuse,  a  plausible  reason,  for  rejecting  it  Yea, 
though  ever  so  many  miracles  were  wrought  to  confirm  it  For  let  ever 
so  much  '^  light  come  into  the  world,"  it  will  have  no  effect  (such  is  the 
wise  and  just  will  of  God)  on  those  who  ^'  love  darkness  rather  than 
light"    It  will  not  convince  those  who  do  not  simi^y  desire  to  do  the 


328  PRIIfCIFLKS  OF  A  MBTH0DI8T 

will  of  their  Father  which  is  in  heaven ;  those  who  mind  earthly  things ; 
who  (if  thej  do  not  continue  in  any  gross  outward  sin,  yet)  love  pleasure 
or  ease ;  yet  seek  profit  or  power,  preferment  or  reputation^  Nothing 
will  ever  be  an  effectual  proof  to  these  of  the  holy  and  acceptable  will  of 
God,  unless  first  their  proud  hearts  be  humbled,  their  stubborn  wills 
bowed  down,  and  their  desires  brought,  at  least  in  some  degree,  into 
obedience  to  the  law  of  Christ. 

Hence,  although  it  should  please  God  to  work  anew  all  the  wonder j 
that  ever  were  wrought  on  the  earth,  still  these  men,  however  ^  wise  and 
prudent"  they  may  be  in  things  relating  to  the  present  world,  would 
fight  against  God  and  all  his  messengers,  and  that  in  spite  of  all  these 
miracles.  Meanwhile,  God  will  reveal  his  truth  unto  babes,  unto  those 
who  are  meek  and  lowly,  whose  desires  are  in  heaven,  who  want  to 
'*  know  nothing  save  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified."  These  need  no 
outward  miracle  to  show  them  his  will ;  they  have  a  plain  rule, — ^the  writ- 
ten word.  And  '*the  anointing  which  they  have  received  of  him  abideth 
in  them,  and  teacheth  them  of  all  things,"  1  John  ii,  27.  Through 
this  they  are  enabled  to  bring  all  doctrines  '^  to  the  law  and  to  the  testi- 
mony:" and  whatsoever  is  agreeable  to  this  they  receive,  without 
waiting  to  see  it  attested  by  miracles  ;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  whatever 
is  contrary  to  this  they  reject ;  nor  can  any  miracles  move  them  to 
receive  it 

5.  Yet  I  do  not  know  that  God  hath  any  way  precluded  himself  from 
thus  exerting  his  sovereign  power,  from  working  miracles  in  any  kind  or 
degree,  in  any  age,  to  the  end  of  the  world.  I  do  not  recollect  any 
scripture  wherein  we  are  taught,  that  miracles  were  to  be  confined  within 
the  limits  either  of  the  apostolic  or  the  Cyprianic  age ;  or  of  any  period  of 
time,  longer  or  shorter,  even  till  the  restitution  of  all  things.  I  have  not 
observed,  either  in  the  Old  Testament  or  the  New,  any  intimation  at 
all  of  this  kind.  St  Paul  says,  indeed,  once,  concerning  two  of  the 
miraculous  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  (so,  I  think,  that  text  is  usually  understood,) 
"Whether  there  be  prophecies,.they  shall  fail,  whether  there  be  tongues, 
they  shall  oease."  But  he  does  not  say,  either  that  these  or  any  other 
miracles  shall  cease,  (ill  faith  and  hope  shall  cease  also  ;  till  they  all  be 
swallowed  up  in  the  vision  of  God,  and  love  be  all  in  all. 

I  presume  you  will  allow  there  is  one  kind  of  miracles  (loosely  speak- 
'  ing)  which  are  not  ceased;  namely,  rtpara  •]^svS:ig,  "lying  wonders,** 
diabolical  miracles,  or  works  beyond  th*)  virtue  of  natural  causes,  wrought 
by  the  power  of  evil  spirits.  Nor  can  you  easily  conceive  that  these 
Mill  cease,  as  long  as  the  father  of  lies  is  the  prince  of  this  worid.  And 
why  should  you  think  that  the  God  of  truth  is  less  active  than  him,  or 
that  he  will  not  have  his  miracles  also  1  only,  not  as  man  wiUs,  neither 
when  he  wills ;  but  according  to  his  own  excellent  wisdom  and  greatness. 

6.  But  even  if  it  were  supposed  that  God  does  now  work  beyond  the 
operation  of  merely  natural  causes,  yet  what  impression  would  this  make 
upon  you,  in  the  disposition  your  mind  is  now  in  ?  Suppose  the  trial 
were  repeated,  were  made  again  to-morrow.  One  informs  you  the 
next  day,  "  While  a  clergyman  was  preaching  yesterday,  where  I  was, 
a  man  came  who  had  been  long  ill  of  an  incurable  distemper.  Prayer 
was  made  for  him,  and  he  was  restored  to  perfect  health." 

Suppose,  now,  that  this  were  real  fact :  perhaps  you  would  scarce' 


FABTHUt  IXPLAIKID.  310 

▼e  pfltience  to  hear  the  account  of  it ;  but  would  cut  it  short,  in  the 
jdflt,  with,  ^ Do  you  tell  this  as  something  supernatural?  Then  miracles 
)  not  ceased."  But  if  you  should  venture  to  ask,  **  Where  was  this, 
d  who  was  the  person  that  prayed  ]"  and  it  was  answered,  *^  At  the 
nmdery  near  Moorfields ;  the  person  who  prayed  was  Mr.  Wesley ;" 
lat  a  damp  comes  at  once !  What  a  weight  falls  on  your  mind,  at  the 
ry  first  setting  out !  It  is  well  if  you  have  any  heart  or  desire  to  move 
e  «tep  farther.  Or  if  you  should,  what  a  strong  additional  propensity 
jou  now  feel  to  deny  the  fact !  And  is  there  not  a  ready  excuse  for 
doing] — **0,  they  who  tell  the  story  are  doubtless  his  own  people ; 
Mt  of  whom,  we  may  be  sure,  will  say  any  thing  for  him,  and  the  rest 
U  believe  any  thing."  But  if  you  at  length  allowed  the  fact,  might 
u  not  find  means  to  account  for  it  by  natural  causes  ?  **  Great  crowds, 
ilent  heats,  with  obstructions  and  irregularities  of  the  blood  and  spirits," 
II  do  wonders.  If  you  could  not  but  allow  it  was  more  than  natural, 
ght  not  some  plausible  reason  be  found  for  ranking  it  among  the  l3ring 
iftders,  for  ascribing  it  to  the  devil  rather  than  CTod  ?  And  if,  afler 
,  jou  was  convinced  it  was  the  finger  of  God,  must  you  not  still  bring 
ny  doctrine  advanced  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony,  the  only  sure 
1  infallible  test  of  all  ?  What,  then,  is  the  use  of  this  continual  de- 
md,  **Show  us  a  sign,  and  we  Mrill  believe  ?"  What  will  you  believe? 
tope,  no  more  than  is  written  in  the  book  of  God.  And  thus  far  you 
^  venture  to  beheve,  even  without  a  miracle. 
7.  Let  us  consider  this  point  yet  a  little  farther.  <*  What  is  it  you 
mid  have  us  prove  by  miracles  ?  the  doctrines  we  preach  ?"  We 
vwe  these  by  Scripture  and  reason;  and,  if  need  be,  by  antiquify. 
bat  else  is  k,  then,  that  we  are  to  prove  by  miracles  ?  At  length  we 
re  a  distinct  reply  :  "Wise  and  sober  men  will  not  otherwise  be  con- 
iced,"  (that  is,  unless  you  prove  this  by  miracles,)  "that  God  is,  by 
I  means  of  such  teachers,  and  such  doctrines,  working  a  great  and 
traordinary  work  in  the  earth."  {Pref,  p.  6.) 
So  then  the  determinate  point  which  you,  in  their  name,  call  upon  us 
prove  by  miracles,  is  this,  "that  God  is,  by  these  teachers,  working  a 
sat  and  extraordinary  work  in  the  earth." 

What  I  mean  by  "  a  great  and  extraordinary  work,"  is,  the  bringing 
iltitudes  of  gross  notorious  sinners,  in  a  short  space,  to  the  fear,  and 
re,  and  service  of  God,  to  an  entire  change  of  heart  and  life. 
Now,  then,  let  us  take  a  nearer  view  of  the  proposition,  and  see  which 
It  of  it  we  are  to  prove  by  miracles. 

**  Is  it,  (1.)  That  A.  B.  was,  for  many  years,  without  God  in  the  world, 

common  swearer,  a  drunkard,  a  Sabbath  breaker? 

"Or,  (2.)  That  he  is  not  so  now ? 

"Or,  (3.) That  he  continued  so  till  he  heard  these  men  preach;  and 

)m  that  time  was  another  man  ? 

"  Not  so.    The  proper  way  to  prove  these  facts  is,  by  the  testimony  of 

mpetent  witnesses.   And  these  witnesses  are  ready,  whenever  required, 

nve  full  evidence  of  them. 

"Or  would  you  have  us  prove  by  miracles,  (4.)  That  this  was  not  done 

^  our  own  power  or  holiness  ?  that  God  only  is  able  to  raise  the  dead, 

quicken  those  who  are  diead  in  trespasses  and  sins?" 

Surely  No.     Whosoever  believes  the  Scriptures,  will  want  no  new 
oof  m  this. 


830  PRllfCIPLBS  OF  A  MXTHODIST 

Where  then  is  the  wisdom  of  those  men  wfio  demand  miraclee  in 
proof  of  such  a  proposition  1  one  branch  of  which,  **  that  such  sinners 
were  reformed  by  the  means  of  these  teachers,"  being  a  plain  feet,  can 
only  be  proved  by  testimony,  as  all  other  facts  are ;  and  the  other, 
*  That  this  is  a  work  of  God,  and  a  great  and  more  than  ordinary  work,** 
needs  no  proof,  as  carrying  its  own  evidence  to  every  thinking  man. 

8.  To  sum  up  this :  No  truly  wise  or  sober  man  can  possibly  desire  or 
expect  miracles  to  prove  either,  (1.)  That  these  doctrines  are  true; — this 
must  be  decided  by  Scripture  and  reason ;  or,  (2.)  That  these  facts  are 
true ;  this  can  only  be  proved  by  testimony ;  or,  (3.)  That  to  change  sin- 
ners from  darkness  to  light,  is  the  work  of  God  alone ;  only  using  what 
instruments  he  pleases; — ^this  is  glaringly  self-evident;  or,  (4.)  That 
such  a  change  wrought  in  so  many  notorious  sinners,  within  so  short  a 
time,  is  a  great  and  extraordinary  work  of  God ;  this  also  carries  its  own 
evidence.  What  then  is  it  which  remains  to  be  proved  by  miracles  T 
Perhaps  you  will  say.  It  is  this :  **  That  God  hath  called  or  sent  you  to 
do  this."  Nay,  thb  is  implied  in  the  third  of  the  foregoing  propositions. 
If  God  has  actually  used  us  therein,  if  his  work  hath  in  fact  prospered 
in  our  hands,  then  he  hath  called  or  sent  us  to  do  this.  I  entreat  rea« 
sonable  men  to  weigh  this  thoroughly,  whether  the  fact  does  not  plainly 
prove  the  call ;  whether  He  who  enables  us  thus  to  save  souls  alive, 
does  not  commission  us  so  to  do ;  whether,  by  giving  us  the  power 
to  pluck  these  brands  out  of  the  burning.  He  does  not  authorize  ua  tc 
exert  it  ? 

0  that  it  were  possible  for  you  to  consider  calmly,  whether  the  suc- 
cess of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  as  it  is  preached  by  us,  the 
least  of  his  servants,  be  not  itself  a  miracle,  never  to  be  forgotten !  one 
which  cannot  be  denied,  as  being  visible  at  this  day,  not  in  one,  but  a 
hundred  places ;  one  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  the  ordinary 
course  of  any  natural  cause  whatsoever ;  one  which  cannot  be  ascribed, 
with  any  colour  of  reason,  to  diabotical  agency ;  and,  lastly,  one  which 
will  bear  the  infallible  test, — ^the  trial  of  the  written  word. 

YI.  1.  But  here  I  am  aware  of  abundance  of  objections.  You  object. 
That  to  speak  any  thing  of  myself,  of  what  I  have  done,  or  am  doing 
now,  is  mere  boasting  and  vanity.  This  charge  you  frequently  repeat 
So,  p.  102  :  ^'  The  following  page  is  full  of  boasting.".  ^  You  boast 
very  much  of  the  numbers  you  have  converted ;"  (p.  113 ;)  and  again, 
**  As  to  myself,  I  hope  I  shall  never  be  led  to  imitate  you  in  boasting." 
I  think  therefore  it  is  needful,  once  for  all,  to  examine  this  chai^  tho- 
roughly ;  and  to  show  distinctly  what  that  good  thing  is  which  yoi 
disguise  under  this  bad  name. 

(1.)  From  the  year  1725  to  1729  I  preached  much,  but  saw  no  fruit 
of  my  labour.  Indeed  it  could  not  be  that  I  should ;  for  I  neither  laid 
the  foundation  of  repentance,  nor  of  betieving  the  Gospel ;  taking  it 
for  granted,  that  all  to  whom  I  preached  were  believers,  and  that  many 
of  them  **  needed  no  repentance."  (2.)  From  the  year  1729  to  1734, 
laying  a  deeper  foundation  of  repentance,  I  saw  a  little  fruit  But  it 
was  only  a  little ;  and  no  wonder :  for  I  did  not  preach  faidi  in  the  blooi 
of  the  covenant.  (3.)  From  1734  to  1738,  speaking  more  of  faith  m 
Christ,  I  saw  more  fruit  of  my  preaching,  and  visiting  from  bonae  to 
house,  than  ever  I  had  done  before ;  though  I  know  not  if  any  of 


VARTHEE  KXPLAINKD.  d31 

who  were  outwardly  reformed  were  inwardly  and  thoroughly  converted 
to  God.  (4.)  From  1738  to  this  time,  speaking  continually  of  Jesus 
Christ,  laying  him  only  for  the  foundation  of  the  whole  huilding,  mak- 
ing him  all  in  all,  the  first  and  the  last ;  preaching  only  on  this  plan, 
**'  The  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand ;  repent  ye,  and  believe  the  Gospel  ;'* 
the  "  word  of  God  ran"  as  fire  among  the  stubble ;  it  "  was  glorified" 
more  and  more ;  multitudes  cr3dng  out,  *' What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?" 
and  afterward  witnessing,  *' By  grace  we  are  saved  through  faith." 
(5.)  I  considered  deeply  with  myself  what  I  ought  to  do ;  whether  to 
declare  the  things  I  had  seen,  or  not.  I  consulted  the  most  serious 
friends  I  had.  They  all  agreed,  I  ought  to  declare  them  ;  that  the  work 
itself  was  of  such  a  kind,  as  ought  in  no  wise  to  be  concealed ;  and 
indeed,  that  the  unusual  circumstances  now  attending  it,  made  it  impos- 
sible diat  it  should.  (6.)  This  very  difficulty  occurred :  **  Will  not  my 
speaking  of  this  be  boasting  1  at  least,  will  it  not  be  accounted  so  V* 
They  replied,  **  If  you  speak  of  it  as  your  own  work,  it  will  be  vanity 
and  boasting  all  over ;  but  if  you  ascribe  it  wholly  to  God,  if  you  give 
him  aD  the  praise,  it  will  not  And  if,  after  this,  some  will  account  it  so 
sdD,  you  must  be  content,  and  bear  the  burden."  (7.)  I  yielded,  and 
transcribed  my  papers  for  the  press ;  only  labouring,  as  far  as  possible, 
to  ^  render  unto  God  the  things  which  are  God's ;"  to  give  him  the 
praise  of  his  own  work. 

2.  But  this  very  thing  you  improve  into  a  fresh  objection.  If  I  as- 
cribe any  thing  to  God,  it  is  enlhusicum.  If  I  do  not  (or  if  I  do)  it  is 
tMthf  and  hoasting^  supposing  me  to  mention  it  at  all.  What  then  can 
I  do  to  escape  your  censure  1  **  Why,  be  silent ;  say  nothing  at  all." 
I  cannot,  I  dare  not.  Were  I  thus  to  please  men,  I  could  not  be  the 
servant  of  Christ 

Tou  do  not  appear  to  have  the  least  idea  or  conception  of  what  is  in 
the  heart  of  one  whom  it  pleases  Him  that  worketh  aJl  in  all  to  employ 
in  a  work  of  this  kind.  He  is  in  no  wise  forward  to  be  at  all  employed 
therein ;  he  starts  back,  again  and  again ;  not  only  because  he  readily 
foresees  what  shame,  care,  sorrow,  reproach,  what  loss  of  friends,  and 
of  all  that  the  world  accounts  dear,  will  inevitably  follow ;  but  much 
more,  because  he  (in  some  measure)  knows  himself.  This  chiefly  it  is 
which  constrains  him  to  cry  out,  (and  that  many  times,  in  the  bitterness 
of  his  soul,  when  no  human  eye  seeth  him,)  0  Lord,  send  by  whom  thou 
wik  send,  only  send  not  me !  What  am  I  ?  A  worm !  A  dead  dog !  A 
man  unclean  in  heart  and  lips !"  And  when  he  dares  no  longer  gainsay 
or  resist,  when  he  is  at  last  *'  thrust  out  into  the  harvest,"  he  looketh  on 
the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,  he  takes  every  step  with  fear  and  trem- 
bling, and  with  the  deepest  sense  (such  as  words  cannot  express)  of 
**  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?"  Every  gift  which  he  has  received 
of  God  for  the  furtherance  of  his  word,  whether  of  nature  or  grace, 
heightens  this  fear,  and  increases  his  jealousy  over  himself;  knowing 
disk  so  much  the  stricter  must  the  ir.quiry  be,  when  he  gives  an  account 
of  his  stewardship.  He  is  most  of  all  jealous  over  himself  when  the 
work  of  the  Lord  prospers  in  his  hand.  He  is  then  amazed  and  con- 
founded before  God.  Shame  covers  his  face.  Yet  when  he  sees,  that 
he  ought  **  to  praise  the  Lord  for  his  goodness,  and  to  declare  the  won- 
deiB  which  he  doeth  for  the  children  of  men,"  he  is  in  a  strait  between 


832  PRINCIPLES  OF  A  METHODIST 

two ;  be  knows  not  which  way  to  turn ;  he  cannot  speak ;  he  dares 
not  be  silent.  It  may  be,  for  a  time  he  **  keeps  his  mouth  with  a  bridle ; 
he  holds  his  peace  even  from  good.  But  his  heart  is^  hot  within  him," 
and  constrains  him  at  length  to  declare  what  God  hath  wrought  And 
this  he  then  doeth  in  all  simplicity,  with  "  great  plainness  of  speech,'* 
desiring  only  to  conmiend  himself  to  Him  who  *'  searcheth  the  heart 
and  trieth  the  reins ;"  and  (whether  his  words  are  the  savour  of  life  or  of 
death  to  others)  to  have  that  witness  in  himself,  **  As  of  sincerity,  as  of 
God,  in  the  sight  of  God,  speak  we  in  Christ."  If  any  man  counts  this 
boasting,  he  cannot  help  it  It  is  enough  that  a  higher  Judge  standeth 
at  the  door. 

3.  But  you  may  say,  **  Why  do  you  talk  of  the  success  of  the  Gospel 
in  England,  which  was  a  Christian  country  before  you  was  bom  ?**  Was 
it  indeed  ?  Is  it  so  at  this  day  ?  I  would  explain  myself  a  little  on  this 
head  also. 

And,  (I.)  None  can  deny,  that  the  people  of  England,  in  general,  are 
called  Christians.  They  are  called  so,  a  few  only  excepted,  by  others, 
as  well  as  by  themselves.  But  I  presume  no  man  wiU  say  that  the  name 
makes  the  thing;  that  men  are  Christians,  barely  because  they  are 
called  so.  (2.)  It  must  be  allowed,  that  the  people  of  England,  gene- 
rally speaking,  have  been  christened  or  baptized.  But  neither  can  we 
infer,  "  These  were  once  baptized ;  therefore  they  are  Christians  now.** 
(3.)  It  is  allowed,  that  many  of  those  who  were  once  baptized,  and  are 
called  Christians  to  this  day,  hear  the  word  of  God,  attend  public  pray- 
ers, and  partake  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  But  neither  does  this  prove  that 
they  are  Christians.  For,  notwithstanding  this,  some  of  them  live  in 
open  sin ;  and  others  (though  not  conscious  to  themselves  of  hypocrisy, 
yet)  are  utter  strangers  to  the  religion  of  the  heart ;  are  full  of  pride, 
vanity,  covetousness,  ambition;  oi  hatred,  anger,  malice,  or  envy ;  and, 
consequently,  are  no  more  scriptural  Christians,  than  the  open  drunkard 
or  common  swearer. 

Now,  these  being  removed,  where  are  the  Christians,  from  whom  we 
may  properly  term  England  a  Christian  country  ?  the  men  who  have  the 
mind  which  was  in  Christ,  and  who  walk  as  he  also  walked ;  whose  inmost 
soul  is  renewed  afler  the  image  of  God ;  and  who  are  outwardly  holy, 
as  He  who  hath  called  them  is  holy  ?  There  are  doubtless  a  few  such 
to  be  found.  To  deny  this  would  be  want  of  candour.  But  bow  few! 
'how  thinly  scattered  up  and  down!  And  as  for  a  Christian  visible 
Church,  or  a  body  of  Christians  visibly  united  together,  where  is  this  to 
be  seen  ? 

Ye  difTerent  sects,  who  all  declare, 

Lo  1  here  is  Christ,  or,  Christ  is  there ! 

Your  stronger  proofs  divinely  ^ve, 

And  show  me  where  the  Christians  live ! 

And  what  use  is  it  of,  what  good  end  does  it  serve,  to  term  England 
a  Christian  country  1  (Although  it  is  true,  most  of  the  natives  are 
called  Christians,  have  been  baptized,  frequent  the  ordinances ;  and 
although  a  real  Christian  is  here  and  there  to  be  found,  **  as  a  lig^ 
shining  in  a  dark  place.")  Does  it  do  any  honour  to  our  great  Masteri 
among  those  who  are  not  called  by  his  name?  Does  it  recommend 
Christianity  to  the  Jews,  the  Mohammedans,  or  the  avowed  HeatbemT 
Surely  no  one  can  conceive  it  does.    It  only  makes  Christianity  ttiiik 


FARTHBR  EXPLAINED.  833 

in  their  nostrils.  Does  it  answer  any  good  end  with  regard  to  those  on 
whom  this  worthy  name  is  called  ?  I  fear  not ;  but  rather  an  exceeding 
Dad  one.  For,  does  it  not  keep  multitudes  easy  in  their  heathen  prac- 
tice T  Does  it  not  make  or  keep  still  greater  numbers  satisfied  with 
their  heathen  tempers  ?  Does  it  not  directly  tend  to  make  both  the  one 
and  the  other  imagine,  that  they  are  what  indeed  they  are  not ;  that  they 
are  Christians,  while  they  are  utterly  without  Christ,  and  without  God 
in  the  world  ?  To  close  this  point :  If  men  are  not  Christians  till  they 
are  renewed  after  the  image  of  Christ,  and  if  the  people  of  England  in 
general  are  not  thus  renewed,  why  do  we  term  them  so  ?  The  god  of 
this  world  hath  long  blinded  their  hearts.  Let  us  do  nothing  to  increase 
that  blindness ;  but  rather  labour  to  recover  them  from  that  strong  delu- 
sion, that  they  may  no  longer  believe  a  Ue. 

4.  Let  us  labour  to  convince  all  mankind,  that  to  be  a  real  Christian, 
is,  to  love  the  Lord  our  God  with  all  our  heart,  and  to  serve  him  with 
all  our  strength ;  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves ;  and  therefore 
do  unto  every  man  as  we  would  he  should  do  imto  us.  Nay,  you  say, 
^  Had  you  confined  yourselves  to  these  great  points,  there  would  have 
been  no  objection  against  your  doctrine.  But  the  doctrines  you  have 
distinguished  yourselves  by,  are  not  the  love  of  God  and  man,  but  many 
&be  and  pernicious  errors."  (p.  104.) 

I  haye  again  and  again,  with  all  the  plainness  I  could,  declared  what 
our  constant  doctrines  are ;  whereby  we  are  distinguished  only  from 
Headiens,  or  nominal  Christians ;  not  from  any  that  worship  God  in 
spirit  and  in,  truth.  Our  main  doctrines,  which  include  all  the  rest,  are 
tfaree^ — that  of  repentance,  of  faith,  and  of  holiness.  The  first  of  these 
we  account,  as  it  were,  the  porch  of  religion;  the  next,  the  door;  the 
third,  religion  itself. 

That  repentance  or  conviction  of  sin,  which  is  always  previous  to 
faith,  (either  in  a  higher  or  lower  degree,  as  it  pleases  God,)  we  describe 
in  words  to  this  effect : — 

"When  men  feel  in  themselves  the  heavy  burden  of  sin,  see  damnation 
to  be  the  reward  of  it,  behold  with  the  eye  of  their  mind  the  horror  of 
hell ;  they  tremble,  they  quake,  and  are  inwardly  touched  with  sorrow- 
fulness of  heart,  and  cannot  but  accuse  themselves,  and  open  their  mef 
Qoto  Almighty  God,  and  call  unto  him  for  mercy.  This  being  done 
serionady,  their  mind  is  so  occupied,  partly  with  sorrow  and  heaviness, 
partly  with  an  earnest  desire  to  be  delivered  from  this  danger  of  hell  and 
damnation,  that  all  desire  of  meat  and  drink  is  laid  apart,  and  loathing  of 
all  worldly  things  and  pleasure  cometh  in  place.  So  that  nothing  Uien 
liketh  them  more,  than  to  weep,  to  lament,  to  mourn ;  and  both  with 
words  and  behaviour  of  body  to  show  themselves  weary  of  life." 

Now,  permit  me  to  ask,  What,  if,  before  you  had  observed  that  these 
were  the  very  words  of  our  own  Church,  one  of  your  acquaintance  or  par- 
ishioners had  come  and  told  you,  that  ever  since  he  heard  a  sermon  at 
the  Foundery,  he  '^  saw  damnation"  before  him,  **  and  beheld  with  the  eye 
of  his  mind  the  horror  of  hell  ?"  What,  if  he  had  '*  trembled  and  quaked," 
and  been  so  taken  up,  *^  partly  with  sorrow  and  heaviness,  partly  with 
an  earnest  desire  to  be  delivered  from  the  danger  of  hell  and  damnation," 
as  to  ^  weep,  to  lament,  to  mourn,  and  both  with  words  and  behaviour  to 
Aow  himself  weary  of  life  t"  Would  you  have  scrupled  to  say,  '*  Here 
is  anothiw  *  deplordi)le  instance'  of  the  *  Methodists  driving  men  to  dia* 


884  PRINCIPLES  OF  A  MKTH0DI8T 

traction !'  See,  <  into  what  excessive  terrors,  frights,  doubts,  and  per* 
plexities,  they  throw  weak  and  well-meaning  men !  quite  oversettiiig 
their  understandings  and  judgments,  and  makmg  them  liable  to  all  these 
miseries.' " 

I  dare  not  refrain  from  adding  one  plain  question,  which  I  beseech 
you  to  answer,  not  to  me,  but  to  God :  Have  you  ever  experienced  this 
repentance  yourself?  Did  you  ever  "feel  in  yourself  that  heavy  burden 
of  sin?"  of  sin  in  general,  more  especially,  inward  sin ;  of  pride,  anger, 
lust,  vanity  ?  of  (what  is  all  sin  in  one)  that  carnal  mind  which  is  enmity, 
essentia]  enmity,  against  God  ?  Do  you  know  by  experience  what  it 
is,  to  "  behold  with  the  eye  of  the  mind  the  horror  of  hell  V^  Was  *•  your 
mind"  ever  so  "  taken  up,  partly  with  sorrow  and  heaviness,  partly  with 
an  earnest  desire  to  be  delivered  from  diis  danger  of  hell  and  damna- 
tion, that  even  all  desire  of  meat  and  drink*'  was  taken  away,  and  you 
*' loathed  all  worldly  things  and  pleasure?"  Surely  if  you  had  known 
what  it  is  to  have  the  "  arrows  of  the  Almighty"  thus  "  sticking  fast  in 
you,"  you  could  not  so  lightly  have  condenmed  those  who  now  ciy  out, 
*'  The  pains  of  hell  come  about  me ;  the  sorrows  of  death  compass  me, 
and  the  overflowings  of  ungodliness  make  me  afraid." 

5.  Concerning  the  gate  of  religion, — (if  it  may  be  allowed  so  to 
speak,)  the  true.  Christian,  saving  faith, — we  believe  it  implies  abund- 
antly more  than  an  assent  to  the  truth  of  the  Bible.  "  Even  the  devils 
believe  that  Christ  was  bom  of  a  virgin ;  that  he  wrought  all  kind  of 
miracles  ;  that  for  our  sakes  he  suffered  a  most  painful  death  to  redeem 
us  from  death  everlasting.  These  articles  of  our  faith  the  veiy  devils 
believe,  and  so  they  believe  all  that  is  written  in  the  Old  and  New  Tes- 
tament And  yet,  for  all  this  faith,  they  be  but  devils.  They  remain 
still  in  their  damnable  estate,  lacking  the  very  true  Christian  faith. 

**  The  right  and  true  Christian  faith  is,  not  only  to  believe  thai  the 
Holy  Scriptures  and  the  articles  of  our  faith  are  true,  but  also  to  have  a 
sure  trust  and  confidence  to  be  saved  from  everlasting  damnation, 
durough  Christ"  Perhaps  it  may  be  expressed  more  cleariy  thus  :  "A 
sure  trust  and  confidence  which  a  man  hath  in  God,  that  by  the  merits 
of  Christ  his  sins  are  forgiven,  and  he  reconciled  to  the  favour  of  God*" 

For  giving  this  account  of  Christian  faith,  (as  well  as  the  preceding 
account  of  repentance,  both  which  I  have  here  also  purposely  described 
in  the  very  terms  of  the  Homilies,)  I  have  been  again  and  again,  for 
near  these  eight  years  past,  accused  of  enthusiasm ;  sometimes  by  those 
who  spoke  to  my  face,  either  in  conversation,  or  from  the  pulpit ;  but 
more  frequentlv  by  those  who  chose  to  speak  in  my  absence  ;  and  not 
seldom  from  the  press.  I  wait  for  those  who  iudge  this  to  be  enthu- 
siasm, to  bring  forth  their  strong  reasons.  Till  then,  I  must  continue 
to  account  all  these  the  **  words  of  truth  and  soberness." 

6.  Religion  itself  (I  choose  to  use  the  very  words  wherein  I  described 
it  long  ago)  we  deflnc,  ^  The  loving  God  with  all  our  heart,  and  our 
neighbour  as  ourselves ;  and  in  that  love  abstaining  from  all  evil,  and 
doing  all  possible  good  to  all  men."  The  same  meaning  we  have 
sometimes  expressed  a  little  more  at  large,  thus :  *'  Religion  we  conceive 
to  be  no  other  than  love ;  the  love  of  God  and  of  all  mankind ;  the  lov- 
ing God  ^  with  all  our  heart,  and  soul,  and  strength,'  as  having  *  first 
loved  us,'  as  the  fountain  of  all  the  good  we  have  received,  and  dT  al 


FAETHBR  BZPLAIlflD.  835 

ever  hope  to  enjo  j ;  and  the  loving  every  soul  which  God  hath  made, 
ererj  man  on  earth,  as  our  own  soul. 

"  This  love  we  believe  to  be  the  medicine  of  life,  the  never-failinff 
remedy  for  all  the  evils  of  a  disordered  world,  for  all  the  miseries  and 
noes  of  men.  Wherever  this  is,  there  are  virtue  and  happiness  going 
hand  in  hand.  There  is  humbleness  of  mind,  gentleness,  longsufTering, 
the  whole  image  of  God,  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  peace  that  passeth  iQl 
understanding,  and  jov  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. 

^  This  religion  we  long  to  see  established  in  the  world,  a  religion  of 
love,  and  joy,  and  peace ;  having  its  seat  in  the'  heart,  in  the  inmost  soul, 
hat  ever  showing  itself  by  its  fruits;  continually  springing  forth,  not  only 
in  all  innocence,  (for  love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour,)  but  likewise 
in  every  kind  of  beneficence,  spreading  virtue  and  happiness  all  around  it." 

If  this  can  be  proved  by  Scripture  or  reason  to  be  enthusiastic  or 
errooeoae  doctrine,  we  will  then  plead  guilty  to  the  indictment  of  '*  teach- 
ing error  and  enthusiasm."  But  if  this  be  the  genuine  religion  of  Christ, 
then  win  all  who  advance  this  charge  against  us  be  found  false  witnesses 
before  God,  in  the  day  when  he  shall  judge  the  earth. 

7.  However,  with  regard  to  the  fruits  of  our  teaching,  you  say,  **  It 
is  to  be  feared,  the  numbers  of  serious  men  who  have  been  perplexed 
and  deluded  are  much  greater  than  the  numbers  of  notorious  sinners 
who  have  been  brought  to  repentance  and  good  life."  (p.  113.)  **  In- 
deed, if  you  could  prove  that  the  Methodists  were,  in  general,  very 
wicked  people  before  they  followed  you,  and  that  all  you  have  been 
teaching  them  is,  the  love  of  God  and  their  neighbour,  and  a  care  to 
keep  his  conmiandments,  which  accordingly  they  have  done  since,  you 
would  stop  the  mouths  of  all  adversaries  at  once.  But  we  have  great 
reason  to  believe  that  the  generality  of  the  Methodists,  before  they  be- 
came so,  were  serious,  regular,  and  well-disposed  people."  (p.  103.) 
V  If  the  question  were  proposed,  *^  Which  are  greater,  the  numbers  of 
lerious  men  who  have  been  perplexed  and  deluded,  or  of  notorious  sin- 
ners who  have  been  brought  to  repentance  and  good  life,"  by  these 
preachers,  throughout  England,  within  seven  years?  it  might  be  difficult 
for  you  to  fix  the  conclusion.  For  England  is  a  place  of  wide  dimen- 
lioofl ;  nor  is  it  easy  to  make  a  satisfactory  computation,  unless  you 
confine  yourself  within  a  smaller  compass.  Suppose  then  we  were  to 
contract  the  question,  in  order  to  make  it  a  little  less  unwieldy.  We 
win  bound  our  inquiry,  for  the  present,  within  a  square  of  three  or  four 
miles.  It  may  be  certainly  known  by  candid  men,  both  what  has  been 
and  what  is  now  done  within  this  distance ;  and  from  hence  they  may 
judge  of  those  fruits  elsewhere,  which  they  cannot  be  so  particularly 
informed  of. 

Inquire  then,  *'  Which  are  greater,  the  numbers  of  serious  men,  per- 
plexed and  deluded  by  these  teachers,  or  of  notorious  sinners  brought 
to  repentance  and  good  life,"  within  the  forest  of  Kingswood  I  Many 
'wdeid  of  the  inhabitants  are  nearly  as  they  were ;  are  not  much  bettor 
or  worse  for  their  preaching ;  because  die  neighbouring  clergy  and 
gentry  have  successfully  laboured  to  deter  them  from  hearing  it  But 
between  three  and  four  hundred  of  those  who  would  not  be  deterred  are 
BOW  under  the  care  of  those  preachers.  Now,  what  number  of  these 
were  serious  Christians  before]  Were  fifly ]  Were  twen^?  Were  tent 
PenMfventure,  there  mij^t  five  such  be  found.     But  it  is  a  question 


836  PRINCIPLES  OF  A  METHODIST 

ivhether  there  could  or  no.  The  remainder  were  gross,  open  sinners, 
common  swearers,  drunkards,  Sabbath  breakers,  whoremongers,  plun- 
derers, robbers,  implacable,  unmerciful,  wolves  and  bears  in  the  shape 
of  men.  Do  you  desire  instances  of  more  **  notorious  sinners"  than 
these  ?  I  know  not  if  Turkey  or  Japan  can  afford  them.  And  what  do 
you  include  in  **  repentance  and  good  life  ?"  Give  the  strictest  definitioii 
thereof  that  you  are  able ;  and  1  will  undertake,  these  once  notorious 
sinners  shall  be  weighed  in  that  balance,  and  not  found  wanting. 

8.  Not  that  all  the  Methodists  (so  called)  **  were  very  wicked  people 
before  they  followed  us."  There  are  those  among  them,  and  not  a  few, 
who  are  able  to  stop  the  boasting  of  those  that  despise  them,  and  to  saj, 
'*  Whereinsoever  any  of  you  is  bold,  I  am  bold  also :"  only  they  **  count 
all  these  things  but  loss,  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
Jesus."  But  these  we  found,  as  it  were,  when  we  sought  them  not 
We  went  forth  to  **  seek  that  which  was  lost ;"  (more  eminently  lost ;) 
>«to  call"  the  most  flagrant,  hardened,  desperate  "sinners  to  repentance." 
To  this  end  we  preached  in  the  Horsefair  at  Bristol,  in  Kingswood,  in 
Newcastle ;  among  the  colliers  in  Staffordshire,  and  the  tinners  in  Corn- 
wall ;  in  Southwark,  Wapping,  Moorficlds,  Druiy-lane,  at  London.  Did 
any  man  ever  pick  out  such  places  as  these,  in  order  to  find  **  serious, 
regular,  well-disposed  people  ?"  How  many  such  might  then  be  in  any 
of  them  I  know  not  But  this  I  know,  that  four  in  five  of  those  who  are 
now  with  us  were  not  of  that  number,  but  were  wallowing  in  their  blood, 
till  God  by  us  said  unto  them,  "  Live." 

Sir,  I  willingly  put  the  whole  cause  on  this  issue :  what  are  the  gene- 
ral  consequences  of  this  preaching?  Are  there  more  tares  or  wheat  1 
more  "  good  men  destroyed,"  (that  is  the  proper  question,)  or  '*  wicked 
men  saved  1"  The  last  place  where  we  be^n  constant  preaching  is  a 
part  of  Wiltshire  and  Somersetshire,  near  bath.  Now,  let  any  man 
inquire  at  Rhode,  Bradford,  Wrexall,  or  among  the  colliers  at  Coleford, 
(1.)  What  kind  of  people  were  those  "  before  tiliey  followed  these  men?* 
(2.)  Wliat  are  the  main  doctrines  they  have  been  teaching  for  this  twelve- 
month ?  (3.)  What  efiect  have  these  doctrines  upon  their  foUowera  I 
What  manner  of  lives  do  they  lead  now?  And  if  you  do  not  find,  (1.) 
That  three  in  four  of  these  were,  two  years  ago,  notoriously  wicked 
men ;  (2.)  That  the  main  doctrines  they  have  heard  since,  were,  '^Lore 
God  and  your  neighbour,  and  carefully  keep  his  commandments ;"  and, 
(3.)  That  they  have  since  exercised  themselves  herein,  and  c<»itinue  so 
to  do ; — ^I  say,  if  you,  or  any  reasonable  man,  who  will  be  at  the  paint 
to  inquire,  does  not  find  this  to  be  an  unquestionable  fact,  I  will  openly 
acknowledge  myself  an  enthusiast,  or  whatsoever  else  you  shall  please 
to  style  me. 

Only  one  caution  I  would  give  to  such  an  inquirer :  let  him  not  ask 
the  colliers  of  Coleford,  "  Were  not  the  generality  of  you,  before  you 
followed  these  men,  serious,  regular,  well-disposed  people  ?"  Were  too 
not  "  ofiended  at  the  profaneness  and  debauchery  of  the  age?"  Anfl 
'*  was  it  not  this  disposition  which  at  first  made  you  liable  to  receife 
these  impressions?"  {Second  Letter^  p.  103.)  Because  if  he  talk  fkt$ 
to  some  of  those  who  do  not  yet ''  follow  these  men,"  perhaps  he  jfH, 
not  live  to  bring  back  their  answer.  , 

9.  But  will  this,  or  a  thousand  such  instances  a«  thiii  ^ifeOfi  ttjj^ 


PARTHBR  EXPLAIHKD.  887 

tha  of  all  adversaries  at  once  t"  0  sir,  would  one  expect  such  a 
ght  as  this  in  one  that  had  read  the  Bible  ?  What  if  you  could  con- 
aa  many  sinners  as  St.  Paul  himself?  Would  that  ''stop  the  mouths 
1  your  adversaries  ?"  Yea,  if  you  could  convert  three  thousand  at 
sermon,  still  you  would  be  so  far  from  *'  stopping  all  their  mouths 
ice,*'  that  the  greater  part  of  them  would  gnash  upon  you  with  their 
I,  and  cry,  "  Away  with  such  a  fellow  from  the  earth !" 
never,  therefore,  expect  *♦  to  persuade  the  world,"  the  majority  of 
kind,  that  I  "  have  been,"  for  some  years,  "  advancing  nothing"  but 
:  has  a  clear,  immediate  connection  with  '*  the  true  knowledge  and 

of  God ;"  that  God  hath  been  pleased  to  use  me,  a  weak,  vile 
n,  in  reforming  many  of  my  fellow  sinnera,  and  making  them,  at 
day,  living  witnesses  of  "  inward  and  pure  religion ;"  and  that  many 
leae^  ^  from  living  in  all  sin,  are  quite  changed,  are  become"  so  far 
ly,  that"  though  they  are  not  ''  free  from  all  sin,"  yet  no  sin  hath 
Inion  over  them.  And  yet  I  do  finnly  believe, ''  it  is  nothing  but  down- 
prejudice,  to  deny  or  oppose  any  of  these  particulars."  (Pref.  p.  5.) 
Allow  Mr.  Wesley,"  you  say,  "but  these  few  points,  and  he  will 
id  his  conduct  beyond  exception."  That  is  most  true.  If  I  have 
n1  *'  been  advancing  nothing  but  the  true  knowledge  and  love  of 
;  if  God  has  made  mo  an  instrument  in  reforming  many  siimers, 
iringing  them  to  ^  inward  and  pure  religion ;"  and  if  many  of  these 
nae  holy  to  this  day,  and  free  from  all  wilful  sin,  then  may  I,  even 
e  those  awful  words,  ''  He  that  despiseth  me,  despiseth  tlim  that 
me."  But  I  never  expect  the  world  to  allow  me  one  of  these  points, 
ever,  I  must  go  on  as  God  shall  enable  me.  I  must  lay  out  v/hai- 
Br  he  intrusts  me  with,  (whether  others  will  believe  I  do  it  or  no,) 
Ivaocing  the  true  Christian  knowledge  of  God,  and  the  love  and 
of  God  among  men ;  in  reforming  (if  so  be  it  please  him  to  use  me 
those  who  are  yet  without  God  in  the  world ;  and  in  propasating  in- 
,  and  pure  religion, — righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  Uie  Holy  Ghost. 
L  But  you  believe,  I  only  corrupt  those  who  were  good  Chris- 

before,  teaching  them  to  revile  and  censure  their  neighbours, 
to  abuse  the  clergy,  notwithstanding  all  their  meekness  and  gende- 
,  as  I  do  myself.  ''  I  must  declare,"  say  you,  ''we  have,  in  general, 
'ered  your  pretence  with  all  meekness  and  temper ;  the  railing  and 
ing  has  been  chiefly  on  the  side  of  the  Methodists."  {Sec,  Let.  p.  16.) 
lur  first  charge  ran  thus  :  "  How  have  such  abuses  &s  these  been 
m  out  by  you  against  our  regular  clergy,  not  the  highest  or  the 
liiest  excepted!"  {Remarks,  p.  15.)    I  answered,  "  I  am  altogether 

in  this  matter,  as  oflen  as  it  has  been  objected :  neither  do  I  desire 
oeive  any  other  treatment  from  the  clergy,  than  they  have  received 

me  to  this  day."  (p.  282.) 

m  reply,  (1.)  "  ^^^  instance  of  your  misrepresenting  and  injuring 
acher  of  our  Church  I  mentioned."  {Second  Lettevy  p.  106.)  Men- 
d  !  Well,  but  did  you  prove  it  was  an  injury  or  misrepresentation  ? 
>w  not  that  you  once  attempted  it  (2.)  You  next  quote  part  of  a 
'  from  the  Third  Journal ;  (vol.  iii,  p.  126 ;)  wherein,  according  to 
accoimt,  the  "  most  considerable  of  our  clergy  are  abused,  and  at 

accused  in  a  very  gross  manner."  {Second  Letter,  p.  106.)  Set 
I  the  whole  paragraiUf  and  I  will  prove  that  this  also  is  naked  truth* 


338  PRINGIPLXS  OF  A  METHODIST 

and  no  abuse  at  all.  Tou  say,  (3.)  "  Tou  approved  of  Whitefield's  nit 
ing  against  the  cler^ ;"  that  is,  1  say,  **  Mr.  Whitefield  preached  con- 
cerning the  *  Holy  Ghost,  which  all  who  believe  are  to  receive ;'  not 
without  a  just,  though  severe,  censure  of  those  who  preach  as  if  there 
were  no  Holy  Ghost"  (Vol.  iii,  p.  144.)  Nor  is  this  railing,  but  melan- 
choly truth.  I  have  myself  heard  several  preach  in  this  manner.  (4.) 
You  cite  my  words :  **  Wo  unto  you,  ye  bhnd  leaders  of  the  blind !  How 
long  will  you  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord  ?"  and  add,  *^  I  appeal 
to  yourself,  whether  you  did  not  design  this  reflection  against  the  clergy 
in  general  who  differ  from  you."  No  more  than  I  did  against  Moses  aod 
Aaron.  I  expressly  specify  whom  1  design :  *^  Ye  who  tell  the  mourners 
in  Zion,  Much  reUgion  hath  made  you  mad."  You  say,  (5.)  (with  a 
N.  B.,)  *' All  the  clergy  who  differ  from  you,  you  style  so,  p.  154;  ia 
which,  and  the  foregoing  page,  you  causelessly  slander  them  as  speak- 
ing of  their  own  holiness  as  that  for  the  sake  of  which,  on  account  of 
which,  we  are  justified  before  God." 

Let  any  serious  person  read  over  those  pages.  I  therein  slander  no 
man :  I  speak  what  I  know ;  what  I  have  both  heard  and  read.  The 
men  are  sdive,  and  the  books  are  extant  And  the  same  conclusioD  I 
now  defend,  touching  that  part  of  the  clergy  who  preach  or  write  thus; 
viz.  if  they  preach  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  I  am  found  a  false  witness 
before  God.  But  if  I  preach  the  way  of  God  in  truth,  then  they  are 
blind  leaders  of  the  blind.  (6.)  You  quote  those  words,  "  Nor  can  I  be 
said  to  intrude  into  the  labours  of  those  who  do  not  labour  at  all,  but 
suffer  thousands  of  those  for  whom  Christ  died  to  perish  for  ladi  of 
knowledge."  (VoL  iii,  p.  146.)  I  wrote  that  letter  near  Kingswood. 
I  would  to  God  the  observation  were  not  terribly  true !  (7.)  The  fint 
passage  you  cite  from  the  ^*  Earnest  Appeal,"  (p.  21,)  evidently  relates 
to  a  few  only  among  the  clergy;  and  if  the  charge  be  true  but  of  one  ia 
five  hundred,  it  abundantly  supports  my  reasoning.  (8.)  In  the  next, 
(76.  p.  24,)  I  address  all  those,  and  those  only,  who  affirm  that  I  preach 
for  gain. 

You  conclude :  ^*  The  resider  has  now  before  him  the  manner  in  which 
you  have  been  pleased  to  treat  the  clergy;  and  your  late  sermon  is  too 
fresh  an  instance  of  the  like  usage  of  the  universities."  {Second  IMUft 
p.  107.)  It  is  an  instance  of  speaking  the  truth  in  love.  So  I  desire  aD 
mankind  may  use  me.  Nor  could  I  have  said  less  either  to  the  unifer- 
sity  or  the  clergy,  without  sinning  against  God  and  my  own  soul. 

11.  But  I  must  explain  myself  a  little  on  that  practice  which  you  so 
oflen  term  "  abusing  tiie  clergy."  I  have  many  times  great  sorrow  and 
heaviness  in  my  heart  on  account  of  these  my  brethren.  And  this  some* 
times  constrains  me  to  speak  to  them,  in  the  only  way  which  is  now  in 
my  power ;  and  sometimes,  though  rarely,  to  speak  of  them ;  of  a  few, 
not  all,  in  general.  In  either  case,  I  take  an  especial  care,  (1.)  To 
speak  nothing  but  the  truth.  (2.)  To  speak  this^with  all  plainness. 
And,  (3.)  With  love,  and  in  the  spirit  of  meekness.  Now,  if  you  will 
call  this  abusing^  railing,  or  reviling,  you  must  But  still  I  daro  not 
refrain  from  it  I  must  thus  rail,  thus  abuse  sinners  of  all  sorts  and 
degrees,  unless  I  will  perish  with  them. 

When  I  first  read  your  declaration,  that  our  brethren  "  in  general  hbi 
treated  us  with  all  meekness  and  temper,"  I  bad  thoughts  of  sjpfeadiDf 


LBTTSA  TO  THE  BIBHOP  OF  LONDON.  d99^ 

m  you  a  few  of  the  flowers  which  they  have  strowed  upon  us  with 
ipuring  hand.  But,  on  reflection^  I  judged  it  better  to  forbear.  Let 
B  die  and  be  forgotten  ! 

LB  to  those  of  the  people  called  MetiiodUts^  whom  you  suppose  to 
il  at  and  abuse  the  clergy,"  and  to  "  revile  and  censure  their  neigh- 
!«,'*  I  can  only  say,  Which  are  they  ]  Show  me  the  men.  And  if  it 
Mr,  that  any  of  those  under  my  care  habitually  **  censure"  or  '*  revile" 
«B,  whether  clergy  or  laity,  I  will  make  them  an  example,  for  the' 
sfit  of  all  the  rest 

touching  you,  I  believe  I  was  afraid  without  cause.     I  do  not  think 
advanced  a  wilful  untruth.  This  was  a  rash  word.  I  hereby  openly 
act  it,  and  ask  pardon  of  God  and  you. 

!*o  draw  toward  a  conclusion :  Whosoever  they  are  that  **  despise 
and  make  no  account  of  my  labours,"  I  know  that  they  are  **  not  in 
I  in  the  Lord  ;"  and  thsU  I  have  not  *'  fought  as  one  that  beateth  the 
'  I  still  see  (and  I  praise  **  the  Father  of  Lights,"  from  idiom  every 
d  and  perfect  gift  descendeth)  a  continual  increase  of  pure  religion 
undefiled,  of  the  love  of  God  and  man,  of  the  "wisdom"  which  is 
Be  and  peaceable,  gentle,  and  easy  to  be  entreated,  full  of  mercy, 
of  good  fruits."  I  see  more  and  more  of  those  "  who  before  lived 
.  thorough  contempt  of  God's  ordinances,  and  of  all  duties,  now 
lously  discharging  their  duties  to  God  and  man,  and  walking  in  all 
ordinances  blameless."  A  few  indeed  I  have  seen  draw  back  to 
lilion,  chiefly  through  a  fear  of  being  "  righteous  overmuch."  And 
)  and  there  one  has  fallen  into  Calvinism,  or  turned  aside  to  the 
mvians.  But  I  doubt  not,  these  "  are  in  a  better  state  than  they  were 
re  they  heard  us."  Admit  they  are  in  error,  yea,  and  die  therein,  yet 
dares  affirm  they  will  perish  everlastingly?  But  had  they  died  in 
8  sin,  we  are  sure  they  had  fallen  into  "  the  fire  that  never  shall  be 
iched." 

have  now  considered,  as  far  as  my  time  would  permit,  (not  every  thing 
Mir  letter,  whether  of  moment  or  no,  but,)  those  points  which  I  con- 
ed to  be  of  the  greatest  weight  That  God  may  lead  us  both  into 
mth,  and  that  we  may  not  drop  our  love  in  the  pursuit  of  it,  is  the 
ioual  prayer  of,  reverend  sir,  your  friend  and  servant  for  Christ's 
)^  John  Wbslbt. 

tmu  17,  1746. 