
THE
VVO R K S OF
JOHN
WESLEY
THE
wo RKs O F
JOHN
#.
V O L U M E Letters and Essays
IX
Z O N DE R V A N P U B L IS H IN G. HO US E
G r and R a pids C-6 Michig an
This edition of the complete and unabridged
THE WoRks of John Wesley is reproduced
by the photo offset process from the authorized
edition published by the Wesleyan Conference
Office in London, England, in 1872.
Lithographed in the United States of America
EX 22/7
* *
y = 3
//72 a. C 0 NTENTS
V, 7
I. ge.
Page.
A Letter to the Author of “The Enthusiasm of Method
tsts and Papists Compared ” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . l
II.
A Second Letter to Ditto. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15.
III.
Second Letter to the Lord Bishop of Exete. . . . . . . . . 61
IV.
A Letter to the Rev. Mr. Baily, of Cork . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
W.
A Letter to the Rev. Mr. Potter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89.
VI.
A Letter to the Rev. Mr. Downes .........* - - - - - - - - 96
VII.
A Letter to the Rev. Dr. Horne . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
VIII.
A Letter to the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Gloucester 117
IX.
A Short Address to the Inhabitants of Ireland . . . . . . . . 173
X.
A Letter to the Rev. Mr. Fleury. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
XI.
The Doctrine of Original Sin, according to Scripture,
Reason, and Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . PREFACE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19]
192
PART FIRST
Th E PAST AND PRESENT STATE OF MANKIND. . . . . . 196
PART SECOND
ThE SCRIPTURAL METHOD OF ACCOUNTING FOR
TH1S, DEFENDED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238,
PART THIRD
AN ANswer. To DR TAYLOR’s suPPLEMENT.
SECTION I. Of Imputed Guilt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .314.
II. Of the Nature and Design of our Afflic
tions and Mortality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 317
State University of Iowa
Ll BRARIES
vi CONTENTS
Page.
SECTION III. The Argument taken from the Cala- £
mities and Sinfulness of Mankind, considered . . . . 320
IV. Some Consequences of the Doctrine of
Original Sin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326
– V. A General Argument taken from what
God has declared concerning Mankind, at the
Restoration of the World after the Deluge . . . . . . . 328
VI. The notion of Adam's being a Federal
Head, or Representative of Mankind, considered .. 332
— VII. Of the Formation of our Nature in
the Womb. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334.
VIII. Of Original Righteousness. . . . . . . . 339
PART FOURTH.
EXTRACTS FROM ID R. WATTS AND MIR. HEBDEN . . . . . . 353.
ESSAY FIRST.
DO THE PRESENT MISERIES OF MAN ALONE PROVE
HIs APOSTASY FROM GoD 2- ESSAY SECOND.
382
A PLAIN EXPLICATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF IM
PUTED SIN AND IMPUTED RIGHTEOUSNESS. . . . . . . 393
PART FIFTH.
THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 397
PART SIXTH.
THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN, EXPLAINED AND
WINDICATED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415
PART SEVENTH.
THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL S1N, EXTRACTED FROM
MR. BosTON’s FOURFold stATE or MAN. . . . . . . . . . 43.4
KII.
A Letter to the Rev. John Taylor, D.D. . . . . . . . . . . . . 465
XIII.
An Extract of a Letter to the Rev. Mr. Law. . . . . . . . . ... 466
XIV.
Thoughts upon Jacob Behmen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 509
XV.
A Specimen of the Divinity and Philosophy of the
highly-illuminated Jacob Behmen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 514
A LETTER
TO THE AUTHOR OF
“THE ENTHUSIASM OF METHODISTS AND
PAPISTS COMPARED.”
Agedum / Pauca accipe contra."—HoR.
SIR 1. In your late pamphlets you have undertaken to prove,
that Mr. Whitefield and I are gross enthusiasts; and that our
“whole conduct is but a counterpart of the most wild fana
ticisms of the most abominable communion in its most corrupt
ages.” (Preface, p. 3.)
You endeavour to support this charge against us by quota
tions from our own writings, compared with quotations from
celebrated writers of the Romish communion.
2. It lies upon me to answer for one. But I must not
burden you with too long an answer; lest, “for want either
of leisure or inclination,” (ibid. p. 5) you should not give
this, any more than my other tracts, a reading. In order
therefore to spare both you and myself, I shall consider only
your First Part; and that as briefly as possible. Accordingly, I
shall not meddle with your other quotations; but, leaving them
to whom they may concern, shall only examine whether those
you have made from my writings prove the charge of enthu
Slasm Or InC.
This I conceive will be abundantly sufficient to decide the
question between you and me. If these do prove the charge,
I am cast; if they do not, if they are the words of truth and
soberness, it will be an objection of no real weight against
sentiments just in themselves, though they should also be found
in the writings of Papists; yea, of Mahometans or Pagans.
* Thus translated by Boscawen :
“Now hear what briefly I reply.”-EDIT.
2 LETTER, TO
3. Let the eight pages you borrow stand as they are. I pre
sume they will do neither good nor harm. In the tenth you
say, “The Methodists act on the same plan with the Papists;
not, perhaps, from compact and design; but a similar con
figuration and texture of brain, or the fumes of imagination,
producing similar effects. From a commiseration of horror,
arising from the grievous corruptions of the world, perhaps
from a real motive of sincere piety, they both set out with warm
pretences to a reformation.” Sir, this is an uncommon thought,
—that sincere piety should arise from the “configuration and
texture of the brain l” as well as, that “pretences to a refor
mation” should spring from “a real motive of sincere piety l’’
4. You go on : “Both commonly begin their adventures
with field-preaching.” (Enthusiasm, &c., p. 11.) Sir, do you
condemn field-preaching toto genere, as evil in itself? Have a
care! or you (I should say, the gentleman that assists you)
will speak a little too plain, and betray the real motives of his
sincere antipathy to the people called Methodists.
Or do you condemn the preaching on Hannam-Mount, in
particular, to the colliers of Kingswood? If you doubt whether
this has done any real good, it is a very easy thing to be in
formed. And I leave it with all impartial men, whether the
good which has in fact been done by preaching there, and which
could not possibly have been done any other way, does not
abundantly “justify the irregularity of it.” (Page 15.)
5. But you think I am herein inconsistent with myself.
For I say, “The uncommonness is the very circumstance that
recommends it.” (I mean, that recommended it to the colliers
in Kingswood.) And yet I said, but a page or two before, “We
are not suffered to preach in the churches; else we should
prefer them to any places whatsoever.”
Sir, I still aver both the one and the other. I do prefer the
preaching in a church when I am suffered: And yet, when I
am not, the wise providence of God overrules this very cir
cumstance for good; many coming to hear, because of the
uncommonness of the thing, who would otherwise not
have heard at all.
6. Your Second charge is, that I “abuse the Clergy, throw
out so much gall of bitterness against them, and impute this
black art of calumny to the Spirit and power given from God.”
(Page 15.)
Sir, I plead Not Guilty to the whole charge. And you have
BISHOP LAVINGTON. 3
not cited one line to support it. But if you could support it,
what is this to the point in hand? I presume calumny is not
enthusiasm. Perhaps you will say, “But it is something as
bad.” True; but it is nothing to the purpose: Even the
imputing this to the Spirit of God, as you here represent it, is
an instance of art, not of enthusiasm.
7. You charge me, Thirdly, with “putting on a sanctified
appearance, in order to draw followers, by a demure look,
precise behaviour, and other marks of external piety. For
which reason,” you say, “Mr. Wesley made and renewed that
noble resolution, not willingly to indulge himself in the least
levity of behaviour, or in laughter, no, not for a moment; to
speak no word not tending to the glory of God, and not a
tittle of worldly things.” (Pages 18, 19.)
Sir, you miss the mark again. If this “sanctified appear
ance was put on to draw followers,” if it was for “this reason”
(as you flatly affirm it was) that “Mr. Wesley made and
renewed that noble resolution;” (it was made eleven or twelve
years before, about the time of my removal to Lincoln
College;) then it can be no instance of enthusiasm, and so
does not fall within the design of your present work; unless
your title-page does not belong to your book; for that
confines you to the enthusiasm of the Methodists.
8. But to consider this point in another view: You accuse
me of “putting on a sanctified appearance, a demure look,
precise behaviour, and other marks of external piety.” How
are you assured, Sir, this was barely external, and that it was
a bare appearance of sanctity? You affirm this as from per
sonal knowledge. Was you then acquainted with me three or
four and twenty years ago? “He made and renewed that noble
resolution,” in order to “draw followers.” Sir, how do you
know that? Are you in God's place, that you take upon you
to be the searcher of hearts? “That noble resolution, not
willingly to indulge himself in the least levity of behaviour.”
Sir, I acquit you of having any concern in this matter. But I
appeal to all who have the love of God in their hearts, whether
this is not a rational, scriptural resolution, worthy of the voca
tion wherewith we are called.—“Or in laughter, no, not for a
moment.” No, nor ought I to indulge it at all; if I am con
scious to myself, it hurts my soul. In which let every man
judge for himself. “To speak no word not tending to the glory
4. IETTER TO
of God.” A peculiar instance of enthusiasm this ! “And not
a tittle of worldly things.” The words immediately following
are, “Others may, may, must. But what is that to me?”
(words which, injustice, you ought to have inserted,) who was
then entirely disengaged from worldly business of every kind.
Notwithstanding which, I have often since engaged therein,
when the order of Providence plainly required it.
9. Though I did not design to meddle with them, yet I
must here take notice of three of your instances of Popish
enthusiasm. The First is, that “Mechtildis tortured herself for
having spo en an idle word.” (Page 19.) (The point of com
parison lies, not in torturing herself, but in her doing it on
such an occasion.) The Second, that “not a word fell from
St. Katherine of Sienna, that was not religious and holy.”
The Third, that “the lips of Magdalen di Pazzi were never
opened but to chant the praises of God.” I would to God the
comparison between the Methodists and Papists would hold in
this respect! yea, that you and all the Clergy in England
were guilty of just such enthusiasm :
10. You cite as a Fourth instance of my enthusiasm, that I
say, “A Methodist (a real Christian) cannot adorn himself, on
any pretence, with gold or costly apparel.” (Page 21.) If this
be enthusiasm, let the Apostle look to it. His words are clear
and express. If you can find a pretence to set them aside, do.
I cannot; nor do I desire it.
11. My seeming contempt of money,” (page 26,) you urge
as a Fifth instance of enthusiasm. Sir, I understand you.
You was obliged to call it seeming, lest you should yourself
confute the allegation brought in your title-page. But if it
be only seeming, whatever it prove besides, it cannot prove that
I am an enthusiast.
12. Hitherto you have succeeded extremely ill. You have
brought five accusations against me; and have not been able
to make one good. However, you are resolved to throw dirt
enough, that some may stick. So you are next to prove
upon me, “a restless impatience and insatiable thirst of tra
velling, and undertaking dangerous voyages, for the con
version of infidels; together with a declared contempt of all
dangera, pains, and sufferings; and the designing, loving,
and praying for ill usage, persecution, martyrdom, death, and
hell.” (Page 27.)
In order to prove this uncommon charge, you produce four
BiSHOP LAVINGTON. 5
scraps of sentences, (page 31) which you mark as my words,
though, as they stand in your book, they are neither sense nor
£rammar. But you do not refer to the page, or even the treatise,
where any one of them may be found. Sir, it is well you hide
your name, or you would be obliged to hide your face from
every man of candour or even common humanity.
13. “Sometimes indeed,” you say, “Mr. Wesley complains
of the scoffs both of the great vulgar and the small;” (page 32;)
to prove which, you disjoint and murder (as your manner is)
another of my sentences. “But at other times the note is
changed, and ‘till he is despised, no man is in a state of salva
tion.’” The note is changed 1 How so? When did I say
otherwise than I do at this day, viz., “that none are children
of God but those who are hated or despised by the children
of the devil?”
I must beg you,Sir, in your Third Part to inform your reader,
that, whenever any solecism or mangled sentences appear in
the quotations from my writings, they are not chargeable upon
me; that if the sense be mine, (which is not always; sometimes
you do me too much honour, even in this,) yet I lay no claim
fo the manner of expression; the English is all your own.
14. “Corporal severities or mortification by tormenting the
flesh,” (page 31,) is the next thing you charge upon me.
Almost two sentences you bring in proof of this. The one,
“Our bed being wet,” (it was in a storm at sea,) “I laid me
down on the floor, and slept soued till morning; and I believe
I shall not find it needful to go to bed, as it is called, any
more.” But whether I do or not, how will you prove, that
my motive is, to “gain a reputation for sanctity?” I desire
(if it be not too great a favour) a little evidence for this.
The other fragment of a sentence speaks “of bearing cold on
the naked head, rain and wind, frost and snow.” (Page 32.)
True; but not as matter of “mortification, by tormenting the
flesh.” Nothing less. These things are not spoken of there
as voluntary instances of mortification; (you yourself know
perfectly well, they are not, only you make free with your
friend;) but as some of the unavoidable inconveniences which
attend preaching in the open air.
Therefore you need not be so “sure that the Apostle con
demns that abetöta aouatos, “not sparing the body, as useless
and superstitious; and that it is a false show of humility.”
6 LETTER, TO
(Page 33.) Humility is entirely out of the question, as well as
chastity, in the case of hardships endured (but not properly
chosen) out of love to the souls for which Christ died.
15. You add a word or two of my “ardent desire of going
to hell,” which, you think, I “adopted from the Jesuit Nierem
berg.” (Page 34.) Sir, I know not the man. I am wholly a
stranger both to his person and to his doctrine. But if this is
his doctrine, I disclaim it from my heart. I ardently desire,
that both you and I may go to heaven.
But “Mr. Wesley says, “A poor old man decided the ques
tion of disinterested love. He said, I do not care what place I
am in. Let God put me where he will, or do with me what he
will, so I may set forth his honour and glory.’” (Page 35.)
He did so. And what then? Do these words imply “an
ardent desire of going to hell?” I do not suppose the going
to hell ever entered into his thoughts. Nor has it any place
in my notion of disinterested love. How you may understand
that term, I know not.
But you will prove I have this desire, whether I will or no.
You are sure this was my “original meaning,” (page 36,) in
the words cited by Mr. Church,
“Doom, if thou canst, to endless pain,
Or drive me from thy face.”
“God’s power or justice,” you say, “must be intended; be
cause he speaks of God’s love in the very next lines,
“But if thy stronger love constrains,
Let me be saved by grace.’”
Sir, I will tell you a secret. Those lines are not mine. How
ever, I will once more venture to defend them, and to aver, that
your consequence is good for nothing: “If this love is spoken of
in the latter lines, then it is not in the former.” No! Why not?
I take it to be spoken of in both. The plain meaning of which
is, “If thou art not love, I am content to perish. But if thou
art, let me find the effects thereof; let me be saved by grace.”
16. You next accuse me of maintaining a stoical insensi
bility. This objection, also, you borrow from Mr. Church.
You ought likewise to have taken notice, that I had answered
it, and openly disowned that doctrine; I mean, according to
the rules of common justice. But that is not your failing.
17. Part of your thirty-ninth page rums thus: “With respect
DISHOP LAVINGTON. 7
to all this patient enduring hardships, &c., it has been
remarked by learned authors, that ‘some persons, by consti
tutional temper, have been fond of bearing the worst that
could befal them; that others, from a sturdy humour, and the
force of education, have made light of the most exquisite
tortures; that when enthusiasm comes in, in aid of this natural
or acquired sturdiness, and men fancy they are upon God’s
work, and entitled to his rewards, they are immediately all on
fire for rushing into sufferings and pain.’”
I take knowledge of your having faithfully abridged—your
own book, shall I say, or the learned Dr. Middleton’s? But
what is it you are endeavouring to prove?
Quorsum haec tam putida tendant * *
The paragraph seems to point at me. But the plain, natural
tendency of it is, to invalidate that great argument for Christi
anity which is drawn from the constancy of the martyrs. Have
you not here also spoken a little too plain? Had you not
better have kept the mask on a little longer?
Indeed, you lamely add, “The solid and just comforts which
a true martyr receives from above are groundlessly applied to
the counterfeit.” But this is not enough even to save appear
ancéS.
18. You subjoin a truly surprising thought: “It may more
over be observed, that both ancient and modern enthusiasts
always take care to secure some advantage by their sufferings.”
(Page 40.) O rare enthusiasts ! So they are not such fools
neither as they are vulgarly supposed to be. This is just of a
piece with the “cunning epileptic demoniacs,” in your other
performance. And do not you think, (if you would but speak
all that is in your heart, and let us into the whole secret,) that
there was a compact, likewise, between Bishop Hooper and
his executioner, as well as between the ventriloquist and the
exorcist?
But what “advantage do they take care to secure?” a good
salary? a handsome fortune? No; quite another matter;
“free communications with God, and fuller manifestations of
his goodness.” (Ibid.) I dare say, you do not envy them, no
* Thus translated from the Latin of Horace by Francis :
“Whither tends
This putid stuff?”—EDIT.
8 LETTER TO
more than you do those “self-interested enthusiasts” of old
who “were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
obtain a better resurrection.”
19. You proceed to prove my enthusiasm from my notions
of conversion. And here great allowances are to be made,
because you are talking of things quite out of your sphere;
you are got into an unknown world! Yet you still talk as
magisterially as if you was only running down the Fathers of
the primitive Church.
And, First, you say, I “represent conversion as sudden and
instantaneous.” (Ibid.) Soft and fair! Do you know what
conversion is? (A term, indeed, which I very rarely use,
because it rarely occurs in the New Testament.) “Yes; it
is to “start up perfect men at once.’” (Page 41.) Indeed, Sir,
it is not. A man is usually converted long before he is a
perfect man. It is probable most of those Ephesians to whom
St. Paul directed his Epistle were converted. Yet they were
not “come” (few, if any) “to a perfect man, to the measure of
the stature of the fulness of Christ.”
20. I do not, Sir, indeed, I do not undertake to make you
understand these things. I am not so vain as to think it is in
my power. It is the utmost of my hope to convince you, or,
at least, those who read your works, that you understand just
nothing about them.
To put this out of dispute, you go on : “Thus faith and
being born of God are said to be an instantaneous work, at
once, and in a moment, as lightning. Justification, the same as
regeneration, and having a lively faith, this always in a
moment.” (Ibid.) I know not which to admire most, the
English or the sense, which you here father upon me; but,
in truth, it is all your own; I do not thus confound faith and
Seing born of God. I always speak of them as different things;
it is you that thus jumble them together. It is you who dis
cover justification also to be the same as regeneration, and
having a lively faith. I take them to be three different things;
so different as not ever to come under one genus. And yet
it is true, that each of these, “as far as I know,” is at first
experienced suddenly; although two of them (I leave you to
find out which) gradually increase from that hour.
21. “After these sudden conversions,” say you, “they receive
their assurances of salvation.” (Page 43.) Sir, Mr. Bedford's
BiSHOP LAVINGTON. 9
ignorance in charging this doctrine upon me might be involun
tary, and I am persuaded was real. But yours cannot be so.
It must be voluntary; if it is not rather affected. For you
had before you, while you wrote, the very tract wherein I
corrected Mr. Bedford’s mistake, and explicitly declared,
“The assurance whereof I speak is not an assurance of salva
tion.” And the very passages you cite from me prove the
same; every one of which (as you yourself know in your own
conscience) relates wholly and solely to present pardon, not
to future salvation.
Of Christian perfection (page 45) I shall not say anything
to you, till you have learned a little heathen honesty.
22. That this is a lesson you have not yet learned, appears,
also, from your following section; wherein you roundly
affirm, “Whatever they think, say, or do,” (that is, the
Methodists, according to their own account,) “is from God.
And whatever opposeth is from the devil.” I doubt not but
Mr. Church believed this to be true when he asserted it.
But this is no plea for you; who, having read the answer to
Mr. Church, still assert what you know to be false.
“Here we have,” say you, “the true spirit and very
essence of enthusiasm, which sets men above carnal reason
ing, and all conviction of plain Scripture.” (Page 49.) It
may, or may not; that is nothing to me. I am not above
either reason or Scripture. To either of these I am ready to
submit. But I cannot receive scurrilous invective, instead
of Scripture; nor pay the same regard to low buffoonery, as
to clear and cogent reasons.
23. With your two following pages I have nothing to do.
But in the fifty-second I read as follows: “‘A Methodist,’
says Mr. Wesley, ‘went to receive the sacrament; when God
was pleased to let him see a crucified Saviour.” Very well;
and what is this brought to prove? Why, (1.) That I am an
enthusiast: (2.) That I “encourage the notion of the real,
corporal presence, in the sacrifice of the mass.” How so?
Why, “this is as good an argument for transubstantiation
as several produced by Bellarmine.” (Page 57.) Very likely
it may; and as good as several produced by you for the
enthusiasm of the Methodists.
24. In that “seraphic rhapsody of divine love,” as you
term it, which you condemn in the lump, as rant and mad
Aness, there are several scriptural expressions, both from the
I0 LETTER TO
Old and New Testament. At first I imagined you did not
know them; those being books which you did not seem to be
much acquainted with. But upon laying circumstances
together, I rather suppose you was glad of so handsome an
opportunity to make as if you aimed at me, that you might
have a home stroke at some of those old enthusiasts.
25. The next words which you cite from me, as a proof of
my enthusiasm, are, “The power of God was in an unusual
manner present.” (Page 61.) I mean, many found an unusual
degree of that peace, joy, and love, which St. Paul terms,
“the fruit of the Spirit.” And all these, in conformity to his
doctrine, I ascribe to the power of God. I know you, in
conformity to your principles, ascribe them to the power of
nature. But I still believe, according to the old, scriptural
hypothesis, that whenever, in hearing the word of God, men
are filled with peace and love, God “confirms that word by
the Holy Ghost given unto those that hear it.”
26. As a further proof of my enthusiasm you mention
“special directions, mission, and calls by immediate revela
tion.” (Page 67.) For an instance of which, you cite those
words, “I know, and am assured, that God sent forth his
light and his truth.” I did know this. But do I say, “by
immediate revelation?” Not a tittle about it. This is your
own ingenious improvement upon my words.
“However, it was by a special direction. For your own
words in the same paragraph are, “From the direction I
received from God this day, touching an affair of the greatest
importance.’” (Pages 68, 69.)
What, are these words in the same paragraph with those,
“I know and am assured, God sent forth his light and his
truth?” Why then do you tear the paragraph in two, and
put part in your sixty-seventh, part in your sixty-eighth and
sixty-ninth pages? O, for a plain reason,-to make it look
like two instances of enthusiasm, otherwise it could have
made but one at the most.
But you cannot make out one, till you have proved that
these directions were by immediate revelation. I never
affirmed they were. I now affirm they were not. Now, Sir,
make your best of them.
You add, “Let me mention a few directions coming by
way of command: Mr. Wesley says, “I came to Mr. Dela
motte's, where I expected a cool reception; but God had pre
BISHOP LAVINGTON. l I
pared the way before me.’” (Page 69.) What, by a com
mand to Mr. Delamotte P Who told you so P Not I, nor
any one else, only your own fruitful imagination.
27. Your next discovery is more curious still: That
“itinerants order what they want at a public-house, and then
tell the landlord that he will be damned if he takes anything
of them.” (Page 69.)
I was beating my brain to find out what itinerant this
should be; as I could not but imagine, some silly man or
other, probably styling himself a Methodist, must somewhere
or other have given some ground for a story so punctually
delivered. In the midst of this, a letter from Cornwall
informed me, it was I: I myself was the very man, and ac
quainted me with the place, and the person to whom I said it.
But as there are some particulars in that letter (sent without
a name) which I did not well understand, I transcribe a few
words of it, in hopes that the author will give me fuller
information :
“As to the Bishop's declaring what the landlord of Mitchel
says, in respect to your behaviour, I do not at all wonder at
the story.” The Bishop's declaring ! Whom can he mean?
Surely not the Right Reverend Dr. George Lavington, Lord
Bishop of Exeter ! When, or to whom, did he declare it? at
Truro in Cornwall? or in Plymouth, at his Visitation ? to all
the Clergy who were assembled before God to receive his
pastoral instructions? His Lordship of Exeter must cer
tainly have more regard to the dignity of the episcopal office!
28. But to proceed: I was not “offended with the Mora
vians” for warning men “against mixing nature with
grace;” (page 71;) but for their doing it in such a manner
as tended to destroy all the work of grace in their souls. I
did not blame the thing itself, but their manner of doing it; and
this you know perfectly well: But with you, truth must always
give way to wit. At all events, you must have your jest.
29. Had you had any regard to truth, or any desire to
represent things as they really are, when you repeated Mr.
Church’s objection concerning lots, you would have acknow
ledged that I have answered it at large. When you have
replied to that answer, I may add a word more.
30. You are sadly at a loss under the article of ecstasies
and raptures, to glean up anything that will serve your pur
pose. At last, from ten or twelve tracts, you pick out two
l2 LETTER TO
lines; and those the same you had mentioned before: “My
soul was got up into the holy mount. I had no thought of
coming down again into the body.” And truly you might
as well have let these alone; for if by “ecstasy” you mean
trance, here is no account of any such; but only of one “re
joicing” in God “with joy unspeakable and full of glory.”
With the “girl of seven years old” (page 77) I have
nothing to do; though you honestly tack that relation to the
other, in order to make me accountable for both. But all is
fair toward a Methodist.
31. What I assert concerning Peter Wright (page 79) is
this: (1.) That he gave me that relation. (Whether I believed
it or no, I did not say.) (2.) That he died within a month
after. Now, Sir, give us a cast of your office. From these
two propositions extract a proof of my being an enthusiast.
You may full as easily prove it from these, as from the
words you quote next: “God does now give remission of
sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and often in dreams
and visions of God.” “But afterwards,” you say, “I speak
more distrustfully.” (Page 79.) Indeed I do not; but I
guard against enthusiasm in those words, part of which you
have recited. The whole paragraph runs thus:
“From those words, “Beloved, believe not every spirit;
but try the spirits, whether they be of God,” I told them
they were not to judge of the spirit whereby any one spoke,
either by appearances, or by common report, or by their own
inward feelings; no, nor by any dreams, visions, or revela
tions, supposed to be made to their souls, any more than by
their tears, or any involuntary effects wrought upon their
bodies. I warned them, all these were in themselves of a
doubtful, disputable nature; they might be from God, and
they might not; and were therefore not simply to be relied
on, any more than simply to be condemned, but to be tried by
a farther rule; to be brought to the only certain test, the law
and the testimony.” Sir, can you show them a better way?
32. The last proof that you produce of my enthusiasm, is,
my “talking of the great work which God is now beginning
to work upon earth.” (Page 80.) I own the fact. I do
talk of such a work. But I deny the consequence: For if
God has begun a great work, then the saying He has, is no
enthusiasm.
To bring sinners to repentance, to save them from their
IBISHOP LAVINGTON. 18
sins, is allowed by all to be the work of God. Yea, and to
save one sinner is a great work of God; much more to save
many.
But many sinners are saved from their sins at this day, in
London, in Bristol, in Kingswood, in Cornwall, in Newcastle
upon-Tyne, in Whitehaven, in many other parts of England,
in Wales, in Ireland, in Scotland, upon the continent of
Europe, in Asia, and in America. This I term “a great
work of God; ” so great as I have not read of for several
ages.
You ask, how I know so great a work is wrought now—“by
inspiration?” No; but by common sense. I know it by the
evidence of my own eyes and ears. I have seen a considerable
part of it; and I have abundant testimony, such as excludes
all possible doubt, for what I have not seen.
33. But you are so far from acknowledging anything of this,
as to conclude, in full triumph, that “this new dispensation
is a composition of enthusiasm, superstition, and imposture.”
(Page 81.) It is not clear what you mean by a new dispen
sation. But the clear and undeniable fact stands thus: A.
few years ago, Great Britain and Ireland were covered with
vice from sea to sea. Very little of even the form of religion
was left; and still less of the power of it. Out of this dark
ness God commanded light to shine. In a short space He
called thousands of sinners to repentance. They were not only
reformed from their outward vices, but likewise changed in
their dispositions and tempers; “filled with a serious, sober
sense of true religion,” with love to God and all mankind,
with an holy faith, producing good works of every kind,
works both of piety and mercy.
What could the god of this world do in such a case, to
prevent the spreading of this “serious, sober religion?” The
same that he has done from the beginning of the world. To
hinder the light of those whom God hath thus changed, from
shining before men, he gave them all in general a nick-name;
he called them Methodists. And this name, as insignificant
as it was in itself, effectually answered his intention. For by
this means, that light was soon obscured by prejudice, which
could not be withstood by Scripture or reason. By the odious
and ridiculous ideas affixed to that name, they were con
demned in the gross, without ever being heard. So that now
14 LETTER TO BISHOP LAVINGTON.
any scribbler, with a middling share of low wit, not incum
bered with good nature or modesty, may raise a laugh on
those whom he cannot confute, and run them down whom he
dares not look in the face. By this means even a Comparer
of Methodists and Papists may blaspheme the great work of
God, not only without blame, but with applause; at least
from readers of his own stamp. But it is high time, Sir, you
should leave your skulking-place. Come out, and let us look
each other in the face. I have little leisure, and less inclina
tion, for controversy. Yet I promise, if you will set your
name to your Third Part, I will answer all that shall concern
me, in that, as well as the preceding. Till then
I remain, Sir,
Your friend and well-wisher,
JOHN WESLEY.
CANTERBURY,
February 1, 1749–50.
POSTSCRIPT.
WHEN you come to relate those “horrid and shocking
things,” there may be a danger you are not aware of Even
you yourself may fall (as little as you intend or suspect it)
into seriousness. And I am afraid, if once you put off your
fool’s coat, if you stand naked before cool and sober reason,
you yourself may appear as inconsiderable a creature, to use
your own phrase, “as if your name was Perronet.”
SECOND LETTER
To the AUTHOR OF
“THE ENTHUSIASM OF METHODISTS AND
PAPISTS COMPARED.”
Ecce iterum Crispinus ! *-JUVENAL.
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND THE LORD BISHOP
OF EXETER.
MY LoRD,
1. I was grieved when I read the following words in the
Third Part of the “Enthusiasm of Methodists and Papists com
pared:”—“A sensible, honestwoman told the Bishop of Exeter,
in presence of several witnesses, that Mr. John Wesley came
to her house, and questioned her, whether she had “an assur
ance of her salvation.’ Her answer was, that ‘she hoped she
should be saved, but had no absolute assurance of it.” “Why
then, replied he, “you are in hell, you are damned already.”
This so terrified the poor woman, who was then with child,
that she was grievously afraid of miscarrying, and could not, in
a long time, recover her right mind. For this, and the Meth
odists asking her to live upon free cost, she determined to admit
no more of them into her house. So much is her own account
to his Lordship, on whose authority it is here published.”
2. This renewed the concern I felt some time since, when I
was informed (in letters which I have still by me) of your
* Thus translated by Gifford:
“Again Crispinus comes!”-EDIT.
16 SECOND LETTER,
Lordship's publishing this account, both at Plymouth in
Devonshire, and at Truro in Cornwall, before the Clergy
assembled from all parts of those counties, at the solemn season
of your Lordship’s visiting your diocese. But I was not
informed that your Lordship showed a deep concern for the
honour of God, which you supposed to be so dreadfully violated,
or a tender compassion for a Presbyter whom you believed to
be rushing into everlasting destruction.
3. In order to be more fully informed, on Saturday, August
25, 1750, Mr. Trembath, of St. Ginnys, Mr. Haime, of Shaftes
bury, and I, called at Mr. Morgan's, at Mitchel. The servant
telling me her master was not at home, I desired to speak
with her mistress, the “honest, sensible woman.” I imme
diately asked, “Did I ever tell you or your husband that you
would be damned if you took any money of me?” (So the
story ran in the first part of the “Comparison; ” it has now
undergone a very considerable alteration.) “Or did you or
he ever affirm,” (another circumstance related at Truro,) “that I
was rude with your maid?” She replied, vehemently, “Sir,
I never said you was, or that you said any such thing. And I
do not suppose my husband did. But we have been belied as
well as our neighbours.” She added, “When the Bishop
came down last, he sent us word that he would dine at our
house; but he did not, being invited to a neighbouring gentle
man's. He sent for me thither, and said, ‘Good woman, do
you know these people that go up and down? Do you know
Mr. Wesley? Did not he tell you, you would be damned if
you took any money of him? And did not he offer rudeness
to your maid?' I told him, ‘No, my Lord; he never said
any such thing to me, nor to my husband that I know of He
never offered any rudeness to any maid of mine. I never saw
or knew any harm of him: But a man told me once (who I
was told was a Methodist Preacher) that I should be damned
if I did not know my sins were forgiven.’”
4. This is her own account given to me. And an account
it is, irreconcilably different (notwithstanding some small
resemblance in the last circumstance) from that she is affirmed
to have given your Lordship. Whether she did give that
account to your Lordship or no, your Lordship knows best.
That the Comparer affirms it, is no proof at all; since he will
affirm any thing that suits his purpose.
5. Yet I was sorry to see your Lordship's authority cited on
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 17
such an occasion; inasmuch as many of his readers, not con
sidering the man, may think your Lordship did really counte
nance such a writer; one that turns the most serious, the most
awful, the most venerable things into mere farce; that makes
the most essential parts of real, experimental religion matter
of low buffoonery; that, beginning at the very rise of it in
the soul, namely, “repentance towards God, a broken and a
contrite heart,” goes on to “faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,”
whereby “he that believeth is born of God,” to “the love of
God shed abroad in the heart,” attended with “peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost,”—to our subsequent “wrestling not”
only “with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers
and wicked spirits in high places,”-and thence to “perfect
love,” the “loving the Lord our God with all our heart,
mind, soul, and strength; ” and treats on every one of these
sacred topics with the spirit and air of a Merry Andrew.
What advantage the common enemies of Christianity may
reap from this, your Lordship cannot be insensible.
6. Your Lordship cannot but discern how the whole tenor of
his book tends to destroy the Holy Scriptures, to render them
vile in the eyes of the people, to make them stink in the nostrils
of infidels. For instance: After reading his laboured ridicule
of the sorrow and fear which usually attend the first repent
ance, (called by St. Chrysostom, as well as a thousand other
writers, “the pangs or throes of the new birth,”) what can an
infidel think of those and the like expressions in Scripture: “I
have roared for the very disquietness of my heart: Fearfulness
and trembling are come upon me, and an horrible dread hath
overwhelmed me?” After his flood of satire on all kind of con
flicts with Satan, what judgment can a Deist form of what St.
Paul speaks concerning the various wrestlings of a Christian
with the wicked one? Above all, how will his bringing the
lewd heathem poets to expose the pure and spiritual love of
God, naturally cause them to look with the same eyes on the
most elevated passages of the inspired writings? What can be
more diverting to them than to apply his yAvicvrukpov eporos,
“bitter-sweet of love,” to many expressions in the Canticles?
(On which, undoubtedly, he supposes the Fair Circassian to
be a very just paraphrase 1) “Ay,” say they, “the very case:
‘Stay me with apples; for I am sick of love.’”
7. Probably the Comparer will reply, “No, I do not ridicule
18 SECOND LETTER
the things themselves; repentance, the new birth, the fight of
faith, or the love of God; all which I know are essential to
religion; but only the folly and the enthusiasm which are
blended with these by the Methodists.” But how poor a pre
tence is this ! Had this really been the case, how carefully
would he have drawn the line under each of these heads,
between the sober religion of a Christian, and the enthusiasm
of a Methodist! But has he done this? Does he take particular
care to show under each what is true, as well as what is false,
religion ? where the former ends and the latter begins? what
are the proper boundaries of each? Your Lordship knows he
does not so much as endeavour it, or take any pains about it;
but indiscriminately pours the flood out of his unclean mouth,
upon all repentance, faith, love, and holiness.
8. Your Lordship will please to observe that I do not here
touch in the least on the merits of the cause. Be the
Methodists what they may, fools, madmen, enthusiasts, knaves,
impostors, Papists, or anything, yet your Lordship perceives
this does not in any degree affect the point in question: Still
it behoves every Christian, nay, every reasonable Heathen, to
consider the subject he is upon, and to take care not to bring
this into contempt, (especially if it be of the last importance,)
however inexcusable or contemptible his opponents may be.
9. This consideration, my Lord, dwelt much upon my mind
when I read the former parts of the Comparison. Iimmediately
saw there was no encountering a buffoon by serious reason and
argument. This would naturally have furnished both him and
his admirers with fresh matter of ridicule. On the other hand,
if I should let myself down to a level with him, by a less serious
manner of writing than I was accustomed to, I was afraid of
debasing the dignity of the subject. Nay, and I knew not but
I might catch something of his spirit. I remembered the ad
vice, “Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be
like unto him.” (Prov. xxvi. 4.) And yet I saw there must be an
exception in some cases, as the words immediately following
show : “Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise
in his own conceit.” I conceive, as if he had said, “Yet it is
needful, in some cases, to “answer a fool according to his folly,”
otherwise he will be “wiser in his own conceit, than seven men
that can render areason.’” I therefore constrained myself to
approach, as near as I dared, to his own manner of writing.
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 19
And I trust the occasion will plead my excuse with your
Lordship, and all reasonable men.
10. One good effect of my thus meeting him on his own
ground is visible already. Instead of endeavouring to defend,
he entirely gives up, the First Part of his Comparison.
Indeed, I did not expect this, when I observed that the Third
Part was addressed to me. I took it for granted, that he had
therein aimed at something like a reply to my answer: But
going on, I found myself quite mistaken. He never once
attempts a reply to one page, any otherwise than by screaming
out, “Pertness, scurrility, effrontery;” and in subjoining
that deep remark, “Paper and time would be wasted on such
stuff.” (Third Part, preface, p. 15.)
11. I cannot but account it another good effect, that he is
something less confident than he was before. He is likewise
not more angry or more bitter, for that cannot be, but a few
degrees more serious: So that I plainly perceive this is the
way I am to take if I should have leisure to answer the Third
Part; although it is far from my desire to write in this
manner; it is as contrary to my inclination as to my custom.
12. But is it possible that a person of your Lordship's cha
racter should countenance such a performance as this? It
cannot be your Lordship's desire to pour contempt on all
that is truly venerable among men to stab Christianity to
the heart, under a colour of opposing enthusiasm; and to
increase and give a sanction to the profaneness which already
overspreads our land as a flood.
13. Were the Methodists ever so bad, yet are they not too
despicable and inconsiderable for your Lordship's notice?
“Against whom is the King of Israel come out? against a flea?
against a partridge upon the mountains?” Such they undoubt
edly are, if that representation of them bejust which the Comparer
has given. Against whom (if your Lordship espouses his cause)
are you stirring up the supreme power of the nation? Against
whom does your Lordship arm the Ministers of all denomina
tions, particularly our brethren of the Established Church?
inciting them to paint us out to their several congregations as
not fit to live upon the earth. The effects of this have already
appeared in many parts both of Devonshire and Cornwall.
Nor have I known any considerable riot in any part of
England, for which such preaching did not pave the way.
20 SECOND LETTER,
14. I beg leave to ask, would it be a satisfaction to your
Lordship if national persecution were to return? Does your
Lordship desire to revive the old laws, de haeretico combu
rendo?" Would your Lordship rejoice to see the Methodists
themselves tied to so many stakes in Smithfield? Or would
you applaud the execution, though not so legally or decently
performed by the mob of Exeter, Plymouth-Dock, or Laun
ceston? My Lord, what profit would there be in our blood?
Would it be an addition to your Lordship’s happiness, or any
advantage to the Protestant cause, or any honour either to
our Church or nation ?
15. The Comparer, doubtless, would answer, “Yes; for it
would prevent the horrid consequences of your preaching.”
My Lord, give me leave to say once more, I willingly put the
whole causeupon this issue. What are the general consequences
of our preaching? Are there more tares or wheat? more good
men destroyed, (as Mr. Church once supposed,) or wicked
men saved? The last places in your Lordship's diocese, where
we began constant preaching, are near Liskeard in Cornwall,
and at Tiverton in Devonshire. Now, let any man inquire
here, (1.) What kind of people were those a year ago, who now
constantly hear this preaching? (2.) What are the main
doctrines the Methodists have been teaching this twelvemonth?
(3.) What effect have these doctrines had upon their hearers?
And if you do not find, (1.) That the greater part of these
were, a year or two ago, notoriously wicked men: (2.) Yet
the main doctrines they have heard since were, “Love God
and your neighbour, and carefully keep His commandments:”
And, (3.) That they have since exercised themselves herein,
and continue so to do;—I say, if any reasonable man, who
will be at the pains to inquire, does not find this to be an
unquestionable fact, I will openly acknowledge myself an
enthusiast, or whatever else he shall please to style me.
16. I beg leave to conclude this address to your Lordship
with a few morewords transcribed from the same letter: “Allow
Mr. Wesley,” says Mr. Church, “but these few points, and he
will defend his conduct beyond exception.” (Second Letter to
Mr. Church, Vol. VIII. p. 477.) That is most true. If I have
indeed been advancing nothing but the true knowledge and
* Concerning the burning of heretics.—EDIT.
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 21.
love of God; if God has made me an instrument in reforming
many sinners, and bringing them to inward and pure reli
gion; and if many of these continue holy to this day, and free
from all wilful sin; then may I, even I, use those awful words,
“He that despiseth me, despiseth Him that sent me.” But I
Inever expect the world to allow me one of these points. How
ever, I must go on as God shall enable me. I must lay out
whatsoever talents he entrusts me with, (whether others will
believe I do it or no,) in advancing the true Christian knew
ledge of God, and the love and fear of God among men; in re
forming (if so be it please him to use me still) those who are yet
without God in the world; and in propagating inward and pure
religion, “righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.”
Sincerely wishing your Lordship all happiness in time and
in eternity,
I remain
Your Lordship’s most obedient servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
November 27, 1750.
SIR,
1. YoU have undertaken to prove, (as I observed in my
former letter, a few sentences of which I beg leave to repeat,)
that the “whole conduct of the Methodists is but a counter
part of the most wild fanaticisms of Popery.” (Preface to the
Eirst Part, p. 3.)
You endeavour to support this charge by quotations from our
own writings, compared with quotations from Popish authors.
It lies upon me to answer for one. But in order to spare
both you and myself, I shall at present consider only your
Second Part, and that as briefly as possible. Accordingly, I
shall not meddle with your other quotations, but, leaving
them to whom they may concern, shall examine whether
those you have made from my writings prove the charge for
which they were made or no.
If they do, I submit. But if they do not, if they are “the
words of truth and soberness,” it is an objection of no real
weight against any sentiment, just in itself, though it should
also be found in the writings of Papists; yea, of Mahometans
or Pagans.
2. In your first section, in order to prove the “vain boast
ing of the Methodists,” you quote a part of the following
22 SECOND LETTER,
sentence: “When hath religion, I will not say, since the
Reformation, but since the time of Constantine the Great,
made so large a progress in any nation, within so short a
space?” (I beg any impartial person to read the whole pas
sage, from the eighty-fourth to the ninetieth page of the
Third Appeal.”) I repeat the question, giving the glory to
God; and, I trust, without either boasting or enthusiasm.
In your second, you cite (and murder) four or five lines.
from one of my Journals, “as instances of the persuasive
eloquence of the Methodist Preachers.” (Pages 1, 9.) But it
unfortunately happens, that neither of the sentences you
quote were spoke by any Preacher at all. You know full
well the one was used only in a private letter; the other by a
woman on a bed of sickness.
3. You next undertake to prove “the most insufferable
pride and vanity of the Methodists.” (Section iii., p. 12, &c.)
For this end you quote five passages from my Journals, and
one from the Third Appeal.
The first was wrote in the anguish of my heart, to which I
gave vent (between God and my own soul) by breaking out,
not into “confidence of boasting,” as you term it, but into
those expressions of bitter sorrow : “I went to America to
convert the Indians. But O ! who shall convert me?”
(Vol. I. p. 74.) Some of the words which follow you have
picked out, and very honestly laid before your reader, without
either the beginning or end, or one word of the occasion or
manner wherein they were spoken.
Your next quotation is equally fair and generous: “Are
they read in philosophy? So was I,” &c. (Ibid. p. 76, &c.)
This whole “string of self-commendation,” as you call it,
being there brought, ex professo, to prove that, notwith
standing all this, which I once piqued myself upon, I was at
that hour in a state of damnation |
The third is a plain narrative of the manner wherein many
of Bristol expressed their joy on my coming unexpectedly
into the room, after I had been some time at London. (Vol.I.
p. 311.) And this, I conceive, will prove the charge of high
treason, as well as that of “insufferable pride and vanity.”
You say, fourthly, “A dying woman, who had earnestly
* Vol. VIII. pp. 205–209 of the present Edition.—EDIT.
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 23
desired to see me, cried out, as I entered the room, ‘Art thou
come, thou blessed of the Lord?’” (Ibid. p. 320) She did
so. And what does this prove?
The fifth passage is this: “In applying which my soul was
so enlarged, that methought I could have cried out, (in
another sense than poor vain Archimedes,) ‘Give me where
to stand; and I will shake the earth.’” My meaning is, I
found such freedom of thought and speech, (jargon, stuff,
enthusiasm to you,) that methought, could I have then spoken
to all the world, they would all have shared in the blessing.
4. The passage which you quote from the Third Appeal, I
am obliged to relate more at large:–
“There is one more excuse for denying this work of God,
taken from the instruments employed therein; that is, that
they are wicked men; and a thousand stories have been
handed about to prove it.
“Yet I cannot but remind considerate men, in how remark
able a manner the wisdom of God has, for many years, guarded
against this pretence, with regard to my brother and me in par
ticular.” “This pretence, that is, ‘of not employing fit instru
ments.’” These words are yours, though you insert them as
mine. The pretence I mentioned, was, “that they were wicked
men.” And how God guarded against this, is shown in what
follows: “From that time, both my brother and I, utterly
against our will, came to be more and more observed and
known; till we were more spoken of than perhaps two so incon
siderable persons ever were before in the nation. To make us
more public still, as honest madmen at least, by a strange con
currence of providences, overturning all our preceding resolu
tions, we were hurried away to America.”
Afterward it follows: “What persons could, in the nature of
things, have been (antecedently) less liable to exception, with
regard to their moral character at least, than those the all-wise
God hath now employed? Indeed I cannot devise what man
ner of men could have been more unexceptionable on all
accounts. Had God endued us with greater natural or acquired
abilities, this verything might have been turned into an objec
tion. Had we been remarkably defective, it would have been
matter of objection on the other hand. Had we been Dissenters
of any kind, or even Low-Churchmen (so called), it would have
been a greatstumbling-block in the way of those who are zealous
24 SECOND LETTER
for the Church. And yet had we continued in the impetuosity
of our High-Church zeal, neither should we have been willing
to converse with Dissenters, nor they to receive any good at
our hands.” Sir, why did you break off your quotation in the
middle of this paragraph, just at, “more unexceptionable on all
accounts?” Was it not on purpose to give a wrong turn to
the whole? to conceal the real and obvious meaning of my
words, and put one upon them that never entered into my
thoughts?
5. You have reserved your strong reason for the last, namely,
my own confession: “Mr. Wesley says himself, ‘By the most
infallible of proofs, inward feeling, I am convinced of pride, &c.’”
Sir, be pleased to decipher that &c. Or I will spare you the
pains, and do it myself, by reciting the whole sentence :
“By the most infallible of proofs, inward feeling, I am con
vinced,
“(1.) Of unbelief, having no such faith in Christ as will
prevent my heart from being troubled, which it could not be,
if I believed in God, and rightly believed also in him.
“(2.) Of pride throughout my life past, inasmuch as I
thought I had what I find I have not.” (Vol. I. p. 72.)
Now, Sir, you have my whole confession. I entreat you to
make the best of it.
But I myself “acknowledge three Methodists to have
fallen into pride.” Sir, I can tell you of three more. And yet
it will not follow, that the doctrines I teach “lead men into
horrid pride and blasphemy.”
6. In the close of your fourth section, you charge me with
“shuffling and prevaricating with regard to extraordinary gifts
and miraculous powers.” Of these I shall have occasion to
speak by and by. At present I need only return the compli
ment, by charging you with gross, wilful prevarication, from the
beginning of your book to the end. Some instances of this
have appeared already. Many more will appear in due time.
7. Your fifth charges me with an “affectation of prophesy
ing.” Your first proof of it is this:—
“It was about this time that the soldier was executed. For
some time I had visited him every day. But when the love of
God was shed abroad in his heart, I told him, “Do not expect to
see me any more: I believe Satan will separate us for a season.’
Accordingly, the next day, I was informed, the commanding
,
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 25
officer had given strict orders, that neither Mr. Wesley, nor
any of his people, should be admitted.” (Vol. I. p. 266.) I
did believe so, having seen many such things before; yet with
out affecting a spirit of prophecy.
But that I do claim it, you will prove, Secondly, from my
mentioning “the great work which God intends, and is now
beginning, to work over all the earth.” By what art you ex
tract such a conclusion out of such premises, I know not.
That God intends this, none who believe the Scripture doubt.
And that he has begun it, both in Europe and America, any,
who will make use of their eyes and ears, may know without
any “miraculous gift of prophesying.”
8. In your sixth section, you assert, that I lay claim to other
miraculous gifts. (Page 45.) As you borrow this objection
from Mr. Church, I need only give the same answer I gave
before.
“‘I shall give,’” says Mr. Church, “‘but one account
more, and that is, what you give of yourself.’ The sum whereof
is, “At two several times, being ill, and in violent pain, I prayed
to God, and found immediate ease. I did so. I assert the
fact still. “But if these, you say, ‘ are not miraculous cures,
all this is rank enthusiasm.”
“I will put your argument in form:
“He that believes those are miraculous cures which are not
is a rank enthusiast:
“But you believe those to be miraculous cures which are net:
“Therefore you are a rank enthusiast.
“Before I answer, I must know what you mean by miracu
lous: If you term everything so which is ‘not strictly account
able for by the ordinary course of natural causes, then I deny
the latter part of the second proposition. And unless you can
make this good, unless you can prove the effects in question
are strictly accountable for by the ordinary course of natural
causes, your argument is nothing worth.” (First Letter to
Mr. Church, Vol. VIII. p. 412.)
Having largely answered your next objection relating to
what I still term “a signal instance of God’s particular provi
dence,” (Ibid. pp. 410,452) I need only refer you to those an
swers, not having leisure to say the same thing ten times over.
Whether I sometimes claim, and sometimes disclaim, mira
cles, will be considered by and by.
26 SECOND LETTER
In your seventh section, you say, “I shall now give some
account of their grievous conflicts and combats with Satan.”
(Page 51, &c.) O Sir, spare yourself, if not the Methodists |
Do not go so far out of your depth. This is a subject you
are as utterly unacquainted with, as with justification, or the
new birth.
But I attend your motions. “Mr. Wesley,” you say, “was
advised to a very high degree of silence. And he spoke to none
at all for two days, and travelling fourscore miles together.
“The same whim,” you go on, “has run through several
of the religious orders. Hence, St. Bonaventura says, that
silence in all the religious is necessary to perfection. St.
Agatho held a stone in his mouth for three years, till he had
learned taciturnity. St. Alcantara carried several pebbles in
his mouth, for three years likewise, and for the same reason.
Theon observed a continual silence for thirty years. St.
Francis observed it himself, and enjoined it upon his brethren.
The rule of silence was religiously observed by St. Dominic.”
I have repeated more of your words than I otherwise
should, in order to show to a demonstration, that a man of a
lively imagination may run a parallel to any length, without
any foundation in nature.
You begin, “The same whim which led Mr. Wesley to
observe an absolute silence for two days; ” and so run on to
St. Bonaventura, St. Agatho, and I know not whom. But did
Mr. Wesley “observe an absolute silence for two days?” No.;
not for one hour. My words, “I spoke to none at all for
fourscore miles together,” (Vol. I. p. 313,) imply neither more
nor less than that I spoke to none “concerning the things of
God,” as it is in the words immediately preceding. And you
know this as well as I. But it is all one for that. Wit, not
truth, is the point you aim at.
My supposed inconsistency, with regard to the Moravians,
which you likewise drag in (as they say) by head and shoulders,
I have shown, again and again, to be no inconsistency at all;
particularly in both the Letters to Mr. Church.
10. Well, but as to conflicts with Satan: “Nor can Mr.
Wesley,” you say, “escape the attacks of this infernal spirit,”
namely, “suggesting distrustful thoughts, and buffeting him
with inward temptations.” Sir, did you never hear of any one so
attacked, unless among the Papists or Methodists? How deeply
*
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 27
then are you experienced both in the ways of God, and the
devices of Satan |
You add, with regard to a case mentioned in the Fourth
Journal, Vol. I. p. 271, “Though I am not convinced that these
fits of laughing are to be ascribed to Satan, yet I entirely
agree, that they are involuntary and unavoidable.” I am
glad we agree so far. But I must still go farther: I cannot
but ascribe them to a preternatural agent; having observed
so many circumstances attending them which cannot be
accounted for by any natural causes.
Under the head of conflicts with Satan, you observe farther,
“Mr. Wesley says, while he was preaching, the devil knew
his kingdom shook, and therefore stirred up his servants to
make a noise; that, September 18, the prince of the air made
another attempt in defence of his tottering kingdom; and that
another time, the devil’s children fought valiantly for their
master.” I own the whole charge; I did say all this. Nay,
and if need were, I should say it again.
You cite one more instance from my Fourth Journal:
“The many-headed beast began to roar again.” So your head
is so full of the subject, that you construe even poor Horace's
bellua multorum capitum” into the devil |
These are all the combats and conflicts with Satan which
you can prove I ever had. O'Sir, without more and greater
conflicts than these, none shall see the kingdom of God.
11. In the following sections, you are equally out of your
element. The first of them relates to “spiritual desertions;”
(Section viii., p. 75, &c.;) all which you make the subject of
dull ridicule, and place to the account of enthusiasm. And
the case of all you give in the following words: “We may
look upon enthusiasm as a kind of drunkenness, filling and
intoxicating the brain with the heated fumes of spirituous
particles. Now, no sooner does the inebriation go off, but a
coldness and dulness takes place.”
12. As wildly do you talk of the doubts and fears incident to
those who are “weak in faith.” (Section ix., p. 79, &c.) I
cannot prevail upon myself to prostitute this awful subject, by
entering into any debate concerning it with one who is inno
cent of the whole affair. Only I must observe that a great part of
* Rendered by Boscawen,-“A many-headed beast.”—EDIT.
28 SE COND LETTER
what you advance concerning me is entirely wide of the ques
tion. Such is all you quote from the First, and a considerable
part of what you quote from my Second, Journal. This you
know in your own conscience; for you know I speak of myself
during the whole time, as having no faith at all. Conse
quently, the “rising and fallings.” I experienced then have
nothing to do with those “doubts and fears which many go
through, after they have by faith received remission of sins.”
The next words which you cite, “thrown into great per
plexities,” I cannot find in the page you refer to, neither those
that follow. The sum of them is, that “at that time I did not
feel the love of God, but found deadness and wanderings in
public prayer, and coldness even at the holy communion.”
Well, Sir, and have you never found in yourself any such
coldness, deadness, and wanderings? I am persuaded you have.
And yet surely your brain is always cool and temperate! never
“intoxicated with the heated fumes of spirituous particles !”
13. If you quote not incoherent scraps, (by which you may
make anything out of anything,) but entire connected sen
tences, it will appear that the rest of your quotations make no
more for your purpose than the foregoing. Thus, although I
allow, that on May 24, “I was much buffeted with tempta
tions; but I cried to God, and they fled away; that they re
turned again and again; I as often lifted up my eyes, and he
sent me help from his holy place;” (Vol. I. p. 103;) it will
only prove the very observation I make myself: “I was fight
ing both under the law and under grace. But then I was some
times, if not often, conquered; now I was always conqueror.”
That sometime after, I “was strongly assaulted again, and
after recovering peace and joy, was thrown into perplexity
afresh by a letter, asserting that no doubt or fear could con
sist with true faith; that my weak mind could not then bear
to be thus sawn asunder,” will not appear strange to any who
are not utter novices in experimental religion. No more than
that, one night the next year, “I had no life or spirit in me,
and was much in doubt, whether God would not lay me aside,
and send other labourers into his harvest.”
14. You add, “He owns his frequent relapses into sin, for
near twice ten years. Such is the case of a person who tells us
that he carefully considered every step he took; one of inti
mate communication with the Deity l’” Sir, I did not tell you
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 29
that; though, according to custom, you mark the words as mine.
It is well for you, that forging quotations is not felony.
My words are, “O what an hypocrite have I been (if this
be so) for near twice ten years! But I know it is not so. I
know every one under the law is even as I was;” namely, from
the time I was twelve years old, till considerably above thirty.
“And is it strange,” you say, “that such a one should be
destitute of means to resolve his scruples? should be ever at
variance with himself, and find no place to fix his foot?”
Good Sir, not too fast. You quite outrun the truth again.
Blessed be God, this is not my case. I am not destitute of
means to resolve my scruples. I have some friends, and a
little reason left. I am not ever at variance with myself; and
have found a place to fix my foot —
Now I have found the ground wherein
Firm my soul's anchor may remain;
The wounds of Jesus, for my sin
Before the world's foundation slain.
And yet one of your assertions I cannot deny; namely,
that you “could run the parallel between me and numbers
of fanatical Papists: ” And that not only with regard to my
temper, but my stature, complexion, yea, (if need were,) the
very colour of my hair.
15. In your next section, you are to give an account of the
“spiritual succours and advantages received either during
these trials or very soon after.” (Section x. p. 92, &c.) It is
no wonder you make as lame work with these, as with the
conflicts which preceded them. “As the heart knoweth its
own bitterness, so a stranger doth not intermeddle with his
joy.” But it is no business of mine, as you have not done
me the honour to cite any of my words in this section.
16. “The unsteadiness of the Methodists, both in senti
ments and practice,” (section xi. p. 95, &c.,) is what you next
undertake to prove. Your loose declamation with which you
open the cause, I pass over, as it rests on your own bare
word; and haste to your main reason, drawn from my
sentiments and practice with regard to the Moravians.
“He represents them,” you say, “in the blackest colours;
yet declares, in the main, they are some of the best people
in the world. His love and esteem for them increases more
and more. His own disciples among the Methodists go over
30 SECOND LETTER,
to them in crowds. But still Methodism is the strongest
barrier against the Moravian doctrines and principles.”
Sir, I bear you witness you have learned one principle, at
least, from those with whom you have lately conversed;
namely, that no faith is to be kept with heretics; of which
you have given us abundant proof. For you know I have
fully answered every article of this charge; which you repeat,
as if I had not opened my lips about it. You know that there
is not one grain of truth in several things which you here
positively assert. For instance: “His love and esteem of
them increases more and more.” Not so; no more than my
love and esteem for you. I love you both; but I do not much
esteem either. Again: “His own disciples among the
Methodists go over to them in crowds.” When? Where? I
know.not that ten of my disciples, as you call them, have gone
over to them for twice ten months. O Sir, consider ! How do
you know but some of your disciples may tell your name?
17. With the same veracity you go on: “In “The Character
of a Methodist,’ those of the sect are described as having all the
virtues that can adorn the Christian profession. But in their
‘Journals’ you find them waspish, condemning all the world,
except themselves; and among themselves perpetual broils
and confusions, with various other irregularities and vices.”
I answer, (1.) The tract you refer to (as is expressly declared
in the preface) does not describe what the Methodists are
already; but what they desire to be, and what they will be
then when they fully practise the doctrine they hear. (2.) Be
pleased to point the pages in my Journals which mention
those “various irregularities and vices.” Of their “perpetual
broils and confusions.” I shall speak under their proper head.
You add: “Sometimes they are so far from fearing death,
that they wish it: But the keenness of the edge is soon .
blunted. They are full of dreadful apprehensions that the
Clergy intend to murder them.” Do you mean me, Sir? I
plead, Not Guilty. I never had any such apprehension. Yet
I suppose you designed the compliment for me, by your
dragging in two or three broken sentences from my First
Journal. But how little to the purpose ! seeing at the time
that was written, I had never pretended to be above the fear
of death. So that this is no proof of the point in view,—of
the “unsteadiness of my sentiments or practice.”
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 31
18. You proceed: “One day they fancy it their duty to
preach; the next, they preach with great reluctance.” Very
true! But they fancy it their duty still; else they would
not preach at all. This, therefore, does not prove any in
equality either of sentiment or practice.
“Mr. Wesley is sometimes quite averse from speaking,
and then perplexed with the doubt, Is it a prohibition from
the good Spirit, or a temptation from nature and the evil one?”
Just of a piece with the rest. The sentence runs thus: “I
went several times with a design to speak to the sailors, but
could not. I mean, I was quite averse from speaking. Is not
this what men commonly mean by, “I could not speak?’ And
is this a sufficient cause of silence or no? Is it a prohibition
from the good Spirit, or a temptation from nature or the evil
one?” Sir, I was in no doubt at all on the occasion. Nor did I
intend to express any in these words; but to appeal to men’s
conscience, whether what they call “a prohibition from the good
Spirit,” be not a mere “temptation from nature or the evilone.”
19. In the next section you are to show “the art, cunning,
and sophistry of the Methodists, who, when hard pressed by
argument, run themselves into inconsistency and self-contradic
tion; and occasionally either defend or give up some of their
favourite notions and principal points.” (Section xii. p. 102.)
I dare say, Sir, you will not put them to the trial. Argu
ment lies out of the way of one,
-Solutos
Qui captat risus hominum famamque dicacis."
But to the proof. “Mr. Wesley,” you say, “at one time declares
for a disinterested love of God; at another, declares, There is
no one caution in all the Bible against the selfish love of God.”
Nay, Sir, I will tell you what is stranger still: Mr. Wesley
holds, at one time, both sides of this contradiction. I now
declare both that “all true love is disinterested, ‘seeketh not
her own;' and that there is no one caution in all the Bible
against the selfish love of God.”
What, have I the art to slip out of your hands again?
“Pardon me,” as your old friend says, “for being jocular.”
20. You add, altius insurgens : + “But it is a considerable
* One that affects the droll, and loves to raise a horse-laugh.
+ Rising to more exalted strains.-EDIT.
32 SECOND LETTER
offence to charge another wrongfully, and contradict himself
about the doctrine of assurance.” To prove this upon me,
you bring my own words: “The assurance we preach is of
quite another kind from that Mr. Bedford writes against.
We speak of an assurance of our present pardon; not, as he
does, of our final perseverance.” (Vol. I. p. 160.)
“Mr. Wesley might have considered,” you say, “that
when they talk of “assurance of pardon and salvation, the
world will extend the meaning of the words to our eternal
state.” I do consider it, Sir; and therefore I never use that
phrase either in preaching or writing. “Assurance of pardon
and salvation” is an expression that never comes out of my
lips; and if Mr. Whitefield does use it, yet he does not preach
such an assurance as the privilege of all Christians.
“But Mr. Wesley himself says, that, “though a full assur
ance of faith does not necessarily imply a full assurance of
our future perseverance, yet some have both the one and the
other.” And now what becomes of his charge against Mr.
Bedford ? And is it not mere evasion to say afterwards,
‘This is not properly an assurance of what is future?’”
Sir, this argument presses me very hard 1 May I not be
allowed a little evasion now? Come, for once I will try to
do without it, and to answer flat and plain.
And I answer, (1.) That faith is one thing; the full assur
ance of faith another. (2.) That even the full assurance of
faith does not imply the full assurance of perseverance: This
bears another name, being styled by St. Paul, “the full assur
ance of hope.” (3.) Some Christians have only the first of
these; they have faith, but mixed with doubts and fears.
Some have also the full assurance of faith, a full conviction of
present pardon; and yet not the full assurance of hope; not
a full conviction of their future perseverance. (4.) The faith
which we preach, as necessary to all Christians, is the first of
these, and no other. Therefore, (5.) It is no evasion at all to
say, “This (the faith which we preach as necessary to all
Christians) is not properly an assurance of what is future.”
And consequently, my charge against Mr. Bedford stands
good, that his Sermon on Assurance is an ignoratio elenchi, an
“ignorance of the point in question,” from beginning to end.
Therefore, neither do I “charge another wrongfully, nor
contradict myself about the doctrine of assurances.”
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON, 33
21. To prove my art, cunning, and evasion, you instance
next in the case of impulses and impressions. You begin,
“With what pertinacious confidence have impulses, impres
sions, feelings, &c., been advanced into certain rules of con
duct Their followers have been taught to depend upon
them as sure guides and infallible proofs.”
To support this weighty charge, you bring one single scrap,
about a line and a quarter, from one of my Journals. The
words are these: “By the most infallible of proofs, inward
feeling, I am convinced.” Convinced of what? It immedi
ately follows, “Of unbelief, having no such faith as will pre
vent my heart from being troubled.”
I here assert, that inward feeling or consciousness is the
most infallible of proofs of unbelief,-of the want of such a
faith as will prevent the heart's being troubled. But do I
here “advance impressions, impulses, feelings, &c., into cer
tain rules of conduct?” or anywhere else? You may just
as well say, I advance them into certain proofs of transub
stantiation.
Neither in writing, in preaching, nor in private conversa
tion, have I ever “taught any of my followers to depend upon
them as sure guides or infallible proofs" of anything.
Nay, you yourself own, I have taught quite the reverse;
and that at my very first setting out. Then, as well as ever
since, I have told the societies, “they were not to judge by
their own inward feelings. I warned them, all these were in
themselves of a doubtful, disputable nature. They might be
from God, or they might not, and were therefore to be tried
by a further rule, to be brought to the only certain test, the
law and the testimony.” (Vol. I. p. 206.)
This is what I have taught from first to last. And now,
Sir, what becomes of your heavy charge? On which side
lies the “pertinacious confidence” now? How clearly have
you made out my inconsistency and self-contradiction and
that I “occasionally either defend or give up my favourite
notions and principal points ”
22. “Inspiration, and the extraordinary calls and guidances
of the Holy Ghost, are ” what you next affirm to be “given
up.” (Section xiii. p. 106, &c.) Not by me. I do not “give
up” one tittle on this head, which I ever maintained. But
observe: Before you attempt to prove my “giving them up,”
you are to prove that I laid claim to them; that I laid claim
34 SECOND LETTER,
to some extraordinary inspiration, call, or guidance of the
Holy Ghost.
You say, my “concessions on this head” (to Mr. Church)
“are ambiguous and evasive.” Sir, you mistake the fact. I
make no concessions at all, either to him or you. I give up
nothing that ever I advanced on this head; but when Mr.
Church charged me with what I did not advance, I replied,
“I claim no other direction of God’s, but what is common
to all believers. I pretend to be no otherwise inspired than
you are, if you love God.” Where is the ambiguity or
evasion in this? I meant it for a flat denial of the charge.
23. Your next section spirat tragicum satis,* charges the
Methodists “with scepticism and infidelity, with doubts and
denials of the truth of Revelation, and Atheism itself.” (Sec
tion xiv. p. 110, &c.) The passages brought from my Jour
mals to prove this charge, which you have prudently transposed,
I beg leave to consider in the same order as they stand there.
The First you preface thus: “Upon the people's ill usage
(or supposed ill usage) of Mr. Wesley in Georgia, and their
speaking of all manner of evil falsely (as he says) against
him; and trampling under foot the word, after having been
very attentive to it; what an emotion in him is hereby
raised ! “I do hereby bear witness against myself, that I
could scarce refrain from giving the lie to experience, and
reason, and Scripture, all together.’”
The passage, as I wrote it, stands thus: “Sunday, March 7.
I entered upon my ministry at Savannah. In the Second
Lesson, (Luke xviii.,) was our Lord’s prediction of the treat
ment which he himself, and consequently his followers, were
to meet with from the world.
“Yet notwithstanding these plain declarations of our Lord,
notwithstanding my own repeated experience, notwithstanding
the experience of all the sincere followers of Christ, whom I
ever talked with, read or heard of, may, and the reason of the
thing, evincing to a demonstration, that all who love not the
light must hate him who is continually labouring to pour it in
upon them; I do here bear witness against myself, that, when
I saw the number of people crowding into the church, the
deep attention with which they received the word, and the
seriousness that afterwards sat on all their faces; I could
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Francis:
“It breathes the spirit of the tragic scene.”-EDIT.
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 35
scarce refrain from giving the lie to experience, and reason,
and Scripture, all together. I could hardly believe that the
greater, the far greater, part of this attentive, serious people,
would hereafter trample under foot that word, and say all
manner of evil falsely of him that spoke it.” (Vol. I. p. 27.)
Sir, does this prove me guilty of scepticism or infidelity;
of doubting or denying the truth of Revelation? Did I
speak this, “upon the people using me ill, and saying all
manner of evil against me?” Or am I here describing “any
emotion raised in me hereby?” Blush, blush, Sir, if you
can blush. You had here no possible room for mistake.
You grossly and wilfully falsify the whole passage, to support
a groundless, shameless accusation.
24. The second passage (written January 24, 1737–8) is
this: “In a storm, I think, What if the gospel be not true?
Then thou art of all men most foolish P For what hast thou
given thy goods, thy ease, thy friends, thy reputation, thy
country, thy life? For what art thou wandering over the
face of the earth? A dream; a cunningly devised fable.”
(Vol. I. p. 74.)
I am here describing the thoughts which passed through my
mind when I was confessedly an unbeliever. But even this
implies no scepticism, much less Atheism; no “denial of the
truth of Revelation;” but barely such transient doubts as, I
presume, may assault any thinking man that knows not God.
The third passage (which you tack to the former, as if they
were one and the same) runs thus: “I have not such a peace
as excludes the possibility either of doubt or fear. When
holy men have told me I had no faith, I have often doubted
whether I had or no. And those doubts have made me very
uneasy, till I was relieved by prayer and the Holy Scrip
tures.” (Vol. I. p. 162.)
Speak frankly, Sir: Does this prove me guilty of scepticism,
infidelity, or Atheism? What else does it prove? Just nothing
at all, but the “pertinacious confidence” of him that cites it.
25. You recite more at large one passage more. The
whole paragraph stands thus:
“St. Paul tells us, ‘The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, longsuffering, gentleness, meekness, temperance. Now,
although, by the grace of God in Christ, I find a measure of
some of these in myself, viz., of peace, longsuffering, gentle
36 SECOND LETTER,
ness, meekness, temperance; yet others I find not. I cannot
find in myself the love of God or of Christ. Hence my dead
mess and wanderings in public prayer. Hence it is that, even
in the holy communion, I have rarely any more than a cold
attention. Hence, when I hear of the highest instance of
God’s love, my heart is still senseless and unaffected. Yea,
at this moment, (October 14, 1738.) I feel no more love to
Him, than one I had never heard of.” (Vol. I. p. 162.)
To any who knew something of inward religion I should have
observed, that this is what serious Divines mean by desertion.
But all expressions of this kind are jargon to you. So, allow
ing it to be whatever you please, I ask only, Do you know
how long I continued in this state? how many years, months,
weeks, or days? If not, how can you infer what my state of
mind is now, from what it was above eleven years ago?
Sir, I do not tell you, or any man else, that “I cannot
now find the love of God in myself; ” or that now, in the
year 1751, I rarely feel more than a cold attention in the
holy communion : So that your whole argument, built on
this supposition, falls to the ground at once.
26. Sensible, I presume, of the weakness of this reason,
you immediately apply to the passions, by that artful remark:
“Observe, reader, this is the man who charges our religion
as no better than the Turkish pilgrimages to Mecca, or the
Popish worship of our Lady of Loretto !” Our religion 1
How naturally will the reader suppose, that I fix the charge
either on the Protestant religion in general, or on that of
the Church of England in particular ! But how far is this
from the truth !
My words concerning those who are commonly called reli
gious are, “Wherein does their religion consist? in right
eousness and true holiness; in love stronger than death;
fervent gratitude to God, and tender affection to all his
creatures? Is their religion the religion of the heart; a
renewal of the soul in the image of God? Do they resemble
Him they worship? Are they free from pride, from vanity,
from malice, from envy; from ambition and avarice, from
passion and lust, from every uneasy and unlovely temper?
Alas! I fear neither they (the greater part at least) nor you
have any more notion of this religion, than the peasant that
holds the plough, of the religion of a Gymnosophist.
“It is well if the genuine religion of Christ has any more
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 37
alliance with what you call religion, than with the Turkish
pilgrimages to Mecca, or the Popish worship of our Lady of
Loretto. Have not you substituted, in the place of the reli
gion of the heart, something, I do not say, equally sinful, but
equally vain and foreign to the worshipping of God in spirit
and in truth? What else can be said even of prayer, public
or private, in the manner wherein you generally perform it?
as a thing of course, running round and round, in the same
dull track, without either the knowledge or the love of God;
without one heavenly temper, either attained or improved?”
(Farther Appeal, Third Part, Vol. VIII. p. 202.)
Now, Sir, what room is there for your own exclamations?
—“What sort of heavenly temper is his? How can he pos
sibly, consistently with charity, call this our general perform
ance?” Sir, I do not. I only appeal to the conscience of
you, and each particular reader, whether this is, or is not, the
manner wherein you (in the singular number) generally per
form public or private prayer. “How, possibly, without
being omniscient, can he affirm, that we (I presume you mean
all the members of our Church) pray without one heavenly
temper? or know anything at all of our private devotions?
How monstrous is all this 1” Recollect yourself, Sir. If
your terror is real, you are more afraid than hurt. I do not
affirm any such thing. I do not take upon me to know any
thing at all of your private devotions. But I suppose I may
inquire, without offence, and beg you seriously to examine
yourself before God.
So you have brought no one proof, that “scepticism, infi
delity, and Atheism are either constituent parts or genuine
consequences of Methodism.” Therefore your florid decla
mation, in the following pages, is entirely out of its place.
And you might have spared yourself the trouble of account
ing for what has no being, but in your own imagination.
27. You charge the Methodists next with “an uncharitable
spirit.” (Section xv. p. 115, &c.) All you advance in proof
of this, as if it were from my writings, but without naming
either page or book, I have nothing to do with. But what
ever you tell me where to find, I shall carefully consider.
I observe but one single passage of this sort; and that you
have worn threadbare already : “By the most infallible of
proofs, inward feeling, I am convinced of levity and luxuri
ancy of spirit, by speaking words not tending to edify; but
38 SECOND LETTER,
most by my manner of speaking of my enemies.” Sir, you
may print this, not only in italics, but in capitals, and yet it
would do you no service. For what I was convinced of then
was not uncharitableness, but, as I expressly mentioned,
“levity of spirit.”
28. Of the same “uncharitable nature,” you say, is “their
application of divine judgments to their opposers.” (Section
xvi. p. 119, &c.) You borrow two instances from Mr. Church :
But you omit the answers, which I shall therefore subjoin.
His words are, “You describe Heaven as executing judg
ments, immediate punishments, on those who oppose you.
You say, ‘Mr. Molther was taken ill this day. I believe it
was the hand of God that was upon him.’” (First Letter to
Mr. Church, Vol. VIII. p. 409.) “I do; but I do not say,
as a judgment for opposing me. That you say for me.”
“Again, you mention,” says Mr. Church, “as an awful
providence, the case of “a poor wretch, who was last week
cursing and blaspheming, and had boasted to many, that he
would come on Sunday, and no man should stop his mouth;
but on Friday God laid his hand upon him, and on Sunday
he was buried.’” “I do look on this as a manifest judgment
of God on a hardened sinner for his complicated wickedness.”
To repeat these objections, without taking the least notice of
the answers, is one of the usual proofs of your charitable spirit.
29. You pass on to “the Methodists’ uncharitable custom
of summoning their opponents to the bar of judgment.”
(Section xvii. p. 123, &c.)
You bring two passages from my writings to prove this. The
First is, “Calling at Newgate, (in Bristol,) I was informed, that
the poor wretches under sentence of death were earnestly desir
ous to speak with me; but that Alderman Beecher had sent an
express order that they should not. I cite Alderman Beecher
to answer for these souls at the judgment-seat of Christ.”
Why do you leave out those words, for these souls 2
Because they show the sentence means neither more nor
less than, “If these souls perish, he, not I, must answer for
them at the great day.”
The Second passage is still more wide from the point.
The whole of it is as follows :
“I have often inquired, who were the authors of this report,
(that I was a Papist,) and have generally found, they were
either bigoted Dissenters, or (I speak it without fear or favour)
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 39
Ministers of our own Church. I have also frequently con
sidered, what possible ground or motive they could have thus to
speak; seeing few men in the world have had occasion so
clearly and openly to declare their principles as I have done,
both by preaching, printing, and conversation, for several years
last past. And I can no otherwise think, than that either they
spoke thus (to put the most favourable construction upon it)
from gross ignorance; they knew not what Popery was; they
knew not what doctrines these are which the Papists teach; or
they wilfully spoke what they knew to be false, probably
thinking thereby to do God service. Now, take this to your
selves, whoever ye are, high or low, Dissenters or Churchmen,
Clergy or laity, who have advanced this shameless charge, and
digest it how you can.
“But how have ye not been afraid, if ye believe there is a
God, and that he knoweth the secrets of your hearts, (I speak
now to you Preachers, more especially, of whatever denomina
tion,) to declare so gross, palpable a lie, in the name of the God
of truth? I cite you all, before ‘the Judge of all the earth,’
either publicly to prove your charge, or, by publicly retracting
it, to make the best amends you can, to God, to me, and to the
world.” (Vol. I. p. 219.)
Sir, do I here “summon my opponents to the bar of judg
ment?” So you would make me do, by quoting only that scrap,
“I cite you all, before ‘the Judge of all the earth!’” You
then add, with equal charity and sincerity, “Here you have
the true spirit of an enthusiast, flushed with a modest assur
ance of his own salvation, and the charitable prospect of the
damnation of others.” O Sir, never name modesty more !
Here end your laboured attempts to show the “uncharitable
spirit” of the Methodists; who, for anything you have shown
to the contrary, may be the most charitable people under the
Sun.
30. You charge the Methodists next with “violation and
contempt of order and authority;” (Section xviii. p. 124;)
namely, the authority of the governors of the Church. I have
answered every article of this charge, in the Second and Third
Parts of the “Farther Appeal,” and the “Letter to Mr.
Church.” When you have been so good as to reply to what
is there advanced, I may possibly say something more.
What you offer of your own upon this head, I shall
consider without delay:—
40 SECOND LETTER,
“Women and boys are actually employed in this ministry
of public preaching.” Please to tell me where. I know them
not, nor ever heard of them before.
You add, what is more marvellous still, “I speak from per
sonal knowledge, that sometimes, a little before delivering of the
elements at the communion, three or four Methodists together
will take it into their heads to go away; that sometimes, while
the sentences of the offertory were reading, they have called out
to the Minister who carried the bason, reproaching him for ask
ing alms of them; that sometimes, when the Minister has deli
vered the bread into their hands, instead of eating it, they would
slip it into their pockets.” Sir, you must show your face, before
these stories will find credit on your bare asseveration.
“Yet they are surprised,” you say, “that every man in his
senses does not, without the least hesitation, join them.”
Sir, I am surprised (unless you are not in your senses) at
your advancing such a barefaced falsehood.
31. You go on: “Under this head may, not improperly, be
considered their undutiful behaviour to the civil powers.”
What proof have you of this? Why, a single sentence, on
which I laid so little stress myself, that it is only inserted by
way of parenthesis, in the body of another sentence: “Ye
learned in the law, what becomes of Magna Charta, and of
English liberty and property? Are not these mere sounds,
while, on any pretence, there is such a thing as a press-gang
suffered in the land?”
Upon this you descant: “The legislature has, at several
times, made Acts for pressing men. But no matter for this;
touch but a Methodist, and all may perish, rather than a soldier
be pressed. He who had before bound himself not to speak a
tittle of worldly things is now bawling for liberty and property.”
Very lively this! But I hope, Sir, you do not offer it by way
of argument. You are not so unlearned in the law, as not to
know, that the legislature is out of the question. The legis
lature, six years ago, did not appoint press-gangs, but legal
officers to press men. Consequently, this is no proof (and find
another if you can) of our undutiful behaviour to the civil
powers.
32. “Another natural consequence,” you say, “of Method
ism, is their-mutual jealousies and envyings, their manifold
divisions, fierce and rancorous quarrels, and accusations of
one another.” (Vol. I. p. 252.)
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 41
I shall carefully attend whatever you produce on this head:
And if you prove this, I will grant you all the rest.
You First cite those words: “Musing on the things that were
past, and reflecting how many that came after me were preferred
before me, I opened my Testament on those words: ‘The Gen
tiles, which followed not after righteousness, have attained to
righteousness; but Israel, which followed after the law of righ
teousness, hath not attained to the law of righteousness.’”
And how does this prove the manifold divisions and
rancorous quarrels of the Methodists?
Your Second argument is: “Mr. Whitefield told me, he and
I preached two different gospels;” (his meaning was, that he
preached particular, and I universal, redemption;) “and
therefore he would not join with me, but publicly preach
against me.” (Section xix. p. 34.1, &c.)
Well, Sir, here was doubtless a division for a time; but no
fierce and rancorous quarrel yet.
You say, Thirdly, “They write and publish against each
other.” True; but without any degree either of fierceness
Or rancOur.
You assert, Fourthly, “Mr. Wesley, in his sermon “On
Free Grace, opposes the other for the horrible blasphemies
of his horrible doctrine.”
Sir, away with your flourishes, and write plain English.
I opposed the doctrine of predestination, which he held. But
without any degree either of rancour or fierceness. Still,
therefore, you miss the mark.
You quote, Fifthly, these words: “I spent an hour with
Mr. Stonehouse. O what Tru6avoMoyva, “persuasiveness of
speech, is here ! Surely all the deceivableness of unright
eousness.” (Vol. I. p. 290.) But there was no fierceness or
rancour on either side.
The passage, a fragment of which you produce as a Sixth
argument, stands thus: “A few of us had a long conference
together. Mr. C. now told me plainly, he could not agree
with me, because I did not preach the truth, particularly with
regard to election.” He did so; but without any rancour. We
had a long conference; but not a fierce one. (Vol. I. p. 293.)
You, Seventhly, observe, “What scurrility of language the
Moravians throw out against Mr. Wesley!” Perhaps so. But this
will not prove that “the Methodists quarrel with each other.”
42 SECOND LETTER
“And how does he turn their own artillery upon them?”
This is your Eighth argument. But if I do, this no more
proves the “mutual quarrels of the Methodists,” than my
turning your own artillery upon you.
33. Having, by these eight irrefragable arguments, clearly
carried the day, you raise your crest, and cry out, “Is this
Methodism?
And reign such mortal feuds in heavenly minds?”
Truly, Sir, you have not yet brought one single proof (and
yet, I dare say, you have brought the very best you have) of
any such feuds among the Methodists as may not be found
among the most heavenly-minded men on earth.
But you are resolved to pursue your victory, and so go on:
“What are we to think of these charges of Whitefield, and
Wesley, and the Moravians, one against another?” The Mora
vians, Sir, are out of the question; for they are no Methodists;
and as to the rest, Mr. Whitefield charges Mr. Wesley with hold
ing universal redemption, and I charge him with holding parti
cular redemption. This is the standing charge on either side.
And now, Sir, “what are we to think?” Why, that you have
not proved one point of this charge against the Methodists.
However, you stumble on: “Are these things so? Are
they true, or are they not true? If not true, they are grievous
calumniators; if true, they are detestable sectarists. Whether
true or false, the allegation stands good of their fierce and
rancorous quarrels, and mutual heinous accusations.”
Sir, has your passion quite extinguished your reason? Have
fierceness and rancour left you no understanding? Otherwise,
how is it possible you should run on at this senseless, shameless
rate? These things are true which Mr. Whitefield and Wes
ley object to each other. He holds the decrees; I do not: Yet
this does not prove us “detestable sectarists.” And whether
these things are true or false, your allegation of our “fierce and
rancorous quarrels, and mutual heinous accusations,” cannot
stand good, without better proof than you have yet produced.
34. Yet, with the utmost confidence, quasi re bene gesta,”
you proceed, “And how stands the matter among their dis
ciples? They are all together by the ears, embroiled and
broken with unchristian quarrels and confusions.”
* As though you had accomplished some mighty affair.-EDIT.
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 43.
How do you prove this? Why thus: “Mr. Wesley's
Fourth Journal is mostly taken up in enumerating their
wrath, dissensions, and apostasies.” No, Sir, not a tenth
part of it; although it gives a full and explicit account of the
greatest dissensions which ever were among them.
But to come to particulars: You First cite these words,
“At Oxford, but a few who had not forsaken them.”
My words are, “Monday, October 1, 1738. I rode to
Oxford, and found a few who had not yet forsaken the
assembling themselves together.” This is your First proof
that “the Methodists are all together by the ears.” Your
Second is its very twin-brother. “Tuesday, 2. I went to
many who once heard the word with joy; but ‘when the sun
arose they withered away.’” (Vol. I. p. 227.)
Your Third is this: “Many were induced (by the
Moravians) to deny the gift of God, and affirm they never
had any faith at all.” (Ibid. p. 248.) You are at liberty to
enjoy this argument also; and let it prove what it can prove.
You, Fourthly, cite these words: “Many of our sisters are
shaken, grievously torn by reasonings. But few come to
Fetter-Lane, and then after their names are called over they
presently depart. Our brethren here (those who were pros
elytes to the Moravians) have neither wisdom enough to
guide, nor prudence enough to let it alone. They (the
Moravians) have much confounded some of our sisters, and
many of our brothers are much grieved.” (Ibid. p. 255.)
This proves thus much, that one society was at that time
divided; but not that the Methodists, in general, were, even
then, “all together by the ears.”
The passage you quote, in the Fifth place, is, “I believe—
are determined to go on according to Mr. Molther's direction,
and I suppose (says the writer of the letter) above half our
brethren are on their But they are so very confused,
they do not know how to go on, and yet are unwilling to be
taught, except by the Moravians.” (Ibid.)
Add to this: (I recite the whole passages in order; not as
you had mangled, and then jumbled them together:)
“Wednesday, December 19. I came to London, though
with a heavy heart. Here I found every day the dreadful
effects of our brethren’s reasoning and disputing with each
other. Scarce one in ten retained his first love; and most of
44 SECOND LETTER,
the rest were in the utmost confusion,” (they were so, more or
less, for several months,) “biting and devouring one another.”
This also proves so much, neither more nor less, that some
of the Methodists were then in confusion. And just so much
is proved by your Sixth quotation: “Many were wholly un
settled,” (by the Moravians, taking advantage of my absence,)
“ and lost in vain reasonings and doubtful disputations;
not likely to come to any true foundation.” (Ibid. p. 259.)
Your Seventh quotation (I recite the whole sentence) runs
thus: “April 19. I received a letter informing me that our
poor brethren at Fetter-Lane were again in great confusion.”
This quotation proves just as much as the preceding, or as
the following: “The plague” (of false stillness) “was now
spread to them also; ” namely, to the “little society at
Islington.” (Ibid. p. 269.)
Your Ninth is this: “I went to the society, but I found their
hearts were quite estranged. Friday, 4. I met a little handful
of them, who still stand in the old paths.” (Ibid. p. 280.)
Thus far you have been speaking of the Methodists in
London. And what have you proved concerning them? Only
that the Moravians, mixing with them twelve years ago, while
they were young and unexperienced, set them a disputing with
each other, and thereby occasioned much confusion for several
months. But you have not proved that the Methodists in
general were, even them, “all together by the ears; ” and much
less, that they have been so ever since, and that they are so now.
35. I now attend you to Kingswood. Not to “Bristol and
Kingswood,” which you artfully join together. The society
at Bristol was no more concerned with the disputes in
Kingswood, than with those in London.
Here the First quotation, though containing but two lines,
is extracted from three different paragraphs; in one of which I
say: “I had many unpleasing accounts (in December, 1740)
concerning our little society in Kingswood.” In the Second:
“I went to Kingswood, if haply I might repair the breaches
which had been made ’’ by the Predestinarian Preachers. In
the Third: “I laboured to heal the jealousies and misunder
standings which had arisen.” (Vol. I. p. 293.)
The Second passage, part of which you quote, is this: “I
returned early in the morning to Kingswood; but my con
gregation was gone to hear Mr. C.; so that I had not above
two or three men, and as many women.” (Ibid. p. 294.)
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 45.
The Third is, “January 1. I explained, “If any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature. But many of our brethren had
no ears to hear, having disputed away both their faith and
love.” (Ibid. p. 295.)
The Fourth, “February 21. I inquired concerning the divi
sions and offences which began afresh to break out in Kings
wood. In the afternoon I met a few of the Bands; but it was
a cold, uncomfortable meeting.” (Ibid. p. 299.)
You have picked out here and there a word from several
pages, in order to furnish out a Fifth quotation. The most
material part of it is this: “Saturday, 28. I read the follow
ing paper at Kingswood : “For their scoffing at the word and
Ministers of God, for their backbiting and evil-speaking, I
declare the persons above-mentioned to be no longer members
of this society.’” (Ibid. p. 301.)
“And we had great reason to bless God, that, after fifty
two were withdrawn, we have still upwards of ninety left.”
(Ibid. p. 302.)
Who those other “forty were, that,” you say, “left them,”
I know not. Perhaps you may inform me.
Upon the whole, all these quotations prove only this: That
about eleven years ago, Mr. C., falling into predestination, set
the society in Kingswood a disputing with each other, and
occasioned much confusion for some months. But still you
have not gone one step toward proving, (which is the one
point in question,) that the Methodists in general were, even
then, “all together by the ears; ” and much less, that they
have been so ever since, and that they are so now.
However, you fail not to triumph, (like Louis le Grand,
after his victory at Blenheim,) “What shall we say now? Are
these the fruits of Methodism?” No, Sir. They are the fruits
of opposing it. They are the tares sown among the wheat.
You may hear of instances of the same kind, both in earlier
and later ages.
You add, “This is bad enough; but it is not the worst. For
consider, what becomes of those that leave them 7” Why, Sir,
what, if “their last end be worse than their first?” Will you
charge this upon me? By the same rule, you must have charged
upon the Apostles themselves whatever befel those who, having
“known the way of righteousness,” afterwards “turned back
from the holy commandment once delivered to them.”
46 SECOND LETTER,
36. You conclude this section: “Mr. Wesley will probably
say, “Must Ibe answerable for the Moravians, against whom I
have preached and written?” True, since he and the Mora
vians quarrelled. But who gives them a box on the ear with
the one hand, and embraces them with the other? Who first
brought over this wicked generation ? Who made a Moravian
his spiritual guide? Who fanaticized his own followers, and de
prived them of their senses? Whose societies (by his own con
fession) run over in shoals to Moravianism forty or fifty at a
time? Would they have split upon this rock, if they had not
been first Methodists? Lastly: Where is the spawn of Mora
vianism so strongly working as in the children of Methodism?”
Sir, you run very fast. And yet I hope to overtake you
by and by. “Mr. Wesley,” you say, “has preached against
the Moravians, since he quarrelled with them.” Sir, I never
quarrelled with their persons yet: I did with some of their
tenets long ago. He “gives them a box on the ear with the
one hand, and embraces them with the other.” That is, I
embrace what is good among them, and at the same time re
prove what is evil. “Who first brought over this wicked
generation?” Not I, whether they be wicked or not. I
once thought I did; but have since then seen and acknow
ledged my mistake. “Who made a Moravian his spiritual
guide?” Not I; though I have occasionally consulted several.
“Who fanaticized his own followers, and deprived them of
their senses?” Not I. Prove it upon me if you can. “Whose
societies (by his own confession) run over in shoals to Mora
vianism, forty or fifty at a time?” Truly, not mine. Two
and-fifty of Kingswood society ran over to Calvinism, and, a
year before, part of Fetter-Lane society gradually went over
to the Moravians. But I know none of ours that went over
“in shoals.” They never, that I remember, gained five at a
time; nor fifty in all, to the best of my knowledge, for
these last ten years. “Would they” (of Fetter-Lane) “have
split on this rock, if they had not first been Methodists?”
Undoubtedly they would; for several of them had not first been
Methodists. Mr. Viney, for instance, (as well as several
others,) was with the Germans before ever he saw me.
“Lastly: Where is the spawn of Moravianism working so
strongly as in the children of Methodism?” If you mean
the errors of Moravianism, they are not working at all in the
generality of the children of Methodism; the Methodists
To BISBOP LAVINGTON. 47
in general being thoroughly apprized of, and fully guarded
against, them.
So much for your modest assertion, that the Methodists in
general are “all together by the ears; ” the very reverse of
which is true. They are in general in perfect peace. They
enjoy in themselves “the peace of God, which passeth all
understanding.” They are at peace with each other; and, as
much as lieth in them, they live peaceably with all men.
37. Your next charge is, that “Methodism has a tendency
to undermine morality and good works.” (Section xx. p. 146,
&c.) To prove this you assert, (1.) “That the Methodists
are trained up to wait in quietness for sudden conversion;
whence they are naturally led to neglect the means of salva
tion.” This is a mistake all over. For neither are they
taught to wait in quietness (if you mean any more than
patience by that term) for either sudden or gradual conver
sion; neither do they, in fact, neglect the means. So far
from it, that they are eminently exact in the use of them.
You assert, (2) “The doctrine of assurance of pardon and
salvation, present and future, causes a false security, to the
neglect of future endeavours.” Blunder upon blunder
again. That all Christians have an assurance of future sal
vation, is no Methodist doctrine; and an assurance of pre
sent pardon is so far from causing negligence, that it is of
all others the strongest motive to vigorous endeavours after
universal holiness.
You assert, (3.) “Impulses and impressions being made
the rule of duty, will lead into dangerous errors.” Very
true: But the Methodists do not make impulses and impres
sions the rule of duty. They totally disclaim any other rule
of duty than the written word.
You assert, (4.) “A claim of unsinning perfection” (I
mean by perfection, the loving God with all our heart)
“drives some into frenzies, others into despair.” Sir, I
doubt the fact.
You assert, (5) “The Moravian Methodists trample down
morality, and multitudes of the Wesleyans have been in
fected.” The Moravian Methodists 1 You may as well say,
the Presbyterian Papists. The Moravians have no connexion
with the Methodists. . Therefore, whatever they do, (though
you slander them too,) they and not we are to answer for.
The Methodists at present, blessed be God, are as little
48 SECOND LETTER
infected with this plague (of condemning or neglecting good
works) as any body of people in England or Ireland.
38. From these loose assertions you proceed to quotations
from my writings, every one of which I shall consider, to
show that, not in one or two, but in every one, you are a
wilful prevaricator and false accuser of your neighbour.
You say, First, “The Moravians.” Hold, good Sir! you
are out of the way already. You well know, the Moravians
are to answer for themselves. Our present question concerns
the Methodists only.
You say, Secondly, “A general temptation prevails among
the societies of Methodists, of leaving off good works.” (Vol.
I. p. 273.) Sir, you are wrong again. The societies of
Methodists are not there spoken of; but the single society
of Fetter-Lane. Among these only that temptation then
prevailed.
You quote, Thirdly, as my words, “The poor, confused,
shattered society had erred from the faith.” My own words
are, “I told the poor, confused, shattered society, wherein
they had erred from the faith; ” (ibid. p. 274;) namely, with
regard to the ordinances; not in general, as your way of
expressing it naturally imports. Nor had all the society
erred even in this point. Many of them were still unshaken.
You quote, Fourthly, “A woman of Deptford spoke great
words and true. She ordered Mr. Humphreys to leave off
doing good.”
Must not every reader suppose, as you have placed these
words, that they were all spoke at one time? and that the
“great words and true” were those whereby she “ordered
Mr. Humphreys to leave off doing good?”
What then must every honest man think of you, when he
observes, that one half of the sentence (which you thus art
fully put together) stands in another page, and at a consider
a le distance from the other? and that I immediately subjoin
to the latter clause, “We talked largely with her, and she was
humbled to the dust, under a deep sense of the advantage
Satan had gained over her.”
You quote, Fifthly, a part of the following sentence, to
prove that I “undermine morality and good works:”
“His judgment concerning holiness is new. He no longer
judges it to be an outward thing, to consist either in doing no
harm, in doing good, or in using the ordinances of God.” (And
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 49
yet how strongly do I insist upon all these! Sir, do not you
know this?) “He sees it is the life of God in the soul, the
image of God fresh stamped on the heart.” It is so. Sir,
can you deny it? What then will you prove by this?
You quote, Sixthly, part of these words:—
“They speak of holiness as if it consisted chiefly, if not
wholly, in these two points: First, the doing no harm :
Secondly, the doing good, as it is called; that is, the using the
means of grace, and helping our neighbour.” (Vol. I. p. 225.)
And this you term, “disparaging good works!” Sir,
these things, considered barely as to the opus operatum, are
not good works. There must be something good in the heart,
before any of our works are good. Insomuch that, “though
I give all my goods to feed the poor, and have not ” this, “it
profiteth me nothing.”
You observe, by the way, “The Mystic divinity was once
the Methodists’ doctrine.” Sir, you have stepped out of the
way, only to get another fall. The Mystic divinity was never
the Methodists’ doctrine. They could never swallow either
John Tauler or Jacob Behmen; although they often advised
with one that did.
39. You say, Seventhly, “I do not find that Mr. Wesley
has ever cited those express passages of St. James.” Sir,
what if I had not? (I mean in print.) I do not cite every
text from Genesis to the Revelation. But it happens I have.
Look again, Sir; and, by and by, you may find where.
You say, Eighthly, “Mr. Wesley affirms, that the condition
of our justification is faith alone, and not good works.”
Most certainly I do. And I learned it from the Eleventh
and Twelfth Articles, and from the Homilies of our Church.
If you can confute them, do. But I subscribe to them, both
with my hand and heart.
You say, Ninthly, “Give me leave to make a remark. The
Methodists wandered many years in the new path of salvation
by faith and works, which was the time, too, of their highest
glory and popularity. During this time, they were seducing
their disciples into the most destructive errors.” Excuse me,
Sir. While they preached salvation by faith and works, they
had no disciples at all, unless you term a few pupils such ; nor
had they any popularity at all. They then enjoyed (what they
always desired) a quiet, retired life. But whatever disciples we
50 SECOND LETTER,
had, they were not seduced by us into the error of justification
by works. For they were in it before ever they saw our face,
or knew there were such men in the world.
You say, Tenthly, “Mr. Wesley only contends, that it is
possible to use them without trusting in them.” Not in that
page; because the proposition I am confuting is, “It is not
possible to use them without trusting in them.” (Vol. I. p. 258.)
You added, “And now, are not such disparaging expres
sions” (a mere possibility of using them without trusting in
them) “a great discouragement to practice?”
O Sir, when will you deviate into truth? Dare you affirm,
without any regard to God or man, “Mr. Wesley only
contends for a mere possibility of using the means without
trusting in them?”
To go no farther than the very first page you refer to, (vol.
I. p. 258,) my express words are these:
“I believe the way to attain faith is to wait for Christ in
using all the means of grace.
“Because I believe, these do ordinarily convey God’s grace
even to unbelievers.” Is this “contending only for a mere
possibility of using them without trusting in them?”
Not only in this, and many other parts of the Journals, but
in a sermon wrote professedly on the subject, I contend that
all the ordinances of God are the stated channels of his grace
to man; and that it is our bounden duty to use them all, at
all possible opportunities. So that to charge the Methodists
in general, or me in particular, with undervaluing or dis
paraging them, shows just as much regard for justice and
truth, as if you was to charge us with Mahometanism.
40. Tedious as it is to wade through so many dirty pages,
I will follow you step by step, a little farther. Your Eleventh
proof, that we “undermine morality and good works,” is
drawn from the following passage:–
“I know one ‘under the law” is even as I was for near
twice ten years. Every one when he begins to see his fallen
state, and to feel the wrath of God abiding on him, relapses into
the sin that most easily besets him, soon after repenting of it.
Sometimes he avoids, and at many other times he cannot per
suade himself to avoid, the occasions of it. Hence his relapses
are frequent, and, of consequence, his heart is hardened more
and more. Nor can he, with all his sincerity, avoid any one of
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 51
these four marks of hypocrisy, till, ‘being justified by faith,’
he ‘hath peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.’”
(Vol. I. p. 222.)
You, Sir, are no competent judge in the cause. But to
any who has experienced what St. Paul speaks in his seventh
chapter to the Romans, I willingly submit this whole question.
You know by experience, that if anger was the sin that did so
easily beset you, you relapsed into it for days, or months, or
years, soon after repenting of it. Sometimes you avoided the
occasions of it; at other times you did not. Hence your relapses
were frequent, and your heart was hardened more and more:
And yet all this time you was sincerely striving against sin;
you could say, without hypocrisy, “The thing which I do, I
allow not; the evil which I would not, that I do. To will is
even now present with me; but how to perform that which is
good I find not.”
But the Jesuits, you think, “could scarce have granted sal
vation upon easier terms. Have no fear, ye Methodists.” Sir,
I do not grant salvation, as you call it, upon so easy terms. I
believe a man in this state is in a state of damnation. “Have
no fear !” say you? Yea, but those who are thus “under the
law” are in fear all the day long. “Was there ever so pleasing
a scheme?” Pleasing with a vengeance As pleasing as to be
in the belly of hell. So totally do you mistake the whole matter,
not knowing what you speak, nor whereof you affirm.
You are, indeed, somewhat pitiable in speaking wrong on this
head, because you do it in ignorance. But this plea cannot be
allowed when you gravely advance that trite, threadbare objec
tion concerning the Lord’s supper, without taking any notice
that I have answered it again and again, both to Mr. Church
and to the late Lord Bishop of London.
41. Your Thirteenth proof is this: “Mr. Wesley has taught
as that infirmities are no sins.” Sir, you have taught me to
wonder at nothing you assert; else I should wonder at this.
The words I suppose you refer to, stand in the sermon “On
Salvation by Faith; ” though you do not choose to show your
reader where they may be found: “He that is by faith born of
God sinneth not, (1.) By any habitual sin: Nor, (2.) By any
wilful sin: Nor, (3.) By any sinful desire; for he continually
desireth the holy and perfect will of God: Nor, (4.) Doth he
sin by infirmities, whether in act, word, or thought; for his
52- SECOND LETTER
infirmities have no concurrence of his will, and, without this,
they are not properly sins.” And this, you seriously declare,
“is a loop-hole to creep out of every moral and religious
obligation 1’’
In the same paragraph, you say I have strongly affirmed
that “all our works and tempers are evil continually; that our
whole heart is altogether corrupt and abominable, and conse
quently our whole life; all our works, the most specious of
them, our righteousness, our prayers, needing an atonement
themselves.” (Vol. I. pp. 76, 97, 161, 214.)
I do strongly affirm this. But of whom? In all these places,
but the last, of myself only. In every one, but this, I speak in
the singular number, and of myself when confessedly an unbe
liever. And of whom do I speak in that last place? Of unbe
lievers, and them only. The words are, “All our tempers and
works in our natural state are only evil continually.”
Now, Sir, where is your loop-hole to creep out? If you have
none, I fear every impartial man will pass sentence upon you,
that you have no regard either to moral or religious obligations.
I have now weighed every argument you have brought, to
prove that the “Methodists undermine morality and good
works.” A grievous charge indeed! But the more inexcusable
is he who advances it, but is not able to make it good in any
one single instance. Pardon my pertness, Sir, in not barely
affirming, (that is your manner,) but proving, this: Nay, and
in telling you, that you cannot make amends to God, to me, or
to the world, without a retractation as public as your calumny.
42. You add, “How the case stands, in fact, as to the num
ber of converts among the Methodists, and real reformation of
life to the certain and known duties of the gospel, is matter of
difficult determination.” Not at all. What is easier to be deter
mined, than, (1.) That A. B. of Exeter, or Tiverton, was for
many years a notorious drunkard, common-swearer, or Sab
bath-breaker? (2.) That he is not so now; that he is really
reformed from drunkenness, swearing, Sabbath-breaking, to
sobriety and the other certain and known duties of the gospel?
“But from what inquiry” you “can make, there is no reason
to think them, for the generality, better than their neighbours.”
Better than their neighbours ? Why, are they no worse than
their neighbours? Then, what have you been doing all this
time? But whether they are better or worse than their neigh
bours, they are undeniably better than themselves: I mean,
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 53
better than they were before they heard this preaching “in
the certain and known duties of the gospel.”
But you desire us to “consider their black art of calumny;
their uncharitableness; their excessive pride and vanity;
their scepticism, doubts, and disbelief of God and Christ;
their disorderly practices, and contempt of authority; their
bitter envying and inveterate broils among themselves; their
coolness for good works.” Sir, we will consider all these,
when you have proved them. Till then this is mere brutum
fulmen.*
43. You proceed: “If we take Mr. Wesley’s own account,
it falls very short of any considerable reformation.” You
mean, if we take that part of his account which you are
pleased to transcribe. Atticam elegantiam 1 + But let any
impartial man read my whole aceount, and then judge.
However, hence you infer that “the new reformers have
made but a slow and slight progress in the reformation of
manners.”
As a full answer to this I need only transcribe a page or
two from the last “Appeal,” pp. 237, 238, &c. :
“God begins a glorious work in our land. You set your
self against it with your might; to prevent its beginning
where it does not yet appear, and to destroy it wherever it
does. In part you prevail. You keep many from hearing
the word that is able to save their souls. Others who have
heard it, you induce to turn back from God, and to list under
the devil’s banner again. Then you make the success of your
own wickedness an excuse for not acknowledging the work of
God! You urge, ‘that not many sinners were reformed !
and that some of those are now as bad as ever !’
“Whose fault is this? Is it ours, or your own? Why
have not thousands more been reformed ? Yea, for every one
who is now turned to God, why are there not ten thousand 7
Because you and your associates laboured so heartily in the
cause of hell; because you and they spared no pains, either
to prevent or to destroy the work of God. By using all the
power and wisdom you had, you hindered thousands from
hearing the gospel, which they might have found to be the
power of God unto salvation. Their blood is upon your heads.
By inventing, or countenancing, or retailing lies, some refined,
some gross and palpable, you hindered others from profiting
* Harmless artillery.—EDIT. + Attic elegance.-EDIT.
54 SECOND LETTEIt
by what they did hear. You are answerable to God for these
souls also. Many who began to taste the good word and run,
the way of God's commandments, by various methods you
prevailed on to hear it no more. So they soon drew back to
perdition. But know, that, for every one of these also, God
will require an account of you in the day of judgment!
“And yet, in spite of all the malice and wisdom and
strength, not only of men, but of ‘principalities and powers,”
of the ‘rulers of the darkness of this world, of the “wicked
spirits in high places, there are thousands found, who are
“turned from dumb idols to serve the living and true God.”
What a harvest then might we have seen before now, if all who
say they are ‘on the Lord’s side, had come, as in all reason
they ought, ‘to the help of the Lord against the mighty l’
Yea, had they only not opposed the work of God, had they
only refrained from his messengers, might not the trumpet
of God have been heard long since in every corner of our
land? and thousands of sinners in every county been brought
to “fear God and honour the King?’”
44. Without any regard to this, your next assertion is,
“That the Methodists are carrying on the work of Popery.”
(Section xxi. p. 164, &c.) This also being a charge of a very
high nature, I shall particularly consider whatever you
advance in defence of it.
Your First argument is, “They have a strain of Jesuitical,
sophistry, artifice, and craft, evasion, reserve, equivocation,
and prevarication.” So you say. But you do not so much
as aim at any proof.
Your Second argument is, “Mr. Wesley says, where a
Methodist was receiving the sacrament, God was pleased to
let him see a crucified Saviour.” Sir, Mr. W. does not say
this. It is one that occasionally wrote to him. But if he
had, what would you infer? that he is a Papist? Where is
the consequence? Why, you say, “Was not this as good an
argument for transubstantiation, as several produced by the
Papists?” Yes, exactly as good as either their arguments
o: yours; that is, just good for nothing.
Your Third argument runs thus: “We may see in Mr.
W.’s writings, that he was once a strict Churchman, but gra
dually put on a more catholic spirit, tending at length to
Roman Catholic. He rejects any design to convert others
from any communion; and consequently not from Popery.”
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON, 55
This is half true, (which is something uncommon with you,)
and only half false. It is true, that, for thirty years last past,
I have “gradually put on a more catholic spirit; ” finding
more and more tenderness for those who differed from me,
either in opinions or modes of worship. But it is not true
that I “reject any design of converting others from any com
munion.” I have, by the blessing of God, converted several
from Popery, who are now alive and ready to testify it.
Your Fourth argument is, That in a Collection of Prayers,
I cite the words of an ancient Liturgy, “For the faithful
departed.” Sir, whenever I use those words in the Burial
Service, I pray to the same effect: “That we, with all those
who are departed in thy faith and fear, may have our perfect
consummation and bliss, both in body and soul:” Yea, and
whenever I say, “Thy kingdom come; ” for I mean both
the kingdom of grace and glory. In this kind of general
prayer, therefore, “for the faithful departed,” I conceive
myself to be clearly justified, both by the earliest antiquity,
by the Church of England, and by the Lord's Prayer;
although the Papists have corrupted this scriptural practice
into praying for those who die in their sins.
45. Your Fifth argument is, “That they use private confes
sion, in which every one is to speak the state of his heart,
with his several temptations and deliverances, and answer as
many searching questions as may be. And what a scene,” say
you, “is hereby disclosed ! What a filthyjakes opened, when
the most searching questions are answered without reserve l”
Hold, Sir, unless you are answering for yourself: This un
doubtedly you have a right to do. You can tell best what is in
your own heart. And I cannot deny what you say: It may be
a very “filthyjakes,” for aught I know. But pray do not mea
sure others by yourself. The hearts of believers “are purified
through faith.” When these open their hearts one to another,
there is no such scene disclosed. Yet temptations to pride in
various kinds, to self-will, to unbelief in many instances,
they often feel in themselves, (whether they give any place
to them or no,) and occasionally disclose to their brethren.
But this has no resemblance to Popish confession; of which
you are very sensible. For you cite my own words: “The
Popish confession is, the confession made by a single person to
a Priest. Whereas, this is the confession of several persons
conjointly, not to a Priest, but to each other.” You add, “Will
56 SECOND LETTER,
Mr. W. abide by this, and freely answer a question?” I will.
For I desire only, “by manifestation of the truth, to com
mend myself to every man’s conscience in the sight of God.”
Your question is, “After private confessions taken in their
Bands, are not reports made to Mr. W.?” I answer, No.;
no reports are made to me of the particulars mentioned in
private Bands. “Are no delinquents, male and female,
brought before him separately, and confessed by him?” No;
none at all. You ask, “How then do I know the outward
and inward states of those under my care?” I answer, By
examining them once a quarter, more or less, not separately,
but ten or fifteen together.
Therefore, every unprejudiced person must see that there
is no analogy between the Popish confession to a Priest, and
our confessing our faults one to another, and praying one for
another, as St. James directs. Consequently, neither does
this argument, though urged with all your art and force,
amount to any shadow of proof, that “the Methodists are
carrying on the work of Popery.”
46, Your Sixth argument, such as it is, stands thus:
“Another tendency to Popery appears by the notion of a
single drop of Christ's blood being a sufficient atonement for
the sins of the whole world. For, however pious this may
appear, it is absolutely false and Papistical.” Sir, this argu
ment is perfectly new, and entirely your own. It were great
pity to disturb you in the enjoyment of it.
A Seventh argument you ground on those words in the
“Plain Account of the People called Methodists: ” “It is a
point we chiefly insist upon, that orthodoxy or right opinions is
a very slender part of religion, if any part of it at all.” “The
plain consequence whereof is,” (so you affirm,) “that teaching
and believing the fundamental errors of Popery, with the whole
train of their abominations and idolatries, are of very little
moment, if any.” Strain again, Sir ; pull hard, or you will
never be able to drag this conclusion out of these premises.
I assert, “(1.) That in a truly righteous man, right opinions
are a very slender part of religion. (2.) That in an irreligious,
a profane man, they are not any part of religion at all; such a
man not being one jot more religious because he is orthodox.”
Sir, it does not follow from either of these propositions, that
wrong opinions are not an hinderance to religion; and much
less, that “teaching and believing the fundamental errors of
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 57
Popery, with the whole train of their abominations and idol
atries,” (practised, I presume you mean, as well as taught and
believed,) “are of very little moment, if any.”
I am so far from saying or thinking this, that, in my
printed letter to a Priest of that communion, (did you never
read it, or hear of it before ?) are these express words: “I
pity you much, having the same assurance, that Jesus is the
Christ, and that no Romanist can expect to be saved, accord
ing to the terms of his covenant.” (Vol. I. p. 220.) Do you
term this “an extenuation of their abominations; a reducing
them to almost a mere nothing?”
47. You argue, Eighthly, thus: “The Methodist doctrine
of impressions and assurances holds equally for Popish enthu
siasts.” This needs no answer; I have already shown that
the Methodist doctrine in these respects is both scriptural
and rational.
Your Ninth argument is, “Their sudden conversions stand
upon the same footing with the Popish.” You should say,
“are a proof that they are promoting Popery.” I leave you
to enjoy this argument also.
But the dreadful one you reserve for the last; namely,
our “recommending Popish books. One is the Life of Mr.
de Renty, of which Mr. Wesley has published an extract.”
To prove your inimitable fairness here, you scrape up again
all the trash wherein the weak writer of that Life abounds,
and which I had pared off and thrown away. Sir, could you
find nothing to your purpose in the extract itself? I fancy
you might; for I have purposely left in two or three parti
culars, to show of what communion he was, which I did not
think it right to conceal.
You go on : “Francis of Sales is another Papist, much
commended by Mr. W.; and who, he doubts not, is in
Abraham’s bosom. He is the Methodists’ bosom friend.”
I believe he is in Abraham’s bosom; but he is no bosom
friend of the Methodists. I question whether one in five
hundred of them has so much as heard his name. And as for
me, neither do I commend him much, nor recommend him at
all. His Life I never saw, nor any of his Works, but his “ In
troduction to a Holy Life.” This the late Dr. Nichols trans
lated into English, published, and strongly recommended.
Therefore, if this be a proof of promoting Popery, that censure
falls, not on me, but him.
58 SECOND LETTER
I have now considered all the arguments you have brought
to prove that the Methodists are carrying on the work of
Popery. And I am persuaded, every candid man, who
rightly weighs what has been said with any degree of atten
tion, will clearly see, not only that no one of those arguments
is of any real force at all, but that you do not believe your
self; you do not believe the conclusion which you make as if
you would prove: Only you keep close to your laudable
resolution of throwing as much dirt as possible.
48. It remains only to gather up some of your fragments,
as still further proofs of your integrity.
You graciously say, “I do not lay much stress upon the
charge of some of the angry Moravians against Mr. W. and
brother, for preaching Popery.” Sir, if you had, you would
only have hurt yourself. For, (1.) The Moravians never,
that I know of, brought this charge at all. (2.) When Mr.
C., and two other Predestinarians, (these were the persons)
affirmed they had heard both my brother and me preach
Popery, they meant neither more nor less thereby than the
doctrine of universal redemption.
“Some connexion between the doctrines of Methodists and
Papists hath been shown through this whole Comparison.”
Shown / But how? By the same art of wire-drawing and
deciphering, which would prove an equal connexion between
the Methodists and Mahometans.
“Jesuits have often mingled, and been the ringleaders,
among our enthusiastic sectaries.” Sir, I am greatly obliged
to you for your compliment, as well as for your parallel of
Mr. Faithful Commim.
And pray, Sir, at what time do you think it was that I
first mingled with those enthusiastic sectaries? when I came
back from Germany, or when I returned from Georgia, or
while I was at Lincoln College? Although the plot itself
might be laid before, when I was at Christ Church, or at the
Charterhouse school.
But “a Jesuit’s or enthusiast's declaring against Popery is
no test of their sincerity.” Most sure; nor is a nameless per
son’s declaring against Methodism any proof that he is not a
Jesuit. I remember well, when a well-dressed man, taking his
stand not far from Moorfields, had gathered a large company,
and was vehemently asserting, that “those rogues, the Method
TO BISHOP LAVINGTON. 59
ists, were all Papists;” till a gentleman coming by, fixed his
eye on him, and cried, “Stop that man! I know him person
ally; he is a Romish Priest.”
I know not that anything remains on this head which bears
so much as the face of an argument. So that, of all the charges
you have brought, (and truly you have not been sparing)
there is not one wherein your proof falls more miserably short
than in this, that “the Methodists are advancing Popery.”
49. I have at length gone through your whole performance,
weighed whatever you cite from my writings, and shown at
large how far those passages are from proving all, or any part,
of your charge. So that all you attempt to build on them, of
the pride and vanity of the Methodists; of their shuffling and
prevaricating; of their affectation of prophesying; laying claim
to the miraculous favours of Heaven; unsteadiness of temper;
unsteadiness in sentiment and practice; art and cunning;
giving up inspiration and extraordinary calls; scepticism, in
fidelity, Atheism; uncharitableness to their opponents; con
tempt of order and authority; and fierce, rancorous quarrels
with each other; of the tendency of Methodism to undermine
morality and good works; and to carry on the good work of
Popery:—All this fabricfalls to the ground at once, unless you
can find some better foundation to support it. (Sections iii.
vi.; ix., xi.—xv.; xviii.-xxi.)
50. These things being so, what must all unprejudiced men
think of you and your whole performance? You have ad
Vanced a charge, not against one or two persons only, but indis
criminately against a whole body of people, of His Majesty’s
subjects, Englishmen, Protestants, members, I suppose, of your
own Church: a charge containing abundance of articles, and
most of them of the highest and blackest nature. You have
prosecuted this with unparalleled bitterness of spirit and acri
mony of language; using sometimes the most coarse, rude,
scurrilous terms, sometimes the keenest sarcasms you could
devise. The point you have steadily pursued in thus prose
cuting this charge, is, First, to expose the whole people to the
hatred and scorn of all mankind; and, next, to stir up the
civil powers against them. And when this charge comes to
be fairly weighed, there is not a single article of it true !
The passages you cite to make it good are one and all such as
prove nothing less than the points in question; most of them
such as you have palpably maimed, corrupted, and strained to
60 SECOND LETTER TO BISHOP LAVINGTON.
a sense never thought of by the writer; many of them such
as are flat against you, and overthrow the very point they are
brought to support. What can they think, but that this is the
most shocking violation of the Christian rule, “Thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself;” the most open affront to all
justice, and even common humanity; the most glaring insult
upon the common sense and reason of mankind, which has
lately appeared in the world?
If you say, “But I have proved the charge upon Mr.
Whitefield;” admit you have, (which I do not allow,) Mr.
Whitefield is not the Methodists; no, nor the societies under
his care; they are not a third, perhaps not a tenth, part of
the Methodists. What then can excuse your ascribing their
faults, were they proved, to the whole body? You indict ten
men. Suppose you prove the indictment upon one, will you
therefore condemn the other nine? Nay, let every man bear
his own burden, since every man must give an account of
himself to God.
I had occasion once before to say to an opponent, “You
know not to show mercy.” Yet that gentleman did regard
truth and justice. But you regard neither mercy, justice, nor
truth. To vilify, to blacken, is your one point. I pray God
it may not be laid to your charge 1 May He show you mercy,
though you show none !
I am, Sir,
Your friend and well-wisher,
JOHN WESLEY.
SECOND LETTER
To
THE LORD BISHOP OF EXETER :
IN ANSWER To HIS LORDSBIP's LATE LETTER.
MY LoRD,
IN my late Letter to your Lordship I used no ceremony;
(I suppose it was not expected from one who was so deeply
injured;) and I trust I used no rudeness: If I did, I am ready
to ask your Lordship’s pardon.
That Letter” related to a matter of fact published on your
Lordship's authority, which I endeavoured to falsify, and your
Lordship now again endeavours to support.
The facts alleged are, First, that I told Mrs. Morgan, at
Mitchel, “You are in hell; you are damned already.” Secondly,
that I asked her to live upon free cost. Thirdly, that she deter
mined to admit no more Methodists into her house.
At first I thought so silly and improbable a story neither
deserved nor required a confutation; but when my friends
thought otherwise, I called on Mrs. Morgan, who denied she
ever said any such thing. I wrote down her words; part of
which I transcribed in my letter to your Lordship, as follows:–
“On Saturday, August 25, 1750, Mr. Trembath, of St. Gin
nys, Mr. Haime, of Shaftesbury, and I, called at Mr. Morgan's,
at Mitchel. The servant telling me her master was not at home,
I desired to speak with her mistress, the ‘honest, sensible
woman.’ I immediately asked, ‘Did I ever tell you or your
husband, that you would be damned if you took any money of
me?’ (So the story ran in the first part of the ‘Comparison;’
it has now undergone a very considerable alteration.) ‘Or did
* The Bishop of Exeter's Letter, pp. 2, 3.
62 SECOND LETTER TO
you or he ever affirm,” (another circumstance related at Truro,)
‘that I was rude with your maid?' She replied, vehemently,
‘Sir, I never said you was, or that you said any such thing.
And I do not suppose my husband did. But we have been
belied as well as our neighbours. She added, “When the
Bishop came down last, he sent us word he would dine at
our house; but he did not, being invited to a neighbouring
gentleman's. He sent for me thither, and said, Good woman,
do you know these people that go up and down * Do you
know Mr. Wesley * Did not he tell you, you would be
damned if you took any money of him 2 And did not he offer
rudeness to your maid 2 I told him, No, my Lord; he never
said any such thing to me, nor to my husband that I know of.
He never offered any rudeness to any maid of mine. I never
saw or knew any harm of him: But a man told me once, (who
I was told was a Methodist Preacher,) that I should be damned
if I did not know my sins were forgiven.’”
Your Lordship replies, “I neither sent word that I would
dine at their house, nor did I send for Mrs. Morgan; every
word that passed between us was at her own house at Mitchel.”
(Page 7.) I believe it; and consequently, that the want of
exactness in this point rests on Mrs. Morgan, not on your
Lordship.
Your Lordship adds, “The following attestations will suffi
ciently clear me from any imputation, or even suspicion, of
having published a falsehood.” I apprehend otherwise; to
wave what is past, if the facts now published by your Lordship,
or any part of them, be not true, then certainly your Lordship
will lie under more than a “suspicion of having published a
falsehood.”
The attestations your Lordship produces are, First, those
of your Lordship's Chancellor and Archdeacon: Secondly,
those of Mr. Bennet.
The former attests, that in June or July, 1748, Mrs. Mor
gan did say those things to your Lordship. (Page 8.) I believe
she did, and therefore acquit your Lordship of being the in
ventor of those falsehoods.
Mr. Bennet avers, that, in January last, Mrs. Morgan re
peated to him what she had before said to your Lordship.
(Page 11.) Probably she might; having said those things
once, I do not wonder if she said them again.
THE BISHOP OF EXETER. 63
Nevertheless, before Mr. Trembath and Mr. Haime she
denied every word of it.
To get over this difficulty, your Lordship publishes a
Second Letter from Mr. Bennet, wherein he says, “On
March 4th, last, Mrs. Morgan said, ‘I was told by my ser
vant, that I was wanted above stairs; where, when I came,
the chamber door being open, I found them” (Mr. Wesley
and others) ‘round the table on their knees.’” He adds,
“That Mrs. Morgan owned one circumstance in it was true;
but as to the other parts of Mr. Wesley's letter to the Bishop,
she declares it is all false.”
I believe Mrs. Morgan did say this to Mr. Bennet; and
that therefore neither is he “the maker of a lie.” But he is
the relater of a whole train of falsehoods, and those told
merely for telling sake. I was never yet in any chamber at
Mrs. Morgan’s. I was never above stairs there in my life.
On August 25, 1750, I was below stairs all the time I was in
the house. When Mrs. Morgan came in, I was standing in
the large parlour; nor did any of us kneel while we were
under the roof. This both Mr. Trembath and Mr. Haime
can attest upon oath, whatsoever Mrs. Morgan may declare
to the contrary.
But she declared farther, (so Mr. Bennet writes,) “That
Mr. John Wesley, some time ago, said to a maid of hers
such things as were not fit to be spoken;” (page 11;) and
Mr. Morgan declared that he “did or said such indecent
things to the above-named maid” (the same fact, I presume,
only a little embellished) “in his chamber, in the night, that
she immediately ran down stairs, and protested she would
not go near him or any of the Methodists more.” (Page 12.)
To save trouble to your Lordship, as well as to myself, I
will put this cause upon a very short issue : If your Lordship
will only prove that ever I lay one night in Mrs. Morgan's
house, nay, that ever I was in the town of Mitchel after sun
set, I will confess the whole charge.
What your Lordship mentions “by the way,” I will now
consider: “Some of your western correspondents imposed
upon the leaders of Methodism, by transmitting to London a
notoriously false account of my Charge to the Clergy. After
wards the Methodists confessed themselves to have been
deceived; yet some time after, the Methodists at Cork, in
64 SECOND LETTER TO THE BISHOP OF EXETER.
Ireland, your own brother at the head of them, reprinted the
same lying pamphlet, as my performance.” (Pages 4, 5.)
My Lord, I know not who are your Lordship's Irish cor
respondents; but here are almost as many mistakes as lines.
For, (1.) They were none of my correspondents who sent
that account to London. (2.) It was sent, not to the leaders
of Methodism, but to one who was no Methodist at all.
(3.) That it was a false account, I do not know: But your
Lordship may easily put it out of dispute. And many have
wondered, that your Lordship did not do so long ago, by
printing the Charge in question. (4.) I did never confess it
was a false account; nor any person by my consent, or with
my knowledge. (5.) That account was never reprinted at
Cork at all. (6.) When it was reprinted at Dublin, your
Lordship had not disowned it. (7.) My brother was not in
Dublin, when it was done; nor did either he or I know of it
till long after.
Therefore, when my brother was asked, how he could re
print such an account, after your Lordship had publicly
disowned it, I do not at all wonder, that “he did not offer a
single word in answer.”
Whether this, as well as my former Letter, be “mere rant
and declamation,” or plain and sober reason, I must refer to
the world, and your Lordship's own conscience.
I am,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
NEWCASTLE-UPON TYNE,
May 8, 1752.
A LETTER
To
THE REVEREND MIR. BAILY, OF CORK.
IN ANSWER. To
A LETTER, TO THE REV. JOHN WESLEY.
LIMERICK, June 8, 1750.
REVEREND SIR,
1. Why do you not subscribe your name to a performance
so perfectly agreeing, both as to the matter and form, with
the sermons you have been occasionally preaching for more
than a year last past? As to your seeming to disclaim it by
saying once and again, “I am but a plain, simple man; ” and,
“The doctrine you teach is only a revival of the old Antino
mian heresy, I think they call it; ” I presume it is only a
pious fraud. But how came so plain and simple a man to
know the meaning of the Greek word Philalethes? Sir,
this is not of a piece. If you did not care to own your
child, had not you better have subscribed the Second (as well
as the First) Letter, George Fisher ?”
2. I confess you have timed your performance well. When
the other pointless thing was published, I came unluckily to
Cork on the self-same day. But you might now suppose I
was at a convenient distance. However, I will not plead this
as an excuse for taking no notice of your last favour; although,
to say the truth, I scarce know how to answer it, as you
write in a language I am not accustomed to. Both Dr. Tucker,
Dr. Church, and all the other gentlemen who have wrote to
me in public for some years, have wrote as gentlemen, having
some regard to their own, whatever my character was. But
as you fight in the dark, you regard not what weapons you
* The Letter thus subscribed was published at Cork, on May 30th last.
66 LETTER TO
use. We are not, therefore, on even terms; I cannot answer
you in kind; I am constrained to leave this to your good
allies of Blackpool and Fair-Lane.*
I shall first state the facts on which the present controversy
turns; and then consider the most material parts of your
performance.
First. I am to state the facts. But here I am under a
great disadvantage, having few of my papers by me. Excuse
me therefore if I do not give so full an account now, as I may
possibly do hereafter; if I only give you for the present the
extracts of some papers which were lately put into my hands.
1. “THoMAs Jones, of Cork, merchant, deposes,
“That on May 3, 1749, Nicholas Butler, ballad-singer,
came before the house of this deponent, and assembled a
large mob : That this deponent went to Daniel Crone, Esq.,
then Mayor of Cork, and desired that he would put a stop
to those riots; asking, at the same time, whether he gave
the said Butler leave to go about in this manner: That Mr.
Mayor said, he neither gave him leave, neither did he hinder
him : That in the evening Butler gathered a larger mob
than before, and went to the house where the people called
Methodists were assembled to hear the word of God, and, as
they came out, threw dirt and hurt several of them.
“That on May 4, this deponent, with some others, went to
the Mayor and told what had been done, adding, “If your Wor
ship pleases only to speak three words to Butler, it will all be
over:” That the Mayor gave his word and honour there should
be no more of it, he would put an entire stop to it: That, not
withstanding, a larger mob than ever came to the house the
same evening: That they threw much dirt and many stones at
the people, both while they were in the house, and when they
came out: That the mob then fell upon them, both on men and
women, with clubs, hangers, and swords; so that many of them
were much wounded, and lost a considerable quantity of blood.
“That on May 5, this deponent informed the Mayor of all,
and also that Butler had openly declared there should be a
greater mob than ever there was that night: That the Mayor
promised he would prevent it: That in the evening Butler did
bring a greater mob than ever: That this deponent, hearing the
* Celebrated parts of Cork.
ThE REV. M.R. BAILY. 67
Mayor designed to go out of the way, set two men to watch
him, and, when the riot was begun, went to the ale-house, and
inquired for him : That the woman of the house denying he
was there, this deponent insisted he was, declared he would
not go till he had seen him, and began searching the house:
That Mr. Mayor then appearing, he demanded his assistance
to suppress a riotous mob: That when the Mayor came in
sight of them, he beckoned to Butler, who immediately came
down from the place where he stood: That the Mayor then
went with this deponent, and looked on many of the people
covered with dirt and blood: That some of them still remained
in the house, fearing their lives, till James Chatterton and
John Reilly, Esqrs., Sheriffs of Cork, and Hugh Millard,
junior, Esq., Alderman, turned them out to the mob, and
nailed up the doors.
2. “ELIZABETH HollBRAN, of Cork, deposes,
“That on May 3, as she was going down to Castle-Street,
she saw Nicholas Butler on a table, with ballads in one hand,
and a Bible in the other: That she expressed some concern
thereat; on which Sheriff Reilly ordered his bailiff to carry
her to Bridewell: That afterward the bailiff came and said,
his master ordered she should be carried to gaol: And that
she continued in gaol from May 3, about eight in the evening,
till between ten and twelve on May 5.
3. “John StockDALE, of Cork, tallow-chandler, deposes,
“That on May 5, while he and others were assembled to hear
the word of God, Nicholas Butler came down to the house
where they were, with a very numerous mob: That when this
deponent came out, they threw all manner of dirt and abun
dance of stones at him: That they then beat, bruised, and cut
him in several places: That seeing his wife on the ground,
and the mob abusing her still, he called out and besought
them not to kill his wife: That on this one of them struck
him with a large stick, as did also many others, so that he was
hurt in several parts, and his face in a gore of blood.
4. “DANIEL SULLIvAN, of Cork, baker, deposes,
“That every day but one from the sixth to the sixteenth
of May, Nicholas Butler assembled a riotous mob before this
deponent’s house: That they abused all who came into the
shop, to the great damage of this deponent’s business: That,
on or about the fifteenth, Butler swore he would bring a mob
the next day, and pull down his house: That, accordingly, on
68 LETTER. To
the sixteenth he did bring a large mob, and beat or abused all
that came to the house: That the Mayor walked by while the
mob was so employed, but did not hinder them: That after
wards they broke his windows, threw dirt and stones into his
shop, and spoiled a great quantity of his goods.
“DANIEL SULLIVAN is ready to depose farther,
“That, from the sixteenth of May to the twenty-eighth, the
mob gathered every day before his house: That on Sunday,
28, Butler swore they would come the next day, and pull down
the house of that heretic dog; and called aloud to the mob,
‘Let the heretic dogs indict you: I will bring you all off
without a farthing cost.’
“That, accordingly, on May 29, Butler came with a greater
mob than before: That he went to the Mayor and begged him
to come, which he for some time refused to do; but after much
importunity, rose up, and walked with him down the street:
That when they were in the midst of the mob, the Mayor said
aloud, ‘It is your own fault for entertaining these Preachers:
If you will turn them out of your house, I will engage there
shall be no more harm done; but if you will not turn them
out, you must take what you will get: That upon this the mob
set up an huzza, and threw stones faster than before; that
he said, ‘This is fine usage under a Protestant Government
If I had a Priest saying mass in every room of it, my house
would not be touched:” That the Mayor replied, ‘The Priests
are tolerated, but you are not; you talk too much: Go in,
and shut up your doors l’ That, seeing no remedy, he did so;
and the mob continued breaking the windows and throwing
stones in till near twelve at night.
“That on May 31, the said Sullivan and two more went and
informed the Mayor of what the mob was then doing: That it
was not without great importunity they brought him as far as
the Exchange: That he would go no farther, nor send any
help, though some that were much bruised and wounded came
by: That some hours after, when the mob had finished their
work, he sent a party of soldiers to guard the walls.
5. “John StockDALE deposes farther,
“That on May 31, he withothers was quietly hearing the word
of God, when Butler and his mob came down to the house: That
as they came out, the mob threwshowers of dirt and stones: That
many were hurt, many beat, bruised, and cut; among whom was
TIIL REV, Mr. BAILY. 69
this deponent, who was so bruised and cut, that the effusion of
blood from his head could not be stopped foraconsiderable time.
6. “John M“NERNY, of Cork, deposes,
“That on the 31st of May last, as this deponent with others
was hearing a sermon, Butler came down with a large mob:
That the stones and dirt coming in fast, obliged the congrega
tion to shut the doors, and lock themselves in : That the mob
broke open the door; on which this deponent endeavoured to
escape through a window : That not being able to do it, he
returned into the house, where he saw the mob tear up the
pews, benches, and floor; part of which they afterwards burned
in the open street, and carried away part for their own use.
7. “DANIEL SULLIVAN is ready to depose farther,
“That Butler, with a large mob, went about from street to
street, and from house to house, abusing, threatening, and
beating whomsoever he pleased, from June 1st to the 16th,
when they assaulted, bruised, and cut Ann Jenkins; and
from the 16th to the 30th, when a woman whom they had
beaten, miscarried, and narrowly escaped with life.”
Some of the particulars were as follows:
“THoMA's BURNET, of Cork, nailer, deposes,
“That on or about the 12th of June, as this deponent was
at work in his master's shop, Nicholas Butler came with a great
mob to the door, and seeing this deponent, told him he was an
heretic dog, and his soul was burning in hell: That this depo
ment asking, ‘Why do you use me thus?” Butler took up a
stone, and struck him so violently on the side, that he was
thereby rendered incapable of working for upwards of a week:
That he hit this deponent's wife with another stone, without
any kind of provocation; which so hurt her, that she was
obliged to take to her bed, and has not been right well since.
“ANN Coos HEA, of Cork, deposes,
“That on or about the 12th of June, as she was standing
at her father's door, Nicholas Butler, with a riotous mob,
began to abuse this deponent and her family, calling them
heretic bitches, saying they were damned and all their souls
were in hell: That then, without any provocation, he took up
a great stone, and threw it at this deponent, which struck
her on the head with such force that it deprived her of her
senses for some time.
“ANN WRIGHT, of Cork, deposes,
“That on or about the 12th of June, as this deponent was
70 LETTER TO
in her own house, Butler and his mob came before her door,
calling her and her family heretic bitches, and swearing he
would make her house hotter than hell-fire: That he threw
dirt and stomes at them, hit her in the face, dashed all the
goods about which she had in her window, and, she really
believes, would have dashed out her brains, had she not
quitted her shop, and fled for her life.
“MARGARET GRIFFIN, of Cork, deposes,
“That on the 24th of June, as this deponent was about
her business, Butler and his mob came up, took hold on her,
tore her clothes, struck her several times, and cut her mouth;
that after she broke from him, he and his mob pursued her to
her house, and would have broken in, had not some neigh
bours interposed: That he had beat and abused her several
times before, and one of those times to such a degree, that
she was all in a gore of blood, and continued spitting blood
for several days after.
“JAcoB CoNNER, clothier, of Cork, deposes,
“That on the 24th of June, as he was employed in his
lawful business, Butler and his mob came up, and, without
any manner of provocation, fell upon him: That they beat
him till they caused such an effusion of blood as could not be
stopped for a considerable time: And that he verily believes,
had not a gentleman interposed, they would have killed him
on the spot.
9. “ANN HUGHEs, of Cork, deposes,
“That on the 29th of June, she asked Nicholas Butler, why
he broke open her house on the 21st: That hereon he called
her many abusive names, (being attended with his usual
mob,) dragged her up and down, tore her clothes in pieces,
and with his sword stabbed and cut her in both her arms.
“DANIEL FILTs, blacksmith, of Cork, deposes,
“That on the 29th of June, Butler and a riotous mob came
before his door, called him many abusive names, drew his
hanger, and threatened to stab him: That he and his mob the
next day assaulted the house of this deponent with drawn
swords: And that he is persuaded, had not one who came by
prevented, they would have taken away his life.
10. “MARY FULLER, of Cork, deposes,
“That on the 30th of June, Butler, at the head of his mob,
came between nine and ten at night to the deponent’s shop,
with a naked sword in his hand; that he swore he would cleave.
THE REW, MR, BAILY. 71
the depomont's skull, and immediately made a full stroke at her
head; whereupon she was obliged to fly for her life, leaving her
shop and goods to the mob, many of which they hacked and
hewed with their swords, to her no small loss and damage.
“HENRY DUNKLE, joiner, of Cork, deposes,
“That on the 30th of June, as he was standing at the
widow Fuller’s shop window, he saw Butler, accompanied
with a large mob, who stopped before her shop: That after
he had grossly abused her, he made a full stroke with his
hanger at her head, which must have cleft her in two, had not
this deponent received the guard of the hanger on his shoulder:
That presently after, the said Butler seized upon this depo
ment: That he seized him by the collar with one hand, and
with the other held the hanger over his head, calling him all
manner of names, and tearing his shirt and clothes: And
that, had it not been for the timely assistance of some neigh
bours, he verily believes he should have been torn in pieces.
“MARGARET TRIMNELL, of Cork, deposes,
“That on the 30th of June, John Austin and Nicholas
Butler, with a numerous mob, came to her shop: That, after
calling her many names, Austin struck her with his club on
the right arm, so that it has been black ever since from the
shoulder to the elbow : That Butler came next, and with a
great stick struck her a violent blow across the back: That
many of them then drew their swords, which they carried
under their coats, and cut and hacked her goods, part of
which they threw out into the street, while others of them
threw dirt and stones into the shop, to the considerable
damage of her goods, and loss of this deponent.”
11. It was not for those who had any regard either to their
persons or goods, to oppose Mr. Butler after this. So the
poor people patiently suffered whatever he and his mob were
pleased to inflict upon them, till the Assizes drew on, at which
they doubted not to find a sufficient, though late, relief.
Accordingly, twenty-eight depositions were taken, (from
the foul copies of some of which the preceding account is
mostly transcribed,) and laid before the Grand Jury,
August 19. But they did not find any one of these bills.
Instead of this, they made that memorable presentment
which is worthy to be preserved in the annals of Ireland to
all succeeding generations:
“We find and present Charles Wesley to be a person of ill
72 LETTER TO
fame, a vagabond, and a common disturber of His Majesty’s
peace; and we pray he may be transported.
“We find and present James Williams,” &c.
“We find and present Robert Swindle,” &c.
“We find and present Jonathan Reeves,” &c.
“We find and present James Wheatly,” &c.
“We find and present John Larwood,” &c.
“We find and present Joseph M'Auliff,” &c.
“We find and present Charles Skelton,” &c.
“We find and present William Tooker,” &c.
“We find and present Daniel Sullivan,” &c.
12. Mr. Butler and his mob were now in higher spirits than
ever. They scoured the streets day and night; frequently
hallooing, as they went along, “Five pounds for a Swaddler’s
head!”* their chief declaring to them all, he had full liberty
now to do whatever he would, even to murder, if he pleased;
as Mr. Swain, of North Abbey, and others are ready to testify.
13. The Sessions, held at Cork on the 5th of October fol
lowing, produced another memorable presentment.
“We find and present John Horton to be a person of ill
fame, a vagabond, and a common disturber of His Majesty’s
peace; and we pray that he may be transported.”
But complaint being made of this above, as wholly illegal,
it vanished into air.
14. Some time after, Mr. Butler removed to Dublin, and
began to sing his ballads there. But having little success,
he returned to Cork, and in January began to scour the
streets again, pursuing all of “this way,” with a large mob
at his heels, armed with swords, staves, and pistols. Com
plaint was made of this to William Holmes, Esq., the present
Mayor of Cork. But there was no removal of the thing
complained of; the riots were not suppressed: Nay, they not
only continued, but increased.
15. From the beginning of February to the end, His
Majesty’s peace was preserved just as before; of which it
may be proper to subjoin two or three instances, for the
information of all thinking men —
“WILLIAM JEwBLL, clothier, of Shandon Church-Lane,
deposes,
“That Nicholas Butler, with a riotous mob, several times
* A name first given to Mr. Cennick, from his first preaching on those words:
“Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger.”
THE REV. M.R. BAILY. 73
assaulted this deponent’s house: That particularly on the
23d of February, he came thither with a large mob, armed
with clubs and other weapons: That several of the rioters
entered the house, and swore, the first who resisted, they
would blow their brains out: That the deponent’s wife, en
deavouring to stop them, was assaulted and beaten by the said
Butler; who then ordered his men to break the deponent's
windows, which they did with stones of a considerable weight.
“MARY PHILIPs, of St. Peter's Church-Lane, deposes,
“That on the 26th of February, about seven in the evening,
Nicholas Butler came to her house with a large mob, and
asked where her husband was: That as soon as she appeared,
he first abused her in the grossest terms, and then struck her
on the head, so that it stunned her; and she verily believes,
had not some within thrust to and fastened the door, she
should have been murdered on the spot.”
It may suffice for the present to add one instance more —
“ELIZABETH GARDELET, wife of Joseph Gardelet, Corporal,
in Colonel Pawlet’s regiment, Captain Charlton’s company,
deposes,
“That on February 28, as she was going out of her lodgings,
she was met by Butler and his mob : That Butler, without
any manner of provocation, immediately fell upon her, striking
her with both his fists on the side of the head, which knocked
her head against the wall: That she endeavoured to escape
from him; but he pursued her, and struck her several times
in the face: That she ran into the school-yard for shelter;
but he followed, and caught hold of her, saying, ‘You whore,
you stand on consecrated ground,’ and threw her with such
force across the lane, that she was driven against the opposite
wall: That when she had recovered herself a little, she made
the best of her way to her lodging; but Butler still pursued,
and overtook her as she was going up the stairs: That he
struck her with his fist on the stomach; which stroke knocked
her down backwards; that falling with the small of her back
against the edge of one of the stairs, she was not able to rise
again: That her pains immediately came upon her, and about
two in the morning she miscarried.”
16. These, with several more depositions to the same effect,
were, in April, laid before the Grand Jury. Yet they did not
find any of these bills | But they found one against Daniel
74 LETTER. To
Sullivan, the younger, (no Preacher, but a hearer of the people
called Methodists,) who, when Butler and his mob were dis
charging a shower of stones upon him, fired a pistol, without
any ball, over their heads. If any man has wrote this story to
England, in a quite different manner, and fixed it on a young
Methodist Preacher, let him be ashamed in the presence of God
and man, unless shame and he have shook hands and parted.
17. Several of the persons presented as vagabonds in
autumn appeared at the Lent Assizes. But none appearing
against them, they were discharged, with honour to themselves,
and shame to their prosecutors; who, by bringing the matter
to a judicial determination, plainly showed, there is a law
even for Methodists; and gave His Majesty’s Judge a full
occasion to delare the utter illegality of all riots, and the
inexcusableness of tolerating (much more causing) them on
any pretence whatsoever.
18. It was now generally believed there would be no more
riots in Cork; although I cannot say that was my opinion.
On May 19, I accepted the repeated invitation of Mr. Alderman
Pembrock, and came to his house. Understanding the place
where the preaching usually was, would by no means contain
those who desired to hear me, at eight in the morning I went
to Hammond’s Marsh. The congregation was large and
deeply attentive. A few of the rabble gathered at a distance;
but by little and little they drew near, and mixed with the
congregation. So that I have seldom seen a more quiet and
orderly assembly at any church in England or Ireland.
19. In the afternoon a report being spread abroad, that the
Mayor designed to hinder my preaching on the Marsh, I desired
Mr. Skelton and Jones to wait upon him, and inquire concerning
it. Mr. Skelton asked if my preaching there would be offensive
to him; adding, “If it would, Mr. W. would not do it.” He
replied warmly, “Sir, I will have no mobbing.” Mr. S. said,
“Sir, there was none this morning.” He answered, “There
was. Are there not churches and meeting-houses enough 2
I will have no more mobs and riots.” Mr. S. replied, “Sir,
neither Mr. W. nor they that heard him made either mobs or
riots.” He answered plain, “I will have no more preaching;
and if Mr. W. attempts to preach, I am prepared for him.”
I did not conceive till now, that there was any real meaning
in what a gentleman said some time since; who being told,
THE REV. M.R, BAILY. 75
“Sir, King George tolerates Methodists,” replied, “Sir, you
shall find, the Mayor is King of Cork.”
20. I began preaching in our own house soon after five. Mr.
Mayor meantime was walking in the 'Change, where he gave
orders to the drummers of the town, and to his sergeants,—
doubtless, to go down and keep the peace | They came down,
with an innumerable mob, to the house. They continued
drumming, and I continued preaching, till I had finished my
discourse. When I came out, the mob immediately closed me
in. I desired one of the sergeants to protect me from the
mob; but he replied, “Sir, I have no orders to do that.”
When I came into the street, they threw whatever came to
hand. I walked on straight through the midst of them, looking
every man in the face, and they opened to the right and left, till
I came near Dant’s Bridge. A large party had taken possession
of this, one of whom was bawling out, “Now, heigh for the
Romans !” When I came up, these likewise shrunk back,
and I walked through them into Mr. Jenkins's house.
But many of the congregation were more roughly handled;
particularly Mr. Jones, who was covered with dirt, and escaped
with his life almost by miracle. The main body of the mob
then went to the House, brought out all the seats and benches
tore up the floor, the door, the frames of the windows, and
whatever of wood-work remained, part of which they carried off
for their own use, and the rest they burnt in the open street.
21. Monday, 21. I rode on to Bandon. From three in the
afternoon till after seven, the mob of Cork marched in grand
procession, and then burnt me in effigy near Dant’s Bridge.
Tuesday, 22. The mob and drummers were moving again
between three and four in the morning. The same evening the
mob came down to Hammond’s Marsh, but stood at a distance
from Mr. Stockdale's house, till the drums beat, and the
Mayor's sergeants beckoned to them; on which they drew
up, and began the attack. The Mayor, being sent for, came
with a party of soldiers. Mr. Stockdale earnestly desired
that he would disperse the mob, or at least leave the soldiers
there to protect them from the rioters. But he took them
all away with him; on which the mob went on, and broke
all the glass and most of the window-frames in pieces.
22. Wednesday, 23. The mob was still patrolling the
streets; abusing all that were called Methodists; and threat
76 LETTER, TO
ening to murder them, and pull down their houses, if they
did not leave “this way.”
Thursday, 24. They again assaulted Mr. Stockdale's house,
broke down the boards he had nailed up against the windows,
destroyed what little remained of the window-frames and
shutters, and damaged a considerable part of his goods.
Friday, 25, and again on Saturday, 26, one Roger O'Ferrall
fixed up an advertisement at the public Exchange, (as he had
also done for several days before,) that he was ready to head
any mob, in order to pull down any house that should dare
to harbour a Swaddler.
23. Sunday, 27. I wrote the following letter to the Mayor:
“MR. MAYoR,
“AN hour ago I received A Letter to Mr. Butler, just
reprinted at Cork. The publishers assert, ‘It was brought
down from Dublin to be distributed among the society. But
Mr. Wesley called in as many as he could.” Both these
assertions are absolutely false. I read some lines of that
letter when I was in Dublin, but never read it over before this
morning. Who the author of it is, I know not. But this I
know; Inever called in one; neither concerned myself about it;
much less brought any down to distribute among the society.
“Yet I cannot but return my hearty thanks to the gentle
'men who have distributed them through the town. I believe
it will do more good than they are sensible of For though
I dislike its condemning the Magistrates and Clergy in general,
(several of whom were not concerned in the late proceedings,)
yet I think the reasoning is strong and clear; and that the
facts referred to therein are not at all misrepresented, will
sufficiently appear in due time.
“I fear God and honour the King. I earnestly desire to
be at peace with all men. I have not willingly given any
offence, either to the Magistrates, the Clergy, or any of the
inhabitants of the city of Cork; neither do I desire anything
of them, but to be treated (I will not say, as a Clergyman, a
gentleman, or a Christian, but) with such justice and
humanity as are due to a Jew, a Turk, or a Pagan.
“I am,
“Sir,
“Your obedient servant,
“J. WESLEY.”
THE REV. M.R, BAILY. 77
II. l. Your performance is dated, May 28th, the most
material parts of which I am now to consider.
It contains, First, a charge against the Methodist Preachers:
Secondly, a defence of the Corporation and Clergy of Cork.
With regard to your charge against those Preachers, may I
take the liberty to inquire why you drop six out of the eleven
that have been at Cork, viz., Mr. Swindells, Wheatly, Lar
wood, Skelton, Tucker, and Haughton P Can you glean up
no story concerning these; or is it out of mere compassion
that you spare them ?
2. But before I proceed, I must beg leave to ask, Who is this
evidence against the other five? Why, one that neither dares
show his face, nor tell his name, or the place of his abode; one
that is ashamed (and truly not without cause) of the dirty work
he is employed in; so that we could not even conjecture who
he was, but that his speech bewrayeth him. How much credit
is due to such an evidence, let any man of reason judge.
3. This worthy witness falls foul upon Mr. Cownly, and
miserably murders a tale he has got by the end. (Page 13.)
Sir, Mr. M. is nothing obliged to you for bringing the charac
'ter of his niece into question. He is perfectly satisfied that
Mr. C. acted, in that whole affair, with the strictest regard
both to honour and conscience.
You next aver, that Mr. Reeves “asked a young woman,
whether she had a mind to go to hell with her father.”
(Page 16.) It is possible. I will neither deny nor affirm it
without some better proof. But, suppose he did; unless I
know the circumstances of the case, I could not say whether
he spoke right or wrong.
4. But what is this to the “monstrous, shocking, amazing
blasphemy, spoken by Mr. Charles Wesley? who one day,”
you say, “preaching on Hammond's Marsh, called out, ‘Has
any of you got the Spirit?’ and when none answered, said,
‘I am sure some of you have got it; for I feel virtue go out
of me.’” (Page 18.) Sir, do you expect any one to believe this
story? I doubt it will not pass even at Cork; unless with
your wise friend, who said, “Methodists! Ay, they are the
people who place all their religion in wearing long whiskers.”
5. In the same page, you attack Mr. Williams for applying
those words, “I thy Maker am thy husband.” Sir, by the
same rule that you conclude “these expressions could only
'78 LETTER. To
flow from a mind full of lascivious ideas,” you may conclude
the forty-fifth Psalm to be only a wanton sonnet, and the
Canticles a counterpart to Rochester’s Poems.
But you say, he likewise “made use of unwarrantable expres
sions, particularly with regard to faith and good works; and the
next day denied that he had used them.” (Pages 10, 1].) Sir,
your word is not proof of this. Be pleased to produce proper
vouchers of the facts; and I will then give a farther answer.
Likewise, as to his “indecent and irreverent behaviour at
church, turning all the Preacher said into ridicule, so that
numbers asked, in your hearing, why the Churchwardens did
not put the profane, wicked scoundrel in the stocks; ” my
present answer is, I doubt the facts. Will your “men of
undoubted character” be so good as to attest them?
6. Of all these, Mr. Williams, Cownly, Reeves, Haughton,
Larwood, Skelton, Swindells, Tucker, and Wheatly, you pro
nounce in the lump, that they are “a parcel of vagabond, illi
terate babblers;” (pages 3,4;) of whom “every body that has
the least share of reason must know,” that, though “they amuse
the populace with nonsense, ribaldry, and blasphemy, they are
not capable of writing orthography or good sense.” Sir, that is
not an adjudged case. Some who have a little share of reason,
think they are capable both of speaking and writing good sense.
But if they are not, if they cannot write or read, they can save
souls from death; they can, by the grace of God, bring sinners
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
7. But they “made a woman plunder her poor old husband,
and another absent herself from her husband and children.”
(Pages 24, 25.) Pray, what are their names; where do they
live; and how may one come to the speech of them? I have
heard so many plausible tales of this kind, which on examina
tion vanished away, that I cannot believe one word of this till
I have more proof than your bare assertion.
8. So far I have been pleading for others. But I am now
called to answer for myself. For “Theophilus and John Wes
ley,” say you, “seem to me the same individual person.” (Page
4.) They may seem so to you; but not to any who knows
either my style or manner of writing. Besides, if it had been
mine, it would have borne my name: For I do not love fight
ing in the dark.
But were not “a great number ’’ of those books “brought
THE REV. M.R. BAILY. 79
from Dublin, to be dispersed throughout the city?” Not by
me; not by my order, nor to my knowledge. However, I thank
you again for dispersing them.
9. But “while charity stands in the front of Christian
graces, the author of such a book can have none of that grace.
For you must allow the vulgar to think.” (Page 26.) Mal-a
propos enough, a lively saying; but for any use it is of, it
may stand either in the front or rear of the sentence.
The argument itself is something new. A man knocks me
down: I cry, “Help! help! or I shall be murdered.” He
replies, “While charity stands in the front of Christian graces,
the author of such a cry can have none of that grace.”
So now you have shown to all the world “the uncharitable
and consequently unchristian spirit of Methodism.” What!
because the Methodists cry out for help, before you have beat
out their brains?
What grimace is this ! His Majesty’s quiet, loyal, Protest
ant subjects are abused, insulted, outraged, beaten, covered
with dirt, rolled in the mire, bruised, wounded with swords and
hangers, murdered, have their houses broke open, their goods
destroyed, or carried away before their face; and all this in
open day, in the face of the sun, yet without any remedy! And
those who treat them thus are “charitable” men brimful of
a Christian spirit! But if they who are so treated appeal to the
common sense and reason of mankind, you gravely cry, “Sce
the uncharitable, the unchristian spirit of Methodism l”
10. You proceed: “But pray, what are those facts which
you say are not misrepresented? Do you mean, that Butler
was hired and paid by the Corporation and Clergy?” or, “that
this” remarkably loyal “city is disaffected to the present
Government?” and that “a Papist was supported, nay, hired
by the chief Magistrate, to walk the streets, threatening
bloodshed and murder? Declare openly whether these are the
facts.” Sir, I understand you well; but for the present I beg
to be excused. There is a time and a place for all things.
11. I rejoice to hear the city of Cork is so “remarkably
loyal;” so entirely “well-affected to the present Government.”
I presume you mean this chiefly of the Friendly Society, (in
whom the power of the city is now lodged,) erected some time
since, in opposition to that body of Jacobites commonly called,
“The Hanover Club.” I suppose that zealous anti-Methodist
80 1.ETTER. To
who, some days ago, stabbed the Methodist Preacher in the
street, and then cried out, “Damn King George and all his
armies!” did this as a specimen of his “eminent loyalty.”
It cannot be denied that this loyal subject of King George,
Simon Rawlins by name, was, upon oath made of those words,
committed to gaol on May 31; and it was not till six days
after, that he walked in procession through the town, with
drums beating, and colours flying, and declared, at the head
of his mob, he would never rest till he had driven all these false
prophets out of Cork. How sincere they were in their good
wishes to King George and his armies, they gave a clear proof,
the 10th of this instant June, when, as ten or twelve soldiers
were walking along in a very quiet and inoffensive manner, the
mob fell upon them, swore they would have their lives, knocked
them down, and beat them to such a degree, that, on June
12, one of them died of his wounds, and another was not then
expected to live many hours.
12. But you have more proofs of my uncharitableness, that
is, supposing I am the author of that pamphlet; for you read
there, “Riches, ease, and honour are what the Clergy set their
hearts upon; but the souls for whom Christ died, they leave
to the tender mercies of hell.” Sir, can you deny it? Is it not
true, literally true, concerning some of the Clergy? You ask,
“But ought we to condemn all, for the faults of a few 7”
(Page 20.) I answer, No; no more than I will condemn all in
the affair of Cork for the faults of a few. It is you that do
this; and if it were as you say, if they were all concerned in
the late proceedings, then it would be no uncharitableness to
say, “They were in a miserable state indeed;” then they
would doubtless be “kicking against the pricks, contending
with Heaven, fighting against God.”
13. I come now to the general charge against me, indepen
dent on the letter to Mr. Butler. And, (1.) You charge me
with “a frontless assurance, and a well-dissembled hypocrisy.”
(Page 22.) Sir, I thank you. This is as kind, as if you was
to call me, (with Mr. Williams,) “a profane, wicked
scoundrel.” I am not careful to answer in this matter:
Shortly we shall both stand at a higher bar.
14. You charge me, Secondly, with being an “harebrained
enthusiast.” (Page 7.) Sir, I am your most obedient servant.
But you will prove me an enthusiast: “For you say” (those
TIIIE REV. M.R. BAILY. 81
are your words) “you are sent of God to inform mankind of
some other revelation of his will, than what has been left by
Christ and his Apostles.” (Page 28.) Not so. I never said
any such thing. When I do this, then call for miracles; but
at present your demand isquite unreasonable: There is no room
for it at all. What I advance, I prove by the words of Christ
or his Apostles. If not, let it fall to the ground.
15. You charge me, Thirdly, with being employed in “pro
moting the cause of arbitrary Popish power.” (Page 7.) Sir,
I plead, Not Guilty. Produce your witnesses. Prove this,
and I will allow all the rest.
You charge me, Fourthly, with holding “midnight assem
blies.” (Page 24.) Sir, did you never see the word Vigil in
your Common-Prayer Book? Do you know what it means?
If not, permit me to tell you, that it was customary with the
ancient Christians to spend whole nights in prayer; and that
these nights were termed Vigiliae, or Vigils. Therefore for spend
ing a part of some nights in this manner, in public and solemn
prayer, we have not only the authority of our own national
Church, but of the universal Church, in the earliest ages.
16. You charge me, Fifthly, with “being the cause of all
that Butler has done.” (Page 17.) True; just as Latimer
and Ridley (if I may dare to name myself with those venerable
men) were the cause of all that Bishop Bonner did. In this
sense, the charge is true. It has pleased God, (unto him be
all the glory !) even by my preaching or writings, to convince
some of the old Christian scriptural doctrine, which till then
they knew not. And while they declared this to others, you
showed them the same love as Edmund of London did to their
forefathers. Only the expressions of your love were not quite
the same; because (blessed be God!) you had not the same
power.
17. You affirm, Sixthly, that I “rob and plunder the poor,
so as to leave them neither bread to eat, nor raiment to put
on.” (Page 8.) An heavy charge, but without all colour of
truth. Yea, just the reverse is true. Abundance of those in
Cork, Bandon, Limerick, Dublin, as well as in all parts of
England, who, a few years ago, either through sloth or profuse
ness, had not bread to eat, or raiment to put on, have now, by
means of the Preachers called Methodists, a sufficiency of both.
Since, by hearing these, they have learned to fear God, they
82 LETTER TO
have learned also to work with their hands, as well as to cut
off every needless expense, to be good stewards of the mammon
of unrighteousness.
18. You assert, Seventhly, that I am “myself as fond of
riches as the most worldly Clergyman.” (Page 21.) “Two
thousand pence a week a fine yearly revenue from assurance
and salvation tickets 1” (Page 8.) I answer, (1.) What do
you mean by “assurance and salvation tickets?” Is not the
very expression a mixture of nonsense and blasphemy? (2.) How
strangely did you under-rate my revenue, when you wrote in
the person of George Fisher ! You then allowed me only an
hundred pounds a year. What is this to two thousand pence
a week? (3.) “There is not a Clergyman,” you say, “who
would not willingly exchange his livings for your yearly penny
contributions.” (Page 21.) And no wonder: For, according
to a late computation, they amount to no less every year, than
eight hundred, eighty-six thousand pounds, besides some odd
shillings and pence; in comparison of which, the revenue of his
Grace of Armagh, or of Canterbury, is a very trifle. And yet,
Sir, so great is my regard for you, and my gratitude for your late
services, that if you will only resign your Curacy of Christ's
Church, I will make over to you my whole revenue in Ireland.
19. But “the honour.” I gain, you think, is even “greater
than the profit.” Alas, Sir, I have not generosity enough to
relish it. I was always of Juvenal's mind,—
Gloria quantalibet, quid erit, si gloria tantum est **
And especially, while there are so many drawbacks, so many
dead flies in the pot of ointment. Sheer honour might taste
tolerably well. But there is gall with the honey, and less of the
honey than the gall. Pray, Sir, what think you? Have I more
honour or dishonour? Do more people praise or blame me?
How is it in Cork? may, to go no farther, among your own
little circle of acquaintance? Where you hear one commend,
do not ten cry out, “Away with such a fellow from the
earth ?”
Above all, I do not love honour with dry blows. I do not
find it will cure broken bones. But perhaps you may think I
glory in these. O how should I have gloried, then, if your good
* What is glory, without profit too?
THE REV. MIR, BAILY. 83*
friends at Dant's Bridge had burnt my person, instead of my
effigy |
We are here to set religion out of the question. You do
not suppose I have anything to do with that. Why, if so, I
should rather leave you the honour, and myself sleep in a
whole skin. On that supposition I quite agree with the epi
grammatist :
Virgilii in tumulo, divini premia valis,
Erplicat en viridem laurea laeta comam.
Qnid te defunctum juvat haec * Felicior olim
Sub patulae faqi tegmine vivus eras."
20. Your last charge is, that “I profess myself to be a
member of the established Church, and yet act contrary to
the commands of my spiritual governors, and stab the Church
to the very vitals.” (Page 27.) I answer, (1.) What “spi
ritual governor ” has commanded me not to preach in any
part of His Majesty’s dominions? I know not one, to this
very day, either in England or Ireland. (2) What is it, to
“stab the Church to the very vitals?” Why, to deny her
fundamental doctrines. And do I, or you, do this? Let any
one who has read her Liturgy, Articles, and Homilies, judge,
which of us two denies, that “we are justified by faith
alone;” that every believer has “the inspiration of God's
Holy Spirit; ” that all who are strong in faith do “perfectly
love him, and worthily magnify his holy name: ” He that
denies this, is “the treacherous son who stabs this affection
ate and tender mother.”
If you deny it, you have already disowned the Church.
But as for me, I neither can nor will; though I know you
sincerely desire I should.
Hoc Ithacus velit et magno mercentur Alride.}
But I choose to stay in the Church, were it only to reprove
those who “betray” her “with a kiss.”
* See the green laurel rears her graceful head
O'er Virgil's tomb! But can this cheer the dead?
Happier by far thou wast of old, when laid
Beneath thy spreading beech's ample shade 1
+ This quotation from the Eneid of Virgil is thus translated by Beresford:
*- This Ithacus desires,
And Atreus' sons with vast rewards shall buy.”-EDIT.
84 LETTER. To
21. I come now to your defence of the Corporation and
Clergy. But sure such a defence was never seen before. For
whereas I had said, “I dislike the condemning the Magis
trates or Clergy in general, because several of them ” (so I
charitably supposed) “were not concerned in the late pro
ceedings;” you answer, “Pray by all means point them out,
that they may be distinguished by some mark of honour
above their brethren.” (Pages 29, 30.) What do you mean?
If you mean anything at all, it must be that they were all
concerned in the late proceedings. Sir, if they were, (of which
I own you are a better judge than I,) was it needful to declare
this to all the world? especially in so plain terms as these?
Did not your zeal here a little outrun your wisdom ?
22. “But the Magistrate,” you say, was only “endeavour
ing to secure the peace of the city.” (Page 6.) A very ex
traordinary way of securing peace! Truly, Sir, I cannot yet
believe, not even on your word, that “all the Magistrates,
except one,” (pp. 29, 30,) were concerned in this method of
securing peace. Much less can I believe, that all “the Clergy”
were concerned in thus “endeavouring to bring back their
iflock, led astray by these hirelings,” (an unlucky word,)
“into the right fold.”
23. Of the Clergy you add, “What need have they to rage
and foam at your preaching? Suppose you could delude the
greater part of their flocks, this could not affect their tem
poral interest.” (Page 7.) We do not desire it should. We
only desire to delude all mankind (if you will term it a delu
sion) into a serious concern for their eternal interest, for a
treasure which none can take away.
Having now both stated the facts to which you referred,
and considered the most material parts of your performance,
I have only to subjoin a few obvious reflections, naturally
arising from a view of those uncommon occurrences; partly
with regard to the motives of those who were active therein;
partly to their manner of acting.
1. With regard to the former, every reasonable man will
naturally inquire on what motives could any, either of the
Clergy or the Corporation, ever think of opposing that
preaching by which so many notoriously vicious men have
been brought to an eminently virtuous life and conversation.
You supply us yourself with one unexceptionable answer:
TH c REV. M.R. BAILY. 85
“Those of the Clergy with whom I have conversed freely own
they have not learning sufficient to comprehend your scheme of
religion.” (Page 30.) If they have not, I am sorry for them.
My scheme of religion is this:—Love is the fulfilling of the law.
From the true love of God and man, directly flows every Chris
tian grace, every holy and happy temper; and from these
springs uniform holiness of conversation, in conformity to those
great rules, “Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do
all to the glory of God; ” and, “Whatsoever you would that
men should do unto you, even so do unto them.” But this,
you say, “those of the Clergy with whom you converse have
not learning enough to comprehend.” Consequently, their
ignorance, or not understanding our doctrine, is the reason
why they oppose us.
2. I learn from you, that ignorance of another kind is a
Second reason why some of the Clergy oppose us: They, like
you, think us enemies to the Church. The natural conse
quence is, that, in proportion to their zeal for the Church,
their zeal against us will be.
3. The zeal which many of them have for orthodoxy, or
right opinions, is a Third reason for opposing us. For they
judge us heterodox in several points, maintainers of strang
opinions. And the truth is, the old doctrines of the Reforma
tion are now quite new in the world. Hence those who revive
them cannot fail to be opposed by those of the Clergy who
know them not.
4. Fourthly. Their honour is touched when others pretend
to know what they do not know themselves; especially when
unlearned and (otherwise) ignorant men lay claim to any such
knowledge. “What is the tendency of all this,” as you observe
on another head, “but to work in men’s minds a mean opinion
of the Clergy?” But who can tamely suffer this? None
but those who have the mind that was in Christ Jesus.
5. Again: Will not some say, “Master, by thus acting,
thou reproachest us?” by preaching sixteen or eighteen times
a week; and by a thousand other things of the same kind? Is
not this, in effect, reproaching us, as if we were lazy and indo
ent? as if we had not a sufficient love to the souls of those
committed to our charge?
6. May there not likewise be some (perhaps unobserved)
envy in the breast even of men that fear God? How much
more in them that do not, when they hear of the great success
86 LETTER TO
of these Preachers, of the esteem and honour that are paid to
them by the people, and the immense riches which they
acquire ! What wonder if this occasions a zeal which is not
the flame of fervent love?
7. Add to this a desire in some of the inferior Clergy of
pleasing their superiors; supposing these (which is no impos
sible supposition) are first influenced by any of these motives.
Add the imprudence of some that hear those Preachers, and,
perhaps, needlessly provoke their parochial Ministers. And
when all these things are considered, none need be at a loss for
the motives on which many of the Clergy have opposed us.
8. But from what motives can any of the Corporation
oppose us? I must beg the gentlemen of this body to observe,
that I dare by no means lump them all together, as their
awkward defender has done. But this I may say without
offence, there are some even among you who are not so
remarkably loyal as others, not so eminently well-affected to
the present Government. Now, these cannot but observe,
(gentlemen, I speak plain, for I am to deliver my own soul in
the sight of God,) that wherever we preach, many who were
his enemies before, became zealous friends to His Majesty.
The instances glare both in England and Ireland. Those,
therefore, who are not so zealously his friends have a strong
motive to oppose us; though it cannot be expected they should
own this to be the motive on which they act.
9. Others may have been prejudiced by the artful misrepre
sentations these have made, or by those they have frequently
heard from the pulpit. Indeed, this has been the grand foun
tain of popular prejudice. In every part both of England and
Ireland, the Clergy, where they were inclined so to do, have
most effectually stirred up the people.
10. There has been another reason assigned for the opposi
tion that was made to me in particular at Cork, viz., that the
Mayor was offended at my preaching on Hammond's Marsh,
and therefore resolved I should not preach at all; whereas, if I
had not preached abroad, he would have given me leave to
preach in the house. Would Mr. Mayor have given me leave
to preach in my own house? I return him most humble
thanks. But should he be so courteous as to make me thc offer
even now, I should not accept it on any such terms. Greater
men than he have endeavoured to hinderme from calling sinners
THE REW, MR. BAILY. 87
to repentance in that open and public manner; but hitherto
it has been all lost labour. They have never yet been able
to prevail; nor ever will, till they can conquer King George
and his armies. To curse them is not enough.
11. Lastly. Some (I hope but a few) do cordially believe,
that “private vices are public benefits.” I myself heard this
in Cork, when I was there last. These, consequently, think
us the destroyers of their city, by so lessening the number of
their public benefactors, the gluttons, the drunkards, the
dram-drinkers, the Sabbath-breakers, the common swearers,
the cheats of every kind, and the followers of that ancient
and honourable trade, adultery and fornication.
12. These are the undeniable motives to this opposition.
I come now to the manner of it.
When some gentlemen inquired of one of the Bishops in
England, “My Lord, what must we do to stop these new
Preachers?” he answered, “If they preach contrary to Scrip
ture, confute them by Scripture; if contrary to reason, confute
them by reason. But beware you use no other weapons than
these, either in opposing error, or defending the truth.”
Would to God this rule had been followed at Cork | But
how little has it been thought of there ! The opposition was
begun with lies of all kinds, frequently delivered in the name
of God: So that never was anything so ill-judged as for you
to ask, “Does Christianity encourage its professors to make
use of lies, invectives, or low, mean abuse, and scurrility, to
carry on its interest?” No, Sir, it does not. I disclaim
and abhor every weapon of this kind. But with these have
the Methodist Preachers been opposed in Cork above any
other place. In England, in all Ireland, have I neither heard
nor read any like those gross, palpable lies, those low,
Billingsgate invectives, and that inexpressibly mean abuse,
and base scurrility, which the opposers of Methodism, so
called, have continually made use of, and which has been the
strength of their cause from the beginning.
13. If it be not so, let the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of
Cork, (for he too has openly entered the lists against the
Methodists,) the Rev. Dr. Tisdale, or any other whom his
Lordship shall appoint, meet me on even ground, writing as a
gentleman to a gentleman, a scholar to a scholar, a Clergyman
to a Clergyman. Let him thus show me wherein I have
88 LETTER. To
preached or written amiss, and I will stand reproved before
all the world.
14. But let not his Lordship, or any other, continue to
put persecution in the place of reason; either private perse
cution, stirring up husbands to threaten or beat their wives,
parents their children, masters their servants; gentlemen to
ruin their tenants, labourers, or tradesmen, by turning them
out of their farms or cottages, employing or buying of them
no more, because they worship God according to their own
conscience; or open, barefaced, moonday, Cork persecution,
breaking open the houses of His Majesty’s Protestant subjects,
destroying their goods, spoiling or tearing the very clothes
from their backs; striking, bruising, wounding, murdering
them in the streets; dragging them through the mire,
without any regard to either age or sex; not sparing even
those of tender years; no, nor women, though great with
child; but, with more than Pagan or Mahometan barbarity,
destroying infants that were yet unborn.
15. Ought these things so to be? Are they right before
God or man? Are they to the honour of our nation? I
appeal unto Caesar; unto His gracious Majesty King George,
and to the Governors under him, both in England and Ireland.
I appeal to all true, disinterested lovers of this their native
country. Is this the way to make it a flourishing nation?
happy at home, amiable and honourable abroad? Men of
Ireland, judge | Nay, and is not there not some weight in
that additional consideration,—that this is not a concern
of a private nature? Rather, is it not a common cause ?
If the dams are once broken down, if you tamely give up
the fundamental laws of your country, if these are openly
violated in the case of your fellow-subjects, how soon may
the case be your own | For what protection then have any
of you left for either your liberty or property? What security
for either your goods or lives, if a riotous mob is to be both
judge, jury, and executioner?
16. Protestants! What is become of that liberty of conscience
for which your forefathers spent their blood? Is it not an empty
shadow, a mere, unmeaning name, if these things are suffered
among you? Romans, such of you as are calm and candid
men, do you approve of these proceedings? I cannot think
you yourselves would use such methods of convincing us, if we
think amiss. Christians of all denominations, can you reconcile
THE REV. M.R. POTTER. 89
this to our royal law, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy
self?” O tell it not in Gath ! Let it not be named among
those who are enemies to the Christian cause; lest that worthy
name whereby we are called be still more blasphemed among
the Heathen I
A LETTER,
To
THE REVEREND MR. POTTER.
NORWICH, November 4, 1758.
REvEREND SIR,
1. TILL to-day I had not a sight of your sermon, “On
the Pretended Inspiration of the Methodists.” Otherwise I
should have taken the liberty, some days sooner, of sending you
a few lines. That sermon, indeed, only repeats what has been
often said before, and as often answered. But as it is said again,
I believe it is my duty to answer it again. Not that I have any
acquaintance with Mr. Cayley or Osborn: I never exchanged a
word with either. However, as you lump me and them toge
ther, I am constrained to speak for myself, and once more to
give a reason of my hope, that I am clear from the charge you
bring against me.
2. There are several assertions in your sermon which need
not be allowed; but they are not worth disputing. At present,
therefore, I shall only speak of two things: (1.) Your account
of the new birth; and, (2) “The pretended inspiration” (as
you are pleased to term it) “of the Methodists.”
3. Of the new birth, you say, “The terms of being regene.
rated, of being born again, of being born of God, are often used
to express the works of gospel righteousness.” (Pages 10, 11.)
I cannot allow this. I know not that they are ever used in
Scripture to express any outward work at all. They always
express an inward work of the Spirit, whereof baptism is the
90 LETTER. To
outward sign. You add, “Their primary, peculiar, and precise
meaning signifies” (a little impropriety of expression) “our
redemption from death, and restoration to eternal life, through
the grace of God.” (Page 13.) It does not, unless by death
you mean sin; and by eternal life, holiness. The precise mean
ing of the term is, “a new birth unto righteousness,” an in
ward change from unholy to holy tempers. You go on : “This
grace our Lord here calls, ‘entering into the kingdom of God.’”
If so, his assertion is, “Except a man be born again,—he
cannot” be born again. Not so. What he says is, Except a
man experience this change, he cannot enter into my kingdom.
4. You proceed: “Our holy Church doth teach us, that—
by the laver of regeneration in baptism, we are received into
the number of the children of God-This is the first part of
the new birth.” What is the first part of the new birth P
baptism? It is the outward sign of that inward and spiritual
grace; but no part of it at all. It is impossible it should be.
The outward sign is no more a part of the inward grace than
the body is a part of the soul. Or do you mean, that
regeneration is a part of the new birth ? Nay, this is the whole
of it. Or is it the “laver of regeneration ” which is the first
part of it? That cannot be; for you suppose this to be the
same with baptism.
5. “The second part, the inward and spiritual grace, is a
death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness.” What 1
Is the new birth the second part of the new birth? I appre
hend it is the first and second part too: And surely nothing
could have prevented your seeing this, but the ardour of your
spirit, and the impetuosity with which you rush along and
trample down all before you. Your manner of writing reminds
me of an honest Quaker in Cornwall, whose words I would
recommend to your consideration. Being consulted by one
of the Friends, whether he should publish a tract which he
had read to many in private, he replied, “What! Art thou
not content with laying John Wesley on his back, but thou
must tread his guts out too?”
6. So much for your account of the new birth. I am, in
the Second place, to consider the account you give of “the
pretended inspiration” (so you are pleased to term it) “of the
Methodists.”
“The Holy Ghost sat on the Apostles with cloven tongues
as of fire;—and signs and wonders were done by their hands.”
ThE REV. M.R. POTTER, 9I
(Pages 16, 17, 18.) Wonders indeed! sick by a word, a touch, a shadow !—
For they healed the
They spake the dead alive, and living dead.
“But though these extraordinary operations of the Spirit
have been long since withdrawn, yet the pretension to them still
subsists in the confident claim of the Methodists.” This you
boldly affirm, and I flatly deny. I deny that either I, or any in
connexion with me, (for others, whether called Methodists, or
anything else, I am no more concerned to answer than you are,)
do now, or ever did, lay any claim to “these extraordinary
operations of the Spirit.”
7. But you will prove it. They “confidently and presump
tuously claim a particular and immediate inspiration.” (Ibid.)
I answer, First, so do you, and in this very sermon, though
you call it by another name. By inspiration, we mean that
inward assistance of the Holy Ghost, which “helps our infirmi
ties, enlightens our understanding, rectifies our will, comforts,
purifies, and sanctifies us.” (Page 14.) Now, all this you claim as
well as I; for these are your own words. “Nay, but you claim
a particular inspiration.” So do you; do not you expect Him
to sanctify you in particular? “Yes; but I look for no imme
diate inspiration.” You do; you expect He will immediately
and directly help your infirmities. Sometimes, it is true, He
does this, by the mediation or intervention of other men; but at
other times, particularly in private prayer, he gives that he',
directly from himself. “But is this all you mean by particulai,
immediate inspiration?” It is; and so I have declared a thou
sand times in private, in public, by every method I could devise.
It is pity, therefore, that any should still undertake to give an
account of my sentiments, without either hearing or reading
what I say. Is this doing as we would be done to?
8. I answer, Secondly, there is no analogy between claiming.
this inspiration of the Spirit, who, you allow, “assists, and will
assist, all true believers to the end of the world;” (page 18;) and
claiming those extraordinary operations of the Spirit which were
vouchsafed to the Apostles. The former both you and I pretend
to; yea, and enjoy, or we are no believers. The latter you do
not pretend to; nor do I, nor any that are in connexion with me.
9. “But you do pretend to them. For you pray that ‘signs
and wonders may still be wrought in the name of Jesus.’”
True; but what signs and wonders? The conversion of sin
92 LETTER TO
ners; the “healing the broken in heart; the turning men from
darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God.” These
and these only are the signs and wonders which were mentioned
in that prayer. And did I not see these signs and wonders still
wrought, I would sooner hew wood, or draw water, than preach
the gospel. For those are to me very awful words which our
Lord speaks of Prophets or Teachers: “Ye shall know them.”
(whether they are true or false Prophets) “by their fruits.
Every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; every tree that
bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the
fire.” What fruit you have brought forth at Reymerston, I
know not; God knoweth.
10. “Your followers, however, do pretend to the grace of a
miraculous conversion.” Is there any conversion that is not
miraculous? Is conversion a natural or supernatural work? I
suppose all who allow there is any such thing believe it to be
supernatural. And what is the difference between a super
natural and a miraculous work, I am yet to learn.
“But they say, that at such a time, and in such a manner,
the divine illumination shone upon them; Jesus knocked at the
door of their hearts, and the Holy Ghost descended upon their
souls;” that is, in plain terms, raillery apart, at a particular
time, which they cannot easily forget, God did, in so eminent a
manner as they never experienced before, “enlighten their
understanding,” (they are your own words,) “comfort and
purify their hearts, and give his heavenly Spirit to dwell in
them.” But what has all this to do with those extraordinary
operations of the Holy Spirit?
11. “Under these pretended impressions, their next advance
is to a call to preach the word themselves; and forth they issue,
as under the immediate inspiration of God's Spirit, with the
language of Apostles, and zeal of Martyrs, to publish the gos
pel, as if they were among our remotest ancestors, strangers to
the name of Christ.” (Pages 20, 21.)
The plain truth is this: One in five hundred of those whom
God so enlightens and comforts, sooner or later, believes it to
be his duty to call other sinners to repentance. Such an one
commonly stifles this conviction till he is so uneasy he can stifle
it no longer. He then consults one or more of those whom he
believes to be competent judges; and, under the direction of
these, goes on, step by step, from a narrower to a larger sphere
ThE REV. M.R. POTTER. 93
of action. Meantime he endeavours to use only “the language
of the Apostles,” to speak the things of the Spirit in the words
of the Spirit. And he longs and prays for the “zeal of Mar
tyrs,” continually finding the need thereof; seeing our present
countrymen are as great strangers to the mind that was in
Christ, as our ancestors were to his name.
12. “But the Holy Spirit no longer comes from heaven like
a rushing mighty wind. It no longer appears in cloven tongues,
as of fire.” I wonder who imagines it does. “We now dis
cern not between his suggestions and the motions of our own
rational nature.” Many times we do not; but at other times,
God may give such peace or joy, and such love to himself and
all mankind, as we are sure are not “the motions of our own
nature.” “To say, then, that the Holy Spirit began his work
at such a time, and continued it so long in such a manner, is
as vain as to account for the blowing of the wind.” Hold !
accounting for is not the thing. To make a parallel, it must
be, “is as vain as to say, that the wind began to blow at such
a time, and continued so long in such a manner.” And
where is the vanity of this? Why may I not say, either
that the wind began to blow at such a time, and blew so long
in such a manner; or that God began at such a time to com
fort my soul; that He continued that consolation so long, and
$n such a manner, by giving me either peace and joy in
believing, or a lively hope of the glory of God?
13. “Not that we are without a memorable instance of this
instantaneous impulse in the sudden conversion of St. Paul.”
(Page 23.) A poor instance this; for it does not appear that
his was a sudden conversion. It is true, “a great light
suddenly shone round about him; ” but this light did not
convert him. After he had seen this, “he was three days
without sight, and neither did eat nor drink.” And, probably,
during the whole time, God was gradually working in his
heart, till he “arose, and, being baptized, washed away his
sins, and was filled with the Holy Ghost.”
14. But to return: “Their Teachers claim a particular and
immediate inspiration in their nauseous effusions.” (Page 22.)
Certainly they claim either a particular and immediate inspira
tion, (as above explained,) or none at all. But this is no other
inspiration (call it influence, if you please, though it is a far
stronger term) than every one must have, before he can either
94 LETTER, TO
understand, or preach, or live the gospel. “But there is not
in Scripture the least promise or encouragement to expect any
particular inspiration.” Yes, surely, such an inspiration as
this; you have allowed it over and over. And what external
evidence of this would you have? I will believe you are thus
inspired, if you convert sinners to God, and if you yourself
are “holy in all manner of conversation.”
15. Is there “no need of this inspiration now, because the
prejudices of mankind are in favour of the gospel, and the pro
fession of it is under the protection and encouragement of the
civil power?” The prejudices of mankind are in favour of the
gospel ! What! the prejudices of the bulk of mankind? To
go no farther than England: Are the bulk of our nation preju
diced in favour of the genuine gospel; of the holiness which it
enjoins; of chastity and temperance; of denying ourselves, and
taking up our cross daily; of dying to the world, and devoting
all our heart and all our life to God? Are they prejudiced in
favour of presenting our souls and bodies a constant, holy sacri
fice to God? What less than this is gospel holiness? And
are the prejudices of mankind in favour of this?
16. Likewise, how far this real Christianity is “under the
protection and encouragement of the civil power,” I know not.
But I know, “all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution,” domestic persecution, if no other; for “the
foes of” such “a man shall be they of his own household.
There shall be,” and there are now, “five in one house, three
against two, and two against three; ” and that not for being
Methodists, for having a nick-name; (although that may be
the pretence, for want of a better; for who scruples to throw
a man into the ditch, and then beat him, because his clothes
are dirty?) but for living godly; for loving and serving God,
according to the best light they have. And certainly these
meed the assistance of God’s Spirit to strengthen and comfort
them, that they may suffer all things, rather than turn aside,
in any point, from the gospel way.
17. “But the Scriptures are a complete and a sufficient
rule. Therefore, to what purpose could any further inspira
tion serve? All farther inspiration is unnecessary; the sup
posed need of it is highly injurious to the written word. And
the pretension thereto (which must be either to explain or to
supply it) is a wicked presumption, with which Satan hath
filled their hearts, to lie of the Holy Ghost.” (Pages 27, 28.)
THE REV. M.R. POTTER, 95
High sounding words! But, blessed be God, they are only
brutum fulmen : They make much noise, but do not wound.
“To what purpose could any further inspiration serve?”
Answer yourself: “To enlighten the understanding, and to
rectify the will.” Else, be the Scriptures ever so complete,
they will not save your soul. How, then, can you imagine it
is unnecessary; and that “the supposed need of it is injurious
to the written word?” And when you say yourself, “The Spirit
is to teach us all things, and to guide us into all truth;” judge
you, whether this is “to explain, or to supply, the written
word.” “O, He does this by the written word.” True; but
also “by his holy inspiration.” So the compilers of our
Liturgy speak; who, therefore, according to you, are guilty of
“wicked presumption, with which Satan filled their hearts,
to lie of the Holy Ghost.”
18. These, also, are the men upon whom you fall in the fol
lowing warm words:—“The power of enthusiasm over an
heated imagination may be very great. But it must be under
the ferment of that old, sour leaven, hypocrisy, to rise to that
daring height.” I think not: I think they were neither hypo
crites nor enthusiasts, though they teach me to pray for, and
consequently to expect, (unless I am an hypocrite indeed,)
“God’s holy inspiration,” both in order to “think the things
that be good,” and also “perfectly to love him, and worthily
to magnify his holy name.”
19. You go on: “They boast that their heart is clean, and
their spirit right within them.” Sir, did you ever read Morn
ing Prayer on the tenth day of the month? You then said,
“Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit
within me.” Did you mean what you said? If you did not, you
was guilty of the grossest hypocrisy. If you did, when did you
expect God would answer that prayer? when your body was in
the grave? Too late 1 Unless we have clean hearts before we
die, it had been good we had never been born.
20. “But they boast they are pure from sin, harmless, and
undefiled.” So, in a sound sense, is every true believer. “Nay,
they boast that their bodies are a living sacrifice, holy, accept
able to God.” Sir, is not yours? Are not your soul and body
such a sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God? As the Lord God
liveth, before whom we stand, if they are not, you are not a
Christian. If you are not a holy, living sacrifice, you are still
96 LETTER, TO
“dead in trespasses and sins.” You are an “alien from the
commonwealth of Israel, without” Christian “hope, without
God in the world !”
21. You add, “Thus have I exposed their boasted claim to
a particular and immediate inspiration.” (Page 30.) No, Sir,
you have only exposed yourself; for all that we claim, you
allow. “I have shown what a miserable farce is carrying on,
beneath the mask of a more refined holiness.” No tittle of this
have you shown yet; and before you attempt again to show
any thing concerning us, let me entreat you, Sir, to acquaint
yourself better with our real sentiments. Perhaps you may
then find, that there is not so wide a difference as you imagined
between you and,
Reverend Sir,
Your servant for Christ’s sake,
LAKENHEATH, JOHN WESLEY.
November 7, 1758.
A LETTER,
TO
THE REVEREND MR. DOWNES,
RECTOR OF ST. MICHAEL’s, WooD-STREET:
OCCASIONED BY HIS LATE TRACT,
ENTITLED,
“METHODISM EXAMINED AND EXPOSED.”
REVEREND SIR,
1. IN the Tract which you have just published concerning
the people called Methodists, you very properly say, “Our first
care should be, candidly and fairly to examine their doctrines.
For, as to censure them unexamined would be unjust; so to do
the same without a fair and impartial examination would be
ungenerous.” And again: “We should, in the first place,
carefully and candidly examine their doctrines.” (Page 68.)
THE REV. M.R. DOWNES. 97
This is undoubtedly true. But have you done it? Have you
ever examined their doctrines yet? Have you examined them
fairly? fairly and candidly? candidly and carefully? Have you
read over so much as the Sermons they have published, or the
“Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion?” I hope you have
not; for I would fain make some little excuse for your uttering
so many senseless, shameless falsehoods. I hope you know
nothing about the Methodists, no more than I do about the
Cham of Tartary; that you are ignorant of the whole affair,
and are so bold, only because you are blind. Bold enough !
Throughout your whole Tract, you speak satis pro imperio,"—
as authoritatively as if you was, not an Archbishop only, but
Apostolic Vicar also; as if you had the full papal power in your
hands, and fire and faggot at your beck! And blind enough;
so that you blunder on, through thick and thin, bespattering all
that come in your way, according to the old, laudable maxim,
“Throw dirt enough, and some will stick.”
2. I hope, I say, that this is the case, and that you do not
knowingly assert so many palpable falsehoods. You say, “If I
am mistaken, I shall always be ready and desirous to retract my
error.” (Page 56.) A little candour and care might have pre
vented those mistakes; this is the first thing one would have
desired. The next is, that they may be removed; that you
may see wherein you have been mistaken, and be more wary
for the time to come,
3. You undertake to give an account, First, of the rise and
principles, Then, of the practices, of the Methodists.
On the former head you say, “Our Church has long been
infested with these grievous wolves, who, though no more than
two when they entered in, and they so young they might rather
be called wolflings,” (that is lively and pretty!) “have yet spread
their ravenous kind through every part of this kingdom.
Where, what havoc they have made, how many of the sheep
they have torn, I need not say.” (Pages 4, 5.) “About twenty
five years ago, these two bold though beardless Divines,”
(pity, Sir, that you had not taught me, twenty-five years ago
sapientem pascere barbam,t and thereby to avoid some part
of your displeasure,) “being lifted with spiritual pride, were
* With authority enough.—EDIT.
+ This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“What time, by his instructions cheer'd,
He bade me train his sapient beard.”-EDIT.
98 LETTER. To
presumptuous enough to become founders of the sect called
Methodists.” (Page 6.) “A couple of young, raw, aspiring twigs
of the ministry dreamed of a special and supernatural call to
this.” (Page 25.) No, Sir; it was you dreamed of this, not we.
We dreamed of nothing twenty-five years ago, but instructing
our pupils in religion and learning, and a few prisoners in the
common principles of Christianity. You go on: “They were
ambitious of being accounted Missionaries, immediately de
legated by Heaven to correct the errors of Bishops and Arch
bishops, and reform their abuses; to instruct the Clergy in the
true nature of Christianity, and to caution the laity not to
venture their souls in any such unhallowed hands as refused to
be initiated in all the mysteries of Methodism.” (Pages 20, 21.)
Well asserted indeed; but where is the proof of any one of these
propositions? I must insist upon this; clear, cogent proof:
Else they must be set down for so many glaring falsehoods.
4. “The Church of Rome (to which on so many accounts
they were much obliged, and as gratefully returned the obliga
tion) taught them to set up for infallible interpreters of Scrip
ture.” (Page 54.) Pray on what accounts are we “obliged
to the Church of Rome?” And how have we “returned the
obligation?” I beg you would please, (1.) To explain this;
and, (2.) To prove that we ever yet (whoever taught us) “set
up for infallible interpreters of Scripture.” So far from it, that
we have over and over declared, in print as well as in public
preaching, “We are no more to expect any living man to be
infallible than to be omniscient.” (Vol. VI. p. 4.)
5. “As to other extraordinary gifts, influences, and operations
of the Holy Ghost, no man who has but once dipped into their
Journals, and other ostentatious trash of the same kind, can
doubt their looking upon themselves as not coming one whit
behind the greatest of the Apostles.” (Methodism Examined,
p. 21.)
I acquit you, Sir, of ever having “once dipped into that
ostentatious trash.” I do not accuse you of having read so
much as the titles of my Journals. I say, my Journals; for
(as little as you seem to know it) my brother has published
none. I therefore look upon this as simple ignorance. You
talk thus, because you know no better. You do not know, that
in these very Journals I utterly disclaim the “extraordinarygifts
of the Spirit,” and all other “influences and operations of the
Holy Ghost” than those that are common to all real Christians.
THE REV. MIR. DoWNES. 99
And yet I will not say, this ignorance is blameless. For
ought you not to have known better? Ought you not to have
taken the pains of procuring better information, when it
might so easily have been had 7 Ought you to have publicly
advanced so heavy charges as these, without knowing whether
they were true or no?
6. You proceed to give as punctual an account of us, tan
quam intus et in cute nosses : * “They outstripped, if pos
sible, even Montanus, for external sanctity and severity of
discipline.” (Page 22.) “They condemned all regard for tem
poral concerns. They encouraged their devotees to take no
thought for any one thing upon earth; the consequence of
which was, a total neglect of their affairs, and an impoverish
ment of their families.” (Page 23.) Blunder all over ! We
had no room for any discipline, severe or not, five-and-twenty
years ago, unless college discipline; my brother then residing
at Christ Church, and I at Lincoln College. And as to our
“sanctity,” (were it more or less,) how do you know it was
only external 7 Was you intimately acquainted with us? I
do not remember where I had the honour of conversing with
you. Or could you (as the legend says of St. Pabomius)
“smell an heretic ten miles” off? And how came you to dream,
again, that we “condemned all regard for temporal concerns,
and encouraged men to take no thought for any one thing
upon earth?” Vain dream ! We, on the contrary, severely
condemn all who neglect their temporal concerns, and who
do not take care of everything on earth wherewith God hath
entrusted them. The consequence of this is, that the Meth
odists, so called, do not “neglect their affairs, and impoverish
their families; ” but, by diligence in business, “provide things
honest in the sight of all men.” Insomuch, that multitudes
of them, who, in time past, had scarce food to eat or raiment
to put on, have now “all things needful for life and godli
ness;” and that for their families, as well as themselves.
7. Hitherto you have been giving an account of two wolf
lings only; but now they are grown into perfect wolves. Let
us see what a picture you draw of them in this state, both as
to their principles and practice.
You begin with a home stroke: “In the Montanist you
may behold the bold lineaments and bloated countenance of the
* This accommodated quotation from Persius may be thus rendered:—“As if
you had the most intimate knowledge of ns.”-EDIT.
100 LETTER. To
Methodist.” (Page 17.) I wish you do not squint at the honest
countenance of Mr. Venn, who is indeed as far from fear as
he is from guile. But if it is somewhat “bloated,” that is not
his fault; sickness may have the same effect on yours or mine.
But to come closer to the point: “They have darkened re
ligion with many ridiculous fancies, tending to confound the
head, and to corrupt the heart.” (Page 13.) “A thorough
knowledge of them would work, in every rightly-disposed
mind, an abhorrence of those doctrines which directly tend to
distract the head, and to debauch the heart, by turning faith
into frenzy, and the grace of God into wantonness.” (Pages
101, 102.) “These doctrines are unreasonable and ridiculous,
clashing with our natural ideas of the divine perfections, with
the end of religion, with the honour of God, and man’s both
present and future happiness. Therefore we pronounce them
‘filthy dreamers, turning faith into fancy, the gospel into
farce; thus adding blasphemy to enthusiasm.” (Pages 66,68.)
Take breath, Sir; there is a long paragraph behind. “The
abettors of these wild and whimsical notions are, (1.) Close
friends to the Church of Rome, agreeing with her in almost
everything but the doctrine of merit: (2.) They are no less
kind to infidelity, by making the Christian religion a mere
creature of the imagination : (3.) They cut up Christianity by
the roots, frustrating the very end for which Christ died,
which was, that by holiness we might be ‘made meet for the
inheritance of the saints: (4.) They are enemies not only to
Christianity, but to “every religion whatsoever, by labouring
to subvert or overturn the whole system of morality: (5.)
Consequently, they must be enemies of society, dissolving
the band by which it is united and knit together.” In a
word: “All ancient heresies have in a manner concentred in
the Methodists; particularly those of the Simonians, Gnos
tics, Antinomians,” (as widely distant from each other as Pre
destinarians from Calvinists 1) “Valentinians, Donatists, and
Montanists.” (Pages 101, 102.) While your hand was in, you
might as well have added, Carpocratians, Eutychians, Nesto
rians, Sabellians. If you say, “I never heard of them; ” no
matter for that; you may find them, as well as the rest, in
Bishop Pearson’s index.
Well, all this is mere flourish; raising a dust, to blind the
eyes of the spectators. Generals, you know, prove nothing.
So, leaving this as it is, let us come to particulars.
THE REV. M.R., DOWNES. 101
But, first, give me leave to transcribe a few words from a
tract published some years ago. “Your Lordship premises,
‘It is not at all needful to charge the particular tenets upon
the particular persons among them.” Indeed, it is needful
in the highest degree. Just as needful as it is not to put a
stumbling-block in the way of our brethren; not to lay them
under an almost insuperable temptation of condemning the
innocent with the guilty.” (Letter to the Bishop of London.
Vol. VIII. pp. 483,484.)
And it is now far more needful than it was then; as that title
of reproach, Methodist, is now affixed to many people who are
not under my care, nor ever had any connexion with me. And
what have I to do with these? If you give me a nick-name,
and then give it to others whom I know not, does this make me
accountable for them? either for their principles or practice?
In nowise. I am to answer for myself, and for those that are
in connexion with me. This is all that a man of common
sense can undertake, or a man of common humanity require.
Let us begin then upon even ground; and if you can prove
upon me, John Wesley, any one of the charges which you
have advanced, call me not only a wolf, but an otter, if you
please.
8. Your First particular charge (which, indeed, runs
through your book, and is repeated in twenty different places)
is, that we make the way to heaven too broad, teaching, men
may be saved by faith without works. Some of your words
are, “They set out with forming a fair and tempting model of
religion, so flattering the follies of degenerate man, that it
could not fail to gain the hearts of multitudes, especially of
the loose and vicious, the lazy and indolent. They want to
get to heaven the shortest way, and with the least trouble:
Now, a reliance on Christ, and a disclaiming of good works,
are terms as easy as the merest libertine can ask. They per
suade their people that they may be-saved by the righteous
ness of Christ, without any holiness of their own; nay, that
good works are not only unnecessary, but also dangerous; that
we may be saved by faith, without any other requisite, such
as gospel obedience, and an holy life. Lastly: The Valenti
nians pretended, that if good works were necessary to salva
tion, it was only to animal men, that is, to all who were not
of their clan; and that, although sin might damn others, it
could not hurt them. In consequence of which, they lived in
102 LETTER. To
all lust and impurity, and wallowed in the most unheard-of
bestialities. The Methodists distinguish much after the same
manner.” (Methodism Examined, pp. 52, 31, 38, 14.)
Sir, you are not awake yet. You are dreaming still, and
fighting with shadows of your own raising. The “model of
religion with which the Methodists set out” is perfectly well
known; if not to you, yet to many thousands in England who
are no Methodists. I laid it before the University of Oxford,
at St. Mary’s, on January 1, 1733. You may read it when
you are at leisure; for it is in print, entitled, “The Circumci
sion of the Heart.” And whoever reads only that one dis
course, with any tolerable share of attention, will easily judge,
whether that “model of religion flatters the follies of degene
rate man,” or is likely to “gain the hearts of multitudes, es
pecially of the loose and vicious, the lazy and indolent !” Will
a man choose this, as “the shortest way to heaven, and with
the least trouble?” Are these “as easy terms as any libertine”
or infidel “can desire?” The truth is, we have been these thirty
years continually reproached for just the contrary to what you
dream of; with making the way to heaven too strait; with
being ourselves “righteous overmuch,” and teaching others,
they could not be saved without so many works as it was im
possible for them to perform. And to this day, instead of
teaching men that they may be saved by a faith which is without
good works, without “gospel-obedience and holiness of life,”
weteach exactly the reverse, continually insisting on all outward
as well as all inward holiness. For the notorious truth of this
we appeal to the whole tenor of our sermons, printed and un
printed; in particular to those upon “Our Lord’s Sermon on the
Mount,” whereinevery branch ofgospelobedienceisboth asserted
and proved to be indispensably necessary to eternal salvation.
Therefore, as to the rest of the “Antinomian trash ’’ which
you have so carefully gathered up, as, “that the regenerate
are as pure as Christ himself; that it would be criminal for
them to pray for pardon; that the greatest crimes are no crimes
in the saints,” &c. &c., (page 17) I have no concern therewith
at all, no more than with any that teach it. Indeed I have
confuted it over and over, in tracts published many years ago.
9. A Second charge which you advance is, that “we suppose
every man’s final doom to depend on God’s sovereign will and
pleasure;” (I presume you mean, on his absolute, unconditional
decree;) that we “consider man as a mere machine;” that we
THE REW. M. R. Down ES. 103
suppose believers “cannot fall from grace.” (Page 31.) Nay, I
suppose none of these things. Let those who do, answer for
themselves. I suppose just the contrary in “Predestination
Calmly Considered,” a tract published ten years ago.
10. A Third charge is, “They represent faith as a super
natural principle, altogether precluding the judgment and
understanding, and discerned by some internal signs; not
as a firm persuasion founded on the evidence of reason, and
discernible only by a conformity of life and manners to such a
persuasion.” (Page 11.)
We do not represent faith “as altogether precluding,” or
at all “precluding, the judgment and understanding;” rather
as enlightening and strengthening the understanding, as clear
ing and improving the judgment. But we do represent it as
the gift of God, yea, and a “supernatural gift; ” yet it does not
preclude “the evidence of reason; ” though neither is this its
whole foundation. “A conformity of life and manners” to
that persuasion, “Christ loved me, and gave himself for me,”
is doubtless one mark by which it is discerned; but not the only
one. It is likewise discerned by internal signs,—both by the
witness of the Spirit, and the fruit of the Spirit; namely, “love,
peace, joy, meekness, gentleness; ” by all “the mind which
was in Christ Jesus.”
11. You assert, Fourthly, “They speak of grace, that it is
as perceptible to the heart as sensible objects are to the senses;
whereas the Scriptures speak of grace, that it is conveyed
imperceptibly; and that the only way to be satisfied whether
we have it or no, is to appeal, not to our inward feelings, but
our outward actions.” (Page 32.)
We do speak of grace, (meaning thereby, that power of God
which worketh in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure,)
that it is “as perceptible to the heart” (while it comforts,
refreshes, purifies, and sheds the love of God abroad therein)
“as sensible objects are to the senses.” And yet we do not
doubt, but it may frequently be “conveyed to us imperceptibly.”
But we know no scripture which speaks of it as always conveyed,
and always working, in an imperceptible manner. We likewise
allow, that outward actions are one way of satisfying us that we
have grace in our hearts. But we cannot possibly allow, that
“the only way to be satisfied of this is to appeal to our outward
actions, and not our inward feelings.” On the contrary, we
104 LETTER. To
believe that love, joy, peace, are inwardly felt, or they have no
being; and that men are satisfied they have grace, first by feel
ing these, and afterward by their outward actions.
12. You assert, Fifthly, “They talk of regeneration in
every Christian, as if it was as sudden and miraculous a conver
sion as that of St. Paul and the first converts to Christianity,
and as if the signs of it were frightful tremors of body, and
convulsive agonies of mind; not as a work graciously begun
and gradually carried on by the blessed Spirit, in conjunction
with our rational powers and faculties; the signs of which
are sincere and universal obedience.” (Page 33.)
This is part true, part false. We do believe regeneration, or,
in plain English, the new birth, to be as miraculous or super
natural a work now as it was seventeen hundred years ago. We
likewise believe, that the spiritual life, which commences when
we are born again, must, in the nature of the thing, have a first
moment, as well as the natural. But we say again and again,
we are concerned for the substance of the work, not the circum
stance. Let it be wrought at all, and we will not contend whe
therit be wrought gradually or instantaneously. “But what are
the signs that it is wrought?” We never said or thought, that
they were either “frightful tremors of body,” or “convulsive
agonies of mind; ” (I presume you mean, agonies of mind at
tended with bodily convulsions;) although we know many per
sons who, before this change was wrought, felt much fear and
sorrow of mind, which in some of these had such an effect on the
body as to make all their bones to shake. Neither did we ever
deny, that it is “a work graciously begun by the Holy Spirit,”
enlightening our understanding, (which, I suppose, you call
“our rational powers and faculties,”) as well as influencing our
affections. And it is certain, he “gradually carries on this
work,” by continuing to influence all the powers of the soul;
and that the outward sign of this inward work is, “sincere and
universal obedience.”
13. A Sixth charge is: “They treat Christianity as a wild,
enthusiastic scheme, which will bear no examination.” (Page
30.) Where or when? In what sermon? In what tract,
practical or polemical? I wholly deny the charge. I have
myself closely and carefully examined every part of it, every
verse of the New Testament, in the original, as well as in our
own and other translations.
THE REV. M.R. DOWNES. 105
14. Nearly allied to this is the threadbare charge of enthu
siasm, with which you frequently and largely compliment us.
But as this also is asserted only, and not proved, it falls to the
ground of itself. Meantime, your asserting it, is a plain
proof that you know nothing of the men you talk of Be
cause you know them not, you so boldly say, “One advantage
we have over them, and that is reason.” Nay, that is the
very question. I appeal to all mankind, whether you have
it, or no. However, you are sure we have it not, and are
never likely to have. For “reason,” you say, “cannot do
much with an enthusiast, whose first principle is, to have no
thing to do with reason, but resolve all his religious opinions
and notions into immediate inspiration.” Then, by your own
account, I am no enthusiast; for I resolve none of my notions
into immediate inspiration. I have something to do with rea
son; perhaps as much as many of those who make no account
of my labours. And I am ready to give up every opinion
which I cannot by calm, clear reason defend. Whenever,
therefore, you will try what you can do by argument, which
you have not done yet, I wait your leisure, and will follow
you step by step, which way soever you lead.
15. “But is not this plain proof of the enthusiasm of the
Methodists, that they despise human learning, and make a
loud and terrible outcry against it?” Pray, Sir, when and
where was this done? Be so good as to point out the time
and place; for I am quite a stranger to it. I believe, indeed,
and so do you, that many men make an ill use of their learn
ing. But so they do of their Bibles: Therefore, this is no
reason for despising or crying out against it. I would use it
just as far as it will go; how far I apprehend it may be of
use, how far I judge it to be expedient at least, if not neces
sary, for a Clergyman, you might have seen in the “Earnest
Address to the Clergy.” But, in the meantime, I bless God
that there is a more excellent gift than either the knowledge
of languages or philosophy. For tongues, and knowledge,
and learning, will vanish away; but love never faileth.
16. I think this is all you have said which is any way
material concerning the doctrines of the Methodists. The
charges you bring concerning their spirit or practice may be
dispatched in fewer words.
And, First, you charge them with pride and uncharitable
ness: “They talk as proudly as the Domatists, of their being
106 LETTER. To
the only true Preachers of the gospel, and esteem themselves,
in contra-distinction to others, as the regenerate, the children
of God, and as having arrived at sinless perfection.” (Page 15.)
All of a piece. We neither talk nor think so. We doubt
not but there are many true Preachers of the gospel, both in
England and elsewhere, who have no connexion with, no
knowledge of, us. Neither can we doubt but that there are
many thousand children of God who never heard our voice or
saw our face. And this may suffice for an answer to all the
assertions of the same kind which are scattered up and down
your work. Of sinless perfection, here brought in by head
and shoulders, I have nothing to say at present.
17. You charge them, Secondly, “with boldness and blas
phemy, who, triumphing in their train of credulous and crazy
followers, the spurious” (should it not be rather the genu
ine *) “offspring of their insidious craft, ascribe the glorious
event to divine grace, and, in almost every page of their
paltry harangues, invoke the blessed Spirit to go along with
them in their soul-awakening work; that is, to continue to
assist them in seducing the simple and unwary.” (Page 41.)
What we ascribe to divine grace is this: The convincing
sinners of the errors of their ways, and the “turning them
from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God.”
Do not you yourself ascribe this to grace? And do not you
too invoke the blessed Spirit, to go along with you in every
part of your work? If you do not, you lose all your labour.
Whether we “seduce men into sin,” or by his grace save
them from it, is another question.
18. You charge us, Thirdly, with “requiring a blind and
implicit trust from our disciples; ” (p. 10;) who, accordingly,
“trust as implicitly in their Preachers, as the Papists in
their Pope, Councils, or Church.” (Page 51.) Far from it:
Neither do we require it; nor do they that hear us place any
such trust in any creature. They “search the Scriptures,”
and hereby try every doctrine whether it be of God: And
what is agreeable to Scripture, they embrace; what is con
trary to it, they reject.
19. You charge us, Fourthly, with injuring the Clergy in
various ways: (1) “They are very industrious to dissolve or
break off that spiritual intercourse which the relation wherein
we stand requires should be preserved betwixt us and our
people.” But can that spiritual intercourse be either pre
ThE REV. M.R. Dow NES. 107
served or broke off, which never existed? What spiritual
intercourse exists between you, the Rector of St. Michael,
and the people of your parish 2 I suppose you preach to
them once a week, and now and then read Prayers. Perhaps
you visit one in ten of the sick. And is this all the spiritual
intercourse which you have with those over whom the Holy
Ghost hath made you an overseer? In how poor a sense then
do you watch over the souls for whom you are to give an ac
count to God! Sir, I wish to God there were a truly spiritual
intercourse between you and all your people ! I wish you
“knew all your flock by name, not excepting the men
servants and women-servants!” Then you might cherish
each, “as a nurse her own children,” and “train them up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord.” Then might you
“warn every one, and exhort every one,” till you should
“present every one perfect in Christ Jesus.”
“But they say our sermons contradict the Articles, Homi
lies, and Liturgy of our own Church; yea, that we contradict
ourselves, saying one thing in the desk, and another in the
pulpit.” And is there not cause to say so? I myself have
heard several sermons preached in churches, which flatly con
tradicted both the Articles, Homilies, and Liturgy; particu
larly on the head of justification. I have likewise heard more
than one or two persons, who said one thing in the desk, and
another in the pulpit. In the desk, they prayed God to
“cleanse the thoughts of their hearts by the inspiration of
his Holy Spirit.” In the pulpit, they said there was “no
such thing as inspiration since the time of the Apostles.”
“But this is not all. You poison the people by the most
peevish and spiteful invectives against the Clergy, the most
rude and rancorous revilings, and the most invidious calum
nies.” (Page 51.) No more than I poison them with arsenic.
I make no peevish or spiteful invectives against any man.
Rude and rancorous revilings (such as your present tract
abounds with) are also far from me. I dare not “return
railing for railing,” because (whether you know it or no) I
fear God. Invidious calumnies, likewise, I never dealt in;
all such weapons I leave to you.
20. One charge remains, which you repeat over and over,
and lay a peculiar stress upon. (As to what you talk about
perverting Scripture, I pass it by, as mere unmeaning common
place declamation.) It is the poor old worn-out tale of “get
108 LETTER. To
ting money by preaching.” This you only intimate at first.
“Some of their followers had an inward call to sell all that
they had, and lay it at their feet.” (Page 22.) Pray, Sir,
favour us with the name of one, and we will excuse you as to
all the rest. In the next page you grow bolder, and roundly
affirm, “With all their heavenly-mindedness, they could not
help casting a sheep’s eye at the unrighteous mammon. Nor
did they pay their court to it with less cunning and success
than Montanus. Under the specious appearance of gifts and
offerings, they raised contributions from every quarter. Be
sides the weekly pensions squeezed out of the poorer and
lower part of their community, they were favoured with very
large oblations from persons of better figure and fortune;
and especially from many believing wives, who had learned
to practise pious frauds on their unbelieving husbands.”
I am almost ashamed (having done it twenty times before)
to answer this stale calumny again. But the bold, frontless
manner wherein you advance it, obliges me so to do. Know
then, Sir, that you have no authority, either from Scripture
or reason, to judge of other men by yourself. If your own
conscience convicts you of loving money, of “casting a
sheep’s eye at the unrighteous mammon,” humble yourself
before God, if haply the thoughts and desires of your heart
may be forgiven you. But, blessed be God, my conscience is
clear. My heart does not condemn me in this matter. I
know, and God knoweth, that I have no desire to load myself
with thick clay; that I love money no more than I love the
mire in the streets; that I seek it not. And I have it not,
any more than suffices for food and raiment, for the plain con
veniences of life. I pay no court to it at all, or to those that
have it, either with cunning or without. For myself, for my
own use, I raise no contributions, either great or small. The
weekly contributions of our community, (which are freely
given, not squeezed out of any,) as well as the gifts and offer
ings at the Lord’s table, never come into my hands. I have no
concern with them, not so much as the beholding them with
my eyes. They are received every week by the Stewards of
the society, men of well-known character in the world; and
by them constantly distributed, within the week, to those
whom they know to be in real necessity. As to the “very large
oblations wherewith I am favoured by persons of better figure
and fortune,” I know nothing of them. Be so kind as to
THE REV. M.R. DowNES. 109
refresh my memory by mentioning a few of their names. I
have the happiness of knowing some of great figure and
fortune; some right honourable persons. But if I were to
say, that all of them together had given me seven pounds in
seven years, I should say...more than I could make good. And
yet I doubt not, but they would freely give me anything I
wanted; but, by the blessing of God, I want nothing that
they can give. I want only more of the Spirit of love and
power, and of an healthful mind. As to those “many be
lieving wives who practise pious frauds on their unbelieving
husbands,” I know them not, no, not one of that kind; there
fore I doubt the fact. If you know any such, be pleased to
give us their names and places of abode. Otherwise you must
bear the blame of being the lover, if not the maker, of a lie.
Perhaps you will say, “Why, a great man said the same
thing but a few years ago.” What, if he did? Let the
frog swell as long as he can, he will not equal the ox. He
might say many things, all circumstances considered, which
will not come well from you, as you have neither his wit,
nor sense, nor learning, nor age, nor dignity.
Tibi parvula res est:
Metiri se quemque suo modulo ac pede verum est."
If you fall upon people that meddle not with you, without
either fear or wit, you may possibly find they have a little
more to say for themselves than you was aware of. I “follow
peace with all men; ” but if a man set upon me without
either rhyme or reason, I think it my duty to defend myself, so
far as truth and justice permit. Yet still I am, (if a poor
enthusiast may not be so bold as to style himself your brother,)
Reverend Sir,
Your servant for Christ's sake,
JOHN WESLEY.
LONDON, November 17, 1759.
• You are not upon a level with Bishop Warburton. Let every man know his
own size.
A LETTER,
TO THE
REVEREND DIR. HORNE.
OCCASIONED BY HIS LATE SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE
THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, ABOUT 1762.
REvEREND SIR,
WHEN you spoke of “heresies making their periodical
revolutions,” of “Antinomianism rampant among us,” and,
immediately after, of “the new lights at the Tabernacle and
Foundery,” must not your hearers naturally think that Mr.
Whitefield and I were reviving those heresies? But do you
know the persons of whom you speak? Have you ever con
versed with them? Have you read their writings? If not,
is it kind, is it just, to pass so severe a censure upon them?
Had you only taken the trouble of reading one tract, the
“Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion,” you would have
seen that a great part of what you affirm is what I never
denied. To put this beyond dispute, I beg leave to transcribe
some passages from that treatise; which will show not only
what I teach now, but what I have taught for many years.
I will afterward simply and plainly declare wherein I as yet
differ from you: And the rather, that if I err therein, you
may, by God’s assistance, convince me of it.
I. 1. “Justification sometimes means our acquittal at the
last day. (Matt. xii. 37.) But this is altogether out of the
present question; that justification whereof our Articles and
Homilies speak, meaning present forgiveness, pardon of sins,
and, consequently, acceptance with God; who therein
‘declares his righteousness’ (or mercy, by or) “for the
remission of the sins that are past; saying, ‘I will be
merciful to thy unrighteousness, and thine iniquities I will
remember no more.” (Rom. iii. 25; Heb. viii. 12.)
LETTER TO THE RE.V. DR. HORNE. 111
“I believe the condition of this is faith. (Rom. iv. 5, &c.)
I mean, not only, that without faith we cannot be justified;
but also, that as soon as any one has true faith, in that moment
he is justified.
“Good works follow this faith, but cannot go before it:
(Luke vi. 43:) Much less can sanctification, which implies a
continued course of good works, springing from holiness of
heart. But it is allowed, that entire sanctification goes before
our justification at the last day. (Heb. xii. 14.)
“It is allowed, also, that repentance, and ‘fruits meet for
repentance, go before faith. (Mark i. 15; Matt. iii. 8.) Repent
ance absolutely must go before faith; fruits meet for it, if there
be opportunity. By repentance, I mean conviction of sin, pro
ducing real desires and sincere resolutions of amendment; and
by “fruits meet for repentance, forgiving our brother; (Matt.
vi. 14, 15;) ceasing from evil, doing good; (Luke iii. 8, 9,
&c.;) using the ordinances of God, and, in general, obeying
him according to the measure of grace which we have received.
(Matthew vii. 7; xxv. 29.) But these I cannot as yet term
good works; because they do not spring from faith and the
love of God.” (Farther Appeal. Vol. VIII. pp. 46, 47.)
2. “Faith alone is the proximate condition of present justi
fication.”
II. 1. I have shown here, at large, what is the doctrine I
teach with regard to justification, and have taught, ever since
I was convinced of it myself, by carefully reading the New
Testament and the Homilies. In many points, I apprehend,
it agrees with yours: In some it does not; these I come now
to consider. May God enable me to do it in love and meekness
of wisdom.
You say, “Happy times, when faith and a good life
were synonymous terms!” (Page 7.) I conceive, they never
were. Is not faith the root, a good life the tree springing
therefrom ?
“That good works are a necessary condition of our justifi
cation, may be proved, (1.) From express testimonies of Scrip
ture. So Isaiah i. 16, 17: “Cease from evil, learn to do well.’
Then ‘your sins, that were as scarlet, shall be white as snow.’
Here, ceasing from evil, and learning to do well, are the con
ditions of pardon.” I answer: Without them there is no par
don; yet the immediate condition of it is faith. He that
112 LETTER. To
believeth, and he alone, is justified before God. “So Ezekiel
xxxiii. 14–16: If the sinner ‘turn from his evil ways, and
‘walk in the statutes of life, then “all his sins shall not be once.
mentioned to him.’” Most sure; that is, if he believe; else,
whatever his outward walking be, he cannot be justified.
The next scripture you cite, Matt. xi. 28, (Sermon, p. 10,)
proves no more than this, that none find “rest to their souls,”
unless they first come to Christ, (namely, by faith,) and then
obey him.
But, “He says, “Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I
command you.’” He does so; but how does it appear, that
this relates to justification at all?
“St. Peter also declares, “In every nation, he that feareth
God and worketh righteousness is accepted of him.’” (Acts
x. 35.) He is; but none can either fear God, or work right
eousness, till he believes according to the dispensation he is
under. “And St. John : “He that doeth righteousness is
righteous.’” I do not see that this proves anything. “And
again: “If we walk in the light, as God is in the light, then
have we communion with him, and the blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanseth us from all sin.’” (1 John i. 7.) This would
prove something, if it could be proved, that “cleansing us from
all sin” meant only justification.
“The Scriptures insist upon the necessity of repentance, in
particular, for that purpose. But repentance comprehends
compunction, humiliation, hatred of sin, confession of it, prayer
for mercy, ceasing from evil, a firm purpose to do well,
restitution of ill-got goods, forgiveness of all who have done us
wrong, and works of beneficence.” (Pages 11, 12.) I believe it
does.comprehend all these, either as parts or as fruits of it: And it
comprehends “the fear” but not “the love of God,” that flows
from a higher principle. And he who loves God is not barely
in the right way to justification: He is actually justified. The
rest of the paragraph asserts just the same thing which was
asserted in those words: “Previous to justifying faith must be
repentance, and, if opportunity permits, “fruits meet for repent
ance.’” But still I must observe, that “neither the one nor
the other is necessary, either in the same sense, or in the same
degree, with faith.” No scripture testimony can be produced,
which any way contradicts this.
2. “That works are a necessary condition of our justification,
THE REV. DR. HORNE. 113
may be proved, Secondly, from scripture examples; particu
larly those recited in the eleventh chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews. These all “through faith wrought righteousness;
without working righteousness, they had never obtained the
promises.” (Page 13.) I say the same thing: None are finally
saved, but those whose faith “worketh by love.”
“Even in the thief upon the cross, faith was attended by
repentance, piety, and charity.” It was; repentance went be
fore his faith; piety and charity accompanied it. “Therefore,
he was not justified by faith alone.” Our Church, adopting the
words of St. Chrysostom, expressly affirms, in the passage
above cited, he was justified by faith alone. And her authority
ought to weigh more than even that of Bishop Bull, or of any
single man whatever. Authority, be pleased to observe, I
plead against authority; reason against reason.
It is no objection, that the faith whereby he was justified
immediately produced good works.
3. How we are justified by faith alone, and yet by such a
faith as is not alone, it may be proper to explain. And this
also I choose to do, not in my own words, but in those of our
Church:
“Faith does not shut out repentance, hope, love, and the
fear of God, to be joined with faith in every man that is justi
fied: But it shutteth them out from the office of justifying. So
that although they be all present together in him that is justi
fied, yet they justify not all together. Neither doth faith shut
out good works, necessarily to be done afterwards, of duty
towards God. -
“That we are justified only by this faith in Christ, speak all
the ancient authors; specially Origen, St. Cyprian, St. Chry
sostom, Hilary, Basil, St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine.”
(Homily on the Salvation of Man.)
4. You go on: “Thirdly, if we consider the nature of faith,
it will appear impossible that a man should be justified by that
alone. Faith is either an assent to the gospel truths, or a
reliance on the gospel promises. I know of no other notion of
faith.” (Sermon, p. 15.) I do; an exeryxos of things not seen ;
which is far more than a bare assent, and yet toto genere differ
ent from a reliance. Therefore, if you prove that neither an
assent nor a reliance justifies, nor both of them together, still
you do not prove that we are not justified by faith, even by faith
VOL. IX. I
114 LETTER. To
alone. But how do you prove, that we cannot be justified by
faith as a reliance on the promises? Thus: “Such a reliance
must be founded on a consciousness of having performed the
conditions. And a reliance so founded is the result of works
wrought through faith.” No; of works wrought without faith;
else the argument implies a contradiction. For it runs thus:
(On the supposition that faith and reliance were synonymous
terms:) Such a reliance is the result of works wrought through
such a reliance.
5. Your Fourth argument against justification by faith alone,
is drawn from the nature of justification. This, you observe,
“implies a prisoner at the bar, and a law by which he is to be
tried; and this is not the law of Moses, but that of Christ,
requiring repentance and faith, with their proper fruits;” (page
16;) which now, through the blood of Christ, are accepted and
“counted for righteousness.” St. Paul affirms this concerning
faith, in the fourth chapter of his Epistle to the Romans. But
where does he say, that either repentance or its fruits are
counted for righteousness? Nevertheless, I allow that the law of
Christ requires such repentance and faith before justification,
as, if there be opportunity, will bring forth the “fruits of right
eousness.” But if there be not, he that repents and believes is
justified notwithstanding. Consequently, these alone are neces
sary, indispensably necessary, conditions of our justification.
6. Your Last argument against justification by faith alone
“is drawn from the method of God’s proceeding at the last day.
He will then judge every man ‘according to his works. If,
therefore, works wrought through faith are the ground of the
sentence passed upon us in that day, then are they a necessary
condition of our justification; ” (page 19;) in other words, “if
they are a condition of our final, they are a condition of our
present, justification.” I cannot allow the consequence. All
holiness must precede our entering into glory. But no holiness
can exist, till, “being justified by faith, we have peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ.”
7. You next attempt to reconcile the writings of St. Paul
with justification by works. In order to this you say, “In the
three first chapters of his Epistle to the Romans, he proves
that both Jews and Gentiles must have recourse to the gospel
of Christ. To this end he convicts the whole world of sin; and
having stopped every mouth, he makes his inference, ‘There
fore, by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified.
THE REV. DR. HORNE. 115
We conclude, them, says he, “a man is justified by faith, with
out the deeds of the law. But here arise two questions: First,
What are the works excluded from justifying? Secondly, What
is the faith which justifies?” (Pages 20, 21, 22.)
“The works excluded are heathem and Jewish works, set up
as meritorious. This is evident from hence,—that Heathens
and carnal Jews are the persons against whom he is arguing.”
Not so : He is arguing against all mankind: He is convicting
the whole world of sin. His concern is to stop every mouth,
by proving that no flesh, none born of a woman, no child of
man, can be justified by his own works. Consequently, he
speaks of all the works of all mankind, antecedent to justifica
tion, whether Jewish or any other, whether supposed meritori
ous or not, of which the text says not one word. Therefore,
all works antecedent to justification are excluded, and faith is
set in flat opposition to them. “Unto him that worketh not,
but believeth, his faith is counted to him for righteousness.”
“But what is the faith to which he attributes justification?
That ‘which worketh by love;’ which is the same with the
‘new creature, and implies in it the keeping the command
ments of God.”
It is undoubtedly true, that nothing avails for our final salva
tion without catwm &tious, “a new creation,” and consequent
thereon, a sincere, uniform keeping of the commandments of
God. This St. Paul constantly declares. But where does he
say, this is the condition of our justification? In the Epistles
to the Romans and Galatians particularly, he vehemently
asserts the contrary; earnestly maintaining, that nothing is
absolutely necessary to this, but “believing in Him that justi
fieth the ungodly;” not the godly, not him that is already
a “new creature,” that previously keeps all the commandments
of God. He does this afterward; when he is justified by faith,
then his faith “worketh by love.”
“Therefore, there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus,” justified by faith in him, provided they “walk
in Him whom they have received, not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit.” (Page 23.) But should they turn back, and walk
again after the flesh, they would again be under condemnation.
But this no way proves that “walking after the Spirit” was
the condition of their justification.
Neither will anything like this follow from the Apostle's.
I 2
116 LETTER TO THE
saying to the Corinthians, “Though I had all faith, so as to
remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.” This
only proves that miracle-working faith may be where saving
faith is not.
8. To the argument, “St. Paul says, “Abraham was justified
by faith,’” you answer, “St. James says, “Abraham was justi
fied by works.’” (Page 24.) True: But he neither speaks of
the same justification, nor the same faith, nor the same works.
Not of the same justification; for St. Paul speaks of that justi
fication which was five-and-twenty years before Isaac was born;
(Genesis;) St. James, of that wherewith he was justified when
he offered up Isaac on the altar. It is living faith whereby
St. Paul affirms we are justified: It is dead faith whereby St.
James affirms we are not justified. St. Paul speaks of works
antecedent to justification; St. James, of works consequent
upon it. This is the plain, easy, natural way of reconciling the
two Apostles.
The fact was manifestly this: (1.) When Abraham dwelt in
Haran, being then seventy-five years old, God called him
thence: He “believed God,” and He “counted it to him for
righteousness; ” that is, “he was justified by faith,” as St. Paul
strenuously asserts. (2.) Many years after Isaac was born,
(some of the ancients thought three-and-thirty,) Abraham,
showing his faith by his works, offered him up upon the altar.
(3.) Here the “faith” by which, in St. Paul's sense, he was
justified long before, “wrought together with his works;” and
he was justified in St. James’s sense, that is, (as the Apostle
explains his own meaning,) “by works his faith was made
perfect.” God confirmed, increased, and perfected the principle
from which those works sprang.
9. Drawing to a conclusion, you say, “What pity, so many
volumes should have been written upon the question,—whether
a man be justified by faith or works, seeing they are two essen
tial parts of the same thing!” (Page 25.) If by works you
understand inward and outward holiness, both faith and works
are essential parts of Christianity; and yet they are essentially
different, and by God himself contradistinguished from each
other; and that in the very question before us: “Him that
worketh not, but believeth.” Therefore, whether a man be jus
tified by faith or works, is a point of the last importance; other
wise, our Reformers could not have answered to God their spend
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 117
ing so much time upon it. Indeed, they were both too wise
and too good men to have wrote so many volumes on a trifling
or needless question.
10. If in speaking on this important point, (such at least it
appears to me,) I have said any thing offensive, any that im
plies the least degree of anger or disrespect, it was entirely
foreign to my intention; nor indeed have I any provocation:
I have no room to be angry at your maintaining what you
believe to be the truth of the gospel; even though I might
wish you had omitted a few expressions,
Quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit natura."
In the general, from all I have heard concerning you, I cannot
but very highly esteem you in love. And that God may give
you both “a right judgment in all things, and evermore to
rejoice in his holy comfort,” is the prayer of,
Reverend Sir,
Your affectionate brother and servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
A. LETTER,
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND
THE LORD BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER :
OCCASIONED BY HIS TRACT
“ON THE OFFICE AND OPERATIONS OF THE
HOLY SPIRIT.”
My Lord,
YoUR Lordship well observes, “To employ buffoonery in the
service of religion is to violate the majesty of truth, and to
deprive it of a fair hearing. To examine, men must be serious.”
* Such as escaped my notice; or such as may be placed to the account of human
infirmity.
118 LETTER TO THE
(Preface, p. 11.) I will endeavour to be so in all the following
pages; and the rather, not only because I am writing to a
person who is so far, and in so many respects, my superior,
but also because of the importance of the subject: For is the
question only, What I am? a madman, or a man in his senses?
a knave, or an honest man? No; this is only brought in by
way of illustration. The question is, of the office and opera
tion of the Holy Spirit; with which the doctrine of the new
birth, and indeed the whole of real religion, is connected.
On a subject of so deep concern, I desire to be serious as
death. But, at the same time, your Lordship will permit me
to use great plainness. And this I am the more emboldened
to do, because by naming my name, your Lordship, as it were,
condescends to meet me on even ground.
I shall consider, First, what your Lordship advances con
cerning me: and, Then, what is advanced concerning the
operations of the Holy Spirit.
I. First. Concerning me. It is true I am here dealing in
crambe repetita,” reciting objections which have been urged
and answered a hundred times. But as your Lordship is pleased
to repeat them again, I am obliged to repeat the answers.
Your Lordship begins: “If the false prophet pretend to
some extraordinary measure of the Spirit, we are directed to
try that spirit by James iii. 17.” (Page 117.) I answer, 1. (as
I have done many times before,) I do not pretend to any
extraordinary measure of the Spirit. I pretend to no other
measure of it than may be claimed by every Christian Minis
ter. 2. Where are we directed to “try Prophets” by this
text? How does it appear that it was given for any such
purpose? It is certain we may try Christians hereby, whether
they are real or pretended ones; but I know not that either
St. James, or any other inspired writer, gives us the least
hint of trying Prophets thereby.
Your Lordship adds, “In this rule or direction for the trial
of spirits, the marks are to be applied only negatively. The
man in whom they are not found hath not the “wisdom from
above.’ But we are not to conclude, that he has it in whom any
or all of them are found.” (Page 118.) We are not to conclude
that he is a Prophet, for the Apostle says nothing about Pro
phets; but may we not conclude, the man in whom all these are
* Thus translated from Juvenal by Gifford:—
“The selfsame subject, in the selfsame words.”—EDIT.
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 119
found has “the wisdom from above?” Surely we may; for
these are the essential parts of that wisdom; and can he have
all the parts and not have the whole?
Is not this enough to show, that the Apostle is here giving
“a set of marks,” not “to detect impostor-prophets,” but
impostor-Christians? those that impose either upon themselves
or others, as if they were Christians when they are not?
In what follows, I shall simply consider the argument,
without directly addressing your Lordship.
“Apply these marks to the features of modern fanatics,
especially Mr. John Wesley. He has laid claim to almost
every apostolic gift, in as full and ample a manner as they
were possessed of old.” (Page 119.)
The miraculous gifts bestowed upon the Apostles are
enumerated in two places: First, Mark xvi. 17, 18: “In my
name they shall cast out devils; they shall speak with new
tongues; they shall take up serpents; if they drink any
deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on
the sick, and they shall recover.” Second, 1 Cor. xii. 8–10:
“To one is given the word of wisdom; to another the word
of knowledge; to another faith; to another the gifts of heal
ing; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy;
to another the discernment of spirits; to another tongues; to
another the interpretation of tongues.”
Do I lay claim to almost every one of these “in as full and
ample a manner as they were possessed of old?”
Five of them are enumerated in the former catalogue; to
three of which—speaking with new tongues, taking up ser
pents, drinking deadly things—it is not even pretended I lay
any claim at all. In the latter, nine are enumerated. And
as to seven of these, none has yet seen good to call me in
question;-miraculous wisdom, or knowledge, or faith, pro
phecy, discernment of spirits, strange tongues, and the inter
pretation of tongues. What becomes then of the assertion,
that I lay “claim to almost every one of them in the most
full and ample manner?”
Do I lay claim to any one of them? To prove that I do,
my own words are produced, extracted from an account of the
occurrences of about sixteen years.
I shall set them down naked and unadorned: 1. “May 13,
1740. The devil stirred up his servants to make all the noise
they could.” 2. “May 3, 1741. I explained, to a vast mul
120 LETTER TO TEIE
titude of people, ‘What doth the Lord require of thee, but to
do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?”
The devil’s children fought valiantly for their master, that his
kingdom should not be destroyed. And many stones fell on my
right hand and my left.” 3. “April 1, 1740. Some or other
of the children of Belial had laboured to disturb us several
nights before. Now all the street was filled with people, shout
ing, cursing, swearing, and ready to swallow the ground with
rage.” (Page 120.)4. “June 27, 1747. I found only one person
among them who knew the love of God, before my brother
came. No wonder the devil was so still; ‘for his goods were in
peace.’” 5. “April 29, 1752. I preached at Durham to a quiet,
stupid congregation.” (Page 121.) 6. “May 9, 1740. I was a
little surprised at some who were buffeted of Satan in an un
usual manner, by such a spirit of laughter as they could in
nowise resist. I could scarce have believed the account they
gave me, had I not known the same thing ten or eleven years
ago, when both my brother and I were seized in the same man
ner.” (If any man call this hysterics, I am not concerned:
I think and let think.) 7. “May 21, 1740. In the evening
such a spirit of laughter was among us, that many were much
offended. But the attention of all was soon fixed on poor
L S ,whom we all knew to be no dissembler. One so
violently and variously torn of the evil one did I never see be
fore. Sometimes she laughed till almost strangled; then broke
out into cursing and blaspheming. At last she faintly called
on Christ to help her; and the violence of her pangs ceased.”
(Let any who please impute this likewise to hysterics: Only
permit me to think otherwise.) 8. “May 17, 1740. I found
more and more undeniable proofs, that we have need to
watch and pray every moment. Outward trials, indeed, were
now removed: But so much the more did inward trials abound;
and “if one member suffered, all the members suffered with
it.” So strange a sympathy did I never observe before;
whatever considerable temptation fell on any one, unaccount
ably spreading itself to the rest, so that exceeding few were
able to escape it.” (Pages 122, 123.)
I know not what these eight quotations prove, but that I
believe the devil still variously tempts and troubles good men;
while he “works with energy in the children of disobedience.”
Certainly they do not prove that I lay claim to any of the pre
ccding gifts. Let us see whether any more is proved by the
BiSHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 121
ten next quotations: 1. “So many living witnesses hath
God given, that his hand is still stretched out to heal,”
(namely, the souls of sinners, as the whole paragraph fixes
the sense,) “ and that signs and wonders are even now
wrought” (page 124) (namely, in the conversion of the
greatest sinners). 2. “Among the poor colliers of Placey, Jo.
Lane, then nine or ten years old, was one of the first that found
peace with God.” (Ibid.) 3. “Mrs. Nowers said her little
son appeared to have a continual fear of God, and an awful
sense of his presence. A few days since, she said, he broke
out into prayers aloud, and said, ‘I shall go to heaven soon.’”
This child, when he began to have the fear of God, was, as
his parents said, just three years old. 4. I did receive that
“account of the young woman of Manchester from her own
mouth.” But I pass no judgment on it, good or bad; nor,
5. On “the trance,” (page 126) as her mother called it, of
S.T., neither denying nor affirming the truth of it. 6. “You
deny that God does work these effects; at least, that he works
them in this manner: I affirm both. I have seen very many
persons changed in a moment, from the spirit of fear, horror,
despair, to the spirit of love, joy, and praise. In several of
them this change was wrought in a dream, or during a strong
representation to their mind of Christ, either on the cross, or
in glory.” (Page 127.)
“But here the symptoms of grace and of perdition are inter
woven and confounded with one another.” (Page 128.) No.
Though light followed darkness, yet they were not interwoven,
much less confounded with each other. 7. “But some imputed
the work to the force of imagination, or even to the delusion of
the devil.” (Ibid.) They did so; which made me say, 8. “I
fear we have grieved the Spirit of the jealous God, by question
ing his work.” (Ibid.) 9. “Yet he says himself, ‘These symp
toms I can no more impute to any natural cause, than to the
Spirit of God. I make no doubt, it was Satan tearing them, as
they were coming to Christ.’” (Page 129.) But these symp
toms, and the work mentioned before, are wholly different things.
The work spoken of is the conversion of sinners to God; these
symptoms are cries and bodily pain. The very next instance
makes this plain. 10. “I visited a poor old woman. Her
trials had been uncommon; inexpressible agonies of mind,
joined with all sorts of bodily pain; not, it seemed, from any
natural cause, but the direct operation of Satan.” (Page 130.)
122 LETTER, TO THE
Neither do any of those quotations prove that I lay claim
to any miraculous gift.
“Such was the evangelic state of things when Mr. Wesley
first entered on this ministry; who, seeing himself surrounded
with subjects so harmoniously disposed, thus triumphantly
exults.” To illustrate this, let us add the date: “Such was
the evangelic state of things, August 9, 1750; ” (on that day,
I preached that sermon;) “when Mr. Wesley first entered on
this ministry.” Nay, that was in the year 1738. So I
triumphed, because I saw what would be twelve years after.
Let us see what the ten next quotations prove. 1. “In
applying these words, ‘I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance, my soul was so enlarged, that me
thought I could have cried out, (in another sense than poor
vain Archimedes,) ‘Give me where to stand, and I will shake
the earth.’” (Page 130.) I meant neither more nor less
(though I will not justify the use of so strong an expression)
than, I was so deeply penetrated with a sense of the love of
God to sinners, that it seemed, if I could have declared it to
all the world, they could not but be moved thereby.
“Here then was a scene well prepared for a good actor,
and excellently fitted up for the part he was to play.” (Page
131.) But how came so good an actor to begin playing the
part twelve years before the scene was fitted up?
“He sets out with declaring his mission. 2. ‘I cried
aloud, All things are ready : come ye to the marriage. I
then delivered my message.’” And does not every Minister
do the same whenever he preaches?
But how is this? “He sets out with declaring his mis
sion.” Nay, but this was ten years after my setting out.
3. “My heart was not wholly resigned. Yet I know he
heard my voice.” (Page 132.) 4. “The longer I spoke, the
more strength I had; till at twelve, I was as one refreshed with
wine.” (Page 133.) 5. “I explained the nature of inward reli
gion, words flowing upon me faster than I could speak.” (Ibid.)
6. “I intended to have given an exhortation to the society.
But as soon as we met, the Spirit of supplication fell upon us,
(on the congregation as well as me,) so that I could hardly do
anything but pray and give thanks.” (Ibid.) I believe every
true Christian may experience all that is contained in these
three instances. 7. “The Spirit of prayer was so poured upon
BiSHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 123
us all, that we could only speak to God.” (Ibid.) 8. “Many
were seated on a wall, which, in the middle of the sermon, fell
down; but not one was hurt at all. Nor was there any inter
ruption, either of my speaking, or of the attention of the hear
ers.” (Page 134.) 9. “The mob had just broke open the doors,
and while they burst in at one door, we walked out at the other.
Nor did one man take any notice of us, though we were within
five yards of each other.” (Page 135.) The fact was just so.
I do not attempt to account for it; because I cannot. 10.
“The next miracle was on his friends.” They were no friends
of mine. I had seen few of them before in my life. Neither
do I say or think it was any miracle at all, that they were all
“silent while I spake; ” or that “the moment I had done,
the chain fell off, and they all began talking at once.”
Do any or all of these quotations prove, that I “lay claim
to almost every miraculous gift?”
Will the eight following quotations prove any more?
1. “Some heard perfectly well on the side of the opposite hill,
which was sevenscore yards from the place whereIstood.” (Ibid.)
I believe they did, as it was a calm day, and the hill rose gra
dually like a theatre. 2. “What I here aver is the naked fact.
Let every one account for it as he sees good. My horse was
exceeding lame; and my head ached much. I thought, Can
not God heal man or beast by means or without 7 Immedi
ately my weariness and headache ceased, and my horse’s lame
ness in the same instant.” (Page 136.) It was so; and I
believe thousands of serious Christians have found as plain
answers to prayer as this. 3. William Kirkman’s case proves
only, that God does what pleases him; not that I make myself
either “a great saint or a great Physician.” (Page 137.) 4.
“R.A. was freed at once, without any human means, from a
distemper naturally incurable.” (Page 138.) He was; but it
was before I knew him. So, what is that to me? 5. “I found
Mr. Lunell in a violent fever. He revived the moment he
saw me, and began to recover from that time. Perhaps for this
also was I sent.” (Ibid.) I mean, Perhaps this was one end
for which the providence of God brought me thither at that
time. 6. “In the evening, I called upon Ann Calcut. She
had been speechless for some time. But almost as soon as we
began to pray, God restored her speech. And from that hour
the fever left her.” 7. “I visited several ill of the spotted
124 LETTER. To TIl E
fever, which had been extremely mortal. But God had said,
* Hitherto shalt thou come.’ I believe there was not one with
whom we were, but he recovered.” (Page 139.) 8. “Mr.
Meyrick had been speechless and senseless for some time. A
few of us joined in prayer. Before we had done, his sense and
his speech returned. Others may account for this by natural
causes. I believe this is the power of God.” (Ibid.)
But what does all this prove? Not that I claim any gift above
other men; but only that I believe God now hears and answers
prayer, even beyond the ordinary course of nature: Otherwise,
the Clerk was in the right, who, in order to prevent the fana
ticism of his Rector, told him, “Sir, you should not pray for
fair weather yet; for the moon does not change till Saturday.”
While the two accounts (pp. 143, 146) which are next
recited lay before me, a venerable old Clergyman calling upon
me, I asked him, “Sir, would you advise me to publish these
strange relations, or not?” He answered, “Are you sure of
the facts?” I replied, “As sure as that I am alive.”
“Then,” said he, “publish them in God’s name, and be not
careful about the event.”
The short of the case is this: Two young women were tor
mented of the devil in an uncommon manner. Several
serious persons desired my brother and me to pray with them.
We, with many others, did; and they were delivered. But
where, meantime, were the “exorcisms in form, according to
the Roman fashion ?” I never used them : I never saw
them: I know nothing about them.
“Such were the blessings which Mr. W. distributed among
his friends. For his enemies he had in store the judgments
of Heaven.” (Page 144.) Did I then ever distribute, or
profess to distribute, these? Do I claim any such power?
This is the present question. Let us calmly consider the
eight quotations brought to prove it.
1. “I preached at Darlaston, late a den of lions. But the
fiercest of them God has called away, by a train of surprising
strokes.” (Ibid.) But not by me: I was not there. 2. “I preached
at R., late a place of furious riot and persecution; but quiet
and calm, since the bitter Rector is gone to give an account of
himself to God.” (Page 145.) 3. “Hence we rode to T-n,
where the Minister was slowly recovering from a violent fit of
the palsy, with which he was struck immediately after he had
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 125
been preaching a virulent sermon against the Methodists.”
(Page 145.) 4. “The case of Mr. W n was dreadful
indeed, and too notorious to be denied.” (Ibid.) 5. “One of
the chief of those who came to make the disturbance on the
first instant hanged himself.” (Page 146.) 6. “I was quite
surprised when I heard Mr. R. preach; that soft, smooth,
tuneful voice, which he so often employed to blaspheme the
work of God, was lost, without hope of recovery.” (Ibid.)
7. “Mr. C. spoke so much in favour of the rioters, that they
were all discharged. A few days after, walking over the same
field, he dropped down, and spoke no more.” (Page 147.)
And what is the utmost that can be inferred from all these
passages? That I believe these things to have been judg
ments. What if I did? To believe these things to have been
judgments is one thing; to claim a power of inflicting judg
ments is another. If, indeed, I believe things to be judg
ments which are not, I am to blame. But still this is not
“claiming any miraculous gift.”
But “you cite one who forbid your speaking to some dying
criminals, to answer for their souls at the judgment-seat of
Christ.” (Ibid.) I do; but, be this right or wrong, it is not
“claiming a power to inflict judgments.”
“Yes, it is: For these judgments are fulminated with the
air of one who had the divine vengeance at his disposal.”
(Page 147.) I think not: And I believe all impartial men
will be of the same mind.
“These are some of the extraordinary gifts which Mr. W.
claims.” (Page 149.) I claim no extraordinary gift at all;
nor has anything to the contrary been proved yet, so much as
in a single instance.
“We come now to the application of this sovereign test,
James iii. 17.” But let us see that we understand it first. I
beg leave to consider the whole: “Who is a wise and know
ing man among you? Let him show his wisdom,” as well as
his faith, “by his works,” not by words only. “But if ye
have bitter zeal and strife in your heart, do not glory and lie
against the truth; ” as if any such zeal, anything contrary to
love, could consist with true wisdom. “This wisdom de
scendeth not from above; but is earthly, sensual, devilish :
For where bitter zeal and strife are, there is confusion and
every evil work. But the wisdom which is from above,”
which every one that hath is a real Christian, and he only,
126 LETTER TO THE
—“is first pure,” free from all that is earthly, sensual, devil
ish: “then peaceable,” benign, loving, making peace;
“gentle,” soft, mild, yielding, not morose, or sour; “easy to
be entreated,” to be persuaded or convinced, not stubborn,
self-willed, or self-conceited; “full of mercy,” of tenderness
and compassion; “and good fruits,” both in the heart and
life. Two of these are immediately specified; “without par
tiality,” loving and doing good to all, without respect of per
sons; “and without hypocrisy,” sincere, frank, open.
I desire to be tried by this test. I try myself by it con
tinually: Not, indeed, whether I am a Prophet, (for it has
nothing to do with this,) but whether I am a Christian.
I. The present question then is, (not what is Mr. Law, or
what are the Moravians, but) what is John Wesley? And,
(1.) Is he pure or not? “Not pure; for he separates rea
son from grace.” (Page 156.) A wonderful proof! But I
deny the fact. I never did separate reason from grace. “Yes,
you do; for your own words are, ‘The points we chiefly in
sisted on were four: (1.) That orthodoxy, or right opinion, is
at best but a very slender part of religion; if it can be
allowed to be any part of it at all.’” (Page 157.)
After premising that it is our bounden duty to labour after
a right judgment in all things, as a wrong judgment naturally
leads to wrong practice, I say again, right opinion is at best
but a very slender part of religion, (which properly and di
rectly consists in right tempers, words, and actions,) and fre
quently it is no part of religion. For it may be where there
is no religion at all; in men of the most abandoned lives;
yea, in the devil himself.
And yet this does not prove that I “separate reason from
grace; ” that I “discard reason from the service of religion.”
I do continually “employ it to distinguish between right and
wrong opinions.” I never affirmed “this distinction to be of
little consequence,” or denied “the gospel to be a reasonable
service.” (Page 158.)
But “the Apostle Paul considered right opinions as a full
third part, at least, of religion. For he says, “The fruit of the
Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth. By
goodness is meant the conduct of particulars to the whole,
and consists in habits of social virtue; and this refers to
Christian practice. By righteousness is meant the conduct
of the whole to particulars, and consists in the gentle use of
BiSHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 127
church authority; and this refers to Christian discipline. By
truth is meant the conduct of the whole, and of particulars
to one another, and consists in orthodoxy or right opinion;
and this refers to Christian doctrine.” (Page 159.)
My objections to this account are, First, It contradicts St.
Paul; Secondly, It contradicts itself.
First. It contradicts St. Paul. It fixes a meaning upon
his words, foreign both to the text and context. The plain
sense of the text, taken in connexion with the context, is no
other than this: (Eph. v. 9:) “The fruit of the Spirit”
(rather, “of the light,” which Bengelius proves to be the
true reading, opposite to “the unfruitful works of darkness,”
mentioned verse 11) “is,” consists, “in all goodness, kind
ness, tender-heartedness,” (iv. 32,)—opposite to “bitterness,
wrath, anger, clamour, evil-speaking; ” (verse 31;) “in all
righteousness,” rendering unto all their dues,—opposite to
“stealing; ” (verse 28;) “ and in all truth,” veracity, sin
cerity,-opposite to “lying.” (Verse 25.)
Secondly. That interpretation contradicts itself; and that
in every article. For, 1. If by “goodness” be meant “the
conduct of particulars to the whole,” then it does not consist
in habits of social virtue. For social virtue regulates the
conduct of particulars, not so properly to the whole as to
each other. 2. If by “righteousness” be meant “the con
duct of the whole to particulars,” then it cannot consist in
the gentleness of Church authority; unless Church Govern
ors are the whole Church, or the Parliament the whole nation.
3. If by “truth” be meant “the conduct of the whole, and
of particulars to one another,” then it cannot possibly con
sist in orthodoxy or right opinion. For opinion, right or
wrong, is not conduct: They differ toto genere. If, then, it
be orthodoxy, it is not “the conduct of the governors and
governed toward each other.” If it be their conduct toward
each other, it is not orthodoxy.
Although, therefore, it be allowed that right opinions are
a great help, and wrong opinions a great hinderance, to reli
gion, yet, till stronger proof be brought against it, that pro
position remains unshaken, “Right opinions are a slender
part of religion, if any part of it at all.” (Page 160.)
“(As to the affair of Abbé Paris, whoever will read over with
calmness and impartiality but one volume of Monsieur Mont
geron, will then be a competent judge. Meantime I would just
128 LETTER TO THE
observe, that if these miracles were real, they strike at the
root of the whole Papal authority; as having been wrought in
direct opposition to the famous Bull Unigenitus.)” (Page 161.)
Yet I do not say, “Errors in faith have little to do with
religion; ” or that they are “no let or impediment to the
Holy Spirit.” (Page 162.) But still it is true, that “God,
generally speaking, begins his work at the heart.” (Ibid.)
Men usually feel desires to please God, before they know how
to please him. Their heart says, “What must I do to be
saved?” before they understand the way of salvation.
But see “the character he gives his own saints ‘The
more I converse with this people, the more I am amazed.
That God hath wrought a great work is manifest, by saving
many sinners from their sins. And yet the main of them are
not able to give a rational account of the plainest principles
of religion.’” They were not able then, as there had not
been time to instruct them. But the case is far different now.
Again: Did I “give this character,” even then, of the
people called Methodists, in general? No, but of the people
of a particular town in Ireland, where nine in ten of the in
habitants are Romanists.
“Nor is the observation confined to the people. He had
made a proselyte of Mr. D., Vicar of B. And, to show he
was no discredit to his master, he gives him this character:
‘He seemed to stagger at nothing, though as yet his under
standing is not opened.’” (Page 162.)
Mr. D. was never a proselyte of mine; nor did I ever see
him before or since. I endeavoured to show him that we
are justified by faith. And he did not object; though nei
ther did he understand.
“But in the first propagation of religion, God began with
the understanding, and rational conviction won the heart.”
(Page 163.) Frequently, but not always. The jailor's heart
was touched first, then he understood what he must do to
be saved. In this respect then there is nothing new in the
present work of God. So the lively story from Moliere is
just nothing to the purpose.
In drawing the parallel between the work God has wrought
in England and in America, I do not so much as “insinuate
that the understanding has nothing to do in the work.”
(Page 165.) Whoever is engaged therein will find full em
ployment for all the understanding which God has given him.
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 129
“On the whole, therefore, we conclude, that wisdom which
divests the Christian faith of its truth, and the test of it, reason,
and resolves all religion into spiritual mysticism and ecstatic
raptures, cannot be the wisdom from above, whose character
istic is purity.” (Page 166.)
Perhaps so, but I do not “divest faith either of truth or rea
son:” much less do I resolve all into “spiritual mysticism and
ecstatic raptures.” Therefore suppose purity here meant sound
doctrine, (which it no more means than it does a sound consti
tution,) still it touches not me, who, for anything that has yet
been said, may teach the soundest doctrine in the world.
(2.) “Our next business is to apply the other marks to these
pretending sectaries. The First of these, purity, respects the
nature of the “wisdom from above,” or, in other words, the doc
trine taught.” (Page 167.) Not in the least. It has no more
to do with “doctrine,” than the whole text has with “Pro
phets.” “All the rest concern the manner of teaching.”
Neither can this be allowed. They no farther concern either
teaching or teachers, than they concern all mankind.
But to proceed: “Methodism signifies only the manner of
preaching; not either an old or a new religion; it is the manner
in which Mr. W. and his followers attempt to propagate the
plain old religion.” (Page 168.) And is not this sound doctrine?
Is this “spiritual mysticism and ecstatic raptures?”
“Of all men, Mr. W. should best know the meaning of the
term; since it was not a nick-name imposed on the sect by its
enemies, but an appellation of honour bestowed upon it by
themselves.” In answer to this, I need only transcribe what
was published twenty years ago:
“Since the name first came abroad into the world, many
have been at a loss to know what a Methodist is; what are the
principles and practice of those who are commonly called by
that name; and what are the distinguishing marks of the sect,
which “is everywhere spoken against.”
“And it being generally believed that I was able to give the
clearest account of these things, (as having been one of the first
to whom the name was given, and the person by whom the rest
were supposed to be directed,) I have been called upon, in all
manner of ways, and with the utmost earnestness, so to do. I
yield at last to the continued importunity both of friends and
enemies; and do now give the clearest accornt I can, in the
WOL. IX. K
130 LETTER, TO THE
presence of the Lord, the Judge of heaven and earth, of the
principles and practice whereby those who are called Metho
dists are distinguished from other men.
“I say, those who are called Methodists; for, let it be well
observed, that this is not a name which they take upon them
selves, but one fixed on them by way of reproach, without their
approbation or consent. It was first given to three or four young
men at Oxford, by a Student of Christ's Church; either in allu
sion to the ancient sect of Physicians, (so called from their
teaching that almost all diseases might be cured by a specific
method of diet and exercise,) or from their observing a more
regular method of study and behaviour than was usual with
those of their age and station.” (Preface to “the Character of
a Methodist.”)
I need only add, that this nick-name was imposed upon us
before “this manner of preaching” had a being; yea, at a
time when I thought it as lawful to cut a throat, as to preach
out of a church.
“Why then will Mr. W. so grossly misrepresent his adver
saries, as to say, that, when they speak against Methodism, they
speak against the plain, old doctrine of the Church of Eng
land?” (Tract, p. 169.) This is no misrepresentation. Many
of our adversaries, all over the kingdom, speak against us, eo
nomine,” for preaching these doctrines, justification by faith in
particular.
However, a “fanatic manner of preaching, though it were the
doctrine of an Apostle, may do more harm to society at least,
than reviving old heresies, or inventing new. It tends to bewilder
the imaginations of some, to inflame the passions of others,
and to spread disorder and confusion through the whole com
munity.” (Page 169.) I would gladly have the term defined.
What is a “fanatic manner of preaching?” Is it field-preach
ing? But this has no such effect, even among the wildest of
men. This has not “bewildered the imagination” even of
the Kingswood colliers, or “inflamed their passions.” It has
not spread disorder or confusion among them, but just the
contrary. From the time it was heard in that chaos,
Confusion heard the voice, and wild uproar
Stood ruled, and order from disorder sprung.
“But St. James, who delivers the test for the trial of these
men's pretensions,” (the same mistake still,) “unquestionably
* On this account.—EIDT.
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 131
thought a fanatic spirit did more mischief in the mode of
teaching, than in the matter taught; since of six marks, one
only concerns doctrine, all the rest the manner of the Teacher.”
(Page 170.) Nay, all six concern doctrine, as much as one.
The truth is, they have nothing to do either with doctrine or
manner.
“From St. Paul’s words, ‘Be instantin season, out of season,’
he infers more than they will bear; and misapplies them into
the bargain.” (Page 171.) When and where? I do not remem
ber applying them at all.
“When seasonable times are appointed for holy offices, to
fly to unseasonable is factious.” (Page 172.) But it is not
clear, that five in the morning, and seven in the evening, (our
usual times,) are unseasonable.
2. We come now directly to the second article. “‘The wis
dom from above is peaceable. But the propagation of Method
ism has occasioned many and great violations of peace. In order
to know where the blame hereof lies, let us inquire the temper
which ‘makes for peace. For we may be assured the fault
lies not there, where such a temper is found.” (Page 173.) Thus
far we are quite agreed. “Now, the temper which makes for
peace is prudence.” This is one of the tempers which make
for peace; others are kindness, meekness, patience. “This
our Lord recommended by his own example.” (Pages 174
—177.) “But this Mr. W. calls, ‘the mystery of iniquity,
and the offspring of hell.’” (Page 178.) No, not this; not
the prudence which our Lord recommends. I call that so, and
that only, which the world, the men who know not God, style
Christian prudence. By this I mean subtlety, craft, dissimula
tion; study to please man rather than God; the art of trim
ming between God and the world, of serving God and mam
mon. Will any serious man defend this? And this only do I
condemn.
But you “say, ‘Good sort of men, as they are called, are
‘the bane of all religion.” (Pages 179, 180.) And I think
so. By this “good sort of men,” I mean, persons who have a
iking to, but no sense of, religion; no real fear or love of God;
no truly Christian tempers. “These steal away the little zeal
he has, that is, persuade him to be peaceable.” No ; persuade
me to be like themselves,—without love either to God or man
“Again, speaking of one, he says, “Indulging himself in
o
-
132 LETTER TO THE
harmless company,’” (vulgarly so called,) “he first made ship
wreck of his zeal, then of his faith. In this I think he is right.
The zeal and faith of a fanatic are such exact tallies, that nei
ther can exist alone. They came into the world together, to
disturb society and dishonour religion.”
By zeal, I mean the flame of love, or fervent love to God
and man; by faith, the substance or confidence of things hoped
for, the evidence of things not seen. Is this the zeal and faith
of a fanatic? Then St. Paul was the greatest fanatic on earth.
Did these come into the world to “disturb society and dis
honour religion?”
“On the whole, we find Mr. W., by his own confession,
entirely destitute of prudence. Therefore it must be ascribed
to the want of this, if his preaching be attended with tumult
and disorder.” (Page 181.) By his own confession ? Surely
no. This I confess, and this only: What is falsely called pru
dence, I abhor; but true prudence I love and admire.
However, “You set at nought the discipline of the Church,
by invading the province of the parochial Minister:” (Page
182:) Nay, if ever I preach at all, it must be in the province of
some parochial Minister. “By assembling in undue places,
and at unfit times.” I know of no times unfit for those who
assemble. And I believe Hannam Mount and Rose Green
were the most proper places under heaven for preaching to the
colliers in Kingswood. “By scurrilous invectives against the
Governors and Pastors of the National Church.” This is an
entire mistake. I dare not make any “scurrilous invectives”
against any man. “Insolencies of this nature provoke warm.
men to tumult.” But these insolencies do not exist. So that
whatever tumult either warm or cool men raise, I am not.
chargeable therewith.
“To know the true character of Methodism.” The present
point is, to know the true character of John Wesley. Now, in
order to know this, we need not inquire what others were before
he was born. All therefore that follows, of old Precisians,
Puritans, and Independents, may stand just as it is. (Pages
184–186.)
But “Mr. W. wanted to be persecuted.” (Page 187.) As
this is averred over and over, I will explain myself upon it,
once for all. I never desired or wanted to be persecuted.
Lives there who loves his pain?
I love and desire to “live peaceably with all men.” “But
Bis IOP OF GLOUCESTER. 183
persecution would not come at his call.” However, it came
uncalled; and, more than once or twice, it was not “mock
persecution.” It was not only the huzzas of the mob; showers
of stones are something more than huzzas. And whosoever
saw the mob either at Walsal or Cork, (to instance in no more,)
saw that they were not “in jest,” but in great earnest, eagerly
athirst, not for sport, (as you suppose,) but for blood.
But though I do not desire persecution, I expect it. I must,
if I believe St. Paul: “All that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution;” (2 Tim. iii. 12;) either sooner or
later, more or less, according to the wise providence of God.
But I believe, “all these things work together for good to them
that love God.” And from a conviction of this, they may even
rejoice when they are “persecuted for righteousness' sake.”
Yet, as I seldom “complain of ill treatment,” so I am never
“dissatisfied with good.” (Page 188.) But I often wonder at
it: And I once expressed my wonder nearly in the words of
the old Athenian: “What have we done, that the world
should be so civil to us?”
You conclude the head: “As he who persecutes is but the
tool of him that invites persecution,” (I know not who does)
“the crime finally comes home to him who set the rioter at
work.” (Page 191.) And is this all the proof that I am not
peaceable? Then let all men judge if the charge is made good.
3. “The next mark of the celestial wisdom is, it is ‘gentle,
and easy to be entreated;’ compliant and even obsequious to all
men.” And how does it appear that...I am wanting in this?
Why, he is “a severe condemner of his fellow-citizens, and a
severe exactor of conformity to his own observances.” Now, the
proof: (1) “He tells us this in the very appellation he assumes.”
(Page 192.) Nay, I never assumed it at all. (2.) But “you say,
‘Useless conversation is an abomination to the Lord.’ And
what is this, but to withstand St. Paul to the face?” Why, did
St. Paul join in or condemn useless conversation? I rather
think he reproves it. He condemns as oatpos Aoyos, “putrid,
stinking conversation,” all that is not good, all that is not “to
the use of edifying,” and meet to “ministergracetothehearers.”
(Eph. iv. 29.) (3.) Mr. Wesley “resolved never to laugh, nor to
speak a tittle of worldly things;” (page 198;)—“thoughothers
may, nay, must.” Pray add that, with the reason of my so
resolving, namely, that I expected to die in a few days. If I
134 LETTER TO THE
expected it now, probably, I should resume the resolution.
But, be it as it may, this proves nothing against my being
both gentle, and easy to be entreated. (4) “He says, Mr.
G- was a clumsy, overgrown, hardfaced man.” (Page 194.)
So he was. And this was the best of him. I spare him much
in saying no more. But he is gone; let his ashes rest. (5)
“I heard a most miserable sermon, full of dull, senseless, im
probable lies.” It was so, from the beginning to the end. I
have seldom heard the like. (6.) “‘The persecution at
St. Ives’” (which ended before I came; what I saw I do not
term persecution) “‘was owing to the indefatigable labours
of Mr. H. and Mr. S., gentlemen worthy to be had in ever
lasting remembrance.’ Here he tells us, it is his purpose to
gibbet up the names of his two great persecutors to everlast
ing infamy.” (Page 195.) These gentlemen had occasioned
several innocent people to be turned out of their livelihood;
and others to be outraged in the most shocking manner, and
beat only not to death. My purpose is, by setting down their
names, to make others afraid so to offend. Yet I say still,
God forbid that I should rail, either at a Turk, infidel, or
heretic. But I will bring to light the actions of such Chris
tians, to be a warning to others. And all this I judge to be
perfectly consistent with “the spirit of meekness.” (Page 196.)
4. “The Fourth mark is, ‘full of mercy and good fruits.”
Let us inquire into the “mercy and good fruits’ of Mr. W.”
(Page 198.)
(1.) And, First: “He has no mercy on his opposers. They
pass with him under no other title, than that of the devil’s ser
vants, and the devil’s children.” (Ibid.) This is far from true.
Many have opposed and do oppose me still, whom I believe to
be children and servants of God. “We have seen him dis
patching the principal of these children of the devil, without
mercy, to their father.” (Page 199.) No, not one. This has
been affirmed over and over, but never proved yet. I fling
about no exterminating judgments of God; I call down no fire
from heaven. “But it would be for the credit of these new
saints, to distinguish between rage and zeal.” That is easily
done. Rage is furious fire from hell; zeal is loving fire from
heaven. (2.) “If what has been said above does not suffice,
turn again to Mr. W.’s Journals: ‘Mr. S., while he was speak
ing to the society against my brother and me, was struck raving
mad.’” (Page 200.) He was so, before a hundred witnesses;
BISHOP OF GLoUCESTER, 185
though I was the last to believe it. “But, it seems, God is at
length entreated for him, and has restored him to a sound
mind.” And is my relating this fact an instance of “dooming
men to perdition?” (3.) “John Haydon cried aloud, ‘Let the
world see the just judgment of God.” (Page 201.) He did.
But let John Haydon look to that. It was he said so, not I.
(4.) “I was informed of an awful providence. A poor wretch, who
was here the last week, cursing and blaspheming, and labour
ing with all his might to hinder the word of God, had after
wards boasted, he would come again on Sunday, and no man
should stop his mouth then. But on Friday God laid his hand
upon him, and on Sunday he was buried.” (Page 202.) And
was not this an awful providence? But yet I do not doom
evenhim to perdition. (5.) “I saw a poor man, once joined
with us, who wanted nothing in this world. A day or two
before, he hanged himself, but was cut down before he was
dead. He has been crying out ever since, God had left him,
because he had left the children of God.” This was his asser
tion, not mine. I neither affirm nor deny it. (6.) The true
account of Lucy Godshall is this: “I buried the body of Lucy
Godshall. After pressing toward the mark for more than two
years, since she had known the pardoning love of God, she was
for some time weary, and faint in her mind, till I put her out
of the Bands. God blessed this greatly to her soul, so that, in
a short time, she was admitted again. Soon after, being at home,
she felt the love of God in an unusual manner poured into her
heart. She fell down upon her knees, and delivered up her
soul and body into the hands of God. In the instant, the use
of all her limbs was taken away, and she was in a burning fever.
For three days, she mightily praised God, and rejoiced in him
all the day long. She then cried out, ‘Now Satan hath desired
to have me, that he may sift me as wheat.’ Immediately dark
ness and heaviness fell upon her, which continued till Satur
day, the 4th instant. On Sunday the light shone again upon
her heart. About ten in the evening, one said to her, “Jesus
is ready to receive your soul. She said, ‘Amen Amen l’
closed her eyes, and died.” (Vol. I. p. 397.) Is this brought as
a proof of my inexorableness, or of my dooming men to
perdition? (7) “I found Nicholas Palmer in great weakness of body,
and heaviness of spirit. We wrestled with God in his behalf;
and our labour was not in vain. His soul was comforted; and
136 LETTER TO THE
a few hours after he quietly fell asleep.” A strange proof this
likewise, either of inexorableness, or of “dooming men to per
dition 1’’ Therefore this charge too stands totally unsupported.
Here is no proof of my unmercifulness yet.
“Good fruits come next to be considered, which Mr.
Wesley's idea of true religion does not promise. He saith,”
(I will repeat the words a little at large, that their true sense
may more clearly appear,) “‘In explaining those words, The
kingdom of God, or true religion, is not meats and drinks, I
was led to show, that religion does not properly consist in
harmlessness, using the means of grace, and doing good, that
is, helping our neighbours, chiefly by giving alms; but that a
man might both be harmless, use the means of grace, and do
muchgood, and yet have no truereligion at all.’” (Tract, p. 203.)
He may so. Yet whoever has true religion, must be “zealous
of good works.” And zeal for all good works is, according
to my idea, an essential ingredient of true religion.
“Spiritual cures are all the good fruits he pretends to.”
(Pages 204, 205.) Not quite all, says William Kirkman, with
some others. “A few of his spiritual cures we will set in a fair
light: ‘The first time I preached at Swalwell,” (chiefly to col
liers, and workers in the iron work,) “‘none seemed to be con
vinced, only stunned.’” I mean amazed at what they heard,
though they were the first principles of religion. “But he
brings them to their senses with a vengeance.” No, not them.
These were different persons. Are they lumped together, in
order to set things in a fair light? The whole paragraph runs
thus: “I carefully examined those who had lately cried out in
the congregation. Some of these, I found, could give no account
at all, how or wherefore they had done so; only that of a sud
den they dropped down, they knew not how; and what they
afterward said or did they knew not. Others could just remem
ber, they were in fear, but could not tell what they were in fear
of Several said they were afraid of the devil; and this was all
they knew. But a few gave a more intelligible account of the
piercing sense they then had of their sins, both inward and out
ward, which were set in array against them round about; of the
dreadthey werein of the wrath of God, and the punishment they
had deserved, into which they seemed to be justfalling, without
any way to escape. One of them told me, ‘I was as if I was just
falling down from the highest place I had ever seen. I thought
BISHOP OF GLoUCESTER. 137
the devil was pushing me off, and that God had forsaken me.’
Another said, ‘I felt the very fire of hell already kindled in
my breast; and all my body was in as much pain, as if I had
been in a burning fiery furnace. What wisdom is this which
rebuketh these, that they should hold their peace? Nay, let
such an one cry after Jesus of Nazareth, till he saith, ‘Thy
faith hath made thee whole.’” (Journal, Vol. I. p. 407.)
Now follow the proofs of my driving men mad: (1) “Ano
ther of Dr. Monro's patients came to ask my advice. I found
no reason to believe she had been any otherwise mad, than
every one that is deeply convinced of sin.” (Tract, p. 208.)
Let this prove all that it can prove. (2) “A middle-aged
woman was really distracted.” Yes, before I ever saw her, or
she me. (3.) “I could not but be under some concern with
regard to one or two persons, who were tormented in an un
accountable manner, and seemed to be indeed lunatic, as well
as sore vexed.” True; for a time. But the deliverance of
one of them is related in the very next paragraph. (4.) “Two
or three are gone quite distracted; that is, they mourn
and refuse to be comforted till they have redemption.” (Page
209.) (5.) “I desired one to visit Mrs. G. in Bedlam, put in
by her husband, as a madwoman.” But she never was mad
in any degree, as he himself afterwards acknowledged.
(6) “One was so deeply convinced of her ungodliness, that she
cried out day and night, ‘Lord, save, or I perish !’ All the
neighbours agreed she was stark mad.” But I did not make
her so. For this was before she ever saw my face. Now, let
every one judge, whether here is yet a single proof that I
drive men mad.
“The time when this spiritual madness was at its height,
he calls a glorious time.” (Page 210.) I call that a glorious
time when rhany notorious sinners are converted to God;
(whether with any outward symptoms or none, for those are
no way essential;) and when many are in the triumph of
faith, greatly rejoicing in God their Saviour.
“But though Mr. Wesley does so well in turning fools into
madmen, yet his craftmaster is certainly one Mr. Wheatley,
of whom he gives this extraordinary account:” (Page 211 :)
“A poor woman (on Wednesday, September 17, 1740)
said, it was four years (namely, in September, 1786, above a
year before I left Georgia) since her son, by hearing a sermon
of Mr. Wheatley's, fell into great uneasiness. She thought
138 LETTER TO THE
he was ill, and would have sent for a Physician. But he
said, ‘No, no; send for Mr. Wheatley. He was sent for, and
came; and after asking a few questions, told her, ‘The boy is
mad. Get a coach, and carry him to Dr. Monro. Use my
name. I have sent several such to him.’ Who this Mr.
Wheatley is, I know not.” He was Lecturer at Spitalfields
Church. The event was, after the Apothecary had half mur
dered him, he was discharged, and the lad soon recovered his
strength. His senses he never had lost. The supposing this.
was a blunder from the beginning.
“These are the exploits which Mr. Wesley calls blessings
from God.” (Page 212.) Certainly I do, both repentance
and faith. “And which therefore we may call the good fruits
of his ministry.” May God increase them an hundred fold !
“What the Apostle calls ‘good fruits, namely, doing much
good, Mr. Wesley tells us belongs not to true religion.” I
never told any man so yet. I tell all men just the contrary.
I may then safely leave all mankind to judge, whether a
single article of the charge against me has yet been made
good. So much for the first charge, that I am a madman.
Now for the second, that I am a knave.
5. The proof is short: “Every enthusiast is a knave; but
he is an enthusiast; therefore he is a knave.” I deny both
the first and second proposition. Nay, the first is proved
thus: “Enthusiasm must always be accompanied with craft
and knavery.” (Page 213.) It is often so, but not always;
for there may be honest enthusiasts. Therefore the whole
account of that odd combination which follows is ingenious,
but proves nothing. (Pages 214–218.)
Yet I must touch upon one or two parts of it. “An en
thusiast thinks he is dispensed with in breaking, nay, that he
is authorized to break, the common laws of morality.” Does
every enthusiast? Then I am none; for I never thought any
such thing. I believe no man living is authorized to break,
or dispensed with in breaking, any law of morality. I know,
whoever (habitually) breaks one of the least of these, “shall
be called least in the kingdom of heaven.”
“Can any but an enthusiast believe, that he may use guile
to promote the glory of God?” Yes, ten thousand that are
no enthusiasts firmly believe this. How few do we find that
do not believe it! that do not plead for officious lies! How
BISROP OF GLOUCESTER. 189'
few will subscribe to St. Augustine's declaration, (to which I
assent with my whole heart) “I would not tell a wilful lie,
to save the souls of the whole world !”
But to return: “‘The wisdom from above is without par
tiality and without hypocrisy.” Partiality consists in dispens
ing an unequal measure in our transactions with others;
hypocrisy, in attempting to cover that unequal measure by
prevarication and false pretences.”
The former of these definitions is not clear; the latter nei
ther clear nor adequate to the defined.
Butlet this pass. My partiality is now the point. What
are the proofs of it? (1.) “His followers are always the chil
dren of God, his opposers the children of the devil.” (Page
220.) Neither so, nor so. I never affirmed either one or
the other universally. That some of the former are children
of God, and some of the latter children of the devil, I believe.
But what will this prove?
“His followers are directed by inward feelings, the
impulses of an inflamed fancy;” (no more than they are
directed by the Alcoran;) “his opposers, by the Scripture.”
What, while they are cursing, swearing, blaspheming; beat
ing and maiming men that have done them no wrong; and
treating women in a manner too shocking to be repeated?
(2.) The next proof is very extraordinary. My words are, “I
was with two persons, who, I doubt, are properly enthusiasts:
For, first, they think to attain the end without the means,
which is enthusiasm properly so called. Again, they think
themselves inspired of God, and are not. But false imagin
ary inspiration is enthusiasm. That theirs is only imaginary
inspiration appears hence,—it contradicts the law and the
testimony.” (Page 221.)
Now, by what art of man can this be made a proof of my
partiality? Why thus: “These are wise words. But what
do they amount to? Only to this; that these two persons
would not take out their patents of inspiration from his
office.” But what proof is there of this round assertion?
Truly, none at all.
Full as extraordinary is the third proof of my partiality.
* Miss Gr told Mrs. Sp—, Mr. Wesley was a Papist.
Upon this Miss Gr— is anathematized. And we are told
that, in consequence, she had lately been raving mad, and, as
such, was tied down in her bed. Yet all these circumstances
140 LETTER, TO THE
of madness have befallen his favourite saints, whom he has
vindicated from the opprobrium.” (Page 222.)
The passage in my Journal stands thus: “Mrs. Spa-told
me, two or three nights since, ‘Miss Gr— met me, and said,
I assure you, Mr. Wesley is a Papist. Perhaps I need ob
serve no more upon this, than that Miss Gr— had lately been
raving mad, in consequence of a fever;” (not of an ama
thema, which never had any being;) “that, as such, she was
tied down in her bed; and as soon as she was suffered to go
abroad, went to Mr. Whitefield, to inquire of him whether
she was not a Papist. But he quickly perceived she was only
a lunatic; the nature of her disorder soon betraying itself.”
Certainly then my allowing her to be mad is no proof of my
partiality. I will allow every one to be so who is attended
with “all these circumstances of madness.”
(4.) “He pronounces sentence of enthusiasm upon another,
and tells us wherefore, without any disguise: ‘Here I took leave
of a poor, mad, original enthusiast, who had been scattering
lies in every quarter.’” It was the famous John Adams, since
confined at Box, whose capital lie, the source of the rest, was,
that he was a prophet, greater than Moses, or any of the
Apostles. And is the pronouncing him a madman a proof of
my partiality?
(5) “I had much conversation with Mr. Simpson, an ori
ginal enthusiast. I desired him in the evening to give an ex
hortation. He did so, and spoke many good things, in a
manner peculiar to himself: ”—without order or connexion,
head or tail; and in a language very near as mystical as that
of Jacob Behmen. “When he had done, I summed up what he
had said, methodizing and explaining it. O what a pity it is,
this well-meaning man should ever speak without an inter
preter!” (Page 223.)
Let this passage likewise stand as it is, and who can guess
how it is to prove my partiality? But by a sleight-of-hand the
thing is done. “How differently does Mr. Wesley treat these
two enthusiasts ! The first is accused of spreading lies of his
master.” (No, he never was any disciple of mine.) “On which
lfr. W. took his leave of him;—a gentle expression, to signify
the thrusting him out, head and shoulders, from the society of
saints.” It signifies neither more nor less than that I went out
of the room and left him. “The other’s enthusiasm is made
to consist only in want of method.” No. His enthusiasm did
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 141
not consist in this. It was the cause of it. But he was quite
another man than John Adams; and, I believe, a right
honest man.
(6) “I was both surprised and grieved at a genuine
instance of enthusiasm. I. B., who had received a sense of
the love of God a few days before, came riding through the
town, hallooing and shouting, and driving all the people
before him, telling them God had told him he should be a
King, and should tread all his enemies under his feet. I
sent him home immediately to his work; and advised him to
cry day and night to God that he might be lowly in heart,
lest Satan should again “get an advantage over him.’”
What this proves, or is intended to prove, I cannot tell.
Certainly, neither this, nor any of the preceding passages,
prove the point now in question,—my partiality. So this
likewise is wholly unproved still.
“We shall end, where every fanatic leader ends, with his
hypocrisy.” (Page 227.) Five arguments are brought in proof
of this. I shall take them in their order. (1.) “After having
heaped up miracles one upon another, he sneaks away under
the protection of a puny wonder: “About five I began near
the Keelman’s Hospital, many thousands standing round.
The wind was high just before, but scarce a breath was felt all
the time we assembled before God. I praise God for this also.
Is it enthusiasm to see God in every benefit we receive?” It
is not; the enthusiasm consists in believing those benefits to
be conferred through a change in the established course of
nature. But here he insinuates, that he meant no more by
his miracles, than the seeing God in every benefit we receive.”
(Pages 228,229.) That sudden and total ceasing of the wind
I impute to the particular providence of God. This I mean
by seeing God therein. But this I knew many would count
enthusiasm. In guarding against it, I had an eye to that
single incident, and no other. Nor did I insinuate anything
more than I expressed in as plain a manner as I could.
A little digression follows: “A friend of his advises, not to
establish the power of working miracles, as the great cri
terion of a divine mission; seeing the agreement of doctrines
with Scripture is the only infallible rule.” (Page 230.)
“But Christ himself establishes the power of working mira
cles, as the great criterion of a divine mission.” (Page 231.)
True, of a mission to be the Saviour of the world; to put a
142 LETTER TO THE
period to the Jewish, and introduce the Christian, dispensa
tion. And whoever pretends to such a mission will stand in
need of such credentials.
(2) “He shifts and doubles no less” (neither less nor
more) “as to the ecstasies of his saints. Sometimes they are
of God, sometimes of the devil; but he is constant in this,—
that natural causes have no hand in them.” This is not
true: In what are here termed ecstasies, strong joy or grief,
attended with various bodily symptoms, I have openly
affirmed, again and again, that natural causes have a part:
Nor did I ever shift or double on the head. I have steadily
and uniformly maintained, that, if the mind be affected to
such a degree, the body must be affected by the laws of the
vital union. The mind I believe was, in many of those cases,
affected by the Spirit of God, in others by the devil, and in
some by both; and, in consequence of this, the body was
affected also. (3) “Mr. W. says, “I fear we have grieved
the Spirit of the jealous God by questioning his work, and by
blaspheming it, by imputing it to nature, or even to the
devil.’” (Pages 232,233.) True; by imputing the conviction
and conversion of sinners, which is the work of God alone,
(because of these unusual circumstances attending it,) either
to nature or to the devil. This is flat and plain. No prevari
cation yet. Let us attend to the next proof of it: “Innume
rable cautions were given me, not to regard visions or dreams,
or to fancy people had remission of sins because of their cries,
or tears, or outward professions. The sum of my answer
was, You deny that God does now work these effects; at least
that he works them in this manner. I affirm both. I have
seen very many persons changed in a moment from a spirit
of fear, horror, despair, to a spirit of love, joy, peace. What
I have to say touching visions and dreams is this: I know
several persons in whom this great change was wrought in a
dream, or during a strong representation to the eye of their
mind of Christ, either on the cross, or in glory. This is the
fact; let any judge of it as they please. And that such a
change was then wrought, appears (not from their shedding
tears only, or falling into fits, or crying out; these are not the
fruits, as you seem to suppose, whereby I judge, but) from the
whole tenor of their life; till then many ways wicked, from
that time holy, and just, and good.” “Nay, he is so convinced
of its being the work of God, that the horrid blasphemies which
Bishop OR GLOUCESTER. 143
ensued, he ascribes to the abundance of joy which God had
given to a poor mad woman.” (Page 234.) Do I ascribe those
blasphemies to her joy in God? No; but to her pride. My
words are, “I met with one, who, having been lifted up with
the abundance of joy which God had given her, had fallen into
such blasphemies and vain imaginations as are not common to
men. In the afternoon I found another instance, nearly, I fear,
of the same kind; one who set her private revelations, so called,
on the self-same foot with the written word.” (Page 235.)
But how is this to prove prevarication? “Why, on a sud
den, he directly revokes all he had advanced. He says, “I told
them they were not to judge of the spirit whereby any one
spoke, either by appearances, or by common report, or by their
own inward feelings; no, nor by any dreams, visions, or revela
tions, supposed to be made to the soul, any more than by their
tears, or any involuntary effects wrought upon their bodies.
I warned them that all these things were in themselves of a
doubtful, disputable nature: They might be from God, or they
might not; and were therefore not simply to be relied on,
any more than simply to be condemned; but to be tried by a
farther rule, to be brought to the only certain test, the law
and the testimony.” Now, is not this a formal recantation of
what he had said just above?” (Page 235.) Nothing less, as
I will show in two minutes, to every calm, impartial man.
What I say now, I have said any time this thirty years; I have
never varied therefrom for an hour: “Everything disputable
is to be brought to the only certain test, ‘the law and the
testimony.” “But did not you talk just now of visions and
dreams?” Yes; but not as of a test of any thing; only as a
channel through which God is sometimes pleased to convey
“love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, fidelity,
meekness, temperance,” the indisputable fruit of his Spirit:
And these, we may observe, wherever they exist, must be in
wardly felt. Now, where is the prevarication, where the formal
recantation? They are vanished into air.
But here is more proof: “At length he gives up all these
divine agitations to the devil: ‘I inquired, says he, ‘into the
case of those who had lately cried out aloud during the preach
ing. I found this had come upon every one of them in a moment,
without any previous notice. In that moment they dropped
down, lost all their strength, and were seized with violent pain.
Some said they felt as if a sword were running through them;
144 LETTER TO THE
others, as if their whole body was tearing in pieces. These
symptoms I can no more impute to any natural cause, than to.
the Spirit of God. I make no doubt but it was Satan tearing
them as they were coming to Christ.” (Page 236.)
“Now, these were the very symptoms which he had before
ascribed to the Spirit of God.” (Page 237.) Never in my life
Indeed some of them I never met with before. Those outward
symptoms which I had met with before, bodily agitations in
particular, I did not ascribe to the Spirit of God, but to the
natural union of the soul and body. And those symptoms
which I now ascribe to the devil, I never ascribed to any other
cause. The Second proof of my prevarication or hypocrisy is
therefore just as conclusive as the First.
3. Now for the Third: “Mr. W. before spoke contemptu
ously of orthodoxy, to take in the Sectaries. But when he would
take off Churchmen, then orthodoxy is the unum necessa
rium.”* Did I ever say so? No more than, in the other
extreme, speak contemptuously of it. “Yes, you say, ‘I de
scribed the plain, old religion of the Church of England, which
is now almost everywhere spoken against under the new name
of Methodism.” Very well; and what shadow of prevarication
is here? May I not still declare the plain, old religion of the
Church of England, and yet very consistently aver, that right
opinion is a very slender part of it?
4. The next passage, I am sorry to say, is neither related
with seriousness nor truth: “We have seen him inviting perse
cution.” Never; though I “rejoiced,” in the instance alleged,
at having an opportunity of calling a multitude of the most
abandoned sinners to repentance.
What is peculiarly unfair, is, the lame, false account is
palmed upon me, by “So he himself tells the story.” I must
therefore tell the story once more, in as few words as I can:
“Sunday, August 7, 1737. I repelled Mrs. W. from the
communion. Tuesday, 9. I was required by Mr. Bailiff Parker
to appear at the next court. Thursday, 11. Mr. Causton, her
uncle, said to me, ‘Give your reasons for repelling her before
the whole congregation.” I answered: “Sir, if you insist upon
it, I will. But I heard no more of it. Afterward he said, (but
not to me,) ‘Mr. W. had repelled Sophy out of revenge,
because he had made proposals of marriage to her, which she
* The one thing needful.—EDIT.
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 145
rejected. Tuesday, 16. Mrs. W. made affidavit of it. Thurs
day, September 1. A Grand Jury, prepared by Mr. Causton,
found, that ‘John Wesley had broken the laws of the realm,
by speaking and writing to Mrs. W. against her husband’s con
sent, and by repelling her from the communion.’
“Friday, 2, was the third court-day at which I appeared,
since my being required so to do by Mr. Parker. I moved for
an immediate hearing, but was put off till the next court-day.
On the next court-day I appeared again, as also at the two
courts following; but could not be heard. Thursday, Novem
ber 3, I appeared in court again; and yet again on Tuesday,
November 22, on which day Mr. C. desired to speak with me,
and read me an affidavit, in which it was affirmed, that I
‘ abused Mr. C. in his own house, calling him liar, villain,
and so on.’ It was likewise repeated, that I had been repri
manded at the last court, by Mr. C., as an enemy to, and hin
derer of, the public peace.
“My friends agreed with me, that the time we looked for
was now come. And the next morning, calling on Mr. C., I
told him, I designed to set out for England immediately.
“Friday, December 2. I proposed to set out for Carolina
about noon. But about ten, the Magistrates sent for me, and
told me, I must not go out of the province; for I had not
answered the allegations laid against me. I replied, ‘I have
appeared at six or seven courts, in order to answer them. But
I was not suffered so to do. After a few more words, I said,
‘You use me very ill. And so you do the Trustees. You
know your business, and I know mine.’
“In the afternoon, they published an order, forbidding any
to assist me in going out of the province. But I knew I had
no more business there. So as soon as Evening Prayer was over,
the tide then serving, I took boat at the Bluff, for Carolina.”
This is the plain account of the matter. I need only add a
remark or two on the pleasantry of my censurer. “He had
recourse, as usual, to his revelations. “I consulted my friends,
whether God did not call me to England.” (Page 242.) Not
by revelations; these were out of the question; but by clear,
strong reasons. “The Magistrate soon quickened his pace, by
declaring him an enemy to the public peace.” No; that sense
less assertion of Mr. C. made me go neither sooner nor later.
‘The reader has seen him long languish for persecution.”
VOL. IX. L
146 LETTER. To Tn E
What, before November, 1737? I never languished for it,
either before or since. But I submit to what pleases God.
“To hide his poltroonery in a bravado, he gave public notice of
his apostolical intention.” (Page 243.) Kind and civil I
may be excused from taking notice of what follows. It is
equally serious and genteel.
“Had his longings for persecution been without hypocrisy.”
The same mistake throughout. I never longed or professed to
long for it at all. But if I had professed it ever since I returned
from Georgia, what was done before I returned could not prove
that profession to be hypocrisy. So all this ribaldry serves no
end; only to throw much dirt, if haply some may stick.
Meantime, how many untruths are here in one page |
(1.) “He made the path doubly perplexed for his followers.
(2.) He left them to answer for his crimes. (3.) He longed
for persecution. (4.) He went as far as Georgia for it. (5.) The
truth of his mission was questioned by the Magistrate, and
(6.) decried by the people, (7.) for his false morals. (8.) The
gospel was wounded through the sides of its pretended Mission
ary. (9.) The first Christian Preachers offered up themselves.”
So did I. “Instead of this, our paltry mimic.” (Page 244.)
Bona verbal Surely a writer should reverence himself, how
much soever he despises his opponent. So, upon the whole,
this proof of my hypocrisy is as lame as the three former.
5. “We have seen above, how he sets all prudence at defi
ance.” None but false prudence. “But he uses a different
language when his rivals are to be restrained.” No; always
the same, both with regard to false prudence and true.
“But take the affair from the beginning. He began to sus
pect rivals in the year thirty-nine; for he says, “Remembering
how many that came after me were preferred before me.” The
very next words show in what sense. They “had attained
unto the law of righteousness; ” I had not. But what has this
to do with rivals 7
However, go on : “At this time, December 8, 1739, his
opening the Bible afforded him but small relief. He sunk so
far in his despondency, as to doubt if God would not lay him
aside, and send other labourers into his harvest.” But this was
another time. It was June 22; and the occasion of the doubt
is expressly mentioned: “I preached, but had no life or spirit
in me, and was much in doubt,” on that account. Not on
BiSHOP OF GLOUCESTER, 147
-account of Mr. Whitefield. He did not “now begin to set up
for himself.” We were in full union; nor was there the least
shadow of rivalry or contention between us. I still sincerely
“praise God for his wisdom in giving different talents to differ
ent Preachers;” (page 250;) and particularly for his giving
Mr. Whitefield the talents which I have not.
6. What farther proof of hypocrisy? Why, “he had given
innumerable flirts of contempt in his Journals against human
learning.” (Pages 252, 253.) Where? I do not know. Let
the passages be cited; else, let me speak for it ever so much, it
will prove nothing. “At last he was forced to have recourse
to what he had so much scorned, I mean, prudence.” (Page
255.) All a mistake. I hope never to have recourse to false
prudence; and true prudence I never scorned.
“He might have met Mr. Whitefield half way; but he was
too formidable a rival. With a less formidable one he pur
sues this way. “I laboured, says he, ‘to convince Mr. Gr—,’”
(my assistant, not rival,) “‘that he had not done well, in
confuting, as he termed it, the sermon I preached the Sunday
before. I asked, Will you meet me half way?” (The words
following put my meaning beyond all dispute:) “I will never
publicly preach against you. Will not you against me?” Here
we see a fair invitation to Mr. Gr— to play the hypocrite with
him.” (Ibid.) Not in the least. Each might simply deliver
his own sentiments without preaching against the other. “We
conclude that Mr. Wesley, amidst his warmest exclamations
against all prudence, had still a succedaneum, which indeed he
calls prudence; but its true name is craft.” (Page 257.)
Craft is an essential part of worldly prudence. This I detest
and abhor. And let him prove it upon me that can. But it
must be by better arguments than the foregoing. Truly Chris
tian prudence, such as was recommended by our Lord, and
practised by him and his Apostles, I reverence, and desire to
learn, being convinced of its abundant usefulness.
I know nothing material in the argument which I have left
untouched. And I must now refer it to all the world, whether,
for all that has been brought to the contrary, I may not still
have a measure of the “wisdom from above, which is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.”
I have spoke abundantly more concerning myself than I
L 2
148 LETTER TO THE
intended or expected. Yet I must beg leave to add a few
words more. How far I am from being an enemy to prudence,
I hope appears already. It remains to inquire, whether I am
an enemy to reason or natural religion.
“As to the first, he frankly tells us, the father of lies was
the father of reasonings also. For he says, “I observed more
and more the advantage Satan had gained over us. Many
were thrown into idle reasonings.’” (Page 289.) Yes, and
they were hurt thereby. But reason is good, though idle rea
sonings are evil. Nor does it follow that I am an enemy to the
one, because I condemn the other.
“However, you are an enemy to natural religion. For you
say, “A Frenchman gave us a full account of the Chicasaws.
They do nothing but eat, and drink, and smoke, from morning
till night, and almost from night till morning. For they rise at
any hour of the night when they awake, and, after eating and
drinking as much as they can, go to sleep again. Hence we
could not but remark what is the religion of nature, properly so
called, or that religion which flows from natural reason, unas
sisted by Revelation.’” (Page 290.) I believe this dispute
may be cut short by only defining the term. What does your
Lordship mean by natural religion ? a system of principles?
But I mean by it, in this placc, men’s natural manners.
These certainly “flow from their natural passions and appe
tites,” with that degree of reason which they have. And this,
in other instances, is not contemptible; though it is not
sufficient to teach them true religion.
II. I proceed to consider, in the Second place, what is
advanced concerning the operations of the Holy Spirit.
“Our blessed Redeemer promised to send among his follow
ers the Holy Ghost, called ‘the Spirit of Truth’ and ‘the
Comforter, which should co-operate with man, in establishing
his faith, and in perfecting his obedience; or, in other words,
should sanctify him to redemption.” (Page 2.)
Accordingly, “the sanctification and redemption of the
world, man cannot frustrate nor render ineffectual. For it is
not in his power to make that to be undone, which is once done
and perfected.” (Page 337.)
I do not comprehend. Is all the world sanctified? Is not
to be sanctified the same as to be made holy? Is all the world
holy? And can no man frustrate his own sanctification?
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 149
“The Holy Ghost establishes our faith, and perfects our
obedience, by enlightening the understanding, and rectifying
the will.” (Page 3.)
“In the former respect, 1. He gave the gift of tongues at
the day of Pentecost.
“Indeed, enthusiasts, in their ecstasies, have talked very
fluently in languages they had a very imperfect knowledge of
in their sober intervals.” I can no more believe this on the
credit of Lord Shaftesbury and a Polish exorcist, than I can
believe the tale of an hundred people talking without tongues,
on the credit of Dr. Middleton.
“The other gifts of the Spirit St. Paul reckons up thus:
“To one is given the word of wisdom; to another the word of
knowledge; to another the gifts of healing; to another working
of miracles; to another prophecy; to another the discerning of
spirits.’” (Page 23.) But why are the other three left out?—
Faith, diverskinds of tongues, and the interpretation of tongues.
I believe the “word of wisdom” means, light to explain the
manifold wisdom of God in the grand scheme of gospel salvation;
the “word of knowledge,” a power of explaining the Old Testa
ment types and prophecies. “Faith” may mean an extraordi
mary trust in God, under the most difficult and dangerous cir
cumstances; “the gifts of healing,” a miraculous power of
curing diseases; “the discerning of spirits,” a supernatural dis
cernment, whether men were upright or not; whether they
were qualified for offices in the Church; and whether they who
professed to speak by inspiration, really did so or not.
But “the richest of the fruits of the Spirit is the inspiration
of Scripture.” (Page 30.) Herein the promise, that “the Com
forter” should “abide with us for ever,” is eminently fulfilled.
For though his ordinary influence occasionally assists the faith
ful of all ages, yet his constant abode and supreme illumination
is in the Scriptures of the New Testament. I mean, “he is
there only as the Illuminator of the understanding.” (Page 39.)
But does this agree with the following words?—“Nature is
not able to keep a mean: But grace is able; for ‘the Spirit
helpeth our infirmities. We must apply to the Guide of truth,
to prevent our being ‘carried about with divers and strange
doctrines.’” (Page 340.) Is he not, then, everywhere, to illu
minate the understanding, as well as to rectify the will? And
indeed, do we not need the one as continually as the other?
150 LETTER TO THE
“But how did he inspire the Scripture? He so directed
the writers, that no considerable error should fall from them.”
(Page 45.) Nay, will not the allowing there is any error in
Scripture, shake the authority of the whole?
Again: What is the difference between the immediate and
the virtual influence of the Holy Spirit? I know, Milton
speaks of “virtual or immediate touch.” But most incline to
think, virtual touch is no touch at all.
“Were the style of the New Testament utterly rude and
barbarous, and abounding with every fault that can possibly
deform a language; this is so far from proving such language
not divinely inspired, that it is one certain mark of this ori
ginal.” (Page 55.)
A vehement paradox this! But it is not proved yet, and
probably never will.
“The labours of those who have attempted to defend the
purity of Scripture Greek have been very idly employed.”
(Page 66.)
Others think they have been very wisely employed,and
that they have abundantly proved their point.
Having now “considered the operations of the Holy Spirit,
as the Guide of truth, who clears and enlightens the under
standing, I proceed to consider him as the Comforter, who
purifies and supports the will.” (Page 89.)
“Sacred antiquity is full in its accounts of the sudden and
entire change made by the Holy Spirit in the dispositions and
manners of those whom it had enlightened; instantaneously
effacing their evil habits, and familiarizing them to the per
formance of every good action.” (Page 90.)
“No natural cause could effect this. Neither fanaticism nor
superstition, nor both of them, will account for so sudden and
lasting a conversion.” (Ibid.)
“Superstition never effects any considerable change in the
manners. Its utmost force is just enough to make us exact in
the ceremonious offices of religion, or to cause some acts of
penitence, as death approaches.” (Page 91.)
“Fanaticism, indeed, acts with greater violence, and, by
influencing the will, frequently forces the manners from their
bent, and sometimes effaces the strongest impressions of cus
tom and nature. But this fervour, though violent, is rarely
lasting; never so long as to establish the new system into an
BIs HoP or GLOUCESTER. 151
habit. So that when its rage subsides, as it very soon does,
(but where it drives into downright madness,) the bias on the
will keeps abating, till all the former habitudes recover their
relaxed tone.” (Page 92.)
Never were reflections more just than these. And whoever
applies them to the matters of fact, which daily occur all over
England, and particularly in London, will easily discern, that
the changes now wrought cannot be accounted for by natural
causes: Not by superstition; for the manners are changed;
the whole life and conversation: Not by fanaticism; for these
changes are so lasting, “as to establish the new system into a
habit:” Not by mere reason; for they are sudden; therefore
they can only be wrought by the Holy Spirit.
As to Savanarola’s being a fanatic, or assuming the person
of a Prophet, I cannot take a Popish historian’s word. And
what a man says on the rack proves nothing; no more than his
dying silent. Probably this might arise from shame, and con
sciousness of having accused himself falsely under the torture.
“But how does the Spirit, as Comforter, abide with us for
ever? He abides with the Church for ever, as well personally
in his office of Comforter, as virtually in his office of Enlight
ener.” (Page 96.)
Does he not then abide with the Church personally in both
these respects? What is meant by abiding virtually # And
what is the difference between abiding virtually, and abiding
personally?
“The question will be, Does he still exercise his office in the
same extraordinary manner as in the Apostles' days?”
(Page 97.)
I know none that affirms it. “St Paul has determined this
question. ‘Charity, says he, “never faileth: But whether
there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues,
they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish
away.” (1 Cor. xiii. 8, &c.)”
“The common opinion is, that this respects another life, as he
enforceshis argument by this observation: “Now we see through
a glass darkly; but then face to face: Now we know in part;
but then shall we know, even as also we are known.” (Page 99.)
“But the Apostle means, charity is to accompany the
Church in all its stages; whereas prophecy and all the rest
are only bestowed during its infant state, to support it against
the delusions and powers of darkness.” (Page 100.)
152 LETTER. To THE
“The Corinthians abounded in these gifts, but were wanting
in charity. And this the Apostle here exposes, by proving
charity to be superior to them all, both in its qualities and dura
tion. The three first verses declare that the other gifts are use
less without charity. The next four specify the qualities of
charity; the remaining six declare its continuance: “Charity
never faileth: But whether there be prophecies, they shall fail;
whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be
knowledge, it shall vanish away. In the next verse he gives
the reason: ‘For we know in part, and we prophesy in part;
but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away: 'That is, when that Christian life, the
lines of which are marked out by the gospel, shall arrive to its
full vigour and maturity, then the temporary aids, given to sub
due prejudice, and to support the weak, shall, like scaffolding,
be removed. In other words, when that Christian life, wherein
the Apostles and first Christians were but infants, shall arrive
to its full vigour and maturity in their successors, then miracles
shall cease.” (Page 102.) But I fear that time is not yet come.
I doubt, none that are now alive enjoy more of the vigour and
maturity of the Christian life than the very first Christians did.
“To show that the loss of these will not be regretted when
the Church has advanced from a state of infancy to manhood,”
(alas the day ! Were the Apostles but infants to us?) “he
illustrates the case by an elegant similitude: ‘When I was a
child, I spake as a child;—but when I became a man, I put
away childish things.’ His next remark, concerning the defects
of human knowledge, is only an occasional answer to an objec
tion. And the last verse shows that the superior duration of
charity refers to the present life only: “Now abideth faith,
hope, charity, these three: But the greatest of these is charity.’
That is, you may perhaps object, Faith and hope will likewise
remain in the Church, when prophecy, tongues, and knowledge
are ceased: They will so; but still charity is the greatest,
because of its excellent qualities.” (Page 107.)
The last verse shows Is not this begging the question?
How forced is all this ! The plain natural meaning of the pas
sage is, love (the absolute necessity and the nature of which is
shown in the foregoing verses) has another commendation,-it
“never faileth; ” it accompanies and adorns us to eternity.
“But whether there be prophecies, they shall fail,” when all
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 153
things are fulfilled, and God is all in all: “Whether there be
tongues, they shall cease.” One language shall prevail among
all the inhabitants of heaven, while the low, imperfect languages
of earth are forgotten. The “knowledge,” likewise, we now so
eagerly pursue, shall then “vanish away.” As star-light is lost
in that of the mid-day sun, so our present knowledge in the light
of eternity. “For we know in part, and we prophesy in part.”
We have here but short, narrow, imperfect conceptions, even of
the things round about us, and much more of the deep things
of God. And even the prophecies which men deliver from God
are far from taking in the whole of future events. “But when
that which is perfect is come,” at death, and in the last day,
“that which is in part shall be done away.” Both that low,
imperfect, glimmering light, which is all the knowledge we can
now attain to; and these slow and unsatisfactory methods of
attaining, as well as of imparting it to others. “When I was a
child, I talked as a child, I understood as a child, I reasoned as
a child.” As if he had said, In our present state, we are mere
infants, compared to what we shall be hereafter. “But when I
became a man, I put away childish things;” and a proportion
able change shall we all find, when we launch into eternity.
Now we see even the things which surround us by means of a
glass or mirror, in a dim, faint, obscure manner, so that every
thing is a kind of riddle to us; but then we shall see, not a
faint reflection, but the objects themselves, face to face, directly
and distinctly. “Now I know but in part.” Even when God
reveals things to me, great part of them is still kept under the
veil. “But then shall I know even as I also am known; ” in
a clear, full, comprehensive manner, in some measure like God,
who penetrates the centre of every object, and sees, at one
glance, through my soul and all things. “And now,” during
the present life, “abide these three, faith, hope, love; but the
greatest of these,” in its duration, as well as the excellence of its
nature, “is love.” Faith, hope, love, are the sum of perfection
on earth; love alone is the sum of perfection in heaven.
“It appears, then, that the miraculous powers of the Church
were to cease upon its perfect establishment.” (Page 107.)
Nothing like it appears from this scripture. But supposing it
did, is Christianity perfectly established yet? even nominal
Christianity? Mr. Brerewood took large pains to be fully
informed; and, according to his account, five parts in six of
154 LETTER, TO THE
the known world are Mahometans or Pagans to this day. If so,
Christianity is yet far from being perfectly established, either
in Europe, Asia, Africa, or America.
“Having now established the fact,” (wonderfully estab
lished!) “we may inquire into the fitness of it. There were two
causes of the extraordinary operations of the Holy Spirit,—one
to manifest his mission, (and this was done once for all,) the
other to comfort and instruct the Church.” (Page 110.)
“At his first descent on the Apostles, he found their minds
rude and uninformed, strangers to all heavenly knowledge, and
utterly averse to the gospel. He illuminated their minds with
all necessary truth. For a rule of faith not being yet com
posed,” (No! Had they not “the Law and the Prophets?”)
“some extraordinary infusion of his virtue was still necessary.
But when this rule was perfected, part of this office was trans
ferred upon the sacred Canon; and his enlightening grace was
not to be expected in such abundant measure, as to make the
recipients infallible guides.” (Page 112.)
Certainly it was not. If this is all that is intended, no one
will gainsay.
“Yet modern fanatics pretend to as high a degree of divine
communications, as if no such rule were in being;” (I do not;)
“or, at least, as if that rule needed the further assistance of the
Holy Spirit to explain his own meaning.” This is quite ano
ther thing. I do firmly believe, (and what serious man does
not?) omnis scriptura legi debet eo Spiritu quo scripta est:
“We need the same Spirit to understand the Scripture, which
enabled the holy men of old to write it.”
“Again, the whole strength of human prejudices was then
set in opposition to the gospel, to overcome the obstinacy and
violence of which, nothing less than the power of the Holy One
was sufficient. At present, whatever prejudices may remain, it
draws the other way.” (Page 113.) What, toward holiness?
toward temperance and chastity? toward justice, mercy, and
truth? Quite the reverse. And to overcome the obstinacy and
violence of the heart-prejudices which still lie against these, the
power of the Holy One is as necessary now, as ever it was from
the beginning of the world.
“A further reason for the ceasing of miracles is, the peace
and security of the Church. The profession of the Christian
faith is now attended with ease and honour.” The profession,
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 155
true; but not the thing itself, as “all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus” experience.
“But if miracles are not ceased, why do you not prove your
mission thereby?” As your Lordship has frequently spoke to
this effect, I will now give a clear answer. And I purposely do
it in the same words which I published many years since:
“l. I have in some measure explained myself on the head
of miracles, in the Third Part of the ‘Farther Appeal. But
since you repeat the demand, (though without taking any notice
of the arguments there advanced,) I will endeavour once more
to give you a distinct, full, and determinate answer. And,
First, I acknowledge that I have seen with my eyes, and heard
with my ears, several things, which, to the best of my judg
ment, cannot be accounted for by the ordinary course of natural
causes, and which, I therefore believe, ought to be ‘ascribed to
the extraordinary interposition of God.” If any man choose to
style these miracles, I reclaim not. I have diligently inquired
into the facts. I have weighed the preceding and following cir
cumstances. I have strove to account for them in a natural way;
but could not, without doing violence to my reason. Not to go
far back, I am clearly persuaded that the sudden deliverance of
John Haydon was one instance of this kind; and my own
recovery, on May the 10th, another. I cannot account for
either of these in a natural way. Therefore I believe they
were both supernatural.
“I must, Secondly, observe, that the truth of these facts is
supported by the same kind of proof as that of all other facts
is wont to be, namely, the testimony of competent witnesses;
and that the testimony here is in as high a degree as any
reasonable man can desire. Those witnesses were many in num
ber: They could not be deceived themselves; for the facts in
question they saw with their own eyes, and heard with their own
ears. Nor is it credible, that so many of them would combine
together with a view of deceiving others; the greater part being
men who feared God, as appeared by the general tenor of their
lives. Thus, in the case of John Haydon: This thing was
not contrived and executed in a corner, and in the presence of
his own family only, or three or four persons prepared for the
purpose. No; it was in an open street in the city of Bristol,
at one or two in the afternoon; and, the doors being open from
the beginning, not only many of the neighbours from every
side, but several others, (indeed, whosoever desired it,) went in,
156 LETTER. To The
till the house could contain no more. Nor yet does the account
of my own illness and recovery depend, as you suppose, on my
bare word. There were many witnesses both of my disorder
on Friday and Saturday, and my lying down most part of Sun
day; (a thing they were well satisfied could not be the effect of
a slight indisposition;) and all who saw me that evening, plainly
discerned (what I could not wholly conceal)that I was in pain;
about two hundred of whom were present when I was seized
with the cough, which cut me short, so that I could speak
no more; till I cried aloud, ‘Lord, increase my faith ! Lord,
confirm the word of thy grace!' The same persons saw and
heard, that at the instant I changed my posture, and broke
out into thanksgiving; that quickly after, I stood upright,
(which I could not before,) and showed no sign either of
sickness or pain.
“Yet I must desire you well to observe,Thirdly, that my will,
or choice, or desire, had no place either in this, or any case of
this kind, that has ever fallen under my notice. Five minutes
before, I had no thought of this. I expected nothing less. I
was willing to wait for a gradual recovery, in the ordinary use of
outward means. I did not look for any other cure, till the
moment before I found it. And it is my belief, that the case
was always the same with regard to the most real and undoubted
miracles. I believe God never interposed his miraculous power,
but according to his own sovereign will; not according to the
will of man; neither of him by whom he wrought, nor of any
other man whatsoever. The wisdom as well as the power are
his; nor can I find that ever, from the beginning of the world,
He lodged this power in any mere man, to be used whenever
that man saw good. Suppose, therefore, there was a man now
upon earth, who did work real and undoubted miracles, I
would ask, By whose power doth he work these, and at whose
pleasure? his own, or God's? Not his own, but God’s. But
if so, then your demand is made, not on man, but on God. I
cannot say it is modest, thus to challenge God; or well suiting
the relation of a creature to his Creator.
“2. However, I cannot but think there have been already so
many interpositions of divine power, as will shortly leave you
without excuse, if you either deny or despise them. We desire
no favour, but the justice that diligent inquiry may be made
concerning them. We are ready to name the persons on whom
ld iSHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 157
the power was shown which belongeth to none but God; (not
one or two, or ten or twelve only;) to point out their places of
abode; and we engage they shall answer every pertinent ques
tion fairly and directly; and, if required, shall give all their
answers upon oath, before any who are empowered to receive
them. It is our particular request, that the circumstances
which went before, which accompanied, and which followed
after, the facts under consideration, may be throughly examined,
and punctually noted down. Let but this be done, (and is it
not highly needful it should ? at least by those who would
form an exact judgment,) and we have no fear that any rea
sonable man should scruple to say, ‘This hath God wrought.”
“As there have been already so many instances of this
kind, far beyond what we dared to ask or think, I cannot take
upon me to say, whether or no it will please God to add to
their number. I have not herein ‘known the mind of the
Lord, neither am I ‘ his counsellor. He may, or he may
not; I cannot affirm or deny. I have no light, and I have
no desire either way. “It is the Lord, let him do what
seemeth him good.’ I desire only to be as clay in his hand.
“3. But what, if there were now to be wrought ever so
many ‘real and undoubted miracles?’ (I suppose you mean,
by undoubted, such as, being sufficiently attested, ought not
to be doubted of) ‘Why, this, you say, “would put the
controversy on a short foot, and be an effectual proof of the
truth of your pretences. By no means. As common as
this assertion is, there is none upon earth more false. Suppose
a Teacher was now, on this very day, to work real and un
doubted miracles; this would extremely little shorten the con
troversy between him and the greatest part of his opposers:
For all this would not force them to believe; but many would
still stand just where they did before; seeing men may harden
their hearts against miracles, as well as against arguments.
“So men have done from the beginning of the world, even
against such signal, glorious miracles, against suchinterpositions
of the power of God, as may not be again till the consummation
of all things. Permit me to remind you only of a few instances,
and to observe, that the argument holds a fortiori; for who will
ever be empowered of God again to work such miracles as these
were? Did Pharaoh look on all that Moses and Aaron wrought,
as an effectual proof of the truth of their pretences P even
158 LETTER, TO THE
when the ‘Lord made the sea to be dry land, and the waters
were divided; when the children of Israel went into the
midst of the sea, and the waters were a wall on the right and
on the left?’ (Exod. xiv. 21, 22.) Nay,
The wounded dragon raged in vain;
And, fierce the utmost plagues to brave,
Madly he dared the parting main,
And sunk beneath the o'erwhelming wave.
Was all this an effectual proof of the truth of their pretences
to the Israelites themselves? It was not; they were still
‘disobedient at the sea, even at the Red Sea.” Was the giving
them day by day bread from heaven, an effectual proof to
those “two hundred and fifty of the princes of the assembly,
famous in the congregation, men of renown, who said, with
Dathan and Abiram, Wilt thou put out the eyes of these men?
we will not come up; ” (Numb. xvi. 14;) nay, “when the
ground clave asunder that was under them, and the earth
opened her mouth and swallowed them up?’ (Verse 32.)
Neither was this an effectual proof to those who saw it with
their eyes, and heard the cries of those who went down into
the pit; but, the very next day, they ‘murmured against Moses
and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the
Lord!” (Verse 41.) Was not the case generally the same with
regard to the Prophets that followed? several of whom ‘stopped
the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire,’ and did
many other mighty works; yet their own people received them
not; yet ‘they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they
were slain with the sword, they were destitute, afflicted, tor
mented !’—utterly contrary to the commonly received sup
position, “that the working real, undoubted miracles, must
bring all controversy to an end, and convince every gainsayer.’
“Let us come nearer yet. How stood the case between
our Lord himself and his opposers? Did he not work real
and undoubted miracles? And what was the effect? Still,
‘when he came to his own, his own received him not.’
Still “he was despised and rejected of men. Still it was a
challenge not to be answered, ‘Have any of the Rulers or of
the Pharisees believed on him?” After this, how can you
imagine, that whoever works miracles must convince all men
of the truth of his pretences?
“I would just remind you of only one instance more: ‘There
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER, 159
sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a
cripple from his mother’s womb, who had never walked.
The same heard Paul speak; who steadfastly beholding him,
and perceiving he had faith to be healed, said with a loud
voice, Stand upright on thy feet. And he leaped and walked.”
Here was so undoubted a miracle, that the people ‘lifted up
their voices, saying, The Gods are come down in the likeness
of men.” But how long were even these convinced of the
truth of his pretences? Only till ‘there came thither certain
Jews from Antioch and Iconium;’ and then they ‘stoned
him” (as they supposed) ‘to death !” (Acts xiv. 7, &c.) So
certain it is, that no miracles whatever, that were ever yet
wrought in the world, were effectual to prove the most
glaring truth to those who hardened their hearts against it.
“4. And it will equally hold in every age and nation. ‘If
they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be’
convinced of what they desire not to believe, ‘though one
rose from the dead. Without a miracle, without one rising
from the dead, eav ris 6exy to 6eAmua avrov Troueuv, “if any
man be willing to do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God: ” But if he is not ‘willing to do his
will,” he will never want an excuse, a plausible reason for re
jecting it; yea, though ever so many miracles were wrought
to confirm it. For, let ever so much light come into the
world, it will have no effect (such is the wise and just will of
God) on those who ‘love darkness rather than light. It
will not convince those who do not simply desire to do ‘the
will of their Father which is in heaven; those ‘who mind
earthly things, who, if they do not continue in any gross
outward sin, yet love pleasure and ease, yet seek profit or
power, preferment or reputation. Nothing will ever be an
effectual proof to these of the holy and acceptable will of God,
unless first their proud hearts be humbled, their stubborn
wills bowed down, and their desires brought, at least in some
degree, into obedience to the law of Christ.
“Hence, although it should please God to work anew all the
wonders that ever were wrought on earth, still these men, how
ever wise and prudent they may be in things relating to the
present world, would fight against God and all his messengers,
and that in spite of these miracles. Meanwhile, God will reveal
his truth unto babes, unto those who are meek and lowly, whose
lesires are in heaven, who want to “know nothing save Jesus
160 LETTER TO THE
Christ and him crucified. These need no outward miracles
to show them his will; they have a plain rule,—the written
word: And ‘the anointing which they have received of Him
abideth in them, and teacheth them of all things.” (1 John
ii. 27.) Through this they are enabled to bring all doctrines
‘to the law and the testimony: And whatsoever is agreeable
to this they receive, without waiting to see it attested by
miracles: As, on the other hand, whatsoever is contrary to
this they reject; nor can any miracles move them to receive it.
“5. Yet I do not know that God hath any where precluded
himself from thus exerting his sovereign power, from working
miracles in any kind or degree, in any age to the end of the
world. I do not recollect any scripture wherein we are taught
that miracles were to be confined within the limits either of
the apostolic or the Cyprianic age; or of any period of time,
longer or shorter, even till the restitution of all things. I
have not observed, either in the Old Testament or the New,
any intimation at all of this kind. St. Paul indeed says once,
concerning two of the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, (so I
think that text is usually understood,) “Whether there be
prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they
shall cease.” But he does not say, either that these or any
other miracles shall cease till faith and hope shall cease also;
till they shall all be swallowed up in the vision of God, and
love be all in all.
“I presume you will allow there is one kind of miracles
(loosely speaking) which are not ceased; namely, repara
alrevôovs, ‘lying wonders, diabolical miracles, wrought by
the power of evil spirits. Nor can you easily conceive that
these will cease, as long as the father of lies is the prince of
this world. And why should you think that the God of
truth is less active than him, or that he will not have his
miracles also? only not as man wills, neither when he wills;
but according to his own excellent wisdom and goodness.
“6. But even if it were supposed that God does now work
beyond the operation of merely natural causes, yet what im
presion would this make upon you, in the disposition of mind.
you are now in 7 Suppose the trial was repeated, and made
again to-morrow. One informs you the next day, ‘While a
Clergyman was preaching yesterday, where I was, a man
came who had been long ill of an incurable distemper. Prayer.
was made for him; and he was restored to perfect health.”
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 161
“Suppose now that this was a real fact, perhaps you would
scarce have patience to hear the account of it; but would cut
it short in the midst, with, “Do you tell this as something super
natural? Then miracles are not ceased. But if you should
venture to ask, ‘Where was this; and who was the person who
prayed?” and it was answered, “At the Foundery, near Moor
fields; the person who prayed was Mr. Wesley; what a damp
comes at once ! What a weight falls on your mind at the first
setting out! It is well if you have any heart or desire to move
one step farther, or, if you should, what a strong additional
propensity do you now feel to deny the fact! And is there not a
ready excuse for so doing? ‘O! they who tell the story are his
own people; most of whom, we may be sure, will say anything
for him, and the rest will believe anything.” But if you at length
allowed the fact, might you not find means to account for it
by natural causes? ‘Great crowds, violent heats, with obstruc
tions and irregularities of the blood and spirits, will do won
ders. If you could not but allow it was more than natural,
might not some plausible reason be found for ranking it among
the lying wonders, for ascribing it to the devil rather than
God? And if, after all, you was convinced it was the finger
of God, must you not still bring every doctrine advanced
‘to the law and the testimony, the only sure and infallible
test of all? What then is the use of this continual demand,
“Show us a sign, and we will believe?” What will you believe?
I hope no more than is written in the book of God: And thus
far you might venture to believe, even without a miracle.
“7. Let us consider this point a little farther: What is
it you would have us prove by miracles? the doctrines we
preach? We prove these by Scripture and reason; and, if
need be, by antiquity. What else is it then we are to prove
by miracles? At length we have a distinct reply: ‘Wise and
sober men will not otherwise be convinced, (that is, unless
you prove it by miracles,) that God is, by the means of such
Teachers and such doctrines, working a great and extraordi
nary work in the earth.”
“So then the determinate point which you, in their name, call
upon us to prove by miracles, is this,—that God is, by these
Teachers, working a great and extraordinary work in the earth
“What I mean by a great and extraordinary work is, the
bringing multitudes of gross, notorious sinners, in a short
VOL. IX. M
162 LETTER, TO THE
space, to the fear, and love, and service of God, to an entire
change of heart and life.
“Now, then, let us take a nearer view of the proposition,
and see which part of it we are to prove by miracles:
“Is it, (1.) That A.B. was for many years without God in the
world, a common swearer, a drunkard, or a Sabbath-breaker?
“Or, (2.) That he is not so now 7
“Or, (3.) That he continued so till he heard this man
preach, and from that time was another man?
“Not so. The proper way to prove these facts is, by the
testimony of competent witnesses. And these witnesses are
ready, whenever required, to give full evidence of them.
“Or, would you have us prove by miracles,
“(4.) That this was not done by our own power or holi
mess? that God only is able to raise the dead, to quicken those
who are dead in trespasses and sins?
“Surely no. Whosoever believes the Scriptures will want
no new proof of this.
“Where then is the wisdom of those men who demand mira
cles in proof of such a proposition? One branch of which,
“that such sinners are reformed by means of these Teachers,’
being a plain fact, can only be proved by testimony, as all
other facts are; and the other, ‘that this is a work of God,
and a great and more than ordinary work, needs no proof, as
carrying its own evidence to every thinking man.
“8. To sum up this: No truly wise or sober man can possibly
desire or expect miracles, to prove, either, (1.) That these doc
trines are true;—this must be decided by Scripture and reason:
Or, (2.) That these facts are true;—this can only be proved by
testimony: Or, (3.) That to change sinners from darkness to
light, is the work of God alone; only using what instruments he
pleases;—this is glaringly self-evident:-Or, (4.) That such a
change wrought in so many notorious sinners, within so short a
time, is a great and extraordinary work of God. What then is
it remains to be proved by miracles? Perhaps you will say, it
is this: ‘That God has called, or sent, you to do this. Nay, this
is implied in the Third of the foregoing propositions. If God
has actually used us therein, if his work hath in fact prospered
in our hands, then he hath called or sent us to do this. Ientreat
reasonable men to weigh this thoroughly, whether the fact does
not plainly prove the call; whether He who thus enables us to
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER, 163
save souls alive, does not commission us so to do; whether by
giving us the power to pluck these brands out of the burning,
He does not authorize us to exert it. O that it were possible
for you to consider calmly, whether the success of the gospel
of Jesus Christ, even as it is preached by us, the least of his
servants, be not itself a miracle, never to be forgotten l one
which cannot be denied, as being visible at this day, not in
one, but an hundred places; one which cannot be accounted
for by the ordinary course of any natural causes whatsoever;
one which cannot be ascribed, with any colour of reason, to
diabolical agency; and, lastly, one which will bear the infal
lible test,—the trial of the written word.” (Second Letter to
Dr. Church, Vol. VIII. pages 460–468.)
“But ‘why do you talk of the success of the gospel in
England, which was a Christian country before you was
born?’ Was it indeed? Is it so at this day? I would
explain myself a little on this head also.
“And, (1.) None can deny that the people of England, in
general, are called Christians. They are called so, a few only
excepted, by others, as well as by themselves. But I presume
no man will say, the name makes the thing; that men are Chris
tians, barely because they are called so. It must be allowed,
(2.) That the people of England, generally speaking, have been
christened or baptized: But neither can we infer, “These were
once baptized; therefore, they are Christians now.’ It is allowed,
(3.) That many of those who were once baptized, and are
called Christians to this day, hearthe word of God, attend public
prayers, and partake of the Lord’s supper. But neither does this
prove that they are Christians. For, notwithstanding this, some
of them live in open sin; and others (though not conscious to
themselves of hypocrisy, yet) are utter strangers to the religion
of the heart; are full of pride, vanity, covetousness, ambition; of
hatred, anger, malice, or envy; and, consequently, are no more
spiritualChristiansthan the open drunkard or common swearer.
“Now, these being removed, where are the Christians from
whom we may properly term England a Christian country?
the men who have ‘the mind which was in Christ,’ and who
“walk as he also walked?” whose inmost soul is renewed after
the image of God; and who are outwardly holy, as He who
hath called them is holy? There are doubtless a few such to
be found. ' To deny this would be ‘want of candour. But
M 2
164 LETTER, TO THE
how few ! How thinly scattered up and down | And as for
a Christian visible Church, or a body of Christians visibly
united together, where is this to be seen ?
Ye different sects, who all declare,
Lo! here is Christ, or, Christ is there;
Your stronger proofs divinely give,
And show me where the Christians live!
“And what use is it of, what good end does it serve, to term
England a Christian country? Although, it is true, most of
the natives are called Christians, have been baptized, frequent
the ordinances; and although here and there a real Christian
is to be found, “as a light shining in a dark place;’ does it do
any honour to our great Master, among those who are not
called by his name? Does it recommend Christianity to the
Jews, the Mahometans, or the avowed Heathens? Surely no
one can conceive it does. It only makes Christianity stink in
their nostrils. Does it answer any good end, with regard to
those who are called by this worthy name? I fear not; but
rather, an exceeding bad one. For does it not keep multitudes
easy in their heathen practice? Does it not make, or keep,
still greater numbers satisfied with their heathen tempers?
Does it not directly tend to make both the one and the other
imagine, that they are what indeed they are not; that they
are Christians, while they are utterly without Christ, and with
out God in the world? To close this point: If men are not
Christians till they are renewed after the image of Christ, and
if the people of England, in general, are not thus renewed,
why do we term them so? ‘The god of this world hath’
long ‘blinded their hearts. Let us do nothing to increase
their blindness; but rather to recover them from that strong
delusion, that they may no longer believe a lie.
“Let us labour to convince all mankind, that to be a real
Christian is, to love the Lord our God with all our heart, and
to serve him with all our strength; to love our neighbour as
ourselves, and therefore to do unto every man as we would he
should do unto us.” (Second Letter to Dr. Church, Vol. VIII.
pages 470-472.)
To change one of these Heathens into a real Christian, and
to continue him such, all the ordinary operations of the Holy
Spirit are absolutely necessary.
“But what are they?” I sum them up (as I did in the
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 165
“Farther Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion”) in the words
of as learned and orthodox a Divine as ever England bred:
“Sanctification being opposed to our corruption, and
answering fully to the latitude thereof, whatsoever holiness
and perfection is wanting in our nature must be supplied by
the Spirit of God. Wherefore, we being by nature totally
void of all saving truth, and under an impossibility of know
ing the will of God; this ‘Spirit searcheth all things, yea,
even the deep things of God, and revealeth them unto the
sons of men; so that thereby the darkness of their under
standing is expelled, and they are enlightened with the know
ledge of God. The same Spirit which revealeth the object
of faith, generally, to the universal Church, doth also illumi
nate the understanding of such as believe; that they may
receive the truth. For faith is the gift of God, not only in
the object, but also in the act. And this gift is a gift of the
Holy Ghost working within us. And as the increase of per
fection, so the original of faith, is from the Spirit of God, by
an internal illumination of the soul.
“The second part of the office of the Holy Ghost is the
renewing of man in all the parts and faculties of his soul. For
our natural corruption consisting in an aversation of our wills
and a depravation of our affections, an inclination of them to
the will of God is wrought within us by the Spirit of God.
“The third part of his office is to lead, direct, and govern
us in our actions and conversations. “If we live in the Spi
rit, quickened by his renovation, we must also ‘walk in the
spirit, following his direction, led by his manuduction. We
are also animated and acted by the Spirit of God, who
giveth ‘both to will and to do.’
“And “as many as are thus led by the Spirit of God, are the
sons of God.” (Rom. viii. 14.) Moreover, that this direction
may prove more effectual, we are guided in our prayers by the
same Spirit, according to the promise, ‘I will pour upon the
house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
Spirit of grace and supplication.” (Zech. xii. 10.) Whereas
then, “this is the confidence we have in Him, that, if we ask
anything according to his will, he heareth us;’ and whereas,
“we know not what we should pray for as we ought, the Spi
rit itself maketh intercession for us withgroaning that can
not be uttered.’ (Rom. viii. 26, 27.) “And He that search
eth the heart knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because
166 LETTER TO THE
he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of
God.” From which intercession, (made for all true Chris
tians,) he hath the name of the Paraclete given him by
Christ; who said, ‘I will pray the Father, and He will give
you another Paraclete.” (John xiv. 16, 26.) For, “if any man
sin, we have a Paraclete with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous,” saith St. John. “Who maketh intercession for us,’
saith St. Paul. (Rom. viii. 34.) And we have ‘another Para
clete,” saith our Saviour, (John xiv. 16; Rom. viii. 27) ‘which
also maketh intercession for us,” saith St. Paul. A Paraclete
then, in the notion of the Scriptures, is an Intercessor.
“It is also the office of the Holy Ghost to assure us of the
adoption of sons, to create in us a sense of the paternal love
of God toward us, to give us an earnest of our everlasting
inheritance. ‘The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts
by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. For as many as
are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. And
because we are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father. For we have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but we have
received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father; the Spirit itself bearing witness with our spirit, that
we are the children of God.” As, therefore, we are born
again by the Spirit, and receive from him our regeneration,
so we are also by the same Spirit assured of our adoption.
Because, being ‘sons, we are also heirs, heirs of God, and
joint heirs with Christ, by the same Spirit we have the
pledge, or rather the earnest, of our inheritance. ‘For he
which establisheth us in Christ, and hath anointed us, is
God; who hath also sealed us, and hath given us the earnest
of his Spirit in our hearts; so that we are sealed with that
Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inherit
ance.’ The Spirit of God, as given to us in this life, is to be
looked upon as an earnest, being part of that reward which is
promised, and, upon performance of the covenant which God
hath made with us, certainly to be received.”
It now rests with your Lordship to take your choice, either
to condemn or to acquit both ; either your Lordship must
condemn Bishop Pearson for an enthusiast, or you must
acquit me: For I have his express authority on my side, con
cerning every text which I affirm to belong to all Christians.
But I have greater authority than his, and such as I rever
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 167
ence only less than the oracles of God; I mean that of our own
Church. I shall close this head by setting down what occurs
in her authentic records, concerning either our receiving the
Holy Ghost, or his ordinary operations in all true Christians.
In her Daily Service she teacheth us all to “beseech God to
grant us his Holy Spirit, that those things may please him
which we do at this present, and that the rest of our life may
be pure and holy;” to pray for our sovereign Lord the King,
that God would “replenish him with the grace of his Holy
Spirit;” for all the Royal Family, that “they may be endued
with his Holy Spirit, and enriched with his heavenly grace;”
for all the Clergy and People, that he would “send down upon
them the healthful Spirit of his grace,” for the Catholic
Church, that “it may be guided and governed by his good Spi
rit;”and for all therein, who, at any time, make their common
supplications unto him, that “the fellowship ’ or communi
cation “of the Holy Ghost may be with them all evermore.”
Her Collects are full of petitions to the same effect: “Grant
that we may daily be renewed by thy Holy Spirit.” (Collect for
Christmas Day.) “Grant that in all our sufferings here, for
the testimony of thy truth, we may by faith behold the glory
that shall be revealed, and, being filled with the Holy Ghost,
may love and bless our persecutors.” (St. Stephen’s Day.)
“Send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most
excellent gift of charity.” (Quinquagesima Sunday.) “O
Lord, from whom all good things do come, grant to us thy
humble servants, that by thy holy inspiration we may think
those things that are good, and by thy merciful guidance may
perform the same.” (Fifth Sunday after Easter.) “We beseech
thee, leave us not comfortless, but send to us the Holy Ghost
to comfort us.” (Sunday after Ascension Day.) “Grant us by
the same Spirit to have a right judgment in all things, and
evermore to rejoice in his holy comfort.” (Whit-unday.)
“Grant us, Lord, we beseech thee, the Spirit to think and
do always such things as be rightful.” (Ninth Sunday after
Trinity.) “O God, forasmuch as without thee we are not
able to please thee, mercifully grant that thy Holy Spirit may
in all things direct and rule our hearts.” (Nineteenth Sun
day after Trinity.) “Cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by
the inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love
thee, and worthily magnify thy holy name.” (Communion
Office.)
168 LETTER, TO THE
“Give thy Holy Spirit to this infant, (or this person,) that
he may be born again. Give thy Holy Spirit to these per
sons,” (N. B. already baptized,) “that they may continue
thy servants.”
“Almighty God, who hast vouchsafed to regenerate these
persons by water and the Holy Ghost, strengthen them with
the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily increase in them the
manifold gifts of thy grace.” (Office of Confirmation.)
From these passages it may sufficiently appear for what pur
poses every Christian, according to the doctrine of the Church
of England, does now receive the Holy Ghost. But this will
be still more clear from those that follow; wherein we may
likewise observe a plain rational sense of God’s “revealing”
himself to us, of the “inspiration” of the Holy Ghost, and
of a believer's “feeling” in himself the “mighty working” of
the Spirit of Christ.
“God gave them of old, grace to be his children, as he doth
us now. But, now by the coming of our Saviour Christ, we
have received more abundantly the Spirit of God in our
hearts.” (Homily on Faith. Part II.)
“He died to destroy the rule of the devil in us, and he rose
again to send down his Holy Spirit to rule in our hearts.”
(Homil on the Resurrection.)
“We have the Holy Spirit in our hearts, as a seal and
pledge of our everlasting inheritance.” (Ibid.)
“The Holy Ghost sat upon each of them, like as it had been
cloven tongues of fire, to teach that it is he that giveth elo
quence and utterance in preaching the gospel, which engen
dereth a burning zeal towards God’s word, and giveth all men
a tongue, yea, a fiery tongue.” (N. B.—Whatever occurs, in
any of the Journals, of God’s “giving me utterance,” or “ena
bling me to speak with power,” cannot therefore be quoted as
enthusiasm, without wounding the Church through my side.)
“So that if any man be a dumb Christian, not professing his
faith openly, he giveth men occasion to doubtlest he have not
the grace of the Holy Ghost within him.” (Homily on Whit.
sunday. Part I.)
“It is the office of the Holy Ghost to sanctify; which the
more it is hid from our understanding,” (that is, the particular
manner of his working,) “the more it ought to move all men
to wonder at the secret and mighty workings of God’s Holy
Spirit, which is within us. For it is the Holy Ghost that doth
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER. 160
quicken the minds of men, stirring up godly motions in their
Thearts. Neither does he think it sufficient inwardly to work
the new birth of men, unless he does also dwell and abide in
them. ‘Know ye not,” saith St. Paul, “that ye are the tem
ples of God, and that his Spirit dwelleth in you? Know ye
not that your bodies are the temples of the Holy Ghost, which
is within you?” Again he saith, ‘Ye are not in the flesh, but
in the Spirit. For why? ‘The Spirit of God dwelleth in
you. To this agreeth St. John: ‘The anointing which ye
have received’ (he meaneth the Holy Ghost) ‘abideth in
you. (1 John ii. 27.) And St. Peter saith the same: ‘The
Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you. O what com
fort is this to the heart of a true Christian, to think that
the Holy Ghost dwelleth in him ‘If God be with us,’ as
the Apostle saith, “who can be against us?” He giveth
patience and joyfulness of heart in temptation and affliction,
and is therefore worthily called ‘the Comforter.” (John xiv.
16.) He doth instruct the hearts of the simple in the know
ledge of God and his word; therefore he is justly termed,
“the Spirit of Truth. (John xvi. 13.) And (N. B.) where
the Holy Ghost doth instruct and teach, there is no delay at
all in learning.” (Ibid.)
From this passage I learn, (1.) That every true Christian
now “receives the Holy Ghost,” as the Paraclete or Comforter
promised by our Lord. (John xiv. 16.) (2.) That every
Christian receives him, as “the Spirit of Truth,” (promised
John xvi. 13) to “teach him all things.” And, (3.) That
the anointing, mentioned in the First Epistle of St. John,
“abides in every Christian.”
“In reading of God’s word, he profiteth most who is most
inspired with the Holy Ghost.” (Homily on reading the
Scripture. Part I.)
“Human and worldly reason is not needful to the under
standing the Scripture; but the ‘revelation of the Holy
Ghost, who inspireth the true meaning unto them who, with
humility and diligence, search for it.” (Ibid. Part II.)
“Make him know and feel, that there is no other name
given under heaven unto men whereby we can be saved.”
“If we feel our conscience at peace with God, through
remission of our sins, all is of God.” (Homily on Rogation
Week. Part III.)
I70 LETTER TO THE
“If you feel such a faith in you, rejoice in it, and let
it be daily increasing by well working.” (Homily on Faith.
Part III.)
“The faithful may feel wrought, tranquillity of conscience,
the increase of faith and hope, with many other graces of God.”
(Homily on the Sacrament. Part I.)
“Godly men feel inwardly God’s Holy Spirit inflaming
their hearts with love.” (Homily on certain places of Scrip
ture. Part I.)
“God give us grace to know these things, and feel them in
our hearts I This knowledge and feeling is not of ourselves.
Let us therefore meekly call upon the bountiful Spirit, the
Holy Ghost, to inspire us with his presence, that we may be
able to hear the goodness of God to our salvation. For with
out his lively inspiration we cannot so much as speak the name
of the Mediator: “No man can say, Jesus is the Lord, but
by the Holy Ghost. Much less should we be able to believe
and know these great mysteries that be opened to us by Christ.
“But we have received, saith St. Paul, ‘not the Spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is of God;’ for this purpose, ‘that
we may know the things which are freely given to us of God.”
In the power of the Holy Ghost resteth all ability to know
God, and to please him. It is He that purifieth the mind by
his secret working. He enlighteneth the heart to conceive
worthy thoughts of Almighty God. He sitteth on the tongue
of man, to stir him to speak his honour. He only ministereth
spiritual strength to the powers of the soul and body. And if
we have any gift whereby we may profit our neighbour, all is
wrought by this one and selfsame Spirit.” (Homily for Roga
tion Week. Part III.)
Every proposition which I have anywhere advanced con
cerning those operations of the Holy Ghost, which I believe
are common to all Christians in all ages, is here clearly main
tained by our own Church.
Being fully convinced of this, I could not well understand,
for many years, how it was that on the mentioning any of these
great truths, even among men of education, the cry immedi
ately arose, “An enthusiast, an enthusiast !” But I now
plainly perceive, this is only an old fallacy in a new shape.
To object enthusiasm to any person or doctrine, is but a de
cent method of begging the question. It generally spares the
BiSHOP of GLOUCESTER. 171
objector the trouble of reasoning, and is a shorter and easier
way of carrying his cause.
For instance: I assert, that “till a man “receives the Holy
Ghost, he is without God in the world; that he cannot
know the things of God, unless God reveal them unto him
by his Spirit; no, nor have even one holy or heavenly temper,
without the inspiration of the Holy One.” Now, should one
who is conscious to himself that he has experienced none of
these things, attempt to confute these propositions either
from Scripture or antiquity, it might prove a difficult task.
What then shall he do? Why, cry out, “Enthusiasm |
Fanaticism l’’ and the work is done.
“But is it not mere enthusiasm or famaticism to talk of
the new birth ?” So one might imagine, from the manner
in which your Lordship talks of it: “The Spirit did not
stop till it had manifested itself in the last effort of its
power,-the new birth. The new birth began in storms and
tempests, in cries and ecstasies, in tumults and confusions.
Persons who had no sense of religion, that is, no ecstatic
feelings, or pains of the new birth. What can be the issue
of the new birth, attended with those infernal throes? Why
would he elicit sense from these Gentiles, when they were
finally to be deprived of it in ecstasies and new births? All
these circumstances Mr. W. has declared to be constant symp
toms of the new birth.” (Pages 123, 126, 180, 170,225,222.)
So the new birth is, throughout the whole tract, the stand
ing topic of ridicule.
“No, not the new birth itself, but your enthusiastic,
ridiculous account of it.” What is then my account of the
new birth? I gave it some years ago in these words:—
“It is that great change which God works in the soul when
he brings it into life; when he raises it from the death of sin
to the life of righteousness. It is the change wrought in the
whole soul by the almighty Spirit of God, when it is ‘created
anew in Christ Jesus, when it is ‘renewed after the image
of God in righteousness and true holiness;’ when the love
of the world is changed into the love of God, pride into
humility, passion into meekness, hatred, envy, malice, into a
sincere, tender, disinterested love to all mankind. In a
word, it is that change whereby the ‘earthly, sensual, devil
ish’ mind is turned into the mind which was in Christ
Jesus.” (Vol. VI. p. 71.)
172 LETTER TO THE BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER,
This is my account of the new birth. What is there
ridiculous or enthusiastic in it?
“But what do you mean by those tempests, and cries, and
pains, and infernal throes attending the new birth?” I will
tell you as plainly as I can, in the very same words I used to
Dr. Church, after premising that some experience much,
some very little, of these pains and throes:
“‘When men feel in themselves the heavy burden of sin,
see damnation to be the reward of it, behold with the eye of
their mind the horror of hell, they tremble, they quake, and
are inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of heart, and cannot
but accuse themselves, and open their grief unto Almighty
God, and call unto him for mercy. This being done
seriously, their mind is so occupied, partly with sorrow and
heaviness, partly with an earnest desire to be delivered from
this danger of hell and damnation, that all desire of meat and
drink is laid apart, and loathing of worldly things and
pleasures comes in place, so that nothing then liketh them
more than to weep, to lament, to mourn, and both with
words and behaviour of body to show themselves weary of
life.”
“Now permit me to ask, What, if, before you had observed
that these were the very words of our own Church, one of
your acquaintance or parishioners had come and told you that,
ever since he heard a sermon at the Foundery, he saw damna
tion before him, and beheld with the eye of his mind the hor
ror of hell? What, if he had trembled and quaked, and
been so taken up partly with sorrow and heaviness, partly
with an earnest desire to be delivered from the danger of hell
and damnation, as to weep, to lament, to mourn, and both
with words and behaviour to show himself weary of life?
Would you have scrupled to say, ‘Here is another deplorable
instance of the Methodists driving men to distraction?’”
(Second Letter to Dr. Church, Vol. VIII. p. 472.)
I have now finished, as my time permits, what I had to
say, either concerning myself, or on the operations of the
Holy Spirit. In doing this, I have used great plainness of
speech, and yet, I hope, without rudeness. If anything of
that kind has slipped from me, I am ready to retract it. I
desire, on the one hand, to “accept no man's person; ” and
yet, on the other, to give “honour to whom honour is due.”
If your Lordship should think it worth your while to spend
ADDRESS TO THE INHABITANTS OF IRELAND. 173
any more words upon me, may I presume to request one
thing of your Lordship,-to be more serious? It cannot
injure your Lordship’s character or your cause. Truth is
great, and will prevail.
Wishing your Lordship all temporal and spiritual blessings,
I am,
My Lord,
Your Lordship's dutiful son and servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
November 26, 1762.
A.
SHORT ADDRESS
TO
THE INHABITANTS OF IRELAND.
OCCASIONED BY SOME LATE OCCURRENCES.
1. THERE has lately appeared (as you cannot be ignorant)
a set of men preaching up and down in several parts of this
kingdom, who for ten or twelve years have been known in
England by the title of Methodists. The vulgar in Ireland
term them Swaddlers;—a name first given them in Dublin
from one of them preaching on those words: “Ye shall find
the young child wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a
manger.”
2. Extremely various have been the reports concerning
them. Some persons have spoken favourably: But the gene
rality of men treat them in a different manner,-with utter
contempt, if not detestation; and relate abundance of things
in order to prove that they are not fit to live upon the earth.
3. A question, then, which you may maturally ask, is this:
“In what manner ought a man of religion, a man of reason,
a lover of mankind, and a lover of his country, to act on this
occasion?”
4. Before we can properly answer this, it should be inquired,
174 SHORT ADDRESS To
concerning the persons in question, what they are; what
they teach; and what are the effects which are generally
observed to attend their teaching.
5. It should first be inquired, what they are. And in order
to a speedy determination of this, we may set aside whatever
will admit of any dispute; as, whether they are good men or
bad, rich or poor, fools, madmen, and enthusiasts, or sober,
rational men. Now, waving all this, one point is indisputa
ble: It is allowed on all hands, they are men who spend all
their time and strength in teaching those doctrines, the nature
and consequences whereof are described in the following pages.
6. The doctrines they constantly teach are these : That
religion does not consist in negatives only,–in not taking
the name of God in vain, in not robbing or murdering our
neighbour, in bare abstaining from evil of any or every kind;
but is a real, positive thing : That it does not consist in
externals only,–in attending the church and sacrament,
(although all these things they approve and recommend,) in
using all the means of grace, or in works of charity, (com
monly so called,) superadded to works of piety; but that it
is, properly and strictly, a principle within, seated in the
inmost soul, and thence manifesting itself by these outward
fruits, on all suitable occasions.
7. They insist, that nothing deserves the name of religion,
but a virtuous heart, producing a virtuous life: A complica
tion of justice, mercy, and truth, of every right and amiable
temper, beaming forth from the deepest recesses of the mind,
in a series of wise and generous actions.
Compositum jus, /asque animo, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, et incoctum generoso pectus honesto."
8. These are their constant doctrines. It is true, they occa
sionally touch on abundance of other things. Thus they fre
quently maintain, that thereisan inseparable connexion between
virtue and happiness; that none but a virtuous (or, as they
usually express it, a religious) man can behappy; and that every
man is happy in the same proportion as he is truly religious;
seeing a contented mind,(according to them,) acheerful, thank
* This quotation from Persius is thus translated by Drummond:
“ - Let me present a mind,
Which civil and religious duties bind;
A guileless heart, which no dark secrets knows,
But with the generous love of virtue glows.”—EDIT.
THE INHABITANTS OF IRELAND, 175
ful, joyous acquiescence in every disposal of that Sovereign
Wisdom who governs both heaven and earth, if it be not an
essential branch of religion, is, at least, a necessary consequence
of it. On all proper occasions they strongly recommend, on the
one hand, the most intense love of our country; on the other, the
firmest loyalty to our Prince, abstracted from allviews.of private
interest. They likewise take every opportunity of enforcing the
absolute necessity of sobriety and temperance; of unwearied
industry in the works of our calling; of moral honesty in all its
branches; and, particularly, in the discharge of all relative
duties, without which, they say, religion is vain. But all these
they recommend on that one single ground,—the love of God
and of all mankind; declaring them to be of no avail, if they do
not spring from this love, as wellasterminate and centre therein.
9. Whoever is at the pains of hearing these Preachers, or of
reading what they have wrote, with any degree of attention and
impartiality, must perceive that these are their doctrines. And
it is equally easy to discern what the effects of their preaching
have been. These doctrines they spread wherever they come.
They convince many in every place, that religion does not con
sist (as they imagined once) either in negatives or externals, in
barely doing no harm or even doing good; but in the tempers
of the heart, in right dispositions of mind towards God and man,
producing all right words and actions.
10. And these dispositions of mind are, more or less, the
continual consequence of their preaching: (That is, if we may
know the tree by its fruit, which is doubtless the most rational
way of judging.) The lives of many who constantly attend
it show, that God has wrought a real change in their heart;
and that the grand principle of love to God and man already
begins to take root therein.
11. Hence those who were before of quite the opposite temper,
are now generous, disinterested lovers of their country; and
faithful, loyal subjects to their Prince, His sacred Majesty King
George: They are now sober and temperate in all things, and
punctually honest in all their dealings: They are strict in every
relative duty, and laborious and diligent in their callings, not
withstanding the continual discouragement they receive from
many who still cry out, “Ye are idle, ye are idle; therefore ye
say, Let us go and serve the Lord.” They are content in every
state, whether of plenty or want, and thankful to God and man.
176 SHORT ADDRESS TO
These are plain, glaring, undeniable facts, whereof, if any Magis
trate will be at the trouble to take them, numerous affidavits
may be made, in Dublin, Cork, Limerick, and many other places.
But if these things are so, it is easy to conceive in what man
ner every man of religion, every man of reason, every lover of
mankind, every lover of his country, ought to act on this
occasion.
12. For, First, ought not every man of religion, with all the
earnestness of his soul, to praise God, who, after so long a night
of ignorance and error had overspread our country, has poured
light on so many of those that sat in darkness and the shadow
of death? has shown such numbers even of the lowest and most
brutish of men, wherein true religion lies; has taught them both
to lay therightfoundation, and to build the whole fabricthereon;
has convinced them, “Other foundation can no man lay than
that which is laid, even Jesus Christ; ” and, “The end of the
commandment is love,” of the whole commandment or law of
Christ; love, the life, the soul, the spirit of religion, the river
that makes glad the city of God, the living water continually
springing up into everlasting life?
13. Admit that they do not exactly judge right as to some of
the appendages of religion; that you have a clearer and juster
conception than they of several things pertaining to the beauty
of holiness; yet ought you not to bless God for giving these
outcasts of men to see at least the essence of it? nay, to be
living witnesses of the substance of religion, though they may
still mistake as to some of the circumstances of it.
14. Ought not every man of reason (whether he assents, or
no, to that system of opinions commonly called Christianity)
sincerely and heartily to rejoice in the advancement of solid,
rational virtue P in the propagation, not of this or that set of
opinions, but of genuine pure morality? of disinterested bene
volence, of tender affections, to the whole of human race?
Ought you not to be glad, that there are any instruments
found, till others appear who are more equal to the task,
whose one employment it is (from whatever motive) to diffuse
generous honesty thoughout the land?
- 15. Allow that, in doing this, they have some particularities of
opinion, (for humanum est errare et nescire,”) or some little,
odd customs, which you do not conceive to be grounded upon
• It is the lot of humanity to be ignorant of many things, and liable to
error.-EDIT.
ThE INHABITANTS OF IRELAND. 177
strict-reason, yet so long as neither those customs nor those
opinions prevent the advancement of that great end, ought you
not, as areasonableman, to rejoice in theincrease of solid virtue?
especially when you consider, that they do not impose their
own opinions on other men; that (whatever they are) they think
and let think, and condemn no man barely for his opinion; nei
ther blame you for not regarding those little prudential rules
which many observe by their own full and free consent.
16. Ought not every lover of mankind to have something
more than a common regard for those who both labour and
suffer reproach, in order to promote that love in every place; and
to remove every method of speaking or acting, every temper,
contrary to love? Ought not you who are truly moral men, (a
lovely and venerable character,) to have some value for those
who spend and are spent to advance genuine morality? who
spare no pains, if by any means they may induce any of their
countrymen, in any part of the nation, to practise justice, mercy,
and truth, in all their intercourse with each other? to behave
in every circumstance and relation according to those eternal
rules, invariably observing the royal law, “Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself;” and, “Whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you, even so do unto them.”
17. If you are a lover of mankind, must you not sympathize
with those who suffer evil in various kinds, for this very thing,
because they do good to mankind, looking for no reward on this
side heaven? As to the idle tale of their laying up treasures on
earth, it neither agrees with fact nor reason. Not with fact; for
it is notorious, that those who before piqued themselveson owing
no man anything, are now indebted in larger sums, than,
humanly speaking, they can ever pay. Not with reason; for
if riches had been their aim, they would have sought out the
rich, not the poor; not the tinners in Cornwall, the colliers of
Kingswood, the keelmen in Newcastle-upon-Tyne. At the
same time, they showed they were not afraid or ashamed to
appear before the greatest or wisest of men: Witness their
appearing in the most public manner, both at Dublin, Bristol,
Oxford, and London.
18. Ought not every lover of his country, not only not to
oppose, but to assist with all the power and interest he has,
those who continually, and not without success, recommend the
love of our country, and, what is so closely connected therewith,
VOL. IX.
178 ADDRESS TO THE INHABITANTS OF IRELAND.
duty and loyalty to the best of Princes? Ought you not to
forward, so far as ever your influence will go, sobriety and tem
perance among your countrymen? What can be more for the
interest of this poor nation, and for the good of all, whether rich
or poor? You do well to promote that excellent design of
spreading the linen manufacture among us. None can doubt
but this is admirably well calculated for the good of the whole
kingdom: But are not temperance and honesty still more con
ducive to the good of this and of every kingdom? Nay, and
how directly conducive are these virtues to that very end,—the
flourishing of our manufactures !
19. And what can conduce more to the general good of all
the inhabitants of this land, than industry joined to content? to
peace with God, peace with yourselves, peace with one another?
O how needful in this, above all lands! For, what a stranger
has it been in our coasts | Ye men of Ireland, help! Come
all, as one man, all men of religion and reason, all lovers of
God and of mankind, all lovers of your country. O suffer not
yourselves to be thus grossly abused, thus miserably imposed
upon, any longer | Open your eyes; look around and judge
for yourselves; see plain and undeniable facts; be convinced
by the force of truth and love, that the work is indeed of God.
Rejoice in the good of your country, in peace and good-will
continually advanced among men. Beware you do not oppose,
or speak or think evil of, what God hath done in the earth.
Rather, each in the station wherein he is placed, join hearts
and hands in the work, till holiness and happiness cover our
land as the waters cover the sea.
JOHN WESLEY.
DUBLIN, July 6, 1749.
A LETTER,
To
TEIE REVEREND MB, FLEURY.
I labour for peace: But when I speak thereof, they make themselves ready for
battle. Psalm crx. 7.
REVEREND SIR,
1. In June, 1769, I spent two or three days at Waterford.
As soon as my back was turned, you valiantly attacked me, I
suppose both morning and afternoon. Hearing, when I was
there, two or three weeks ago, that you designed me the same
favour, I waited upon you at the Cathedral, on Sunday, April
28. You was as good as your word: You drew the sword,
and, in effect, threw away the scabbard. You made a furious
attack on a large body of people, of whom you knew just
nothing. Blind and bold, you laid about you without fear or
wit, without any regard either to truth, justice, or mercy. And
thus you entertained, both morning and evening, a large con
gregation who came to hear “the words of eternal life.”
2. Not having leisure myself, I desired Mr. Bourke to wait
upon you the next morning. He proposed our writing to each
other. You said, “No; if anything can be said against my
Sermons, I expect it shall be printed: Let it be done in a
public, not a private way.” I did not desire this; I had much
rather it had been done privately. But since you will have it
so, I submit.
3. Your text was, “I know this, that after my departure
shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away disciples after them.” (Acts xx. 29, 30.)
Having shown that St. Paul foresaw these false teachers, you
undertake to show, (1.) The mischiefs which they occasioned.
N 2
180 LETTER TO THE
(2.) The character of them, and how nearly this concerns a set
of men called Methodists. (First Sermon, pp. 1-4.)
4. Against these false teachers, you observe, St. Paul warned
the Corinthians, Galatians, Colossians, and Hebrews. (Pages
5–8.) Very true; but what is this to the point? O, much
more than some are aware of. This insinuation was, all along,
just as if you had said, “I beseech you, my dear hearers, mark
the titles he gives to these grievous wolves, false apostles,
deceitful workers, and apply them to the Methodist Teachers.
There I give them a deadly thrust.”
5. “These are well styled by Christ, ‘ravening wolves;”
by St. Paul, “grievous wolves, from the mischiefs they do,
rending the Church of Christ, and perverting the true sense of
the gospel, for their own private ends. They ever did,
and to this day do, pretend to extraordinary inspiration.”
(Page 8.)
Round assertions! Let us consider them one by one: (1.)
“These are styled by Christ ‘ravening wolves; by St. Paul,
“grievous wolves.’” True; but how does it appear that
these names are applicable to the Methodists? Why, they
* rend the Church of Christ.” What is the Church of Christ?
According to our Article, a Church is “a company of faithful
people,” of true believers, who have “the mind that was in
Christ,” and “walk as Christ walked.” Who then are the
Church of Christ in Waterford? Point them out, Sir, if you
know them; and then be pleased to show how the Methodists
rend this Church of Christ. You may as justly say they
rend the walls or the steeple of the cathedral church. “How
ever, they pervert the true sense of the gospel, for their own
private ends.” Wherein do they pervert the true sense of the
gospel? I have published Notes both on the Gospels and the
other Scriptures. But wherein do those Notes pervert the
sense? None has yet attempted to show. But for what
private ends should I pervert it? For ease or honour? Then
I should be sadly disappointed. Or for money? This is the
silliest tale of all. You may easily know, if you are willing
to know it, that I did not leave Waterford without being
some pounds lighter than I was when I came thither.
6. “But they pretend to extraordinary inspiration.” They
do not: They expressly disclaim it. I have declared an hun
dred times, I suppose ten times in print, that I pretend to no
other inspiration than that which is common to all real Chris
REV. M.R. FLEURY. 181
tians, without which no one can be a Christian at all. “They
denounce hell and damnation to all that reject their pretences.”
(Page 9.) This is another charge; but it is as groundless as
the former; it is without all shadow of truth. You may as
well say, The Methodists denounce hell and damnation to all
that reject Mahometanism. As groundless, as senselessly,
shamelessly false, is the assertion following: “To reject their
ecstasies and fanatic pretences to revelation is cried up as a
crime of the blackest dye.” It cannot be, that we should
count it a crime to reject what we do not pretend to at all.
But I pretend to no ecstasies of any kind, nor to any other
kind of revelation than you yourself, yea, and every Christian
enjoys, unless he is “without God in the world.”
7. “These grievous wolves pretended to greater mortifica
tion and self-denial than the Apostles themselves.” (Page 11.)
This discovery is spick and span new : I never heard of it
before. But pray, Sir, where did you find it? I think, not in
the canonical Scriptures. I doubt you had it from some
apocryphal writer. “Thus also do the modern false teachers.”
I know not any that do. Indeed I have read of some such
among the Mahometan Dervises, and among the Indian Brah
mins. But I doubt whether any of these outlandish crea
tures have been yet imported into Great Britain or Ireland.
8. “They pretend to know the mind of Christ better than
his Apostles.” (Page 12.) Certainly the Methodists do not:
This is another sad mistake, not to say slander. “However,
better than their successors do.” That is another question.
If you rank yourself among their successors, as undoubtedly
you do, I will not deny that some of these poor, despised
people, though not acting in a public character, do know the
mind of Christ, that is, the meaning of the Scripture, better
than you do yet. But, perhaps, when ten years more are
gone over your head, you may know it as well as they.
9. You conclude this Sermon, “Let us not be led away by
those who represent the comfortable religion of Christ as a
path covered over with thorns.” (Page 14.) This cap does
not fit me. I appeal to all that have heard me at Waterford,
or elsewhere, whether I represent religion as an uncomfortable
thing. No, Sir; both in preaching and writing I representit
as far more comfortable than you do, or are able to do. “But
you represent us as lovers of pleasure more than lovers of
182 LETTER TO THE
God.” If any do this, I doubt they touch a sore spot; I am
afraid the shoe pinches. “They affirm pleasure in general to
be unlawful, grounding it on, ‘They that are in the flesh
cannot please God.’” (Page 15.) Wrong, top and bottom.
Did we hold the conclusion, we should never infer it from
such premises. But we do not hold it: We no more affirm
pleasure in general to be unlawful, than eating and drinking.
This is another invention of your own brain, which never
entered into our thoughts. It is really curious when you add,
“This is bringing men “after the principles of the world, and
not after Christ.” What, the affirming that pleasure is un
lawful? Is this “after the principles of the world?” Was
ever text so unhappily applied?
10. So much for your first Sermon; wherein, though you
do not seem to want good-will, yet you are marvellously bar
ren of invention; having only retailed two or three old, thread
bare objections, which have been answered twenty times over.
You begin the second, “I shall now consider some of their
many absurd doctrines: The first of which is, “the pretending
to be divinely inspired.” (Second Sermon, p. 1.) An odd
doctrine enough. “And called in an extraordinary manner
to preach the word of God.” (Pages 2-4.)
This is all harping upon the same string, the grand objection
of Lay-Preachers. We have it again and again, ten, twenty
times over. I shall answer it once for all. Not by anything
new,—that is utterly needless; but barely by repeating the
answer which convinced a serious Clergyman many years
ago:
“TULLAMORE, May 4, 1748.
“REvEREND SIR,
“I HAVE at present neither leisure nor inclination to enter
into a formal controversy; but you will give me leave just to
offer a few loose hints relating to the subject of our last night's
conversation :
“l. Seeing life and health are things of so great import
ance, it is, without question, highly expedient that Physicians
should have all possible advantages of learning and education.
“2. That trial should be made of them by competent
judges, before they practise publicly.
“3. That, after such trial, they be authorized to practise
by those who are empowered to convey that authority.
REV. M. ft. FLEURY. 183
“4. And that, while they are preserving the lives of others,
they should have what is sufficient to sustain their own. .
“5. But supposing a gentleman bred at the University in
Dublin, with all the advantages of education, after he has
undergone all the usual trials, and then been regularly autho
rized to practise:
“6. Suppose, I say, this Physician settles at for some
years, and yet makes no cures at all; but, after trying his
skill on five hundred persons, cannot show that he has healed
one; many of his patients dying under his hands, and the
rest remaining just as they were before he came :
“7. Will you condemn a man who, having some little skill
in physic, and a tender compassion for those who are sick or
dying all around him, cures many of those, without fee or
reward, whom the Doctor could not cure?
“8. At least, did not, (which is the same thing as to the
case in hand,) were it only for this reason,—because he did
not go to them, and they would not come to him?
“9. Will you condemn him because he has not learning,
or has not had an University education?
“What then? He cures those whom the man of learning
and education cannot cure.
“10. Will you object, that he is no Physician, nor has any
authority to practise?
“I cannot come into your opinion. I think, Medicus est
qui medetur; ‘he is a Physician who heals;” and that every
man has authority to save the life of a dying man.
“But if you only mean, he has no authority to take fees,
I contend not : For he takes none at all.
“11. Nay, and I am afraid it will hold, on the other hand,
Medicus non est qui non medetur; I am afraid, if we use
propriety of speech, “he is no Physician who works no cure.’
“12. ‘O, but he has taken his degree of Doctor of Physic,
and therefore has authority.’
“Authority to do what? “Why, to heal all the sick that will
employ him. But (to wave the case of those who will not
employ him; and would you have eventheir lives thrown away?)
he does not heal those that do employ him. He that was sick
before, is sick still; or else he is gone hence, and is no more seen.
“Therefore his authority is not worth a rush; for it serves
not the end for which it was given.
184 LETTER TO THE
“13. And surely he has not authority to kill them, by
hindering another from saving their lives!
“14. If he either attempts or desires to hinder him, if he
condemns or dislikes him for it, it is plain to all thinking men,
he regards his own fees more than the lives of his patients.
“II. Now to apply. 1. Seeing life everlasting, and holi
mess or health of soul, are things of so great importance, it is
highly expedient that Ministers, being Physicians of the
soul, should have all advantage of education and learning.
“2. That full trial should be made of them in all respects,
and that by the most competent judges, before they enter on
the public exercise of their office, the saving souls from death:
“3. That, after such trial, they be authorized to exercise
that office by those who are empowered to convey that
authority. (I believe Bishops are empowered to do this, and
have been so from the apostolic age.)
“4. And that those whose souls they save ought, meantime,
to provide them what is needful for the body.
“5. But suppose a gentleman bred at the University of
Dublin, with all the advantages of education, after he has
undergone the usual trials, and been regularly authorized to
save souls from death:
“6. Suppose, I say, this Minister settles at -for some
years, and yet saves no souls at all; saves no sinners from
their sins; but after he has preached all this time to five or
six hundred persons, cannot show that he has converted one
from the error of his ways; many of his parishioners dying
as they lived, and the rest remaining just as they were before
he came :
“7. Will you condemn a man who, having compassion on
dying souls, and some knowledge of the gospel of Christ,
without any temporal reward, saves many from their sins
whom the Minister could not save?
.“8. At least, did not : Nor ever was likely to do it; for he
did not go to them, and they would not come to him.
“9. Will you condemn such a Preacher, because he has
not learning, or has not had an University education?
“What then? He saves those sinners from their sins
whom the man of learning and education cannot save.
“A peasant being brought before the College of Physicians
at Paris, a learned Doctor accosted him, ‘What, friend, do you
REV. M.R., FLEURY. 185
pretend to prescribe to people that have agues? Dost thou
know what an ague is?’
“He replied, ‘Yes, Sir. An ague is, what I can cure and
you cannot.’
“10. Will you object, “But he is no Minister, nor has any
authority to save souls?’
“I must beg leave to dissent from you in this. I think he is
a true evangelical Minister, Atakovos, servant of Christ and his
Church, who ovro Buakovet, “so ministers’ as to save souls from
death, to reclaim sinners from their sins; and that every Chris
tian, if he is able to do it, has authority to save a dying soul.
“But if you only mean, he has no authority to take tithes,
I grant it. He takes none. As he has freely received, so he
freely gives.
“11. But, to carry the matter a little farther, I am afraid
it will hold, on the other hand, with regard to the soul as
well as the body, Medicus non est qui non medetur. I am
afraid reasonable men will be inclined to think, “he that
saves no souls is no Minister of Christ.’
“12. ‘O but he is ordained, and therefore has authority.’
“Authority to do what? “To save all the souls that will
put themselves under his care.’ True; but (to wave the case
of them that will not; and would you desire that even those
should perish 7) he does not, in fact, save them that are under
his care: Therefore, what end does his authority serve? He
that was a drunkard, is a drunkard still. The same is true
of the Sabbath-breaker, the thief, the common swearer. This
is the best of the case; for many have died in their iniquity,
and their blood will God require at the watchman’s hand.
“13. For surely he has no authority to murder souls;
either by his neglect, by his smooth, if not false, doctrine, or
by hindering another from plucking them out of the fire and
bringing them to life everlasting.
“14. If he either attempts or desires to hinder him, if he
condemns or is displeased with him for it, how great reason
is there to fear, that he regards his own profit more than the
salvation of souls l’’
11. “But why do you not prove your mission by miracles?”
This likewise you repeat over and over. But I have not leisure
to answer the same stale objection an hundred times. I there
186 LETTER TO THE
fore give this also the same answer which I gave many years
ago :
12. “What is it you would have us prove by miracles? that
the doctrines we preach are true? This is not the way to
prove that: We prove the doctrines we preach by Scripture
and reason. Is it, (1.) That A. B. was for many years without
God in the world, a common swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, a
drunkard? Or, (2.) That he is not so now? Or, (3.) That
he continued so till he heard us preach, and from that time
was another man? Not so; the proper way to prove these
facts, is by the testimony of competent witnesses. And these
witnesses are ready, whenever required, to give full evidence
of them. Or would you have it proved by miracles, (4.)
That this was not done by our own power or holiness? that
God only is able to raise the dead, those who are dead in
trespasses and sins? Nay, “if you hear not Moses, and the
Prophets, and the Apostles, on this head, neither will you
believe ‘though one rose from the dead. It is therefore
utterly unreasonable and absurd, to require or expect the
proof of miracles, in questions of such a kind as are always
decided by proofs of quite another nature.” (Farther Appeal
to Men of Reason and Religion, Vol. VIII. p. 233.)
If you will take the trouble of reading that little Tract,
you will find more upon the same head.
13. If you say, “But those who lay claim to extraordinary
inspiration and revelation ought to prove that claim by mira
cles,” we allow it: But this is not our case. We lay claim
to no such thing. The Apostles did lay claim to extraordinary
inspiration, and accordingly proved their claim by miracles.
And their blessed Master claimed to be Lord of all, the eternal
Son of God. Well therefore might he be expected to “do the
works which no other man did; ” especially as he came to put
an end to that dispensation which all men knew to be of God.
See then how idly and impertinently you require the Methodists
to work miracles “because Christ and his Apostles did l”
14. You proceed: “They pretend to be as free from sin as
Jesus Christ.” (Page 6.) You bring three proofs of this: (1.)
“Mr. Wesley, in his answer to a Divine of our Church, says,
“Jesus Christ stands as our regeneration, to help us to the same
holy undefiled nature which he himself had. And if this very
life and identical nature is not propagated and derived on us,
he is not our Saviour.’” (Page 7.) When I heard you read
REV. M.R. FLEURY. 187
these words, I listened and studied, and could not imagine
where you got them. I knew they were not mine: I use no
such queer language; but did not then recollect, that they
are Mr. Law’s words, in his answer to Dr. Trapp, an extract
from which I have published. But be they whose they will,
they by no means imply that we are to be “as righteous as
Christ was,” but that we are to be (which St. Peter likewise
affirms) “partakers of the Divine nature.” (2.) “A Preacher
of yours declared he was as free from sin as Christ ever was.”
I did not hear him declare it: Pray did you? . If not, how
do you know he declared it at all? Nay, but “another
declared he believed it was impossible for one whom he
named to sin, for the Spirit of God dwelt in him bodily.”
(Page 8.) Pray, Sir, did you hear this yourself? Else the
testimony is nothing worth. Hearsay evidence will not be
admitted by any Court in the kingdom.
What you say of that good man Mr. Whitefield, now with
God, I leave with Mr. H—'s remark: “I admire your pru
dence, though not your generosity; for it is much safer to
cudgel a dead man than a living one.”
15. You next descant upon “the disorders which the spirit
of enthusiasm created in the last age.” Very likely it might;
but, blessed be God, that is nothing at all to us. For he
hath given us, not the spirit of enthusiasm, but of love and of a
sound mind. In the following page you quaintly compare
your hearers to sheep, and yourself and friends to the dogs in
the fable; and seem much afraid, lest the silly sheep should
be “persuaded to give you up to these ravening wolves.”
Nay, should you not rather be ranked with the sheep than
the dogs? For your teeth are not so sharp as razors.
16. “Another fundamental error of the Methodists is, the
asserting that laymen may preach; yea, the most ignorant
and illiterate of them, provided they have the inward call of
the Spirit.” (Page 11.)
The former part of this objection we had before. The latter
is a total mistake. They do not allow the “most ignorant”
men to preach, whatever “inward call” they pretend to.
Among them none are allowed to be stated Preachers, but
such as, (1.) Are truly alive to God; such as experience the
“faith that worketh by love; ” such as love God and all man
kind. (2.) Such as have a competent knowledge of the word of
God, and of the work of God in the souls of men. (3.) Such
188 LETTER, TO THE
as have given proof that they are called of God, by con
verting sinners from the error of their ways. And to show
whether they have these qualifications or no, they are a year,
sometimes more, upon trial. Now, I pray, what is the common
examination, either for Deacon’s or Priest's Orders, to this?
17. “But no ambassador can act without a commission from
his King: Consequently, no Preacher without a commission
from God.” (Page 11.) This is a tender point; but you con
strain me to speak. I ask then, Is he commissioned from God
to preach the gospel, who does not know the gospel? who
knows little more of the Bible than of the Koran P I fear
not. But if so, what are many of our brethren? Sent of
man, but not of God!
“However, these laymen are not sent of God to preach;
for does not St. Paul say, ‘No man taketh this honour to
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron P’”
(Page 13.) Another text most unhappily applied; for Aaron
did not preach at all. But if these men are not sent of God,
how comes God to confirm their word, by convincing and con
verting sinners? He confirms the word of his messenger, but
of none else. Therefore, if God owns their word, it is plain
that God has sent them.
“But the earth opened and swallowed up those intruders
into the priestly office, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.” (Page
14.) Such an intruder are you, if you convert no sinners to
God. Take heed lest a deeper pit swallow you up !
18. “But the Church of Rome has sent out Preachers among
us, such as Thomas Heath, a Jesuit; and Faithful Commin, a
Dominican Friar.” (Pages 16, 17.) And what do you infer
from hence? that my brother, who was thought a Student of
Christ Church in Oxford, was really a Jesuit? and that while I
passed for a Fellow of Lincoln College, I was in fact a Domini
can Friar? Even to hint at such absurdities as these is an
insult on common sense.
19. We have now done with the argumentative part of your
Sermons, and come to the exhortation: “Mark them that cause
divisions and offences among you; for they serve not the Lord,
but their own bellies.” (Page 18.) Who “serve their own
bellies?” the Methodists, or ? Alas, how terribly might
this be retorted ! “And by fair speeches deceive the hearts of
the simple.” Deceive them into what? into the knowledge and
love of God! the loving their neighbour as themselves ! the
REV. M.R. FLEURY. 189
walking in justice, mercy, and truth ! the doing to all as they
would be done to ! Felices errore suo l? Would to God all
the people of Waterford, rich and poor, yea, all the men, women,
and children in the three kingdoms, may be thus deceived !
20. “Do not credit those who tell you that we must judge
of our regeneration by sensible impulses, impressions, ardors,
and ecstasies.” (Page 19.) Who tells them so? Not I: Not
Mr. Bourke: Not any in connexion with me. Sir, you your
self either do or ought to know the contrary. Whether there
fore these are, or are not, “signs of the Spirit,” (page 20,) see
you to it; it is nothing to me; any more than whether the
Spirit does or does not “show itself in groanings and sighings,
in fits and starts.” I never affirmed it did: And when you
represent me as so doing, you are a sinner against God, and
me, and your own soul.
21. If you should see good to write anything more about the
Methodists, I beg you would first learn who and what they are.
Be so kind as at least to read over my “Journals,” and the
“Appeals to Men of Reason and Religion.” Then you will
no longer “run” thus “uncertainly,” or “fight as one that
beateth the air.” But I would rather hope you will not fight
at all. For, whom would you fight with ? If you will fight,
it must be with your friends; for such we really are. We wish
all the same happiness to you which we wish to our own souls.
We desire no worse for you, than that you may “present”
yourself “a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God; ” that
you may watch over the souls committed to your charge, as he
“that must give account; ” and that, in the end, you may
receive “the crown which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will
give to all that love his appearing !” So prays,
Reverend Sir,
Your affectionate Brother,
JOHN WESLEY.
LIMERICK,
May 18, 1771.
• Happy in their error.--EDIT.
Th E
DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN,
ACCORDING to
SCRIPTURE, REASON, AND EXPERIENCE.
PREFACE.
•
1. A FEw years ago, a friend put into my hands
Dr. Taylor's “Doctrine of Original Sin,” which I
read carefully over and partly transcribed, and
have many times since diligently considered. The
author is doubtless a person of sense, nay, of unusu
ally strong understanding, joined with no small
liveliness of imagination, and a good degree of
various learning. He has likewise an admirable
command of temper, so that he almost everywhere
speaks as one in good humour. Add to this, that
he has a smooth and pleasing, yet a manly and
nervous, style. And all these talents he exerts to
the uttermost, on a favourite subject, in the Trea
tise before us; which he has had leisure for many
years to revise, file, correct, and strengthen against
all objections.
2. So finished a piece surely deserves the consider
ation of all those masters of reason which the age has
produced. And I have long hoped that some of those
would attempt to show how far the doctrine there
laid down is true; and what weight there is in the
arguments which are produced in confirmation of it.
I know not how to believe that all the Clergy in
England are of the same opinion with this author.
And certainly there are some whom all his skill in
Greek, and even in Hebrew, does not make afraid.
I should rejoice had any of these undertaken the
task, who are, in many respects, better qualified
for it; particularly in this, that they have time
FREFACE. 193
upon their hands; they have full leisure for such an
employment. But since none else will,” I cannot
but speak, though lying under many peculiar disad
vantages. I dare not be silent any longer: Necessity
is laid upon me to provide those who desire to know
the truth with some antidote against that deadly
poison which has been diffusing itself for several
years through our nation, our Church, and even our
Universities. Nay, one (I hope, only one) Father
of the Church has declared that he knows no book
more proper than this to settle the principles of a
young Clergyman. Is it not time, then, for “the
very stones to cry out P”
3. For this is not a point of small importance; a
question that may safely be determined either way.
On the contrary, it may be doubted whether the
scheme before us be not far more dangerous than
open Deism itself. It does not shock us like bare
faced infidelity: We feel no pain, and suspect no evil,
while it steals like “water into our bowels,” like “oil
into our bones.” One who would be upon his guard
in reading the works of Dr. Middleton, or Lord
Bolingbroke, is quite open and unguarded in reading
the smooth, decent writings of Dr. Taylor; one who
does not oppose, (far be it from him !) but only
explain, the Scripture; who does not raise any
difficulties or objections against the Christian Reve
lation, but only removes those with which it
had been unhappily encumbered for so many
centuries !
4. I said, than open Deism : For I cannot look
on this scheme as any other than old Deism in a new
* Since the writing of this, I have seen several Tracts, which I shall
have occasion to take notice of hereafter. There are likewise many excellent
remarks on this subject in Mr. Hervey's Dialogues.
VOL.-IX. O
194 PREFACE.
dress; seeing it saps the very foundation of all
revealed religion, whether Jewish or Christian.
“Indeed, my L—,” said an eminent man to a person
of quality, “I cannot see that we have much need of
Jesus Christ.” And who might not say, upon this
supposition, “I cannot see that we have much need
of Christianity?” Nay, not any at all; for “they
that are whole have no need of a Physician; ” and
the Christian Revelation speaks of nothing else but
the great “Physician” of our souls; nor can Christian
Philosophy, whatever be thought of the Pagan, be
more properly defined than in Plato's word: It is
Separeta \rvX's, “the only true method of healing a
distempered soul.” But what need of this, if we are
in perfect health P If we are not diseased, we do not
want a cure. If we are not sick, why should we seek
for a medicine to heal our sickness? What room is
there to talk of our being renewed in “knowledge”
or “holiness, after the image wherein we were
created,” if we never have lost that image * if we are
as knowing and holy now, nay, far more so, than
Adam was immediately after his creation ? If,
therefore, we take away this foundation, that man
is by nature foolish and sinful, “fallen short of the
glorious image of God,” the Christian system falls at
once; nor will it deserve so honourable an appella
tion, as that of a “cunningly devised fable.”
5. In considering this confutation of the Christian
system, I am under some difficulty from Dr. Taylor's
manner of writing. It is his custom to say the same
thing (sometimes in different, sometimes in nearly
the same words) six or eight, perhaps twelve or fif
teen times, in different parts of his book. Now, I have
accustomed myself, for many years, to say one and the
same thing once only. However, to comply with his
manner as far as possible, I shall add, at proper inter
PREFACE. 195
vals, extracts from others, expressing nearly the
same sentiments which I have before expressed in
my own words.
6. I am sensible, in speaking on so tender a point
as this must needs be, to those who believe the Chris
tian system, there is danger of a warmth which does
no honour to our cause, nor is at all countenanced by
the Revelation which we defend. I desire neither to
show nor to feel this, but to “speak the truth in
love,” (the only warmth which the gospel allows,)
and to write with calmness, though not indifference.
There is likewise a danger of despising our oppo
ments, and of speaking with an air of contempt or
disdain. I would gladly keep clear of this also; well
knowing that a diffidence of ourselves is far from
implying a diffidence of our cause: I distrust myself,
not my argument. O that the God of the Christians
may be with me! that his Spirit may give me under
standing, and enable me to think and “speak as the
oracles of God,” without going from them to the
right hand or to the left
LEWISHAM,
November 30, 1756.
O 2
THE
DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN.
PART I.
THE PAST AND PRESENT STATE OF MANKIND,
BEFoRE we attempt to account for any fact, we should be
well assured of the fact itself. First, therefore, let us inquire
what is the real state of mankind; and, in the Second place,
endeavour to account for it.
I. First, I say, let us inquire, What is the real state, with
regard to knowledge and virtue, wherein mankind have been
from the earliest times? And what state are they in at this
day?
I. 1. What is the state, (to begin with the former branch
of the inquiry,) with regard to knowledge and virtue, wherein,
according to the most authentic accounts, mankind have been
from the earliest times? We have no authentic account of the
state of mankind in the times antecedent to the deluge, but in
the writings of Moses. What then, according to these, was the
state of mankind in those times? Moses gives us an exact and
full account: God then “saw that the wickedness of man was
great, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart
was only evil continually.” (Gen. vi. 5, 12, 13.) And this was
not the case of only part of mankind; but “all flesh had cor
rupted his way upon the earth: ” And accordingly God said,
“The end of all flesh is come, for the earth is filled with vio
lence through them.” Only Noah was “righteous before God.”
(Gen. vii. 1.) Therefore only he and his household were spared,
when God “brought the flood upon the world of the ungodly,”
and destroyed them all from the face of the earth.
“Let us examine the most distinguishing features in this
draught. Not barely the works of their hands, or the works of
their tongue, but “every imagination of the thoughts of their
THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN. 197
hearts was evil.” The contagion had spread itself through
the immer man; had tainted the seat of their principles, and
the source of their actions. But was there not some mixture
of good? No; they were only evil: Not so much as a little
leaven of piety, unless in one single family. But were there
no lucid intervals; no happy moments wherein virtue gained
the ascendancy? None; every imagination, every thought
was only evil continually.”*
2. Such was the state of mankind for at least sixteen
hundred years. Men were corrupting themselves and each
other, and proceeding from one degree of wickedness to
another, till they were all (save eight persons) ripe for
destruction. So deplorable was the state of the moral world,
while the natural was in its highest perfection. And yet it
is highly probable, that the inhabitants of the earth were
then abundantly more numerous than ever they have been
since, considering the length of their lives, falling little short
of a thousand years, and the strength and vigour of their
bodies, which we may easily gather from the time they were
to continue; to say nothing of the fertility of the earth,
probably far greater than it is at present. Consequently, it
was then capable of sustaining such a number of inhabitants
as could not now subsist on the produce of it.
3. Let us next take a view of the “families of the sons of
Noah,” the inhabitants of the earth after the flood. The
first remarkable incident we read concerning them is, that
while “they were all of one language, they said one to another,
Let us build a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto
heaven, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth.”
It is not easy to determine what were the peculiar aggra
vations which attended this attempt. But it is certain, there
was daring wickedness therein, which brought upon them
the very thing they feared; for “the Lord,” by “confounding
their language,” (not their religious worship: Can we suppose
God would confound this?) “scattered them abroad upon the
face of all the earth.” (Gen. xi. 4, 9.) Now, whatever par
ticulars in this account may be variously interpreted, thus much
is clear and undeniable,—that all these, that is, all the in
habitants of the earth, had again “corrupted their way;” the
universal wickedness being legiblein the universal punishment.
* Mr. Hervey's Theron and Aspasio: Dial. 11.
198 The DOCTRINE OF
4. We have no account of their reforming their ways, of
any universal or general repentance, before God separated
Abraham to himself, to be the father of his chosen people.
(Gen. xii. 1, 2.) Nor is there any reason to believe, that the
rest of mankind were improved either in wisdom or virtue,
when “Lot and Abraham separated themselves, and Lot
pitched his tent toward Sodom.” (Gen. xiii. 11, 12.) Of
those among whom he dwelt it is particularly remarked,
“The men of Sodom” (and of all “the cities of the plain”)
“were wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly;”
(Gen. xiii. 13;) so that not even “ten righteous persons”
could be found among them : The consequence of which was,
that “the Lord rained upon them brimstone and fire from
the Lord out of heaven.” (Gen. xix. 24.)
5. We have no ground to suppose that the other inhabit
ants of the earth (Abraham, with his family and descendants,
excepted) had either the knowledge or the fear of God, from
that time till Jacob “went into Egypt.” This was then, as
well as for several ages after, the great seat of learning; inso
much that “the wisdom of the Egyptians” was celebrated
even to a proverb. And indeed for this end, as well as “to
save much people alive,” (Gen. l. 20,) did “God send Joseph
into Egypt,” even “to inform their Princes after his will,
and to teach their Senators wisdom.” And yet not long
after his death, as their King “knew not Joseph,” so his
people knew not God. Yea, they set him at defiance: They
and their King provoked him more and more, and “hardened
their hearts” against him; even after they had “seen his
wonders in Egypt,” after they had groaned under his repeated
vengeance. They still added sin to sin, till they constrained
the Lord to destroy them with an utter destruction; till the
divided “waters returned, and covered the chariots and
horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh.”
6. Nor were the other nations who then inhabited the earth,
any better than the Egyptians; the true knowledge and spiritual
worship of God being confined to the descendants of Abraham.
“He had not dealt so with other nations, neither had the Hea
thens knowledge of his laws.” (Psalm cxlvii. 20.) And in what
state were the Israelites themselves? How did they worship
the God of their fathers? Why, even these were “a stubborn
and rebellious generation, a generation that set not their heart
aright. They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk
ORIGINAL SIN• 199
in his law. They provoked him at the sea, even at the Red
Sea; ” (Psalm lxxviii. 8, 10; cvi. 7; Exod. xiv. 11, 12;) the
very place where he had so signally delivered them. “They
made a calf in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image,”
(Psalm cvi. 19,) where they had heard the Lord, but a little
before, saying, out of the midst of the fire, “Thou shalt not
make unto thyself any graven image; thou shalt not bow down
to them, nor worship them.” And how amazing was their beha
viour during those whole forty years that they sojourned in the
wilderness! even while he “led them in the day-time with a
cloud, and all the night with a light of fire!” (Psalm lxxviii.
14.) Such were the knowledge and virtue of God’s peculiar
people, (certainly the most knowing and virtuous nation which
was then to be found upon the face of the earth,) till God
brought them into the land of Canaan;-considerably more
than two thousand years from the creation of the world.
None, I presume, will say there was any other nation at
that time more knowing and more virtuous than the Israelites.
None can say this while he professes to believe, according to the
scriptural account, that Israel was then underatheocracy, under
the immediate government of God; that he conversed with
their subordinate governor “face to face, as a man talketh with
his friend;” and that God was daily, through him, conveying
such instructions to them as they were capable of receiving.
7. Shall we turn our eyes for a moment from the scriptural
to the profane account of mankind in the earliest ages?
What was the general sentiment of the most polite and
knowing nation, the Romans, when their learning was in its
utmost perfection? Let one, who certainly was no bigot or
enthusiast, speak for the rest. And he speaks home to the
point:
Nam fuit ante Helenam cunnus teterrima belli
Causa; sed ignotis perierunt mortibus omnes
Quos venerem incertam rapientes more ferarum,
Viribus editior caedebat, ut in grege taurus.
“Full many a war has been for women waged
Ere half the world in Helen’s cause engaged;
But, unrecorded in historic verse,
Obscurely died those savage ravishers,
Who like brute beasts the female bore away,
Till some superior brute re-seized the prey:
A a wild bull, his rival bull o'erthrown,
Claims the whole subject herd, and reigns alone.”
200 THE DOCTRINE OF
I doubt he who gives this, not as his peculiar opinion, but as
what was then a generally-received notion, would scarce
have allowed even so much as Juvenal,—
Pudicitiam Saturno rege moratam
In terris...............
“Chastity did once, I grant, remain
On earth, and flourish’d in old Saturn's reign : ”
Unless one should suppose the reign of Saturn to have
expired when Adam was driven out of Paradise.
I cannot forbear adding another picture of the ancient
dignity of human nature, drawn by the same masterly hand.
Before men dwelt in cities, he says, this
Turpe pecus, glandem atque cubilia propter,
Unguibus et pugnis, dein fustibus, atque ita porro
Pugnabant armis, quae post fabricaverat usus.
“The human herd, unbroken and untaught,
For acorns first, and grassy couches fought;
With fists, and then with clubs maintain'd the fray,
Till, urged by hate, they found a quicker way,
And forged pernicious arms, and learn'd the art to slay.”
What a difference is there between this and the gay, florid
accounts which many moderns give of their own species !
8. But to return to more authentic accounts: At the time
when God brought the Israelites into Canaan, in what state
were the rest of mankind? Doubtless in nearly the same
with the Canaanites, with the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites,
and the rest of the seven nations. But the wickedness of
these, we know, was full; they were corrupt in the highest
degree. All manner of vice, all ungodliness and unright
eousness, reigned among them without control; and
therefore the wise and just Governor of the world gave them
up to a swift and total destruction.
9. Of Israel, indeed, we read, that they “served the Lord
all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the Elders that over
lived Joshua.” (Josh. xxiv. 31.) And yet even at that time they
did not serve Him alone; they were not free from gross idolatry;
otherwise, there had been no need of his giving them that
exhortation a little before his death: “Now, therefore, put
away the strange gods which are among you,” the gods which
your fathers served on the other side of the river Jordan.
(Verse 23.) What gods these were, we learn by the words of
ORIGINAL SIN. 201
Amos, cited by St. Stephen: “O ye house of Israel, have ye
offered sacrifices to me by the space of forty years? Yea,
ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your
god Remphan, figures which ye made to worship them.”
(Acts vii. 42, 43.)
10. The sacred history of what occurred within a short space
after the death of Joshua, for some hundred years, even until
the time that Samuel judged Israel, gives us a large account of
their astonishing wickedness during almost that whole period.
It is true, just “when God smote them, then they sought him;
they returned, and inquired after God.” Yet “their heart was
not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant.”
(Psalm lxxviii. 34, 37.) And we find little alteration among
them for the better in the succeeding ages; insomuch that, in
the reign of Ahab, about nine hundred years before Christ,
there were only “seven thousand left in Israel who had not
bowed the knee to Baal.” (1 Kings xix. 18.) What manner of
men they were for the next three hundred years, we may learn
from the books of the Kings, and from the Prophets; whence it
fully appears that, except a few short intervals, they were given
up to all manner of abominations; by reason of which the name
of the Most High was the more abundantly blasphemed among
the Heathens. And this continued, until their open rebellion
against God brought upon the whole nation of the Jews (a
hundred and thirty-four years after the captivity of the ten
tribes, and about six hundred before Christ) those terrible and
long-deserved calamities which made them a spectacle to all
that were round about them. The writings of Ezekiel, Daniel,
and Jeremiah, leave us noroom to think that they were reformed
by those calamities. Nor was there any lasting reformation
in the time of Ezra, or of Nehemiah and Malachi; but they
were still, as their forefathers had been, “a faithless and stub
born generation.” Such were they likewise, as we may
gather from the books of Maccabees and Josephus, to the very
time when Christ came into the world.
11. Our blessed Lord has given us a large description of
those who were then the most eminent for religion: “Ye
devour,” says he, “widows’ houses, and for a pretence make
long prayers. Ye make” your proselytes “twofold more the
children of hell than yourselves. Ye neglect the weightier
matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith. Ye make
202 THE DocTRINE OF
clean the outside of the cup, but within are full of extortion and
excess. Ye are like whited sepulchres, outwardly beautiful,
but within full of dead men’s bones, and of all uncleanness. Ye
serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damna
tion of hell!” (Matt. xxiii. 14, &c.) And to these very men,
after they had murdered the Just One, his faithful follower
declared, “Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears,
ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do
ye.” (Acts vii. 51.) And so they continued to do, until the
wrath of God did indeed “come upon them to the uttermost;”
until eleven hundred thousand of them were destroyed, their
city and temple levelled with the dust, and above ninety
thousand sold for slaves, and scattered into all lands.
12. Such in all generations were the lineal children of Abra
ham, who had so unspeakable advantages over the rest of man
kind; “to whom pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the
covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God,
and the promises:” Among whom, therefore, we may reasonably
expect to find the greatest eminence of knowledge and virtue.
If these then were so stupidly, brutishly ignorant, so desperately
wicked, what can we expect from the heathen world, from them
who had not the knowledge either of his law or promises?
Certainly we cannot expect to find more goodness among them.
But let us make a fair and impartial inquiry; and that not
among wild and barbarous nations, but the most civilized and
refined. What then were the ancient Romans? the people
whose virtue is so highly extolled, and so warmly commended
to our imitation? We have their character given by one who
cannot deceive or be deceived,—the unerring Spirit of God.
And what account does he give of these best of men, these
heroes of antiquity? “When they knew God,” says he, at
least as to his eternity and power, (both implied in that appel
lation, which occurs more than once in their own poet, Pater
omnipotens, “Almighty Father,”) “they glorified him not as
God, neither were thankful.” (Rom. i. 21, &c.) So far from it
that one of their oracles of wisdom (though once he stumbled
on that great truth, Nemo unquam vir magnus sine afflatu
divino fuit,-‘‘There never was any great man without the
afflatus or inspiration of God;” yet, almost in the same breath)
does not scruple to ask, Quis pro virtute aut sapientiá gratias
diis dedit unquam ” “Who ever thanked God for virtue or
ORIGINAL SIN. 203
wisdom?” No, why should he? since these are “his own
aequisition, the pure result of his own industry.” Accordingly,
another virtuous Roman has left it on record, as an unques
tioned maxim,
Haec satis est orare Jovem, quae donat et aufert:
Det vitam, det opes; aquum mí animum ipse parabo.
“Enough for common benefits to pray,
Which Jove can either give or take away:
Long life or wealth his bounty may bestow;
Wisdom and virtue to myself I owe.”
So “vain” were they become “in their imaginations!” So
were their “foolish hearts darkened !” (Rom. i. 21, &c.)
13. But this was only the first step: They did not stop here.
“Professing themselves wise,” they yet sunk into such gross,
astonishing folly, as to “change the glory of the incorruptible
God” (whom they might have known, even from their own
writers, to be
Wastam
Mens agitans molem, et magnose corpore miscens,—
“The all-informing soul
That fills the mighty mass, and moves the whole”)
“into an image made like to corruptible man; yea, to birds, to
beasts, to creeping things!” What wonder was it then, that,
after they had thus “changed his glory into an image, God
gave them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own
hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves?”
How justly, when they had “changed the truth of God into a
lie, and worshipped and served the creature rather than the
Creator,” did he “for this cause,” punishing sin by sin, “give
them up unto vile affections! For even the women did change
the natural use into that which is against nature.” Yea, the
modest, honourable Roman matrons (so little were they
ashamed !) wore their priapi openly on their breasts. “And
likewise the men burned in their lust one toward another, men
with men working that which is unseemly.” What an amazing
testimony of this is left us on record, even by the most modest
of all the Roman poets!
Formosum pastor Corydon ardebat Alerim /
How does this pattern of heathen chastity avow, without either
fear or shame, as if it were an innocent, at least, if not laudable,
204 ThE DOCTRin E OF
passion, their “burning in lust one toward another l” And
did men of the finest taste in the nation censure the song, or
the subject of it? We read nothing of this; on the contrary,
the universal honour and esteem paid to the writer, and that
by persons of the highest rank, plainly shows that the case of
Corydoh, as it was not uncommon in any part of the Roman
dominions, so it was not conceived to be any blemish, either
to him or his master, but an innocent infirmity.
Meantime, how delicate an idea of love had this favourite of
Rome and of the Muses! Hear him explaining himself a little
more fully on this tender point:
Eheu ! quâm pingui macer est mihi taurus in agro /
Idem amor eritium est pecori, pecorisque magistro.
Idem amor The same love in the bull and in the man |
What elegance of sentiment 1 Is it possible anything can
exceed this? One would imagine nothing could, had not the
same chaste poet furnished us with yet another scene, more
abundantly shocking than this:
Pasiphäen nivei solatur amore juvencil
“He comforts Pasiphäe with the love of her milk-white
bull!” Nihil supra ! * The condoling a woman on her unsuc
cessful amour with a bull shows a brutality which nothing can
exceed! How justly then does the Apostle add, “as they did
not like,” or desire, “to retain God in their knowledge, God
gave them over to an undiscerning mind, to do those things
which are not convenient!” In consequence of this, they were
“filled with all unrighteousness,” vice of every kind, and in
every degree;—in particular “with fornication,” (taking the
word in its largest sense, as including every sin of the kind,)
“with wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, with envy, mur
der, debate, deceit, malignity;”—being “haters of God,” the
true God, the God of Israel, to whom they allowed no place
among all their herd of deities;—“despiteful, proud, boasters,”
in as eminent a degree as ever was any nation under heaven ;
“inventors of evil things,” in great abundance, of mille nocendi
artes,t both in peace and war;—“disobedient to parents,”—
although duty to these is supposed to be inscribed on the hearts
of the most barbarous nations;—“covenant-breakers,”—even
* Nothing can exceed this.-EDIT. t A thousand arts of annoyance.-EDIT.
ORIGINAL SIN• 205
of those of the most solemn kind, those wherein the public faith
was engaged by their supreme Magistrate; which, notwith
standing, they made no manner of scruple of breaking, when
ever they saw good; only colouring over their perfidiousness,
by giving those Magistrates into their hands with whom the
“covenant” was made. And what was this to the purpose?
Is the King of France, or the republic of Holland, at liberty
to violate their most solemn treaties at pleasure, provided
they give up to the King of England the Ambassador, or
General, by whom that treaty was made? What would all
Europe have said of the late Czar, if, instead of punctually
performing the engagements made with the Porte when in
his distress, he had only given up the persons by whom he
transacted, and immediately broke through them all? There
is therefore no room to say,
Modo Punica scripta supersint,
Non minus infamis forte Latina fides.
“Perhaps, if the Carthaginian writings were extant, Roman
faith would be as infamous as Punic.” We need them not.
In vain have they destroyed the Carthaginian writings; for
their own sufficiently testify of them; and fully prove that in
perfidy the natives of Carthage could not exceed the senate
and people of Rome.
14. They were as a nation aa top you, void of natural affection,
even to their own bowels. Witness the universal custom which
obtained for several ages in Rome, and all its dependencies,
(as it had done before through all the cities of Greece,) when
in their highest repute for wisdom and virtue, of exposing
their own new-born children, more or fewer of them, as every
man pleased, when he had as many as he thought good to
keep; throwing them out to perish by cold and hunger,
unless some more merciful wild beast shortened their pain,
and provided them a sepulchre. Nor do I remember a single
Greek, or Roman, of all those that occasionally mention it,
ever complaining of this diabolical custom, or fixing the least
touch of blame upon it. Even the tender mother in Terence,
who had some compassion for her helpless infant, does not
dare to acknowledge it to her husband, without that re
markable preface, Ut miserè superstitiosae sumus omnes; “As
we women are all miserably superstitious.”
15. I would desire those gentlemen who are so very severe
206 THE DOCTRINE OF
upon the Israelites for killing the children of the Canaanites,
at their entrance into the land of Canaan, to spend a few
thoughts on this. Not to insist, that the Creator is the
absolute Lord and Proprietor of the lives of all his creatures;
that, as such, he may at any time, without the least injustice,
take away the life which he has given; that he may do this in
whatsoever manner, and by whatever instruments, he pleases;
and consequently may inflict death on any creature by whom
he pleases, without any blame either to him or them;-not
to insist, I say, on this, or many other things which might
be offered, let us at present fix on this single consideration:
The Israelites destroyed the children for some weeks or
months; the Greeks and Romans for above a thousand years.
The one put them out of their pain at once, doubtless by the
shortest and easiest way; the others were not so compas
sionate as to cut their throats, but left them to pine away by
a lingering death. Above all, the Hebrews destroyed only
the children of their enemies; the Romans destroyed their
own. O fair pattern indeed ! Where shall we find a parallel
to this virtue 2 I read of a modern, who took up a child that
fell from its mother’s womb, and threw it back into the flames.
(Pure, genuine human nature !) And reason good,—for it
was the child of a heretic. But what evil, ye worthies of
ancient Rome, did ye find in your own children? I must
still say, this is without a parallel even in the Papal history.
16. They were implacable, unmerciful. Witness (one or
two instances of ten thousand) poor grey-headed Hannibal,
(whom, very probably, had we any other accounts of him than
those which were given by his bitterest enemies, we should have
reverenced as one of the most amiable of men, as well as the
most valiant of all the ancient Heathens,) hunted from nation to
nation, and never quitted, till he fell by his own hand. Wit
ness the famous suffrage, Delenda est Carthago; “Let Car
thage be destroyed.” Why? It was imperii aemula ; “the
rival of the Roman glory.” These were open, undeniable
evidences of the public, national placability and mercy of the
Romans. Need instances of a more private nature be added?
Behold, then, one for all, in that glory of Rome, that prodigy
of virtue, the great, the celebrated Cato. Cato the Elder, when
any of his domestics had worn themselves out in his service, and
grew decrepit with age, constantly turned them out to starve,
ORIGINAL SIN. 207
and was much applauded for his frugality in so doing. But
what mercy was this? Just such as that which dwelt in Cato
of Utica, who repaid the tenderness of his servant endeavour
ing to save his life, to prevent his tearing open his wound, by
striking him on the face with such violence as to fill his mouth
with blood. These are thy gods, O Deism . These the pat
terns so zealously recommended to our imitation |
17. And what was the real character of that hero, whom
Cato himself so admired? whose cause he espoused with such
eagerness, with such unwearied diligence? of Pompey the
Great? Surely never did any man purchase that title at so
cheap a rate | What made him great? The villany of Per
penna, and the treachery of Pharnaces. Had not the one
murdered his friend, the other rebelled against his father,
where had been Pompey’s greatness? So this stalking-horse
of a party procured his reputation in the commonwealth.
And when it was procured, how did he use it? Let his own
poet Lucan speak:
Nec quenquam jam ferre potest Cesarve priorem,
Pompeiusve parem.
“Nor Caesar could to a superior look;
Nor patriot Pompey could an equal brook.”
He would bear no equal ! And this a senator of Rome!
Nay, the grand patron of the republic | But what a repub
lican himself, when this principle was the spring of all his
designs and actions ! Indeed, a less amiable character it is not
easy to find among all the great men of antiquity; ambitious,
vain, haughty, surly, and overbearing, beyond the common
rate of men. And what virtue had he to balance these faults?
I can scarce find one, even in Lucan's account: It does not
appear that in the latter part of his life he had even military
virtues. What proof did he give of personal courage, in all
his war with Caesar? what instances of eminent conduct?
None at all, if we may credit his friend Cicero; who complains
heavily to Atticus, that he acted like a madman, and would
ruin the cause he had undertaken to defend.
18. Let none therefore look for placability or mercy in
Pompey. But was there any unmercifulness in Caesar?
“Who than Julius hopes to rise
More brave, more generous, or more wise?”
208 THE DOCTRINE OF
Of his courage and sense there can be no doubt. And much
may be said with regard to his contest with Pompey, even for
the justice of his cause; for with him he certainly fought for
life, rather than glory; of which he had the strongest convic
tion (though he was ashamed to own it) when he passed the
Rubicon. Nor can it be doubted but he was often merciful.
It is no proof to the contrary that he rode up and down his
ranks during the battle of Pharsalia, and cried to those who
were engaged with the pretty gentlemen of Pompey’s army,
Miles, faciem feri, “Soldiers, strike at the face;” for this
greatly shortened the dispute with those who were more afraid
of losing their beauty than their lives, and so prevented the
effusion of much blood. But I cannot get over (to say nothing
of the myriads of common Gauls whom he destroyed) a short
sentence in his own Commentaries: Vercingetoria per tormenta
necatus. Who was this Vercingetorix? As brave a man, and
(considering his years) as great a General, as even Caesar.
What was his crime? The love of his parents, wife, children,
country; and sacrificing all things in the defence of them.
And how did Caesar treat him on this account? “He tortured
him to death.” O Roman mercy! Did not Brutus and
Cassius avenge Vercingetorix rather than Pompey? How well
was Rome represented in the prophetical vision by that beast
“dreadful and terrible,” which had “great iron teeth, and
devoured, and brake in pieces, and stamped under his feet,”
all other kingdoms |-
II. 1. Such is the state with regard to knowledge and virtue,
wherein, according to the most authentic accounts, mankind
was from earliest times, for above four thousand years.
Such nearly did it continue, during the decline, and since the
destruction, of the Roman empire. But we will wave all that
is past, if it only appears that mankind is virtuous and wise at
this day. This, then, is the point we are at present to consi
der: Are-men in general now wise and virtuous?
Our ingenious countryman, Mr. Brerewood, after his most
careful and laborious inquiries, computes, that, supposing that
part of the earth which we know to be inhabited were divided
into thirty equal parts, nineteen of these are Heathen still;
and of the remaining eleven, six are Mahometan, and only
five Christian. Let us take as fair and impartial a survey as
we can of the Heathens first, and then of the Mahometans
and Christians.
ORIGINAL SIN. 209
2. And, First, of the Heathens. What manner of men are
these, as to virtue and knowledge, at this day? Many of
late, who still bear the Christian name, have entertained very
honourable thoughts of the old Heathens. They cannot be
lieve them to have been so stupid and senseless as they have
been represented to be; particularly with regard to idolatry,
in worshipping birds, beasts, and creeping things; much less
can they credit the stories told of many nations, the Egyp
tians in particular,
Who are said to
Have set the leek they after pray'd to.
But if they do not consider who they are that transmit to us
these accounts, namely, both those writers who, they profess
to believe, spake “as they were moved by the Holy Ghost,”
and those whom perhaps they value more, the most credible
of their contemporary Heathens; if, I say, they forget this,
do they not consider the present state of the heathen world?
Now, allowing the bulk of the ancient Heathens (which itself
is not easily proved) to have had as much understanding as
the modern, we have no pretence to suppose they had more.
What therefore they were, we may safely gather from what
they are; we may judge of the past by the present. Would
we know, then, (to begin with a part of the world known to
very early antiquity,) what manner of men the Heathens in
Africa were two or three thousand years ago? Inquire what
they are now, who are genuine Pagans still, not tainted either
with Mahometanism or Christianity. They are to be found in
abundance, either in Negroland, or round the Cape of Good
Hope. Now, what measure of knowledge have the natives of
these countries? I do not say in metaphysics, mathematics,
or astronomy. Of these it is plain they know just as much
as their four-footed brethren; the lion and the man are equally
accomplished with regard to this knowledge. I will not ask
what they know of the nature of government, of the respective
rights of Kings and various orders of subjects: In this re
gard, a herd of men are manifestly inferior to a herd of ele
phants. But let us view them with respect to common life.
What do they know of the things they continually stand in
need of? How do they build habitations for themselves and
their families; how select and prepare their food; clothe and
adorn their persons? As to their habitations, it is certain, I
will not say, our horses, (particularly those belonging to the
VOL. IX.
210 THE DOCTRINE OF
Nobility and Gentry,) but an English peasant's dogs, nay, his
very swine, are more commodiously lodged; and as to their
food, apparel, and ornaments, they are just suitable to their
edifices:
Your nicer Hottentots think meet
With guts and tripe to deck their feet.
With downcast eyes on Totta's legs,
The love-sick youth most humbly begs,
She would not from his sight remove
At once his breakfast and his love.
Such is the knowledge of these accomplished animals, in
things which cannot but daily employ their thoughts; and
wherein, consequently, they cannot avoid exerting, to the
uttermost, both their natural and acquired understanding.
And what are their present attainments in virtue? Are
they not, one and all, “without God in the world?” having
either no knowledge of him at all; no conception of anything
he has to do with them, or they with him; or such concep
tions as are far worse than none, as make him such a one as
themselves. And what are their social virtues? What are
their dispositions and behaviour between man and man? Are
they eminent for justice, for mercy, or truth? As to mercy,
they know not what it means, being continually cutting each
other’s throats, from generation to generation, and selling for
slaves as many of those who fall into their hands, as on that
consideration only they do not murder. Justice they have
mone; no courts of justice at all; no public method of re
dressing wrong; but every man does what is right in his own
eyes, till a stronger than he beats out his brains for so doing.
And they have just as much regard to truth; cozening, cheat
ing, and over-reaching every man that believes a word they
say. Such are the moral, such the intellectual perfections,
according to the latest and most accurate accounts, of the
present Heathens, who are diffused in great numbers over a
fourth part of the known world!
3. It is true, that in the new world, in America, they seem
to breathe a purer air, and to be in general men of a stronger
understanding, and a less savage temper. Among these,
then, we may surely find higher degrees of knowledge as well
as virtue. But in order to form a just conception of them,
we must not take our account from their enemies; from any
that would justify themselves by blackening those whom they
seek to destroy. No; but let us inquire of more impartial
ORIGINAL SIN. 211
Judges, concerning those whom they have personally known,
the Indians bordering upon our own settlements, from New
England down to Georgia.
We cannot learn that there is any great difference, in point
of knowledge, between any of these, from east to west, or
from north to south. They are all equally unacquainted with
European learning, being total strangers to every branch of
literature, having not the least conception of any part of
philosophy, speculative or practical. Neither have they
(whatever accounts some have given) any such thing as a
regular civil government among them. They have no laws
of any kind, unless a few temporary rules made in and for
the time of war. They are likewise utter strangers to the
arts of peace, having scarce any such thing as an artificer in
a nation. They know nothing of building; having only poor,
miserable, ill-contrived huts, far inferior to many English
dog-kennels. Their clothing, till of late, was only skins of
beasts, commonly of deer, hanging down before and behind
them. Now, among those who have commerce with our nation,
it is frequently a blanket wrapt about them. Their food is
equally delicate, -pounded Indian corn, sometimes mixed
with water, and so eaten at once; sometimes kneaded into
cakes, meal and bran together, and half-baked upon the coals.
Fish or flesh, dried in the sun, is frequently added to this;
and now and then a piece of tough, fresh-killed deer.
Such is the knowledge of the Americans, whether in things
of an abstruser nature, or in the affairs of common life. And
this, so far as we can learn, is the condition of all, without
any considerable difference. But, in point of religion, there
is a very material difference between the northern and the
southern Indians: Those in the north are idolaters of the
lowest kind. If they do not worship the devil appearing in
person, (which many firmly believe they do, many think in
credible,) certainly they worship the most vile and contempt
ible idols. It were more excusable if they only “turned the
glory of the incorruptible God into the image of corruptible
man;” yea, or “of birds, or four-footed beasts, or reptiles,”
or any creature which God has made. But their idols are
more horrid and deformed than anything in the visible cre
ation; and their whole worship is at once the highest affront
to the divine, and disgrace to the human, nature.
P 2
212 THE DOCTRINE OF
On the contrary, the Indians of our southern provinces do
not appear to have any worship at all. By the most diligent
inquiry from those who had spent many years among them, I
could never learn that any of the Indian nations who border
on Georgia and Carolina have any public worship of any kind,
nor any private; for they have no idea of prayer. It is not
without much difficulty that one can make any of them
understand what is meant by prayer; and when they do, they
cannot be made to apprehend that God will answer or even
hear it. They say, “He that sitteth in heaven is too high;
he is too far off to hear us.” In consequence of which they
leave him to himself, and manage their affairs without him.
Only the Chicasaws, of all the Indian nations, are an excep
tion to this.
I believe it will be found, on the strictest inquiry, that the
whole body of southern Indians, as they have no letters and
no laws, so, properly speaking, have no religion at all; so that
every one does what he sees good; and if it appears wrong to
his neighbour, he usually comes upon him unawares, and
shoots or scalps him alive. They are likewise all (Icould never
find any exception) gluttons, drunkards, thieves, dissemblers,
liars. They are implacable ; never forgiving an injury or
affront, or being satisfied with less than blood. They are
wn merciful ; killing all whom they take prisoners in war, with
the most exquisite tortures. They are murderers of fathers,
murderers of mothers, murderers of their own children; it
being a common thing for a son, to shoot his father or mother
because they are old and past labour; and for a woman either
to procure abortion, or to throw her child into the next river,
because she will go to the war with her husband. Indeed,
husbands, properly speaking, they have none; for any man
leaves his wife, so called, at pleasure; who frequently, in re
turn, cuts the throats of all the children she has had by him.
The Chicasaws alone seem to have some notion of an inter
course between man and a superior Being. They speak much
of their beloved ones ; with whom they say they converse both
day and night. But their beloved ones teach them to eat and
drink from morning to night, and, in a manner, from night to
morning; for they rise at any hour of the night when they
wake, and eat and drink as much as they can, and sleep again.
Their beloved ones likewise expressly command them to torture
and burn all their prisoners. Their manner of doing it is this:
ORIGINAL SIN. 213
They hold lighted canes to their arms and legs, and several parts
of their body, for some time, and then for a while take them
away. They also stick burning pieces of wood in their flesh;
in which condition they keep them from morning to evening.
Such are at present the knowledge and virtue of the native
Heathens, over another fourth of the known world.
4. In Asia, however, we are informed that the case is widely
different. For although the Heathens bordering on Europe,
the thousands and myriads of Tartars, have not much to boast
either as to knowledge or virtue; and although the numerous
little nations under the Mogul, who retain their original Hea
thenism, are nearly on a level with them, as are the inhabitants
of the many large and populous islands in the eastern seas;
yet we hear high encomiums of the Chinese, who are as numer
ous as all these together; some late travellers assuring us, that
China alone has fifty-eight million of inhabitants. Now, these
have been described as men of the deepest penetration, the
highest learning, and the strictest integrity; and such doubtless
they are, at least with regard to their understanding, if we will
believe their own proverb: “The Chinese have two eyes, the
Europeans one, and other men none at all.”
And one circumstance, it must be owned, is much in their
favour, -they live some thousand miles off; so that if it were
affirmed, that every Chinese had literally three eyes, it would be
difficult for us to disprove it. Nevertheless, there is room to
doubt even of their understanding; nay, one of the arguments
often brought to prove the greatness, to me clearly demon
strates the littleness, of it; namely, the thirty thousand letters
of their alphabet. To keep an alphabet of thirty hundred
letters could never be reconciled to common sense; since every
alphabet ought to be as short, simple, and easy as possible. No
more can we reconcile to any degree of common sense, their
crippling all the women in the empire, by a silly, senseless
affectation of squeezing their feet till they bear no proportion to
their bodies; so that the feet of a woman at thirty must still
be as small as they would be naturally when four years old.
But in order to see the true measure of their understanding in
the clearest light, let us look, not at women, or the vulgar, but
at the Nobility, the wisest, the politest part of the nation. Look
at the Mandarins, the glory of the empire, and see any, every
one of them at his meals, not deigning to use his own hands,
214 THE DOCTRINE OF
but having his meat put into his mouth by two servants,
planted for that purpose, one on his right hand, the other on
his left | O the deep understanding of the noble lubber that
sits in the midst, and
Hiat, ceu pullus hirundinis /
“Gapes, as the young swallow, for his food.”
Surely an English ploughman, or a Dutch sailor, would have
too much sense to endure it. If you say, “Nay, the Mandarin
would not endure it, but that it is a custom ;” I answer,
Undoubtedly it is; but how came it to be a custom? Such
a custom could not have begun, much less have become gene
ral, but through a general and marvellous want of common
Sense.
What their learning is now, I know not; but notwithstand
ing their boast of its antiquity, it was certainly very low and
contemptible in the last century, when they were so astonished
at the skill of the French Jesuits, and honoured them as
almost more than human, for calculating eclipses ! And
whatever progress they may have made since, in the know
ledge of astronomy, and other curious, rather than useful,
sciences, it is certain they are still utterly ignorant of what
it most of all concerns them to know: They know not God,
any more than the Hottentots; they are all idolaters to a
man; and so tenacious are they of their national idolatry,
that even those whom the French Missionaries called con
verts, yet continued one and all to worship Confucius and the
souls of their ancestors. It is true, that when this was
strongly represented at Rome by an honest Dominican who
came from thence, a Bull was issued out and sent over into
China, forbidding them to do it any longer. But the good
Fathers kept it privately among themselves, saying, the
Chinese were not able to bear it.
Such is their religion with respect to God. But are they not
eminent for all social virtues, all that have place between man
and man? Yes, according to the accounts which some have
given. According to these, they are the glory of mankind, and
may be a pattern to all Europe. But have not we some reason
to doubt if these accounts are true? Are pride and laziness
good ingredients of social virtue 7 And can all Europe equal
either the laziness or pride of the Chinese Nobility and Gentry,
ORIGINAL SIN. 215
who are too stately or too indolent even to put the meat into
their own mouths? Yet they are not too proud or too
indolent to oppress, to rob, to defraud, all that fall into their
hands. How flagrant instances of this may any one find even
in the account of Lord Anson's voyage 1 exactly agreeing
with the accounts given by all our countrymen who have
traded in any part of China; as well as with the observation
made by a late writer in his “Geographical Grammar:”
“Trade and commerce, or rather, cheating and over-reaching,
is the natural bent and genius of the Chinese. Gain is their
god; they prefer this to everything besides. A stranger is
in great danger of being cheated, if he trusts to his own
judgment; and if he employs a Chinese broker, it is well if
he does not join with the merchant to cheat the stranger.
“Their laws oblige them to certain rules of civility in
their words and actions; and they are naturally a fawning,
cringing generation; but the greatest hypocrites on the face
of the earth.”
5. Such is the boasted virtue of those who are, beyond all
degrees of comparison, the best and wisest of all the Heathens
in Asia. And how little preferable to them are those in Europe!
rather, how many degrees beneath them | Vast numbers of
these are within the borders of Muscovy; but how amazingly
ignorant! How totally void both of civil and sacred wisdom !
How shockingly savage, both in their tempers and manners!
Their idolatry is of the basest and vilest kind. They not only
worship the work of their own hands; but idols of the most
horrid and detestable forms that men or devils could devise.
Equally savage, (or more so, if more can be,) as is well known,
are the natives of Lapland; and, indeed, of all the countries
which have been discovered to the north of Muscovy or
Sweden. In truth, the bulk of these nations seem to be
considerably more barbarous, not only than the men near the
Cape of Good Hope, but than many tribes in the brute creation.
Thus have we seen what is the present state of the
Heathens in every part of the known world; and these still
make up, according to the preceding calculation, very near
two-thirds of mankind. Let us now calmly and impartially
consider what manner of men the Mahometans in general are.
6. An ingenious writer, who, a few years ago, published a
pompous translation of the Koran, takes great pains to give us
216 THE DOCTRINE OF
a very favourable opinion both of Mahomet and his followers;
but he cannot wash the Ethiop white. After all, men who
have but a moderate share of reason cannot but observe in
his Koran, even as polished by Mr. Sale, the most gross and
impious absurdities. To cite particulars is not now my
business: It may suffice to observe, in general, that human
understanding must be debased, to an inconceivable degree, in
those who can swallow such absurdities as divinely revealed.
And yet we know the Mahometans not only condemn all who
cannot swallow them to everlasting fire, -not only appropriate
to themselves the title of Mussulmen, or True Believers, –
but even anathematize, with the utmost bitterness, and adjudge
to eternal destruction, all their brethren of the sect of Hali,
all who contend for a figurative interpretation of them.
That these men, then, have no knowledge or love of God
is undeniably manifest, not only from their gross horrible
notions of him, but from their not loving their brethren. But
they have not always so weighty a cause to hate and murder
one another as difference of opinion. Mahometans will
butcher each other by thousands, without so plausible a plea
as this. Why is it that such numbers of Turks and Persians
have stabbed one another in cool blood? Truly, because
they differ in the manner of dressing their head. The
Ottoman vehemently maintains, (for he has unquestionable
tradition on his side,) that a Mussulman should wear a round
turban; whereas the Persian insists upon his liberty of
conscience, and will wear it picked before. So, for this won
derful reason, when a more plausible one is wanting, they
beat out each other's brains from generation to generation |
It is not therefore strange that, ever since the religion of
Mahomet appeared in the world, the espousers of it, particularly
those under the Turkish Emperor, have been as wolves and
tigers to all other nations, rending and tearing all that fell into
their merciless paws, and grinding them with their iron teeth;
that numberless cities are rased from the foundation, and only
their name remaining; that many countries, which were once as
the garden of God, are now a desolate wilderness; and that so
many once numerous and powerful nations are vanished away
from the earth | Such was, and is at this day, the rage, the
fury, the revenge, of these destroyers of human kind.
7. Proceed we now to the Christian world. But we must not
ORIGINAL SIN. 217
judge of Christians in general from those who are scattered
through the Turkish dominions, the Armenian, Georgian,
Mengrelian Christians; nor indeed from any others of the
Greek communion. The gross, barbarous ignorance, the
deep, stupid superstition, the blind and bitter zeal, and the
endless thirst after vain jangling and strife of words, which
have reigned for many ages in the Greek Church, and well
nigh banished true religion from among them, make these
scarce worthy of the Christian name, and lay an insuperable
stumbling-block before the Mahometans.
8. Perhaps those of the Romish communion may say,
“What wonder that this is the case with heretics? with those
who have erred from the Catholic faith, nay, and left the
pale of the Church?” But what is the case with them who
have not left that Church, and who retain the Roman faith
still ? yea, with the most zealous of all its patrons, the
inhabitants of Italy, of Spain, and Portugal? Wherein do
they excel the Greek Church, except in Italianism, received
by tradition from their heathen fathers, and diffused through
every city and village? They may, indeed, praise chastity,
and rail at women as loudly as their forefather, Juvenal; but
what is the moral of all this?—
Nonne putas melius, quod tecum pusio dormit *
This, it must be acknowledged, is the glory of the Romish
Church. Herein it does excel the Greek.
They excel it, likewise, in Deism. Perhaps there is no country
in the world, at least in that part of it which bears the Christian
name, wherein so large a proportion of the men of education are
absolute Deists, if not Atheists, as Italy. And from hence the
plague has spread far and wide; through France in particular.
So that, did not temporal motives restrain, no small part of the
French Nobility and Gentry would pay no more regard to the
Christian Revelation, than do the Mandarins in China.
They excel still more in murder, both private and public.
Instances of the former abound all over Italy, Spain, and
Portugal; and the frequency of shedding blood has taken
away all that horror which otherwise might attend it. Take
one instance of a thousand: An English gentleman was, some
years ago, at an entertainment in Brescia, when one who was
near him whispered a few words in his ear, which he did not
well understand. He asked his host, “What did that gentleman
218 THE DOCTRINE OF
mean by these words?” and was answered, “That he will mur
der you: And an Italian is never worse than his word in this.
You have no way but to be beforehand with him.” This he
rejected with abhorrence. But his host, it seems, being not
of so tender a conscience, sent a stranger to him in the morn
ing, who said, “Sir, look out of your window;—I have done
his business. There he lies. You will please to give me my
pay.” He pulled out a handful of money, in great disorder,
and cried, “There, take what you will.” The other replied,
“Sir, I am a man of honour; I take only my pay;” took a
small piece of silver, and retired.
This was a man of honour among the Christians of the
Romish Church ! And many such are to be found all over
Italy, whose trade it is to cut throats; to stab for hire, in
cool blood. They have men of conscience too. Such were
two of the Catholic soldiers, under the famous Duke of Alva,
who broke into the house of a poor countryman in Flanders,
butchered him and his wife, with five or six children; and
after they had finished their work, sat down to enjoy the
fruit of their labour. But in the midst of their meal con
science awaked. One of them started up in great emotion,
and cried out, “O Lord! what have I done? As I hope for
salvation, I have eaten flesh in Lent l”
The same sort of conscience undoubtedly it was, which con
strained the late Most Christian King, in defiance of the most
solemn treaties, yea, of all ties, divine and human, most gra
ciously to murder so many thousands of his quiet, unresisting
subjects; to order his dragoons, wherever they found the Pro
testants worshipping God, to fall in upon them, sword in hand,
without any regard to sex or age. It was conscience, no ques
tion, which induced so many of the Dukes of Savoy, notwith
standing the public faith engaged over and over, to shed the
blood of their loyal subjects, the Vaudois, like water, to ravage
their fields, and destroy their cities. What but conscience could
move the good Catholics of a neighbouring kingdom, in the last
century,tomurder (according to their own account) two hundred
and fifteen thousand Protestants in six months? A costly sacri
fice this! What is a hecatomb, a hundred oxen, to two hun
dred thousand men? And yet what is even this to the whole
number of victims who have been offered up in Europe since
the beginning of the Reformation; partly by war, partly by the
ORIGINAL SIN. 219
Inquisition, and a thousand other methods of Romish cruelty?
No less, within forty years, if the computation of an eminent
writer be just, than five-and-forty millions !
Such is the conscience, such the religion, of Romish Chris
tians! Of their Inquisition (the House of Mercy, as it is most
unfortunately called) I should give some account, but that it
has been largely described by others. Yet it may not be im
proper to give a specimen of that mercy which they show to
those under their care. At the Act of Faith, so called, which
was celebrated some years ago, when Dr. Geddes was in Por
tugal, a prisoner, who had been confined for nine years, was
brought out to execution. Looking up, and seeing, what he
had not seen for so long a time, the sun in the midst of
heaven, he cried out, “How can any one, who sees that
glorious creature, worship any but the God that made it?”
The Father who attended immediately ordered a gag to be
run through his lip, that he might speak no more.
See the Christians, who have received all the advantages of
education, all the helps of modern and ancient learning!“Nay,
but we have still greater helps than them. We are reformed
from the errors of Popery; we protest against all those novel
corruptions, with which the Church of Rome has polluted
ancient Christianity. The enormities, therefore, of Popish
countries are not to be charged upon us: We are Protestants,
and have nothing to do with the vices and villanies of Romish
nations.”
9. Have we not? Are Protestant nations nothing concerned
in those melancholy reflections of Mr. Cowley?—“If twenty
thousand naked Americans were not able to resist the assaults
of but twenty well-armed Spaniards, how is it possible for one
honest man to defend himself against twenty thousand knaves,
who are all furnished cap-à-pié, with the defensive arms of
worldly prudence, and the offensive too of craft and malice?
He will find no less odds than this against him, if he have
much to do in human affairs. Do you wonder, then, that a
virtuous man should love to be alone? It is hard for him to
be otherwise. He is so when he is among ten thousand. Nor
is it so uncomfortable to be alone, without any other creature,
as it is to be alone in the midst of wild beasts. Man is to man
all kinds of beasts, a fawning dog, a roaring lion, a thieving fox,
a robbing wolf, a dissembling crocodile, a treacherous decoy,
and a rapacious vulture. The civilest, methinks, of all nations,
220 ThE DoCTRINE OF
are those whom we account the most barbarous. There is
some moderation and good nature in the Toupinambaltions,
who eat no men but their enemies; while we learned and
polite and Christian Europeans, like so many pikes and sharks,
prey upon everything that we can swallow.” .
Are Protestant nations nothing concerned in that humorous
but terrible picture, drawn by a late eminent hand?—“He was
perfectly astonished (and who would not, if it were the first time
he had heard it?) at the historical account I gave him of our
affairs during the last century; protesting it was only a heap
of conspiracies, rebellions, murders, massacres; the very worst
effects that avarice, faction, hypocrisy, perfidiousness, cruelty,
rage, madness, hatred, envy, lust, malice, and ambition, could
produce. Even in times of peace, how many innocent and
excellent persons have been condemned to death or banish
ment, by great Ministers practising upon the corruption of
Judges, and the malice of factions! How many villains have
been exalted to the highest places of trust, power, dignity, and
profit! By what methods have great numbers, in all countries,
procured titles of honour and vast estates ! Perjury, oppres
sion, subornation, fraud, panderism, were some of the most
excusable; for many owed their greatness to sodomy or incest;
others, to the prostituting of their own wives or daughters;
others, to the betraying of their country, or their Prince;
more, to the perverting of justice to destroy the innocent.”
Well might that keen author add, “If a creature pretending
to reason can be guilty of such enormities, certainly the cor
ruption of that faculty is far worse than brutality itself.”
Now, are Popish nations only concerned in this? Are the
Protestants quite clear? Is there no such thing among them
(to take one instance only) as “perverting of justice,” even in
public courts of judicature? Can it not be said in any Protest
ant country, “There is a society of men among us, bred up
from their youth in the art of proving, according as they are
paid, by words multiplied for the purpose, that white is black,
and black is white? For example : If my neighbour has a
mind to my cow, he hires a Lawyer to prove that he ought to
have my cow from me. I must hire another to defend my right,
it being against all rules of law that a man should speak for him
self. In pleading, they do not dwell on the merits of the cause,
but upon circumstances foreign thereto. For instance: They
ORIGINAL SIN. 221
do not take the shortest method to know what title my adver
sary has to my cow; but whether the cow be red or black,
her horns long or short; whether the field she grazes in be
round or square, and the like. After which, they adjourn
the cause from time to time; and in ten or twenty years'
time they come to an issue. This society, likewise, has a
peculiar cant and jargon of their own, in which all their laws
are written. And these they take special care to multiply;
whereby they have so confounded truth and falsehood, right
and wrong, that it will take twelve years to decide, whether
the field, left me by my ancestors for six generations, belong
to me or to one three hundred miles off.”
Is it in Popish countries only that it can be said, “It does
not appear that any one perfection is required towards the
procurement of any one station among you; much less, that
men are ennobled on account of their virtue; that Priests are
advanced for their piety or learning, Judges for their inte
grity, Senators for the love of their country, or Counsellors
for their wisdom ?”
10. But there is a still greater and more undeniable proof
that the very foundations of all things, civil and religious,
are utterly out of course in the Christian as well as the hea
then world. There is a still more horrid reproach to the
Christian name, yea, to the name of man, to all reason and
humanity. There is war in the world ! war between men I
war between Christians ! I mean, between those that bear
the name of Christ, and profess to “walk as he also walked.”
Now, who can reconcile war, I will not say to religion, but to
any degree of reason or common sense?
But is there not a cause ? O yes: “The causes of war,” as
the same writer observes, “are innumerable. Some of the
chief are these: The ambition of Princes; or the corruption
of their Ministers: Difference of opinion; as, whether flesh
be bread, or bread be flesh; whether the juice of the grape
be blood or wine; what is the best colour for a coat, whether
black, white, or grey; and whether it should be long or short,
whether narrow or wide. Nor are there any wars so furious
as those occasioned by such difference of opinions.
“Sometimes two Princes make a war to decide which of
them shall dispossess a third of his dominions. Sometimes
a war is commenced, because another Prince is too strong;
222 THE DOCTRINE OF
sometimes, because he is too weak. Sometimes our neigh
bours want the things which we have, or have the things
which we want: So both fight, until they take ours, or we
take theirs. It is a reason for invading a country, if the peo
ple have been wasted by famine, destroyed by pestilence, or
embroiled by faction; or to attack our nearest ally, if part of
his land would make our dominions more round and compact.
“Another cause of making war is this: A crew are driven
by a storm they know not where; at length they make the
land and go ashore; they are entertained with kindness.
They give the country a new name; set up a stone or rotten
plank for a memorial; murder a dozen of the natives, and
bring away a couple by force. Here commences a new right of
dominion : Ships are sent, and the natives driven out or de
stroyed. And this is done to civilize and convert a barbarous
and idolatrous people.”
But, whatever be the cause, let us calmly and impartially
consider the thing itself. Here are forty thousand men
gathered together on this plain. What are they going to do?
See, there are thirty or forty thousand more at a little dis
tance. And these are going to shoot them through the head
or body, to stab them, or split their skulls, and send most of
their souls into everlasting fire, as fast as they possibly can.
Why so? What harm have they done to them? O none at
all ! They do not so much as know them. But a man, who
is King of France, has a quarrel with another man, who is
King of England. So these Frenchmen are to kill as many
of these Englishmen as they can, to prove the King of France
is in the right. Now, what an argument is this l What a
method of proof! What an amazing way of deciding con
troversies ! What must mankind be, before such a thing as
war could ever be known or thought of upon earth? How
shocking, how inconceivable a want must there have been of
common understanding, as well as common humanity, before
any two Governors, or any two nations in the universe, could
once think of such a method of decision ? If, then, all na
tions, Pagan, Mahometan, and Christian, do, in fact, make
this their last resort, what farther proof do we need of the
utter degeneracy of all nations from the plainest principles of
reason and virtue P of the absolute want, both of common
sense and common humanity, which runs through the whole
race of mankind?
ORIGINAL SIN. 223
In how just and strong a light is this placed by the writer
cited before l—“I gave him a description of cannons,
muskets, pistols, swords, bayonets; of sieges, attacks, mines,
countermines, bombardments; of engagements by sea and
land; ships sunk with a thousand men, twenty thousand killed
on each side, dying groans, limbs flying in the air; smoke,
noise, trampling to death under horses’ feet, flight, pursuit,
victory; fields strewed with carcases, left for food to dogs
and beasts of prey; and, farther, of plundering, stripping,
ravishing, burning, and destroying. I assured him, I had
seen a hundred enemies blown up at once in a siege, and as
many in a ship, and beheld the dead bodies drop down in pieces
from the clouds, to the great diversion of the spectators.”
Is it not astonishing, beyond all expression, that this is the
naked truth? that, within a short term of years, this has been
the real case in almost every part of even the Christian world?
And meanwhile we gravely talk of the “dignity of our nature”
in its present state | This is really surprising, and might easily
drive even a well-tempered man to say, “One might bear with
men, if they would be content with those vices and follies to
which nature has entitled them. I am not provoked at the sight
of a pickpocket, a gamester, a politician, a suborner, a traitor,
or the like. This is all according to the natural course of things.
But when I behold a lump of deformity and diseases, both in
body and mind, smitten with pride, it breaks all the measures
of my patience; neither shall I ever be able to comprehend
how such an animal and such a vice can tally together.”
And surely all our declamations on the strength of human
reason, and the eminence of our virtues, are no more than
the cant and jargon of pride and ignorance, so long as there
is such a thing as war in the world. Men in general can
never be allowed to be reasonable creatures, till they know
not war any more. So long as this monster stalks uncon
trolled, where is reason, virtue, humanity? They are utterly
excluded; they have no place; they are a name, and nothing
more. If even a Heathen were to give an account of an age
wherein reason and virtue reigned, he would allow no war to
have place therein. So Ovid of the golden age:–
Nondum pracipites cingebant oppida fossa ;
Non galeae, non ensis erat. Sine militis usu
Mollia secure peragebant otia gentes.
224 ThE DOCTRINE OF
“Steep ditches did not then the towns surround,
Nor glittering helm, nor slaughtering sword was found;
Nor arms had they to wield, nor wars to wage,
But peace and safety crown'd the blissful age.”
11. How far is the world at present from this state 1 Yet,
when we speak of the folly and wickedness of mankind, may we
not except our own country, Great Britain and Ireland? In
these we have such advantages for improvement, both in know
ledge and virtue, as scarce any other nation enjoys. We are
under an excellent constitution, which secures both our reli
gious and civil liberty. We have religion taught in its primitive
purity, its genuine, native simplicity. And how it prospers
among us, we may know with great ease and certainty; for we
depend not on hearsay, on the report of others, or on subtle and
uncertain reasonings; but may see everything with our own
eyes, and hear it with our own ears. Well, then, to make all
the allowance possible, we will suppose mankind in general to
be on a level, with regard to knowledge and virtue, even with
the inhabitants of our fortunateislands; and take our measure of
them from the present undeniable state of our own countrymen.
In order to take a thorough survey of these, let us begin
with the lowest, and proceed upward. The bulk of the
natives of Ireland are to be found in or near their little cabins.
throughout the kingdom, most of which are their own work
manship, consisting of four earthen walls, covered with straw,
or sods, with one opening in the side wall, which serves at
once for door, window, and chimney. Here, in one room, are
the cow and pig, the woman with her children, and the
master of the family. Now, what knowledge have these
rational animals? They know to plant and boil their
potatoes, to milk their cow, and put their clothes on and off.
if they have any besides a blanket; but other knowledge they
have none, unless in religion. And how much do they know
of this? A little more than the Hottentots, and not much.
They know the names of God, and Christ, and the Virgin
Mary. They know a little of St. Patrick, the Pope, and the
Priest; how to tell their beads, to say Ave Maria and Pater
Noster; to do what penance they are bid, to hear mass,
confess, and pay so much for the pardon of their sins. But
as to the nature of religion, the life of God in the soul, they
know no more (I will not say, than the Priest, but) than the
beasts of the field.
ORIGINAL SIN. 225
And how very little above these are the numerous inhabit
ants of the northern parts of Scotland, or of the islands which
lie either on the west or the north side of that kingdom I
What knowledge have these, and what religion? Their re
ligion usually lies in a single point, in implicitly believing
the head of their clan, and implicitly doing what he bids.”
Meantime they are, one and all, as ignorant of rational,
scriptural religion, as of Algebra; and altogether as far from
the practice as from the theory of it.
“But it is not so in England: The very lowest of the peo
ple are here better instructed.” I should be right glad to
find it so; but I doubt a fair trial will show the contrary. I
am afraid we may still say of thousands, myriads of peasants,
men, women, and children, throughout our nation,
“Wild as the untaught Indian's brood,
The Christian savages remain;
Strangers, yea, enemies to God,
They make thee spill thy blood in vain.”
The generality of English peasants are not only grossly,
stupidly, I had almost said, brutishly ignorant as to all the
arts of this life, but eminently so with regard to religion and
the life to come. Ask a countryman, What is faith? What
is repentance? What is holiness? What is true religion?
and he is no more able to give you an intelligible answer,
than if you were to ask him about the north-east passage.
Is there, then, any possibility that they should practise what
they know nothing of? If religion is not even in their
heads, can it be in their hearts or lives? It cannot. Nor
is there the least savour thereof, either in their tempers or
conversation. Neither in the one, nor the other, do they
rise one jot above the pitch of a Turk or a Heathen.
Perhaps it will be said, “Whatever the clowns in the midland
counties are, the people near the sea-coasts are more civilized.”
Yes; great numbers of them are, in and near all our ports;
many thousands there are civilized by smuggling. The num
bers concerned herein, upon all our coasts, are far greater than
can be imagined. But what reason, and what religion, have
these that trample on all laws, divine and human, by a course of
thieving, or receiving stolen goods, of plundering their King and
* By a late Act of Parliament, there is a happy alteration made in this
particular.
VOL. IX. Q
226 THE DOCTRINE OF
country? I say King and country; seeing, whatever is taken
from the King, is in effect taken from the country, who are
obliged to make up all deficiencies in the royal revenue.
These are, therefore, general robbers. They rob you and
me, and every one of their countrymen; seeing, had the
King his due customs, a great part of our taxes might be
spared. A smuggler, then, (and, in proportion, every seller
or buyer of uncustomed goods) is a thief of the first order,
a highwayman or pickpocket of the worst sort. Let not any
of those prate about reason or religion. It is an amazing
instance of human folly, that every government in Europe
does not drive these vermin away into lands not inhabited.
We are all indebted to those detachments of the army which
have cleared some of our coasts of these public nuisances;
and indeed many of that body have, in several respects, de
served well of their country. Yet can we say of the soldiery
in general, that they are men of reason and religion? I fear
not. Are not the bulk of them void of almost all knowledge,
divine and human P And is their virtue more eminent than
their knowledge? But I spare them. May God be mer
ciful to them 1 May he be glorified by their reformation,
rather than their destruction |
Is there any more knowledge or virtue in that vast body of
men, (some hundred thousands,) the English sailors? Surely
no. It is not without cause, that a ship has been called, “a
floating hell.” What power, what form, of religion is to be
found in nine out of ten, shall I say, or ninety-nine out of a
hundred, either of our merchantmen, or men-of-war? What
do the men in them think or know about religion? What
do they practise; either sailors or marines? I doubt whether
any heathen sailors, in any country or age, Greek, Roman,
or Barbarian, ever came up to ours, for profound ignorance,
and barefaced, shameless, shocking impiety. Add to these,
out of our renowned metropolis, the whole brood of porters,
draymen, carmen, hackney-coachmen, and I am sorry to say,
Noblemen and Gentlemen’s footmen, (together making up
some thousands,) and you will have such a collection of
knowing and pious Christians as all Europe cannot exceed !
“But all men are not like these.” No; it is pity they
should. And yet how little better are the retailers of brandy or
gin, the inhabitants of blind alehouses, the oyster-women, fish
wives, and other good creatures about Billingsgate, and the
ORIGINAL SIN. 227
various clans of pedlars and hawkers that patrol through the
streets, or ply in Rag-fair, and other places of public resort |
These, likewise, amount to several thousands, even within the
Bills of Mortality. And what knowledge have they? What
religion are they of ? What morality do they practise?
“But these have had no advantage of education, many of
them scarce being able to write or read.” Proceed we, then,
to those who have had these advantages, the officers of the
Excise and Customs. Are these, in general, men of reason,
who think with clearness and connexion, and speak perti
nently on a given subject? Are they men of religion; sober,
temperate, fearing God and working righteousness; having a
conscience void of offence toward God and toward man? How
many do you find of this kind among them? men that fear an
oath; that fear perjury more than death; that would die
rather than neglect any part of that duty which they have
sworn to perform; that would sooner be torn in pieces, than
suffer any man, under any pretence, to defraud His Majesty
of his just right? How many of them will not be deterred
from doing their duty either by fear or favour, regard no
threatenings in the execution of their office, and accept no
bribes, called presents? These only are wise and honest
men. Set down all the rest as having neither religion nor
sound reason.
“But surely tradesmen have.” Some of them have both ;
and in an eminent degree. Some of our traders are an honour
to the nation. But are the bulk of them so 7 Are a vast
majority of our tradesmen, whether in town or country, I
will not say religious, but honest men? Who shall judge
whether they are or no? Perhaps you think St. Paul is too
strict. Let us appeal then to Cicero, an honest Heathen.
Now, when he is laying down rules of honesty between man
and man, he proposes two cases:
1. Antisthenes brings a ship load of corn to Rhodes, at a
time of great scarcity. The Rhodians flock about him to
buy. He knows that five other ships laden with corn will
be there to-morrow. Ought he to tell the Rhodians this,
before he sells his own corn? “Undoubtedly he ought,”
says the Heathen; “otherwise, he makes a gain of their
ignorance, and so is no better than a thief or a robber.”
2. A Roman Nobleman comes to a Gentleman to buy his
Q 2
228 THE DOCTRINE OF
house, who tells him, “There is another going to be built
near it, which will darken the windows,” and, on that ac
count, makes a deduction in the price. Some years after,
the Gentleman buys it of him again. Afterward he sues the
Nobleman for selling it without telling him first that houses.
were built near, which darkened the windows. The Noble
man pleads, “I thought he knew it.” The Judge asks,
“Did you tell him or not?” and, on his owning he did not,
determines, “This is contrary to the law, Ne quid dolo malo.
fiat, Let nothing be done fraudulently,” and sentences him
immediately to pay back part of the price.
Now, how many of our tradesmen come up to the heathen
standard of honesty? Who is clear of dolus malus, such
fraud as the Roman Judge would immediately have con
demned? Which of our countrymen would not have sold
his corn, or other wares, at the highest price he could 7 Who
would have sunk his own market, by telling his customers
there would be plenty the next day? Perhaps scarce one in
twenty. That one the Heathen would have allowed to be an
honest man; and every one of the rest, according to his sen
tence, is “no better than a thief or a robber.”
I must acknowledge, I once believed the body of English
merchants to be men of the strictest honesty and honour.
But I have lately had more experience. Whoever wrongs
the widow and fatherless, knows not what honour or honesty
means. And how very few are there that would scruple this!
I could relate many flagrant instances.
But let one suffice: A merchant dies in the full course of
a very extensive business. Another agrees with his widow,
that provided she will recommend him to her late husband’s
correspondents, he will allow her yearly such a proportion of
the profits of the trade. She does so; and articles are
drawn, which she lodges with an eminent man. This emi
nent man positively refuses to give them back to her; but
gives them to the other merchant, and so leaves her entirely
at his mercy. The consequence is, the other says, there is
no profit at all; so he does not give her a groat. Now,
where is the honesty or honour, either of him who made the
agreement, or him who gave back the articles to him?
That there is honour, nay, and honesty, to be found in ano
ther body of men, among the gentlemen of the law, I firmly
believe, whether Attorneys, Solicitors, or Counsellors. But are
ORIGINAL SIN. 229
they not thinly spread? Do the generality of Attorneys and
Solicitors in Chancery love their neighbour as themselves,
and do to others what (if the circumstances were changed)
they would have others do to them? Do the generality of
Counsellors walk by this rule, and by the rules of justice,
mercy, and truth? Do they use their utmost endeavours, do
they take all the care which the nature of the thing will
allow, to be assured that a cause is just and good before they
undertake to defend it? Do they never knowingly defend a
bad cause, and so make themselves accomplices in wrong and
oppression? Do they never deliver the poor into the hand of
his oppressor, and see that such as are in necessity have not
right? Are they not often the means of withholding bread
from the hungry, and raiment from the naked, even when it
is their own, when they have a clear right thereto, by the law
both of God and man? Is not this effectually done in many
cases by protracting the suit from year to year? I have
known a friendly bill preferred in Chancery by the consent of
all parties; the manager assuring them, a decree would be
procured in two or three months. But although several
years are now elapsed, they can see no land yet; nor do I
know that we are a jot nearer the conclusion than we were
the first day. Now, where is the honesty of this? Is it not
picking of pockets, and no better? A Lawyer who does not
finish his client’s suit as soon as it can be done, I cannot
allow to have more honesty (though he has more prudence)
than if he robbed him on the highway.
“But whether Lawyers are or no, sure the Nobility and
Gentry are all men of reason and religion.” If you think
they are all men of religion, you think very differently from
your Master, who made no exception of time or nation when
he uttered that weighty sentence, “How difficultly shall they
that have riches enter into the kingdom of heaven l’’ And
when some who seem to have been of your judgment were
greatly astonished at his saying, instead of retracting or soft
ening, he adds, “Verily I say unto you, It is easier for a
camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of God.” You think differently
from St. Paul, who declares, in those remarkable words, veri
fied in all ages, “Not many rich men, not many noble are
called,” and obey the heavenly calling. So many snares sur
round them, that it is the greatest of all miracles, if any of
230 THE DOCTRINE OF
them have any religion at all. And if you think they are all
men of sound reason, you do not judge by fact and expe
rience. Much money does not imply much sense; neither
does a good estate infer a good understanding. As a gay coat
may cover a bad heart, so a fair peruke may adorn a weak
head. Nay, a critical judge of human nature avers, that
this is generally the case. He lays it down as a rule,
Sensus communis in illá
Fortund rarus :
“Common sense is rarely found in men of fortune.” “A rich
man,” says he, “has liberty to be a fool. His fortune will
bear him out.” Stultitiam patiuntur opes : But, Tibi par
vula res est: “You have little money, and therefore should
have common sense.”
I would not willingly say any thing concerning those whom
the providence of God has allotted for guides to others.
There are many thousands of these in the Established
Church; many among Dissenters of all denominations. We
may add, some thousands of Romish Priests, scattered
through England, and swarming in Ireland. Of these, there
fore, I would only ask, “Are they all moved by the Holy
Ghost to take upon them that office and ministry?” If not,
they do not “enter by the door into the sheep-fold;” they
are not sent of God. Is their “eye single?” Is it their
sole intention, in all their ministrations, to glorify God, and
to save souls? Otherwise, “the light which is in them is
darkness.” And if it be, “how great is that darkness l’’
Is their “heart right with God?” Are their “affections set
on things above, not on things of the earth?” Else, how
will they themselves go one step in the way wherein they are
to guide others? Once more: “Are they holy in all manner
of conversation, as He who hath called them is holy?” If
not, with what face can they say to the flock, “Be ye follow
ers of me, as I am of Christ?”
12. We have now taken a cursory view of the present state
of mankind in all parts of the habitable world, and seen, in a
general way, what is their real condition, both with regard to
knowledge and virtue. But because this is not so pleasing a
icture as human pride is accustomed to draw ; and because
those who are prepossessed with high notions of their own
beauty, will not easily believe thatit is taken from the life; I
shall endeavour to place it in another view, that it may be cer
ORIGINAL SIN. 231
tainly known whether it resembles the original. I shall desire
every one who is willing to know mankind, to begin his inquiry
at home. First, let him survey himself; and then go on, step
by step, among his neighbours.
I ask, then, First, Are you throughly pleased with your
self? Say you, Who is not? Nay, I say, Who is? Do you
observe nothing in yourself which you dislike, which you
cannot cordially approve of? Do you never think too well of
yourself? think yourself wiser, better, and stronger than you
appear to be upon the proof? Is not this pride? And do you
approve of pride? Was you never angry without a cause, or
farther than that cause required? Are you not apt to be so?
Do you approve of this? Do not you frequently resolve against
it, and do not you break those resolutions again and again?
Can you help breaking them? If so, why do you not? Are
not you prone to “unreasonable desires,” either of pleasure,
praise, or money? Do not you catch yourself desiring things
not worth a desire, and other things more than they deserve?
Are all your desires proportioned to the real intrinsic value of
things? Do you not know and feel the contrary? Are not you
continually liable to “foolish and hurtful desires?” And do
not you frequently relapse into them, knowing them to be
such; knowing that they have before “pierced you through
with many sorrows?” Have you not often resolved against
these desires, and as often broke your resolutions? Can you
help breaking them? Do so; help it, if you can; and if not,
own your helplessness.
Are you throughly pleased with your own life? Nihilna
vides quod nolis ? “Do you observe nothing there which you
dislike?” I presume you are not too severe a judge here;
nevertheless, I ask, Are you quite satisfied, from day to day,
with all you say or do? Do you say nothing which you after
wards wish you had not said? do nothing which you wish
you had not done? Do you never speak anything contrary to
truth or love? Is that right? Let your own conscience deter
mine. Do you never do anything contrary to justice or mercy?
Is that well done? You know it is not. Why, then, do you
not amend? Moves, sed nil promoves. You resolve, and
resolve, and do just as you did before.
Your wife, however, is wiser and better than you. Nay,
perhaps you do not think so. Possibly you said once,—
232 THE DOCTRINE OF
“Thou hast no faults, or I no faults can spy;
Thou art all beauty, or all blindness I.”
But you do not say so now : She is not without faults; and
you can see them plain enough. You see more faults than you
desire, both in her temper and behaviour: And yet you cannot
mend them; and she either cannot or will not. And she says
the very same of you. Do your parents or hers live with you?
And do they, too, exercise your patience? Is there nothing
in their temper or behaviour that gives you pain? nothing
which you wish to have altered P Are you a parent yourself?
Parents in general are not apt to think too meanly of their own
dear offspring. And, probably, at some times you admire yours
more than enough; you think there are none such. But do
you think so upon cool reflection? Is the behaviour of all your
children, of most, of any of them, just such as you would
desire, toward yourself, toward each other, and toward all
men ? Are their tempers just such as you would wish; loving,
modest, mild, and teachable? Do you observe no self will,
no passion, no stubbornness, no ill-nature or surliness among
them? Did you not observe more or less of these in every
one of them, before they were two years old? And have not
those seeds ever since grown up with them, till they have
brought forth a plentiful harvest?
Your servants, or apprentices, are probably older than your
children. And are they wiser and better? Of all those who
have succeeded each other for twenty years, how many were
good servants? How many of them did their work “unto the
Lord, not as pleasing man, but God?” How many did the
same work, and in as exact a manner, behind your back as
before your face? They that did not were knaves; they had
no religion; they had no morality. Which of them studied
your interest in all things, just as if it had been his own? I
am afraid, as long as you have lived in the world you have
seen few of these black swans yet.
Have you had better success with the journeymen and labour
ers whom you occasionally employ? Will they do the same
work if you are at a distance, which they do while you are stand
ing by ? Can you depend upon their using you, as they would
you should use them? And will they do this, not so much for
gain, as for conscience sake? Can you trust them as to the
price of their labour? Will they never charge more than it is
ORIGINAL SIN. 233
fairly worth? If you have found a set of such workmen, pray
do not conceal so valuable a treasure; but immediately
advertise the men, and their places of abode, for the common
benefit of your countrymen.
Happy you who have such as these about your house ! And
are your neighbours as honest and loving as they? They who
live either in the same, or in the next house; do these love you
as themselves? and do to you, in every point, as they would
have you do to them? Are they guilty of no untrue or unkind
sayings, no unfriendly actions towards you? And are they, (as
far as you see or know,) in all other respects, reasonable and
religious men? How many of your neighbours answer this
character? Would it require a large house to contain them?
But you have intercourse, not with the next neighbours only,
but with several tradesmen. And all very honest; are they
not? You may easily make a trial. Send a child, or a coun
tryman, to one of their shops. If the shopkeeper is an honest
man, he will take no advantage of the buyer's ignorance.
If he does, he is no honester than a thief. And how many
tradesmen do you know who would scruple it?
Go a little farther. Send to the market for what you want.
“What is the lowest price of this?” “Five shillings, Sir.”
“Can you take no less?” “No, upon my word. It is worth
it, every penny.” An hour after he sells it for a shilling less.
And it is really worth no more. Yet is not this the course (a
few persons excepted) in every market throughout the king
dom? Is it not generally, though not always, “Cheat that
cheat can: Sell as dear as you can, and buy as cheap P”
And what are they who steer by this rule better than a company
of Newgate-birds? Shake them all together; for there is
not a grain of honesty among them.
But are not your own tenants, at least, or your landlord,
honest men ? You are persuaded they are. Very good:
Remember, then, an honest man’s word is as good as his bond.
You are preparing a receipt, or writing, for a sum of money,
which you are going to pay or lend to this honest man. Writ
fing ! What need of that? You do not fear he should die soon.
You did not once think of it. But you do not care to trust
him without it; that is, you are not sure but he is a mere
knave. What, your landlord, who is a Justice of Peace;
it may be, a Judge; nay, a Member of Parliament; possibly
234 Ith E DOCTRINE OF
a Peer of the realm ! And cannot you trust this Honourable,
if not Right Honourable, man, without a paltry receipt? I do
not ask whether he is a whoremonger, an adulterer, a
blasphemer, a proud, a passionate, a revengeful man: This, it
may be, his nearest friends will allow; but do you suspect his
honesty too?
13. Such is the state of the Protestant Christians in Eng
land. Such their virtue, from the least to the greatest; if
you take an impartial survey of your parents, children, ser
vants, labourers, neighbours; of tradesmen, Gentry, Nobility.
What then can we expect from Papists? what from Jews,
Mahometans, Heathens?
And it may be remarked, that this is the plain, glaring, appa
rent condition of human kind. It strikes the eye of the most
careless, inaccurateobserver, who does not trouble himself with
any more than their outside. Now, it is certain the generality
of men do not wear their worst side outward. Rather, they
study to appear better than they are, and to conceal what they
can of their faults. What a figure, then, would they make,
were we able to touch them with Ithuriel’s spear! What a pros
pect would there be, could we anticipate the transactions of the
great day ! could we “bring to light the hidden things of dark
ness, and make manifest the thoughts and intents of the heart!”
This is the plain, naked fact, without any extenuation on
the one hand, or exaggeration on the other. The present
state of the moral world is as conspicuous as that of the
natural. Ovid said no more concerning both, near two thou
sand years since, than is evidently true at this day. Of the
natural world he says, (whether this took place at the fall of
man, or about the time of the deluge,)
Jupiter antiqui contraxit tempora veris,
Perque hyemes, astusque, et indequales autumnos,
Et breve ver, spatiis exegit quatuor annum.
“The God of nature, and her sovereign King,
Shorten’d the primitive perennial spring:
The spring gave place, no sooner come than past,
To summer's heat, and winter's chilling blast,
And autumn sick, irregular, and uneven :
While the sad year, through different seasons driven,
Obey'd the stern decree of angry Heaven.”
And a man may as modestlv deny, that spring and summer,
ORIGINAL SIN. 235
autumn and winter, succeed each other, as deny one article of
the ensuing account of the moral world:
Irrupit vena pejoris in aevum
Omne nefas: Fugere pudor, verumque, fidesque ;
In quorum subiere locum, fraudesque, dolique,
Insidiaque, et vis, et amor sceleratus habendi.
“A flood of general wickedness broke in
At once, and made the iron age begin:
Wirtue and truth forsook the faithless race,
And fraud and wrong succeeded in their place;
Deceit and violence, the dire thirst of gold,
Lust to possess, and rage to have and hold.”
What country is there now upon earth, in Europe, Asia,
Africa, or America, be the inhabitants Pagans, Turks, or
Christians, concerning which we may not say?—
Vivitur ex rapto: Non hospes ab hospite tutus:
Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos;
Victa jacet pietas ; et Virgo cade madentes
Ultima caelestum terras Astraa reliquit.
*They live by rapine. The unwary guest
Is poison’d at the inhospitable feast.
The son, impatient for his father's death,
Numbers his years, and longs to stop his breath:
Extinguish’d all regard for God and man;
And Justice, last of the celestial train,
Spurns the earth drench’d in blood, and flies to heaven again.”
14. Universal misery is at once a consequence and a proof
of this universal corruption. Men are unhappy, (how very
few are the exceptions !) because they are unholy. Culpam
paena premit comes: “Pain accompanies and follows sin.”
Why is the earth so full of complicated distress? Because
it is full of complicated wickedness. Why are not you happy?
Other circumstances may concur, but the main reason is, be
cause you are not holy. It is impossible, in the nature of
things, that wickedness can consist with happiness. A
Roman Heathen tells the English Heathens, Nemo malus
felix : “No vicious man is happy.” And if you are not
guilty of any gross outward vice, yet you have vicious tem
pers; and as long as these have power in your heart, true
peace has no place. You are proud; you think too highly
of yourself. You are passionate; often angry without rea
son. You are self-willed; you would have your own will,
your own way, in everything; that is, plainly, you would rule
236 THE DOCTRINE OF
over God and man; you would be the governor of the world.
You are daily liable to unreasonable desires: Some things you
desire that are no way desirable; others which ought to be
avoided, yea, abhorred, as least as they are now circumstanced.
...And can a proud or a passionate man be happy? O no ! ex
perience shows it is impossible. Can a man be happy who is
full of self-will? Not unless he can dethrone the Most High.
Can a man of unreasonable desires be happy? Nay, they
“pierce” him “through with many sorrows.”
I have not touched upon envy, malice, revenge, covetous
ness, and other gross vices. Concerning these it is univer
sally agreed, by all thinking men, Christian or Heathen, that
a man can no more be happy while they lodge in his bosom,
than if a vulture was gnawing his liver. It is supposed, in
deed, that a very small part of mankind, only the vilest of
men, are liable to these. I know not that; but certainly this
is not the case with regard to pride, anger, self-will, foolish de
sires. Those who are not accounted bad men are by no means
free from these. And this alone (were they liable to no other
pain) would prevent the generality of men, rich and poor,
learned and unlearned, from ever knowing what happiness
IneallS.
15. You think, however, you could bear yourself pretty well;
but you have such a husband or wife, such parents and child
ren, as are intolerable ! One has such a tongue, the other so
perverse a temper! The language of these, the carriage of those,
is so provoking; otherwise you should be happy enough.
True; if both you and they were wise and virtuous. Mean
while, neither the vices of your family, nor your own, will
suffer you to rest.
Look out of your own doors: “Is there any evil in the
city, and” sin “hath not done it?” Is there any misfortune
or misery to be named, whereof it is not either the direct or
remote occasion? Why is it that the friend or relation for
whom you are so tenderly concerned is involved in so many
troubles? Have not you done your part toward making them
happy? Yes, but they will not do their own: One has no
management, no frugality, or no industry; another is too fond
of pleasure. If he is not what is called scandalously vicious,
he loves wine, women, or gaming. And to what does all this
amount? He might be happy; but sin will not suffer it.
Perhaps you will say, “Nay, he is not in fault; he is both
ORIGINAL SIN. 237
frugal and diligent; but he has fallen into the hands of those
who have imposed upon his good-nature.” Very well; but
still sin is the cause of his misfortunes; only it is another's,
not his own.
If you inquire into the troubles under which your neigh
bour, your acquaintance, or one you casually talk with, labours,
still you will find the far greater part of them arise from some
fault, either of the sufferer or of others; so that still sin is at the
root of trouble, and it is unholiness which causes unhappiness.
And this holds as well with regard to families, as with re
gard to individuals. Many families are miserable through
want. They have not the conveniences, if the necessaries, of
life. Why have they not? Because they will not work: Were
they diligent, they would want nothing. Or, if not idle, they
are wasteful; they squander away, in a short time, what might
have served for many years. Others, indeed, are diligent and
frugal too; but a treacherous friend, or a malicious enemy,
has ruined them; or they groan under the hand of the
oppressor; or the extortioner has entered into their labours.
You see, then, in all these cases, want (though in various ways)
is the effect of sin. But is there no rich man near? none that
could relieve these innocent sufferers, without impairing his
own fortune? Yes; but he thinks of nothing less. They
may rot and perish for him. See, more sin is implied in
their suffering.
But is not the family of that rich man himself happy? No;
far from it; perhaps farther than his poor neighbours. For
they are not content; their “eye is not satisfied with seeing,
nor” their “ear with hearing.” Endeavouring to fill their
souls with the pleasures of sense and imagination, they are
only pouring water into a sieve. Is not this the case with
the wealthiest families you know? But it is not the whole
case with some of them. There is a debauched, a jealous, or
an ill-natured husband; a gaming, passionate, or imperious
wife; an undutiful son; or an imprudent daughter,-who
banishes happiness from the house. And what is all this but
sin in various shapes; with its sure attendant, misery?
In a town, a corporation, a city, a kingdom, is it not the
same thing still? From whence comes that complication of
all the miseries incident to human nature,—war? Is it not
from the tempers “which war in the soul?” When nation
rises up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, docs
238 THE DOCTRINE OF
it not necessarily imply pride, ambition, coveting what is
another's; or envy, or malice, or revenge, on one side, if not
on both ? Still, then, sin is the baleful source of affliction;
and consequently, the flood of miseries which covers the face
of the earth,-which overwhelms not only single persons, but
whole families, towns, cities, kingdoms,—is a demonstrative
proof of the overflowing of ungodliness in every nation under
heaven
PART II.
THE SCRIPTURAL METHOD OF ACCOUNTING FOR THIS
DEFENDED.
I. 1. THE fact then being undeniable, I would ask, How is
it to be accounted for? Will you resolve it into the prevalence
of custom, and say, “Men are guided more by example than
reason?” It is true: They run after one another like a flock
of sheep, (as Seneca remarked long ago) non qua eundum est,
sed qua itur: “Not where they ought to go, but where others
go.” But I gain no ground by this; I am equally at a loss
to account for this custom. How is it (seeing men are rea
sonable creatures, and nothing is so agreeable to reason as
virtue) that the custom of all ages and nations is not on the
side of virtue rather than vice? If you say, “This is owing
to bad education, which propagates ill customs;” I own,
education has an amazing force, far beyond what is com
monly imagined. I own, too, that as bad education is found
among Christians as ever obtained among the Heathens.
But I am no nearer still; I am not advanced a hair's breadth
toward the conclusion. For how am I to account for the
almost universal prevalence of this bad education? I want
to know when this prevailed first; and how it came to pre
vail. How came wise and good men (for such they must
have been before bad education commenced) not to train up
their children in wisdom and goodness; in the way wherein
they had been brought up themselves? They had then no
ill precedent before them: How came they to make such a
precedent? And how came all the wisdom of after-ages never
to correct that precedent? You must suppose it to have been
of ancient date. Profane history gives us a large account
ORIGINAL SIN. 239
of universal wickedness, that is, universal bad education, for
above two thousand years last past. Sacred history adds the
account of above two thousand more: In the very beginning
of which (more than four thousand years ago) “all flesh had
corrupted their ways before the Lord!” or, to speak
agreeably to this hypothesis, were very corruptly educated.
Now, how is this to be accounted for, that, in so long a tract
of time, no one nation under the sun has been able, by whole
some laws, or by any other method, to remove this grievous
evil; so that, their children being well educated, the scale
might at length turn on the side of reason and virtue?
These are questions which I conceive will not easily be
answered to the satisfaction of any impartial inquirer. But,
to bring the matter to a short issue: The first parents who
educated their children in vice and folly, either were wise and
virtuous themselves, or were not. If they were not, their
vice did not proceed from education; so the supposition falls
to the ground: Wickedness was antecedent to bad education.
If they were wise and virtuous, it cannot be supposed but
they would teach their children to tread in the same steps.
In mowise, therefore, can we account for the present state of
mankind from example or education.
2. Let us then have recourse to the oracles of God. How do
they teach us to account for this fact, —that “all flesh corrupted
their way before God,” even in the antediluvian world; that
mankind was little, if at all, less corrupt, from the flood to the
giving of the law by Moses; that from that time till Christ
came, even God’s chosen people were a “faithless and stubborn
generation,” little better, though certainly not worse, than the
Heathens who knew not God; that when Christ came, both
“Jews and Gentiles’’ were “all under sin; all the world was
guilty before God;” that, even after the gospel had been
preached in all nations, still the wise and virtuous were a “little
flock;” bearing so small a proportion to the bulk of mankind,
that it might yet be said, “The whole world lieth in wicked
ness;” that, from that time, “the mystery of iniquity” wrought
even in the Church, till the Christianswere little better than the
Heathens; and, lastly, that at this day “the whole world,”
whether Pagan, Mahometan, or nominally Christian, (little,
indeed, is the flock which is to be excepted,) again “lieth in
wickedness; ” doth not “know the only true God; ” doth not
240 THE DOCTRINE OF
love, doth not worship him as God; hath not “the mind
which was in Christ,” neither “walketh as he walked; ” doth
not practise justice, mercy, and truth, nor do to others as
they would others should do to them;—how, I say, do the
oracles of God teach us to account for this plain fact?
3. They teach us, that “in Adam all die; ” (1 Cor. xv.
22, compared with Genesis ii. & iii.;) that “by” the first
“man came ’’ both natural and spiritual “death;” that
“by” this “one man sin entered into the world, and death.”
in consequence of sin; and that from him “death passed
upon all men, in that all have sinned.” (Rom. v. 12.)
But you aver, that “no evil but temporal death came upon
men in consequence of Adam’s sin.” And this you endea
vour to prove by considering the chief scriptures which are
supposed to relate thereto.
The first you mention is Genesis ii. 17: “But of the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it:
For in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.”
On this you observe: “Death was to be the consequence
of his disobedience. And the death here threatened can be
opposed only to that life God gave Adam when he created
him.” (Page 7.) True; but how are you assured that God,
when he created him, did not give him spiritual as well as
animal life? Now, spiritual death is opposed to spiritual
life. And this is more than the death of the body.
“But this is pure conjecture, without a solid foundation;
for no other life is spoken of before.” Yes, there is; “the
image of God” is spoken of before. This is not, therefore,
pure conjecture; but is grounded upon a solid foundation,
upon the plain word of God.
Allowing then that “Adam could understand it of no
other life than that which he had newly received;” yet would
he naturally understand it of the life of God in his soul, as
well as of the life of his body.
“In this light, therefore, the sense of the threatening will
stand thus: ‘Thou shalt surely die; as if he had said, I have
“formed thee of the dust of the ground, and breathed into thy
nostrils the breath of lives;’” (Third Edition, p. 8;) both of
* Dr. Taylor’s “Doctrine of Original Sin,” Part I., to whom I address myself
in what follows. What is quoted 'rom him, generally in his own words, is
inclosed in cummas.
ORIGINAL SIN. 241
animal life, and of spiritual life; and in both respects thou
“art become a living soul.” “But if thou eatest of the for
bidden tree, thou shalt cease to be a living soul. For I will
take from thee” the lives I have given, and thou shalt die
spiritually, temporally, eternally.
But “here is not one word relating to Adam's posterity.
Though it be true, if he had died immediately upon his trans.
gression, all hisposterity must have been extinct with him.”
It is true; yet “not one word” of it is expressed. There
fore, other consequences of his sin may be equally implied,
though they are no more expressed than this.
4. The second scripture you cite is Gen. iii., from verse 7
to 24. (Pages 9, 10.)
On this you observe: Here “we have some consequences
of our first parents’ sin before God judged them; some
appointed by his judicial sentence; and some which happened
after that sentence was pronounced.” (Page 11.)
“Immediately upon their transgression, they were seized
with shame and fear. Guilt will always be attended with
shame. And a state of guilt is often in Scripture expressed
by being naked. Moses ‘saw that the people were naked;
for Aaron had made them naked to their shame among their
enemies.” (Exod. xxxii. 25.)” Certainly, naked does not
mean guilty here; but either stripped of their ornaments,
(xxxiii. 5, 6) or of their swords, or their upper garment.
“Thy nakedness shall be uncovered; yea, thy shame shall be
seen.” (Isaiah xlvii. 3.) (Page 12.) Here also nakedness
does not mean guilt; but is to be taken literally, as mani
festly appears from the words immediately preceding: “Make
bare the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers.” (Verse
2.) And, “Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his gar
ments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.” (Rev.
xvi. 15.) The plain meaning is, lest he lose the graces he has
received, and so be ashamed before men and angels.
“Their fear is described: “Adam and his wife hid them
selves from the presence of the Lord God among the trees of
the garden. (Gen. iii. 8.) They had no such fear while they
were innocent; but now they were afraid to stand before
their Judge.” (Page 13.)
This is all you can discern in the Mosaic account as the
consequence of our first parents’ sin, before God judged them.
VOL. IX.
242 THE DOCTRINE OF
Mr. Hervey discerns something more. I make no apology
for transcribing some of his words:
“Adam violated the precept, and, as the nervous original
expresses it, “died the death.’ He before possessed a life
incomparably more excellent than that which the beasts en
joy. He possessed a divine life, consisting, according to the
Apostle, “in knowledge, in righteousness, and true holi
ness.’ This, which was the distinguishing glory of his na
ture, in the day that he ate the forbidden fruit was extinct.
“His understanding, originally enlightened with wisdom,
was clouded with ignorance. His heart, once warmed with
heavenly love, became alienated from God his Maker. His
passions and appetites, rational and regular before, shook off
the government of order and reason. In a word, the whole
moral frame was unhinged, disjointed, broken.
“The ignorance of fallen Adam was palpable. Witness
that absurd attempt to hide himself from the eye of Omni
science among the trees of the garden. His aversion to the
all-gracious God was equally plain; otherwise, he would
never have fled from his Maker, but rather have hasted on
the wings of desire, into the place of the divine manifestation.
“A strange variety of disorderly passions were evidently
predominant in his breast. Pride; for he refuses to acknow
ledge his guilt, though he cannot but own the fact. Ingrati
tude; for he obliquely upbraids the Creator with his gift, as
though it had been a snare rather than a blessing: ‘The
woman thou gavest me.’ The female criminal acts the same
unhumbled part. She neither takes shame to herself, nor
gives glory to God, nor puts up a single petition for pardon.
“As all these disasters ensued upon the breach of the com
mandment, they furnish us with the best key to open the
meaning of the penalty annexed. They prove beyond any
argument that spiritual death and all its consequences were
comprised in the extent of the threatening.” (Theron and
Aspasio, Dial. 11.)
5. However, “no other could in justice be punishable for
that transgression, which was their own act and deed only.”
(Page 13.) If no other was justly punishable, then no other
was punished for that transgression. But all were punished
for that transgression, namely, with death. Therefore, all
men were justly punishable for it.
By punishment I meansuffering consequent upon sin, or pain
ORIGINAL SIN. 243
inflicted because of sin preceding. Now, it is plain, all man
Kind suffer death; and that this suffering is consequent upon
Adam’ssin. Yea, and that this pain is inflicted on all men because
of his sin. When, therefore, you say, “Death does descend to
us in consequence of his transgression,” (Doctrine of Original
Sin, p. 20) you allow the point we contend for; and are very
welcome to add, “Yet it is not a punishment for his sin.” You
allow the thing. Call it by what name you please.
But “punishment always connotes guilt.” (Page 21.) It
always connotes sin and suffering; and here are both. Adam
sinned; his posterity suffer; and that, in consequence of his sin.
But “sufferings are benefits to us.” Doubtless; but this
does not hinder their being punishments. The pain I suffer
as a punishment for my own sins may be a benefit to me, but
it is a punishment nevertheless.
But “as they two only were guilty of the first sin, so no
other but they two only could be conscious of it as their sin.”
(Page 14.) No other could be conscious of it as their sin, in
the same sense as Adam and Eve were; and yet others may
“charge it upon themselves * in a different sense, so as to
judge themselves “children of wrath” on that account.
To sum up this point in Dr. Jennings's words: “If there
be anything in this argument, that Adam’s posterity could not
be justly punishable for his transgression, because it was his
personal act and not theirs, it must prove universally, that it is
unjust to punish the posterity of any man for his personal
crimes. And yet most certain it is, that God has in other
cases actually punished men’s sins on their posterity. Thus
the posterity of Canaan, the son of Ham, is punished with
slavery for his sin. (Gen. ix. 25, 27.) Noah pronounced the
curse under a divine afflatus, and God confirmed it by his
providence. So we do in fact suffer for Adam's sin, and that
too by the sentence inflicted on our first parents. We suffer
death in consequence of their transgression. Therefore we
are, in some sense, guilty of their sin. I would ask, What
is guilt, but an obligation to suffer punishment for sin? Now
since we suffer the same penal evil which God threatened
to, and inflicted on, Adam for his sin; and since it is
allowed, we suffer this for Adam’s sin, and that by the
sentence of God, appointing all men to die, because Adam
sinned; is not the consequence evident? Therefore we are
all some way guilty of Adam’s sin.” (Jennings’s Vindication.)
R 2
244 THE DOCTRINE OF
6. “The consequences appointed by the judicial sentence of
God are found in that pronounced on the serpent, or the
woman, or the man.” (Page 15.)
“The serpent is cursed, Gen. iii. 14, 15. And those words
in the fifteenth verse: ‘I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed: He' (so the He
brew) “shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel,’
imply, that God would appointhis only-begotten Sonto maintain
a kingdom in the world opposite to the kingdom of Satan, till
he should be born of a woman, and by his doctrine, example,
obedience, and death, give the last stroke, by way of moral
means, to the power and works of the devil.” (Page 16.)
I do not understand that expression, “By way of moral
means.” What I understand from the whole tenor of Scrip
ture is, that the eternal, almighty Son of God, “who is over
all, God blessed for ever,” having reconciled us to God by his
blood, creates us anew by his Spirit, and reigns till he hath
destroyed all the works of the devil.
“Sentence is passed upon the woman, (verse 16,) that she
should bring forth children with more pain and hazard than
otherwise she would have done.” (Page 17.) How? With
“more pain and hazard” than otherwise she would have done!
Would she otherwise have had any pain at all? or have brought
forth children with any hazard? Hazard of what? Certainly,
not of death. I cannot comprehend this.
“Lastly, the sentence upon the man (verses 17–19) first
affects the earth, and then denounces death upon himself.
“After sentence pronounced, God, having clothed Adam
and Eve, drove them out of paradise.” (Page 18.)
Here, “observe, (1.) A curse is pronounced on the serpent
and on the ground; but no curseupon the woman and the man.”
(Page 19.) But a curse fell upon them in that very moment
wherein they transgressed the law of God. For, “cursed is
everyone that continuethnotin all things which are” contained
“in the law to do them.” Vainly, therefore, do you subjoin,
“Though they are subjected to sorrow, labour, and death, these
are not inflicted under the notion of a curse.” “Surely they
are; as the several branches of that curse which he had already
incurred; and which had already notonly “darkened and weak
ened his rational powers,” but disordered his whole soul.
“Observe, (2.) Here is not one word of any other death, but
ORIGINAL SIN. 245
the dissolution of the body.” Nor was it needful. He felt
in himself that spiritual death, which is the prelude of death
everlasting. “But the words, ‘Dust thou art, and unto dust
shalt thou return, restrain this death to this dissolution
alone.” (Page 20.) “This dissolution alone” is expressed in
those words. But how does it appear, that nothing more is
implied ? The direct contrary appears from your own asser
tions; for if these words refer clearly to those, “And the Lord
God formed man out of the dust of the ground, and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of lives;” and if “the judicial act
of condemnation clearly implieth the depriving him of that
life which God then breathed into him;” it undeniably fol
lows, that this judicial act implieth a deprivation of spiritual
life as well as temporal; seeing God breathed into him both
one and the other, in order to his becoming “a living soul.”
It remains, that the death expressed in the original threat
ening, and implied in the sentence pronounced upon man,
includes all evils which could befal his soul and body; death
temporal, spiritual, and eternal.
7. You next cite 1 Cor. xv. 21, 22 : “Since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For
as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.”
(Page 22.)
On this you observe, (1) “The Apostle is in this chapter
proving and explaining the resurrection. It is this fact or
event, and no other, which he here affirms and demonstrates.”
(Page 23.)
If you mean, “The resurrection of the body to that life
which it enjoyed in this world is the only thing which the
Apostle speaks of in this chapter,” your assertion is palpably
false; for he speaks therein of “that glorious life” both of
soul and body, which is not, cannot be, enjoyed in this world.
You observe, (2.) “It is undeniable, that all mankind ‘die
in Adam;’ all are mortal, in consequence of his sin.” (Page
24.) (3.) “It is equally clear, that ‘ by Christ came the re
surrection of the dead: ‘That, in Christ,’ all who die in
Adam, that is, all mankind, “are made alive.” It is neither
clear nor true, that St. Paul affirms this, in either of the
texts before us: For in this whole chapter he speaks only of
the resurrection of the just, of “them that are Christ’s.”
(Verse 23.) So that from hence it cannot be inferred at all,
that all mankind will be “made alive.” Admitting then,
246 THE DOCTRINE OF
“that the “resurrection of the dead, and being ‘made alive,”
are expressions of the same signification;” this proves.
nothing; since the Apostle affirms neither one nor the other,
of any but of those “who are fallen asleep in Christ.”
(Verse 18.) It is of these only that he here asserts, their
death came by the first, their resurrection by the second,
Adam; or, that in Adam they all died; in Christ, they all
are made alive. Whatever life they all lost by means of
Adam, they all recover by means of Christ.
“From this place we cannot conclude that any death came
upon mankind in consequence of Adam’s sin, beside that.
death from which mankind shall be delivered at the resur
rection.” (Page 25.)
Nay, from this place we cannot conclude, that mankind in.
general shall be delivered from any death at all; seeing it
does not relate to mankind in general, but wholly and solely
to “them that are Christ’s.”
But from this place we may firmly conclude that more than
the mere death of the body came even upon these by man, by
Adam’s sin; seeing the resurrection which comes to them by
man, by Christ, is far more than the mere removal of that.
death: Therefore their dying in Adam implies far more than
the bare loss of the bodily life we now enjoy; seeing their
“being made alive in ”Christ implies far more than a bare
recovery of that life.
Yet it is true, that whatever death came on them by one
man, came upon all mankind; and that in the same sense
wherein they “died in Adam,” all mankind died likewise.
And that all mankind are not “made alive in ”Christ, as
they are, is not God’s fault, but their own.-
I know not therefore what you mean by saying, that after
Dr. Jennings has proved this whole chapter, and consequently
the two verses in question, to relate wholly and solely to the
resurrection of the just, “he leaves you in full possession of
your argument.” Surely if he proves this, he wrests your
whole argument out of your hands. He leaves you not one
shred of it.
8. “We come now,” you say, “to the most difficult scrip
ture which speaks of this point:—
“‘As by one man sin entered into the world, and death
by sin; even ‘so death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned.
ORIGINAL SIN• 247
“‘For until the law sin was in the world; but sin is not
imputed when there is no law.
“‘Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even
over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam’s
transgression, who is the figure of him that was to come.
“‘But not as the offence, so also is the free gift. For if
through the offence of one many be dead, much more the
grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man,
Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many.
“‘And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift; for
the judgment was by one’ offence ‘to condemnation, but the
free gift is of many offences unto justification.
“‘For if by one man's offence death reigned by one; much
more they who receive the abundance of grace, and of the
gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.
“‘Therefore as by the offence of one judgment came upon
all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of
one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life.
“‘For as by one man’s disobedience many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous.” (Romans v. 12–19.)” (Page 26.)
On this you observe: (1.) That this passage “speaks of
temporal death, and no other.” (Page 28.) That it speaks of
temporal death is allowed; but not that it speaks of no other.
How prove you this? Why thus: “He evidently speaks of
that death which ‘entered into the world’ by Adam’s sin;
that death which is common to all mankind; which “passed
upon all men; that death which “reigned from Adam to
Moses;’ that whereby the ‘many,’ that is, all mankind, “are
dead.’” He does so; but how does it appear that the death
which “entered into the world by ”Adam's sin; which is
common to all mankind; which “passed upon all men;”
which “reigned from Adam to Moses;” and whereby the
many, that is, all mankind, are dead; how, I say, does it
appear, from any or all of these expressions, that this is tem
poral death only P Just here lies the fallacy: “No man,”
say you, “can deny that the Apostle is here speaking of that
death.” True; but when you infer, “Therefore he speaks of
that only,” we deny the consequence.
9. You affirm : (2.) “By judgment to condemnation, (verses
16, 18,) he means the being adjudged to the forementioned
death; for the ‘condemnation’ inflicted by the ‘judgment’
248 THE DOCTRINE OF
of God (verse 16) is the same thing with “being dead.”
(Verse 15.)” (Page 27.) Perhaps so; but that this is merely
the death of the body still remains to be proved; as, on the
other hand, that “the gift, or free gift,” opposed thereto, is
merely deliverance from that death.
You add: “In all the Scriptures there is recorded but one
‘judgment to condemnation; one sentence, one judicial act
of condemnation, which ‘came upon all men.’” (Page 29)
Nay, in this sense of the word, there is not one; not one for
mal sentence, which was explicitly and judicially pronounced
upon “all mankind.” That which you cite, (Gen. iii. 17,
19,) was not; neither does all that sentence, in fact, “come
upon all men.” “Unto dust shalt thou return,” does come
upon all; but that other part does not,-“In sorrow shalt
thou eat of it all the days of thy life.” This was formally
pronounced, and actually fulfilled upon Adam; but it is not
fulfilled upon all his posterity.
10. You affirm: (3) “These words, in the 19th verse,
“As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,”
mean the same as those in the 18th,—“As by the offence of
one judgment came upon all men to condemnation.’” (Page
30.) Not exactly the same. The being “made sinners” is
different from the being judged, condemned, or punished as
such. You subjoin: “But these words, “By the offence of
one judgment came upon all men to conden nation, answer
in sense to those, (verse 17,) “By one man’s offence death
reigned by one.’” (Ibid.) Neither is this exactly true.
“Condemnation” came first; and in consequence of this,
“death reigned.” You add: “And by “death’ most cer
tainly is intended no other than temporal death.” Most
certainly this cannot be proved. Therefore it does not fol
low, “that these words, “By one man's disobedience many
were made sinners,” mean no more than, “By one man’s dis
obedience’ mankind were made subject to temporal death.”
“Review,” you say, “this reasoning, and see if you can find
any flaw in it.” There are several; but the grand flaw lies
in the very first link of the chain. You have not yet proved
that “death throughout this passage means only the death
of the body.”
This flaw is not amended by your observing that St. Paul
was a Jew, and wrote to Jews as well as Gentiles; that he often
uses Hebrew idioms; and that “the Hebrew word which signi
ORIGINAL SIN. 249
fies to be a sinner, in Hiphil signifies to condemn, or make
(that is, declare) a man a sinner by a judicial sentence;” that
you can, by the help of your Concordance, “produce fifteen
Hebrew texts, in which the word is so taken :” (Pages 31,
32:) For if it would follow from hence, that, “By the offence
of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation,” is just
equivalent with, “By one man’s disobedience many were made
sinners;” still this does not prove that the death in question
is no other than temporal death.
But indeed it does not follow, that two expressions are just
equivalent, because one Hebrew word may contain them both;
nor can it, therefore, be inferred from hence, that, “Many
were made sinners,” is just equivalent with, “Judgment came
upon all men to condemnation.” Rather, the former expres
sion answers to “All have sinned;” the latter, to “Death
passed upon all men.” Sin is the cause of their condemnation,
and not the same thing with it.
You go on : “Besides all this, it is here expressly affirmed,
that the many are ‘made sinners’ by the disobedience of another
man.” (Page 33.) It is expressly affirmed; and by an inspired
Apostle; therefore I firmly believe it. “But they can be
made sinners by the disobedience of another in no other sense
than as they are sufferers.” (Page 34.) How is this proved ?
We grant the Hebrew words for sin and iniquity are often used
to signify suffering. But this does not prove that the phrase,
“Were made sinners,” signifies only, they were made sufferers.
“So ‘Christ was made sin for us.” (Page 35.) No.; not
so, but as he was “made an offering for sin.” “He suffered
on account of the sins of men, and so he ‘was made sin.”
Yes, “a sin-offering.” But it is never said, he was made a
sinner; therefore the expressions are not parallel. But he
need not have been made sin at all, if we had not been made
sinners by Adam. “And men suffer on account of Adam’s
sin, and so they are made sinners.” Are they made sinners
so only * That remains to be proved.
“It seems then confirmed, beyond all doubt, that ‘by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners, meaneth only,
By Adam’s sin, the many, that is, all mankind, ‘were made
subject to death.” He that will believe it (taking death in
the common sense) may; but you have not confirmed it by
one sound argument.
250 Tille DoCTRINE OF
11. You affirm, (4.) “The Apostle draws a comparison
between Adam and Christ; between what Adam did, with the
consequences of it, and what Christ did, with the consequences
of that. And this comparison is the main thing he has in
view.” (Page 36.)
This is true. “The comparison begins at the twelfth verse:
‘Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin,”—there he stops awhile, and brings an argument
to prove, that death came on mankind through Adam’s trans
gression.” (Pages 37, 38.) He does so; but not before he had
finished his sentence, which literally runs thus: “As by one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, even so death
passed upon all men, in that all had sinned.” The comparison,
therefore, between Adam and Christ begins not at the twelfth
but the fourteenth verse. Of this you seem sensible yourself,
when you say, “Adam is the ‘pattern of Him that was to come.’
Here a new thought starts into the Apostle's mind.” (Page 39.)
For it was not a new thought starting into his mind here, if it
was the same which he began to express at the twelfth verse.
You proceed: “The extent of the free gift in Christ answers
to the extent of the consequences of Adam’s sin; nay, abounds
far beyond them. This he incidentally handles, verses 15–17,
and then resumes his main design, verses 18, 19, half of which
he had executed in the twelfth verse.” Not one jot of it. That
verse is a complete sentence, not half of one only. And the
particle therefore, prefixed to the eighteenth verse, shows, that
the discourse goes straight forward; and that this, as well as the
nineteenth verse, are closely connected with the seventeenth
Allowing, then, that “the Apostle draws a comparison
between the disobedience of Adam, by which all men are
‘brought under condemnation, and the “obedience of Christ,’
by which all men are, in some sense, “justified unto life;’”
(page 40;) still it does not appear either that this condemna
tion means no more than the death of the body, or that this
justification means no more than the resurrection of the body.
12. You affirm, (5.) “The whole of the Apostle's argument
stands upon these two principles, that, by the ‘offence of one,’
death passed upon all men; and, by “the obedience of one,’
all are justified.”
This is allowed. But I cannot allow your interpretation of,
“Sin is not imputed, where there is no law;” or, as you would
ORIGINAL SIN. 251
oddly, and contrary to all precedent, translate it, “where law is
not in being.” “The sins of mankind,” say you, “were not
imputed, were not taxed with the forfeitnre of life, because the
law which subjects the transgressor to death was not then in
being; for it was abrogated upon Adam’s transgression, and
was not again in force till revived by Moses.” (Page 41.) On
this I would ask, (1.) Where is it written, that “the law which
subjected the transgressor to death was abrogated by Adam’s
transgression?” I want a clear text for this. (2.) Suppose it
was, how does it appear that it was not again in force till revived
by Moses? (3.) Did not that law, “Whoso sheddeth man’s
blood, by man shall his blood be shed,” “subject the trans
gressor to death?” And was it “not in force” after Adam’s
transgression, and before Moses? (4.) What do you mean by
that ambiguous expression, “Were not taxed with the for
feiture of life?” Your argument requires that it should
mean, “Were not punished or punishable with death.” But
is this true? Were not the sins of the men of Sodom, and, in
deed, the whole antediluvian world, punished with death during
that period? (5.) Was not every wilful, impenitent trans
gressor, during this whole time, subject to death everlasting?
Neither can I allow that unnatural interpretation of, “Them
who had not sinned after the similitude of Adam’s transgres
sion;” “Had not sinned against law, making death the pe
nalty of their sin, as Adam did.” (Page 42.) Do not the
words obviously mean, “Had not sinned by any actual sin, as
Adam did?”
Nay, “the Sodomites and Antediluvians are no objection to
this.” That is strange indeed! But how so? “Because
extraordinary interpositions come under no rule, but the will
of God.” What is that to the purpose? Their sins were
actually punished with death, “during that space wherein,”
you say, “mankind were not subject to death for their trans
gression.” They were subject to death for their transgressions,
as God demonstrated by those extraordinary interpositions.
You add, “That law, ‘Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by
man shall his blood be shed, makes death the penalty of mur
der.” (Page 43.) It does; and thereby overthrows your whole
assertion. “No; for, (1.) It was not enacted till the year of
the world 1657.” Well, and if it had been enacted only the
year before Moses was born, it would still have destroyed your
252 ThE DOCTRINE OF
argument. But, (2) “It is given as a rule for Magistrates in
executing justice, and not as a declaration of the penalty of sin
to be inflicted by God himself.” What then? What does it
matter, whether the penalty annexed by God were inflicted by
God or man? However, I suppose this punishment on the
Antediluvians, and on Sodom and Gomorrah, was “inflicted
by God himself.” But, (3) “None of these were made mortal
by those sins.” Certainly, infallibly true! And yet the case
of any of these abundantly proves, that the law was in force
from Adam to Moses, even according to your own definition
of it: “A rule of duty with the penalty of death annexed, as
due to the transgressor from God.”
13. You affirm, (6.) “The consequences of Adam’s sin
answer those of Christ's obedience; but not exactly: ‘Not
as the offence, so is the free gift. For if through the offence
of one many be dead, much more the grace’ (or favour) ‘of
God and the gift” (the benefits that are) ‘by grace, which is
by one mail Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many.’ (Verse
15.) That is, he hath in Christ bestowed benefits upon man
kind, far exceeding the consequences of Adam’s sin; in erect
ing a new dispensation, furnished with a glorious fund of light
and truth, means and motives.” (Pages 43,44.) This is true;
but how small a part of the truth ! What a poor, low account
of the Christian dispensation 1
You go on: “‘Not as it was by one that sinned, so is the
gift : For the judgment was by one offence to condemnation;
but the free gift is of many offences unto justification;' (verse
16;) that is, the grace of God in Christ discharges mankind
from the consequences of Adam’s one offence.” Does it en
tirely discharge them from these consequences? from sorrow,
and labour, and death, which you affirmed a while ago to be
the only consequences of it that affect his posterity? It “also
sets them quite to rights with God, both as to a conformity
to the law and eternal life.”
Is not this allowing too much? Is it well consistent with what
you said before? “In the 19th verse, the Apostle concludes
the whole argument: “As by one man’s disobedience many were
made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous.’” (Page 29, et seq.) “Were made sinners,” you
aver means only, “were made mortal.” If so, the counterpart,
“made righteous,” can only mean, “made immortal.” And that
ORIGINAL SIN. 253
you thought so then, appears from your citing as a parallel
text, “In Christ shall all be made alive;” which you had be
fore asserted to mean only, “shall be raised from the dead.”
14. “Hence it followeth, First, that the abounding of
God’s grace, and the blessing by that grace, doth not respect
the consequences of Adam’s sin, hath no reference to his
transgression, but to the grace of God, and the obedience of
Christ.” (Page 45.) “The abounding of God’s grace,” you
inform us, “has reference to the grace of God.” Most sure:
But this does not prove that it has no reference to the con
sequences of Adam’s sin. If we gain more blessing by Christ
than we lost by Adam, it is doubtless abounding grace. But
still it has a reference to Adam’s transgression, and the con
sequences of it. It is over these that it abounds; therefore
it has a manifest respect to them.
“It followeth, Secondly, that in the 18th and 19th verses
the Apostle considers the effects of Christ's obedience only
so far as they answer to, and reverse the consequences of,
Adam’s disobedience; the additional benefits flowing there
from having been mentioned apart in the 15th, 16th, and 17th
verses.” (Page 46.) In those verses the Apostle does un
doubtedly show how the blessing by Christ abounded over
the curse by Adam. But what then? How does this prove
that the 18th and 19th verses do not respect all the benefits
mentioned before? Without question they do: They are a
general conclusion, not from one, but all the preceding verses.
“Again observe, that the ‘justification to life’ is such a
justification as comes upon all men.” (Page 47.) It may in
some sense; but does it in fact? According to your sense
of it, it comes upon none. For if it means, “the discharging
men from the consequences of Adam’s sin; and if the only
consequences of that sin are sorrow, labour, and death;” it
is manifest, no man upon earth is justified to this day.
But you go on: “As justification to life comes upon all
men.” No; not in the proper scripture sense of justifica
tion. That term is never once in the Bible used for the
resurrection, no more than for heaven or hell.
It may be proper here, once for all, to observe, that what
St. Paul says of abounding grace is simply this: (1.) The
condemnation came by “one offence” only; the acquittal is
from “many offences.” (2.) They who receive this shall
enjoy a far higher blessing by Christ than they lost by Adam.
254 THE DOCTRINE OF
In both these respects, the consequences of Christ’s death
abound over the consequences of Adam’s sin. And this
whole blessing by Christ is termed, in the 18th verse, “jus
tification;” in the 19th, “being made righteous.”
“Further, the phrase, “being made righteous, as well as
‘being made sinners, is a Hebrew way of speaking.” (Page
49.) I do not allow that: Both the phrases, caëla Taofia.
8ucatow, or aplapto\ot, are pure and good Greek. That,
therefore, there is any Hebraism at all in these expressions,
cannot be admitted without proof. If, then, the same He
brew word does signify to “make righteous,” and to “acquit
in judgment,” it does not follow that the Greek word here
translated, “made righteous,” means only “being acquitted.”
You yourself say the contrary. You but now defined this
very gift, “the benefits that are by grace;” (page 44;) and,
in explaining those very words, “The free gift is of many
offences unto justification,” affirmed, That is, “the grace of
God in Christ not only discharges mankind from the conse
quences of Adam’s sin, but also sets them quite to rights
with God, both as to a conformity to the law, and as to
eternal life.” And is this no more than “acquitting them in
judgment,” “ or reversing the sentence of condemnation?”
Through this whole passage, it may be observed that “the
gift,” “the free gift,” “the gift by grace,” mean one and the
same thing, even the whole benefit given by the abounding
grace of God, through the obedience of Christ; abounding
both with regard to the fountain itself, and the streams:
Abundant grace producing abundant blessings.
If, then, these verses are “evidently parallel to those
1 Cor. xv. 21, 22,” it follows even hence, that “dying,” and
“being made alive,” in the latter passage, do not refer to the
body only; but that “dying” implies all the evils, temporal
and spiritual, which are derived from Adam’s sin; and
“being made alive,” all the blessings which are derived from
Christ, in time and in eternity.
Whereas, therefore, you add, “It is now evident, surely
beyond all doubt,” (strong expressions!) “that the conse
quences of Adam’s sin here spoken of are no other than the
‘death’ which comes upon all men:” (Page 50.) I must beg
leave to reply, It is not evident at all; nay, it is tolerably
evident, on the contrary, that this “death” implies all man
ner of evils, to which either the body or soul is liable.
ORIGINAL SIN. 255
15. You next reconsider the 12th verse, which you under
stand thus: “Death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned,” namely, in Adam. “‘All have sinned;’ that is, are
subjected to death through that one offence of his.” (Page 51.)
You said before, “‘Death passed upon all men,” means, all
were by a judicial sentence made subject to death.” And
here you say, “‘All have sinned, means, all have been sub
jected to death.” So the Apostle asserts, “All were subjected
to death, because all were subjected to death !” Not so: Sin
is one thing, death another; and the former is here assigned
as the cause of the latter.
Although the criticism on ep’ Go (p. 52) is liable to much
exception, yet I leave that and the Hebrew citations as they
stand; because, though they may cause many readers to
admire your learning, yet they are not to the point.
“Seeing then the phrase, “All are made sinners, hath
been demonstrated to signify, all are subjected to death by a
judicial sentence; and seeing the Apostle's whole argument
turns on this point, that all men die through the one offence
of Adam; who can doubt but, ‘All have sinned,” means the
same with, “All are made sinners?’” (Pages 53, 54.) I do
not doubt it; but I still deny that either phrase means no
more than, “All are in a state of suffering.”
16. In order fully to clear this important text, I shall here
subjoin some of Dr. Jennings's remarks: “The Apostle
having treated in the preceding chapter of the cause and
manner of a sinner’s justification before God, namely, through
the merits of Christ, and by faith in his blood, and having
spoken of the fruits of justification in the former part of this
chapter, he proceeds, in the verses before us, to illustrate our
salvation by Christ, by comparing it with our ruin by Adam.
He compares Adam with Christ, and shows how what we lost
by the one is restored by the other with abundant advantage.
He makes Adam to be a figure or type of Christ; considering
them both as public persons, representing, the one, all his
natural descendants; the other, all his spiritual seed; the
one, Adam, all mankind, who are ‘all guilty before God;’
the other, Christ, all those ‘who obtain the righteousness of
God, which is by faith to all them that believe.”
“Concerning the consequences of Adam’s sin upon his
posterity, we have here the following particulars:—
256 THE DOCTRINE OF
“(1.) That by one man sin entered into the world; that
the whole world is some way concerned in Adam’s sin. And
this indeed is evident, because,—
“(2.) Death, which is ‘the wages of sin, and the very
punishment threatened to Adam’s first transgression, ‘en
tered by sin, and passed upon all men, is actually inflicted on
all mankind. Upon which it is asserted in the next words,—
“(3.) That all have sinned: ‘Even so death passed upon
all men, for that all have sinned.’ All men then are deemed
sinners in the eye of God, on account of that one sin, of
which alone the Apostle is here speaking. And,—
“(4.) Not only after, but before, and ‘until the law, given
by Moses, ‘sin was in the world;’ and men were deemed
sinners, and accordingly punished with death, through many
generations. Now, “sin is not imputed where there is no
law; nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses; ”
plainly showing, that all mankind, during that whole period,
had sinned in Adam, and so died in virtue of the death
threatened to him; and death could not then be inflicted on
mankind for any actual sin, because it was inflicted on so
many infants, who had neither eaten of the forbidden fruit,
nor committed any actual sin whatever, and therefore had
not sinned in any sense, “after the similitude of Adam’s
transgression.’ Therefore, —
“(5.) It was ‘through the offence of one that many are
dead. (Verse 15.) “By one offence death reigned by one.’
(Verse 17.) And seeing the sin of Adam is thus punished
in all men, it follows,—
“(6.) That they were all involved in that sentence of con
demnation which God passed upon him. “The judgment was
by one to condemnation.” (Verse 16.) “By one offence judg
ment came upon all men to condemnation.” (Verse 18.) And,
since it is so plain that all men are actually punished for
Adam’s sin, it must needs follow,
“(7.) That they “all sinned in Adam. By one man’s diso
bedience many were made sinners. They were so constituted
sinners by Adam’s sinning, as to become liable to the punish
ment threatened to his transgression.
“Between Adam and Christ, the type and the antitype,
St. Paul draws the parallel in the following particulars:
“(1.) Both have done something by which many others are
affected, who either lose or gain by what they did: ‘Through
ORIGINAL SIN. 257
the offence of one many are dead; by one, the gift of grace
hath abounded to many.’ (Verse 15.)
“(2.) That which the first Adam did, by which many, that
is, all men receive hurt, was sin, offence, and disobedience:
They all suffer by one that sinned. (Verse 16) “By the
offence of one, by one man’s disobedience.” (Verses 18, 19.)
That which the second Adam did, by which many, that is,
all who believe, receive benefit, is righteousness and obedi
ence: ‘By the righteousness of one, by the obedience of one.’
(Verses 18, 19.)
“(3.) The detriment which all men receive through Adam
is, that they “are made sinners;’ that ‘judgment is come upon
them to condemnation; in consequence of which, death, the
wages of sin, is inflicted on every one of them. The benefit
which all believers receive through Christ is grace, or the favour
of God, justification, righteousness, or sanctification, and eternal
life: ‘The grace of God, and the gift by grace, hath, by one
man, Jesus Christ, abounded to many. By the righteousness
of one, the free gift came upon all men’ who receive it ‘to
justification of life. By the obedience of one, many are made
righteous.” (Verses 15, 18, 19.)
“Thus the Apostle shows the parity between the effects of
Adam’s sin, and of Christ's righteousness. Only in two
instances he shows that the effect of the latter vastly exceeds
the effect of the former:
“(1.) It removes many sins, besides that one sin of Adam,
which so affected all his posterity: “If through one offence
many be dead, much more the grace of God by Jesus Christ
hath abounded to many. The judgment was by one to con
demnation; but the free gift is of many offences unto justifi
cation.” (Verses 15, 16.)
“(2.) Christ raises believers to a far happier state than that
which Adam enjoyed in paradise: “Much more they who receive
abundanceof grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reignin
life by one, Jesus Christ.” (Verse 17.)” (Jennings's Vindication.)
17. Your paraphrase on the text, (Taylor’s Doctrine, &c.,
pp. 55–64) being only a repetition of what you had said over
and over before, does not require any separate consideration.
Only I must observe a few mistakes which have not occurred
before: (1) “The resurrection is the first and fundamental step
in the gospel salvation.” (Page 64.) No; “He shall save his
;
258 THE DOCTRINE OF
people from their sins;” this is the first and fundamental step.
(2.) You have very grievously mistaken the meaning of four
texts in John vi. : “This is the Father’s will, that, of all which
he hath given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up
again at the last day.” (Verse 39) “This is the will of Him
that sent me, that everyone that seeth the Son, and believethon
him, should have everlasting life: And I will raise him up at the
last day.” (Verse 40.) “No man can come to me except the
Father draw him: And I will raise him up at the last day.”
(Verse 44.) “Whoso eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood
hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day.”
(Verse 54.) Now, you cite all these texts as relating to the
general resurrection, whereas not one of them relates to it at all.
They are all promises made to true believers only; and relate
wholly and solely to the resurrection of the just.
18. It remains then, all that has been advanced to the con
trary notwithstanding, that the only true and rational way of
accounting for the general wickedness of mankind, in all ages
and nations, is pointed out in those words: “In Adam all die.”
In and through their first parent, all his posterity died in a spi
ritual sense; and they remain wholly “dead in trespasses and
sins,” till the second Adam makes them alive. By this “one
man sin entered into the world, and passed upon all men:” And
through the infection which they derive from him, all men are
and ever were, by nature, entirely “alienated from the life of
God; without hope, without God in the world.”
(1.) Your Appendix to the first part of your book is wholly
employed in answering two questions: “One is, How is it con
sistent with justice, that all men should die by the disobedience
of one man? The other, How shall we account for all men’s
rising again, by the obedience of another man, Jesus Christ?”
(Page 65.)
You may determine the former question as you please, since
it does not touch the main point in debate. I shall therefore
take no farther pains about it, than to make a short extract of
what Dr. Jennings speaks on the head:
“(2.) As to the first question, Dr. Taylor gets rid of all diffi
culty that may arise from the consideration of God’s justice, by
ascribing it wholly to his goodness, that ‘death passed upon all
men.” “Death, he tells us, ‘is upon the whole a benefit.’ It
is certain that believers in Christ receive benefit by it. But
this gentleman will have death to be an ‘original benefit, and
ORIGINAL SIN. 259
that to all mankind; merely intended to increase the vanity of
all earthly things, and to abate their force to delude us.” He
afterward displays the benefit of shortening human life to its
present standard: ‘That death being nearer to our view, might
be a powerful motive to regard less the things of a transitory
world. But does the “nearer view of death,’ in fact, produce
this effect? Does not the common observation of all ages prove
the contrary? Has not covetousness been the peculiar vice of
old age? As death is nearer to the view, we plainly see that
men have more and more regard for the things of a transitory
world. We are sure, therefore, that death is no such benefit
to the generality of men. On the contrary, it is the king of
terrors to them, the burden of their lives, and bane of their
pleasures. To talk, therefore, of death’s being a benefit, an
original benefit, and that to all mankind, is to talk against the
common sense and experience of the whole world.
“It is strange, death should be originally given by God as a
benefit to man, and that the shortening of man’s life afterward
should be designed as a farther benefit; and yet that God
should so often promise his peculiar people long iife as the
reward of obedience, and threaten them with death as a punish
ment of disobedience |
“‘But the Scripture, he says, “affirms that sufferings are
the chastisements of our heavenly Father, and death in parti
cular. But does not every chastisement suppose a fault?
Must he not be a cruel father who will chasten his children for
no fault at all? If then God does but chasten us for Adam’s
sin, the fault of it must some way lie upon us; else we suppose
God’s dealings with his children to be unreasonable and
unrighteous.” (Vindication, p. 36, &c.)
(3.) I would only add two or three obvious questions: (i.)
Did God propose death as a benefit in the original threatening?
(ii.) Did he represent it as a benefit in the sentence pronounced
on Adam : “Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return?”
(iii.) Do the inspired writers speak of God’s “bringing a flood
on the world of the ungodly, as a benefit, or a punishment?”
(iv.) Do they mention the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah
as designed for a benefit to them? (v.) Is it by way of
benefit that God declares, “The soul that sinneth, it shall
die?” Certainly this point is not defensible. Death is pro
perly not a benefit, but a punishment.
S 2
260 THE DOCTRINE OF
(4.) The other question is, “How shall we account for all
men’s rising again, by the obedience of another man, Jesus
Christ?” (Taylor's Doctrine, &c., p. 70.)
“To set this in a clear light, I ask another question: What
was it that gave the glorious Personage, emblemized by “the
Lamb,” (Rev. v. 1, &c.,) his superior worthiness, his prevailing
interest in God, beyond all others in heaven and earth? It
was his being slain; that is, his obedience to God, and good
will to men: It was his consummate virtue. ‘Thou artworthy.’
—Why? Because thou hast exhibited to God such an instance.
of virtue, obedience, and goodness. Thou hast sacrificed thy
life in the cause of truth, and ‘hast redeemed us” by that act
of the highest obedience.” (Pages 71, 72.)
With what extreme wariness is this whole paragraph worded!
You do not care to say directly, “Jesus Christ is either a
little God, or he is no God at all.” So you say it indirectly,
in a heap of smooth, laboured, decent circumlocutions. Yet
permit me to ask, Was “that act of obedience, the original
and sole ground” of his prevailing interest in God, and of his
worthiness, not only “to open the book,” but “to receive”
from all the armies of heaven “the power, and the riches, and
the wisdom, and the strength, and the honour, and the glory,
and the blessing?” (Rev v. 12.) And is this act the original
and the sole ground, why “all men” must “honour him even
as they honour the Father?” Yea, and why “every creature
which is in the heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth,
and on the sea, and all that are in them, say, To him that
sitteth upon the throne and to the Lamb, is the blessing, and
the honour, and the glory, and the power, for ever and
ever?” (Verse 13.)
“To Him that sitteth on the throne and to the Lamb :”
—Does that mean, to the great God and the little God? If
so, when all “creatures in heaven and earth,” all throughout
the universe, thus “honour him even as they honour the
Father,” are they not doing him too much honour? “My
glory,” saith the Lord, “I will not give to another.” How
comes it then to be given to the Lamb?
(5.) You proceed: “The worthiness of Christ is his consum
mate virtue, obedience to God, and benevolence to his crea
tures.” Is this the only ground of his worthiness to be
“honoured even as the Father?” Is it on this ground alone,
that “all the angels of God” are to “worship him?” Or rather,
ORIGINAL SIN. 261
because “in the beginning,” from everlasting, he “was with
God, and was God?”
“Virtue is the only price which purchaseth everything with
God. True virtue, or the right exercise of reason, is true
worth, and the only valuable consideration which prevails
with God.” (Page 73.)
Do youthen conceive this to be the exact meaning of St. Paul,
when he says, “Ye are bought with a price?” and that where
he speaks of “the Church of God which he hath purchased with
his own blood,” he means with his own virtue? Agreeable to
which, “Thou hast redeemed us by thy blood,” must mean, by
the right exercise of thy reason * Well, then, might Father
Socinus say, Tota redemption is nostrae per Christum meta
phora: “The whole metaphor of our redemption by Christ.”
For on this scheme there is nothing real in it.
“It was not the mere natural power or strength of the
Lamb, but his most excellent character.”—Sir, do “you
honour the Son, even as you honour the Father?” If you
did, could you possibly talk of him in this strain?
However, all this does not affect the question; but it still
remains an unshaken truth, that all men's dying in Adam is
the grand cause why “the whole world lieth in wickedness.”
NEWINGTON, January 18, 1757.
1. In your Second Part you profess to “examine the princi
pal passages of Scripture, which Divines have applied in support
of the doctrine of original sin; particularly those cited by the
Assembly of Divines in their Larger Catechism.” (Pages 87,
88.) To this I never subscribed; but I think it is in the main a
very excellent composition, which I shall therefore cheerfully
endeavour to defend, so far as I conceive it is grounded on
clear Scripture.
But I would first observe in general, with Dr. Jennings, that
there are two kinds of texts in the ensuing collection: Some that
directly prove, others that properly illustrate, the doctrine of
original sin. And there are so many in which it is either
directly spoken of, or evidently implied, that the author might
well have spared his observation, “The Scripture speaks very
sparingly of the consequences of Adam’s sin upon us, because
as these are freely reversed to mankind by Christ, we are not so
much concerned to know them.” (Page 50.) The fact here
affirmed is equally true with the reason assigned for it.
262 THE DOCTRINE OF
2. The First proposition in the Catechism, which relates to
original sin, is this:—
“The covenant being made with Adam as a public person,
not for himself only, but for his posterity, all mankind descend
ing from him by ordinary generation, sinned with him, and
fell with him, in that first transgression.
“‘God hath made of one blood all nations of men.” (Acts
xvii. 26.)” (Pages 91, 92.)—I believe Dr. Jennings's remark
here will suffice:—
“This is quoted to prove that all mankind descend from
Adam. But Dr. Taylor adds, “That is, hath made all the
nations of the world of one species, endowed with the same facul
ties.’” (Jennings’s Vindication, p. 49, &c.) And so they might
have been, if all men had been created singly and separately,
just as Adam was; but they could not then, with any propriety
of language, have been said to be of one blood. This Scripture,
therefore, is very pertinently quoted to prove what it is brought
for. That ‘Adam was a public person, including all his pos
terity, and, consequently, that all mankind, descending from
him by ordinary generation, sinned in him, and fell with him
in his first transgression, the Assembly have proved very
methodically and substantially: First, from Gen. ii. 16, 17,
where death is threatened to Adam in case of his sinning; then
from Romans v. 12–20, and l Cor. xv. 21, 22, where we are
expressly told that “all men die in Adam;” and that, “by his
offence, judgment is come upon all men to condemnation.”
Proposition. “All mankind sinned in him, and fell with
him in that first transgression.” Which they prove by Gen.
ii. 16, 17, compared with Romans v. 15–20.
On this you remark, “The threatening, ‘Thou shalt surely
die,” is addressed to Adam personally; and therefore nothing
can be concluded thence, with regard to Adam’s posterity.”
(Pages 93, 94.) Is this consequence good? Was not the
sentence also grounded on this threatening, “Unto dust thou
shalt return,” personally directed to him? And is this
nothing to his posterity? Nay, does it not from this very
consideration appear, that all his posterity were concerned in
that threatening, because they are all partakers of the death
which was so threatened to Adam?
“But we cannot gather from Romans v., or 1 Cor. xv., ‘that
all mankind sinned in Adam, if we understand sinned as distin
guished from suffering.” It has been largely proved that we
ORIGINAL SIN. 263
can; and that sinning must necessarily be understood there,
as distinguished from suffering.
“But the Apostle says, “The offence of one’ brought death
into the world; whereas, had all mankind sinned in Adam
when he sinned, then that offence would not have been ‘the
offence of one,’ but of millions.” (Page 95.) It might be,
in one sense, the offence of millions, and in another, “the
offence of one.”
“It is true, Adam's posterity so fell with him in that first
transgression, that if the threatening had been immediately
executed, he would have had no posterity at all.” The
threatening ! What was the threatening to them? Did
not you assure us, in the very last page, “The threatening
is addressed to Adam personally; and therefore nothing can
be concluded from thence with regard to his posterity?”
And here you say, Their very “existence did certainly fall
under the threatening of the law, and into the hands of the
Judge, to be disposed of as he should think fit.” As he
should think fit. Then he might, without any injustice,
have deprived them of all blessings; of being itself, the only
possible ground of all ! And this, for the sin of another.
You close the article thus: “We cannot from those passages
conclude, that mankind, by Adam’soffence, incurred anyevil but
temporal death.” Just the contrary has been shown at large.
3. Their Second proposition is, “The fall brought man
kind into a state of sin and misery.” (Page 96.)
To prove this, they cite Romans v. 12; a proof which all
the art of man cannot evade; and Romans iii. 23, “All have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God.” “But this,”
you say, “means only, Jews as well as Gentiles, men of all
nations, have sinned.” (Page 97.) Nay, it is most certain, as
Dr. Jennings observes, that he “means all men of all nations;
or he means nothing to the purpose of his conclusion and his
inferences. (Verses 19–22.) The Apostle concludes from
the view he had given before of the universal corruption of
mankind, that “every mouth must be stopped, and all the
world become guilty before God.” (Verse 19.) From whence
he draws two inferences: (1) “Therefore by the works of the
law there shall no flesh be justified.’ (2.) The only way of
justification for all sinners is, “by faith in Jesus Christ. For
there is no difference, as to the way of justification; ‘for all
have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.’ And,
264 THE DOCTRINE OF
therefore, whoever they are whom Dr. Taylor excludes from
this ‘all,’ (‘all have sinned,’) he must likewise exclude from
having any need of justification by Christ.” (Jennings's Vin
dication, p. 50, &c.)
Be this as it may, it is certain, (1.) That mankind are now
in a state of sin and suffering. (2.) That they have been so in
all ages, nearly from the time that Adam fell. Now, if his fall
did not bring them into that state, I would be glad to know
what did.
4. Their Third proposition is, “Sin is any want of con
formity to, or transgression of, the law of God, given as a
rule to the reasonable creature.” “This,” you say, “has no
immediate relation to our present design.” (Taylor's Doctrine,
&c., p. 98.) But it had to theirs; which was to illustrate the
preceding assertion: “That the fall of Adam brought man
kind into a state of sin,” in both these senses of the word.
5. Their Fourth proposition is, “The sinfulness of that
state into which man fell consists in the guilt of Adam’s first
sin; the want of that righteousness wherein he was created;
and the corruption of his nature, whereby he is utterly indis
posed, disabled, and made opposite to all that is spiritually
good, and wholly inclined to evil, and that continually;
which is commonly called original sin, and from which do
proceed all actual transgressions.”
On the first article of this you say, “Adam’s first sin was
attended with consequences which affect all his posterity.
But we could not, on account of his sin, become obnoxious
to punishment.” (Page 99.) By punishment I mean evil,
suffered on account of sin. And are we not obnoxious to
any evil on account of Adam’s sin?
To prove the rest of the proposition, they cite first, Rom.
iii. 10–20. On which you remark, “The Apostle is here
speaking of Jews and Gentiles, not in a personal, but in a
national, capacity. “The mouth, says he, of all sorts of peo
ple is ‘stopped, and both Jews and Gentiles are brought in
guilty; for I have proved that there are transgressors among
the Jews, as well as among the Gentiles.” (Page 102.) Not
at all. If he proved no more than this, not one person
would “become guilty before God.” Not one “mouth” of
Jew or Gentile would “be stopped,” by showing, “there
were Jewish as well as Heathen transgressors.”
I proceed to your observations:—
ORIGINAL SIN. 265
(1) “In this whole section there is not one word of Adam.”
There is enough in the next chapter but one. The Apostle
first describes the effect, and afterwards point out the cause.
(2.) “He is here speaking, not of all men, but of the Jews;
of those alone who were “under the law,’ (verse 19,) and
proving from their own writings that there were great cor
ruptions among them as well as other people.” (Page 103.)
He is speaking of them chiefly; but not of them only, as
appears from the ninth verse: “We have before proved both
Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin: As it is written,
There is none righteous,” (neither among the Jews nor Gen
tiles,) “no, not one.” Does this respect them in their na
tional only, not personal, capacity? Does it prove no more
than, that there were great corruptions among the Jews, as
well as other people?
(3.) “The section consists of several quotations out of the
Old Testament; but, (i.) None of them, taken separately,
speaks of any depravity of nature; but of habits of wickedness,
which men had themselves contracted.” (Page 103.) They do
speak of habits which men had contracted themselves; but do
they speak of these only? The way to know this is, not to
“take them separately;” not to consider the precise meaning,
wherein they were occasionally spoken by David, Solomon, or
Isaiah; but to take them conjointly, as they are here put toge
ther by the Holy Ghost, to form the character of all mankind.
On one of them, “separately taken,” you say, “How could
God look down from heaven, to see if there were any that
did seek God, if he knew all mankind were naturally disabled
from seeking him?” Why not, if, whatever they were by
nature, the grace of God was more or less given to all?
Though they were wholly inclined to all evil by nature, yet
by grace they might recover all goodness.
You affirm, (ii.) “In none of these places does God speak
strictly of every individual Jew under David or Solomon.
Very many were bad; but some were good.” (Page 104.)
They were; though by grace, not nature. But among all
those of whom God speaks by St. Paul, “there” was “none”
good or “righteous, no, not one;” every individual, whether
Jew or Heathen, was guilty before God.
“I conclude, therefore, (i.) That none of those texts refer
to any corruption common to all mankind.” (Page 106.)
Perhaps they do not, as spoken by David; but they do as
266 THE DOCTRINE OF
spoken by St. Paul. “I conclude, (ii.) Such a general cor
rūption as admits of no exception was not necessary to the
Apostle’s argument.” (Page 107.) Absolutely necessary;
had it not included every individual person, no person’s
“mouth” would have been “stopped.”
These texts, therefore, do “directly and certainly prove”
that, at the time when the Apostle wrote, every individual
Jew and Gentile (excepting only those who were “saved by
grace”) “were all under sin; ” “that there was none” of
them “righteous, no, not one; none that understood or that
sought after’” God. This was the fact: And who can find
out a more rational way of accounting for this universal
wickedness, than by a universal corruption of our nature,
derived from our first parent?
6. The next proof is, Eph. ii. 1–3 : “And you hath he
quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins; wherein, in
time past, ye walked according to the course of this world,
according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that
now worketh in the children of disobedience; among whom,
also, we all had our conversation in times past, in the desires
of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind;
and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others.”
(Page 108.)
(1) “Nothing is here intimated of any ill effects of
Adam's sin upon us.” No ! Not if we are “children of
wrath by nature?”
(2.) “The Ephesians were Gentiles converted to the faith.”
Yea, and Jews also. In this very passage the Apostle speaks
of both ; first, the Gentile, then the Jewish, converts.
(3.) “In these verses he is describing their wretched state,
while they were in Gentile darkness,”—and while they were
in Jewish darkness; the Jews having been just as wicked be
fore their conversion as the Heathens. Both the one and the
other had “walked,” till then, “in the vanity of their mind;
having their understanding darkened,” being equally “dead
in trespasses and sins,” equally “alienated from the iife of
God, through the blindness of their heart:”—A very lively
description, not so much of a wicked life, as of an evil nature.
(4.) “When he saith, they were ‘dead in trespasses and
sins, he speaks of their personal iniquities.” (Page 109.)
True, both of heart and life. I must make some variation in
the rest of your paraphrase. “Wherein,” saith he, “in times
ORIGINAL SIN. 267
past, ye,” Heathens particularly, “walked;” inwardly and
outwardly, “according to the prince of the power of the air,
the spirit that now” (still) “worketh in the children of dis
obedience; among whom we Jews also had our conversation;”
being as “dead in trespasses and sins” as you.
“Therefore, (5.) When he adds, “And were by nature the
children of wrath, even as others, he cannot mean, they were
liable to wrath, by that nature which they brought into the
world.” (Page 110.) Why not? This does not follow from
anything you have said yet. Let us see how you prove it
now : “This nature is now no other than God’s own work.
The nature of every man comes out of the hands of God.”
The same may be said of those who are still “dead in tres
passes and sins.” Their original nature came from God, and
was no other than God’s own work; yet the present corrup
tion of their nature came not from God, and is not his work.
“Consequently, the nature of every person, when brought into
being, is just what God sees fit it should be.” This is true of
the original nature of mankind, when it was first “brought
into being;” but it is not true of our present corrupt nature.
This is not “what God sees fit it should be.” “It is his power
alone that forms it.” Yes, that forms us men; but not that
forms us sinful men. “To say, The nature he gives is the
object of his wrath, is little less than blasphemy.” As he gave
it, it is not the object of his wrath; but it is, as it is defiled with
sin. “Far was it from the Apostle to depreciate our nature.”
True, our original nature; but never did man more deeply
depreciate our present corrupt nature. “His intent is to show
the Ephesians they were children of wrath, through the sins
in which they walked.” Yea, and through “the desires of the
flesh and the mind,” mentioned immediately before; “through
the vanity of their mind;” through “the blindness of their
hearts, past feeling, alienated from the life of God.” Is he “not
here speaking of their nature, but of the vicious course of life
they had led?” (Page 111.) “He well understood the worth
of the human nature;”—he did, both in its original and in its
present state;—“and elsewhere shows it was endowed, even
in the Heathens, with light and power sufficient to know God,
and obey his will.” In what Heathens, in Europe, Asia, Africa,
or America, is nature now endowed with this light and power?
I have never found it in any Heathen yet; and I have con
versed with many, of various nations. On the contrary, I
268 THE DOCTRINE OF
have found one and all deeply ignorant of the very end of
their existence. All of them have confirmed what a heathen
Meeko (or Chief) told me many years ago: “He that sitteth
in heaven knoweth why he made man; but we know nothing.”
“But St. Paul says, “When the Gentiles which have not
the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, they
are a law to themselves. This supposes, they might have
done them “by nature, or their natural powers.” But how
does it appear, that, “by nature,” here means, By their mere
“natural powers?” It is certain they had not the written
law; but had they no supernatural assistance? Is it not
one God “who works in ” us and in them, “both to will and
to do?” They who, by this help, do the things contained in
the law, we grant, “are not the objects of God’s wrath.”
“Again: He affirms, the Gentiles had light sufficient to
have seen God’s eternal power and Godhead.” (Rom. i. 19
–21.) They had; but how does it appear that this was the
merely natural light of their own unassisted reason? If
they had assistance from God, and did not use it, they were
equally without excuse. “Nay, if their nature was corrupt,
and therefore they did not glorify God, they had a fair
excuse.” (Page 112.) True, if God had not offered them
grace to balance the corruption of nature: But if he did,
they are still without excuse; because they might have con
quered that corruption, and would not. Therefore we are
not obliged to seek any other sense of the phrase, “By
nature,” than, “By the nature we bring into the world.”
However, you think you have found another: “By nature,
may signify really and truly. Thus St. Paul calls Timothy,
‘yvmatov tekvov, “his own, genuine son in the faith; not to
signify he was the child of the Apostle, but that he was a real
imitator of his faith. In like manner he calls the Ephesians,
$voet Tekva, ‘genuine children of wrath; not to signify they
were related to wrath by their natural birth, but by their sin
and disobedience.” (Page 113.)
This is simply begging the question, without so much as a
shadow of proof; for the Greek word in one text is not the
same, nor anyway related to that in the other. Nor is there
the least resemblance between the Apostle's calling Timothy
his “own son in the faith,” and his affirming that even those
who are now “saved by grace,” were “by nature children of
wrath.”
ORIGINAL SIN. 269
To add, therefore, “Not as they came under condemnation
by the offence of Adam,” is only begging the question once
more; though, it is true, they had afterwards inflamed their
account by “their own trespasses and sins.”
You conclude: “‘By nature, therefore, may be a meta
phorical expression, and consequently is not intended” (may be
in the premises, is not in the conclusion 1 A way of arguing
you frequently use) “to signify nature in the proper sense of
the word; but to mean, they were really and truly children
of wrath.” (Page 114.) But where is the proof? Till this
is produced, I must still believe, with the Christian Church
in all ages, that all men are “children of wrath by nature,”
in the plain, proper sense of the word.
7. The next proof is Rom. v. 6: “While we were yet with
out strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly.” You
answer, (1.) “The Apostle is here speaking, not of mankind
in general, but of the Gentiles only; as appears by the whole
thread of his discourse, from the beginning of the Epistle.”
(Page 115.) From the beginning of the Epistle to the 6th
verse of the 5th chapter is the Apostle speaking of the Gentiles
only ? Otherwise it cannot appear, “by the whole thread of his
discourse from the beginning of the Epistle.” “But it appears
especially from chap. iii.9: ‘What then? Are we, Jews, ‘better
than they, Gentiles?” (Page 116, &c.) Nay, from that very verse
he speaks chiefly of the Jews. And you yourself, a few pages
ago, roundly affirmed that “he there spoke of the Jews only.”
And will you affirm that, in the 4th chapter likewise, “he
is speaking of the Gentiles only ?” Is it not manifest, that
he does not speak of them at all in a considerable part of that
chapter? How then does it appear, by “the whole thread of
his discourse from the beginning of the Epistle, that he is here
speaking, not of mankind in general, but of the Gentiles only?”
However, you boldly go on : “Having established the point,
that the Gentiles have as good a title to God’s favour as the
Jews.” (Page 116.) How P Is this the only, or the chief point,
which St. Paul establishes in the 4th chapter? Is not his
main point throughout that chapter to prove, that both Jews
and Gentiles were “justified by faith?” or, is he “speaking
this, not of mankind in general, but of the Gentiles only P”
“He proceeds: (Chap. v. 1:) ‘Therefore, being justified by
faith, we, Gentiles, ‘have peace with God.’” In the same
270 ThE DOCTRINE OF
manner you thrust in the word Gentiles into each of the fol
lowing verses. Had then the Gentiles only “peace with
God?” You might with more colour have inserted Jews in
every verse; for of them chiefly the Apostle had been speak
ing. To say that “he principally speaks of and to the Gen
tiles, to the end of the 6th chapter,” (page 117,) is another
assertion which cannot be proved. It is therefore by no
means true, that “he is in this verse speaking of the Gentiles
in contradistinction to the Jews.”
You affirm, (2.) “By the same argument, he here considers
the Gentiles only in a body, as distinguished from the body
of the Jews; for so he does all along in the four first chap
ters.” No, not in one of them. If he had, the “mouth.”
of no one individual person had been “stopped.” On the
contrary, he speaks both here, and all along, of every indi
vidual, that every one might believe in Him “who died for”
every one of “the ungodly.”
You affirm, (3) “In this verse he describes the condition of
the converted Gentiles when in their heathen state, in which
they were “without strength, unable to recover themselves;
they were “ungodly, yea, ‘sinners, and “enemies to God.’”
(Page 118.) And were not the unconverted Jews also
“sinners,” and “enemies to God, ungodly,” and “without
strength” to recover themselves? These four characters,
therefore, are no proof at all, “that the Gentiles only are
here spoken of.”
“Their sin, and enmity, and ungodliness, consisted in their
wicked works.” Primarily, in their wicked tempers. But
how came all men, Jews and Gentiles, to have those wicked
tempers, and to walk in those wicked works? How came
they all, till converted, to be “dead in sin,” and “without
strength” to recover from it, unless “in Adam all died,” in
a deeper sense than you are willing to allow 7
You sum up your argument thus: “The Apostle is not
speaking here of all mankind’s being corrupted in Adam, but
of the Gentiles being corrupted by the idolatry and wicked
ness into which they had plunged themselves, and out of
which they were unable to recover themselves, without the
extraordinary interposal of divine grace.” (Page 120.)
If this was the case of the Heathens only, then the Jews
were not “without strength,” but were able to recover them
selves from their wickedness, without any such interposal |
ORIGINAL SIN. 27]
But with regard to the Heathens, I ask, (1.) Was this the state
of all the heathen nations, or of some only? (2.) If of some
only, which were they that were not corrupted? (3.) If it was
the state of all heathen nations, how came it to be so? How
was it, that there was not one uncorrupted nation on earth?
(4.) How could any heathen nation be in this state; “without
strength; unable to recover themselves” from sin, without the
extraordinary interposal of the divine grace? since you are
clear in this, “that all the Gentiles are endowed with light and
power sufficient to know God, and perform obedience to his
will, by their natural powers of reason and understanding.”
(Page 111.) If you say, “They were once endowed with these
powers, but now they had cast them away;” I am not satisfied
still. What, did all nations cast away their natural powers of
reason and understanding? Surely not. But if not, how came
they all to plunge themselves into this dreadful corruption?
8. Another proof is, “The carnal mind is enmity against
God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed
can be. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please
God.” (Rom viii. 7, 8.)
On this you observe, (1.) “Here is not one word of Adam,
or any consequence of his sin upon us.”
The whole passage speaks of that corruption of our nature
which is the consequence of Adam’s sin.
The plain and obvious sense of it is this: “What the law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh,” (too
weak to contend with our corrupt nature,) God hath done:
“Sending his own Son,” he hath “condemned” that “sin”
which was “in our flesh;” (verse 3;) hath given sentence that
it should be destroyed: “That the righteousness of the law
might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit;” (verse 4;) who are guided in all our thoughts,
words, and actions, not by corrupt nature, but by the Spirit of
God. “They that are after the flesh”—who are still guided
by corrupt nature—“mind the things of the flesh;” have their
thoughts and affections fixed on such things as gratify cor
rupt nature; “but they that are after the Spirit”—who are
under his guidance—“mind the things of the Spirit;” (verse
5;) think of, relish, love the things which the Spirit hath re
vealed; which he moves us to, and promises to give us. “For
to be carnally minded”—to mind the things of the flesh, of
our corrupt nature—“is death;” the sure mark of spiritual
272 THE DOCTRINE OF
death, and the way to death everlasting: “But to be spirituall
minded”—to mind the things of the Spirit—“is life; ” (vers
6;) the sure mark of spiritual life, and the way to life even
lasting; and attended with the “peace” of God, and peac
with God, which otherwise can have no place. “Because th
carnal mind”—the mind, taste, inclination, the whole bias
our evil nature—“is enmity against God; for it is not sub
ject to the law of God, neither indeed can be ; ” (verse 7
being as opposite thereto as hell to heaven. “So then the
that are in the flesh”—still unrenewed by the Spirit, sti
following the bent of corrupt nature—“cannot please God.
(Verse 8.) Every man may see now whether this passag
does not strongly illustrate the depravity of our nature.
9. The last proof of this part of the proposition is: “Go
saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, an
that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was on
evil continually.” (Gen. vi. 5.) And below: “The earth wi
corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.
(Verse 11.) (Page 122.)
“Mankind,” you say, “was universally debauched in
lust and sensuality, rapine and violence.” And how can
this universal wickedness, if all mankind were quite uprigl
by nature? You answer, “They had corrupted themselves
So the text, (verse 12,) ‘All flesh had corrupted his wa
upon the earth.’” This expression does not necessaril
imply any more than that all flesh, all men, were corrupte
But taking it literally, I ask, How came all flesh to corrul
themselves? O, “by Seth's posterity intermarrying with th
Cainites.” But how came all the Cainites to corrupt them
selves; and all the Sethites to follow, not reform, them?
the balance was even, if nature leaned neither way, the
ought to have been as many good as bad still; and the Seth
ites ought to have reformed as many of the children of Cai,
as the Cainites corrupted of the children of Seth. How came i
then, that “only Noah was a just man?” And does one goo
man, amidst a world of the ungodly, prove that the “natu,
of mankind in general is not corrupted;” or, rather, strongl
prove that it is? It does not prove that Noah himself was no
naturally inclined to evil; but it does, that the world was.
“But if the corruption of nature was the reason why the ol
world was destroyed, it is a reason for the destruction of th
world at any time.” (Page 123.) This alone was never sup
ORIGINAL SIN. 273
posed to be the reason; but their actual wickedness added
thereto.
You add: “It may be urged, that God said, ‘I will not
again curse the ground for man's sake; for the imagination of
man's heart is evil from his youth. (Gen. viii. 21.) But the
Hebrew particles: sometimes signifies although.” That does
not prove that it signifies so here. But what, if it does?
What, if the text be rendered, Though “the imagination of
man’s heart is evil from his youth ?” Even thus rendered, it
implies as strongly as it did before, that “man’s heart” is
naturally inclined to evil.
The Hebrew word, translated youth, (Page 124) is always
applied to childhood or tender age; (Isaiah vii. 16;) ny: signi
fies a little child: And none of the texts you have cited prove
the contrary. Heman, the author of the eighty-eighth Psalm,
was doubtless “afflicted from his youth,” or childhood. The
Babylonians (mentioned Isaiah xlvii. 12) may well be supposed
to have been trained up in the way of their fathers, from their
earliest childhood: And the plain meaning of Jeremiah, (iii. 24,
25,) “Shame hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our
youth: We lie down in our shame; for we have sinned against
the Lord our God, we and our fathers from our youth,” is,—Ever
since we began to think or act, we have gone astray from God.
10. The preceding texts were brought to prove (and they
do abundantly prove it) that our nature is deeply corrupted,
inclined to evil, and disinclined to all that is spiritually good;
so that, without supernatural grace, we can neither will nor
do what is pleasing to God. And this easily accounts for the
wickedness and misery of mankind in all ages and nations;
whereby experience and reason do so strongly confirm this
scriptural doctrine of original sin.
Yet it will not “follow, that men are no moral agents.”
(Page 125.) If you ask, “Why, how are they capable of per
forming duty?” I answer, By grace; though not by nature.
And a measure of this is given to all men.
Nor does it follow, “that we can by no means help or
hinder that sin which is natural to us.” Yes, we can. Anger,
for instance, is natural to me; yea, irregular, unreasonable
anger. I am naturally inclined to this, as I experience every
day. Yet I can help it, by the grace of God; and do so, as
long as I watch and pray.
274 THE DOCTRINE OF
Dr. Jennings answers this assertion more at large: “‘If
sin be natural, then it is necessary.” If by sin is meant the
corrupt bias of our wills, that indeed is natural to us, as our
nature is corrupted by the fall; but not as it came originally
out of the hand of God. Therefore it is improperly com
pared to the appetites of hunger and thirst, which might be
in our original nature. Now, this bias of the will is certainly
evil and sinful, and hateful to God; whether we have con
tracted it ourselves, or whether we derive it from Adam, makes
no difference. A proud or passionate temper is evil, whether
a man has contracted it himself, or derived it from his parents.
Therefore the inference, “if natural and’ (in some sense)
‘necessary, then no sin, does by no means hold.
“But if by sin be meant sinful actions, to which this cor
rupt bias of the will inclines us; it remains to be proved, that
a corrupt bias of the will makes the actions necessary, and,
consequently, not sinful. And, indeed, if a corrupt bias
makes sin to be necessary, and, consequently, to be no sin,
then the more any man is inclined to sin, the less sin he can
commit; and as that corrupt bias grows stronger, his actual
sinning becomes more necessary: And so the man, instead of
growing more wicked, grows more innocent.” (Jennings's
Windication, p. 68, &c.)
11. That this doctrine has been long “held in the Church
of Rome,” (Taylor’s Doctrine, &c., p. 126,) is true. But so
it has in the Greek Church also; and, so far as we can learn,
in every Church under heaven; at least from the time that
God spake by Moses.
From this infection of our nature (call it original sin, or what
you please) spring many, if not all, actual sins. And this St.
James (i. 14) plainly intimates, even according to your para
phrase on his words: “‘Every man is tempted, is overcome by
temptation, “when he is drawn away by his own lust,”—his own
irregular desire; where the Apostle charges the wickedness of
men on its proper cause,—their ‘own lust.” Very true. And
irregular desire is (not so much a fruit as a) part of original sin.
For to say, “Eve had irregular desires before she sinned,”
(p. 127) is a contradiction; since all irregular desire is sin.
12. Another proof that actual sins spring from original, is,
“Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies.” (Matt. xv. 19.)
“But what has this text to do with Adam’s sin?” It has
ORIGINAL SIN. 275
much to do with the point it is brought to prove; namely, that
actual sin proceeds from original; evil works, from an evil
heart. Do not, therefore, triumph over these venerable men,
(as you have done again and again,) because a text cited in
proof of one clause of a proposition does not prove the whole.
But “neither of those texts proves that all our wickedness
proceeds from our being corrupted by Adam’s sin.” (Page
128.) But they both prove what they were brought to prove,—
that all outward wickedness proceeds from inward wickedness.
Those pious men, therefore, did not mix “the forgery of
their own imagination with the truth of God.”
But “if all actual transgressions proceed from Adam’s sin,
then he is the only guilty person that ever lived. For if his
sin is the cause of all ours, he alone is chargeable with them.”
True; if all our transgressions so proceed from his sin,
that we cannot possibly avoid them. But this is not the
case; by the grace of God we may cast away all our trans
gressions: Therefore, if we do not, they are chargeable on
ourselves. We may live; but we will die.
Well, but “on these principles all actual sins proceed from
Adam’s sin; either by necessary consequence, or through our
own choice; or partly by one, and partly by the other.”
(Page 129.) Yes; partly by one, and partly by the other.
We are inclined to evil, antecedently to our own choice. By
grace we may conquer this inclination; or we may choose
to follow it, and so commit actual sin.
13. Their Fifth proposition is, “Original sin is conveyed
from our first parents to their posterity by natural genera
tion, so as all that proceed from them in that way are con
ceived and born in sin.” (Page 130.)
In proof of this they urge: “Behold, I was shapen in iniquity;
and in sindid my mother conceive me. (Psalmli.5.)” (Page 131.)
On this you observe: “The word which we translate
“shapen, signifies to bring forth, or bear. So here it means,
‘Behold, I was brought forth, or born, in iniquity.’”
Suppose it does, (which is not plain; for you cannot infer
from its meaning so sometimes, that it means so here,) what
have you gained? If David was born in iniquity, it is little
different from being “shapen” therein.
That the Hebrew word does not always mean “to be born,”
but rather to be “shapen, formed, or made,” evidently appears
276 ThE DoCTRINE OF
from Psalm x.c. 2; where it is applied to the formation of the
earth: And in this very text, the Seventy render it by eTAaorém.
-a word of the very same import. It is therefore here very
properly rendered “shapen; ” nor can it be more exactly
translated.
But “the word "nor" properly signifies, warmed me.” You
should say, literally signifies. But it signifies conceived me,
nevertheless. And so it is taken, Gen. xxx. 38,39,41, &c.; xxxi.
10. “Nay, it signifies there the act of copulation. So several
translators render it.” (Page 132, 133.) And several render
it otherwise: So this does not determine the point either way.
It must therefore be determined by the sense. Now, for
what end did Jacob put the “pilled rods before the cattle P”
That the lambs might be marked as the rods were. And when
is it that females of any kind mark their young? Not in that
act; but some time after, when the foetus is either forming or
actually formed. Throw a plum or a pear at a woman before
conception, and it will not mark the foetus at all; but it will, if
thrown while she is conceiving, or after she has conceived; as
we see in a thousand instances. This observation justifies our
translators in rendering the word by conceiving in all those
places.
And indeed you own, “David could not apply that word to his
mother, in the sense wherein you would apply it to the cattle.”
Youtherefore affirm, “It means here, to nurse.” (Page 134.)
You may as well say it means to roast. You have as much
authority from the Bible for one interpretation as for the
other. Produce, if you can, one single text, in which tri
signifies to nurse, or anything like it.
You stride on : (1) “The verse means, “In sin did my
mother nurse me: ’ (2.) That is, ‘ I am a sinner from the
womb: (3.) That is, ‘I am a great sinner:* (4.) That is,
‘I have contracted strong habits of sin.’”
By this art you make the most expressive texts mean just
anything or nothing.
So Psalm lviii. 3: “‘The wicked are estranged from the
womb; they go astray as soon as they are born, telling lies.’
That is, My unjust persecutors in Saul’s court are exceedingly
wicked.” If this was all David meant, what need of "1, “are
alienated?” and that from the “bowels” of their mother? Nay,
but he means as he speaks. They “are alienated from the
ORIGINAL SIN. 277
life of God,” from the time of their coming into the world.
From the time of their birth, they “knew not the way of
truth; ” neither can, unless they are “born of God.”
You cite as a parallel text, “‘Thou wast called a transgressor
from the womb; that is, set to iniquity by prevailing habits
and customs.” Nay, the plain meaning is, The Israelites in
general had never kept God’s law since they came into the world.
Perhaps the phrase, “from the womb,” is once used figura
tively, namely, Job xxxi. 18. But it is manifest, that it is to
be literally taken, Isaiah xlix. 1 : “The Lord hath called me
from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made
mention of my name.” For, (1.) This whole passage relates
to Christ; these expressions in particular. (2.) This was lite
rally fulfilled, when the angel was sent while he was yet in
the womb, to order that his “name * should be “called
Jesus.” This is not therefore barely “an hyperbolical form
of aggravating sin; ” but a humble confession of a deep and
weighty truth, whereof we cannot be too sensible.
“But you have no manner of ground to conclude, that it
relates to Adam’s sin.” (Page 136.)
Whether it relates to Adam’s personal sin or no, it relates
to a corrupt nature. This is the present question; and your
pulling in Adam’s sin only tends to puzzle the reader.
But how do you prove (since you will drag this in) that it
does not relate to Adam’s sin?
Thus: “(1.) In the whole Psalm there is not one word
about Adam, or the effects of his sin upon us.”
Here, as usual, you blend the two questions together; the
ready way to confound an unwary reader. But first, to the
first: “In the whole Psalm there is not one word about Adam;
therefore it relateth not to him.” Just as well you may argue,
“In the whole Psalm there is not oneword about Uriah; there
fore it relatethnot to him.” The second assertion, “There is not
one word of the effects of his sin,” is a fair begging the question.
“(2.) The Psalmist is here charging himself with his own
sin.” He is; and tracing it up to the fountain.
“(3.) But according to our version, he does not charge
himself with his sin, but some other person. He throws the
whole load of his sin from off himself, on God who shaped
him, and his mother who conceived him.”
What you say might have had weight, if he had offered this
278 THE DOCTRINE OF
in excuse of his sin, or even in extenuation of it. But doe
he do this? Does he, in fact, “throw the whole blame, or an
part of it, from off himself?” Just the reverse. He acknow
ledges and bewails his own total iniquity; not to excus
but to abase himself the more before God, for his inward a
well as outward wickedness.
And yet he might, in perfect consistency with this, whe
God had caused “the bones which had been broken to re
joice,” cry out, “I will praise thee, O God; for I am fearfull.
and wonderfully made; ” yea, and repeat all that follows i
the same Psalm; which proves so much, and no more, tha
every foetus in the womb is formed by the power and wisdon
of God. Yet does it not follow, that the sin transmitte
from the parent “must be attributed to God.” (Page 137.)
“But how could he with pleasure reflect upon his forma
tion, or praise God for it?” As I can at this day; thoug
I know I was “conceived in sin, and shapen in iniquity.
But, “where sin abounds, grace does much more abound.
I lose less by Adam, than I gain by Christ.
This also perfectly consists with the following verse: “Behold
thou desirest truth,” or, It is thy will that we should have truth
“in the inward parts;” (page 138;) thou art willing to remov
all that “iniquity” wherein “I was shapen;” to “give me
clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me;” and in th
hidden part thou hast made me to know wisdom; thou has
“shown me what was good.” So that I am everyway with
out excuse; I knew thy will, and did it not.
“But if, after all, you will adhere to the literal sense of thi
text, why do you not adhere to the literal sense of that text
‘This is my body, and believe transubstantiation ?” (Ibid.
For those very reasons which you suggest: (1.) Because it i
grossly absurd, to suppose that Christ speaks of what he the
held in his hands, as his real, natural body. But it is nowa,
absurd, to suppose the Psalmist was “conceived in sin.” (2.
The sense of, “This is my body,” may be clearly explained b.
other scriptures, where the like forms of speech are used; bu
there are no other scriptures where the like forms with thi
of David are used in any other sense. (3.) Transubstantia
tion is attended with consequences hurtful to piety; but th
doctrine of original sin, and faith grounded thereon, is th
only foundation of true piety.
ORIGINAL SIN. 279
14. The next proof is, “Who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean? Not one.” (Job xiv. 4.)
On this you observe: “Job is here speaking of the weak
ness of our nature; not with regard to sin, but to the short
ness and afflictions of life.” (Page 139.) Certainly, with
regard both to the one and the other. For though, in the
first and second verses, he mentions the shortness and
troubles of life, yet even these are mentioned with a manifest
regard to sin. This appears from the very next verse: (Page
140:) “And dost thou open thy eyes upon such a one;” to
punish one already so wretched? “And bringest me into
judgment with thee;” by chastising me still more? It then
immediately follows, “Who can bring a clean thing out of
an unclean? Not one.” It does therefore by no means
appear, that “Job is here speaking only with regard to
the shortness and troubles of life.”
Part of the following verses too run thus: “Now thou
numberest my steps: Dost thou not watch over my sin?
My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up
mine iniquity.” (Verses 16, 17.) Let any one judge then,
whether Job in this chapter does not speak of “the sinful
ness, as well as the mortality, of human nature.”
Not that he “urges his natural pravity as a reason why he
should not be ‘brought into judgment;’” (page 141;) no
more than David urges his being “shapen in wickedness,” as
an excuse for that wickedness. Rather, Job (as well as David)
humbly acknowledges his total sinfulness; confessing that he
deserved the judgment, which he yet prays God not to inflict.
15. Another proof is, “What is man, that he should be
clean? and he that is born of a woman, that he should be
righteous?” (Job xv.1 ...)
On this you observe: “‘Born of a woman, signifies no
more than a man.” Often it does not; but here it is em
phatical. “The phrase indeed includes frailty and imperfec
tion.” (Page 142.) How can that be? Was Adam made
frail and imperfect? And have you forgot that every man
is now born in as good a state as Adam was made at first?
“But it is not to be understood as the reason why man is
unclean and unrighteous.” From the placing of the words,
one would really judge it was; and how do you prove it is
not? Why, “Job and his friends use this manner of speech
in other places of this book: “Shall mortal man be more just
280 THE DOCTRINE OF
than God? Shall a man be more pure than his Maker?”
(iv. 17.)” Nay, this is not the manner of speech which is in
question; so you are here quite wide of the mark. “How
ever that is, ‘How can man be justified with God? or how
can he be clean that is born of a woman?’ (xxv. 4.)”
And does not this point at original sin? You say, No: For
“if Job and his friends had known that the reason of our
uncleanness and imperfection was our receiving a corrupted
nature from Adam, they ought to have given this reason of
it.” And do they not in the very words before us? You
say, “No; they turn our thoughts to a quite different reason;
namely, the uncleanness of the best of creatures in his sight.”
This is not a different reason, but falls in with the other;
and the natural meaning of these texts is, “How can he be
clean that is born of a woman;” and so conceived and born
in sin? “Behold, even to the moon, and it shineth not,’
compared with God; “yea, the stars are not pure in his
sight !” How “much less man that is a worm !” (xxv. 6.)
In how much higher and stricter a sense is man impure, that
carries about with him his mortality, the testimony of that
unclean nature which he brought with him into the world?
“‘Shall mortal man be more just than God? Shall a man
be more pure than his Maker?” (Job iv. 17, &c.)” (Page
143.) Shall man dare to arraign the justice of God; to say
God punishes him more than he deserves? “Behold, he
puts no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged with
folly.” Many of these left their first estates; even their
wisdom was not to be depended on: “How much less in
them that dwell in houses of clay;” whose bodies, liable to
pain, sickness, death, are standing monuments of the folly
and wickedness which are deep rooted in their souls
“What is man, that he should be clean; and he which is
born of a woman, that he should be righteous Behold, he
putteth no trust in his holy ones;” yea, the heavens “are
not pure in his sight.” His holy angels have fallen, and the
highest creatures are not pure in comparison of him. “How
much more abominable and filthy,” in the strictest sense, “is
man;” every man born into the world: “Who drinketh
iniquity like water;” (Job xv. 16, &c.;) iniquity of every
kind; so readily, so naturally, as being so thoroughly agree
able to the “desires of his “flesh and of his “mind I’’
You conclude the head thus: “Man, in his present weak
ORIGINAL SIN. 281
and fleshly state, cannot be clean before God.” Certainly as
clean as the moon and stars at least; if he be as he was first
created. He was “made but a little lower than the angels;”
consequently, he was then far higher and more pure than these,
or the sun itself, or any other part of the material creation.
You go on: “Why cannot a man be clean before God?
because he is conceived and born in sin? No such thing.
But because, if the purest creatures are not pure in compari
son of God, much less a being subject to so many infirmities
as a mortal man.” Infirmities 1 What then, do innocent in
firmities make a man unclean before God? Do labour, pain,
bodily weakness, or mortality, make us“filthy and abominable?”
Surely not. Neither could they make a man pure from sin, less
pure than the moon and stars. Nor can we conceive Adam, as
he came out of the hands of God, to have been, in any sense,
less clean than these. All these texts, therefore, must refer to
that sinful impurity which every man brings into the world.
You add : “Which is a demonstration to me that Job and
his friends were wholly strangers to this doctrine.” A demon
stration of a peculiar kind | I think neither mathematical nor
logical.
16. The last proof is, “‘That which is born of the flesh is
flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.” (John
iii.6.)” (Page 144.)
“Here, by ‘flesh, Dr. Taylor understands nothing else but
the mere parts and powers of a man; and by “being born of the
flesh, the being ‘born of a woman,’ with the constitution and
natural powers of a man.” (Jennings's Vindication, p. 78, &c.)
Now, let us suppose that human nature is not at all corrupted;
and let us try what sense we can make of other scriptures where
the word flesh is used in opposition to Spirit, as it is here:
“There is no condemnation to them who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit;” (Rom. viii. 1;) that is, not after the
pure, uncorrupted constitution and powers of man. Again :
“They that are in the flesh cannot please God,” (verse&;) that
is, they that have the parts and powers of a man. Again: “If ye
live after the flesh, ye shall die;” that is, if ye live suitably to
the constitution and powers of your nature. Once more: How
shall we understand, “The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the flesh;” (Gal. v.17;) if flesh means nothing
but the pure and uncorrupted powers of human nature?
“But this text (John iii. 3) is,” according to Dr. Taylor,
282 THE DOCTRINE OF
“so far from implying any corruption of our nature, that,
‘on the contrary, it supposes we have a nature susceptible of
the best habits, and capable of being born of the Spirit.’”
(Page 145.) And who ever denied it? Who ever supposed
that such a corruption of nature, as for the present disables
us for spiritual good, renders us incapable of being “born of
the Spirit?”
“But if natural generation is the means of conveying a
sinful nature from our first parents to their posterity, then
must itself be a sinful and unlawful thing.” I deny the
consequence. You may transmit to your children a nature
tainted with sin, and yet commit no sin in so doing.
“Again: We produce one another only as the oak pro
duces the acorn. The proper production of a child is from
God. But if God produces a foetus which has sinful dispo
sitions, he produces those dispositions.” (Page 146.) Your
argument proves too much. It would prove God to be the
author of all actual as well as original sin. For “it is the
power of God, under certain laws and established rules,”
which produces not only the foetus, but all the motion in the
universe. It is his power which so violently expands the air,
on the discharge of a pistol or cannon. It is the same which
produces muscular motion, and the circulation of all the
juices in man. But does he therefore produce adultery or
murder? Is he the cause of those sinful motions? He is
the cause of the motion; (as he is of the foetus;) of the sin,
he is not. Do not say, “This is too fine a distinction.”
Fine as it is, you must necessarily allow it: Otherwise, you
make God the direct author of all the sin under heaven. To
apply this more directly to the point: God does produce the
foetus of man, as he does of trees; empowering the one and
the other to propagate each after its kind; and a sinful man
propagates, after his kind, another sinful man. Yet God pro
duces, in the sense above mentioned, the man, but not the sin.
17. Their Sixth proposition is, “The fall brought upon
mankind the loss of communion with God, his displeasure
and curse; (Gen. iii. 8, 10, 24;) so as ‘we are by nature
children of wrath,’ (Eph. ii. 2, 3) bond-slaves to Satan, and
justly liable to all punishments, (2 Tim. ii. 26) in this world,
and that which is to come. (Gen. ii. 17; Rom. vi. 23.)”
In proof of the first clause of this proposition, they cite Gen.
iii. 8, 10, 24. On this you observe: “Adam and Eve by their
ORIGINAL SIN. 283
sin did forfeit communion with God. But God did not take
the forfeiture.” (Page 147.) Surely he did, when “they were
afraid, and hid themselves from his presence.” “But after
ward they had frequent communion with him.” This does
not prove they did not lose it before.
“But their posterity did not. Abel had communion with
him, and so had the Patriarchs and Prophets; and so have
we at this day. So that, as we could not justly have lost this
communion by Adam’s sin, it is true, in fact, that we have
not lost it: We still have ‘fellowship with the Father and
the Son.’” (Page 148.)
Could we not justly, by Adam’s sin, have lost our very exist
ence? And if we had not existed, could we have had commu
nion with God? “But we have not lost it, in fact. We still
have ‘fellowship with the Father and with the Son.’” Who
have? all men born into the world? all Jews, and Turks, and
Heathens? Have all that are called Christians? Have the
generality of Protestants “fellowship with the Father and with
the Son?” What fellowship? Just as much as light has with
darkness; as much as Christ has with Belial. The bulk of
mankind, Christians as well as Heathens, Protestants as well as
Papists, are at this day, and have been ever since they were
born, “without God,”-A6eou, Atheists, “in the world.”
We need not therefore say, “Their fellowship with God is
owing to his mercy, through a Redeemer.” They have none at
all: No fellowship with “the only true God, and” with “Jesus
Christ whom he hath sent.” Indeed they have no great need of
Jesus Christ, according to your account; seeing, “all that
God’s grace doeth for us in Christ, to repair what we lost in
Adam, is, raising us up at the last day !” You add, “And
therefore communion with God is either the same grace which
was vouchsafed to Adam, continued to us;” (to every man born
into the world, as naturally as seeing or hearing !) “or, if there
be anything extraordinary in it,” (which you judge can hardly
be allowed!) “it belongs to the redundancy of grace, which has
no relation to anything we lost by Adam.” (Page 149.) That
that whole passage has relation to what we lost in Adam, has
been shown already. But what conception you have of commu
nion with God is easily seen by this wonderful account of it.
“However, this text gives no intimation that Adam’s posterity
lost communion with God for his sin.” It shows that Adam did
284 THE DOCTRINE OF
so; and all his posterity has done the same. Whence is this,
unless from his sin P
“So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the
garden of Eden, Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned
every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.” (Gen. iii. 24.)
Although God is equally present in every place, yet this
was a clear token that man had not now that near communion
with him which he had enjoyed before his sin.
18. Proposition. “The fall brought upon mankind God’s
displeasure and curse, so as we are “by nature the children of
wrath.”
“The text on which this is grounded, (Eph. ii. 2, 3,) we
have considered before.” (Page 150.) And those considera
tions have been answered at large.
You add: “How mankind could be justly brought under
God’s displeasure for Adam’s sin, we cannot understand: On the
contrary, we do understand, it is unjust. And therefore, unless
our understanding or perception of truth be false, it must be
unjust. But understanding must be the same in all beings, as
far as they do understand. Therefore, if we understand that
it is unjust, God understands it to be so too.” (Page 151.)
Plausible enough. But let us take the argument in pieces:
“How mankind could be justly brought under God’s displea
sure for Adam’s sin, we cannot understand.” I allow it. Icannot
understand, that is, clearly or fully comprehend, the deep of the
divine judgment therein; no more than I can, how “the whole”
brute “creation,” through his sin, should have been “made
subject to vanity,” and should “groan together,” in weakness,
in various pain, in death, “until this day.” “On the con
trary, we do understand, it is unjust.” I do not understand
it is. It is quite beyond my understanding. It is a depth
which I cannot fathom. “Therefore, unless our understanding
or perception of truth be false, it must be unjust.” Here lies
the deceit. You shift the terms, and place as equivalent those
which are not equivalent. Our perception of truth cannot be
false; our understanding or apprehension of things may.
“But understanding must be the same in all beings.” Yes,
in the former sense of the word, but not the latter. “There
fore, if we understand (apprehend) it is unjust, God under
stands it so too.” Nay, verily: “As the heavens are higher
than the earth, so are his thoughts higher than our thoughts.”
ORIGINAL SIN. 285
“What a God must he be, who can curse his innocent
creatures before they have a being ! Is this thy God, O
Christian?” Bold enough ! So Lord B , “Is Moses's
God your God?” He is mine, although he said, “Cursed be
Canaan,” including his posterity before they had a being;
and although he now permits millions to come into a world
which everywhere bears the marks of his displeasure. And
he permits human souls to exist in bodies which are (how we
know not, but the fact we know) “conceived and born in
sin; ” by reason whereof, all men coming into the world are
“children of wrath.” But he has provided a Saviour for
them all; and this fully acquits both his justice and mercy.
19. “So as we are by nature bond-slaves to Satan: “And
that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
devil, who are taken captive at his will. (2 Tim. ii. 26.)”
(Page 152.)
But you say, “The Apostle speaks this of the unconverted
Gentiles, who were slaves to Satan, not through Adam, but
through their own fault.” Both one and the other. But how
does it appear, that he speaks this of the Gentiles only?
Without offering at any proof of this, you go on : “The
clause, ‘Taken captive by him, is spoken, not of the devil,
but of ‘the servant of the Lord; for thus the place should
be rendered: ‘That they may awake out of the snare of the
devil, being revived by him,” that is, the servant of the
Lord, ‘to his, that is, God’s, “will.’” (Page 153.)
Well, the proof. “The word £oypeo signifies, to revive;
and so here, to restore men to life and salvation.” As a proof
of this sense of the word, you cite Luke v. 10. But this
rather proves the contrary; for there it has nothing to do with
reviving. We read, in the verse before, of the “fishes which
they had taken; ” alluding to which, Jesus “ said unto Simon,
From henceforth thou shalt catch men; ” take them captive
in the gospel net. Although, therefore, it were allowed,
(which cannot be done,) that his related, not to the word im
mediately preceding, but to another which stands three verses
off, yet even this would avail nothing; since the sense which
you impose upon £oypeo is what it will by no means bear.
You say, indeed, “It always means, to take alive, or save
alive.” (Page 154.) It does mean, to take alive. But you
bring not one authority to prove that it ever means, to save
alive. It therefore “suits the devil and his snare” admirably
286 THE DOCTRINE OF
well; for he does not take therein those who are free amo
the dead; but those who are alive in a natural, though de
in a spiritual, sense.
“But, however this be, they were not led captive throu!
Adam’s sin, but their own wickedness.” (Page 155.) Th
were “bond-slaves to Satan,” (which was the point to
proved,) through Adam’s sin, and their own wickedness.
“Yea, but what an inconsistency must that be in the divi
dispensations and in the Scriptures, if it can be made appe
from them, that God hath, for no fault of ours, but only f
Adam’s one sin, put us all into the hands of the devil; whi
he hath been, in all ages, providing means to preserve
rescue mankind from him?” (Page 155.) What can be ma
appear from the Scriptures is this: “That from “Adam s
passed upon all men;” that hereby all men, being by natu
“dead in sin,” cannot of themselves resist the devil; an
that, consequently, all who will not accept of help from Go
are “taken captive by Satan at his will.” And there is no il
consistency between this and any of the Divine dispensation
Proposition. “And justly liable to all punishments in th
world, and that which is to come.”
That all men are liable to these for Adam’s sin alone, I d
not assert; but they are so, for their own outward and in
ward sins, which, through their own fault, spring from th
infection of their nature. And this, I think, may fairly t
inferred from Rom. vi. 23: “The wages of sin is death;
(pages 157, 158;) its due reward; death, temporal, spiritua
and eternal. God grant that we may never feel it so !
20. You conclude this Part : “I cannot see that we hal
advanced one step further than where we were at the conclu
sion of the First Part; namely, That the consequences
Adam’s first sin upon us are labour, sorrow, and mortalit,
and no other.” (Page 162.)
The contrary to this having been so largely proved, instea
of repeating those proofs over again, I shall close this Pa
with that beautiful description of the present state of ma
which Mr. Hervey gives us from Mr. Howe’s “Living Temple,
“Only,” says he, “let me hint, that it considers the huma
soul as originally a habitation of God through the Spirit: ”
“That he hath withdrawn himself, and left this his temp
desolate, we have many sad and plain proofs before us. Th
ORIGINAL SIN. 287
stately ruins are visible to every eye, and bear in their front
(yet extant) this doleful inscription: ‘Here God once dwelt.”
Enough appears of the admirable structure of the soul of man
to show the divine presence did sometime reside in it; more
than enough of vicious deformity to proclaim, He is now retired
and gone. The lamps are extinct; the altar overturned; the
light and love are now vanished, which did the one shine with
so heavenly brightness, the other burn with so pious fervour.
The golden candlestick is displaced, to make room for the
throne of the prince of darkness. The sacred incense, which
sent up its rich perfumes, is exchanged for a poisonous hellish
vapour. The comely order of this house is all turned into
confusion; the beauties of holiness into noisome impurities;
the house of prayer into a den of thieves: Thieves of the
worst kind; for every lust is a thief, and every theft is sacri
lege. The noble powers which were designed and dedicated
to divine contemplation and delight in God, are alienated to
the service of the most despicable idols, and employed in the
vilest embraces: To behold and admire lying vanities; to
indulge and cherish lust and wickedness.
“There is not now a system, an entire table, of coherent
truths to be found, or a frame of holiness: but some shivered
parcels. And if any with great toil and labour apply them
selves to draw out here one piece, and there another, and set
them together; they serve rather to show, how exquisite the
divine workmanship was in the original composition, than to the
excellent purposes for which the whole was at first designed.
Some pieces agree, and own one another; but how soon are our
inquiries nonplussed and superseded! How many attempts have
been made, since that fearful fall and ruin of this fabric, to
compose again the truths of so many several kinds into their
distinct orders, and make up frames of science or useful know
ledge And after so many ages, nothing is finished in any kind.
Sometimes truths are misplaced; and what belongs to one kind
is transferred to another, where it will not fitly match; some
times falsehood inserted, which shatters or disturbs the whole
frame. And what with much fruitless pains is done by one
hand, is dashed in pieces by another; and it is the work of a
following age, to sweep away the fine-spun cobwebs of a for
mer. And those truths which are of greatest use, though not
most out of sight, are least regarded; their tendency and
288 THE DOCTRINE OF
design are overlooked, or they are so loosened and torn off,
that they cannot be wrought in, so as to take hold of the soul,
but hover as faint, ineffectual motions that signify nothing.
“Its very fundamental powers are shaken and disjointed, and
their order toward one another confounded and broken; so that
what is judged considerable, is not considered; what is recom
mended as lovely and eligible, is not loved and chosen. Yea,
‘the truth which is after godliness’ is not so much disbelieved,
as hated, or “held in unrighteousness;’ and shines with too
feeble a light in that malignant darkness which ‘comprehends.
it not.’ You come, amidst all this confusion, into the ruined
palace of some great Prince, in which you see, here the frag
ments of a noble pillar, there the shattered pieces of some
curious imagery, and all lying neglected and useless, among
heaps of dirt. He that invites you to take a view of the soul
of man gives you but such another prospect, and doth but say
to you, ‘Behold the desolation l’ All things rude and waste.
So that, should there be any pretence to the Divine presence,
it might be said, ‘If God be here, why is it thus?’ The
faded glory, the darkness, the disorder, the impurity, the
decayed state in all respects of this temple, too plainly show,
‘the Great Inhabitant is gone !’”
NEWINGTON, Jan. 21.
In your Third Part you propose, First, to answer some
objections and queries; and then to consider the connexion
of the doctrine of original sin with other parts of religion.
“Objection 1. Are we not in worse moral circumstances
than Adam was before he fell? I answer:
“(1.) If by moral circumstances you mean, the state of
religion and virtue, it is certain the greatest part of mankind
ever were and still are very corrupt. But this is not the fault
of their nature, but occasioned by the abuse of it, in prostitut
ing reason to appetite, whereby, in process of time, they have
sunk themselves into the most lamentable degree of ignorance,
superstition, idolatry, injustice, debauchery.” (Page 168.)
But how came this? How came all nations thus to “abuse
their nature,” thus to “prostitute reason to appetite?” How
came they all to sink into this “lamentable ignorance, super
stition, idolatry, injustice, debauchery?” How came it, that
half of them, at least, if their nature was uncorrupt, did not
ORIGINAL SIN. 289
use it well? submit appetite to reason, and rise while the
other sunk? “Process of time” does not help us out at all;
for if it made the one half of mankind more and more vicious,
it ought, by the same degrees, to have made the other half
more and more virtuous. If men were no more inclined to
one side than the other, this must absolutely have been the
event. Turn and wind as you please, you will never be able
to get over this. You will never account for this fact, that
the bulk of mankind have, in all ages, “prostituted their
reason to appetite,” even till they sunk into “lamentable
ignorance, superstition, idolatry, injustice, and debauchery,”
but by allowing their very nature to be in fault, to be more
inclined to vice than virtue.
“But if we have all a corrupt nature, which as we cannot,
so God will not, wholly remove in this life, then why do we
try to reform the world?” Why? Because, whether the
corrupt nature be wholly removed or no, men may be so far
reformed as to “cease from evil,” to be “renewed in the
spirit of their mind, and by patient continuance in well-doing,”
to “seek” and find, “glory, and honour, and immortality.”
“I answer: (2.) If by moral circumstances you mean,
provision and means for spiritual improvement, those given
us through Christ are far greater than Adam had before he
sinned.” (Page 169.) To those who believe in Christ they
are. But above four-fifths of the world are Mahometans or
Pagans still. And have these (immensely the greater part
of mankind, to say nothing of Popish nations) greater pro
vision and means for spiritual improvement than Adam
before he sinned P
“But if, (3.) by moral circumstances you mean moral”
(rather natural) “abilities, or mental powers;” (a considera
tion quite foreign to the question;) “I answer, The Scriptures
nowhere compare our faculties with Adam’s. Nor know I
how we can judge, but by comparing the actions of Adam in
innocence with what men have performed since.” (Page 170.)
Yes, we can judge thus: There could be no defect in Adam’s
understanding, when he came first out of the hands of his
Creator; but there are essential defects in mine and yours,
and every man’s whom we know. Our apprehension is indis
tinct, our judgment false, our reasoning wrong in a thousand
instances. So it always was; and so it is still, after all the care
290 THE DOCTRINE OF
we can possibly take: Therefore, “our faculties are not a
sound and fit for right action as Adam’s were before he sinned.’
“But any man of common understanding might havedressed
and kept the garden as well as he.” I can neither affirm no
deny this; for we know not how he dressed and kept it.
“Nor doth it appear, that in giving names to all the crea.
tures, he showed any extraordinary penetration into thei
natures; for that the names he gave truly expressed the
several qualities of them is a mere fiction, without any foun.
dation in Scripture history, or the names of animals in the
original Hebrew.” (Page 171.)
This is really strange that any man of learning should be
so hardy as to affirm this, after the numberless instances
which have been produced of Hebrew names expressing the
most essential property of each animal.
And is this supposition likewise “without any foundation
in Scripture history?” What is that? “And the Lord
God brought every beast of the field, and every fowl of the
air, unto Adam, to see what he would call them;” to make
proof of his understanding. “And whatsoever Adam called
every living creature, that was the name thereof.” (Gen. ii.
19.) Now, whether those names were Hebrew or no, (which
you affect to doubt,) can it be supposed that God would have
permitted them to stand, if they had not suited the nature of
each creature? It is bold therefore to affirm, that “many
of his posterity could have given names to them as well as
he ; and that therefore this is not a proof that he had any
capacity superior to us.” (Page 172.)
You proceed: “Surely his eating the forbidden fruit is no
evidence of superior abilities.” (Page 173.) And it is no
evidence of the contrary; “seeing,” as you yourself observe,
“what his special temptation was, we do not know.” There
fore, neither do we know whether any of his posterity could have
overcome it; much less, that “many of his posterity have over.
come temptations more violent than his.” All this is talking in
the dark, “not knowing what we say, neither whereof weaffirm.”
“And now let any man see whether there be any ground
in revelation for exalting Adam's nature as Divines have done,
who have affirmed that all his faculties were eminently per.
fact, and entirely set to the love and obedience of his Creator.”
(Page 175.) “And yet these same suppose him to have been
guilty of the vilest act that ever was committed.” (Page 176.)
ORIGINAL SIN. 291
They suppose Adam to have been created holy and wise,
like his Creator; and yet capable of falling from it. They
suppose farther, that through temptations, of which we cannot
possibly judge, he did fall from that state; and that hereby he
brought pain, labour, and sorrow on himself and all his pos
terity; together with death, not only temporal, but spiritual,
and (without the grace of God) eternal. And it must be com
fessed, that not only a few Divines, but the whole body of
Christians in all ages, did suppose this, till after seventeen
hundred years a sweet-tongued orator arose, not only more
enlightened than silly Adam, but than any of his wise posterity,
and declared that the whole supposition was folly, nonsense,
inconsistency, and blasphemy
“Objection 2. But do not the Scriptures say, Adam was
created after God's own image? And do his posterity bear
that image now?
“The Scriptures do say, ‘God created man in his own
image.” (Gen. i. 27.) But whatever that phrase means here,
it doubtless means the same in Gen. ix. 6: ‘Whoso sheddeth
man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed: For in the
image of God made he man.’” (Page 177.) Certainly it has
the same meaning in both places; for the latter plainly refers
to the former. And thus much we may fairly infer from
hence, that “the image of God,” wherein “man was” at first
“created,” whereinsoever it consisted, was not utterly effaced
in the time of Noah. Yea, so much of it will always remain
in all men, as will justify the punishing murderers with death.
But we can in nowise infer from hence, that that entire image
of God, in which Adam was at first created, now remains in
all his posterity.
The words of Gen. v. 3, rendered literally, are, “He begat
in his likeness, according to his image.” “Adam,” says Mr.
Hervey, “was created ‘in the image of God. After his fall,
the sacred historian varies his style, and, with a remarkable
peculiarity, as well as propriety, says, “Adam begat a son in
his own likeness;’-so it must be translated, according to all
the rules of grammar, Adam being the nearest antecedent.
That every reader may advert to this melancholy but import
ant truth, it is enforced by a very emphatical repetition:
“After his own image,’ as contradistinguished from that
“image of God,” mentioned in the preceding verse; which
292 ThE DOCTRINE OF
expressions are evidently intended to denote the difference
between the state in which Adam was created and Seth
bgeotten.”
“The two following texts are brought by the Assembly, to
show what the image of God was in which Adam was made:
“‘And have put on the new man, which is renewed in know
ledge, after the image of Him that created him. (Col. iii. 10.)
“‘Put on the new man, which after the image of God is
created in righteousness and true holiness.” (Ephesians iv.
24.)” (Page 178.)
“I answer, These texts are parallel. ‘The old man’ means
a wicked life; ‘the new man, a good life; to which they
were formed and ‘created’ by the gospel dispensation. And
this ‘new man,” this new life, is “after the image,’ that is,
agreeable to the nature, ‘of God.’” (Page 179.)
As you advance no proof of this perfectly new interpreta
tion, I leave it to shift for itself.
To disprove the common interpretation, you add, “Adam
could not be originally created in righteousness and true holi
ness; because habits of holiness cannot be created without our
knowledge, concurrence, or consent. For holiness in its
nature implies the choice and consent of a moral agent,
without which it cannot be holiness.” (Page 180.)
What is holiness? Is it not essentially love? the love of
God, and of all mankind? love producing “bowels of mercies,
humbleness of mind, meekness, gentleness, long-suffering?”
And cannot God shed abroad this love in any soul without his
concurrence, antecedent to his knowledge or consent? And
supposing this to be done, will love change its nature? Will
it be no longer holiness? This argument can never be sus
tained, unless you would play upon the word habits. Love
is holiness wherever it exists. And God could create either
men or angels, endued from the very first moment of their
existence with whatsoever degree of love he pleased.
You “think, on the contrary, it is demonstration that we
cannot be righteous or holy, we cannot observe what is right,
without our own free and explicit choice.” I suppose you
mean, practise what is right. But a man may be righteous
before he does what is right; holy in heart before he is holy
in life. The confounding these two, all along, seems to be
the ground of your strange imagination, that Adam “must
choose to be righteous, must exercise thought and reflection,
ORIGINAL SIN. 293
ibefore he could be righteous.” Why so? “Because righteous
mess is the right use and application of our powers.” Here
is your capital mistake. No, it is not; it is the right state
of our powers. It is the right disposition of our soul, the
right temper of our mind. Take this with you, and you will
no more dream that “God could not create man in righteous
mess and true holiness;” or that “to talk of wanting that
righteousness in which Adam was created, is to talk of
nothing we want.” (Page 181.)
On Romans ii. 14, you observe: “This text clearly proves
that natural reason and understanding is a rule of action to all
mankind, and that all men ought to follow it. This, therefore,
overthrows the whole doctrine of original sin.” (Page 183.)
How do you prove the consequence? May not men have
some reason left, which in some measure discerns good from
evil, and yet be deeply fallen, even as to their understanding
as well as their will and affections?
On Eccles. vii. 29, “God hath made man upright; but
they have found out many inventions,” you say, -
“‘Man” here means all mankind; “upright,’ endued with
powers to know and perform their duty.” (Pages 184, 185.)
You offer no proof for either of these assertions; and with
out it I cannot receive them.
Again: “‘They,’” you say, “means mankind in general.”
I rather believe it means our first parents, who are by Moses
likewise comprehended under the common name of man, or
rather ETN “Adam.” So Gen. v. 2: “God called their
name Adam in the day when they were created.” And in
the day that they fell, whoever reads Genesis iii., will see,
“they found out,” not one, but “many inventions.” This
text, therefore, in its obvious meaning, teaches both the ori
ginal uprightness and subsequent fall of man.
From all these texts it manifestly appears, (1.) That man
was created in the image of God. (2.) That this image con
sisted, not only in his rational and immortal nature, and his
dominion over the creatures, but also in knowledge, actual
knowledge, both of God and of his works; in the right state
of his intellectual powers, and in love, which is true holiness.
“Objection 3. But do we not derive from Adam a moral
taint and infection, whereby we have a natural propensity to
sin?
“I answer: We have many natural appetites and passions,
29.4 THE DOCTRINE OF
which, if they grow irregular, become sinful. But this does
not amount to a natural propensity to sin.” (Page 186.) But
is not pride sin Is not idolatry sin? And is it not idolatry,
to “love the creature more than the Creator?” Is not
revenge sin? Is it not sin to “look upon a woman,” so as
“to lust after her?” And have not all men a natural pro
pensity to these things? They have all, then, a natural
propensity to sin. Nevertheless, this propensity is not
necessary, if by necessary you mean irresistible. We can
resist and conquer it too, by the grace which is ever at hand.
This propensity to pride, to revenge, to idolatry, (call it
taint, or anything,) cannot be pleasing to God, who yet in
fact does permit that it should descend from Adam to his
latest posterity. And “we can neither help nor hinder” its
descending to us. Indeed we can heap up plausible argu
ments to prove the impossibility of it: But I feel it, and the
argument drops. Bring ever so many proofs that there can
be no such thing as motion: I move, and they vanish away.
“But nature cannot be morally corrupted, but by the
choice of a moral agent.” (Page 187.) You may play upon
words as long as you please; but still I hold this fast: I (and
you too, whether you will own it or no) am inclined, and was
ever since I can remember, antecedently to any choice of my
own, to pride, revenge, idolatry. If you will not call these
moral corruptions, call them just what you will; but the fact
I am as well assured of, as that I have any memory or under
standing.
“But some have attempted to explain this intricate affair.”
(Page 188.) I do not commend their wisdom. I do not
attempt to explain even how I, at this moment, stretch out
my hand, or move my finger.
One more of your assertions I must not pass over “It is
absurd to say, infection is derived from Adam, independent
of the will of God; and to say, it is by his will, is to make
him the author of the pollution.” (Page 189.)
We answer: It is not derived from Adam, independent of
the will of God; that is, his permissive will. But our allow
ing this, does not make him the author of the pollution.
“Objection 4. But do not the vices of parents often infect
their children?” (Pages 190, 191.)
I think we cannot deny it.
“Objection 5. How can we account for children’s beginning
ORIGINAL SIN. 295
so soon to sin, but by supposing they have a natural pro
pensity to it?
“I answer: Who can tell how soon they begin?” (Page
192.) Then they begin, when they first show wrong tempers;
such as plain, undeniable frowardness, revenge, self-will; which
is as soon as they have any exercise of reason. So that the use
of reason, and the abuse, generally commence and grow up
together. As soon as their faculties appear at all, they appear
to be disordered; the wrong state of their powers being easily
inferred from their continual wrong application of them.
“But if parents were wise and virtuous themselves, and
then endeavoured to bring up their children virtuously, there
would be less wickedness in the world.” There would: But
this does not reach the point; nor, that “undisciplined
children contract bad habits.” I have known wise and virtuous
parents who did earnestly labour to bring up their children
virtuously; and disciplined them with all possible care, from
the very first dawn of reason; yet these very children showed
bad tempers before it was possible they should “contract bad
habits.” They daily evidenced the wrong state of all their
faculties, both of their understanding, will, and affections;
just contrary both to the examples and instructions of all that
were round about them. Here, then, these wrong tempers
were not owing to “the fault of careless or ungodly parents; ”
nor could be rationally accounted for, but by supposing those
children to have a matural propensity to evil.
It is indeed a general rule, “Train up a child in the way he
should go: And when he isold, he will not depart fromit:” (Prov.
xxii. 6:) And there is much truth in that observation, “Fool
ishness is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of correction
shall drive it far from him:” (Verse 15:) That is, prudent cor
rection is the most probable means which you can use to remove
that foolishness. Yet this no way contradicts, what is matter of
daily experience, that we have a natural propensity to evil. Nay,
the latter of these texts strongly confirms it; for if there be no
such propensity, how comes “foolishness” (that is, wickedness,
in the language of Solomon) to be “bound in the heart of a
child?” of every child, of children in general, as the phrase
manifestly imports? It is not from education here: It is sup
posed to be antecedent to education, whether good or bad. “O,
foolishness means only strong appetite.” (Page 193.) Yes,
296 ThE DOCTRINE OF
strong appetite to evil; otherwise it would not call for “the
rod of correction,” or need to be “driven far from him.”
“Objection 6. Might not Adam's posterity be said to sin in
him, as Levi is said to ‘pay tithes in Abraham?’ (Heb. vii. 9.)”
If the querist means, not to prove a doctrine already
proved, but only to illustrate one expression by another, your
answer, that “it is a bold figure,” (page 195) does not at all
affect him. It is so; but still it may be pertinently cited to
illustrate a similar expression.
“Objection 7. “But there is a law in our members which
wars against the law of our minds, and brings us into captivity
to the law of sin and death.’ (Rom. vii. 23.) And does not this
prove, that we come into the world with sinful propensities?”
(Page 199.)
You answer, (1) “If we come into the world with them,
they are natural; but if natural, necessary; and if necessary,
then no sin.” (Page 200.)
If the consequence were good, with regard to what is so
natural and necessary as to be irresistible, yet certainly it is
not good with regard to those propensities which we may
both resist and conquer.
You answer, (2.) “The Apostle does not in this chapter
speak of any man as he comes into the world, but as he is
afterward depraved and corrupted by his own wicked choice.”
Where is the proof? How does it appear that he does
not speak of men corrupted both by choice and by nature?
You answer, (3.) “He does not speak of himself, or any
regenerate man, but of a Jew under the power of sin.” (Ibid.)
Nay, your argument proves, he does not speak of any Jew;
for in order to prove, “the Apostle does not speak of himself,”
you say, “The persons of whom he speaks were, ‘before the
commandment came, that is, before they came under the
law, “once without the law. But the Apostle never was
‘without the law.’” No, nor any Jew. “For he was born
and continued ‘under the law till he was a Christian.” So
did all the Jews as well as he,—“ and therefore it cannot be
true, that he,” or any Jew whatever, “was ‘without the law”
before he came under it.” So you have clearly proved, that
the Apostle does not in this passage speak of any Jew at all.
But why do you think he does speak of Jews? may, of them
only? It “appears,” you say, “from verse 1, ‘I speak to them
that know the law. For the Gentiles never were “under the
ORIGINAL SIN. 297
law.” Yes, they were: All the Gentiles who were “convinced
of sin” were “under the law” in the sense here spoken of, under
the condemning power of the law “written in their hearts;” for
transgressing which they were under the wrath of God. And
this whole chapter, from verses 7 to 24, describes the state of
all those, Jews or Gentiles, who saw and felt the wickedness both
of their hearts and lives, and groaned to be delivered from it.
Many passages in your paraphrase on the former part of this
chapter are liable to much exception; but as they do not imme
diately touch the point in question, Ipass on tothe latter part:
“Verse 14: I am ‘ carnal, sold under sin.” He means a
willing slavery.” (Page 216.) Quite the contrary; as appears
from the very next words: “For that which I do, I allow not:
For what I would, I do not; but what I hate, that I do.”
“What I hate;” not barely, “what my reason disapproves;”
but what I really detest and abhor, yet cannot help.
“Verse 17: ‘Now then, it is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwelleth in me.’ It is my sinful propensities, my in
dulged appetites and passions.” (Page 217.) True; but those
propensities were antecedent to that indulgence.
“But the Apostle cannot mean, that there is something in
man which makes him sin whether he will or no; for then it
would not be sin at all.” Experience explains his meaning.
I have felt in me, a thousand times, something which made me
transgress God’s law, whether I would or no. Yet I dare not
say, that “transgression of the law” was “no sin at all.”
Verse 18: “For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh,”
(not my “fleshly appetites” only, but my whole nature while
unrenewed,) “dwelleth no good thing. For to will” indeed
“is present with me;” not barely “that natural faculty, the
will,” but an actual will to do good; as evidently appears from
the following words: “But how to perform that which is good
I find not :” I have the desire, but not the power.
Verse 19: “For the good that I would,”—that I desire and
choose, -“I do not; but the evil which I would not,”—which
I hate,—“that I do.”
Verse 20: “Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I,
but sin that dwelleth in me,” but “the prevalency of sensual
affections,” (page 218,) yea, sinful tempers of every kind,
“settled and ruling in my heart,” both by nature and habit.
Verse 21: “I find then that when I would do good,” when I
298 THE DOCTRINE OF
choose and earnestly desire it, I cannot; “evil is present with
me;” as it were, gets in between.
“Verse 22: “For I delight in the law of God, after the
inward man: My mind, my conscience approves it.
“Verse 23: “But I see another law in my members, which
warreth against the law in my mind: Another principle of
action, which fights against my reason and conscience, ‘and
bringeth me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my
members: Which captivates and enslaves me to the principle
of wickedness.” (Page 219.) (Strange language for you to
use !) “Seated in the lusts of the flesh:” Seated indeed in all
my tempers, passions, and appetites, which are the several
members of “the old man.”
“‘O wretched man that I am I who shall deliver me from
the body of this death?” (Verse 24.) He is under the power of
such passions as his own reason disapproves, but is too weak
to conquer; and, N. B., being a Jew, he stands condemned to
eternal death by the law. How shall such a wretched Jew be
delivered from sinful lusts, and the curse of the law P” Did,
then, none but a Jew ever cry out, under the burden of sin,
“Wretched man that I am?” Are none but Jews “under the
power of such passions as their own reason disapproves, but is
too weak to conquer?” And does the law of God condemn to
eternal death no sinners beside Jews? Do not Christians also
(in the wide sense of the word) groan to be delivered “from
the body of this death?” With what truth, with what sense, can
you restrain this passage to a Jew any more than to a Turk?
I cannot but observe, upon the whole, the question is, Does
not Rom. vii. 23, show that we come into the world with sinful
propensities? (This is all that is pertinent in the objection
awkwardly proposed, page 199.) But instead of keeping to
this, you spend above twenty pages in proving that this chapter
does not describe a regenerate person It may, or it may not;
but this does not touch the question : Do not men come into
the world with sinful propensities P
We have, undoubtedly, an additional proof that they do, in
the words of Jeremiah: “‘The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked; who can know it?’ (xvii. 9.)”
(Page 224.) On this you descant: (One instance of a thousand
of your artful manner of declaiming, in order to forestal the
reader's judgment, and “deceive the hearts of the simple:”)
ORIGINAL SIN. 299
“Christians, too generally neglecting the study of the Scrip
ture, content themselves with a few scraps, which, though
wrong understood, they make the test of truth, in contradic
tion to the whole tenor of Revelation. Thus this text has
been misapplied to prove that every man’s heart is so despe
rately wicked, that no man can know how wicked his heart is.”
O what Tru6avoMoyla, “persuasiveness of speech !” After read
ing this, I was much inclined to believe, without going a
step further, that this text had been “generally misunder
stood.” I thought, Probably it has been misapplied, and
does not assert that every man’s “heart is desperately
wicked.” But no sooner did I read over the very verses you
cite, than the clear light appeared again. “‘Cursed be the
man that trusteth in man, and whose heart departeth from
the Lord.” (Verse 5.)” (Page 225.) That man, whom we
are not to trust in, means man in general, cannot be denied.
After repeating the intermediate verses, you yourself add,
“He subjoins a reason, which demonstrates the error of trust
ing in man: ‘The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked; who can know it?’ (Verse 9.) This text,
therefore, does not mean, Who can know his own heart, but
another's?” Whether it means one or both, it positively
asserts, that “the heart” of man, of men in general, of
every man, is “desperately wicked.” Therefore, as to the
main point contained therein, “Christians do not understand
it wrong; ” (page 224;) neither misapply it at all.
When I say, “I feel I have a ‘wicked heart,’” (another
thing which you do not understand,) “I mean this: I feel
much pride remaining in my heart, much self-will, much un
belief.” (Page 225.) Now, I really believe pride, and self
will, and unbelief to be essentially wicked tempers. There
fore, in whatever heart they remain, (and they remain in
yours as well as mine,) that is a “wicked heart.”
After a long. pause, you return to the seventh of the
Romans, and affirm: “We cannot, from anything in that
chapter, infer, that we came into the world with sinful dispo
sitions derived from Adam; for the Apostle says nothing
about Adam.” (Page 229.) He had said enough in the fifth
chapter of the cause: Here he only describes the effect; the
state of those who are now “brought to the birth; ” but
“there is not ” yet “strength to bring forth.”
“Nor can we infer from hence, that any man sins through
300 THE DOCTRINE OF
a principle which it was never in his power to command; for
then it would be no sin.” Upon this I would only ask, Are
you assured that no man transgresses God’s law (whether you
will call it sin or not) through a principle which it was never
in his power to command; at least, not for any time to
gether? Every passionate man can confute you in this. He
has sad experience of the contrary.
To those objections which you have, in some sort, answered,
you subjoin the following questions:—
“1. Is not the doctrine of original sin necessary to account
for the being of so much wickedness in the world?”
You answer, “Adam’s nature, it is allowed, was not sinful;
and yet he sinned. Therefore this doctrine is no more neces
sary to account for the wickedness of the world than to ac
count for Adam’s sin.” (Page 231.) Yes, it is. I can account
for one man’s sinning, or a hundred, or even half mankind,
suppose they were evenly poised between vice and virtue,
from their own choice, which might turn one way or the
other: But I cannot possibly, on this supposition, account
for the general wickedness of mankind in all ages and nations.
Again: “If men were never drawn into sin any other way
than as Adam was, namely, by temptations offered from with
out, there might be something in this answer; but there are
numberless instances of men sinning, though no temptation
is offered from without. It is necessary, therefore, some
other account should be given of their sinning, than of
Adam’s. And how to account for the universal spread of
sin over the whole world without one exception, if there were
no corruption in their common head, would be an insur
mountable difficulty.” (Jennings's Vindication, p. 110.)
“2. How, then, are we born into the world?”
You answer, “As void of actual knowledge as the brutes.”
(Taylor's Doctrine, &c., p. 232.)
And can you really imagine that text, “Wain man would be
wise,” (evidently spoken of man in general,) “though a man be
born like a wild ass’s colt,” (Job xi. 12,) implies no more than,
“Men are born void of actual knowledge?” Do we need
inspiration to make this discovery, that a new-born child has
po actual knowledge? Is man compared to a “wild ass,” of
all animals the most stupid, to teach us no more than this?
“yea, a wild ass’s colt?” Does not this intimate anything of
ORIGINAL SIN. 301
untractableness, sullenness, stubbornness, perverseness? “How
keenly is the comparison pointed ! Like the “ass;” an animal
stupid even to a proverb: Like the ‘ass’s colt; ” which must be
still more egregiously stupid than its dam: Like the ‘wild ass’s
colt;’ which is not only blockish, but stubborn and refractory;
neither has valuable qualities by nature, nor will easily receive
them by discipline. The image in the original is yet more
strongly touched. The particle ‘like” is not in the Hebrew,
‘Born a wild ass’s colt; or, as we should say in English, a
mere ‘wild ass’s colt.’” (Theron and Aspasio, Dial. 13.)
Yes, “we are born with many sensual appetites and pas
sions; but every one of these are in themselves good.” I grant
all the appetites and passions originally implanted in our nature
were good in themselves: But are all that now exist in us good?
“If not, they become evil only by excess or abuse.” First,
this may be doubted. I do not know that love of praise, of
power, of money, become evil only by abuse. I am afraid these
and other passions, which we have had from our infancy, are
evil “in themselves.” But be that as it may, in how few do
we find even the more innocent passions and appetites clear
of excess or abuse ! “But all that is wrong in them is from
habit.” This cannot be allowed as universally true. The little
children of wise and pious parents have not yet contracted ill
habits; yet before they can go alone, they show such passions
as are palpably excessive, if not evil in themselves.
But whatever they are in themselves, here is the “grand
difficulty, of which you give us no manner of solution: Whence
comes it to pass, that those appetites and passions which, no
doubt, were at first kindly implanted in our nature by a holy
God, are now become so excessive or irregular, that no one
man, from the beginning of the world, has so resisted them
as to keep himself pure and innocent?”
“But without these appetites and passions, our nature would
be defective, sluggish, or unarmed. Noris there any one of them
which we can at present spare.” We could very well spare the
excess and irregularity of them all; and, possibly, some of the
passions themselves, as love of praise, and love of revenge: The
love of God would more than supply the place of both. Neither
does it suffer us to be sluggish or inactive; nor does calm
Christian fortitude leave us unarmed against any danger which
can occur. “But our reason would have nothing to struggle
302 ThE DOCTRINE OF
with.” (Page 233.) O yes; not only all our reason, but all the
grace we have received, has enough to struggle with, even
when we do not “wrestle with flesh and blood.” We are
still abundantly “exercised ” by “principalities, and powers,
and spiritual wickedness in high places.”
“On the other hand, we are born with rational powers
which grow gradually capable of the most useful knowledge.
And we under the gospel have clear ideas of the divine perfec
tions; we see our duty, and the most cogent reasons to per
form it.” This sounds well. But will knowledge balance
passion? Or are rational powers a counterpoise to sensual
appetites? Will clear ideas deliver men from lust or vanity?
or seeing the duty to love our enemies, enable us to practise
it? What are cogent reasons opposed to covetousness or
ambition? A thread of tow that has touched the fire. “But
the Spirit of God is promised for our assistance.” Nay, but
what need of Him, upon your scheme? Man is sufficient for
himself. “He that glorieth,” on this hypothesis, must
“glory” in himself, not “in the Lord.”
3. “How far is our present state the same with that of
Adam in paradise?”
I suppose “our mental capacities are the same as Adam’s;
only that some are above, some below, his standard. Pro
bably there are many in the world much below Adam in
rational endowments: But possibly the force and acuteness of
understanding was much greater in our Sir Isaac Newton
than in Adam.” (Page 235.)
I do not apprehend this requires any answer. He that can
believe it, let him believe it.
“We are next to inquire upon what true grounds those
parts of religion stand, which the Schoolmen have founded
upon the doctrine of original sin, particularly the two grand
articles of Redemption and Regeneration.”
In what century did the Schoolmen write? how long before
St. Augustine,—to go no higher? A sad specimen this of
“the honesty and impartiality with which you deliver your
sentiments l”
I. REDEMPTION.
“Our fall, corruption, and apostasy in Adam, has been
made the reason why the Son of God came into the world,
and ‘gave himself a ransom’ for us.”
ORIGINAL SIN. 303
And undoubtedly it is the reason. Accordingly, the very
first promise of the Redeemer was given presently after the
fall; and given with a manifest reference to those evils which
came on all men through Adam’s transgression. Nor does
it appear from any scripture, that he would have come into
the world at all, had not “all men died in Adam.”
You yourself allow, “the Apostle affirms, (Rom. v. 18, 19)
that by “the righteousness and obedience of Christ,’ all men
are delivered from the condemnation and sentence they came
under through Adam’s disobedience; and that thus far the
redemption by Christ stands in connexion with Adam’s trans
gression.” (Page 238.)
“But the redemption by Christ extends far beyond the
consequences of Adam’s transgression.” It does. Men
receive far greater blessings by Christ, than those they lost
by Adam. But this does not prove, that our fall in Adam is
not the ground of our redemption by Christ.
Let us once more consider the text itself: “But not as the
offence, so is the free gift. For if through the offence of one
many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by
grace,” (the blessing which flows from the mere mercy of God,)
“which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto
many.” (Rom. v. 15.) “For not as it was by one that
sinned, so is the gift; for the judgment was by one offence
to condemnation; but the free gift is of many offences unto
justification.” (Verse 16.) In this respect, First, the free
gift by Christ “hath abounded much more” than the loss by
Adam. And in this, Secondly, “If by one man’s offence,
death” spiritual and temporal, leading to death eternal,
“reigned by one” over his whole posterity; “much more
they who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of
righteousness,” the free gift of justification and sanctifica
tion, “shall reign in life” everlasting, “by one, Jesus Christ.”
(Verse 17.) Let any one who calmly and impartially reads this
passage, judge if this be not the plain, natural meaning of it.
But let us now observe your comment upon it: “Here
the Apostle asserts a grace of God, which already ‘hath
abounded, beyond the effects of Adam’s sin upon us.” (Page
239.) It has, upon them that are justified and sanctified;
but not upon all mankind. “And which has respect, not
to his one offence,’”—(not to that only,)—“but also to the
“many offences’ which men have personally committed: Not
304 ThE DOCTRINE OF
to the ‘death’ which “reigned’ by him.” Yes, verily; but
over and above the removal of this, it hath also respect “to
the ‘life’ in which “they who receive’ the “abounding grace’
shall “reign” with him for ever.”
Thus far you have proved just nothing. But you go on:
“The death consequent on Adam’s sin is reversed by the
redemption in Christ. But this is not the whole end of it by
far. The grand reason and end of redemption is, ‘the grace
of God, and the gift by grace.’” (Page 239.) Infallibly it is;
but this is not a different thing, but precisely the same with
the “free gift.” Consequently, your whole structure raised
on the supposition of that difference is a mere castle in the
air. But if “the gift by grace,” and “the free gift,” are the
very same thing, and if “the gift by grace” is “the grand
reason and end of redemption,” then our fall in Adam, to
which you allow “the free gift” directly refers, is “the reason
of Christ's coming into the world.”
“But the Scriptures of the New Testament (excepting Rom.
v. 12–19, and 1 Cor. xv. 21, 22) always assign the actual
wickedness of mankind as the reason of Christ’s coming into
the world.” (Page 240.) They generally do assign this,—
their outward and inward wickedness. But this does not
exclude the wickedness of their nature, springing from their
fall in Adam. Rather this, which is expressed in those two
places at least, is pre-supposed in all places; particularly in
the beginning of the Epistle to the Romans, where he describes
the enormous wickedness both of the Jews and Gentiles. It
is true “he begins his discourse with an account of the actual
transgressions of the idolatrous Gentiles.” (Page 166, &c.)
Afterwards, (chap. iii.,) he treats of the depravity and corrup
tion of all mankind; and then proceeds (chap. v.) to show,
that we are all “made sinners by Adam,” and that “by his
offence judgment is come upon all men to condemnation.”
The Apostle's method is clear and natural. He begins with
that which is most obvious, even actual sin; and then pro
ceeds to speak of original sin, as the joint cause of the neces
sity of redemption for all men. But which way can we infer,
that because he begins with the mention of actual sins, in
order to demonstrate the necessity of redemption, therefore
he excludes original out of the account P Neither can we
infer, that because “it is not expressly mentioned in other
texts, therefore it is not implied.” (Page 241.)
ORIGINAL SIN. 305
“‘But the Redeemer himself saith not one word of redeem
ing us from the corruption of nature derived from Adam. And
seeing he spake exactly according to the commission which the
Father gave him, we may safely conclude, it was no part of
his commission to preach the doctrine of original sin.” (Page
242.) Just as safely may we conclude, that it was no part of
his commission to teach and make known to men the ‘many
things’ which he ‘had to say to” his Apostles before his death,
which they “could not then ‘bear;” (John xvi. 12;) but
which, according to his promise, he afterward taught them by
his Spirit, and by them to the world. It makes no difference
as to the ground of our faith, whether a doctrine was delivered
by Christ himself, or by his Apostles; and whether it be
written in any of the four Gospels, or of the divine Epistles.
There is only this difference: The Epistles were wrote after
the resurrection and ascension of Christ; therefore, after the
full commencement of the gospel dispensation; whereas the
discourses of Christ recorded in the Gospels were delivered
before the gospel dispensation was properly begun; therefore
we are to look for the peculiar doctrines of Christ rather in
the Epistles than in the Gospels. However, Christ did speak
of this, and referred to it more than once, during his personal
ministry, particularly in his discourse with Nicodemus, and
Matt. xxiii. But it is not surprising that he did not speak
so largely of redeeming us from sin, original or actual, by the
price of his blood, before that price was actually paid, as the
Apostles did afterward. He considered the littleness of their
knowledge, with the violence of their prejudices; therefore
we have no cause to be surprised that no more is said on this
head in those discourses which Christ delivered before his
death. But to us he has told it plainly, and we do find the
doctrines of original sin, and redemption from it by Jesus
Christ, distinguished emphatically in almost every page of the
inspired Epistles.” (Jennings’s Vindication, page 116, &c.)
To sum up this: 1. Christ speaks very sparingly of many
things, whereof his Apostles have spoken largely. 2. Yet he does
speak of the corruption of our nature, (which St. Paul expressly
tells us is derived from Adam,) particularly in the 23d of St.
Matthew, and the 3d of St. John. 3. Wherever he speaks of
“saving that which was lost,” he in effect speaks of this; espe
cially Matt. xviii. 11, where he mentions “little children” as
306 THE DOCTRINE OF
lost; which could not be by actual sin. 4. There was the
less need of our Lord’s speaking much on this head, because
it was so fully declared in the Old Testament, and was not
questioned by any of those false teachers against whom he
was chiefly concerned to warn his disciples.
You add: “It has been delivered as a fundamental truth,
that no man will come to Christ, the Second Adam, who is
not first throughly convinced of the several things he lost in
the first Adam.” (Taylor's Doctrine, &c., p. 243.) This is a
fundamental truth; none will come to Christ as a Redeemer
until he is throughly convinced he wants a Redeemer. No
man will ever come to him as a Saviour, till he knows and
feels himself a lost sinner. None will come to the
“Physician” but “they that are sick,” and are throughly
sensible of it; that are deeply convinced of their sinful
tempers, as well as sinful words and actions. And these
tempers, they well know, were antecedent to their choice, and
came into the world with them. So far “every man who
comes to Christ is first convinced of the several things he lost
by Adam;” though he may not clearly know the source of that
corruption whch he sees and feels in his own heart and life.
“But why does our Lord never mention Adam, or the corrup
tion of our nature through him?” He does mention this
corruption, and he presupposes it in all his public discourses.
He does not mention it largely and explicitly, for the reasons
above recited. “But the Apostles are wholly silent on this
head, in their sermons recorded in the Acts, and in their
Epistles too.” (Pages 243, 244.) Are they wholly silent in
their Epistles? This is a violent mistake. And as to their
sermons, it may be observed, 1. That we have not one whole
sermon of any one Apostle recorded in the Acts; nor, it may
be, the twentieth part of one. 2. That it was not needful
for them to prove what none of their hearers denied: No,
not even the Heathens; even these allowed the corruption of
human nature. Even these received it as an undeniable fact,
Vitiis nemo sine nascitur:
“No man is born without vices.”
These acknowledged, (as Seneca expresses,) Omnia in omni
bus vitia sunt : “All vices are in all men.” These saw there
were hardly any good men to be found upon the face of the
earth; and openly testified it.
ORIGINAL SIN. 307
Rari quippe boni; numero vir sunt totidem quot
Thebarum porte, vel divitis ostia Nili :
“The good lie scatter'd in this barren soil,
Few as the gates of Thebes, or mouths of Nile.”
They had also among them some faint account of the cause of
that overflowing corruption. So Horace, immediately after
he had asserted the fact,—
Audar omnia perpeti
Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas,—
“Lawless and unrestrain'd, the human race
Rushes through all the paths of daring wickedness,”
glances at the cause of it, in their fabulous manner:
Audar Japeti genus
Ignem fraude mal4 gentibus intulit;
Post ignem athered domo
Subductum, macies, et nova febrium
Terris incubuit cohors:
Semotique prius tarda necessitas
Lethi corripwit gradum.
“Prometheus first provok'd the heavenly Sire,
Purloining Jupiter's authentic fire :
Evil, from hence derived, and brooding pain,
And strange disease, with all the ghastly train,
Pour'd in upon the wretched sons of men:
While hasty Fate quicken'd the lingering pace
Of distant death, unveil'd the monster's face,
And gave into his hands our whole devoted race.”
I observe, 3. It was neither needful nor proper for an
Apostle, in his first sermon to a congregation wholly unawak
ened, to descant upon original sin. No man of common sense
would do it now. Were I to preach to a certain congrega
tion at Norwich, I should not say one word of Adam, but
endeavour to show them that their lives, and therefore their
hearts, were corrupt and abominable before God.
You conclude this head: “Guilt imputed is imaginary
guilt, and so no object of redemption.” I dare not say so as
to my own particular. I pray God, of his tender mercy, to
free me from this and all other guilt, “through the redemp
tion which is in Jesus Christ!”
II. REGENERATION.
“Why must we be ‘born again?’” (Page 245.) You
subjoin the common, but, as you suppose, absurd, answer:
308 THE DOCTRINE OF
“Because we are ‘born in sin; nature is averse to all good,
and inclined to all evil: Therefore we must be born again,
before we can please God.”
In order to confute this, you assert, “Then it cannot be our
duty to be born again; nor, consequently, our fault if we are
not; because it is not in our power.” It is, by grace; though
not by nature: By this we may all be born again. Therefore
it is our duty; and if we fall short herein, it is our own fault.
“But being born again does really signify, the gaining those
habits of virtue which make us children of God.” (Page 246.)
Then St. Paul ought to have said, not, “Ye are all the children
of God by faith in Christ Jesus; ” but, “Ye are all the children
of God” by gaining habits of virtue !
Nay, but, according to the whole tenor of Scripture, the
being born again does really signify the being inwardly
changed by the almighty operation of the Spirit of God;
changed from sin to holiness; renewed in the image of Him
that created us. And why must we be so changed? Because
“without holiness no man shall see the Lord; ” and because,
without this change, all our endeavours after holiness are
ineffectual. God hath indeed “endowed us with understand
ing, and given us abundant means: ” But our understanding
is as insufficient for that end, as are the outward means, if
not attended with inward power.
You proceed to explain yourself at large: “Christ informs
us, that ‘except a man be born again, he cannot see the king
dom of God;’” (page 246;) “and thereby teaches us,—
“1. That God hath erected a kingdom, united in and under
him, for his glory, and men’s mutual happiness.” (Page 247.)
“2. He will finally admit none into it who are not disposed
to relish and promote the happiness of it.” (Page 247.)
(Both these propositions I willingly allow.)
“3. All wickedness is quite contrary to the nature and end
of this kingdom; therefore no wicked men can be fit members
of it, unless there be a full persuasion, that reverence, love, and
obedience are due to God: ” (I add, and unless it be actually
paid him; otherwise that persuasion but increases our condemn
ation:) “Unless his favour is preferred before all other enjoy
ments whatsoever; unless there be a delight in the worship of
God, and in converse with him; unless every appetite be
brought into subjection to reason; ” (add, and reason to the
ORIGINAL SIN. 309
word of God;) “how can any man be fit to dwell with God,
or to do him service in his kingdom?” (Page 248.)
“4. It is one thing to be born into God’s creation, another
to be born into his peculiar kingdom. In order to an admit
tance into his peculiar kingdom, it is not enough for an intelli
gent being to exist.” (Pages 250, 251.) I do not know that.
Perhaps it is not possible for God to create an intelligent
being, without creating it duly subject to himself, that is, a
subject of his peculiar kingdom. It is highly probable, the holy
angels were subjects of his peculiar kingdom from the first
moment of theirexistence. Therefore, the following peremptory
assertion, and all of the like kind, are wholly groundless: “It
is absolutely necessary, before any creature can be a subject
of this, that it learn to employ and exercise its powers suitably
to the nature of them.” It is not necessary at all. In this
sense, surely God “may do what He will with his own.”
He may bestow his own blessings as he pleases. “Is thine
eye evil, because he is good?”
The premises them being gone, what becomes of the con
clusion: “So that the being ‘born into God’s peculiar
kingdom depends upon a right use and application of our life
and being, and is the privilege only of those wise men whose
spirits attain to a habit of true holiness?”
This stands without any proof at all. At best, therefore, it
is extremely doubtful. But it must appear extremely absurd
to those who believe, God can create spirits both wise and
holy; that he can stamp any creature with what measure of
holiness he sees good, at the first moment of its existence.
The occasion of your running into this absurdity seems to
be, that you stumbled at the very threshold. In the text under
consideration, our Lord mentions two things,—the “new
birth,” and the “kingdom of God.” These two your imagina
tion blended into one; in consequence of which you run on with
“born into his kingdom,” (a phrase never used by our Lord,
nor any of his Apostles,) and a heap of other crude expressions
of the same kind, all betraying that confusedness of thought
which alone could prevent your usual clearness of language.
Just in the same manner you go on: “Our first parents in
Paradise were to form their minds to an habitual subjection to
the law of God, without which they could not be received into
his spiritual kingdom.” (Pages 252,253.) This runs upon the
310 THE DOCTRINE OF
same mistaken supposition, that God could not create them
boly. Certainly he could and did; and from the very moment
that they were created, their minds were in subjection to the
law of God, and they were members of his spiritual kingdom.
“But if Adam was originally perfect in holiness,” (say, per
fectly holy, made in the moral image of God,) “what occasion
was there for any farther trial?” That there might be room
for farther holiness and happiness. Entire holiness does not
exclude growth; nor did the right state of all his faculties
entitle him to that full reward which would have followed the
right use of them.
“Upon the whole, regeneration, or gaining habits of holiness,
takes in no part of the doctrine of original sin.” (Page 254.)
But regeneration is not “gaining habits of holiness;” it is
quite a different thing. It is not a natural, but a supernatural,
change; and is just as different from the gradual “gaining
habits,” as a child’s being born into the world is from his grow
ing up into a man. The new birth is not, as you suppose, the
progress, or the whole, of sanctification, but the beginning of
it; as the natural birth is not the whole of life, but only the
entrance upon it. He that “is born of a woman,” then begins
to live a natural life; he that is “born of God,” then begins
to live a spiritual. And if every man “born of a woman” had
spiritual life already, he would not need to be “born of God.”
“However, I allow the Spirit of God assists our endeavours;
but this does not suppose any naturalpravity of our minds.”
(Page 255.) Does not his “quickening,” then, suppose we
were dead; his “opening our eyes” suppose we were blind;
and his “creating us anew” imply something more than the
assisting our endeavours? How very slender a part in sancti
fication will you allow to the Spirit of God! You seem very
fearful of doing him too much honour, of taking from man
the glory due to his name!
Accordingly, you say, “His aids are so far from supposing
the previous inaptitude of our minds” (to the being born again),
“thatour previous desire of the Spirit’s assistance is the condi
tion of our receiving it.” But who gave us that desire? Is it not
God “that worketh in us to will,” to desire, as well as “to do?”
His grace does accompany and follow our desires: But does it
not also prevent, go before, them? After this we may ask and
seek farther assistance; and, if we do, not otherwise, it is given.
I cannot but add a few words from Dr. Jennings: “Dr.
ORIGINAL SIN. 311
Taylor believes, ‘the influence of the Spirit of God, to assist our
sincere endeavours, is spoken of in the gospel, but never as
supposing any natural pravity of our minds. But certain it
is, that Christ opposeth our being ‘born of the Spirit, to our
being ‘born of the flesh : ‘That which is born of the flesh is
flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.” (John
iii.6.) Therefore, the influence of the Spirit in regeneration
supposeth something that we are ‘born with; which makes
such an influence necessary to our being ‘born again.” And
if this be not some natural pravity, let our author tell us
what it is. It is plain it is not any ill habit afterward
acquired; for it is something that we are born with. And
if to be ‘born of the flesh, means only ‘to have the parts
and powers of a man;’ and if these parts and powers are all
‘pure and uncorrupted, we have no need of any such influ
ence of the Spirit to be superadded to our natural powers.
Without this, our own sincere endeavours will suffice for attain
ing all habits of virtue.” (Jennings's Vindication, p. 125.)
I proceed to your conclusion: “Is it not highly injurious
to the God of our nature, whose hands have formed and
fashioned us, to believe our nature is originally corrupted?”
(Taylor's Doctrine, &c., p. 256.) It is; but the charge falls
not on us, but you. We do not believe “our nature is ori
ginally corrupted.” It is you who believe this; who believe
our nature to be in the same state, moral and intellectual, as
it originally was ! Highly injurious indeed is this supposition
to the God of our nature. Did he originally give us such a
nature as this? so like that of a wild ass’s colt; so stupid, so
stubborn, so intractable; so prone to evil, averse to good?
Did his hands form and fashion us thus? no wiser or better
than men at present are? If I believed this,—that men were
originally what they are now,-if you could once convince
me of this, I could not go so far as to be a Deist; I must
either be a Manichee or an Atheist. I must either believe
there was an evil God, or that there was no God at all.
“But to disparage our nature is to disparage the work and
gifts of God.” (Page 257.) True; but to describe the cor
ruption of our nature as it is, is not disparaging the work of
God. For that corruption is not his work. On the other hand,
to say it is; to say God created us as corrupt as we are now,
with as weak an understanding and as perverse a will; this is dis
paraging the work of God, and God himself, to some purpose!
312 THE DOCTRINE OF
“But doth not this doctrine teach you to transfer your
wickedness and sin to a wrong cause? Whereas you ought
to blame yourself alone, you lay the whole blame upon
Adam.” (Page 258.) I do not : I know God is willing to
save me from all sin, both original and actual. Therefore, if
I am not saved, I must lay the whole blame upon myself.
“But what good end does this doctrine promote?” The
doctrine, that we are by nature “dead in sin,” and therefore
“children of wrath,” promotes repentance, a true knowledge
of ourselves; and thereby leads to faith in Christ, to a true
knowledge of Christ crucified. And faith worketh love; and,
by love, all holiness both of heart and life. Consequently,
this doctrine promotes (nay, and is absolutely, indispensably
necessary to promote) the whole of that religion which the
Son of God lived and died to establish.
“We are told, indeed, that it promotes humility; but nei
ther our Lord nor his Apostles, when inculcating humility,
say a word about natural corruption.” Supposing (not grant
ing) that they did not, yet it cannot be, in the very nature
of the thing, that any whose nature is corrupt should be hum
ble, should know himself, without knowing that corruption.
“But what can be more destructive to virtue, than to repre
sent sin as altogether unavoidable?” (Page 259.) This does
not follow from the doctrine. Corrupt as we are, through
almighty grace we may avoid all sin.
But it is destructive of virtue. For ‘if we believe we are
by nature worse than the brutes, what wonder if we act worse
than brutes?” Yea, if we are so, what wonder if we act so?
And this it is absolutely certain men do, whether they believe
one way or the other; for they who do not believe this, live no
better than those that do. Therefore, if “the generality of
Christians have been the most wicked, lewd, bloody, and trea
cherous of all mankind,” it is not owing to this belief. But,
in truth, they have not been so; neither are they at this day.
The generality of Christians, so called, are perhaps but little
better, yet surely they are no worse, either in tempers or
actions, than the rest of mankind. The generality of Jews,
yea, of Turks and Pagans, are full as “lewd, bloody, and
treacherous” as they.
You go on: “It is surprising that Christians” (you mean
those of them who believe original sin) “have lost even a sense
ORIGINAL SIN. 313
of the beneficence of God, in giving them a rational nature.”
(Page 260.) Nay, surely, Christians have lost that rational
nature itself, or they retain it to very little purpose, if “the
generality of them are the most wicked, lewd, bloody, and
treacherous of all mankind l’’ They ought “to be humbled”
for yielding to those evil propensities, which, through the grace
of God, they may conquer. And they who do conquer, ought to
be continually “thanking God” for this and all his benefits.
With great decency you proceed: “Who can believe that
to be a revelation from God, which teacheth so absurd a doc
trime? I make no doubt, this, with other like principles, have
filled our land with infidels.” However, the gentlemen who
disclaim these absurd principles, of original sin, redemption,
and regeneration, may very easily convert those infidels; since
there is scarce any room for contention left between them.
“Is not this doctrine hurtful to the power of godliness, as
it diverts men from the heavenly and substantial truths of
religion?” (Page 261.) Just the reverse. There is no pos
sibility of the power of godliness without it. The power of
godliness consists in the love of God and man; this is
heavenly and substantial religion. But no man can possibly
“love his neighbour as himself,” till he loves God; and no
man can possibly love God, till he truly believes in Christ;
and no man truly believes in Christ, till he is deeply con
vinced of his own sinfulness, guiltiness, and helplessness.
But this no man ever was, neither can be, who does not
know he has a corrupt nature.
This doctrine, therefore, is the “most proper” of all others
“to be instilled into a child:” That it is by nature a “child
of wrath,” under the guilt and under the power of sin; that it
can be saved from wrath only by the merits, and sufferings,
and love of the son of God; that it can be delivered from the
power of sin only by the inspiration of his Holy Spirit; but
that by his grace it may be renewed in the image of God,
perfected in love, and made meet for glory.
But “must it not lessen the due love of parents to children,
to believe they are the vilest creatures in the world?” (Pages
262,263.) Far from it; if they know how God loves both them
and theirs, vile and sinful as they are. And it is a certain fact,
that no persons love their children more tenderly, than those
who firmly believe this doctrine; and that none are more careful
to “bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.”
814 ThE DocTRINE OF
But “how can young people “remember’ their “Creator’
without horror, if he has given them life under such de
plorable circumstances?” They can remember him with
pleasure, with earnest thankfulness, when they reflect “out
of ” what a “pit” he hath “brought them up;” and that if
“sin abounded,” both by nature and habit, “grace” did
“much more abound.”
You conclude: “Why should we subject our consciences
to tales and fables, invented by Priests and Monks?” (Page
264.) This fable, as you term it, of original sin, could not
be invented by Romish Priests or Monks, because it is by
many ages older than either; yea, than Christianity itself.
I have now weighed, as my leisure would permit, all the
arguments advanced in your Three Parts. And this I have
done with continual prayer, that I might know “the truth as
it is in Jesus.” But still I see no ground to alter my senti
ments touching the general corruption of human nature.
Nor can I find any better or any other way of accounting for
that general wickedness which has prevailed in all nations,
and through all ages, nearly from the beginning of the world
to this day.
LEWISHAM,
January 25, 1757.
PART III.
AN ANswer. To DR. TAYLOR's suPPLEMENT.
YoU subjoin to your book a very large Supplement, in
answer to Dr. Jennings and Dr. Watts. All that they have
advanced, I am not engaged to defend; but such parts only
as affect the merits of the cause.
You divide this part of your work into eight sections. The
first treats
OF IMPUTED GUILT.
And here you roundly affirm, “No action is said in Scrip
ture to be imputed to any person for righteousness or con
demnation, but the proper act and deed of that person.”
(Supplement, page 7.)
ORIGINAL SIN. 315
Were, then, the iniquities and sins which were put upon the
scape-goat, his own “proper act and deed?” You answer,
“Here was no imputation of sin to the goat. It was only a
figurative way of signifying the removal of guilt from the
penitent Israelites, by the goat’s going into the wilderness.”
But how could it be a figure of any such thing, if no guilt
was imputed to him?
“Aaron is commanded to put the iniquities of Israel upon the
scape-goat; (Lev. xvi. 21;) and this goat is said to bear the
iniquities of the people. (Verse 22.) This was plainly an impu
tation. Yet it could not possibly be an imputation of anything
done by the animal itself. The effects also which took place
upon the execution of the ordinance indicate a translation of
guilt; for the congregation was cleansed, but the goat was pol
luted: The congregation so cleansed, that their iniquities were
borne away, and to be found no more; the goat so polluted
that it communicated defilement to the person who conducted
it into a land not inhabited.” (Theron and Aspasio.)
In truth, the scape-goat was a figure of Him “on whom the
Lord laid the iniquities of us all.” (Isai. liii.6.) “He bore our
iniquity.” (Verse 11.) “He bare the sin of many.” (Verse 12.)
The Prophet uses three different words in the original; of which
the first does properly signify the meeting together ; the last,
the lifting up a weight or burden. This burden it was which
made him “sweat as it were great drops of blood falling to
the ground.” “But iniquity and sin sometimes signify suffer
$ngs.” (Supplement, pp. 8, 9.) Yes, suffering for sin; the
effect being put for the cause. Accordingly, what we mean by,
“Our sins “were imputed to him, is, He was punished for
them: ‘He was wounded for our transgressions; he was
bruised for our iniquities.’ He, ‘who knew no sin,” but what
was thus imputed, ‘was made sin,” a sin-offering, ‘for us.’”
“It pleased the Lord” (your own words) “to bruise him, in
order to the expiation of our sins.” (Pages 10, 11.)
“But with regard to parents and their posterity, God
assures us, children ‘shall not die for the iniquity of their
fathers.’” No, not eternally. I believe none ever did, or ever
will, die eternally, merely for the sin of our first father.
“But the Scripture never speaks of imputing any sin to any
person, but what is the act of that person.” (Pages 13, 14.) It
was but now you yourself observed, that, by, “Our sins were
316 THE DOCTRINE OF
imputed to Christ,” we mean, “He suffered for them.” Our
sins, then, were imputed to Christ; and yet these sins were
not the act of the person that suffered. He did not commit
the sin which was thus imputed to him.
But “no just constitution can punish the innocent.” (Page
16.) This is undoubtedly true; therefore God does not look
upon infants as innocent, but as involved in the guilt of Adam’s
sin; otherwise death, the punishment denounced against that
sin, could not be inflicted upon them.
“It is allowed, the posterity of Ham and Gehazi, and the
children of Dathan and Abiram, suffered for the sins of their
parents.” It is enough. You need allow no more. All the
world will see, if they suffered for them, then they were punished
for them. Yet we do not “confound punishment with suffer
ing, as if to suffer, and to be punished, were the same thing.”
Punishment is not barely suffering, but suffering for sin: To
suffer, and to be punished, are not the same thing; but to
suffer for sin, and to be punished, are precisely the same.
If therefore, the children of Dathan and Abiram suffered for
the sins of their parents, which no man can deny, then they
were punished for them. Consequently, it is not true that, “in
the instances alleged, the parents only were punished by the
sufferings of the children.” (Pages 17, 18.) If the children
suffered for those sins, then they were punished for them.
Indeed, sometimes the parents too were punished, by the
sufferings of their children; which is all that your heap of
quotations proves; and sometimes they were not. But,
however this were, if the children suffered for their sins, they
were punished for them.
It is not therefore “evident, that, in all these cases, children
are considered, not as criminals involved in guilt, but as the
enjoyments of their parents, who alone are punished by their
sufferings.” (Page 18.) On the contrary, it is very evident that
the children of Canaan were punished for the sin of Ham; and
that the children of Dathan and Abiram were punished with
death, as “involved in the guilt of their parents.”
“On the other hand, the virtues of an ancestor may convey
great advantages to his posterity. But no man’s posterity can
be rewarded for their ancestor's virtue.” (Page 21.) The point
here in dispute between Dr. Watts and you is, whether the
thing, concerning which you are agreed, should be expressed by
ORIGINAL SIN. 317
one term or another. You both agree, (and no man in his
senses can deny,) that, in all ages, God has, on account of pious
ancestors, given many blessings to “heir offspring. But he
thinks these blessings should be termed rewards; (and so do all
the world;) you say they should not. The fact is plain either
way: God does continually, and did in all ages, give number
less blessings to the children, on account of the piety of their
fathers; and, it is certain, blessings given on account of virtue
have been hitherto termed rewards, both by God and man.
You conclude this section: “Thus, it appears, the distinc
tion between personal sin and imputed guilt is without any
ground in Scripture.” (Page 22.) Just the contrary appears,
namely, that guilt was imputed to the scape-goat, to the child
ren of wicked parents, and to our blessed Lord himself, with
out any personal sin. The distinction, therefore, is sound
and scriptural.
SECTION II.
OF THE NATURE AND DESIGN OF OUR AFFLICTIONS AND
MORTALITY.
THAT God designs to bring good out of these is certain. But
does this prove, they have not the nature of punishments? Did
Adam himself suffer any affliction, any toil or pain? Doubt
less he did, long before he returned to dust. And can we doubt
but he received spiritual good from that pain? Yet it was a
punishment still; as really such, as if it had consigned him
over to everlasting punishment. This argument, therefore, is
of no weight: “God draws good out of punishments; there
fore they are no punishments at all.” However, then, the
sufferings wherein Adam’s sin has involved his own posterity
may “try and purify us, in order to future and everlasting
happiness,” (page 23,) this circumstance does not alter their
nature; they are punishments still.
Let “afflictions, calamities, and death itself, be means of
improving in virtue,” (page 24,) of healing or preventing sin,
this is no manner of proof that they are not punishments. Was
not God able to heal or prevent sin, without either pain or
death? Could not the Almighty have done this as easily, as
318 THE DOCTRINE OF
speedily, and as effectually, without these, as with them? Why,
then, did he not? Why did Adam's sin bring these on his
whole posterity? Why should one man suffer for another
man's fault? If you say, “To cure his own;” I ask, 1. What
necessity was there of any suffering at all for this? If God
intended only to cure his sin, he could have done that with
out any suffering. I ask, 2. Why do infants suffer? What
sin have they to be cured thereby? If you say, “It is to
heal the sin of their parents, who sympathize and suffer with
them; ” in a thousand instances this has no place; the
parents are not the better, nor anyway likely to be the better,
for all the sufferings of their children. Their sufferings,
therefore, yea, and those of all mankind, which are entailed
upon them by the sin of Adam, are not the result of mere
mercy, but of justice also. In other words, they have in
them the nature of punishments, even on us and on our child
ren. Therefore, children themselves are not innocent before
God. They suffer; therefore, they deserve to suffer.
And here another question arises, What benefit accrues to
the brute creation from the sufferings wherein their whole race
is involved through the sin of the first man? The fact cannot
be denied; daily experience attests what we read in the oracles
of God, that “the whole creation groaneth together, and tra
vaileth in pain to this day;” a considerable past of it groans to
God, under the wantonness or cruelty of man. Their sufferings
are caused, or at least greatly increased, by our luxury or inhu
manity; nay, and by our diversions ! We draw entertainment
from the pain, the death, of other creatures;—not to mention
several entire species, which at present have such natural quali
ties, that we are obliged to inflict pain, nay, perhaps death, upon
them, purely in our own defence. And even those species which
are out of the reach of men, are not out of the reach of suffer
ing. “The lions do lack and suffer hunger,” though they are,
as it were, sovereigns of the plain. Do they not acknowledge
this when, “roaring for their prey,” they “seek their meat from
God?” And what shall we say of their helpless prey? Is not
their lot more miserable still? Now, what benefits, I say, have
these from their sufferings? Are they also “tried and purified
thereby?” Do sufferings “correct their inordinate passions,
and dispose their minds to sober reflections?” Do they “give
them opportunity of exercising kindness and compassion in
ORIGINAL SIN. 319
relieving each other’s distresses?” That I know not; but I
know by this and a thousand proofs, that when man, the lord
of the visible creation, rebelled against God, every part of the
creation began to suffer on account of his sin. And to
suffering on account of sin, I can give no properer name
than that of punishment.
“It was to reclaim offenders that an extraordinary power
was exercised, either immediately by our Lord himself, or
by his Apostles, of inflicting bodily distempers, and, in some
cases, death itself.” (Page 25.) I do not remember any
more than one single case, wherein one of the Apostles
“inflicted death.” I remember no instance recorded in
Scripture, of their “inflicting bodily distempers; ” (the
blindness inflicted on Elymas cannot be so termed, without
great impropriety;) and certain I am, that our Lord himself
inflicted neither one nor the other.
The citations in the next page prove no more than that we
may reap benefit from the punishments of others. (Page 26.)
But though either we or they reap benefit from them, yet
they are punishments still.
“We do not here consider death and suffering as they
stand in the threatening of the law.” (Page 27.) You are
sensible, if we did, all mankind must acknowledge them to
be punishments. And this is the very light wherein we do
and must consider them in the present question. We consider
death and suffering as they stand in that threatening, “Thou
shalt surely die.” That this was denounced to all mankind,
we know, because it is executed on all. Therefore, considering
suffering and death as so threatened and executed, we cannot
deny that they are punishments,—punishments not on Adam
only, but on all that in fact do either die or suffer.
To sum up this point: Although the wisdom and mercy of
God do “bring good out of evil; ” although God designs to
extract blessings from punishments, and does it in numberless
instances; yet this does not alter the nature of things, but
punishments are punishments still: Still this name properly
belongs to all sufferings which are inflicted on account of
sin; and, consequently, it is an evident truth, that the whole
animate creation is punished for Adam’s sin.
320 THE DOCTRINE OF
SECTION III.
THE ARGUMENT TAKEN FROM THE CALAMITIES AND SINFUL
NESS OF MANKIND CONSIDERED.
“THE subject of our present inquiry is threefold: 1. Whether
mankind be under God’s displeasure, antecedently to their actual
sins. 2. Whether our nature be corrupt from the beginning of
life. And, 3. Whether these propositions can be proved from
the calamities and sinfulness of mankind.” (Pages 30, 31.)
Whether they can or no, they have been fully proved from
Scripture. Let us now inquire if they may not be proved
from the state of the world.
But you think Dr. Watts “has here laid too great stress on
supposition and imagination.” In proof of which you cite
from him the following words: “Can we suppose that the
blessed God would place his innocent creatures in such a
dangerous habitation? Can we suppose, that, among the roots,
and the herbs, and the trees, which are good for food, the
great God would have suffered deadly poison to spring up here
and there? Would there have been any such creatures in our
world as bears and tigers? Can we ever imagine the great and
good God would have appointed men to be propagated in such a
way as would necessarily give such exquisite pain and anguish to
the mothers that produce them, if they had been all accounted
in his eyes a race of holy and sinless beings?” (Page 31.)
I answer, It is not true, “that too great stress,” or any
stress at all, is “here laid on mere supposition and imagina
tion.” Your catching at those two words, suppose and
imagine, will by no means prove it; for the meaning of them
is plain. “Can we suppose the blessed God would do this?”
is manifestly the same with, “How can we reconcile it with
his essential attributes?” In like manner, “Can we ever
imagine?” is plainly equivalent with, “Can we possibly
conceive?” So that the occasional use of these words does
not infer his laying any stress on supposition and imagination.
When, therefore, you add, “Our suppositions and imagi
nations are not a just standard by which to measure the
divine dispensations,” (page 32,) what you say is absolutely
true, but absolutely foreign to the point.
Some of the questions which you yourself ask, to expose his
ORIGINAL SIN, 321
it is not so easy to answer: “Would innocent creatures have
been thrust into the world in so contemptible circumstances,
and have been doomed to grow up so slowly to maturity and
the use of reason? Would they, when grown up, have been
constrained to spend so much time in low and servile labour?
Would millions have been obliged to spend all their days,
from early morn until evening, in hewing stone, sawing
wood, heaving, rubbing, or beating the limb of an oak, or a
bar of iron?” (Page 33.) I really think they would not. I
believe all this toil, as well as the pain and anguish of women
in child-birth, is an evidence of the fall of man, of the sin of
our first parents, and part of the punishment denounced and
executed, first on them, and then on all their posterity.
You add: “He doth not consider this world as a state of
trial, but as if it ought to have been a seat of happiness.”
(Pages 34, 35.) There is no contrariety between these: It
might be a state of trial and of happiness too. And such it
certainly was to Adam in Paradise; whether he was holy or
no, he was undoubtedly happy. A state of trial, therefore,
does not necessarily imply any kind or degree of natural evil;
and, accordingly, the Creator himself assures us, there was
none originally in his creation. For so I read at the conclu
sion of it: “And God saw everything that he had made,
and, behold, it was very good.” (Gen. i. 31.)
“But natural evil may be mixed with a state of trial;
consequently this world could not be built for a seat of hap
piness.” Admirable drawing of consequences ! It may be;
therefore, it could not be otherwise. Whatever may be, God
himself here tells us what was. And from his own declara
tion, it is infallibly certain, there was no natural evil in the
world, until it entered as the punishment of sin.
“Neither doth he take a future state into his representa
tion.” (Page 36.) No, nor is there any need he should, when
he is representing the present state of the world as a punish
ment of Adam's sin.” “Nor doth he take into his argument
the goodness of God.” (Page 37.) Not into this argument;
that is of after consideration. So the texts you have heaped to
gether on this head also are very good; but what do they prove?
“He supposes our sufferings to be mere punishments.” I
suppose they are punishments mixed with mercy. But still
they are punishments; they are evils inflicted on account of sin.
VOL. IX. Y
322 THE DOCTRINE OF
“We find, in fact, that the best of men may be made very
unhappy, by calamities and oppressions.” (Page 39.) It can
not be. The best of men cannot be made unhappy by any
calamities or oppressions whatsoever; for they “have learned
in every” possible “state, therewith to be content.” In spite
of all calamities, they “rejoice evermore, and in everything
give thanks.” “From punishments inflicted on particular persons, he infers
that all men are under the wrath of God. But to infer the state
of the whole from the case of some is not a fair way of arguing.”
(Page 40.) No. The punishments inflicted on particular per
sons prove nothing, but with regard to those on whom they
are inflicted. If, therefore, some men only suffer and die, this
proves nothing with regard to the rest. But if the whole of
mankind suffer and die, then the conclusion reaches all men.
“He is not quite just, in pronouncing the present form of
the earth “irregular, abrupt, and horrid;’ and asking, “Doth
it not bear strongly on our sight, the ideas of ruin and con
fusion, in vast broken mountains, dreadful cliffs and precipices,
immense extents of waste and barren ground?” If this be the
case, how can ‘the invisible things of God’ be “clearly seen
from such a ruined ‘creation?’” (Page 41.) Perfectly well.
“His eternal power and Godhead,” the existence of a power
ful and eternal Being, may still be inferred from these his
works, grand and magnificent, though in ruin. Consequently,
these leave the Atheist without excuse. And whatever objec
tions he might form (as Lucretius actually does) from these
palpable blemishes and irregularities of the terraqueous globe,
the scriptural account of natural, flowing from moral, evil,
will easily and perfectly solve them; all which is well con
sistent with the words of the Psalmist: “O Lord, how mani
fold are thy works ! In wisdom hast thou made them all ;
the earth is full of thy riches!” (Page 42.) So undoubtedly
it is, though it bears so visible signs of ruin and devastation.
“We have no authority from Scripture to say, that the
earth, in its present constitution, is at all different from what
it was at its first creation.” Certainly we have, if the Scrip
ture affirms that God “ said,” after Adam sinned, “Cursed is
the ground for thy sake; thorns and thistles shall it bring
forth to thee;” and, that “the earth was of old, standing
out of the water, and in the water,” till God destroyed it for
the sin of its inhabitants.
ORIGINAL SIN. 323
You go on : “I cannot agree, ‘that disease, anguish, and
death have entered into the bowels and veins of multitudes,
by an innocent and fatal mistake of pernicious plants and
fruits for proper food.’” (Page 43.) Why not? Doubtless,
multitudes also have perished hereby, if we take in the
account of all ages and nations; multitudes, also, have been
the living prey of bears and tigers, wolves and lions; and
multitudes have had their flesh and bones crushed and
churned between the jaws of panthers and leopards, sharks
and crocodiles. And would these things have come upon
mankind, were it not on account of Adam’s sin?
Yet you think, we have “now a more extensive dominion
over all creatures, than Adam had even in his innocence,
because we have the liberty of eating them, which Adam
never had.” (Page 44.) This will not prove the point. That
I have liberty to eat a lamb, does not prove that I have
dominion over a lion. Certainly I have not dominion over
any creature which I can neither govern nor resist; yea, and
if the dread of me is on every beast and fowl, this does not
prove that I have any dominion over them. I know, on the
contrary, that not only a tiger or a bear, but even a dove,
will not stoop to my dominion.
“However, we have no authority to say, man himself was
cursed, though the ground was.” (Pages 45, 46.) Yes, we
have,—the authority of God himself: “Cursed is every man
that continueth not in all things” which God hath com
manded. The moment, therefore, that he sinned, Adam
fell under this curse. And whether the toil and death to
which he and his posterity were sentenced, and the pain of
child-birth, be termed curses or no, sure it is, they are
punishments, and heavy ones too; though mercy is often
mixed with judgment. (Pages 47–50.)
The main argument follows, taken from the state of man
kind in general, with regard to religion. But you say, “It is
impossible we should make a just estimate of the wickedness
of mankind.” (Page 51.) Yes, an exactly just estimate of the
precise degree of wickedness in the whole world; but it is very
possible, nay, very easy, to make an estimate in the gross, with
such a degree of justness as suffices for the present question.
Indeed you “think we carry our censures of the Heathens
too far.” I dare not carry them so far as to say, no Heathen
shall be saved. But this I say; I never knew an Heathen
Y 2
324 THE DOCTRINE OF
yet (and I have personally known many out of various nations)
who was not a slave to some gross vice or other. Bad, therefore,
as nominal Christians are, I cannot yet place them on a level
with the Heathens; not even with the mild, courteous, conversa
ble Heathens who border on Georgia and Carolina. Much less
would I say, “Possibly the Heathens may be less vicious than
the Christian world in general.” If I believed this, I should bid
adieu to Christianity, and commence Heathen without delay.
“But if we allow mankind to be ever so wicked, suppose
there is not one upon earth who is truly righteous, it will not
follow that men are naturally corrupt; for a sinful action does
not infer a sinful nature. If it does, then Adam brought a
sinful nature with him into the world. But if we cannot infer
from Adam’s sin, that his nature was originally corrupt,
neither can we infer from the wickedness of all mankind, be it
ever so great, that they have a sinful nature.” (Pages 52, 53.)
The consequence is not good: “If one man’s committing a
sin does not prove that he was naturally inclined to evil, then
the wickedness of all mankind for six thousand years will not
prove that they are naturally inclined to evil.” For we may
easily account for one man’s committing sin, though he was
not naturally inclined to evil; but not so easily, for “all flesh
corrupting themselves,” for the wickedness of all mankind in
all ages. It is not possible rationally to account for this, for
the general wickedness of mankind; for such a majority of
men, through all generations, being so corrupt; but on the
supposition of their having a corrupt nature. Sin in one or
a few cases, does not prove a sinful nature; but sin over
spreading the earth, does. Nor is your argument drawn from
the sin of the angels, (pp. 54, 55,) of any more force than
that drawn from the sin of Adam, unless you can prove that
as great a majority of angels as of men have rebelled against
their Creator.
“Again: If our first parents felt fear and shame, and yet
their nature was not originally corrupt, then it will not follow
that ours is so, notwithstanding our uneasy and unruly pas
sions.” Empty sound ! Had any one said to Adam, “Your
nature was originally corrupt, for you feel uneasy and unruly
passions;” would he not readily have answered, “But these
began at such an hour; till then my nature was without either
pain or corruption.” Apply this to any child of Adam; and if
he can answer in like manner, “Till such an hour no uneasy
ORIGINAL SIN. 325
or unruly passion had any place in my breast; ” we will then
grant, these passions no more prove a corrupt nature in the
sons than in their first father. But no man can answer thus.
You, and I, and every man, must acknowledge, that uneasy
and unruly passions are coeval with our understanding and
memory at least, if not with our very being.
“Again: Adam by his sin brought sufferings on himself
and his posterity. Yet it does not follow, that his nature was
corrupt. Therefore, though others by their sins bring suffer
ings on themselves and their posterity, it will not follow that
their nature is corrupt, or under the displeasure of God.”
Two very different things are here blended together. The
corruption of their nature is one thing, the displeasure of
God another. None affirms that those sufferings which men
by their sins bring on themselves or posterity prove that
their nature is corrupt. But do not the various sufferings of
all mankind prove that they are under the displeasure of God?
It is certain no suffering came upon Adam till he was under
the displeasure of God.
Again: “If our first parents, by their sin, brought suffer
ing both on themselves and others, and yet their nature was
not originally corrupt, nor under the displeasure of God, it
clearly follows that the nature of those who suffer purely in
consequence of their sin is not originally corrupt, nor are they
under God's displeasure.” This argument is bad every way.
For, 1. At the time when Adam. brought the sentence of
suffering both on himself and others, his nature was corrupt,
and he was under the actual displeasure of God. But, 2.
Suppose it were otherwise, all you could possibly infer, with
regard to his posterity, is, that their suffering does not prove
their corruption, or their being under the displeasure of God.
How could you think their suffering would prove them not
corrupt, not under God’s displeasure? Therefore, neither
this nor the preceding argument (seeing both are utterly
inconclusive) “take off anything that Dr. Watts has said,”
touching the present state of the world, as a proof of God’s
displeasure, and the natural corruption of man. So far,
therefore, is “his argument from the sinfulness and misery
of mankind from being altogether insufficient in every part,”
that it is strong and conclusive, anything you have advanced
to the contrary notwithstanding.
326 ThE DOCTR iNE OF
You add: “Suffering may happen where there is no sin;
as in the case of brutes and infants; or where there is the
most perfect innocence; as in the case of our blessed Lord.”
Absolutely true; that is, where there is no personal sin, but
only sin imputed. There was no personal sin in our blessed
Lord; there can be none either in brutes or infants. He
suffered, therefore, for the sins of others, which were thus
imputed to him; as is the sin of Adam to infants, who suffer
death through him; and, in some sense, to the whole
creation; which was “made subject to vanity, not willingly,”
but on account of his transgression. But where there is no
sin, either personal or imputed, there can be no suffering.
“I may add, from the present state of things, a directly
opposite argument may be taken: From the enjoyments and
comforts, the good things and blessings, which abound in the
world, I might ask, Are these creatures, so well provided for,
under God’s displeasure? Are they not the care of his good
ness? Does he not love them, and delight to do them
good?” (Pages 58–61.) I answer, God does still give us
many good things, many enjoyments, comforts, and blessings.
But all these are given through the “Seed of the woman;”
they are all the purchase of his blood. Through Him we are
still the care of the divine goodness, and God does delight to
do us good: But this does not at all prove, either that we
have not a sinful nature, or that we are not, while sinful,
under his displeasure.
SECTION IV.
SOME CONSEQUENCES OF THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN.
“BY this doctrine some have been led to maintain, 1. That
men have not a sufficient power to perform their duty. But if
so, it ceases to be their duty.” (Pages 63-69.) I maintain,
that men have not this power by nature: But they have or
may have it by grace; therefore it does not cease to be their
duty. And if they perform it not, they are without excuse.
“Hence some maintain, 2. That we have no reason to thank
our Creator for our being.” (Pages 70–73.) He that will
maintain it, may. But it does by no means follow from this
ORIGINAL SIN. 327
doctrine; since, whatever we are by nature, we may by grace
be children of God, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven.
“But unthankfulness is a natural consequence of this doctrine,
which greatly diminishes, if not totally excludes, the goodness
and mercy of God.” (Page 74.) St. Paul thought otherwise.
He imagined the total ungodliness and impotence of our nature
to be the very thing which most of all illustrated the goodness
and mercy of God: “For a good man,” says he, “peradventure
one would even dare to die. But God commendeth,” unspeak
ably, inconceivably, beyond all human precedent, “his love to
us; in that while we were yet without strength, Christ died for
the ungodly.” Here is the ground, the real and the only
ground, for true Christian thankfulness: “Christ died for the
ungodly that were without strength;” such as is every man by
nature. And till a man has been deeply sensible of it, he can
never truly thank God for his redemption; nor, consequently,
for his creation; which is, in the event, a blessing to those
only who are “created anew in Christ Jesus.”
“Hence, 3. Some have poured great contempt upon human
nature: Whereas God himself does not despise mankind, but
thinks them worthy of his highest regards.” (Page 75.) To
describe human nature as deeply fallen, as far removed both
from virtue and wisdom, does not argue that we despise it.
We know by Scripture, as well as by sad experience, that men
are now unspeakably foolish and wicked. And such the Son
of God knew them to be, when he laid down his life for them.
But this did not hinder him from loving them, no more than
it does any of the children of God.
You next consider what Dr. Watts observes with regard to
infants. “Mankind,” says he, “in its younger years, before it
is capable of proper moral action, discovers the principles of
iniquity and the seeds of sin. What young ferments of spite
and envy, what native malice and rage, are found in the little
hearts of infants, and sufficiently discovered by their little hands
and eyes, and their wrathful countenances, even before they can
speak!” You answer, “Our Lord gave us different ideas of
them, when he taught his Apostles to become “as little child
ren.’” (Pages 77–82.) Not at all. They may be imitable
in some respects, and yet have all the tempers above described.
And it is certain they have; as any impartial observer will be
convinced by his own eyes Nor is this any way contradicted
328 ThE DOCTRINE OF
by St. Paul's words: “In wickedness,” caciq, “be ye
children,” (1 Cor. xiv. 20,)—untaught, unexperienced; or
by those of David, “My soul is even as a weaned child.”
(Psalm crxxi. 2.)
“But we discover in them also the noble principles of reason
and understanding, with several tempers which are capable of
improvement, whereby they may be trained up in a good way;
and numbers in all ages of the world have risen to very con
siderable degrees of excellence.” All this is true; but it is
not at all inconsistent with the account of them given above;
by which it clearly appears, that they are strongly inclined
to evil, long before any ill habits can be contracted.
SECTION V.
A GENERAL ARGUMENT TAKEN FROM WHAT GOD HAS
DECLARED CONCERNING MANKIND AT THE RESTORATION
OF THE WORLD AFTER THE DELUGE.
“THERE are three passages from which Divines infer the
excellency of Adam’s state and nature above ours: 1. “And
God blessed them, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multi
ply, and replenish the earth. (Gen. i. 28.)” (Page 84.) With
this I have nothing to do; for I infer nothing from it, with
regard to the present question. “2. ‘Have dominion over the
fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
living thing that moveth upon the earth. 3. ‘God created
man in his own image; in the image of God created he him.”
(Verse 27.) From these three particulars they deduce the
superiority of Adam’s nature above ours. But the very same
marks of excellence are more expressly pronounced by God
upon the human nature, when the race of mankind was to be
propagated anew from Noah and his sons.” (Page 85.)
1. “And God blessed Noah and his sons.” (Gen. ix. 1.)
With regard to this whole passage, I must observe, that God
did not pronounce any blessing at all, either on him or them,
till Noah had “built an altar unto the Lord, and” had “offered
burnt-offerings on the altar.” Then it was that “the Lord
smelled a sweet savour;” accepted the sacrifice which implied
faith in the promised Seed; and for His sake restored, in some
ORIGINAL SIN. 329
measure, the blessing which he had given to Adam at his
creation; “and said, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish
the earth.”—On this, I need only observe, had Adam stood,
or had not his fall affected his posterity, there would have
been no need of this; for they would have “multiplied and
replenished the earth,” in virtue of the original blessing.
2. Verses 2,8. “The fear of you, and the dread of you, shall
be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the
air, and upon all that moveth upon the earth; into your hands
they are delivered: Every moving thing that liveth shall be
meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all
things.” On this likewise I would observe, What need was
there of any such power over the creatures to be given to
man, if he had not forfeited his former power? Had man
remained subject to God, the creatures would have remained
subject to him, by virtue of God’s original constitution.
And why was it, but because man had lost this power, that
God here in some degree restores it?
But hence you “infer that all that power is restored, yea,
more than all ; that we have a more extensive dominion
granted to us over the brutal world, than was originally given
to Adam.” (Page 86.) It has been commonly thought, that
Adam had full dominion over the creatures, subject to him by
a kind of instinct; whereas we have only so far power over
them, that by labour and vigilance we may use or subdue
them. But how do you prove that we have a fuller dominion
than he had By those words: “The fear and the dread of
you shall be upon all: Into your hands they are delivered;
even as the green herb have I given you all things.” Nay,
“the fear and the dread of you shall be upon them,” does
not imply any dominion at all. A wolf may fear me, who
yet does not obey me. I dread a viper; but I do not obey
it. And those words, “Into your hands they are delivered,”
are plainly equivalent with, “I have given you all things,
even as the green herb;” namely, “for food;” you may feed
on any of them. So far therefore is the text from expressly
pronouncing “a more extensive dominion given to Noah over
the brutal world than was originally given to Adam,” that it
does not express any proper dominion at all.
3. Verse 6. “Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall
his blood be shed. For in the image of God made he man;”
namely, at the creation. And some remains of the natural
330 ThE DOCTRINE OF
image of God, as we are spiritual and immortal beings, a
even now to be found in every man, sufficient to justify t
putting a murderer to death. St. James alludes to the san
scripture, when he says, “Therewith bless we God, and cur
men, who were made” (rovs 'yeyovoras, not are made)“after ti
similitude of God.” (iii. 9.) But what does all this prove? th
the being “created in the image of God,” “is more express
pronounced upon Noah and his sons, than it was originally (
Adam?” I think no man of sense will say this in cool bloo
Of “the three particulars,” then, which you brought
prove the superiority of Noah over Adam in innocence, t
First proves no more than that God gave to both the blessi,
of fruitfulness; the Second, far from proving that Noah had
more extensive dominion over the brute creation than Adar
hardly proves that he had any dominion over them at al
and the Third proves only this,—that the image of Go
wherein man was made at first, is not totally lost now.
Yet you say, “These three particulars contain all the pi
vileges conferred on Adam at first.” And every one of the
is “expressly repeated, and more emphatically and exte:
sively pronounced upon man, after the judgment passed a
Adam had come upon his posterity.” (Page 87.) Expressl
more emphatically, more extensively / Where? I am sul
not in the Bible.
However, you pompously add, (sicut tuus est mos,”) “Th
is to me a clear and undoubted demonstration,—
“l. That ‘the judgment which came upon all men to co
demnation, did noways alter the primary relation in whi
God stood to man, and man to God.” Certainly it w
altered thus far, God was a condemner, and man was co
demned. And though “God is still the God and Father
mankind,” yet it cannot be said that he is so to unregeners
men,—men who are as yet “dead in sin, and children
wrath,”—“ as much,” or in the same sense, “as he was
Adam in innocence.” Adam then was surely “the son
God” as no other man is, till “born of the Spirit.” T
power to become the sons of God is now given to none
they “believe on his name.”
“2. That the love, regards, and providence of God tow:
mankind in general are still the very same as to man at
first formation.” (Page 88.)
*A*ter your usual manner.—EDIT.
ORIGINAL SIN• 331
His providence is still over all his works: But he cannot
regard or delight in sinful man, in the very same manner
wherein he delighted in him when innocent.
“3. That our nature, as derived from Noah, has just the
same endowments, natural and moral, with which Adam was
created.” This does not follow from anything that has yet
been said. If it stands of itself, it may.
“4. That whatever came upon us from ‘the judgment to
condemnation,’ came no farther than was consistent with that
blessing, pronounced upon Noah as well as Adam, “Be fruitful
and multiply.’” This is undoubtedly true; otherwise, the
human species could not have been continued. “So that
‘the condemnation which came upon all men, cannot infer
the ‘wrath’ of God upon mankind; ” (it may, notwithstand
ing that they “increase and multiply;” it must, if they are
“by nature children of wrath;”) “but only as subjecting
us to such evils as were perfectly consistent with his blessing,
declared to Adam as soon as he came out of his Maker’s
hands;” (page 89;) (namely, with the blessing, “Increase and
multiply;) “and, consequently, tosuch evils as God might justly
have subjected mankind to, before Adam sinned.” Whether
God could justly have done this, or not, what a consequence is
this!—“If God gave that blessing, “Increase and multiply,”
to men in general, as well as he did to Adam, then men in
general are not ‘children of wrath’ now, any more than Adam
was at his creation l’”
“5. It is no less evident, that when St. Paul says, “By
the disobedience of one many, or all, ‘were made sinners, he
cannot mean they “were made sinners’ in any sense incon
sistent with the blessing pronounced on man in innocence.”
True; not in any sense inconsistent with that blessing,
“Increase and multiply.” But this blessing is no way incon
sistent with their being “by nature children of wrath.”
* “From all which I conclude, that our state with regard
to the blessing of God, and the dignity and faculties of our
nature, unless debased by our own sins, is not inferior to
that in which Adam was created.” (Pages 90–93.) Be this
so or not, it cannot be concluded from anything that has
gone before. But we may still believe, that men in general
are “fallen short of the glory of God; ” are deprived of that
glorious image of God wherein man was originally created.
332 THE DOCTRINE OF
SECTION VI.
THE NOTION OF ADAM’s BEING A FEDERAL HEAD or REPRE
sENTATIVE OF MANKIND CONsIDERED.”
MY reason for believing he was so, in some sense, is this:
Christ was the representative of mankind, when God “laid
on him the iniquities of us all, and he was wounded for our
transgressions.” But Adam was a type or figure of Christ;
therefore, he was also, in some sense, our representative; in
consequence of which, “all died” in him, as “in Christ
all shall be made alive.”
But as neither representative, nor federal head, are
scripture words, it is not worth while to contend for them.
The thing I mean is this: The state of all mankind did so
far depend on Adam, that, by his fall, they all fell into sorrow,
and pain, and death, spiritual and temporal. And all this is
noways inconsistent with either the justice or goodness of
God, provided all may recover through the Second Adam,
whatever they lost through the first; nay, and recover it
with unspeakable gain; since every additional temptation
they feel, by that corruption of their nature which is antece
dent to their choice, will, if conquered by grace, be a means
of adding to that “exceeding and eternal weight of glory.”
This single consideration totally removes all reflections on
the divine justice or mercy, in making the state of all man
kind so dependent on the behaviour of their common parent;
for not one child of man finally loses thereby, unless by his
own choice; and every one who “receives the grace of God
in Christ,” will be an unspeakable gainer. Who then has
any reason to complain, even of having a nature inclined to
evil? seeing the more opportunities he has of fighting, the
more of conquering; and seeing, the greater is the difficulty
of obtaining the victory, the brighter is the crown of glory.
But if Adam and Christ did not stand or fall, obey and suffer,
for mankind, how can the death of others be the consequence of
Adam’s offence; the life of others, the consequence of Christ's
obedience? How could all men be, in any sense, constituted
sinners by the one, or constituted righteous by the other?
* Page 94.
ORIGINAL SIN. 333
To explain this a little further in Mr. Hervey's words: “By
Jederal head, or representative, I mean, what the Apostle
teaches, when he calls Christ, “the Second Man, and “the
last Adam.” (1 Cor. xv. 47.) The last ! How? Not in a
numerical sense; not in order of time: But in this respect,
that, as Adam was a public person, and acted in the stead of
all mankind, so Christ, likewise, was a public person, and
acted in behalf of all his people; that as Adam was the first
general representative of mankind, Christ was the second and
the last; (there never was, and never will be, any other;) that
what they severally did in this capacity, was not intended to
terminate in themselves, but to affect as many as they seve
rally represented.
“This does not rest on a single text, but is established
again and again in the same chapter. The divinely-wise
Apostle, foreseeing the prejudices which men would entertain
against this doctrine, as lying quite out of the road of reason’s
researches, has inculcated and re-inculcated this momentous
point: ‘Through the offence of one, many are dead;—the
judgment was by one to condemnation;-by one man's
offence death reigned by one;—by the offence of one, judg
ment came upon all men to condemnation;’ and that there
may remain no possibility of mistaking his meaning, or
eluding his argument, he adds, “By one man’s disobedience
many were made sinners. All these expressions demonstrate,
that Adam (as well as Christ) was a representative of all
mankind; and that what he did in this capacity did not ter
minate in himself, but affected all whom he represented.”
After vehemently cavilling at the terms, you yourself allow
the thing. You say, “If what was lost by “the disobedience
of one’ person might afterward be recovered by “the obedi
ence’ of another, then matters would have stood upon an
equal footing.” (Page 113.) And this is, indeed, the truth.
For “all that was lost to us by Adam’s ‘disobedience’ is fully
recovered by Christ’s “obedience; however we denominate
the relation in which the one and the other stands to us.”
In this we agree; but not in what follows: “By law, in the
fifth of the Romans, as in several other places, the Apostle
does not mean, barely a rule of duty; but such a rule, with
the penalty of death threatened to every transgression of it.
Such was the law given by Moses;” that is, “a rule, to every
334 THE DOCTRINE OF
transgression of which the penalty of death was threatened.”
(Pages 114, 115.) Not so; there were a thousand transgres
sions of it, to which death was not threatened. Observe: By
death, we now mean temporal death, according to the whole
tenor of your argument. “But is it not said, ‘Cursed is
every one that continueth not in all things written in the law
to do them?’” It is. But whatever this curse implied, it
did not imply temporal death. For a man might neglect to
do many “things written in the law,” and yet not be punish
able with death.
Neither can I agree with your interpretation of Rom. vii. 9:
“‘I was alive without the law once;’ namely, before the giv
ing of the law at Mount Sinai. The Jew was then alive;
that is, because he was not then under the law, he was not
slain by his sin. His sin was not so imputed to him as to
subject him to death. “But when the commandment came,’
with the penalty of death annexed, “sin revived,’—acquired
full life and vigour,”—(How so? One would have expected
just the contrary !) “‘ and I died;’ that is, was a dead man in
law, upon the first transgression I committed.” (Page 116.)
Beside many other objections to this strange interpretation, an
obvious one is this: It supposes every transgression punish
able with death. But this is a palpable mistake: Therefore,
all that is built on this foundation falls to the ground at once.
Upon the whole: Whatever objections may lie against Dr.
Watts's method of explaining it, it appears, from clear Scrip
ture, and from your own words, that Adam was the repre
sentative of mankind.
SECTION VII.
OF THE FORMATION OF OUR NATURE IN THE WOMB.*
BEFoRE I say anything on this head, I must premise, that
there are a thousand circumstances relating to it, concerning
which I can form no conception at all, but am utterly in the
dark. I know not how my body was fashioned there; or when
or how my soul was united to it: And it is far easier, in speak
* Page 129.
ORIGINAL SIN. 335
ing on so abstruse a subject to pull down, than to build up. I
can easily object to any hypothesis which is advanced; but I
cannot easily defend any.
And if you ask me, how, in what determinate manner, sin
is propagated; how it is transmitted from father to son: I
answer plainly, I cannot tell; no more than I can tell how
man is propagated, how a body is transmitted from father to
son. I know both the one and the other fact; but I can
account for neither.
Thus much, however, is plain: That “God is the maker of
every man who comes into the world.” (Page 138.) For it is
God alone who gives man power to propagate his species. Or
rather, it is God himself who does the work by man as an
instrument; man (as you observed before) having no other
part in producing man, than the oak has in producing an
acorn. God is really the producer of every man, every ani
mal, every vegetable in the world; as he is the true primum
mobile, the spring of all motion throughout the universe. So
far we agree. But when you subsume, “If it is the power
of God whereby a sinful species is propagated, whereby a sin
ful father begets a sinful son, then God is the author of sin;
that sinfulness is chargeable upon him :” Here we divide; I
cannot allow the consequence, because the same argument
would make God chargeable with all the sinful actions of men.
For it is the power of God whereby the murderer lifts up his
arm, whereby the adulterer perpetrates his wickedness; full
as much as it is his power whereby an acorn produces an oak,
or a father a son. But does it follow, that God is chargeable
with the sin? You know it does not follow. The power of
God, vulgarly termed nature, acts from age to age, under its
fixed rules. Yet he who this moment supplies the power by
which a sinful action is committed is not chargeable with the
sinfulness of that action. In like manner, it is the power of
God which, from age to age, continues the human species;
yet He who this moment supplies the power whereby a sinful
nature is propagated (according to the fixed rules established
in the lower world) is not chargeable with the sinfulness of
that nature. This distinction you must allow, as was observed
before, or charge God with all the sin committed under heaven.
And this general answer may suffice any sincere and modest
inquirer, without entangling himself in those minute particu
lars which are beyond the reach of human understanding.
336 ThE DOCTRINE OF
“But does not God create the nature of every man that
comes into the world?” He does not, in the proper sense of
the word create. The Scripture plainly affirms the contrary:
“On the seventh day he rested from all his work which God
created and made.” (Gen. ii. 2, 3.) “The works” which God
created “were finished from the foundation of the world.”
And as soon as they were finished, “God ceased from his
work;” (Heb. iv. 3, 10;) namely, from his work of creating.
He therefore now (not creates, but) produces the body of every
man, in the same manner as he produces the oak; only by
supplying the power whereby one creature begets another,
according to what we term the laws of nature. In a higher
sense he is the Creator of all souls. But how or when he
does or did create them, I cannot tell. Neither can I give
any account how or when he unites them to the body. Like
wise how we are conceived in sin, I know not; but know
that we are so conceived. God hath said it; and I know he
will be “justified in his saying, and clear when he is judged.”
It is certain, that God is the Maker of every man. But it
is neither certain nor true, that he “makes every man in
the womb, both soul and body, as immediately as he made
Adam;” and that, therefore, “every man comes out of the
hands of God as properly as Adam did.” (Page 140.) To inter
pret any scriptures as affirming this is to make them flatly
contradict other scriptures. God made Adam by immediate
creation: He does not so make every man, or any man beside
him. Adam came directly out of the hands of God, without
the intervention of any creature. Does every man thus come
out of the hands of God? Do no creatures now intervene?
“But if God produces the nature of every man in the womb,
he must produce it with all the qualities which belong to that
nature, as it is then and so produced.” So, if God produces
the action of every man in the world, he must produce it with
all the qualities which belong to that action, as it is then and so
produced. “For it is impossible God should produce our
nature, and not produce the qualities it has when produced.”
For it is impossible God should produce an action, and yet not
produce the qualities it has when produced. “No substance
can be made without some qualities. And it must necessarily,
as soon as it is made, have those qualities which the Maker
gives it, and no other.” No action can be produced without
some qualities. And it must necessarily, as soon as it is pro
ORIGINAL SIN• 337
duced, have those qualities which the producer gives it, and
no other. You see what this argument would prove, if it
proved any thing at all.
We will trace it a little farther: “If God produces the
nature of every man in the womb, with all its qualities, them,
whatever those qualities are, they are the will and the work of
God.” So, if God produces the action of every man in the
world, with all its qualities, then, whatever those qualities are,
they are the will and the work of God. Surely, no. God
does (in the sense above explained) produce the action which
is sinful; and yet (whether I can account for it or no) the
sinfulness of it is not his will or work. He does also produce
the nature which is sinful; (he supplies the power by which it
is produced;) and yet (whether I can account for this or no)
the sinfulness of it is not his will or work. I am as sure of
this, as I am that there is a God; and yet, impenetrable dark
mess rests on the subject. Yet I am conscious my understand
ing can no more fathom this deep, than reconcile man’s free
will with the foreknowledge of God.
“Consequently, those qualities cannot be sinful.” This
consequence cannot hold in one case, unless it holds in
both; but, if it does, there can be no sin in the universe.
However, you go on: “It is highly dishonourable to God,
to suppose he is displeased at us for what he himself has
infused into our nature.” (Page 142.) It is not allowed that
he has “infused sin into our nature;” no more than that he
infuses sin into our actions; though it is his power which
produces both our actions and nature.
I am aware of the distinction, that man’s free will is con
cerned in the one case, but not the other; and that on this
account, God cannot be charged with the sinfulness of human
actions: But this does by no means remove the difficulty.
For, 1. Does not God know what the murderer or adulterer
is about to do? what use he will make of that power to act,
which he cannot have but from God? 2. Does he not at the
instant supply him with that power whereby the sinful action
is done? God, therefore, produces the action which is sinful.
It is his work, and his will, (for he works nothing but what he
wills,) and yet the sinfulness of the action is neither his work
nor will.
“But can those passions or propensities be sinful, which are
VOL IX. Z
338 THE DOCTRINE OF
neither caused nor consented to by me?” I answer, Spite,
envy, and those other passions and tempers which are mani
festly discernible even in little children, are certainly not
virtuous, not morally good, whether you term them sinful or
not; and it is as certain, these exist before they are consented
to, much less caused by, those that feel them. “But sin, if
it is unavoidable, is no sin.” (Page 143.) Whether you term
it sin or not, it is contrary to the nature of God, and a trans
gression of his holy and good law.
“But a natural moral evil is a contradiction; for if it be
natural, it cannot be moral.” That tempers contrary to the
nature and the law of God are natural, is a point of daily
experience; but if you do not choose to call these morally
evil, call them what you please. All I aver is, that such
tempers do exist in us antecedent to our choice.
“But if the actual sins of men proceed from a corrupt
nature, they are unavoidable, and consequently no sins at all.”
(Page 144.) Actual sins may proceed from a corrupt nature,
and yet not be unavoidable; but if actions contrary to the
nature of God were unavoidable, it would not follow that they
were innocent.
To the question, “How comes it to pass, that our passions
and appetites are now so irregular and strong, that not one
person has resisted them so far as to keep himself pure and
innocent?” you answer by another question, “How came Adam
not to keep himself pure and innocent?” (Page 145.) There
is no parity between the one case and the other. I can account
for any one man’s committing sin, supposing him to be natu
rally upright, as easily as for Adam’s committing it. Any one
person, as well as Adam, though naturally inclined to neither,
might choose either good or evil; and, on this supposition, he
would be as likely to choose one as the other. But the case
is extremely different, if you place Adam on one side, and all
mankind on the other. It is true, “the nature of sin is not
altered by its being general.” But the case is very widely
altered. On this or that man it may “come, just as it came
upon Adam, by his own choice and compliance with tempta
tion.” But how comes it, that all men under the sun should
choose evil rather than good? How came all the children of
Adam, from the beginning of the world till now, to comply
with temptation? How is it, that, in all ages, the scale has
ORIGINAL SIN. 339
turned the wrong way, with regard to every man born into
the world? Can you see no difficulty in this? And can
you find any way to solve that difficulty, but to say with the
Psalmist, We were “shapen in iniquity, and in sin did our
mothers conceive” us?
**
SECTION VIII.
OF ORIGINAL RIGHTEOUSNES8.
“ORIGINAL righteousness is said to be, ‘that moral recti
tude in which Adam was created. His reason was clear; and
sense, appetite, and, passion were subject to it. His judgment
was uncorrupted, and his will had a constant propensity to holi
mess. He had a supreme love to his Creator, a fear of offend
ing him, and a readiness to do his will.” When Adam sinned,
he lost this moral rectitude, this image of God in which he was
created; in consequence of which all his posterity come into
the world destitute of that image.” (Pages 147–149.)
In order to remove this mistake, you re-consider some of
the texts on which it is grounded: “Lie not one to another,
seeing ye have put off the old man with his deeds; and have
put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the
image of him that created him.” (Col. iii. 9, 10.) “That ye
put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which
is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; and be renewed
in the spirit of your mind; and put on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.”
(Ephesians iv. 22–24.)
On this, you affirm: “‘The old’ and ‘new man, here do not
signify a course of life; but the ‘old man’ signifies the heathen,
the ‘new man, the Christian, profession.” (Pages 150, 151.)
This you prove, 1. From Eph. ii. 15: “Christ abolished
the enmity, to make” (or create) “in himself of twain one new
man.” Does this only mean one new profession? It evidently
means one Church, both of Jews and Gentiles.
You prove it, 2. From Col. iii. 8–12; where “the Apostle
tells the Colossian Christians, that ‘now’ they were obliged to
“put off anger, and “to put on bowels of mercies;’ to admit
the Christian spirit into their hearts, and to practise Christian
duties; for this reason, because they “had put off the old
Z 2
340 THE DOCTRINE OF
man, and ‘had put on the new. This shows ‘the new man’
was something they might have “put on, and yet be defective
in personal, internal holiness.” True; defective so far, as still
to want more; more “bowels of mercies, meekness, long-suf
fering.” But this does not show, that the “new man” does
not mean the principle both of internal and external holiness.
The consciousness of having received this is a strong motive
both to depart from evil, and to labour after a continual increase
of every holy and heavenly temper; therefore, here likewise,
“the putting off the old and the putting on the new man”
does not mean an outward profession, but a real, inward change;
a renewal of soul “in righteousness and true holiness.”
You prove it, 3. From Eph. iv. 22, 24: “Here,” you say,
“he considers ‘the putting off the old and ‘putting on the
new man’ as a duty. They had done it by profession, and
therefore were obliged to do it effectually.” They had done
it effectually. So the whole tenor of the Apostle's words implies:
“Ye have not so learned Christ; if so be,” rather, seeing that,
“ye have been taught by him;—that ye put off the old man;
—and be renewed in the spirit of your mind;—and that ye put
on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness.” (Eph. iv. 20–24.) The Apostle here
manifestly speaks, not of a lesson they had not learned, but
of one which God had taught them already; and thence exhorts
them to walk worthy of the blessing they had received, to be
“holy in all manner of conversation.”
But, 4. “‘The putting on the new man’ is one thing, and
the creating him is another. He must first be created, and
then put on.” (Page 152.) No.; he is created and put on at
the same time; the former word more directly referring to God,
who creates, the latter to man, who is created. “But God,”
you say, “‘created the new man, when he erected the gospel
dispensation, as appears from Eph. ii. 15, 19–22.” I answer:
(1.) If those latter verses are explanatory of that expression,
“one new man,” in the 15th, then it does not mean one out
ward profession, but the one Church of living believers in
Christ. (2.) The expression in the 15th verse is not the same
with what we are now considering. Neither is the meaning of
that and this expression the same: “One new man means
one Church, and nothing else;” “the new man” means quite
another thing,-the work of God in every individual believer.
ORIGINAL SIN. 341
You say, 5. “‘The old man and the new, and ‘the new
'man's being renewed and created, and the ‘renewing of the
Ephesians, all refer, not to any corruption of nature, but to
their late wicked life.” (Page 153.) What? Does their being
“renewed in the spirit of their mind” refer only to their
wicked life? If you had not affirmed this, I should really
wonder at your affirming quickly after, “In all other places
of Scripture, except 2 Cor. iv. 16, ‘renewing’ relates only to
a vicious course of life;” (Page 154;) seeing you immediately
confute yourself by both the following citations:—“Be not
conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewal
of your mind:” (Rom.xii. 2:) Unless the mind be only another
expression for “a vicious course of life.” “We ourselves also
were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers
lusts and pleasures; living in malice and envy, hateful, and
hating one another.” (Titus iii. 3-5.) Do these words imply
nothing but “a vicious course of life?” no inward corruption
at all? “‘But after that the lovingkindness and love of God
our Saviour toward man appeared,—He saved us by the
renewing of the Holy Ghost.’” From what? from a vicious
course of life only? Nay, but from “foolishness” of heart
also; from error, from malice, hatred, envy, evil desire; all
which are inward corruptions.
You add: “From all this we may gather, that “God’s
creating the new man after his own image in righteousness
and true holiness, means his erecting the Christian Church
with a view to promote righteousness and holiness among
men. For ‘we are God's workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus unto good works.’” (Page 155.) Surely you do not
cite this verse also to prove, that the “renewing of our mind”
implies no inward change | It must be something more than
an outward profession, or the reforming a vicious course of
life, by reason of which we are said to be “God’s workman
ship, created anew in Christ Jesus.”
These texts, therefore, do manifestly refer to personal, inter
mal holiness; and clearly prove, that this is the chief part of
that “image of God” in which man was originally created.
The other text which you re-consider, is Eccles. vii. 29:
“God hath made man upright; but they have sought out
many inventions.” (Pages 156–160.) But this, you say, does
not mean, that God made man righteous; but that he made
him right, as having those powers, means, and encourage
342 The DoCTRINE OF
ments, by a due use of which he may become righteous. In
order to prove that this is the true meaning of the words, you
affirm, 1. “That man here is not to be understood of Adam,
but of all mankind.” This cannot be granted without full
proof. You affirm, 2. “This appears from the latter part of
the sentence: ‘They sought out many inventions.’” Adam
and Eve did so, in and after their fall. This, therefore,
proves nothing. You affirm, 8. “The word jashar” (which
we translate upright) “does not always imply uprightness or
righteousness.” But this is its proper meaning, as will
appear to any who seriously considers the following texts:—
1. “When thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of
the Lord.” (Deut. xii. 25.) It is taken in the very same
sense, verse 28; xiii. 18, and xxi. 9. In all these texts, it
undeniably implies, morally good, or righteous. 2. “A God
of truth and without iniquity; just and right is he.” (Deut.
xxxii. 4.) “Good and upright is the Lord.” (Psalm xxv. 8.)
3. “The word of the Lord is right.” (Psalm xxxiii. 4.) “The
ways of the Lord are right.” (Hosea xiv. 9.) 4. “Be glad and
rejcice, ye righteous.” (Psalm xxxii. 11.) “Rejoice in the
Lord, O ye righteous.” (Psalm xxxiii. 1.) In the very same
sense it occurs in numberless places. As the word is there
fore properly applied to God himself, to his word, his provi
dences, and his people, (in all which cases it must necessarily
mean righteous,) we cannot lightly depart from this its proper
signification.
But you think there is a necessity of departing from it
here; because “to say, God created Adam righteous, is to
affirm a contradiction, or what is inconsistent with the very
nature of righteousness. For a righteousness wrought in
him without his knowledge or consent, would have been no
righteousness at all.” (Page 161.) You may call it by any
name you like better. But we must use the old name still;
as being persuaded that the love of God, governing the senses,
appetites, and passions, however or whenever it is wrought
in the soul, is true, essential righteousness.
Nay, “righteousness is right action.” Indeed it is not.
Here (as we said before) is your fundamental mistake. It is a
right state of mind; which differs from right action, as the
cause does from the effect. Righteousness is, properly and
directly, a right temper or disposition of mind, or a complex
of all right tempers.
ORIGINAL SIN. 343
For want of observing this, you say, “Adam could not act
before he was created. Therefore he must exist, and use his
intellectual powers, before he could be righteous.” “But,
according to this reasoning,” as Dr. Jennings observes, “Christ
could not be righteous at his birth.” You answer, “He ex
isted before he was made flesh.” I reply, He did,—as God.
But the man Christ Jesus did not. Neither, therefore, did he
use his intellectual powers. According to your reasoning,
then, the man Christ Jesus could not be righteous at his birth.
The Doctor adds: “Nay, according to this reasoning, God
could not be righteous from eternity? because he must exist be
fore he was righteous.” (Jennings's Windication.) You answer:
“My reasoning would hold even with respect to God, were it
true that he ever did begin to exist. But neither the existence
nor the holiness of God was prior to each other.” (Taylor's Sup
plement, p. 162.) Nay, but if his existence was not prior to his
holiness, if he did not exist before he was holy, your assertion,
that every being must exist before it is righteous, is not true.
Besides, (to pursue your reasoning a little farther,) if “God
did always exist,” yet unless you can prove that he always
acted, it will not clear your argument. For let him exist
millions of ages, he could not be righteous (according to your
maxim) before he acted right.
One word more on this article: You say, “My reasoning
would hold good, even with respect to God, were it true that
he ever did begin to exist.” Then I ask concerning the Son
of God, Did he ever begin to exist? If he did not, he is the
one, eternal God; (for there cannot be two eternals; ) if he
did, and your reasoning hold good, when he began to exist
he was not righteous.
“But St.John saith, “He that doeth righteousness is right
eous.’” Yes, it appears he is, by his doing or practising
“righteousness.” “But where doth the Scripture speak one
word of a righteousness infused into us?” Where it speaks
of “the love of God” (the essence of righteousness) “shed
abroad in our hearts.”
And cannot God, by his almighty power, infuse any good
tempers into us? You answer, “No;—no being whatever
can do for us that which cannot be at all if it be not our own
choice, and the effect of our own industry and exercise. But
all good tempers are the effect of our own industry and exer
cise; otherwise they cannot be at all.”
344 ThE DOCTRINE OF
Nay, then, it is certain they cannot be at all. For neither
lowliness, meekness, long-suffering, nor any other good tem
per, can ever be the effect of my own industry and exercise.
But I verily believe they may be the effect of God's Spirit,
working in me whatsoever pleaseth him. See Isaiah xxvi. 12.
You add: “The thing cannot exist, unless we choose;
because our choosing to do what is right, is the very thing
which is to exist.” No; the thing which is to exist is, a
right state of mind. And it is certain, God can give this to
any creature, at the very first moment of its existence. Nay,
it may be questioned, whether God can create an intelligent
being in any other state.
“But a habit is gained by repeated acts. Therefore, habits
of righteousness could not be created in man.” Mere play
ing upon words! He could be, he was, created full of love.
Now, whether you call this a habit or no, it is the sum of all
righteousness.
“But this love is either under the government of my will,
or it is not.” It is. The love of God which Adam enjoyed
was under the government of his will. “But if so, it could
be righteous only so far as applied to right action in heart
and life.” (Pages 164, 165.) Stop here. The love of God is
righteousness, the moment it exists in any soul; and it must
exist before it can be applied to action. Accordingly, it was
righteousness in Adam the moment he was created. And yet
he had a power either to follow the dictates of that love, (in
which case his righteousness would have endured for ever,)
or to act contrary thereto; but love was righteousness still,
though it was not irresistible.
“I might add, Adam’s inclination to sin (for he could not
sin without a sinful inclination) must be so strong as to over
come his (supposed) inbred propensity to holiness; and so
malignant, as to expel that principle at once, and totally.
Consequently, the supposed original righteousness was con
sistent with a sinful propensity, vastly stronger and more
malignant than ever was or can be in any of his posterity;
who cannot sin against such resistance, or with such dreadful
consequences. Thus, original righteousness in Adam proves
far worse than original sin in his posterity.” (Page 166.)
I have set down your argnment at large, that it may appear
in its full strength. Now, let us view it more closely: “Adam
ORIGINAL SIN. 345
cculd not sin without a sinful inclination.” The sentence is
ambiguous. Either it may mean, “Adam could not choose ill,
without some sinful temper preceding;” and in this sense it is
false; or, “He could not commit outward sin, without first
inclining, that is, choosing so to do.” 2. “This his sinful in
clination (or temper) was so strong as to overcome his inbred
propensity to holiness.” It was not any sinful inclination (in
this sense) which overcame his propensity to holiness; but
strong temptation from without: How strong we know not,
and the circumstances of it we know not. 3. “This his sinful
inclination was so malignant, as to expel that principle at
once, and totally.” Not by any sinful inclination, but by
yielding to temptation, he did lose the love and image of God.
But that this was totally and at once, we have no authority to
affirm. 4. “Consequently, original righteousness in Adam was
consistent with a sinful propensity, vastly stronger, and more
malignant, than ever was or can be in any of his posterity.”
It was consistent with no sinful propensity at all, but barely
with a power of yielding to temptation. It declined in the
same proportion, and by the same degrees, as he did actually
yield to this. And when he had yielded entirely, and eaten the
fruit, original righteousness was no more. Therefore, the Fifth
proposition, “Thus original righteousness proves to be far
worse than original sin,” is flourish. What a figure does this
fair argument make, now it is turned inside out !
From all this it may appear, that the doctrine of original
righteousness (as well as that of original sin) hath a firm foun
dation in Scripture, as well as in the attributes of a wise, holy,
and gracious God.
As you do not offer any new argument in your conclusion,
I need not spend any time upon it.
You subjoin Remarks on Dr. Watts's Additions to his book.
Some of these deserve a serious consideration:
1. Either the new-created man loved God supremely, or not.
If he did not, he was not innocent ; since the very law and
light of nature require such a love to God. If he did, he
stood disposed for every act of obedience. And this is true
holiness of heart.
You answer, (in many words,) “The new-created man did
not love God supremely. For, before he could love God, the
powers of his mind must have been quite finished, and actually
346 THE DOCTRINE OF
exercised.” (Page 186.) And, doubtless, the very moment he
was created, they were quite finished, and actually exercised
too. For man was not gradually formed by God, as a statue is
by a human artificer; but “He spake the word, and they were
made; He commanded, and they were created.” And as light
and heat were not subsequent to the creation of the sun, but
began to exist with it, so that the moment it existed it shone;
so spiritual light and heat, knowledge and love, were not sub
sequent to the creation of man, but they began to exist toge
ther with him. The moment he existed, he knew and loved.
2. If the new-made creature had not a propensity to love
and obey God, but was in a state of mere indifference to good
or evil, then his being put into such an union with flesh and
blood, among a thousand temptations, would have been an
over-balance on the side of vice. But our reason can never
suppose, that God, the wise, just, and good, would have placed
a new-made creature in such a situation.
This argument cannot be answered, unless it can be showed,
either, (1.) That in such a situation, there would not have
been an over-balance on the side of vice; or, (2.) That to
place a new-made creature in a situation where there was such
an over-balance, was consistent with the wisdom, justice, and
goodness of God.
But, instead of showing, or even attempting to show, this,
you feebly say, “I do not think the reason of man by any
means sufficient to direct God, in what state to make moral
agents.” (O that you had always thought so ! How much
vain, yea, mischievous, reasoning had then been spared!)
“But, however Adam’s propensities and temptations were
balanced, he had freedom to choose evil as well as good.”
(Pages 187, 188.) He had. But this is no answer to the
argument, which, like the former, remains in its full force.
How could a wise, just, and good God place his creature in
such a state as that the scale of evil should preponderate?
Although it be allowed, he is, in a measure, free still; the other
scale does not “fly up, and kick the beam.”
3. Notwithstanding all the cavils which have been raised,
yet if those two texts (Eph. iv. 24; Col. iii. 10) are considered
together, their obvious meaning will strike an honest and
unbiassed reader, the new man, or the principle of true reli
gion in the heart, is created by God after his moral image, in
ORIGINAL SIN. 347
that righteousness and true holiness wherein man was at first
created.
You answer, “I have endeavoured to prove the contrary;
and he does not offer to point out any one mistake in my inter
pretations.” (Page 189.) I have pointed out more than one.
4. If these are the qualifications with which such a new
made creature should be endued; and these the circumstances,
wherein, from the wisdom, justice, and goodness of God, we
should expect him to be situated ; then, by a careful survey of
what man is now, compared with what he should be, we may
easily determine, whether man is at present such a creature
as the great and blessed God made him at first.
You answer in abundance of words, the sum of which is
this: “Our circumstances are, on the whole, far better than
Adam’s were; for he was under that severe law, ‘Transgress
and die.’” (Page 190.) He was so; but this does not prove
the point still; balancing this single disadvantage (if such it
was; for even that may be disputed) with the numerous
advantages he was possessed of, with the holiness and
happiness which he enjoyed, and might have enjoyed for ever,
it does by no means appear that the present circumstances of
mankind in general are better than Adam’s were.
5. God did not give Noah dominion over the brute creatures
in so ample a manner as he did to Adam. Fear indeed fell
on the brutes; but this does not sufficiently preserve man from
their outrage. In the innocent state, no man would have been
poisoned or torn by serpents or lions as now.
You answer: “The second grant runs,—‘The fear of you
and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the field, and
upon every fowl of the air, and upon all that moves on the earth,
and upon all the fishes of the sea: Into your hands they are
delivered. Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for
you: Even as the green herb I have given you all things. Now,
this grant is more extensive than the first.” (Page 191.) It is,
as to food; but not as to dominion. The liberty of eating an
animal does not necessarily imply any dominion over it at all.
“But the “fear’ and “dread of every beast are the effects of
dominion in man, and the subjection in brutes.” Nay, neither
does fear necessarily imply dominion. I may fear what has not
dominion over me, and what I am not subject to. And those
animals may fear me, over which, nevertheless, I have not
348 THE DoCTRINE OF
dominion, neither are they subject to me. I fear every viper,
yea, every poisonous spider; and they fear me: Yet neither
has dominion over the other. Fear, therefore, and dread
may be in a high degree; and yet no dominion at all. But
they are “‘all delivered into our hands.’” Yes; “for
meat; ” as the very next words explain that expression.
Whatever therefore it may “import in other scriptures,” the
meaning of it here is plain and certain.
6. Would God have exposed the pure and innocent works of
his hands to such unavoidable perils and miseries as arise
from bears, tigers, serpents, precipices, volcanoes, &c. *
You answer: “He did expose innocent Adam to a peril and
misery greater than all these put together, even to a tempting
devil.” (Pages 191,192.) I reply, (1.) This did not imply any
unavoidable misery at all. (2.) It implied no more peril than
God saw was needful, as a test of his obedience. Therefore this
is no parallel case: So this argument also stands unanswered.
7. It has been said, indeed, “If Adam fell into sin though
he was innocent, then among a million of creatures every one
might sin, though he was as innocent as Adam.” (Pages 194,
195.) I answer, There is a possibility of the event; but the
improbability of it is a million to one. I prove it thus: If
a million of creatures were made in an equal probability to
stand or fall; and if all the numbers, from one to one million
$nclusively, were set in a rank, it is plainly a million to
one, that just any single proposed number of this multitude
should fall. Now, the total sum is one of these numbers, that
ts, the last of them. Consequently, it is a million to one
against the supposition, that the whole number of men should
fall. And this argument will grow still ten thousand times
stronger, if we suppose ten thousand millions to have lived
since the creation.
Your argument stood thus: “If we cannot infer from Adam’s
transgression, that his nature was originally corrupt, neither
can we infer from the transgressions of all mankind, that their
mature is originally corrupt.” It is answered, Ifamillion of crea
tures were made in an equal probability to stand or fall, it is
a million to one they should not all fall. You reply, “This is
no answer to my argument.” (Page 196.) Surely it is; and a
direct answer. That one man sinned, does not prove he had a
corrupt nature. Why? Because (supposing him free to choose
ORIGINAL SIN. 349
good or evil) it was as probable he should sin, as not, there being
no odds on one side or the other; but that all men should sin,
does prove they have a corrupt nature; because it is not as pro
bable, that all men should sin, as that one man should; the odds
against it being as a million, or rather ten thousand millions, to
one. Either, therefore, we must allow that mankind are more
inclined to evil than to good, or we must maintain a supposition
so highly improbable as comes very near a flat impossibility.
And thus much you yourself cannot but allow: “The reason
ing may hold good, where all circumstances agree to make the
probability equal with regard to every individual in this sup
posed million.” And how can the probability be other than
equal, if every individual be as wise and good as Adam? “But
be it equal or no,” you say, “the case is not to be estimated
by the laws of equal probability, but of infection. For when
sin is once entered into a body of men, it goes on, not accord
ing to the laws of chance,” (is this precisely the same with
equal probability?) “but the laws, as I may say, of infection.”
But how came sin to enter into a body of men? That is the
very question. Supposing, first a body of sinners, sin “may
assume the nature of a contagion.” But the difficulty lies
against supposing any body of sinners at all. You say, in
deed, “One sinner produces another, as the serpent drew in
Eve: The first sin and sinner being like a ‘little leaven which
leavens the whole lump.’” All this I can understand, sup
posing our nature is inclined to evil. But if not, why does
not one good man produce another, as naturally as one sinner
produces another? And why does not righteousness spread
as fast and as wide among mankind as wickedness? Why
does not this “leaven, leaven the whole lump,” as frequently,
as readily, and as throughly, as the other? These laws of
infection, so called, will therefore stand you in no stead. For,
to bring the matter still more to a point, suppose Adam and
Eve newly infected by sin; they had then none to infect,
having no child. Afterward they repented, and found mercy.
Then Cain was born. Now, surely neither Adam nor Eve
would infect him, having suffered so severely for their own
sin; which, therefore, they must needs guard hin- against !
How, then, came he to be a sinner? “O, by his own choice;
as Seth was righteous.” Well; afterwards, both wicked Cain
and good Seth begat sons and daughters. Now, was it not
just as probable, one should infect his children with goodness,
350 THE DOCTRINE OF
as the other with wickedness? How came, then, Cain to
transmit vice, any more than Seth to transmit virtue? If
you say, “Seth did transmit virtue; his posterity was vir
tuous until they mixed with the vicious offspring of Cain,”
I answer, (1.) How does that appear? How do you prove
that all the posterity of Seth were virtuous? But, (2.) If
they were, why did not this mixture amend the vicious, rather
than corrupt the virtuous? If our nature is equally inclined
to virtue and vice, vice is no more contagious than virtue.
How, then, came it totally to prevail over virtue, so that “all
flesh had corrupted themselves before the Lord?” Con
tagion and infection are nothing to the purpose; seeing they
might propagate good as well as evil.
Let us go one step farther: Eight persons only were saved
from the general deluge. We have reason to believe that
four, at least, of these were persons truly virtuous.
How then came vice to have a majority again among the
new inhabitants of the earth ? Had the nature of man been
inclined to neither, virtue must certainly have had as many
votaries as vice. Nay, suppose man a reasonable creature,
and supposing virtue to be agreeable to the highest reason,
according to all the rules of probability, the majority of man.
kind must in every age have been on the side of virtue.
8. Some have reckoned up a large catalogue of the instances
of divine goodness, and would make this as evident a proof
that mankind stands in the favour of God, as all the other
instances are of a universal degeneracy of man, and the anger
of God against them. But it is easy to reply, The goodness
of God may incline him to bestow a thousand bounties upon
criminals; but his justice and goodness will not suffer him to
inflict misery in such a universal manner, where there has
been no sin to deserve it either in parents or children.
You answer: “There is more than enough sin among man
kind, to deserve all the sufferings God inflicts upon them.
And the Scriptures represent those sufferings as disciplinary,
for correction and reformation.” What, all the sufferings of
all mankind? This can in nowise be allowed. Where do
the Scriptures say, that all sufferings, those of infants in
particular, are purely disciplinary, and intended only “for
correction and reformation?” Neither can this be reconciled
to matter of fact. How did the sufferings of Grecian or
Roman infants tend to their correction and reformation?
ORIGINAL SIN. 851
Neither do they tend to the correction or reformation of their
parents, or of any other persons under heaven. And even as
to adults: If universal suffering is a proof of universal sin,
and universal sin could not take place unless men were natu
rally prone to evil, then the present sufferings of mankind are
a clear and strong evidence that their nature is prone to evil.
9. Notwithstanding all God’s provision for the good of man,
still the Scripture represents men while they are in their
fallen state, as destitute of God’s favour, and without hope.
You answer: “How can men be destitute of God’s favour,
when he has vouchsafed them a Redeemer?” (Page 207.) By
destitute of God’s favour, we mean, children of wrath, objects
of God’s displeasure; and because they were so, the Redeemer
was given, to reconcile them to God by his own blood; but,
notwithstanding this, while we and they were in our fallen
state, we were all objects of God’s displeasure.
“But how can they be without hope, when he ‘hath given
them the hope of eternal life?’” All men who are not born
again, born of God, are without hope at this day. God, indeed,
“hath given,” but they have not accepted, “the hope of eter
nal life.” Hence the bulk of mankind are still as void of this
hope, as are the beasts that perish. And so (the Scripture
declares) are all men by nature, whatever difference grace
may make. “By nature” all are “children of wrath, without
hope, without God in the world.”
10. Doth that man write the sincere sense of his own mind
and conscience, who charges the expression, “Adam was on
trial for us all,” with this inference, “That we are none of
us in a state of trial now, but Adam alone was upon trial for
us all ?” We have owned and granted, that men are now in
a state of trial; but this is upon the foot of a new covenant.
You answer, “What can be more evident, than that, accord
ing to this scheme, Adam alone was to be upon trial for us all,
and that none of Adam’s posterity are upon personal trial?”
(Page 209.) Do you not see the ambiguity in the word
alone? Or do you see and dissemble it? Dr. Watts sup
poses, that Adam alone, that is, this single person, was on trial
for all men. Does it follow from hence, that Adam alone,
that is, no other person, was ever in a state of trial? Again:
If no person but Adam was upon trial for all men, will it
follow, “No person but Adam was upon trial at all?” It is
352 THE DOCTRINE OF
really hard to think, that you here “speak the sincere sense
of your own mind and conscience.”
You go on: “He supposes all mankind are still under the
original covenant with Adam, according to which he alone was
upon trial for us all, and none of his posterity are upon per
sonal trial.” He does not suppose any man to be so under
that covenant, as to supersede his being upon personal trial.
Yourself add: “I knew he owned we are upon personal trial,
and that all mankind are now under the covenant of grace;
but how can either of these consist with the scheme?” Both
of them consist with it perfectly well. (1) Adam alone, or
single, was, in some sense, on trial for all mankind, according
to the tenor of the oid covenant, “Do this and live.” (2.)
Adam fell, and hereby the sentence of death came on him
and all his posterity. (3.) The new covenant was given,
whereby all mankind were put into a state of personal trial;
yet, still, (4.) Death, the penalty of the old covenant, came
(more or less) on all mankind. Now, all this is well con
sistent with itself, as well as with the tenor of Scripture.
11. Mankind is represented as one collective body in several
verses of the 5th chapter to the Romans.
You answer: “St. Paul always distinguishes between
Adam, and all men, his posterity, and does not consider
Adam with all men, as one creature.” (Page 211.)
What then? This does not prove that he does not repre
sent mankind (Adam’s posterity) as one collective body.
12. All that is contained in the blessing given to Noah is
consistent with the curse which came on all men by the first
sin. But that curse is not consistent with the original blessing
which was given to Adam.
You answer: “The blessing given to Noah was the very
same which was given to Adam.” (Page 212.) This is pal
pably false. The blessing which was given to Adam included,
(1.) Freedom from pain and death. (2.) Dominion over the
whole brute creation. But that given to Noah did not include
either. Yet you affirm, “It is renewed to Noah, without any
manner of alteration, after pain and death were introduced
into the world !” And do pain and death then make no
manner of alteration?
13. The dominion over the brutes given to Adam was not
given to Noah.
You answer: “Our killing and feeding upon them is the
ORIGINAL SIN. 353
highest instance of dominion over them.” (Page 213.) It is
no instance of it all. I may shoot a bear, and then eat him;
yet I have no dominion, unless it be over his carcase.
PART IV.
EXTRACTS FROM DR, WATTS AND MR. HEBDEN.
I HAVE now considered what is material in your “Doc
trine of Original Sin,” with the “Supplement, and Reply to
Dr. Watts.” And this I purposely did, before I read the
Doctor's book. But how was I surprised on reading it, to
observe the manner wherein you have treated it, of which I
could not be a judge before ! The frame which he had so
beautifully and strongly connected, you have disjointed and
broken in pieces, and given us nothing but mangled frag
ments of it, from which it is impossible to form any judg
ment of the whole. In order, therefore, to do justice to that
great and good man, as well as to his argument, I subjoin
an extract of so much of that work as directly affects the
main question.
I the rather subjoin this, and the following extracts, for
these two reasons: 1. Because what has gone before, being
purely argumentative, is dry, and less profitable to the gene
rality of readers: 2. Because they contain one uniform, con
nected scheme of the great doctrine which I have been
hitherto defending; and which, after the objections have been
removed out of the way, may be more clearly understood
and firmly embraced.
INTRODUCTION.
“MAN is a creature made up of an animal body and a
rational mind, so united as to act in a mutual correspondence,
according to certain laws appointed by his Creator. Now,
suppose the blessed God, who is perfect in wisdom and power,
in justice and goodness, were to form such a new creature,
with what qualifications may we conceive such a creature
would be endowed, by a Being of such goodness, justice, and
wisdom?” (Ruin and Recovery of Mankind, p. 1.)
VOL. IX. A. A
354 THE DOCTRINE OF
“1. We cannot but conceive, he must have a perfection of
natural powers, both of body and spirit, as, united together,
suited to his present circumstances.” (Page 2.)
“Not that we need conceive, man would be made so per
fect a being as God could make him: For the wisdom of God
plainly designed to display itself in the different ranks and
orders of his creation. Nor is it reasonable to suppose, man
would be made at first with such sublime perfections, as he
himself might afterwards arrive at, by a wise improvement
of his powers. But still the creature which was designed to
bear the nearest likeness of his Maker in this lower world
must have powers perfectly sufficient for his present well
being and acting in that station wherein God had placed him.
All his senses must be clear and strong, his limbs vigorous
and active, his body healthy in all the inward and outward
parts of it, and every natural power in its proper order.”
(Page 3.) “For God would surely form such a creature in a
state of perfect ease, without any original malady of nature,
to give him pain or sorrow. Nor could there be any ten
dency in his body to pain or disease while he remained with
out sin.” (Page 4.)
“And as the powers of his body must be thus perfect, so
the faculties of his soul must have their perfection too.
“His understanding must have that knowledge both of
God and his creatures, which was needful for his happiness.
Not that he was formed with all knowledge in arts and
sciences, but such as was requisite to his peace and welfare.
His reason must be clear, his judgment uncorrupted, and his
conscience upright and sensible.
“This leads me to speak of his moral perfection. A rational
creature thus made must not only be innocent, as a tree, but
must be formed holy. His will must have an inward bias to
virtue; he must have an inclination to please that God who
made him, a supreme love to his Creator, a zeal to serve him,
and a tender fear of offending him.” (Page 5.)
“For either the new-created man loved God supremely, or
not; if he did not, he was not innocent, since the law of
nature requires a supreme love to God; if he did, he stood
ready for every act of obedience: And this is true holiness
of heart. And, indeed, without this, how could a God of
holiness love the work of his own hands?
“There must be also in this creature a regular objection of
ORIGINAL SIN. 355
the inferior powers to the superior. Sense, and appetite, and
passion, must be subject to reason. The mind must have a
power to govern these lower faculties, that he might not
offend against the law of his creation.
“He must also have his heart inlaid with love to the crea
tures, especially those of his own species, if he should be
placed among them; and with a principle of honesty and
truth in dealing with them; and if many of these creatures
were made at once, there would be no pride, malice, or envy,
no falsehood, no brawls or contentions among them, but all
harmony and love.” (Page 6.)
“This universal righteousness, which is the moral image
of God, is far the noblest part of that image in which Moses
represents man to have been originally created. The same
writer assures us, that when God surveyed all his works, he
pronounced them ‘very good?’ agreeably to what Solomon
assures us, that God “made man upright.’” (Page 7.)
“It is true, the natural image of God in which man was
created, consisted in his spiritual, intelligent, and immortal
mature; and his political image, (if I may so speak,) in his
being lord of this lower creation. But the chief, the moral,
part of his image, we learn from St. Paul, to have been the
rectitude of man's nature; who, in his Epistle to the Ephe.
sians, (iv. 24) says, that the image of God in which man is
to be renewed, and, consequently, in which he was made,
consists “in righteousness and true holiness.’
“2. From the justice and goodness of God we may infer,
that though man was made free, with a power to choose
either evil or good, that he might be put into a state of pro
bation, yet he had a full sufficiency of power to preserve him
self in love and obedience to his Creator, and to guard him
self against every temptation.” (Page 8.)
“3. It is highly probable, from the goodness of God, that
such a creature would be made immortal: It is true, the
great God, as sovereign Lord of his creatures, might take
away all that he had given; but it is hard to suppose, that he
ever would have destroyed an intelligent creature who had
continued to serve and please him.” (Page 9.)
“It is also probable that he was endued with a power to
arrive at higher degrees of excellency and happiness than those
in which he was formed at first ; and hereby he was greatly
2 A 2
356 THE DOCTRINE OF
encouraged, both to watch against every sin, and to use all
zeal and diligence in improving the powers he had received.
“4. We may add, that the habitation in which a God of
infinite goodness would place such an innocent and holy crea
ture, would be furnished with all the necessaries and conveni
ences of life, and prepared for his delight as well as safety.
And so Moses tells us, that the first created pair were placed
in Eden, a garden of pleasure, and were made lords of all
therein, of all the creatures, animal and vegetable, that were
round about them.” (Page 10.)
“Neither can we conceive that anything destructive or
hurtful could be found in this delightful habitation, but
what man would have sufficient notice of, with sufficient
power to oppose or avoid it.
“5. And if this creature had power to propagate its kind,
the child must be innocent and holy, and equally capable of
persevering in virtue and happiness.” (Page 11.)
“Now, if we may judge from the wisdom, justice, and
goodness of God, that these are the qualifications with which
such a new-made creature would be endued, these the circum
stances in which he would be situated; then, by a careful sur
vey of what mankind is now, we may easily judge whether
man is now such a creature as the great and blessed God
made him at first. And this is the subject of the ensuing
inquiry.”
QUESTION I.
“Is man, in his present circumstances, such a creature as
he came out of the hands of God, his Creator *
“We may derive a full answer to this inquiry from the fol
lowing considerations.” (Page 12.)
“1. This earth, which was designed for the habitation of
man, carries evident tokens of ruin and desolation, and does
not seem to be ordained, in its present form and circum
stances, for the habitation of innocent beings; but is appa
rently fit for the dwelling-place of creatures who are degene
rate, and fallen from God.
“It is granted that the beauty and order of this lower world,
even in its present constitution, and the wonderful texture,
composition, and harmony of the several parts of it, both in air,
earth, and sea, do still illustriously display the power, wisdom,
ORIGINAL SIN. 357
and goodness of their Creator. Yet it must be confessed also,
that there are glaring proofs of the terrors of his justice, and
the execution of his vengeance.” (Page 13.)
“Is not the present shape of our earth, in its divisions of
seas and shores, rude and irregular, abrupt and horrid? Survey
a map of the world, and say, does the form of it strike our eyes
with any natural beauty and harmony? Rather, does it not
strongly bear on our sight the ideas of ruin and confusion?
Travel over the countries of this globe, or visit several parts
of this island,—what various appearances of a ruined world!
What vast, broken mountains hang over the heads of tra
vellers! What stupendous cliffs and promontories rise,—high
and hideous to behold ! What dreadful precipices,—which
make us giddy to look down, are ready to betray us into
destruction | What immense extents are there in many
countries of waste and barren ground ! What vast and
almost impassable deserts | What broad and faithless
morasses, which are made at once deaths and graves to
unwary travellers ! What huge ruinous caverns, deep and
wide, big enough to bury whole cities !” (Page 14.)
“What resistless deluges of water, in a season of great rains,
come rolling down the hills, bear all things before them, and
spread spacious desolation | What roaring and tremendous
waterfalls in several parts of the globe I What burning
mountains, in whose caverns are lakes of liquid fire ready to
burst upon the lower lands ! or they are a mere shell of
earth, covering prodigious cavities of smoke, and furnaces of
flame; and seem to wait a divine command, to break inward,
and bury towns and provinces in fiery ruin.” (Page 15.)
“What active treasures of wind are pent up in the bowels
of the earth, ready to break out into wide and surprising
mischief! What huge torrents of water rush and roar
through the hollows of the globe we tread | What dreadful
sounds and threatening appearances from the reign of meteors
in the air! What clouds charged with flame, ready to burst
on the earth, and discompose and terrify all nature !
“When I survey such scenes as these, I cannot but say
within myself, ‘Surely this earth, in these rude and broken
appearances, this unsettled and dangerous state, was designed
as a dwelling for some unhappy inhabitants, who did or would
transgress the laws of their Maker, and merit desolation from
358 ThE DOCTRINE or
his hand. And he hath here stored up his magazines of divine
artillery against the day of punishment.’” (Page 16.)
“How often have the terrible occurrences of nature in the
air, earth, and sea, and the calamitous incidents in several
countries, given a strong confirmation of this sentiment 1
“What destructive storms have we and our father seen
even in this temperate island of Great Britain | What floods
of water and violent explosions of fire do we read of in the his
tories of the world ! What shocking convulsions of the globe,
stretching far and wide under the affrighted nations ! What
huge disruptions of the caverns of the earth, with tremendous
bellowings, which have filled its inhabitants with terror and
astonishment, and made wide devastations ! Would a good
and gracious Being have originally so formed the inanimate
parts of this lower world, as to produce such deadly concus
sions therein, and such desolating appearances, had he not
designed it for the habitation of such creatures as he foresaw
would deserve these strokes of his indignation?” (Page 17.)
“And thus both Moses and St. Peter suppose God to have
laid up stores of ruin and destruction within the bowels of the
earth, that he might break open his dreadful treasures of flood
and fire at proper seasons, to drown and to burn the world,
together with the sinful inhabitants thereof.” (Pages 18, 19.)
“Now, the great God, who appointed such prodigious quan
tities both of water and fire to be reserved in the bowels of the
earth, and among the clouds of heaven, for such a foreseen day
of general destruction, did also doubtless prepare the materials
of all the lesser storms and hurricanes, earthquakes and floods,
and convulsions of nature; and treasured up for these purposes
his magazines of wind, and flood, and fire, in the earth. And is
this a habitation prepared for the residence of pure and holy
beings? Is this such a peaceful place as a kind Creator would
have formed for innocent creatures? It is absurd to imagine
this of a God so wise, so righteous, and so merciful!” (Page20.)
“2. Let us take a survey of the vegetables which grow out
of the earth, with the brute animals which are found on the
surface of it; and we shall find more reasons to conclude that
man, the chief inhabitant, is not such as he came first out of
his Maker's hand.
“It must be granted here again, that the wisdom and good
ness of the Creator are amazingly displayed in the animal and
ORIGINAL SIN. 359
the vegetable world, beyond the utmost reach of our thoughts
or praises. But still we may have leave to inquire, whether,
if man had continued innocent, among the numerous herbs
and flowers fitted for his support and delight, any plants or
fruits of a malignant, mortal nature would have grown out of
the earth, without some plain mark or caution set upon them.”
(Page 21.)
“Can we suppose that among the roots, herbs, and trees,
good for food, the great God would have suffered mischief,
malady, and deadly poison, to spring up here and there,
without any sufficient distinction, that man might know how
to avoid them? This is the case in our present world;
disease, anguish, and death, have entered into the bowels and
veins of multitudes by an innocent and fatal mistake of these
pernicious things for proper food.
“There was indeed ‘the tree of knowledge’ in Paradise;
but man was expressly cautioned against it. And certainly
had he continued holy, no poisonous plant would have been
suffered to grow on the earth, without either some natural mark
set upon it, or some divine caution to avoid it. (Page 22.)
“Proceed to the animal world: There are many creatures,
indeed, which serve the use or pleasure of man. But are there
not many other sorts which he is neither able to govern nor to
resist; and by which all his race are exposed, whenever they
meet them, to wounds, and anguish, and death?” (Page 23.)
“If man had not sinned, would there have been in the
world any such creatures as bears and tigers, wolves and
lions, animated with such fierceness and rage, and armed
with such destructive teeth and talons? Would the innocent
children of men have ever been formed to be the living prey
of these devourers? Were the life and limbs of holy creatures
made to become heaps of agonizing carnage? Or would their
flesh and bones have been given up to be crushed and churned
between the jaws of panthers and leopards, sharks and croco
diles? Let brutes be content to prey on their fellow-brutes,
but let man be their lord and ruler.
“If man were not fallen, would there have been so many
tribes of the serpent kind, armed with deadly venom? Would
such subtle and active mischiefs have been made and sent to
dwell in a world of innocents? And would the race of all these
murderers and destructive animals have been propagated for six
360 THE DOCTRINE OF
thousand years, in any province of God’s dominion, had not its
rational inhabitants been in rebellion against God?” (Page24.)
“What are the immense flights of locusts which darken the
sky, and lay the fields desolate? What are the armies of
hornets or musquitoes that frequently make a pleasant land
almost intolerable? If they are found in the heats of Afric,
and of the East and West Indies, one would think they should
not infest the Polar regions, if the Creator had not designed
them for a scourge to the nations on all sides of the globe.
“What are the innumerable host of caterpillars, but so many
messengers of the anger of God against a sinful race? And
since we can neither resist nor subdue them, we may certainly
infer, that we are not now such favourites of Heaven as God
at first made us.” (Page 25.)
“The troublesome and pernicious tribes of animals, both
of large and smaller size, which are fellow-commoners with
us on this great globe, together with our impotence to pre
vent or escape their mischiefs, is a sufficient proof that we are
not in the full favour and love of the God that made us, and
that he has quartered his armies, his legions, among us, as
Princes do in a rebellious province.
“It is true, all these are trials for man during his state of
probation. But a state of probation for innocent man would
not have included death; much less a violent and bloody, or
a lingering and painful, death.” (Page 26.) “Accordingly,
our return to dust is mentioned by Moses as a curse of God
for the sin of man. And when once life is forfeited by all
mankind, then a painful death may properly become a part of
the further trial of such creatures as are to rise again; and
any pious sufferers may be rewarded by a happy resurrection.
But a painful death could never be made a part of the trial
of innocent creatures, who had never forfeited life, nor were
ever legally subjected to death.” (Page 27.)
“Upon the whole, therefore, such noxious and destructive
plants and animals could not be made to vex and disturb, to
poison and destroy, a race of innocent, intellectual beings.
“3. The manner of our entrance into life is another proof
of universal sin.” (Page 29.) “Would the great and good
God have appointed intellectual animals, had they been sin
less, to be propagated in such in a way as should necessarily
give such exquisite pain and anguish to the mothers who
bring them forth? And if the contagion had not been univer
ORIGINAL SIN. 361
sal, why should such acute pangs attend almost every female
parent? Are not the multiplied sorrows with which the
daughters of Eve bring forth, an evident token that they are
not in their original state of favour with that God who
created them, and pronounced a blessing upon them in their
propagation?”
“Moses informs us, that God blessed the first pair, and bid
them ‘be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and
subdue it; and soon after tells us that these ‘multiplied sor
rows in child-birth are a curse from an offended God. Surely
the curse is not as old as the blessing; but sin and sorrow
came in together, and spread a wide curse over the birth of
man, which before stood only under a divine benediction.
Not that the blessing is now quite taken away, though the
pains of child-bearing are added to it: And daily experience
proves, this curse is not taken away by the blessing repeated
to Noah.” (Page 29.)
“4. Let us consider, in the next place, how the generality
of mankind are preserved in life. Some few have their food
without care or toil: But the millions of human creatures, in
all the nations of the earth, are constrained to support a
wretched life by hard labour. What dreadful risks of life or
limbs do multitudes run, to purchase their necessary food |
What waste of the hours of sweet repose, what long and
slavish and painful toils by day, do multitudes sustain, in
order to procure their daily nourishment! It is ‘by the
sweat of their brows they obtain ‘their bread: It is by a
continual exhausting their spirits, that many of them are
forced to relieve their own hunger, and to feed their helpless
offspring.” (Page 30.)
“If we survey the lower ranks of mankind even in England,
in a land of freedom and plenty, a climate temperate and fer
tile, which abounds with corn and fruits, and rich variety of
food; yet what a hard shift do ten thousand families make to
support lifel Their whole time is devoured by bodily labour,
and their souls almost eaten up with gnawing eares, to
answer that question, What shall I eat, and what shall I
drink? even in the poorest and coarsest manner? But if we
* “The Author has been censured here for not dropping a tear over the fair
sex, under their sorrows and acute pains. But he imagines he has been drop
ping tears in every page, and that over every part of mankind.” Undoubtedly
he has; and if so, how unjust, how cruel, is that censurel
362 THE DOCTRINE OF
send our thoughts to the sultry regions of Afric, the frost and
snows of Norway, the rocks and deserts of Lapland and
northern Tartary,—what a frightful thing is human life l
How is the rational nature lost in slavery, and brutality, and
incessant toils, and hardships | They are treated like brutes
by their lords, and they live like dogs and asses, among labours
and wants, hunger and weariness, blows and burdens without
end. Did God appoint this for innocents?” (Page 31.)
“Is the momentary pleasure of eating and drinking a recom
pence for incessant labour? Does it bear any proportion to the
length of toil, pain, and hazard, wherewith the provisions of life
are procured? Moses thought not. When he speaks of man's
‘eating bread in the sweat of his brow, he acknowledges this to
be another of the curses of God for the sin of man.” (Page 32.)
“It is strange that any man should say, ‘In this sentence
of God, no curse is pronounced upon either Adam’s body,
soul, or posterity; that the sorrow of child-bearing is not
inflicted as a curse; that the labours of life were increased,
but not as a curse; that death was not a curse.’ I would
fain ask, What is a curse, if some natural evil pronounced and
executed upon a person, or thing, be not so, especially when
it is pronounced on account of sin, and by God himself, as
supreme Governor and Judge? And even the curse on the
ground falls properly on the person who tills it.
“It is granted, God can turn curses into blessings. Yet
these evils were originally pronounced and inflicted as a curse
or punishment of sin; as it is written, ‘Cursed is every one
who continueth not in all things.’ And that death was designed
as a curse on man for sin is evident; for Christ ‘suffered”
that “curse for us.”
“5. Consider the character of mankind in general, with
regard to religion and virtue, and it will be hard to believe they
bear the image of their common Father in knowledge and holi
ness. Some, I grant, are renewed in his image; but the bulk
of the world are of another stamp, and sufficiently show, there
is some fatal contagion spread through this province of God’s
dominion. So St. John tells us, that, except the few who are
‘born of God, the whole world lieth in wickedness.” (Page 33.)
“And can we think of that gross and stupid ignorance of
God, which reigns through vast tracts of Asia, Africa, and
America, and the thick darkness which buries all the heathen
countries, and reduces them almost to brutes; can we think of
ORIGINAL SIN. 863
the abominable idolatries, the lewd and cruel rites of worship,
which have been spread through whole nations; the impious
and ridiculous superstitions which are now practised among the
greatest part of the world; and yet believe the blessed God
would put such wretched, polluted workmanship out of his
pure hands?” (Page 34.)
“Can we survey the desperate impiety and profaneness, the
swearing, and cursing, and wild blasphemy, that is practised,
day and night, among vast multitudes of those who profess to
know the true God; can we behold that almost universal neg
lect of God, of his fear, his worship, and the obedience due to
him, which is found even among them who are called Chris
tians; and yet imagine, that these bear that image of God in
which they were created?
“Nor have men forgot God only, but they seem also to have
abandoned their duties to their fellow-creatures also. Hence
the perpetual practices of fraud and villany in the commerce of
mankind, the innumerable instances of oppression and cruelty
which run through the world; the pride and violence of the
great; the wrath, ambition, and tyranny of princes, and the
endless iniquities and mischiefs that arise from malice, envy,
and revenge, in lower people. If we add to these the impure
scenes of lust and intemperance, which defy the day and pollute
the darkness; with the monstrous barbarities which are con
tinually committed by the heathen savages in Africa and
America, (some of whom kill and roast their fellow-creatures,
and eat up men as they eat bread,) and by the Christian
savages in the Inquisition established in Asia, as well as in
many parts of Europe; can we still imagine that mankind
abide in that state, wherein they came from the hands of their
Maker?” (Page 35.)
“That far the greatest number of men are evil, was the
known sentiment of the wiser Heathens.” (Page 37.) “They
saw and bewailed the undeniable fact, though they knew not
how to account for it. Ot TAetoves cascot, “Most men are wicked,’
was a common observation among thcm. Even the poets could
not but see this obvious truth. So Virgil brings in Anchises,
telling his son, “Few are happy in the other world:’—
Pauci laeta arva tenemus.
And in this life, Horace remarks of men in general,—
Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata.
364 THE DOCTRINE OF
“We are always desiring and pursuing forbidden things.’
Nay, he says,—
Witiis memo sine nascitur.
“No man is born without vices; and gives this character of
young men in general,—
Cereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus asper.
Seneca says just the same,—
Pejora juvenes facile precepta audiunt.
‘Young men readily hearken to evil counsels: They are soft
as wax to be moulded into vice, but rough and rugged to their
best monitors.’” (Page 38.)
“Juvenal abounds with the same accounts of human
nature:
Quas tam festa dies, ut cesset proderefuren f
Ad mores natura recurrit
Damnatos, fixa et mutari nescia.
Quisnam hominum est, quem tu contentum videris uno
Flagitiof
Dociles imitandis
Turpibus et pravis omnes sumus."
“6. And not only they of riper age, but even those of ten
der years, discover the principles of iniquity and seeds of sin.
What young ferments of spite and envy, what native wrath and
rage, are found in the little hearts of infants, and sufficiently
discovered by their hands, and eyes, and countenances, before
they can speak, or know good from evil ! What additional
crimes of lying and deceit, obstinacy and perverseness proceed
to blemish their younger years!” (Pages 39, 41.)
“How little knowledge or thought of God, their Creator and
Governor, is found in children when they can distinguish good
and evil!” (Page 42.) “What an utter disregard of Him that
made them, and of the duties they owe to him And when they
* These quotations from Juvenal are thus translated by Gifford :
“What day so sacred, which no guilt profanes?”
------“Nature still,
Incapable of change, and fix’d in ill,
Recurs to her old habits:-never yet
Could sinner to his sin a period set.
When did the flush of modest blood inflame
The cheek once harden'd to the sense of shame?
Or when the offender, since the birth of time,
Retire, contented with a single crime?”
“For youth is facile, and its yielding will
Receives, with fatal ease, the print of ill.”-EDIT.
ORIGINAL SIN. 365.
begin to act according to their childish age, how little sense
have they of what is morally right and good How do evil
passions or irregular appetites continually prevail in them !
Even from their first capacity of acting as moral creatures,
how are they led away to practise falsehood and injury to
their play-fellows, perhaps with cruelty or revenge How
often are they engaged in bold disobedience to their parents
or teachers | And whence does this arise ? What is the
root, that brings forth such early bitter fruit?” (Page 43.)
“It cannot be imputed to custom, education, or example;
for many of these things appear in children before they can
take any notice of ill examples, or are capable of imitating
them. And even where there are only good examples about
them, and where the best and earliest instructions are given
them, and inculcated with the utmost care, yet their hearts
run astray from God. The far greatest part of them visibly
follow the corrupt influences of sense, appetite, passion, and
manifest very early the evil principles of stubbornness, pride,
and disobedience.” (Page 44.)
“To give a still fuller confirmation of this truth, that man
kind have a corrupt nature in them, let it be observed, that
where persons have not only had all possible helps of educa
tion from their parents, but have themselves taken a religious
turn betimes, what perpetual hinderance do they find within
themselves!” (Page 45.) “What inward oppositions work in
their heart, and, perhaps, interrupt their holy course of life
What vanity of mind, what irregular appetites, what forget
fulness of God, what evil thoughts and tendencies of heart
rise up in contradiction to their best purposes ! Insomuch,
that “there is not a just man upon earth, who, through his
whole life, ‘doeth good and sinneth not.’” (Page 46.)
“To sum up the three last considerations: If the bulk of
mankind are grossly sinful, and if every individual, without
exception, is actually a sinner against the law of his Creator;
if sinful propensities appear even in our most tender years,
and every child becomes an actual sinner almost as soon as
it becomes a moral agent; then we have just reason to con
clude, that there is some original taint spread through the
whole race of men from their birth.
“7. It has been said, indeed, that, “if the first man fell
into sin, though he was innocent and perfect, then among a
366 THE DOCTRINE OF
million of men, every one might sin, though he was as inno
cent and perfect as Adam.’” (Page 47.)
“I answer, There is a bare possibility of the event; but
the improbability of it is in the proportion of a million to one.
“And I prove it thus: If a million of creatures were made
in an equal probability to stand or fall; and if all the num
bers, from one to one million inclusively, were set in a rank,
it is a million to one that just any single proposed number
of all these should fall by sin. Now, the total sum is one of
these numbers, that is, the last of them; consequently it is a
million to one against the supposition that the whole number
of men should fall.
“And yet farther, if they were all made (as the goodness
of God seems to require) in a greater probability of standing
than falling, then it is abundantly more than a million to one,
that all should sin without exception. And the argument
grows still ten thousand times stronger, if we suppose ten
thousand millions to have lived since the creation.” (Page 48.)
“8. That man is a fallen creature, appears farther from
hence: No man is able by his present natural powers to per
form that law of his Creator which is still written upon his
heart.” (Page 49.)
“Does not this law require us to love God with all our heart,
to do to others as we would they should do to us, and to go
vern our senses, appetites, and passions by the rules of reason?
Does it not require that these things, whether they regard God,
ourselves, or others, should be done perfectly, without defect?
Doth it not demand, that we should fear, honour, and trust the
great God, and obey all his will in a perfect manner P Doth it
not prescribe constant justice, truth, and goodness, toward our
neighbour, without one covetous wish, one act of the will, or
tongue, or hand, contrary to truthor love? Does it not demand,
that every sense, appetite, and passion, should be perfectly sub
ject to reason? Now, is there a man on earth, who can say,
‘I am able by my natural powers to do this?’” (Page 50.)
“Even the outward temptations to which man is exposed,
are evidently too strong to be effectually and constantly re
sisted by his now enfeebled reason and conscience; while at
the same time, his will, his appetites, and passions, have a
powerful propensity to comply with them.” (Page 51.)
“Now, would a just, a wise, and a merciful God have formed
intellectual creatures in such awretched state, with powers and
ORIGINAL SIN. 367
capacities so much below their duties, that they break his law
daily and continually, and are notable to help it?” (Page 52.)
“Should it be said, ‘God cannot require more than we are
able to perform: 'You have an answer in your own bosom;
for you know and feel God does require this, even by the law
he has written in your heart; yet you feel you are not able to
perform it, untie or cut the knot how you may.
“Should it be said again, “God pities and pardons feeble
creatures:” I answer, (1.) According to the covenant of grace,
he does, but not according to the law of creation. But, (2)
Did God make some of his noblest creatures so feeble in their
original state, as continually to offend, and want pardon?
Did he give them such a law as should never, never be fulfilled
by any one of them? Would a God who adjusts the proportion
of all things with the exactest wisdom, give a law to his crea
tures so disproportionate to their original powers, that, even
in the state of their creation, they are under a necessity of
breaking it, and stand in need of daily forgiveness? Does not
this single consideration prove, that man is now a degenerate
being, and not such as he was at first created by the wise,
the righteous, the merciful God?” (Page 54.)
“If you, who are most unwilling to acknowledge the fall of
man, would but look into yourself daily, and observe all the
sinful and irregular turns of your own heart; how propense
you are to folly, in greater or less instances; how soon appetite
and passion oppose reason and conscience; how frequently
you fall short of the demand of the perfect law of God; how
thoughtless and forgetful you are of your Creator; how cold
and languishing your affection to Him; how little delight you
have in virtue, or in communion with God: Could you think
you are such an innocent and holy creature as God at first
created you? and that you have been such even from your
childhood? Surely a more accurate observation of your own
heart must convince you, that you yourself are degenerated
from the first rectitude of your mature.” (Page 55.)
“9. Another proof of the degeneracy of mankind is this:
They are evidently under the displeasure of God, which could
not be in their primeval state. As we have taken a short view
of the sins of men, let us also briefly survey the miseries of
mankind, and see how these consist with their being in the
favour of God.” (Page 56.)
368 THE DOCTRINE OF
“Think on the thousands of rational creatures descending
hourly to the grave: A few, by some sudden stroke; but far
the greater part by painful and slow approaches. The gravel
A dark and shameful prison which would never have been
made for creatures persisting in innocence, and abiding in the
favour of Him that gave them life and being. Death is the
wages of sin; and from this punishment of sin, none of man
kind can claim a discharge.
“Had they stood, can we think any of them would have died;
much less every one of them? And, especially, that half the
human race should have been doomed to die before seven
years old? before they reach the tenth part of the present age
of man, or have done anything in life worth living for?”
(Page 57.)
“But let us proceed to other miseries that attend us, and
hasten us down to the grave:—
“Think next of the multitudes that are racked day and night
by the gout and stone, the colic and rheumatism, and all man
ner of acute and painful diseases; and then say, Would a mer
ciful God have contrived these torments for sinless creatures?
Think of the dismal scenes of war and bloodshed that have
by times overspread all nations. Cast your thought on a field
of battle, where thousands of men are destroyed like brute
beasts, and perish by sharp and bloody strokes, or by the fatal
engines of death. See thousands more lie on the cold ground,
with their flesh and limbs battered and torn, wounded and
panting in extreme anguish, till the murmuring soul takes its
flight. Are these the signals of their Maker’s love, and of his
image in which they were created?” (Page 58.)
“Think of the numbers that are swallowed up in the mighty
waters, by the rage of stormy winds and seas; review the mul
titudes which have been swept away by the pestilence, or con
sumed by the tedious agonies of famine. Would famine and
pestilence, with all the train of lingering horrors which attend
them, have ever been made for innocent creatures, to have
swept away whole nations of them, of every age and sex, men,
women, and children, without distinction?” (Page 59.)
“Think yet again what numbers of men have been crushed
into miseries and death, and buried by earthquakes; or have
had their bones broken, their limbs disjointed, and &leir flesh
painfully battered by the fall of houses; perhaps buried alive
in the ruins of entire towns or villages, while their neighbours
ORIGINAL SIN. 369
have been drowned in multitudes by the dismal eruptions of
water, or destroyed by deluges of liquid fire bursting out of the
earth: Would a God of goodness and justice have treated
innocent creatures in this manner P” (Page 60.)
“Carry your thoughts to the countries of those savages,
where thousands of their conquered enemies, or prisoners of
war, are offered in sacrifice to their idols, or tortured and roasted
to death by slow fires! Add this to all the former miseries,
and then let calm reflection say, whether this world does not
look like a province half forsaken of its gracious Governor.
“Some, perhaps, will say, It is but a small part of mankind
who are involved in these dreadful calamities; and they may
suffer peculiar afflictions for their own personal iniquities.”
(Page 61.)
“I answer: Take a just survey of those who have suf
fered thus, and there is not the least reason to think they
were sinners above others. Do not these calamities spread
through whole countries, and involve the best and the worst of
men together? Whole nations suffer by them at once. And,
indeed, such is the corruption of human nature, that wherever
they come they find none innocent. And it is the general
situation of mankind, under the just displeasure of God, which
exposes them to such destruction.
“But to proceed: Think of the innumerable common mis
fortunes that attend human life. What multitudes perish by
these in one week! And how much larger a number do these
accidents injure, and fill their lives with pain, though they are
not brought immediately to the grave! Think of the mischiefs
which one part of mankind, in every place, are continually
contriving or practising against the other. Take a view of
these extensive and reigning evils, and then say, whether this
world be not a part of the creation of God, which bears plain
marks of its Creator’s displeasure.” (Page 62.)
“Much is added to the heap of human miseries by the sor
rows that arise from the daily loss of our dearest comforts.
What groans and wailings of the living surround the pillows
of dying friends or relations! What symptoms of piercing dis
tress attend the remains when they are conveyed to the gravel
By such losses, the comforts of future life lose their relish, and
the sorrows are doubly embittered.” (Page 68.)
“In the civilized parts of the world, there is scarce one per
VOL. IX. B B
370 THE DOCTRINE of
son sick or in pain, miserable or dying, but several others sus
tain a considerable share of misery, by the strong ties of nature
or friendship. This diffuses a personal calamity through whole
families. This multiplies human miseries into a new and end
less number. Add to this, not only the unkindness or false
hood of those from whom we expected the tenderest affection,
but the anguish which springs from all our own uneasy and
unruly passions. Bring in here all the wrath and resent
ment in the hearts of men; all the envy and malice that burn
within; all the imaginary fears, and the real terrors, of future
distress coming upon us; all the rage and despair of lost bless
ings that were once within our hopes, and all the ferments of
animal nature, which torment the spirit all day, and forbid our
nightly repose. Would mankind be in such a condition as this,
if they were still in the favour of their Maker?” (Page 64.)
“‘Yes; men may make miseries for themselves, and be
punished by them. But compare the sorrows which any man
necessarily suffers, with the comforts he enjoys, and the one
will balance the other. Or if his sorrows outweigh his com
forts, this may be necessary in a state of trial; and God will
reward the over-balance of sufferings hereafter.’
“I answer: There is no reason to think the far greater part
of mankind will have any reward hereafter; and if not, how
shall we account for this over-balance of sufferings with regard
to them? Therefore, we cannot reasonably impute their supe
rior sorrows merely to their being in a state of probation; but
rather to the displeasure of the righteous Creator and Governor
of the world.” (Pages 65, 66.)
“10. To make this still clearer: Not only those who are
grown up in the practice of iniquity, who may be punished by
their own sins, but all mankind, in their very infancy, bear
the tokens of God’s displeasure.
“Before children are capable of committing sin, they are
subject to a thousand miseries. What anguish and pain are
they frequently exposed to, even as they are coming into the
world, and as soon as they are entered into it! What agonies
await their birth ! What numerous and acute maladies are
ready to attack them I What gripes, what convulsions, what
inward torments, which bring some of them down to death
within a few hours or days after they have begun to live! And
if they survive a few months, what torture do they find in
ORIGINAL SIN. 37]
breeding their teeth, and other maladies of infancy, which can
be told only by shrieks and tears, and that for whole days and
nights together! What additional pains do they often sustain
by the negligence of their mothers, or cruelty of their nurses!
whereby many of them are brought down to the grave, either
on a sudden, or by slow and painful degrees.” (Page 67.)
“And what shall we say of whole nations in elder times, and
some even at this day, who, when they cannot, or will not,
maintain them, expose their children in the woods to be torn
and devoured by the next wild beast that passes by? Add to
this the common calamities in which infants are involved by fire,
earthquake, pestilence. And there are a thousand other acci
dents which attend them, whereby their members, their natural
powers, receive dismal injuries; so that, perhaps, they drag on
life with blindness, deafness, lameness, or distortion of body or
limbs. Sometimes they languish on to manhood, or even old
age, under sore calamities, which began almost as soon as their
being, and which are only ended by death.” (Page 68.)
“Now, as these sufferings cannot be sent upon them to cor
rect their personal sins, so neither are they sent as a trial of
their virtue; for they have no knowledge of good or evil. Yet we
see multitudes of these little, miserable beings. And are these
treated as innocent creatures; or rather, as under some gene
ral curse, involved in some general punishment?” (Page 69.)
“‘But may not these sufferings of children be for the
punishment of the sins of their parents?”
“Not with any justice or equity, unless the sins of the parents
are imputed to their children. Besides, many of the parents
of these suffering children are dead or absent, so as never to
know it. And how in these cases can it be a punishment for
their parents’ sin, any otherwise than as it is a general punish
ment for the sin of their first parent?” (Page 71.)
“But God recompenses them for these sufferings hereafter.’
Where does the Scripture affirm this? Besides, many of them
grow up to manhood. And if they prove wicked, and are sent
to hell at last, what recompence have they for their infant suffer
ings? Or will you say, God punished them before they had
sinned, because he knew beforehand they would sin? Yet far
ther: What wise or good design can this their punishment
answer, when no creature can know what they are punished
for, if it be not for that which affects all mankind?
2 B 2
372 THE DOCTRINE OF
“‘But how are such miseries reigning among his creatures
consistent with the goodness of God?” Perfectly well, if we
consider mankind as a sinful, degenerate part of God’s creation.
It is most abundant goodness that they have any comforts left,
and that their miseries are not doubled. Now, the inspired
writers do consider mankind as fallen from God; and so his
goodness is evident in a thousand instances; though it must be
confessed there are also a thousand instances of his just hatred
of sin, and his righteous punishments among all nations.”
(Page 73.)
“11. If we put together all these scenes of vice and misery,
it is evident that creatures lying in such deplorable circum
stances are not such as they came out of the hands of their Cre
ator, who is wise, holy, and good. His wisdom, which is all
harmony and order, would not suffer him to frame a whole race
of beings, under such wild and innumerable disorders, moral as
well as matural; his holiness would not permit him to create
beings with innate principles of iniquity; nor his goodness to
produce a whole order of creatures in such circumstances of
pain, torment, and death.” (Page 74.)
“Could the holy and blessed God originally design and frame
a whole world of intelligent creatures in such circumstances, that
every one of them, coming into being, according to the laws of
nature, in a long succession of ages, in different climates, of
different constitutions and tempers, and in ten thousand differ
ent stations and conditions of life; that every one of them
should break the laws of reason, and more or less defile them
selves with sin? that every one should offend his Maker?
every one become guilty in his sight? every one expose him
self to God’s displeasure, to pain, and misery, and mortality,
without one single exception? If men were such creatures as
God at first made them, would not one man among so many
millions have made a right use of his reason and conscience, and
so have avoided sin and death? Would this have been the
universal consequent of their original constitution, as framed
by the hand of a wise, holy, merciful God? What can be
more absurd to imagine than this? Surely God made man
upright and happy; nor could all these mischiefs have come
directly from our Creator's hand.” (Pages 75, 76.)
“Is it objected, that ‘still the greater part of men have
more moral good than evil in them, and have more pleasure than
pain; and therefore, on the whole, mankind is not sinful and
ORIGINAL SIN. 373
miserable; and that even the best human constitutions lay
some innocent persons under unavoidable hardships?’ I
answer, (1.) In order to pronounce a man miserable, he must
have more pain than pleasure; but in order to pronounce a
man a sinner, there is no need that his moral evil should
exceed his good. If a man had a hundred virtues, one vice
would make him a criminal in the sight of God; one trans
gression of the law of his Creator would lay him under his
just displeasure. He that keeps the whole law, except in
one point, affronts that authority which requires all obedience.
All men, therefore, are under this condemnation; they are
sinners every one of them.” (Page 77.)
“As to misery, let it be supposed, (though by no means
granted,) that there are many whose pleasures exceed their
uneasiness; yet it is certain there are more whose pains and
uneasiness far exceed their pleasures; and it is hard to
conceive how this should be, if all men were innocent and
happy by nature.” (Page 78.)
“I answer, (2.) Men are not able to frame such constitutions
in every case, as shall secure happiness to all the innocent.
Their narrow views of things do not enable them to provide
against all future inconveniences. But it is not thus with the
Creator and Governor of all things. He views at once all
possibles and all futures. Therefore, he is well able to guard
against any inconvenience that might befal innocent beings.
“I answer, (3.) Though the bulk of mankind were happy
in the present constitution of things, this gives no manner of
satisfaction to any one individual who is unhappy without
any demerit: The advantage of the majority is no reason at
all why any one innocent should suffer. If any one, therefore,
man or child, and much more, if numbers of them, have
more pain than pleasure, they must be involved in some guilt,
which may give just occasion to their misery.” (Page 79.)
“12. To enforce this, after the survey of these pains and
sorrows, let us consider what are the pleasures of the bulk of
mankind. Cast a glance at the sports of children, from five to
fifteen years of age. What toys and fooleries are these! Would
a race of wise and holy beings waste so many years of early life
in such wretched trifles? And as for our manly years, what are
the greatest part of the delights of men, but silly and irrational,
if not grossly sinful? What are the pleaaures even of the rich
and great, to relieve them under the common sorrows of life?
374 THE DOCTRINE OF
If they be not luxury and intemperance, are they not
furniture and equipage, finery of dress and gay appearances?
to shine in silks of various dye, and blaze in the splendour of
gold and jewels? Now, would wise and holy creatures have
made this the matter of their joy and pleasure: ‘My coat is
gayer than yours, and I have more glittering things about
me than you have P’” (Pages 80, 81.)
“Others call for cards, or dice, to divert their trouble, and
pass away their time. How inexpressibly trifling are these
sports, if mere diversion be sought therein But if the
design be gain, how is the game mingled with uneasy fears,
with the working of various passions, which, in case of
disappointment and loss, often break out into wrath and fury!
“Again: What multitudes drench themselves in gross
sensualities as their chief delight ! They make a god of their
belly, till they overload nature, and make haste to disease
and death. They drown their cares and their senses together;
or they bury them in sensual impurities.” (Page 82.)
“Others release themselves from the troubles of life, by
gadding abroad, and mixing with impertinent company.
Some delight in wanton jests, in foolish merriment, in mean
and trifling conversation; a little above the chattering of
monkeys in a wood, or the chirping of crickets upon a hearth.
Nay, perhaps it is their diversion to rail at their neighbours,
to murder the reputation of the absent. This is their mirth
and recreation; these their reliefs against the common
miseries of human life l’’ (Page 83.)
“But would a race of innocent beings fly to such mean
and foolish, or criminal, refuges from pain as these? Would
they pursue such vain or vile delights? Would they become
rivals to the beasts of the field, or sport themselves, as devils
do, in accusing their fellow-creatures? Surely, if we survey
the very pleasures, as well as the sorrows, of the bulk of
mankind, we may learn from thence, that we are by no
means such creatures as we were originally created.
“13. I need add but one more proof of the general ruin of
human nature. We are all posting to the grave. Every one of
us are succeeding our neighbours, into some unknown, invisible
world. And we all profess to believe this. Yet how exceeding
few are solicitous about this great and awful futurity | Though
we are exposed to so many sins and miseries in this life, and are
ORIGINAL SIN. 375
hastening visibly and hourly to the end of it, yet how few are
there that make any careful preparation for a better state than
this! What multitudes are daily running down into darkness,
speeding to an endless duration in an unknown country,
without any earnest inquiries about the manner of exist
ence there! They walk over the busy stage of life, they toil
and labour, or play and trifle awhile here, and then plunge into
a strange unseen world, where they will meet with a just and
holy God, whose wisdom will assign them a place and portion
suited to their own character. Now, were men indeed wise
and holy, could they remain so ignorant and thoughtless of
that state into which they are all hastening? Or could a
gracious God create a race of beings in such a stupid insensi
bility of their eternal interests, so unsuited to the felicities
of an immortal spirit, and so negligent of all preparations for
them?” (Pages 84, 85.)
“Upon this whole survey, reason must join in this mournful
confession,-that there must be some spreading poison which
has tainted our nature, made us so sinful and miserable, so
thoughtless of the future, and unprepared for it. There must
have been some general revolt of mankind from their Creator,
whereby they have ruined their innocence and peace, and pro
voked the anger of their Maker; whereby they become exposed
to such wretched circumstances, even in their infancy and
childhood, as well as when they grow to years of ripe under
standing.” (Page 86.)
“And, methinks, when I take a just survey of this world,
with all the inhabitants of it, I can look upon it no otherwise
than as a grand and magnificent structure in ruins, wherein
lie millions of rebels against their Creator, under condemnation
to misery and death; who are at the same time sick of a mortal
distemper, and disordered in their minds even to distraction.
Hence proceed those numberless follies and vices which are
practised here, and the righteous anger of an offended God
visible in ten thousand instances. Yet are there proclama
tions of divine grace, health, and life, sounding among them;
though very few take any notice thereof. Only here and there
one attends to the call, and complies with the proposals of peace.
His sins are pardoned and healed. And though his body goes
down to the dust for a season, his soul is happy with God;
while the bulk of those criminals, despising all the offers of
mercy, perish in their own wilful madness.” (Pages 89, 90.)
376 THE DOCTRINE OF
“What is the chief temptation that leads some men to deny
so glaring a truth? Is it that they cannot give a satisfactory
account of some of the difficulties that attend it? Nay, many
even of the heathen philosophers believed it, from their own
experience, and their daily survey of mankind; though they
were utterly at a loss how to account for it. And what, if
we could not assign a sufficient and satisfactory reason for it,
or show how this spreading degeneracy began, or how it came
to take place so universally? What, if we were still at a loss to
explain how all this guilt and misery came upon us,—must
we therefore deny the things which we see, and hear, and
feel, daily?” (Page 91.)
“Can we account for all the secret things in the creation
of God? And must we deny whatever we cannot account for?
Does any man refuse to believe that the infinite variety of
plants and flowers, in all their beauteous colours and forms,
grow out of the same earth, because he does not know all the
springs of their vegetation? Do men doubt of a loadstone's
drawing iron to itself, because they cannot find out the way of
its operation? Are we not sure that food nourishes our bodies,
and medicines relieve our pains? Yet we know not all the
ferment and motions of those atoms by which we are relieved
and nourished. Why then should we deny that degeneracy of
our nature which admits of so full and various proof, though
we are not able to account for every circumstance relating to
it, or to solve every difficulty that may attend it?” (Page 92.)
QUESTION II.
“How came vice and misery to overspread mankind in all
nations, and in all ages?
“Heathen philosophers could never answer this; but Chris
tians may from the oracles of God.” (Page 94.)
“These inform us, that the first man was a ‘common head
and representative of all mankind;’ and that he, by sinning
against his Maker, lost his own holiness and happiness, and
exposed himself and his posterity (whom he naturally pro
duced, and whom he legally represented) to the displeasure of
his Maker, and so spread sin and misery through his whole
offspring.” (Page 102.)
“So St. Paul: “As by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin; even so death passed upon all men, for that
ORIGINAL SIN. 377
all have sinned.” (Rom. v. 12.) All are esteemed in some sort
guilty before God, though they “did not sin after the similitude
of Adam’s transgression. They did not commit actual personal
sin against a known law, as Adam did.” (Page 104.)
“This may more fully appear from the following parti
culars:
“1. It is plainly taught us in Scripture, that God at first
created one man and woman, called Adam and Eve; and from
them is derived the whole race of mankind. God “hath made
of one blood, as the Apostle observes, ‘all nations of men, to
dwell on all the face of the earth.’” (Page 159.)
“2. God created man at first in a holy and happy state,—in
his own likeness, and in his favour. “And God said, Let us
make man in our own image, after our own likeness.’ (Gen. i.
26.) And that none of the brute creation might molest him,
but all of them be for his service, he said, ‘Let them have
dominion over the fish, and the fowl, and the cattle.’ ‘So God
created man in his own image.’ And what this image consisted
in, beside his spiritual and immortal nature, and his dominion
over other creatures, we are told by St. Paul, where he speaks
of ‘the new man, which, says he, “after God,” that is, after the
likeness of God, ‘is created in righteousness and true holiness.”
(Eph. iv. 24.) So Solomon assures us, God “made man upright.”
And Moses says, when God had finished all his creation, “God
saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it was very good.’
It was all according to his idea and his will, and well-pleasing in
his sight. Man, the last of his creatures, as well as all the
rest, ‘was very good;’ was holy and happy.” (Pages 160, 161.)
“3. God originally appointed that Adam, when innocent,
should produce an offspring in his own holy image; and, on the
other hand, that if he sinned, he should propagate his kind in
his own sinful image. The former is allowed. The latter may
be gathered from Gen. v. 1-3, 5: “In the day that God cre
ated man, in the likeness of God made he him:—And Adam
lived an hundred and thirty years’ after his loss of the image of
God, ‘and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image;’
that is, his own sinful and mortal image.
“It is not to be supposed, that Moses, in this brief history
of the first generations of men, should so particularly repeat
‘the image and likeness of God in which Adam was created,
unless he had designed to set the comparison in a fair light,
378 The DOCTRINE OF
between Adam’s begetting a son in his own sinful and mortal
*mage, whereas he himself was created in God’s holy and
immortal image.” (Page 162.)
“4. God was pleased to put the man whom he had made
upon a trial of his obedience for a season. He placed him in a
garden of Eden, (or pleasure,) and gave him a free use of all
the creatures; only forbidding him to eat of the fruit of one
tree,—‘the tree of the kncwledge of good and evil.” “For in
the day,” said he, ‘that thou eatest of it, thou shalt surely die.’
In which threatening were doubtless included all evils,—death
spiritual, temporal, and eternal.” (Page 163.)
“5. As Adam was under a law whose sanction threatened
death upon disobedience, so doubtless God favoured him with a
covenant of life, and a promise of life and immortality upon his
obedience.” (Page 164)
“6. Adam broke the law of his maker, lost his image and
his favour, forfeited the hope of immortality, and exposed him
self to the wrath of God, and all the punishment which he had
threatened; in consequence of which he was now painfully afraid
of Him in whom he before delighted, and foolishly endeavoured
to ‘hide himself from the presence of the Lord.’” (Page 168.)
“7. Adam, after his sin, propagated his kind according to
the law of nature;—not in the moral image or likeness of God;
not “in righteousness and true holiness;' but in his own sinful
likeness; with irregular passions, corrupt appetites and inclina
tions. To this degeneracy Job manifestly refers in those
expressions: ‘What is man, that he should be clean? or the son
of man, that he should be righteous? Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean? Not one.’ And David says the
same thing: ‘Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did
my mother conceive me.’” (Pages 170, 171.)
“This is not an hyperbolical aggravation of David’s early
sins, and propensity to evil from his childhood. But the
text is strong and plain in asserting sin someway to belong
to his very conception, and to be conveyed from his natural
parents; which is a different idea from his actual sins, or pro
pensity to sin in his infancy. It shows the cause both of this
propensity, and of his actual sins, which operated before he was
born. So that if original pravity be not so conveyed and
derived as is here asserted, the words are not an exaggeration
of what is, but a downright fiction of what is not.
ORIGINAL SIN. 379
“8. As Adam produced his offspring, like himself, destitute
of the image of God, so he produced them destitute of the
favour of God, under the same condemnation with himself.
So Job: ‘Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and
full of trouble;’ (xiv. 1;) that is, his short life, and his
troubles, proceed from his very birth; his propagation from
sinful and mortal parents: Otherwise, God would not have
appointed his noblest creature in this world to have been ‘born
to trouble:” Yet this is the case; ‘man is born to trouble as
the sparks fly upward;’ (Job v. 7;) naturally; for it is owing
to his birth and his natural derivation from a sinful stock. We
are a miserable race, springing from a corrupted and dying
root, prone to sin, and liable to sorrows and sufferings.”
(Pages 174, 175.)
“In proof of this sentence of condemnation and death
coming upon all mankind for the sin of Adam, we need only
read from the twelfth verse of the fifth chapter of St. Paul’s
Epistle to the Romans; on which I observe,” (page 176,)—
“1. Here Adam and Christ are set up as distinct heads or
representatives of their several families. Adam was the head of
all mankind, who became sinful and mortal through his sin;
Christ was the head of all believers, who obtain pardon and life
through his righteousness. To prove this headship of Adam,
the Apostle says, “Until the law,’ (that is, from the creation till
the law of Moses,) “sin was in the world; but sin is not
imputed where there is no law; that is, where there is no law
or constitution of duty or penalty at all. Yet, saith he, “Death
reigned from Adam to Moses:” Yet sin was imputed, and pun
ished by death, even upon all mankind, both small and great,
before the law given by Moses. The inference is, therefore,
there was some law or constitution during all the time from
Adam to Moses, in virtue of which sin was imputed to man
kind, and death accordingly executed upon them. Now, what
law or constitution could this be, beside that which said to
Adam, as a representative of his whole posterity, ‘In the day
thou sinnest thou shalt die?’” (Pages 177, 178.)
“2. The Apostle carries his argument yet farther: ‘Sin was
imputed, and death reigned, or was executed, “even upon those
who had not sinned after the similitude of Adam’s transgres
sion;' who had not broken an express command, as Adam had
done. This manifestly refers to infants;—death reigned over
them; death was executed upon them. And this must be by
380 THE DOCTRINE OF
some constitution which, in some sense, imputed sin to them
who had not committed actual sin: For without such a con
stitution, sin would never have been imputed, nor death
executed on children.
“Yet, 3. Death did not come upon them as a mere natural
effect of their father Adam’s sin and death, but as a proper and
legal punishment of sin; for it is said, his sin brought “con
demnation’ upon all men. (Verse 18.) Now, this is a legal
term, and shows that death is not only a natural but a penal
evil, and comes upon infants as guilty and condemned;—not
for their own actual sins, for they had none; but for the sin
of Adam, their legal head, their appointed representative.”
(Page 179.)
“In the eighteenth verse the expression is very strong:
“By the offence of one, judgment came upon all men to con
demnation. All the children of Adam, young and old, are
condemned for his one offence. But farther:—
“4. In the original it is not, “By the offence of one;” but,
“By one offence.’ By the single offence of Adam, when he
stood as the head of all his offspring, and brought sin and death
upon them by his disobedience; as in the following verse: ‘By
one man’s disobedience many were made, or constituted, ‘sin
ners; that is, became liable to guilt and death. And so, in
the sixteenth verse, one single offence is represented as con
demning through Adam, and stands in opposition to the ‘many
offences’ which are pardoned through Christ.
“5. There is a yet farther proof in this chapter, that Adam
conveyed sin and death to his posterity, not merely as a natural
parent, but as a common head and representative of all his off
spring. As Adam and Christ are here said to be the two
springs of sin and righteousness, of death and life to mankind,
so the one is represented as a “type’ and ‘figure’ of the other.
In this very respect Adam was a ‘figure or type of Christ.’
(Verse 14.) And for this very reason Christ is called ‘the
Second Man, the last Adam.” (Cor. xv. 45–47.) As one was
the spring of life, so the other was the spring of death, to all
his seed or offspring.” (Page 181.)
“Now, Christ is a spring of life, not only as he conveys sanc
tification or holiness to his seed, but as he procures for them
justification and eternal life by his personal obedience. And so
Adam is a spring of death, not only as he conveys an unholy
nature to his seed, to all men, but as he brings condemnation
ORIGINAL SIN. 381
to eternal death upon them, by his personal disobedience.
And this is the chief thing which the Apostle seems to have
in his eye, throughout the latter part of this chapter; the
conveyance of condemnation and death to the seed of Adam,
of justification and eternal life to the seed of Christ, by the
means of what their respective heads or representatives had
done.
“But some object: ‘All the blessings which God gave at
first to Adam consisted in these three particulars: (1.) The
blessing of propagation: (2.) Dominion over the brutes: (3.)
The image of God. But all these three are more expressly
and emphatically pronounced to Norh and his sons, than to
Adam in Paradise.’” (Page 183.)
“I answer, If we review the history and context, we shall
find, the blessing of Adam, and that of Noah, very widely
differ from each other, in all the three particulars mentioned.”
(Page 186.)
“l. The blessing of Adam relating to propagation was with
out those multiplied pains and sorrows which, after the first
sin, fell upon women in bearing children. It was also a blessing
of sustentation or nourishment, without hard toil and the sweat
of his brow. It was a blessing without a curse on the ground,
to lessen or destroy the fruitfulness thereof. It was a blessing
without death, without returning to dust; whereas the blessing
of Noah did not exclude death, no, nor the pains of child-birth
nor the earning our bread by the sweat of our brow.
“2. To Adam was given ‘dominion over the brutes. To
Noah it was only said, ‘The fear of you and the dread of you
shall be upon every beast. But notwithstanding this fear and
dread, yet they frequently sting men to death, or bite and tear
them in pieces. Whereas no such calamity could ever have
befallen innocent Adam, or his innocent offspring.” (Page 187.)
“The ‘image of God,” in which Adam was created, consisted
eminently in righteousness and true holiness. But that part of
the ‘image of God’ which remained after the fall, and remains
in all men to this day, is the natural image of God, namely,
the spiritual nature and immortality of the soul; not excluding
the political image of God, or a degree of dominion over the
creatures still remaining. But the moral image of God is lost
and defaced, or else it could not be said to be ‘renewed.” It
is then evident, that the blessing given to Adam in innocency,
382 Tii E DOCTRINE OF
and that given to Noah after the flood, differ so widely, that
the latter was consistent with the condemnation or curse for
sin, and the former was not. Consequently, mankind does
not now stand in the same favour of God, as Adam did while
he was innocent.” (Pages 188, 189.)
“Thus it appears that the holy Scriptures, both in the Old
and New Testaments, give us a plain and full account of the
conveyance of sin, misery, and death, from the first man to
all his offspring.”
THE FIRST ESSAY.
DO THE PRESENT MISERIES OF MAN ALONE PROVE HIS
APosTACY FROM GoD 7
SECTION I.
A GENERAL survey of THE FOLLIES AND MISERLEs
OF MANKIND.
“UPoN a just view of human nature, from its entrance into
life, till it retires behind the curtain of death, one would be
ready to say concerning man, ‘Is this the creature that is so
superior to the rest of the inhabitants of the globe, as to require
the peculiar care of the Creator in forming him? Does he
deserve such an illustrious description, as even the heathen
poet has given us of him?”
Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius alte
Deerat adhuc, et quod dominari in catera posset.
Natus homo est / sive hunc divino semine cretum
Ille opifex rerum mundi melioris origo
Finzit in effigiem moderantúm cuncta deorum.
Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram;
Os homini sublime dedit; calumque tueri
Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
A creature of a more exalted kind
Was wanting yet; and then was man design'd:
Conscious of thought, of more capacious breast,
For empire form’d, and fit to rule the rest.
Whether with particles of heavenly fire
The God of nature did his soul inspire,
ORIGINAL SIN. 383
And moulding up a mass in shape like ours,
Form'd a bright image of the all-ruling powers,
And while the mute creation downward bend
Their sight, and to their earthly mother tend,
Man looks aloft, and with erected eyes
Beholds his own hereditary skies.’
“Now, if man was formed in the image of God, certainly he
was a holy and a happy being. But what is there like holi
ness or happiness now found, running through this rank of
creatures? Are there any of the brutal kind that do not more
regularly answer the design of their creation? Are there any
brutes that we ever find acting so much below their original
character, on the land, in the water, or the air, as mankind
does all over the earth? Or are there any tribes among them,
through which pain, vexation, and misery are so plentifully
distributed as they are among the children of men?” (Pages
359, 360, 361.)
“Were this globe of earth to be surveyed from one end to
the other by some spirit of a superior order, it would be found
such a theatre of folly and madness, such a maze of mingled
vice and misery, as would move the compassion of his refined
nature to a painful degree, were it not tempered by a clear sight
of that wise and just Providence which strongly and sweetly
works in the midst of all; and will, in the end, bring good out
of all evil, and justify the ways of God with man.” (Page 362.)
SECTION II.
A PARTICULAR VieW of ThE MISERIES OF MAN.
“BUT, to wave for the present the sins and follies of man
kind, may we not infer from his miseries alone, that we are
degenerate beings, bearing the most evident marks of the
displeasure of our Maker?” (Page 863.)
“View the histories of mankind; and what is almost all his
tory but a description of the wretchedness of men, under the
mischiefs they bring upon themselves, and the judgments of the
great God? The scenes of happiness and peace are very thin
setamong all thenations; and they are ratheratransient glimpse,
here and there, than anything solid and durable. But if we
look over the universe, what public desolations by plague and
384 THE DOCTRINE OF
famine, by storms and earthquakes, by wars and pestilence!
What secret mischiefs reign among men, which pierce and tor
ture the soul! What smarting wounds and bruises, what pains
and diseases, attack and torment the animal frame!” (Page364.)
“Where is the family of seven or eight persons wherein there
is not one or more afflicted with some troublesome malady, or
tiresome inconvenience? These indeed are often concealed by
the persons who suffer them, and by the families where they
dwell. But were they all brought together, what hospitals or
infirmaries would be able to contain them?” (Page 365.)
“What toils and hardships, what inward anxieties and sor
rows, disappointments and calamities, are diffused through
every age and country ! Do not the rich feel them as well as
the poor? Are they not all teazed with their own appetites,
which are never satisfied ? And their impetuous passions
give them no rest. What keen anguish of mind arises from
pride, and envy, and resentment ! What tortures does
ambition, or disappointed love, or wild jealousy, infuse into
their bosoms Meanwhile the poor, together with inward
vexations and corroding maladies of the mind, sustain like
wise endless drudgeries in procuring their necessary subsist
ence. And how many of them cannot, after all, procure even
food to eat and raiment to put on l’’ (Page 366.)
“Survey man through every stage. See, first, what a figure
he makes, at his entrance into life! “This animal,” says Pliny,
‘who is to govern the rest of the creatures, how he lies bound
hand and foot, all in teals, and begins his life in misery and pun
ishment!’ If we trace the education of the human race, from
the cradle to mature age, especially among the poor, who are
the bulk of all nations, the wretchedness of mankind will farther
appear. How are they everywhere dragged up in their tender
age,through a train of nonsense, madness, and miseries! What
millions of uneasy sensations do they endure in infancy and
childhood, by reason of those pressing necessities, which, for
some years, they can tell only in cries and groans, and which
their parents are either so poor they cannot relieve, or so savage
or blutish that they will not! How wretchedly are these young
generations hurried on through the folly and weakness of child
hood, till new calamities arise from their own ungoverned appe
tites and impetuous passions! As youth advances, the ferments
of the blood rise higher, and the appetites and passions grow
ORIGINAL SIN. 385
much stronger, and give more abundant vexation to the race
of mankind than they do to any of the brutal creation. And
whereas the all-wise God, for kind reasons, has limited the
gratification of these appetites by rules of virtue; perhaps
those very rules, through the corruption of our nature, irritate
mankind to greater excesses.” (Pages 368, 369.)
“Would the affairs of human life, in infancy, childhood,
and youth, have ever been in such a sore and painful situation,
if man had been such a being as God at first made him, and
had continued in the favour of his Maker? Could divine
wisdom and goodness admit of these scenes, were there not a
degeneracy through the whole race, which, by the just per
mission of God, exerts itself some way or other in every
stage of life?” (Page 370.)
“Follow mankind to the age of public appearance upon the
stage of the world, and what shall we find there, but infinite
cares, labours, and toil, attended with fond hopes almost
always frustrated with endless crosses and disappointments,
through ten thousand accidents that are every moment flying
across this mortal stage As for the poor, how does the
sultry toil exhaust their lives in summer, and what starving
wretchedness do they feel in winter ! How is a miserable life
sustained among all the pains and fatigues of nature, with the
oppression, cruelty, and scorn of the rich !” (Page 371.)
“Let us follow on the track to the close of life. What a
scene is presented us in old age How innumerable and
how inexpressible are the disasters and sorrows, the pains
and aches, the groans and wretchedness, that meet man on
the borders of the grave, before they plunge him into it !
“And indeed, is there any person on earth, high or low,
without such distresses and difficulties, such crossing accidents
and perplexing cares, such painful infirmities in some or other
part of life, as must pronounce mankind, upon the whole, a
miserable being? Whatever scenes of happiness seem to
attend him, in any shining hour, a dark cloud soon casts a
gloom over them, and the pleasing vision vanishes as a dream.
“And what are the boasted pleasures which some have sup
posed to balance the sorrows of life? Are not most of them
owing, in a good degree, to some previous uneasiness? It is
the pain of hunger which makes food so relishing; the pain of
weariness that renders sleep so refreshing. And as for the
VOL. IX. C C
386 THE DOCTRINE OF
blessings of love and friendship, among neighbours and kindred,
do they not often produce as much vexationassatisfaction; not,
indeed, of themselves, but by reason of the endless humours
and follies, errors and passions, of mankind?” (Page 373.)
“Again: Do not the very pleasures of the body prove the
ruin of ten thousand souls? They may be used with
innocence and wisdom; but the unruly appetites and passions
of men continually turn into a curse what God originally
designed for a blessing.” (Page 374.)
“Think again how short and transient are the pleasures
of life in comparison of the pains of it! How vanishing the
sweetest sensations of delight! But, in many persons and
families, how many are the days, the months, the years, of
fatigue, or pain, or bitter sorrow ! What pleasure of the
animal frame is either as lasting, or as intense, as the pain
of the gout or stone? How small is the proportion of sensible
pleasure to that of pain, or trouble, or uneasiness! And
how far is it over-balanced by the maladies or miseries, the
fears or sorrows, of the greatest part of mankind |
“As for intellectual pleasures, how few are there in the
world who have any capacity for them ! and among those
few, how many differences and contentions! How many
crossing objections, bewildered inquiries, and unhappy
mistakes, are mingled with the enjoyment so that ‘He who
increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow,” saith the wisest of
men; and upon the whole computation, he writes on this
also, “Vanity and vexation of spirit.”
“To talk, then, of real happiness to be enjoyed in this life,
(abstracted from the foretaste of another,) is contrary to all the
common sense and experience of everythinking man. Without
this ‘taste of the powers of the world to come,” I know not what
wise man would willingly come into these scenes of mortality,
or go through them with any patience.” (Pages 376, 377.)
“What, to be trained up from infancy under so many una
voidable follies, prejudices, and wretched delusions, through the
power of flesh and sense! to be sunk into such gross ignorance
both of our souls, our better selves, and of the glorious Being
that made us! to lie under such heavy shades of darkness, such
a world of mistakes and errors, as are mingled with our little
faint glimpses, and low notices of God our Creator ! What, to
be so far distant from God, and to endure such a long estrange
ORIGINAL SIN. 387
ment from the Wisest and Best of Beings, in this foolish and
fleshly state, with so few and slender communications with or
from him |
“What, to feel so many powerful and disquieting appe
#tes, so many restless and unruly passions, which want the
perpetual guard of a jealous eye, and a strong restraint over
them; otherwise they will be ever breaking out into some
new mischief!
“What, to be ever surrounded with such delights of sense
as are constant temptations to folly and sin! to have scarce
any joys, but what we are liable to pay dear for, by an exces
sive or irregular indulgence I Can this be a desirable state,
for any wise being, who knows what happiness is, to be united
to such a disorderly machine of flesh and blood with all its
uneasy and unruly ferments?” (Page 378.)
“Add to this another train of inbred miseries which attend
this animal frame. What wise spirit would willingly put on
such flesh and blood as ours, with all the springs of sickness
and pain, anguish and disease, in it? What, to be liable to
the racking disquietudes of gout and stone, and a thousand
other distempers! to have nature worn out by slow and long
aches and infirmities, and lie lingering many years on the
borders of death, before we can find a grave
“Solomon seems to be much of this mind, when, after a
survey of the whole scheme of human life, in its variety of
scenes, (without the views of hereafter,) he declares, ‘I
praised the dead who were already dead, more than the living
who are yet alive.” (Eccles. iv. 2.) And, indeed, it appears
that the miseries of life are so numerous as to over-balance
all its real comforts, and sufficiently to show, that mankind
now lie under evident marks of their Maker’s displeasure, as
being degenerated from that state of innocence wherein they
were at first created.” (Pages 380, 381.)
SECTION III.
OBJECTIONS ANSWERED,
“BUT it is objected, “If human life in general is miserable,
how is it that all men are so unwilling to die?’
2 C 2
388 THE DOCTRINE OF
“I answer, 1. Because they fear to meet with more misery
in another life than they feel in this. So our Poet,
‘The weariest and most loathed worldly life
That pain, age, penury, and imprisonment
Can lay on nature, ’tis a paradise
To what we fear of death.’
“And in another place :
“If by the sleep of death we could but end
The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to, ’twere a consummation
Devoutly to be wish’d. O who would bear
The oppressor's wrongs, the proud man’s contumely,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
With all the long calamities of life;
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would bear such burdens,
And groan and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death—
That undiscover'd country, from whose border
No traveller returns—puzzles the will,
And makes us rather bear those ills we have,
Than fly to others which are all unknown.”
“If you say, “But the Heathens knew nothing of a future
life; and yet they too, in all their generations, have been
unwilling to die; nor would they put an end to their own
life, were it never so miserable;’ I answer, Most of the
ancient, as well as the modern, Heathens, had some motions
of an after-state, and some fears of punishment in another
life for sins committed in this. And in the politer nations
they generally supposed self-murderers in particular would be
punished after death.” (Pages 384, 385.)
Prorima deinde tenent maesti loca, qui sibi lethum
Insontes peperére manu, lucemque perosi
Projecáre animas. Quam vellent aethere in alto
Nunc et pauperiem et duros perferre labores /
Fata obstant : Duraque palus innabilis unda
Alligat, et novies Styr interfusa coercet.
‘The next in place and punishment are they
Who prodigally throw their lives away.
Fools, who, repining at their wretched state,
And loathing anxious life, have hurried on their fate.
ORIGINAL SIN. 389
With late repentance now they would retrieve
The bodies they forsook, and wish to live:
All pain and poverty desire to bear,
To view the light of heaven, and breathe the vital air.
But fate forbids; the Stygian floods oppose,
And with nine circling streams the captive souls inclose.”
“I answer, 2. Suppose this love of life and aversion to death
are found even where there is no regard to a future state, this
will not prove that mankind is happy; but only that the God
of nature hath wrought this principle into the souls of all men,
in order to preserve the work of his own hands: So that
reluctance against dying is owing to the natural principle of
self-preservation, without any formed and sedate judgment,
whether it is best to continue in this life or no, or whether
life has more happiness or misery.” (Page 386.)
“It may be objected, Secondly, “If brutes suffer nearly the
same miseries with mankind, and yet have not sinned, how
can these miseries prove that man is an apostate being?’”
(Page 389.
“7. I answer: It is by reason of man’s apostasy that even
brute animals suffer. ‘The whole creation groaneth together’
on his account, ‘and travaileth together in pain to this day.”
For the brute “creation was made subject to vanity, to abuse,
pain, corruption, death, “not willingly, not by any act of its
own, “but by reason of him that subjected it;’ of God, who,
in consequence of Adam’s sin, whom he had appointed lord
of the whole lower world, for his sake pronounced this curse,
not only on the ground, but on all which was before under
his dominion.
“The misery, therefore, of the brute creation is so far
from being an objection to the apostasy of man, that it is a
visible standing demonstration thereof: If beasts suffer, then
man is fallen.” (389.)
SECTION IV.
THE APOSTASY OF MAN PROVED BY SCRIPTURE AND REASON.
“BUT whether or no the miseries of mankind alone will
prove their apostasy from God, it is certain these, together
with the sins of men, are an abundant proof that we are
fallen creatures. And this I shall endeavour to show, both
390 Th E DOCTRINE OF
from the express testimony of Scripture, from the necessity
of renewing grace, and from a survey of the heathen world.”
(Pages 409, 410.)
“First. The Scripture testifies that a universal degeneracy
and corruption is come upon all the sons and daughters of
Adam. “Every imagination of the thoughts of the heart of
man is only evil continually;’ (Gen. vi. 5;) yea, “evil from his
youth.” (Gen. viii. 21.) ‘The Lord looked down from heaven
upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did
understand and seek God. They are gone out of the way;
there is none that doeth good, no, not one.” (Psalm xiv. 2, 3.)
“There is not a just man upon earth, who doeth good, and sin
neth not.” (Eccles. vii. 20.) “All we like sheep have gone
astray, we have turned every one to his own way; ' (Isaiah liii.
6;) different wanderings, but all wanderers. ‘There is none
righteous, no, not one; there is none that doeth good, no, not
one. Every mouth is stopped, and all the world become guilty
before God. All are fallen short of the glory of God, because
all have sinned. (Rom. iii. 10, 12, 19, 23.) “If one died for
all, then were all dead;’ (2 Cor. v. 14;) that is, spiritually
dead; ‘dead in trespasses and sins.”
“Now, can we suppose that all God’s creatures would uni
versally break his law, run into sin and death, defile and destroy
themselves, and that without any one exception, if it had not
arisen from some root of bitterness, some originaliniquity, which
was diffused through them all, from their very entrance into
the world? It is utterly incredible, that every single person,
among the millions of mankind, should be born pure and inno
cent, and yet should all, by free and voluntary choice, every one
for himself, for near six thousand years together, rebel against
Him that made them, if there were not some original contagion
spread through them all at their entrance into life.
“Secondly. The same thing appears from the scriptural
doctrine of our recovery by divine grace, Let us consider in
what manner the Scripture represents that great change which
must be wrought in our souls, in order to our obtaining the
favour and image of God, and future happiness. ‘Except a
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” (John
iii. 3,6,8.) In other scriptures it is represented, that they ‘must
be born of the Spirit;’ they must be ‘born of God;’ they must
be ‘created anew in Christ Jesus unto good works;’ (Eph. ii.
10;) they must “be quickened, or raised again, from their
ORIGINAL SIN. 391
‘death in trespasses and sins;’ (Eph. ii. 5;) they must “be
renewed in their spirit, or ‘created after the image of God
in righteousness and true holiness;' they must “be recon
ciled to God by Jesus Christ; they must be “washed from
their sins in his blood.’ “Since all have sinned and come
short of the glory of God, therefore, if ever they are saved,
they must be justified freely by his grace, through the redemp
tion that is in Christ Jesus. Now, can any one suppose God
to have made so many millions of creatures, as have come
into the world from Adam till now, which have all entered
the world, innocent and holy, and yet not one of them should
retain his image in holiness, or be fit for his favour, without
being born again, created anew, raised from the dead, re
deemed, not with corruptible things, but with the blood of
his own Son? Do not all these representations prove that
every man is born with some original contagion, and under
some criminal imputation in the sight of God? Else would not
one among all these millions be fit to be made a partaker of
his favour, without such amazing purifications as require the
blood of the Son of God, and the almighty operation of his
Spirit! Do not all these things show that mankind in their
present generations are not such creatures as God at first
made them?” (Pages 413, 414.)
“The same great truth we may learn, Thirdly, from even a
slight survey of the heathen nations. A few days ago I was
viewing, in the map of the world, the vast Asiatic empires of
Tartary and China, and a great part of the kingdom of the
Mogul, with the multitude of islands in the East Indies. I
went on to survey all the southern part of Afric, with the
savage nations of America. I observed the thousands, or
rather millions, who dwell on this globe, and walk, and trifle,
and live and die there, under the heaviest cloud of ignorance
and darkness, not knowing God, nor the way to his favour;
who are drenched in gross impieties and superstitions, who
are continually guilty of national immoralities, and practise
idolatry, malice, and lewdness, fraud and falsehood, with
scarce any regret or restraint.” (Page 415.)
“Then, sighing within myself, I said, It is not many years
since these were all infants; and they were brought up by
parents who knew not God, nor the path that leads to life and
happiness. Are not these unhappy children born under diffi
culties almost unsurmountable? Are they not laid under almost
392 THE DOCTRINE OF
an impossibility of breaking their way of themselves, through
so much thick darkness, to the knowledge, the fear, and love
of Him that made them 7 Dreadful truth indeed ! Yet, so
far I can see, certain and incontestable. Such, I fear, is the
case of those of the human race who cover at present the far
greatest part of the globe.” (Page 416.)
“Then I ran back in my thoughts four or five thousand
years, and said within myself, What multitudes, in every age
of the world, have been born in these deplorable circumstances!
They are inured from their birth to barbarous customs and
impious practices; they have an image of the life of brutes and
devils wrought in them by their early education; they have
had the seeds of wretched wickedness sown, planted, and cul
tivated in them, by the savage instructions of those that went
efore them; and their own imitation of such horrible ex
amples has confirmed the mischief, long before they knew or
heard of the true God, if they have heard of Him to this day.
Scarce any of them have admitted one thoughtful inquiry,
whether they follow the rules of reason, or whether they are
in the way of happiness and peace, any more than their parents
before them. As they are born in this gross darkness, so they
grow up in the vile idolatries, and all the shameful abomina
tions, of their country; and go on to death in the same course.
Nor have they light enough, either from without or within,
to make them ask seriously, ‘Is there not a lie in my right
hand? Am I not in the way of destruction?’” (Page 417.)
“St. Peter says indeed, that ‘in every nation he that
feareth God and worketh righteousness is accepted of him;’
but if there were very few (among the Jews) who feared God,
very few in those learned nations of the Gentiles; how much
fewer, may we suppose, are in those barbarous countries, which
have no knowledge either divine or human l’’ (Page 419.)
“But would this have been the case of those unhappy na
tions, both of the parents and their children, in a hundred
long successions, had they been such a race of creatures as
they came out of the hand of the Creator? If those children
had been guiltless in the eye of God, could this have been
their portion? In short, can we suppose the wise, and right
eous, and merciful God would have established and continued
such a constitution for that propagation of mankind which
should naturally place so many millions of them so early in
such dismal circumstances if there had not been some dread
ORIGINAL SIN. 393
ful and universal degeneracy spread over them and their
fathers, by some original crime, which met and seized them
at the very entrance into life?” (Page 420.)
THE SECOND ESSAY.
A PLAIN EXPLICATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF IMPUTED SIN
AND IMPUTED RIGHTEOUSNESS.
“THIs doctrine has been attended with many noisy contro
versies in the Christian world. Let us try whether it may not
be set in so fair and easy a light as to reconcile the sentiments
of the contending parties.” (Page 427.)
“When a man has broken the law of his country, and is
punished for so doing, it is plain that sin is imputed to him;
his wickedness is upon him; he bears his iniquity; that is,
he is reputed, or accounted guilty; he is condemned and
dealt with as an offender.” (Page 428.)
“On the other hand, if an innocent man, who is falsely
accused, is acquitted by the court, sin is not imputed to him,
but righteousness is imputed to him; or, to use another
phrase, his ‘righteousness is upon him.’
“Or if a reward be given a man for any righteous action,
this righteous act is imputed to him.
“Farther: If a man has committed a crime, but the Prince
pardons him, then he is justified from it; and his fault is not
imputed to him.” (Page 429.)
“But if a man having committed treason, his estate is
taken from him and his children, then they “bear the iniquity
of their father, and his sin is imputed to them also.
“If a man lose his life and estate for murder, and his
children thereby become vagabonds, then the blood of the
person murdered is said to be upon the murderer, and upon
his children also. So the Jews: ‘His blood be on us and on
our children;’ let us and our children be punished for it !
“Or if a criminal had incurred the penalty of imprison
ment, and the State were to permit a friend of his to become
his surety, and to be confined in his room, then his crime is
said to be imputed to his surety, or to be laid upon him; he
bears the iniquity of his friend, by suffering for him. Mean
394 ThE DOCTRINE OF
time the crime for which the surety now suffers, is not
imputed to the real offender.” (Page 430.)
“And should we suppose the Prince to permit this surety
to exert himself in some eminent service, to which a reward
is promised; and all this in order to entitle the criminal to
the promised reward: Then this eminent service may be said
to be imputed to the criminal, that is, he is rewarded on the
account of it. So in this case, both what his friend has done
and suffered is imputed to him.
“If a man do some eminent service to his Prince, and he
with his posterity are dignified on account of it; then the
service performed by the father is said to be imputed to the
children also.” (Page 431.)
“Now, if, among the histories of nations, we find anything
of this kind, do we not easily understand what the writers say?
Why then do we judge these phrases, when they are found in
the inspired writers, to be so hard to be understood?
“But it may be asked, “How can the acts of the parent’s
treason be imputed to his little child, since those acts were
quite out of the reach of an infant, nor was it possible for him
to commit them?”
“Or, “How can the eminent service performed by a father
be imputed to his child, who is but an infant?’
“I answer: 1. Those acts of treason, or acts of service, are,
by a common figure, said to be imputed to the children, when
they suffer or enjoy the consequences of their father’s treason
or eminent service; though the particular actions of treason
or service could not be practised by the children. This would
easily be understood, should it occur in a human history:
And why not, when it occurs in the sacred writings?
“I answer: 2. Sin is taken either for an act of disobedience
to a law, or for the legal result of such an act; that is, the
guilt, or liableness to punishment. Now, when we say, The
sin of a traitor is imputed to his children, we do not mean,
that the act of the father is charged upon the child; but that
the guilt, or liableness to punishment, is so transferred to him,
that he suffers banishment or poverty on account of it.”
(Pages 432, 433,434.)
“In like manner, righteousness is either particular acts of
obedience to a law, or the legal result of those actions; that
is, a right to the reward annexed to them.
ORIGINA.L SIN. 395
“And so when we say, The righteousness of him that has
performed some eminent act of obedience is imputed to his
children, we do not mean, that the particular act of the father
is charged on the child, as if he had done it; but that the
right to reward, which is the result of that act, is transferred
to his children.
“Now, if we would but thus explain every text of Scripture
wherein either imputed sin, or imputed righteousness, is men
tioned, (whether in express words, or in the plain meaning of
them,) weshould find them all easy and intelligible.” (Page435.)
“Thus we may easily understand how the obedience of Christ
is imputed to all his seed; and how the disobedience of Adam
is imputed to all his children.” (Page 436.)
“To confirm this, I would add these three remarks:—
“1. There are several histories in Scripture, where expres
sions of the same import occur.
“So Gen. xxii. 16: “Thy seed shall possess the gate of his
enemies, because thou hast obeyed my voice.” Here Abraham’s
obedience, that is, the result of it, is imputed to his posterity.
“So Num. xxv. 13: ‘God gave to Phinehas and his seed
after him the covenant of an everlasting priesthood, because
he was zealous for his God,” and slew the criminals in Israel.
This was so imputed to his children, that they also received
the reward of it.” (Page 437.)
“Thus the sin of Achan was so imputed to his children,
that they were all stoned on account of it. (Joshua vii. 24.)
In like manner, the covetousness of Gehazi was imputed to
his posterity, (2 Kings v. 27) when God by his Prophet
pronounced that the leprosy should cleave unto him and to
his seed for ever.” (Page 438.)
“2. The Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament,
use the words sin and iniquity, (both in Hebrew and Greek,)
to signify, not only the criminal actions themselves, but also
the result and consequences of those actions; that is, the
guilt or liableness to punishment; and sometimes the punish
ment itself, whether it fall upon the original criminal, or upon
others on his account.” (Page 439.)
“In the same manner, the Scriptures use the word righteous
ness, not only for acts of obedience, but also the result of
them; that is, justification, or right to a reward. A moderate
study of some of those texts where these words are used may
convince us of this.
396 ThE DOCTRINE OF
“So Job xxxiii. 26: “God will render to a man his
righteousness, that is, the reward of it. “Sow to yourselves
in righteousness, till the Lord come and rain righteousness
upon you:’ (Hosea x. 12:) That is, till he pour down the
rewards, or fruits, of it upon you.
“I might add here, that, in several places of St. Paul’s
Epistles, righteousness means justification, in the passive
sense of the word.” (Page 440.)
“So Rom. x. 4: ‘Christ is the end of the law for righteous
ness to every one that believeth;’ that is, in order to the
justification of believers. . ‘With the heart man believeth
unto righteousness;' (verse 10;) that is, so as to obtain jus
tification.
“‘If righteousness, that is,justification, ‘come by the law,
then Christ is dead in vain.” (Gal. ii. 21.) This particularly
holds where the word Aoyugouai, or impute, is joined with
righteousness. As Rom. iv. 3: Abraham ‘believed God,
and it was imputed to him for righteousness.’ ‘His faith is
counted to him for righteousness.” (Rom. iv.5.) It is not avrt
or varep, for or instead of righteousness; but evs Bucatoavvmw,
‘in order to justification, or acceptance with God.
“And in other places of Scripture, a work, whether good or
evil, is put for the reward of it: ‘The work of a man will he
render unto him;’ (Job xxxiv. 11;) that is, the recompence
of it. So St. Paul desires Philemon to impute any wrong he
had received from Onesimus to himself; that is, not the evil
action, but the damage he had sustained.
“Indeed, when sin or righteousness are said to be imputed
to any man, on account of what himself hath done, the words
usually denote both the good or evil actions themselves, and
the legal result of them. But when the sin or righteousness
of one person is said to be imputed to another, then, generally,
those words mean only the result thereof; that is, a liableness
to punishment on the one hand, and to reward on the other.
“But let us say what we will to confine the sense of the
imputation of sin and righteousness to the legal result, —the
reward or punishment of good or evil actions; let us ever so
explicitly deny the imputation of the actions themselves to
others; still Dr. Taylor will level almost all his arguments
against the imputation of the actions themselves, and then
triumph in having demolished what we never built, and
refuting what we never asserted.” (Page 444.)
ORIGINAL SIN. 397
“3. The Scripture does not, that I remember, anywhere
say, in express words, that the sin of Adam is imputed to his
children; or, that the sins of believers are imputed to Christ;
or, that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to believers:
But the true meaning of all these expressions is sufficiently
found in several places of Scripture.” (Page 446.)
“Yet since these express words and phrases, of the imputa
tion of Adam’s sin to us, of our sins to Christ, and of Christ's
righteousness to us, are not plainly written in Scripture, we
should not impose it on every Christian, to use these very
expressions. Let every one take his liberty, either of con
fining himself to strictly scriptural language, or of manifest
ing his sense of these plain scriptural doctrines, in words and
phrases of his own.” (Page 447.)
“But if the words were expressly written in the Bible, they
could not reasonably be interpreted in any other sense, than
this which I have explained by so many examples, both in
Scripture, history, and in common life.
“I would only add, If it were allowed, that the very act of
Adam’s disobedience was imputed to all his posterity; that
all the same sinful actions which men have committed were
imputed to Christ, and the very actions which Christ did
upon earth were imputed to believers; what greater punish
ments would the posterity of Adam suffer, or what greater
blessings could believers enjoy, beyond what Scripture has
assigned, either to mankind, as the result of the sin of Adam;
or to Christ, as the result of the sins of men; or to believers,
as the result of the righteousness of Christ?”
PART V.
THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN,
I BELIEVE every impartial reader is now able to judge,
whether Dr. Taylor has solidly answered Dr. Watts or no.
But there is another not inconsiderable writer whom I can
not find he has answered at all, though he has published four
several tracts professedly against Dr. Taylor, of which he
could not be ignorant, because they are mentioned in “The
398 THE DOCTRINE OF
Ruin and Recovery of Human Nature;”—I mean the Rev.
Mr. Samuel Hebden, Minister at Wrentham, in Suffolk. I
think it, therefore, highly expedient, to subjoin a short
abstract of these also ; the rather, because the tracts them
selves are very scarce, having been for some time out of print.
“Lo, this only have I found, that God made man upright;
but they have sought out many inventions.” Eccles. vii. 29.
“IN the preceding verse Solomon had declared, how few
wise and good persons he had found in the whole course of
his life; but, lest any should blame the providence of God
for this, he here observes, that these were not what God
made man at first; and that their being what they were not
was the effect of a wretched apostasy from God. The original
words stand thus: Only see thou, I have found.” (Page 3.)
“Only: This word sets a mark on what it is prefixed to,
as a truth of great certainty and importance. See, observe,
thou. He invites every hearer and reader, in particular, to
consider what he was about to offer. I have found: I have
discovered this certain truth, and assert it on the fullest
evidence, ‘that God made man upright; but they have
sought out many inventions.’” (Page 4.)
“The Hebrew word "ws which we render upright, is pro
perly opposed to crooked, irregular, perverse. It is applied to
things, to signify their being straight, or agreeable to rule;
but it is likewise applied both to God and man, with the
words and works of both. As applied to God, the ways of
God, the word of God, it is joined with good; (Psalm xxv. 8;)
with righteous; (Psalm crix. 137;) with true and good; (Neh.
ix. 13;) where mention is made of ‘right judgments, true
laws, good statutes. The uprightness with which God is said
to minister judgment to the people, answers to righteousness:
In a word,—God’s uprightness is the moral rectitude of his
nature, infinitely wise, good, just, and perfect. The upright
ness of man, is his conformity, of heart and life, to the rule
he is under; which is the law or will of God. Accordingly,
we read of uprightness of heart; (Psalm xxxvi. 10; Job
xxxiii. 33) and uprightness of way, or conversation; (Psalm
ORIGINAL SIN. 399
xxxvii. 14;) and often elsewhere. ‘The upright man,’
throughout the Scripture, is a truly good man; a man of
integrity, a holy person. In Job i. 1, 8; ii. 3, upright is
the same with perfect, (as in Psalm xxxvii. 37, and many
other places,) and is explained by, one “who feareth God and
escheweth evil. In Job viii. 6, it is joined and is the same
with pure. In the same sense it is taken, (to mention but a
few out of many texts which might be produced,) Prov. x. 29:
“The way of the Lord is strength to the upright; but destruc
tion shall be to the workers of iniquity.’ ‘The integrity of
the upright shall guide them; but the perverseness of trans
gressors shall destroy them. (xi. 3.) ‘The righteousness of
the upright shall deliver them; but transgressors shall be
taken in their own naughtiness.” (Verse 6.) ‘By the blessing
of the upright the city is exalted. (Verse 11.) ‘The sacrifice
of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; but the prayer
of the upright is his delight.” (xv.8.) “A wicked man hardeneth
his face; but as for the upright, he directeth his way.” (xxi. 29.)
From all these texts it manifestly appears, that uprightness,
as applied to man, is the very same with righteousness, holi
ness, or integrity of heart and conversation.” (Pages 5, 6.)
“When, therefore, Solomon says, God “made man upright,’
the plain, undeniable meaning is, God at first formed man
righteous or holy; although “they have sought out many
inventions.” They, —this refers to Adam, which is both a
singular and a plural noun: They, our first parents, and
with them their posterity, have sought out many inventions;’
many contrivances, to offend God, and injure themselves.
These ‘many inventions’ are opposed to the uprightness, the
simplicity of heart and integrity, with which our first parents,
and mankind in them, were originally made by God.” (Page 7.)
“The doctrine of the text then is, that God, at his creation,
‘made man upright, or righteous; not only rational, and a
free agent, but holy. Therefore, to maintain, that ‘man
neither was, nor could be, formed holy, because none can be
holy, but in consequence of his own choice and endeavour, is
bold indeed! To prove the contrary, and justify Solomon’s
assertion, I offer a few plain arguments.” (Page 8.)
“1. Moses, in his account of the creation, writes, “And God
said, Let us make man in our own image. Now, that righte
ousness or holiness is the principal part of this image of God,
appears from Eph. iv. 22, 24, and Col. iii. 9, 10. On which
400 THE DOCTRINE OF
passages I observe, (1.) By ‘the old man’ is not meant a
heathenish life, or an ungodly conversation; but a corrupt
nature. For the Apostle elsewhere speaks of our ‘old man,’
as ‘crucified with Christ;’ and here distinguishes from it
their ‘former conversation,’ or sinful actions, which he calls
‘the deeds of the old man.’ (2.) By ‘the new man’ is meant,
not a new course of life; (as the Socinians interpret it;) but
a principle of grace, called by St. Peter, ‘The hidden man of
the heart, and a ‘divine nature. (3.) To put off ‘the old
man’ (the same as to ‘crucify the flesh”) is, to subdue and
mortify our corrupt nature; to “put on the new man’ is, to
stir up and cultivate that gracious principle, that new nature.
‘This,” saith the Apostle, ‘is created after God, in righteous
ness and true holiness.’ It is created: Which cannot pro
perly be said of a new course of life; but may of a ‘new
nature. It is ‘created after God; or, ‘in his image and
likeness, mentioned by Moses. But what is it to be “created
after God,” or ‘in his image?’ It is to be “created in righte
ousness and true holiness;’ termed ‘knowledge, the practical
knowledge of God. (Col. iii. 10.) But if ‘to be created after
God, or ‘in his image and likeness, is ‘to be created in
righteousness and true holiness, and if that principle of right
eousness and holiness by which we are ‘created unto good
works, is a ‘new man,” a “divine nature; it is easy to infer, that
man was at first created ‘righteous’ or ‘holy.’” (Pages 9, 10.)
“2. All things, as at first made by God, ‘were very good.’
Nor indeed could he make them otherwise. Now, a rational
being is not good, unless his rational powers are all devoted to
God. The goodness of man, as a rational being, must lie in a
devotedness and consecration to God. Consequently, man was
at first thus devoted to God: Otherwise he was not good. But
this devotedness to the love and service of God is true righteous
ness or holiness. This righteousness then, this goodness, or
uprightness, this regular and due state or disposition of the
human mind, was at first natural to man. It was wrought into
his nature, and concreated with his rational powers. A rational
creature, as such, is capable of knowing, loving, serving, living
in communion with, the Most Holy One. Adam at first either
did or did not use this capacity; either he knew and loved God,
or he did not. If he did not, he was not ‘very good, no, nor good
at all: If he did, he was upright, righteous, holy.” (Page 12.)
“3. When God vested man with dominion over the other
ORIGINAL SIN. 401
creatures, how was he qualified for exercising that dominion,'
unless he had in himself a principle of love and obedience to the
Supreme Governor? Did not God form the creatures obedient
to man, to confirm man in his loving obedience to God; Or did
he create them with a disposition to depend on and obey man
as their lord, and not create man with a disposition to obey and
live dependent on the Lord of all? But this disposition is
uprightness. Therefore God “made man upright.’” (Page 13.)
“4. Either man was created with principles of love and obe
dience, or he was created an enemy to God. One of these must
be: For as all the duty required of man, as a rational being, is
summarily comprised in love, a supreme love to God, and a sub
ordinate love to others, for his sake; so there can be no me
dium between a rational creature's loving God, and not loving,
which is a degree of ‘enmity’ to him. Either, O man, thou
lovest God, or thou dost not: If thou dost, thou art holy or
righteous; if thou dost not, thou art indisposed to serve him
in such a manner, and with such a frame of spirit, as he re
quires. Then thou art an enemy to God, a rebel against his
authority. But God could not create man in such a state, in
a state of enmity against himself. It follows, that man was
created a lover of God, that is, righteous and holy.” (Page 14.)
“In a word: Can you prove, either that man was not
‘created after God,” or that this does not mean, being ‘created
in righteousness and true holiness?’ Was not man, as all crea
tures, good in his kind? And is a rational creature good,
unless all its powers are devoted to God? Was not man duly
qualified at first to exercise dominion over the other creatures?
And could he be so qualified without a principle of love and
obedience to their common Lord? Lastly: Can any man prove,
either that man could be innocent if he did not love the Lord
his God with all his heart; or that such a love to God is not
‘righteousness and true holiness?’” (Page 15.)
“From the doctrine of man’s original righteousness we may
easily conclude that of original sin. For this reason it is, that
some so earnestlyprotestagainstoriginal righteousness, because
they dread looking on themselves as ‘by nature’ fallencreatures,
and ‘children of wrath. If man was not holy at first, he could
not fall from a state of holiness; and, consequently, that first
transgression exposed him and his posterity to nothing but tem
poral death. But, on the other hand, if ‘man was made upright,’
VOL. IX. D D
402 THE DOCTRINE OF
it follows, (1.) That man, when he fell, lost his original righte
ousness, and therewith his title to God’s favour, and to commu
nion with God. (2.) That he thereby incurred not only tem
poral but spiritual death. He became dead in sin, and a child
of wrath. And, (3.) That all his posterity are born with such
a nature, not as man had at first, but as he contracted by his
fall.” (Pages 20, 21.)
“And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every
tree of the garden thow mayest freely eat: But of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it :
For in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely
die.” Gen. ii. 16, 17.
“GoD forbade man to eat of this tree, in token of his sove
reign authority, and for the exercise of man’s love, and the trial
of his obedience. The words added, ‘In the day thou eatest
thereofthou shalt surely die, or literally, “In dying thou shalt
die, mean, not only, ‘Thou shalt certainly die, but, ‘Thou
shalt suffer every kind of death:” Thy soul as well as thy body
shall die. And, indeed, if God made manupright or holy; if man
at first enjoyed the life of God, including holiness joined with
blessedness; and if the miserable state of the soul (as well as
the dissolution of the body) is in the Scripture termed ‘death;’
it plainly follows, that the original threatening includes nothing
less than a loss of man’s original uprightness, of his title to
God’s favour, and happy life of communion with God.”
(Pages 26, 27.)
“The words mean, farther, “Thou shalt instantly die;’ as
soon as ever thou eatest. And so he did. For in that instant
his original righteousness, title to God’s favour, and communion
with God being lost, he was spiritually dead, ‘dead in sin; his
soul was dead to God, and his body liable to death, temporal
and eternal.” (Pages 28, 29.)
“And as there is a threatening of death expressed in these
words, so a promise of life is implied. The threatening death
only in case of disobedience, implied, that otherwise he should
not die. And even since the fall, the law of God promises life
to obedience, as well as threatens death to disobedience; since
the tenor of it is, “Do this and live: If thou wilt enter into life,
keep the commandments.’” (Page 30.)
ORIGINAL SIN. 403
“Now, a law given by God with a promise of life and a
threatening of death, consented to by man, is evidently a cove
nant. For what is a covenant, but a mutual agreement of
two or more parties on certain terms? Now, in this sense
God covenanted with man, and man covenanted with God.
God gave a law, promising life in case of obedience, threat
ening death in case of disobedience. And man accepted of the
terms. Here, therefore, was a real covenant.” (Page 31.)
“But, to guard this against objections, I add:—
“1. We do not affirm, that God visibly appeared, and form
ally treated with Adam, as one man with another. Without
so formal a procedure, God could, and doubtless did, signify to
him, on what terms he was to expect life or death.” (Page 32.)
“2. We do not assert, that God promised to translate him
to heaven; but, without question, he made Adam sensible,
that if he continued obedient he should continue happy,
whether in paradise or some other region.
“3. If one greatly superior will freely condescend to treat
with an inferior, this does not disannul the mutual agreement,
or hinder its having the nature of a covenant. So God entered
into a proper covenant with Abraham of old, and with his peo
ple in the gospel. And if so, much more might he do so with
man, when perfectly upright toward God.” (Page 33.)
“And this covenant was made with Adam, not only for
himself, but likewise for all his posterity. This appears,—
“1. From the tenor of the original threatening, compared
with the present state of mankind. For it is evident, that
every one of his posterity is born liable to death; that the
death, to which all are liable, was not threatened but in case
of man’s sinning; that man was not liable to death till he
sinned, and his being so was the result of the threatening;
and that the Scripture constantly points at sin as the sole
cause of death, and of all suffering. But if all mankind are
born liable to that which was originally threatened only to
sin, then all mankind are accounted sinners, and as such are
concerned in the original threatening, and consequently in
the original promise.” (Page 34.)
“2. From 1 Cor. xv. 22: ‘In Adam all die.’ Here the
Apostle speaks, not of both our parents, but of Adam singly, (as
also Rom. v.) to denote our peculiar relation to him. The ‘all’
mentioned, are all his natural descendants, who ‘all die in or
2 D 2
404 THE DocTRINE of
through him; that is, are liable to death on account of their
relation to him. And it is not only a bodily death that is
here spoken of; for it stands opposed, not to a bare revival
of the body, but to a happy and glorious resurrection, such
as ‘they that are Christ’s’ will partake of at his second coming
For of this resurrection, not that of the ungodly, the Apostle
is speaking throughout this chapter. But they could not
“die in Adam, if they did not in some sense sin in him, and
fall with him; if the covenant had not been made with him,
not for himself only, but for all his posterity.” (Pages 35, 36.)
“3. From verses 45 and 47 of the same chapter. The
‘first man, Adam, and ‘the second Man, the last Adam, are
here opposed. Now, why is Christ, notwithstanding the
millions of men intervening between Adam and him, and
following after his birth, called ‘the second Man, and ‘the
last Adam?' We have an answer, Rom. v. 12, 14, &c.,
where Adam is said to be ‘a figure of Christ; and the
resemblance between them is shown to lie in this,—that as ‘sin’
and ‘death’ descend from one, so ‘righteousness’ and ‘life.”
from the other. Consequently, what Christ is with regard to
all his spiritual seed, that Adam is with regard to all his
natural descendants; namely, a public person, a federal head,
a legal representative: One with whom the covenant was
made, not only for himself, but also for his whole posterity.”
“Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God.
“That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is
born of the Spirit is spirit.” John iii. 5, 6.
“IN this text we have,—
“I. The new birth described;
“II. The necessity of it insisted on;
“III. The original corruption of every child of Adam ob
served, as that from which the necessity of such a change arises.
“I. The new birth is here described. Whatever this im
plies, the Spirit of God is the sole author of it. He does not
help a man to regenerate himself, but takes the work into his
own hands. A child of God, as such, is ‘not born of blood;’
does not become so by descent from pious parents. He is not
‘born of the will of the flesh; is not renewed by the power of
ORIGINAL SIN. 405
'his own carnal will; ‘nor of man,’ of any man whatsoever,
“but of God, by the sole power of his Spirit.
“In regeneration, the Holy Spirit mortifies “the old man,’
corrupt nature, and breathes a principle of life into the soul;
a principle of faith, of sincere love, and willing obedience to
God. He who was ‘dead in sin,” is now ‘dead to sin,” and
“alive to God through Jesus Christ.” God has ‘created in him
a clean heart, and renewed a right spirit within him.’ He
has ‘created” him ‘unto good works, and ‘written” his ‘law
in his heart.” But if the Spirit of God is the sole agent in
the work of regeneration; if the soul of man has no active
interest or concern in his ‘being born again;’ if man was
created holy, and regeneration re-instamps that holy image
of God on the soul; if ‘the new man is created after God in
righteousness and true holiness; if the corruption of nature
(termed ‘the old man’ or ‘flesh”) is not contracted by imita
tion or custom, but is an inbred hereditary distemper, coeval
with our nature; if all truly good works are the fruits of a
good heart, a good principle wrought in the soul; it plainly
follows, that the faith, hope, love, fear, which distinguish the
children of God from others, are not of the nature of acquired,
but of infused, habits or principles. To say then, “that all
holiness must be the effect of a man’s own choice and en
deavour, and that, by a right use of his natural powers, every
man may and must attain a habit of holiness,’ that is, ‘be
born again, however pleasing it may be to human vanity, is
contrary to the whole tenor of Scripture.
“And all the scriptural expressions on this head are
grounded on the real nature of things. “Sin’ is of the nature
of ‘filth’ and ‘corruption.”. It pollutes the whole man, and
renders him as an ‘unclean thing’ in the sight of God.
When, therefore, the Spirit of God removes this, he is said
to “create a clean heart, to “purify the heart, to ‘sprinkle
clean water upon us, to wash us ‘from our ‘filthiness.’
And this cleansing efficacy is in the text expressed by being
‘born of water and of the Spirit.”
“When, therefore, our Lord speaks of being ‘born of the
Spirit, his plain meaning is, there is a spiritual cleansing you
must partake of, mentioned in those promises: ‘I will sprinkle
clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your
filthiness and from all your idols will I cleanse you. A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
406 THE DOCTRINE OF
you. And I will take away the stony heart, and I will give
you a heart of flesh.” These promises give us a plain description
of the Spirit's regenerating work; without experiencing which,
our state is miserable now, and will be much more so hereafter.
“II. For this spiritual renovation of the soul is indispens
ably necessary. Without it none can ‘enter the kingdom of
heaven, either the kingdom of grace or of glory.
“1. ‘Except a man be born of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of grace; he cannot be a loyal subject of
Jesus Christ. By nature we are subjects of Satan; and such
we must remain, unless renewing grace ‘translate us into the
kingdom of God’s dear Son.”
“2. Consequently, ‘except we are born again, we cannot
“enter into the kingdom of glory. Indeed, supposing he
could be admitted there, what could an unregenerate sinner
do in heaven? He could not possibly have any relish either
for the business, the company, or the enjoyments of that world.
“III. Our Lord, having asserted the absolute necessity of
the new birth, to show the ground of this necessity, adds,
‘That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is
born of the Spirit is spirit.” Here observe,—
“l. Our Lord opposes ‘flesh” and ‘spirit” to each other;
which opposition we often meet with. Whatever, therefore,
is meant by these two, they denote things opposite.
“2. He speaks here of two several births, which are dis
tinctly mentioned.
“3. The former of these two is spoken of as that which
renders the other so necessary. Because “that which is
born of the flesh is flesh; therefore ‘we must be born of the
Spirit: * Therefore this great change must be wrought in us,
or we cannot ‘enter into the kingdom of God.”
“4. If the latter of these is made necessary by the former,
then to be ‘born flesh” is to be born corrupt and sinful.
And, indeed, the word ‘flesh” is very frequently taken for
the corrupt principle in man. It is always so taken when it
stands opposed to ‘the Spirit, or to that inwrought principle
of obedience, which itself also (taking the name of its Author)
is sometimes termed ‘Spirit.”
“Now, in the text, whatever or whoever is born of a man,
since the fall, is denominated ‘flesh.’ And that “flesh” is here
put, not for sinless frailty, but sinful corruption, we learn from
its being opposed to the ‘Spirit.” Christ was born frail, as well
ORIGINAL SIN. 407
as we, and in this sense was ‘flesh; yet, being without sin,
he had no need to be ‘born of the Spirit.” This is not made
necessary by any sinless infirmities, but by a sinful nature
only. This alone is opposite to ‘the Spirit; thus, there
fore, we must understand it here.
“But Dr. Taylor says, “To be born of the flesh is only to
be naturally born of a woman. I answer, Is not ‘flesh” op
posed to ‘Spirit’ in this verse? Is it not the Spirit of God,
which is spoken of in the latter clause, together with the
principle of grace, which is in every regenerate person? And
is anything beside sinful corruption opposite to the Spirit of
God? No, certainly . But if so, and if wherever ‘flesh” is
opposed to ‘the Spirit, it implies sinful corruption, then it is
evident, to be ‘born of the flesh, is to be the sinful offspring
of sinful parents, so as to have need of the renewing influ
ences of the Holy Spirit, on that account, even from our birth.
“If to ‘walk after the flesh, as opposed to “walking after
the Spirit,” is to follow our sinful inclinations; if to ‘be in
the flesh, opposed to “being in the Spirit, is to be in a state
of sin; if ‘the flesh” and ‘the Spirit” are two contrary prin
ciples, which counteract each other; (Gal. v. 16, 17;) if ‘the
works of the flesh, and the lusts of the flesh, are opposed to
‘the Spirit” and ‘the fruit of the Spirit;’ then, “to be born
of the flesh” must signify more than barely to be born of a
woman. Had Adam transmitted a pure nature to his de
scendants, still each of them would have been born of a
woman; but they would have had no necessity of being ‘born
of the Spirit, or renewed by the Holy Ghost.
“But what is that corruption of nature which the Scrip
ture terms flesh 2 There are two branches of it: 1. A want
of original righteousness: 2. A natural propensity to sin.
“1. A want of original righteousness. God created man
righteous; holiness was connatural to his soul; a principle of
love and obedience to God. But when he sinned he lost this
principle. And every man is now born totally void both of
the knowledge and love of God.
“2. A natural propensity to sin is in every man. And
this is inseparable from the other. If man is born and grows
up without the knowledge or love of God, he is born and
grows up propense to sin; which includes two things,'—an
aversion to what is good, and an inclination to what is evil.
408 THE DOCTRINE OF
“We are naturally averse to what is good. ‘The carnal
mind is enmity against God. Nature does not, will not,
cannot, submit to his holy, just, and good law. Therefore,
‘they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Being averse
to the will, law, and ways of God, they are utterly indisposed
for such an obedience as the relation between God and man
indispensably requires.
“And as we are all naturally averse to what is good, so we
are naturally inclined to what is evil. Even young children
of themselves run into evil; but are with difficulty brought
to practise what is good. No sooner do they discover rea
son, than they discover evil, unreasonable dispositions. And
these discovering themselves in every one, even from his
early childhood, manifestly prove the inbred and universal
corruption of human nature.
“But why is this corruption termed flesh? Not because
it is confined to the body. It is the corruption of our whole
nature, and is therefore termed ‘the old man.” Not because
it consists merely in a repugnance of the sensual appetites to
reason. This is but one branch of that corruption; the
whole of it is far more extensive. Not because it is prima
rily seated in the body; it is primarily seated in the soul. If
“sin reigns in our mortal bodies, it is because the sinful soul
uses the bodily members as ‘instruments of unrighteousness.’
“‘Nay, all which those words, That which is born of the
flesh is flesh, mean, is this: All men being descended of frail
and mortal parents are, like them, frail and mortal. In con
sequence of Adam’s sin, all his descendants die.’
“I answer, 1. Though this be true, it is not the whole
truth. Nor is it the proper truth of the text, which speaks
of our being ‘born of the flesh, as the reason why we must
be ‘born of the Spirit.”
“2. It is not consistent with the moral perfections of God
for sinless creatures to be born ‘mortal.” Death, in every
sense of the word, is the proper “wages of sin.’ ‘Sin has
the same casual influence on death, as the obedience of
Christ has on eternal life.
“3. We are not only born ‘mortal, but ‘children of
wrath; we who are now regenerate, as well as others.
“4. The Scripture ascribes both our “mortality’ and ‘cor
ruption’ to our relation to Adam. “In him all die; ‘through
ORIGINAL SIN. 409
the offence of one, many, all mankind, are dead, liable to
death. Again: “By the disobedience of one, the same,
‘many are constituted sinners. Therefore, when our Lord
says, “That which is born of the flesh is flesh, he means, not
only that we and our parents are ‘mortal, but that all man
kind derive spiritual as well as temporal death from their first
father.”
THE SCRIPTURE DOCTRINE
OF
IMPUTED SIN AND RIGHTEO USNESS.
“1. SIN is “a transgression of the law;’ of that law of God
to which a rational creature is subject. “Righteousness’ is a
fulfilment of, or conformity to, that law. This is the proper
scriptural sense of the words. But as sin involves the creature
in guilt, that is, a liableness to punishment, the same words are
often used to denote either sin itself, or guilt and punishment.
On the other hand, righteousness denotes, not only a fulfilling
of the law, but also a freedom from guilt and punishment; yea,
and sometimes all the rewards of righteousness.” (Pages 1,2...)
“Accordingly, to impute sin, is either to impute sin itself,
or guilt on the account of it. To impute sin itself to a person,
is to account him a transgressor of the law, to pronounce him
such, or to treat him as a transgressor. To impute guilt to a
person, is to account him obnoxious to a threatened punish
ment, to pronounce him so, or to inflict that punishment. So,
to impute righteousness, properly so called, is to account him
a fulfiller of the law, to pronounce him so to be, and to treat
him as righteous. And to impute righteousness, as opposed to
guilt, is to account, to pronounce, and to treat him as guiltless.
“Thus much is agreed. But the point in question is,
“Does God impute no sin or righteousness but what is per
sonal?” Dr. Taylor positively asserts, he does not. I under
take to prove that he does; that he imputes Adam’s first sin
to all mankind, and our sins to Christ.” (Page 5.)
“l. God imputes Adam’s first sin to all mankind. I do not
410 THE DOCTRINE OF
mean that the actual commission of it was imputed to any
beside himself; (it was impossible it should;) nor is the guilt
of it imputed to any of his descendants, in the full latitude of
it, or in regard to its attendant circumstances. It consti
tutes none of them equally guilty with him. Yet both that
sin itself, and a degree of guilt on account of it, are imputed
to all his posterity; the sin itself is imputed to them, as
included in their head. And on this account, they are
reputed guilty, are ‘children of wrath, liable to the threat
ened punishment. And this cannot be denied, supposing,
(1.) Man’s original righteousness: (2.) Adam’s being the
federal head of all mankind.” (Page 6.)
“(1.) Man’s original righteousness has been largely proved.
Let me add only an argument ad hominem. Supposing (not
granting) that the Son of God is no more than the first of
creatures, either he was originally righteous, or he was not.
If he was not, then time was when he was not ‘the Holy One
of God;’ and possibly he never might have been such, no, nor
righteous at all; but instead of that, as ungodly, guilty, and
wretched, as the devil himself is. For the best creature is
(Dr. Taylor grants) alterable for the worst; and the best, when
corrupted, becomes the worst. Again: If the Son of God
was a mere creature, and as such made without righteousness,
(which every creature must be, according to Dr. Taylor,) then
he was not, could not be, at first as righteous, as like God, as
the holy angels are now, yea, or as any holy man on earth is.
But if these suppositions are shockingly absurd; if the Son
of God could not have become as bad as the devil; if he never
was unrighteous; if he was not originally less holy than
angels and men are now; then the assertion, ‘that righteous
ness must be the effect of a creature's antecedent choice and
endeavour, falls to the ground.” (Pages, 7, 9, 10.)
“But the Hebrew word jasher, Dr. Taylor says, “does not
generally signify a moral character. This is one of the numer
ous critical mistakes in this gentleman’s books. Of the more
than one hundred and fifty texts in which jasher, or the sub
stantive josher, occurs, there are very few which do not confirm
our interpretation of Ecclesiastes vii.29. “But jasher is applied
to various things not capable of moral action. It is; and what
then? Many of these applications are neither for us, nor against
us. Some make strongly for us; as when it is applied to the
words or ways of God and man. But the question now is, what
ORIGINAL SIN. 411
it signifies when applied to God or to moral agents, and that by
way of opposition to a vicious character and conduct. Is it not,
in the text before us, applied to man as a moral agent, and by
way of opposition to a corrupt character and conduct? No
man can deny it. Either, therefore, prove, that jasher, when
opposed, as here, to a corrupt conduct and character, does not
signify righteous, or acknowledge the truth, that God “created
man upright, or righteous.” (Page 11.)
“To evade the argument from Ephesians iv. 24, Dr. Taylor
first says, “The old man means a heathenish life;’ and then
says, “The old and new man do not signify a course of life.’
What then do they signify? Why, ‘The old man,’ says he,
“relates to the Gentile state; and the new man is either the
Christian state, or the Christian Church, body, society.’ But
for all this, he says again, a page or two after, “The old and
new man, and the new man’s being renewed, and the renewing of
the Ephesians, do all manifestly refer to their Gentile state and
wicked course of life, from which they were lately converted.’
“When, then, the Apostle says, “Our old man is crucified
with Christ, (Romans vi. 6) is it the Gentile state or course
of life which was so crucified? No; but the corrupt nature,
‘the body of sin,” as it is termed in the same verse. And ‘to
put off the old man,’ is, (according to St. Paul,) ‘to crucify”
this ‘with its affections and desires.’ On the other hand, to
‘put on the new man,’ is to cultivate the divine principle
which is formed in the soul of every believer by the Spirit of
Christ. It is this of which it is said, (i.) It is created; and
in regard to it we are said to be “created unto good works.”
(ii.) It is renewed; for it is indeed no other than original
righteousness restored. (iii.) It is after God, after his image
and likeness, now stamped afresh on the soul. (iv.) It con
sists in righteousness and holiness, or that knowledge which
comprehends both.” (Pages 13, 14.)
“Again: To that argument, “Either man at first loved God,
or he was an enemy to God,” Dr. Taylor gives only this slight,
superficial answer: “Man could not love God before he knew
him;’ without vouchsafing the least notice of the arguments
which prove, that man was not created without the knowledge
of God. Let him attend to those proofs, and either honestly
yield to their force, or, if he is able, fairly confute them.
“The doctrine of original sin presupposes,—
“(2.) Adam’s being the federal head of all mankind. Seve
412 THE DOCTRINE OF
ral proofs of this having been given already, I need not pro
duce more until those are answered.
“2. God imputes our sins, or the guilt of them, to Christ.
He consented to be responsible for them, to suffer the punish
ment due for them. This sufficiently appears from Isai. liii.,
which contains a summary of the Scripture doctrine upon this
head. “He hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows.”
The word nasa (borne) signifies, (1.) To take up somewhat, as
on one’s shoulders: (2.) To bear or carry something weighty,
as a porter does a burden: (3.) To take away : And in all these
senses it is here applied to the Son of God. He carried, as a
strong man does a heavy burden, (the clear, indisputable sense
of the other word, sabal,) our sorrows; the suffering of various.
kinds which were due to our sins. ‘He was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities. Wounds and
bruises are put for the whole of his sufferings; as his death and
blood frequently are. He was wounded and bruised, not for sins
of his own; not merely to show God’s hatred of sin; not chiefly
to give us a pattern of patience; but for our sins, as the proper,
impulsive cause. Our sins were the procuring cause of all his
sufferings. His sufferings were the penal effects of our sins.
‘The chastisement of our peace, the punishment necessary to
procure it, “was laid “on him, freely submitting thereto: “And
by his stripes” (a part of his sufferings again put for the whole)
“we are healed;’ pardon, sanctification, and final salvation, are
all purchased and bestowed upon us. Every chastisement is
for some fault. That laid on Christ was not for his own, but
ours; and was needful to reconcile an offended Lawgiver, and
offending guilty creatures, to each other. So ‘the Lord laid
on him the iniquity of us all; that is, the punishment due
to our iniquity.” (Pages 16–20.)
“It is true, as Dr. Taylor says, “sin and iniquity often sig
nify affliction or suffering. But why? Because it is usual for
a cause to give denomination to its effect. And so the conse
quences of sin are called by the same name. But this rather
hurts Dr. Taylor's cause than helps it. For sufferings could
with no propriety be called sin, if they were not the proper
effects of it. Man, in innocence, was liable to no suffering or
sorrow ; he was indeed tried, but not by suffering. All sorrow
was introduced by sin; and if man is ‘born to trouble, it is
because he is born ‘in sin.” God indeed does afflict his children
ORIGINAL SIN. 413
for their good; and turns even death into a blessing. Yet
as it is the effect of sin, so is it in itself an enemy to all
mankind; nor would any man have been either tried or cor
rected by affliction, had it not been for sin.” (Pages 21, 22.)
“The Lord’s laying on Christ ‘the iniquity of us all,’ was
eminently typified by the High Priest putting all the iniqui
ties of Israel on the scape-goat, who then carried them away.
“But the goat, says Dr. Taylor, “was to suffer nothing. This
is a gross mistake. It was a ‘sin-offering,’ (verse 5) and, as
such, was to ‘bear upon him all the iniquities’ of the people
into the wilderness; and there (as the Jewish Doctors una
nimously hold) to suffer a violent death, by way of punish
ment, instead of the people, for their sins “put upon him.’
Yet Dr. Taylor says, “Here was no imputation of sin. No!
What is the difference between imputing sins, and putting
them upon him? This is just of a piece with, “A sin-offering
that suffered nothing; a creature ‘turned loose into a land
the properest for its subsistence, while bearing upon him all
the iniquities of God’s people !” (Pages 23–25.)
“Thus ‘Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us.” Dr. Taylor, when he wrote his
late books, was not apprized of the usual scripture meaning
of this awful word, curse. It is often put to signify the legal
punishment of sin. What the law of God threatens against
transgressors, or the threatening itself, is frequently called
by this name. What signifies then his trifling observation,
‘that God inflicted no curse on our first parents?’ (Gen. iii.
16–18;) that is, he did not say, in so many words, ‘Cursed
art thou, O man, or ‘O woman. But God’s cursing the
ground for man’s sake, was really a curse pronounced against
him; and what the Lord said to the woman was really a
curse, a penalty legally inflicted on her. For God is then
said to curse, when he either threatens to punish, or actually
punishes, his creatures for sin. See Deut. xxvii. 15, &c.;
xxviii. 16, &c.; Jer. xvii. 5; Zech. v. 3.” (Pages 39, 40.)
“To conclude: Either we must allow the imputation of
Adam’s sin, whatever difficulties attend it, or renounce justifi
cation by Christ, and salvation through the merit of his blood.
Accordingly, the Socinians do this. Whether Dr. Taylor does,
let every thinking man judge, after having weighed what he
writes, particularly at pages 72,73, of his ‘Scripture Doctrine.’
414 THE DOCTRINE OF
‘The worthiness of Christ is his consummate virtue. It is
virtue that carrieth every cause in heaven. Virtue is the only
price which purchaseth everything with God. True virtue, or
the right exercise of reason, is true worth, and the only valu
able consideration, the only power which prevails with God.”
These passages are indeed connected with others, which carry
with them a show of ascribing honour to Christ and grace.
But the fallacy lies open to every careful, intelligent, unpre
judiced reader. He ascribes to Christ a singular worthiness;
but it is nothing more than superior degree of the same kind
of worthiness which belongs to every virtuous man. He talks
of Christ's consummate virtue, or his obedience to God, and
good-will to man. And to this virtue of his, as imitated by us,
he would teach us to ascribe our acceptance with God; which
is indeed to ascribe it to ourselves, or to our own virtue; to
works of righteousness done by us, in direct opposition to the
whole tenor of the gospel. To what dangerous lengths are
men carried by an ignorance of God, as infinitely holy and
just; by a fond conceit of their own abilities, and a resolved
opposition to the doctrine of original sin! Rather than allow
this, they renounce Christ as the meritorious procurer of sal
vation for sinners. They may seem, indeed, to acknowledge
him as such, and talk of “eternal life as given by God through
his Son.” But all this is mere show, and can only impose on
the ignorant and unwary. They dare not profess, in plain
terms, that Christ has merited salvation for any; neither can
they consistently allow this, while they deny original sin.”
(Pages 80, 81.)
“Let not any, then, who regard their everlasting interests,
entertain or even tamper with doctrines which, how plausibly
soever recommended, are contrary to many express texts, nay,
to the whole tenor of Scripture, and which cannot be embraced
without renouncing an humble dependence on Christ, and
rejecting the gospel method of salvation.” (Page 82.)
“God grant every reader of this plain treatise may not only
be convinced of the truth and importance of the scripture
doctrines maintained therein, but invincibly confirmed in his
attachments to them, by an experimental knowledge of their
happy influence on faith, holiness, and comfort | Then shall
we gladly say, We, who are made sinners by the disobedience
of Adam, are made righteous by the obedience of Christ. His
righteousness entitles us to a far better inheritance than that
ORIGINAL SIN. 4.15
we lost in Adam. In consequence of being justified through
him, we shall “reign in life’ with him. Unto whom, with
God the Father, and the sanctifying, comforting Spirit, be
ascribed all praise for ever !” (Page 83.)
BART VI.
THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN EXPLAINED AND WINDI
CATED,
“THE phrase, original sin, so far as we can discover, was
first used in the fourth century. The first who used it was
either St. Chrysostom, or Hilary, some of whose words are
these: ‘The Psalmist says, Behold, I was conceived in iniqui
ties, and in sins did my mother conceive me. He acknow
ledges that he was born under original sin and the law of sin.”
Soon after Hilary’s time, St. Augustine, and other Christian
writers, brought it into common use.” (Pages 2, 3.)
“The scriptural doctrine of original sin may be comprised
in the following propositions:—
“I. Man was originally made righteous or holy.
“II. That original righteousness was lost by the first sin.
“III. Thereby man incurred death of every kind; for,"
“IV. Adam’s first sin was the sin of a public person, one
whom God had appointed to represent all his descendants.
“W. Hence all these are from their birth ‘children of wrath,’
void of all righteousness, and propense to sin of all sorts.
“I add, WI. This is not only a truth agreeable to Scripture
and reason, but a truth of the utmost importance, and one to
which the Churches of Christ, from the beginning, have
borne a clear testimony.” (Page 8.)-
“I. Man was originally made righteous or holy; formed with
such a principle of love and obedience to his Maker as disposed
and enabled him to perform the whole of his duty with ease and
pleasure. This has been proved already; and this wholly over
turns Dr. Taylor's fundamental aphorism, ‘Whatever is natural
is necessary, and what is necessary is not sinful. For if man
was originally righteous or holy, we may argue thus: It was at
416 ThE DOCTRINE OF
first natural to man to love and obey his Maker; yet it was
not necessary; neither as necessary is opposed to voluntary
or free; (for he both loved and obeyed freely and willingly;)
nor, as necessary means unavoidable; (this is manifest by the
event;) no, nor as necessary is opposed to rewardable; for
had he continued to love and obey, he would have been rewarded
with everlasting happiness. Therefore that assertion, ‘What
ever is natural is necessary, is palpably, glaringly false;
consequently, what is natural, as well as what is acquired,
may be good or evil, rewardable or punishable.” (Page 10.)
“II. Man’s original righteousness was lost by the first sin.
Though he was made righteous, he was not made immutable.
He was free to stand or fall. And he soon fell, and lost at
once both the favour and image of God. This fully appears,
1. From the account which Moses gives of our first parents,
where we read, (1.) ‘The eyes of them both were opened, and
they knew that they were naked;’ (Gen. iii.;) that is, they
were conscious of guilt, and touched with a pungent sense of
their folly and wickedness. They began to find their naked
ness irksome to them, and to reflect on it with sinful emotions
of soul. (2.) Immediately they were indisposed for com
munion with God, and struck with such a dread of him as
could not consist with true love. (Verse 8.) (3.) When
questioned by God, how do they prevaricate, instead of con
fessing their sin, and humbly imploring forgiveness! which
proves, not only their having "inned, but their being as yet
wholly impenitent. (4.) The judgment passed upon them
was a proof of their being guilty in the sight of God. Thus
was man’s original righteousness lost; thus did he fall both
from the favour and image of God.” (Pages 14, 15.)
“This appears, 2. From the guilt which inseparably attends
every trangression of the divine law. I say, every transgres
sion; because every sin virtually contains all sin; for ‘whoso
ever keepeth the whole law, and offendeth in one point, he is
guilty of all.” Every single offence is a virtual breach of all
the commands of God. There is in every particular sin, the
principle of all sin; namely, the contempt of that sovereign
authority which is equally stamped upon every command.
When, therefore, our first parents ate the forbidden fruit, they
not only violated a particular precept, but the entire law of
God. They could not sin in one instance, without virtually
ORIGINAL SIN. 417
transgressing the whole law of their creation; which being
once done, their title to God’s favour and their original
righteousness were both lost.” (Page 16.)
“This appears, 3. From the comprehensive nature and
aggravating circumstances of the first transgression. For it
implied, (1.) Unbelief: Man did not dare to break the divine
command till he was brought to question the truth of the divine
threatening. (2.) Irreverence of God: Reverence is a mixture
of love and fear; and had they continued in their first love and
filial fear, they could not have broken through the sole com
mand of God. (3.) Ingratitude : For what a return did they
hereby make to their Creator for all his benefits 1 (4.) Pride
and ambition; affecting to be ‘as gods, knowing good and
evil.” (5.) Sensuality: The woman looked upon the fruit with
an irregular appetite. Here the conflict between reason and
sense began. To talk of such a conflict in man before he fell
is to represent him as in a degree sinful and guilty even while
innocent. For conflict implies opposition; and an opposition
of appetite to reason is nothing else than a repugnance to the
law of God. But of this our first parents were no way guilty,
till their innocence was impaired; till they were led by the
temptation of the devil to desire the forbidden fruit. (6)
Robbery: For the fruit was none of theirs. They had no
manner of right to it. Thereforetheir taking it was a flatrobbery
of God; which cannot be less criminal than robbing our fellow
creatures. So comprehensive was the nature, so aggravated the
circumstances, of man's first transgression.” (Pages 17, 18.)
“III. Hereby he incurred death of every kind; not only
temporal, but also spiritual and eternal. By losing his original
righteousness, he became not only mortal as to his body, but
also spiritually dead, dead to God, dead in sin; void of that
principle which St. Paul terms, ‘the life of God;’ (Eph. iv.
18;) St. John, “eternal life abiding in us.” (1 John iii. 15.)
A creature formed with a capacity of knowing, loving, and
serving God, must be either ‘dead in sin,” or ‘alive to God.”
Adam, in his primitive state, was ‘alive to God;’ but after he
had sinned, dead in sin, as well as dead in law.” (Page 20.)
“But Dr. Taylor is sure, only temporal death was to be
the consequence of his disobedience. ‘For death is the loss of
life, and must be understood according to the nature of the life
to which it is opposed. Most true; and the life to which it is
VOL. IX. E E
4.18 THE DOCTRINE OF
here opposed, the life Adam enjoyed, till lost by sin, was not
only bodily life, but that principle of holiness which the Scrip
ture terms, ‘the life of God. It was also a title to eternal
life. All this, therefore, he lost by sin. And that justly;
for ‘death is the due “wages of sin;’ death, both temporal,
spiritual, and eternal.” (Page 21.)
“IV. Adam’s first sin was the sin of a public person,-one
whom God had appointed to represent all his descendants.
“This also has been proved. In one sense, indeed, Adam’s
sin was not ours. It was not our personal fault, our actual
transgression. But in another sense it was ours; it was the
sin of our common representative: And, as such, St. Paul
shows it is imputed to us and all his descendants. Hence,—
“W. All these are from their birth ‘children of wrath;’
void of all righteousness, and propense to sin of all sorts.
“In order to clear and confirm this proposition, I intend,
“1. To consider a text which proves original sin in the full
extent of it.
“2. To explain some other texts, which relate either to the
guilt or the corruption we derive from our first parents.
“3. To add some arguments which Dr. Taylor has taken
no notice of, or touched but very slightly.
“4. To answer objections.
“And, 1. To consider that text, “And were by nature chil
dren of wrath, even as others.” (Eph. ii. 3.) In the beginning
of the chapter, St. Paul puts the Ephesians in mind of what
God had done for them. This led him to observe what they
had been before their conversion to God: They had been ‘dead
in trespasses and sins; but were now “quickened, made alive
to God. They had “walked according to the prince of the
power of the air, the spirit that worketh with energy in the
children of disobedience.’ ‘Among such,” saith the Apostle,
‘we all had our conversation in times past; the whole time
before our conversion; ‘fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of
the mind; and were by nature children of wrath, even as
others.” On this I observe,—
“(1.) The persons spoken of are both the believing Ephe
sians and the Apostle himself. For he says not, “Ye were,’
speaking in the second person, as he had done, verses 1, 2; but,
“We were,’—plainly with a design the more expressly to
include himself. Indeed, had he still spoken in the second
ORIGINAL SIN. 419
Terson, yet what is here affirmed would have been true of
him as well as them. But for the sake of more explicitly
including himself, he chose to say, ‘We were; ’—you,
Ephesians, who were descended of heathen parents, and I
who was born in the visible Church.
“(2.) The ‘wrath’ here spoken of, means either God’s
displeasure at sinners, or the punishment which he threatens
and inflicts for sin.” (Pages 25–28.)
“(3.) ‘Children of wrath,” is an Hebraism, and denotes
persons worthy of, or liable to, wrath. And this implies the
being sinners; seeing sin only exposes us to God's displea
sure and the dreadful effects of it.
“(4.) This charge the Apostle fixes on himself and them,
as they had been before their conversion. He does not say,
We are, but “we were, children of wrath.’ (Page 29.)
“ (5.) He speaks of himself and the converted Ephesians
as having been so equally with others. There is an emphasis
on the words, “even as others; even as the stubborn Jews
and idolatrous Heathens; even as all who are still “strangers
and enemies’ to Christ. These are still ‘children of wrath: ’
But whatever difference there is between us and them, we
were once what they are now.
“(6.) He expressly says, “We were children of wrath
even as others, by nature,” or, from our birth. He does not
say, We became so by education, or by imitation, or by cus
tom in sinning; but, to show us when it is that we commence
sinners, by what means we become ‘children of wrath,
whence it is that we are so prone to evil from our infancy
and to imitate bad rather than good examples, he says, “We
were children of wrath by nature; we were born fallen crea
tures; we came into the world sinners, and, as such, liable to
wrath, in consequence of the fall of our first father.
“But, it is affirmed, (i.) That “by nature means, by habit
or custom.’ I answer, Though the term, nature, with some
qualifying expression annexed, is sometimes taken for in
veterate custom, yet it is never so taken when put singly,
without any such qualifying expression. When, therefore,
the Apostle says absolutely, ‘We are children of wrath by
nature, this, according to the constant sense of the words,
must mean, We were so from our birth.” (Page 31.)
“It is affirmed, (ii.) That “because the original words stand
2 E 2
420 ThE DOCTRINE OF
thus, tekwa buoet opyms, children by nature of wrath; there
fore, children by nature means only truly and really children
of wrath. I answer, The consequence is good for nothing:
For let the words stand as they will, it is evident that recwa.
$vae are, children by birth ; or, such as are born so, in dis
tinction from those who became such afterward.
“It is affirmed, (iii.) ‘That buoet, by nature, signifies no
more than truly or really.” I answer, First, It is not allowed,
that any good Greek writers ever use the word in this sense.
Secondly, Whatever others do, the writers of the New Testa
ment always use it in another sense. So Galatians ii. 15: “We
who are Jews by nature,’ buoet Iovôatou that is, We who are
born Jews, in contradistinction to proselytes. ‘Ye did service
to them which by nature are no gods; ” (Gal. iv.8;) um bvaret
ovat Seous, persons or things which are partakers of no divine
nature. ‘The Gentiles do by nature the things contained in the
law; ” (Rom. ii. 14;) that is, by their own natural powers, with
out a written law. Neither here, nor anywhere else, does the
word (bvael signify no more than really or truly.” (Page 32.)
“It remains, then, that the word which we render by
nature does really so signify.
“And yet it is allowed, we are not so guilty by nature, as
a course of actual sin afterward makes us. But we are, ante
cedent to that course, ‘children of wrath; liable to some
degree of wrath and punishment. Here, then, from a plain
text, taken in its obvious sense, we have a clear evidence both
of what Divines term, original sin imputed, and of original
sin inherent. The former is the sin of Adam, so far reckoned
ours as to constitute us in some degree guilty; the latter, a
want of original righteousness, and a corruption of nature;
whence it is, that from our infancy we are averse to what is
good, and propense to what is evil.” (Page 33.)
“I am, 2. To explain some other texts which relate either to
theguilt or the corruption which we derive from our first parents.
“Genesis v. 3: Here the image of Adam, in which he begat
a son after his fall, stands opposed to the image of God, in which
man was at first created. Moses had said, ‘In the day that God
created man, in the likeness of God made He him.” (Verse 1.)
In this, speaking of Adam as he was after the fall, he does not
say, He begat a son in the likeness of God; but, He ‘begat a son
in his own likeness, after his image. Now, this must refer to
Adam, either as a man, or as a good man, or as a mortal, sinful
ORIGINAL SIN. 421
man. But it could not refer to him merely as a man. The
inspired writer could not design to inform us, that Adam begat
a man, not a lion, or a horse. It could not well refer to him as
a good man; for it is not said, Adam begat a son, who at length
became pious like himself; but, He ‘begat a son in his own like
mess.’ It refers to him, therefore, as a mortal, sinful man; giv
ing us to know, that the mortality and corruption contracted by
the fall descended from Adam to his son: Adam, a sinner,
begat a sinner like himself. And if Seth was thus a sinner by
nature, so is every other descendant of Adam.” (Pages 35, 36.)
“Dr. Taylor takes no notice of the antithesis between ‘the
likeness of God,” (verse 1) and ‘the likeness of Adam : ’
(Verse 3:) On the other hand, he speaks of these two as one;
as if Seth had been ‘born’ in the very same image of God
wherein Adam was ‘made.” But this cannot be admitted;
because Adam had now lost his original righteousness. It
must therefore be “the likeness’ of fallen, corrupted Adam
which is here intended.
“‘And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in
the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart was only evil continually.” (Gen. vi. 5.) Here Moses,
having observed, as the cause of the flood, that ‘God saw that
the wickedness of man was great,” to account for this general
wickedness, adds, “Every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart was evil; yea, was ‘only evil, and that “continually.”
The heart of man is here put for his soul. This God had
formed with a marvellous thinking power. But so is his soul
debased, that “every imagination, figment, formation, ‘of
the thoughts’ of it, “is evil, only evil, ‘continually evil.
Whatever it forms within itself, as a thinking power, is an
evil formation. This Moses spoke of the Antediluvians; but
we cannot confine it to them. If all their actual wickedness
sprung from the evil formations of their corrupt heart; and
if consequently they were sinners from the birth, so are all
others likewise.” (Page 37.)
“‘I will not again curse the ground any more for man’s sake;
for the imagination of man’s heart is evil fröm his youth; neither
will I again smite any more every living thing.” (Gen. viii. 21.)
I will not be provoked to this by the wickedness of mankind; for
they are inclined tosin from their childhood. Was I, therefore,to
do this as often as they deserve, I must be continually destroying
the earth. The word-iss—imagination—(as was observed before)
422 THE DOCTRINE or
includes the thoughts, affections, inclinations, with everything
which the soul, as a thinking being, forges and frames within
itself. And the word we render youth, includes childhood
and infancy, the earliest age of man; the whole time from
his birth, or (as others affirm) from his formation in the womb.
“Indeed Dr. Taylor would translate the text, ‘Although
the imagination of man’s heart should be evil from his
youth. But, (1.) Though the particle -- sometimes signifies
although ; yet for is its common meaning. And we are not
to recede from the usual signification of a word without any
necessity. (2.) If we read although, it will not at all
invalidate our proof. For still the plain meaning of the words
would be, ‘I will not send another general flood, although
every figment or formation of the heart of every man is evil
from his earliest infancy.’” (Page 39.)
“Although affliction cometh not forth of the dust; yet man
is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward.’ (Job v. 6, 7.)
The word which is here rendered affliction, sometimes signifies
‘iniquity. For what reason, but to show that these two,
‘sin’ and ‘affliction, are inseparable? Sin is the cause of
affliction; and affliction, of whatever kind, is the genuine
effect of sin. Indeed it is incompatible with the justice and
mercy of God to appoint afflictions of any kind for the innocent.
If Christ suffered, it was because the sins of others were im
puted to him. If, then, every one of the posterity of Adam
“is born to trouble, it must be because he is born a sinner:
For man was not originally made to suffer. Nor while he
preserved his innocence was he liable to suffering of any kind.
Are the angels, or any pure, sinless creatures, liable to any
sorrow or affliction? Surely no. But every child of Adam is.
And it is in consequence of his sin, that the present life of man
is short and afflictive; of which the very Heathens were deeply
sensible. They also saw, that “great travail is created for
every man, and a heavy yoke is upon the sons of Adam, from
the day that they go out of their mother's womb, till the day
that they return to the mother of all things.’” (Page 40.)
“‘Wain man would be wise, though man be born like a wild
ass’s colt;’ (Job xi. 12;) in the original, ‘though man be born’
(will be born in every age) ‘the colt of a wild ass. Dr. Taylor
owns, “We are born quite ignorant.” But this is far from reach
ing the plain import of the text, in which man, as born into the
world, is compared to an animal most remarkably stupid and
ORIGINAL SIN. 423
intractable. And such all the sons of Adam naturally are,
particularly with regard to the things of God; from their
infancy slow to learn what is good, though impetuously pro
pense to learn and practise what is evil.” (Pages 43, 44.)
“Job xiv. 4, and xv. 14. I join these, because the latter
confirms the former. “Who can bring a clean thing, or
person, “out of an unclean? Not one.’ This is express. Job
had been reflecting on the sorrowful, uncertain, imperfect
state of all Adam’s children in the present world. (xiv. 1–3.)
Then he carries his thoughts to the spring of such a state,
the original corruption of man. “Who, what creature, can
make an innocent, righteous person proceed from a parent
defiled by sin? ‘Not one.’ Through the whole Scripture
we may observe, ‘sin’ is described as ‘uncleanness,’ and a
sinner as an unclean thing. On the contrary, holiness is
expressed by ‘cleanness’ of heart and hands; and the right
eous man is described as clean. Agreeably to which, the
text asserts the natural impossibility of any man’s being born
clean, guiltless, and sinless, because he proceeds from them
who are unclean, guilty, and defiled with sin.
“The Septuagint translate the text, “Who shall be clean
from filth? Not one; even though his life on earth be a single
day.’ And this rendering, though not according to the Hebrew,
is followed by all the Fathers; and shows what was the general
belief of the Jews before Christ came into the world.”
“‘But since the heavens and stars are represented as not
clean, compared to God, may not man also be here termed
unclean, only as compared with him?” I answer, (1.) The
heavens are manifestly compared with God; but man is not
in either of these texts. He is here described, not as he is
in comparison of God, but as he is absolutely in himself.
(2.) When ‘the heavens’ and man’ are mentioned in the same
text, and man is set forth as ‘unclean,’ his ‘uncleanness’ is
expressed by his being ‘unrighteous;’ and that always means
guilty or sinful. Nor, indeed, is the innocent frailty of man
kind ever in Scripture termed ‘uncleanness.’” (Pages 45,46.)
“‘Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my
mother conceive me.” (Psalm li. 5.) The Psalmist here con
fesses, bewails, and condemns himself for his natural corrup
tion, as that which principally gave birth to the horrid sins
with which he had been overtaken. ‘Behold !” He prefixes
this to render his confession the more remarkable, and to
424 ThE DOCTRINE of
show the importance of the truth here declared : ‘I was
shapen; this passive verb denotes somewhat in which neither
David nor his parents had any active concern: “In or with
‘iniquity, and in or with ‘sin did my mother conceive me.’
The word which we render ‘conceive, signifies properly, to
warm, or to cherish by warmth. It does not, therefore, so
directly refer to the act of conceiving as to the cherishing
what is conceived till the time of its birth. But either way
the proof is equally strong for the corruption of mankind
from their first existence.” (Pages 47, 48.)
“‘The wicked are estranged from the womb : They go
astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies.’ ‘They are
estranged from the womb;’ (Psalm lviii. 3, 4;) strangers and
averse to true, practical religion, from the birth. ‘They go
astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies. Not that they
actually speak lies as soon as they are born; but they natu
rally incline that way, and discover that inclination as early
as is possible.” (Pages 51, 52.)
“‘Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; but the
rod of correction shall drive it far from him.’ (Prov. xxii. 15.)
‘The rod and reproof give wisdom: But a child left to himself
bringeth his mother to shame.’ (xxix. 15.) These passages put
together are a plain testimony of the inbred corruption of
young children. “Foolishness, in the former, is not barely
“appetite, or a want of the knowledge attainable by instruction.”
Neither of these deserve that sharp correction. But it is an
indisposedness to what is good, and a strong propensity to evil.
This ‘foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; it is rooted
in his inmost nature. It is, as it were, ‘fastened to him by
strong cords; so the original word signifies. From this corrup
tion of heart in every child it is, that the ‘rod of correction’
is necessary to give him ‘wisdom: Hence it is, that “a child
left to himself,’ without correction, ‘brings his mother to
shame. If a child were born equally inclined to virtue and
vice, why should the wise man speak of foolishness, or wicked
ness, as fastened so closely to his heart? And why should ‘the
rod and reproof’ be so necessary for him? These texts, there
fore, are another clear proof of the corruption of human nature.
“‘Those things which proceed out of the mouth, come from
the heart, and they defile the man. For from within, out of the
heart, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, murders:—All these
things come from within, and defile the man.’ (Matt.xv. 18, 19;
ORIGINAL SIN. 425
Mark vii. 20–23.) Our Lord here teaches, that all evil
thoughts, words, and actions, of every kind, flow out of the
heart, the soul of man, as being now averse to all good, and
inclined to all evil.” (Pages 55, 56.)
“Rom. v. 12–19. Let the reader please to read the whole
passage very carefully. The Apostle here discourses of Adam
and Christ as two representatives or public persons, comparing
the ‘sin’ of the one, with the ‘righteousness’ of the other.”
(Page 66.)
“On this I observe, (1.) The ‘one man, spoken of through
out, is Adam, the common head of mankind: And to him
(not to the devil or Eve) the Apostle ascribes the introduction
of ‘sin’ and ‘death. The devil was the first sinner, and Eve,
seduced by him, sinned before her husband. Yet the Apostle
saith, “By one man sin entered into the world; through the
offence of one many are dead; the judgment was by one to con
demnation; death reigned by one. By the offence of one,
judgment came upon all men; by one man’s disobedience
many were made sinners.” Now, why should the Apostle lay
all this on Adam, whose sin was posterior both to the devil’s
and Eve's, if Adam was not appointed by God the federal
head of mankind? In regard to which the Apostle points at
him singly, as the type or ‘figure of Him that was to come.’
According to Dr. Taylor’s doctrine, he should rather have
said, ‘By the devil sin entered into the world;’ or, ‘Through
the disobedience of Eve, many were made sinners. But,
instead of this he fixes on our first father alone, as bringing
sin and death on all his posterity.” (Page 67.)
“(2.) ‘The sin, transgression, offence, disobedience, here
spoken of, was Adam’s eating the forbidden fruit. It is remark
able, that as the Apostle throughout his discourse arraigns one
man only, so he ascribes all the mischief done to one single
offence of that one man. And as he then stood in that special
relation of federal as well as natural head to his descendants,
soupon his committing that one sin, this special relation ceased.
“(3.) The ‘all, (verses 12, 18,) and the ‘many,’ (verses
15, 19,) are all the natural descendants of Adam; equivalent
with ‘the world, (verse 12,) which means the inhabitants of
it.” (Page 69.)
“(4.) The effects of Adam's sin on his descendants, the Apos
tlereduces to two heads, sin and death. ‘By one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed on all
426 THE DOCTRINE OF
men, for that all have sinned.’ “Sin’ sometimes means
“punishment; but not here: ‘Sin and ‘death’ are here
plainly distinguished. The common translation is therefore
right, and gives us the true meaning of the words. “Death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned; ' namely, in or
with their first father. And this agrees with the context;
the purport of which is, that all have sinned, and are there
fore liable to the death originally threatened; which is evident
from this: That ‘ until the law sin was in the world; ’—in the
ages that preceded the law of Moses, all men were sinners in
the sight of God: “But sin is not imputed where there is no
law; ’—none can be sinners in the sight of God if they are
not transgressors of some law, for the transgressing of which
they are reputed guilty: “Nevertheless death reigned’ all the
time ‘from Adam to Moses’ over all mankind. Now, if none
is liable to death, but for sin; if “sin is not imputed where
there is no law; and if, notwithstanding this, all mankind in
all ages have died; infants themselves, who cannot actually
sin, not excepted; it is undeniable, that guilt is imputed to all
for the sin of Adam. Why else are they liable to that which
is inflicted on none but for sin 7
“This is the purport of the Apostle’s arguing, (verses 12–
14,) which having led him to mention Adam as a figure of
Christ, he then draws a parallel between them. The substance
of it is this: As through the ‘offence of Adam many are dead,”
as ‘by the disobedience of him many are made sinners;” so
through the righteousness or “obedience of Christ many are
made righteous. But how are many dead, or made sinners,
through the disobedience of Adam? His first sin so far affects
all his descendants as to constitute them guilty, or liable to all
that death which was contained in the original threatening.”
(Page 72.)
“But Dr. Taylor avers, ‘To be made sinners, means only
to be subjected to temporal death.’
“I answer, (1.) Whatever it means, the disobedience of
Adam had a proper, causal influence upon it; just as the
obedience of Christ has upon our being made righteous.
“(2.) What ‘to be made sinners’ means, must be learned
from the opposite to it, in the latter part of the verse. Now,
allowing the Apostle to be his own interpreter, “being made
righteous’ is the same with “justification.” (Verse 16.) Of this
he had treated largely before. And through the whole of his
discourse, ‘to be justified is to be acquitted from guilt, and
ORIGINAL SIN. 427
accepted of God’ as righteous. Consequently, ‘to be made
sinners’ is to be ‘condemned of God,” or to be ‘children of
wrath, and that on account of Adam’s sin.” (Page 73.)
“By man came death: In Adam all die.” (1 Cor. xv.21, 22.)
Let the reader please to bear in mind the whole of the two
verses and the context. By ‘man,’ in the twenty-first verse,
is meant Adam. The “all” spoken of are all his natural
descendants. These ‘all die;’ that is, as his descendants, are
liable to death, yea, to death everlasting. That this is the
meaning appears hence: That the ‘being made alive,” to
which this dying stands opposed, is not a mere recovery of
life, but a blessed resurrection to a glorious immortality.
Hence I observe, (1.) Man was originally immortal as well
as righteous. In his primitive state he was not liable to
death. (2.) Death is constantly ascribed to sin, as the sole
and proper cause of it. As it was threatened only for sin, so
the sentence was not pronounced till after man had sinned.
(3.) All men are mortal from their birth. As soon as they
begin to live they are liable to death, the punishment de
nounced against sin, and sin only. (4.) This is the genuine
effect of the first sin of our first father. The Apostle does
not attribute it to the devil; neither does he say, ‘In Adam
and Eve all die.’ But here also he mentions Adam singly.
Him he speaks of as ‘a figure of Christ.” (Verses 45, 47, 48.)
And here, as the sole author of death to all his natural de
scendants. ‘In Adam, or on account of his fall, “all” of
mankind, in every age, ‘die;’ consequently, in him all sinned.
With him all fell in his first transgression. That they are all
born liable to the legal punishment of sin proves him the
federal as well as natural head of mankind; whose sin is so
far imputed to all men, that they are born ‘children of
wrath, and liable to death.” (Pages 74–77.)
“Thus have I considered a large number of texts, which
testify of original sin, imputed and inherent. Some are more
express than others, of which kind are Job xiv. 4; Psalm li. 5;
lviii. 3; Rom. v. 12, &c.; 1 Cor. xv. 22; Eph. ii. 3. That in
Ephesians presents us with a direct proof of the entire doc
trine. Those in Romans and Corinthians relate directly to
original sin imputed, and are but consequential proofs of
original corruption. The rest refer particularly to this, and
are but consequential proofs of original sin imputed.
“And as this doctrine stands impregnable on the basis of
428 THE DOCTRINE OF
Scripture, so it is perfectly agreeable to sound reason; as
may appear from a few plain arguments which confirm this
scripture doctrine.” (Page 79.)
“(1.) If the first man was by God’s appointment, as has
been shown, the federal head of all his descendants, it fol
lows, that when Adam sinned and fell, they all sinned in him,
and fell with him. And if they did, they must come into
the world both guilty and unclean.
“‘But we had no hand in Adam’s sin, and therefore can
not be guilty on account of it.’
“This, ‘We had no hand in it, is ambiguous. It means
either, “We did not actually join therein, which no one
denies, or, “We were wholly unconcerned in it; the contrary
to which has been fully proved.
“(2.) Since Adam’s posterity are born liable to death,
which is the due “wages of sin, it follows, that they are born
sinners. No art can set aside the consequence.
“(3.) Either Christ is the Saviour of infants, or he is not;
if he is not, how is he ‘the Saviour of all men?” But, if he
is, then infants are sinners; for he suffered death for sinners
only. He ‘came to seek and save’ only ‘that which was
lost;’ to ‘save his people from their sins. It follows, that
infants are sinners; that they are lost, and, without Christ,
are undone for ever.
“(4) The consequences of the contrary opinion are shock
ingly absurd:—
“(i.) If original sin is not, either death is not ‘the wages
of sin,” or there is punishment without guilt; God punishes
innocent, guiltless creatures. To suppose which is to impute
iniquity to the Most Holy.” (Page 84.)
“(ii.) If we are not sinners by nature, there are sinful
actions without a principle, fruit growing without a root.
‘No; men contract sinful habits by degrees, and then com
mence sinners.’ But whence is it that they contract those
habits so easily and speedily? Whence is it, that, as soon as
ever we discover reason, we discover sinful dispositions? The
early discoveries of reason prove a principle of reason planted
in our nature. In like manner, the early discoveries of sinful
dispositions prove those dispositions planted therein.” (Page 85.)
“(iii.) If we were not ruined by the first Adam, neither
are we recovered by the Second. If the sin of Adam was
not imputed to us, neither is the righteousness of Christ.
ORIGINAL SIN. 429
“(iv.) If we do not derive a corrupt nature from Adam,
we do not derive a new nature from Christ.
“(v.) A denial of original sin not only renders baptism
needless with regard to infants, but represents a great part
of mankind as having no need of Christ, or the grace of the
new covenant. I now speak of infants in particular, who, if
not “guilty before God,’ no more need the merits and grace
of the Second Adam than the brutes themselves.
“Lastly. A denial of original sin contradicts the main
design of the gospel, which is to humble vain man, and to
ascribe to God’s free grace, not man’s free will, the whole of
his salvation. Nor, indeed, can we let this doctrine go with
out giving up, at the same time, the greatest part, if not all,
of the essential articles of the Christian faith. If we give
up this, we cannot defend either justification by the merits of
Christ, or the renewal of our natures by his Spirit. Dr.
Taylor’s book is not, therefore, subversive of a particular
branch, but of the whole scheme, of Christianity.
“WI. The doctrine, therefore, of original sin is not only a
truth agreeable to Scripture and reason, but a truth of the
utmost importance. And it is a truth to which the Churches
of Christ, from the beginning, have borne a clear testimony.
“Few truths, if any, are more necessary to be known, be
lieved, and thoroughly considered. For if we are not ac
quainted with this, we do not know ourselves; and if we do
not know ourselves, we cannot rightly know Christ and the
grace of God. And on this knowledge of Christ and the grace
of God depends the whole of our salvation. St. Augustine,
therefore, well remarks, ‘Christianity lies properly in the
knowledge of what concerns, Adam and Christ. For, certainly,
if we do not know Christ, we know nothing to any purpose;
and we cannot know Christ, without some knowledge of what
relates to Adam, who was ‘the figure of Him that was to come.’
“‘But if this doctrine is so important, why is so little
said of it in Scripture, and in the writings of the ancients?”
“This is a grand mistake. We totally deny that the Scrip
ture says little of it. Dr. Taylor, indeed, affirms, ‘There are
but five passages of Scripture that plainly relate to the effects
of Adam’s fall.” Not so: Many Scriptures, as has been shown,
plainly and directly teach us this doctrine; and many others
deliver that from which it may be rationally and easily de
duced. Indeed, the whole doctrine of salvation by Christ,
430 THE DOCTRINE OF
and divine grace, implies this; and each of its main branches
—justification and regeneration—directly leads to it. So
does the doctrine of man's original righteousness, than
which nothing is more clearly revealed.” (Page 88.)
“And if the writers before St. Augustine say little con
cerning it, is not the reason plain? The occasions of their
writing did not lead them to enlarge on what none had ever
opposed or denied. For none had ever opposed or denied
this doctrine. “Who, says Vincentius Lirinensis, ‘before
Celestius, denied all mankind to be involved in the guilt of
Adam’s transgression ?’ Yet they are not silent concerning
it. Justin Martyr speaks of ‘mankind as fallen under death
and the deceit of the serpent; of ‘all Adam’s descendants,
as condemned for his sin; and all that are Christ's, as justi
fied by him.’ (Dial. with Trypho.) In Irenaeus there are nu
merous, strong, express testimonies, both to original righteous
ness and original sin in the full extent: ‘What we lost in
Adam, that is, a being after the image and likeness of God,
this we recover by Christ.” (Irenaeus, l. 3. c. 20.) Again
“They who receive the ingrafted word return to the ancient
nature of man, that by which he was made after the image
and likeness of God.” (Ibid. l. 5, c. 10.) He likewise speaks
of our sinning in Adam: ‘In the first Adam,” says he, “we
offended God; in the Second Adam, we are reconciled: ”
And frequently of “man’s losing the image of God by the
fall, and recovering it by Christ.’ Tertullian says, “Man was
in the beginning deceived, and, therefore, condemned to
death; upon which his whole race became infected and par
taker of his condemnation.’ (De Testimonio Animae.) Cyprian
is express in his Epistle to Fidus. Origen says, “The curse
of Adam is common to all. Again: ‘Man, by sinning, lost
the image and likeness of God.’ And again : “No one is
clean from the filth of sin, even though he is not above a day
old.’” (Page 93.)
“‘The whole of me,’ says Nazianzen, ‘has need of being
saved, since the whole of me fell, and was condemned for the
disobedience of my first father. Many more are the testi
monies of Athanasius, Basil, Hilary; all prior to St. Augus
tine. And how generally since St. Augustine this important
truth has been asserted is well known. Plain it is, therefore,
that the Churches of Christ, from the beginning, have borne
clear testimony to it.
ORIGINAL SIN. 431
“To conclude, 1. This is a scriptural doctrine: Many plain
texts directly teach it.
“2. It is a rational doctrine, throughly consistent with the
dictates of sound reason; and this, notwithstanding there may
be some circumstances relating thereto which human reason
cannot fathom.” (Page 91.)
“3. It is a practical doctrine. It has the closest connexion
with the life, power, and practice of religion. It leads man to
the foundation of all Christian practice, the knowledge of him
self; and hereby, to the knowledge of God, and the knowledge
of Christ crucified. It prepares him for, and confirms him in,
just conceptions of the dependence of his salvation, on the merits
of Christ for justification, and the power of his Spirit for inward
and outward holiness. It humbles the natural pride of man;
it excludes self-applause and boasting; and points out the true
and only way whereby we may fulfil all righteousness.
“4. It is an experimental doctrine. The sincere Christian,
day by day, carries the proof of it in his own bosom; expe
riencing that in himself, which is abundantly sufficient to
convince him, that “in him,” by nature, ‘dwelleth no good
thing; but that it is God alone who worketh in him both to
will and to do of his good pleasure.’”
LEWISHAM, March 23, 1757.
I HAVE now gone through, as my leisure would permit, this
whole complicated question; and I have spoken on each
branch of it with plainness and openness, according to the best
light I have at present. I have only a few words more to add,
and that with the same openness and simplicity.
What I have often acknowledged, I now repeat. Were it
not on a point of so deep importance, I would no more enter
the lists with Dr. Taylor, than I would lift my hand against
a giant. I acknowledge your abilities of every kind; your
natural and acquired endowments; your strong understanding;
your lively and fruitful imagination; your plain and easy, yet
nervous style. I make no doubt of your having studied the
original Scriptures for many years. And I believe you have
moral endowments which are infinitely more valuable and
more amiable than all these. For (if I am not greatly
deceived) you bear “good-will to all men.” And may not I
add, you fear God?
432 THE LOCTRINE OF
O what might not you do with these abilities! What would
be too great for you to attempt and effect! Of what service
might you be, not only to your own countrymen, but to all that
bear the Christian name ! How might you advance the cause
of true, primitive, scriptural Christianity; of solid, rational
virtue; of the deep, holy, happy, spiritual religion, which is
brought to light by the gospel ! How capable are you of
recommending, not barely morality, (the duty of man to man,)
but piety, the duty of man to God, even the “worshipping him
in spirit and in truth !” How well qualified are you to explain,
enforce, defend, even “the deep things of God,” the nature of
the kingdom of God “within us;” yea, the interiora regni
Dei !” (I speak on supposition of your having the “unction
of the Holy One,” added to your other qualifications.) And are
you, whom God has so highly favoured, among those who serve
the opposite cause? If one might transfer the words of a man
to Him, might not one conceive Him to say, Kat av et exeuvov;
scal av, Texvov;t Are you disserving the cause of inward religion,
labouring to destroy the inward kingdom of God, sapping the
foundations of all true, spiritual worship, advancing morality on
the ruins of piety? Are you among those who are overthrow
ing the very foundations of primitive, scriptural Christianity?
which certainly can have noground to stand upon, if the scheme
lately advanced be true. What room is there for it, till men
repent? know themselves? Without this can they know or love
God? O why should you block up the way to repentance, and,
consequently, to the whole religion of the heart? “Let a man be
a fool,” says the Apostle, “that he may be wise.” But you tell
him, he is wise already; that every man is by nature as wise as
Adam was in paradise. He gladly drinks in the soothing sound,
and sleeps on and takes his rest. We beseech those who are
mad after earthly things, to take knowledge of the dreadful
state they are in ; to return to their Father, and beg of him
“the spirit of love and of asound mind.” You tell them, they are
of a “sound mind” already. They believe, and turn to their
husks again. Jesus comes to “seek and save that which is lost.”
You tell the men of form, (though as dead to God as a stone,).
that they are not lost; that (inasmuch as they are free from
* The more inward things of the kingdom of God.—EDIT.
+ What! art thou one of them too ! Thou, my son?—EDIT.
ORIGINAL SIN. 433
gross sins,) they are in a good way, and will undoubtedly be
saved. So they live and die, without the knowledge, love, or
image of God; and die eternally !
“They will be saved.” But are they saved already? We
know all real Christians are. If they are, if these are possessed
of the present salvation which the Scripture speaks of, what is
that salvation? How poor, dry, dull, shallow, superficial a
thing ! Wherein does it excel what the wiser Heathens taught,
nay, and perhaps experienced? What poor pitiable creatures
are those Christians, so called, who have advanced no higher
than this! You see enough of these on every side; perhaps
even in your own congregation. What knowledge have they
of the things of God? what love to God, or to Christ? what
heavenly mindedness? how much of “the mind which was in
Christ Jesus?” How little have they profited by all your
instructions ! How few are wiser and better than when you
knew them first ! O take knowledge of the reason why they
are not? That doctrine will not “make them wise unto salva
tion.” All it can possibly do, is to shake off the leaves. It
does not affect the branches of sin. Unholy tempers are just
as they were. Much less does it strike at the root: Pride,
self-will, unbelief, heart-idolatry, remain undisturbed and
unsuspected.
I am grieved for the people who are thus seeking death in the
error of their life. I am grieved for you, who surely desire to
teach them the way of God in truth. O'Sir, think it possible,
that you may have been mistaken that you may have leaned
too far, to what you thought the better extreme! Be persuaded
once more to review your whole cause, and that from the very
foundation. And in doing so, you will not disdain to desire
móre than natural light. O that “the Father of glory may
give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation : * May He
“enlighten the eyes of your understanding, that you may know
what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory
of his inheritance in the saints l’”
LEWISHAM,
March 24, 1757.
VOL. IX. F F
434 THE DOCTRINE OF
PART VII.
THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN.
BECAUSE of the unspeakable importance of throughly under
standing this great foundation of all revealed religion, I subjoin
one more extract, relating both to the original and the present
state of man:—
“God “made man upright. By man we are to understand
our first parents, the archetypal pair, the root of mankind.
This man was made right, (agreeable to the nature of God,
whose work is perfect) without any imperfection, corruption,
or principle of corruption, in his body or soul. He was made
upright; that is, straight with the will and law of God, with
out any irregularity in his soul. God made him thus; he did
not first make him, and then make him righteous: But in the
very making of him he made him righteous; righteousness was
concreated with him. With the same breath that God breathed
into him a living soul, he breathed into him a righteous soul.
“This righteousness was the conformity of all the faculties
and powers of his soul to the moral law; which implied three
things:
“First. His understanding was a lamp of light. He was
made after God’s image, and, consequently, could not want
knowledge, which is a part thereof. And a perfect knowledge
of the law was necessary to fit him for universal obedience, see
ing no obedience can be according to the law, unless it proceed
from a sense of the command of God requiring it. It is true,
Adam had not the law writ on tables of stone; but it was writ
ten upon his mind. God impressed it upon his soul, and made
him a law to himself, as the remains of it even among the Hea
thens testify. And seeing man was made to be the mouth of
the creation, to glorify God in his works, we have ground to
believe, he had an exquisite knowledge of the works of God.
We have a proof of this in his giving names to the beasts of the
field, and the fowls of the air, and these such as express their
* From Mr. Boston’s “Fourfold State of Man.”
ORIGINAL SlN. 435
nature: ‘Whatsoever Adam called every living thing, that
was the name thereof.” And the dominion which God gave
him over the creatures, soberly to use them according to his
will, (still in subordination to the will of God,) implies a
knowledge of their natures.
“Secondly. His will lay straight with the will of God.
There was no corruption in his will, no bent or inclination to
evil; for that is sin properly so called; and, therefore, incon
sistent with that uprightness with which it is expressly said he
was endued at his creation. The will of man was then naturally
inclined to God and goodness, though mutably. It was disposed
by its original make to follow the Creator's will, as the shadow
does the body. It was not left in an equal balance to good and
evil; for then he had not been upright, or conform to the law;
which no more can allow the creature not to be inclined to
God as his end, than it can allow man to be a god to himself.
“Thirdly. His affections were regular, pure, and holy. All
his passions, yea, all his sensitive motions and inclinations,
were subordinate to his reason and will, which lay straight
with the will of God. They were all, therefore, pure from
all defilement, free from all disorder or distemper; because
in all their motions they were duly subjected to his clear
reason and his holy will. He had also an executive power,
answerable to his will ; a power to do the good which he
knew should be done, and which he inclined to do; even to
fulfil the whole law of God. If it had not been so, God
would not have required perfect obedience of him. For to
say that “the Lord gathereth where he hath not strewed, is
but the blasphemy of a slothful servant.
“From what has been said it may be gathered, that man's
original righteousness was universal, and natural, yet mutable.
“1. It was universal, both with respect to the subject of it,
the whole man; and the object of it, the whole law: It was
diffused through the whole man; it was a blessed leaven that
leavened the whole lump. Man was then holy in soul, body,
and spirit: While the soul remained untainted, the members
of the body were consecrated vessels and instruments of
righteousness. A combat between reason and appetite, nay,
the least inclination to sin, was utterly inconsistent with this
uprightness in which man was created; and has been invented
to veil the corruption of man’s nature, and to obscure the
2 F 2
436 THE DOCTRINE OF
grace of God in Christ Jesus. And as this righteousness spread
through the whole man, so it respected the whole law. There
was nothing in the law but what was agreeable to his reason.
and will. His soul was shapen out in length and breadth, to
the commandment, though exceeding broad; so that his origi
mal righteousness was not only perfect in parts, but in degrees.
“2. As it was universal, so it was natural to him. He was
created with it. And it was necessary to the perfection of
man, as he came out of the hand of God; necessary to con
stitute him in a state of integrity. Yet,
“3. It was mutable: It was a righteousness which might
be lost, as appears from the sad event. His will was not
indifferent to good and evil: God set it towards good only,
yet did not so fix it, that it could not alter: it was movable
to evil, but by man himself only.
“Thus was man made originally righteous, being ‘created
in God’s own image,’ (Gen. i. 27,) which consists in ‘knowledge,
righteousness, and holiness.’ (Col. iii. 10; Eph. iv. 24.) All
that God made ‘was very good, according to their several
natures. (Gen. i. 31.) And so man was morally good, being
‘made after the image’ of Him who is ‘good and upright.”
(Psalm xxv. 8.) Without this he could not have answered
the end of his creation, which was to know, love, and serve
his God. Nay, he could not be created otherwise; for he must
either have been conform to the law in his powers, principles,
and inclinations, or not. If he was, he was righteous: If not,
he was a sinner; which is absurd and horrible to imagine.
“And as man was holy, so he was happy. He was full of
peace as well as of love. And he was the favourite of Heaven.
He bore the image of God, who cannot but love his own
image. While he was alone in the world he was not alone;
for he had free, full ‘communion with God.” As yet there
was nothing to turn away the face of God from the work of
his own hands; seeing sin had not as yet entered, which alone
could make the breach.
“He was also lord of the world, universal emperor of the
whole earth. His Creator gave him ‘dominion over the fish
of the sea, the fowl of the air, and everything that moveth on
the earth.’ He was God’s deputy-governor in the lower world;
and this his dominion was an image of God’s sovereignty.
Thus was man ‘crowned with glory and honour, having ‘all
things put under his feet.’
ORIGINAL SIN. 437
“Again : As he had perfect tranquillity in his own breast,
so he had a perfect calm without. His heart had nothing to
reproach him with; and, without, there was nothing to annoy
him. Their beautiful bodies were not capable of injuries
from the air. They were liable to no diseases or pains; and
though they were not to live idle, yet toil, weariness, and
sweat of the brows, were not known in this state.
“Lastly. He was immortal. He would never have died
if he had not sinned. Death was threatened only in case of
sin. The perfect constitution of his body, which came out
of God’s hand, was ‘very good;’ and the righteousness of
his soul removed all inward causes of death. And God’s
special care of his innocent creature secured him against
outward violence. Such were the holiness and the happiness
of man in his original state.
“But there is now a sad alteration in our nature. It is
now entirely corrupted. Where at first there was nothing
evil, there is now nothing good: I shall,
“First, prove this.
“Secondly, represent this corruption in its several parts.
“Thirdly, show how man’s nature comes to be thus cor
rupted.
“First, I shall prove that man's nature is corrupted, both
by God’s word, and by men’s experience and observation.
“1. For proof from God’s word, let us consider,
“(1.) How it takes particular notice of fallen Adam’s com
municating his image to his posterity. ‘Adam begat a son in
his own likeness, after his image.” (Gen. v. 3.) Compare this
with verse 1: “In the day that God created man, in the image
of God made he him. Behold here, how the ‘image’ after
which man was ‘made,’ and the ‘image’ after which he is be
gotten, are opposed. Man was ‘made’ in the likeness of God;
a holy and righteous God “made a holy and righteous creature:
But fallen Adam ‘begat’ a son, not in the likeness of God, but
in his ‘own likeness; corrupt, sinful Adam begat a corrupt,
sinful son. For as the image of God included ‘righteousness’
and “immortality, so this image of fallen Adam included ‘cor
ruption’ and ‘death. Moses, giving us in this chapter the first
bill of mortality that ever was in the world, ushers it in with
this observation,-that dying Adam begat mortals. Having
sinned, he became ‘mortal, according to the threatening. And
438 THE DOCTRINE OF
so he ‘begat a son in his own likeness, sinful, and therefore
mortal; and so “sin and death passed on all.’
“Let us consider, (2.) That text, ‘Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean P. Not one.” (Job xiv. 4.) Our first
parents were unclean; how then can we be clean? How
could our immediate parents be clean? Or how shall our
children be so? The uncleanness here mentioned is a sinful
uncleanness; for it is such as makes man’s days ‘full of
trouble.’ And it is natural, being derived from unclean
parents. ‘How can he be clean that is born of a woman?”
God can ‘bring a clean thing out of an unclean; and did so
in the case of the man Christ; but no other can. Every person
then that is born according to the course of nature is born
unclean; if the root be corrupt, so are the branches. Neither
is the matter mended, though the parents be holy. For they
are such by “grace, not by “nature: ' And they beget their
children as men, not as holy men; wherefore, as the cir
cumcised parent begets an uncircumcised child, so the holiest
parents beget unholy children, and cannot communicate
their grace to them as they do their nature.
“(3.) Hear our Lord’s determination of the point: “That
which is born of the flesh is flesh.” (John iii. 6.) Behold the
corruption of all mankind; all are ‘flesh. It does not mean,
all are frail; (though that is a sad truth too; yea, and our
natural frailty is an evidence of our natural corruption;) but,
all are ‘corrupt” and ‘sinful, and that naturally. Hence
our Lord argues, that because they are ‘flesh, therefore they
‘must be born again, or they “cannot enter into the kingdom
of God.” (Verses 3, 5.) And as the corruption of our nature
evidences the absolute necessity of regeneration, so the
necessity of regeneration proves the corruption of our nature.
For why should a man need a second birth, if his nature
were not ruined in the first birth ? Even infants must be
born again; for this rule admits of no exception; and there
fore they were circumcised under the Old Testament, as
having ‘the body of the sins of the flesh, (which is conveyed
to them by natural generation,) the whole old man, “to put
off.” (Col. ii. 11.) And now, by the appointment of Christ,
they are to be baptized; which shows they are unclean, and
that there is no salvation for them, but “by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.’
“(4.) ‘We are by nature children of wrath. We are wor
ORIGINAL SIN. 439
thy of, and liable to, the wrath of God; and that “by
nature; and therefore, doubtless, we are by nature sinful
creatures. We are condemned before we have done good or
evil; under the curse ere we know what it is. But ‘will a
lion roar in the forest while he hath no prey ?’ Will a holy
and just God roar in his wrath against man, if he be not, by
his sin, made a prey for wrath? No, he will not, he cannot.
We conclude, then, that, according to the word of God,
man’s nature is a corrupt nature.
“2. If we consult experience, and observe the case of the
world, in the things that are obvious to any person, we shall,
by its fruits, easily discover the root of bitterness. I shall
instance but in a few :—
“(1.) Who sees not a flood of miseries overflowing the
world? Every one, at home and abroad, in city and country,
in palaces and cottages, is groaning under some unpleasing
circumstance or other. Some are oppressed with poverty or
want; some chastened with pain or sickness; some are
lamenting their losses; none is without a cross of one sort or
another. No man’s condition is so soft but there is some
thorn of uneasiness in it. And at length death, ‘the wages
of sin,’ comes, and sweeps all away. Now, what but sin has
opened the sluice? There is not a complaint or sigh heard
in the world, or a tear that falls from our eye, but it is an
evidence, that man is fallen as a star from heaven. For God
‘distributeth sorrows in his anger.” (Job xxi. 17.) This is a
plain proof of the corruption of nature; forasmuch as those
that have not actually sinned have their share of these sor
rows; yea, and draw their first breath weeping. There are
also graves of the smallest as well as the largest size; and
there are never wanting some in the world, who, like Rachel,
are ‘weeping for their children, because they are not.’
“(2.) How early does this corruption of nature appear !
It is soon discerned which way the bias of the heart lies.
Do not the children of fallen Adam, before they can go
alone, follow their father’s footsteps? What pride, ambition,
curiosity, vanity, wilfulness, and averseness to good, appear
in them ! And when they creep out of infancy, there is a
necessity of using ‘the rod of correction, to drive away the
foolishness that is bound in their heart.”
“(3.) Take a view of the out-breakings of sin in the world.
‘The wickedness of man is yet great in the earth. Behold
440 THE DOCTRINE OF
the bitter fruits of corrupt nature ! ‘By swearing, and lying,
and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they
break out,’ (like the breaking forth of waters,) “and blood
toucheth blood. The world is filled with all manner of filthi
ness, wickedness, and impiety. And whence is this deluge of
sin on the earth, but from the breaking up of the fountains of
the great deep, “the heart of man,’ out of which ‘proceed
adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wicked
ness?’ Ye may, it may be, thank God, that ye are not in
these respects ‘like other men: And you have reason; for
the corruption of nature is the very same in you as in them.
“(4.) Cast your eye upon those terrible convulsions the
world is thrown into by the wickedness of men. Lions prey
not on lions, nor wolves on wolves; but men bite and devour
one another. Upon how slight occasions will men sheathe
their swords in one another's bowels | Since Cain shed Abel's
blood, the world has been turned into a slaughter-house.
And the chase has been continued, ever since Nimrod began
his hunting; as on the earth, so in the seas, the greater still
devouring the lesser. Now, when we see the world in such
a ferment, every one stabbing another with words or swords,
these violent heats among the sons of Adam speak the whole
body to be distempered; ‘the whole head to be sick, and the
whole heart faint.”
“(5.) Consider the necessity of human laws, fenced with
terrors and severities. Man was made for society; and God
himself said, when he created him, it was not good for him to
be alone. Yet the case is such now, that, in society, he must
be hedged in with thorns. And from hence we may the
better discern the corruption of man’s nature, consider, (i.)
Every man naturally kves to be at full liberty himself; and,
were he to follow his inclination, would vote himself out of the
reach of all laws, divine and human: Yet, (ii) No man would
willingly adventure to live in a lawless society; and, therefore,
even pirates and robbers have laws among themselves. Thus
men show they are conscious of the corruption of nature, not
daring to trust one another but upon security. (iii.) How
dangerous soever it is to break through the hedge, yet many
will do it daily. They will not only sacrifice their conscience
and credit, but, for the pleasure of a few moments, lay them
selves open to a violent death, by the laws of the land wherein
they live. (iv.) Laws are often made to yield to man’s lusts.
ORIGINAL SIN 441
Sometimes whole societies break off the fetters, and the voice of
laws cannot be heard for the noise of arms: And seldom there
is a time, wherein there are not some persons so great and
daring, that the laws dare not look them in the face. (v.)
Observe even the Israelites, separated to God from all the
nations of the earth; yet what horrible confusions were among
them, when ‘there was no King in Israel!” How hard was it
to reform them, when they had the best of magistrates ! And
how quickly did they turn aside again, when they had wicked
rulers! It seems, one grand design of that sacred history was,
to discover the corruption of man’s nature. (vi.) Consider the
remains of natural corruption, even in them that believe.
Through grace has entered, corruption is not expelled; they
find it with them at all times, and in all places. If a man
have an ill neighbour, he may remove; but should he go into
a wilderness, or pitch his tent on a remote rock in the sea,
there it will be with him. I need not stand to prove so clear
a point: But consider these few things on this head: 1st.
If it be thus in the green tree, how must it be in the dry?
Does so much of the old remain even in those who have received
a new nature? How great, then, must that corruption be
in those, where it is unmixed with renewing grace | 2d.
Though natural corruption is no burden to a natural man, is
he therefore free from it? No, no. Only he is dead, and
feels not the sinking weight. Many a groan is heard from a
sick bed, but never one from a grave. 3d. The good man
resists the old nature; he strives to starve it; yet it remains.
How must it spread, then, and strengthen itself in the soul,
where it is not starved, but fed, as in unbelievers! If the
garden of the diligent find him full work, in cutting off and
rooting up, surely that of the sluggard must needs be ‘all
grown over with thorns.”
“I shall add but one observation more, that in every man
maturally the image of fallen Adam appears: To evince which,
I appeal to the consciences of all, in the following particulars:—
“(1.) If God by his holy law or wise providence put a
restraint upon us, to keep us back from anything, does not
that restraint whet the edge of our natural inclinations, and
make us so much the keener in our desires? The very Hea
thens were convinced, that there is this spirit of contradiction in
us, though they knew not the spring of it. How often do men
give themselves a loose in those things, wherein if God had left
442 THE DOCTRINE OF
them at liberty, they would have bound up themselves! And
is not this a repeating of our father’s folly, that men will rather
climb for forbidden fruit, than gather what Providence offers
to them, when they have God’s express allowance for it?
“(2.) Is it not natural to us, to care for the body, at the
expense of the soul? This was one ingredient in the sin of
our first parents. (Gen. iii. 6.) O how happy might we be,
if we were but at half the pains about our souls, which we
bestow upon our bodies ! if that question, ‘What must I do
to be saved?” did but run near so often through our minds,
as those, ‘What shall we eat? What shall we drink?
Wherewithal shall we be clothed ?”
“(3.) Is not every one by nature discontent with his present
lot, or with some one thing or other in it? Some one thing
is always missing; so that man is a creature given to change.
If any doubt of this, let them look over all their enjoyments,
and, after a review of them, listen to their own hearts, and they
will hear a secret murmuring for want of something. Since
the hearts of our first parents wandered from God, their pos
terity have a natural disease, which Solomon calls, ‘the
wandering of desire; literally, ‘the walking of the soul.”
(Eccles. vi. 9.) This is a sort of diabolical trance, wherein
the soul traverseth the world, feeds itself with a thousand airy
nothings, snatcheth at this and the other imagined excellency;
goes here and there and everywhere, except where it should
go. And the soul is never cured of this disease till it takes
up its rest in God through Christ.
“(4.) Do not Adam's children naturally follow his foot
steps, in ‘hiding’ themselves “from the presence of the Lord?”
(Gen. iii. 8.) We are just as blind in this matter as he was,
who thought to ‘hide himself from the presence of the Lord
among the trees of the garden. We promise ourselves more
security in a secret sin than in one that is openly committed.
‘The adulterer saith, No eye shall see me.’ And men will freely
do that in secret, which they would be ashamed to do in the
presence of a child: As if darkness could hide from an all
seeing God. Are we not naturally careless of ‘communion
with God?’ nay, and averse to it? Never was there any
communion between God and Adam’s children, where God
himself had not the first word. If he would let them alone,
they would never inquire after him.
ORIGINAL SIN. 443
“(5.) How loath are men to ‘confess sin, to take guilt and
shame to themselves! And was it not thus in the case before
us? Adam confesses his nakedness, (which indeed he could
not deny,) but not one word does he say about his sin. It is
as natural for us to hide sin as to commit it. Many instances
of this we see daily; but how many will there be in that day
when God “will judge the secrets of men?” Many a foul
mouth will then be seen, which is now “wiped, and saith, I
have done no wickedness.’
“Lastly. Is it not natural for us to extenuate our sin, and
transfer the guilt to others? As Adam laid the blame of his
sin on the woman: And did not the woman lay the blame on
the serpent? Adam’s children need not be taught this; for
before they can well speak, if they cannot deny, they lisp out
something to lessen their fault, and lay the blame upon another.
Nay, so natural is this to men, that, in the greatest of sins, they
will charge the fault on God himself: blaspheming his provi
dence under the name of ill luck, or misfortune, and so laying
the blame of their sin at Heaven’s door. Thus does ‘the fool
ishness of man pervert his ways; and his heart fretteth against
the Lord. Let us then call Adam, Father: Let us not deny
the relation, seeing we bear his image.
“I proceed to inquire into the corruption of nature in the
several parts of it. But who can take the exact dimensions of
it, in its breadth, length, height, and depth? ‘The heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: Who can
know it?” However, we may quickly perceive so much of it as
may show the absolute necessity of regeneration. Man, in his
natural state, is altogether corrupt, through all the faculties of
his soul: Corrupt in his understanding, his will, his affections,
his conscience, and his memory.
“1. The understanding is despoiled of its primitive glory,
and covered over with confusion. We are fallen into the
hands of our grand adversary, and are deprived of our two
eyes. ‘There is none that understandeth;’ the very mind and
conscience of the natural man are defiled or spoiled. But to
point out this corruption of the understanding more parti
cularly, let the following things be considered:—
“First. There is a natural weakness in the minds of men,
with respect to spiritual things. How hard is it to teach them
the common principles of religion; to make truths so plain, that
444 THE DOCTRINE OF
they may understand them I Try the same persons in other
things, speak of the things of this world, and they will under
stand quickly; but it is hard to make them know how their souls
may be saved, or how their hearts may find rest in Christ.
Consider even those who have many advantages above the
common run of mankind: Yet how small is their knowledge of
divine things! What confusion still remains in their minds!
How often are they mired, and ‘speak as a child, even in the
matter of practical truths ! It is a pitiable weakness, that we
cannot perceive the things which God has revealed. And it
must needs be a sinful weakness, since the law of God
requires us to know and believe them.
“Secondly. Man's understanding is naturally overwhelmed
with gross “darkness’ in spiritual things. Man, at the instiga
tion of the devil, attempting to break out a new light in his
mind, instead of that, broke up the doors of the bottomless pit,
by the smoke whereof he was covered with darkness. When
God at first made man, his mind was a lamp of light; but sin
has now turned it into darkness. Sin has closed the window of
the soul. It is the land of darkness and the shadow of death,
where ‘the light is as darkness.’ The ‘prince of darkness’
reigns therein, and nothing but the ‘works of darkness’ are
framed there. That you may be the more fully convinced of
this, take the following evidences of it:—
“1. The darkness that was upon the face of ‘the world’
before, and at the time that Christ came. When Adam by his
sin had lost his light, it pleased God to reveal to him the way of
salvation. (Gen. iii. 15.) This was handed down by holy men
before the flood; yet the natural darkness of the mind of man
so prevailed, as to carry off all sense of true religion from the
old world, except what remained in Noah’s family. After the
flood, as men increased, their natural darkness of mind
prevailed again, and the light decayed, till it died out among
the generality of mankind, and was preserved only among
the posterity of Shem. And even with them it was near
setting, when God called Abraham ‘from serving other
gods.” (Joshua xxiv. 15.) God gave him a more full
revelation, which he communicated to his family: (Gen.
xviii. 19:) Yet the natural darkness wore it out at length,
save that it was preserved among the posterity of Jaeob.
In Egypt, that darkness so prevailed over them also, that
a new revelation was necessary. And many a dark cloud
ORIGINAL SIN. 445
got above that, during the time from Moses to Christ. When
Christ came, nothing was to be seen in the Gentile world but
“darkness and cruel habitations. They were drowned in super
stition and idolatry; and whatever wisdom was among their
philosophers, ‘the world by that wisdom knew not God, but
became more and more vain in their imaginations. Nor were
the Jews much wiser: Except a few, gross darkness covered
them also. Their traditions were multiplied; but the know
ledge of those things wherein the life of religion lies was lost.
They gloried in outward ordinances, but knew nothing of
“worshipping God in Spirit and in truth.' .
“Now, what but the natural darkness of men’s minds could
still thus wear out the light of external revelation? Men did
not forget the way of preserving their lives; but how quickly
did they forget the way of saving their souls' So that it was
necessary for God himself to reveal it again and again. Yea,
and a mere external revelation did not suffice to remove this
darkness; no, not when it was by Christ in person; there
needed also the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. Such is
the natural darkness of our minds, that it only yields to the
blood and Spirit of Christ.
“2. Every natural man’s heart, how refined soever he appear,
is full of darkness, disorder, and confusion. The unrenewed part
of mankind are rambling through the world, like so many blind
men, who will neither take a guide, nor can guide themselves,
and therefore fall over this and the other precipice into destruc
tion. Some are running after their covetousness, some sticking
in the mire of sensuality, others dashing on the rock of pride;
every one stumbling on one stone of stumbling or other, as their
unmortified passions drive them. ...And while some are lying
along in the way, others are coming up and falling headlong
over them. Errors swarm in the world; all the unregenerate
are utterly mistaken in the point of true happiness. All desire
to be happy; but, touching the way to happiness, there are
almost as many opinions as there are men. They are like the
blind Sodomites about Lot's house; all seeking to ‘find the
door, but in vain. Look into thine own heart, (if thou art not
born again,) and thou wilt see all turned upside down; heaven
lying under, and earth at top; look into thy life, and see how
thou art playing the madman, eagerly flying after that which is
not, and slighting that which is, and will be for ever. Thus is
446 THE DOCTRINE OF
man’s understanding naturally overwhelmed with gross
‘ darkness’ in spiritual things.
“Thirdly. There is in the mind of man a natural bias
to evil: Let us reflect a little, and we shall find incontestable
evidence of it.
“1. Men’s minds have a natural dexterity to do mischief;
none are so simple as to want skill for this. None needs to
be taught it; but as weeds, without being sown, grow up of
their own accord, so does this ‘earthly, sensual, devilish
wisdom naturally grow up in us.
“2. We naturally form gross conceptions of spiritual things,
as if the soul were quite immersed in flesh and blood. Let
men but look into themselves, and they will find this bias in
their minds; whereof the idolatry which still prevails so far
and wide is an incontestable evidence; for it plainly shows men
would have a visible deity; therefore they change the “glory of
the incorruptible God into an image.’ Indeed the Reforma
tion of these nations has banished gross idolatry out of our
churches: But heart-reformation alone can banished mental
idolatry, subtle and refined image-worship, out of our minds.
“3. How difficult is it to detain the carnal mind before the
Lord! to fix it in the meditation of spiritual things | When
God is speaking to man by his word, or they are speaking to
him in prayer, the body remains before God, but the world
steals away the heart. Though the eyes be closed, the man sees
a thousand vanities, and the mind roves hither and thither;
and many times the man scarce comes to himself, till he is
‘gone from the presence of the Lord. The worldly man’s
mind does not wander when he is contriving business, casting
up his accounts, or telling his money. If he answers you not
at first, he tells you he did not hear you, he was busy, his
mind was fixed. But the carnal mind employed about spiritual
things is out of its element, and therefore cannot fix.
“4. Consider how the carnal ‘imagination’ supplies the
want of real objects to the corrupt heart. The unclean person
is filled with speculative impurities, ‘having eyes full of
adultery. The covetous man fills his heart with the world, if
he cannot get his hands full of it. The malicious person acts
his revenge in his own breast; the envious, within his own nar
row soul, sees his neighbour laid low enough; and so every lust
is fed by the imagination. These things may suffice to con
vince us of the natural bias of the mind to evil.
ORIGINAL SIN. 447
“Fourthly. There is in the carnal mind an opposition to
spiritual truths, and an aversion to the receiving them. God
has revealed to sinners the way of salvation; he has given his
word. But do natural men believe it? Indeed they do not.
They believe not the promises of the word; for they who
receive them are thereby made ‘partakers of the divine
nature.” They believe not the threatenings of the word;
otherwise they could not live as they do. I doubt not but
most, if not all, of you, who are in a state of nature, will here
plead, Not Guilty. But the very difficulty you find in assent
ing to this truth, proves the unbelief with which I charge you.
Has it not proceeded so far with some, that it has steeled
their foreheads openly to reject all revealed religion? And
though ye set not your mouths as they do against the heavens,
yet the same bitter root of unbelief is in you, and reigns and
will reign in you, till overcoming grace captivate your minds
to the belief of the truth. To convince you of this,—
“Consider, 1. How have you learned those truths which
you think you believe? Is it not merely by the benefit of
your education, and of external revelation? You are strangers
to the inward work of the Holy Spirit, bearing witness with
the word in your hearts; and therefore ye are still unbe
lievers. ‘It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all
taught of God. Every one therefore that hath heard and
learned of the Father,’ saith our Lord, ‘cometh unto me.’
But ye have not come to Christ; therefore ye have not been
“taught of God.” Ye have not been so taught, and therefore
ye have not come; ye believe not.
“Consider, 2. The utter inconsistency of most men’s lives
with the principles which they profess. They profess to believe
the Scripture; but how little are they concerned about what
is revealed therein . How unconcerned are ye even about that
weighty point, whether ye be born again, or not! Many live as
they were born, and are like to die as they live, and yet live in
peace. Do such believe the sinfulness of a natural state? Do
they believe they are ‘children of wrath? Do they believe there .
is no salvation without regeneration? and no regeneration, but
what makes man ‘a new creature?’ O no! If ye did, ye could
not live in your sins, live out of Christ, and yet hope for mercy.
“Fifthly. Man is naturally high-minded. Lowliness is not
a flower which grows in the field of nature. It is natural to
man to think highly of himself and what is his own. ‘Vain
448 THE DOCTRINE OF
man would be wise;” so he accounts himself, and so he would
be accounted by others. His way is right, because it is ‘his
own;’ ‘for every way of man is right in his own eyes. He
is ‘alive without the law;’ and therefore his hope is strong,
and his confidence firm. It is another tower of Babel; the
word batters it, yet it stands. One while breaches are made
in it, but they are quickly repaired. At another time, it is
all made to shake; but it is still kept up; till God's Spirit
raise an heartquake within the man, which tumbles it down,
and leaves not one stone upon another.
“Thus much of the corruption of the understanding. Call
the understanding, “Ichabod; for the glory is departed from it.”
Consider this, ye that are yet in the state of nature, and groan
ye out your case before the Lord, that the Sun of Righteous
ness may arise upon you, before ye be shut up in everlasting
darkness. What avails your worldly wisdom? What do all
your attainments in religion avail, while your understanding
lies wrapped up in darkness and confusion, utterly void of the
light of life?
“2. Nor is the will less corrupted than the understanding.
It was at first faithful, and ruled with God; but now it is turned
traitor against God, and rules with and for the devil. To open
this plague of the heart, let the following thingsbe considered:–
“First. There is in the unrenewed will an utter inability
for what is truly good in the sight of God. Indeed a natural
man has a power to choose and do what is materially good;
but though he can will what is good and right, he can do
nothing aright and well. “Without me,’ that is, separate
from me, ‘ye can do nothing; nothing truly and spiritually
good. To evidence this, consider,
“(1.) How often do men see the good they should choose,
and the evil they should refuse; and yet their hearts have
no more power to comply with their light, than if they were
arrested by some invisible hand! Their consciences tell them
the right way; yet cannot their will be brought up to it.
Else, how is it, that the clear arguments on the side of virtue
do not bring men over to that side? Although heaven and
hell were but a may be, even this would determine the will
to holiness, could it be determined by reason. Yet so far is
it from this, that men ‘knowing the judgment of God, that
they who do such things are worthy of death, not only do the
same, but have pleasure in them that do them.’
ORIGINAL SIN. 449
“(2.) Let those who have been truly convinced of the
spirituality of the law, speak, and tell if they then found
themselves able to incline their hearts toward it. Nay, the
more that light shone into their souls, did they not find their
hearts more and more unable to comply with it? Yea, there
are some who are yet in the devil’s camp that can tell from
their own experience, light let into the mind cannot give life
to the will, or enable it to comply therewith.
“Secondly. There is in the unrenewed will an averseness
to good. Sin is the natural man’s element; and he is as
loath to part with it, as the fishes are to come out of the
water. He is sick; but utterly averse to the remedy: He
loves his disease, so that he loathes the Physician. He is a
captive, a prisoner, and a slave; but he loves his conqueror,
gaoler, and master: He is fond of his fetters, prison, and
drudgery, and has no liking to his liberty. For evidence of
this averseness to good in the will of man,—
“Consider, 1. The untowardness of children. How averse
are they to restraint ! Are they not ‘as bullocks unaccus
tomed to the yoke ’’ Yea, it is far easier to tame young
bullocks to the yoke, than to bring young children under dis
cipline. Every man may see in this, as in a glass, that man is
naturally wild and wilful; that, according to Zophar’s observ
ation, he ‘is born a wild ass’s colt. What can be said more?
He is like a ‘colt, the colt of an “ass, the colt of a ‘wild
ass; a wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the
wind at her pleasure; in her occasion who can turn her away?’
“2. What pain and difficulty do men find in bringing their
hearts to religious duties ! And what a task is it to the
natural man to abide at them to leave the world but a little,
and converse with God! When they are engaged in worldly
business or company, time seems to fly, and is gone before
they are aware. But how heavily does it drive, while a prayer,
a sermon, or a Sabbath lasts | With many the Lord’s day is
the longest day in the week; and therefore they must sleep
longer that morning, and go sooner to bed that night, than
ordinarily they do, that the day may be of a tolerable length.
And still their hearts say, ‘When will the Sabbath be gone?”
“3. Consider how the will of the natural man “rebels
against the light. Sometimes he is not able to keep it out;
but he “loves darkness rather than light. The outer door of
VOL. IX. G G
450 THE DOCTRINE OF
the understanding is broken open, but the inner door of the
will remains shut. Corruption and conscience then encounter;
till conscience is forced to give back; convictions are murdered,
and truth is made and “held prisoner “in righteousness.”
“4. When the Spirit of the Lord is working a deeper
work, yet what “resistance’ does the soul make | When he
connes, he finds the ‘strong man keeping the house, while
the soul is fast asleep in the devil’s arms, till the Lord
awakens in the sinner, opens his eyes, and strikes him with
terror, while the clouds are black above his head, and the sword
of vengeance is held to his breast. But what pains is he at
to put a fair face on a black heart! to shake off his fears, or
make head against them | Carnal reason suggests, If it be
ill with him, it will be ill with many. When he is beat from
this, and sees no advantage in going to hell with company, he
resolves to leave his sins; but cannot think of breaking off so
soon; there is time enough, and he will do it afterwards.
When at length he is constrained to part with some sins,
others are kept as right hands or right eyes. Nay, when he
is so pressed, that he must needs say before the Lord, he is
willing to part with all his idols, yet how long will his heart
give the lie to his tongue, and prevent the execution of it !
“Thirdly. There is in the will of man a natural proneness
to evil. Men are naturally ‘bent to backsliding from God;’
they hang (as the word is) towards backsliding. Leave the
unrenewed will to itself, it will choose sin and reject holi
ness; and that as certainly as water poured on the side of a
hill will run downward and not upward.
“1. Is not the way of evil the first way wherein the children
of men go? Do not their inclinations plainly appear on the
wrong side, while they have not cunning to hide them ? As
soon as it appears we are reasonable creatures, it appears we
are sinful creatures. ‘Foolishness is bound in the heart of a
child, till the rod of correction drives it from him.’ It is
bound in the heart, woven into our very nature; nor will the
knots loose; they must be broke asunder by strokes. Words
will not do; the rod must be taken to drive it away. Not
that the rod of itself will do this; the sad experience of many
parents testifies the contrary. And Solomon himself tells
you, “Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar, yet
will not his foolishness depart from him. But the rod is an
ordinance of God, appointed for that end; which, like the
ORIGINAL SIN. 45I
word, is made effectual, by the Spirit's accompanying his
Dwn ordinance.
“2. How easily men are led into sin persuaded to evil,
though not to good. Those whom the word cannot draw to
holiness, Satan leads to wickedness at his pleasure. To learn
doing ill is always easy to the unrenewed man; but to learn to
do good is as difficult as for ‘the Ethiopian to change his skin.”
Were the will evenly poised between good and evil, one might
be embraced with as much ease as the other. But experience
testifies it is not; yea, the experience of all ages. How often
did the Israelites forsake the almighty God, and dote upon the
idols of the nations! But did ever one of those nations forsake
their idols, and grow fond of the God of Israel? No, no.
Though man is naturally given to change, it is but from evil
to evil; not from evil to good. Surely then the will of man
stands not in equal balance, but has a cast on the wrong side.
“3. Consider how men go on still in the way of sin, till
they meet with a stop from another hand than their own.
“I hid me, and he went on frowardly in the way of his own
heart. If God withdraws his restraining hand, man is in no
doubt which way to choose; for the way of sin is ‘the way of
his heart; his heart maturally lies that way. As long as God
suffereth them, all nations “walk in their own way.’ The
natural man is so fixed in evil, that there needs no more to
show he is off of God’s way, than to say, He is upon ‘his own.”
“Fourthly. There is a natural contrariety, a directopposition,
in the will of man to God himself. “The carnal mind is enmity
against God; it is not subject to the law of God, neither can be.’
“I have a charge against every unregenenerate man and
woman, to be proved by the testimony of Scripture, and their
own conscience; namely, that, whether they have the form
of religion or no, they are heart-enemies to God; to the Son
of God, to the Spirit of God, and to the law of God. Hear this,
all ye careless souls, that live at ease in your natural state |
“1. Ye are ‘enemies to God in your mind.’ Ye are not
as yet reconciled to him. The natural enmity is not slain,
though perhaps it lies hid, and ye do not perceive it. Every
natural man is an enemy to God, as he is revealed in his word,
—to an infinitely holy, just, powerful, and true Being. In
effect, men are naturally “haters of God;’ and if they could,
they would certainly make him another than what he is.
2 G 2
452 THE DOCTRINE OF
“To convince you of this, let me propose a few queries:
(1.) How are your hearts affected to the infinite holiness of
God? If ye are not “partakers of his holiness, ye cannot be
reconciled to it. The Heathens, finding they were not like
God in holiness, made their gods like themselves in filthiness;
and thereby discovered what sort of a god the natural man
would have. God is holy. Can an unholy creature love his
unspotted holiness? Nay, it is ‘the righteous” only that
can “give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness.” God
is light: Can creatures of darkness, and that walk in darkness,
rejoice therein? Nay, “every one that doeth evil hateth the
light.” For what communion hath light with darkness?
(2.) How are your hearts affected to the justice of God?
There is not a man who is wedded to his sins, but would be
content with the blood of his body to blot that letter out of the
name of God. Can the malefactor love his condemning
judge; or an unjustified sinner a just God? No, he cannot.
And hence, since men cannot get the doctrine of his justice
blotted out of the Bible, yet it is such an eye-sore to them, that
they strive to blot it out of their minds; they ruin themselves
by presuming on his mercy, “ saying in their heart, The Lord
will not do good, neither will he do evil.” (3.) How are ye
affected to the omniscience and omnipresence of God? Men
naturally would ratherhave a blind idol, than an all-seeing God;
and therefore do what they can, as Adam did, to ‘hide themselves
from the presence of the Lord.’ They no more love an omni
present God, than the thief loves to have the judge witness to
his evil deeds. (4.) How are ye affected to the truth of God?
How many hope that God will not be true to his word ' There
are thousands that hear the gospel, and hope to be saved, who
never experienced the new birth, nor do at all concern them
selves in that question,-whether they are born again or not.
Our Lord’s words are plain and peremptory: ‘Except a man
be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” What, then,
are such hopes, but real hopes that God will recal his word,
and that Christ will prove a false Prophet? (5.) How are
they affected to the power of God? None but new creatures can
love him for it. Every natural man would contribute to the
building another tower of Babel, to hem it in. On these
grounds I declare every unrenewed man ‘an enemy to God.”
“2. Ye are enemies to the Son of God: That enmity to Christ
is in your hearts, which would have made you join the ‘husband
ORIGINAL SIN. 453
"men who killed the heir and cast him out of the vineyard.”
‘Am I a dog, ye will say, ‘to have so treated my dear Saviour?”
So said Hazael, in another case. Yet how did he act? Many
call him dear, to whom their sins are ten times dearer than
their Saviour. He is no otherwise dear to them, than as they
abuse his death, for the peaceable enjoyment of their sins; that
they may live as they list in this world, and, when they die, be
kept out of hell. To convince you of this, I will lay before you
the enumity of your hearts against Christ in all his offices:—
“(1.) Every unregenerate man is an enemy to Christ in his
prophetic office. For evidence of this, consider,—
“(i.) The entertainment he meets with, when he comes to
teach souls “inwardly’ by his ‘Spirit.” Men do what they
can to stop their ears, that they may not hear his voice.
They “always resist the Holy Ghost;’ they “desire not the
knowledge of his ways. The old calumny is thrown upon
him again: ‘He is mad; why hear ye him?’ ‘The spirit of
bondage is accounted by many mere distraction and melan
choly: Men thus blaspheming God’s work, because they
themselves are beside themselves, and cannot judge of those
matters.
“(ii) Consider the entertainment he meets with, when he
comes to teach men outwardly by his word.
“1st. His written word, the Bible, is slighted. Many lay
by their Bibles with their Sunday clothes. Alas! the dust
about your Bibles is a witness of the enmity of your hearts
against Christ as a Prophet. And of those who read them
oftener, how few are there that read them as the word of the
Lord to their souls in particular, so as to keep up communion
with God therein Hence they are strangers to the solid
comfort of the Scriptures; and if at any time they are dejected,
it is something else, and not the word of God, which revives
their drooping spirits.
“2d. Christ's word preached is despised. Men can, with
out remorse, make to themselves one silent Sabbath after
another. And, alas! when they ‘tread his courts, how little
reverence and awe of God appears on their spirits! Many
stand like brazen walls before the word, on whom it makes
no breach at all. Nay, not a few are growing worse and
worse, notwithstanding ‘precept upon precept.” What tears
of blood are sufficient to lament this ! Remember, we are
but the ‘voice of one crying. The Speaker is in heaven:
454 THE DOCTRINE OF
Yet ye refuse Him that speaketh, and prefer the prince of
darkness before the Prince of Peace. A dismal darkness
overspread the world by Adam’s fall, more terrible than if
the sun and moon had been extinguished. And it must have
covered us eternally, had not ‘the grace of God appeared’ to
dispel it. But we fly from it, and, like the wild beasts, lay
ourselves down in our dens. Such is the enmity of the hearts.
of men against Christ in his prophetic office.
“(2.) The natural man is an enemy to Christ in his priestly
office. He is appointed of the Father ‘a Priest for ever,’ that,
by his sacrifice and intercession alone, sinners may have
access to, and peace with, God. But ‘Christ crucified’ is.
ever a stumbling-block and foolishness to the unregenerate
part of mankind.
“None of Adam’s children naturally incline to receive the
blessing in borrowed robes, but would always climb up to
heaven on a thread spun out of their own bowels. They look.
on God as a great Master, and themselves as his servants,
that must work and win heaven as their wages. Hence, when
conscience awakes, they think that, to be saved, they must
answer the demands of the law; serve God as well as they
can, and pray for mercy wherein they come short. And thus
many come to duties, that never come out of them to Christ.
“Indeed, the natural man, going to God in duties, will
continually be found, either to go without a Mediator, or with
more mediators than one. Nature is blind, and therefore
venturous; it puts men on going immediately to God without
Christ. Converse with many hearers of the gospel on their
hopes of salvation, and the name of Christ will scarce be
heard from their mouth. Ask them, how they think to find
the pardon of sin. They say, they look for mercy, because
God is a merciful God; and this is all they have to trust in.
Others look for mercy for Christ's sake. But how do they
know Christ will take their plea in hand? Why, they pray,
mourn, confess, and have great desires. So they have some
thing of their own to recommend them to him. They were
never made ‘poor in spirit, and brought empty-handed to
God, to lay the stress of all on his atoning blood.
“(3.) The natural man is an enemy to Christ in his kingly
office.
“How unwilling are natural men to submit to the laws and
discipline of his kingdom However they may be brought to
ORIGINAL SIN. 455
some outward submission to the King of saints, yet sin alway
retains its throne in their hearts, and they are ‘serving divers
lusts and pleasures. None but those in whom Christ is formed
do really put the crown on his head. None but these receive
the kingdom of Christ within them, and let him set up and
put down in their souls as he will. As for others, any lord
shall sooner have the rule over them than the Lord of glory.
They kindly entertain his enemies, and will never absolutely
resign themselves to his government. Thus you see the
natural man is an enemy to Jesus Christ in all his offices.
“3. Ye are enemies to the Spirit of God: He is the Spirit
of holiness. The natural man is unholy, and loves to be so;
and therefore “resists the Holy Ghost. The work of the Spirit
is to ‘convince the world of sin, righteousness, and judgment.’
But O, how do men strive to ward off these convictions, as they
would a blow that threatened their life! If the Spirit dart them
in, so that they cannot avoid them, does not the heart say,
‘Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?’ And indeed they treat
him as an enemy, doing their utmost to stifle their convictions,
and to murder these harbingers that come to prepare the way of
the Lord into the soul. Some fill their hands with business, to
put convictions out of their head, as Cain, who fell to building
a city. Some put them off with fair promises, as Felix did;
some sport or sleep them away. And how can it be other
wise? For it is the work of the Holy Spirit to subdue lusts,
and burn up corruption. How then can he whose lusts are
dear as his life fail of being an enemy to Him?
“Lastly. Ye are enemies to the law of God. Though the
matural man ‘desires to be under the law,’ as a covenant of works;
yet as it is a rule of life, he ‘is not subject to it, neither indeed
can be.’ For, (1.) Every natural man is wedded to some sin,
which he cannot part with. And as he cannot bring up his
inclinations to the law, he would fain bring down the law to his
inclinations. And this is a plain, standing evidence of the
enmity of his heart against it. (2.) The law, set home on the
awakened conscience in its spirituality, irritates corruption. It
is as oil to the fire, which, instead of quenching, makes it flame
the more. “When the commandment comes, sin revives.”
What reason can be assigned for this, but the natural enmity of
the heart against the holy law P. We conclude then, that the
unregenerate are heart-enemies to God, his Son, his Spirit, and
456 THE DOCTRINE OF
his law; that there is a natural contrariety, opposition, and
enmity in the will of man, to God himself and his holy will.
“Fifthly. The unrenewed will is wholly perverse, in refer
ence to the end of man. Man is a merely dependent being;
having no existence or goodness originally from himself; but
all he has is from God, as the first cause and spring of all per
fection, natural and moral. Dependence is woven into his very
nature; so that, should God withdraw from him, he would sink
into nothing. Since then whatever man is, he is of Him, surely
whatever he is, he should be to Him; as the waters which came
out of the sea return thither again. And thus man was cre
ated looking directly to God, as his last end; but, falling into
sin, he fell off from God, and turned into himself. Now, this
infers a total apostasy and universal corruption in man; for
where the last end is changed, there can be no real goodness.
And this is the case of all men in their natural state: They
seek not God, but themselves. Hence though many fair shreds
of morality are among them, yet ‘there is none that doeth
good, no, not one. For though some of them “run well, they
are still off the way; they never aim at the right mark.
Whithersoever they move, they cannot move beyond the circle
of self. They seek themselves, they act for themselves; their
natural, civil, and religious actions, from whatever spring
they come, do all run into, and meet in, this dead sea.
“Most men are so far from making God their end in their
natural and civil actions, that he is not in all their thoughts.
They eat and drink for no higher end, than their own pleasure
or necessity. Nor do the drops of sweetness God has put into
the creatures raise their souls toward that ocean of delights
that are in the Creator. And what are the natural man’s civil
actions, such as buying, selling, working, but fruit to himself?
Yea, self is the highest end of unregenerate men, even in their
religious actions. They perform duties for a name; for some
worldly interest; or, at best, in order to escape from hell.
They seek not God at all, but for their own interest. So that
God is only the means, and self their end.
“Thus have I given a rude draught of man’s will in his
natural state, drawn from Scripture and our own experience.
Now, since all must be wrong where the understanding and
will are so corrupt, I shall briefly despatch what remains.
“3. The affections are corrupted; wholly disordered and dis
ORIGINAL SIN. 457
tempered. They are like an unruly horse, that either will not
receive, or violently runs away with, the rider. Man's heart is
naturally a mother of abominations: “For from within, out of
the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications,
murders, thefts, covetousness.’ The natural man’s affections
are wholly misplaced; he is a spiritual monster. His heart is,
where his feet should be, fixed on earth: His heels are lifted
up against heaven, which his heart should be set on: His face
is toward hell, his back toward heaven. He loves what he
should hate, and hates what he should love; joys in what he
ought to mourn for, and mourns for what he should rejoice
in; glories in his shame, and is ashamed of his glory; abhors
what he should desire, and desires what he should abhor. If
his affections are set on lawful objects, they are either exces
sive or defective. These objects have either too little of them,
or too much. But spiritual things have always too little.
“Here is “a threefold cord’ against Heaven, not easily
broken,—a blind mind, a perverse will, disordered affections.
The mind, swelled with pride, says, The man should not
stoop; the will, opposite to the will of God, says, He will not;
and the corrupt affections, rising against the Lord, in defence
of the corrupt will, say, He shall not. And thus we stand
out against God, till we are created anew in Christ Jesus.
“4. The conscience is corrupt and defiled. It cannot do
its work, but according to the light it hath to work by.
Wherefore, seeing ‘the natural man discerneth not spiritual
things,’ his conscience is quite useless in that point. It may
indeed check for grosser sins; but spiritual sins it discerns
not. Thus it will fly in the face of many for drunkenness;
who yet have a profound peace though they live in unbelief,
and are utter strangers to spiritual worship and ‘the life of
faith.’ And the light of his conscience being faint and
languishing even in the things which it does reach, its incite
ments to duty, and struggles against sin, are very remiss and
easily got over. But there is also a false light in the dark
mind, which often ‘ calls evil good, and good evil.” And such
a conscience is like a blind and furious horse, which violently
runs down all that comes in his way. Indeed, whenever
conscience is awakened by the spirit of conviction, it will rage
and roar, and put the whole man in a consternation. It
makes the stiff heart to tremble, and the knees to bow; sets
the eyes a weeping, the tongue a confessing. But still it is an
458 THE DOCTRINE OF
evil conscience, which naturally leads only to despair; and
will do it effectually, unless either sin prevails over it to lull
it asleep, as in the case of Felix, or the blood of Christ pre
vail over it, sprinkling and ‘purging it from dead works.’
“Thus is man by nature wholly corrupted. But whence
came this total corruption of our nature? That man’s nature
was corrupt, the very Heathens perceived; but how “sin
entered’ they could not tell. But the Scripture is very plain
in the point: “By one man sin entered into the world.” “By
one man’s disobedience many’ (all) “were made sinners.”
Adam's sin corrupted man’s nature, and leavened the whole
lump of mankind. We putrefied in Adam as our root. The
root was poisoned, and so the branches were envenomed. The
vine turned ‘the vine of Sodom,’ and so the grapes became
‘grapes of gall. Adam, by his sin, became not only guilty,
but corrupt; and so transmits guilt and corruption to his
posterity. By his sin he stripped himself of his original
righteousness and corrupted himself. We were in him repre
sentatively, as our moral head; we were in him seminally,
as our natural head. Hence we fell in him; (as Levi ‘paid
tithes’ when ‘in the loins of Abraham;’) “by his disobe
dience’ we ‘were made sinners;’ his first sin is imputed to
us. And we are left without that original righteousness.
which, being given to him as a common person, he cast off.
And this is necessarily followed, in him and us, by the cor
ruption of our whole nature; righteousness and corruption
being two contraries, one of which must always be in man.
And Adam, our common father, being corrupt, so are we;.
for, ‘who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?’
“It remains only to apply this doctrine. And First, for
information: Is man’s nature wholly corrupted? Then, 1.
No wonder the grave opens its devouring mouth for us as
soon as the womb has cast us forth. For we are all, in a
spiritual sense, dead-born; yea, and ‘filthy,' (Psalm xiv. 3,)
noisome, rank, and stinking, as a corrupt thing; so the word
imports. Let us not complain of the miseries we are exposed
to at our entrance, or during our continuance, in the world.
Here is the venom that has poisoned all the springs of earthly
enjoyments. It is the corruption of human nature, which
brings forth all the miseries of life.
“2. Behold here, as in a glass, the spring of all the wicked
mess, profaneness, and formality in the world. Every thing
ORIGINAL SIN. 459
acts agreeable to its own nature; and so corrupt man acts
corruptly. You need not wonder at the sinfulness of your
own heart and life, nor at the sinfulness and perverseness of
others. If a man be crooked, he cannot but halt; and if the
clock be set wrong, how can it point the hour right?
“3. See here why sin is so pleasant, and religion such a bur
den, to men: Sin is natural; holiness not so. Oxen cannot
feed in the sea, nor fishes in the fruitful field. A swine
brought into a palace would prefer the mire. And corrupt
nature tends ever to impurity.
“4. Learn from hence the nature and necessity of regene
ration. (1.) The nature: It is not a partial, but a total,
change. Thy whole nature is corrupted; therefore, the whole
must be renewed. “All things’ must “become new.” If a
man who had received many wounds were cured of all but
one, he might still bleed to death. It is not a change made
by human industry, but by the almighty Spirit of God. A
man must be ‘born of the Spirit.’ Our nature is eorrupt,
and none but the God of nature can change it. Man may
pin a new life to an old heart, but he can never change the
heart. (2.) The necessity: It is absolutely necessary in order
to salvation. ‘Except a man be born again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God.” No unclean thing can enter ‘the new
Jerusalem: But thou art by nature wholly unclean. Deceive
not thyself: No mercy of God, no blood of Christ, will bring
an unregenerate sinner to heaven. For God will never open
a fountain of mercy to wash away his own holiness and truth:
nor did Christ shed his precious blood to blot out the truths of
God. Heaven! What would you do there, who are not born
again? A holy Head, and corrupt members! A Head full
of treasures of grace, members filled with treasures of wicked
ness! Ye are no ways adapted to the society above, more
than beasts to converse with men. Could the unrenewed man
go to heaven, he would go to it no otherwise than now he comes
to the duties of holiness, that is, leaving his heart behind him.
“We may apply this doctrine, Secondly, for lamentation.
Well may we lament thy case, O natural man; for it is the sad
dest case one can be in out of hell. It is time to lament for
thee; for thou art dead already, dead while thou livest. Thou
carriest about a dead soul in a living body; and because thou
art dead, canst not lament thy own case. Thou ‘hast no good
in thee; thy soul is a mass of darkness, rebellion, and vile
-460 THE DOCTRINE OF
ness, before God. Thou ‘canst do no good;’ thou canst do
nothing but sin. For thou art ‘the servant of sin, and,
therefore, free from righteousness; thou dost not, canst not,
meddle with it. Thou art ‘under the dominion of sin a
dominion where righteousness can have no place. Thou art
a child and a servant of the devil as long as thou artin a state
of nature. But, to prevent any mistake, consider that Satan
hath two kinds of servants. There are some employed, as it
were, in coarser work. These bear the devil’s mark in their
foreheads; having no form of godliness; not so much as per
forming the external duties of religion; but living apparently
as sons of earth, only minding earthly things. Whereas,
others are employed in more refined work, who carry his
mark in their right hand, which they can and do hide, by a
form of religion, from the view of the world. These sacrifice
to the corrupt mind, as the other to the flesh. Pride, unbelief,
self-pleasing, and the like spiritual sins, prey on their cor
rupted, wholly corrupted, souls. Both are servants of the
same house, equally void of righteousness.
“Indeed, how is it possible thou shouldest be able to do any
thing good, whose nature is wholly corrupt? ‘Can an evil tree
bring forth good fruit? Do men gather grapes of thorns?” If
then thy nature be totally evil, all thou doest is certainly so too.
“Hear, O sinner, what is thy case! Innumerable sins com
pass thee about; floods of impurities overwhelm thee. Sins
of all sorts roll up and down in the dead sea of thy soul;
where no good can breathe, because of the corruption there.
Thy lips are unclean; the opening of thy mouth is as the
opening of a grave, full of stench and rottenness. Thy
natural actions are sin; for ‘when ye did eat, and when ye
did drink, did not ye eat for yourselves and drink for
yourselves?” (Zech. vii. 6.) Thy civil actions are sin: ‘The
ploughing of the wicked is sin.” (Prov. xxi. 4.) Thy religious
actions Poe sin: ‘The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomina
tion to the Lord. The thoughts and imaginations of thy
heart are ‘only evil continually. A deed may be soon done,
a word soon spoken, a thought pass; but each of these is an
item in thy accounts. O sad reckoning ! As many thoughts,
words, actions, so many sins; and the longer thou livest, thy
accounts swell the more. Should a tear be dropped for
every sin, thine eyes must be ‘fountains of tears. For nothing
but sin comes from thee; thy heart frames nothing but evil
ORIGINAL SIN. 46 L
imaginations; there is nothing in thy life, but what is framed by
thy heart; therefore, there is nothing in thy heart or life but evil.
“And all thy religion, if thou hast any, is lost labour, if thou
art not born again: Truly then thy duties are sins. Would not
the best wine be loathsome in a foul vessel ? So is the religion
of an unregenerate man. Thy duties cannot make thy corrupt
soul holy; but thy corrupt heart makes them unclean. Thou
wast wont to divide thy works into two sorts; to count some
good, and some evil. But thou must count again, and put all
under one head; for God writes on them all, ‘Only evil.”
“And thou canst not help thyself. What canst thou do to
take away thy sin, who art wholly corrupt? Will mud and filth
wash our filthiness? And wilt thou purge out sin by sinning?
Job took a potsherd to scrape himself, because his hands were
as full of boils as his body. This is the case of thy corrupt soul,
so long as thou art in a state of nature. Thou art poor indeed,
extremely ‘miserable and poor;” thou hast no shelter, but a
refuge of lies; no garment for thy soul, but ‘filthy rags;”
nothing to nourish it, but husks that cannot satisfy. More than
that, thou hast got such a bruise in the loins of Adam, that thou
art “without strength,’ unable to do anything. Nay, more than
all this, thou canst not so much as seek aright, but liest
helpless, as an infant exposed in the open field.
“O that ye would believe this sad truth! How little is it
believed in the world ! Few are concerned to have their evil
lives reformed; but fewer far, to have their evil nature changed.
Most men know not what they are; as the eye, which, seeing
many things, never sees itself. But until ye know every one
‘the plague of his own heart, there is no hope of your recovery.
Why will ye not believe the plain testimony of Scripture?
Alas! that is the nature of your disease. ‘Thou knowest not
that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. Lord, open their eyes, before they lift them up in hell,
and see what they will not see now !
“Meantime, let us have a special eye upon the corruption
and sin of our nature. What avails it to take notice of other
sins, while this mother sin is unnoticed? This is a weighty
point; in speaking to which, I shall,
“1. Point at some evidences of men's overlooking the sin of
their nature. As (1.) Men's being so confident of themselves,
as if they were in no danger of gross sins. Many would take
462 THE DOCTRINE OF
heinously such a caution as Christ gave his Apostles: ‘Take
heed of surfeiting and drunkenness.’ They would be ready to
cry out, ‘Am I a dog?’ It would raise the pride of their heart,
not their fear and trembling. And all this is a proof that they
know not the corruption of their own nature. (2.) Untender
ness toward them that fall. Many, in this case, cast off all
bowels of compassion; a plain proof that they do not know, or
‘consider themselves, lest they also be tempted.” Grace, indeed,
does make men zealous against sin, in others as well as in them
selves. But eyes turned inward to the corruption of nature,
clothe them with pity and compassion, and fill them with thank
fulness, that they were not the persons left to be such spectacles
of human frailty. (3.) Men’s venturing so boldly on temptation,
in confidence of their coming off fairly. Were they sensible of
the corruption of their nature, they would beware of entering on
the devil’s ground; as one girt about with bags of gunpowder
would be loath to walk where sparks of fire were flying.
“2. I shall mention a few things in which ye should have a
special eye to the sin of your nature. (1) In your application
to Christ. When you are with the Physician, O forget not this
disease! They never yet knew their errand to Christ, who went
not to Him for the sin of their nature; for his blood to take
away the guilt and his Spirit to break the power of it. Though
ye should lay before him a catalogue of sins, which might reach
from earth to heaven, yet if you omit this, you have forgot
the best part of the errand a poor sinner has to the Physician
of souls. (2.) Have a special eye to it in your repentance. If
you would repent indeed, let the streams lead you up to the
fountain, and mourn over your corrupt nature, as the cause of
all sin, in heart, word, and work. ‘Against thee, thee only
have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. Behold, I was
shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.”
(3.) Have a special eye to it in your mortification. “Crucify
the flesh with its affections and desires.’ It is the root of
bitterness which must be struck at, else we labour in vain.
In vain do we go about to purge the streams, if we are at no
pains about the muddy fountain. (4.) Ye are to eye this in
your daily walk. He that would walk uprightly, must have
one eye upward to Jesus Christ, another inward to the cor
ruption of his own nature.
“3. I shall offer some reasons, why we should especially
observe the sin of our nature. (1.) Because, of all sins, it is the
ORIGINAL SIN. 463
most extensive and diffusive. It goes through the whole
man, and spoils all. Other sins mar particular parts of the
image of God; but this defaces the whole. It is the poison
of the old serpent cast into the fountain, and so infects every
action, every breathing of the soul.
“(2.) It is the cause of all particular sins, both in our hearts
and lives. ‘Out of the heart of man proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, and all other abominations. It is the bitter foun
tain; and particular lusts are but rivulets running from it,
which bring forth into the life a part only, not the whole, of
what is within.
“(3.) It is virtually all sins; for it is the seed of all, which
want but the occasion to set up their heads. Hence it is
called, ‘a body of death,’ as consisting of the several members
which constitute that “body of sins,” (Col. ii. 11,) whose life
lies in spiritual death. It is the cursed ground, fit to bring forth
all manner of noxious weeds. Never did every sin appear in
the conversation of the vilest wretch that ever lived. But look
into thy nature, and thou mayest see all and every sin in the
root thereof. There is a fulness of all unrighteousness
there;—Atheism, idolatry, adultery, murder. Perhaps none
of these appear to thee in thy heart; but there is more in that
unfathomable depth of wickedness than thou knowest.
“(4.) The sin of our nature is of all sins the most fixed and
abiding. Sinful actions are transient, though the guilt and
stain of them may remain. But the corruption of nature
passes not away. It remains in its full power, by night and
by day, at all times, till nature is changed by converting grace.
“You may observe three things in the corrupt heart: (i.)
There is the corrupt nature, the evil bent of the heart, whereby
men are unapt for all good, and fitted for all evil. (ii) There
are particular lusts or dispositions of that corrupt nature, such
as pride, passion, covetousness. (iii.) There is one of these
stronger than all the rest,-‘the sin which doth so easily beset
us.” So that the river divides into many streams, whereof one
is greater than the rest. The corruption of nature is the river
head, which has many particular lusts wherein it runs; but it
mainly disburdensitself into that which we call the predominant
sin. But as in some rivers the main stream runs not always
in the same channel, so the besetting sin may change; as lust
in youth may be succeeded by covetousness in old age. Now,
what does it avail, to reform in other things, while the reigning
464 THE DOCTRINE OF ORIGINAL SIN,
sin retains its full power? What, if a particular sin be gone?
If the sin of our nature keep the throne, it will set up another
in its stead;—as when a water-course is stopped in one place,
it will break forth in another. Thus some cast off their prodi
gality; but covetousness comes in its stead. Some quit their
profaneness; but the same stream runs in the other channel
of self-righteousness.-
“That you may have a full view of the sin of your nature, I
would recommend to you three things:–1. Study to know the
spirituality and the extent of the law of God; for that is the
glass wherein you may see yourselves. 2. Observe your hearts
at all times; but especially under temptation. Temptation is a
fire that brings up the scum of the unregenerate heart. 3. Go to
God through Jesus Christ, for illumination by his Spirit. Say
unto him, ‘What I know not, teach thou me!’ and be willing
to take in light from the word. It is by the word the Spirit
teacheth; but unless he teach, all other teaching is to little pur
pose. You will never see yourself aright, till he light his candle
in your breast. Neither the fulness and glory of Christ, nor
the corruption and vileness of our nature, ever were, or can be,
rightly learned, but where the Spirit of Christ is the teacher.
“To conclude: Let the consideration of what has been said
commend Christ to you all. Ye that are brought out of your
natural state, be humble; still coming to Christ, still cleaving
to him, for the purging out what remains of your natural corrup
tion. Ye that are yet in your natural state, what will ye do?
Yemust die;yemust standatthejudgment-seat of God. Willyou
lie down, and sleep another might at ease in this case! See ye
do it not. Before another day youmaybe set before his dreadful
tribunal, in the grave-clothes of your corrupt state, and your
vile souls cast into the pit of destruction, to be forever buried out
of God’s sight: For I testify unto you, there is no peace with
God, no pardon, no heaven for you in this state. There is but
a step betwixt you and eternal destruction from the presence
of the Lord. If the brittle thread of life, which may be broke
with a touch in a moment, or everyou are aware, be broke while
you are in this state, you are ruined forever, and withoutremedy.
But come ye speedily to Jesus Christ. He hath cleansed as vile
souls as yours. ‘Confess your sins;’ and he will both ‘for
give your sins, and cleanse you from all unrighteousness.’”
BRISTOL, August 17, 1757.
A LETTER
TO
THE REVEREND JOHN TAYLOR, D.D.
HARTLEPOOL, July 3, 1759.
REVEREND SIR,
I ESTEEM you, as a person of uncommon sense and learn
ing; but your doctrine I cannot esteem : And, some time
since, I believed it to be my duty to speak my sentiments
at large concerning your doctrine of Original Sin. When
Mr. Newton mentioned this, and asked whether you designed
to answer, you said you thought not; for it would only be a
personal controversy between John Wesley and John Taylor.
—How gladly, if I durst, would I accept of this discharge!
But, certainly, it is a controversy of the highest importance;
nay, of all those things that concern our eternal peace. It
is Christianity, or Heathenism. For, take away the scriptural
doctrine of redemption, justification, and the new birth, the
beginning of sanctification; or, which amounts to the same,
explain them as you do,-and in what is Christianity better
than Heathenism ? Wherein (save in rectifying some of our
notions) has the religion of St. Paul any pre-eminence over
that of Socrates or Epictetus? The point is, therefore, Are
those things that have been believed for so many ages,
throughout the Christian world; real, solid truths, or
monkish dreams and vain imaginations?
Either you or I mistake the whole of Christianity, from
the beginning to the end | Either my scheme or yours is
as contrary to the scriptural, as the Koran is. Is it mine or
yours? Yours has gone through all England, and made
numerous converts. I attack it from end to end: Let all
England judge whether it can be defended or not.
Earnestly praying that God may give you and me a right
understanding in all things,
I am, Reverend Sir, Your servant for Christ's sake,
JOHN WESLEY.
WOL. IX. H H
AN EXTRACT
OF
A LETTER, TO THE REVEREND MR. L.A.W.
oCCAS'ONED BY SOME OF HIS IATE WRITINGS.
REVEREND SIR,
IN matters of religion I regard no writings but the inspired.
Tauler, Behmen, and a whole army of Mystic authors, are
with me nothing to St. Paul. In every point I appeal “to
the law and the testimony,” and value no authority but this.
At a time when I was in great danger of not valuing this
authority enough, you made that important observation: “I
see where your mistake lies. You would have a philosophical
religion; but there can be no such thing. Religion is the
most plain, simple thing in the world. It is only, ‘We love
him, because he first loved us.” So far as you add philo
sophy to religion, just so far you spoil it.” This remark I
have never forgotten since; and I trust in God I never shall.
But have not you? Permit me, Sir, to speak plainly. Have
you ever thought of it since 2 Is there a writer in England
who so continually blends philosophy with religion ? even in
tracts on “The Spirit of Prayer,” and “The Spirit of Love,”
wherein, from the titles of them, one would expect to find no
more of philosophy than in the Epistles of St. John. Con
cerning which, give me leave to observe in general, l. That
the whole of it is utterly superfluous: A man may be full both
of prayer and love, and not know a word of this hypothesis.
2. The whole of this hypothesis is unproved;—it is all pre
carious, all uncertain. 3. The whole hypothesis has a
dangerous tendency. It naturally leads men off from plain,
practical religion, and fills them with the “knowledge” that
“puffeth up,” instead of the “love” that “ edifieth.” And, 4.
It is often flatly contrary to Scripture, to reason, and to itself.
But over and above this superfluous, uncertain, dangerous,
EXTRACT OF A LETTER, TO MR. L.A.W. 467
irrational, and unscriptural philosophy, have not you lately
grieved many who are not strangers to the spirit of prayer or
love, by advancing tenets in religion, some of which they think
are unsupported by Scripture, some even repugnant to it?
Allow me, Sir, first to touch upon your philosophy, and then
to speak freely concerning these.
I. As to your philosophy, the main of your theory respects,
1. Things antecedent to the creation: 2. The creation itself:
3. Adam in paradise: 4. The fall of man.
I do not undertake formally to refute what you have asserted
on any of these heads. I dare not; I cannot answer either to
God or man such an employment of my time. I shall only give
a sketch of this strange system, and ask a few obvious questions.
And 1. Of things antecedent to the creation.
“All that can be conceived is God, or nature, or creature.”
(Spirit of Prayer, Part II, p. 33.)
Is nature created, or not created ? It must be one or the
other; for there is no medium. If not created, is it not God?
If created, is it not a creature? How then can there be three,
God, nature, and creature; since nature must coincide either
with God or creature ?
“Nature is initself a hungry, wrathful fire of life.” (Page 34.)
“Nature is and can be only a desire. Desire is the very
being of nature.” (Spirit of Love, Part I., p. 20.)
“Nature is only a desire, because it is for the sake of some
thing else. Nature is only a torment; because it cannot help
itself to that which it wants.” (Page 34.)
“Nature is the outward manifestion of the invisible glories
of God.” (Part II., p. 62.)
Is not the last of these definitions contradictory to all that
precede?
If desire is the very being of nature; if it is a torment, an
hungry, wrathful fire; how is it “the outward manifestation
of the invisible glories of God?”
“Nature as well as God is antecedent to all creatures.”
(Page 59.)
“There is an eternal nature, as universal and as unlimited
as God.” (Page 64.)
Is then nature God? Or are there two eternal, universai,
infinite beings?
* Mr. Law’s words are enclosed all along in commas.
2 H 2.
468 EXTRACT OF A LETTER
“Nothing is before eternal nature but God.” (Ibid.)
“Nothing but !” Is anything before that which is eternal?
But how is this grand account of nature consistent with what
you say elsewhere?
“Nature, and darkness, and self, are but three different
expressions for one and the same thing.” (Page 18l.)
“Nature has all evil and no evil in it.” (Page 192.) Yea,
“Nature, self, or darkness, has not only no evil in it, but
is the only ground of all good.” (Ibid.)
O rare darkness |
“Nature has seven chief properties, and can have neither
more nor less, because it is a birth from the Deity in nature.”
Is nature a birth from the Deity in nature? Is this sense?
If it be, what kind of proof is it? Is it not ignotum per ceque
ignotum ?* “For God is tri-une, and nature is tri-une.”
“Nature is tri-une !” Is not this flat begging the question?
“And hence arise properties, three and three.” Nay, why not
nine and nine? “And that which brings these three and
three into union is another property.” (Spirit of Love, Part
II., p. 64.) Why so? Why may it not be two, or five, or
nine? Is it not rather the will and power of God?
“The three first properties of nature are the whole essence
of that desire which is, and is called, nature.” (Page 69.)
How? Are the properties of a thing the same as the essence
of it? What confusion is this ! But if they were, can a part
of its properties be the whole essence of it?
“The three first properties of nature are attraction, resist
ance, and whirling. In these three properties of the desire,
you see the reason of the three great laws of matter and
motion, and need not be told that Sir Isaac ploughed with
Jacob Behmen’s heifer.” (Page 37.) Just as much as Milton
ploughed with Francis Quarles's heifer.
How does it appear, that these are any of the properties of
nature, if you mean by nature anything distinct from matter?
And how are they the properties of desire? What a jumbling
of dissonant notions is here !
“The fourth property” (you affirm, not prove) “is called
fire: The fifth, the form of light and love.” What do you
mean by the form of love? Are light and love one and the
* To prove an unknown proposition by one equally unknown.—EDIT.
TO THE REV. M.R. L.A.W. 469
same thing? “The sixth, sound or understanding.” Are
then sound and understanding the same thing? “The
seventh, a life of triumphing joy.” (Page 58.) Is then a life
of triumphing joy, “that which brings the three and three
properties into union?” If so, how can it be “the result of
that union ?” Do these things hang together?
To conclude this head: You say, “Attraction is an incessant
working of three contrary properties, drawing, resisting, and
whirling.” (Page 200.) That is, in plain terms, (a discovery
worthy of Jacob Behmen, and yet not borrowed by Sir Isaac,)
“Drawing is incessant drawing, resistance, and whirling.”
2. Of the creation:— .
You put these words, with many more equally important,
into the mouth of God himself!
“Angels first inhabited the region which is now taken up
by the sun and the planets that move round him. It was
then all a glassy sea, in which perpetual scenes of light and
glory were ever rising and changing in obedience to their
call. Hence they fancied they had infinite power, and
resolved to abjure all submission to God. In that moment
they were whirled down into their own dark, fiery, working
powers. And in that moment the glassy sea, by the wrathful
workings of these spirits, was broke in pieces, and became a
chaos of fire and wrath, thickness and darkness.” (Spirit of
Prayer, Part I., p. 14, &c.)
I would inquire upon this,
(1) Is it well for a man to take such liberty with the most
high God?
(2.) Is not this being immeasurably “wise above that
which is written ?” wiser than all the Prophets and all the
Apostles put together?
(3.) How can anything of this be proved?—Why thus:
“‘Darkness was upon the face of the deep. What can this
mean, but that the fall of angels brought desolation into the
very place of this world?” (Part II., p. 49.) What a proof!
Secondly. “The Scripture shows, that the Spirit of God
entering into this darkness,” that is, into the very place where
Satan reigned before, “brought forth a new world.” (Page 50.)
Where does it show, that this darkness was the place
where Satan reigned? I cannot find it in my Bible.
Thirdly. “How could the devil be called the prince of this
world if it was not once his own kingdom?” (Ibid.)
470 EXTRACT OF A LETTER
May he not be so called, because he now reigns therein?
Is he not now “the ruler of the darkness,” or wickedness,
“of this world P”
Fourthly. “Had it not been their own kingdom, the devils.
could have no power here. This may pass for a demonstration,
that this is the very place in which the angels fell.” (Page 51.)
I doubt it will not pass. Cannot God permit Satan to
exert his power wherever it pleaseth him?
Hitherto then we have not a grain of sound proof. Yet
you pronounce with all peremptoriness,
“The grounds of true religion cannot be truly known but
by going so far back as this fall of angels.” (Pages 37, 38.)
Cannot Positively cannot How few men in England, in
Europe, can or do go back so far ! And are there none but
these, no not one, who knows the grounds of true religion?
“It was their revolt which brought wrath and fire and
thickness and darkness into nature.” (Ibid.)
If it was sin that brought fire in the world, (which is hard
to prove,) did it bring darkness, and thickness too? But if
it did, what harm is there in either? Is not thickness as
good in its place as thinness? And as to darkness, you say
yourself, “It has not only no evil in it, but is the only
ground of all possible good.”
Touching creation in general you aver,
“A creation out of nothing is no better sense than a
creation into nothing.” (Page 60.)
“A creation into nothing ” is a contradiction in terms.
Can you say a creation out of nothing is so? It is indeed
tautology; since the single term creation is equivalent with
production out of nothing.
“That all things were created out of nothing has not the
least tittle of Scripture to support it.” (Page 55.)
Is it not supported (as all the Christian Church has thought
hitherto) by the very first verse of Genesis?
“Nay, it is a fiction big with the grossest absurdities. It
is full of horrid consequences. It separates everything from:
God. It leaves no relation between God and the creature.
For ” (mark the proof!) “if it is created out of nothing, it
cannot have something of God in it.” (Page 58.)
The consequence is not clear. Till this is made good, can
any of those propositions be allowed ?
TO THE REW. M.R. LAW. 471
“Nature is the first birth of God.” Did God create it or
not? If not, how came it out of him? If he did, did he
create it out of something, or nothing?
“St. Paul says, All things are of, or out of, God.” And
what does this prove, but that God is the cause of all things?
“The materiality of the angelic kingdom was spiritual.”
(Spirit of Prayer, Part II., p. 27.) What is spiritual materi
ality? Is it not much the same with immaterial materiality?
“This spiritual materiality brought forth the heavenly
flesh and blood of angels.” (Ibid. p. 57.) That angels have
bodies, you affirm elsewhere. But are you sure they have
flesh and blood? Are not the angels spirits? And surely
a spirit hath not flesh and blood.
“The whole glassy sea was a mirror of beauteous forms,
colours, and sounds, perpetually springing up, having also
fruits and vegetables, but not gross, as the fruits of the
world. This was continually bringing forth new figures of
life; not animals, but ideal forms of the endless divisibility
of life.” (Part I., pp. 18, 19.)
This likewise is put into the mouth of God. But is non
sense from the Most High P
What less is “a mirror of beauteous sounds?” And what are
“figures of life?” Are they alive or dead, or between both, as a
man may be between sleeping and waking? What are “ideal
forms of the endless divisibility of life?” Are they the same
with those forms of stones, one of which Maraton took up (while
he was seeking Yaratilda) to throw at the form of a lion? *
“The glassy sea being become thick and dark, the spirit
converted its fire and wrath into sun and stars, its dross and
darkness into earth, its mobility into air, its moisture into
water.” (Part II., p. 29.)
Was wrath converted into sun or stars, or a little of it
bestowed on both ? How was darkness turned into earth,
or mobility into air? Has not fire more mobility than this?
Did there need omnipotence, to convert fire into fire, into
the sun, or moisture into water?
“Darkness was absolutely unknown to the angels till they
fell. Hence it appears, that darkness is the ground of the mate
riality of nature.” (Page 33.) Appears—to whom? Nothing
appears to me, but the proving ignotum per ignotius.f
* See the Spectator.
+ The proving of an unknown proposition by one still less known.-EDIT.
472 EXTRACT OF A LETTER,
“All life is a desire.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 198.)
“Every desire, as such, is and must be made up of contra
riety. God’s bringing a sensible creature into existence is
the bringing the power of desire into a creaturely state.”
(Ibid.) Does not all this require a little more proof, and not
a little illustration?
“Hard and soft, thick and thin, could have no existence,
till nature lost its first purity. And this is the one true origin
of all the materiality of this world. Else, nothing thick or
hard could ever have been.” (Part I., p. 21.) Does not this
call for much proof? since most people believe God created
matter, merely because so it seemed good in his sight.
But you add a kind of proof. “How comes a flint to be
so hard and dark? It is because the meekness and fluidity
of the light, air, and water are not in it.” (Ibid.) The
meekness of light, and air, and water / What is that? Is
air or water capable of virtue?
“The first property of nature is a constraining, attracting,
and coagulating power.” (Page 24.) I wait the proof of this.
“God brought gross matter out of the sinful properties of
mature, that thereby the fallen angels might lose all their power
over them.” (Page 27.) And have they lost all power over
them? Is Satan no longer prince of the power of the air?
“As all matter is owing to the first property of nature,
which is an astringing, compressing desire.” (Page 28.)
Stop here, Sir. I totally deny, that any unintelligent being
is capable of any desire at all. And yet this gross, capital
mistake, runs through your whole theory.
“The fourth property is fire.” (Page 49.) Where is the
proof? “Which changes the properties of nature into an
heavenly state.” (Page 48.) Proof again? “The con
junction of God and nature brings forth fire.” This needs
the most proof of all.
“Every right-kindled fire must give forth light.” Why?
“Because the eternal fire is the effect of supernatural light.”
Nay, then light should rather give forth fire.
“The fire of the soul and that of the body has but one
nature.” (Page 52.) Can either Behmen or Spinosa prove
this ?
3. Of Adam in paradise.
“Paradise is an heavenly birth of life.” (Spirit of Prayer,
TO THE REV. M.R. L.A.W. 473
Part I., p. 6.) How does this definition explain the thing
defined 9
“Adam had at first both an heavenly and an earthly body.
Into the latter, was the spirit of this world breathed; and in this
spirit and body did the heavenly spirit and body of Adam
dwell.” (Page 7.) So he had originally two bodies and two
souls | This will need abundance of proof. “The spirit and
body of this world was the medium through which he was
to have commerce with this world.” The proof? “But it
was no more alive in him, than Satan and the serpent were
alive in him at his first creation. Good and evil were then
only in his outward body and in the outward world.” What!
was there evil in the world, and even in Adam, together with
Satan and the serpent, at his first creation? “But they were
kept unactive by the power of the heavenly man within him.”
Did this case cover the earthly man, or the earthly case the
heavenly 9
But “he had power to choose, whether he would use his out
ward body only as a means of opening the outward world to.
him;” (so it was not quite unactive neither;) “or of opening
the bestial life in himself. Till this was opened in him, nothing
in this outward world, no more than his own outward body,”
(so now it is unactive again,) “could act upon him, make any
impressions upon him, or raise any sensations in him; neither
had he any feeling of good or evil from it.” (Page 9.) All this
being entirely new, we must beg clear and full proof of it.
“God said to man at his creation, Rule thou over this imper
fect, perishing world, without partaking of its impure nature.”
(Page 21.) Was not the world then at first perfect in its kind?
Was it impure then? Or would it have perished if man had
not sinned? And are we sure that God spake thus?
“The end God proposed in the creation was the restoring
all things to their glorious state.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part II.,
p. 61.) “In the creation 1” Was not this rather the end which
he proposed in the redemption?
“Adam was created to keep what is called the curse, covered
and overcome by Paradise. And as Paradise concealed and
overcame all the evil in the elements, so Adam's heavenly man
concealed from him all the evil of the earthly nature that was
under it.” (Page 62.) Can we believe that there was any evil
in man from the creation, if we believe the Bible?
474 EXTRACT OF A LETTER
“Our own good spirit is the very Spirit of God; and yet
not God, but the Spirit of God kindled into a creaturely form.”
Is there any meaning in these words? And how are they con
sistent with those that follow * “This spirit is so related to
God, as my breath is to the air.” (Page 195.) Nay, if so,
your spirit is God. For your breath is air.
“That Adam had at first the nature of an angel, is plain
from hence, that he was both male and female in one person.
Now, this (the being both male and female) is the very perfec
tion of the angelic nature.” (Page 65.) Naturalists say that snails
have this perfection. But who can prove that angels have?
You attempt to prove it thus: “‘In the resurrection they
neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels.’
Here we are told, (1.) That the being male and female in one
person is the very nature of angels. (2.) That man shall be
so too at the resurrection: Therefore he was so at first.”
(Page 66.)
Indeed, we are not told here, that angels are hermaphrodites.
No, nor anything like it. The whole passage is: “They who
are accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrec
tion from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage;
neither can they die any more; for they are equal unto the
angels;” (Luke xx. 35, 36;) namely, (not in being male
and female, but) in this, that they “cannot die any more.”
This is the indisputable meaning of the words. So this whole
proof vanishes into air.
You have one more thought, full as new as this: “All
earthly beasts are but creaturely eruptions of the disorder that
is broken out from the fallen spiritual world. So earthly ser
pents are but transitory out-births of covetousness, envy,
pride, and wrath.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 207.)
How shall we reconcile this with the Mosaic account? “And
God said, Let the earth bring forth cattle, and creeping thing,
and beast. And God made the beast of the earth; and God
saw that it was good.” (Gen. i. 24, 25.) Does anything here
intimate that beasts or serpents literally crept out of the womb
of sin? And what have serpents, in particular, to do with
covetousness, or, indeed, with envy, unless in poetic fables?
4. Of the fall of man.
“Adam had lost much of his perfection before Eve was
taken out of him. “It is not good,” said God, ‘that man should
TO THE REV. M. R. LAW, 475
be alone.” This shows that Adam had now made that not to
be good, which God saw to be good when he created him.”
(Spirit of Prayer, p. 74.) Nay, does it show either more or
less than this, that it was not conducive to the wise ends God
had in view, for man to remain single?
“God then divided the human nature into a male and
female creature: Otherwise man would have brought forth
his own likeness out of himself, in the same manner as he
had a birth from God. But Adam let in an adulterous love
of the world: By this his virginity was lost, and he had no
longer a power of bringing forth a birth from himself.”
(Page 75.) We have no shadow of proof for all this.
“This state of inability is called his falling into a deep
sleep.” (Page 76.) How does this agree with, “The Lord
God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam?” (Gen. ii. 21.)
“God took his Eve out of him, as a lesser evil, to avoid a
greater. For it was a less folly to love the female part of
himself, than to love things lower than himself.” (Page 77.)
Who can extract this out of the words of Moses? Who
can reconcile it with the words of our Lord? “He who made
them at the beginning ” (not a word of any previous fall)
“made them male and female, and said, For this cause shall
a man leave father and mother, and cleave unto his wife.”
(Matt. xix. 4, 5.) Is here any intimation, that for a man to
love his wife is only less folly than to love the world? “A
man ought so to love his wife, even as Christ the Church.”
Is there any folly in the love of Christ to the Church 7
“Marriage came in by Adam’s falling from his first per
fection.” (Page 88.) Does this account do honour to that
institution, any more than that memorable saying of an emi
nent Mystic, “Marriage is but licensed whoredom?”
“Had Adam stood, no Eve would have been taken out of
him. But from Eve God raised that angelic man, whom
Adam should have brought forth without Eve, who is called
the Second Adam, as being both male and female.” (Page
79.) Many things herewant proof. How does it appear,
(1.) That Eve would not have been, had Adam stood? (2.)
That had he stood, he would have brought forth the Second
Adam without Eve? (3.) That Christ was both male and
female? and, (4.) That he was on this account called the
Second Adam?
“The Second Adam is now to do that which the first
476 EXTRACT OF A LETTER,
should have done.” (Page 84.) Is he to do no more than that?
no more than a mere creature should have done? Then what
need is there of his being any more than a creature? What
need of his being God?
“Our having from him a new heavenly flesh and blood,
raised in us by his spiritual power, is the strongest proof that
we should have been born of Adam by the same spiritual
power.” (Page 85.)
Had Adam then the very same spiritual power which
Christ had ? And would he, if he had stood, have trans
mitted to us the very same benefit? Surely none that be
lieves the Christian Revelation will aver this in cool blood |
“From Adam’s desire turned toward the world, the earth
got a power of giving forth an evil tree. It was his will
which opened a passage for the evil hid in the earth,” (I
know not how it came there before Adam fell,) “to bring
forth a tree in its own likeness. No sooner was it brought
forth, than God assured him that death was hid in it: A
plain proof that this tree was not from God, but from a power
in the earth, which could not show itself, till Adam desired
to taste something which was not paradisiacal.” (Page 96.)
This is the marvellous in the highest degree, and affords
many questions not very easy to be answered. But, waving all
these, can anything be more flatly contradictory to the Mosaic
account? We read there, “The Lord God formed man. And
the Lord planted a garden. And out of the ground made the
Lord God every tree to grow that is pleasant to the sight and
good for food; the tree of life also, and the tree of knowledge
of good and evil.” (Gen. ii. 7–9.) Is it not here plainly
taught that this tree was from God? that, not the desire of
Adam, but the Lord God, made this tree to grow, as well as
the tree of life? And when was it that God gave him that
solemn warning, “In the day that thou eatest thereof thou
shalt surely die?” (Verse 17.) Not so soon as that tree was
brought forth; but when Adam was put into the garden.
“At first, all the natural properties of man’s creaturely life
were hid in God, just as the natural qualities of darkness are
hid till glorified by the light.” (Spirit of Love, Part II. p.
181.) Nay, were they not sufficiently hid by the heavenly
man? Need they be hid over and over?
“But when man fell, all these properties broke forth, just as
TO THE REV. MIR. LAW. 477
the darkness, when it has lost the light, must show forth its
own coldness, horror, and other uncomfortable qualities.”
Exemplum placet !” But, are either coldness or horror
natural qualities of darkness? If so, they must be insepar
able from it. But who will affirm this?
“Darkness, though contrary to light, is yet absolutely
necessary to it. Without this, no manifestation or visibility
of light could possibly be.” This is absolutely new and
surprising. But how is it to be proved?
Thus: “God dwelleth in the light which no man can
approach. Therefore, light cannot be manifested to man but
by darkness.” (Page 189.) Ah, poor consequence I Would
not the same text just as well prove transubstantiation?
“Light and darkness do everything, whether good or evil,
that is done in man. Light is all power, light is all things
and nothing.” (Ibid.)
I cannot conceive what ideas you affix to the terms light
and darkness. But I forget. You except against ideas.
Can you teach us to think without them?
Once more : You say, “Darkness is a positive thing, and
has a strength and a substantiality in it.” (Page 182.) I
have scarce met with a greater friend to darkness, except
“the illuminated Jacob Behmen.”
But, Sir, have you not done him an irreparable injury? I
do not mean by misrepresenting his sentiments; (though some
of his profound admirers are positive that you misunderstand
and murder him throughout;) but by dragging him out of his
awful obscurity; by pouring light upon his venerable darkness.
Men may admire the deepness of the well, and the excellence of
the water it contains: But if some officious person puts a light
into it, it will appear to be both very shallow and very dirty.
I could not have borne to spend so many words on so egre
gious trifles, but that they are mischievous trifles:
IIae nuga seria ducent
In mala.t
This is dreadfully apparent in your own case, (I would not
speak, but that Idare not refrain,) whom, notwithstanding your
* The example is pleasing.—EDIT.
# This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
*These trifles serious mischief brecd.”-EDIT,
478 EXTRACT OF A LETTER,
uncommon abilities, they have led astray in things of the
greatest importance. Bad philosophy has, by insensible
degrees, paved the way for bad divinity: In consequence of
this miserable hypothesis, you advance many things in reli
gion also, some of which are unsupported by Scripture, some
even repugnant to it.
II. Some of these I shall now mention with the utmost
plainness, as knowing for whom, and before whom, I speak.
And, 1. You deny the omnipotence of God.
You say: “As no seeing eye could be created unless there
was, antecedent to it, a natural visibility of things,” (Why not?
Why might not visible things be created at the same instant
with it?) “so no creature could come into any natural life,
unless such a state of nature was antecedent to it.” (Page 60.)
“All that God does is, and must be, done in and by the powers
of nature.” (Page 135.) What then did it avail that, as you
elsewhere say, God was before nature? He not only could not
then do all things, but he could do nothing till nature existed.
But if so, how came nature itself, this second eternal, to
exist at all?
“There cannot possibly be any other difference between
created beings, than arises from that out of which they were
created.” (Page 60.) Why not? Who will stay the hand of
the Almighty, or say unto him, What doest thou?
“No fruits or vegetables could have sprung up in the divided
elements, but because they are parts of that glassy sea, where
angelical fruits grew before.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 19.)
But how came those fruits to grow before? How came
they to grow in the glassy sea? Were they not produced
out of nothing at first 7 If not, God was not before nature.
If they were, cannot he still produce out of nothing whatso
ever pleaseth him?
“All outward nature being fallen from heaven,” (that we
deny,) “must, as well as it can, do and work as it did in
heaven.” (Page 20.) “As well as it can l’” What can it do
without God, who upholdeth all things by the word of his
power? And what can it not do, if he pleaseth? Or, rather,
what cannot he do, with or without it?
“Matter could not possibly be, but from sin.” (Spirit of
Love, Part I., p. 23.) That is, in very plain terms, God
could not have created matter if Satan had not sinned !
“God could not create man with a soul and a body, unless
TO THE REV. M.R. L.A.W. 479
there was such a thing as nature antecedent to the creation of
man.” (Page 30.)
Why could not God do this? Because “body and spirit are
not two separate things, but are only the inward and outward
condition of one and the same being. Every creature must
have its own body, and cannot be without it. For its body is
that” (Who would have thought it!) “which makes it manifest
to itself. It cannot know either that it is, or what it is, but by
its own body 1” (Page 32.)
What a heap of bold assertions is here to curb omnipotence
And not one of them has a tittle of proof, unless one can prove
the other |
But we have more still: “The body of any creature has
nothing of its own, but is solely the outward manifestation of
that which is inwardly in the soul. Every animal has nothing
in its outward form or shape but that which is the form and
growth of its spirit. As no number can be anything else but
that which the units contained in it make it to be, so no body
can be anything else but the coagulation or sum total of those
properties of nature that are coagulated in it.” (Page 33.)
Astonishing! What a discovery is this, that a body is only
a curdled spirit ! that our bodies are only the sum total of our
spiritual properties! and that the form of every man’s body is
only the form of his spirit made visible !
“Every spirit manifests its own nature by that body which
proceeds from it as its own birth.” (Part II., p. 17.)
Does the body then grow out of the spirit, as the hair and
nails grow out of the body; and this in consequence of the
“powers of nature,” distinct from the power and will of God?
To abridge God of his power, after creation, as well as before
it, you affirm, farther,
“This is an axiom that cannot be shaken, Nothing can rise
higher than its first created nature; and therefore an angel at
last must have been an angel at first. Do you think it possible
for an ox to be changed into a rational philosopher? Yet this
is as possible as for one who has only by creation the life of this
world to be changed into an angel of heaven. The life of this
world can reach no farther than this world; no omnipotence of
God can carry it farther: Therefore, if man is to be an angel at
last, he must have been created an angel; because no creature
can possibly have any other life, or higher degree of life, than
480 EXTRACT OF A LETTER,
that which his creation brought forth in him.” (Spirit of
Prayer, Part II., p. 81.)
I have quoted this passage at some length, that the sense
of it may appear beyond dispute. But what divinity ! and
what reasoning to support it! Can God raise nothing higher
than its first created state? Is it not possible for him to
change an ox or a stone into a rational philosopher, or a child
of Abraham ? to change a man or a worm into an angel of
heaven? Poor omnipotence which cannot do this! Whether
he will or no, is another question. But if he cannot do it,
how can he be said to do “whatsoever pleaseth him in
heaven, and in earth, and in the sea, and in all deep places?”
Thus does your attachment to a miserable philosophy, lead
you to deny the almighty power of God.
2. It leads you, in the Second place, to deny his justice;
to abridge this no less than his power.
This I may be permitted to consider more at large; because,
though it was allowed by all the wiser Heathens of past ages,
yet it is now one main hinge on which the controversy
between Christianity and Deism turns. To convert a
thousand Deists, therefore, by giving up this point, with the
doctrine of justification which is built upon it, is little more
than it would be to convert as many Jews by allowing the
Messiah is not yet come. It is converting them by allowing
all they contend for; by granting them the main point in
question. Consequently, it is no other than establishing
Deism, while it pretends to overturn it.
I would greatly wish, in weighing what you have advanced
on this head, to forget who speaks, and simply consider what
is spoken. The person I greatly reverence and love: The
doctrine I utterly abhor; as I apprehend it to be totally
subversive of the very essence of Christianity.
God himself hath declared, that, in consequence of his
justice, he will, in the great day of general retribution,
“render to every man according to his works, whether they
be good or evil.”
But man says, No: “There is no righteous wrath or vindic
tive justive in God.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 108.) If so,
ye may go on, ye children of the devil, in doing the works of
your father. It is written, indeed, “The wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousncss:” But
TO THE REV. MR, LAW. 481
this is not literally to be taken; for, properly speaking, there
is no such thing as the wrath of God!
Fear not the bugbear of everlasting burnings. There is
not only no everlasting punishment, but no punishment at
all; no such thing in the universe. It is a mere vulgar errror!
I should be extremely glad to prophesy these smooth things
too, did not a difficulty lie in the way. As nothing is more
frequently or more expressly declared in Scripture, than God’s
anger at sin, and his punishing it both temporally and eter
nally, every assertion of this kind strikes directly at the credit
of the whole revelation. For if there be one falsehood in the
Bible, there may be a thousand; neither can it proceed from
the God of truth. However, I will weigh all your assertions.
And may the God of truth shine on both our hearts!
I must premise, that I have no objection to the using the
words wrath (or anger) and justice as nearly synonymous;
seeing anger stands in the same relation to justice, as love
does to mercy; love and anger being the passions (speaking
after the manner of men) which correspond with the dis
positions of mercy and justice. Whoever therefore denies
God to be capable of wrath or anger, acts consistently in
denying his justice also.
You begin: “(1.) No wrath (anger, vindictive justice) ever
was or ever will be in God. If a wrath of God were any
where, it must be everywhere.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I.,
p. 27.) So it is, as sure as the just God is everywhere.
“(2.) Wrath and pain dwell only in the creatures.” (Page28.)
Pain is only in creatures. Of wrath, we are to inquire farther.
“(3.) To say, God ever punished any creature out of wrath,
is as absurd as to say, He began the creation out of wrath.”
I conceive, not. It is not as absurd to say, “God is angry at
the guilty,” as to say, “God is angry at the innocent.” Now,
it is certain, when God began the creation of man, no guilty
men were in being.
“(4.) He must always will that to his creatures, which he
willed at the creation of them.” True; and he willed, at the very
creation of men, “to reward every one as his work should be.”
“(5.) God is incapable of willing painto any creature, because
he is nothing but goodness.” (Page 29.) You mean, because
his goodness excludes justice. Nay, that is the very question.
“(6.) God can give nothing but happiness from himself,
VOL. IX. I I
482 EXTRACT OF A LETTER
because he hath nothing else in himself.” (Spirit of Love,
Part I., p. 3.) As if you had said, “God can give nothing
but infinity from himself, because he has nothing else in him
self.” It is certain he has not. He is all infinity. Yet that
argument will not hold.
“(7.) God can no more begin to have any wrath after the
creature is fallen, than he could be infinite wrath and rage
from all eternity.” (Part II., p. 4.) No changing the terms.
We have nothing to do with rage. This properly means
excessive anger. Setting this aside, I answer to the argument,
God was infinitely just from all eternity: In consequence
of which, his anger then began to show itself, when man had
sinned.
“(8.) No wrath can be in God, unless God was, from all
eternity, an infinity of wrath.” just. (Page 6.) That is, infinitely
So he was and will be to all eternity.
“(9.) There must either be no possibility of wrath, or no
possibility of its having any bounds.” (Page 7.) The divine
justice cannot possibly have any bounds. It is as unlimited
as his power.
“(10.) Two things show the nature of wrath,-a tempest,
and a raging sore. The former is wrath in the elements; the
latter is wrath in the body. Now, both these are a disorder;
but there is no disorder in God: Therefore there is no wrath
in God.” (Page 13.)
“A tempest is wrath in the elements; a raging sore is
wrath in the body.” It is not. Neither the body, the elements,
nor anything inanimate is capable of wrath. And when we
say, “The sore looks angry,” does any one dream this is to
be taken literally? The pillars of the argument, therefore, are
rotten. Consequently, the superstructure falls to the ground.
In vain would you prop it up by saying, “Wrath can have
no other nature in body than it has in spirit, because it can
have no existence in body, but what it has from spirit.” (Page
15.) Nay, it can have no existence in body at all, as yourself
affirm presently after. Yet you strangely go on: “There is
but one wrath in all outward things, animate or inanimate.”
Most true; for all wrath is in animals; things inanimate are
utterly incapable of it.
“There can be but one kind of wrath, because nothing can
be wrathful but spirit.” (Page 18.)
TO THE REV. M.R. L.A.W. 483
Never then let us talk of wrathful elements, of wrathful
tempests or sores, again.
“(11.) Wrath and evil are but two words for the samething.”
(Ibid.) This is home; but it cannot be granted without proof.
“ (12.) God is as incapable of wrath, as of thickness, hard
ness, and darkness; because wrath can exist nowhere else
but in thickness, hardness, and darkness.” (Page 71.)
So far from it, that wrath cannot exist in thicknees or
hardness at all. For these are qualities of bodies; and
“nothing can be wrathful but spirit.”
“(13.) Wrath cannot be in any creature, till it has lost
its first perfection.” (Page 72.) That remains to be proved.
Thus far you have advanced arguments for your doctrine.
You next attempt to answer objections:—
And to the objection, that Scripture speaks so frequently
of the wrath of God, you answer,
“(1.) All the wrath and vengeance that ever was in any
creature, is to be called and looked on as the wrath and ven
geance of God.”
I totally deny that proposition, and call for the proof of it.
“(2.) God works everything in nature. Therefore all death,
or rage, or curse, wherever it is, must be said, in the language
of Scripture, to be the wrath or vengeance of God.” (Page 55.)
I deny the consequence. The latter proposition does not
follow from the former. And indeed it is not true. All
death, and rage, and curse, is not in the language of Scripture
termed the wrath and vengeance of God.
“(3) Because the devils have their life from God; there
fore, their cursed, miserable, wrathful life is said to be the
curse, and misery, and wrath of God upon them.” (Page 53.)
Neither can this be proved, that the devils having their
life from God, is the reason why they are said to be under
his wrath. Nor does the Scripture ever term their wrathful,
miserable life, the wrath or misery of God.
“(4.) Devils are his, as well as holy angels. Therefore all the
wrath and rage of the one must be as truly his wrath and rage
burning in them, as the joy of the others is his joy.” (Page 54.)
So it seems, the wrath of God in Scripture means no more
or less than the wrath of the devil! However, this argument
will not prove it. The joy of saints (not of angels that I
remember) is styled the joy of their Lord, because he pre
2 I 2
484 EXTRACT OF A LETTER
pared it for them, and bestows it on them. Does he prepare
and bestow the rage of devils upon them?
“(5.) His wrath and his vengeance are no more in God,
than what the Psalmist calls his ice and his frost.” (Page 74.)
There is nothing parallel in the case. We cannot take the
latter expression literally, without glaring absurdity; the
former we may.
“(6.) ‘The earth trembled because he was wroth. No
wrath here but in the elements.”
Nay, if so, here was no wrath at all. For we are agreed,
“Only spirits can be wrathful.”
(7.) One more text, usually cited against your opinion,
you improve into an argument for it: “‘Avenge not your
selves, for vengeance is mine. This is a full proof that
vengeance is not in God. If it was, then it would belong to
every child of God, or he could not ‘be perfect as his Father
is perfect.’ ” (Page 76.)
Yes, he could in all his imitable perfections. But God has
peculiarly forbidden our imitating him in this. Wengeance,
says he, is mine, incommunicably mine; unless so far as he
delegates it to those who are in authority. This therefore
clearly shows, that God executes vengeance; though justice,
not vengeance, is properly in Him.
Having now proved (as you suppose) that God has neither
anger nor justice, it remains only to show (which indeed fol
lows by easy and natural consequence) that he never did nor
can punish.
“To say, Adam’s miserable state was a punishment in
flicted upon him by God is an utter absurdity.” (Spirit of
Prayer, Part I., p. 24.) “His sin had not the least punish
ment of any kind inflicted upon it by God.” (Page 26.)
This is flat and plain. But let us see how far this account
agrees with that which God himself hath given:—
“Of the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou shalt not
eat : In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.”
(Gen. ii. 17.) “And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall
not die.” (iii. 4.) “And the woman, being deceived,” did eat;
(1 Tim. ii. 14;) “and gave unto her husband, and he did eat.”
(Gen. iii. 6.) “And the Lord God said unto the serpent,
Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed. Dust thou shalt
eat all the days of thy life;” (verse 14;) “and I will put enmity
TO THE REV. MR, LAW. 485
between thee and the woman.” (Verse 15.) “Unto the
woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and” (that
is, in) “thy conception.” (Verse 16.) “And unto Adam he
said, Because thou hast eaten of the tree, cursed is the
ground for thy sake: In sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the
days of thy life.” (Verse 17.) “Dust thou art, and unto
dust thou shalt return.” (Verse 19.)
Can any man read this and affirm, “God did not inflict the
least punishment, of any kind, either on Eve, or Adam, or
the serpent?” With what eyes or understanding then must
he read |
But you say, “All that came on Adam was implied in
what he chose to himself.” (Page 25.) It was. He chose
it to himself in the same sense that he who robs chooses to
be hanged. But this does not at all prove, that the death
which one or the other suffers is no punishment.
You go on: “Fire and brimstone, or manna, rained on the
earth, are only one and the same love. It was the same love
that preserved Noah, burned up Sodom, and overwhelmed
Pharaoh in the Red Sea.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., pp. 72,78.)
Surely nothing can equal this, unless you add, (which
indeed you must do, to be consistent with yourself) “It is
one and the same love which will say, ‘Come, ye blessed,’
and, ‘Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire.’”
You add: “‘Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth.’ Here
you have God's own word for it, nothing but love chasteneth.”
(Page 81.) We know his love chasteneth his children. Of
these only God is speaking here, as appears from the latter
clause of the sentence. And yet we cannot say even as to
them, “It is nothing but his love.” It is mercy mixed with
justice.
You cite one text more: “I have smitten you; Yet have
ye not returned to me;” (Amos iv. 9;) and say, “Now, how
is it possible for words to give stronger proof?” (Ibid.) Proof
of what? Not that God did not punish them; but that “ in
the midst of wrath He remembered mercy.”
To these texts of Scripture (wide enough of the point) you
subjoin: “The doctrine of atonement made by Christ is the
strongest demonstration, that the wrath to be atoned cannot
be in God.” (Page 85.) Who talks of wrath to be atoned?
“The wrath to be atoned” is neither sense nor English,
though it is a solecism you perpetually run into: (I hope,
486 EXTRACT OF A Lb TTER
not on purpose to puzzle the cause:) That the sin to be
atoned cannot be in God, we all allow; but it does not affect
the question.
Once more, to silence all contradiction at once, to stop the
mouths of all gainsayers, you say, “This (that there is no
anger, no vindictive justice in God, no punishment at all
inflicted by him) is openly asserted, constantly affirmed and
repeated, in the plainest letter of Scripture.” Whether this,
or the very reverse, is true, will appear from a few out of
numberless texts, which I shall barely set down, without any
comment, and leave to your cool consideration.
You say, (1.) There is no vindictive, avenging, or punitive
justice in God. (2.) There is no wrath or anger in God.
(3.) God inflicts no punishment on any creature, neither in
this world, nor that to come.
God says,—
(1) “The just Lord is in the midst of you.” (Zeph. iii. 5.)
“Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne.”
(Psalm lxxxix. 14.) “Wilt thou condemn him that is most
just P” (Job xxxiv. 17.) “He is excellent in power, and in
plenty of justice.” (xxxvii. 23.) “Just and true are thy ways,
O King of saints.” (Rev. xv. 3.) “Thou art just in all that is
brought upon us.” (Neh. ix. 33.) “There is no God beside
me, a just God and a Saviour.” (Isaiah xlv. 21.) “Whom
God hath set forth, that he might be just, and the justifier
of him that believeth in Jesus.” (Rom. iii. 25, 26.)
(2.) “The Lord heard their words, and was wroth.” (Deut.
i. 34.) “The Lord was wroth with me for your sakes.”
(iii. 26.) “I was wroth with my people.” (Isaiah xlvii. 6.)
“For his covetousness I was wroth.” (lvii. 17.) “And the
anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel.” (Num. xxv. 3.)
“His wrath is against them that forsake him.” (Ezra viii. 22.)
“Thou art very wroth with us.” (Lam. v. 22.) “Thou art
wroth, for we have sinned.” (Isaiah lxiv. 5.) “Who may
stand in thy sight when thou art angry?” (Psalm lxxvi. 7.)
“I have mingled my drink with weeping, because of thine
indignation and thy wrath.” (cii. 9, 10.) “In my wrath I
smote thee.” (Isaiah lx. 10.) “He hath visited in his anger.”
(Job xxxv. 15.) “God distributeth sorrows in his anger.”
(xxi. 17.) “I have seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.”
(Lam. iii. 1.) “I sware in my wrath, they shall not enter
into my rest.” (Psalm xcv. 11.) “He casteth upon them
TO THE REV. M.R. LAW, 487
the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation. He
made a way to his anger; he spared not their soul from
death.” (lxxviii.49, 50.) “At his wrath the earth shall trem
ble.” (Jer. x. 10.) “The land is desolate because of his anger.”
(xxv. 38.) “By his anger they are consumed.” (Job iv. 9.)
“The Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire
shall devour them.” (Psalm xxi. 9.) “The Lord turned not
from his wrath.” (2 Kings xxiii. 26.) “For all this his anger
is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.”
(Isaiah v. 25.) “The Lord is slow to anger, and of great
kindness; he will not always chide, neither keepeth he his
anger for ever.” (Psalm ciii. 8, 9.) “The Lord turned from
the fierceness of his anger.” (Joshua vii. 26.) “In wrath
remember mercy.” (Hab. iii. 2.) “Though thou wast angry,
thine anger is turned away.” (Isaiah xii. 1.) “Many a time
turned he his anger away.” (Psalm lxxviii. 38.)
(3) “I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked
for their iniquity.” (Isaiah xiii. 11.) “Behold, the Lord
cometh to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their
iniquity.” (xxvi. 21.) “Is not destruction to the wicked, and
a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity?” (Job
xxxi. 3.) “I will punish you according to the fruit of your
doings.” (Jer. xxi. 14.) “I will punish you for all your
iniquities.” (Amos iii. 2.) “If ye will not hearken unto me,
then I will punish you seven times more for your sins.” (Lev.
xxvi. 18.) “I will punish all that oppress them.” (Jer. xxx.20.)
Now, which am I to believe? God or man?
Your miserable philosophy leads you, in the Third place,
totally to deny the scripture doctrine of justification. Indeed,
you do not appear to have the least conception of the matter;
no, not even to know what the term justification means.
Accordingly, you affirm,
“Salvation, which all Divines agree includes both justifica
tion and sanctification, is nothing else but to be made like
Christ.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 53.)
“Regeneration is the whole of man’s salvation.” (Part II.,
p. 37.)
“Redemption is nothing else but the life of God in the
soul.” (Part I., p. 79.)
“The one only work of Christ as your Redeemer is to
raise into life the smothered spark of heaven in you.” (Spirit
of Love, Part II., p. 45.)
488 EXTRACT OF A LETTER,
“He is our atonement and reconciliation with God, because
by him we are set again in our first state of holiness.” (Part
I., p. 10.)
“The atonement of the divine wrath or justice,” (a mere
solecism, on which your whole reasoning for several pages is
built) “and the extinguishing of sin in the creature, are only
different expressions of the same thing.”(Part II.,p.86) Nay,
the former is an expression of nothing: It is flat nonsense.
“All that Christ does as an atonement, has no other opera
tion but that of renewing the fallen nature of man.” (Page 106.)
Here are seven peremptory assertions. But till they are
fully proved I cannot give up my Bible.
But you grow bolder and bolder, and say, “The satisfaction
of Christ is represented in all our systems of divinity, as a
satisfaction made to God; and the sufferings and death of
Christ, as that which could only avail with God to have mercy
on man. Nay, what is still worse, if possible, the ground, and
nature, and efficacy of this great transaction between God and
man is often explained by debtor and creditor; man as having
contracted a debt with God, which he could not pay, and God
as having a right to insist upon the payment of it.” (Page 91.)
“There is no wrath in God, no fictitious atonement, no
folly of debtor and creditor.” (Page 131.)
“What is still worse, if possible! Folly of debtor and cre
ditor!” Surely I would not have spoken thus, unless I had
been above the Son of God.
“After this manner pray ye, Forgive us our debts as we
forgive our debtors.” (Matthew vi. 9, 12.) “And Jesus said,
There was a certain creditor which had two debtors.” Luke
vii. 41.) “The kingdom of heaven is likened to a king who
would take account of his servants. And one was brought unto
him who owed him ten thousand talents. But forasmuch as
he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and
all that he had. The servant fell down, saying, Lord, have
patience with me. And his Lord was moved with compassion,
and forgave him the debt.” Yet, afterwards, on his unmerci
fulness to his fellow-servant, he retracted that forgiveness;
“ and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all
that was due unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly Father
do unto you also, if ye from your heart forgive not every one
his brother their trespasses.” (Matthew xviii. 23, &c.)
Is not man here represented as having contracted a debt with
TO THE REV, MR, LAW. 489
God which he cannot pay? and God as having, nevertheless
a right to insist upon the payment of it? and a right, if he
hath not to pay, of delivering him to the tormentors? And is
it not expressly asserted, that God will, in some cases, claim
this right, and use it to the uttermost P Upon whom, then,
lights this imputation of folly, and of “what is still worse?”
“Lord,lay not this sin to their charge I Forgive them, for
they know not what they do.”
But if the Son of God did not die to atone for our sins,
what did he die for ?
You answer: “He died,
“(1.) To extinguish our own hell within us.” (Spirit of
Prayer, Part II., p. 159.)
Nay, the Scripture represents this, not as the first, but the
second, end of his death.
“(2.) To show that he was above the world, death, hell, and
Satan.” (Pages 130, 131.)
Where is it written that he died for this end? Could he
not have done this without dying at all?
“(3.) His death was the only possible way of overcoming all
the evil that was in fallen man.” (Page 129.)
This is true, supposing he atoned for our sins. But if this
supposition be not made, his death was not the only possible
way whereby the Almighty could have overcome all things.
“(4.) Through this he got power to give the same victory to
all his brethren of the human race.” (Page (132.)
Had he not this power before? Otherwise, how was he
O ov, He that is ; “God over all, blessed for ever?”
If Christ died for no other ends than these, what need was
there of his being more than a creature?
As you seem never to have employed your thoughts on
justification or redemption, in the Scripture sense, I beg leave
to subjoin a plain account thereof, wrote by a woman of the
last century:—*
“(1.) Christ hath acquired for us a right to eternal life by his
satisfaction and merits alone. Neither our repentance nor
amendment can be any satisfaction for sin. It is only ‘through
his blood that we have redemption.” (Ephesians i. 7.) This alone
“cleanseth us from all sin.” (1 John i. 7.) And herein “was the
* Annae Mariac a Schurman EvkAmpua, Pars II, p. 118, &c.
490 EXTRACT OF A LETTER,
love of God manifested towards us, that he sent his Son to be
the propitiation for our sins.” (1 John iv. 9, 10.) So was the
Lord ‘our righteousness;’ (Jer. xxiii. 6;) without which we
could not have been justified. As man owed his Creator the
perfect obedience of his whole life, or a punishment propor
tioned to his transgression, it was impossible he could satisfy
him by a partial and imperfect obedience. Neither could he
merit anything from Him to whom he owed all things. There
was need therefore of a Mediator who could repair the immense
wrong he had done to the Divine Majesty, satisfy the Supreme
Judge, who had pronounced the sentence of death against the
transgressors of his law, suffer in the place of his people, and
merit for them pardon, holiness, and glory. Accordingly, he
“gave himself a ransom for all, (1 Tim. ii. 6) and “by himself
purged our sins.” (Heb. i. 3.) “He loved us, and gave himself
for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God.” (Eph. v. 2.) So we
read, God “raised him from the dead; who was delivered for
our offences, and raised again for our justification: Because
our Surety’s being discharged by the will and act of the Judge
himself, is a full proof that he has paid our whole debt.
“(2.) Nor is there any more sure way to the imitation of
Christ, than faith in Christ crucified, in Him ‘who suffered
for us, leaving us an example,’ that we might tread in his
steps; who ‘died for us, while we were yet enemies,” that we
might be ‘justified by his blood.’ (Rom. v. 9.) Yet it is true,
this doctrine finds no place in those who are proud of heart,
who love their own reasonings, and have notaste for ‘the sincere
milk of the word. But it is precious to them who feel the
weight of their sins, who know they ‘are by nature children
of wrath,’ and, at the same time, utterly incapable either of
paying the debt, of rising from the death of sin, of conquering
themselves, the world, and the devil, or of meriting eternal life.
“(3.) The origin and cause of our redemption is, the ineffable
love of God the Father, who willed to redeem us by the blood
of his own Son;—the grace of the Son, who freely took our
curse upon him, and imparts his blessing and merits to us;—
and the Holy Spirit, who communicates the love of the Father
and the grace of the Son to our hearts.
“When we speak of this, and of the satisfaction of Christ,
we speak of the inmost mystery of the Christian faith. There
ore all the inventions of men ought now to be kept at the
TO THE REW, MR, LAW, 491
utmost distance; nor can anything certain be established, with
out the express authority of Scripture. And herein is offered
first to our consideration, the only-begotten Son of God, as the
Head of the redeemed, the righteous Servant of God, who by
the knowledge of himself “shall justify many. (Isaiah liii. 11.)
Him God hath constituted the ‘surety of that better covenant,’
(Heb. vii.22,)—the covenant of grace. And how clearly is his
execution of this office described in the fifty-third chapter of
Isaiah ! where the Prophet describes him as ‘bearing our
griefs, or sins, ‘and carrying our sorrows. (Verse 4.) “All
we,” says he, “like sheep have gone astray; we have turned
every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him
the iniquity of us all.” (Verse 6.) All mankind have forsaken
God, and placed their own will upon his throne, and so
were liable to the highest punishment, when the Mediator
voluntarily interposed himself between them and the just
Judge. And the incomprehensible love of God, that he might
spare them, ‘spared not his own Son.” This is shown in those
words: ‘The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. It
was on this account that ‘He was oppressed and afflicted, and
brought as a lamb to the slaughter;’ (verse 7;) while God
‘made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him.’ (2 Cor. v. 21.)
This is expressed in the ninth and tenth verses: ‘He had done
no violence, nor was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it pleased
the Lord to bruise him, when he ‘made his soul an offering for
sin.” How exactly do his own words agree with these: “I am
the good Shepherd, and I lay down my life for the sheep !”
(John x. 14, 15.) For them “was he taken from prison and from
judgment, and cut off out of the land of the living.” (Isai. liii.
8.) How doth God herein “commend his love towards’ us, in
‘delivering up his own Son to die for us!’ Yea, God “was
pleased with bruising him, when, clothed with our flesh, and
bearing our sins, he manifested to angels and men his infinite
love of divine justice, till, being ‘made obedient unto death,
even the death of the cross,’ he satisfied its utmost demand.
“It was then God “was pleased to bruise him, when “he
made his soul an offering for sin. He then appeared before the
Judge of all, under ‘the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, as
the Apostle speaks. And therefore God was pleased ‘to condemn
sin in the flesh;” (Rom. viii.3,4;) to ‘bruise him” whosustained
492 EXTRACT OF A LETTER
the person of sinners. But this was only the prelude of a
glorious victory. Therefore, the Prophet adds: ‘He shall
see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of
the Lord shall prosper in his hand. (Isai. liii. 10.) After
repeating (verse 11) the sum of all, “He shall bear their
iniquities, he subjoins the cause of his reward: ‘Because he
poured out his soul unto death, and was numbered with the
transgressors; for he bore the sin of many, and made inter
cession for the transgressors.” (Verse 12.)
“The fifth verse, of which I have not yet spoken, renders
this great truth still more evident: ‘He was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: The chastise
ment of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are
healed. He loved his own body less than his mystical body,
the Church, and therefore gave the former for the latter, “to
redeem and purchase it with his own blood, by paying himself
as a ransom for it. Hereby “nailing the handwriting which
was against us to his cross, he took it out of the way,’ and so
became “our peace.”
“(4.) From all which it appears, that Christ was not only a
pattern, but, first and principally, the surety of the new cove
nant, yea, a sacrifice and a victim for the sins of his people;
‘whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in
his blood.’ (Rom. iii.25.) And that precious sacrifice offered
on the cross is the very centre and marrow of the gospel. To
that one offering whereby our great High Priest ‘hath perfected
for ever them that are sanctified,’ (Heb. x. 14) all the ancient
sacrifices referred, as well as numberless other types and figures.
“All these, says the Apostle, “were shadows of things to
come; but the body is Christ.” (Col. ii. 17.) He it was, who,
‘not by the blood of bulls and goats, but by his own blood,
entered into the holiest, having obtained eternal redemption
for us.” (Heb. ix.12.) In consequence of this we are accepted,
‘through the offering of the body of Christ once for all.’ (x. 10.)
In all the ancient types and figures, “without shedding of
blood there was no remission; which was intended to show,
there never could be any without the blood of the great
Antitype; without that grand propitiatory sacrifice, which
(like the figure of it) was to be offered “without the gate.’
“Indeed, the whole worship of the Old Testament teaches
nothing else but the satisfaction made by the blood of Christ,
and our reconciliation with God thereby: Hence he is styled,
TO THE REV. M.R. LAW. 493
“The Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world; with
a view to the paschal lamb, and the other lambs that were
offered in sacrifice: On which account the inhabitants of
heaven likewise ‘give glory, and sing a new song, because he
hath redeemed’ them ‘unto God by his blood, out of every
tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation.” (Rev. v. 9.)
“(5.) To this might be added the numerous figures that
occur in the lives of the old patriarchs, prophets, and kings.
But it may suffice to add to the preceding only two testimonies
more of the manner of our redemption by a proper sacrifice;
the one that of St. Paul,—‘Christ hath delivered us from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for us; as it is written,
Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree;’ (Gal. iii. 13;)
the other of St. Peter,-‘Who himself bore our sins in his
own body on the tree.” (1 Peter ii. 24.) From all this abun
dantly appears the substitution of the Messiah in the place
of his people, thereby atoning for their sins, and restoring
them to the favour of God.
“These are the points which are so vehemently opposed by
Socinus and his followers, who rob Christ of the principal
part of his priestly office, and leave him only that of inter
ceding for us by prayer; as if any intercession were worthy
of Christ, which had not his full satisfaction and propitiatory
sacrifice for its foundation. Indeed these cannot be put
asunder, as sufficiently appears from the words cited before,—
‘He bore the sin of many, and made intercession for the
transgressors; where the Holy Ghost closely joins his inter
cession with his satisfaction made by sacrifice. These and a
thousand other solid arguments that might be advanced in
proof of this fundamental doctrine, overturn all the cavils
that flow from corrupt reason, which indeed are weak and
thin as a spider’s web.”
I have dwelt the longer on this head, because of its inex
pressible moment. For whether or no the doctrine of justifi
cation by faith be, as all Protestants thought at the time of
the Reformation, articulus stantis vel cadentis Ecclesiae, “a
doctrine without which there can be no Christian church;”
most certainly there can be none where the whole notion of
justification is ridiculed and exploded, unless it be such a
Church as includes, according to your account, every child
of man, of which, consequently, Turks, Deists, and Pagans
are as real members as the most pious Christian under the
494 EXTRACT OF A LETTER,
sun. I cannot but observe, that this is the very essence of
Deism; no serious Infidel need contend for more. I would
therefore no more set one of this opinion to convert Deists,
than I would set a Turk to convert Mahometans.
4. As every one that is justified is born of God, I am natu
rally led to consider, in the next place, (so far as it is delivered
in the tracts now before us,) your doctrine of the new birth.
“In the day that Adam ate of the tree, he died; that is,
his heavenly spirit, with its heavenly body, were extinguished.
To make that heavenly spirit and body to be alive again in
man, this is regeneration.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 9.)
O no; this is not; nor anything like it. This is the unscrip
tural dream of Behmen’s heated imagination.
“See the true reason why only the Son of God could be
our Redeemer. It is because he alone could be able to bring
to life again that celestial spirit and body which had died in
Adam.” (Ibid.)
Not so; but he alone could be our Redeemer, because he
alone, “by that one oblation of himself once offered” could
make “a sufficient sacrifice and satisfaction for the sins of
the whole world.”
“See also why a man must “be born again of water and of
the Spirit.” He must be born again of the Spirit, because
Adam’s heavenly spirit was lost.” (Ibid.) Nay, but because
Adam had lost the inward image of God, wherein he was
created. And no less than the almighty Spirit of God could
renew that image in his soul.
“He must be born of water, because that heavenly body
which Adam lost was formed out of the heavenly materiality,
which is called water.” (Ibid.)
Vain philosophy | The plain meaning of the expression,
“Except a man be born of water,” is neither more nor less
than this, “Except he be baptized.” And the plain reason
why he ought to be thus born of water is, because God hath
appointed it. He hath appointed it as an outward and visible
sign of an inward and spiritual grace, which grace is, “a
death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness.”
“The necessity of our regaining our first heavenly body is
the necessity” (I presume you mean, the ground of the neces
sity) “of our eating the body and blood of Christ.” (Page 10.)
Neither can I believe this, till I find it in the Bible. I am
there taught to believe, that our “spiritually receiving the body
TO THE REV. M.R. LAW, 495
aud blood of Christ,” which is most eminently done in the
Lord’s supper, is necessary to “strengthen and refresh our
souls, as our bodies are by the bread and wine.”
“The necessity of having again our first heavenly spirit is
shown by the necessity of our being baptized with the Holy
Ghost !” (Ibid.)
No. That we “must be baptized with the Holy Ghost,”
implies this and no more, that we cannot be “renewed in
righteousness and true holiness” any otherwise than by
being over-shadowed, quickened, and animated by that
blessed Spirit.
“Our fall is nothing else but the falling of our soul from
its heavenly body and spirit, into a bestial body and spirit.
Our redemption” (you mean, our new birth) “is nothing else
but the regaining our first angelic spirit and body.” (Ibid.)
What an account is here of the Christian redemption How
would Dr. Tindal have smiled at this ! Where you say, “Re
demption is nothing else but the life of God in the soul,” you
allow an essential part of it. But here you allow it to be no
thing else but that which is no part of it at all; nothing else
but a whim, a madman’s dream, a chimera, a mere non-entity!
“This,” (angelic spirit and body,) “in Scripture, is called
our ‘new’ or ‘inward man.’” (Ibid.)
The “inward man” in Scripture means one thing, the
“new man” another. The former means, the mind, opposed
to the body: “Though our outward man,” our body, “perish,
yet the inward man,” the mind or soul, “is renewed day by
day.” (2 Cor. iv. 16.) The latter means, universal holiness:
“Put off the old man, which is corrupt; and put on the new
man, which, after God, is created in righteousness and true
holiness.” (Eph. iv. 22, 24.) But neither does the one nor
the other ever mean “this angelic spirit and body.”
You yourself know better what the new birth is. You
describe it better, though still with amazing queerness of
language, where you say, -
“Man hath the light and water of an outward nature to
quench the wrath of his own life, and the light and meekness
of Christ, as a seed born in him, to bring forth anew the
image of God.”
But it is not strange, that you speak so confusedly and
darkly, as you generally do, of the new birth, seeing you seem
to have no conception of that faith whereby we are born again.
496 EXTRACT OF A LETTER,
This abundantly appears from your frank declaration,
“We are neither saved by faith, nor by works.” (Spirit of
Prayer, Part II., p. 36.) Flatly contrary to the declaration
of St. Paul, “By grace we are saved through faith.”
To put the matter out of dispute, you declare that you mean
by faith, “a desire to be one with Christ.” (Part I., p. 50.)
Again: “The desire of turning to God is the coming of
Christ into the soul. This faith will save thee.” (Page 76.)
So, in your judgment, saving faith is, “a desire of coming
to God, or of being one with Christ.” I know the contrary
from experience. I had this desire many years before I even
knew what saving faith was.
Faith is so far from being only this desire, that it is no
desire at all. It differs from all desire toto genere, although
doubtless all good desires accompany it. It is, according
to St. Paul, an exeyxos, an “evidence” or “conviction”
(which is totally different from a desire) “of things not
seen,” a supernatural, a divine evidence and conviction of
the things which God hath revealed in his word; of this in
particular, that the Son of God hath loved me and given
himself for me. Whosoever hath this faith is born of God.
Whosoever thus believeth is saved; and if he endure therein
to the end, shall be saved everlastingly.
The process of this work in the soul, of the present salva
tion which is through faith, you likewise describe confusedly
and obscurely. The sum of what you say is this:—
“The painful sense of what you are, kindled into a working
state of sensibility by the light of God, is the light and fire
from whence the spirit of prayer proceeds. In its first kind
ling, nothing is found but pain, wrath, and darkness: And
therefore its first prayer is all humility.” (Part II., p. 172.)
Would it not be more intelligible if one had said, “The con
vincing Spirit of God gives you to see and feel that you are a
poor undone, guilty, helpless sinner: At the same time, he in
cites you to cry for help to Him who is “mighty to save?” This
is true. But it is not true, that, in the first kindling of this
fire, in plain terms, during the first convictions, “nothing is
found but pain, wrath, and darkness.” Very often there are
found even in the first conviction, sweet gleams of light, touches
of joy, of hope, and of love, mixed with sorrow and fear. Much
less is it true, that the first prayer of an awakening sinner is all
humility. (Ibid.) On the contrary, a sinner newly awakened
TO THE REV. M.R. LAW, 497
has always more or less confidence in himself, in what he is,
or has, or does, and will do; which is not humility, but
downright pride. And this mingles itself with all his prayer,
till the day-star is just rising in his heart.
You add: “This prayer is met by the divine love, and
changed into hymns, and songs, and thanksgivings.” (Ibid.)
It is so, when “being justified by faith, we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ.” “This state of fervour
melts away all earthly passions and affections, and leaves no
inclination in the soul, but to delight in God alone.” (Ibid.)
It is certain, this is the genuine effect of “the love of God
shed abroad in the heart;” which expression ef St. Paul, I
suppose, means the same with “this state of fervour.” “Then
its prayer changes again, and continually stands in fulness of
faith, in purity of love, in absolute resignation to do and be
what and how his Beloved pleaseth. This is the last state of
the spirit of prayer, and is our highest union with God in this
life.” (Page 173.)
Assuredly it is: Fulness of faith, beholding, with open face,
the glory of the Lord; purity of love, free from all mixture of
its contrary, yielding the whole heart to God; absolute resig
nation, excluding every degree of self-will, sacrificing every
thought, word, and work to God. But do we change directly,
from our first love, into the highest union with God? Surely
not. There is an intermediate state between that of “babes
in Christ,” and that of fathers. You yourself are very sensible
there is, although you here speak as if there were not.
You go on : “People who have long dwelt in this fervour
are frighted when coldness seizes upon them;” (page 174;)
that is, when they lose it, when their love grows cold. And
certainly, well they may, if this fervour was to bring them to
“fulness of faith, purity of love, and absolute resignation.”
Well they may be affrighted, if that fervour be lost before “it
has done its work.”
Indeed, they might be affrighted when it is not lost, if that
which follows be true : “Fervour is good, and ought to be
loved; but distress and coldness are better. It brings the soul
nearer to God than the fervour did.” (Pages 175, 176.)
The fervour, you said, brought the soul to “its highest
union with God in this life.” Can coldness do more? Can it
bring us to an union higher than the highest?
VOL. IX. K. K.
498 EXTRACT OF A LETTER
To explain this, you say, “The fervour made the soul delight
in God. But it was too much an own delight. It was a fancied
self-holiness, and occasioned rest and satisfaction in itself, in
a spiritual self.” (Page 175.) Either fervour does bring us to
purity of love, and absolute resignation, or not. To say it does
not, contradicts what you said before: To say, it does, contra
dicts what you say now. For if it does, we cannot say, “Cold
ness does the work which fervour did in a higher degree.”
I should not insist so long on these glaring inconsistencies,
were not thedoctrine you are here labouring to support abso
lutely inconsistent with that of St. Paul, and naturally pro
ductive of the most fatal consequences. St. Paul asserts, the
present kingdom of God in the soul is “righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.” He continually teaches,
that these, which God hath joined, man ought not to put
asunder; that peace and joy should never be separated from
righteousness, being the divine means both of preserving and
increasing it; and that we may, yea, ought, to rejoice ever
more, till the God of peace sanctifies us wholly. But if these
things are so, then “distress and coldness are ” not “better”
than fervent love, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
Again: The doctrine, that it is better and more profitable
for the soul to lose its sense of the love of God than to keep
it, is not only unscriptural, but naturally attended with the
most fatal consequences. It directly tends to obstruct, if not
destroy, the work of God in the heart, by causing men to bless
themselves in those ways which damp the fervour of their
affections; and to imagine they are considerably advanced in
grace, when they have grieved, yea, quenched, the Spirit.
Nay, but let all who now feel the love of God in their hearts,
and “walk in the light as he is in the light,” labour, by every
possible means, to “keep themselves in the love of God.” Let
them be ever “fervent in spirit;” let them “rejoice evermore,”
and stir up the gift of God which is in them. And if, at any
time, “coldness seizes upon them,” let them be assured, they
have grieved the Spirit of God. Let them be affrighted; let
them fear lest they sink lower and lower; yea, into total
deadness and hardness of heart. At the peril of their souls,
let them not rest in darkness, but examine themselves, search
out their spirits, cry vehemently to God, and not cease till he
restores the light of his countenance.
TO THE REV. M.R. L.A.W. 499
5. If this doctrine of the profitableness of coldness above
fervour directly tends to make believers easy, while they are
sliding back into unbelief, you have another which tends as
directly to make them easy who never believed at all; I mean,
that of Christ in every man. What you advance on this head,
I desire next to consider, as the importance of it requires.
“The birth of Christ is already begun in every one. Jesus
is already within thee, (whoever thou art,) living, stirring,
calling, knocking at the door of thy heart.” (Spirit of Prayer,
Part I., p. 55.)
“Every man has Christ in his spirit, lying there as in a state
of insensibility and death.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p.34)
But he is living, for all that. And though “in a state of
insensibility,” he is “stirring, calling, knocking at the door
of the heart l”
“Something of heaven” (you use this phrase as equivalent
with Christ) “lies, in every soul, in a state of inactivity and
death.” (Page 35.)
“All the holy nature, tempers, and Spirit of Christ lie hid
as a seed in thy soul.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 68.)
But are they active or inactive? living and stirring, or in
a state of insensibility and death?
“Thou art poor, and blind, and naked, and miserable, while
all the peace and joy of God are within thee.” (Page 74.)
This is most wonderful of all ! Are these within him who
is “dead in sin,” who is a “stranger to all that is holy and
heavenly ?” If they are, how can he be miserable, who has
“all the peace and joy of God within him?” Will you say,
“They are in him, but he does not feel them?” Nay, then,
they are not in him. I have peace in me no longer than I
feel peace; I feel joy, or I have it not.
“See here the extent of the Catholic Church of Christ ! It
takes in all the world.” (Page 56.)
So Jews, Mahometans, Dsists, Heathens, are all members
of the Church of Christ ! Should we not add devils too,
seeing these also are to dwell with us in heaven?
“Poor sinner, Christ dwelleth in the centre, the fund or
bottom, of thy soul.” (Page 59.)
What is this? What is either the centre, the top, or bot
tom of a spirit?
“When Adam fell, this centre of his soul became a prisoner
2 K. 2
500 EXTRACT OF A LETTER,
in an earthly animal. But from the moment God spoke
Christ into Adam, all the treasures of the divine nature, the
light and Spirit of God, came again into man, into the centre
of his soul.” (Page 60.)
I cannot find in the Bible when that was, when “God
spoke Christ into Adam.”
We come now to the proofs of these strong assertions:—
And, (1) “No faith could ever begin, unless every man
had Christ in him.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 34.)
This proposition needs just as much proof itself, as that
which it is brought to prove.
(2) “Unless the remains of the perfect love of God were in
every man, it would be impossible he should ever love God
at all.” (Page 38.)
Why so? Cannot God give his love this moment to one
who never loved him before ?
(3.) “Unless Christ was hidden in the soul, there could not
be the least beginning of man’s salvation. For what could
begin to desire heaven, unless something of heaven was hid in
the soul?” (Page 35.)
What could? Why, any soul which had nothing but hell
in it before, the moment grace was infused from above.
(4) “The Ten Commandments lay hid in men's souls,”
(how?) “till called into sensibility by writing them on stone.
Just so Christ lies in the soul, till awakened by the media
torial office of the holy Jesus.” (Page 37.)
This is only assertion still, not proof. But what do you
mean by the mediatorial office of Christ? And how is Christ
“awakened by the mediatorial office of the holy Jesus?”
(5) “The sea cannot be moved by any other wind than
that which had its birth from the sea itself.” (Page 40.)
I think it can. I have seen it “moved by a wind which
had its birth from the’’ land.
(6) “The musician cannot make his instrument give any
other melody than that which lies hid in it, as its own inward
state.” (Page 42.)
Did the tune, then, lie hid in the trumpet, before the trum
peter biew? And was this tune, or another, or all that ever
were and will be played on it, the inward state of the trumpet?
“No more can the mind have any grief or joy but that
which is from itself.” (Page 43.)
TO THE REV. M.R. LAW. 501
An unhappy comparison | For the instrument can have
no melody or sound at all from itself; and most unhappily
applied to the operations of God upon the souls of men. For
has God no more power over my soul, than I have over a
musical instrument?
These are your arguments to prove that Christ is in every
man: A blessing which St. Paul thought was peculiar to
believers. He said, “Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates,” unbelievers. You say, Christ is in you, whether
ye be reprobates or no. “If any man hath not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his,” saith the Apostle. Yea, but “every
man,” saith Mr. Law, “hath the Spirit of God. The Spirit
of Christ is in every soul.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 63.)
“He that hath not the Son of God hath not life,” saith St.
John. But Mr. Law saith, “Every man hath the Son of
God.” Sleep on, then, ye sons of Belial, and take your rest;
ye are all safe; for “he that hath the Son hath life.”
There can hardly be any doctrine under heaven more
agreeable to flesh and blood; nor any which more directly
tends to prevent the very dawn of conviction, or, at least, to
hinder its deepening in the soul, and coming to a sound issue.
None more naturally tends to keep men asleep in sin, and to
lull asleep those who begin to be awakened. Only persuade
one of this, “Christ is already in thy heart; thou hast now
the inspiration of his Spirit; all the peace and joy of God
are within thee, yea, all the holy nature, tempers, and Spirit
of Christ;” and you need do no more; the siren song quiets
all his sorrow and fear. As soon as you have sewed this
pillow to his soul, he sinks back into the sleep of death.
6. But you have made an ample amends for this, by pro
viding so short and easy a way to heaven; not a long,
narrow, troublesome, round-about path, like that described in
the Bible; but one that will as compendiously save the soul,
as Dr. Ward’s “pill and drop” heal the body: A way so
plain, that they who follow it need no Bible, no human
teaching, no outward means whatever; being every one able
to stand alone, every one sufficient for himself!
“The first step is, to turn wholly from yourself, and to
give up yourself wholly unto God.” (Part II., p. 22.)
If it be, no flesh living shall be saved. How grievously do
we stumble at the threshold! Do you seriously call this the first
502 EXTRACT OF A LETTER,
step,-to turn wholly from myself, and give up myself wholly
unto God? Am I then to step first on the highest round of
the ladder? Not unless you turn it upside down. The way
to heaven would be short indeed, if the first and the last
step were all one; if we were to step as far the moment we
set out, as we can do till we enter into glory.
But what do you mean by giving up myself to God? You.
answer: “Every sincere wish and desire after Christian
virtues, is giving up yourself to him, and the very perfection
of faith.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 217.)
Far, very far from it: I know from the experience of a
thousand persons, as well as from Scripture, and the very
reason of the thing, that a man may have sincere desires.
after all these, long before he attains them. He may sincerely
wish to give himself up to God, long before he is able so to
do. He may desire this, not only before he has the per
fection, but before he has any degree, of saving faith.
More marvellous still is that which follows: “You may
easily and immediately, by the mere turning of your mind,
have all these virtues,—patience, meekness, humility, and
resignation to God.” (Page 212.)
Who may ? Not I; not you; not any that is born of a.
woman; as is proved by the daily experience of all that know
what patience, meekness, or resignation means.
But how shall I know whether I have faith or not? “I will
give you an infallible touchstone. Retire from all conversation.
only for a month. Neither write, nor read, nor debate anything
with yourself. Stop all the former workings of your heart and
mind, and stand all this month in prayer to God. If your heart
cannot give itself up in this manner to prayer, be fully assured
you are an infidel.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part II., p. 163.)
If this be so, the infidels are a goodly company l if every
man be of that number who cannot “stop all the former
workings of his heart and mind, and stand thus in prayer to:
God for a month together.”
But I would gladly know by what authority you give us this
touchstone; and how you prove it to be infallible. I read
nothing like it in the oracles of God. I cannot find one word
there of “refraining from all conversation, from writing, and
reading, for a month.” (I fear you make no exception in favour
of public worship or reading the word of God.) Where does
TO THE REV. M.R. L.A.W. 503
the Bible speak of this? of stopping for a month, or a day,
all the former workings of my heart and mind? of refraining
from all converse with the children of God, and from reading
his word? It would be no wonder, should any man make
this unscriptural (if not anti-scriptural) experiment, if Satan
were permitted to work in him “a strong delusion,” so that
he should “believe a lie.”
Nearly related to this touchstone is the direction which
you give elsewhere: “Stop all self-activity; be retired, silent,
passive, and humbly attentive to the inward light.” (Part I.,
pp. 77, 82.)
But beware “the light which is in thee be not darkness; ”
as it surely is, if it agree not with “the law and the testi
mony.” “Open thy heart to all its impressions,” if they
agree with that truly infallible touchstone. Otherwise regard
no impression of any kind, at the peril of thy soul,—“wholly
stopping the workings of thy own reason and judgment.”
I find no such advice in the word of God. And I fear they
who stop the workings of their reason, lie the more open to
the workings of their imagination.
There is abundantly greater danger of this when we fancy
we have no longer need to “be taught of man.” To this
your late writings directly lead. One who admires them
will be very apt to cry out, “I have found all that I need
know of God, of Christ, of myself, of heaven, of hell, of sin,
of grace, and of salvation.” (Part II., p. 4.) And the rather,
because you yourself affirm roundly, “When once we appre
hend the all of God, and our own nothingness,” (which a
man may persuade himself he does, in less than four-and
twenty hours,) “it brings a kind of infallibility into the soul
in which it dwells; all that is vain, and false, and deceitful, is
forced to vanish and fly before it.” (Part I., p. 95.) Agree
ably to which, you tell your convert, “You have no questions
to ask of any body.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p.218.) And
if, notwithstanding this, he will ask, “But how am I to keep
up the flame of love?” you answer, “I wonder you should
want to know this. Does a blind, or sick, or lame man want
to know how he should desire sight, health, or limbs?” (Spirit
of Prayer, Part II., p. 165.) No; but he wants to know how
he should attain, and how he should keep, them. And he
who has attained the love of God, may still want to know
how he shall keep it. And he may still inquire, “May I
504 EXTRACT OF A LETTER,
not take my own passions, or the suggestions of evil spirits,
for the workings of the Spirit of God?” (Page 198.) To this
you answer, “Every man knows when he is governed by the
spirit of wrath, envy, or covetousness, as easily and as cer
tainly as he knows when he is hungry.” (Ibid.) Indeed he
does not; neither as easily nor as certainly. Without great
care, he may take wrath to be pious zeal, envy to be virtuous
emulation, and covetousness to be Christian prudence or
laudable frugality. “Now, the knowledge of the Spirit of
God in yourself is as perceptible as covetousness.” Perhaps
so; for this is as difficultly perceptible as any temper of the
human soul. “And liable to no more delusion.” Indeed it
need not ; for this is liable to ten thousand delusions.
You add: “His spirit is more distinguishable from all
other spirits, than any of your natural affections are from one
another.” (Page 199.) Suppose joy and grief: Is it more
distinguishable from all other spirits, than these are from one
another? Did any man ever mistake grief for joy? No, not
from the beginning of the world. But did none ever mistake
nature for grace? Who will be so hardy as to affirm this?
But you set your pupil as much above the being taught by
books, as being taught by men. “Seek,” say you, “for help
no other way, neither from men, nor books; but wholly
leave yourself to God.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 225.)
But how can a man “leave himself wholly to God,” in the
total neglect of his ordinances? The old Bible way is, to
“leave ourselves wholly to God,” in the constant use of all
the means he hath ordained. And I cannot yet think the
new is better, though you are fully persuaded it is. “There
are two ways,” you say, “ of attaining goodness and virtue;
the one by books or the ministry of men, the other by an
inward birth. The former is only in order to the latter.”
This is most true, that all the externals of religion are in
order to the renewal of our soul in righteousness and true
holiness. But it is not true, that the external way is one,
and the internal way another. There is but one scriptural
way, wherein we receive inward grace, through the outward
means which God hath appointed.
Some might think that when you advised, “not to seek help
from books,” you did not include the Bible. But you clear up
this, where you answer the objection, of your not esteeming the
Bible enough. You say, “How could you more magnify John
TO THE REV. M.R. L.A.W. 505
the Baptist, than by going from his teaching, to be taught by
that Christ to whom he directed you? Now, the Bible can
have no other office or power, than to direct you to Christ.
How then can you more magnify the Bible than by going
from its teaching, to be taught by Christ?” So you set Christ
and the Bible in flat opposition to each other l And is this the
way we are to learn of him? Nay, but we are taught of him,
not by going from the Bible, but by keeping close to it. Both
by the Bible and by experience we know, that his word and
his Spirit act in connexion with each other. And thus it is,
that by Christ continually teaching and strengthening him
through the Scripture, “the man of God is made perfect, and
throughly furnished for every good word and work.”
According to your veneration for the Bible, is your regard
for public worship and for the Lord’s supper. “Christ,” you
say, “is the Church or temple of God within thee. There the
supper of the Lamb is kept. When thou art well grounded in
this inward worship, thou wilt have learned to live unto God
above time and place. For every day will be Sunday to thee;
and wherever thou goest, thou wilt have a Priest, a church, and
an altar along with thee.” (Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 73.)
The plain inference is, Thou wilt not need to make any
difference between Sunday and other days. Thou wilt need
no other church than that which thou hast always along with
thee; no other supper, worship, Priest, or altar. Be well
grounded in this inward worship, and it supersedes all the rest.
This is right pleasing to flesh and blood; and I could most
easily believe it, if I did not believe the Bible. But that
teaches me inwardly to worship God, as at all times and in
all places, so particularly on his own day, in the congregation
of his people, at his altar, and by the ministry of those his
servants whom he hath given for this very thing, “for the
perfecting of the saints,” and with whom he will be to the
end of the world.
Extremely dangerous therefore is this other gospel, which
leads quite wide of the gospel of Christ. And what must the
consequence be, if we thus “break,” yea, “and teach men so,”
not “one” only, neither “the least,” of “his commandments?”
Even that we “shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven.” God grant this may not fall on you or me !
7. However, whether we have a place in heaven or not, you
are very sure we shall have none in hell. For there is no hell
506 EXTRACT OF A LETTER
in rerum naturá, “no such place in the universe.” You
declare this over and over again, in great variety of expres
sions. It may suffice to mention two or three: “Hell is no
penalty prepared or inflicted by God.” (Spirit of Prayer,
Part II, p. 33.) “Damnation is only that which springs up
within you.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 47.) “Hell and
damnation are nothing but the various operations of self.”
(Spirit of Prayer, Part I., p. 79.)
I rather incline to the account published a few years ago, by
a wise and pious man, (the late Bishop of Cork) where he is
speaking of theimprovement of human knowledge by revelation.
Some of his words are: “Concerning future punishments, we
learn from revelation only, (1.) That they are both for soul
and body, which are distinguished in Scripture by “the worm
that dieth not,’ and ‘the fire which never shall be quenched:”
And accordingly we are bid to “fear him who is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell. Upon which I shall only
remark, that whereas we find by experience, the body and
soul in this life are not capable of suffering the extremity of
pain and anguish at the same time, insomuch that the greatest
anguish of mind is lost and diverted by acute and pungent
pain of body; yet we learn from Scripture, that in hell the
wicked will be subject to extreme torments of both together.”
(Procedure, &c., of Human Understanding, p. 350.)
“(2.) That the chief cause of their eternal misery will be
an eternal exclusion from the beatific vision of God. This
exclusion seems to be the only punishment to which we can
now conceive a pure spirit liable. And according as all
intelligent beings are at a less or greater distance from this
fountain of all happiness, so they are necessarily more or less
miserable or happy.
“(3.) That one part of those punishments will be by fire,
than which we have not any revelation more express and
positive. And as it is an instance of great goodness in God,
that the joys of heaven are represented to us under the
figurative images of light and glory and a kingdom, and that
the substance shall exceed the utmost of our conception; so
it is an argument of his strict justice, that future punishments
are more literally threatened and foretold.
“(4.) The eternity of these punishments is revealed as plainly
as words can express it. And the difficulty of that question,
‘What proportion endless torments can bear to momentary
TO THE REV. M.R. LAW. 507
sin,” is quite removed by considering, that the punishments
denounced are not sanctions entirely arbitrary, but are withal
so many previous warnings or declarations of the matural
tendency of sin itself. So that an unrepenting sinner must
be miserable in another life by a necessity of nature.
Therefore he is not capable of mercy; since there never
can be an alteration of his condition, without such a change
of the whole man as would put the natural and settled order
of the creation out of course.” (Page 351.)
Doubtless this eminent man (whose books on the Human
Understanding, and on Divine Analogy, I would earnestly
recommend to all who either in whole or in part deny the
Christian Revelation) grounded his judgment both of the
nature and duration of future punishments on these and the
like passages of Scripture :
“If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins; but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation,
which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses’
law died without mercy: of how much sorer punishment
shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the
Son of God! For we know him that hath said, Vengeance
belongeth unto me, I will recompense. It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God.” (Heb. x. 26–31.)
And let not any who live and die in their sins, vainly hope
to escape his vengeance. “For if God spared not the angels
that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment; the
Lord knoweth how to reserve the unjust unto the day of
judgment to be punished.” (2 Peter ii. 4—9.) In that day,
peculiarly styled, “the day of the Lord,” they “that sleep in
the dust of the earth shall awake; some to everlasting life,
and some to everlasting shame and contempt.” (Dan. xii. 2.)
Among the latter will all those be found, who are now, by
their obstinate impenitence, “treasuring up to themselves
wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righ
teous judgment of God; who will” then render “indignation
and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man
that doeth evil.” (Rom. ii. 5–9.) He hath declared the very
sentence which he will then pronounce on all the workers of
iniquity: “Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels.” (Matt. xxv. 41.) And in that
508 LETTER, TO THE REV. M.R. L.A.W.
hour it will be executed; being “cast into outer darkness,
where is wailing and gnashing of teeth,” (verse 30,) they
“will be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.”
(2 Thess. i. 9.) A punishment not only without end, but
likewise without intermission. For when once “they are
cast into that furnace of fire,” that “lake of fire burning
with brimstone, the worm,” gnawing their soul, “ dieth not,
and the fire,” tormenting their body, “is not quenched.” So
that “they have no rest day or night; but the smoke of their
torment ascendeth up for ever and ever.”
Now, thus much cannot be denied, that these texts speak
as if there were really such a place as hell, as if there were a
real fire there, and as if it would remain for ever. I would
then ask but one plain question : If the case is not so, why
did God speak as if it was? Say you, “To affright men from
sin?” What, by guile, by dissimulation, by hanging out
false colours? Can you possibly ascribe this to the God of
truth? Can you believe it of Him? Can you conceive the
Most High dressing up a scarecrow, as we do to fright chil
dren? Far be it from him ! If there be then any such fraud
in the Bible, the Bible is not of God. And indeed this must be
the result of all: If there be “no unquenchable fire, no ever
lasting burnings,” there is no dependence on those writings
wherein they are so expressly asserted, nor of the eternity of
heaven, any more than of hell. So that if we give up the one, we
must give up the other. No hell, no heaven, no revelation 1
In vain you strive to supply the place of this, by putting
purgatory in its room; by saying, “These virtues must have
their perfect work in you, if not before, yet cert inly after,
death. Everything else must be taken from you by fire, either
here or hereafter.” (Spirit of Love, Part II., p. 232.) Poor,
broken reed ! Nothing will “be taken from you” by that
fire which is “prepared for the devil and his angels,” but all
rest, all joy, all comfort, all hope. For “the worm dieth not,
and the fire is not quenched.”
I have now, Sir, delivered my own soul. And I have used
great plainness of speech; such as I could not have prevailed
on myself to use to one whom I so much respect, on any
other occasion.
O that your latter Works may be more and greater than
your first! Surely they would, if you could ever be persuaded to
THOUGHTS ON JACOB BEHMEN. 509
study, instead of the writings of Tauler and Behmen, those
of St. Paul, James, Peter, and John; to spew out of your
mouth and out of your heart that vain philosophy, and speak
neither higher nor lower things, neither more nor less, than
the oracles of God; to renounce, despise, abhor all the high
flown bombast, all the unintelligible jargon of the Mystics,
and come back to the plain religion of the Bible, “We love
him, because he first loved us.”
LONDON,
January 6, 1756.
THOUGHTS UPON JACOB BEHMEN
I HAVE considered the Memoirs of Jacob Behmen, of which
I will speak very freely.
I believe he was a good man. But I see nothing extra
ordinary either in his life or in his death. I have known
many, both men and women, who were far more exemplary
in their lives, and far more honoured of God in their death.
I allow he wrote many truths; but none that would have
appeared at all extraordinary, had he thrown aside his hard
words, and used plain and common language.
What some seem most to admire in his writings, is what I
most object to; I mean his philosophy and his phraseology.
These are really his own; and these are quite new ; therefore,
they are quite wrong.
I totally object to his blending religion with philosophy;
and as vain a philosophy as ever existed: Crude, indigested;
supported neither by Scripture nor reason, nor anything but
his own ipse dixit.-
I grant, Mr. Law, by taking immense pains, has licked it
into some shape. And he has made it hang tolerably together.
But still it admits of no manner of proof.
510 THOUGHTS UPON
And all he writes concerning religion is what very many
have said before him, and in a far better manner.
To his whole scheme I object,
1. The whole foundation of it is wrong; the very attempt
to explain religion, which is the most simple thing in the
world, by an abstruse, complicated, philosophical theory, is
"the most absurd thing that can be conceived.
I pray, consider but one argument against it. Either St.
Paul and St. John knew this theory, or they did not. Mr.
Law supposes, they did not know it; but that Jacob knew
more than them both. I verily think this needs no confuta
tion. Let him believe it that can. But if they did know it,
how did they dare to conceal any part of the counsel of God?
Upon the theory itself I shall only repeat a very little of
what I observed in my printed “Letter to Mr. Law: ”—
“All that can be conceived,” says Mr. Law, quoting from
Jacob, “is God, or nature, or creature.”
Is nature created or not created ? It must be one or the
other; for there is no medium. If not created, it is God.
If created, is it not a creature? How then can these be
three, -God, nature, and creature; since nature must coin
cide either with God or creature?
“Nature is in itself a hungry, wrathful fire of life. Nature
is and can be only a desire. Desire is the very being of
nature.” “Nature is only a desire, because it is for the sake
of something else! Nature is only a torment, because it
cannot help itself to what it wants.”
Shame to human understanding, that any man should fall
in love with such stark, staring nonsense as this!
“Nature, as well as God, is antecedent to all creatures.
There is an eternal nature, as universal and as unlimited as
God.” Is then nature God? Or, are there two eternal,
universal, infinite beings?
“Nothing is before eternal nature, but God.” Nothing
but ! Is anything before that which is eternal?
“Nature, and darkness, and self, are but three different
expressions for one and the same thing.” “Nature has all
evil and no evil in it.”
“Nature has seven chief properties, and can have neither
more nor less, because it is a birth from the Deity in nature.”
(Is nature a birth from the Deity in nature ? Is not this a flat
JACOB BEHMEN. 511
contradiction?) “For God is tri-une, and nature is tri-une.”
(Nature triune 1 Prove it who can.) “And hence arise
properties, three and three.” (Why not four and four?)
“And that which brings these three and three into union is
another property.” Sublime jargon I
“The three first properties of nature are the whole essence of
that desire which is, and is called, nature.” A part of its pro
perties are the whole essence of it ! Flat contradiction again :
“The three first properties of nature are, attraction,
resistance, and whirling. In these three properties of the
desire, you see the reason of the three great laws of matter
and motion.”
How does it appear that these are any of the properties of
nature, if you mean by nature anything distinct from matter?
And how are they properties of desire?
“The fourth property is fire; the fifth, the form of light
and love;” (what is the form of love? and are light and
love the same thing?) “the sixth, sound or understanding;”
(the same thing doubtless!) “the seventh, a life of triumph
ing joy.” Is then “a life of triumphing joy,” “that which
brings the three and three properties into union?” If so,
how is it “the result of that union?”
Once more: “Attraction is an incessant working of three
contrary properties,—drawing, resisting, and whirling.”
That is, in plain terms, drawing is incessant drawing, resist
ance, and whirling.
Such is the philosophy which Jacob received by immediate
inspiration; (to mention only the first principles of it;) and
by which he is to explain all religion, and the whole revela
tion of God!
1. As to his divinity, I object, First, to the very design of
explaining religion by any philosophy whatever. The Scrip
ture gives us no direction, no, nor any permission, so to do.
I object, much more, to the execution of his design; the
attempting to explain it by that base, unmeaning, self
contradictory jargon, which is as far remote from all true,
genuine philosophy, as it is from the Scripture itself.
2. But be the foundation as it may, he builds no super
structure upon it, but what we knew before, either with
regard to internal or external holiness. We knew before,
“Neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircum
cision, but faith that worketh by love.” And what does he
512 THOUGHTS UPON
teach us by all his hard, uncouth words, more than this plain
truth ?
We knew before that we “must be born again; ”
inwardly changed from all evil tempers to all good; “from
an earthly, sensual, devilish mind, to the mind that was in
Christ Jesus.” And what more does he teach us on this
head, by all his vain, precarious, mystical philosophy?
We knew before that “the loving God with all our heart,
and the loving our neighbour as ourselves, is the fulfilling of
the law, the end of the commandment,” the sum of all reli
gion. And what has he told us more than this, in all his
nineteen volumes?-
We knew before that the whole of religion is, a heart and
life totally devoted to God. Has he told us, or can he tell
us, any thing more? No, nor all the angels in heaven.
We knew before that the foundation and the superstruc
ture of religion are comprised in those words, “We love him
because he first loved us.” Does he teach us anything
higher or deeper? In a word, does he teach any single point,
either of inward or outward holiness, which we did not know
before ? If he does, what is it? I cannot find out one in
all his writings.
3. But if his matter is not new, if this is nothing uncom
mon, his manner of speaking is new indeed ! His language
is utterly new ; it was never used since the world began.
And this is the very reason for which he is so admired,—
because he speaks (which cannot be denied) as never man
spake. Indeed, I hardly know for which he is most
admired,—the novelty, or the obscurity, of his language.
But I cannot admire it at all; because it is quite unscrip
tural. There is no trace of it to be found in any part either
of the Old or New Testament. Therefore, I cannot recon
cile it to that express command, “If any man speak, let him
speak as the oracles of God.”
I cannot admire it, because, Secondly, it is barbarous in
the highest degree : Whatever is peculiar in his phraseology,
is not authorized by any good writer whatever. It is queer
ness itself. It is mere dog-Latin. It is an insult upon the
ear and the understanding of all mankind.
One allows, “None can understand it without much pains;
perhaps not without reading him thrice over.” I would not
read him thrice over on any consideration. (1.) Because it
JACOB BEHMEN. 513
would be enough to crack any man's brain to brood so long
over such unintelligible nonsense; and, (2.) Because such a
waste of time might provoke God to give me up to a strong
delusion, to believe a lie.
But I doubt whether any man understands it at all: For
it is so dark and indeterminate, that I have not found any
two persons in England who understand it alike. I thought,
if any man living understood Behmen, Mr. Law did. “No,”
says one who has been studying him these forty years, “Mr.
Law never understood a page of him.”
4. The whole of Behmenism, including both phrase and
sense, is useless. It stuns and astonishes its admirers. It
fills their heads, but it does not change their hearts. It
makes no eminent Christians. For many years I have dili
gently inquired concerning the grand patrons of it. And I
have found none of them who were burning and shining
lights; none who adorned the doctrine of God our Saviour.
5. But it is not barely useless; it is mischievous, and that
in a high degree. For it strikes at the root of both internal and
external religion, (suppose Mr. Law understood it,) by sapping
the foundation of justification by faith. For Jacob affirms,
“God was never angry at sinners.” But, if so, he was never
reconciled to them. His wrath was never turned away, if it
never existed. And, admitting this, there is no place for
justification; nor, consequently, for faith in a pardoning
God, which is the root of both inward and outward holiness.
More particularly, it strikes at the root of humility, tending
to make men admire themselves, and despise others. Never
was a more melancholy proof of this than Mr. Law, who seri
ously believed himself the most knowing man in the kingdom,
and despised all that contradicted him, even in the tenderest
manner, as the mire in the streets. It strikes at the root of
charity, inspiring into its strictest votaries deep censorious
ness toward the world in general, and an inexpressible bitter
ness toward all who do not receive their new apostle. This
may be observed in all the authors of the memoirs, though,
in other respects, good men; and in all I have conversed
with in my life who were thorough Behmenists.
Above all, it strikes at the root of external religion, by
destroying zeal for good works; by laying little stress on
either works of piety or mercy, and still less upon Christian
VOL. IX. L L
514 SPECIMEN OF BEHMEN’s
society; it particularly tends to make all men of sense and
learning bury their talent in the earth, the natural effect of
continually declaiming, in a loose and indiscriminate manner,
against reason and learning.
It strikes at the root of all revealed religion, by making
men think meanly of the Bible; a natural effect of thinking
Behmen more highly illuminated than any or all of the
Apostles. So Mr. S. frankly acknowledged, “While I admired
him, I thought St. Paul and St. John very mean writers.”
Indeed it quite spoils the taste for plain, simple religion,
such as that of the Bible is; and gives a false taste, which can
relish nothing so well, as high, obscure, unintelligible jargon.
December 22, 1780.
A SPECIMIEN
OF
THE DIVINITY AND PHILOSOPHY OF THE
HIGHLY-ILLUMINATED JACOB BEHMEN.
IN the late edition of his Works before the second volume,
we have the following advertisement:
“As he and Mr. Law were raised up by God, and highly
qualified as instructers of mankind in divine wisdom, sc
all who are followers of Christ in simplicity of heart, and seek
only the salvation of their souls, will find in their writings
everything relating to their essential happiness. And all the
efforts of human wisdom to depreciate them, can be but like
sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.”
Mr. Law’s writings are entirely out of the present question:
We are only concerned with those of Jacob Behmen; a speci
DIVINITY AND PHILOSOPHY. 515
men of which I beg to lay before those who really seek the
salvation of their souls:—
“AN ExPLANATION oR THE LoRD’s PRAYER.
“ Unser water tim himmel :
“Our Father in heaven :
“41. Un is God’s eternal will to nature; ser comprehends
in it the four forms of nature.
“42. Va is the matrix upon the cross; ter is Mercury in
the centre of nature. And they are the two mothers in the
eternal will. The one severs itself into fire, the other into
the light of meekness and into water. For va is the mother
of the light which affords substantiality, and ter is the mother
of the fire's tincture.
“43. Im is the heart: For the syllable im goes forth from
the heart, and soundeth through the lips.
“44. Him means the creation of the soul; mel is the
angelical soul itself: Which the heart on the cross in the
centre between the two mothers has comprehended, and with
the word him framed it to a creature, viz., into mel: For him
is the habitation of mel.
“Dein nahme werde geheiliget:
“Thy name be hallowed:
“45. When we say dein, we understand how the poor
soul swims in the water of this world.
“46. In the syllable nah it inclines inward; and in the
syllable me it comprehends the heavenly substantiality.
“47. When we say wer, the whole creature goes along in
the will: For wer has the whole centre; and with the syllable
de, it lays itself down in obedience to the meekness, and will
not kindle the wer in the fire.
“48. And when we say ge, the soul goes into the hea
venly substantiality; and then hei is the powerful entering
upon the cross into the number three. With the syllable li
the soul's will has comprehended the Holy Ghost. Get :
There the soul will go forth with the Holy Ghost.
“Dein reich komme:
“Thy kingdom come:
2 L 2
516 SPECIMEN OF BEHMGN's
“49. Dein: Then the soul gives itself into the will of God.
“50. Reich: Here it gives itself into the virtue of the
angelical world.
“51. In the syllable kom, it goes into the virtue; and,
with the syllable me, it goes into the kingdom as a sprout:
For the me makes the lips be open.
“Dein wille geschehe, wie im himmel:
“Thy will be done, as in heaven:
“Also auch aufferden :
“So also upon earth:
“52. Dein : Here the will casts itself into God’s will.
“53. Wil is its desire to will the same with the Holy
Ghost. Le: With this syllable it takes in the will with the
spirit into the centre.-
“54. Ge: With this syllable it goes into the will. Sche:
With this syllable it worketh the work of God. He : In this
syllable it bows itself as a child.
“55. Wie: There it goes again into the voice of God; im,
is the heart of God. Him is again the creating of the
creatures: mel is the soul willing the will of God.
“56. Al : There it drives on that will, with the syllable
so, out of its centre into the outward principle. Auch :
There it affords all it has in itself out into the outward.
“57. Auff. With this syllable it apprehends the same
again, and desires its substance should not be dissipated.
“58. Er: With this syllable it brings its substance into
the spirit of this world, and there the will shall work wonders.
Den : With this syllable it shows that it must not be done in
the fire of the anger: For this syllable does not break up the
centre. They should be done in meek love, and yet taken
out of the er.
“Gicb uns unser taglich brodt heute:
“Give us our daily bread to-day:
“60. Gieb : There the will sticketh in the heart, and
presses outward, and the mouth catches it.
“61. Uns: With this syllable the soul desires food for all
its fellow-members.
“62. Un: With this syllable the soul goes into the
internal wisdom, wherein, before the creation in the seed, it
DIVINITY AND PHILOSOPHY. 517
was discerned in the eternal will. Ser: With this syllable
it takes the original of nature in the will, where one form in
the original penetrates, fills, and preserves the other. And
that is the bond of the soul, whereby it eternally subsists.
And that the will of the soul desires; else it would be
dissolved.
“63. This is the true “doctorship of the Holy Ghost.”
The outward is but foppery.
“64. Tag : With this syllable the heavenly number is
understood, as wherein the spirit on the cross in the holy
matrix comprehends the genitive in the multiplication.
Lich : In this syllable the soul quickens and strengthens
itself with the heavenly number, which springs up out of the
Divine Majesty infinitely; and herein the soul is acknow
ledged for an angel.”
Whoever desires it, may read the rest of this explanation
at his leisure. I will only add the conclusion of it:—
“Amen :
“95. A is the first letter, and presses forth out of the
heart, and has no nature; but we clearly understand herein,
the seeking, longing, or attracting of the eternal will, with
out nature, wherein nature is generated, which has been from
eternity.
“96. Now, as the A is generated out of the heart, that is,
out of the eternal will, so out of A afterwards comes the
whole alphabet with four-and-twenty numbers; for the A
begins to number, and comprises the whole number in the
syllable men.” (Behmen's Works, Vol. II., p. 165, &c.)
Now, here I fix my foot. Upon this ground I join issue
with every admirer of Jacob Behmen in England.
I appeal to every candid man, every man of piety and
common sense, whether this explanation deserves those
violent encomiums contained in the Advertisement.
I ask any person of understanding, First, whether any
man in his senses, from the beginning of the world, ever
thought of explaining any treatise, divine or human, syllable
by syllable. Did a more absurd imagination ever enter into
a madman's brain? Is it possible by this means to make
sense of any text from Genesis to the Revelation? Must
there not be a very high degree of lunacy before any such
518 SPECIMEN of BEHMEN’s DIVINITY, &c.
design could be formed ? I ask, Secondly, If any scripture
could be thus explained, if any meaning could be extracted
from the several syllables, must it not be from the syllables
of the original, not of a translation, whether German or
English? I ask, Thirdly, whether this explanation be any
explanation at all; whether it gives the meaning of any one
petition; nay, whether it does not reduce the divine Prayer,
all the parts of which are accurately connected together, into
an unconnected, incoherent jumble of no one can tell what!
I ask, Fourthly, whether we may not pronounce, with the
utmost certainty, of one who thus distorts, mangles, and
murders the word of God, that the light which is in him is
darkness; that he is illuminated from beneath, rather than
from above; and that he ought to be styled a demonosopher,
rather than a theosopher !
JOIN WESLEY.