

V O L U M E VIII
Addresses, Essays, Letters
Z O N D E R V A N P U B L IS H IN G H O U S E
G r and R a pids C-9 M ic hig an
This edition of the complete and unabridged
THE WoRks of JoHN WESLEY is reproduced
by the photo offset process from the authorized
edition published by the Wesleyan Conference
Office in London, England, in 1872.
Lithographed in the United States of America
e - - 7.</7
''' A. I 5.
. CONTENTS
J. &
Page.
I.
An Earnest Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion ...... l
II.
A Farther Appeal to Men of Reason, &c. PART I. 46.
— PART II. 136
PART III. 201
III.
A plain. Account of the People called Methodists ......... 248.
IV.
The Nature, Design, and General Rules of the United
Societies in London, Bristol, Kingswood, &c.......... 269
W.
Rules of the Band Societies............................... ..... 272
VI.
Minutes of some late Conversations between the Rev.
Mr. Wesleys and others, in 1744 ................- - - - - - - 275
VII.
Minutes of Several Conversations between the Rev. Mr.
Wesley and others, from the year 1744, to 1789...... 299
VIII.
The Character of a Methodist ................................ 339,
IX.
A Short History of Methodism .............................. 3:47
X.
Advice to the People called Methodists ..................... 351
State University of lowa
L. BRARIES
iv. CONTENTS.
Page.
XI.
The Principles of a Methodist................................. 359.
XII.
An Answer to the Rev. Mr. Church’s Remarks on the
Rev. Mr. John Wesley’s last Journal: In a Letter
to that Gentleman.......................................... 375.
XIII.
The Principles of a Methodist farther explained: Occa
sioned by the Rev. Mr. Church's Second Letter to
Mr. Wesley : In a Second Letter to that Gen
tleman ...............• - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - • - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 414.
XIV.
A Letter to the Bishop of London : Occasioned by his
Lordship’s late Charge to his Clergy .................. 481
XV.
A Letter to a Clergyman ....................................... 496
XVI.
A Letter to the Rev. Dr. Free ........................ ........ 500
XVII.
A Second Letter to the Rev. Dr. Free........................ 504.
XVIII.
A Letter to the Author of “The Craftsman,” concerning
real Christianity, disparaged under the name of
Methodism ................................................ 512
XIX.
An Answer to a Letter published in the Bath Journal ... 514
AN
EARNEST APPEAL
To
MEN OF R. EA S ON AN ID R ELIGION
Doth our law judge any man, before it hear him, and know what he doeth?
John vii. 51.
VOL. VIII.
AN
EARNEST APPEAL
TO MEN OF REASON AND RELIGION
1. ALTHough it is with us a “very small thing to be judged
of you or of man’s judgment,” seeing we know God will “make
our innocency as clear as the light, and our just dealing as the
noon-day;” yet are we ready to give any that are willing to
hear a plain account, both of our principles and actions; as
having “renounced the hidden things of shame,” and desiring
nothing more, “than by manifestation of the truth to commend
ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God.”
2. We see (and who does not?) the numberless follies and
miseries of our fellow-creatures. We see, on every side, either
men of no religion at all, or men of a lifeless, formal religion.
We are grieved at the sight; and should greatly rejoice, if by
any means we might convince some that there is a better reli
gion to be attained,—a religion worthy of God that gave it.
And this we conceive to be no other than love; the love of
God and of all mankind; the loving God with all our heart, and
soul, and strength, as having first loved us, as the fountain of
all the good we have received, and of all we ever hope to
enjoy; and the loving every soul which God hath made, every
man on earth, as our own soul.
3. This love we believe to be the medicine of life, the never
failing remedy for all the evils of a disordered world, for all the
miseries and vices of men. Wherever this is, there are virtue
and happiness going hand in hand. There is humbleness of
mind, gentleness, long-suffering, the whole image of God; and
at the same time a peace that passeth all understanding, and
joy unspeakable and full of glory.
Eternal sunshine of the spotless mind;
Each prayer accepted, and each wish resign'd,
Desires composed, affections ever even,
Tears that delight, and sighs that waft to heaven.
4. This religion we long to see established in the world, a
religion of love, and joy, and peace, having its seat in the
4 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
inmost soul, but ever showing itself by its fruits, continually
springing forth, not only in all innocence, (for love worketh
no ill to his neighbour,) but likewise in every kind of bene
ficence, spreading virtue and happiness all around it.
5. This religion have we been following after for many
years, as many know, if they would testify: But all this time,
seeking wisdom, we found it not; we were spending our
strength in vain. And being now under full conviction of this,
we declare it to all mankind; for we desire not that others
should wander out of the way as we have done before them :
But rather that they may profit by our loss, that they may go
(though we did not, having then no man to guide us) the
straight way to the religion of love, even by faith.
6. Now, faith (supposing the Scripture to be of God) is Tpay
parov exeyxos ov 8Aerouevov, “the demonstrative evidence of
things unseen,” the supernatural evidence of things invisible,
not perceivable by eyes of flesh, or by any of our natural senses
or faculties. Faith is that divine evidence whereby the spiritual
man discerneth God, and the things of God. It is with regard
to the spiritual world, what sense is with regard to the natural.
It is the spiritual sensation of every soul that is born of God.
7. Perhaps you have not considered it in this view. I will,
then, explain it a little further.
Faith, according to the scriptural account, is the eye of the
new-born soul. Hereby every true believer in God “seeth
him who is invisible.” Hereby (in a more particular manner,
since life and immortality have been brought to light by the
gospel) he “seeth the light of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ; ” and “beholdeth what manner of love it is
which the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we,” who are
born of the Spirit, “should be called the sons of God.”
It is the car of the soul, whereby a sinner “hears the voice
of thc Son of God, and lives; ” even that voice which alone
wakes the dead, “Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.”
It is (if I may be allowed the expression) the palate of the
soul; for hereby a believer “tastes the good word, and the
powers of the world to come; ” and “hereby he both tastes and
sees that God is gracious,” yea, “and merciful to him a sinner.”
It is the feeling of the soul, whereby a believer perceives,
through the “power of the Highest overshadowing him,” both
the existence and the presence of Him in whom “he lives,
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 5
moves, and has his being; ” and indeed the whole invisible
world, the entire system of things eternal. And hereby, in
particular, he feels “the love of God shed abroad in his heart.”
8. By this faith we are saved from all uneasiness of mind,
from the anguish of a wounded spirit, from discontent, from
fear and sorrow of heart, and from that inexpressible listless
mess and weariness, both of the world and of ourselves, which
we had so helplessly laboured under for many years; especially
when we were out of the hurry of the world, and sunk into
calm reflection. In this we find that love of God, and of all
mankind, which we had elsewhere sought in vain. This we
know and feel, and therefore cannot but declare, saves every
one that partakes of it, both from sin and misery, from every
unhappy and every unholy temper.
Soft peace she brings, wherever she arrives;
She builds our quiet, as she forms our lives;
Lays the rough paths of peevish nature even,
And opens in each breast a little heaven.
9. If you ask, “Why then have not all men this faith? all,
at least, who conceive it to be so happy a thing? Why do
they not believe immediately?”
We answer, (on the Scripture hypothesis,) “It is the gift
of God.” No man is able to work it in himself. It is a
work of omnipotence. It requires no less power thus to
quicken a dead soul, than to raise a body that lies in the grave.
It is a new creation; and none can create a soul anew, but
He who at first created the heavens and the earth.
10. May not your own experience teach you this? Can you
give yourself this faith? Is it now in your power to see, or hear,
or taste, or feel God? Have you already, or can you raise
in yourself, any perception of God, or of an invisible world?
I suppose you do not deny that there is an invisible world;
you will not charge it in poor old Hesiod to Christian pre
judice of education, when he says, in those well-known words,
“Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth
Unseen, whether we wake, or if we sleep.”
Now, is there any power in your soul whereby you discern
either these, or Him that created them? Or, can all your wis
dom and strength open an intercourse between yourself and the
world of spirits? Is it in your power to burst the veil that is
6 AN DARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
on your heart, and let in the light of eternity? You know it
is not. You not only do not, but cannot, by your own
strength, thus believe. The more you labour so to do, the
more you will be convinced “it is the gift of God.”
11. It is the free gift of God, which he bestows, not on those
who are worthy of his favour, not on such as are previously
holy, and so fit to be crowned with all the blessings of his
goodness; but on the ungodly and unholy; on those who till
that hour were fit only for everlasting destruction; those in
whom was no good thing, and whose only plea was, “God be
merciful to me, a sinner !” No merit, no goodness in man.
precedes the forgiving love of God. His pardoning mercy
supposes nothing in us but a sense of mere sin and misery;
and to all who see, and feel, and own their wants, and their
utter inability to remove them, God freely gives faith, for the
sake of Him in whom he is always “well pleased.”
12. This is a short, rude sketch of the doctrine we teach.
These are our fundamental principles; and we spend our lives
in confirming others herein, and in a behaviour suitable to them.
Now, if you are a reasonable man, although you do not
believe the Christian system to be of God, lay your hand upon
your breast, and calmly consider what it is that you can here
condemn? What evil have we done to you, that you should join
the common cry against us? Why should you say, “Away with
such fellows from the earth; it is not fit that they should live?”
13. It is true, your judgment does not fall in with ours.
We believe the Scripture to be of God. This you do not
believe. And how do you defend yourselves against them who
urge you with the guilt of unbelief? Do you not say, “Every
man must judge according to the light he has,” and that “if
he be true to this, he ought not to be condemned?” Keep
then to this, and turn the tables. Must not we also judge
according to the light we have 2 You can in nowise condemn
us without involving yoarselves in the same condemnation.
According to the light we have, we cannot but believe the
Scripture is of God; and while we believe this, we dare not
turn aside from it, to the right hand or to the left.
14. Let us consider this point a little farther. You yourself
believe there is a God. You have the witness of this in your
own breast. Perhaps sometimes you tremble before him. You
believe there is such a thing as right and wrong; that there is
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 7
a difference between moral good and evil. Of consequence you
must allow, there is such a thing as conscience: I mean, that
every person, capable of reflection, is conscious to himself, when
he looks back on anything he has done, whether it be good or
evil. You must likewise allow, that every man is to be guided
by his own conscience, not another's. Thus far, doubtless,
you may go, without any danger of being a volunteer in faith.
15. Now then, be consistent with yourself. If there be a
God, who, being just and good, (attributes inseparable from
the very idea of God,) is “a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him,” ought we not to do whatever we believe will be
acceptable to so good a Master? Observe: If we believe, if
we are fully persuaded of this in our mind, ought we not thus
to seek him, and that with all diligence? Else, how should
we expect any reward at his hands?
16. Again: Ought we not to do what we believe is morally
good, and to abstain from what we judge is evil? By good I
mean, conducive to the good of mankind, tending to advance
peace and good-will among men, promotive of the happiness
of our fellow-creatures; and by evil, what is contrary thereto.
Then surely you cannot condemn our endeavouring, after our
power, to make mankind happy; (I now speak only with
regard to the present world;) our striving, as we can, to
lessen their sorrows, and to teach them, in whatsoever state
they are, therewith to be content.
17. Yet again: are we to be guided by our own conscience,
or by that of other men? You surely will not say that any
man’s conscience can preclude mine. You, at least, will not
plead for robbing us of what you so strongly claim for your
selves: I mean, the right of private judgment, which is
indeed unalienable from reasonable creatures. You well
know, that, unless we faithfully follow the dictates of our
own mind, we cannot have a conscience void of offence to
ward God and toward man.
18. Upon your own principles, therefore, you must allow us
to be, at least, innocent. Do you find any difficulty in this?
You speak much of prepossession and prejudice; beware you
are not entangled therein yourselves! Are you not pre
judiced against us, because we believe and strenuously defend
that system of doctrines which you oppose? Are you not
enemies to us, because you take it for granted we are so to
8 AN EARN EST APPEAL TO MEN
you? Nay, God forbid! I once saw one, who, from a plen
tiful fortune, was reduced to the lowest extremity. He was
lying on a sick bed, in violent pain, without even conveni
ent food, or one friend to comfort him : So that when his
merciful landlord, to complete all, sent one to take his bed from
under him, I was not surprised at his attempt to put an end to
so miserable a life. Now, when I saw that poor man weltering
in his blood, could I be angry at him ? Surely, no. No more
can I at you. I can no more hate than I can envy you. I can
only lift up my heart to God for you, (as I did then for him,)
and, with silent tears, beseech the Father of Mercies, that he
would look on you in your blood, and say unto you, “Live.”
19. “Sir,” said that unhappy man, at my first interview
with him, “I scorn to deceive you or any man. You must
not tell me of your Bible; for I do not believe one word of
it. I know there is a God; and believe he is all in all, the
Anima mundi,” the
Totam
Mens agitans molem, et magnose corpore miscens.t
But farther than this I believe not: All is dark; my thought is
lost. But I hear,” added he, “you preach to a great number
of people every night and morning. Pray, what would you do
with them? Whither would you lead them? What religion
do you preach * What is it good for?” I replied, “I do
preach to as many as desire to hear, every night and morning.
You ask, what I would do with them : I would make them
virtuous and happy, easy in themselves, and useful to others.
Whither would I lead them? To heaven; to God the Judge,
the lover of all, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new cove
nant. What religion do I preach? The religion of love; the
law of kindness brought to light by the gospel. What is
this good for? To make all who receive it enjoy God and
themselves: To make them like God; lovers of all; contented
in their lives; and crying out at their death, in calm assu
rance, “O grave, where is thy victory ! Thanks be unto God,
who giveth me the victory, through my Lord Jesus Christ.’”
20. Will you object to such a religion as this, that it is not
reasonable? Is it not reasonable then to love God? Hath
he not given you life, and breath, and all things? Does he
* The soul of the world.
+ The all-informing soul,
Which spreads through the vast mass, and moves the whole.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 9
not continue his love to you, filling your heart with food and
gladness? What have you which you have not received of
him? And does not love demand a return of love? Whether,
therefore, you do love God or no, you cannot but own it is
reasonable so to do; nay, seeing he is the Parent of all good,
to love him with all your heart.
21. Is it not reasonable also to love our neighbour, every
man whom God hath made? Are we not brethren, the
children of one Father? Ought we not, then, to love one
another? And should we only love them that love us? Is
that acting like our Father which is in heaven? He causeth
his sun to shine on the evil and on the good, and sendeth
rain on the just and on the unjust. And can there be a more
equitable rule than this: “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself?” You will plead for the reasonableness of this; as
also for that golden rule, (the only adequate measure of bro
therly love, in all our words and actions) “Whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them P”
22. Is it not reasonable, then, that, as we have opportunity,
we should do good unto all men; not only friends, but
enemies; not only to the deserving, but likewise to the evil and
unthankful? Is it not right that all our life should be one con
tinued labour of love? If a day passes without doing good, may
one not well say, with Titus, Amici, diem perdidi ! + And is it
enough, to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to visit those
who are sick or in prison? Should we have no pity for those
Who sigh beneath guilt's horrid stain,
The worst confinement, and the heaviest chain?
Should we shut up our compassion toward those who are of all
men most miserable, because they are miserable by their own
fault? If we have found a medicine to heal even that sick
ness, should we not, as we have freely received it, freely give?
Should we not pluck them as brands out of the fire? the fire
of lust, anger, malice, revenge? Your inmost soul answers,
“It should be done; it is reasonable in the highest degree.”
Well, this is the sum of our preaching, and of our lives, our
enemies themselves being the judges. If therefore you allow,
that it is reasonable to love God, to love mankind, and to do
good to all men, you cannot but allow that religion which we
preach and live to be agreeable to the highest reason.
* My friends, I have lost a day.
10 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
23. Perhaps, all this you can bear. It is tolerable enough;
and if we spoke only of being saved by love, you should have
no great objection: But you do not comprehend what we say
of being saved by faith. I know you do not. You do not in
any degree comprehend what we mean by that expression:
Have patience then, and I will tell you yet again. By those
words, “We are saved by faith,” we mean, that the moment a
man receives that faith which is above described, he is saved
from doubt and fear, and sorrow of heart, by a peace that passes
all understanding; from the heaviness of a wounded spirit, by
joy unspeakable; and from his sins, of whatsoever kind they were,
from his vicious desires, as well as words and actions, by the love
of God, and of all mankind, then shed abroad in his heart.
24. Wegrant, nothing is more unreasonable, than to imagine
that such mighty effects as these can be wrought by that poor,
empty, insignificant thing, which the world calls faith, and you
among them. But supposing there be such a faith on the
earth as that which the Apostle speaks of, such an intercourse
between God and the soul, what is too hard for such a faith?
You yourselves may conceive that “all things are possible to
him that ” thus “believeth; ” to him that thus “walks with
God,” that is now a citizen of heaven, an inhabitant of eternity.
If therefore you will contend with us, you must change the
ground of your attack. You must flatly deny there is any faith
upon earth: But perhaps this you might think too large a step.
You cannot do this without a secret condemnation in your
own breast. O that you would at length cry to God for that
heavenly gift! whereby alone this truly reasonable religion, this
beneficent love of God and man, can be planted in your heart.
25. If you say, “But those that profess this faith are the
most unreasonable of all men; ” I ask, Who are those that
profess this faith? Perhaps you do not personally know such
a man in the world. Who are they that so much as profess
to have this “evidence of things not seen 7” that profess to
“see Him that is invisible,” to hear the voice of God, and to
have his Spirit ever “witnessing with their spirits, that they
are the children of God?” I fear you will find few that even
profess this faith, among the large numbcrs of those who are
called believers.
26. “However, there are enough that profess themselves
Christians.” Yea, too many, God knoweth; too many that
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 11
confute their vain professions by the whole tenor of their lives.
I will allow all you can say on this head, and perhaps more than
all. It is now some years since I was engaged unawares in a
conversation with a strong reasoner, who at first urged the
wickedness of the American Indians, as a bar to our hope of
converting them to Christianity. But when I mentioned their
temperance, justice, and veracity, (according to the accounts
I had then received,) it was asked, “Why, if those Heathens
are such men as these, what will they gain by being made
Christians? What would they gain by being such Christians
as we see everywhere round about us?” I could not deny
they would lose, not gain, by such a Christianity as this. Upon
which she added, “Why, what else do you mean by Christian
ity?” My plain answer was, “What do you apprehend to be
more valuable than good sense, good nature, and good man
ners? All these are contained, and that in the highest degree,
in what I mean by Christianity. Good sense (so called) is but a
poor, dim shadow of what Christians call faith. Good nature
is only a faint, distant resemblance of Christian charity.
And good manners, if of the most finished kind that nature,
assisted by art, can attain to, is but a dead picture of that
holiness of conversation which is the image of God visibly
expressed. All these, put together by the art of God, I call
Christianity.” “Sir, if this be Christianity,” said my
opponent in amaze, “I never saw a Christian in my life.”
27. Perhaps it is the same case with you. If so, I am grieved
for you, and can only wish, till you do see a living proof of this,
that you would not say you see a Christian. For this is scrip
tural Christianity, and this alone. Whenever, therefore, you
see an unreasonable man, you see one who perhaps calls him
self by that name, but is no more a Christian than he is an
angel. So far as he departs from true, genuine reason, so far
he departs from Christianity. Do not say, “This is only
asserted, not proved.” It is undeniably proved by the original
charter of Christianity. We appeal to this, to the written word.
If any man’s temper, or words, or actions, are contradictory to
right reason, it is evident to a demonstration, they are contra
dictory to this. Produce any possible or conceivable instance,
and you will find the fact is so. The lives, therefore, of those
who are called Christians, is no just objection to Christianity.
28. We join with you then in desiring a religion founded on
12 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
reason, and every way agreeable thereto. But one question still
remains to be asked, What do you mean by reason 2 I sup
pose you mean the eternal reason, or the nature of things; the
nature of God, and the nature of man, with the relations neces
sarily subsisting between them. Why, this is the very religion
we preach; a religion evidently founded on, and every way
agreeable to, eternal reason, to the essential nature of things.
Its foundation stands on the nature of God and the nature of
man, together with their mutual relations. And it is every way
suitable thereto; to the nature of God; for it begins in know
ing him: And where, but in the true knowledge of God, can
you conceive true religion to begin? It goes on in loving
him and all mankind; for you cannot but imitate whom you
love: It ends in serving him; in doing kis will; in obeying
him whom we know and love.
29. It is every way suited to the nature of man; for it
begins in a man’s knowing himself; knowing himself to be
what he really is,—foolish, vicious, miserable. It goes on to
point out the remedy for this, to make him truly wise, vir
tuous, and happy; as every thinking mind (perhaps from some
implicit remembrance of what it originally was) longs to be.
It finishes all, by restoring the due relations between God
and man; by uniting for ever the tender Father, and the grate
ful, obedient son; the great Lord of all, and the faithful ser
vant; doing not his own will, but the will of Him that sent him
30. But perhaps by reason you mean the faculty of reason
ing, of inferring one thing from another.
There are many, it is confessed, (particularly those who are
styled Mystic Divines) that utterly decry the use of reason,
thus understood, in religion; nay, that condemn all reasoning
concerning the things of God, as utterly destructive of true
religion.
But we can in mowise agree with this. We find no author
ity for it in holy writ. So far from it, that we find there both
our Lord and his Apostles continually reasoning with their
opposers. Neither do we know, in all the productions of ancient
and modern times, such a chain of reasoning or argumentation,
so close, so solid, so regularly connected, as the Epistle to the
Hebrews. And the strongest reasoner whom we have ever
observed (excepting only Jesus of Nazareth) was that Paul of
Tarsus; the same who has left that plain direction for all Chris
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 13
tians: “In malice,” or wickedness, “be ye children; but in
understanding,” or reason, “be ye men.”
31. We therefore not only allow, but earnestly exhort, all
who seek after true religion, to use all the reason which God
hath given them, in searching out the things of God. But
your reasoning justly, not only on this, but on any subject
whatsoever, pre-supposes true judgments already formed,
whereon to ground your argumentation. Else, you know,
you will stumble at every step; because ex falso non sequitur
terum, “it is impossible, if your premises are false, to infer
from them true conclusions.”
32. You know, likewise, that before it is possible for you to
form a true judgment of them, it is absolutely necessary that
you have a clear apprehension of the things of God, and that
your ideas thereof be all fixed, distinct, and determinate. And
seeing our ideas are not innate, but must all originally come
from our senses, it is certainly necessary that you have senses
capable of discerning objects of this kind: Not those only
which are called natural senses, which in this respect profit
nothing, as being altogether incapable of discerning objects of
a spiritual kind; but spiritual senses, exercised to discern
spiritual good and evil. It is necessary that you have the hear
ting ear, and the seeing eye, emphatically so called; that you
have a new class of senses opened in your soul, not depending
on organs of flesh and blood, to be “the evidence of things not
seen,” as your bodily senses are of visible things; to be the
avenues to the invisible world, to discern spiritual objects,
and to furnish you with ideas of what the outward “eye hath
not seen, neither the ear heard.”
33. And till you have these internal senses, till the eyes of
your understanding are opened, you can have no apprehension
of divine things, no idea of them at all. Nor, consequently,
till then, can you either judge truly, or reason justly, concern
ing them; seeing your reason has no ground whereon to
stand, no materials to work upon.
34. To use the trite instance: As you cannot reason con
cerning colours, if you have no natural sight, because all the
ideas received by your other senses are of a different kind; so
that neither your hearing, nor any other sense, can supply your
want of sight, or furnish your reason in this respect with matter
to work upon: Soyou cannot reason concerning spiritual things,
14. AN EARN EST APPEAL TO MEN
if you have no spiritual sight; because all your ideas received
by your outward senses are of a different kind; yea, far more
different from those received by faith or internal sensation, than
the idea of colour from that of sound. These are only different
species of one genus, namely, sensible ideas, received by exter
nal sensation; whereas the ideas of faith differ toto genere from
those of external sensation. So that it is not conceivable, that
external sensation should supply the want of internal senses; or
furnish your reason in this respect with matter to work upon.
35. What then will your reason do here? How will it pass
from things natural to spiritual; from the things that are seen
to those that are not seen; from the visible to the invisible
world? What a gulf is here ! By what art will reason get
over the immense chasm ? This cannot be till the Almighty
come in to your succour, and give you that faith you have
hitherto despised. Then upborne, as it were, on eagles’ wings,
you shall soar away into the regions of eternity; and your
enlightened reason shall explore even “the deep things of
God; ” God himself “revealing them to you by his Spirit.”
36. I expected to have received much light on this head,
from a treatise lately published, and earnestly recommended to
me; I mean, “Christianity not founded on Argument.” But on
a careful perusal of that piece, notwithstanding my prejudice in
its favour, I could not but perceive, that the great design uni
formly pursued throughout the work was, to render the whole
of the Christian Institution both odious and contemptible. In
order to this, the author gleans up, with great care and diligence,
the most plausible of those many objections that have been raised
against it by late writers, and proposes them with the utmost
strength of which he was capable. To do this with the more
effect, he personates a Christian: He makes a show of defend
ing an avoweddoctrine of Christianity, namely, the supernatural
influence of the Spirit of God; and often, for several sentences
together, (indeed, in the beginning of almost every paragraph,)
speaks so like a Christian, that not a few have received him
according to his wish. Meanwhile, with all possible art and show
of reason, and in the most laboured language, he pursues his
point throughout, which is to prove, that “Christianity is con
trary to reason;” or, that “no man acting according to the
principles of reason can possibly be a Christian.”
37. It is a wonderful proof of the power that smooth words
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 15
may have even on serious minds, that so many have mistook
such a writer as this for a friend of Christianity; since almost
every page of his tract is filled with gross falsehood and broad
blasphemy; and these supported by such exploded fallacies, and
common-place sophistry, that a person of two or three years’
standing in the university might give them a sufficient answer,
and make the author appear as irrational and contemptible as
he labours to make Christ and his Apostles.
38. I have hitherto spoken to those chiefly, who do not
receive the Christian system as of God. I would add a few
words to another sort of men;—though not so much with
regard to our principles or practice, as with regard to their
own: To you who do receive it, who believe the Scripture, but
yet do not take upon you the character of religious men. I
am therefore obliged to address myself to you likewise under
the character of men of reason.
39. I would only ask, Are you such indeed? Do you answer
the character under which you appear? If so, you are consistent
with yourselves; your principles and practice agree together.
Let us try whether this is so or not. Do you not take the
name of God in vain? Do you remember the Sabbath-day, to
keep it holy? Do you not speak evil of the ruler of your people?
Are you not a drunkard, or a glutton, faring as sumptuously as
you can every day; making a god of your belly P Do you not
avenge yourself? Are you not a whoremonger or adulterer?
Answer plainly to your own heart, before God the Judge of all.
Why then do you say you believe the Scripture? If the
Scripture is true, you are lost. You are in the broad way
that leadeth to destruction. Your damnation slumbereth not.
You are heaping up to yourself wrath against the day of
wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.
Doubtless, if the Scripture is true, and you remain thus, it
had been good for you if you had never been born.
40. Howisit that you call yourselves men of reason? Is reason
inconsistent with itself? You are the farthest of all men under
the sun from any pretence to that character. A common swearer,
a Sabbath-breaker, a whoremonger, a drunkard, who says he
believes the Scripture is of God, is a monster upon earth, the
greatest contradiction to his own, as well as to the reason of all
mankind. In the name of God, (that worthy name whereby
you are called, and which you daily cause to be blasphemed,)
16 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
turn either to the right hand or to the left. Either profess
you are an infidel, or be a Christian. Halt no longer thus
between two opinions. Either cast off the Bible, or your sins.
And, in the mean time, if you have any spark of your boasted
reason left, do not “count us your enemies,” (as I fear you
have done hitherto, and as thousands do wherever we have
declared, “They who do such things shall not inherit eternal
life,”) “because we tell you the truth; ” seeing these are not
our words, but the words of Him that sent us; yea, though,
in doing this, we use “great plainness of speech,” as becomes
the ministry we have received. “For we are not as many
who corrupt” (cauponize, soften, and thereby adulterate,
“the word of God. But as of sincerity, but as of God, in
the sight of God speak we in Christ.”
41. But, it may be, you are none of these. You abstain from
all such things. You have an unspotted reputation. You are
a man of honour, or a woman of virtue. You scorn to do an
unhandsome thing, and are of an unblamable life and conver
sation. You are harmless (if I understand you right) and use
less from morning to night. You do no hurt,-and no good to
any one, no more than a straw floating upon the water. Your
life glides smoothly on from year to year; and from one season
to another, having no occasion to work,
You waste away
In gentle inactivity the day.
42. I will not now shock the easiness of your temper by
talking about a future state; but suffer me to ask you a
question about present things: Are you now happy?
I have seen a large company of reasonable creatures, called
Indians, sitting in a row on the side of a river, looking some
times at one another, sometimes at the sky, and sometimes at
the bubbles on the water. And so they sat, (unless in the time
of war,) for a great part of the year, from morning to night.
These were, doubtless, much at ease. But can you think they
were happy? And how little happier are you than they?
43. You eat, and drink, and sleep, and dress, and dance, and
sit down to play. You are carried abroad. You are at the
masquerade, the theatre, the opera-house, the park, the levee,
the drawing-room. What do you do there? Why, sometimes
you talk; sometimes you look at one another. And what are
Ol' REASON AND RELIGION, 17
you to do to-morrow, the next day, the next week, the next
year? You are to eat, and drink, and sleep, and dance, and
dress, and play again. And you are to be carried abroad
again, that you may again look at one another ! And is this
all? Alas, how little more happiness have you in this, than
the Indians in looking at the sky or water !
Ah, poor, dull round ! I do not wonder that Colonel M
(or any man of reflection) should prefer death itself, even in
the midst of his years, to such a life as this; and should
frankly declare that he chose to go out of the world, because
he found nothing in it worth living for.
44. Yet it is certain there is business to be done: And many
we find in all places (not to speak of the vulgar, the drudges of
the earth) who are continually employed therein. Are you of
that number? Are you engaged in trade, or some other repu
table employment? I suppose, profitable too; for you would
not spend your time and labour and thought for nothing.
You are then making your fortune; you are getting money.
True; but money is not your ultimate end. The treasuring
up gold and silver, for its own sake, all men own, is as foolish
and absurd, as grossly unreasonable, as the treasuring up
spiders, or the wings of butterflies. You consider this but as
a means to some farther end. And what is that? Why, the
enjoying yourself, the being at ease, the taking your pleasure,
the living like a gentleman; that is, plainly, either the whole
or some part of the happiness above described.
Supposing then your end to be actually attained; suppose
you have your wish before you drop into eternity: Go
and sit down with Thleeanowhee and his companions on
the river side.—After you have toiled for fifty years, you
are just as happy as they.
45. Are you, can you, or any reasonable man, be satisfied
with this? You are not. It is not possible you should. But
what else can you do? You would have something better to
employ your time; but you know not where to find it upon
earth.
And, indeed, it is obvious that the earth, as it is now consti
tuted, even with the help of all European arts, does not afford
sufficient employment to take up half the waking hours of
half its inhabitants.
What then can you do? How can you employ the time
VOL. VIII.
18 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
that lies so heavy upon your hands? This very thing which
you seek declare we unto you. The thing you want is the
religion we preach. That alone leaves no time upon our
hands. It fills up all the blank spaces of life. It exactly
takes up all the time we have to spare, be it more or less; so
that “he that hath much hath nothing over; and he that has
little has no lack.”
46. Once more: Can you, or any man of reason, think you
was made for the life you now lead? You cannot possibly think
so; at least, not till you tread the Bible under foot. The ora
cles of God bear thee witness inevery page, (and thine own heart
agreeth thereto,) that thou wast made in the image of God, an
incorruptible picture of the God of glory. And what art thou,
even in thy present state? An everlasting spirit, going to God.
For what end then did he create thee, but to dwell with him,
above this perishable world, to know him, to love him, to do his
will, to enjoy him for ever and ever? Olook more deeply into
thyself! and into that Scripture, which thou professest to
receive as the word of God, as “right concerning all things.”
There thou wilt find a nobler, happier state described, than it
ever yet entered into thy heart to conceive. But God hath now
revealed it to all those who “rejoice evermore, and pray without
ceasing, and ineverything give thanks,” and dohis “will on earth
as it is done in heaven.” For this thou wast made. Hereunto
also thou art called. O be not disobedient to the heavenly call
ing ! At least be not angry with those who would fain bring
thee to be a living witness of that religion, “whose ways are ”
indeed “ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace.”
47. Do you say in your heart?—“I know all this already.
I am aot barely a man of reason. I am a religious man; for
I not only avoid evil and do good, but use all the means of
grace. I am constantly at church, and at the sacrament too.
I say my prayers every day. I read many good books. I
fast every thirtieth of January, and Good-Friday.” Do
you indeed? Do you do all this? This you may do, you may
go thus far, and yet have no religion at all; no such religion
as avails before God: Nay, much farther than this; than you
have ever gone yet, or so much as thought of going. For you
may “give all your goods to feed the poor,” yea, “ your body
to be burned,” and yet very possibly, if St. Paul be a judge,
“have no charity,” no true religion.
48. This religion, which alone is of value before God, is the
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 19
very thing you want. You want (and in wanting this, you want
all) the religion of love. You do not love your neighbour as
yourself, no more than you love God with all your heart. Ask
your own heart now if it be not so. It is plain you do not love
God. If you did, you would be happy in him. But you know
you are not happy. Your formal religion no more makes you
happy, than your neighbour's gay religion does him. O how
much have you suffered for want of plain dealing! Can you
now bear to hear the naked truth? You have “the form of
godliness, but not the power.” You are a mere whited wall.
Before the Lord your God, I ask you, Are you not? Too sure;
for your “inward parts are very wickedness.” You love “the
creature more than the Creator.” You are “a lover of pleasure
more than a lover of God.” A lover of God | You do not love
God at all, no more than you love a stone. You love the
world; therefore the love of the Father is not in you.
49. You are on the brink of the pit, ready to be plunged into
everlasting perdition. Indeed you have a zeal for God; but
not according to knowledge. O how terribly have you been
deceived posting to hell, and fancying it was heaven. See,
at length, that outward religion, without inward, is nothing; is
far worse than nothing, being, indeed, no other than a solemn
mockery of God. And inward religion you have not. You
have not the faith “that worketh by love.” Your faith (so
called) is no living, saving principle. It is not the Apostle's
faith, “the substance,” or subsistence, “of things hoped for,
the evidence of things not seen.” So far from it, that this faith
is the verything which you call enthusiasm. You are not con
tent with being without it, unless you blaspheme it too. You
even revile that “life which is hid with Christ in God; ” all
seeing, tasting, hearing, feeling God. These things are foolish
ness unto you. No marvel; “for they are spiritually discerned.”
50. O no longer shut your eyes against the light! Know, you
have a name that you live, but are dead. Your soul is utterly
dead in sin; dead in pride, in vanity, in self-will, in sensuality,
in love of the world. You are utterly dead to God. There is
no intercourse between your soul and God. “You have neither
seen him,” (by faith, as our Lord witnessed against them of old
time,) “nor heard his voice at any time.” You have no spirit
ual “senses exercised to discern spiritual good and evil.” You
are angry at infidels, and are all the while as mere an infidel
20 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
before God as they. You have “eyes that see not, and ears.
that hear not.” You have a callous, unfeeling heart.
51. Bear with me a little longer: My soul is distressed for
you. “The god of this world hath blinded your eyes,” and
you are “seeking death in the error of your life.” Because
you do not commit gross sin, because you give alms, and go to
the church and sacrament, you imagine that you are serving
God: Yet, in very deed, you are serving the devil; for you are
doing still your own will, not the will of God your Saviour.
You are pleasing yourself in all you do. Pride, vanity, and
self-will (the genuine fruits of an earthly, sensual, devilish
heart) pollute all your words and actions. You are in dark
mess, in the shadow of death. O that God would say to you
in thunder, “Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light !”
52. But, blessed be God, he hath not yet left himself with
out witness:
All are not lost! There be, who faith prefer,
Though few, and piety to God!
who know the power of faith, and are no strangers to that
inward, vital religion, “the mind that was in Christ; right
eousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.” Of you
who “ have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of
the world to come,” I would be glad to learn if we have
“erred from the faith,” or walked contrary to “the truth as
it is in Jesus.” “Let the righteous smite me friendly, and
reprove me;” if haply that which is amiss may be done away,
and what is wanting supplied, till we all come to the measure
of the stature of the fulness of Christ.
53. Perhaps the first thing that now occurs to your mind
relates to the doctrine which we teach. You have heard that
we say, “Men may live without sin.” And have you not heard
that the Scripture says the same;—we mean, without committing
sin? Does not St. Paul say plainly, that those who believe “do
not continue insin,” that they cannot “live any longertherein?”
(Rom. vi. 1, 2.) Does not St. Peter say, “He that hath suf
fered in the flesh hath ceased from sin; that he no longer should
live to the desires of men, but to the will of God?” (1 Peter iv.
1, 2.) Aad does not St. John say expressly, “He that com
mitteth sin is of the devil? For this purpose the Son of God
was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 21
"Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; for his seed
remaineth in him: And he cannot sin, because he is born
of God.” (1 John iii. 8, &c.) And again: “We know that
whosoever is born of God sinneth not.” (v. 18.)
54. You see then it is not we that say this, but the Lord.
These are not our words, but his. And who is he that replieth
against God? Who is able to make God a liar? Surely he
will be justified in his saying, and clear when he is judged !
Can you deny it? Have you not often felt a secret check when
you was contradicting this great truth? And how often have
you wished for what you was taught to deny P Nay, can you
help wishing for it this moment? Do you not now earnestly
desire to cease from sin? to commit it no more? Does not
your soul pant after this glorious liberty of the sons of God?
And what strong reason have you to expect it! Have you
not had a foretaste of it already? Do you not remember the
time when God first lifted up the light of his countenance
upon you? Can it ever be forgotten? the day when the candle
of the Lord first shone upon your head?
Butter and honey did you eat;
And, lifted up on high,
You saw the clouds beneath your feet,
And rode upon the sky.
Far, far above all earthly things
Triumphantly you rode;
You soar'd to heaven on eagles' wings,
And found, and talk'd with God.
You then had power not to commit sin. You found the
Apostle's words strictly true, “He that is begotten of God
keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not.” But
those whom you took to be experienced Christians telling you,
this was only the time of your espousals, this could not last
always, you must come down from the mount, and the like,
shook your faith. You looked at men more than God, and so be
came weak, and like another man. Whereas, had you then had
any to guide you according to the truth of God, had you then
heard the doctrine which now you blame, you had never fallen
from your steadfastness; but had found, that, in this sense
also, “the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.”
55. Have you not another objection nearly allied to this,
namely, that we preach perfection? True; but what perfec
tion? The term you cannot object to; because it is scriptural,
22 As EARNEST APPFAL TO MEN
All the difficulty is, to fix the meaning of it according to the
word of God. And this we have done again and again, de
claring to all the world, that Christian perfection does not imply
an exemption from ignorance, or mistake, or infirmities, or
temptations; but that it does imply the being so crucified with
Christ, as to be able to testify, “I live not, but Christ liveth
in me,” (Gal. ii. 20,) and hath “purified my heart by faith.”
(Acts xv. 9.) It does imply “the casting down every high
thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ.” It does imply “the being holy, as he that hath called
us is holy, in all manner of conversation; ” (2 Cor. x. 5;
1 Peter i. 15;) and, in a word, “the loving the Lord our God
with all our heart, and serving him with all our strength.”
56. Now, is it possible for any who believe the Scripture to
deny one tittle of this? You cannot. You dare not. You would
not for the world. You know it is the pure word of God. And
this is the whole of what we preach; this is the height and depth
of what we (with St. Paul) call perfection;—a state of soul
devoutly to be wished by all who have tasted of the love of
God. Opray for it without ceasing ! It is the one thing you
want. Come with boldness to the throne of grace; and be
assured that when you ask this of God, you shall have the
petition you ask of him. We know indeed that to man, to
the natural man, this is impossible. But we know also, that.
as no word is impossible with God, so “all things are possible
to him that believeth.”
57. For “we are saved by faith.” But have you not heard
this urged as another objection against us, that we preach
salvation by faith alone? And does not St. Paul do the same
thing? “By grace,” saith he, “ye are saved through faith.”
Can any words be more express? And elsewhere, “Believe in
the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved.” (Acts xvi. 31.)
What we mean by this(if it has not been sufficiently explained
already) is, that we are saved from our sins, only by a confidence
in the love of God. As soon as we “behold what manner of love
it is which the Father hath bestowed uponus, we love him,” (as
the Apostle observes,) “because he first loved us.” And then is
that commandment written in our heart, “That he who loveth
God love his brother also; ” from which love of God and man,
meekness, humbleness of mind, and all holy tempers, spring.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 23
Now, these are the very essence of salvation, of Christian
salvation, salvation from sin; and from these outward salva
tion flows, that is, holiness of life and conversation. Well,
and are not these things so? If you know in whom you
have believed, you need no further witnesses.
58. But perhaps you doubt whether that faith whereby we
are thus saved implies such a trust and confidence in God as
we describe. You cannot think faith implies assurance; an
assurance of the love of God to our souls, of his being now
reconciled to us, and having forgiven all our sins. And this we
freely confess, that, if number of voices is to decide the ques
tion, we must give it up at once: For you have on your side,
not only some who desire to be Christians indeed; but all
nominal Christians in every place; and the Romish Church,
one and all. Nay, these last are so vehement in your defence,
that, in the famed Council of Trent, they have decreed, “If
any man hold (fiduciam) trust, confidence, or assurance of
pardon, to be essential to faith, let him be accursed.”
59. Thus does that Council anathematize the Church of Eng
land; for she is convicted hereof by her own confession. The
very words in the Homily on Salvation are, “Even the devils
believe that Christ was born of a virgin; that he wrought all
kind of miracles, declaring himself very God; that for our sakes
he suffered a most painful death, to redeem us from death ever
lasting. These articles of our faith the devils believe; and so
they believe all that is written in the Old and New Testament.
And yet, for all this faith, they be but devils. They remain still
in their damnable estate, lacking the very true, Christian faith.
“The right and true Christian faith is, not only to believe
the Holy Scriptures, and the articles of our faith, are true;
but also to have a sure trust and confidence, to be saved from
everlasting damnation through Christ.” Or, (as it is ex
pressed a little after,) “a sure trust and confidence which a
man hath in God, that by the merits of Christ his sins are
forgiven, and he reconciled to the favour of God.”
60. Indeed, the Bishop of Rome saith, “If any man hold this,
let him be an Anathema Maranatha.” But it is to be hoped,
Papal anathemas do not move you. You are a member of the
Church of England. Are you? Then the controversy is at an
end. Then hear the Church: “Faith is a sure trust which a
man hath in God, that his sins are forgiven.” Or, if you are not,
24 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
whether you hear our Church or no, at least hear the Scrip
tures. Hear believing Job, declaring his faith, “I know that
my Redeemer liveth.” Hear Thomas (when having seen, he
believed) crying out, “My Lord and my God!” Hear St.
Paul cleasly describing the nature of his faith, “The life I now
live, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me.” Hear (to mention no more) all the believers
who were with Paul when he wrote to the Colossians, bearing
witness, “We give thanks unto the Father, who hath delivered
us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into
the kingdom of his dear Son; in whom we have redemption
through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.” (i. 12, 13, 14.)
61. But what need have we of distant witnesses? You have
a witness in your own breast. For am I not speaking to one
that loves God? How came you then to love him at first?
Was it not because you knew that he loved you? Did you,
could you, love God at all, till you tasted and saw that he
was gracious; that he was merciful to you a sinner? What
avails then controversy, or strife of words? Out of thy own
mouth ! You own you had no love to God till you was sensi
ble of his love to you. And whatever expressions any sinner
who loves God uses, to denote God's love to him, you will
always upon examination find, that they directly or indirectly
imply forgiveness. Pardoning love is still at the root of all.
He who was offended is now reconciled. The new song which
God puts in every mouth is always to that effect: “O Lord, I
will praise thee; though thou wast angry with me, thine anger
is turned away. Behold, God is my salvation. I will trust,
and not be afraid: For the Lord Jehovah is my strength and
my song; he is also become my salvation.” (Isaiah xii. 1, 2.)
62. A confidence then in a pardoning God is essential to
saving faith. The forgiveness of sins is one of the first of those
unseen things whereof faith is the evidence. And if you are
sensible of this, will you quarrel with us concerning an indiffer
ent circumstance of it? Will you think it an important objec
tion, that we assert that this faith is usually given in a moment?
First, let me entreat you to read over that authentic account of
God’s dealings with men, the Acts of the Apostles. In this
treatise you will find how he wrought from the beginning on
those who received remission of sins by faith. And can you
find one of these (except, perhaps, St. Paul) who did not receive
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 25
it in a moment? But abundance you find of those who did,
besides Cornelius and the three thousand. (Acts ii. 41.) And
to this also agrees the experience of those who now receive the
heavenly gift. Three or four exceptions only have I found in the
course of several years;—perhaps you yourself may be added
to that number, and one or two more whom you have known.
But all the rest of those who from time to time among us have
believed in the Lord Jesus were in a moment brought from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
63. And why should it seem a thing incredible to you, who
have known the power of God unto salvation, (whether he hath
wrought thus in your soul or no; “for there are diversities of
operations, but the same Spirit,”) that “the dead should hear
the voice of the Son of God,” and in that moment live? Thus
he useth to act, to show that when he willeth, to do is present
with him. “Let there be light,” said God; “and there was
light. He spoke the word, and it was done. Thus the heavens
and the earth were created, and all the hosts of them.” And
this manner of acting in the present case highly suits both his
power and love. There is therefore no hinderance on God’s
part; since “as his majesty is, so is his mercy.” And what
ever hinderance there is on the part of man, when God speaketh,
it is not. Only ask then, O sinner, “and it shall be given
thee,” even the faith that brings salvation: And that without
any merit or good work of thine; for “it is not of works, lest
any man should boast.” No; it is of grace, of grace alone. For
“unto him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifi
eth the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for righteousness.”
64. “But by talking thus you encourage sinners.” I do
encourage them—to repent; and do not you? Do not you
know how many heap sin upon sin, purely for want of such
encouragement; because they think they can never be forgiven,
there is no place for repentance left? Does not your heart also
bleed for them? What would you think too dear to part with?
What would you not do, what would you not suffer, to bring
one such sinner to repentance? Could not your love “endure
all things” for them? Yes,—if you believed it would do them
good; if you had any hope that they would be better. Why
do you not believe it would do them good? Why have you not
a hope that they will be better? Plainly, because you do not
love them enough; because you have not that charity which
26 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
not only endureth, but at the same time believeth and hopeth,
all things.
65. But that you may see the wholestrength of this objection, I
will show you, without any disguise or reserve, how I encourage
the chief of sinners. My usual language to them runs thus:—
O ye that deny the Lord that bought you, yet hear the word
of the Lord! You seek rest, but find none. your heart is in heaviness. Even in laughter
How long spend ye your labour for
that which is not bread, and your strength for that which satis
fieth not? You know your soul is not satisfied. It is still an
aching void. Sometimes you find, in spite of your principles,
a sense of guilt, an awakened conscience. That grisly phan
tom, religion, (so you describe her,) will now and then haunt
you still. Righteousness looking down from heaven is indeed
to us no unpleasing sight. But how does it appear to you?
Horribili super aspecta mortalibus instans ? *
How often are you in fear of the very things you deny?
How often in racking suspense? What, if there be an
hereafter, a judgment to come, an unhappy eternity? Do
you not start at the thought? Can you be content to be
always thus? Shall it be said of you akso?—
“Here lies a dicer, long in doubt
If death could kill the soul, or not :
Here ends his doubtfulness; at last
Convinced: But, O, the die is cast !”
Or, are you already convinced there is no hereafter? What a
poor state then are you in now? taking a few more dull turns
upon earth, and then dropping into nothing ! What kind of
spirit must you be of, if you can sustain yourself under the
thought ! under the expectation of being in a few moments
swept away by the stream of time, and then for ever
swallow'd up, and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated night !
But neither indeed are you certain of this; nor of anything
else. It may be so; it may not. A vast scene is behind:
* The following is Dr. Mason Good's translation of this quotation from
Lucretius, and of the lines connected with it:—
“Them long the tyrant power
Of SUPERSTItion sway’d, uplifting proud
Her head to heaven, and with horrific limbs
Brooding o'er earth.”—EDIT.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 27
But clouds and darkness rest upon it. All is doubt and uncer
tainty. You are continually tossed to and fro, and have no
firm ground for the sole of your foot. O let not the poor wis
dom of man any longer exalt itself against the wisdom of God!
You have fled from him long enough; at length, suffer your
eyes to be opened by Him that made them. You want rest to
your soul. Ask it of Him who giveth to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not ! You are now a mere riddle to yourself, and
your condition full of darkness and perplexity. You are one
among many restless inhabitants of a miserable, disordered
world, “walking in a vain shadow, and disquieting yourself in
vain.” But the light of God will speedily disperse the anxiety
of your vain conjectures. By adding heaven to earth, and eter
nity to time, it will open such a glorious view of things as will
lead you, even in the present world, to a peace which passeth
all understanding.
66. O ye gross, vile, scandalous sinners, hear ye the word
of the Lord. “Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; so
iniquity shall not be your ruin. As I live, saith the Lord, I
have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he'
should turn and live.” O make haste; delay not the time !
“Come, and let us reason together: Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be red
as crimson, they shall be as wool. Who is this that cometh
from Edom, with dyed garments, red in his apparel?” It is
He on whom the Lord “hath laid the iniquities of us all !”
Behold, behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away thy sins!
See the only-begotten Son of the Father, “full of grace and
truth !” He loveth thee. He gave himself for thee. Now his
bowels of compassion yearn over thee! O believe in the Lord
Jesus, and thou shalt be saved !“Go in peace, sin no more!”
67. Now, cannot you join in all this? Is it not the very lan
guage of your heart? O when will you take knowledge, that our
whole concern, our constant labour, is, to bring all the world
to the religion which you feel; to solid, inward, vital religion!
What power is it then that keeps us asunder? “Is thine heart
right, as my heart is with thy heart? If it be, give me thy
hand. Come with me, and see,” and rejoice in, “my zeal for the
Lord.” No difference between us (if thou art a child of God)
can be so considerable as our agreement is. If we differ in
smaller things, we agree in that which is greatest of all. How
28 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
is it possible then that you should be induced to think or speak
evil of us? How could it ever come into your mind to oppose
us, or weaken our hands? How long shall we complain of the
wounds which we receive in the house of our friends? Surely
the children of this world are still “wiser in their generation
than the children of light.” Satan is not divided against him
self: Why are they who are on the Lord’s side? How is it
that wisdom is not justified of her own children?
68. Is it because you have heard that we only make religion
a cloak for covetousness; and because you have heard abun
dance of particulars alleged in support of that general charge?
It is probable you may also have heard how much we have
gained by preaching already; and, to crown all, that we are
only Papists in disguise, who are undermining and destroying
the Church.
69. You have heard this. Well; and can you believe it?
Have you then never heard the fifth chapter of St. Matthew?
I would to God you could believe it. What is written there?
How readest thou? “Blessed are ye, when men shall revile
you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you
falsely, for my name's sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad: For
great is your reward in heaven: For so persecuted they the
Prophets that were before you;” namely, by “reviling them,
and saying all manner of evil of them falsely.” Do not you
know that this, as well as all other scriptures, must needs be
fulfilled? If so, take knowledge that this day also it is fulfilled
in your ears. For our Lord’s sake, and for the sake of his
gospel which we preach, “men do revile us and persecute us,
and ” (blessed be God, who giveth us to rejoice therein) “say
all manner of evil of us falsely.” And how can it be otherwise?
“The disciple is not above his Master. It is enough for the
disciple, that he be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord.
If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more shall they call them of his household?”
70. This only we confess, that we preach inward salvation,
now attainable by faith. And for preaching this (for no other
crime was then so much as pretended) we were forbid to preach
any more in those churches, where, till then, we were gladly
received. This is a notorious fact. Being thus hindered from
preaching in the places we should first have chosen, we now
declare the “grace of God which bringeth salvation,” in all
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 29
places of his dominion; as well knowing, that God dwelleth
not only in temples made with hands. This is the real, and it is
the only real, ground of complaint against us. And this we
avow before all mankind, we do preach this salvation by faith.
And not being suffered to preach it in the usual places, we
declare it wherever a door is opened, either on a mountain, or
a plain, or by a river side, (for all which we conceive we have
sufficient precedent,) or in prison, or, as it were, in the house
of Justus, or the school of one Tyrannus. Nor dare werefrain.
“A dispensation of the gospel is committed to me; and woe
is me, if I preach not the gospel.”
71. Here we allow the fact, but deny the guilt. But is every
other point alleged, we deny the fact, and call upon the world
to prove it, if they can. More especially, we call upon those
who for many years saw our manner of life at Oxford. These
well know that “after the straitest sect of our religion we
lived Pharisees;” and that the grand objection to us for all
those years was, the being righteous overmuch ; the reading,
fasting, praying, denying ourselves,—the going to church, and
to the Lord’s table,—the relieving the poor, visiting those that
were sick and in prison, instructing the ignorant, and labouring
to reclaim the wicked,—more than was necessary for salvation.
These were our open, flagrant crimes, from the year 1729 to
the year 1737; touching which our Lord shall judge in thatday.
72. But, waving the things that are past, which of you now
convinceth us of sin? Which of you (I here more especially
appeal to my brethren, the Clergy) can personally convict us
of any ungodliness or unholiness of conversation? Ye know in
your own hearts, (all that are candid men, all that arenot utterly
blinded with prejudice,) that we “labour to have a conscience
void of offence both toward God and toward man.” Brethren,
I would to God that in this ye were even as we. But indeed
(with grief I speak it) ye are not. There are among yourselves
ungodly and unholy men; openly, undeniably such; drunkards,
gluttons, returners of evil for evil, liars, swearers, profaners of
the day of the Lord. Proof hereof is not wanting, if ye require
it. Where then is your zeal against these? A Clergyman, so
drunk he can scarce stand or speak, may, in the presence of a
thousand people," set upon another Clergyman of the same
* At Epworth, in Lincolnshire.
30 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
Church, both with abusive words and open violence. And what
follows? Why, the one is still allowed to dispense the sacred
signs of the body and blood of Christ: But the other is not
allowed to receive them,--because he is a field Preacher.
73. O ye pillars and fathers of the Church, are these things
well-pleasing to Him who hath made you Overseers over that
flock which he hath purchased with his own blood? O that ye
would suffer me to boast myself a little ! Is there not a
cause? Have ye not compelled me? Which of your Clergy are
more unspotted in their lives, which more unwearied in their
labours, than those whose “names ye cast out as evil,” whom
ye count “as the filth and off-scouring of the world?” Which
of them is more zealous to spend and be spent, for the lost
sheep of the house of Israel? Or who among them is more
ready to be offered up for their flock “upon the sacrifice and
service of their faith ?”
74. Will ye say, (as the historian of Catiline,) Si sic pro
patrid “If this were done in defence of the Church, and not
in order to undermine and destroy it !” That is the very pro
position I undertake to prove,—that we are now defending the
Church, even the Church of England, in opposition to all
those who either secretly undermine or more openly attempt
to destroy it.
75. That we are Papists, (we who are daily and hourly preach
ing that very doctrine which is so solemnly anathematized by
the whole Church of Rome,) is such a charge that I dare not
waste my time in industriously confuting it. Let any man of
common sense only look on the title-pages of the sermons we
have lately preached at Oxford, and he will need nothing moreto
show him the weight of this senseless, shameless accusation;–
unless he can suppose the Governors both of Christ Church and
Lincoln College, nay, and all the University, to be Papists too.
76. You yourself can easily acquit us of this; but not of
the other part of the charge. You still think we are secretly
undermining, if not openly destroying, the Church.
What do you mean by the Church? A visible Church (as
our article defines it) is a company of faithful or believing
people;—coetus credentium. This is the essence of a Church;
and the propertiesthereofare, (as they are described in the words
that follow,) “among whom the pure word of God is preached,
and the sacraments duly administered.” Now then, (according
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 31
to this authentic account,) what is the Church of England?
What is it indeed, but the faithful people, the true believers in
England? It is true, if these are scattered abroad, they come
under another consideration: But when they are visibly
joined, by assembling together to hear the pure word of God
preached, and to eat of one bread, and drink of one coup, they
are then properly the visible Church of England.
77. It were well if this were a little more considered by those
who so vehemently cry out, “The Church ! the Church !” (as
those of old, “The temple of the Lord! the temple of the
Lord!”) not knowing what they speak, nor whereof they affirm.
A provincial or national Church, according to our article, is the
true believers of that province or nation. If these are dispersed
up and down, they are only a part of the invisible Church of
Christ. But if they are visibly joined by assembling together
to hear his word and partake of his supper, they are then avisible
Church, such as the Church of England, France, or any other.
78. This being premised, I ask, How do we undermine or
destroy the Church,—the provincial, visible Church of Eng
land? The article mentions three things as essential to a
visible Church. First : Living faith; without which, indeed,
there can be no Church at all, neither visible nor invisible. Se
condly: Preaching, and consequently hearing, the pure word of
God, else that faith would languish and die. And, Thirdly, a due
administration of the sacraments,—the ordinary means whereby
God increaseth faith. Now come close to the question: In
which of these points do we undermine or destroy the Church?
Do we shut the door of faith? Do we lessen the number of
believing people in England 7 Only remember what faith is,
according to our Homilies, viz., “a sure trust and confidence
in God, that through the merits of Christ my sins are for
given, and I reconciled to the favour of God.” And we
appeal to all mankind, Do we destroy this faith, which is the
life and soul of the Church 7 Is there, in fact, less of this
faith in England, than there was before we went forth? I
think this is an assertion which the father of lies himself will
scarce dare to utter or maintain.
With regard then to this First point, it is undeniable we
neither undermine nor destroy the Church. The Second thing
is the preaching and hearing the pure word of God. And dowe
hinder this? Do we hinder any Minister from preaching the
32 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
pure word of God? If any preach not at all, or not the pure word
of God, is the hinderance in us, or in themselves? or do we
lessen the number of those that hear the pure word of God?
Are then the hearers thereof (whether read or preached) fewer
than they were in times past? Are the usual places of pub
lic worship less frequented by means of our preaching?
Wheresoever our lot has been cast for any time, are the
churches emptier than they were before? Surely, none that
has any regard left either for truth or modesty will say that
in this point we are enemies to, or destroyers of, the Church.
The Third thing requisite (if not to the being, at least) to
the well-being of a Church, is the due administration of the
sacraments, particularly that of the Lord’s supper. And are we,
in this respect, underminers or destroyers of the Church? Do
we, either by our example or advice, draw men away from the
Lord’s table? Where we have laboured most, are there the
fewest communicants? How does the fact stand in London,
Bristol, Newcastle? Othat you would no longer shut your eyes
against the broad light which encompasses you on every side
79. I believe you are sensible, by this time, not only how
weak this objection is, but likewise how easy it would be
terribly to retort every branch of it upon most of those that
make it; whether we speak of true living faith, of preaching
the pure word of God, or of the due administration of the
sacraments, both of baptism and the Lord’s supper. But I
spare you. It sufficeth that our God knoweth, and will make
manifest in that day, whether it be by reason of us or you
that “men abhor the offering of the Lord.”
80. Others object that we do not observe the laws of the
Church, and thereby undermine it. What laws? the Rubrics
or Canons? In every parish where I have been Curate yet, I
have observed the Rubrics with a scrupulous exactness, not for
wrath, but for conscience’ sake. And this, so far as belongs to
an unbeneficed Minister, or to a private member of the Church,
I do now. I will just mention a few of them, and leave you to
consider which of us has observed, or does observe, them most.
(1) Days of fasting or abstinence to be observed:
The forty days of Lent;
The Ember days at the four seasons;
The three Rogation days;
All Fridays in the year, except Christmas-day.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 33
(2.) “So many as intend to be partakers of the holy com
munion shall signify their names to the Curate, at least some
time the day before:
“And if any of these be an open and notorious evil liver,
the Curate shall advertise him, that in anywise he presume
not to come to the Lord’s table, until he hath openly declared
himself to have truly repented.
(3.) “Then (after the Nicene Creed) the Curate shall
declare unto the people what holidays or fasting-days are in
the week following to be observed.
(4) “The Minister shall first receive the communion in
both kinds himself, and then proceed to deliver the same to
the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, in like manner, if any be
present, and after that, to the people.
(5.) “In cathedral and collegiate churches, and colleges,
where there are many Priests and Deacons, they shall all receive
the communion with the Priest every Sunday at the least.
(6.) “The children to be baptized must be ready at the
font immediately after the last Lesson.
(7.) “The Curates of every parish shall warn the people,
that without great necessity they procure not their children
to be baptized at home in their houses.
(8.) “The Curate of every parish shall diligently upon Sun
days and holidays, after the Second Lesson at Evening Prayer,
openly in the church, instruct and examine so many children
as he shall think convenient, in some part of the Catechism.
(9.)“Whensoever the Bishop shall give notice for children to
be brought unto him for their confirmation, the Curate of every
parish shall either bring or send in writing, with his hand
subscribed thereunto, the names of all such persons within his
parish, as he shall think fit to be presented to the Bishop.”
81. Now, the question is not whether these Rubrics ought
to be observed, (you take this for granted in making the objec
tion,) but whether in fact they have been observed by you, or
me, most. Many can witness I have observed them punctu
ally, yea, sometimes at the hazard of my life; and as many, I
fear, that you have not observed them at all, and that several
of them you never pretended to observe. And is it you that
are accusing me for not observing the Rubrics of the Church?
What grimace is this ! “O tell it not in Gath ! Publish it
not in the streets of Askelon | *
VOL. VIII.
34 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
82. With regard to the Canons, I would, in the first place,
desire you to consider two or three plain questions:
First. Have you ever read them over?
Secondly. How can these be called the Canons of the Church
of England, seeing they were never legally established by the
Church, never regularly confirmed in any full Convocation?
Thirdly. By what right am I required to observe such
Canons as were never legally established?
And then I will join issue with you on one question more,
viz., Whether you or I have observed them most.
To instance only in a few:
“Canon 29.—No person shall be admitted godfather or
godmother to any child, before the said person hath received
the holy communion.
“Can. 59.—Every Parson, Vicar, or Curate, upon every
Sunday and holiday, before Evening Prayer, shall, for half
an hour, or more, examine and instruct the youth and igno
rant persons of his parish.
“Can. 64.—Every Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall declare
to the people every Sunday, whether there be any holidays or
fasting-days the week following.
“Can. 68.—No Minister shall refuse or delay to christen
any child that is brought to the church to him upon Sundays
or holidays to be christened, or to bury any corpse that is
brought to the church or church-yard.”
(N.B. Inability to pay fees does not alter the case.)
“Can. 75.—No ecclesiastical persons shall spend their time
idly, by day or by night, playing at dice, cards, or tables.”
Now, let the Clergyman who has observed only these five
Canons for one year last past, and who has read over all the
Canons in his congregation; (as the King’s ratification straitly
enjoins him to do once every year;) let him, I say, cast the
first stone at us, for not observing the Canons (so called) of
the Church of England.
83. “However, we cannot be,” it is said, “friends to the
Church, because we do not obey the Governors of it, and sub
mit ourselves (as at our ordination we promised to do) to all their
godly admonitions and injunctions.”* I answer, In every indi
* The author of a tract just published at Newcastle, entitled, “The Notions of
the Methodists fully disproved, in a Letter to the Rev. Mr. John Wesley,” much
insists upon this objection. I have read, and believe it quite needless to take any
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 35
vidual point of an indifferent nature, we do and will, by the
grace of God, obey the Governors of the Church. But the
testifying the gospel of the grace of God is not a point of an
indifferent nature. “The ministry which we have received
of the Lord Jesus,” we are at all hazards to fulfil. It is the
burden of the Lord which is laid upon us here; and we are
“to obey God rather than man.” Nor yet do we in any ways
violate the promise which each of us made, when it was said
unto him, “Take thou authority to preach the word of God,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
ghost.” We then promised to submit (mark the words) to the
Godly admonitions and injunctions of our Ordinary. But
we did not, could not, promise to obey such injunctions as we
know are contrary to the word of God.
84. “But why then,” say some, “do you leave the Church?”
Leave the Church I What can you mean? Do we leave so
much as the Church walls? Your own eyes tell you we do not.
Do we leave the ordinances of the Church 7 You daily see
and know the contrary. Do we leave the fundamental doctrine
of the Church, namely, salvation by faith? It is our constant
theme, in public, in private, in writing, in conversation. Do
we leave the practice of the Church, the standard whereof are
the ten commandments? which are so essentially in-wrought
in her constitution, (as little as you may apprehend it,) that
whosoever breaks one of the least of these is no member of the
Church of England. I believe you do not care to put the
cause on this issue. Neither do you mean this by leaving the
Church. In truth, I cannot conceive what you mean. I doubt
you cannot conceive yourself. You have retailed a sentence
from somebody else, which you no more understand than he.
And no marvel; for it is a true observation,
Nonsense is never to be understood.
85. Nearly related to this is that other objection, that we
divide the Church. Remember, the Church is the faithful peo
ple, or true believers. Now, how do we divide these ? “Why,
by our societies.” Very good. Now the case is plain. “We
further notice of, this performance; the writer being so utterly unacquainted
with the merits of the cause; and showing himself so perfectly a stranger, both to
my life, preaching, and writing, and to the word of God, and to the Articles and
Homilies of the Church of England.
36 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
divide them,” you say, “by uniting them together.” Truly,
a very uncommon way of dividing. “O, but we divide those
who are thus united with each other, from the rest of the
Church !” By no means. Many of them were before joined
to all their brethren of the Church of England (and many were
not, until they knew us) by “assembling themselves together,”
to hear the word of God, and to eat of one bread, and drink of
one cup. And do they now forsake that assembling themselves
together? You cannot, you dare not, say it. You know they
are more diligent therein than ever; it being one of the fixed
rules of our societies, that every member attend the ordinances
of God; that is, do not divide from the Church. And if any
member of the Church does thus divide from or leave it, he
hath no more place among us.
86. I have considered this objection the more at large,
because it is of most weight with sincere minds. And to all
these, if they have fairly and impartially weighed the answer as
well as the objection, I believe it clearly appears, that we are
neither undermining nor destroying, neither dividing nor leav
ing, the Church. So far from it, that we have great heaviness
on her account, yea, continual sorrow in our hearts. And our
prayer to God is, that he would repair the breaches of Zion, and
build the walls of Jerusalem; that this our desolate Church
may flourish again, and be the praise of the whole earth.
87. But perhaps you have heard that we in truth regard no
Church at all; that gain is the true spring of all our actions;
that I, in particular, am well paid for my work, having thirteen
hundred pounds a year (as a reverend author accurately com
putes it) at the Foundery alone, over and above what I receive
from Bristol, Kingswood, Newcastle, and other places; and
that whoever survives me will see I have made good use of
my time; for I shall not die a beggar.
88. I freely own this is one of the best-devised objections
which has ever yet been made; because it not only puts us upon
proving a negative, (which is seldom an easy task,) but also one
of such a kind as scarce admits of any demonstrative proof at
all. But for such proof as the nature of the thing allows, I
appeal to my manner of life which hath been from the begin
ning. Ye who have seen it (and not with a friendly eye) for
these twelve or fourteen years last past, or for any part of that
time, have ye ever seen anything like the love of gain therein?
OF REASON AND RELIGION, 37
Did I not continually remember the words of the Lord Jesus,
“It is more blessed to give than to receive?” Ye of Oxford,
do ye not know these things are so? What gain did I seek
among you? Of whom did I take anything? From whom did
I covet silver, or gold, or apparel? To whom did I deny any
thing which I had, even to the hour that I departed from you?
Ye of Epworth and Wroote, among whom I ministered for
nearly the space of three years, what gain did I seek among
you? Or of whom did I take or covet anything? Ye of Savannah
and Frederica, among whom God afterwards proved me, and
showed me what was in my heart, what gain did I seek among
you? Of whom did I take anything? Or whose food or apparel
did I covet, (for silver or gold had ye none, no more than I
myself for many months,) even when I was in hunger and
nakedness? Ye yourselves, and the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, know that I lie not.
89. “But,” it is said, “things are fairly altered now. Now
I cannot complain of wanting anything; having the yearly
income of a Bishop of London, over and above what I gain at
other places.” At what other places, my friend? Inform your
self a little better, and you will find that both at Newcastle,
Bristol, and Kingswood, and all other places, where any collec
tion is made, the money collected is both received and
expended by the stewards of those several societies, and
never comes into my hands at all,—neither first nor last.
And you, or any who desire it, shall read over the accounts
kept by any of those stewards, and see with your own eyes,
that by all these scoieties I gain just as much as you do.
90. The case in London stands thus:-In November, 1739,
two gentlemen, then unknown to me, (Mr. Ball and Mr. Wat
Kins,) came and desired me, once and again, to preach in a place
called the Foundery, near Moorfields. With much reluctance
I at length complied. I was soon after pressed to take that
place into my own hands. Those who were most earnest therein
lent me the purchase-money, which was one hundred and fif
teen pounds. Mr. Watkins and Mr. Ball then delivered me
the names of several subscribers, who offered to pay, some four
or six, some ten shillings a year towards the repayment of the
purchase-money, and the putting the buildings into repair.
This amounted one year to near two hundred pounds, the
second to about one hundred and forty pounds, and so the last.
38 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
91. The united society began a little after, whose weekly
contribution for the poor is received and expended by the stew
ards, and comes not into my hands at all. But there is also a
quarterly subscription of many of the society, which is nearly
equal to that above mentioned.
92. The uses to which these subscriptions have been hitherto
applied, are, First, the payment of that one hundred and fifteen
pounds: Secondly, the repairing (I might almost say, rebuild
ing) that vast, uncouth heap of ruins, the Foundery: Thirdly,
the building galleries both for men and women: Fourthly, the
enlarging the society-room to near thrice its first bigness. All
taxes and occasional expenses are likewise defrayed out of this
fund. And it has been hitherto so far from yielding any over
plus, that it has never sufficed for these purposes. So far from
it, that I am still in debt, on these accounts, near three hun
dred pounds. So much have I hitherto gained by preaching
the gospel! besides a debt of one hundred and fifty pounds,
still remaining on account of the school built at Bristol; and
another of above two hundred pounds, on account of that now
building at Newcastle. I desire any reasonable man would
now sit down and lay these things together, and let him see,
whether, allowing me a grain of common sense, if not of
common honesty, he can possibly conceive, that a view of
gain would induce me to act in this manner.
93. You can never reconcile it with any degree of common
sense, that a man who wants nothing, who has already all the
necessaries, all the conveniences, nay, and many of the super
fluities, of life, and these not only independent on any one, but
less liable to contingencies than even a gentleman’s freehold
estate; that such an one should calmly and deliberately throw
up his ease, most of his friends, his reputation, and that way
of life which of all others is most agreeable both to his natural
temper and education; that he should toil day and night,
spend all his time and strength, knowingly destroy a firm con
stitution, and hasten into weakness, pain, diseases, death,-to
gain a debt of six or seven hundred pounds!
94. But suppose the balance on the other side, let me ask
you one plain question: For whatgain (setting conscience aside)
will you be obliged to act thus? to live exactly as I do? For
what price will you preach (and that with all your might, not
in an easy, indolent, fashionableway) eighteen or nineteen times.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 39
every week; and this throughout the year? What shall I give
you to travel seven or eight hundred miles, in all weathers,
every two or three months? For what salary will you abstain
from all other diversions, than the doing good, and the praising
God? I am mistaken if you would not prefer strangling to
such a life, even with thousands of gold and silver.
95. And what is the comfort you have found out for me in
these circumstances? Why, that I shall not die a beggar. So
now I am supposed to be heaping up riches, that I may leave
them behind me. Leave them behind me ! For whom? my
wife and children? Who are they? They are yet unborn.
Unless thou meanest the children of faith whom God hath given
me. But my heavenly Father feedeth them. Indeed, if I lay
up riches at all, it must be to leave behind me; seeing my Fel
lowship is a provision for life. But I cannot understand this.
What comfort would it betomy soul, now launched into eternity,
that I had left behind me gold as the dust, and silver as the sand
of the sea? Will it follow me over the great gulf? or can I go
back to it? Thou that liftest up thy eyes in hell, what do thy
riches profit thee now? Will all thou once hadst under the sun
gain thee a drop of water to cool thy tongue? O the comfort of
riches left behind to one who is tormented in that flame! You
put me in mind of those celebrated lines, (which I once exceed
ing admired,) addressed by way of consolation to the soul of a
poor self-murderer:—
Yet shall thy grave with rising flowers be dress'd,
And the green turf lie light upon thy breast !
Here shall the year its earliest beauties show :
Here the first roses of the spring shall blow :
While angels with their silver wings o'ershade
The place now sacred by thy relics made.
96. I will now simply tell you my sense of these matters,
whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear. Food and
raiment I have; such food as I choose to eat, and such raiment
as I choose to put on. I have a place where to lay my head.
I have what is needful for life and godliness. And I appre
hend this is all the world can afford. The kings of the earth
can give me no more. For as to gold and silver, I count it
dung and dross; I trample it under my feet. I (yet not I,
but the grace of God that is in me) esteem it just as the mire
in the streets. I desire it not; I seek it not; I only fear lest
40 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
any of it should cleave to me, and I should not be able to shake
it off before my spirit returns to God. It must indeed pass
through my hands; but I will take care (God being my helper)
that the mammon of unrighteousness shall only pass through;
it shall not rest there. None of the accursed thing shall be
found in my tents when the Lord calleth me hence. And hear
ye this, all you who have discovered the treasures which I amto
leave behind me: If I leave behind me ten pounds, (above my
debts, and my books, or what may happen to be due on account
of them,) you and all mankind bear witness against me, that I
lived and died a thief and a robber,
97. Before I conclude, I cannot but entreat you who know
God to review the whole matter from the foundation. Call to
mind what the state of religion was in our nation a few years
since. In whom did you find the holy tempers that were in
Christ? bowels of mercies, lowliness, meekness, gentleness,
contempt of the world, patience, temperance, long-suffering?
a burning love to God, rejoicing evermore, and in everything
giving thanks; and a tender love to all mankind, covering,
believing, hoping, enduring all things? Perhaps you did not
know one such man in the world. But how many that had all
unholy tempers? What vanity and pride, what stubbornness
and self-will, what anger, fretfulness, discontent, what suspicion
and resentment, what inordinate affections, what irregular pas
sions, what foolish and hurtful desires, might you find in those
who were called the best of men, in those who made the strict
est profession of religion? And how few did you know who
went so far as the profession of religion, who had even the “form
of godliness!” Did you not frequently bewail, wherever your
lot was cast, the general want of even outward religion? How
few were seen at the public worship of God! how much fewer
at the Lord’s table ! And was cven this little flock zealous of
good works, careful, as they had time, to do good to all men?
On the other hand, did you not with grief observe outward
irreligion in every place? Where could you be for one week
without being an eye or an ear witness of cursing, swearing, or
profaneness, of sabbath-breaking or drunkenness, of quarrelling
or brawling, of revenge or obscenity? Were these things done
in a corner ? Did not gross iniquity of all kinds overspread our
land as a flood? yea, and daily increase, in spite of all the oppo
sition which the children of God did or could make against it?
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 41
98. If you had been then told that the jealous God would
soon arise and maintain his own cause; that he would pour down
his Spirit from on high, and renew the face of the earth; that
he would shed abroad his love in the hearts of the outcasts of
men, producing all holy and heavenly tempers, expelling anger,
and pride, and evil desire, and all unholy and earthly tempers;
causing outward religion, the work of faith, the patience of hope,
the labour of love, to flourish and abound; and, wherever it
spread, abolishing outward irreligion, destroying all the works of
the devil: If you had been told that this living knowledge of
the Lord would in a short space of time overspread our land;
yea, and daily increase, in spite of all the opposition which the
devil and his children did or could make against it; would you
not have vehemently desired to see that day, that you might
bless God and rejoice therein?
99. Behold, the day of the Lord is come! He is again visiting
and redeeming his people. Having eyes, see ye not? Having
ears, do ye not hear, neither understand with your hearts? At
this hour the Lord is rolling away our reproach. Already his
standard is set up. His Spirit is poured forth on the outcasts of
men, and his love shed abroad in their hearts. Love of all man
kind, meekness, gentleness, humbleness of mind, holy and hea
venly affections, do take place of hate, anger, pride, revenge, and
vile or vain affections. Hence, wherever the power of the Lord
spreads, springs outward religion in all its forms. The houses
of God are filled; the table of the Lord is thronged on every
side. And those who thus show their love of God, show they
love their neighbour also, by being careful to maintain good
works, by doing all manner of good, as they have time, to all
men. They are likewise careful to abstain from all evil. Curs
ing, sabbath-breaking, drunkenness, with all other (however
fashionable) works of the devil, are not once named among
them. All this is plain, demonstrable fact. For this also is not
done in a corner. Now, do you acknowledge the day of your
visitation? Do you bless God and rejoice therein?
100. What hinders? Is it this,—that men say all manner
of evil of those whom God is pleased to use as instruments in
his work? O ye fools, did ye suppose the devil was dead? or
that he would not fight for his kingdom ? And what weapons
shall he fight with, if not with lies? Is he not a liar, and the
father of it? Suffer ye then thus far. Let the devil and his
42 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
children say all manner of evil of us. And let them go on
deceiving each other, and being deceived. But ye need not be
deceived also; or if you are, if you will believe all they say, be
it so,-that we are weak, silly, wicked men; without sense,
without learning, without even a desire or design of doing good;
yet I insist upon the fact: Christ is preached, and sinners are
converted to God. This none but a madman can deny. We
are ready to prove it by a cloud of witnesses. Neither, there
fore, can the inference be denied, that God is now visiting his
people. O that all men may know, in this their day, the
things that make for their peace !
101. Upon the whole, to men of the world I would still recom
mend the known advice of Gamaliel: “Refrain from these men,
and let them alone: For if this work be of men, it will come to
nought: But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply
ye be found even to fight against God.” But unto you whom
God hath chosen out of the world, I say, Ye are our brethren,
and of our father’s house; it behoveth you, in whatsoever man
ner ye are able, “to strengthen our hands in God.” And this
ye are all able to do; to wish us good luck in the name of the
Lord, and to pray continually that none of “these things may
move us,” and that “we may not count our lives dear unto
ourselves, so that we may finish our course with joy, and the
ministry which we have received of the Lord Jesus!”
Written in the year 1744.
OF REASON AND RELIGION.
PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY
HAPPY the souls who first believed,
To Jesus and each other cleaved,
Join’d by the unction from above,
In mystic fellowship of love!
Meek, simple followers of the Lamb,
They lived and spake and thought the same;
Brake the commemorative bread,
And drank the Spirit of their Head.
On God they cast their every care:
Wrestling with God in mighty prayer,
They claim'd the grace, through Jesus given;
By prayer they shut and open'd heaven.
To Jesus they perform'd their vows:
A little Church in every house,
They joyfully conspired to raise
Their ceaseless sacrifice of praise.
Propriety was there unknown,
None call'd what he possess'd his own;
Where all the common blessings share,
No selfish happiness was there.
With grace abundantly endued,
A pure, believing multitude!
They all were of one heart and soul,
And only love inspired the whole.
O what an age of golden days 1
O what a choice, peculiar race!
Wash’d in the Lamb's all-cleansing blood,
Anointed kings and priests to God.
Where shall I wander now to find
The successors they left behind?
The faithful whom I seek in vain,
Are 'minished from the sons of men.
Ye different sects, who all declare,
“Lo, here is Christ !” or, “Christ is there!”
Your stronger proofs divinely give,
And show me where the Christians live.
44 AN EARNEST APPEAL TO MEN
Your claim, alas! ye cannot prove,
Ye want the genuine mark of love:
Thou only, Lord, thine own canst show;
For sure thou hast a Church below.
The gates of hell cannot prevail,
The Church on earth can never fail:
Ah! join me to thy secret ones |
Ah! gather all thy living stones !
Scatter'd o'er all the earth they lie,
Till thou collect them with thine eye,
Draw by the music of thy name,
And charm into a beauteous frame.
For this the pleading Spirit groans,
And cries in all thy banish'd ones:
Greatest of gifts, thy love, impart,
And make us of one mind and heart!
Join every soul that looks to thee
In bonds of perfect charity:
Now, Lord, the glorious fulness give,
And all in all for ever live!
PART II.
JESUs, from whom all blessings flow,
Great Builder of thy Church below,
If now thy Spirit moves my breast,
Hear, and fulfil thy own request!
The few that truly call thee Lord,
And wait thy sanctifying word,
And thee their utmost Saviour own,
Unite, and perfect them in one.
Gather them in on every side,
And in thy tabernacle hide;
Give them a resting-place to find,
A covert from the storm and wind.
O find them out some calm recess,
Some unfrequented wilderness!
Thou, Lord, the secret place prepare,
And hide and feed “the woman” there
Thither collect thy little flock,
Under the shadow of their Rock:
The holy sced, the royal race,
The standing monuments of thy grace.
OF REASON AND RELIGION.
O let them all thy mind express,
Stand forth thy chosen witnesses !
Thy power unto salvation show,
And perfect holiness below:
The fulness of thy grace receive,
And simply to thy glory live;
Strongly reflect the light divine,
And in a land of darkness shine.
In them let all mankind behold
How Christians lived in days of old;
Mighty their cnvious oes to move,
A proverb of reproach—and love.
O make them of one soul and heart,
The all-conforming mind impart;
Spirit of peace and unity,
The sinless mind that was in thee.
Call them into thy wondrous light,
Worthy to walk with thee in white;
Make up thy jewels, Lord, and show
The glorious, spotless Church below.
From every sinful wrinkle free,
Redeem'd from all iniquity;
The fellowship of saints make known;
And O, my God, might I be one!
O might my lot be cast with these,
The least of Jesu's wituesses !
() that my Lord would count me meet
To wash his dear disciples’ feet!
This only thing do I require,
Thou know'st 'tis all my heart's desire,
Freely what I receive to give,
The servant of thy Church to live :
After my lowly Lord to go,
And wait upon the saints below;
Enjoy the grace to angels given,
And serve the royal heirs of heaven.
Lord, if I now thy drawings feel,
And ask according to thy will,
Confirm the prayer, the seal impart,
And speak the answer to my heart!
Tell me, or thou shalt never go,
“Thy prayer is heard, it shall be so : "
The word hath passed thy lips, -and I
Shall with thy people live and die.
A FARTHER APPEAL
TO
MEN OF REASON AND RELIGION
Let the righteous smite me friendly, and reprove me. Psalm crli. 5.
PART I.
IN a former treatise I declared, in the plainest manner I
could, both my principles and practice; and answered some of
the most important, as well as the most common, objections
to each. But I have not yet delivered my own soul. I believe
it is still incumbent upon me to answer other objections, par
ticularly such as have been urged by those who are esteemed
religious or reasonable men.
These partly relate to the doctrines I teach, partly to my
manner of teaching them, and partly to the effects which are sup
posed to follow from teaching these doctrines in this manner.
I. 1. I will briefly mention what those doctrines are, before
I consider the objections against them. Now, all I teach
respects either the nature and condition of justification, the
nature and condition of salvation, the nature of justifying
and saving faith, or the Author of faith and salvation.
2. First: The nature of justification. It sometimes means
our acquittal at the last day. (Matt. xii. 37.) But this is alto
gether out of the present question; that justification whereof
our Articles and Homilies speak, meaning present forgiveness,
pardon of sins, and, consequently, acceptance with God; who
therein “declares his righteousness” (or mercy, by or) “for
the remission of the sins that are past;” saying, “I will be
A FARTHER APPEAL. 47
merciful to thy unrighteousness, and thine iniquities I will
remember no more.” (Rom. iii. 25; Heb. viii. 12.)
I believe the condition of this is faith : (Rom. iv. 5, &c.:) I
mean, not only, that without faith we cannot be justified; but,
also, that as soon as any one has true faith, in that moment he
is justified. Good works follow this faith, but cannot go before it: (Luke
vi. 43.) Much less can sanctification, which implies a con
timued course of good works, springing from holiness of heart.
But it is allowed, that entire sanctification goes before our
justification at the last day. (Heb. xii. 14.)
It is allowed, also, that repentance, and “fruits meet for
repentance,” go before faith. (Mark i. 15; Matthew iii. 8.)
Repentance absolutely must go before faith; fruits meet for
it, if there be opportunity. By repentance, I mean conviction
of sin, producing real desires and sincere resolutions of amend
ment; and by “fruits meet for repentance,” forgiving our bro
ther; (Matt. vi. 14, 15;) ceasing from evil, doing good; (Luke
iii. 3, 4, 9, &c.;) using the ordinances of God, and in general
obeying him according to the measure of grace which we have
received. (Matt. vii. 7; xxv. 29.) But these I cannot as yet
term good works; because they do not spring from faith and
the love of God.
3. By salvation I mean, not barely, according to the vulgar
notion, deliverance from hell, or going to heaven; but a
present deliverance from sin, a restoration of the soul to its
primitive health, its original purity; a recovery of the divine
nature; the renewal of our souls after the image of God, in
righteousness and true holiness, in justice, mercy, and truth.
This implies all holy and heavenly tempers, and, by conse
quence, all holiness of conversation.
Now, if by salvation we mean a present salvation from sin,
we cannot say, holiness is the condition of it; for it is the
thing itself. Salvation, in this sense, and holiness, are
synonymous terms. We must therefore say, “We are saved
by faith.” Faith is the sole condition of this salvation. For
without faith we cannot be thus saved. But whosoever
believeth is saved already.
Without faith we cannot be thus saved; for we cannot
rightly serve God unless we love him. And we cannot love
him unless we know him; neither can we know God unless by
48 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
faith. Therefore, salvation by faith is only, in other words,
the love of God by the knowledge of God; or, the recovery of
the image of God, by a true, spiritual acquaintance with him.
4. Faith, in general, is a divine, supernatural exeyxos * of
things not seen, not discoverable by our bodily senses, as being
either past, future, or spiritual. Justifying faith implies, not
only a divine exeyxos, that God “was in Christ, reconciling
the world unto himself,” but a sure trust and confidence that
Christ died for my sins, that he loved me, and gave himself for
me. And the moment a penitent sinner believes this, God
pardons and absolves him.
And as soon as his pardon or justification is witnessed to
him by the Holy Ghost, he is saved. He loves God and all
mankind. He has “the mind that was in Christ,” and power
to “walk as he also walked.” From that time (unless he
make shipwreck of the faith) salvation gradually increases in
his soul. For “so is the kingdom of God, as if a man should
cast seed into the ground; and it springeth up, first the blade,
then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.”
5. The first sowing of this seed I cannot conceive to be
other than instantaneous; whether I consider experience, or
the word of God, or the very nature of the thing;—however,
I contend not for a circumstance, but the substance: If you
can attain it another way, do. Only see that you do attain it;
for if you fall short, you perish everlastingly.
This beginning of that vast, inward change, is usually termed,
the new birth. Baptism is the outward sign of this inward
grace, which is supposed by our Church to be given with and
through that sign to all infants, and to those of riper years, if
they repent and believe the gospel. But how extremely idle are
the common disputes on this head ! I tell a sinner, “You must
be born again.” “No,” say you: “He was born again in bap
tism. Therefore he cannot be born again now.” Alas, what
trifling is this! What, if he was then a child of God? He is
now manifestly achild of the devil; for the works of his fatherhe
doeth. Therefore, do not play upon words. He must go through
an entire change of heart. In one not yet baptized, you yourself
would call that change, the new birth. In him, call it what you
will; but remember, meantime, that if either he or you die
* Evidence, or conviction.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 49
without it, your baptism will be so far from profiting you,
that it will greatly increase your damnation.
6. The author of faith and salvation is God alone. It is
he that works in us both to will and to do. He is the sole
Giver of every good gift, and the sole Author of every good
work. There is no more of power than of merit in man;
but as all merit is in the Son of God, in what he has done
and suffered for us, so all power is in the Spirit of God. And
therefore every man, in order to believe unto salvation, must
receive the Holy Ghost. This is essentially necessary to every
Christian, not in order to his working miracles, but in order
to faith, peace, joy, and love,—the ordinary fruits of the Spirit.
Although no man on earth can explain the particular
manner wherein the Spirit of God works on the soul, yet
whosoever has these fruits, cannot but know and feel that
God has wrought them in his heart.
Sometimes He acts more particularly on the understanding,
opening or enlightening it, (as the Scripture speaks,) and re
vealing, unveiling, discovering to us “the deep things of God.”
Sometimes He acts on the wills and affections of men;
withdrawing them from evil, inclining them to good, inspiring
(breathing, as it were) good thoughts into them : So it has
frequently been expressed, by an easy, natural metaphor,
strictly analogous to r", Trvevua, spiritus, and the words
used in most modern tongues also, to denote the third person
in the ever-blessed Trinity. But however it be expressed,
it is certain all true faith, and the whole work of salvation,
every good thought, word, and work, is altogether by the
operation of the Spirit of God.
II. 1. I come now to consider the principal objections
which have lately been made against these doctrines.
I know nothing material which has been objected as to the
nature of justification; but many persons seem to be very
confused in their thoughts concerning it, and speak as if they
had never heard of any justification antecedent to that of
the last day. To clear up this, there needs only a closer
inspection of our Articles and Homilies; wherein justifica
tion is always taken for the present remission of our sins.
But many are the objections which have been warmly urged
against the condition of justification, faith alone; particularly
in two treatises, the former entitled, “The Notions of the
VOL. VIII.
50 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
Methodists fully disproved; ” the second, “The Notions of the
Methodists farther disproved: ” In both of which it is vehe
mently affirmed, (1.) That this is not a scriptural doctrine;
(2.) That it is not the doctrine of the Church of England.
It will not be needful to name the former of these any more;
seeing there is neither one text produced therein to prove this
doctrine unscriptural, nor one sentence from the Articles or
Homilies to prove it contrary to the doctrine of the Church.
But so much of the latter as relates to the merits of the cause,
I will endeavour to consider calmly. As to what is personal,
I leave it as it is. “God be merciful to me, a sinner!”
2. To prove this doctrine unscriptural,—That faith alone
is the condition of justification,—you allege, that “sanctifi
cation, according to Scripture, must go before it: ”To evince
which, you quote the following texts, which I leave as I find
them : “Go, disciple all nations,—teaching them to observe
all things, whatsoever I have commanded you.” (Matt. xxviii.
19, 20) “He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.”
(Mark xvi. 16.) “Preach repentance and remission of sins.”
(Luke xxiv. 47.) “Repent, and be baptized every one of
you, for the remission of sins.” (Acts ii. 38.) “Repent and
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out.” (iii. 19.)
“By one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are
sanctified.” (Heb. x. 14.) You add, “St. Paul taught ‘re
pentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ; (Acts xx. 21;) and calls “repentance from dead
works, and faith toward God, first principles. (Heb. vi. 1.)”
You subjoin : “But ‘ye are washed, says he, “but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified. By ‘washed, is meant their
baptism; and by their baptism is meant, first, their sanctifi
cation, and then their justification.” This is a flat begging
the question; you take for granted the very point which you
ought to prove. “St. Peter also,” you say, “affirms that
‘baptism doth save us, or justify us.” Again you beg the
question; you take for granted what I utterly deny, viz., that
save and justify are here synonymous terms. Till this is
proved, you can draw no inference at all; for you have no
foundation whereon to build.
I conceive these and all the scriptures which can be quoted
to prove sanctification antecedent to justification, (if they do
not relate to our final justification,) prove only, (what I have
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 51
never denied,) that repentance, or conviction of sin, and
fruits meet for repentance, precede that faith whereby we are
justified: But by no means, that the love of God, or any
branch of true holiness, must or can precede faith.
3. It is objected, Secondly, that justification by faith alone
is not the doctrine of the Church of England.
“You believe,” says the writer above-mentioned, “that no
good work can be previous to justification, nor, consequently,
a condition of it. But, God be praised, our Church has
nowhere delivered such abominable doctrine.” (Page 14.)
“The Clergy contend for inward holiness, as previous to
the first justification;—this is the doctrine they universally
inculcate, and which you cannot oppose without contradict
ing the doctrine of our Church.” (Page 26.)
“All your strongest persuasives to the love of God will
not blanch over the deformity of that doctrine, that men
may be justified by faith alone;—unless you publicly recant
this horrid doctrine, your faith is vain.” (Page 27.)
“If you will vouchsafe to purge out this venomous part of
your principles, in which the wide, essential, fundamental,
irreconcilable difference, as you very justly term it, mainly
consists, then there will be found, so far, no disagreement be
tween you and the Clergy of the Church of England.” (Ibid.)
4. In order to be clearly and fully satisfied what the doctrine
of the Church of England is, (as it stands opposite to the doc
trine of the Antinomians, on the one hand, and to that of justi
fication by works, on the other,) Iwill simply set down what oc
curs on this head, either in her Liturgy, Articles, or Homilies:—
“Spare thou them, O God, which confess their faults:
Restore thou them that are penitent, according to thy pro
mises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesu our Lord.”
“He pardoneth and absolveth all them that truly repent,
and unfeignedly believe his holy gospel.”
“Almighty God, who dost forgive the sins of them that are
Penitent, create and makein us new and contrite hearts; that we,
worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our wretched
ness, may obtain of thee perfect remission and forgiveness,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.” (Collect for Ash-Wednesday.)
“Almighty God—hath promised forgiveness of sins to all
them that with hearty repentance and true faith turn unta
him.” (Communion Office.)
52 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
“Our Lord Jesus Christ hath left power to absolve all sinners
who truly repent and believe in him.” (Visitation of the Sick.)
“Give him unfeigned repentance and steadfast faith, that
his sins may be blotted out.” (Ibid.)
“He is a merciful receiver of all true penitent sinners, and
is ready to pardon us, if we come unto him with faithful
repentance.” (Commination Office.)
Infants, indeed, our Church supposes to be justified in
baptism, although they cannot then either believe or repent.
But she expressly requires both repentance and faith in those
who come to be baptized when they are of riper years.
As earnestly, therefore, as our Church inculcates justifi
cation by faith alone, she nevertheless supposes repentance to
be previous to faith, and fruits meet for repentance; yea,
and universal holiness to be previous to final justification, as
evidently appears from the following words:—
“Let us beseech him—that the rest of our life may be
pure and holy, so that at the last we may come to his eternal
joy.” (Absolution.)
“May we seriously apply our hearts to that holy and hea
venly wisdom here, which may in the end bring us to life
everlasting.” (Visitation of the Sick.)
“Raise us from the death of sin unto the life of righteous
ness,—that at the last day we may be found acceptable in thy
sight.” (Burial Office.)
“If we from henceforth walk in his ways, -seeking always
his glory, Christ will set us on his right hand.” (Commina
tion Office.)
5. We come next to the Articles of our Church: The
former part of the Ninth runs thus:
OF ORIGINAL OR BIRTH-SIN.
“Original sin—is the fault and corruption of the nature of
every man,—whereby man is very far gone from original
righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil, so
that the flesh lusteth always contrary to the spirit; and
therefore in every person born into this world, it deserveth
God’s wrath and damnation.”
ARTICLE X.-OF FREE-WILL.
“The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, that
he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 53
and good works to faith and calling upon God. Wherefore
we have no power to do good works, pleasant and acceptable
to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us,
that we may have a good-will, and working with us when we
have that good-will.”
ARTICLE XI.-OF THE JUSTIFICATION OF MAN.
“We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our
own works or deservings. Wherefore that we are justified by
faith only, is a most wholesome doctrine, and very full of com
fort, as most largely is expressed in the Homily of Justification.”
I believe this Article relates to the meritorious cause of jus
tification, rather than to the condition of it. On this, therefore,
I do not build anything concerning it, but on those that follow.
ARTICLE XII.-OF GOOD WORKS.
“Albeit, that good works, which are the fruits of faith and
follow after justification, cannot put away our sins; yet are
they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring
out necessarily of a true and lively faith : Insomuch that by
them a lively faith may be as evidently known as a tree may
be known by the fruit.”
We are taught here, (1.) That good works in general
follow after justification. (2.) That they spring out of a
true and lively faith, that faith whereby we are justified.
(3.) That true, justifying faith may be as evidently known by
them as a tree discerned by the fruit.
Does it not follow, that the supposing any good work to go
before justification is full as absurd as the supposing an apple,
or any other fruit, to grow before the tree?
But let us hear the Church, speaking yet more plainly:—
AltTICLE XIII.-OF WORKS DONE BEFORE JUSTIFICATION.
“Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration
of his Spirit,” (that is, before justification, as the title expresses
it.) “are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not
of faith in Jesu Christ. Yea, rather, for that they are not
done as God hath willed and commanded them to be done, we
-doubt not they have the nature of sin.”
Now, if all works done before justification have the nature of
sin, (both because they spring not of faith in Christ, and because
54 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
they are not done as God hath willed and commanded them
to be done,) what becomes of sanctification previous to justi
fication? It is utterly excluded; seeing whatever is previous
to justification is not good or holy, but evil and sinful.
Although, therefore, our Church does frequently assert that
we ought to repent, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance, if
ever we would attain to that faith whereby alone we are justified;
yet she never asserts (and here the hinge of the question turns)
that these are good works, so long as they are previous to justi
fication. Nay, she expressly asserts the direct contrary, viz.,
that they have all the nature of sin. So that this “horrid,
scandalous, wicked, abominable, venomous, blasphemous doc
trine,” is nevertheless the doctrine of the Church of England.
6. It remains to consider what occurs in the Homilies, first
with regard to the meritorious cause of our justification, agree
able to the eleventh; and then with regard to the condition
of it, agreeable to the twelfth and thirteenth Articles:—
“These things must go together in our justification;—upon
God’s part, his great mercy and grace; upon Christ's part,
the satisfaction of God’s justice; and upon our part, true and
lively faith in the merits of Jesus Christ.” (Homily on Salva
tion. Part I.)
“So that the grace of God doth not shut out the justice
(or righteousness) of God in our justification; but only shutteth
out the righteousness of man,—as to deserving our justification.
“And therefore St. Paul declareth nothing on the behalf of
man, concerning his justification, but only a true faith.
“And yet that faith doth not shut out repentance, hope,
love, to be joined with faith (that is, afterwards; see below) in
every man that is justified: Neither doth faith shut out the
righteousness of our good works, necessarily to be done after
wards. But it excludeth them so that we may not do them to
this intent,—to be made just (or, to be justified) by doing them.
“That we are justified by faith alone, is spoken to take away
clearly all merit of our works, and wholly to ascribe the merit
and deserving of our justification unto Christ only.” (Ibid.
Part II.)
“The true meaning of this saying, ‘We be justified by
faith only, is this, “We be justified by the merits of Christ
only, and not of our own works.’” (Ibid. Part III.)
7. Thus far touching the meritorious cause of our justifica
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 55
tion; referred to in the Eleventh Article. The Twelfth and
Thirteenth are a summary of what now follows, with regard
to the condition of it:—
“Of justifying, true faith, three things are specially to be
noted: First, that it bringeth forth good works: Secondly,
that without it can no good works be done: Thirdly, what good
works it doth bring forth.” (Sermon on Faith. Part I.)
“Without faith can no good work be done, accepted and
pleasant unto God. For ‘as a branch cannot bear fruit of
itself,” saith our Saviour Christ, ‘except it abide in the vine,
so cannot you, except you abide in me.’ Faith giveth life to
the soul; and they be as much dead to God that lack faith, as
they be to the world whose bodies lack souls. Without faith
all that is done of us is but dead before God. Even as a picture
is but a dead representation of the thing itself, so be the works
of all unfaithful (unbelieving) persons before God. They be
but shadows of lively and good things, and not good things
indeed. For true faith doth give life to the works, and without
faith no work is good before God.” (Ibid. Part III.)
“We must set no good works before faith, nor think that
before faith a man may do any good works. For such works
are as the course of an horse that runneth out of the way,
which taketh great labour, but to no purpose.” (Ibid.)
“Without faith we have no virtues, but only the shadows
of them. All the life of them that lack the true faith is sin.”
(Ibid.)
“As men first have life, and after be nourished, so must our
faith go before, and after be nourished with, good works. And
life may be without nourishment, but nourishment cannot be
without life.” (Homily of Works annexed to Faith. Part I.)
“I can show a man that by faith without works lived and
came to heaven. But without faith never man had life. The
thief on the cross only believed, and the most merciful God
justified him. Truth it is, if he had lived and not regarded
faith and the works thereof, he should have lost his salvation
again. But this I say, faith by itself saved him. But works
by themselves never justified any man.
“Good works go not before in him which shall afterwards
be justified. But good works do follow after when a man is
first justified.” (Homily on Fasting. Part I.)
8. From the whole tenor then of her Liturgy, Articles, and
56 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MREN
Homilies, the doctrine of the Church of England appears to
be this:
(1.) That no good work, properly so called, can go before
justification. (2.) That no degree of true sanctification can be previous toit.
(3.) That as the meritorious cause of justification is the life
and death of Christ, so the condition of it is faith, faith alone.
And,
(4.) That both inward and outward holiness are consequent
on this faith, and are the ordinary, stated condition of final
justification. 9. And what more can you desire, who have hitherto opposed
justification by faith alone, merely upon a principle of conscience;
because you was zealous for holiness and good works? Do I
not effectually secure these from contempt at the same time that
I defend the doctrines of the Church? I not only allow, but
vehemently contend, that none shall ever enter into glory who is
not holy on earth, as well in heart, as “in all manner of conver
sation.” I cry aloud, “Let all that have believed, be careful to
maintain good works; ” and, “Let every one that nameth the
name of Christ, depart from all iniquity.” I exhort even those
who are conscious they do not believe: “Cease to do evil, learn
to do well: The kingdom of heaven is at hand; ” therefore,
“repent, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance.” Are not
these directions the very same in substance which you yourself
would give to persons so circumstanced? What means then this
endless strife of words? Or what doth your arguing prove P
10. Many of those who are perhaps as zealous of goodworks as
you, think I have allowed you too much. Nay, my brethren, but
how can we help allowing it, if weallow the Scriptures to be from
God? For is it not written, and do not you yourselves believe,
“Without holiness no man shall see the Lord?” And how then,
without fighting about words, can we deny that holiness is a con
dition of final acceptance? And as to the first acceptance or
pardon, does not all experience, as well as Scripture, prove that
no man ever yet truly believed the gospel who did not first
repent? that none was ever yet truly “convinced of righteous
ness,” who was not first “convinced of sin?” Repentance, there
fore, in this sense, we cannot deny to be necessarily previous to
faith. Is it not equally undeniable, that the running back into
known, wilful sin, (suppose it were drunkennessor uncleanness,)
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 57
stifles that repentance or conviction? And can that repentance
come to any good issue in his soul, who resolves not to forgive
his brother; or who obstinately refrains from what God con
vinces him is right, whether it be prayer or hearing his word?
Would you scruple yourself to tell one of these, “Why, if
you will thus drink away all conviction, how should you ever
truly know your want of Christ; or, consequently, believe in
him ? If you will not forgive your brother his trespasses,
neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses.
If you will not ask, how can you expect to receive? If you
will not hear, how can “faith come by hearing?’ It is plain
you ‘grieve the Spirit of God;’ you will not have him to reign
over you. Take care that he does not utterly depart from you.
For ‘unto him that hath shall be given; but from him that
hath not,’ that is, uses it not, “shall be taken away, even that
which he hath.’” Would you scruple, on a proper occasion,
to say this? You could not scruple it if you believe the
Bible. But in saying this, you allow all which I have said,
viz., that previous to justifying faith, there must be repentance,
and, if opportunity permit, “fruits meet for repentance.”
11. And yet I allow you this, that although both repent
ance and the fruits thereof are in some sense necessary be
fore justification, yet neither the one nor the other is neces
sary in the same sense, or in the same degree, with faith.
Not in the same degree; for in whatever moment a man
believes (in the Christian sense of the word) he is justified,
his sins are blotted out, “his faith is counted to him for right
eousness.” But it is not so at whatever moment he repents,
or brings forth any or all the fruits of repentance. Faith
alone, therefore, justifies; which repentance alone does not,
much less any outward work. And, consequently, none of these
are necessary to justification, in the same degree with faith.
Nor in the same sense. For none of these has so direct,
immediate a relation to justification as faith. This is proxi
mately necessary thereto; repentance, remotely, as it is neces
sary to the increase or continuance of faith. And even in this
sense these are only necessary on supposition,—if there be time
and opportunity for them; for in many instances there is not;
but God cuts short his work, and faith prevents the fruits of
repentance. So that the general proposition is not overthrown,
but clearly established by these concessions; and we conclude
58 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
still, both on the authority of Scripture and the Church, that
faith alone is the proximate condition of justification.
III. l. Iwasonceinclined to believe that none would openly
object against what I had anywhere said of the nature of salva
tion. How greatly, then was I surprised some months ago,
when I was shown a kind of circular letter, which one of those
whom “the Holy Ghost hath made overseers” of his Church,”
I was informed, had sent to all the Clergy of his diocese !
Past of it ran (nearly, if not exactly) thus:—
“There is great indiscretion in preaching up a sort of
religion, as the true and only Christianity, which, in their
own account of it, consists in an enthusiastic ardour, to be
understood or attained by very few, and not to be practised
without breaking in upon the common duties of life.”
O, my Lord, what manner of words are these ! Supposing
candour and love out of the question, are they the words of
truth? I dare stake my life upon it, there is not one true
clause in all this paragraph.
The propositions contained therein are these :
(1.) That the religion I preach consists in enthusiastic ardour.
(2.) That it can be attained by very few.
(3.) That it can be understood by very few.
(4.) That it cannot be practised without breaking in upon
the common duties of life.
(5.) And that all this may be proved by my own account of it.
I earnestly entreat your Grace to review my own account
of it, as it stands in any of my former writings; or to consider
the short account which is given in this; and if you can thence
make good any one of those propositions, I do hereby pro
mise, before God and the world, that I will never preach more.
At present I do not well understand what your Grace means
by “an enthusiastic ardour.” Surely you do not mean the
love of God! No, not though a poor, pardoned sinner should
carry it so far as to love the Lord his God with all his heart,
and with all his soul, and with all his strength ! But this
alone is the ardour which I preach up as the foundation of the
true and only Christianity. I pray God so to fill your whole
heart therewith, that you may praise him for ever and ever.
But why should your Grace believe that the love of God can
be attained by very few ; or, that it can be understood by very
* The (then) Archbishop of York.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 59
few 7 All who attain it understand it well. And did not He
who is loving to every man design that every man should
attain true love? “O that all would know, in this their day,
the things that make for their peace l’’
And cannot the love both of God and our neighbour be
practised, without breaking in upon the common duties of
life? Nay, can any of the common duties of life be rightly
practised without them? I apprehend not. I apprehend I
am then laying the true, the only foundation for all those
duties, when I preach, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and thy neighbour as thyself.”
2. With this letter was sent (I believe to every Clergyman in
the diocese) the pamphlet, entitled, “Observations on the Con
duct and Behaviour of a certain Sect, usually distinguished by
the name of Methodists.” It has been generally supposed to be
wrote by a person who is every way my superior. Perhaps one
reason why he did not inscribe his name was, that his greatness
might not make me afraid; and that I might have liberty to
stand as it were on even ground, while I answer for myself.
In considering, therefore, such parts of these “Observations”
as fall in my way, I will take that method which I believe the
author desires, using no ceremony at all; but speaking as to
an equal, that it may the more easily be discerned where the
truth lies.
The first query relating to doctrine is this:—
“Whether motions in religion may not be heightened to such
extremes, as to lead some into a disregard of religion itself,
through despair of attaining such exalted heights: And whe
ther others who have imbibed those notions may not be led by
them into a disregard and disesteem of the common duties and
offices of life; to such a degree, at least, as is inconsistent with
that attention to them, and that diligence in them, which Provi
dence has made necessary to the well-being of private families
and public societies, and which Christianity does not only
require in all stations, and in all conditions, but declares at
the same time, that the performance even of the lowest offices
in life, as unto God, (whose providence has placed people in
their several stations,) is truly a serving of Christ, and will
not fail of its reward in the next world.”
You have interwoven so many particulars in this general
question, that I must divide and answer them one by one.
60 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
Query 1. Whether notions in religion may not be heightened
to such extremes, as to lead some into a disregard of religion
itself.
Answer. They may. But that I have so heightened them,
it lies upon you to prove.
Q. 2. Whether others may not be led into a disregard of
religion, through despair of attaining such exalted heights.
A. What heights? the loving God with all our heart? I
believe this is the most exalted height in man or angel. But
I have not heard that any have been led into a disregard of
religion through despair of attaining this.
Q. 3. Whether others who have imbibed these notions may
not be led by them into a disregard and disesteem of the com
mon duties and offices of life.
A. My notions are, True religion is the loving God with all
our heart, and our neighbour as ourselves; and in that love
abstaining from all evil, and doing all possible good to all men.
Now, it is not possible, in the nature of things, that any should
be led by these notions into either a disregard or disesteem
of the common duties and offices of life.
Q. 4. But may they not be led by them into such a degree,
at least, of disregard for the common duties of life as is incon
sistent with that attention to them, and diligence in them,
which Providence has made necessary?
A. No; quite the reverse. They lead men to discharge
all those duties with the strictest diligence and closest atten
tion.
Q. 5. Does not Christianity require this attention and dili
gence in all stations and in all conditions?
A. Yes.
Q. 6. Does it not declare that the performance even of the
lowest offices of life, as unto God, is truly “a serving of Christ;”
and will not fail of its reward in the next world?
A. It does. But whom are you confuting? Not me; for
this is the doctrine I preach continually.
3. Query the Second:—“Whether the enemy of Christi
anity may not find his account in carrying Christianity, which
was designed for a rule to all stations and all conditions, to such
heights as make it practicable by a very few, in comparison,
or rather, by none.”
I answer, (1.) The height to which we carry Christianity (as
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 61
was but now observed) is this: “Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbour as thyself.”
(2.) The enemy of Christianity cannot find his account in our
carrying it to this height. (3.) You will not say, on reflection,
that Christianity, even in this height, is practicable by very
few, or rather, by none: You yourself will confess this is a rule
(as God designed it should) for all stations and all conditions.
Query the Third:—“Whether, in particular, the carrying
the doctrine of justification by faith alone to such a height as
not to allow that a sincere and carefulobservance of moral duties
is so much as a condition of our acceptance with God, and of our
being justified in his sight: Whether this, Isay, does not natu
rally lead people to a disregard of those duties, and a lowesteem of
them; or, rather, tothink them no part of the Christian religion.”
I trust justification by faith alone has been so explained
above, as to secure not only a high esteem but also a careful
and sincere observance of all moral duties.
4. Query the Fourth :—“Whether a due and regular
attendance on the public offices of religion, paid by good men
in a serious and composed way, does not answer the true ends
of devotion, and is not a better evidence of the co-operation
of the Holy Spirit, than those sudden agonies, roarings,
screamings, tremblings, droppings down, ravings, and mad
nesses, into which their hearers have been cast.”
I must answer this query likewise part by part.
Query 1. Whether a due and regular attendance on the
public offices of religion, paid in a serious and composed
way, by good (that is, well-meaning) men, does not answer
the true ends of devotion.
Answer. I suppose, by devotion, you mean public worship;
by the true ends of it, the love of God and man; and by a due
and regular attendance on the public offices of religion, paid in a
serious and composed way, the going as often as we have oppor
tunity to our parish church, and to the sacrament there adminis
tered. If so, the question is, whether this attendance on those
offices does not produce the love of God and man. I answer,
Sometimes it does; and sometimes it does not. I myself thus
attended them for many years; and yet am conscious to myself
that during that whole time I had no more of the love of God
than a stone. And I know many hundreds, perhaps thousands,
of serious persons, who are ready to testify the same thing.
62 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
Q. 2. But is not this a better evidence of the co-operation
of the Holy Spirit, than those sudden agonies?
A. All these persons, as well as I, can testify also that this
is no evidence at all of the co-operation of the Holy Spirit.
For some years I attended these public offices, because I
would not be punished for non-attendance. And many of
these attended them, because their parents did before them,
or because they would not lose their character: Many more,
because they confounded the means with the end, and fancied
this opus operatum would bring them to heaven. How many
thousands are now under this strong delusion | Beware, you
bring not their blood on your own head !
Q. 3. However, does not this attendance better answer
those ends, than those roarings, screamings? &c.
A. I suppose you mean, better than an attendance on
that preaching, which has often been accompanied with these.
I answer, (1.) There is no manner of need to set the one in
opposition to the other; seeing we continually exhort all who
attend on our preaching to attend the offices of the Church.
And they do pay a more regular attendance there than ever
they did before. (2.) Their attending the Church did not, in
fact, answer those ends at all till they attended this preaching
also. (3.) It is the preaching of remission of sins through
Jesus Christ, which alone answers the true ends of devotion.
And this will always be accompanied with the co-operation of
the Holy Spirit; though not always with sudden agonies,
roarings, screamings, tremblings, or droppings down. Indeed,
if God is pleased at any time to permit any of these, I cannot
hinder it. Neither can this hinder the work of his Spirit in
the soul; which may be carried on either with or without
them. But, (4.) I cannot apprehend it to be any reasonable
proof, that “this is not the work of God,” that a convinced
sinner should “fall into an extreme agony, both of body and
soul; ” (Journal III., p.26;) that another should “roar for the
disquietness of her heart; ” (p. 40;) that others should scream
or “cry with a loud and bitter cry, ‘What must we do to be
saved?’” (p. 50;) that others should “exceedingly tremble and
quake; ” (p. 58;) and others, in a deep sense of the majesty
of God, “should fall prostrate upon the ground.” (P. 59.)
Indeed, by picking out one single word from a sentence, and
then putting together what you had gleaned in sixty or seventy
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 63
pages, you have drawn a terrible group for them who look no
farther than those two lines in the “Observations.” But the
bare addition of half a line to each word, just as it stands in
the place from which you quoted it, reconciles all both to
Scripture and reason; and the spectre-form vanishes away.
You have taken into your account ravings and madnesses too.
As instances of the former, you refer to the case of John Hay
don, (p. 44,) and of Thomas Maxfield. (P. 50.) I wish you
would calmly consider his reasoning on that head, who is not
prejudiced in my favour: “What influence sudden and sharp
awakenings may have upon the body, I pretend not to explain.
But I make no question, Satan, so far as he gets power, may
exert himself on such occasions, partly to hinder the good
work in the persons who are thus touched with the sharp
arrows of conviction, and partly to disparage the work of God,
as if it tended to lead people to distraction.”
For instances of madness you refer to pages 88,90, 91, 92,
93. The words in page 88 are these:—
“I could not but be under some concern, with regard to one
or two persons, who were tormented in an unaccountable man
ner, and seemed to be indeed lunatic as well as ‘sore vexed.’
Soon after I was sent for to one of these, who was so strangely
‘torn of the devil,” that I almost wondered her relations did
not say, Much religion ‘hath made thee mad. We prayed
God to bruise Satan under her feet. Immediately ‘we had
the petition we asked of him. She cried out vehemently,
‘He is gone ! he is gone !’ and was filled with the Spirit of
‘love, and of a sound mind.’ I have seen her many times since
strong in the Lord. When I asked, abruptly, ‘What do you
desire now 2° she answered, “Heaven.” I asked, ‘What is in
your heart?” She replied, ‘God.” I asked, “But how is your
heart when anything provokes you?” She said, ‘By the grace
of God, I am not provoked at anything. All the things of this
world pass by me as shadows.’” Are these the words of one
that is beside herself? Let any man of reason judge!
Your next instance (p. 90) stands thus:
“About noon I came to Usk, where I preached to a small
company of poor people, on, ‘The Scn of man is come to save
that which is lost.’ One grey-headed man wept and trembled
exceedingly; and another who was there, (I have since heard,)
as well as two or three who were at the Devauden, are gone quite
64 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
distracted; that is, (my express words, that immediately follow,
specify what it was which some accounted distraction,) “they
mourn and refuse to be comforted, until they have redemption
through his blood.’”
If you think the case mentioned pp. 92, 93, to be another
instance of madness, I contend not. It was because I did not
understand that uncommon case that I prefaced it with this
reflection: “The fact I nakedly relate, and leave every man to
his own judgment upon it.” Only be pleased to observe, that
this madness, if such it was, is no more chargeable upon me
than upon you. For the subject of it had no relation to, or
commerce with, me; nor had I ever seen her before that hour.
5. Query the Fifth:—“Whether those exalted strains in
religion, and an imagination of being already in a state of per
fection, are not apt to lead men to spiritual pride, and to a con
tempt of their fellow Christians; while they consider them as
only going on in what they call the low and imperfect way,
(that is, as growing in grace and goodness only by degrees,)
even though it appear by the lives of those who are considered
by them as in that low and imperfect way, that they are
persons who are gradually working out their salvation by their
own honest endeavours, and through the ordinary assistances
of God’s grace; with an humble reliance upon the merits of
Christ for the pardon of their sins, and the acceptance of
their sincere though imperfect services.”
I must divide this query too; but first permit me to ask,
What do you mean by “those exalted strains in religion?”
I have said again and again, I know of no more exalted strain
than, “I will love thee, O Lord my God:” Especially accord
ing to the propriety of David’s expression, Tris Tort-s: Ex
intimis visceribus diligam te, Domine.” This premised, let
us go on step by step.
Query 1. Whether the preaching of “loving God from our
inmost bowels,” is not apt to lead men to spiritual pride, and
to a contempt of their fellow Christians.
Answer. No : But, so far as it takes place, it will humble
them to the dust.
Q. 2. Whether an imagination of being already in a state
of perfection is not apt to lead men into spiritual pride.
* I will love thee from my inmost bowels.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 65
A. (1) If it be a false imagination, it is spiritual pride. (2.)
But true Christian perfection is no other than humble love.
Q. 3. Do not men who imagine they have attained this despise
others, as only going on in what they account the low and imper
fect way, that is, as growing in grace and goodness by degrees?
A. (1.) Men who only imagine they have attained this may
probably despise those that are going on in any way. (2.) But
the growing in grace and goodness by degrees is no mark of a
low and imperfect way. Those who are fathers in Christ grow
in grace by degrees, as well as the new-born babes.
Q. 4. Do they not despise those who are working out their
salvation with an humble reliance upon the merits of Christ
for the pardon of their sins, and the acceptance of their sincere
though imperfect services?
A. (1.) They who really love God despise no man. But,
(2.) They grieve to hear many talk of thus relying on Christ,
who, though perhaps they are grave, honest, moral men, yet
by their own words appear not to love God at all; whose souls
cleave to the dust; who love the world; who have no part of
the mind that was in Christ.
6. Query the Sixth —“Whether the same exalted strains
and notions do not tend toweaken the natural and civil relations
among men, by leading the inferiors, into whose heads those
notions are infused, to a disesteem of their superiors; while
they consider them as in a much lower dispensation than
themselves; though those superiors are otherwise sober and
good men, and regular attendants on the ordinances of religion.”
I havementioned beforewhat those exalted notions are. These
do not tend to weaken either thenatural or civil relations among
men; or to lead inferiors to a disesteem of their superiors, even
where those superiors are neither good nor sober men.
Query the Seventh —“Whether a gradual improvement in
grace and goodness is not a better foundation of comfort, and of
an assurance of a gospel new-birth, than that which is founded
on the doctrine of a sudden and instantaneous change; which,
if there be any such thing, is not easily distinguished from
fancy and imagination; the workings whereof we may well sup
pose to be more strong and powerful, while the person considers
himself in the state of one who is admitted as a candidate for
such a change, and is taught in due time to expect it.”
Let us go one step at a time.
VOL. VIII.
66 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
Query 1. Whether a gradual improvement in grace and
goodness is not a good foundation of comfort.
Answer. Doubtless it is, if by grace and goodness be meant
the knowledge and love of God through Christ.
Q. 2. Whether it be not a good foundation of an assurance
of a gospel new-birth.
A. If we daily grow in this knowledge and love, it is a
good proof that we are born of the Spirit. But this does in
mowise supersede the previous witness of God's Spirit with
ours, that we are the children of God. And this is properly
the foundation of the assurance of faith.
Q. 3. Whether this improvement is not a better foundation of
comfort, and ofanassuranceofagospel new-birth, than that which
is founded on the doctrine of a sudden and instantaneous change.
A. A better foundation than that. That 1 What? To what
substantive does this refer? According to the rulesofgrammar,
(for all the substantives are in the genitive case, and, conse
quently, to be considered as only parts of that which governs
them,) you must mean a better foundation than that foundation
which is founded on this doctrine. As soon as I understand
the question, I will endeavour to answer it.
Q. 4. Can that sudden and instantaneous change be easily
distinguished from fancy and imagination?
A. Just as easily as light from darkness; seeing it brings
with it a peace that passeth all understanding, a joy unspeak
able, full of glory, the love of God and all mankind filling the
heart, and power over all sin.
Q. 5. May we not well suppose the workings of imagination
to be more strong and powerful in one who is taught to
expect such a change?
A. Perhaps we may; but still the tree is known by its
fruits. And such fruits as those above-mentioned imagination
was never yet strong enough to produce, nor any power, save
that of the Almighty.
7. There is only one clause in the Eighth Query which
falls under our present inquiry.
“They make it their principal employ, wherever they go,
to instil into people a few favourite tenets of their own; and
this with such diligence and zeal as if the whole of Christianity
depended upon them, and all efforts toward the true Christian
life, without a belief of those tenets, were vain and ineffectual.”
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 67
I plead guilty to this charge. I do make it my principal,
may, my whole employ, and that wherever I go, to instil into the
people a few favourite tenets;—only, be it observed, they are
not my own, but His that sent me. And it is undoubtedly true
that this I do, (though deeply conscious of my want both of
zeal and diligence,) as if the whole of Christianity depended
upon them, and all efforts without them were void and vain.
I frequently sum them all up in one: “In Christ Jesus.”
(that is, according to his gospel) “neither circumcision availeth
anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith which worketh by love.”
But many times I instil them one by one, under these or the
like expressions: “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself;” as
thy own soul; as Christ loved us. “God is love; and he that
dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him. Love work
eth no ill to his neighbour; therefore love is the fulfilling of the
law. While we have time, let us do good unto all men; espe
cially unto them that are of the household of faith. Whatsoever
ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them.”
These are my favourite tenets, and have been for many years.
O that I could instil them into every soul throughout the land!
Ought they not to be instilled with such diligence and zeal,
as if the whole of Christianity depended upon them? For
who can deny, that all efforts toward a Christian life, without
more than a bare belief, without a thorough experience and
practice of these, are utterly vain and ineffectual?
8. Part of your Ninth query is to the same effect:—
“A few young heads set up their own schemes as the great
standard of Christianity; and indulge their own notions to such
a degree, as to perplex, unhinge, terrify, and distract the minds
of multitudes of people, who have lived from their infancy under
a gospel ministry, and in the regular exercise of a gospel wor
ship. And all this, by persuading them that they neither are
anor can be true Christians, but by adhering to their doctrines.”
What do you mean by their own schemes, their own notions,
their doctrines? Are they not yours too? Are they not the
schemes, the notisms, the doctrines of Jesus Christ; the
great fundamental truths of his gospel? Can you deny one
of them without denying the Bible? It is hard for you to
kick against the pricks!
68 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
“They persuade,” you say, “multitudes of people, that.
they cannot be true Christians but by adhering to their doc
trines.” Why, who says they can? Whosoever he be, I will
prove him to be an infidel. Do you say that any man can
be a true Christian without loving God and his neighbour?
Surely you have not so learned Christ ! It is your doctrine
as well as mine, and St. Paul’s: “Though I speak with the
tongues of men and angels; though I have all knowledge, and
all faith; though I give all my goods to feed the poor, yea,
my body to be burned, and have not love, I am nothing.”
Whatever public worship, therefore, people may have at
tended, or whatever ministry they have lived under from their
infancy, they must at all hazards be convinced of this, or they
perish for ever; yea, though that conviction at first unhinge
them ever so much; though it should in a manner distract them
for a season. For it is better they should be perplexed and ter
rified now, than that they should sleep on and awake in hell.
9. In the Tenth, Twelfth, and Thirteenth queries I am not
concerned. But you include me also when you say, in the
Eleventh, “They absolutely deny that recreations of any kind,
considered as such, are or can be innocent.”
I cannot find any such assertion of mine either in the place
you refer to, or any other. But what kinds of recreation are
innocent it is easy to determine by that plain rule: “Whether
ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God.”
I am now to take my leave of you for the present. But first
I would earnestly entreat you to acquaint yourself what ourdoc
trines are, before you make any fartherobservations upon them.
Surely, touching the nature of salvation we agree, -that “pure
religion and undefiled is this, to visit the fatherless and widows
in their affliction,”—to do all possible good, from a principle of
love to God and man; “and to keep ourselves unspotted from
the world,”—inwardly and outwardly to abstain from all evil.
10. With regard to the condition of salvation, it may be re
membered that I allow, not only faith, but likewise holiness or
universal obedience, to be the ordinary condition of final salva
tion; and that when I say, Faith alone is the condition of pre
sent salvation, what I would assert is this: (1) That without
faith no man can be saved from his sins; can be either inwardly
or outwardly holy. And, (2.) That at what time soever faith is
given, holiness commences in the soul. For that instant “the
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 69
love of God” (which is the source of holiness) “is shed
abroad in the heart.”
But it is objected by the author of “The Notions of the
Methodists disproved,” “St.James says, “Can faithsave him?”
I answer, Such a faithasis without works cannot “bring a man
to heaven.” But this is quite beside the present question.
You object, (2) “St. Paul says that “faith made perfect by
love, St. James, that “faith made perfect by works, is the
condition of salvation.” You mean final salvation. I say so
too: But this also is beside the question.-
You object, (3) “That the belief of the gospel is called the
obedience of faith.” (Rom. i. 5.) And, (4.) that what Isaiah
terms believing, St. Paul terms obeying. Suppose I grant
you both the one and the other, what will you infer?
You object, (5.) That in one scripture our Lord is styled,
“The Saviour of them that believe;” and in another, “The
Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him.” (6.)
That to the Galatians St. Paul writes, “Neither circumcision
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith which worketh
by love;” and to the Corinthians, “Circumcision is nothing,
and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping the command
ments of God.” And hence you conclude, “There are several
texts of Scripture wherein unbelief and disobedience are
equivalently used.” Very true; but can you conclude from
thence that we are not “saved by faith alone?”
11. You proceed to answer some texts which I had quoted.
The first is Ephesians ii. 8: “By grace ye are saved through
faith.” “But,” say you, “faith does not mean here that grace
especially so called, but includes also obedience.” But how do
you prove this? That circumstance you had forgot; and so
run off with a comment upon the context; to which I have no
other objection, than that it is nothing at all to the question.
Indeed, some time after, you add, “It is plain then that
good works are always, in St. Paul’s judgment, joined with
faith;” (so undoubtedly they are; that is, as an effect is always
joined with its cause;) “and therefore we are not saved by
faith alone.” I cannot possibly allow the consequence.
You afterwards cite two more texts, and add, “You see,
mere faith cannot be a condition of justification.” You are
out of your way. We are no more talking now of justification
than of final salvation.
70 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
In considering Acts xvi. 31. “Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shalt be saved,” you say again, “Here the word.
believe does not signify faith only. Faith necessarily produces
charity and repentance; therefore, these are expressed by the
word believe; ” that is, faith necessarily produces holiness;.
therefore holiness is a condition of holiness. I want farther
proof. That “Paul and Silas spake unto him the word of
the Lord,” and that his faith did “in the same hour” work
by love, I take to be no proof at all.
You then undertake to show, that confessing our sins is a
condition of justification, and that a confidence in the love of
God is not a condition. Some of your words are: “This,
good Sir, give me leave to say, is the greatest nonsense and
contradiction possible. It is impossible you can understand
this jargon yourself; and therefore you labour in vain to make
it intelligible to others. You soar aloft on eagles’ wings, and
leave the poor people to gape and stare after you.”
This is very pretty, and very lively. But it is nothing to,
the purpose. For we are not now speaking of justification;
neither have I said one word of the condition of justification
in the whole tract to which you here refer.
“In the next place,” say you, “if we are saved” (finally
you mean) “only by a confidence in the love of God.” Here
I must stop you again; you are now running beside the
question, on the other hand. The sole position which I here
advance is this: True believers are saved from inward and out
ward sin by faith. By faith alone the love of God and all man
kind is shed abroad in their hearts, bringing with it the mind'
that was in Christ, and producing all holiness of conversation.
IV. 1. I am now to consider what has been lately objected.
with regard to the mature of saving faith.
The author last mentioned “cannot understand how those
texts of St. John are at all to the purpose: ” “Behold, what
manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the sons of God; ” (1 John iii. 1;) and, “We
love him, because he first loved us.” (iv. 19.) I answer, (1.)
These texts were not produced in the “Appeal” by way of
proof, but of illustration only. But, (2.) I apprehend they may
be produced as a proof, both that Christian faith implies a con
fidence in the love of God, and that such a confidence has a
direct tendency to salvation, to holiness both of heart and life
OF RIEASON AND RELIGION. 71
“Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed
upon us, that we should be called the sons of God!” Are not
these words an expression of Christian faith, as direct an one
as can well be conceived? And I appeal to every man, whe
ther they do not express the strongest confidence of the love of
God. Your own comment puts this beyond dispute: “Let us
consider attentively, and with grateful hearts, the great love and
mercy of God in calling us to be his sons, and bestowing on us
the privileges belonging to such.” Do you not perceive that
you have given up the cause ? You have yourself taught us
that these words imply a “sense of the great love and mercy of
God, in bestowing upon us the privileges belonging to his sons.”
The Apostle adds, “Beloved, now are we the sons of God;
and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: But we know
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall
see him as he is.”
I suppose no one will say, either that these words are not
expressive of Christian faith; or that they do not imply the
strongest confidence in the love of God. It follows, “And
every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself even
as he is pure.”
Hence it appears that this faith is a saving faith, that there
is the closest connexion between this faith and holiness.
This text, therefore, is directly to the purpose, in respect of
both the propositions to be proved.
The other is, “We love him, because he first loved us.”
And here also, for fear I should fail in the proof, you have
drawn it up ready to my hands:—
“God sent his only Son to redeem us from sin, by purchas
ing for us grace and salvation. By which grace we, through
faith and repentance, have our sins pardoned; and therefore
we are bound to return the tribute of our love and gratitude,
and to obey him faithfully as long as we live.”
Now, that we have our sins pardoned, if we do not know
they are pardoned, cannot bind us either to love or obedience.
But if we do know it, and by that very knowledge or confidence
in the pardoning love of God are both bound and enabled to
love and obey him, this is the whole of what I contend for.
2. You afterwards object against some othertexts which I had
cited to illustrate the nature of saving faith. My words were,
“Hear believing Job declaring his faith: ‘I know that my
72 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
Redeemer liveth.’” I here affirm two things: (1.) That Job
was then a believer. (2.) That he declared his faith in these
words. And all I affirm, you allow. Your own words are,
“God was pleased to bestow upon him a strong assurance of
his favour; to inspire him with a prophecy of the resurrection,
and that he should have a share in it.”
I went on, “Hear Thomas (when having seen he believed)
crying out, ‘My Lord and my God.” Hereon you comment
thus: “The meaning of which is, that St. Thomas makes a
confession both of his faith and repentance.” I agree with
you. But you add, “In St. Thomas’s confession there is not
implied an assurance of pardon.” You cannot agree with
yourself in this; but immediately subjoin, “If it did imply
such an assurance, he might well have it, since he had an
immediate revelation of it from God himself.”
Yet a little before you endeavoured to prove that one who
was not a whit behind the very chief Apostles had not such
an assurance; where, in order to show that faith does not
imply this, you said, “St. Paul methinks has fully determined
this point, ‘I know nothing by myself,’ says he; ‘yet am I
not hereby justified.’” (1 Cor. iv. 4.) “And if an Apostle,
so illuminated, does not think himself justified,” then I grant,
he has fully determined the point. But before you absolutely
fix upon that conclusion, be pleased to remember your own
comment that follows, on those other words of St. Paul :
“The life I now live, I live by faith in the Son of God, who
loved me and gave himself for me.” Your words are, “And,
no question, a person endowed with such extraordinary gifts
might arrive at a very eminent degree of assurance.” So he
did arrive at a very eminent degree of assurance, though he
did not think himself justified !
I can scarce think you have read over that chapter to the
Colossians; else, surely, you would not assert that those words
on which the stress lies (viz., “Who hath delivered us from the
power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of
his dear Son: In whom we have redemption through his blood,
eventheforgiveness of sins,”)“do not relate to Pauland Timothy
who wrote the Epistle, but to the Colossians, to whom they
wrote.” I need be at no pains to answer this; for presently
after your own words are, “He hath made us,” meaning the
Colossians, as well as himself, “meet to be inheritors.”
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 73
3. You may easily observe that I quoted the Council of
Trent by memory, not having the book then by me. I own,
and thank you for correcting, my mistake: But in correct
ing one you make another; for the decrees of the Sixth
Session were not published on the thirteenth of January;
but the Session itself began on that day.
I cannot help reciting your next words, although they are
not exactly to the present question:
“The words of the Twelfth Canon of the Council of Trent
are,—
“‘If any man shall say that justifying faith is nothing else
but a confidence in the divine mercy, remitting sins for
Christ's sake, and that this confidence is that alone by which
we are justified, let him be accursed.’” You add,—
“This, Sir, I am sure is true doctrine, and perfectly agree
able to the doctrine of our Church. And so you are not only
anathematized by the Council of Trent, but also condemned
by our own Church.”
“Our Church holds no such scandalous and disgraceful
opinion.” According to our Church, no man can have “the
true faith who has not a loving heart. Therefore, faith is
not a confidence that any man’s sins are actually forgiven,
and he reconciled to God.” (What have the premises to do
with the conclusion?)
4. To decide this, let our Church speak for herself
whether she does not suppose and teach, that every parti
cular believer knows that his sins are forgiven, and he him
self is reconciled to God.
First, then, our Church supposes and teaches every parti
cular believer to say concerning himself, “In my baptism I
was made a member of Christ, a child of God, and an inher
itor of the kingdom of heaven. And I thank God who hath
called me to that state of salvation. And I pray to God that
I may continue in the same to my life's end.”
Now, does this person know what he says to be true? If
not, it is the grossest hypocrisy. But if he does, then he
knows that he in particular is reconciled to God.
The next words I shall quote may be a comment on these:
May God write them in our hearts |
“A true Christian man is not afraid to die, who is the very
member of Christ, the temple of the Holy Ghost, the son of
74 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
God, and the very inheritor of the everlasting kingdom of
heaven. But plainly contrary, he not only puts away the fear
of death, but wishes, desires, and longs heartily for it.” (Ser
mon against the Fear of Death. Part I.)
Can this be, unless he has a sure confidence that he in
particular is reconciled to God?
“Men commonly fear death, First, because of leaving their
worldly goods and pleasures: Secondly, for fear of the pains
of death: And, Thirdly, for fear of perpetual damnation.
But none of these causes trouble good men, because they
stay themselves by true faith, perfect charity, and sure hope
of endless joy and bliss everlasting.” (Ibid. Part II.)
“All these therefore have great cause to be full of joy, and
not to fear death nor everlasting damnation. For death can
not deprive them of Jesus Christ; death cannot take him
from us, nor us from him. Death not only cannot harm us, but
also shall profit us, and join us to God more perfectly. And
thereof a Christian heart may be surely certified. ‘It is God,”
saith St. Paul, ‘which hath given us an earnest of his Spirit.”
As long as we be in the body we are in a strange country
But we have a desire rather to be at home with God.” (Ibid.)
He that runneth may read in all these words the confidence
which our Church supposes every particular believer to have,
that he himself is reconciled to God.
To proceed: “The only instrument of salvation required
on our parts is faith; that is, a sure trust and confidence that
God both hath and will forgive our sins, that he hath ac
cepted us again into his favour, for the merits of Christ's
death and passion.” (Second Sermon on the Passion.)
“But here we must take heed that we do not halt with God
through an unconstant, wavering faith. Peter, coming to
Christ upon the water, because he fainted in faith, was in
danger of drowning. So we, if we begin to waver or doubt, it
is to be feared lest we should sink as Peter did,—not into the
water, but into the bottomless pit of hell-fire. Therefore I say
unto yeu, that we must apprehend the merits of Christ's death
by faith, and that with a strong and steadfast faith; nothing
deubting but that Christ by his own oblation hath taken away
eur sins, and hath restored us again to God's favour.” (Ibid.)
5. it it be still said that the Church speaks only cf men in
sereral, but net of the confidence of this or that particular
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 75
person; even this last poor subterfuge is utterly cut off by
the following words:—
“Thou, O man, hast received the body of Christ which was
once broken, and his blood which was shed for the remission of thy
sin. Thou hastreceived his body to have within thee the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for to endow thee with grace,
and to comfort thee with their presence. Thou hastreceived his
body to endow thee with everlasting righteousness, and to
assure thee of everlasting bliss.” (Sermon on the Resurrection.)
I shall add but one passage more, from the first part of the
“Sermon on the Sacrament:”—
“Have a sure and constant faith, not only that the death of
Christ is available for all the world, but that he hath made a
full and sufficient sacrifice for thee, a perfect cleansing of thy
sins, so that thou mayest say with the Apostle, ‘He loved
thee, and gave himself for thee. For this is to make Christ
thine own, and to apply his merits unto thyself.”
Let every reasonable man now judge for himself, what is
the sense of our Church as to the nature of saving faith.
Does it not abundantly appear that the Church of England
supposes every particular believer to have a sure confidence
that his sins are forgiven, and he himself reconciled to God?
Yea, and how can the absolute necessity of this faith, this
unwavering confidence, be more strongly or peremptorily
asserted, than it is in those words: “If we begin to waver
or doubt, it is to be feared lest we sink as Peter did,—not
into the water, but into the bottomless pit of hell-fire?”
6. I would willingly dismiss this writer here. I had said
in the “Earnest Appeal,” (what I am daily more and more
confirmed in,) that this faith is usually given in a moment.
This you greatly dislike. Your argument against it, if put
into form, will run thus:—
“They who first apprehended the meaning of the words
delivered, then gave their assent to them, then had confidence
in the promises to which they assented, and, lastly, loved
God, did not receive faith in a moment.
“But the believers mentioned in the Acts first apprehended
the meaning of the words, then gave their assent, then had
confidence in the promises, and, lastly, loved God: Therefore,
“The believers mentioned in the Acts did not receive faith
in a moment.”
76 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
I deny the major. They might first apprehend, then assent,
then confide, then love, and yet receive faith in a moment;
in that moment wherein their general confidence became
particular, so that each could say, “My Lord and my God!”
One paragraph more I will be at the pains to transcribe:
“You insinuate that the sacraments are only requisite to the
well-being of a visible Church: Whereas the Church declares
that the due administration of them is an essential property
thereof. I suppose you hinted this to satisfy your loving dis
ciples, the Quakers.”
This is flat and plain. Here is a fact positively averred; and
a reason also assigned for it. Now, do you take yourself to
be a man of candour, I had almost said, of common honesty?
My very words in the place referred to, are, “A visible Church
is a company of faithful people. This is the essence of it.
And the properties thereof are, that the pure word of God be
preached therein, and the sacraments duly administered.”
7. Before I take my leave I cannot but recommend to you
that advice of a wise and good man,—
“Be calm in arguing; for fierceness makes
Error a fault, and truth discourtesy.”
I am grieved at your extreme warmth : You are in a thorough
ill-humour from the very beginning of your book to the end.
This cannot hurt me; but it may yourself. And it does not
at all help your cause. If you denounce against me all the
curses from Genesis to the Revelation, they will not amount
to one argument. I am willing (so far as I know myself) to
be reproved either by you or any other. But whatever you
do, let it be done in love, in patience, in meekness of wisdom.
V. 1. With regard to the Author of faith and salvation,
abundance of objections have been made; it being a current
opinion, that Christians are not now to receive the Holy Ghost.
Accordingly, whenever we speak of the Spirit of God, of
his operations on the souls of men, of his revealing unto us the
things of God, or inspiring us with good desires or tempers;
whenever we mention the feeling his mighty power “work
ing in us” according to his good pleasure; the general answer
we have to expect is, “This is rank enthusiasm. So it was
with the Apostles and first Christians. But only enthusiasts
pretend to this now.”
Thus all the Scriptures, abundance of which might be pro
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 77
duced, are set aside at one stroke. And whoever cites them, as
belonging to all Christians, is set down for an enthusiast.
The first tract I have seen wrote expressly on this head, is
remarkably entitled, “The Operations of the Holy Spirit im
perceptible; and how Men may know when they are under the
Guidance and Influence of the Spirit.”
You begin: “As we have some among us who pretend to
a more than ordinary guidance by the Spirit,” (indeed I do
not; I pretend to no other guidance than is ordinarily given to
all Christians,) “it may not be improper to discourse on the
operations of God’s Holy Spirit.
“To this end be thou pleased, O gracious Fountain of
Truth, to assist me with thy heavenly direction, in speaking of
thee.”
Alas, Sir, what need have you to speak any more? You have
already granted all I desire, viz., that we may all now enjoy, and
know that we do enjoy, the heavenly direction of God’s Spirit.
However, you go on, and observe that the extraordinary gifts
of the Holy Ghost were granted to the first Christians only, but
his ordinary graces to all Christians in all ages; both which you
then attempt to enumerate; only suspending your discourse a
little, when “some conceited enthusiasts” come in your way.
2. You next inquire, “after what manner these graces are
raised in our souls;” and answer, “How to distinguish these
heavenly motions from the natural operations of our minds, we
have no light to discover; the Scriptures declaring, that the
operations of the Holy Spirit are not subject to any sensible
feelings or perceptions. For what communication can there
be between feelings which are properties peculiar to matter,
and the suggestions of the Spirit? All reasonable Christians
believe that he works his graces in us in an imperceptible
manner; and that there is no sensible difference between his
and the natural operations of our minds.”
I conceive this to be the strength of your cause. To support
that conclusion, that the operations of the Spirit are impercep
tible, you here allege, (1) “That all reasonable Christians
believe this.” So you say; but I want proof. (2.) “That
there can be no communications” (Ifear you mistook the word)
“between the suggestions of the Spirit, and feelings which are
properties peculiar to matter.” How ! Are the feelings now in
question “properties peculiar to matter?” the feeling of peace,
78 A FAItTHER APPEAL TO MEN
joy, love, or any feelings at all? I can no more understand the
philosophy than the divinity of this. (3.) “That the Scriptures
declare the operations of the Spirit are not subject to any sensi
ble feelings.” You are here disproving, as you suppose, a propo
sition of mine. But are you sure you understand it? By feel
ing, I mean, being inwardly conscious of. By the operations of
the Spirit, I do not mean the manner in which he operates, but
the graces which he operates in a Christian. Now, be pleased
to produce those scriptures which declare that a Christian
cannot feel or perceive these operations.
3. Are you not convinced, Sir, that you have laid to my
charge things which I know not? I do not gravely tell you
(as much an enthusiast as you over and over affirm me to be)
that I sensibly feel (in your sense) the motions of the Holy
Spirit. Much less do I make this, any more than “convulsions,
agonies, howlings, roarings, and violent contortions of the
body,” either “certain signs of men’s being in a state of sal
vation,” or “necessary in order thereunto.” You might with
equal justice and truth inform the world, and the worshipful
the magistrates of Newcastle, that I make seeing the wind, or
feeling the light, necessary to salvation.
Neither do I confound the extraordinary with the ordinary
operations of the Spirit. And as to your last inquiry, “What
is the best proof of our being led by the Spirit P” I have no
exception to that just and scriptural answer which you your
self have given,-“A thorough change and renovation of mind
and heart, and the leading a new and holy life.”
4. That I confound the extraordinary with the ordinary
operations of the Spirit, and therefore am an enthusiast, is also
strongly urged, in a charge delivered to his Clergy, and lately
published, by the Lord Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry.
An extract of the former part of this I subjoin, in his Lord
ship’s words:
“I cannot think it improper to obviate the contagion of those
enthusiastical pretensions, that have lately betrayed whole mul
titudes either into presumption or melancholy. Enthusiasm,
indeed, when detected, is apt to create infidelity; and infidelity
is so shocking a thing, that many rather run into the other
extreme, and take refuge in enthusiasm. But infidelity and
enthusiasm seem now to act in concert against our established
religion. As infidelity has been sufficiently opposed, I shall
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 79
now lay before you the weakness of those enthusiastical pre
tensions.” (Pp. 1, 2.)
“Now, to confute effectually, and strike at the root of,
those enthusiastical pretensions,
“First, I shall show that it is necessary to lay down some
method for distinguishing real from pretended inspiration.”
(Pp. 3, 5.)
“Many expressions occur in the New Testament concerning
the operations of the Holy Spirit. But men of an enthusias
tical temper have confounded passages of a quite different
nature, and have jumbled together those that relate to the
extraordinary operations of the Spirit, with those that relate
only to his ordinary influences. It is therefore necessary to
use some method for separating those passages relating to the
operations of the Spirit, that have been so misapplied to the
service of enthusiastical pretenders.” (Pp. 5–7.)
“I proceed therefore to show,
“Secondly, that a distinction is to be made between those
passages of Scripture about the blessed Spirit that peculiarly
belong to the primitive Church, and those that relate to
Christians in all ages.” (P. 7.)
“The exigences of the apostolical age required the miracu
lous gifts of the Spirit. But these soon ceased. When there
fore we meet in the Scripture with an account of those extra
ordinary gifts, and likewise with an account of his ordinary
operations, we must distinguish the one from the other. And
that, not only for our own satisfaction, but as a means to
stop the growth of enthusiasm.” (Pp. 8–10.)
“And such a distinction ought to be made by the best
methods of interpreting the Scriptures; which most certainly
are an attentive consideration of the occasion and scope of
those passages, in concurrence with the general sense of the
primitive Church.” (P. 11.)
“I propose, Thirdly, to specify some of the chief passages
of Scripture that are misapplied by modern enthusiasts, and
to show that they are to be interpreted chiefly, if not only, of
the apostolical Church; and that they very little, if at all, relate
to the present state of Christians.” (P. 12.)
“I begin,” says your Lordship, “with the original promise
of the Spirit, as made by our Lord a little before he left the
world.”
80 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
I must take the liberty to stop your Lordship on the
threshold. I deny that this is the original promise of the
Spirit. I expect his assistance, in virtue of many promises
some hundred years prior to this.
If you say, “However, this is the original or first promise
of the Spirit in the New Testament:” No, my Lord; those
words were spoken long before: “He shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost, and with fire.”
Will you reply?—“Well, but this is the original promise
made by our Lord.” I answer, Not so, neither; for it was before
this Jesus himself stood and cried, “If any man thirst, let him
come unto me and drink: He that believeth on me, as the
Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water. And this he spake of the Spirit, which they should
receive who believed on him.” (Ov eple}\}\ov Aap gavew ot tria
Tevovres eus avtov.) If I mistake not, this may more justly be
termed, our Lord’s original promise of the Spirit. And who
will assert that this is to be “interpreted chiefly, if not only,
of the apostolical Church 7”
5. Your Lordship proceeds: “It occurs in the fourteenth
and sixteenth chapters of St. John’s Gospel; in which he uses
these words.” In what verses, my Lord?" Why is not this
specified ? unless to furnish your Lordship with an opportu
nity of doing the verythings whereof you before complained,—
of “confounding passages of a quite contrary nature, and jum
bling together those that relate to the extraordinary operations
of the Spirit, with those that relate to his ordinary influences?”
You cite the words thus: “‘When the Spirit of truth is come,
he will guide you into all truth, and he will show you things
to come.’ These are nearly the words that occur. (xvi. 13.)
“And again: ‘The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever
I have said unto you.” These words occur in the fourteenth
chapter, at the twenty-sixth verse.”
But, my Lord, I want the original promise still; the origi
mal, I mean, of those made in this very discourse. Indeed your
margin tells us where it is, (xiv. 16,) but the words appear not.
Taken together with the context, they run thus:
“If ye love me, keep my commandments.
* I take it for granted, that the citation of texts in the margin, which is totally
wrong, is a blunder of the printer's.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 81
“And I will pray the Father, and he will give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever:
“Even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive,
because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him.” (xiv. 15–17.)
My Lord, suffer me to inquire why you slipped over this
text. Was it not (I appeal to the Searcher of your heart 1)
because you was conscious to yourself that it would neces
sarily drive you to that unhappy dilemma, either to assert
that for ever, ets Tov atova, meant only sixty or seventy years;
or to allow that the text must be interpreted of the ordinary
operations of the Spirit, in all future ages of the Church 9
And indeed that the promise in this text belongs to all
Christians, evidently appears, not only from your Lordship’s
own concession, and from the text itself, (for who can deny
that this Comforter, or Paraclete, is now given to all them
that believe?) but also from the preceding, as well as follow
ing, words. The preceding are, “If ye love me, keep my
commandments. And I will pray the Father.” None, surely,
can doubt but these belong to all Christians in all ages. The
following words are, “Even the Spirit of truth, whom the
world cannot receive.” True, the world cannot; but all
Christians can and will receive him for ever.
6. The second promise of the Comforter, made in this
chapter, together with its context, stands thus:—
“Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that
thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?
“Jesus answered, and said unto him, If any man love me,
he will keep my word. And my Father will love him, and
we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.
“He that loveth me not, keepeth not my word: And the
word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father’s which sent me.
“These things have I spoken unto you, being yet with you.
“But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things,
and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have
said unto you.” (Verses 22–26.)
Now, how does your Lordship prove that this promise
belongs only to the primitive Church P Why, (1) you say, “It
is very clear from the bare recital of the words.” I apprehend
not. But this is the very question, which is not to be begged,
but proved. (2) You say, “The Spirit's ‘bringing all things
VOL. VIII.
82 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
to their remembrance, whatsoever he had said unto them, can
not possibly be applied to any other persons but the Apostles.”
Cannot be applied ! This is a flat begging the question again,
which I cannot give up without better reasons. (3) “The gifts
of prophecy and of being “guided into all truth, and taught all
things, can be applied only to the Apostles, and those of that
age who were immediately inspired.” Here your Lordship, in
order the more plausibly to beg the question again, “jumbles
together the extraordinary with the ordinary operations of the
Spirit.” The gift of prophecy, we know, is one of his extra
ordinary operations; but there is not a word of it in this text;
nor, therefore, ought it to be “confounded with his ordinary
operations,” such as the being “guided into all truth,” (all
that is necessary to salvation,) and taught all (necessary) things,
in a due use of the means he hath ordained. (Verse 26.)
In the same manner, namely, in a serious and constant use
of proper means, I believe the assistance of the Holy Ghost is
given to all Christians, to “bring all things needful to their
remembrance,” whatsoever Christ hath spoken to them in his
word. So that I see no occasion to grant, without some kind
of proof, (especially considering the occasion of this, and the
scope of the preceding verses,) that even “this promise cannot
possibly be applied to any other persons but the Apostles.”
7. In the same discourse of our Lord we have a third pro
mise of the Comforter: The whole clause runs thus:
“If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you;
but if I go, I will send him unto you.
“And when he is come, he will reprove,” or convince, “the
world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment:
“Of sin, because they believe not on me;
“Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see
me no more;
“Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.
“I have yet many things to say unto you; but ye cannot
bear them now: But when he shall come, the Spirit of truth,
he will guide you into all truth; and he will show you things
to come.” (xvi. 7–13.)
There is only one sentence here which has not already
been considered, “He will show you things to come.”
And this, it is granted, relates to the gift of prophecy, one
of the extraordinary operations of the Spirit.
OF ftBASON AND RELIGION. 33
The general conclusion which your Lordship draws is
expressed in these words: “Consequently, all pretensions to
the Spirit, in the proper sense of the words of this promise,
(that is, of these several texts of St. John,) are vain and
insignificant, as they are claimed by modern enthusiasts.”
And in the end of the same paragraph you add, “None but
the ordinary operations of the Spirit are to be now
expected, since those that are of a miraculous (or extraordinary)
kind are not pretended to, even by modern enthusiasts.”
My Lord, this is surprising. I read it over and over before
I could credit my own eyes. I verily believe, this one clause,
with unprejudiced persons, will be an answer to the whole book.
You have been vehemently crying out all along against those
enthusiastical pretenders; nay, the very design of your book, as
you openly declare, was “to stop the growth of their enthusi
asm; who have had the assurance” (as you positively affirm,
page 6) “to claim to themselves the extraordinary operations
of the Holy Spirit.” And here you as positively affirm that
those extraordinary operations “are not pretended to ” by
them at all !
8. Yet your Lordship proceeds: “The next passage of Scrip
ture I shall mention, as peculiarly belonging to the primitive
times, though misapplied to the present state of Christians by
modern enthusiasts, is what relates to the “testimony of the
Spirit, and ‘praying by the Spirit, in the eighth chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans.” (Page 16.)
I believe it incumbent upon methoroughly to weigh the force
of your Lordship's reasoning on this head. You begin: “After
St. Paul had treated of that spiritual principle in Christians,
which enables them “to mortify the deeds of the body, he says,
“If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.”
This makes the distinction of a true Christian, particularly in
opposition to the Jews.” I apprehend it is just here that your
Lordship turns out of the way, when you say, “particularly in
opposition to the Jews.” Such a particular opposition I cannot
allow, till some stronger proof is produced, than St. Paul’s occa
sionally mentioning, six verses before, “the imperfection of
the Jewish law.”
Yet your Lordship's mind is so full of this, that after repeat
ing the fourteenth and fifteenth verses, “As many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God: For ye have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received
84 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father !” you
add, “In the former part of this verse, the Apostle shows again
the imperfection of the Jewish law.” This also calls for proof;
otherwise it will not be allowed, that he here speaks of the Jew
ish law at all; not, though we grant that “the Jews were sub
ject to the fear of death, and lived, in consequence of it, in a
state of bondage.” For are not all unbelievers, as well as the
Jews, more or less, in the same fear and bondage?
Your Lordship goes on : “In the latter part of the verse he
shows the superiority of the Christian law to that of the
Jews.” (P. 18.) Where is the proof, my Lord? How does it
appear that he is speaking either of the Christian or Jewish
law in those words, “Ye have received the Spirit of adop
tion, whereby we cry, Abba, Father?” However, you infer,
“Christians them are the adopted sons of God, in contradistinc
tion to the Jews, as the former had the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
which none of the latter had at that time; and the body of the
Jews never had.” No, nor the body of the Christians neither:
So that, if this be a proof against the Jews, it is the very same
against the Christians.
I must observe farther on the preceding words, (1.) That
your Lordship begins here, to take the word Christians in a new
and peculiar sense, for the whole body of the then Christian
Church. (2) That it is a bad inference: “As (or because) they
had the gifts of the Holy Ghost, therefore they were the sons of
God.” On the one hand, if they were the children of God, it
was not because they had those gifts. On the other, a man may
have all those gifts, and yet be a child of the devil.
9. I conceive, not only that your Lordship has proved nothing
hitherto, not one point that has any relation to the question, but
that, strictly speaking, you have not attempted to prove any
thing, having taken for granted whatever came in your way. In
the same manner you proceed, “The Apostle goes on, ‘The
Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God.” This passage, as it is connected with the pre
ceding one, relates to the general adoption of Christians, or their
becoming the sons of God instead of the Jews.”—“This pas
sage relates”—How is that proved? by its connexion with the
preceding? In mowise, unless it be good arguing to prove
ignotum per ignotius.” It has not yet been proved, that the
preceding passage itself has any relation to this matter.
* An unknown proposition by one that is less known.—EDIT.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 85
Your Lordship adds, “But what was the ground of this pre
ference that was given to Christians? It was plainly the mira
culous gifts of the Spirit, which they had, and which the Jews
had not.” This preference given to Christians was just before
expressed by their becoming the sons of God instead of the
Jews. Were the gifts of the Spirit then the ground of this pre
ference, the ground of their becoming the sons of God? What
an assertion is this ! And how little is it mended, though I al
low that “these miraculous gifts of the Spirit were a testimony
that God acknowledged the Christians to be his people, and not
the Jews;” since the Christians, who worked miracles, did it,
not “by the works of the law,” but by “the hearing of faith !”
Your Lordship concludes, “From these passages of St.
Paul, compared together, it clearly follows, that the fore-men
tioned testimony of the Spirit was the public testimony of
miraculous gifts; and, consequently, the witness of the Spirit
that we are the children of God, cannot possibly be applied to
the private testimony of the Spirit given to our own con
sciences, as is pretended by modern enthusiasts.” (P. 20.)
If your conclusion, my Lord, will stand without the pre
mises, it may; but that it has no manner of connexion with
them, I trust does partly, and will more fully, appear, when we
view the whole passage to which you refer; and I believe that
passage, with very little comment, will prove, in direct oppo
sition to that conclusion, that the testimony of the Spirit,
there mentioned, is not the public testimony of miraculous
gifts, but must be applied to the private testimony of the
Spirit, given to our own consciences.
10. St. Paul begins the eighth chapter of his Epistle to the
Romans, with the great privilege of every Christian believer,
(whether Jew or Gentile before,) “There is now no con
demnation for them that are in Christ Jesus,” engrafted into
him by faith, “who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
For” now every one of them may truly say, “The law,” or
power, “of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,” given unto me
for his sake, “hath made me free from the law,” or power,
“of sin and death. For that which the law could not do, in
that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son,
in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin,” did, when he “ con
demned,” crucified, put to death, destroyed, “sin in the flesh;
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who
86 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For they that
are after the flesh, mind the things of the flesh; but they that
are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit.” (Verses 1-5.)
Is it not evident, that the Apostle is here describing a true.
Christian, a holy believer?—in opposition, not particularly to
a Jew, much less to the Jewish law, but to every unholy man,
to all, whether Jews or Gentiles, “who walk after the flesh?”
He goes on:
“For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually
minded is life and peace. Because the carnal mind is enmity
against God: For it is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be. So then they that are in the flesh cannot.
please God.” (Verses 6–8.)
The opposition between a holy and unlıoly man is still glar
ing and undeniable. But can any man discern the least glim
mering of opposition between the Christian and the Jewish law?
The Apostle goes on: “But ye are not in the flesh, but in
the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but
the Spirit is life because of righteousness. But if the Spirit of
Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that.
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal
bodies by his Spirit which dwelleth in you. Therefore, bre
thren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh.
For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: But if ye through
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
sons of God.” (Verses 9–14.)
Is there one word here, is there any the least intimation, of
miraculous gifts, or of the Jewish law?
It follows, “For ye have not received the Spirit of bondage
again to fear; ” such as all sinners have, when they are at
first stirred up to seek God, and begin to serve him from a
slavish fear of punishment; “but ye have received the Spirit.
of adoption,” of free love, “whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
The Spirit itself,” which God “hath sent forth into our
hearts, crying, Abba, Father, beareth witness with our spirit,
that we are the children of God.” (Verses 15, 16.)
I am now willing to leave it, without farther comment, to
the judgment of every impartial reader, whether it does not.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 87
appear from the whole scope and tenor of the text and con
text taken together, that this passage does not refer to the
Jewish law, nor to the public testimony of miracles; neither
of which can be dragged in without putting the utmost force
on the natural meaning of the words. And if so, it will fol
low, that this “witness of the Spirit” is the private testimony
given to our own consciences; which, consequently, all sober
Christians may claim, without any danger of enthusiasm.
11. “But I go on,” says your Lordship, “to the considera
tion of the other passages in the same chapter, relating to our
praying by the Spirit, namely, at verses 26 and 27, which run
thus: “Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: For
we know not what we should pray for as we ought : But the
Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered. And He that searcheth the hearts knoweth
what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh interces
sion for the saints according to the will of God.’” (P. 21.)
Here is a circumstance highly needful to be observed, be
fore we enter upon this question. Your Lordship undertakes
to fix the meaning of an expression used by St. Paul, in the
fourteenth chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians. And
in order thereto, you laboriously explain part of the eighth
chapterof the Romans. My Lord, how is this? Will it be said,
“Why, this is often alleged to prove the wrong sense of that
scripture?” I conceive, this will not salve the matter at all.
Your Lordship had before laid down a particular method, as
the only sure one whereby to distinguish what scriptures
belong to all Christians, and what do not. This method is, the
considering the occasion and scope of those passages, by com
paring the text and context together. You then propose, by
the use of this method, to show, that several texts have been
misapplied by enthusiasts. One of these is the fifteenth verse
of the fourteenth chapter of the first Epistle to the Corin
thians. And to show, that enthusiasts have misapplied this,
you comment on the eighth chapter to the Romans !
However, let us weigh the comment itself. The material
part of it begins thus: “Now he adds another proof of the
truth of Christianity: “Likewise the Spirit helpeth our
infirmities,” or our distresses, for aoréevetats signifies both.”
(P. 22.) I doubt that: I require authority for it. “And then
he mentions, in what instances he does so, viz., in prayers to
88 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
God about afflictions.”—In nothing else, my Lord? Did he
“help their infirmities” in no other instance than this?
“‘We know not,’ says he, “what we should pray for as we
ought.” That is, whether it be best for us to bear afflictions, or
to be delivered from them. But the Spirit, or the gift of the
Spirit, instructs us how to pray in a manner agreeable to the
will of God.” “The Spirit, or the gift of the Spirit !” What
marvellous reasoning is this? If these “are often put for each
other,” what then? How is that evinced to be the case here?
12. “The Apostle goes on, ‘The Spirit itself maketh inter
cession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.’ That
is, the spiritual or inspired person prayed in that capacity for
the whole assembly.” (P. 23.) “That is !” Nay, that is again
the very point to be proved, else we get not one step farther.
“The Apostle goes on thus, (verse 27,) “And he that search
eth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, that is,
of the spiritual or inspired person, ‘because he maketh interces
sion for the saints, according to the will of God.” That is, God
knows the intention of the spiritual person, who has the gift of
prayer, which he uses for the benefit of the whole assembly; he,
I say, leaves it entirely to God, whether it be best that they
should suffer afflictions, or be delivered from them.” (Pp. 24,25.)
My Lord, this is more astonishing than all the rest ! I
was expecting all along, in reading the preceding pages, (and
so, I suppose, was every thinking reader,) when your Lord
ship would mention, that the person miraculously inspired for
that intent, and praying, kata 6eov,” either for the support
or deliverance of the people, should have the very petition
which he asked of him. Whereas you intended no such
thing ! but shut up the whole with that lame and impotent
conclusion, “He leaves it to God whether it be best they
should suffer afflictions, or be delivered from them.”
Had he then that miraculous gift of God, that he might do
what any common Christian mighthave done without it? Why,
any person in the congregation might have prayed thus; nay,
could not pray otherwise, if he had the ordinary grace of God:
“Leaving it to God, whether he should suffer afflictions still, or
be delivered from them.” Was it only in the apostolical age,
that “the Spirit instructed Christians thus to pray?” Cannot
a man pray thus, either for himself or others, unless he has the
* According to [the will of] God.—EDIT.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 89
miraculous gift of prayer l—So, according to your Lordship's
judgment, “to pray in such a manner, as in the event to leave
the continuance of our sufferings, or our deliverance from
them, with a due submission, to the good pleasure of God,”
is one of those extraordinary operations of the Spirit, which
none now pretend to but modern enthusiasts
I beseech your Lordship to consider. Can you coolly
maintain, that the praying with a due submission to the will
of God, even in heavy affliction, is a miraculous gift, an
extraordinary operation of the Holy Ghost? Is this peculiar
to the primitive times? Is it what none but enthusiasts now
pretend to? If not, then your Lordship’s own account of pray
ing by the Spirit indisputably proves, that this is one of the
ordinary privileges of all Christians to the end of the world.
13. “I go on,” your Lordship adds, “to another passage of
Scripture, that has been entirely misapplied by modern enthu
siasts: “And my speech and mypreaching were notwith enticing
words of man’s wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit
and of power; that your faith should not stand in the wisdom
of men, but in the power of God.” (1 Cor. ii. 4, 5.)
“It is only necessary to evince, that by “the demonstration
of the Spirit and of power’ is meant the demonstration of the
truth of Christianity, that arises from the prophecies of the Old
Testament, and the miracles of Christ and his Apostles.” (Pp.
27, 29.) Yes, it is necessary farther to evince, that these words
bave no other meaning. But, First, how will you evince that
they bear this? In order thereto, your Lordship argues thus:
“The former seems to be the demonstration of the Spirit,
with regard to the prophetical testimonies of Him.—And the
demonstration of power must signify the power of God, exerted
in miracles.” (P. 30.) “Must!” Why so? That 8vvauls often
signifies miraculous power, is allowed,—but what follows? that
it must mean so in this place? That still remains to be proved.
Indeed your Lordship says, this “appears from the following
verse, in which is assigned the reason for using this method of
proving Christianity to be true, namely, “That your faith should
not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. By
the power of God, therefore, must necessarily be understood the
miracles performed by Christ and his Apostles.” By the illa
tive particle, “therefore,” this proposition should be an infer
ence from some other: But what other I cannot yet discern. So
90 A FARTBER APPEAL TO MEN
that, for the present, I can only look upon it as a fresh
instance of begging the question.
“He goes on in the seventh, tenth, and following verses,
to explain this ‘demonstration of the Spirit and of power.’”
But he does not say one syllable therein, either of the ancient
prophecies, or of miracles. Nor will it be easily proved, that
he speaks either of one or the other, from the beginning of
the chapter to the end.
After transcribing the thirteenth verse, “Which things
also we speak, not in the words which man’s wisdom teacheth,
but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spiritual
things with spiritual,” your Lordship adds, “From which last
passage it appears, that the words which the Holy Ghost is
said to teach, must be the prophetical revelations of the Old
Testament, which were discovered to the Apostles by the same
Spirit.” I cannot apprehend how this appears. I cannot as yet
see any connexion at all between the premises and the conclusion.
Upon the whole, I desire any calm and serious man to read
over this whole chapter; and then he will easily judge what is
the natural meaning of the words in question; and whether
(although it be allowed, that they were peculiarly fulfilled in
the Apostles, yet) they do not manifestly belong, in a lower
sense, to every true Minister of Christ. For what can be more
undeniable than this, that our preaching also is vain, unless it
be attended with the power of that Spirit who alone pierceth
the heart? and that your hearing is vain, unless the same power
be present to heal your soul, and to give you a faith which
“standeth not in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God?”
14. “Another passage that,” your Lordship thinks, “has
been misapplied by enthusiasts, but was really peculiar to the
times of the Apostles, is 1 John ii. 20, 27: ‘Ye have an unction
from the Holy One, and ye know all things.—But theanointing
which ye have received of him abideth in you : And ye need
not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teacheth
you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie. And even as
it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.’ Here the Apostle
arms the true Christians against seducers, by an argument
drawn from ‘the unction from the Holy One,” that was in, or
rather, among them; that is, from the immediate inspiration
of some of their Teachers.” (Pp. 35, 37.)
Here it rests upon your Lordship to prove, as well as affirm,
oF REASON AND RELIGION. 9I
(1.) That ev should be translated among : (2.) That this
“unction from the Holy One” means the inspiration of
some of their Teachers.
The latter your Lordship attempts to prove thus:—
“The inspired Teachers of old were set apart for that office,
by an extraordinary effusion of the Holy Ghost: Therefore,
“‘The unction from the Holy One here means such an
effusion.” (P. 38.) I deny the consequence; so the question
is still to be proved.
Your Lordship's second argument is drawn from the twenty
sixth verse of the fourteenth chapter of St. John's Gospel.
Proposed in form, it will stand thus:—
“If those words, “He shall teach you all things, relate
only to a miraculous gift of the Holy Ghost, then these words,
‘The same anointing teacheth you of all things, relate to the
same miraculous gift :
“But those words relate only to a miraculous gift :
“Therefore these relate to the same.”
I conceive, it will not be very easy to make good the conse
quence in the first proposition. But I deny the minor also:
The contradictory whereto, I trust, has appeared to be true.
I grant indeed, that these words were more eminently
fulfilled in the age of the Apostles: But this is altogether
consistent with their belonging, in a lower sense, to all
Christians in all ages; seeing they have all need of “an
unction from the Holy One,” a supernatural assistance from
the Holy Ghost, that they may know, in the due use of all
proper means, all things needful for their souls' health.
Therefore it is no enthusiasm, to teach that “the unction
from the Holy One” belongs to all Christians in all ages.
15. There is one topic of your Lordship's yet untouched;
that is, authority; one you have very frequently made use of,
and wherein, probably, the generality of readers suppose your
Lordship's great strength lies. And indeed when your Lord
ship first mentioned (p. 11) “the general sense of the primi
tive Church,” I presumed you would have produced so nume
rous authorities, that I should not easily be able to consult
them all. But I soon found my mistake; your Lordship
naming only Chrysostom, Jerome, Origen, and Athanasius.
However, though these four can no more betermed the primi
tive Church, than the Church universal, yet I consent to abide
92 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
by their suffrage. Nay, I will go a step farther still: If any
two of these affirm, that those seven texts belong only to the
apostolic age, and not to the Christians of succeeding times,
I will give up the whole cause.
But let it be observed, if they should affirm that these pri
marily belong to the Christians of the apostolic age, that does
not prove the point, because they may, in a secondary sense,
belong to others notwithstanding: Nor does any of them
speak home to the question, unless he maintain, in express
terms, that these texts refer only to the miraculous gifts of
the Spirit, and not at all to the state of ordinary Christians.
16. Concerning those three texts, John xiv. 16, 26, and
John xvi. 13, “I could easily add,” says your Lordship, “the
authorities of Chrysostom and the other ancient commen
tators.” (P. 15.) St. Chrysostom’s authority I will consider
now, and that of the others when they are produced.
It is granted, that he interprets not only John xvi. 13, but
also both the passages in the fourteenth chapter, as primarily
belonging to the Apostles. Yet part of his comment on the
twenty-sixth verse is as follows:
“Such is that grace,” of the Comforter, “that if it finds sad
ness, it takes it away; if evil desire, it consumes it. It casts out
fear, and suffers him that receives it to be a man no longer, but
translates him, as it were, into heaven. Hence “none of them
counted anything his own, but continued in prayer, with glad
ness and singleness of heart. For this chiefly is their need of
the Holy Ghost; for the fruit of the Spirit is joy, peace, faith,
meekness. Indeed spiritual men often grieve; but that grief
is sweeter than joy: For whatever is of the Spirit is the great
est gain, as whatever is of the world is the greatest loss. Let
us therefore in keeping the commandments,” according to our
Lord’s exhortation, verse 15, “secure the unconquerable assist
ance of the Spirit, and we shall be nothing inferior to angels.”
St. Chrysostom here, after he had shown that the promise of
the Comforter primarily belonged to the Apostles, (and who
ever questioned it?) undemiably teaches, that, in a secondary
sense, it belongs to all Christians; to all spiritual men, all who
keep the commandments. I appeal, therefore, to all mankind,
whether his authority, touching the promiseof our Lord in these
texts, does not overthrow the proposition it was cited to prove?
Although your Lordship names no other author here, yet
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 93
you say, “The assigned sense of these passages was confirmed
by the authority of Origen.” (P. 42.) It is needful, therefore, to
add what occursin his Works with regard to the presentquestion.
He occasionally mentions this promise of our Lord, in four
several places. But it is in one only that he speaks perti
nently to the point in hand, (vol. ii., p. 403, Edit. Bened.)
where his words are these :—
“‘When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you
into all truth, and he will teach you all things.’ The sum of
all good things consists in this, that a man be found worthy
to receive the grace of the Holy Ghost. Otherwise, nothing
will be accounted perfectin him who hath not the Holy Spirit.”
Do these words confirm that “sense of those passages
which your Lordship had assigned ?” Rather do they not
utterly overturn it, and prove (as above) that although this
promise of our Lord primarily belongs to the Apostles, yet,
in the secondary sense, it belongs (according to Origen’s
judgment) to all Christians in all ages?
17. The fourth text mentioned as belonging to the first
Christians only, is Romans viii. 15, 16; and it is said, page
26, “This interpretation is confirmed by the authority of the
most eminent fathers.” The reader is particularly referred to
Origen and Jerome in locum. But here seems to be a mistake
of the name. Jerome in locum should mean, Jerome upon the
place, upon Romans viii. 15, 16. But I cannot perceive that
there is one word upon that place, in all St. Jerome's Works.
Nor indeed has Origen commented upon it any more than
Jerome. But he occasionally mentions it in these words:—
“He is a babe who is fed with milk; but if he seeks the
things that are above, without doubt he will be of the number
of those who “receive not the spirit of bondage again unto
fear, but the Spirit of adoption, through whom they cry,
‘Abba, Father.’” (Vol. i., p. 79.)
Again: “The fulness of time is come; when they who are
willing receive the adoption, as Paul teaches in these words,
‘Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again unto fear;
but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father!’ And it is written in the Gospel according to
St. John, ‘To as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the sons of God, even to then that believe
in his name.’” (Vol. i., pp. 231, 232.)
94 A FARTHER, APPEAL TO MEN
Yet again: “Every one that is born of God, and doth not
commit sin, by his very actions saith, “Our Father which art
in heaven; ‘the Spirit itself bearing witness with their
spirit, that they are the children of God.’” (Ibid.)
According to Origen, therefore, this testimony of the Spirit
is not any public testimony by miracles, peculiar to the first
times, but an inward testimony, belonging in common to all
that are born of God; and consequently the authority of
Origen does not “confirm that interpretation” neither, but
absolutely destroys it.
18. The last authority your Lordship appeals to on this
text is, “that of the great John Chrysostom, who reckons the
testimony of the Spirit of adoption by which we cry, ‘Abba,
Father, among the miraculous gifts of the Spirit.” “I rather
choose” (your Lordship adds, p. 26) “to refer you to the
words of St. Chrysostom, than to transcribe them here, as
having almost translated them in the present account of the
testimony of the Spirit.”
However, I believe it will not be labour lost to transcribe
a few of those words.
It is in his comment on the fourteenth verse, that he first
mentions St. Paul’s comparison between a Jew and a Chris
tian. How fairly your Lordship has represented this, let
every reader judge:–
“‘As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons
of God.”—Whereas the same title had been given of old to
the Jews also, he shows in the sequel, how great a difference
there is between that honour and this. For though, says he,
the titles are the same, yet the things are not. And he plainly
proves it, by comparing both what they had received, and what
they looked for. And first he shows what they had received,
viz., a ‘spirit of bondage. Therefore he adds, “Ye have not
received the spirit of bondage again unto fear; but ye have
received the Spirit of adoption.’ What means the spirit of
fear?–Observe their whole life, and you will know clearly. For
punishments were at their heels, and much fear was on every
side, and before their face. But with us it is not so. For our
mind and conscience are cleansed, so that we do all things well,
not for fear of present punishment, but through our love of
God, and an habit of virtue. They therefore, though they were
called sons, yet were as slaves; but we, being made free, have
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 95
received the adoption, and look not for a land of milk and
honey, but for heaven.
“He brings also another proof, that we have the Spirit of
adoption, by which, says he, we cry, ‘Abba, Father. This
is the first word we utter ueta tas 6avuaatas obvas exceivas,
scal Tov £evov cat Trapabokov Xoxevuatov voluov; after those
amazing throes, (or birth-pangs,) and that strange and won
derful manner of bringing forth.
“He brings yet another proof of the superiority of those who
had this Spirit of adoption: ‘The Spirit itself beareth witness
with our spirit that we are the children of God.' I prove this,
says he, not only from the voice itself, but also from the cause
whence that voice proceeds: For the Spirit suggests the words
while we thus speak, which he hath elsewhere expressed more
plainly, ‘God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts, crying, Abba, Father!’ But what is, ‘The Spirit
beareth witness with our spirit?” He means, the Paraclete by
the gift given unto us.” (But that this was an extraordinary
gift, we have no intimation at all, neither before nor after.)
“And when ‘the Spirit beareth witness, what doubt is left? If
a man or an angel spake, some might doubt; but when the
Most High beareth witness to us, who can doubt any longer?”
Now let any reasonable man judge how far your Lordship
has “translated the words of St. Chrysostom; and whether
he reckons the testimony of the Spirit among the miraculous
gifts of the Holy Ghost,” or among those ordinary gifts of
the Spirit of Christ which if a man have not he is none of his.
19. The fifth text your Lordship quotes, as describing a
miraculous gift of the Spirit, is 1 Cor. xiv. 15: To prove
which, you comment on the eighth chapter to the Romans,
particularly the twenty-sixth verse; and here again it is said,
that “the interpretation assigned is confirmed by several of
the most eminent fathers, more especially the great John
Chrysostom, as well as by Origen and Jerome upon the place.”
I cannot find St. Jerome to have writ one line upon the place.
And it is obvious, that St. Chrysostom supposes the whole con
text from the seventeenth to the twenty-fifth verse, torelate to all
Christians in all ages. How this can be said to “confirm the
interpretation assigned,” I cannot conjecture. Nay, it is remark
able, that he expounds the former part of the twenty-sixth verse
as describing the ordinary privilege of all Christians. Thus far,
96 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
therefore, he does not confirm but overthrow, the “interpre
tation before assigned.” But in the middle of the verse he
breaks off, and expounds the latter part, as describing one of
the miraculous gifts.
Yet I must do the justice to this venerable man to observe,
he does not suppose that a miraculous gift was given, only that
the inspired might do what any ordinary Christian might have
done without it; (this interpretation, even of the latter part
of the verse, he does in nowise confirm;) but that he might
ask, in every particular circumstance, the determinate thing
which it was the will of God to give.
20. The third father by whom it is said this interpretation
is confirmed, is Origen. The first passage of his, which
relates to Rom. viii. 26, runs thus:
“Paul, perceiving how far he was, after all these things, from
knowing to pray for what he ought, as he ought, says, “We
know not what we should pray for as we ought. But he adds,
whence, what is wanting may be had by one who indeed does
not know, but labours to be found worthy of having the defect.
supplied. For he says, “Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our
infirmities. For we know not what we should pray for as we
ought. But the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us, with
groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searcheth
the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit; because
he maketh intercession for the saints, according to the will of
God.” The Spirit which crieth, ‘Abba, Father, in the hearts
of the saints, knowing well our groanings in this tabernacle,
“maketh intercession for us to God, with groanings which
cannot be uttered.’ To the same effect is that Scripture: ‘I
will pray with the Spirit, I will pray with the understanding
also.” (1 Cor. xiv. 15. For our understanding (or mind,
o vows) cannot pray, if the Spirit do not pray before it, and
the understanding, as it were, listen to it.” (Vol. i., p. 199.)
Again: “I would know how the saints cry to God without a
voice. The Apostle shows, ‘God hath sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father !’ and he adds,
“The Spirit itself maketh intercession for us, with groanings
which cannot be uttered.’ And again, “He that searcheth the
hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh
intercession for the saints, according to the will of God.” Thus,
therefore, the Spirit making intercession for us with God, the
cry of the saints is heard without a voice.” (Vol. ii., p. 146.)
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 97
Once more in his Homily on Joshua :
“Jesus our Lord doth not forsake us; but although when
we would pray, “we know not what to pray for as we ought,’
yet ‘the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groan
ings which cannot be uttered. Now the Lord is that Spirit: ”
The Spirit assists our prayers, and offers them to God with
groanings which we cannot express in words.” (Vol. ii., p. 419.)
I believe all rational men will observe from hence, that
Origen is so far from confirming, that he quite overturns,
your Lordship’s interpretation of the sixteenth as well as the
twenty-sixth verse of this chapter; seeing, in his judgment,
both that testimony of the Spirit and this prayer belong to
all Christians in all ages.
21. The sixth scripture which your Lordship has undertaken
to show “relates only to the apostolical times,” is 1 Cor. ii. 4, 5.
And “this interpretation also,” it is said, “is confirmed by the
authority of Chrysostom, Origen, and other ancient writers.”
(P. 33.) With those other “ancient writers” I have no con
cern yet. St. Chrysostom so far confirms this interpretation, as
to explain that whole phrase “the demonstration of the Spirit
and of power,” of “the power of the Spirit shown by miracles.”
But he says not one word of any “proof of the Christian religion
arising from the types and prophecies of the Old Testament.”
Origen has these words:—
“Our word has a certain peculiar demonstration, more
divine than the Grecian logical demonstration. This the
Apostle terms, ‘the demonstration of the Spirit and of
power;” of the Spirit, because of the prophecies, sufficient to
convince any one, especially of the things that relate to
Christ; of power, because of the miraculous powers, some
footsteps of which still remain.” (Vol. i., p. 321.)
Hence we may doubtless infer, that Origen judged this text
to relate, in its primary sense, to the Apostles; but can we
thence infer, that he did not judge it to belong, in a lower
sense, to all true Ministers of Christ?
Let us hear him speaking for himself in the same treatise:
“‘And my speech and my preaching were not with entic
ing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit
and of power; that your faith should not stand in the wisdom
of men, but in the power of God.” Those who hear the word
preached with power are themselves filled with power,” (N.B.
VOL. VIII.
98 A FARTHER AppEAL TO MEN
not the power of working miracles,) “which they demon
strate both in their disposition, and in their life, and in their
striving for the truth unto death. But some, although they
profess to believe, have not this power of God in them, but
are empty thereof.” (P. 377.)
(Did Origen, then, believe that the power mentioned in this
text belonged only to the apostolical age?)
“See the force of the word, conquering believers by a per
suasiveness attended with the power of God! I speak this to
show the meaning of him that said, “And my speech and my
preaching were not with the enticing words of man’s wisdom,
but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your
faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power
of God.” This divine saying means, that what is spoken is
not sufficient of itself (although it be true, and most worthy to
be believed) to pierce a man’s soul, if there be not also a
certain power from God given to the speaker, and grace bloom
upon what is spoken; and this grace cannot be but from God.”
After observing that this is the very passage which your
Lordship mentions at the close of the other, but does not cite,
I desire every unprejudiced person to judge, whether Origen
does not clearly determine that the power spoken of in this
text, is in some measure given to all true Ministers in all ages.
22. The last scripture which your Lordship affirms “to be
peculiar to the times of the Apostles,” is that in the First
Epistle of St. John, concerning the “unction of the Holy One.”
To confirm this interpretation, we are referred to the au
thority of “Origen and Chrysostom, on the parallel passages
in St. John's Gospel.” (P. 42.)
But it has appeared, that both these fathers suppose those
passages to belong to all Christians; and, consequently, their
authority (if these are parallel passages) stands full against
this interpretation.
Your Lordship subjoins, “I shall here only add that of the
great Athanasius, who, in his epistle to Serapion, interprets
the ‘unction from the Holy One, not mercly of divine grace,
but of the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit.”
Nay, it is enough, if he interprets it at all of ordinary
grace, such as is common to all Christians.
And this your Lordship allows he does. But I cannot allow
that he interprets it of any thing else. I cannot perceive that
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 90
he interprets it at all “of the extraordinary gifts of the Holy
Spirit.”
His words are, “The Holy Spirit is called, and is, the unction
and the seal. For John writes, ‘The anointing which ye have
received of him, abideth in you; and ye need not that any man
should teach you, but as his anointing, his Spirit, “teacheth you
of all things' Again : It is written in the Prophet Isaiah,
“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed
me.’ And Paul writes thus: “In whom also ye were sealed.’
And again: ‘Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye
are sealed unto the day of redemption.” This anointing is the
breath of the Son; so that he who hath the Spirit may say, ‘We
are the sweet smelling savour of Christ. Because we are par
takers of the Holy Spirit, we have the Son; and having the Son,
we have ‘the Spirit crying in our hearts, Abba, Father.’”
And so in his Oration against the Arians:—
“‘He sendeth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying,
Abba, Father.” His Son in us, invoking the Father, makes him
to be called our Father. Certainly God cannot be called their
Father, who have not the Son in their hearts.”
Is it not easy to be observed here, (1.) That Athanasius makes
“that testimony of the Spirit” common to all the children of
God: (2.) That he joins “the anointing of the Holy One,” with
that seal of the Spirit wherewith all that persevere are “sealed
to the day of redemption:” And, (3.) That he does not, through
out this passage, speak of the extraordinary gifts at all?
Therefore, upon the whole, the sense of the primitive Church,
so far as it can be gathered from the authors above cited, is,
that “although some of the scriptures primarily refer to those
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit which were given to the Apos
tles, and a few other persons in the apostolical age; yet they
refer also, in a secondary sense, to those ordinary operations
of the Holy Spirit which all the children of God do and will
experience, even to the end of the world.”
23. What I mean by the ordinary operations of the Holy
Ghost, I sum up in the words of a modern writer:—
“Sanctification being opposed to our corruption, and answer
ing fully to the latitude thereof, whatsoever of holiness and per
fection is wanting in our nature must be supplied by the Spirit
of God. Wherefore, being by nature we are totally void of
all saving truth, and under an impossibility of knowing the will
I00 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
of God, this ‘Spirit searcheth all things, yea, even the deep
things of God,” and revealeth them unto the sons of men, so
that thereby the darkness of their understanding is expelled,
and they are enlightenéd with the knowledge of God. The
same Spirit which revealeth the object of faith generally to the
universal Church, doth also illuminate the understanding of
such as believe, that they may receive the truth. For ‘faith
is the gift of God, not only in the object, but also in the act.
And this gift is a gift of the Holy Ghost working within us.—
And as the increase of perfection, so the original of faith, is from
the Spirit of God, by an internal illumination of the soul.”
“The second part of the office of the Holy Ghost, is the
renewing of man in all the parts and faculties of his soul. For
our natural corruption consisting in an aversation of our wills,
and a depravation of our affections, an inclination of them to
the will of God is wrought within us by the Spirit of God.
“The third part of this office is, to lead, direct, and govern
usin our actions and conversations. “If we live in the Spirit,”
quickened by his renovation, we must also ‘walk in the Spirit,”
following his direction, led by his manuduction. We are also
animated and acted by the Spirit of God, who giveth ‘both to
will and to do: And ‘as many as are’ thus ‘led by the Spirit of
God, are the sons of God.” (Rom. viii. 14.) Moreover, that
this direction may prove more effectual, we are guided in our
prayers by the same Spirit; according to the promise, ‘I will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and supplication.” (Zech. xii. 10.)
Whereas then ‘this is the confidence which we have in him,
that if we ask anything according to his will, he heareth us;”
and whereas ‘we know not what we should pray for as we ought,
the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered;’ and “he that searcheth the hearts knoweth
what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession
for the saints, according to the will of God.” (Rom. viii.27.) From
which intercession,” (made for all true Christians,) “he hath the
name of the Paraclete given him by Christ, who said, ‘I will pray
the Father, and he will give you another Paraclete.” (John xiv.
16,26.)‘For if any man sin, we have a Paraclete with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous,” saith St. John; ‘who maketh inter
cession for us,” saith St. Paul. (Rom. viii. 34.) And we have
‘another Paraclete,” saith our Saviour; (John xiv. 16;) ‘which
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 101
also maketh intercession for us,” saith St. Paul. (Rom. viii.
27.) A Paraclete, then, in the notion of the Scriptures, is an
intercessor.
“It is also the office of the Holy Ghost, to “assure us of the
adoption of sons,’ to create in us a sense of the paternal love of
God towards us, to give us an earnest of our everlasting inherit
ance. ‘The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the
Holy Ghost which is given untous.’ ‘For as many as are led
by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.” “And because
we are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts, crying, Abba, Father.’ ‘For we have not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear; but we have received the Spirit
of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father; the Spirit itself
bearing witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.”
(Verses 15, 16.)
“As, therefore, we are born again by the Spirit, and receive
from him our regeneration, so we are also by the same Spirit
- assured of our adoption.” Because, being ‘sons, we are also
heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, by the same
‘Spirit we have the pledge, or rather the ‘earnest, of our inherit
ance.” For ‘he which establishethus in Christ, and hath anointed
us, is God; who hath also sealed us, and hath given us the
earnest of his Spirit in our hearts:’ So that “we are sealed with
that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inherit
ance. The Spirit of God, as given unto us in this life, is to be
looked upon as an earnest, being part of that reward which is
promised, and, upon performance of the covenant which God
hath made with us, certainly to be received.”
Your Lordship observed, that “the interpretation of those
passages which relate to the ‘unction from the Holy One,”
depends on the sense of those other passages of Holy Scripture,
particularly those in St. John’s Gospel.” Now, if so, then these
words fix the sense of six out of the seven texts in question; and
every one of them, in the judgment of this writer, describes the
ordinary gifts bestowed on all Christians.
It now rests with your Lordship to take your choice; either
to condemn or to acquit both. Either your Lordship must con
demn Bishop Pearson for an enthusiast; (a man no ways inferior
to Bishop Chrysostom;) or you must acquit me: for I have
hisexpress authority on my side, concerning every text which I
affirm to belong to all Christians.
24. But I have greater authority than his, and such as I rever
I02 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
ence only less than that of the oracles of God; I mean, that
of our own Church. I shall close this head by setting down
what occurs in her authentic records, concerning either our
“receiving the Holy Ghost,” or his ordinary operations in all
true Christians.
In her Daily Service she teaches us all to beseech God “to
grant us his Holy Spirit, that those things may please him
which we do at this present, and that the rest of our life may
be pure and holy;” to pray for our Sovereign Lord the King,
that God would “replenish him with the grace of his Holy
Spirit;” for all the Royal Family, that they may be “endued
with his Holy Spirit, and enriched with his heavenly grace;”
for all the Clergy and people, that he would “send down upon
them the healthful Spirit of his grace;” for “the Catholic
Church, that it may be guided and governed by his good
Spirit;” and for all therein who at any time “make their com
mon supplication unto him,” that “the fellowship” or communi
cation “of the Holy Ghost may be with them all evermore.”
Her Collects are full of petitions to the same effect: “Grant
that we may daily be renewed by thy Holy Spirit.” (Collect for
Christmas-Day.) “Grant that in all our sufferings here, for
the testimony of thy truth, we may by faith behold the glory
that shall be revealed, and, “being filled with the Holy Ghost,”
may love and bless our persecutors.” (St. Stephen’s Day.)
“Send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most
excellent gift of charity.” (Quinquagesima Sunday.) “O.
Lord, from whom all good things do come, grant to us, thy
humble servants, that by thy holy inspiration we may think
those things that are good, and by thy merciful guidance may
perform the same.” (Fifth Sunday after Easter.) “We
beseech thee, leave us not comfortless, but send us the Holy
Ghost to comfort us.” (Sunday after Ascension Day.) “Grant
us by the same Spirit to have a right judgment in all things, and
evermore to rejoice in his holy comfort.” (Whit-Sunday.)
(N.B. The Church here teaches all Christians to claim the
Comforter, in virtue of the promise made, John xiv.) “Grant
us, Lord, we beseech thee, the Spirit, to think and do always
such things as be rightful.” (Ninth Sunday after Trinity.)
“O God, forasmuch as without thee we are not able to please
thee; mercifully grant that thy Holy Spirit may in all things
direct and rule our hearts.” (Nineteenth Sunday after Trinity.)
“Cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of thy
Ol' R EASON AND RELIGION. 103
Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily
magnify thy holy name.” (Communion Office.)
“Give thy Holy Spirit to this infant, (or this person,) that
he may be born again.–Give thy Holy Spirit to these persons,”
(N.B. already baptized,) “that they may continue thy servants.
“Almighty God, who hast vouchsafed to regenerate these
persons by water and the Holy Ghost; strengthen them with
the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily increase in them the
manifold gifts of thy grace.” (Office of Confirmation.)
From these passages it may sufficiently appear, for what
purposes every Christian, according to the doctrine of the
Church of England, does now “receive the IIoly Ghost.” But
this will be still more clear from those that follow ; wherein
the reader may likewise observe a plain, rational sense of God’s
revealing himself to us, of the inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
and of a believer's feeling in himself “the mighty working”
of the Spirit of Christ:—
25. “God gave them of old grace to be his children, as he
doth us now. But now, by the coming of our Saviour Christ,
we have received more abundantly the Spirit of God in our
hearts.” (Homily on Faith, Part II.)
“He died to destroy the rule of the devil in us; and he rose
again to send down his Holy Spirit, to ‘rule in our hearts.”
(Homily on the Resurrection.)
“We have the Holy Spirit in our hearts, as a seal and
pledge of our everlasting inheritance.” (Ibid.)
“The Holy Ghost sat upon each of them, like as it had been
cloven tongues of fire; to teach, that it is he which giveth elo
quence and utterance in preaching the gospel; which engen
dereth a burning zeal towards God’s word, and giveth all men
a tongue, yea, a fiery tongue.” (N.B. Whatever occurs in
any of the Journals, of God’s “giving me utterance,” or
“enabling me to speak with power,” cannot therefore be
quoted as enthusiasm, without wounding the Church through
my side.) “So that if any man be a dumb Christian, not
professing his faith openly, he giveth men occasion to doubt
lest he have not the grace of the Holy Ghost within him.”
(Homily on Whit-Sunday, Part I.)
“It is the office of the Holy Ghost to sanctify; which the
more it is hid from our understanding,” (that is, the more par
ticular manner of his working) “the more it ought to move all
104. A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
men to wonder at the secret and mighty workings of God’s
Holy Spirit which is within us. For it is the Holy Ghost
that doth quicken the minds of men, stirring up godly motions
in their hearts. Neither doth he think it sufficient inwardly
to work the new birth of man, unless he do also dwell and
abide in him. ‘Know ye not,” saith St. Paul, ‘that ye are the
temple of God, and that his Spirit dwelleth in you? Know ye
not that your bodies are the temple of the Holy Ghost, which
is in you?” Again he saith, ‘Ye are not in the flesh, but in
the Spirit. For why? ‘The Spirit of God dwelleth in you.’
To this agreeth St. John : ‘The anointing which ye have re
ceived’ (he meaneth the Holy Ghost) ‘abidethin you.’ (1 John
ii. 27.) And St. Peter saith the same: ‘The Spirit of glory and
of God resteth upon you. O what comfort is this to the heart
of a true Christian, to think that the Holy Ghost dwelleth in
him ! “If God be with us,’ as the Apostle saith, “who can be
against us?” He giveth patience and joyfulness of heart, in
temptation and affliction, and is therefore worthily called ‘the
Comforter.” (John xiv. 16.) He doth instruct the hearts of the
simple in the knowledge of God and his word; therefore he
is justly termed ‘the Spirit of truth.’ (xvi. 13.) And where the
Holy Ghost doth instruct and teach, there is no delay at all in
learning.” (Ibid.)
From this passage I learn, First, that every true Christian
now “receives the Holy Ghost,” as the Paraclete or Comfor
ter promised by our Lord, John xiv. 16: Secondly, that every
Christian receives him as “the Spirit of truth,” (promised
John xvi.) to “teach him all things:” And, Thirdly, that “the
anointing,” mentioned in the first Epistle of St. John, “abides
in every Christian.”
26. “In reading of God’s word, he profiteth most that is
most inspired with the Holy Ghost.” (Homily on reading the
Scripture, Part I.)-
“Human and worldly wisdom is not needful to the under
standing of Scripture, but the revelation of the Holy Ghost,
who inspireth the true meaning unto them that with humility
and diligence search for it.” (Ibid. Part II.)
“Make him know and feel that there is no other name
under heaven given unto men, whereby we can be saved.
“If we feel our conscience at peace with God, through
remission of our sin,—all is of God.” Homily on Rogation,
Week, Part III.)
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 105
“If you feel such a faith in you, rejoice in it, and let it be
daily increasing by well-working.” (Homily on Faith, Part III.)
“The faithful may feel wrought tranquillity of conscience,
the increase of faith and hope, with many other graces of God.”
(Homily on the Sacrament, Part I.)
“Godly men feel inwardly God's Holy Spirit, inflaming
their hearts with love.” (Homily on certain places of Scrip
ture, Part I.)
“God give us grace to know these things, and to feel them
in our hearts | This knowledge and feeling is not of ourselves.
Let us therefore meekly call upon the bountiful Spirit, the
Holy Ghost, to inspire us with his presence, that we may be
able to hear the goodness of God to our salvation. For without
his lively inspiration, can we not so much as speak the name
of the Mediator. “No man can say that Jesus is the Lord,
but by the Holy Ghost; much less should we be able to
believe and know these great mysteries that be opened to us
by Christ. “But we have received, saith St. Paul, ‘not the
spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God;’ for this
purpose, ‘that we may know the things which are freely given
to us of God.” In the power of the Holy Ghost resteth all
ability to know God, and to please him. It is he that purifieth
the mind by his secret working. He enlighteneth the heart,
to conceive worthy thoughts of Almighty God. He sitteth
in the tongue of man, to stir him to speak his honour. He
only ministereth spiritual strength to the powers of the soul
and body. And if we have any gift whereby we may profit
our neighbour, all is wrought by this one and the self-same
Spirit.” (Homily for Rogation Week, Part III.)
27. Every proposition which I have anywhere advanced
concerning those operations of the Holy Ghost, which, I
believe, are common to all Christians in all ages, is here
clearly maintained by our own Church.
Under a full sense of this, I could not well understand, for
many years, how it was, that on the mentioning any of thesegreat
truths,even among men of education, the cryimmediately arose,
“An enthusiast! An enthusiast !” But I now plainly perceive
this is only an old fallacy in a new shape. To object enthu
siasm to any person or doctrine is but a decent method of beg
£ing thequestion. It generally spares the objector the trouble of
reasoning, and is a shorter and easier way of carrying his cause.
I06 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
For instance, I assert that “till a man “receives the Holy
Ghost, he is without God in the world; that he cannot know
the things of God, unless God reveal them unto him by the
Spirit; no, nor have even one holy or heavenly temper, without
the inspiration of the Holy One.” Now, should one who is
conscious to himself that he has experienced none of these
things, attempt to confute these propositions, either from Scrip
ture or antiquity, it might prove a difficult task. What then
shall he do? Why, cry out, “Enthusiasm ! Enthusiasm !”
and the work is done.
But what does he mean by enthusiasm 2 Perhaps nothing
at all: Few have any distinct idea of its meaning. Perhaps
“something very bad,” or, “something I never experienced and
do not understand.” Shall I tell you then what that “terrible
something” is ? I believe, thinking men mean by enthusiasm,
a sort of religious madness; a false imagination of being
inspired by God: And by an enthusiast, one that fancics himself
under the influence of the Holy Ghost, when, in fact, he is not.
Let him prove me guilty of this who can. I will tell you
once more the whole of my belief on these heads: And if any
man will show me (by arguments, not hard names) what is
wrong, I will thank God and him.
28. Every good gift is from God, and is given to man by the
Holy Ghost. By nature there is in us no good thing; and
there can be none, but so far as it is wrought in us by that good
Spirit. Have we any true knowledge of what is good? This
is not the result of our matural understanding. “The natural
man discerneth not the things of the Spirit of God:” So that
we never can discern them, until God “reveals them unto us by
his Spirit.” Reveals, that is, unveils, uncovers; gives us to
know what we did not know before. Have we love? It “is
shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given
unto us.” He inspires, breathes, infuses into our soul, what of
ourselves we could not have. Does our spirit rejoice in God
our Saviour? It is “joy in,” or by, “the Holy Ghost.” Have
we true inward peace? It is “the peace of God,” wrought in
us by the same Spirit. Faith, peace, joy, love, are all his fruits.
And as we are figuratively said to see the light of faith; so, by
a like figure of speech, we are said to feel this peace and joy and
love; that is, we have an inward experience of them, which we
cannot find any fitter word to express.
OF REASON AND RELIGION, 107
The reasons why, in speaking of these things, I use those
terms, (inspiration particularly,) are, (1.) Because they are
scriptural: (2.) Because they are used by our Church : (3.)
Because I know none better. The word, “influence of the Holy
Ghost,” which I suppose you use, is both a far stronger and a
less natural term than inspiration. It is far stronger; even as
far as “flowing into the soul” is a stronger expression than
“breathing upon it;”—and less natural, as breathing bears a
near relation to spirit; to which flowing in has only a distant
relation.
But you thought I had meant “immediate inspiration.” So
I do, or I mean nothing at all. Not indeed such inspiration as
is sine mediis. But all inspiration, though by means, is imme
diate. Suppose, for instance, you are employed in private
prayer, and God pours his love into your heart. God then acts
immediately on your soul; and the love of him which you then
experience, is as immediately breathed into you by the Holy
Ghost, as if you had lived seventeen hundred years ago.
Change the term: Say, God then assists you to love him.
Well, and is not this immediate assistance 2 Say, His Spirit
concurs with yours. You gain no ground. It is immediate con
currence, or none at all. God, a Spirit, acts upon your spirit.
Make it out any otherwise if you can.
I cannot conceive how that harmless word immediate came
to be such a bugbear in the world: “Why, I thought you meant
such inspiration as the Apostles had; and such a receiving the
Holy Ghost as that was at the day of Pentecost.” I do, in
part: Indeed I do not mean, that Christians now receive the
Holy Ghost in order to work miracles; but they do doubtless
now “receive,” yea, are “filled with, the Holy Ghost,” in
order to be filled with the fruits of that blessed Spirit. And he
inspires into all true believers now, a degree of the same peace
and joy and love which the Apostles felt in themselves on that
day, when they were first “filled with the Holy Ghost.”
29. I have now considered the most material objections I
know, which have been lately made against the great doctrines
I teach. I have produced, so far as in me lay, the strength of
those objections, and then answered them, I hope, in the spirit
of meekness. And now I trust it appears, that these doctrines.
are no other than the doctrines of Jesus Christ; that they are
all evidently contained in the word of God, by which alone I
desire to stand or fall; and that they are fundamentally the
108 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
same with the doctrines of the Church of England, of which I
do, and ever did, profess myself a member.
But there remains one objection, which, though relating
to the head of doctrine, yet is independent on all that went
before. And that is, “You cannot agree in your doctrines
among yourselves. One holds one thing, and one another.
Mr. Whitefield anathematizes Mr. Wesley; and Mr. Wesley
anathematizes Mr. Whitefield. And yet each pretends to be
led by the Holy Ghost, by the infallible Spirit of God! Every
reasonable man must conclude from hence, that neither one
nor the other is led by the Spirit.”
I need not say, how continually this has been urged, both in
common conversation and from the press: (I am grieved to
add, and from the pulpit too; for, if the argument were good,
it would overturn the Bible:) Nor, how great stress has been
continually laid upon it. Whoever proposes it, proposes it as
demonstration, and generally claps his wings, as being quite
assured, it will admit of no answer.
And indeed I am in doubt, whether it does admit (I am sure
it does not require) any other answer, than that coarse one of
the countryman to the Romish champion, “Bellarmine, thou
liest.” For cvery proposition contained herein is grossly,
shamelessly false. (1.) “You cannot agree in your doctrines
among yourselves.”—Who told you so? All our fundamental
doctrines I have recited above. And in every one of these we
do and have agreed for several years. In these we hold one and
the same thing. In smaller points, each of us thinks, and lets
think. (2) “Mr. Whitefield anathematizes Mr. Wesley.”
Another shameless untruth. Let any one read what Mr.
Whitefield wrote, even in the heat of controversy, and he will
be convinced of the contrary. (3) “And Mr. Wesley anathe
matizes Mr. Whitefield.” This is equally false and scandalous.
I reverence Mr. Whitefield, both as a child of God, and a true
Minister of Jesus Christ. (4.) “And yet each pretends to be
led by the Holy Ghost, by the infallible Spirit of God.” Not
in our private opinions; nor does either of us pretend to be any
farther led by the Spirit of God, than every Christian must
pretend to be, unless he will deny the Bible. For only “as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons of God.”
Therefore, if you do not pretend to be led by him too, yea, if
it be not so in fact, “you are none of his.”
And now, what is become of your demonstration? Leave it
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 109.
to the carmen and porters, its just proprietors; to the zealous
apple-women, that cry after me in the street, “This is he that
rails at the Whole Dutiful of Man.” But let every one that pre
tends to learning or reason be ashamed to mention it any more.
30. The first inference easily deduced from what has been
said, is, that we are not false prophets. In one sense of the
word, we are no prophets at all; for we do not foretel things to
come. But in another, (wherein every Minister is a prophet,)
we are; for we do speak in the name of God. Now, a false pro
phet (in this sense of the word) is one who declares as the will
of God what is not so. But we declare (as has been shown at
large) nothing else as the will of God, but what is evidently con
tained in his written word, as explained by our own Church.
Therefore, unless you can prove the Bible to be a false book,
you cannot possibly prove us to be false prophets.
The text which is generally cited on this occasion is Matthew
vii. 15. But how unhappily chosen In the preceding chap
ters, our Lord had been describing that “righteousness which
exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,” and
without which we cannot “enter into the kingdom of heaven.”
Even the life of God in the soul; holiness of heart, producing
all holiness of conversation. In this, he closes that rule which
sums up the whole, with those solemn words, “Enter ye in at
the strait gate; ” (such indeed is that of universal holiness;)
“for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to
destruction.” The gate of hell is wide as the whole earth; the
way of unholiness is broad as the great deep. “And many
there be which go in thereat; ” yea, and excuse themselves in
so doing, “because strait is the gate and narrow is the way that
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.” It follows,
“Beware of false prophets;” of those who speak as from God
what God hath not spoken; those who show you any other
way to life, than that which I have now shown. So that the
false prophets here spoken of are those who point out any other
way to heaven than this; who teach men to find a wider gate,
a broader way, than that described in the foregoing chapters.
But it has been abundantly shown that we do not. Therefore
(whatever we are beside) we are not false prophets.
Neither are we (as has been frequently and vehemently
affirmed) “deceivers of the people.” If we teach “the truth as
it is in Jesus,” if “we speak as the oracles of God,” it follows,
110 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
that we do not deceive those that hear, though they should
believe whatever we speak. “Let God be true, and every
man a liar; ” every man that contradicts his truth. But he
will “be justified in his saying, and clear when he is judged.”
31. One thing more I infer, that we are not enthusiasts.
This accusation has been considered at large; and the main
arguments hitherto brought to support it have been weighed
in the balance and found wanting: Particularly this, “that
none but enthusiasts suppose either that promise of the Com
forter, (John xiv. 16, 26; xvi. 13) or the witness of the
Spirit, (Rom. viii. 15, 16) or that unutterable prayer, (Rom.
viii. 26, 27,) or the ‘unction from the Holy One, (1 John
ii. 20, 27,) to belong in common to all Christians.” O my
Lord, how deeply have you condemned the generation of
God’s children | Whom have you represented as rank,
dreaming enthusiasts, as either deluded or designing men ?
Not only Bishop Pearson, a man hitherto accounted both
sound in heart, and of good understanding; but likewise
Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, Bishop Latimer, Bishop
Hooper; and all the vcncrable compilers of our Liturgy and
Homilies; all the members of both the Houses of Convocation,
by whom they were revised and approved; yea, King Edward,
and all his Lords and Commons together, by whose authority
they were established; and, with these modern enthusiasts,
Origen, Chrysostom, and Athanasius are comprehended in the
same censure !
I grant, a Deist might rank both us and them in the
number of religious madmen; nay, ought so to do, on his sup
position that the Gospel is but a “cunningly-devised fable.”
And on this ground some of them have done so in fact. One
of them was asking me, some years since, “What! are you
one of the knight-errants? How, I pray, got this Quixotism
into your head? You want nothing; you have a good pro
vision for life; and are in a fair way of preferment. And
must you leave all, to fight windmills; to convert savages in
America?” I could only reply, “Sir, if the Bible is a lie, I
am as very a madman as you can conceive. But if it be true,
I am in my senses; I am neither a madman nor enthusiast.
‘For there is no man who hath left father, or mother, or
wife, or house, or land, for the gospel’s sake; but he shall
receive an hundred fold, in this world, with persecutions, and
in the world to come, eternal life.’”
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 1II
Nominal, outside Christians too, men of form, may pass the
same judgment. For we give up all our pretensions to what
they account happiness, for what they (with the Deists) believe
to be a mere dream. We expect, therefore, to pass for enthu
siasts with these also: “But wisdom is justified of ’’ all “her
children.”
32. I cannot conclude this head without one obvious
remark: Suppose we really were enthusiasts; suppose our doc
trines were false, and unsupported either by reason, Scripture,
or authority; then why hath not some one, “who is a wise man,
and endued with knowledge among you,” attempted at least
to show us our fault “in love and meekness of wisdom ?”
Brethren, “if ye have bitter zeal in your hearts, your wisdom
descendeth not from above. The wisdom that is from above,
is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy” or
pity. Does this spirit appear in one single tract of all those
which have been published against us? Is there one writer that
has reproved us in love? Bring it to a single point. “Love
hopeth all things.” If you had loved usin any degree, you would
have hoped that God would some time give us the knowledge
of his truth. But where shall we find even this slender instance
of love? Has not every one who has wrote at all (I do not
remember so much as one exception) treated us as incorrigible?
Brethren, how is this? Why do ye labour to teach us an evil
lesson against yourselves? O may God never suffer others to
deal with you as ye have dealt with us!
VI. 1. Before I enter upon the consideration of those objec
tions which have been made to the manner of our preaching,
I believe it may be satisfactory to some readers, if I relate how
I began to preach in this manner:
I was ordained Deacon in 1725, and Priest in the year fol
lowing. But it was many years after this before I was convinced
of the great truths above recited. During all that time I was
utterly ignorant of the nature and condition of justification.
Sometimes I confounded it with sanctification; (particularly
when I was in Georgia;) at other times I had some confused
notion about the forgiveness of sins; but then I took it for
granted the time of this must be either the hour of death, or
the day of judgment,
I was equally ignorant of the nature of saving faith; appre
hending it to mean no more than a “firm assent to all the
propositions contained in the Old and New Testaments.”
112 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
2. As soon as, by the great blessing of God, I had a clearer
view of these things, I began to declare them to others also.
“I believed, and therefore I spake.” Wherever I was now
desired to preach, salvation by faith was my only theme. My
constant subjects were, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shalt be saved.” “Him hath God exalted to be a Prince
and a Saviour, to give repentance and remission of sins.” These
Iexplained and enforced with all my might, both in every church
where I was asked to preach, and occasionally in the religious
societies of London and Westminster; to some or other of
which I was continually pressed to go by the stewards or other
members of them.
Things were in this posture, when I was told I must preach
no more in this, and this, and another church; the reason was
usually added without reserve, “Because you preach such doc
trines.” So much the more those who could not hear me there
flocked together when I was at any of the societies; where I
spoke, more or less, though with much inconvenience, to as
many as the room I was in would contain.
3. But after a time, finding those rooms could not contain a
tenth part of the people that were earnest to hear, I determined
to do the same thing in England, which I had often done in a
warmer climate; namely, when the house would not contain the
congregation, to preach in the open air. This I accordingly
did, first at Bristol, where the society rooms were exceeding
small, and at Kingswood, where we had no room at all; after
wards, in or near London.
And I cannot say I have ever seen a more awful sight, than,
when on Rose-Green, or the top of Hannam-Mount, some
thousands of people were calmly joined together in solemn
waiting upon God, while
They stood, and under open air adored
The God who made both air, earth, heaven, and sky.
And, whether they were listening to his word with attention still
as night, or were lifting up their voice in praise as the sound
of many waters, many a time have I been constrained to say
in my heart, “How dreadful is this place! This” also “is no
other than the house of God! This is the gate of heaven!”
Be pleased to observe: (1.) That I was forbidden, as by a
general consent, to preach in any church, (though not by any
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 113
judicial sentence,) “for preaching such doctrine.” This was
the open, avowed cause; there was at that time no other, either
real or pretended, except that the people crowded so. (2.) That
I had no desire or design to preach in the open air, till after
this prohibition. (3.) That when I did, as it was no matter of
choice, so neither of premeditation. There was no scheme at
all previously formed, which was to be supported thereby; nor
had I any other end in view than this,—to save as many souls
as I could. (4.) Field-preaching was therefore a sudden expe
dient, a thing submitted to, rather than chosen; and therefore
submitted to, because I thought preaching even thus, better
than not preaching at all: First, in regard to my own soul,
because, “a dispensation of the gospel being committed to me,”
I did not dare “not to preach the gospel:” Secondly, in regard
to the souls of others, whom I everywhere saw “seeking death
in the error of their life.”
4. But the author of the “Observations,” and of “The
Case of the Methodists briefly stated, more particularly in the
point of Field-Preaching,” thinks field-preaching worse than
not preaching at all, “because it is illegal.”
Your argument, in form, runs thus:—
“That preaching which is contrary to the laws of the land is
worse than not preaching at all:
“But field-preaching is contrary to the laws of the land:
“Therefore, it is worse than not preaching at all.”
The first proposition is not self-evident, nor, indeed, univer
sally true: For the preaching of all the primitive Christians
was contrary to the whole tenor of the Roman law; the wor
ship of the devil-gods being established by the strongest laws
then in being. Nor is it ever true, but on supposition that the
preaching in question is an indifferent thing.
But waving this, I deny the second proposition; I deny that
field-preaching is contrary to the laws of our land.
To prove which, you begin thus: “It does not appear that
any of the Preachers among the Methodists have qualified
themselves, and the places of their assembling, according to the
Act of Toleration.”
I answer, (1.) That Act grants toleration to those who dis
sent from the Established Church: But we do not dissent from
it: Therefore, we cannot make use of that Act. (2.) That Act
exempts Dissenters from penalties consequent on their breach
VOL. VIII.
114 A l'ARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
of preceding laws: But we are not conscious of breaking any
law at all: Therefore, we need not make use of it.
In the next section you say, “They have broken through all
these provisions, in open defiance of government; and have
met, not only in houses, but in the fields, notwithstanding the
statute (22 Car. II, c. 1) which forbids this by name.”
I answer, (1.) We do nothing in defiance of government:
We reverence Magistrates, as the Ministers of God. (2.)
Although we have met in the fields, yet we do not conceive that
statute at all affects us; not only because that Act points
wholly at Dissenters; whereas we are members of the Estab
lished Church; but also because (they are your own words)
“it was evidently intended to suppress and prevent sedition;”
whereas, no sedition, nor any the least approach thereto, can
with any colour be laid to our charge.
In your third section you affirm that the Act of Toleration
itself cannot secure us in field-preaching from the penalties of
former laws. We have no desire it should; as not apprehend
ing ourselves to be condemned by any former law whatever.
Nor does what you add, “that the Act of Toleration forbids
any assembly of persons dissenting from the Church of Eng
land, to meet with the doors locked,” affect us at all; because
we do not dissent from it.
5. In “The Case of the Methodists briefly stated,” your first
observation is, “The Act of Toleration leaves them liable to the
penalties of several statutes made against unlawful assemblies.”
I suppose then these several statutes specify what those
unlawful assemblies are ; and whether unlawful, as being con
demned by previous laws, or made unlawful by those statutes.
And it still remains to be proved, that our assemblies are
unlawful, in one or other of these senses.
You next observe, that “the Dissenters of all denominations
qualify themselves according to the Act of Toleration; other
wise, they are liable to the penalties of all the laws recited in
this Act.”
I answer, as before, all this strikes wide. It relates wholly
to “persons dissenting from the Church.” But we are not the
men: We do not dissent from the Church: Whoever affirms
it, we put him to the proof.
You go on : “One of those laws so recited (viz., 22 Car.
II., c. 1) is that which forbids field-preaching by name; and
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 115
was evidently intended, not only to suppress, but also to
prevent, sedition: As the title of the Act declares, and as the
preamble expresses it, “to provide farther and more speedy
remedies against it.”
Was this then, in your own judgment, the evident intention
of that Act, viz., to provide remedies against sedition? Does the
very title of the Act declare this, and the preamble also express
it? With what justice then, with what ingenuity or candour,
with what shadow of truth or reason, can any man cite this Act
against us; whom you yourself no more suspect of a design to
raise sedition, (I appeal to your own conscience in the sight of
God,) than of a design to blow up the city of London?
6. Hitherto, therefore, it hath not been made to appear that
field-preaching is contrary to any law in being. However, “it
is dangerous.” This you strongly insist on. “It may be
attended with mischievous consequences. It may give advan
tages to the enemies of the established government. It is big
with mischief.” (Observations, Sect. i. & ii.)
With what mischief? Why, “evil-minded men, by meeting
together in the fields, under pretence of religion, may raise riots
and tumults; or, by meeting secretly, may carry on private
cabals against the state.” (Case of the Methodists, p. 2.)
“And if the Methodists themselves are a harmless and loyal
people, it is nothing to the point in hand. For disloyal and
seditious persons may use such an opportunity of getting toge
ther, in order to execute any private design. Mr. Whitefield
says, thirty, fifty, or eighty thousand have attended his preach
ing at once. Now, (1.) He cannot know one tenth part of such
a congregation: (2.) All people may come and carry on what
designs they will: Therefore, (3.) This is a great opportunity
put into the hands of seditious persons to raise disturbances.
“With what safety to the public these field-preachings may
be continued, let the world judge.” (Ibid. pp. 2–4.)
May I speak without offence? I cannot think you are in
earnest. You do not mean what you say. Do you believe Mr.
Whitefield had eighty thousand hearers at once? No more
than you believe he had eighty millions. Is not all this talk
of danger mere finesse, thrown in purely ad movendam invi
diam ** You know governments generally are suspicious;
*To excite ill-will.-EDIT.
116 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
especially in the time of war; and therefore apply, as you sup
pose, to their weak side; in hopes, if possible, to deliver over
these heretics to the secular arm. However, I will answer as if
you spoke from your heart: For I am in earnest, if you are not.
(1.) “The Preacher cannot know a tenth part of his congre
gation.” Let us come to the present state of things. The
largest congregations that now attend the preaching of any
Methodist, are those (God be merciful to me!) that attend
mine. And cannot I know a tenth part of one of these congre
gations, either at Bristol, Kingswood, Newcastle, or London?
As strange as it may seem, I generally know two-thirds of the
congregation in every place, even on Sunday evening, and nine
in ten of those who attend at most other times. (2.) “All
people may come and carry on what designs they will.” Not so.
All field-preaching is now in the open day. And were only ten
persons to come to such an assembly with arms, it would soon
be inquired, with what design they came. This is therefore,
(3.) No “great opportunity put into the hands of seditious
persons to raise disturbances.” And if ever any disturbance.
has been raised, it was quite of another kind. :
The public, then, is entirely safe, if it be in no other danger
than arises from field-preaching.
7. There is one other sentence belonging to this head, in the
eighth section of the “Observations.” “Thereligious societies,”
you say, “in London and Westminster, for many years past,
have received no discouragements, but, on the contrary, have
been countenanced and encouraged both by the Bishops and
Clergy.” How is this? Have they then “qualified themselves
and places of their assembling, according to the Act of Tolera
tion?” Have they “embraced the protection which that Act
might give them, in case they complied with the conditions.
of it?” If not, are they not all “liable to the penalties of
the several statutes made before that time against unlawful
assemblies?”
How can they escape? Have they “qualified themselves for
holding these separate assemblies, according to the tenor of that
Act?” Have, then, “the several members thereof taken the
oaths to the government?” And are the “doors of the places
wherein they meet always open at the time of such meetings?”
I presume you know they are not; and that neither “the per
sons nor places are so qualified as that Act directs.”
OF REASON AND RELIGION, 117
How then come “the Bishops and Clergy to countenance
and encourage” unlawful assemblies? If it be said, “They
meet in a private, inoffensive way;” that is nothing to the
point in hand. If those meetings are unlawful in themselves,
all their inoffensiveness will not make them lawful. “O, but
they behave with modesty and decency.” Very well; but the
law ! What is that to the law There can be no solid defence
but this: They are not Dissenters from the Church; therefore
they cannot use, and they do not need, the Act of Toleration.
And their meetings are not seditious; therefore the statute
against seditious meetings does not affect them.
The application is obvious. If our meetings are illegal, so
are theirs also. But if this plea be good (as doubtless it is) in
the one case, it is good in the other also.
8. You propose another objection to our manner of preach
ing, in the second part of the “Observations.” The substance
of it I will repeat, and answer as briefly as I can :—
“They run up and down from place to place, and from
county to county;” that is, they preach in several places.
This is undoubtedly true. “They draw after them confused
multitudes of people;” that is, many come to hear them.
This is true also. “But they would do well to remember,
God is not the author of confusion or of tumult, but of peace.”
I trust we do: Nor is there any confusion or tumult at all in
our largest congregations; unless at some rare times, when the
sons of Belial mix therewith, on purpose to disturb the peace
able worshippers of God.
“But our Church has provided against this preaching up
and down, in the ordination of a Priest, by expressly limiting
the exercise of the powers then conferred upon him, to the con
gregation where he shall be lawfully appointed thereunto.”
I answer, (1.) Your argument proves too much. If it be
allowed just as you proposed it, it proves that no Priest has
authority, either to preach or minister the sacraments, in any
other than his own congregation.
(2.) Had the powers conferred been so limited when I was
ordained Priest, my ordination would have signified just
nothing. For I was not appointed to any congregation at all;
but was ordained as a member of that “College of Divines,”
(so our statutes express it,) “founded to overturn all heresies,
and defend the Catholic faith.”
118 A FARTIi Eit APPEAL TO MEN
(3.) For many years after I was ordained Priest, this limita
tion was never heard of. I heard not one syllable of it, by way
of objection, to my preaching up and down in Oxford or Lon
don, or the parts adjacent; in Gloucestershire, or Worcester
shire; in Lancashire, Yorkshire, or Lincolnshire. Nor did the
strictest disciplinarian scruple suffering me to exercise those
powers wherever I came.
(4.) And in fact, is it not universally allowed, that every
Priest, as such, has a power, in virtue of his ordination, either
to preach or to administer the sacraments, in any congregation,
wherever the Rector or Curate desires his assistance? Does
not every one then see through this thin pretence?
9. “The Bishops and Universities indeed have power to
grant licenses to Itinerants. But the Church has provided in
that case; they are not to preach in any church (Canon 50) till
they show their license.”
The Church has well provided in that case. But what has
that case to do with the case of common Clergymen? Only
so much as to show how grossly this Canon has been abused,
at Islington in particular; where the Churchwardens were
instructed to hinder, by main force, the Priest whom the
Vicar himself had appointed, from preaching, and to quote this
Canon; which, as you plainly show, belongs to quite another
thing.
In the note you add, “Mr. Wesley being asked, by what
authority he preached, replied, “By the authority of Jesus
Christ conveyed to me by the (now) Archbishop of Canterbury,
when he laid his hands upon me and said, Take thou authority
to preach the gospel. In this reply he thought fit, for a plain
reason, to leave out this latter part of the commission; for that
would have shown his reader the restraint and limitation under
which the exercise of the power is granted.” Nay, I did not
print the latter part of the words, for a plainer reason, because
I did not speak them. And I did not speak them then, because
they did not come into my mind. Though probably, if they had,
I should not have spoken them; it being my only concern, to
answer the question proposed, in as few words as I could.
But before those words, which you suppose to imply such a
restraint as would condemn all the Bishops and Clergy in the
nation, were those, spoken without any restraint or limitation
at all, which I apprehend to convey an indelible character:
“Receive the Holy Ghost, for the office and work of a Priest
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 119
in the Church of God, now committed unto thee, by the impo
sition of our hands. Whose sins thou dost forgive, they are
forgiven; and whose sins thou dost retain, they are retained.
And be thou a faithful dispenser of the word of God, and of
his holy sacraments, in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”
You proceed: “In the same Journal he declares, that he
looks upon all the world as his parish, and explains his mean
ing as follows: ‘In whatever part of it I am, I judge it meet,
right, and my bounden duty, to declare, unto all that are
willing to hear, the glad tidings of salvation. This is the work
which I know God hath called me to;’” namely, “by the
laying on of the hands of the presbytery,” which directs me
how to obey that general command, “While we have time,
let us do good unto all men.”
10. You object farther, “that the Methodists do not observe
the Rubric before the Communion Service; which directs, so
many as desire to partake of the holy communion, to signify
their names to the Curate the day before.” What Curate
desires they should? Whenever any Minister will give but one
week's notice of this, I undertake, all that have any relation
to me shall signify their names within the time appointed.
You object also, that they break through the twenty-eighth
Canon, which requires, “That if strangers come often to any
church from other parishes, they should be remitted to their
own churches, there to receive the communion with their
neighbours.”
But what, if there be no communion there? Then this
Canon does not touch the case; nor does any one break it, by
coming to another church purely because there is no commu
nion at his own.
As to your next advice, “To have a greater regard to the
rules and orders of the Church,” I cannot; for I now regard
them next to the word of God. And as to your last, “To
renounce communion with the Church,” I dare not. Nay,
but let them thrust us out. We will not leave the ship; if
you cast us out of it, then our Lord will take us up.
11. To the same head may be referred the objection some
time urged, by a friendly and candid man, viz., “That it was
unlawful to use extemporary prayer, because there was a Canon
against it.”
120 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
It was not quite clear to me, that the Canon he cited was
against extemporary prayer. But supposing it were, my plain
answer would be, “That Canon I dare not obey; because
the law of man binds only so far as it is consistent with the
word of God.”
The same person objected my not obeying the Bishops and
Governors of the Church. I answer, I both do and will obey
them, in whatsoever I can with a clear conscience. So that
there is no just ground for that charge,—that I despise either
the rules or the Governors of the Church. I obey them in
all things where I do not apprehend there is some particular
law of God to the contrary. Even in that case, I show all
the deference I can : I endeavour to act as inoffensively as
possible; and am ready to submit to any penalty which can by
law be inflicted upon me. Would to God every Minister and
member of the Church were herein altogether as I am !
VII. 1. I have considered the chief objections that have
lately been urged against the doctrines I teach. The main
arguments brought against this manner of teaching have been
considered also. It remains, to examine the most current
objections, concerning the effects of this teaching.
Many affirm, “that it does abundance of hurt; that it has
had very bad effects; insomuch that if any good at all has
been done, yet it bears no proportion to the evil.”
But, to come to particulars: “First, then, you are disturb
ers of the public peace.”
What, do we either teach or raise sedition? Do we speak
evil of the ruler of our people? Or do we stir them up
against any of those that are put in authority under him?
Do we directly or indirectly promote faction, mutiny, or
rebellion? I have not found any man in his senses yet, that
would affirm this.
“But it is plain, peace is broke, and disturbances do arise,
in consequence of your preaching.” I grant it. But what
would you infer? Have you never read the Bible? Have you
not read, that the Prince of Peace himself was, in this sense, a
disturber of the public peace? “When he came into Jerusalem
all the city was moved,” (Matt. xxi. 10,) eaeugèn, shaken as
with an earthquake. And the disturbance rose higher and higher,
till “the whole multitude” cried out together, “Away with
him, away with him; crucify him, crucify him !” and Pilate
OF REASON AND RELIGION.e. 121
gave sentence it should be done. Such another disturber of the
public peace was that Stephen, even from the time he began
“disputing with the Libertines and Cyrenians,” till the people
“stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord, and
cast him out of the city, and stomed him.” Such disturbers
of the peace were all those ringleaders of the sect of the
Nazarenes, (commonly called Apostles,) who, wherever they
came, “turned the world upside down: ” And above all the
rest, that Paul of Tarsus, who occasioned so much disturb
ance at Damascus, (Acts ix.) at Antioch of Pisidia, (xiii.,) at
Iconium, (xiv.) at Lystra, (xiv. 19,) at Philippi, (xvi.) at Thes
salonica, (xvii.) and particularly at Ephesus. The consequence
of his preaching there was, that “the whole city was filled with
confusion.” And “they all ran together with one accord, some
crying one thing, some another; ” inasmuch “as the greater
part of them knew not wherefore they were come together.”
2. And can we expect it to be any otherwise now? Although
what we preach is the gospel of peace, yet if you will violently
and illegally hinder our preaching, must not this create disturb
ance? But observe, the disturbance begins on your part. All
is peace, till you raise that disturbance. And then you very
modestly impute it to us, and lay your own riot at our door !
But of all this, our Lord hath told us before: “Think not
that I am come to send peace upon earth; ” that this will be
the immediate effect, wherever my gospel is preached with
power. “I am not come to send peace, but a sword; ” this
(so far as the wisdom of God permits, by whom “the hairs of
your head are all numbered”) will be the first consequence
of my coming, whenever my word turns sinners “from dark
ness to light, from the power of Satan unto God.”
I would wish all you who see this scripture fulfilled, by dis
turbance following the preaching the gospel, to remember the
behaviour of that wise magistrate at Ephesus on the like
occasion. He did not lay the disturbance to the Preacher's
charge, but “beckoned to the multitude, and said, Ye men of
Ephesus, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.
For ye have brought these men, who are neither robbers of
temples, nor yet blasphemers of your goddess; ” not con
victed of any such notorious crime, as can at all excuse this
lawless violence. “But if Demetrius hath a matter against
any, the law is open, and there are deputies,” (or proconsuls,
122 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
capable of hearing and deciding the cause,) “let them im
plead one another. But if ye inquire anything concerning
other things, it shall be determined in a lawful assembly.”
3. “But you create divisions in private families.” Acciden
tally, we do. For instance: Suppose an entire family to have
the form but not the power of godliness; or to have neither
the form nor the power; in either case, they may in some
sort agree together. But suppose, when these hear the plain
word of God, one or two of them are convinced, “This is the
truth; and I have been all this time in the broad way that
leadeth to destruction: ” These then will begin to mourn after
God, while the rest remain as they were. Will they not there
fore of consequence divide, and form themselves into separate
parties? Must it not be so, in the very nature of things?
And how exactly does this agree with the words of our Lord?
“Suppose ye that I am come to send peace upon earth? I
tell you, Nay; but rather division: For from henceforth there
shall be five divided in one house, three against two, and two
against three. The father shall be divided against the son, and
the son against the father; the mother against the daughter,
and the daughter against the mother; the mother-in-law
against the daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law against
the mother-in-law.” (Luke xii. 51–53.) “And the foes of a
man shall be they of his own household.” (Matt. x. 36.)
Thus it was from the very beginning. For is it to be sup
posed that a heathen parent would long endure a Christian
child, or that a heathen husband would agree with a Chris
tian wife? unless either the believing wife could gain her
husband; or the unbelieving husband prevailed on the wife to
renounce her way of worshipping God; at least, unless she
would obey him in going no more to those societies, or con
venticles, (etaptat) as they termed the Christian assemblies?
4. Do you think, now, I have an eye to your case? Doubt
less I have ; for I do not fight as one that beateth the air.
“Why have not I a right to hinder my own wife or child from
going to a conventicle? And is it not the duty of wives to
obey their husbands, and of children to obey their parents?”
Only set the case seventeen hundred years back, and your own
conscience gives you the answer. What would St. Paul have
said to one whose husband forbade her to follow this way any
more? What directions would our Saviour have given to him
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 123,
whose father enjoined him not to hear the gospel? His words
are extant still: “He that loveth father or mother more than
me, is not worthy of me. And he that loveth son or daughter
more than me, is not worthy of me.” (Matt. x. 37.) Nay
more, “If any man cometh to me, and hateth not,” in compari
son of me, “his father, and mother, and wife, and children, yea,
and his own life, he cannot be my disciple.” (Luke xiv. 26.)
“O, but this is not a parallel case! For they were Heathens;
but I am a Christian.” A Christian | Are you so? Do you
understand the word? Do vou know what a Christian is?
If you are a Christian, you have the mind that was in Christ;
and you so walk as he also walked. You are holy as he is
holy, both in heart and in all manner of conversation. Have
you then that mind that was in Christ? And do you walk
as Christ walked ? Are you nwardly and outwardly holy?
I fear, not even outwardly. No; you live in known sin.
Alas! How then are you a Christian? What, a railer a
Christian? a common swearer a Christian? a Sabbath
breaker a Christian? a drunkard or whoremonger a Christian?
Thou art a Heathen barefaced; the wrath of God is on thy
head, and the curse of God upon thy back. Thy damnation
slumbereth not. By reason of such Christians it is that the
holy name of Christ is blasphemed. Such as thou they are
that cause the very savages in the Indian woods to cry out,
“Christian much drunk; Christian beat men; Christian
tell lies; devil Christian | Me no Christian.”
And so thou wilt direct thy wife and children in the way
of salvation | Woe unto thee, thou devil Christian | Woe
unto thee, thou blind leader of the blind! What wilt thou
make them? two-fold more the children of hell than thyself?
Be ashamed. Blush, if thou canst blush. Hide thy face. Lay
thee in the dust. Out of the deep cry unto God, if haply he
may hear thy voice. Instantly smite upon thy breast. Who
knoweth but God may take thee out of the belly of hell?
5. But you are not one of these. You fear God, and labour
to have a conscience void of offence. And it is from a principle
of conscience that you restrain your wife and children from kear
ing false doctrine.—But how do you know it is false doctrine?
Have you heard for yourself? Or, if you have not heard, have
you carefully read what we have occasionally answered for our
selves? A man of conscience cannot condemn anyone unheard.
This is not common humanity. Norwill he refrain from hearing
124 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
what may be the truth, for no better reason than fearof hisrepu
tation. Pray observe, I do not say, every man, or any man, is
obliged in conscience to hear us: But I do say, every man in
England who condemns us is obliged to hear us first. This is
only common justice, such as is not denied to a thief or a mur
derer. Take your choice therefore: Either hear us, or condemn
us not; either speak nothing at all, or hear before you speak.
But suppose you have both read and heard more than you
like: Did you read and hear fairly ? Was not you loaden
with prejudice P Did you not read or hear, expecting no
good; perhaps, desiring to find fault? If so, what wonder
you judge as you do ! What a poor mock-trial is this ! You
had decided the cause in your own breast before you heard
one word of the evidence. And still do you talk of acting
out of conscience? yea, a conscience void of offence?
We will put the case farther yet. Suppose your censure
was just, and this was actually false doctrine. Still every
one must give an account of himself to God; and you cannot
force the conscience of any one. You cannot compel another
to see as you see; you ought not to attempt it. Reason and
persuasion are the only weapons you ought to use, even
toward your own wife and children. Nay, and it is impossible
to starve them into conviction, or to beat even truth into
their head. You may destroy them in this way, but cannot
convert them. Remember what our own poet has said:
By force beasts act, and are by force restrain’d;
The human mind by gentle means is gain'd.
Thou canst not take what I refuse to yield;
Nor reap the harvest, though thou spoil'st the field.
6. Every reasonable man is convinced of this. And perhaps
you do not concern yourself so much about the doctrine, but the
mischief that is done: “How many poor families are starved,
ruined, brought to beggary!” By what? Not by contributing
a penny a week, (the usual contribution in our societies,) and
letting that alone when they please, when there is any shadow
of reason to suppose they cannot afford it. You will not say
any are brought to beggary by this. Not by gifts to me; for I
receive none; save (sometimes) the food I eat. And public
collections are nothing to me. That it may evidently appear
they are not, when any such collection is made, to clothe the
poor, or for any other determinate purpose, the money is both
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 125
received and expended before many witnesses, without ever
going through my hands at all. And then, likewise, all possi
ble regard is had to the circumstances of those who contribute
anything. And they are told over and over, “If there be a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath.”
But where are all these families that have been brought to
beggary? How is it that none of them is forthcoming? Are
they all out of town Then, indeed, I am in no danger of
clearing myself from their indictment. It is the easiest thing of
a thousand, for one at Newcastle to say that I have beggared
him and all his kindred. If one of the long-bearded men on
Tyne-Bridge were to say so just now, I could not readily con
fute him. But why will you not bring a few of these to tell me
so to my face? I have not found one that would do this yet.
They pray you would have them excused.
I remember a man coming to me with a doleful countenance,
putting himself into many lamentable postures, gaping as wide
as he could, and pointing to his mouth, as though he would say
he could not speak. I inquired of his companion, what was the
matter; and was informed, he had fallen into the hands of the
Turks, who had used him in a barbarous manner, and cut out
his tongue by the roots. I believed him. But when the man
had had a cheerful cup, he could find his tongue as well as ano
ther. I reflected, How is it that I could so readily believe that
tale? The answer was easy: “Because it was told of a
Turk.” My friend, take knowledge of your own case. If you
had not first took me for a Turk, or something equally bad,
you could not so readily have believed that tale.
7. “But can it be, that there is no ground at all for a report
which is in every one's mouth?” I will simply tell you all the
ground which I can conceive. I believe many of those who
attend on my ministry have less of this world’s goods than they
had before, or, at least, might have had if they did not attend
it. This fact I allow; and it may be easily accounted for in
one or other of the following ways:
First. Ifrequently preach on such texts as these: “Having
food and raiment, let us be content therewith.” “They who
desire to be rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition.” “Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth,
where the rust and moth doth corrupt, and where thieves.
126 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
break through and steal. But lay up for yourselves treasures
in heaven, where neither rust nor moth doth corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through and steal.”
Now, should any of those who are labouring by all possible
means “to lay up treasure upon earth,” feel these words, they
would not “enlarge their desires as hell,” but be “content with
such things as they had.” They then probably might not heap
up so much for their heirs as otherwise they would have done.
These would therefore have less than if they had not heard
me; because they would grasp at less.
Secondly. Wherever the gospel takes effect, “the foes of a
man will be those of his own household.” By this means then
some who hear and receive it with joy will be poorer than they
were before. Their domestic foes will, in many cases, hinder,
embroil, and disturb the course of their affairs. And their
relations, who assisted them before, or promised at least so to
do, will probably withdraw or deny that assistance, unless they
will be advised by them: Perhaps their nearest relations; it
being no new thing for parents to disown their children, if
“after the way which they call heresy, these worship the God
of their fathers.” Hence, therefore, some haveless of this world’s
goods than they had in times past, either because they earn less,
or because they receive less from them on whom they depend.
Thirdly. It is written, that “those who received not the
mark of the beast, either on their foreheads, or in their right
hands,” either openly or secretly, were not permitted “to buy
or sell any more.” Now, whatever the mystery contained herein
may be, I apprehend the plain mark of the beast is wickedness;
inward and outward unholiness; whatever is secretly or openly
contrary to justice, mercy, or truth. And certain it is, the time
is well nigh come when those who have not this mark can nei
ther buy nor sell, can scarce follow any profession so as to gain
a subsistence thereby. Therefore, many of those who attend
on my ministry are, by this means, poorer than before. They
will not receive the mark of the beast, either on their forehead
or in their hand; or if they had received it before, they rid
themselves of it as soon as possible. Some cannot follow their
former way of life at all; (as pawnbrokers, smugglers, buyers
or sellers of uncustomed goods;)—others cannot follow it as
they did before; for they cannot oppress, cheat, or defraud
their neighbour; they cannot lie, or say what they do not
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 127
mean; they must now speak the truth from their heart. On
all these accounts, they have less of this world’s goods; because
they gain less than they did before.
Fourthly. “All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution;” if in no other way, yet at least in this, that
“men will by revilings persecute them, and say all manner of
evil against them falsely, for his sake.” One unavoidable effect
of this will be, that men whose subsistence depends on their
daily labour will be often in want, for few will care to employ
those of so bad a character; and even those who did employ
them before, perhaps for many years, will employ them no
amore; so that hereby some may indeed be brought to beggary.
8. What, does this touch you? Are you one of those “who
will have nothing to do with those scandalous wretches?” Per
haps you will say, “And who can blame me for it? May I not
employ whom I please?” We will weigh this:—You employed
A.B. for several years. By your own account, he was an hon
est, diligent man. You had no objection to him but his follow
ing “this way.” For this reason you turn him off. In a short
time, having spent his little all, and having no supply, he wants
bread. So does his family too, as well as himself. Before he
can get into other business to procure it, through want of con
venient food to eat, and raiment to put on, he sickens and dies.
This is not an imaginary scene. I have known the case,
though too late to remedy it.
“And what then?” What then you are a murderer! “O
earth, cover not thou his blood!” No; it doth not. “The cry
thereof hath entered into the ears of the Lord God of Sabaoth.”
And God requireth it at your hands; and will require it in an
hour when you think not. For you have as effectually mur
dered that man, as if you had stabbed him to the heart.
It is not I then who ruin and starve that family: It is you;
you who call yourself a Protestant! you who cry out against
the persecuting spirit of the Papists! Ye fools, and blind!
What are ye better than they? Why, Edmund Bonner would
have starved the heretics in prison; whereas you starve them
in their own houses!
And all this time you talk of liberty of conscience! Yes,
liberty for such a conscience as your own! a conscience past
feeling; (for sure it had some once;) a conscience “seared with
a hot iron l’ Liberty to serve the devil, according to your poor,
128 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
hardened conscience, you allow; but not liberty to serve
God |
Nay, and what marvel? Whosoever thou art that readest
this, and feelest in thy heart a real desire to serve God, I warn
thee, expect no liberty for thy conscience from him that hath
no conscience at all. All ungodly, unthankful, unholy men;
all villains, of whatever denomination, will have liberty indeed
all the world over, as long as their master is “god of this
world:” But expect not liberty to worship God in spirit and in
truth, to practise pure and undefiled religion, (unless the Lord
should work a new thing in the earth,) from any but those who
themselves love and serve God.
9. “However, it is plain you make men idle: And this tends
to beggar their families.” This objection having been continu
ally urged for some years, I will trace it from the foundation.
Two or three years after my return from America, one Cap
tain Robert Williams, of Bristol, made affidavit before the then
Mayor of the city, that “it was a common report in Georgia,
Mr. Wesley took people off from their work and made them
idle by preaching so much.”
The fact stood thus: At my first coming to Savannah, the
generality of the people rose at seven or eight in the morning.
And that part of them, who were accustomed to work, usually
worked till six in the evening. A few of them sometimes worked
till seven; which is the time of sunset there at Midsummer.
I immediately began reading Prayers, and expounding the
Second Lesson, both in the morning and evening. The Morn
ing Service began at five, and ended at or before six : The
Evening Service began at seven.
Now, supposing all the grown persons in the town had been
present every morning and evening, would this have made them
idle? Would they hereby have had less, or considerably more,
time for working?
10. The same rule I follow now, both at London, Bristol,
and Newcastle-upon-Tyne; concluding the service at every
place, winter and summer, before six in the morning; and not
ordinarily beginning to preach till near seven in the evening.
Now, do you who make this objection work longer, through
out the year, than from six to six? Do you desire that the
generality of people should? or can you count them idle that
work so long?
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 129
Some few are indeed accustomed to work longer. These I
advise not to come on week-days; and it is apparent, that they
take this advice, unless on some rare and extraordinary occasion.
But I hope none of you who turn them out of their employ
ment have the confidence to talk of my making them idle !
Do you (as the homely phrase is) cry wh— first? I admire
your cunning, but not your modesty.
So far am I from either causing or encouraging idleness, that
an idle person, known to be such, is not suffered to remain in
any of our societies; we drive him out, as we would a thief or a
murderer. “To show all possible diligence,” (as well as frugal
ity) is one of our standing rules; and one, concerning the
observance of which we continually make the strictest inquiry.
11. “But you drive them out of their senses. You make
them mad.” Nay, then they are idle with a vengeance. This
objection, therefore, being of the utmost importance, deserves
our deepest consideration.
And, First, I grant, it is my earnest desire to drive all the
world into what you probably call madness; (I mean, inward
religion;) to make them just as mad as Paul when he was so
accounted by Festus.
The counting all things on earth but dung and dross, so we
may win Christ; the trampling under foot all the pleasures of
the world; the seeking no treasure but in heaven; the having
no desire of the praise of men, a gocd character, a fair reputa
tion; the being exceeding glad when men revile us, and perse
cute us, and say all manner of evil against us falsely; the giving
God thanks, when our father and mother forsake us, when we
have neither food to eat, nor raiment to put on, nor a friend but
what shoots out bitter words, nor a place where to lay our head:
This is utter distraction in your account; but in God’s it is
sober, rational religion; the genuine fruit, not of a distempered
brain, not of a sickly imagination, but of the power of God in
the heart, of victorious love, “and of a sound mind.”
12. I grant, Secondly, it is my endeavour to drive all I can,
into what you may term another species of madness, which
is usually preparatory to this, and which I term repentance or
conviction.
I cannot describe this better than a writer of our own has
donc: I will therefore transcribe his words:—
“When men feel in themselves the heavy burden of sin, see
VOL. VIII.
130 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
damnation to be the reward of it, and behold with the eye of
their mind the horror of hell; they tremble, they quake, and
are inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of heart, and cannot
but accuse themselves, and open their grief unto Almighty
God, and call unto him for mercy. This being done seriously,
their mind is so occupied, partly with sorrow and heaviness,
partly with an earnest desire to be delivered from this danger
of hell and damnation, that all desire of meat and drink is
laid apart, and loathsomeness (or loathing) of all worldly
things and pleasure cometh in place. So that nothing then
liketh them, more than to weep, to lament, to mourn, and
both with words and behaviour of body to show themselves
weary of life.”
Now, what, if your wife, or daughter, or acquaintance, after
hearing one of these field-preachers, should come and tell you,
that they saw damnation before them, and beheld with the
eye of their mind the horror of hell? What, if they should
“tremble and quake,” and be so taken up “partly with
sorrow and heaviness, partly with an earnest desire to be
delivered from this danger of hell and damnation, as to weep,
to lament, to mourn, and both with words and behaviour to
show themselves weary of life; ” would you scruple to say,
that they were stark mad; that these fellows had driven them
out of their senses; and that whatever writer it was that talked
at this rate, he was fitter for Bedlam than any other place?
You have overshot yourself now to some purpose. These
are the very words of our own Church. You may read them,
if you are so inclined, in the first part of the “Homily on
Fasting.” And consequently, what you have peremptorily
determined to be mere lunacy and distraction, is that
“repentance unto life,” which, in the judgment both of the
Church and of St. Paul, is “never to be repented of.”
13. I grant, Thirdly, that extraordinary circumstances have
attended this conviction in some instances. A particular
account of these I have frequently given. While the word of
God was preached, some persons have dropped down as dead;
some have been, as it were, in strong convulsions; some
roared aloud, though not with an articulate voice; and others
spoke the anguish of their souls.
This, I suppose, you believe to be perfect madness. But it is
easily accounted for, either on principles of reason or Scripture.
OF REASON AND RELIGION, 131
First. On principles of reason. For, how easy is it to sup
pose, that a strong, lively, and sudden apprehension of the
heinousness of sin, the wrath of God, and the bitter pains of
eternal death, should affect the body as well as the soul, during
the present laws of vital union, should interrupt or disturb the
ordinary circulations, and put mature out of its course ! Yea,
we may question, whether, while this union subsists, it be pos
sible for the mind to be affected, in so violent a degree, without
some or other of those bodily symptoms following.
It is likewise easy to account for these things, on principles
of Scripture. For when we take a view of them in this light,
we are to add, to the consideration of natural causes, the
agency of those spirits who still excel in strength, and, as far
as they have leave from God, will not fail to torment whom
they cannot destroy; to tear those that are coming to Christ.
It is also remarkable, that there is plain Scripture precedent
of every symptom which has lately appeared. So that we
cannot allow even the conviction attended with these to be
madness, without giving up both reason and Scripture.
14. I grant, Fourthly, that touches of extravagance, border
ing on madness, may sometimes attend severe conviction.
And this also is easy to be accounted for, by the present laws
of the animal economy. For we know, fear or grief, from a
temporal cause, may occasion a fever, and thereby a delirium.
It is not strange, then, that some, while under strong impres
sions of grief or fear, from a sense of the wrath of God, should
for a season forget almost all things else, and scarce be able to
answer a common question; that some should fancy they see
the flames of hell, or the devil and his angels, around them; or
that others, for a space, should be “afraid,” like Cain, “whoso
ever meeteth me will slay me.” All these, and whateverless.com
moneffects may sometimes accompany this conviction, are easily
known from thematural distemperof madness, were it only by this
one circumstance,—that whenever the person convinced tastes
the pardoning love of God, they all vanish away in a moment.
Lastly. I have seen one instance (I pray God I may see no
more such !) of real, lasting madness.
Two or three years since, I took one with me to Bristol, who
was under deep convictions; but of as sound an understanding
in all respects, as ever he had been in his life. I went a short
journey, and, when I came to Bristol again, found him really
132 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
distracted. I inquired particularly, at what time and place,
and in what manner, this disorder began. And I believe
there are at least threescore witnesses alive, and ready to testify
what follows: When I went from Bristol, he contracted an
acquaintance with some persons, who were not of the same
judgment with me. He was soon prejudiced against me:
Quickly after, when our society were met together in Kings
wood house, he began a vehement invective both against my
person and doctrines. In the midst of this, he was struck
raving mad. And so he continued till his friends put him into
Bedlam; and probably laid his madness too to my charge.
15. I fear there may also be some instances of real madness,
proceeding from a different cause.
Suppose, for instance, a person hearing me, is strongly con
vinced that a liar cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.
He comes home, and relates this to his parents or friends, and
appears to be very uneasy. These good Christians are dis
turbed at this, and afraid he is running mad too. They are
resolved, he shall never hear any of those fellows more; and
keep to it, in spite of all his intreaties. They will not suffer
him, when at home, to be alone, for fear he should read or
pray. And perhaps in a while they will constrain him, at least
by repeated importunities, to do again the very thing for
which he was convinced the wrath of God cometh upon the
children of disobedience.
What is the event of this? Sometimes the Spirit of God is
quenched, and departs from him. Now you have carried the
point. The man is easy as ever, and sins on without any
remorse. But in other instances, where those convictions
sink deep, and the arrows of the Almighty stick fast in the
soul, you will drive the person into real, settled madness,
before you can quench the Spirit of God. I am afraid there
have been several instances of this. You have forced the man’s
conscience, till he is stark mad. But then, pray do not impute
that madness to me. Had you left him to my direction, or
rather to the direction of the Spirit of God, he would have
been filled with love and a sound mind. But you have taken
the matter out of God’s hand; and now you have brought
it to a fair conclusion |
16. How frequent this case maybe, I know not. But doubt
less most of those who make this objection, of our driving men
mad, have never met with such an instance in their lives. The
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 133
common cry is occasioned, either by those who are convinced of
sin, or those who are inwardly converted to God; mere madness
both, (as was observed before,) to those who are without God in
the world. Yet I do not deny, but you may have seen one in
Bedlam, who said he had followed me. But observe, a mad
man's saying this, is no proof of the fact; nay, and if he really
had, it should be farther considered, that his being in Bedlam
is no sure proof of his being mad. Witness the well-known
case of Mr. Periam; and I doubt more such are to be found.
Yea, it is well if some have not been sent thither, for no other
reason, but because they followed me; their kind relations
either concluding that they must be distracted, before they
could do this; or, perhaps, hoping that Bedlam would make
them mad, if it did not find them so.
17. And it must be owned, a confinement of such a sort is as
fit to cause as to cure distraction: For what scene of distress is
to be compared to it?—To be separated at once from all who
are near and dear to you; to be cut off from all reasonable con
versation; to be secluded from all business, from all reading,
from every innocent entertainment of the mind, which is left to
prey wholly upon itself, and day and night to pore over your
misfortunes; to be shut up day by day in a gloomy cell, with
only the walls to employ your heavy eyes, in the midst either of
melancholy silence, or horrid cries, groans and laughter inter
mixed; to be forced by the main strength of those
Who laugh at human nature and compassion,
to take drenches of nauseous, perhaps torturing, medicines,
which you know you have no need of now, but know not how
soon you may, possibly by the operation of these very drugs
on a weak and tender constitution: Here is distress It is an
astonishing thing, a signal proof of the power of God, if any
creature who has his senses when the confinement begins, does
not lose them before it is at an end |
How must it heighten the distress, if such a poor wretch,
being deeply convinced of sin, and growing worse and worse, (as
he probably will, seeing there is no medicine here for his sick
ness, no such Physician as his case requires,) be soon placed
among the incurables! Can imagination itself paint such a hell
upon earth? where even “hope never comes, that comes to
all!”—For, what remedy? If a man of sense and humanity
134 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
should happen to visit that house of woe, would he give the
hearing to a madman’s tale? Or if he did, would he credit it?
“Do we not know,” might he say, “how well any of these will
talk in their lucid intervals P” So that a thousand to one he
would concern himself no more about it, but leave the weary to
wait for rest in the grave
18. I have now answered most of the current objections, par
ticularly such as have appeared of weight to religious or reason
able men. I have endeavoured to show, (1.) That the doctrines
I teach are no other than the great truths of the gospel: (2.)
That though I teach them, not as I would, but as I can, yet it
is in a manner not contrary to law: And, (3.) That the effects of
thus preaching the gospel have not been such as was weakly or
wickedly reported; those reports being mere artifices of the
devil to hinder the work of God. Whosoever therefore ye are,
who look for God to “revive his work in the midst of the years,”
cry aloud, that he may finish it nevertheless, may “cut it short
in righteousness.” Cry to Messiah the Prince, that he may
soon end the transgression, that he may lift up his standard
upon earth, sending by whom he will send, and working his
own work, when he pleaseth, and as he pleaseth, till “all the
kindreds of the people worship before him,” and the earth “be
full of the knowledge of the glory of the Lord!”
December 22, 1744.
O: REASON AND RELIGION. 135
AN ACT OF DEVOTION
Behold the servant of the Lord!
I wait thy guiding eye to feel,
To hear and keep thine every word,
To prove and do thy perfect will:
Joyful from all my works to cease,
Glad to fulfil all righteousness.
Me if thy grace vouchsafe to use,
Meanest of all thy creatures me,
The deed, the time, the manner choose;
Let all my fruit be found of thee;
Let all my works in thee be wrought,
By thee to full perfection brought.
My every weak, though good design,
O'errule, or change, as seems thee meets
Jesus, let all the work be thine :
Thy work, O Lord, is all complete,
And pleasing in thy Father's sight;
Thou only hast done all things right.
Here then to thee thine own I leave,
Mould as thou wilt the passive clay;
Butlet me all thy stamp receive,
But let me all thy words obey;
Serve with a single heart and eye,
And to thy glory live and die.
A FARTHER APPEAL
To
MEN OF REASON AND RELIGION
PART II
I. 1. It is not my present design to touch on any particular
opinions, whether they are right or wrong; nor on any of those
smaller points of practice, which are variously held by men of
different persuasions; but, First, to point out some things
which, on common principles, are condemned by men of every
denomination, and yet found in all; and, Secondly, some
wherein those of each denomination are more particularly
inconsistent with their own principles.
And, First, it is my design, abstracting from opinions of
every kind, as well as from disputable points of practice, to
mention such of those things as occur to my mind, which are
on common principles condemned, and notwithstanding
found, more or less, among men of every denomination.
2. But before I enter on this unpleasing task, I beseech
you, brethren, by the mercies of God, by whatever love you
bear to God, to your country, to your own souls, do not con
sider who speaks, but what is spoken. If it be possible, for
one hour lay prejudice aside; give what is advanced a fair
hearing. Consider simply on each head, Is this true, or is it
false? Is it reasonable, or is it not? If you ask, “But in
whose judgment?” I answer, In your own; I appeal to the
light of your own mind. Is there not a faithful witness in your
own breast? By this you must stand or fall. You cannot be
, judged by another man’s conscience. Judge for yourself by
the best light you have ; and the merciful God teach me and
thee whatsoever we know not
A FARTHER APPEAL. 137
Now, as I speak chiefly to those who believe the Scriptures,
the method I propose is this: First, to observe what account
is given therein of the Jews, the ancient Church of God, inas
much as all these things were written for our instruction, who
say, We are now the visible Church of the God of Israel:
Secondly, to appeal to all who profess to be members thereof,
to every one who is called a Christian, how far, in each instance,
the parallel holds; and how much we are better than they.
3. First. I am to observe what account the Scriptures give of
the Jews, the ancient Church of God. I mean, with regard to
their moral character; their tempers and outward behaviour.
No sooner were they brought out of Egypt, than we find
them “murmuring against God;” (Exod. xiv. 12;) again,
when he had just brought them through the Rea Sea “with
a mighty hand and stretched out arm;” (xv. 24;) and yet
again, quickly after, in the wilderness of Zin : “Your mur
murings,” saith Moses, “are not against us, but against the
Lord.” (xvi. 8.) Nay, even while he was “giving them bread
from heaven,” they were still “murmuring and tempting
God;” (xvii. 2, 3;) and their amazing language at that very
season was, “Is the Lord among us or not?” (xvii. 7.)
The same spirit they showed, during the whole forty years
that he “bore their manners in the wilderness: ” A solemn
testimony whereof, “Moses spake in the ears of all the con
gregation of Israel,” when God was about to take him away
from their head. “They have corrupted themselves,” saith
he; “their spot was not of his children; they are a perverse
and crooked generation. The Lord led Jacob about; he
instructed him; he kept him as the apple of his eye.” (Deut.
xxxii. 5, 10.) “He made him ride on the high places of the
earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields; then he
forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock
of his salvation.” (Verses 13, 15.)
In like manner God complains long after this: “Hear, O
heavens, and give ear, O earth ! I have nourished and brought
up children, and they have rebelled against me. The ox know
eth his owner, and the ass his master's crib; but Israel doth not
know, my people doth not consider. Ah sinful nation, a people
laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are cor
rupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the
Holy One of Israel.” (Isaiah i. 2-4.) “Can a maid forget
138 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
her ornaments, or a bride her attire? Yet my people have
forgotten me days without number.” (Jer. ii. 32.)
4. And “as they did not like to retain God in their know
ledge,” so they had small regard to the ordinances of God:
“Even from the days of your fathers,” saith God by his Pro
phets, “ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not
kept them.” (Mal. iii. 7.) “Ye have said, It is vain to serve
God; and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinances?”
(Verse 14.) “Thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but
thou hast been weary of me, O Israel: Thou hast not brought
me thy burnt-offerings, neither hast thou honoured mewith thy
sacrifices.” (Isaiah xliii. 22, 23.) And so the Prophet himself
confesses: “Thou meetest those that remember thee in thy
ways;—but there is none that calleth upon thy name, that
stirreth up himself to take hold of thee.” (Isaiah lxiv. 5, 7.)
5. But they called upon his name by vain oaths, by perjury
and blasphemy. So Jeremiah: “Because of swearing the land
mourneth.” (xxiii. 10.) “And though they say, The Lord
liveth, surely they swear falsely.” (v. 2.) So Hosea: “They
have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a covenant.” So
Ezekiel: “They say, The Lord seeth us not, the Lord hath for
saken the earth.” So Isaiah: “Their tongue and their doings
are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory.” (iii. 8.)
“They say, Let him make speed and hasten his work, that we
may see it; and let the counsel of the Holy One draw nigh and
come, that we may know it.” (v. 19.) And so Malachi: “Ye
have wearied the Lord with your words; ye say, Every one that
doeth evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth
in them; or, Where is the God of judgment?” (ii. 17.)
6. And as they “despised his holy things,” so they “pro
faned his Sabbaths.” (Ezekiel xxii. 8.) Yea, when God sent
unto them, saying, “Take heed unto yourselves, and bear no
burden on the Sabbath-day, neither do ye any work, but
hallow ye the Sabbath-day, as I commanded your fathers:—
Yet they obeyed not, neither inclined their ear, but made
their neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor receive
instruction.” (Jer xvii. 21–23.)
Neither did they honour their parents, or those whom God,
from time to time, appointed to be rulers over them: “In thee”
(in Jerusalem, saith the Prophet) “they have set light by father
and mother.” (Ezekiel xxii. 7.) And from the very day when
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 139
God brought them up out of the land of Egypt, their mur
murings, chiding, rebellion, and disobedience, against those
whom he had chosen to go before them, make the most
considerable part of their history. So that had not Moses
“stood in the gap,” he had even then destroyed them from
the face of the earth.
7. How much more did they afterwards provoke God, by
drunkenness, sloth, and luxury ! “They have erred through
wine,” saith the Prophet Isaiah, “ and through strong drink
they are out of the way: ” (xxviii. 7 :) Which occasioned those
vehement and repeated warnings against that reigning sin:
“Woe to the drunkards of Ephraim, them that are overcome
with wine!” (Verse 1.) “The drunkards of Ephraim shall be
trodden under foot.” (Verse 3.) “Woe unto them that rise up
early that they may follow strong drink; that continue until
night, till wine inflame them !—But they regard not the work
of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands.”
(v. 11, 12.) “Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine,
and men of strength to mingle strong drink l’’ (Verse 22.)
“Woe to them that are at ease in Zion; that lie upon beds
of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat
the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of
the stall; that chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to
themselves instruments of music; that drink wine in bowls, and
anoint themselves with the chief ointments: But they are not
grieved for the affliction of Joseph.” (Amos vi. 1, 4–6.)
“Behold,” saith Ezekiel to Jerusalem, “this was the iniquity
of thy sister Sodom, fulness of bread and abundance of idle
ness was in her and in her daughters.” (xvi. 49.)
8. From sloth and fulness of bread, lewdness naturally fol
lowed. It was even while Moses was with them, that “the
people begantocommit whoredom with the daughters of Moab.”
Yea, of the daughters of Zion Isaiah complains: “They walk
with stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes.” (iii. 16.) And of
his people in general God complains by Jeremiah: “When I
had fed them to the full, they assembled themselves by troops
in the harlots’ houses. They were as fed horses in the morning:
Every one neighed after his neighbour's wife.” (v. 7, 8.)
“They be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.”
(ix. 2.) “The land is full of adulterers.” (xxiii. 10.)
Yea, and some of them were given up to unnatural lusts:
140 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
Thus we read: “The men of Gibeah beset the house,” wherein
the stranger was, “and beat at the door, and spake to the mas
ter of the house, saying, Bring forth the man that came into
thine house, that we may know him.” (Judges xix. 22.) “And
there were also,” long after, “Sodomites in the land,” in the
days of Rehoboam, and of the following kings: “The very
show of whose countenance witnessed against them, and they
declared their sin as Sodom, they hid it not.” (Isaiah iii. 9.)
9. This was accompanied with injustice in all its forms.
Thus all the Prophets testify against them: “The Lord
looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness,
but behold a cry.” (Isaiah v. 7.) “Thou hast taken usury
and increase; thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbour by
extortion.—Behold, I have smitten my hand at thy dishonest
gain which thou hast made.” (Ezekiel xxii. 12, 13.) “The
balances of deceit are in Jacob’s hand; he loveth to oppress.”
(Hosea xii. 7.) “Are there not yet the scant measure that
is abominable, the wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful
weights?” (Micah vi. 10, 11.) “He that departeth from evil
maketh himself a prey. And the Lord saw it, and it dis
pleased him, that there was no judgment.” (Isaiah lix. 15.)
“The wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than
he. They take up all of them with the angle, they catch them
in their net, and gather them in their drag.” (Hab. i. 13, 15.)
“They covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses,
and take them away.” (Micah ii. 2.) They “pull off the robe
with the garment from them that pass by securely.” (Verse
8.) “They have dealt by oppression with the stranger; they
have vexed the fatherless and the widow.” (Ezekiel xxii. 7.)
“The people of the land have used oppression, and exercised
robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy: Yea, they have
oppressed the stranger wrongfully.” (Verse 29.) “Their
works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their
hands.” (Isaiah lix. 6.) “Judgment is turned away backward,
and justice standeth afar off; for truth is fallen in the street,
and equity cannot enter.” (Verse 14.)
10. Truth indeed was fallen, as well as justice: “Every
mouth,” saith Isaiah, “speaketh folly.” (ix. 17.) “This is a
rebellious people, lying children.” (xxx. 9.) Their “lips have
spoken lies and muttered perverseness. None calleth for justice,
nor any pleadeth for truth: They trust in vanity, and speak lies.”
(lix. 3, 4.) This occasioned that caution of Jeremiah: “Take
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 141
ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any
brother; for every brother will utterly supplant, and every
neighbour will walk with slanders. And they will deceive
every one his neighbour, and will not speak the truth; they
have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves
to commit iniquity.” (ix. 4, 5.)
11. And even those who abstained from these gross outward
sins were still inwardly corrupt and abominable: “The whole
head was sick, and the whole heart was faint; yea, from the sole
of the foot even unto the head there was no soundness, but
wounds, and bruiscs, and putrifying sores.” (Isaiah i. 5, 6.)
“All these nations.” saith God, “are uncircumcised; and all
the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.” (Jer. ix. 26.)
“Their heart is divided.” (Hosea x. 2.) “They have set up
their idols in their heart; they are all estranged from me
through their idols.” (Ezekiel xiv. 3, 5.)
Their soul still “clave unto the dust.” They “laid up trea
sures upon earth.” “From the least of them,” saith Jeremiah,
“even unto the greatest, every one is given to covetousness.”
(vi. 13.) “They panted after the dust of the earth.” (Amos
ii. 7.) “They laded themselves with thick clay.” (Hab. ii.6.)
“They joined house to house, and laid field to field, until
there was no place.” (Isaiah v. 8) Yea, they “enlarged their
desires as hell:” They were “as death, and could not be
satisfied.” (Hab. ii. 5.)
12. And not only for their covetousness, but for their pride
of heart, were they an abomination to the Lord: “The pride
of Israel,” saith Hosea, “doth testify to his face.” (vii. 10.)
“Hear ye, give ear,” saith Jeremiah, “be not proud.–Give
glory to the Lord your God.” (xiii. 15, 16.) But they would not
be reproved; they were still “wise in their own eyes, and pru
dent in their own sight;” (Isaiah v. 21;) and continually say
ing to their neighbour, “Stand by thyself, come not near to
me; for I am holier than thou !” (Isaiah lxv. 5.)
They added hypocrisy to their pride: “This people,” saith
God himself, “draw near me with their mouth, and with their
lips do honour me, but have removed their hearts far from me.”
(Isai. xxix. 13.) “They have not cried unto me with their heart,
when they howled upon their beds.” (Hosea vii. 14) “They
return, but not to the Most High; they are like a deceitful bow.”
(Verse 16.) “They did but flatter him with their mouth, and
142 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
dissemble with him in their tongue.” (Psalm lxxviii. 36.) So
that herein they only “profaned the holiness of the Lord.”
“And this have yedone again,” saith Malachi, “covering the altar
of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, inso
much that he regardeth not the offering any more.” (ii. 11, 13.)
13. This God continually declared to those formal worship
pers, that their outside religion was but vain: “To what purpose
is the multitude of your sacrifices, saith the Lord? I am full
of the burnt-offerings of rams, and I delight not in the blood of
bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats. Bring no more vain obla
tions: Incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and
sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with; it is
iniquity, even the solemn meeting.—When you spread forth
your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make
many prayers, I will not hear.” (Isaiah i. 11, 13, 15.) “He
that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a
lamb, as if he cut off a dog's neck.” (lxvi. 3.) “When they
fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer an oblation,
I will not accept.” (Jer. xiv. 12.) “Go ye, serve your idols, if
ye will not hearken unto me; but pollute ye my holy name no
more with your gifts.” (Ezekiel xx. 39.)
14. Yet all this time were they utterly careless and secure;
nay, confident of being in the favour of God: They were at
ease; they “put far away the evil day.” (Amos vi. 1, 3.)
Even when God had “poured his anger upon Israel, it set him
on fire round about, yet he knew it not; it burned him, yet he
laid it not to heart.” (Isaiah xlii. 25.) “A deceived heart had
turned him aside, that he could not say, Is there not a lie in my
right hand?” (xliv. 20.) So far from it, that at this very time
they said, “We are innocent, we have not sinned.” (Jer. ii.
35, 37.) “We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us.”
(viii. 8.) “The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord,
are we.” (vii. 4.)
15. Thus it was that they hardened themselves in their wick
edness: “They are impudent children,” saith God, “and stiff
hearted.” (Ezekiel ii. 4.) “Were they ashamed when they had
committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed,
neither could they blush.” (Jer. vi. 15.) “I have spread out
my hand all the day to a rebellious people, that provoketh me to
anger continually to my face.” (Isai. lxv. 2, 3.) “They will not
hearken unto me, saith the Lord; for all the house of Israel are
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 143
impudent and hard-hearted.” (Ezekiel iii. 7.) “Since the
day that their fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt
unto this day, I have sent unto them all my servants the
Prophets, rising up early and sending them: Yet they hearkened
not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck;
they did worse than their fathers.” (Jer. vii. 25, 26.)
They were equally hardened against mercies and judgments:
When He “gave them rain, both the former and the latter in
his season;” when “He reserved unto them the appointed
weeks of the harvest,” filling their hearts with food and glad
ness, still none of this “revolting and rebellious people said,
Let us now fear the Lord our God; ” (Jer. v. 23, 24;) nor yet
did “they turn unto him when he smote them.” (Isaiah ix. 13.)
“In that day did the Lord call to weeping and to mourning:
And behold joy and gladness, eating flesh and drinking wine;
let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall die.” (Isaiah xxii.
12, 13.) Although “he consumed them, yet they refused to
receive instruction; thcy made their faces harder than a rock.—
Nonerepented him, but everyone turned to his course, as a horse
rusheth into the battle.” (Jer. v. 3; viii. 6.) “I have given you
want of bread in all your places, yet have ye not returned unto
me, saith the Lord. I have also withholden the rain from
you when there were yet three months unto the harvest. I
have smitten you with blasting and mildew : Your gardens and
your vineyards, the palmer worm devoured. I have sent among
you the pestilence after the manner of Egypt; your young men
have I slain with the sword. I have overthrown some of you,
as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a
firebrand plucked out of the burning; yet have ye not re
.turned unto me, saith the Lord.” (Amos iv. 6-11.)
16. In consequence of their resolution not to return, they
would not endure sound doctrine, or those that spake it: They
“ said to the Seers, See not; and to the Prophets, Prophesy
not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, cause
the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.” (Isaiah xxx.
10, 11.) “But they hated him that rebuked in the gate,
and they abhorred him that spake uprightly.” (Amos v. 10.)
Accordingly, “Thy people,” saith God to Ezekiel, “still are
talking against thee by the walls, and in the doors of the
houses.” (xxxiii. 30.) “And Amaziah the Priest sent to
Jeroboam, king of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired against
144 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
thce in the midst of the house of Israel; the land is not able
to bear all his words. Also Amaziah said unto Amos, Go,
flee thee away into the land of Judah, and prophesy there.
But prophesy not again any more at Bethel; for it is the king's
chapel,and it is the king's court.” (Amos vii. 10, 12, 13.) From
the same spirit it was that they said of Jeremiah, “Come, and
let us devise devices against him.—Come, and let us smite him
with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.”
(Jer. xviii. 18.) Hence it was that he was constrained to cry
out, “O Lord, I am in derision daily; every one mocketh me.
Since I spake, the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto
me, and a derision daily: For I heard the defaming of many:
Fear on every side: Report, say they, and we will report it.
All my familiars watched for my halting; saying, Perad
venture he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him,
and we shall take our revenge on him.” (xx. 7, 8, 10.) And
elsewhere, “Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me
a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth !
I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent to me on
usury; yet every one of them doth curse me.” (xv. 10.)
17. But “if a man walking in the spirit of falsehood do lie,”
saith the Prophet Micah, “saying, I will prophesy unto thee of
wine and strong drink, he shall even be the Prophet of this
people.” (ii. 11.) And God gave them Pastors after their own
hearts; such were those sons of Eli, “sons of Belial, who knew
not the Lord; ” (1 Sam. ii. 12;) rapacious, covetous, violent
men; (verses 14–16;) by reason of whom “men abhorred the
offering of the Lord; ” (verse 17;) who not only “made them
selves vile,” (iii. 13,) but also “made the Lord’s people to
transgress,” (ii. 24.) while they “made themselves fat with the
chiefest of all the offerings of Israel.” (Verse 29.) Such were
those of whom Isaiah says, “The Priest and the Prophet have
erred through strong drink; they are swallowed up of wine.”
(xxviii. 7.) “Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we
will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to-morrow shall be as
this day, and much more abundant.” (lvi.12.) Therefore, saith
he, “The Lord hath poured out upon youthe spiritof deep sleep,
and hath closed your eyes: The Prophets and the Seers hath he
covered; and the vision of all is become unto you as the words
of a book that is sealed.” (xxix. 10, 11.) Such also were those
of whom he saith, “His watchmen are blind, they are all igno
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 145
rant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping,
lying down, loving to slumber. Greedy dogs, which can never
have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand.
They all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from
his quarter.” (lvi. 10, 11.)
Little better were those of whom the Prophets that followed
have left us so dreadful an account: “Both Prophet and
Priest are profane; yea, in my house have I found their
wickedness, saith the Lord. And from the Prophets of Jeru
salem is profaneness gone forth into all the land.” (Jer. xxiii.
11, 15) “Her Priests have violated my law, and have pro
faned my holy things: They have put no difference between
the holy and the profane, and I am profaned among them.”
(Ezekiel xxii. 26.) “If I be a father, where is mine honour?
and if I be a master, where is my fear? saith the Lord of Hosts
unto you, O Priests, that despise my name!” (Malachii. 6)
Yea, some of them were fallen into the grossest sins:
“The company of Priests,” saith Hosea, “commit lewdness:
There is the whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is defiled.” (vi. 9,
10.) “I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem,” saith
God by Jeremiah, “an horrible thing: They commit adultery,
and walk in lies.” (xxiii. 14.)
18. And those who were clear of this, were deeply covetous;
“Who is there among you that would shut the doors for
nought? Neither do ye kindle fire on my altar for nought.
have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of Hosts.” (Malachi i.
10.) “The Priests of Zion teach for hire, and the Prophets
thereof divine for money. Yet will they lean upon the Lord,
and say, Is not the Lord among us?” (Micah iii. 11.) “Thus
saith the Lord, The Prophets bite with their teeth, and cry,
Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even
prepare war against him.” (iii. 5.) Therefore, “the word of the
Lord came unto Ezekiel, saying, Prophesy against the shep
herds of Israel, and say, Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that
do feed themselves! Should not the shepherds feed the flocks?
Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool; but ye feed not
the flock. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have
ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that
which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was
driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but
with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them. And they were
VOL. VIII.
146 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
scattered, because there was no shepherd; and they became
meat to all the beasts of the field. Yea, my flock was scattered
upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek
after them.” (Ezekiel xxxiv. 1-6.)
19. To the same effect do the other Prophets declare: “Ye
are departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble:
Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before
all the people.” (Malachi ii. 8, 9.) “From the Prophet even
unto the Priest, every one dealeth falsely. They have healed
also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying,
Peace, peace; when there is no peace.” (Jer. vi. 13, 14.)
“They prophesy lies in my name.” (xiv. 14.) “They say
still unto them that despise me, The Lord had said, Ye shall
have peace; and they say unto every man that walketh after
the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you.”
(xxiii. 17.) “The Prophets of Jerusalem strengthen the hands
of the evil-doers, that none doth return from his wickedness.”
(Verse 14.) “They have seduced my people; and one built
up a wall, and, lo, others daubed it with untempered mortar.”
(Ezekiel xiii. 10.) “With lies they have made the hearts of
the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened
the hands of the wicked, that he shall not return from his
wicked way, by promising him life.” (Verse 22.) “Many Pas
tors have destroyed my vineyard; they have trodden my portion
under foot; they have made my pleasant portion a desolate
wilderness.” (Jer. xii. 10.) “There is a conspiracy of her
Prophets in the midst of her, like a roaring lion ravening the
prey; they have devoured souls.” (Ezekiel xxii. 25.) “Thus
saith the Lord, Feed the flock of the slaughter; whose pos
sessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: And they
that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord; for I am rich: And
their own shepherds pity them not.” (Zechariah xi, 4, 5.)
II. 1. Such is the general account which the Scriptures
give of the Jews, the ancient Church of God. And since all
these things were “written for our instruction,” who are now
the visible Church of the God of Israel, I shall, in the next
place, appeal to all who profess this, to every one who calls
himself a Christian, how far in each instance the parallel
holds, and how much we are better than they.
And, first, Were they discontented? Did they repine at the
providence of God? Did they say, “Is the Lord among us or
OF REASON AND RELIGION. J47
not?” when they were in imminent danger, or pressing want.
and saw no way to escape. And which of us can say, “I
am clear from this sin: I have washed my hands and my
heart in innocency?” Have not we who “judge others, done
the same things; ” murmured and repined times without
number; yea, and that when we were not in pressing want,
nor distressed with imminent danger? Are we not in general,
(our own writers being the judges,) have we not ever been
from the earliest ages, a “repining, murmuring, discontented
people;” never long satisfied either with God or man? Surely
in this we have great need to humble ourselves before God;
for we are in nowise better than they.
But “Jeshurun forsook God which made him, and lightly
esteemed the Rock of his salvation.” And did not England too?
Ask ye of the generations of old, inquire from the rising of the
sun to the going down thereof, whether there was ever a people
called by his name, which had less of “God in all their
thoughts;” who, in the whole tenor of their behaviour, showed
so light an “esteem for the Rock of their salvation.”
Could there ever be stronger cause for God to cry out,
“Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth !” For hath he not
“nourished and brought us up” as his children? And yet,
how have we “rebelled against ’’ him | If Israel of old “did
not know God,” if his ancient people “did not consider,”
was this peculiar to them ? Are not we also under the very
same condemnation? Do we, as a people, know God? Do
we consider him as God? Do we tremble at the presence of
his power? Do we revere his excellent majesty? Do we
remember, at all times, “God is here ! He is now reading
my heart; He spieth out all my ways; there is not a word
in my tongue but He knoweth it altogether?” Is this the
character of us English Christians; the mark whereby we are
known from the Heathen? Do we thus know God; thus
consider his power, his love, his all-seeing eye? Rather, are
we not likewise a “sinful nation, who have forgotten him days
without number; a people laden with iniquity, continually
forsaking the Lord, and provoking the Holy One of Israel?”
2. There is indeed a wide difference in this respect between
the Jews and us: They happened (if I may so speak) to forget
God, because other things came in their way; but we design to
forget him; we do it of set purpose, because we do not like to
148 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
1emember him. From the accounts given by Jeremiah, we
have reason to believe that when that people were most deeply
corrupted, yet the greatest men in the nation, the Ministers
of State, the Nobles and Princes of Judah, talked of God some
times; perhaps, as frequently as upon any other subject. But
is it so among us? Rather, is it not a point of good-breeding
to put God far away, out of our sight? Is he talked of at all
among the great,-the Nobles or Ministers of State in England?
among any persons of rank or figure in the world? Do they
allow God any place in their conversation? From day to day,
from year to year, do you discourse one hour of the wonders
He doeth for the children of men? If one at a Gentleman
or a Nobleman’s table was to begin a discourse of the wisdom,
greatness, or power of God, would it not occasion, at least, as
much astonishment, as if he had begun to talk blasphemy?
And if the unbred man persisted therein, would it not put all
the company in confusion? And what do you sincerely believe
the more favourable part would say of him when he was gone,
but that, “He is a little touched in his head l’’ or, “Poor
man he has not seen the world?”
You know this is the naked truth. But how terrible is the
thought to every serious mind! Into what a state is this
Christian nation fallen 1 nay, the men of eminence, of fortune,
of education! Would not a thinking foreigner, who should
be present at such an interview, be apt to conclude, that the
men of quality in England were Atheists? that they did not
believe there was any God at all; or, at best, but an Epicurean
god, who sat at ease upon the circle of the heavens, and did
not concern himself about us worms of the earth? Nay, but
He understands every thought now rising in your heart. And
how long can you put him out of your sight? Only till this
veil of flesh is rent in sunder; for your pomp will not then
follow you. Will not your body be mingled with common
dust, and your soul stand naked before God? O that you
would now “acquaint yourself with God,” that you may then
be clothed with glory and immortality
3. Did God complain of the Jews, “Even from the days of
your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have
not kept them?” And how justly may He make the same com
plaint of us; for how exceeding small a proportion do we find of
those in any place who call themselves Christians, that make a
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 149
conscience of attending them ! Does one-third of the inhabi
tants in any one parish throughout this great city constantly
attend public prayer, and the ministry of his word, as of con
science towards God? Does one-tenth of those who acknow
ledge it is an institution of Christ duly attend the Lord's
supper? Does a fiftieth part of the nominal members of the
Church of England observe the fasts of the Church, or so
much as the forty days of Lent, and all Fridays in the year?
Who of these, then, can cast the first stone at the Jews for
neglecting the ordinances of God?
Nay, how many thousands are found among us who have
never partook of the supper of the Lord! How many thou
sands are there that live and die in this unrepented disobedi
ence | What multitudes, even in this Christian city, do not
attend any public worship at all; no, nor spend a single hour
from one year to another, in privately pouring out their hearts
before God! Whether God “meeteth him that remembereth
him in his ways,” or not, is no concern of theirs: So the
man eats and drinks, and “dies as a beast dieth : ”
Drops into the dark, and disappears.
It was not, therefore, of the children of Israel alone that the
messenger of God might say, “There is none” (comparatively)
“that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth himself up to take
hold of thee.”
4. Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time,
“Because of swearing, the land mourneth.” But if this might
be said of the land of Canaan, how much more of this land
In what city or town, in what market or exchange, in what
street or place of public resort, is not the holy “name whereby
we are called ” taken in vain, day by day? From the noble
to the peasant, who fails to call upon God, in this, if in no
other, way? Whither can you turn, where can you go,
without hearing some praying to God for damnation, either
on his neighbour or himself? cursing those, without either fear
or remorse, whom Christ hath bought to inherit a blessing !
Are you one of these stupid, senseless, shameless wretches,
that call so earnestly for damnation on your own soul? What,
if God should take you at your word? Are you “able to dwell
with everlasting burnings?” If you are, yet why should you
be in haste to be in the “lake of fire burning with brimstone?”
150 A FARTIER APPEAL TO MEN
God help you! or you will be there soon enough, and long
enough; for that “fire is not quenched !” But the “smoke
thereof ascendeth up, day and night, for ever and ever.”
And what is that important affair, concerning which you was
but now appealing to God? Was you “calling God to record
upon your soul,” touching your everlasting salvation? No;
but touching the beauty of your horse, the swiftness of your
dog, or the goodness of your drink. How is this? What
notion have you of God? What do you take him to be?
Idcirco stolidam prebet tibi vellere barbam
Jupiter **
What stupidity, what infatuation is this ! thus without either
pleasure, or profit, or praise, to set at nought Him that hath
“all power both in heaven and earth!” wantonly to “provoke
the eyes of his glory !”
Are you a man of letters who are sunk so low 7 I will not
then send you to the inspired writers, (so called;—perhaps you
disdain to receive instruction by them,) but the old, blind Hea
then. Could you only fix in your mind the idea he had of
God, (though it is not strictly just, unless we refer it to God.
made man,) you would never thus affront him more:
H, trai kvavenoriver oppval vevoe Kpovia"
Außporial 5' apa Xaltai erepôwaravro avakros
Kpatos ar’ affavatoio ueyay 3’ exeAièew OAvurov't
Shall not the very Heathen then “rise up in judgment
against this generation, and condemn it?” Yea, and not
only the learned Heathens of Greece and Rome, but the
savages of America; for I never remember to have heard a
wild Indian name the name of Sootaleicatee, (Him that sitteth
in heaven,) without either laying his hand upon his breast, or
casting his eyes down to the ground. And you are a Christian |
O how do you cause the very name of Christianity to be
blasphemed among the Heathen
5. But is it light swearing only, (inexcusable as that is,)
because of which our “land mourneth?” May it not also be
said of us, “Though they say, The Lord liveth, surely they
* Thinkest thou that God is mocked ?
+ Jove spake, and nodded with his sable brow,
And huge Olympus to his centre shook.
oF REASON AND RELIGION. 15]
swear falsely?” yea, to such a degree, that there is hardly the
like in any nation under heaven; that almost every corner of
the land is filled with wilful, deliberate perjury.
I speak not now of the perjuries which every common swearer
cannot but run into day by day: (And indeed common “swear
ing notoriously contributes to the growth of perjury; for oaths
are little minded when common use has sullied them, and every
minute’s repetition has made them cheap and vulgar:”) Nor of
those which are continually committed and often detected in
our open Courts of Justice. Only with regard to the latter I
must remark, that they are a natural consequence of that
monstrous, shocking manner wherein oaths are usually admin
istered therein; without any decency or seriousness at all; much
less with that awful solemnity which a rational Heathen would
expect in an immediate appeal to the great God of heaven.
I had once designed to consider all the oaths which are cus
tomarily taken by any set of men among us. But I soon
found this was a work too weighty for me; so almost in inft
nitum are oaths multiplied in England: I suppose, to a degree
which is not known in any other nation in Europe.
What I now propose is, to instance only in a few, (but those
notof small importance,) and to show how amazingly little regard
is had to what is solemnly promised or affirmed before God.
6. This is done in part to my hands by a late author. So far
as he goes, I shall little more than transcribe his words:—
“When a Justice of Peace is sworn into the commission, he
makes oath,-‘that he shall do equal right to the poor and to
the rich, after his cunning, wit, and power, and after the laws
and customs of the realm and statutes thereof made, in all arti
cles in the King’s commission to him directed.” What those
articlesare, you will find in thefirst Assignavimus of the commis
sion: ‘We have assigned you and every one of you, jointly and
severally, to keep, and cause to be kept, all ordinances and
statutes made for the quiet rule and government of our people,
in all and every the articles thereof, according to the force, form,
and effect of the same, and to chastise and punish all persons.
offending against any of them, according to the form of those
statutes and ordinances.’ So that he is solemnly sworn to the
execution of all such statutes as the legislative power of the
nation has thought fit to throw upon his care. Such are all
those (among others) made against drunkenness, tippling, pro
152 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
fane swearing, blasphemy, lewd and disorderly practices, and
profanation of the Lord's day. And it is hard to imagine how
a Justice of Peace can think himself more concerned to suppress
riots or private quarrels, than he is to levy twelve-pence on a
profane swearer, five shillings on a drunkard, ten shillings on
the public-house that suffers tippling, or any other penalty which
the law exacts on vice and immorality. The same oath binds
him both to one and the other, laying an equal obligation on
his conscience. Howa Magistrate who neglects topunish excess,
profaneness, and impiety, can excuse himself from the guilt of
perjury, I do not pretend to know. If he reasons fairly, he will
find himself as much forsworn, as an evidence who being upon
his oath to declare the whole truth, nevertheless conceals the
most considerable part of it. And his perjury is so much the
more infamous, as the ill example and effects of it will be mis
chievous.” (Mr. Disney's First Essay, Page 30.)
7. The same author (in the preface to his Second Essay)
goes on :
“You, gentlemen of the Grand Juries, take a solemn oath,
that “you will diligently inquire, and true presentment make, of
all such articles, matters, and things as shall be given you in
charge: As also, that you will (not only present no person for
envy, hatred, or malice, but) not leave any unpresented, for fear,
favour, or affection.” Now, are not the laws against immorality
and profaneness given you in charge, as well as those against
riots, felony, and treason P Are not presentment and indict
ment one method expressly appointed by the statutes, for the
punishment of drunkenness and tippling? Are not houses of
bawdry and gaming punishable in the same courts, and, conse
quently, presentable by you? Is not the proclamation for the
punishing of vice, profaneness, and immorality always read
before you as soon as you are sworn? And does not the Judge
of Assize, or Chairman of the Bench, in the charge given imme
diately after the reading it, either recite to you the particular
laws against such offences, or refer you for them to that procla
mation? It is plain from all this, that you are bound upon your
oaths to present all vice and immorality, as well as other crimes,
that fall within your knowledge, because they are expressly given
you in charge. And this you are to do, not only when evidence
isoffered before you by the information of others, but with regard
to all such offences as you or any of you are able, of your own
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 153
personal knowledge, to present; all which you have sworn to do
impartially, without fear, favour, or affection.”
I leave it now with all reasonable men to consider, how few
Grand Jurors perform this; and, consequently, what multi
tudes of them, throughout the nation, fall under the guilt of
wilful perjury !
8. The author proceeds: “I shall next address myself to you
that are Constables. And to you I must needs say, that if you
know your duty, it is no thanks to us that are Justices. For the
oath we usually give you is so short, and in such general terms,
that it leaves with you no manner of instruction in the par
ticulars of the office to which you are sworn. But that which
ought to be given you, recites part of your duty in the following
words:—
“You shall do your best endeavour, that rogues, vagabonds,
and night-walkers be apprehended; and that the statutes made
for their punishment be duly put in execution. You shall have
a watchful eye to such as shall keep any house or place where
any unlawful game is used; as also to such as shall frequent
such places, or shall use any unlawful game there or elsewhere.
You shall present all and every the offences contrary to the sta
tutes made to restrain the tippling in inns, alehouses, and other
victualling houses, and for repressing of drunkenness. You
shall once in the year, during your office, present all Popish
recusants. You shall well and duly execute all precepts and
warrants to you directed. And you shall well and duly, accord
ing to your knowledge, power, and ability, do and execute all
other things belonging to the office of a Constable, so long as
you shall continue therein.” (Page 8.)
“Upon this, I would observe, first, that actors of plays are
expressed by name within the statute, to be taken up for vaga
bonds, and punished accordingly; and that though a statute of
Queen Elizabeth’s excepts such companies as have a license
under the hand and seal of a Nobleman, yet a later statute in
the reign of King James the First has taken away that protec
tion from them, by declaring, that ‘from thenceforth no autho
rity to be given by any Peer of the realm shall be available to
free or discharge them from the pains and punishments of that
former statute. Every Constable, therefore, in those parishes
where any of these strolling players come, is bound by his oath,
to seize upon, correct, and send them packing without delay.
“The next part of your oath obliges you to keep a watchful
154 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
eye on such houses as keep, and such persons as use, unlawful
gaming. The statute directs you weekly, or at least monthly,
to search within your liberties all houses or places suspected of
this offence, and, upon discovering, to bring them to punish
ment. Upon this article, I would observe, (1.) That the law
makes some allowance for artificers, husbandmen, apprentices,
labourers, and servants, to play in Christmas, but at no other
time of the year; and, (2.) That all sports and pastimes what
soever are made unlawful upon the Lord’s day, by a statute of
King Charles II. You are therefore bound upon oath, to bring
to punishment such as are guilty of profaning that day by any
sports or pastimes whatsoever.
“The following parts of your oath are, (1.) That you shall
present all and every the offences of tippling and drunkenness
that come to your knowledge. (2.) That you shall once in the
year present all Popish recusants; nay, and by the statute on
which your oath is grounded, you are obliged once a year to
present in Session all those within your parishes who (not being
Dissenters) come not once in a month, at least, to church.
And, (3.) That you shall well and duly execute all precepts and
warrants to you directed. I believe no Constable will pre
tend to be ignorant of this. How is it then, that when we send
out warrants, to levy on offenders for swearing, drunkenness,
and the like, those warrants are so ill obeyed? Are you not
sworn to execute these as well as any other, and that duly too,
according to the tenor of your precept 7 Your precept tells
you, You shall demand such a sum; and if the offender will
not pay, you shall levy it by distress of his goods; and if no
distress can be taken, you are then only to set him in the
stocks; otherwise you have no authority so to do; nor is the
setting him in the stocks, when you might have distrained,
any execution of your precept.
“The last part of your oath is in general terms: That you
shall well and duly, according to your knowledge, power, and
ability, do and execute all other things belonging to the office
of a Constable. I shall instance in some things which certainly
belong to your office, because you, and none else, can do them.
(1.) A Constable may, without a warrant, apprehend any per
sons, and carry them before a Justice, who are driving carts,
horses, or cattle on the Lord’s day. (2.) Such as he shall find
at sports and pastimes on that day. (3.) Such as he shall find
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 155.
tippling in public houses. (4.) Shopkeepers selling, or exposing
goods to sale, on the Lord’s day. And, Lastly, such as he shall
find drunk or blaspheming, or profanely swearing or cursing.
“Thus I have shown you, in part, what belongs to your
office: It is well, if, according to the tenor of your oath, you
duly, according to your knowledge and ability, do and execute
all these things. But remember, that, if you do not, if you
neglect any of them, you are forsworn.”
Now let all men judge, how many Constables in England
are clear of wilful perjury !
9. “I will now,” he goes on, “address myself to Church
wardens. Your oath is, ‘that you shall well and truly execute
the office of a Churchwarden, for the ensuing year; and, to
the best of your skill and knowledge, present such persons
and things as are presentable by the ecclesiastical laws of this
realm.’ I shall set down only a few of these.
“The statute of King James I. obliges you to present, once
a year, all monthly absenters from church.
“The ninetieth Canon enjoins you, first to admonish, and
then, if they reform not, to present, all your parishioners who
do not duly resort to church on Sundays, and there continue
the whole time of divine service. On this article observe, (1.)
That a person’s being absent from church, is ground sufficient
for you to proceed. (2.) That you are not only to present
those who do not come to church, but also those that
behave irreverently or indecently there, either walking about
or talking; all who do not abide there, orderly and soberly,
the whole time of service and sermon, and all that loiter away
any part of that time in the churchyard or in the fields.
“The one hundred and twelfth Canon enjoins you, within
forty days after Easter, to exhibit to the Bishop, or his Chan
cellor, the names of all above the age of sixteen, within your
parish, that did not receive the communion.
“Other statutes oblige you to present drunkenness, tippling,
and public houses suffering persons to tipple in them.
“And the one hundred and ninth Canon binds you to pre
sent all manner of vice, profaneness, and debauchery, requiring
you faithfully to present all and every the offenders in adul
tery, whoredom, drunkenness, profane swearing, or any other
uncleanness and wickedness of life. It is therefore a part of
that office to which you are solemnly sworn, to present, not only
156 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
all drunkenness and tippling, but profane swearing, lewdness,
and whatsoever else is contrary to Christian piety. So that
if you know any of your parishioners, be his quality or cir
cumstances what they will, that is guilty of any of these, you
are obliged to present him at the next visitation, or you are
yourselves guilty of perjury. And the twenty-sixth Canon
expresses such an abhorrence of a Churchwarden's neglect in
this matter, that it forbids the Minister, in any wise, to admit
you to the holy communion, ‘who, as the words of the Canon
are, ‘having taken your oaths to present all such offences in
your several parishes, shall, notwithstanding your said oaths,
either in neglecting or refusing to present, wittingly and will
ingly, desperately and irreligiously, incur the horrid guilt of
perjury.’”
And who is clear? I appeal to every Minister of a parish,
from one end of England to the other, how many Church
wardens have you known, in twenty, thirty, forty years, who
did not thus “desperately and irreligiously incur the horrid
guilt of perjury?”
10. I proceed to perjuries of another kind. The oath
taken by all Captains of ships, every time they return from a
trading voyage, runs in these terms:
“I do swear, that the entry above written, now tendered
and subscribed by me, is a just report of the name of my ship,
its burden, bulk, property, number and country of mariners,
the present Master and voyage; and that it doth farther contain
a true account of my lading, with the particular marks, num
bers, quantity, quality, and consignment of all the goods and
merchandises in my said ship, to the best of my knowledge;
and that I have not broke bulk, or delivered any goods out
of my said ship, since her loading in. So help me God.”
These words are so clear, express, and unambiguous, that
they require no explanation. But who takes this plain oath,
without being knowingly and deliberately forsworn ? Does one
Captain in fifty? Does one in five hundred? May we not
go farther yet? Are there five Captains of vessels now in
London, who have not, at one time or another, by this very
oath, which they knew to be false when they took it, incurred
the guilt of wilful perjury?
11. The oath which all Officers of His Majesty's Customs
take, at their admission into the office, runs thus:
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 157
“I do swear to be true and faithful in the execution, to the
best of my knowledge and power, of the trust committed to my
charge and inspection, in the service of His Majesty’s Customs;
and that I will not take or receive any reward or gratuity,
directly or indirectly, other than my salary, or what is or shall
be allowed me from the Crown, or the regular fees established
by law, for any service done or to be done in the execution of
my employment in the Customs, on any account whatsoever.
So help me God.”
On this it may be observed, (1.) That there are regular fees,
“established by law,” for some of these officers: (2.) That the
rest do hereby engage not to take or receive “any reward or
gratuity, directly or indirectly,” other than their salary or
allowance from the Crown, “on any account whatsoever.”
How do the former keep this solemn engagement? they
whose fees are “established by law?” Do they take those
established fees, and no more? Do they not “receive any
farther gratuity,” not “on any account whatsoever?” If they
do, they are undeniably guilty of wilful perjury.
And do the latter take no fees at all? Do they receive “no
reward or gratuity, for any service done, or to be done, in the
execution of their employment?” Do they not take any
money, “directly or indirectly, on any account whatsoever?”
Every time they do receive either more or less, they also are
flatly forsworn.
Yet who scruples either the one or the other? either the
taking a larger fee than the law appoints; or the taking any fee,
large or small, which is offered, even where the law appoints
none at all?
What innumerable perjuries, then, are here committed, over
and over, day by day! and without any remorse; without any
shame; without any fear either of God or man |
12. I will produce but one instance more. The oath of one
who votes for a Member of Parliament is this:—
“I do swear, I have not received or had, by myself, or of
any person whatsoever in trust for me, or for my use and benefit,
directly or indirectly, any sum or sums of money, office, place,
or employment, gift, or reward, or any promise or security for
any money, office, employment, or gift, in order to give my vote
at this election, and that I have not before been polled at this
election. So help me God.”
158 a rarTHER APPEAL TO MEN
We may observe here, (1.) That this oath is taken once in
seven years (if required) by all the freeholders, in every county
throughout England and Wales, as well as by all the freemen
in every city and borough-town: And, (2.) That hereby every
voter swears, in words liable to no evasion, that he has not
received, directly or indirectly, any gift or reward, or promise of
any.
But, to pass over those godless and shameless wretches who
frequently vote twice at one election, how few are there who
can take this oath with a conscience void of offence who have
not received, directly or indirectly, any gift, or promise of any |
No! have not you? If you have received nothing else, have
not you received meat or drink? And did you pay for the meat
or drink you received ? If not, that was a gift; and, conse
quently, you are as really perjured as the man that has received
an hundred pounds.
What a melancholy prospect is then before us! Here are
almost all the common people of any substance throughout the
land, both in the city and country, calling God to record to a
known, wilful falsehood |
13. I shall conclude this head in the weighty words of the
author before cited:—
“Most of these, I am afraid, look upon their oaths as things
of course, and little to be regarded. But can there be anything
in the world more sacred than an oath ? Is it not a solemn
appeal to God for your sincerity? And is not that very appeal
an acknowledgment, that he will surely punish falsehood? Nay,
farther, is it not a calling down the vengeance of God upon
yourselves, if you are false? Do you not, by laying your hand
upon the Gospel, declare that you hope for no salvation by
Christ, if you perform not what you then promise, or if what
you then affirm is not true? And do not the words, ‘So help
me God,” sufficiently prove, that the intention of your oath is
so; and that if you swear false, you are to expect no mercy
from God, either in this world or the next? And do you not
personally and expressly give your consent to this heavy curse,
by kissing the book? How, then, dare any of you to venture
to play with so awful an engagement? Is it that you think the
oath of a Grand-Juryman or parish-officer” (of a Captain, an
Officer of the Customs, or a voter in elections) “is not as sacred
and binding as that of an evidence at the bar? What is it can
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 159
make the difference? Both of them are equally appeals to
God, and imprecations of his vengeance upon wilful perjury.”
14. If there be, then, a God that is not mocked, what a
weight of sin lies on this nation and sin of no common dye;
for perjury has always been accounted one of the deepest
stain. And how will any one attempt to excuse this? by
adding blasphemy thereto? So indeed some have done;
saying, like those of old, “Tush, thou God carest not for it.
The Lord seeth.” (that is, regardeth) “us not. The Lord
hath forsaken the earth.” He has left second causes to take
their course, and man “in the hand of his own counsel.”
How many are they who now speak thus ! according to
whose minute philosophy the particular providence of God is
utterly exploded; the hairs of our head are no longer numbered;
and not only a sparrow, but a city, an empire, may fall to the
ground, without the will or care of our heavenly Father. You
allow, then, only a general Providence. I do not understand
the term. Be so kind as to let me know what you mean by a
“general Providence, contradistinguished from a particular
one.” I doubt you are at a loss for an answer; unless you mean
some huge, unwieldy thing, (I suppose, resembling the primum
snobile in the Ptolemaic system,) which continually whirls the
whole universe round, without affecting one thing more than
another. I doubt this hypothesis will demand more proof than
you are at present able to produce; beside that, it is attended
with a thousand difficulties, such as you cannot readily solve.
It may be, therefore, your wisest way for once to think with the
vulgar, to acquiesce in the plainscriptural account. This informs
us, that although God dwelleth in heaven, yet he still “ruleth
over all;” that his providence extends to every individual in the
whole system of beings which he hath made; that all natural
causes of every kind depend wholly upon his will; and he
increases, lessens, suspends, or destroys their efficacy, according
to his own good pleasure; that he uses preternatural causes at
his will,—the ministry of good or of evil angels; and that he
hath never yet precluded himself from exerting his own
immediate power, from speaking life or death into any of his
creatures, from looking a world into being or into nothing.
“Thinkest thou then, O man, that thou shalt escape the
judgment of” this great God? O, no longer “treasure up unto
thyself wrath against the day of wrath!” Thou canst not recal
160 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
what is past; but now “keep thyself pure,” even were it at
the price of all that thou hast; and acknowledge the goodness.
of God, in that he did not long since cut thee off, and send
thee to thy own place.-
15. The Jews of old were charged by God with profaning
his Sabbath also. And do we Christians come behind them
herein? (I speak of those who acknowledge the obligation.)
Do we call “the Sabbath a delight, holy of the Lord,
honourable; not doing our own ways, not finding our own
pleasure, nor speaking our own words?” Do our “man-servant
and maid-servant” rest thereon, and “the stranger that is
within our gates?” Is no business, but what is really neces
sary, done within our house? You know in your own conscience,
and God knoweth, that the very reverse of this is true.
But setting aside these things, which are done, as it were,
by stealth, whether by mean or honourable men; how many
are they, in every city, as well as in this, who profane the
Sabbath with a high hand? How many in this, that openly
defy both God and the King, that break the laws, both divine
and human, by working at their trade, delivering their goods,
receiving their pay, or following their ordinary business, in
one branch or another, and “wiping their mouths and saying,
I do no evil.” How many buy and sell on the day of the
Lord, even in the open streets of this city ? How many open
or (with some modesty) half open their shops? even when
they have not the pretence of perishable goods; without any
pretence at all; money is their god, and gain their godliness.
But what are all these droves in the skirts of the town, that
well-nigh cover the face of the earth? till they drop one after
another into the numerous receptacles prepared for them in
every corner. What are these to gain by profaning the day
of the Lord? Nothing at all. They “drink in iniquity like
water.” Nay, many of them pay for their sin; perhaps great
part of what should sustain their family the ensuing week. I
know not what is “finding our own pleasure, or doing our own
ways,” if this is not. What then shall we plead in your excuse?
that “many others do it as well as you?” Nay, number is so
far from extenuating your fault, that it aggravates it above
measure. For this is open war against God. And a whole
army of you joins together, and with one consent, in the face
of the sun, “runs upon the thick bosses of his buckler.”
16. It is oncementioned in the Prophets, “In thee” (Jeru
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 161
salem) “they have set light by father and mother.” But fre
quent mention is made of their setting light by their civil
parents, of their murmurings and rebellions against their
governors. Yet surely our boasting against them is excluded,
even in this respect. For do not all our histories witness
such a series of mutinies, seditions, factions, and rebellions,
as are scarce to be paralleled in any other kingdom since the
world began? And has not the wild, turbulent, ungovernable
spirit of our countrymen been continually acknowledged and
lamented (as abundance of their writings testify to this day) by
the cool, rational part of the nation? Terrible effects whereof
have been seen and felt, more or less, in every generation.
But did this spirit exist only in times past? Blessed be
God, it is now restrained, it does not break out; but the
traces thereof are still easy to be found. For, whence
springs this continual “speaking evil of dignities 7 ° of all
who are at the helm of public affairs? Whence this “speak
ing evil of the ruler of our people,” so common among all
orders of men? I do not include those whose province it is
to inspect all the public administrations. But is not almost
every private gentleman in the land, every Clergyman, every
tradesman, yea, every man or woman that has a tongue, a
politician, a settler of the state? Is not every carman and
porter abundantly more knowing than the King, Lords, and
Commons together? able to tell you all their foibles, to point
out their faults and mistakes, and how they ought to proceed,
if they will save the nation? Now all this has a natural,
undeniable tendency to mutiny and rebellion. O what need
have we, above any nation upon earth, of His continual care
and protection, who alone is able to “rule the raging of the
sea, and still the madness of the people!”
17. But to proceed: Were there “drunkards in Ephraim,
mighty to drink wine, men of strength to mingle strong
drink?” And are there not in England? Are they not the
growth of every county, city, and town therein P These do not
indeed, or not often, “rise up early, that they may follow
strong drink; ” and so “continue till night, till wine inflame
them.” They have found a readier way; namely, to begin
at night, and continue following their wine or strong drink
till the morning. And what numbers are there of these
throughout the land 1 lost to reason and humanity, as well as
VOL. VIII.
162 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
to religion; so that no wonder “they regard not the works of
the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands.”
Nor indeed have our drunkards need to continue from morn
ing “to night, until wine inflame them; ” seeing they have
found a far more compendious method of casting aside all sensc.
and reason, and disencumbering themselves of all remains
either of conscience or understanding So that whatever work
of darkness is speedily to be done, and that without any danger
of being interrupted, either by fear, compassion, or remorse, they
may be in a few moments, by one draught, as effectually quali
fied for it, as if they could swallow a legion of devils. Or, (if
that be all their concern,) they may, at a moderate expense,
destroy their own body as well as soul, and plunge through
this liquid fire into that “prepared for the devil and his angels.”
Friend! stop. You have the form of a man still ; and per
haps some remains of understanding. O may the merciful God
lay hold of that Unto him all things are possible. Think a
little for once. What is it you are doing? Why should you
destroy yourself? I could not use the worst enemy I have in
the world as you use yourself. Why should you murder your
self inch by inch? Why should you burn yourself alive? O
spare your own body at least, if you have no pity for your soul!
But have you a soul then? Do you really believe it? What,
a soul that must live for ever! O spare thy soul! Do not
destroy thy own soul with an everlasting destruction | 1t was
made for God. Do not give it into the hands of that old mur
derer of men! Thou canst not stupify it long. When it leaves
the body, it will awake and sleep no more. Yet a little while,
and it launches out into the great deep, to live, and think, and
feel for ever. And what will cheer thy spirit there, if thou hast
not a drop of water to cool thy tongue? But the die is not
yet cast: Now cry to God, and iniquity shall not be thy ruin.
18. Of old time there were also those that “were at ease in
Zion, that lay upon beds of ivory, and stretched themselves
upon their couches, that ate the lambs out of the flock, and
calves out of the stall.” But how inelegant were these ancient
epicures !“Lambs out of the flock, and calves out of the stall!”
Were these the best dainties they could procure? How have
we improved since Jeroboam’s time! Who can number the
varieties of our tables? or the arts we have “to enlarge the
pleasure of tasting?” And what are their couches, or beds
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 163
of ivory, to the furniture of our apartments? or their “chains,
and bracelets, and mantles, and changeable suits of apparel,”
to the ornaments of our persons? What comparison is there
between their diversions and ours? Look at Solomon in all his
glory, and yet may we not question, whether he was not an
utter stranger to the pleasures of the chase ? And, notwith
standing his forty thousand horses, did he ever see a race in
his life? He “made gardens, and orchards, and pools of
water; he planted vineyards, and built houses; ” but had he
one theatre among them all? No. This is the glory of later
times. Or had he any conception of a ball, an assembly, a
masquerade, or a ridotto ? And who imagines that all his
instruments of music, put together, were any more to be com
pared to ours, than his or his father’s rumbling Hebrew verses,
To the soft sing-song of Italian lays.
In all these points, our pre-eminence over the Jews is much
every way.-
Yea, and over our own ancestors, as well as theirs. But is
this our glory, or our shame? Were Edward III. or IIenry V.
to come among us now, what would they think of the change
in their people? Would they applaud the elegant variety at
the old Baron’s table? or the costly delicacy of his furniture
and apparel ? Would they listen to these instruments of music,
or find pleasure in those diversions? Would they rejoice to
see the Nobles and Gentry of the land lying “at ease, stretch
ing themselves on beds” of down? too delicate to use their
own limbs, even in the streets of the city; to bear the touch of
the people, the blowing of the wind, or the shining of the sun
O how would their hearts burn within them | What indigna
tion, sorrow, shame must they feel, to see the ancient hardiness
lost, the British temperance, patience, and scorn of superflu
ities, the rough, indefatigable industry, exchanged for softness,
“idleness, and fulness of bread!” Well for them, that they
were gathered unto their fathers before this exchange was made!
19. To prove at large, that the luxury and sensuality, the
sloth and indolence, the softness and idleness, the effeminacy
and false delicacy of our nation are without a parallel, would
be but lost labour. I fear, we may say, the lewdness too; for
if the Jews, as the Prophet speaks, “assembled themselves by
troops in the harlots’ houses,” so do the English, and much
more abundantly. Indeed, where is male chastity to be
164 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
found? among the Nobility, among the Gentry, among the
tradesmen, or among the common people of England? How
few lay any claim to it at all ! How few desire so much as
the reputation of it ! Would you yourself account it an
honour or a reproach, to be ranked among those of whom it is
said, “These are they which are not defiled with women: For
they are virgins?” And how numerous are they now, even
among such as are accounted men of honour and probity, “who
are as fed horses, everyone neighing after his neighbour's wife!”
But as if this were not enough, is not the sin of Sodom,
too, more common among us than ever it was in Jerusalem?
Are not our streets beset with those monsters of uncleanness,
who “burn in their lust one toward another,” whom God
hath “given up to a reprobate mind, to do those things which
are not convenient?” O Lord, thy compassions fail not:
Therefore we are not consumed.
20. Neither do we yield to them in injustice, any more than
uncleanness. How frequent are open robberies among us! Is
not “the act of violence ’’ even “in our streets?” And what
laws are sufficient to prevent it? Does not theft of various kinds
abound in all parts of the land, even though death be the
punishment of it? And are there not among us, who “take
usury and increase,” who “greedily gain of their neighbour by
extortion?” yea, whole trades which subsist by such extortion
as was not named either among the Jews or Heathens? “Is
there not ” yet “the scant measure, the wicked balances, and
the bag of deceitful weights?” beside the thousand nameless
ways of over-reaching and defrauding, the craft and mystery of
every trade and profession. It were an endless task to descend
to particulars, to point out in every circumstance, how not only
sharpers and gamesters, (those public nuisances, those scandals
to the English nation,) but high and low, rich and poor, men of
character, and men of none, in every station of public or private
life, “have corrupted themselves,” and generally applaud them
selves, and count it policy and wisdom so to do; so that if gain
be at hand, they care not though “justice stand afar off; ” so
that “he which departeth from evil,” which cometh not into
their secret, still “maketh himself a prey;” and “the wicked”
still “devoureth the man that is more righteous than he.”
And what redress? Suppose a great man to oppress the
needy; suppose the rich grinds the face of the poor; what
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 165
remedy against such oppression can he find in this Christian
country? If the one is rich and the other poor, doth not
justice stand afar off? And is not the poor under the utmost
improbability (if not impossibility) of obtaining it? Perhaps
the hazard is greater among us, than either among Jews,
Turks, or Heathens.
For example: Suppose a great man, with or without form
of law, does wrong to his poor neighbour. What will he do?
sue his lordship at common law P have the cause tried at the
next Sessions or Assizes? Alas! your own neighbours, those
who know the whole case, will tell you, “You are out of your
senses.” “But twelve good men and true will do me justice.”
Very well; but where will you find them;—men unbiassed,
incapable of corruption, superior both to fear and favour, to
every view, whether of gain or loss? But this is not all;
they must not only be good and true, but wise and under
standing men. Else how easy is it for a skilful Pleader to
throw a mist before their eyes? even supposing too the Judge
to be quite impartial, and proof against all corruption. And
should all these circumstances concur, (of which I fear there
are not many precedents) supposing a verdict is given in your
favour, still you have gained nothing. The suit is removed
into a higher court, and you have all your work to begin
again. Here you have to struggle with all the same difficul
ties as before, and perhaps many new ones too. However, if
you have money enough, you may succeed; but if that fails,
your cause is gone. Without money, you can have no more
law; poverty alone utterly shuts out justice.
But “cannot an honest Attorney procure me justice?” An
honest Attorney ! Where will you find one? Of those who
are called exceeding honest Attorneys, who is there that
makes any scruple,—
(1) To promote and encourage needless suits, if not unjust
Ones too :
(2.) To defend a bad cause, knowing it so to be,—
By making a demur, and then withdrawing it;
By pleading some false plea, to the plaintiff’s declaration;
By putting in an evasive answer to his bill;
By protracting the suit, if possible, till the plaintiff is ruined:
(3.) To carry a cause not amounting to ten shillings into
Westminster-Hall, by laying it in his declaration as above forty:
J66 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
(4.) To delay his own client's suit knowingly and wilfully,
in order to gain more thereby:
(5.) To draw himself the pleadings or conveyances of his
client, instead of giving them to be drawn by able Counsel:
(6) To charge his client with the fees which should have
been given to such Counsel, although they were not given:
(7.) To charge for drawing fair copies, where none were
drawn :
(8.) To charge fees for expedition given to clerks, when not
one farthing has been given them:
(9.) To send his clerk a journey (longer or shorter) to do
business with or for different persons; and to charge the horse
hire and expense of that journey to every person severally:
(10.) To send his clerk to Westminster, on the business of
ten (it may be) or twenty persons, and to charge each of these
twenty for his attendance, as if he had been sent on account
of one only :
(11.) To charge his own attendance in like manner: And,
(12.) To fill up his bill with attendances, fees, and term
fees, though his client is no whit forwarder in his cause ?
This is he that is called an honest Attorney ! How much
homester is a pickpocket!
But there is a Magistrate whose peculiar office it is to redress
the injured and oppressed. Go, then, and make trial of this
remedy; go, and tell your case to the Lord Chancellor. Hold;
you must go on regularly; you must tell him your case in form
of law, or not at all. You must therefore file a bill in Chancery,
and retain a Lawyer belonging to that court. “But you have
already spent all you have; you have no money.” Then I fear
you will have no justice. You stumble at the threshold. If
you have either lost or spent all, your cause is nought; it will
not cven come to a hearing. So, if the oppressor has secured
all that you had, he is as safe as if you was under the earth.
1. Now, what an amazing thing is this ! The very greatness
of the villany makes it beyond redress! But suppose he that
is oppressed has some substance left, and can go through all
the Courts of Justice, what parallel can we find among Jews,
Turks, or Heathens, for either the delays or the expense attend
ing it? With regard to the former, how monstrous is it, that in
a suit relating to that inheritance which is to furnish you and
your family with food and raiment, you must wait month after
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 167
month, perhaps year after year, before it is determined whether
it be yours or not ! And what are you to eat or to wear in the
mean time? Of that the Court takes no cognizance! Is not
this very delay (suppose there were no other grievance attend
ing the English course of law) wrong beyond all expression?
contrary to all sense, reason, justice, and equity? A capital
cause is tried in one day, and finally decided at once. And “is
the life less than meat; or the body of less concern than rai
ment?” What a shameless mockery of justice, then, is this
putting off pecuniary causes from term to term, yea, from
year to year!
With regard to the latter: A man has wronged me of a hun
dred pounds. I appeal to a Judge for the recovery of it. How
astonishing is it that this Judge himself cannot give me what is
my right, and whatevidently appears so to be, unless I first give,
perhaps, one half of the sum to men I neversaw beforein my life!
22. I have hitherto supposed that all causes, when they are
decided, are decided according to justice and equity. But is it
so P Ye learned in the law, is no unjust sentence given in your
Courts? Have not the same causes been decided quite opposite
ways? one way this term, just the contrary the next? Perhaps
one way in the morning, (this I remember an instance of) and
another way in the afternoon. How is this? Is there no justice
left on earth; no regard for right or wrong? Or have causes
been puzzled so long, that you know not now what is either
wrong or right; what is agreeable to law, or contrary to it?
I have heard some of you frankly declare, that it is in many
cases next to impossible to know what is law, and what is not.
So are your folios of law multiplied upon you, that no human
brain is able to contain them; no, nor any consistent scheme
or abstract of them all.
But is it really owing to ignorance of the law (this is the
most favourable supposition) that so few of you scruple taking
fees on either side of almost any cause that can be conceived;
and that you generally plead in the manner you do on any side
of any cause; rambling to and fro in a way so abhorrent from
common sense, and so utterly foreign to the question? I have
been amazed at hearing the pleadings of some eminent Coun
sel; and when it has fallen out that the Pleader on the other
side understood only the common rules of logic, he has made
those eminent men appear either such egregious knaves, if they
could help it, or such egregious blockheads, if they could not,
168 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
that one would have believed they would show their face there
no more. Meantime, if there be a God that judgeth righteously,
what horrid insults upon him are these ! “Shall I not visit
for these things, saith the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged
on such a nation as this?”
23. There is one instance more of (I know not what to term
it) injustice, oppression, sacrilege, which hath long cried aloud
in the ears of God. For among men, who doth hear? I mean
the management of many of those who are entrusted with our
public charitics. By the pious munificence of our forefathers
we have abundance of these of various kinds: But is it not
glaringly true, (to touch only on a few generals,) that the
managers of many of them either (1.) do not apply the bene
faction to that use for which it was designed by the benefactor;
or (2.) do not apply it with such care and frugality as in such
a case are indispensably required; or (3.) do not apply the
whole of the benefaction to any charitable use at all; but
secrete part thereof, from time to time, for the use of themselves
and their families; or, lastly by plain barefaced oppression,
exclude those from having any part in such benefaction, who
dare (though with all possible tenderness and respect) set
before them the things that they have done?
Yet Brutus is an honourable man:
So are they all: All honourable men 1
And some of them had in esteem for religion; accounted pat
terns both of honesty and piety But God “seeth not as man
seeth.” He “shall repay them to their face;” perhaps even
in the present world. For that scripture is often still fulfilled:
“This is the curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole
earth. I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of Hosts, and it
shall enter into the house of the thief,” (such he is, and no
better, in the eyes of God, no whit honester than a highway
man,) “and it shall remain in the midst of the house, and shall
consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof.”
24. And is not truth, as well as “justice, fallen in our
streets?” For who “speaketh the truth from his heart?” Who
is there that makes a conscience of speaking the thing as it is,
whenever he speaks at all? Who scruples the telling of offi
cious lies? the varying from truth, in order to do good? How
strange does that saying of the ancient fathers sound in modern
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 169
ears “I would not tell a lie, no, not to save the souls of the
whole world.” Yet is this strictly agreeable to the word of
Sod; to that of St. Paul in particular, If any say, “Let us
do evil that good may come, their damnation is just.”
But how many of us do this evil without ever considering
whether good will come or no; speaking what we do not
mean, merely out of custom, because it is fashionable so to
do ! What an immense quantity of falsehood does this
ungodly fashion occasion day by day! for hath it not overrun
every part of the nation? How is all our language swoln with
compliment; so that a well-bred person is not expected to
speak as he thinks; we do not look for it at his hands ! Nay,
who would thank him for it? how few would suffer it ! It
was said of old, even by a warrior and a King, “He that
telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight:” But are we not of
another mind? Do not we rather say, “He that telleth not
lies shall not tarry in my sight?” Indeed the trial seldom
comes; for both speakers and hearers are agreed that form
and ceremony, flattery and compliment, should take place,
and truth be banished from all that know the world.
And if the rich and great have so small regard to truth, as
to lie even for lying sake, what wonder can it be that men of
lower rank will do the same thing for gain? what wonder
that it should obtain, as by common consent, in all kinds of
buying and selling? Is it not an adjudged case, that it is no
harm to tell lies in the way of trade; to say that is the lowest
price which is not the lowest; or that you will not take what
you do take immediately? Insomuch that it is a proverb
even among the Turks, when asked to abate of their price,
“What I do you take me to be a Christian?” So that never
was that caution more seasonable than it is at this day:
“Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not
in any brother: For every brother will utterly supplant, and
they will deceive every one his neighbour.”
25. And as for those few who abstain from outward sins, is
their heart right with God? May he not say of us also, as of
the Jews, “This people is uncircumcised in heart?” Are not
you? Do you then “love the Lord your God with all your
heart, and with all your strength?” Is he your God and your
all, the desire of your eyes, the joy of your very heart?
Rather, do you not “set up your idols in your heart?” Is not
170 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
your belly your God, or your diversion, or your fair reputation,
or your friend, or wife, or child? That is, plainly, do not
you delight in some of these earthly goods, more than in the
God of heaven? Nay, perhaps you are one of those grovel
ling souls that “pant after the dust of the earth !” Indeed,
who does not? Who does not get as much as he can 2 Who
of those that are not accounted covetous, yet does not gather
all the money he can fairly, and perhaps much more? For
are they those only whom the world rank among misers that
use every art to increase their fortune; toiling early and late,
spending all their strength in “loading themselves with thick
clay?” How long? Until the very hour when God calleth
them; when he saith unto each of them, “Thou fool! this
night shall thy soul be required of thee! And whose shall
those things be which thou hast prepared ?”
26. And yet doth not our pride, even the pride of those whose
soul “cleaves to the dust, testify against us?” Are they not
“wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own conceit?”
Have not writers of our own remarked, that there is not upon
earth a more self-conceited nation than the English; more opi
niated both of their own national and personal wisdom, and
courage, and strength? And indeed, if we may judge by the in
habitants of London, this is evident to a demonstration; for are
not the very meanest of them able to instruct both the King and
all his Counsellors? What cobbler in London is not wiser than
the principal Secretary of State? What coffee-house disputer is
not an abler Divine than his Grace of Canterbury? And how
deep a contempt of others is joined with this high opinion of our
selves ! I know not whether the people of all other nations are
greater masters of dissimulation; but there does not appear in
any nation whateversuch a proneness to despise their neighbour;
to despise, not foreigners only, (near two thousand years ago they
remarked, Britannos hospitibus feros,”) but their own country
men; and that very often for such surprising reasons as nothing
but undeniable fact could make credible. How often does the
gentleman in his coach despise those dirty fellows that go a-foot;
and these, on the other hand, despise full as much those lazy
fellows that loll in their coaches ! No wonder then that those
who have “the form of godliness” should despise them that have
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Francis :
-“Britons of inhospitable strain.”-EDIT.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 17F
it not; that the saint of the world so frequently says to the
gross sinner, in effect, if not in terms, “Stand by thyself;
come not near unto me; for I am holier than thou !”
27. Yet what kind of holiness is this? May not God
justly declare of us also, “This people draw near me with
their mouth, but they have removed their hearts far from me:
They do but flatter me with their mouth, and dissemble with
me in their tongue?” Is it not so with you? When you
speak to God, do your lips and your heart go together? Do
you not often utter words by which you mean just nothing?
Do not you say and unsay; or say one thing to God, and
another to man? For instance, you say to God, “Vouchsafe,
O Lord, to keep me this day without sin: ” But you say to
man, “This cannot be done; it is all folly and madness to
expect it.” You ask of God that you “may perfectly love him,
and worthily magnify his holy name: ” But you tell man,
“There is no perfect love upon earth; it is only a madman’s
dream.” You pray God to “cleanse the thoughts of your heart,
by the inspiration of his Holy Spirit:” But you assure your
neighbour there is no such thing as inspiration now, and that
none pretend to it but enthusiasts. What gross hypocrisy is
this! Surely you think there is no “knowledge in the Most
High. O be not deceived ! God is not mocked. But
whatsoever ye sow, that also shall ye reap !”
28. Such at present is the religion of this Christian nation |
So do we honour Him by whose name we are called ! And yet
was there ever a nation more careless and secure, more unap
prehensive of the wrath of God? How can a man more effectu
ally expose himself to the ridicule of those who are esteemed
men of understanding, than by showing any concern, as if the
judgments of God were hanging over our heads? Surely then,
“a deceived heart hath turned us aside, that we cannot say, Is
there not a lie in my fight hand?” Surely this our confidence
is not of God; it is rather a judicial infatuation, a stupid insen
sibility, a deep sleep, the forerunner of heavy vengeance.
Ruin behind it stalks, and empty desolation.
Surely never was any people more fitted for destruction
“Impudent children are they, and stiff-hearted. Are they
ashamed when they have committed abomination;” when they
have openly profaned the day of the Lord; when they have
committed lewdness; or when they have uttered such curses
I72 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
and blasphemies as are not heard of among the Heathens?
Nay, “they are not at all ashamed, neither can they blush.”
And though God send unto them all his servants, rising up
early and sending them, yet “will they not hear; they harden
their neck; they do worse than their fathers.”
What, then, can “God do more for his vineyard which he
hath not done?” He hath long tried us with mercies,
“giving rain and fruitful seasons, filling us with the flour of
wheat.” But still “this revolting and rebellious people say
not, Let us now fear the Lord our God.” Nay, they gave him
no thanks for all his mercies; they did not even acknowledge
them to be his gift. They did not see the hand of God in any
of these things; they could account for them another way. O
ye unwise, when will ye understand? Know ye not yet, there
is a God that ruleth the world? What did ye see with your
eyes? Was the “race to the swift, or the battle to the
strong?” Have ye forgotten Dettingen already? Does not
England know that God was there? Or suppose your con
tinuance in peace, or success in war, be the mere result of
your own wisdom and strength; do ye command the sun and
the clouds also ? Can ye pour out or “stay the bottles of
heaven?” But let it all be nature, chance, anything,-so
God may have no hand in governing the earth !
29. Will his judgments bring us to a better mind? Do we
“hear the rod, and Him that has appointed it?” Let us observe:
What fruit do we find in those who are “even consumed by
means of his heavy hand?” Let any one that desires to be
clearly satisfied herein visit the hospitals of this city. Let
him judge for himself how the patients there receive God’s
fatherly visitation; especially there, because mercy also is
mixed with judgment; so that it is evident “the Lord loveth
whom he chasteneth.” Go then into any ward, either of men
or women; look narrowly from one end to the other: Are they
humbling themselves under the hand of God? Are they trem
bling under a sense of his anger? Are they praising him for
his love? Are they exhorting one another not to faint when
they are rebuked of him ? How do nine in ten of them spend
the time, that important time, from morning to evening?
Why, in such a manner, that you would not easily learn, from
thence, whether they were Christians, Pagans, or Mahometans.
Is there any deeper distress than this to be found? Is there
OF REASON AND RELIGION, 173
a greater affliction than the loss of health? Perhaps there is,
—the loss of liberty, especially as it is sometimes circum
stanced. You may easily be convinced of this, by going into
either Ludgate or Newgate. What a scene appears as soon
as you enter ! The very place strikes horror into your soul.
How dark and dreary ! How unhealthy and unclean How
void of all that might minister comfort ! But this is little,
compared to the circumstances that attend the being confined
in this shadow of death. See that poor wretch, who was
formerly in want of nothing, and encompassed with friends
and acquaintance, now cut off, perhaps, by an unexpected
stroke, from all the cheerful ways of men; ruined, forsaken
of all, and delivered into the hands of such masters, and such
companions! I know not, if, to one of a thinking, sensible
turn of mind, there could be anything like it on this side hell.
What effect then has this heavy visitation of God on those
who lie under it for any time? There is perhaps an excep
tion here and there; but, in general, they are abandoned to
all wickedness, utterly divested of all fear of God, and all
reverence to man; insomuch, that they commonly go out of
that school completely fitted for any kind or degree of villany,
perfectly brutal and devilish, thoroughly furnished for every
evil word and work.
30. Are our countrymen more effectually reclaimed when
danger and distress are joined ? If so, the army, especially
in time of war, raust be the most religious part of the nation.
But is it so indeed? Do the soldiery walk as those who see
themselves on the brink of eternity? redeeming every oppor
tunity of glorifying God, and doing good to men, because
they know not the hour in which their Lord will require their
souls of them P So far from it, that a soldier's religion is a
by-word, even with those who have no religion at all; that
vice and profaneness in every shape reign among them with
out control; and that the whole tenor of their behaviour
speaks, “Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.”
Have those who are exposed to still more danger, the Eng
lish sea-forces, more religion than those at land? It is said
they were once remarkable for this; and it is certain Sir
Francis Drake feared God, as did most of his Commanders,
and, we have reason to believe, his mariners and sailors too.
But what shall we say of the navy that now is, more particu
174 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
larly of the ships of war? Is religion there,—either the power
or the form? Is not almost every single man-of-war a mere
floating hell? Where is there to be found more consummate
wickedness, a more full, daring contempt of God, and all his
laws,—except in the bottomless pit? But here description
fails; and the goodness of God endureth yet daily But
“shall I not visit for these things, saith the Lord? Shall not
my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?” O that the
prospect of national judgments may suffice that we may
remember ourselves, and turn unto the Lord our God, before
his long-suffering mercy is at an end, and he pours out the
vials of his wrath upon us!
But how small ground have we as yet to hope for this! for,
who will now “suffer the word of exhortation ?” How few
will “endure sound doctrine,” and the honest, close applica
tion of it! Do they not “say unto the Seers, See not; and
unto the Prophets, Prophesy smooth things?” And if a man
will do thus, if he will “sew pillows to all arm-holes,” and
“cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before them, if
he will prophesy of wine and strong drink, he shall even be
the Prophet of this people.”
31. I am sensible how nice a subject this is, and how
extremely difficult it is so to speak, as neither to say too little
nor too much, neither more nor less than the cause of God
requires. I know also, that it is absolutely impossible so to
speak as not to give offence. But whosoever is offended, I
dare not to be silent; neither may I refrain from plainness of
speech; only I will endeavour to use all the tenderness I can
consistently with that plainness.
In tender love then I ask, Are there none among us, (I
speak to you, my brethren, who are Priests and Prophets
of the Lord, set apart to “minister in holy things, and to
declare the word of the Lord,”)—Are there none among us
who commit lewdness, as did those by whom “Israel was
defiled ?” Hath not the Lord seen an horrible thing in some
of the Prophets of this land also, even, that “they commit
adultery, and” (to conceal it) “walk in lies!” God forbid
that I should affirm this! I only propose (not maintain) the
question. If there be such a wretch, I pray God to strike
him to the heart, and to say, “Thou art the man!”
Are there none of you, like them, “mighty to drink wine,
men of strength to mingle strong drink?” Yea, are there none
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 175
that “err through strong drink, that are swallowed up of
wine?” Are there not found those who say, “I will fetch
wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant?”
Alas, my brother, is this the voice of a “Minister of
Christ, a steward of the mysteries of God?” Suppose you
find at any time trouble and heaviness, “is there no help for
you in your God?” Is not the God whom you serve able to
deliver you from any plague or trouble? Is the being “drunk
with wine” a better relief than the being “filled with his
Spirit?” Do you not understand this? Do you “not know
the Lord?” Take heed you do not destroy both your own
soul and them that hear you ! O beware ! If you know not
his love, fear his power! Make haste to flee from the wrath to
come, lest he smite you with a curse great as your sin, and
sweep you away from the face of the earth.
32. Can such as you be said to honour or fear God, any more
than those spoken of by Malachi? May not God complain,
“These priests have violated my law and profaned my holy
things?” yea, whensoever you presume with those unhallowed
hands to touch the mysteries of God; whensoever you utter his
name or his word with those unhallowed lips ! But is it on
this account only that God may say, “Both Prophet and Priest
are profane?” May he not add, “They have put no difference
between the holy and profane; therefore I am profaned among
them?” For is it not so? Do you put a difference between
the holy and profane; him that feareth God, and him that
feareth him not? Do you put an effectual difference between
them, even in the most solemn office of our religion? At the
table of the Lord, do you take care to “separate the precious
from the vile?” to “receive all those who ” (as you may rea
sonably believe) “draw near with penitent hearts and lively
faith,” and utterly to reject those who testify against them
selves, that they are without hope and without God in the world?
Nay, who dares repel one of the greatest men in his parish
from the Lord’s table; even though he be a drunkard or a
common swearer; yea, though he openly deny the Lord that
bought him? Mr. Stonehouse did this once. But what was
the event? The gentleman brought an action against him,
for the terror of all such insolent fellows in succeeding times.
33. O my brethren, is it not for want of your making this
176 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
difference, as well as for many other abominations, that, with
regard to some among us, (how many God knoweth,) that
scripture is now also fulfilled: “His watchmen are blind, they
are ignorant, they are shepherds that cannot understand:—
The Lord hath poured out upon them the spirit of deep sleep,
and hath closed their eyes; the Prophets and the Seers hath
he covered: and the vision of all is become unto you as the
words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that
is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee; and he saith, I
cannot; for it is sealed?”
If you ask, what those other abominations are; I will speak
in love, and in the spirit of meekness. There are found among
us covetous men, men who “mind earthly things,” who “seek
themselves,” and not Christ crucified, who “love the world, and
the things of the world; ” men in whom these words are still
fulfilled: “Who is there among you that would shut the door
for nought? Neither do ye kindle fire on my altar for nought.
I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of Hosts.” Yea,
are there not those, at this day, (O that I might be found to
fear where no fear is !) who “make themselves fat with the
chiefest of all the offerings of Israel?” Are there not those
who now “enlarge their desire as hell; who are as death, and
cannot be satisfied?” who, though they want neither food to
eat nor raiment to put on, yet seek more and more preferment?
who are continually studying to “join house to house, and to lay
field to field;” to grow rich in the service of that Master who
himself “had not where to lay his head?” Is it not to these that
those dreadful words belong, enough to cause the ears of him
that heareth to tingle: “They are greedy dogs, which never
can have enough; they all look to their own way,” (not the
way of their Lord,) “every one for his gain, from his quarter?”
Is it strange, if among these there should be some who are
cruel, oppressive men; inasmuch as covetousness knows no
mercy, nor can a lover of money be a lover of his neighbour?
Have not some been known even to “grind the face of the
poor?” to strip, rather than clothe, the naked? some, who,
while they cried out, “as the horse-leech, Give, give,” would
take, if it was not given; like those of old, who said, “Thou
shalt give it me now, and if not, I will take it by force;” or
those spoken of by Micah, “The Prophets bite with their teeth,
and cry, Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 177
even prepare war against him.” Very great is the sin of
these men before the Lord. If there be ten such now in the
land, may God smite them this day with terror and astonish
ment, that they may have no rest in their bones till their sin
is done away !
34. Are you as watchful and zealous to gain souls, as those
are to gain the gold that perisheth? Do you know by experi
ence what that meaneth, “The zeal of thine house hath eaten
me up?” Or are you one of those watchmen who do not watch
at all, who neither know nor care when the sword cometh? of
whom the Prophet saith, “They are dumb dogs that cannot
bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber?”
Can it be supposed that such shepherds will “feed the flock?”
will “give to every one his portion of meat in due season P”
Will these “warn every man, and exhort every man, that they
may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus?” Will they
take care to “know all their flock by name, not forgetting the
men-servants and women-servants?” Will they inquire into
the state of every soul committed to their charge; and watch
over each with all tenderness and longsuffering, “as they that
must give account?” marking how they either fall or rise; how
these wax “weary and faint in their mind; ” and those “grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ?” Who can do this, unless his whole heart be in the
work; unless he desire nothing but to “spend and be spent for
them; and count not his life dear unto himself, so he may
present them blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus?”
Can any shepherd do this, (and if he do not, he will never
“give an account with joy,”) who imagines he has little more
to do than to preach once or twice a week; that this is the main
point, the chief part of the office, which he hath taken upon
himself before God? What gross ignorance is this What a
total mistake of the truth! What a miserable blunder touching
the whole nature of his office It is, indeed, a very great thing
to speak in the name of God; it might make him that is the
stoutest of heart tremble, if he considered that every time he
speaks to others, his own soul is at stake. But great, inexpressi
bly great, as this is, it is perhaps the least part of our work.
To “seek and save that which is lost; ” to bring souls from
Satan to God; to instruct the ignorant; to reclaim the wicked;
to convince the gainsayer; to direct their feet into the way of
VOL. VIII.
178 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
peace, and then keep them therein; to follow them step by step,
lest they turn out of the way, and advise them in their doubts
and temptations; to lift up them that fall; to refresh them that
are faint; and to comfort the weak-hearted; to administer
various helps, as the variety of occasions require, according
to their several necessities: These are parts of our office;
all this we have undertaken at the peril of our own soul.
A sense of this made that holy man of old cry out, “I
marvel if any ruler in the Church shall be saved; ” and a
greater than him say, in the fulness of his heart, “Who is
sufficient for these things?”
35. But who is not sufficient for these things, for the taking
care of a parish, though it contain twenty thousand souls, if
this implies no more than the taking care to preach there
once or twice a week; and to procure one to read Prayers on
the other days, and do what is called the parish duty ? Is any
trade in the nation so easy as this? Is not any man sufficient
for it, without any more talents, either of nature or grace,
than a small degree of common understanding? But Q |
what manner of shepherds are those who look no farther into
the nature of their office, who sink no deeper into the import
ance of it, than this ! Were they not such as these concerning
whom “the word of the Lord came unto Ezekiel, saying, Wo
be to the shepherds that feed themselves | should not the
shepherds feed the flock? Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you
with the wool; but ye feed not the flock. The diseased have
ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was
sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither
have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither
have ye sought that which was lost.—And they were scattered,
because there was no shepherd, and they became meat to all
the beasts of the field. Yea, my flock was scattered upon all
the face of the earth, and none did search or seek after them.”
I conjure you, brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus, the
great Shepherd of the sheep, who hath bought them and us
with his own blood, apply this each to his own soul. Let every
man look unto God, and say, “Lord, is it I? Am I one of
these idle, careless, indolent shepherds, that feed myself, not the
fock? Am I one that cannot bark, slothful, sleeping, lying
down, loving to slumber? one of those who have not strength
ened that which was diseased, neither healed that which was
sick? “Search me, O Lord, and prove me; try out my reins
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 179
:and my heart. Look well if there be any way of wickedness
in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.’
36. “Have I not, at least, “healed the hurt of thy people
slightly?’ Have I not said, “Peace, peace, when there was no
peace?’”—How many are they also that do this? who do not
study to speak what is true, especially to the rich and great, so
much as what is pleasing? who flatter honourable sinners, in
stead of telling them plain, “How can ye escape the damnation
of hell?” O, what an account have you to make, if there be a
God that judgeth the earth? Will he not require at your hands
the blood of all these souls, of whom “ye are the betrayers and
murderers?” Well spake the Prophets of your fathers, in whose
steps ye now tread: “They have seduced my people; and one
built up a wall, and another daubed it with untempered mortar.
They strengthen the hands of the evil-doers, that none doth
return from his wickedness. They prophesy lies in my name,
saith the Lord. They say unto them that despise me, Ye
shall have peace; and unto them that walk after the imagi
nation of their own heart, No evil shall come upon you.”
How great will your damnation be, who destroy souls,
instead of saving them ! Where will you appear, or how will
you stand, “in that great and terrible day of the Lord?” How
will ye lift up your head, when the Lord “descends from
heaven in flaming fire, to take vengeance on his adversaries;”
more especially on those who have so betrayed his cause, and
done Satan’s work under the banner of Christ? With what
voice wilt thou say, “Behold me, Lord, and the sheep whom
thou hadst given me, whom I gave to the devil, and told them
they were in the way to heaven, till they dropped into hell!”
Were they not just such shepherds of souls as you are, con
cerning whom God spake by Jeremiah,-‘‘Many Pastors have
destroyed my vineyard; they have trodden my portion under
foot; they have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilder
mess?” by Ezekiel,—“There is a conspiracy of her Prophets;
like a roaring lion ravening the prey, they have devoured souls?”
and by Zechariah,-“Thus saith the Lord, Feed the flock of
the slaughter, whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves
not guilty; and they that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord,
for I am rich; and their own shepherds pity them not?”
37. Is not this the real ground, the principal reason, of the
present contempt of the Clergy? And long since was it assigned
180 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
as such by Him who cannot lie. The same men of old, who
“made the Lord’s people to transgress,” thereby “made
themselves vile.” They were despised, both as the natural
effect, and the judicial punishment, of their wickedness.
And the same cause the Prophet observes to have produced
the same effect, many hundred years after this: “Ye are
departed out of the way, saith the Lord; ye have caused many
to stumble; therefore have I also made you contemptible and
base before all the people.”
I have now, brethren, “delivered mine own soul; ” and in
so doing, I have (as I proposed at first) “used great plainness
of speech,” as not studying “to please men, but the Lord.”
The event I leave to Him in whose name I have spoken, and
who hath the hearts of all men in his hand.
I “have brought you heavy tidings this day,” and yet I
cannot but be persuaded, that some of you will not “count
me your enemy, because I tell you the truth.” O that all of
us may taste the good word which we declare ! may receive
that knowledge of salvation which we are commanded to
preach unto every creature, through the remission of sins!
My heart's desire is, that all of us to whom “is committed
the ministry of reconciliation” may ourselves be reconciled to
God, through the blood of the everlasting covenant; that he
may be henceforth unto us a God, and we may be unto him a
people; that we may all know, as well as preach, the Lord,
“from the least unto the greatest;” even by that token, “I am
merciful tothy unrighteousness; thysins Iremember no more!”
III. 1. I have hitherto spoken more immediately to those
who profess themselves members of the Church of England.
But inasmuch as I am a debtor also to those who do not, my
design is now, to apply to them also; and briefly to show,
wherein (I fear) they are severally inconsistent with their own
principles.
I begin with those who are at the smallest distance from us,
whether they are termed Presbyterians or Independents: Of
whom in general I cannot but have a widely different opinion,
from that I entertained some years ago; as having since then
conversed with many among them, “in whom the root of the
matter is’ undeniably found; and who labour “to keep a con
science void of offence, both toward God and toward men.” I
cannot, therefore, doubt, but every serious man, of either
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 181
one or the other denomination, does utterly condemn all that
inward as well as outward unholiness which has been above
described.
But do you, as a people, avoid what you condemn? Are
mo whoremongers or adulterers found among you; no children
disobedient to their parents; no servants that are slothful or
careless, that answer again, that do not “honour their masters
as is meet in the Lord?” Are there none among you that
censure or “speak evil of the ruler of their people?” Are
there no drunkards, no gluttons, no luxurious men, no regular
epicures, none “whose belly is their God,” who, as their for
tune permits, “fare sumptuously every day?” Have you no
dishonest dealers, no unfair traders, no usurers, or extortion
ers? Have you no liars, either for gain, or for good man
ners, so called ? Are you clear of ceremony and compli
ment? Alas, you are sensible, in most (if not all) these
respects, you have now small pre-eminence over us.
How much more sensible must you be of this, if you do
not rest on the surface, but inquire into the bottom of reli
gion, the religion of the heart | For, what inward unholiness,
what evil tempers, are among us, which have not a place
among you also ? You likewise bewail that ignorance of God,
ithat want of faith and of the love of God and man, that in
'ward idolatry of various kinds, that pride, ambition, and
vanity, which rule in the hearts even of those who still have
“the form of godliness.” You lament before God the deep
covetousness that “eats so many souls as doth a gangrene;”
and perhaps are sometimes ready to cry out, “Help, Lord,
for there is scarce one godly man left l” Lay to thine hand;
“for the faithful are minished from the children of men l’’
2. And yet you retain “the truth that is after godliness,”
at least as to the substance of it. You own what is laid down
in Scripture, both touching the nature and condition of justi
fication and salvation. And with regard to the author of faith
and salvation, you have always avowed, even in the face of your
enemies, that “it is God which worketh in us, both to will
and to do, of his good pleasure; ” that it is his Spirit alone
who “teacheth us all things,” all we know of “the deep things
of God; ” that every true believer has “an unction from the
Holy One to lead him into all” necessary “truth; ” that,
“because we are sons, God sendeth forth the Spirit of his Son
182 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father; ” and that “this Spirit
beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God.”
How is it then, my brethren; (so I can call you now,
although I could not have done it heretofore;) how is it, that
the generality of you also are fallen from your steadfastness?
In the times of persecution ye stood as a rock, though “all
the waves and storms went over you.” But who can bear ease
and fulness of bread? How are you changed, since these came
upon you ! Do not many of you now (practically, I mean) put
something else in the room of “faith that worketh by love?”
Do not some of you suppose, that gravity and composedness
of behaviour are the main parts of Christianity? especially,
provided you neither swear, nor take the name of God in vain.
Do not others imagine, that to abstain from idle songs, and
those fashionable diversions commonly used by persons of
their fortune, is almost the whole of religion? To which, if they
add family prayer, and a strict observation of the Sabbath,
then doubtless all is well. Nay, my brethren, this is well so
far as it goes; but how little a way does it go toward Chris
tianity All these things, you cannot but see, are merely
external; whereas Christianity is an inward thing, without
which the most beautiful outward form is lighter than vanity.
Do not others of you rest in convictions or good desires?
Alas, what do these avail? A man may be convinced he is
sick, yea, deeply convinced, and yet never recover. He may
desire food, yea, with earnest desire; and nevertheless perish
with hunger. And thus I may be convinced I am a sinner;
but this will not justify me before God. And I may desire sal
vation, (perhaps by fits and starts, for many years,) and yet be
lost for ever. Come close then to the point, and keep to your
principles. Have you received the Holy Ghost; the Spirit
which is of God, and is bestowed by him on all believers, “that
we may know the things which are freely given to us of God?”
The time is short. Do you experience now that “unction from
the Holy One,” without which you confess outward religion,
whether negative or positive, is nothing? Nay, and inward con
viction of our wants is nothing, unless those wants are in fact
supplied. Good desires also are nothing, unless we actually
attain what we are stirred up to desire. For still, “if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ,” whatever he desires, “he is none
of his.” O my brother, beware you stop not short! Beware you
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 183
never account yourself a Christian, no, not in the lowest degree,
till God “hath sent forth the Spirit of Christ into your heart;”
and that “Spirit bear witness with your spirit, that you are a
child of God.”
3. One step farther from us, are you who are called
(though not by your own choice) Anabaptists. The smallness
of your number, compared to that of either the Presbyteri
ans, or those of the Church, makes it easier for you to have
an exact knowledge of the behaviour of all your members,
and to put away from among you every one that “walketh
not according to the doctrine you have received.”
But is this done? Do all your members adorn the gospel?
Are they all “holy as He which hath called us is holy?” I
fear not. I have known some instances to the contrary; and
doubtless you know many more. There are unholy, out
wardly unholy men in your congregations also; men that
profane either the name or the day of the Lord; that do not
honour their natural or civil parents; that know not how to
possess their bodies in sanctification and honour; that are in
temperate, either in meat or drink, gluttonous, sensual, luxu
rious; that variously offend against justice, mercy, or truth,
in their intercourse with their neighbour, and do not walk by
that royal law, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.”
But how is this consistent with your leading principle,—
“That no man ought to be admitted to baptism, till he has
that repentance whereby we forsake sin, and living faith in
God through Christ?”
For if no man ought to be admitted into a church or con
gregation, who has not actual faith and repentance; then
neither ought any who has them not, to continue in any con
gregation: And, consequently, an open sinner cannot remain
amongyou, unless you practically renounceyour main principle.
4. I refer it to your own serious consideration, whether one
reason why unholy men are still suffered to remain among
you may not be this,—That many of you have unawares put
opinion in the room of faith and repentance? But how fatal
a mistake is this ! Supposing your opinion to be true, yet a.
true opinion concerning repentance is wholly different from
the thing itself; and you may have a true opinion concerning
faith all your life, and yet die an unbeliever.
Supposing therefore the opinion of particular redemption
true, yet how little does it avail toward salvation l Nay, were
184. A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
we to suppose that none can be saved who do not hold it, it
does not follow that all will be saved who do: So that if the
one proved a man to be in ever so bad a state, the other would
not prove him to be in a good one; and, consequently, whoso
ever leans on this opinion, leans on the staff of a broken reed.
Would to God that ye would mind this one thing, to
“make your own calling and election sure!” that every one .
of you (leaving the rest of the world to Him that made it)
would himself “repent and believe the gospel !” Not repent
alone, (for then you know only the baptism of John,) but
believe, and be “baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire.”
Are you still a stranger to that inward baptism wherewith all
true believers are baptized? May the Lord constrain you to
cry out, “How am I straitened till it be accomplished!” even
till the love of God inflame your heart, and consume all your
vile affections ! Be not content with anything less than this!
It is this loving faith alone which opens our way into “the
general Church of the first-born, whose names are written in
heaven l’’ which giveth us to “enter within the veil, where
Jesus our fore-runner is gone before us!”
5. There is a still wider difference in some points between
us and the people usually termed Quakers. But not in these
points. You, as well as we, condemn “all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men; ” all those works of the devil which
were recited above, and all those tempers from which they spring.
You agree, that we are all to be taught of God, and to be
“led by his Spirit; ” that the Spirit alone reveals all truth, and
inspires all holiness; that by his inspiration men attain perfect
love, the love which “purifies them as he is pure;” and that,
through this knowledge and love of God, they have power to
“do always such things as please him;” to worship God, a Spi
rit, according to his own will, that is, “in spirit and in truth.”
Hence you infer, thatformal worship is not acceptable to God,
but that alone that springs from God in the heart. You infer
also, that they who are led by him will use great “plainness of
speech,” and great plainness of dress, seeking no “outward
adorning,” but only “the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit.”
I will look no farther now, than simply to inquire whether
you are consistent with these principles.
To begin with the latter: “He that is led by the Spirit
will use great plainness of speech.”
You would have said, “will use the plain language.” But
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 185
that term leads you into a grand mistake. That term, the plain
language, naturally leads you to think of one particular way of
speaking; as if “plainness of speech” implied no more than
the use of that particular form.
Alas, my brethren know ye not, that yourancestors designed
this only as a specimen of plain language? And is it possible
that you should mistake the sample for the whole bale of cloth?
Consult the light God has given you, and you must see that
“plainness of speech” does not lie in a single point, but im
plies an open, undisguised sincerity, a child-like simplicity in
all we speak.
I do not desire you to refrain from saying thou or thee. I
would not spend ten words about it. But I desire you, when
ever you speak at all, to speak the truth, and nothing but the
truth. I desire your words may always be the picture of your
heart. This is truly plain language.
Either do not pretend to plain speech at all, or be uniformly
plain. Are you so? I pray, consider. Do you never compli
ment? I do not suppose you say, “Sir, your very humble ser
vant;” but do you say no civil things? Do you never flatter?
Do you not commend any man or woman to their face? Per
haps farther than you do behind their back. Is this plainness
of speech? Do you never dissemble? Do you speak to all per
sons, high or low, rich or poor, just what you think, neither
more nor less, and in the shortest and clearest manner you
can P If not, what a mere jest is your plain language! You
carry your condemnation in your own breast.
6. You hold also, that “he which is led by the Spirit will
use great plainness of dress, seeking no “outward adorning,”
but only the ‘ornament of a meek and quiet spirit;” and that,
in particular, “he will leave ‘gold and costly apparel” to those
who know not God.”
Now, I appeal to every serious, reasonable man among you,
—Do your people act consistently with this principle? Do not
many of your women wear gold upon their very feet; and many
of your men use “ ornaments of gold?” Are you a stranger to
these things? Have you not seen with your eyes (such trifles
as will scarce bear the naming) their canes and snuff-boxes glit
ter, even in your solemn assembly, while ye were waiting toge
ther upon God? Surely, they are not yet so lost to modesty,
as to pretend that they do not use them by way of ornament.
186 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
If they do not, if it be only out of necessity, a plain oaken
stick will supply the place of the one, and a piece of horn or
tin will unexceptionably answer all the reasonable ends of the
other.-
To speak freely, (and do not count me your enemy for this,)
you cannot but observe, upon cool reflection, that you retain
just so much of your ancient practice, as leaves your present
without excuse; as makes the inconsistency, between the one
and the other, glaring and undeniable. For instance: This
woman is too strict a Quaker to lay out a shilling in a necklace.
Very well; but she is not too strict to lay out fourscore guineas
in a repeating watch. Another would not for the world wear
any lace; no, not an edging round her cap: But she will wear
point, and sees no harm in it at all, though it should be of
twelve times the price. In one kind of apron or handkerchief
she dares not lay out twenty shillings; but in another sort lays
out twenty pounds. And what multitudes of you are very
jealous, as to the colour and form of your apparel, (the least
important of all the circumstances that relate to it,) while in
the most important, the expense, they are without any concern
at all! They will not put on a scarlet or crimson stuff, but
the richest velvet, so it be black or grave. They will not touch a
coloured riband; but will cover themselves with a stiff silk from
head to foot. They cannot bear purple; but make no scruple
at all of being clothed in fine linen; yea, to such a degree,
that the linen of the Quakers is grown almost into a proverb.
Surely you cannot be ignorant, that the sinfulness of fine
apparel lies chiefly in the expensiveness: In that it is robbing
God and the poor; it is defrauding the fatherless and widow;
it is wasting the food of the hungry, and withholding his
raiment from the naked to consume it on our own lusts.
7. Let it not be said that this affects only a few among you,
and those of the younger and lighter sort. Yes, it does your
whole body: For why do you, who are older and graver, suffer
such things? Why do ye not vehemently reprove them; and
if they repent not, in spite of all worldly considerations, expel
them out of your society? In conniving at their sin, you make
it your own; you, especially, who are Preachers. Do you say,
“They cannot bear it; they will not hear?” Alas! into what
state, then, are ye fallen | But whether they will bear it or
not, what is that to thee? Thou art to “speak, whether they
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 187
will hear, or whether they will forbear.” To say the very truth,
I am afraid you rather strengthen their hands in their wicked
ness. For you not only do not testify against it in the con
gregation,” but even sit at their table and reprove them not.
Why, then, thou also art one of “the dumb dogs that cannot
bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.”
I fix this charge upon every Preacher, in particular, who saw
a young woman, daughter to one of the Quakers in London,
going to be married in apparel suitable to her diamond buckle,
which cost a hundred guineas. Could you see this, and not call
heaven and earth to witness against it? Then I witness against
thee, in the name of the Lord, thou art a blind leader of the
blind; thou “strainest a gnat, and swallowest a camel !”
Verily, the sin both of teachers and hearers is herein exceed
ing great. And the little attempts towards plainness of apparel,
which are still observable among you, (I mean, in the colour
and form of your clothes, and the manner of putting them on,)
only testify against you, that you were once what you know in
your hearts you are not now.
8. I come now to your main principle: “We are all to be
“taught of God, to be inspired and “led by his Spirit: And
then we shall ‘worship him, not with dead form, but ‘in
spirit and in truth.”
These are deep and weighty words; but many hold fast the
words, and are utterly ignorant of their meaning. Is not this
* You say you do testify against it in the congregation. Against what?
“Against gay and gaudy apparel.” I grant it. But this is not the thing I speak
of You quite mistake my mark. Do you testify against the costliness of their
apparel, however plain and grave it may be? against the price of the velvet, the
linen, the silk, or raiment of whatever kind? If you do this frequently and explicitly,
you are clear. If not, own and amend the fault.
It is easy to discern how your people fell into this snare of the devil. You were
at first a poor, despised, afflicted people. Then what some of you had to spare was
little enough to relieve the needy members of your own society. In a few years
you increased in goods, and were able to relieve more than your own poor. But
you did not bestow all that you had to spare from them on the poor belonging to
other societies. It remained either to lay it up, or to expend it in superfluities.
Some chose one way, and some the other.
Lay this deeply to heart, ye who are now a poor, despised, afflicted people.
Hitherto ye are not able to relieve your own poor. But if ever your substance
increase, see that ye be not straitened in your own bowels, that ye fall not into the
same snare of the devil. Before any of you either lay up treasures on earth, or
indulge needless expense of any kind, I pray the Lord God to scatter you to the
corners of the earth, and blot out your name from under heaven
188 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
an exceeding common case? Are you not conscious abundance
of your friends have done so? with whom the being “taught of
God” and “led by his Spirit” are mere words of course, that
mean just nothing. And their crude and indigested accounts
of the things they did not understand have raised that deep
prejudice against these great truths which we find in the gene
rality of men.
Do some of you ask, “But dost thou acknowledge the inward
principle?” I do, my friends: And I would to God every one
of you acknowledged it as much. I say, all religion is either
empty show, or perfection by inspiration; in other words, the
obedient love of God, by the supernatural knowledge of God;
yea, all that which “is not of faith is sin;” all which does not
spring from this loving knowledge of God; which knowledge
cannot begin or subsist one moment without immediate inspi
ration; not only all public worship, and all private prayer, but
every thought in common life, and word, and work. What
think you of this? Do you not stagger? Dare you carry the in
ward principle so far? Do you acknowledge it to be the very
truth? But, alas! what is the acknowledging it? Dost thou
experience this principle in thyself? What saith thy heart?
Does God dwell therein? And doth it now echo to the voice of
God? Hast thou the continual inspiration of his Spirit, filling
thy heart with his love, as with a well of water, springing up
into everlasting life?
9. Art thou acquainted with the “leading of his Spirit,” not
by notion only, but by living experience? I fear very many of
you talk of this, who do not so much as know what it means.
How does the Spirit of God lead his children to this or that
particular action? Do you imagine it is by blind impulse only?
by moving you to do it, you know not why? Not so. He leads
us by our eye, at least, as much as by the hand; and by light
as well as by heat. He shows us the way wherein we should
go, as well as incites us to walk therein. For example: Here
is a man ready to perish with hunger. How am I “led by the
Spirit” to relieve him? First, by His convincing me it is the
will of God I should; and Secondly, by His filling my heart
with love toward him. Both this light and this heat are the
gift of God; are wrought in me by the same Spirit, who leads
me, by this conviction as well as love, to go and feed that man.
This is the plain, rational account of the ordinary leading of
the Spirit; but how far from that which some have given I
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 189
Art thou thus led by the Spirit to every good word and
work, till God hath thereby made thy faith perfect? Dost thou
know what faith is? It is a loving, obedient sight of a pre
sent and reconciled God. Now, where this is, there is no dead
form; neither can be, so long as it continues. But all that is
said or done is full of God, full of spirit, and life, and power.
10. But perhaps, as much as you talk of them, you do not
know the difference between form and spirit; or between
worshipping God in a formal way, and worshipping him “in
spirit and in truth.”
The Lord is that Spirit. The seeing and feeling and lov
ing him is spiritual life. And whatever is said or done in the
sight or love of God, that is full of spirit and life. All beside
this is form, mere dead form; whether it be in our public
addresses to God, or in our private; or in our worldly
business, or in our daily conversation.
But if so, how poor and mean and narrow have your views
and conceptions been You was afraid of formality in public
worship: And reason good. But was you afraid of it nowhere
else? Did not you consider that formality in common life is
also an abomination to the Lord; and that it can have no
place in anything we say or do, but so far as we forget God?
O watch against it in every place, every moment, that you
may every moment see and love God; and, consequently, at all
times and in all places, worship him “in spirit and in truth !”
My brethren, permit me to add a few words in tender love
to your souls. Do not you lean too much on the spirit and
power which you believe rested upon your forefathers? Sup
pose it did Will that avail you, if you do not drink into the
same spirit? And how evident is this,—that, whatever you
once were, ye are now “shorn of your strength !” Ye are
weak and become like other men. The Lord is well migh
departed from you. Where is now the spirit, the life, the
power? Be not offended with my plain dealing, when I beseech
you who are able to weigh things calmly, to open your eyes,
and see multitudes, even in the Church, pursuing, yea, and
attaining, the substance of spiritual life, and leaving unto you
the shadow. Nay, a still greater evil is before you: For, if ye
find not some effectual means to prevent it, your rising gene
ration will utterly cast off the shadow as well as the substance.
11. There is an abundantly greater difference still, according
190 A FARTHER, APPEAL TO MEN
to your own account, between us who profess ourselves mem
bers of the Church of England, and you who are members of
the Church of Rome. But notwithstanding this, do you not
agree with us in condemning the vices above recited; pro
faneness, drunkenness, whoredom, adultery, theft, disobedi
ence to parents, and such like? And how unhappily do you
agree with us in practising the very vices which you condemn !
And yet you acknowledge, (nay, and frequently contend
for this with a peculiar earnestness,) that every Christian is
called to be “zealous of good works,” as well as to “deny
himself and take up his cross daily.” How, then, do you
depart from your own principles, when you are gluttons, drunk
ards, or epicures? when you live at your ease, in all the ele
gance and voluptuousness of a plentiful fortune? How will you
reconcile the being adorned with gold, arrayed in purple and
fine linen, and faring sumptuously every day, with the “deny
ing yourself and taking up your cross daily?” Surely, while
you indulge the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eye, and
the pride of life, the excellent rules of self-denial that abound
in your own writers leave you of all men most inexcusable.
12. Neither can this self-indulgence be reconciled with the
being “zealous of good works.” For by this needless and
continual expense, you disable yourself from doing good.
You bind your own hands. You make it impossible for you
to do that good which otherwise you might. So that you
injure the poor in the same proportion as you poison your
own soul. You might have clothed the naked; but what was
due to them was thrown away on your costly apparel. You
might have fed the hungry, entertained the stranger, relieved
them that were sick or in prison; but the superfluities of
your own table swallowed up that whereby they should have
been profited. And so this wasting of thy Lord’s goods is an
instance of complicated wickedness; since hereby thy poor
brother perisheth, for whom Christ died.
I will not recommend to you either the writings or examples
of those whom you account heretics: (Although some of these,
if you could view them with impartial eyes, might “provoke
you to jealousy: ”) But O that God would write in your hearts
the rules of self-denial and love laid down by Thomas à Kempis!
or that you would follow, both in this and in good works, that
burning and shining light of your own Church, the Marquis de
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 191
Renty | Then would all who knew and loved the Lord rejoice
to acknowledge you as the “Church of the living God; ” when
ye were zealous of every good word and work, and abstained
from all appearance of evil; when it was hereby shown that you
were filled with the Holy Ghost, and delivered from all unholy
tempers; when ye were all “unblamable and unrebukable,
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; a chosen generation,
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, showing
forth” to all Jews, infidels, and heretics, by your active, patient,
spotless love of God and man, “the praises of Him who had
called you out of darkness into his marvellous light.”
13. “Men and brethren, children of the seed of Abraham,”
suffer me to speak a few words to you also; you who do not
allow that Messiah the Prince is already come and cut off.
However, you so far hear Moses and the Prophets as to allow,
(1.) That “it is the inspiration of the Holy One which giveth
man understanding,” and that all the true children of God
“are taught of God.” (2.) That the substance both of the
Law and the Prophets is contained in that one word, “Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy strength, and thy neighbour as
thyself.” And, (3.) That the sure fruit of love is obedience,
“ceasing from evil, and doing good.”
And do you walk by this rule 7 Have you yourselves that
“inspiration of the Holy One?” Are you taught of God?
Hath he opened your understanding? Have you the inward
knowledge of the Most High? I fear not. Perhaps you
know little more, even of the meaning of the words, than a
Mahometan.
Let us go a little farther. Do you “love the Lord your
God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your
strength?” Can you say, “Whom have I in heaven but thee?
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee?” Do
you desire God at all? Do you desire to have anything to do
with him, till you can keep the world no longer? Are you not
content, so you enjoy the good things of earth, to let God stand
afar off? only calling upon him now and then, when you can
not do without him. Why then you do not love God at all,
though you will sometimes condescend to use him. You love
the world. This possesses your heart. This, therefore, is your
god. You renounce the God of your fathers, the God of Israel;
192 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
you are still uncircumcised in heart. Your own conscience
bears witness, you in this no more hear Moses and the
Prophets, than you do Jesus of Nazareth.
14. From Moses and the Prophets it has been shown, that
your forefathers were a “faithless and stubborn generation; a
generation which set not their hearts aright, and whose spirit
cleaved not steadfastly unto God.” And this you acknowledge
yourselves. If you are asked, “How is it that the promise
is not fulfilled ? Seeing ‘the sceptre is long since “departed
from Judah,” why is not Shiloh come 7” your usual answer
is, “Because of the sins of our fathers God hath delayed his
coming.” Have you then reformed from the sins of your
fathers? Are you turned unto the Lord your God? Nay,
do ye not tread in the same steps? Bating that single point
of outward idolatry, what abomination did they ever commit,
which you have not committed also, which the generality of
you do not commit still according to your power? If there
fore the coming of the Messiah was hindered by the sins of
your forefathers, then, by the same rule, your continuance
therein will hinder his coming to the end of the world.
“Brethren, my heart's desire and prayer to God” is, that he
would “gather the outcasts of Israel.” And I doubt not, but,
when the fulness of the Gentiles is come in, then “all Israel
shall be saved.” But, mean time, is there not great cause that
ye should say with Daniel, “O Lord, righteousness belongeth
unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day, to the
men of Judah, and unto all Israel. O Lord, we have sinned,
we have rebelled against thee, neither have we obeyed the voice
of the Lord our God. Yet, O our God, incline thine ear, and
hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations; for we do
not present oursupplications before thee for our righteousnesses,
but for thy great mercies. O Lord, hear! O Lord, forgive 1
O Lord, hearken and do ! Defer not, for thine own sake;
for thy city and thy people that are called by thy name.”
15. I cannot conclude without addressing myself to you also,
who donot admit either the Jewish or Christian Revelation. But
still you desire to be happy. You own the essential difference
between vice and virtue; and acknowledge, (as did all the wiser
Greeks and Romans) that vice cannot consist with happiness.
You allow likewise that gratitude and benevolence, self-know
ledge and modesty, mildness, temperance, patience, and genero
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 193
sity, are justly numbered among virtues; and that ingratitude
and malice, envy and ill-nature, pride, insolence, and vanity,
gluttony and luxury, covetousness and discontent, are vices of
the highest kind.
Now, let us calmly inquire how far your life is consistent
with your principles.
You seek happiness. But you find it not. You come no
nearer it with all your labours. You are not happier than you
was a year ago. Nay, I doubt you are more unhappy. Why
is this, but because you look for happiness there, where you
own it cannot be found? Indeed, what is there on earth which
can long satisfy a man of understanding? His soul is too
large for the world he lives in. He wants more room.
AEstuat infelix angusto limite mundi,
Ut brevibus clausus Gyaris, parváque Seripho."
He has already travelled through all which is called pleasure;
diversions and entertainments of every kind. But among these
he can find no enjoyment of any depth; they are empty, shal
low, superficial things: They pleased for a while; but the gloss.
is gone, and now they are dull and tasteless. And what has
he next? Only the same things again; for this world affords
nothing more. It can supply him with no change. Go, feed
again; but it is upon one dish still. Thus
Occidit miseros crambe repetita.t
Yet what remedy under the sun?
16. The sounder judgment, the stronger understanding you
have, the sooner are you sated with the world; and the more
deeply convinced, all that cometh is vanity, foolish, insipid,
nauseous. You see the foibles of men in so much clearer a
light, and have the keener sense of the emptiness of life.
Here you are, a poor, unsatisfied inhabitant of an unquiet
world; turning your weary eyes on this side and on that side;
seeking rest, but finding none. You seem to be out of your
place: Neither the persons nor things that surround you are
such as you want. You have a confused idea of something
better than all this; but you know not where to find it. You
* Frets at the narrow limits of the world,
As in a prison pent.
+ They are surfeited with the dull repetition.
VOL. VIII.
194 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
are always gasping for something which you cannot attain, no,
not if you range to the uttermost parts of the earth.
But this is not all. You are not only negatively unhappy,
as finding nothing whereon to stay the weight of your soul;
but positively so, because you are unholy: You are miserable,
because you are vicious. Are you not vicious? Are you then
full of gratitude to Him who giveth you life, and breath, and
all things? Not so; you rather spurn his gifts, and murmur at
Him that gave them. How often has your heart said, God did
not use you well? How often have you questioned either his
wisdom or goodness? Was this well done? What kind of
gratitude is this? It is the best you are master of Then take
knowledge of yourself. Black ingratitude is rooted in your
inmost frame. You can no more love God, than you can see
him; or than you can be happy without that love.
Neither (how much soever you may pique yourself upon it)
are you a lover of mankind. Can love and malice consist?
benevolence and envy? O do not put out your own eyes! And
are not these horrid tempers in you? Do not you envy one
man, and bear malice or ill-will to another? I know you call
these dispositions by softer names; but names change not the
nature of things. You are pained that one should enjoy what
you cannot enjoy yourself. Call this what you please, it is rank
envy. You are grieved that a second enjoys even what you have
yourself; you rejoice in seeing a third unhappy. Do not flatter
yourself; this is malice, venomous malice, and nothing else.
And how could you ever think of being happy, with malice and
envy in your heart? Just as well might you expect to be at
ease, while you held burning coals in your bosom.
17. I entreat you to reflect, whether there are not other
inhabitants in your breast, which leave no room for happiness
there. May you not discover, through a thousand disguises,
pride? too high an opinion of yourself? vanity, thirst of praise,
even (who would believe it?) of the applause of knaves and
fools? unevenness or sourness of temper? proneness to anger
or revenge? peevishness, fretfulness, or pining discontent? Nay,
perhaps even covetousness.—And did you ever think happiness
could dwell with these? Awake out of that senseless dream.
Think not of reconciling things incompatible. All these tem
pers are essential misery: So long as any of these are har
boured in your breast, you must be a stranger to inward peace.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 195
What avails it you if there be no other hell? Whenever these
fiends are let loose upon you, you will be constrained to own,
Hell is where'er I am : Myself am hell.
And can the Supreme Being love those tempers, which you
yourself abhor in all but yourself? If not, they imply guilt
as well as misery. Doubtless they do. Only inquire of your
own heart. How often in the mid-career of your vice have you
felt a secret reproof, which you knew not how to bear, and
therefore stifled as soon as possible !
18. And did not even this point at an hereafter; a future
state of existence? The more reasonable among you have no
doubt of this; you do not imagine the whole man dies together;
r though you hardly suppose the soul, once disengaged, will
dwell again in a house of clay. But how will your soul subsist
without it? How are you qualified for a separate state? Sup
pose this earthly covering, this vehicle of organized matter,
whereby you hold commerce with the material world, were now
to drop off! Now, what would you do in the regions of immor
tality? You cannot eat or drink there. You cannot indulge
either the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eye, or the pride
of life. You love only worldly things; and they are gone, fled
as smoke, driven away for ever. Here is no possibility of sen
sual enjoyments; and you have a relish for nothing else. O
what a separation is this, from all that you hold dear! What
a breach is made, never to be healed !
But beside this, you are unholy, full of evil tempers; for
you did not put off these with the body; you did not leave
pride, revenge, malice, envy, discontent, behind you, when
you left the world. And now you are no longer cheered
by the light of the sun, nor diverted by the flux of various
objects; but those dogs of hell are let loose to prey upon your
soul, with their whole unrebated strength. Nor is there any
hope that your spirit will now ever be restored to its original
purity; not even that poor hope of a purging fire, so elegantly
described by the heathen poet, some ages before the notion was
wevived among the doctrines of the Romish Church.
Aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos; aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut eruritur igni.
Donec longa dies, perfecto temporis orbe,
196 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
Coneretam eremit labem, purumque reliquit
AEthereum sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem."
19. What a great gulf then is fixed between you and happi
ness, both in this world and that which is to come! Well may
you shudder at the thought ! more especially when you are
about to enter on that untried state of existence. For what a
prospect is this, when you stand on the verge of life, ready to
launch out into etermity! What can you then think? You
see nothing before you. All is dark and dreary. On the very
best supposition, how well may you address your parting soul
in the words of dying Adrian:
Poor, little, pretty, fluttering thing,
Must we no longer live together?
And dost thou prune thy trembling wing,
To take thy flight thou know'st not whither?'
Thy pleasing vein, thy humorous folly
Is all neglected, all forgot;
And pensive, wavering, melancholy,
Thou hop'st and fear'st thou know'st not what.
“Thou know'st not what l” Here is the sting, suppose there
were no other. To be “thou know'st not what !” not for a
month, or a year, but through the countless ages of eternity
What a tormenting uncertainty must this be What racking
unwillingness must it occasion, to exchange even this known
vale of tears for the unknown valley of the shadow of death !
And is there no cure for this? Indeed there is an effectual
cure; even the knowledge and love of God. There is a know
ledge of God which unveils etermity, and a love of God which
endears it. That knowledge makes the great abyss visible;
and all uncertainty vanishes away. That love makes it amiable
to the soul, so that fear has no more place | But the moment
God says, by the welcome angel of death, “Come thou up
hither l’” she
Claps the glad wing, and towers away,
And mingles with the blaze of day.
20. See ye not what advantage every way a Christian has
* Some to the piercing winds are stretch'd abroad;
Some plunged beneath the watery gulf: The fire
In some burns out the deep-imprinted stain,
Till the long course of slowly-rolling years
Has purged out every spot, and pure remains
The ethereal spirit, and simple heavenly fire.
OF REASON AND RELIGION, 197
over you? Probably the reason you saw it not before was,
because you knew none but nominal Christians; men who
professed to believe more, (in their way of believing,) but had
no more of the knowledge or love of God than yourselves:
So that with regard to real, inward religion, you stood upon
even ground. And perhaps in many branches of outward
.religion the advantage was on your side.
May the Lord, the God of the Christians, either reform
these wretches, or take them away from the earth, that lay
this grand stumbling-block in the way of those who desire to
know the will of God!
O ye who desire to know his will, regard them not! If it
be possible, blot them out of your remembrance.
They neither can nor will do you any good. O, suffer them
not to do you harm ! Be not prejudiced against Christianity
‘by those who know nothing at all of it: Nay, they condemn
it, all real substantial Christianity; they speak evil of the
thing they know not; they have a kind of cant word for the
whole religion of the heart; they call it enthusiasm.
I will briefly lay before you the ground of the matter, and
appeal to you yourselves for the reasonableness of it.
21. What a miserable drudgery is the service of God, unless
I love the God whom I serve | But I cannot love one whom
I know not. How then can I love God till I know him?
And how is it possible I should know God, unless he make
.himself known unto me? By analogy or proportion? Very
good. But where is that proportion to be found? What
proportion does a creature bear to its Creator? What is
.the proportion between finite and infinite?
I grant, the existence of the creatures demonstratively shows
the existence of their Creator. The whole creation speaks
that there is a God. But that is not the point in question.
I know there is a God. Thus far is clear. But who will show
·me what that God is? The more I reflect the more convinced
I am, that it is not possible for any or all the creatures to
take off the veil which is on my heart, that I might discern
this unknown God; to draw the curtain back which now hangs
between, that I may see Him which is invisible.
This veil of flesh now hides him from my sight; and who is
able to make it transparent? so that I may perceive, through
this glass, God always before me, till I see him “face to face.”
198 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
I want to know this great God who filleth heaven and earth;
who is above, beneath, and on every side, in all places of his
dominion; who just now besets me behind and before, and
lays his hand upon me; and yet I am no more acquainted with
him, than with one of the inhabitants of Jupiter or Saturn.
O my friend, how will you get one step farther, unless
God reveal himself to your soul?
22. And why should this seem a thing incredible to you;
that God, a Spirit, and the Father of the spirits of all flesh,
should discoverhimself to yourspirit, which is itself “the breath
of God,” divinae particula aurae; any more than that material
things should discover themselves to your material eye? Is
it any more repugnant to reason, that spirit should influence
spirit, than that matter should influence matter? Nay, is
not the former the more intelligible of the two? For there is
the utmost difficulty in conceiving how matter should influence
matter at all; how that which is totally passive should act.
Neither can we rationally account either for gravitation, attrac
tion, or any natural motion whatsoever, but by supposing in all
the finger of God, who alone conquers that vis inertiae which is
essential to every particle of matter, and worketh all in all.
Now, if God should everopen the eyes of your understanding,
must not the love of God be the immediate consequence? Do
you imagine you can see God without loving him? Is it possi
ble in the nature of things? Si virtus conspiceretur oculis,
(said the old Heathen,) mirabiles amores excitaret sui.” How
much more if you see Him who is the original fountain, the great
archetype of all virtue, will that sight raise in you a love that is
wonderful, such as the gay and busy world know not of !
23. What benevolence also, what tender love to the whole
of human kind, will you drink in, together with the love of
God, from the unexhausted source of love! And how easy
is it to conceive that more and more of his image will be then
transfused into your soul; that from disinterested love, all.
other divine tempers will, as it were naturally, spring:
Mildness, gentleness, patience, temperance, justice, sincerity,
contempt of the world; yea, whatsoever things are venerable:
and lovely, whatsoever are justly of good report!
• This quotation from Cicero is thus translated by Addison —“If virtue.
could be made the object of sight, she would (as Plato says) excite in us a won
derful love.”—EDIT.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 199
And when you thus love God and all mankind, and are
transformed into his likeness, then the commandments of God
will not be grievous; you will no more complain that they
destroy the comforts of life: So far from it, that they will be
the very joy of your heart; ways of pleasantness, paths of
peace! You will experience here that solid happiness which
you had elsewhere sought in vain. Without servile fear or
anxious care, so long as you continue on earth, you will gladly
do the will of God here as the angels do it in heaven; and
when the time is come that you should depart hence, when
God says, “Arise, and come away,” you will pass with joy
unspeakable out of the body, into all the fulness of God.
Now, does not your own heart condemn you if you call this
religion enthusiasm? O leave that to those blind zealots who
tack together a set of opinions and an outside worship, and
call this poor, dull, lifeless thing by the sacred name of Chris
tianity | Well might you account such Christianity as this a
mere piece of empty pageantry, fit indeed to keep the vulgar
in awe, but beneath the regard of a man of understanding.
But in how different a light does it now appear ! If there
be such a religion as I have sketched out, must not every
reasonable man see there is nothing on earth to be desired in
comparison of it? But if any man desire this, let him ask
of God; he giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not.
24. May you not ask, quite consistently with your principles,
in some manner resembling this?
“O thou Being of beings, thou cause of all, thou seest my
heart; thou understandest all my thoughts: But how small
a part of thy ways do I understand l I know not what is
above, beneath, on every side; I know not my own soul.
Only this I know, I am not what I ought to be. I see and
approve the virtue which I have not. I do not, love thee,
neither am I thankful. I commend the love of mankind;
but I feel it not. Thou hast seen hatred, malice, envy in my
heart; thou hast seen anger, murmuring, discontent. These
uneasy passions harrow up my soul. I cannot rest while I
am under this yoke; nor am I able to shake it off; I am
unhappy, and that thou knowest.
“Have compassion upon me, thou whose years do not fail! on
me who have but a short time to live. I rise up, and am cut
down as a flower. I flee as it were a shadow. Yet a little
200 A FARTHER APPEAL.
while and I return to dust, and have no more place under
the sun.
“Yet I know thou hast made my soul to live for ever; but
I know not where, and I am unwilling to try. I tremble, I
am afraid to go thither, whence I shall not return. I stand
quivering on the edge of the gulf; for clouds and darkness
rest upon it. O God! must I go always ‘creeping with
terrors, and plunge into eternity with a peradventure l’
“O thou Lover of men, is there no help in thee? I have
heard (what indeed my heart cannot conceive) that thou
revealest thyself to those that seek thee, and pourest thy love
into their hearts; and that they who know and love thee,
walk through the shadow of death and fear no evil. O that
this were so! that there was such an unspeakable gift given
to the children of men I for then might I hope for it. O
God, if there be, give it unto me ! Speak, that I may see
thee! Make thyself known unto me also in the manner that
thou knowest ! In anywise, let me know thee, and love thee,
that I may be formed after thy likeness | That I may be
love, as thou art love; that I may now be happy in thee; and,
when thou wilt, fall into the abyss of thy love, and enjoy thee
through the ages of eternity.”
A FARTHER APPEAL
To
MEN OF REASON AND RELIGION
And when he came near, he beheld the city, and wept over it, saying, If thou
hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong
unto thy peace / Luke xix. 41, 42.
-
PART III
I. 1. Now, what can an impartial person think concerning
the present state of religion in England? Is there a nation
under the sun which is so deeply fallen from the very first prin
ciples of all religion? Where is the country in which is found
so utter a disregard to even heathen morality; such a thorough
contempt of justice and truth, and all that should be dear and
honourable to rational creatures?
What species of vice can possibly be named, even of those
that nature itself abhors, of which we have not had, for many
years, a plentiful and still-increasing harvest? What sin
remains either in Rome or Constantinople, which we have not
imported long ago, (if it was not of our native growth,) and
improved upon ever since? Such a complication of villanies of
every kind, considered with all their aggravations; such a
scorn of whatever bears the face of virtue; such injustice,
fraud, and falsehood; above all, such perjury, and such a
method of law, we may defy the whole world to produce.
What multitudes are found throughout our land, who do not
even profess any religion at all ! And what numbers of those
who profess much, confute their profession by their practice
yea, and perhaps by their exorbitant pride, vanity, covetousness,
rapaciousness or oppression, cause the very name of religion to
stink in the nostrils of many (otherwise) reasonable men I
202 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
2. “However, we have many thousands still of truly virtuous
and religious men.” Wherein does their religion consist? in
righteousness and true holiness; in love stronger than death;
fervent gratitude to God, and tender affection to all his crea
tures? Is their religion the religion of the heart; a renewal of
soul in the image of God? Do they resemble Him they worship?
Are they free from pride, from vanity, from malice and envy;
from ambition and avarice; from passion and lust; from every
uneasy and unlovely temper? Alas, I fear neither they (the
greater part at least) nor you know what this religion means;
or have any more notion of it, than the peasant that holds the
plough of the religion of a Gymnosophist.
It is well if the genuine religion of Christ has any more alli
ance with what you call religion, than with the Turkish pil
grimages to Mecca, or the Popish worship of our Lady of
Loretto. Have not you substituted, in the place of the reli
gion of the heart, something (I do not say equally sinful, but)
equally vain, and foreign to the worshipping of God “in spirit
and in truth?” What else can be said even of prayer, (public
or private,) in the manner wherein you generally perform it?
as a thing of course, running round and round in the same dull
track, without either the knowledge or love of God, without one
heavenly temper, either attained or improved ! O what
mockery of God is this!
And yet even this religion, which can do you no good, may
do you much harm. Nay, it is plain it does; it daily increases
your pride, as you measure your goodness by the number and
length of your performances. It gives you a deep contempt of
those who do not come up to the full tale of your virtues. It
inspires men with a zeal which is the very fire of hell, furious,
bitter, implacable, unmerciful; often to a degree that extin
guishes all compassion, all good nature and humanity, Inso
much that the execrable fierceness of spirit, which is the
natural fruit of such a religion, hath many times, in spite of
all ties, divine and human, broke out into open violence, into
rapine, murder, sedition, rebellion, civil war, to the desolation
of whole cities and countries.
Tantum haec religio potuit suadere malorum !"
3. Now, if there be a God, and one that is not a mere idle
* So much mischief this religion does !
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 203
spectator of the things that are done upon earth, but a re
warder of men and nations according to their works, what can
the event of these things be? It was reasonable to believe that
he would have risen long ago and maintained his own cause,
either by sending the famine or pestilence among us, or by
pouring out his fury in blood. And many wise and holy men
have frequently declared that they daily expected this; that
they daily looked for the patience of God to give place, and
judgment to rejoice over mercy.
4. Just at this time, when we wanted little of “filling up the
measure of our iniquities,” two or three Clergymen of the
Church of England began vehemently to “call sinners to re
pentance.” In two or three years they had sounded the alarm
to the utmost borders of the land. Many thousands gathered
together to hear them; and in every place where they came,
many began to show such a concern for religion as they never
had done before. A stronger impression was made on their
minds, of the importance of things eternal, and they had more
earnest desires of serving God than they had ever had from their
earliest childhood. Thus did God begin to draw them toward
himself, with the cords of love, with the bands of a man.
Many of these were in a short time deeply convinced of the
number and heinousness of their sins. They were also made
throughly sensible of those tempers which are justly hateful
to God and man, and of their utter ignorance of God, and entire
inability, either to know, love, or serve him. At the same time,
they saw in the strongest light the insignificancy of their out
side religion; nay, and often confessed it before God, as the
most abominable hypocrisy. Thus did they sink deeper and
deeper into that repentance, which must ever precede faith in
the Son of God.
And from hence sprung “fruits meet for repentance.” The
drunkard commenced sober and temperate; the whoremonger
abstained from adultery and fornication; the unjust from
oppression and wrong. He that had been accustomed to curse
and swear for many years, now swore no more. The sluggard
began to work with his hands, that he might eat his own
bread. The miser learned to deal his bread to the hungry, and
to cover the naked with a garment. Indeed, the whole form
of their life was changed: They had “left off doing evil, and
learned to do well.”
5. But this was not all. Over and above this outward change,
204 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
they hegan to experience inward religion. “The love of God
was shed abroad in their hearts,” which they continue to enjoy
to this day. They “love him, because he first loved us,” and
withheld not from us his Son, his only Son. And this love
constrains them to love all mankind, all the children of the
Father of heaven and earth; and inspires them with every holy
and heavenly temper, the whole mind that was in Christ.
Hence it is that they are now uniform in their behaviour, un
blamable in all manner of conversation. And in whatsoever
state they are, they have learned therewith to be content; in
somuch that now they can “in every thing give thanks.” They
more than patiently acquiesce, they rejoice and are exceeding
qlad, in all God’s dispensations toward them. For as long
as they love God, (and that love no man taketh from them,)
they are always happy in God. Thus they calmly travel on
through life, being never weary nor faint in their minds, never
repining, murmuring, or dissatisfied, casting all their care upon
God, till the hour comes that they should drop this covering of
earth, and return unto the great Father of spirits. Then, espe
cially, it is that they “rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
glory.” You who credit it not, come and see. See these living
and dying Christians.
Happy while on earth they breathe;
Mightier joys ordain'd to know,
Trampling on siu, hell, and death,
To the third heaven they go!
Now, if these things are so, what reasonable man can deny
(supposing the Scriptures to be true) that God is now visiting
this nation, in a far other manner than we had cause to ex
pect? Instead of pouring out his fierce displeasure upon us, he
hath made us yet another tender of mercy: So that even when
sin did most abound, grace hath much more abounded.
6. Yea, “the grace of God, which bringeth salvation,” pre
sent salvation from inward and outward sin, hath abounded of
late years in such a degree, as neither we nor our fathers had
known. How extensive is the change which has been wrought
on the minds and lives of the people! Know ye not that the
sound has gone forth into all the land; that there is scarce a city
or considerable town to be found, where some have not been
roused out of the sleep of death, and constrained to cry out, in
the bitterness of their soul, “What must I do to be saved ?”
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 205
that this religious concern has spread to every age and sex;
to most orders and degrees of men? to abundance of those,
in particular, who, in time past, were accounted monsters of
wickedness, “drinking in iniquity like water,” and commit
ting all “uncleanness with greediness.”
7. In what age has such a work been wrought, considering
the swiftness as well as the extent of it? When have such
numbers of sinners in so short a time been recovered from
the error of their ways? When hath religion, I will not say
since the Reformation, but since the time of Constantine the
Great, made so large a progress in any nation, within so
small a space? I believe, hardly can either ancient or
modern history supply us with a parallel instance.
8. Let understanding men observe also the depth of the
work, so extensively and swiftly wrought. It is not a slight
or superficial thing; but multitudes of men have been so
thoroughly “convinced of sin,” that their “bones were smit
ten asunder, as it were with a sword dividing the very joints
and marrow.” Many of these have been shortly after so filled
with “peace and joy in believing,” that, whether they were in
the body or out of the body, they could scarcely tell. And in
the power of this faith they have trampled under foot what
ever the world accounts either terrible or desirable; having
evidenced, in the severest trials, so fervent a love to God, so
invariable and tender a goodwill to mankind, particularly to
their enemies, and such a measure of all the fruits of holi
ness, as were not unworthy the apostolic age. Now, so deep
a repentance, so firm a faith, so fervent love and unblemished
holiness, wrought in so many persons, within so short a time,
the world has not seen for many ages.
9. No less remarkable is the purity of the religion which
has extended itself so deeply and swiftly. I speak particu
larly with regard to the doctrines held by those among whom
it is so extended. Those of the Church of England, at least,
must acknowledge this. For where is there a body of people
in the realm, who, number for number, so closely adhere to
what our Church delivers as pure doctrine? Where are those
who have approved and do approve themselves more orthodox,
more sound in their opinions? Is there a Socinian or Arian
among them all? Nay, were you to recite the whole cata
logue of heresies enumerated by Bishop Pearson, it might be
asked, Who can lay any one of these to their charge?
206 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
Nor is their religion more pure from heresy than it is from
superstition. In former times, wherever an unusual concern
for the things of God hath appeared, on the one hand, strange
and erroneous opinions continually sprung up with it; on the
other, a zeal for things which were no part of religion, as though
they had been essential branches of it. And many have laid
as great, if not greater, stress on trifles, as on the weightier
matters of the law. But it has not been so in the present case.
No stress has been laid on anything, as though it were neces
sary to salvation, but what is undeniably contained in the word
of God. And of the things contained therein, the stress laid on
each has been in proportion to the nearness of its relation to
what is there laid down as the sum of all, the love of God and
our neighbour. So pure from superstition, so throughly scrip
tural, is that religion which has lately spread in this nation |
10. It is likewise rational as well as scriptural; it is as
pure from enthusiasm as from superstition. It is true, the
contrary has been continually affirmed: But to affirm is one
thing, to prove is another. Who will prove that it is enthusi
asm to love God, even though we love him with all our heart?
to rejoice in the sense of his love to us? to praise him, even
with all our strength? Who is able to make good this charge
against the love of all mankind? or, laying rhetorical flour
ishes aside, to come close to the question, and demonstrate
that it is enthusiasm, in every state we are in, therewith to be
content? I do but just touch on the general heads. Ye men
of reason, give me a man who, setting raillery and ill names
apart, will maintain this by dint of argument. If not, own
this religion is the thing you seek; sober, manly, rational,
divine; however exposed to the censure of those who are
accustomed to revile what they understand not.
11. It may be farther observed, the religion of those we now
speak of is entirely clear from bigotry. (Perhaps this might
have been ranked with superstition, of which it seems to
be only a particular species.) They are in nowise bigoted to
opinions. They do indeed hold right opinions; but they are
peculiarly cautious not to rest the weight of Christianity
there. They have no such overgrown fondness for any opi
nions, as to think those alone will make them Christians, or
to confine their affection or esteem to those who agree with
them therein. There is nothing they are more fearful of
!
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 207
than this, lest it should steal upon them unawares. Nor are
they bigoted to any particular branch even of practical reli
gion. They desire indeed to be exact in every jot and tittle,
in the very smallest points of Christian practice. But they
are not attached to one point more than another: they aim
at uniform, universal obedience. They contend for nothing
trifling, as if it was important; for nothing indifferent, as if
it were necessary; for nothing circumstantial, as if it were
essential to Christianity; but for every thing in its own order.
12. Above all, let it be observed, that this religion has no
mixture of vice or unholiness. It gives no man of any rank
or profession the least license to sin. It makes no allowance
to any person for ungodliness of any kind. Not that all who
follow after have attained this, either are already perfect. But
however that be, they plead for no sin, either inward or out
ward. They condemn every kind and degree thereof, in
themselves as well as in other men. Indeed, most in them
selves; it being their constant care to bring those words
home to their own case, “Whosoever shall keep the whole
law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.”
13. Yet there is not found among them that bitter zeal in
points either of small or of great importance, that spirit of
persecution, which has so often accompanied the spirit of
reformation. It is an idle conceit, that the spirit of persecu
tion is among the Papists only . It is wheresoever the devil,
that old murderer, works; and he still “worketh in ” all “the
children of disobedience.” Of consequence, all the children
of disobedience will, on a thousand different pretences, and
in a thousand different ways, so far as God permits, persecute
the children of God. But what is still more to be lamented
is, that the children of God themselves have so often used
the same weapons, and persecuted others, when the power
was in their own hands.
Can we wholly excuse those venerable men, our great Re
formers themselves, from this charge? I fear not, if we impar
tially read over any history of the Reformation. What wonder
is it then, that, when the tables were turned, Bishop Bonner
or Gardiner should make reprisals; that they should measure
to others (indeed good measure, shaken together) what had
before been measured to them? Nor is it strange, when we
consider the single case of Joan Bocher, that God should suffer
208 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
those (otherwise) holy men, Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop
Ridley, and Bishop Latimer, to drink of the same cup with her.
14. But can you find any tincture of this in the case before
us? Do not all who have lately known the love of God, know
“what spirit they are of; ” and that the Son of man is not
come to destroy men's lives, but to save them? Do they
approve of the using any kind or degree of violence, on any
account or pretence whatsoever, in matters of religion? Do
they not hold the right every man has to judge for himself, to
be sacred and inviolable? Do they allow any method of
bringing even those who are farthest out of the way, who are
in the grossest errors, to the knowledge of the truth, except
the methods of reason and persuasion; of love, patience, gen
tleness, long-suffering? Is there anything in their practice
which is inconsistent with this their constant profession? Do
they in fact hinder their own relations or dependents from
worshipping God according to their own conscience? When
they believe them to be in error, do they use force of any
kind, in order to bring them out of it? Let the instances, if
there are such, be produced. But if no such are to be found,
then let all reasonable men, who believe the Bible, own that a
work of God is wrought in our land; and such a work (if we
survey in one view the extent of it, the swiftness with which
it has spread, the depth of that religion which was so swiftly
diffused, and its purity from all corrupt mixtures) as, it must
be acknowledged, cannot easily be paralleled, in all these con
current circumstances, by any thing that is found in the Eng
lish annals, since Christianity was first planted in this island.
II. 1. And yet those who “can discern the face of the sky,
cannot discern the signs of the times.” Yet those who are
esteemed wise men do not know that God is now reviving his
work upon earth. Indeed, concerning some of these, the rea
son is plain: They know not, because they think not of it.
Their thoughts are otherwise employed; their minds are taken
up with things of quite a different nature: Or, perhaps, they
may think of it a little now and then, when they have nothing
else to do; but not seriously or deeply; not with any closeness
or attention of thought. They are too much in haste, to
weigh the facts whereof we speak, and to draw the just inference
therefrom : Nor is the conviction which they may sometimes
feel, suffered to sink into their hearts; but things that have
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 209
a larger share in their affections soon destroy the very traces
of it.
2. True it is, that there are some who think more deeply,
who are accustomed to consider things from the foundation, and
to lay circumstances together, that they may judge of nothing
before they have full evidence; and yet even some of these appear
to be in doubt concerning the present work. Now, supposing it
to be a work of God, how can this be accounted for, -that they
who so diligently inquire concerning it, do not know the time of
their visitation? Perhaps because of the deeply rooted prejudice
which they brought with them to the inquiry; and which, still
hanging on their minds, makes it scarce possible for them to
form an impartial judgment. Perhaps, even a slight preposses
sion might occasion their stumbling on some of those rocks cf
offence, which, by the wise permission of God, always did ard
always will attend any revival of his work. Nay, it may be,
their very caution was carried to excess. They would not
judge before they had such evidence as the mature of the thing
would not admit, or, at least, God did not see fit to give.
3. All this is very easy to conceive. But it may at first
appear surprising, to find men of renown, men supposed to
be endowed with knowledge, and with abilities of every kind,
flatly, openly, percmptorily denying, that there has been any
unusual work of God at all ! Yea, a late eminent writer
gocs farther yet; accounts it an instance of downright enthu
siasm, to imagine that there is any extraordinary work now
wrought upon the earth. (Observations, Part III.)
It avails not to say, “No ; he docs not deny this, but he
denies it to be the work of God.” This is palpably trifling;
for the work under consideration is of such a nature, (namely,
the conversion of men from all manner of sins, to holiness of
lieart and life,) that if it be at any time wrought at all, it must
be the work of God; seeing it is God alone, and not any child
of man, who is able to “destroy the works of the devil.”
Yet neither is this difficult to be accounted for, if we consider
things more closely; for the same prejudice which keeps some
in doubt, may easily be conceived so to influence others, as to
make them wholly deny the work of God. And this it may do
in several ways: It may either bring them to question the facts
related, and hinder their endeavouring to be more fully
informed; or prevent their drawing such inferences from those
VOL. VIII.
210 A FARTHER Al"PEAL TO MEN
facts, as they would otherwise see to be plain and undeniable.
Yea, and it will give tenfold weight to the offences which
must come, so as to over-balance all evidence whatsoever.
4. This also may account for the behaviour of those who,
not content to suspend their judgment, or to deny the work of
God, go farther still, even to the length of contradicting and
blaspheming. Nay, some of these have expressed a deeper
abhorrence, and shown astronger enmity against this, than they
were ever known to do against Popery, infidelity, or any heresy
whatsoever. Some have persecuted the instruments whom it
pleased God to use herein, only not to the death; and others
have treated in the same manner all those whom they termed
their followers. A few instances of this it may be proper to
mention, out of very many which might be recited.
5. On the 20th of June, 1743, a great multitude of people
gathered together, chiefly from Walsal, Darlaston, and Bilston,
in Wednesbury church-yard, Staffordshire. They went from
thence (when by sounding a horn they had gathered their
whole company together) to Mr. Eaton’s house, in the middle
of the town, who was at that time Constable. He went to
the door with his Constable's staff, and began reading the
Act of Parliament against riots; but the stones flew so thick
about his head, that he was forced to leave off reading and
retire. They broke all his windows, the door of his house, and
a large clock in pieces. They went then to above fourscore
houses, in many of which there were not three panes of glass left.
6. On June 20, 1743, John Baker, at the head of a large
mob, came to the house of Jonas Turner, at West-Bromwich,
near Wednesbury, and asked him, whether he would keep from
these men that went preaching about, and go to the church.
He answered, “I do go to the church; but I never see any
of you there.” Presently one Dan. Oniens, with a great club,
broke great part of the window at one blow. Others laid hold
of him, and dragged him about sixty yards before he could get
loose from them. Afterwards they broke all his windows, and
threw into the house abundance of stones, to break his goods.
About four in the afternoon they came to the house of widow
Turner of West-Bromwich. They threw in bricks and stones so
fast, that she was forced to open the door and run out among
them. One of her daughters cried out, “My mother will be
killed !” On which, they fell to throwing stones at her. She
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 211
ran into a neighbour's house; but before she could shut the
door, they broke the bottom off with a brick-end. They fol
lowed her other daughter with stones, and one with a great
stake. She ran into another house, much frightened, expect
ing to be murdered. The widow asked, “How can you come
and abuse us thus?” On which, one came with a large
club, and swore, if she spoke another word, he would knock
her on the head, and bury her in the ditch. Then he went
and broke all the glass that was left. The same they did to
many of the neighbouring houses.
7. On the 19th of June, James Yeoman, of Walsal, saw
Mary Bird in her father's house at Wednesbury, and swore,
“By G—, you are there now; but we will kill you to-mor
row.” Accordingly, he came with a mob the next day; and
after they had broken all the windows, he took up a stone,
and said, “Now, by God, I will kill you.” He threw it, and
struck her on the side of the head. The blood gushed out,
and she dropped down immediately.
Another of them took Mr. Hands, of Wednesbury, by the
throat, swore he would be the death of him, gave him a great
swing round, and threw him upon the ground. As soon as he
.rose, one Equal Baker gave him a blow on the eye, and knocked
him down again. In about half an hour, the mob came to his
house, and broke all the windows, except about twenty panes.
The kitchen windows they cleared, lead, bars, and all, broke
the window-posts, and threw them into the house. The shop
was shut up; (he being an apothecary;) but they quickly
broke it open, broke all the pots and bottles in pieces, and
destroyed all his medicines. They broke also the shelves and
drawers in the shop to pieces, and many of his household goods.
8. On January 13, 1743–4, the mob rose again at Darlas
ton, broke all the windows of all who followed “this way,”
(except two or three who bought themselves off) broke open
several houses, and took what they liked, the people belong
ing to them being fled for their lives.
About the same time the Rev. Mr. E came to Darlas
ton; and meeting some others at Thomas Forshcw’s, they
drew up a writing; and Nicholas Winspur, the crier of the
town, gave public notice, That all the people of the society
must come to Mr. Forshew’s, and sign it, or else their houses
would be pulled down immediately. It was to this effect,
212 A FARTII ER APPEAL TO MEN
That they would never read, or sing, or pray together, or
hear these Parsons, any more.
Several signed this through fear. They made every one
who did, lay down a penny,—“to make the mob drink.”
9. About Candlemas, the wife of Joshua Constable, of Dar
laston, was going to Wednesbury, when a mob met her in
the road, threw her down several times, and abused her in a
manner too horrible to write. A warrant was procured for
some of these; but one of them only was carried before Mr.
G , who came back and told his companions, the Justice
said that they might go home about their business. On this
the mob rose again, came to Joshua’s house, and destroyed all
the necessary goods therein. They likewise broke and spoiled
all his shop tools, threw the tiles off the roof of the house, and
pulled down one room, the joist of which they carried away
with them. All his gun-locks they took away; they tore in
pieces all his wife’s linen, cut the bed and bedstead, so that
it was good for nothing; and tore her Bible and Common
Prayer Book all to pieces. She and her husband retired to
another house; but one telling the mob they were there, they
swore they would tear it down immediately, if the man let
them stay any longer: So they went out in the frost and
snow, not knowing where to lay their head.
10. On Tuesday, January 31, 1743–4, Henry Old came to
John Griffith's house, saying, if he did not leave following
“this way,” he had a hundred men at his command, who
should come and pull his house down. Soon after he
brought some with him; but the neighbours gave him
money, and sent him away for that time.
Monday, February 6, between seven and eight at night,
came part of the same company. Hearing them afar off, John
and his wife fastened the door, and left the house. Some of
the neighbours going in soon after, found them destroying all
they could: Two chairs and several bundles of linen were laid
upon the fire. After they had destroyed what they could, they
loaded themselves with clothes and meat, and went their way.
The same day public notice was given at Walsal, by a
paper fixed up there, That all who designed to assist in
breaking the windows, and plundering the houses, of the
Methodists at Wednesbury, should be ready at ten o’clock,
the next morning, on the Church-hill.
11. The next morning, February 7, (being Shrove-Tuesday,)
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 213
about half an hour after ten, great numbers of men were
gathered together on the Church-hill. Thence they marched
down, some armed with swords, some with clubs, and some with
axes. They first fell upon Benjamin Watson’s house, and broke
many of the tiles, and all the windows. Next they came to Mr.
Addinbrook’s, broke a fine clock, with many of his goods, and
stole all the things they could carry away. The next house
was Jane Smith’s, whose windows they broke, with what little
goods she had. The next was Mr. Bird's, where they destroyed
every thing they found, except what they carried away; cutting
the beds in pieces, as they did all the beds which they could
anywhere find. Thence they went to Mr. Edge's house: He
was ill of a fever; so, for a sum of money, they passed it over.
The next house was Mr. Hands's. They broke all his counter,
boxes, and drawers, and all (except some bedsteads) that axe
or hammer could break. They spilt all his drugs and chemical
medicines, and stole every thing they could carry, even all his
and his wife's wearing apparel beside what they had on.
12. Mr. Eaton's house was next. They broke all his win
dows, and all his inside doors in pieces, cut the lead off his house,
destroyed or stole whatever they could lay their hands on.
Some gentlemen offered to stop them, if he would sign a paper,
implying that he would never hear those Parsons more. But
he told them, he had felt already what a wounded conscience
was; and, by the grace of God, he would wound his conscience
no more.
After they had done at Mr. Eaton's, they plundered several
other houses in Wednesbury and West-Bromwich. It is scarce
possible to describe the outrages they committed; only they
left them they plundered alive.
While they were plundering John Turner's house, he waded
through the brook, to try if he could save some of his goods,
which one David Garington was carrying away: Upon which
Garington told him, it would be the same here as it was in
Ireland; for there would be a massacre very quickly; and he
wished it was now.
13. About eleven o’clock, Sarah, the wife of John Sheldon,
being told the mob was coming to her house, went and met them
at the gate. She asked John Baker, their captain, what they were
come for. He answered, if she would have nothing more to do
with these people, not a pennyworth of her goods should be hurt.
She made no reply. Then they broke the door open, and began
214 A FART II ER APPEAL TO MEN
breaking and plundering the goods. One coming out with a
fire-shovel, she begged him not to take it away. He swore, if
she spoke another word, he would beat her brains out.
John Sheldon was this while helping Thomas Parkes to hide
his goods, though he knew by the noise they were breaking his
own to pieces. Between two and three he came to his house
with William Sitch. William asked Sarah how she did, saying,
for his part, he took joyfully the spoiling of his goods. She an
swered, that, seeing so much wickedness, she could not rejoice;
but she blessed God she could bear it patiently, and found not
the least anger in her. John Sheldon seeing the spoil they had
made, smiled and said, “Here is strange work.” His wife told
him, if she had complied with their terms, not one pennyworth
would have been hurt. He replied, that if she had complied to
deny the truth, and he had found his goods whole on that
account, he should never have been easy as long as he lived;
but he blessed God that she had rather chosen to suffer wrong.
I believe every reasonable man will allow, that nothing can
possibly excuse these proceedings; seeing they are open, bare
faced violations both of justice and mercy, and of all laws divine
and human.
III. l. I suppose no Protestant will undertake to defend such
proceedings, even toward the vilest miscreants. But abundance
of excuses have been made, if not for opposing it thus, yet for
denying this work to be of God, and for not acknowledging the
time of our visitation.
Some allege that the doctrines of these men are false, errone
ous, and enthusiastic; that they are new, and unheard of till of
late; that they are Quakerism, fanaticism, Popery.
This whole pretence has been already cut up by the roots;
t having been shown at large, that every branch of this doc
trine is the plain doctrine of Scripture, interpreted by our own
Church. Therefore it cannot be either false or erroneous,
provided the Scripture be true. Neither can it be enthu
siastic, unless the same epithet belongs to our Articles,
Homilies, and Liturgy. Nor yet can these doctrines be
termed new; no newer, at least, than the reign of Queen
Elizabeth; not even with regard to the way of expression, or
the manner wherein they are proposed. And as to the sub
stance, they are more ancient still; as ancient, not only as the
gospel, as the times of Isaiah, or David, or Moses, but as
the first revelation of God to man. If, therefore, they
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 215
were unheard of till of late, in any that is termed a Christian
country, the greater guilt is on those who, as ambassadors of
Christ, ought to publish them day by day.
Fanaticism, if it means anything at all, means the same with
enthusiasm, or religious madness, from which (as was observed
before) these doctrines are distant as far as the east from the
west. However, it is a convenient word to be thrown out upon
anything we do not like; because scarce one reader in a thou
sand has any idea of what it means. If any part of this doc
trine is held by the Quakers, there is the more reason to rejoice.
I would to God they held it all, though the doctrine itself
would be neither better nor worse for this.
Popery in the mouth of many men means just nothing; or,
at most, something very horrid and bad. But Popery, pro
perly speaking, is the distinguishing doctrines of the Church
of Rome. They are summed up in the Twelve Articles which
the Council of Trent added to the Nicene Creed. Now, who
can find the least connexion between any of these, and the
doctrines whereof we are speaking?
2. Others allege, “Their doctrine is too strict; they make
the way to heaven too narrow.” And this is in truth the origi
nal objection, (as it was almost the only one for some time,)
and is secretly at the bottom of a thousand more, which appear
in various forms. But do they make the way to heaven any
narrower than our Lord and his Apostles made it? Is their
doctrine stricter than that of the Bible? Consider only a few
plain texts: “Thou shalt love the Gord thy 1:d with all thy
heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength.” “For every idle word which men shall
speak, they shall give an account in the day of judgment.”
“Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the
glory of God.” If their doctrine is stricter than this, they are
to blame; but you know in your conscience, it is not. And
who can be one jot less strict, without corrupting the word
of God? Can any steward of the mysteries of God be found
faithful, if he change any part of that sacred depositum ? No.
He can abate nothing, he can soften nothing; he is constrained
to declare to all men, “I may not bring down the Scripture to
your taste. You must come up to it, or perish for ever.”
3. This is the real ground of that other popular cry concern
ing “the uncharitableness of these men.” Uncharitable, are
216 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
they? In what respect? Do they not feed the hungry, and
clothe the naked? “No ; that is not the thing : They are not
wanting in this: But they are so uncharitable in judging !
They think none can be saved but those of their own way. They
damn all the world beside themselves.”
What do you mean? “They think none can be saved but
those of their own way.” Most surely they do. For as there
is but one heaven, so there is but one way to it, even the way
of faith in Christ, (for we speak not of opinions or outward
modes of worship,) the way of love to God and man, the high
way of holiness. And is it uncharitable to think or say that
none can be saved but those who walk in this way? Was He
then uncharitable who declared, “He that believeth not shall
be damned?” or he that said, “Follow holiness, without which
no man shall see the Lord?” and again: “Though I bestow
all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to
be burned,” yet, “if I have not ayatnv, charity,” love, all this
“profiteth me nothing.”
“But they damn all,” you say, “beside themselves.” Damn
all ! What kind of word is this? They damn no man. None is
able to damn any man, but the Lord aud Judge of all. What
you probably mean by that strange expression is, they declare
that God condemns all beside those who believe in Jesus
Christ, and love him and keep his commandments. And so
must you also, or you sin against God, and your neighbour,
and your own soul. But is there any uncharitableness in this,
in warning sinners to flee from the wrath to come On the
contrary, not to warn a poor, blind, stupid wretch that he is
hanging over the mouth of hell, would be so inexcusable a
want of charity, as would bring his blood upon our own head.
4. But there is no room for dispute, touching these doctrines
in general, seeing our Lord gives you so plain a rule, by which
you may easily and infallibly know whether they be of God:
“The tree is known by its fruit: Either therefore make the tree
good, and its fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt, and its
fruit corrupt.” (Matt. xii. 33.) Now, what fruit does the tree
before us bring forth? Look and see; believe your own eyes and
ears. Sinners leave their sins: The servants of the devil become
the servants of God. Is this good or evil fruit; that vice loses
ground, and virtue, practical religion, gains? Odispute no more!
Know the tree by its fruit. Bow, and own the finger of God.
OF REASON AND RELIGION, 217*
5. But many who own these doctrines to be of God, yet
cannot be reconciled to the instruments he hath made use of.
A very common exception taken against these is, and was
from the beginning, that “they are so young: ” Therefore,
(abundance of men have readily inferred,) this work cannot
be of God.
Perhaps they are not so young as you conceive. Mr.
Whitefield is now upwards of thirty; my brother is thirty
seven years of age; I have lived above forty-two years; and
a gentleman in Cornwall, for whom I often preach, has the
merit of having lived threescore and seventeen years.
But, supposing the antecedent true, what a consequence is
this! What shadow of Scripture have you to support it?
Doth not God “send by whom he will send?” And who
shall say to him, “What doest thou?” “These are too
young; send elder men.” What shadow of reason? Is it
not possible that a person of thirty or forty may have as true
a judgment in the things of God, and as great a blessing
attending his preaching, as one of fifty or fourscore?
I wish you would explain yourself a little on this head:—
Scire velin, verbo, pretium quotus arroget annus * *
How old do you require a man to be, before God should have
leave to speak by his mouth ? O my brethren, who could
have believed any serious man would once have named such
an argument as this; seeing both Scripture and reason teach,
that God herein “giveth account to none of his ways l”
But he worketh by whomsoever he will work; he showeth
mercy by whom he will show mercy.
6. “But there are only a few young heads.” I cannot but
observe here what great pains have been taken, what diligence
shown, to make and to keep them few. What arts have not
been used to keep back those, of the Clergy in particular,
who have been clearly convinced, from time to time, that they
ought to join hearts and hands in the work? On this occasion
it has been accounted meritorious to “say all manner of evil
of us falsely;” to promise them whatever their hearts
desired, if they would refrain from these men; and, on the other
hand, to threaten them with heavy things if ever they went
among them more. So that how fully soever they were con
vinced, they could not act according to their conviction, unless
* How old must a book be before it is good for anything?
|
218 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
they could give up at once all thought of preferment either in
Church or State; nay, all hope of even a Fellowship, or poor
Scholarship, in either University. Many also have been
threatened, that if they went on in this way, what little they
had should be taken from them. And many have, on this
very account, been disowned by their dearest friends and
nearest relations: So that there was no possibility the num
ber of these labourers should ever be increased at all, unless
by those who could break through all these ties, who desired
nothing in the present world, who counted neither their for
tunes, nor friends, nor lives, dear unto themselves, so they
might only keep “a conscience void of offence toward God
and toward men.”
7. But what do you infer from their fewness? that, be
cause they are few, therefore God cannot work by them?
Upon what scripture do you ground this? I thought it was
the same to Him, to save by many or by few. Upon what rea
son ? Why cannot God save ten thousand souls by one man,
as well as by ten thousand? How little, how inconsiderable
a circumstance is number before God! Nay, is there not
reason to believe that whensoever God is pleased to work a
great deliverance, spiritual or temporal, he may first say, as
of old, “The people are too many for me to give the Midi
anites into their hands?” May he not purposely choose few as
well as inconsiderable instruments, for the greater manifesta
tion of his own glory? Very few, I grant, are the instru
ments now employed; yet a great work is wrought already.
And the fewer they are by whom this large harvest hath
hitherto been gathered in, the more evident must it appear to
unprejudiced minds that the work is not of man, but of God.
8. “But they are not only few, but unlearned also.” This
is a grievous offence, and is by many csteemed a sufficient
excuse for not acknowledging the work to be of God.
The ground of this offence is partly true. Some of those
who now preach are unlearned. They neither understand
the ancient languages, nor any of the branches of philosophy.
And yet this objection might have been spared by many of
those who have frequently made it; because they are un
learned too, though accounted otherwise. They have not
themselves the very thing they require in others.
Men in general are under a great mistake with regard to
OF REASON AND RELIGION.- 219
what is called the learned world. They do not know, they
cannot easily imagine, how little learning there is among
them. I do not speak of abstruse learning; but of what all
Divines, at least, of any note, are supposed to have, namely,
the knowledge of the tongues, at least, Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, and of the common arts and sciences.
How few men of learning, so called, understand Hebrew ;
cven so far as to read a plain chapter in Genesis ! Nay, how
few understand Greek! Make an easy experiment. Desire
that grave man, who is urging this objection, only to tell you
the English of the first paragraph that occurs in one of Plato's
Dialogues. I am afraid we may go farther still. How few
understand Latin Give one of them an Epistle of Tully,
and see how readily he will explain it without his dictionary.
If he can hobble through that, it is odds but a Georgic in
Virgil, or a Satire of Persius, sets him fast.
And with regard to the arts and sciences; how few under
stand so much as the general principles of logic l Can one in
ten of the Clergy, (O grief of heart!) or of the Masters of Arts
in either University, when an argument is brought, tell you
even the mood and figure wherein it is proposed; or complete
an enthy meme * Perhaps you do not so much as understand
the term;—supply the premiss which is wanting, in order to
make it a full categorical syllogism. Can one in ten of them
demonstrate a Problem or theorem in Euclid's Elements, or
define the common terms used in Metaphysics, or intelligibly
explain the first principles of it? Why then will they pretend
to that learning which they are conscious to themselves they
have not? nay, and censure others who have it not, and do not
pretend to it? Where are sincerity and candour fled?
It will easily be observed, that I do not depreciate learning
of any kind. The knowledge of the languages is a valuable
talent; so is the knowledge of the arts and sciences. Both
the one and the other may be employed to the glory of God
and the good of men. But yet I ask, Where hath God
declared in his word, that he cannot, or will not, make use of
men that have it not? Has Moses or any of the Prophets
affirmed this? or our Lord, or any of his Apostles? You are
sensible all these are against you: You know the Apostles
themselves, all except St. Paul, were avópes atypa/puatot cat
w8total, “common, unphilosophical, unlettered men.”
220 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
9. “What! Then you make yourselves like the Apostles.”
Because this silly objection has so often been urged, I will for
once spend a few words upon it, though it does not deserve that
honour. Why, must not every man, whether Clergyman or
layman, be in some respects like the Apostles, or go to hell?
Can any man be saved if he be not holy, like the Apostles; a
follower of them, as they were of Christ? And ought not every
Preacher of the gospel to be in a peculiar manner like the
Apostles, both in holy tempers, in examplariness of life, and in
his indefatigable labours for the good of souls? Wo unto every
ambassador of Christ, who is not like the Apostles in this! in
holiness, in making full proof of his ministry, in spending and
being spent for Christ! We cannot, and therefore we need not,
be like them in working outward miracles; but we may, and
ought, in working together with God for the salvation of men.
And the same God who was always ready to help their infirmi
ties, is ready to help ours also. He who made them “workmen
that needed not to be ashamed,” will teach us also “rightly
to divide the word of truth.” In this respect likewise, in
respect of his “having help from God,” for the work where
unto he is called, every Preacher of the gospel is like the
Apostles: Otherwise, he is of all men most miserable.
10. And I am bold to affirm, that these unlettered men have
help from God for that great work,-the saving souls from
death; seeing he hath enabled, and doth enable them still, to
“turn many to righteousness.” Thus hath he “destroyed the
wisdom of the wise, and brought to nought the understanding of
the prudent.” When they imagined they had effectually shut
the door, and locked up every passage whereby any help could
come to two or three Preachers, weak in body as well as soul,
who they might reasonably believe would, humanly speaking,
wear themselves out in a short time;—when they had gained
their point by securing, as they supposed, all the men of learn
ing in the nation, “He that sitteth in heaven laughed them to
scorn,” and came upon them by a way they thought not of.
“Out of the stones he raised up ’’ those who should beget
“children to Abraham.” We had no more foresight of this than
you: Nay, we had the deepest prejudices against it; until we
could not but own that God gave “wisdom from above ’’ to
these unlearned and ignorant men, so that the work of the Lord
prospered intheir hand, and sinners were daily converted to God.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 221
Indeed, in the one thing which they profess to know, they are
not ignorant men. I trust there is not one of them who is not
able to go through such an examination, in substantial, prac
tical, experimental Divinity, as few of our candidates for holy
orders, even in the University, (I speak it with sorrow and
shame, and in tender love,) are able to do. But, O! what man
ner of examination do most of those candidates go through! and
what proof are the tesimonials commonly brought, (as solemn as
the form is wherein they run,) either of their piety or know
ledge to whom are entrusted those sheep which God hath
purchased with his own blood |
11. “But they are laymen. You seem to be sensible your
self of the strength of this objection. For as many as you have
answered, I observe you have never once so much as touched
on this.”
I have not. Yet it was not distrust of my cause, but tender
ness to you, which occasioned my silence. I had something to
advance on this head also; but I was afraid you could not bear
it. I was conscious to myself that, some years since, to touch
this point, was to touch the apple of my eye: And this makes
me almost unwilling to speak now, lest I should shock the
prejudices I cannot remove.
Suffer me, however, just to intimate to you some things
which I would leave to your farther consideration: The Scribes
of old, who were the ordinary Preachers among the Jews, were
not Priests; they were not better than laymen. Yea, many
of them were incapable of the priesthood, being of the tribe of
Simeon, not of Levi.
Hence, probably, it was that the Jews themselves never urged
it as an objection to our Lord’s preaching, (even those who did
not acknowledge or believe that he was sent of God in an
extraordinary character) that he was no Priest after the order
of Aaron: Nor, indeed, could be; seeing he was of the tribe
of Judah.
Nor does it appear that any objected this to the Apostles:
So far from it, that at Antioch, in Pisidia, we find the rulers of
the synagogue sending unto Paul and Barnabas, strangers just
come into the city, “saying, Men and brethren, if ye have any
word of exhortation for the people, say on.” (Acts xiii. 15.)
If we consider these things, we shall be the less surprised at
what occurs in the eighth chapter of the Acts: “At that time
222 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
there was a great persccution against the Church; and they
were all scattered abroad” (that is, all the Church, all the
believers in Jesus) “throughout the regions of Judea and
Samaria.” (Verse 1.) “Therefore, they that were scattered
abroad went everywhere preaching the word.” (Verse 4.)
Now, what shadow of reason have we to say, or think, that
all these were ordained before they preached?
12. If we come to later times: Was Mr. Calvin ordained ?
Was he either Priest or Deacon? And were not most of those
whom it pleased God to employ in promoting the Reforma
tion abroad, laymen also ? Could that great work have been
promoted at all in many places, if laymen had not preached ?
And yet how seldom do the very Papists urge this as an objec
tion against the Reformation l Nay, as rigorous as they are in
things of this kind, they themselves appoint, even in some of
their strictest Orders, that “if any lay-brother believes himself
called of God to preach as a Missionary, the Superior of the
Order, being informed thereof, shall immediately send
him away.”
In all Protestant Churches it is still more evident that ordi
nation is not held a necessary pre-requisite of preaching; for
in Sweden, in Germany, in Holland, and, I believe, in every
Reformed Church in Europe, it is not only permitted but
required, that before any one is ordained, (before he is admitted
even into Deacon’s Orders, wherever the distinction between
Priests and Deacons is retained,) he should publicly preach a
year or more ad probandum facultatem. And for this practice
they believe they have the authority of an express command of
God: “Let these first be proved; then let them use the office
of a Deacon, being found blameless.” (1 Tim. iii. 10.)
13. “In England, however, there is nothing of this kind; no
layman permitted to speak in public.” No! Can you be igno
rant, that in an hundred churches they do it continually? In
how many (particularly in the west of England) does the parish
clerk read one of the Lessons? (In some he reads the whole
Service of the Church, perhaps cv.cry Lord’s day.) And do not
other laymen constantly do the same thing, yea, in our very
cathedrals? which, being under the more immediate inspection
of the Bishops, should be patterns to all other churches.
Perhaps it will be said, “But this is not preaching.” Yes,
but it is essentially such. For what is it to preach, but praedi
care verbum Dei; “to publish the word of God?” And this
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 223
laymen do all over England; particularly under the eye of
every Bishop in the nation.
Nay, is it not done in the Universities themselves? Who
ordained that singing-man at Christ-Church; who is likewise
utterly unqualified for the work, murdering every Lesson he
reads? not even endeavouring to read it as the word of God,
but rather as an old song! Such a layman as this, meddling
at all with the word of God, I grant, is a scandal to the
English nation.
To go a step farther: Do not the fundamental constitutions
of the University of Oxford, the statutes, even as revised by
Archbishop Laud, require every Bachelor of Arts, nine in ten
of whom are laymen, to read three public lectures in moral
philosophy, on whatever subject he chooses? My subject, I
well remember, was, “the love of God.” Now, what was
this but preaching?-
Nay, may not a man be a Doctor of Divinity even in
Oxford, though he never was ordained at all ? The instance
of Dr. Atwell, (late) Rector of Exeter College, is fresh in
cvery one's memory.
These are a few of the considcrations that may readily
occur to any thinking man on this head. But I do not rest the
cause on these. I believe it may be defended a shorter way.
14. It pleased God, by two or three Ministers of the Church
of England, to call many sinners to repentance; who, in
several parts, were undeniably turned from a course of sin,
to a course of holiness.
The Ministers of the places where this was done ought to
have received those Ministers with open arms; and to have
taken them who had just begun to serve God into their pecu
liar care; watching over them in tender love, lest they should
fall back into the snare of the devil.
Instead of this, the greater part spoke of those Ministers
as if the devil, not God, had sent them. Some repelled them
from the Lord’s table; others stirred up the people against
them, representing them, even in their public discourses, as
fellows not fit to live; Papists, heretics, traitors; conspirators
against their King and country.
And how did they watch over the sinners lately reformed?
Even as a leopard watcheth over his prey. They drove some
of them also from the Lord’s table; to which till now they had
224 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
no desire to approach. They preached all manner of evil
concerning them, openly cursing them in the name of the
Lord. They turned many out of their work; persuaded others
to do so too, and harassed them all manner of ways.
The event was, that some were wearied out, and so turned
back to their vomit again. And then these good Pastors gloried
over them, and endeavoured to shake others by their example.
15. When the Ministers by whom God had helped them
before came again to those places, great part of their work
was to begin again; (if it could be begun again;) but the
relapsers were often so hardened in sin, that no impression
could be made upon them.
What could they do in a case of so extreme necessity, where
many souls lay at stake 2
No Clergyman would assist at all. The expedient that
remained was, to find some one among themselves, who was
upright of heart, and of sound judgment in the things of God;
and to desire him to meet the rest as often as he could, in
order to confirm them, as he was able, in the ways of God,
either by reading to them, or by prayer, or by exhortation.
God immediately gave a blessing hereto. In several places,
by means of these plain men, not only those who had already
begun to run well were hindered from drawing back to per
dition; but other sinners also, from time to time, were con
verted from the error of their ways.
This plain account of the whole proceeding I take to be the
best defence of it. I know no scripture which forbids making
use of such help, in a case of such necessity. And I praise
God who has given even this help to those poor sheep, when
“their own shepherds pitied them not.”
“But does not the Scripture say, ‘No man taketh this
honour to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron?’”
Nor do these. The honour here mentioned is the Priesthood.
But they no more take upon them to be Priests than to be
Kings. They take not upon them to administer the sacra
ments, -an honour peculiar to the Priests of God. Only,
according to their power, they exhort their brethren to con
tinue in the grace of God.
“But for these laymen to exhort at all is a violation of all
order.”
What is this order of which you speak? Will it serve instead
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 225
of the knowledge and love of God? Will this order rescue
those from the snare of the devil, who are now taken captive
at his will? Will it keep them who are escaped a little way,
from turning back into Egypt? If not, how should I answer
it to God, if, rather than violate I know not what order, I
should sacrifice thousands of souls thereto? I dare not do it.
It is at the peril of my own soul.
Indeed, if by order were meant true Christian discipline,
whereby all the living members of Christ are knit together in
one, and all that are putrid and dead immediately cut off from
the body; this order I reverence, for it is of God. But where
is it to be found? in what diocese, in what town or parish,
within England or Wales? Are you Rector of a parish? Then
let us go no farther. Does this order obtain there? Nothing
less. Your parishioners are a rope of sand. As few (if any)
of them are alive to God; so they have no connexion with each
other, unless such as might be among Turks or Heathens.
Neither have you any power to cut off from that body, were it
alive, the dead and putrid members. Perhaps you have no
desire; but all are jumbled together without any care or
concern of yours.
It is plain, then, that what order is to be found is not among
you who so loudly contend for it, but among that very people
whom you continually blame for their violation and contempt
of it. The little flock you condemn is united together in one
body, by one Spirit; so that “if one member suffers, all the
members suffer with it; if one be honoured, all rejoice with
it.” Nor does any dead member long remain; but as soon as
the hope of recovering it is past, it is cut off.
Now, suppose we were willing to relinquish our charge, and
to give up this flock into your hands, would you observe the
same order as we do now with them and the other souls under
your care? You dare not; because you have respect of persons.
You fear the faces of men. You cannot; because you have not
overcome the world. You are not above the desire of earthly
things. And it is impossible you should ever have any true
order, or exercise any Christian discipline, till you are wholly
crucified to the world, till you desire nothing more but God.
Consider this matter, I entreat you, a little farther. Herc
are thirty thousand persons” (perhaps somewhat more) of whom
* In the year 1772.-EDIT.
VOL. VIII.
226 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
I take care, watching over their souls as he that must give
account. In order hereto it lies upon me, (so I judge,) at the
peril of my own salvation, to know, not only their names, but
their outward and inward states, their difficulties and dangers.
Otherwise, how can I know either how to guide them aright,
or to commend them to God in prayer? Now, if I am willing
tomake these over to you, will you watch over them in the same
manner? Will you take the same care (or as much more as
you please) of each soul as I have hitherto done? Not such
curam animarum” as you have taken these ten years in your
own parish. Poor empty name ! Has not your parish been,
in fact, as much a sinecure to you as your prebend ? O what
an account have you to give to the Great Shepherd and
Bishop of souls !
18. There is one more excuse for denying this work of God,
taken from the instruments employed therein; that is, “that
they are wicked men.” And a thousand stories have been
handed about to prove it.
But you may observe, their wickedness was not heard of till
after they “went about doing good.” Their reputation for
honesty was till then unblemished. But it was impossible it
should continue so, when they were publicly employed in “tes
tifying of the world, that its deeds were evil.” It could not be
but the Scriptures should be fulfilled: “The servant is not
above his Master. If they have called thc Master of the house
Beelzebub, how much more them of his household !”
Yet I cannot but remind considerate men, in how remarkable
a manner the wisdom of God has for many years guarded against
this pretence, with respect to my brother and me in particular.
Scarce any two men in Great Britain, of our rank, have been
so held out, as it were, to all the world; especially of those who
from their childhood had always loved and studiously sought
retirement. And I had procured what I sought; I was quite
safe, as I supposed, in a little country town, when I was required
to return to Oxford, without delay, to take the charge of some
young gentlemen, by Dr. Morley, the only man then in England
to whom I could deny nothing. From that time both my bro
ther and I (utterly against our will) came to be more and more
observed and known, till we were more spoken of, than perhaps
* “A cure of souls.”—EDIT.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 227
two so inconsiderable persons ever were before in the nation.
To make us more public still, as honest madmen at least, by a
strange concurrence of providences, overturning all our preced
ing resolutions, we were hurried away to America. However, at
our return from thence, we were resolved to retire out of the
world at once; being sated with noise, hurry, and fatigue, and
seeking nothing but to be at rest. Indeed, for a long season,
the greatest pleasure I had desired on this side eternity was,
Tacitum sylvas inter reptare salubres,
Quaerentem quicquid dignum sapiente bonoque."
And we had attained our desire. We wanted nothing. We
looked for nothing more in this world when we were dragged
out again, by earnest importunity, to preach at one place, and
another, and another, and so carried on, we knew not how,
without any design but the general one of saving souls, into
a situation, which, had it been named to us at first, would
have appeared far worse than death.
19. What a surprising apparatus of Providence was here !
And what stronger demonstrations could have been given, of
men’s acting from a zeal for God, whether it were “according
to knowledge” or no? What persons could, in the nature of
things, have been (antecedently) less liable to exception, with
regard to their moral character, at least, than those the all-wise
God hath now employed? Indeed I cannot devise what manner
of men could have been more unexceptionable on all accounts.
Had God endued us with greater natural or acquired abilities,
that verything might have been turned into an objection. Had
we becn remarkably defective, it would have been matter of
objection on the other hand. Had we been Dissenters of any
kind, or even Low-Church men, (so called,) it would have been
a great stumbling-block in the way of those who are zealous for
the Church. And yet had we continued in the impetuosity of
our High-Church zeal, neither should we have been willing to
converse with Dissenters, nor they to receive any good at our
hands. Some objections were kept out of the way, by our
known contempt of money and preferment; and others, by that
rigorous strictness of life which we exacted, not of others, but
ourselves only. Insomuch, that, twelve or fourteen years ago,
* Creeping silent through the sylvan shades,
Exploring what is wise and good in man.
228 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
the censure of one who had narrowly observed us (me in parti
cular) went no farther than this:—
Does John beyond his strength persist to go,
To his frail carcase literally foe 3
Careless of health, as if in haste to die,
And lavish time to insure eternity
So that, upon the whole, I see not what God could have done
more in this respect which he hath not done; or what instru
ments he could have employed in such a work, who would have
been less liable to exception.
20. Neither can I conceive how it was possible to do that
work, the doing of which, we are still under the strongest con
viction, is bound upon us at the peril of our own souls, in a less
exceptionable manner. We have, by the grace of God, behaved,
not only with meekness, but with all tenderness toward all men;
with all the tenderness which we conceived it was possible to
use, without betraying their souls. And from the very first
it has been our special care, to deal tenderly with our brethren,
the Ciergy. We have not willingly provoked them at any
time; neither any single Clergyman. We have not sought
occasion to publish their faults; we have not used a thousand
occasions that offered. When we were constrained to speak
something, we spake as little as we believed we could, without
offending God; and that little, though in plain and strong
words, yet as mildly and lovingly as we were able. And in
the same course we have steadily persevered, (as well as in
earnestly advising others to tread in our steps,) even though
we saw that, with regard to them, by all this we profited
nothing; though we knew we were still continually represented
as implacable enemies to the Clergy, as railers against them,
as slanderers of them, as seeking all opportunities to blacken
and asperse them. When a Clergyman himself has vehemently
accused me of doing this, I bless God he could not provoke
me to do it. I still “kept my mouth as it were with a bridle,”
and committed my cause to a higher-hand.
21. The truth is, you impute that hatred to us, which is in
your own breast. (I speak not this of all the Clergy; God for
bid! But let it fall on whom it concerns.) You, it is certain,
have shown the utmost hatred to us, and in every possible way;
unless you were actually to beat us, (of which also we are not
without precedent,) or to shoot us through the head. And if
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 229
you could prevail upon others to do this, I suppose you would
think you did God service. I do not speak without ground. I
have heard with my own ears such sermons, (in Staffordshire
particularly,) that I should not have wondered if, as soon as we
came out of the church, the people had stoned me with stones.
And it was a natural consequence of what that poor Minister
had lately heard at the Bishop’s visitation; as it was one great
cause of the miserable riots and outrages which soon followed.
It is this, my brethren, it is your own preaching, and not
ours, which sets the people against you. The very same per
sons who are diverted with those sermons, cannot but despise
you for them in their hearts; even those who on your autho
rity believe most of the assertions which you adv nce. What
then must they think of you, who know the greatest part of
what you assert to be utterly false? They may pity and pray
for you; but they can esteem you no other than false wit
nesses against God and your brethren.
22. “But what need is there,” say even some of a milder
spirit, “ of this preaching in fields and streets? Are there
not churches enough to preach in ?” No, my friend, there
are not; not for us to preach in. You forget; we are not
suffered to preach there, else we should prefer them to any
places whatever. “Well, there are Ministers enough with
out you.” Ministers enough, and churches enough ! for what?
to reclaim all the sinners within the four seas? If there
were, they would all be reclaimed. But they are not re
claimed: Therefore, it is evident that there are not churches
enough. And one plain reason why, notwithstanding all these
churches, they are no nearer being reclaimed, is this, -they
never come into a church, perhaps not once in a twelve
month, perhaps not for many years together. Will you say,
(as I have known some tender-hearted Christians,) “Then it
is their own fault; let them die, and be damned ?” I grant it
is their own fault; and so it was my fault and yours when we
went astray like sheep that were lost. Yet the Shepherd of
souls sought after us, and went after us into the wildcriness.
And “oughtest not thou to have compassion on thy fellow
servants, as he had pity on thee?” Ought not we also “to
seek,” as far as in us lies, “and to save, that which is lost?”
Behold the amazing love of God to the outcasts of men
His tender condescension to their folly! They would regard
nothing done in the usual way. All this was lost upon them.
230 . A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
The ordinary preaching of the word of God, they would not
even deign to hear. So the devil made sure of these careless
ones; for who should pluck them out of his hand? Then God
was moved to jealousy, and went out of the usual way to save
the souls which he had made. Then, over and above what was
ordinarily spoken in his name in all the houses of God in the
land, he commanded a voice to cry in the wilderness, “Pre
pare ye the way of the Lord. The time is fulfilled. The king
dom of heaven is at hand. Repent ye, and believe the gospel.”
23. Consider coolly, if it was not highly expedient that
something of this kind should be. How expedient, were it
only on the account of those poor sinners against their own
souls who, to all human appearance, were utterly inaccessible
every other way ! And what numbers of these are still to be
found, even in or near our most populous cities ! What mul
titudes of them were, some years since, both in Kingswood,
and the Fells about Newcastle! who, week after week, spent
the Lord’s day, either in the alc-house, or in idle diversions,
and never troubled themselves about going to church, or to
any public worship at all. Now, would you really have
desired that these poor wretches should have sinned on till
they dropped into hell? Surely you would not. But by
what other means was it possible they should have been
plucked out of the fire? Had the Minister of the parish
preached like an angel, it had profited them nothing; for
they heard him not. But when one came and said, “Yonder
is a man preaching on the top of the mountain,” they ran in
droves to hear what he would say; and God spoke to their
hearts. It is hard to conceive anything else which could
have reached them. Had it not been for field-preaching, the
uncommonness of which was the very circumstance that
recommended it, they must have run on in the error of their
way, and perished in their blood.
24. But suppose field-preaching to be, in a case of this kind,
ever so expedient or even necessary, yet who will contest with
us for this province? May we not enjoy this quiet and unmo
lested ? Unmolested, I mean, by any competitors: For who is
there among you, brethren, that is willing (examine your own
hearts) even to save souls from death at this price? Would
not you let a thousand souls perish, rather than you would be
the instruments of rescuing them thus? I do not speak now
with regard to conscience, but to the inconveniences that must
OF REASON AND It ELIGION, 23]
accompany it. Can you sustain them, if you would 9 Can
you bear the summer sun to beat upon your naked head?
Can you suffer the wintry rain or wind, from whatever
quarter it blows? Are you able to stand in the open air
without any covering or defence when God casteth abroad his
snow like wool, or scattereth his hoar-frost like ashcs? And
yet these are some of the smallest inconveniences which ac
company field-preaching. Far beyond all these, are the contra
diction of sinners, the scoffs both of the great vulgar and the
small; contempt and reproach of every kind; often more than
verbal affronts, stupid, brutal violence, sometimes to the hazard
of health, or limbs, or life. Brethren, do you envy us this
honour? What, I pray, would buy you to be a field-preacher?
Or what, think you, could induce any man of common sense
to continue therein one year, unless he had a full conviction
in himself that it was the will of God concerning him ?
Upon this conviction it is (were we to submit to these
things on any other motive whatsoever, it would furnish you
with a better proof of our distraction than any that has yet
been found) that we now do, for the good of poor souls, what
you cannot, will not, dare not do: And we desire not that
you should. But this one thing we may reasonably desire of
you,—Do not increase the difficulties, which are already so
great, that, without the mighty power of God, we must sink
under them. Do not assist in trampling down a little hand
ful of men, who, for the present, stand in the gap between
ten thousand poor wretches and destruction, till you find
some others to take their places.
25. Highly needful it is that some should do this, lest
those poor souls be lost without remedy: And it should re
joice the hearts of all who desire the kingdom of God should
come, that so many of them have been snatched already from
the mouth of the lion, by an uncommon, though not unlaw
ful, way. This circumstance, therefore, is no just excuse for
not acknowledging the work of God; especially, if we con
sider, that whenever it has pleased God to work any great
work upon the earth, even from the earliest times, he hath
stepped more or less out of the common way;—whether to
excite the attention of a greater number of people than might
otherwise have regarded it; or to separate the proud and
haughty of heart, from those of an humble, childlike spirit; the
former of whom he foresaw, trusting in their own wisdom, would
232 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
fall on that stone and be broken; while the latter, inquiring with
simplicity, would soon know of the work, that it was of God.
26. “Nay,” say some, “but God is a God of wisdom: And
it is his work to give understanding. Whereas this man is
one of them, and he is a fool. You see the fruits of their
preaching.” No, my friend, you do not. That is your mis
take. A fool very possibly he may be. So it appears by his
talking, perhaps writing too. But this is none of the fruits of
our preaching. He was a fool before ever he heard us. We
found and are likely to leave him so. Therefore his folly is
not to be imputed to us, even if it continue to the day of his
death. As we were not the cause, so we undertake not the
cure, of disorders of this kind. No fair man, therefore, can
excuse himself thus, from acknowledging the work of God.
Perhaps you will say, “He is not a natural fool, neither; but
he is so ignorant. He knows not the first principles of religion.”
It is very possible. But have patience with him, and he will
know them by and by; yea, if he be in earnest to save his
soul, far sooner than you can conceive. And, in the mean time,
neither is this an objection of any weight. Many, when they
begin to hear us, may, without any fault of ours, be utter
strangers to the whole of religion. But this is no incurable
disease. Yet a little while, and they may be wise unto salvation.
Is the ignorance you complain of among this people (you
who object to the people more than to their teachers) of ano
ther kind? Do not they “know how in meekness to reprove
or instruct those that oppose themselves?” I believe what
you say: All of them do not; they have not put on gentle
ness and longsuffering. I wish they had : Pray for them
that they may ; that they may be mild and patient toward all
men. But what, if they are not? Sure, you do not make
this an argument that God hath not sent us! Our Lord
came, and we come, “not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance; ” passionate sinners, (such as these whereof you
complain,) as well as those of every other kind. Nor can it
be expected they should be wholly delivered from their sin as
soon as they begin to hear his word.
27. A greater stumbling-block than this is laid before you,
by those that “say and do not.” Such, I take it for granted,
will be among us, although we purge them out as fast as we
can; persons that talk much of religion, that commend the
Preachers, perhaps are diligent in hearing them; it may be,
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 233
read all their books, and sing their hymns; and yet no change
is wrought in their hearts. Were they of old time as lions in
their houses? They are the same still. Were they (in low
life) slothful or intemperate? Were they tricking or dishonest,
over-reaching or oppressive Or did they use to borrow and
not pay? The Ethiopian hath not changed his skin. Were
they (in high life) delicate, tender, self-indulgent? Were they
nice in furniture or apparel? Were they fond of trifles, or of
their own dear persons? The leopard hath not changed her
spots. Yet their being with us for a time proves no more
than that we have not the miraculous discernment of spirits.
Others you may find, in whom there was a real change. But
it was only for a season. They are now turned back, and are
two-fold more the children of hell than before. Yet neither is
this any manner of proof that the former work was not of God.
No, not though these apostates should, with the utmost confi
dence, say all manner of evil against us. I expect they should.
For every other injury hath been forgiven, and will be to the
end of the world. But hardly shall any one forgive the intoler
able injury of almost persuading him to be a Christian. When
these men, therefore, who were with us, but went out from
among us, assert things that may cause your ears to tingle, if
you consider either the Scripture or the nature of man it will
not stagger you at all : Much less will it excuse you for not
acknowledging the work in general to be of God.
28. But to all this it may possibly be replied, “When you
bring your credentials with you, when youprove by miracles what
you assert, then we will acknowledge that God hath sent you.”
What is it you would have us prove by miracles? that the
doctrines we preach are true? This is not the way to prove
that. (As our first Reformers replied to those of the Church of
Rome, who, you may probably remember, were continually
urging them with this very demand.) We prove the doctrineswe
preach by Scripture and reason, and, if need be, by antiquity.
What else is it then we are to prove by miracles?
Is it, (1.) That A. B. was for many years without God in
the world, a common swearer, a drunkard, a Sabbath-breaker?
Or, (2.) That he is not so now?
Or, (3.) That he continued so till he heard us preach, and
from that time was another man?
Not so. The proper way to prove these facts is by the testi
234 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
mony of competent witnesses; and these witnesses are ready,
whenever required, to give full evidence of them.
Or, would you have us prove by miracles,
(4.) That this was not done by our own power or holiness?
that God only is able to raise the dead, those who are dead
in trespasses and sins? Nay, if you “hear not Moses and
the Prophets” and Apostles, on this head, neither would you
believe, “though one rose from the dead.”
It is therefore utterly unreasonable and absurd to require
or expect the proof of miracles, in questions of such a kind as
are always decided by proofs of quite another nature.
29. “But you relate them yourself.” I relate just what I
saw, from time to time: And this is true, that some of those
circumstances seem to go beyond the ordinary course of
nature. But I do not peremptorily determine, whether they
were supernatural or no; much less do I rest upon them
either the proof of other facts, or of the doctrines which I
preach. I prove these in the ordinary way; the one by
testimony, the other by Scripture and reason.
“But if you can work miracles when you please, is not this
the surest way of proving them? This would put the matter
out of dispute at once, and supersede all other proof.”
You seem to lie under an entire mistake, both as to the
nature and use of miracles. It may reasonably be questioned,
whether there ever was that man living upon earth, except
the man Christ Jesus, that could work miracles when he
pleased. God only, when he pleased, exerted that power, and
by whomsoever it pleased him.
But if a man could work miracles when he pleased, yet there
is no Scripture authority, nor even example, for doing it in
order to satisfy such a demand as this. I do not read that
either our Lord, or any of his Apostles, wrought any miracle on
such an occasion. Nay, how sharply does our Lord rebuke
those who made a demand of this kind ' When “certain of
the Scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we
would see a sign from thee;” (observe, this was their method of
answering the strong reasons whereby he had just proved the
works in question to be of God!) “he answered and said to
them, An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign;
but there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the Pro
phet Jonas.” (Matt. xii. 38, 39.) “An evil and adulterous
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 235
generation l’” else they would not have needed such a kind
of proof. Had they been willing to do his will, they would,
without this, have known that the doctrine was of God.
Miracles, therefore, are quite needless in such a case. Nor
are they so conclusive a proof as you imagine. If a man could
and did work them in defence of any doctrine, yet this would
not supersede other proof; for there may be tepata \revôovs,
“lying wonders,” miracles wrought in support of falsehood.
Still, therefore, his doctrine would remain to be proved from
the proper topics of Scripture and reason: And these even
without miracles are sufficient; but miracles without these are
not. Accordingly, our Saviour and all his Apostles, in the
midst of their greatest miracles, never failed to prove every
doctrine they taught by clear Scripture and cogent reason.
30. I presume, by this time you may perceive the gross
absurdity of demanding miracles in the present case; seeing
one of the propositions in question, (over and above our gene
ral doctrines) viz., “That sinners are reformed,” can only be
proved by testimony; and the other, “This cannot be done
but by the power of God,” necds no proof, being self-evident.
“Why, I did once myself rejoice to hear,” says a grave citi
zen, with an air of great importance, “that so many sinners
were reformed, till I found they were only turned from one
wickedness to another; that they were turned from cursing or
swearing, or drunkenness, into a mo less damnable sin, that of
schism.”
Do you know what you say? You have, I am afraid, a con
fused huddle of ideas in your head; and I doubt you have not
capacity to clear them up yourself, nor coolness enough to
receive help from others.
However, I will try. What is schism? Have you any deter
minate idea of it? I ask the rather, because I have found, by
repeated experiments, that a common English tradesman
receives no more light when he hears or reads, “This is
schism,” than if he heard or read,—
Bombalio, stridor, clangor, taratantara, murmur.
Honest neighbour, do not be angry. Lay down your ham
mer, and let us talk a little on this head.
You say, we are in the damnable sin of schism, and therefore
in as bad a state as adulterers or murderers.
I ask once more, What do you mean by schism? “Schism !
schism why, it is separating from the Church.” Ay, so it is.
236 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
And yet every separating from the Church to which we once
belonged is not schism; else you will make all the English to
be schismatics, by separating from the Church of Rome. “But
we had just cause.” So doubtless we had; whereas schism is a
causeless separation from the Church of Christ. So far so good.
But you have many steps to take before you can make good that
conclusion, that a separation from a particular national Church,
such as the Church of England is, whether with sufficient cause
or without, comes under the scriptural notion of schism.
However, taking this for granted, will you aver in cool blood,
that all who die in such a separation, that is, every one who dies
a Quaker, a Baptist, an Independent, or a Presbyterian, is as
infallibly damned as if he died in the act of murder or adultery?
Surely you start at the thought ! It makes even nature recoil.
How then can you reconcile it to the love that “hopeth all
things?”
31. But whatever state they are in, who causelessly separate
from the Church of England, it affects not those of whom we
are speaking; for they do not separate from it at all.
You may easily be convinced of this, if you will only weigh
the particulars following:
(1) A great part of these went to no church at all before
they heard us preach. They no more pretended to belong to
the Church of England, than to the Church of Muscovy. If,
therefore, they went to no church now, they would be no farther
from the Church than they were before.
(2.) Those who did sometimes go to church before, go three
times as often now. These, therefore, do not separate from the
Church. Nay, they are united to it more closely than before.
(3.) Those who never went to church at all before, do go now,
at all opportunities. Will common sense allow any one to say,
that these are separated from the Church?
(4.) The main question is, Are they turned from doing the
works of the devil, to do the works of God? Do they now live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in the present world? If they
do, if they live according to the directions of the Church, believe
her doctrines, and join in her ordinances; with what face can
you say, that these men separate from the Church of England?
32. But in what state are they whom the Clergy and Gentry
(and perhaps you for one) have successfully laboured to preserve
from this damnable sin of schism, whom you have kept from
hearing these men, and separating from the Church?
OF REASON AND RELIGION, 237
Is not the drunkard that was, a drunkard still? Inquire of
his poor wife and family. Is not the common swearer still hor
ribly crying to God for damnation upon his soul? Is not the
sinner in every other kind, exactly the same man still? Not
better at least, if he be not worse, than he was ten years ago.
Now, consider, (1.) Does the Church of England gain either
honour, or strength, or blessing, by such wretches as these
calling themselves her members? by ten thousand drunkards,
or whoremongers, or common swearers? Nay, ought she not
immediately to spew them out, to renounce all fellowship with
them? Would she not be far better without them than with
them? Let any man of reason judge.
(2.) Is the drunkard's calling himself of the Church of Eng
land, of any more use to him than to the Church? Will this
save him from hell, if he die in his sin? Will it not rather
increase his damnation?
(3.) Is not a drunkard of any other Church just as good as
a drunkard of the Church of England? Yea, is not a drunken
Papist as much in the favour of God as a drunken Protestant?
(4.) Is not a cursing, swearing Turk, (if there be such an
one to be found) full as acceptable to God, as a cursing,
swearing Christian?
Nay, (5.) If there be any advantage, does it not lie on the
side of the former? Is he not the less inexcusable of the two,
as sinning against less light?
O why will you sink these poor souls deeper into perdition
than they are sunk already? Why will you prophesy unto them,
“Peace, peace,” when there is no peace? Why, if you do it not
yourself, (whether you cannot, or will not, God knoweth,) should
you hinder us from “guiding them into the way of peace?”
33. Will you endeavour to excuse yourself by saying, “There
are not many who are the better for your preaching; and these
by and by will be as bad as ever; as such and such an one is
already?”
I would to God I could set this in a just light! But I can
not: All language fails.
God begins a glorious work in our land. You set yourself
against it with all your might, to prevent its beginning where
it does not yet appear, and to destroy it wherever it does. In
part you prevail. You keep many from hearing the word that is
able to save their souls. Others who had heard it, you induce
238 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
to turn back from God, and to list under the devil’s banner
again. Then you make the success of your own wickedness
an excuse for not acknowledging the work of God! You urge,
that not many sinners were reformed; and that some of those
are now as bad as ever !
Whose fault is this? Is it ours, or your own 2 Why have
not thousands more been reformed ? Yea, for every one who
is now turned to God, why are there not ten thousand 7
Because you and your associates laboured so heartily in the
cause of hell; because you and they spared no pains, either to
prevent or to destroy the work of God! By using all the
power and wisdom you had, you hindered thousands from
hearing the gospel which they might have found to be the
power of God unto salvation. Their blood is upon your heads.
By inventing, or countenancing, or retailing lies, some refined,
some gross and palpable, you hindered others from profiting by
what they did hear. You are answerable to God for these
souls also. Many who began to taste the good word, and run
the way of God’s commandments, you, by various methods,
prevailed on to hear it no more: So they soon drew back to
perdition. But know, that, for every one of these also, God
will require an account of you in the day of judgment.
34. And yet, in spite of all the malice, and wisdom, and
strength, not only of men, but of “principalities and powers,”
of the “rulers of the darkness of this world,” of the “wicked
spirits in high places,” there are thousands found who are
turned from “dumb idols to serve the living and true God.”
What a harvest then might we have seen before now, if all who
say they are “on the Lord’s side,” had come, as in all reason
they ought, “to the help of the Lord against the mighty!”
Yea, had they only not opposed the work of God, had they
only refrained from his messengers, might not the trumpet of
God have been heard long since in every corner of our land;
and thousands of sinners in every county been brought to
“fear God and honour the King?”
Judge of what immense service we might have been, even in
this single point, both to our King and country. All who hear
and regard the word we preach, “honour the King” for God's
sake. They “render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's,”
as well as “unto God the things that are God’s.” They have no
conception of piety without loyalty; knowing “the powers that
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 239
be are ordained of God.” I pray God to strengthen all that
are of this mind, how many soever they be | But might there
not have been at this day a hundred thousand in England, thus
minded, more than are now? Yea verily, even by our ministry,
had not they who should have strengthened us, weakened our
hands.
35. Surely you are not wise! What advantages do you throw
away ! What opportunities do you lose ! Such as, another day,
you may earnestly seek, and, nevertheless, may not find them.
For if it please God to remove us, whom will you find to
supply our place? We are in all things “your servants for
Jesus’s sake; ” though the more we love you, the less we are
loved. Let us be employed, not in the highest, but in the
meanest, and not in the easiest, but the hottest, service. Base
and plenty we leave to those that want them. Let us go on
in toil, in weariness, in painfulness, in cold or hunger, so we
may but testify the gospel of the grace of God. The rich, the
honourable, the great, we are thoroughly willing (if it be the
will of our Lord) to leave to you. Only let us alone with the
poor, the vulgar, the base, the outcasts of men. Take also to
yourselves the saints of the world: But suffer us “to call sinners
to repentance; ” cven the most vile, the most ignorant, the
most abandoned, the most fierce and savage of whom we can
hear. To these we will go forth in the manne of our Lord, de
siring nothing, receiving nothing of any man, (save the bread
we eat, while we are under his roof) and lot it be scen whether
God hath sent us. Only let not your hands, who fear the Lord,
be upon us. Why should we be stricken of you any more?
IV. 1. Surely ye are without excuse, all who do not yet
know the day of your visitation the day wherein the great
God, who hath been forgotten among us days without number,
is arising at once to be avenged of his adversaries, and to
visit and redeem his people. Are not his judgments and
mercies both abroad? and still will ye not learn righteousness?
Is not the Lord passing by? Doth not a great and strong
wind already begin “to rend the mountains and to break in
pieces the rocks before the Lord?” Is not the earthquake
also felt already? and a fire hath begun to burn in his anger.
Who knoweth what will be the end thereof.” But at the
same time, he is speaking to many in “a still, small voice.”
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear, lest he be suddenly
destroyed, and that without remedy :
240 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
2. What excuse can possibly be made for those who are
regardless of such a season as this? who are, at such a crisis,
stupid, senseless, unapprehensive? caring for none of these
things; who do not give themselves the pains to think about
them, but are still easy and unconcerned ? What! can there
ever be a point on which it more behoves you to think; and
that with the coolest and deepest attention? As long as the
heaven and the earth remain, can there be anything of so vast
importance, as God’s last call to a guilty land, just perishing
in its iniquity?
You, with those round about you, deserved long ago to have
“drank the dregs of the cup of trembling; ” yea, to have been
“punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power.” But he hath
not dealt with you according to your sins, neither rewarded
you after your iniquities. And once more he is mixing
mercy with judgment. Once more he is crying aloud, “Turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house
of Israel?” And will you not deign to give him the hearing?
If you are not careful to answer him in this matter, do not
still shut your eyes, and stop your ears, and harden your
stubborn heart. O beware, lest God laugh at your calamity,
and mock when your fear cometh !
3. Will you plead that you have other concerns to mind;
that other business engages your thoughts? It does so indeed?
But this is your foolishness; this is the very thing that leaves
you without excuse. For what business can beof equal moment:
The mariner may have many concerns to mind, and many
businesses to engage his thoughts; but not when the ship is
sinking. In such a circumstance (it is your own) you have but
one thing to think of,-save the ship and your own life together!
And the higher post you are in, the more deeply intent should
you be on this one point. Is this a time for diversions; for
eating and drinking, and rising up to play? Keep the ship.
above water. Let all else go, and mind this one thing !
4. Perhaps you will say, “So I do: I do mind this one thing,
—how to save the sinking nation. And therefore now I must
think of arms and provisions. I have no time now to think of
religion.” This is exactly as if the mariner should say, “Now
I must think of my guns and stores. I have no time now to
think of the hold.” Why, man, you must think of this, or perish.
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 241
It is there the leak is sprung. Stop that, or you and all
your stores will go together to the bottom of the sea.
Is not this your very case? Then, whatever you do, stop
the leak; else you go to the bottom I do not speak against
your stores: They are good in their kind; and it may be well
they are laid in. But all your stores will not save the sink
ing ship, unless you can stop the leak. Unless you can some
way keep out these floods of ungodliness, that are still con
tinually pouring in, you must soon be swallowed up in the
great deep, in the abyss of God’s judgments. This, this is
the destruction of the English nation. It is vice, bursting in
on every side, that is just ready to sink us into slavery first,
and then into the nethermost hell. “Who is a wise man, and
endued with knowledge among you?” Let him think of this.
Think of this, all that love your country, or that care for
your own souls. If now especially you do not think of this
one thing, you have no excuse before God or man.
5. Little more excuse have you who are still in doubt con
cerning this day of your visitation. For you have all the proof
that you can reasonably expect or desire, all that the nature of
the thing requires. That in many places, abundance of noto
rious sinners are totally reformed, is declared by a thousand eye
and ear witnesses both of their present and past behaviour.
And you are sensible, the proof of such a point as this must,
in the nature of things, rest upon testimony. And that God
alone is able to work such areformation, you know all the Scrip
tures testify. What would you have more? What pretence
can you have for doubting any longer? You have not the least
room to expect or desire any other or any stronger evidence.
I trust you are not of those who fortify themselves against
conviction; who are resolved they will never believe this.
They ask, “Who are these men?” We tell them plainly;
but they credit us not. Another and another of their own
friends is convinced, and tells them the same thing. But
their answer is ready, “Are you turned Methodist too?” So
their testimony likewise goes for nothing. Now, how is
it possible these should ever be convinced? for they will
believe none but those who speak on one side.
6. Do you delay fixing your judgment till you see a work
of God, without any stumbling-block attending it? That
never was yet, nor ever will. “It must needs be that
VOL. VIII.
242 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
offences will come.” And scarce ever was there such a work
of God before, with so few as have attended this.
When the Reformation began, what mountainous offences
lay in the way of even the sincere members of the Church of
Rome! They saw such failings in those great men, Luther
and Calvin Their vehement tenaciousness of their own
opinions; their bitterness toward all who differed from them;
their impatience of contradiction, and utter want of forbear
ance, even with their own brethren.
But the grand stumbling-block of all was their open,
avowed separation from the Church; their rejecting so many
of the doctrines and practices, which the others accounted
the most sacred; and their continual invectives against the
Church they separated from, so much sharper than Michael’s
reproof of Satan.
Were there fewer stumbling-blocks attending the Reform
ation in England? Surely no: For what was Henry the
Eighth ? Consider either his character, his motives to the
work, or his manner of pursuing it! And even King
Edward’s ministry we cannot clear of persecuting in their
turns, yea, and burning heretics. The main stumbling-block
also still remained, viz., open separation from the Church.
7. Full as many were the offences that lay in the way of
even the sincere members of the Church of England, when the
people called Quakers first professed that they were sent of
God to reform the land. Whether they were or no is beside
our question; it suffices for the present purpose to observe,
that over and above their open, avowed, total separation from
the Church, and their vehement invectives against many of her
doctrines, and the whole frame of her discipline, they spent
their main strength in disputing about opinions and externals,
rather than in preaching faith, mercy, and the love of God.
In these respects the case was nearly the same when the Bap
tists first appeared in England. They immediately commenced
a warm dispute, not concerning the vitals of Christianity, but
concerning the manner and time of administering one of the
external ordinances of it. And as their opinion hereof totally
differed from that of all the other members of the Church of
England, so they soon openly declared their separation from
it, not without sharp censures of those that continued therein.
8. The same occasion of offence was, in a smaller degree,
given by the Presbyterians and Independents; for they also
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 243
spent great part of their time and strength in opposing the
commonly-received opinions concerning some of the circum
stantials of religion; and, for the sake of these, separated
from the Church.
But I do not include that venerable man, Mr. Philip Henry,
nor any that were of his spirit, in this number. I know they
abhorred contending about externals. Neither did they sepa
rate themselves from the Church. They continued therein till
they were driven out, whether they would or no. I cannot but
tenderly sympathize with these; and the more, because this is
in part our own case. Warm men spare no pains, at this very
day, to drive us out of the Church. They cry out to the peo
ple, wherever one of us comes, “A mad dog, a mad dog !” if
haply we might fly for our lives, as many have done before us.
And sure it is, we should have complied with their desire, we
should merely for peace and quietness have left the Church
long before now, but that we could not in conscience do it.
And it is on this single motive, it is for conscience sake, that
we still continue therein; and shall continue, (God being our
helper) unless they by violence thrust us out.
9. But to return : What are the stumbling-blocks in the
present case, compared to those in any of the preceding?
We do not dispute concerning any of the externals or cir
cumstantials of religion. There is no room; for we agree with
you therein. We approve of, and adhere to, them all; all that
we learned together when we were children, in our Catechism
and Common-Prayer Book. We were born and bred up in your
own Church, and desire to die therein. We always were, and
are now, zealous for the Church; only not with a blind, angry
zeal. We hold, and ever have done, the same opinions which
you and we received from our forefathers. But we do not lay
the main stress of our religion on any opinions, right or wrong;
neither do we ever begin, or willingly join in, any dispute con
cerning them. The weight of all religion, we apprehend, rests
on holiness of heart and life. And consequently, wherever we
come, we press this with all our might. How wide then is
the difference between our case and the case of any of those
that are above mentioned ! They avowedly separated from the
Church: We utterly disavow any such design. They severely,
and almost continually, inveighed against the doctrines and dis
cipline of the Church they left: We approve both the doctrincs
244 A FARTIIER APPEAL TO MEN
and discipline of our Church, and inveigh only against ungod
liness and unrighteousness. They spent great part of their time
and strength in contending about externals and circumstan
tials: We agree with you in both; so that having no room to
spend any time in such vain contention, we have our desire of
spending and being spent, in promoting plain, practical reli
gion. How many stumbling-blocks are removed out of your
way! Why do not you acknowledge the work of God?
10. If you say, “Because you hold opinions which I cannot
believe are true:” I answer, Believe them true or false; I will
not quarrel with you about any opinion. Only see that your
heart be right toward God, that you know and love the Lord
Jesus Christ; that you love your neighbour, and walk as your
Master walked; and I desire no more. I am sick of opinions:
I am weary to bear them. My soul loathcs this frothy food.
Give me solid and substantial religion; give me an humble,
gentle lover of God and man; a man full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy; a man laying
himself out in the work of faith, the patience of hope, the
labour of love. Let my soul be with these Christians, whereso
cver they are, and whatsoever opinion they are of “Whoso
ever” thus “doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven,
the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.”
11. Inexcusably infatuated must you be, if you can even
doubt whether the propagation of this religion be of God!
Only more inexcusable are those unhappy men who oppose,
contradict, and blaspheme it.
How long will you stop your ears against Him that still
crieth, “Why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick
against the pricks;” for a man to “contend with his Maker.”
How long will you despise the well-known advice of a great and
learned man?—“Refrain from these men, and let them alone.
If this work be of man, it will come to nought. But if it be of
God, ye cannot overthrow it.” And why should you “be
found even to fight against God?” If a man fight with God,
shall he prevail? “Canst thou thunder with a voice like
him?” Make haste! Fall down Humble thyself before
him, lest he put forth his hand, and thou perish !
12. How long will you fight under the banner of the great
enemy of God and man? You are now in his service; you are
“taking part with the devil” against God. Even supposing
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 245
there were no other proof, this would undeniably appear from
the goodly company annong whom you are enlisted, and who war
one and the same warfare. I have heard some affirm, that the
most bitter enemies to the present work of God were Pharisees.
They meant, men who had the form of godliness, but denied the
power of it. But I cannot say so. The sharpest adversaries
thereof whom I have hitherto known (unless one might except a
few honourable men whom I may be excused from naming)
were the scum of Cornwall, the rabble of Bilston and Darlaston,
the wild beasts of Walsal, and the turnkeys of Newgate.
13. Might not the sight of these troops show any reasonable
man to what General they belonged; as well as the weapons
they never fail to use?—the most horrid oaths and execrations,
and lawless violence, carrying away as a flood whatsoever it is
which stands before it; having no eyes, nor ears, no regard to
the loudest cries of reason, justice, or humanity. Can you join
heart or hands with these any longer? with such an infamous,
scandalous rabble-rout, roaring and raging as if they were just
broke loose, with their captain Apollyon, from the bottomless
pit? Does it not rather concern you, and that in the highest
degree, as well as every friend to his King and country, every
lover of peace, justice, and mercy, immediately to join and
stop any such godless crew, as they would join to stop a fire
just beginning to spread, or an inundation of the sea?
14. If, on the contrary, you join with that godless crew,
and streng'hen their hands in their wickedness, must not you,
in all reason, be accounted (like them) a public enemy of
mankind? And indeed such must every one appear, in the
eye of unprejudiced reason, who opposes, directly or indirectly,
the reformation of mankind. By reformation, I mean the
bringing them back (not to this or that system of opinions, or
this or that set of rites and ceremonies, how decent and
significant soever; but) to the calm love of God and one
another, to an uniform practice of justice, mercy, and truth.
With what colour can you lay any claim to humanity, to
benevolence, to public spirit, if you can once open your
mouth, or stir one finger, against such a reformation as this?
It is a poor excuse to say, “O, but the people are brought
into several erroneous opinions!” It matters notastraw, whether
they are or no; (I speak of such opinions as do not touch the
foundation;) it is scarce worth while to spend ten words about
246 A FARTHER APPEAL TO MEN
it. Whether they embrace this religious opinion or that, is no
more concern to me, than whether they embrace this or that
system of astronomy. Are they brought to holy tempers and
holy lives? This is mine, and should be your, inquiry; since on
this, both social and personal happiness depend, happiness
temporal and eternal. Are they brought to the love of God
and the love of their neighbour? Pure religion and undefiled
is this. How long then will you “darken counsel by words
without knowledge?” The plain religion now propagated is Love.
And can you oppose this without being an enemy to mankind?
15. No, nor without being an enemy to your King and coun
try; especially at such a time as this. For, however men of no
thought may not see or regard it, or hectoring cowards may
brave it out, it is evident to every man of calm reflection, that
our nation stands on the very brink of destruction. And why
are we thus, but because “the cry of our wickedness is goneup to
heaven?” because we have so exceedingly, abundantly, beyond
measure, “corrupted our ways before the Lord?” and because
to all our other abominations we have added the open fighting
against God; the not only rejecting, but even denying, yea,
blaspheming his last offers of mercy; the hindering others
who were desirous to close there with; the despitefully using
his messengers, and the variously troubling and oppressing
those who did accept of his grace, break off their sins, and
turn to him with their whole heart.
16. I cannot but believe, it is chiefly on this account that
God hath now “a controversy with our land.” And must not
any considerate man be inclined to form the same judgment, if
he reviews the state of public affairs for only a few years last
past? I will not enter into particulars; but, in general, can
you possibly help observing, that, whenever there has been any
thing like a public attempt to suppress this new sect, (for so it
was artfully represented,) another and another public trouble
arose? This has been repeated so often, that it is surprising
any man of sense can avoid taking notice of it. May we “turn”
at length “to Him that smiteth us, hearing the rod and Him
that appointeth it !” May we “humble ourselves under the
mighty hand of God,” before the great deep swallow us up!
17. Just now, viz., on the 4th of this instant December, the
Reverend Mr. Henry Wickham, one of His Majesty's Justices
of Peace for the West-riding of Yorkshire, writes an order
*
OF REASON AND RELIGION. 247
To the Constable of Keighley, commanding him, “to convey
the body of Jonathan Reeves” (whose real crime is, the calling
sinners to repentance) “to His Majesty’s gaol and castle of
York; suspected,” said the precept, “ of being a spy among us,
and a dangerous man to the person and government of His
Majesty King George.”
God avert the omen I I fear this is no presage either of the
repentance or deliverance of our poor nation
18. If we will not turn and repent, if we will harden our
hearts, and acknowledge neither his judgments nor mercies;
what remains, but the fulfilling of that dreadful word, which
God spake by the Prophet Ezekiel: “Son of man, when the
land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, then will I
stretch forth my hand upon it, and break the staff of the bread
thereof—Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job,
were in it, they should deliver but their own souls. Or if I
bring a sword upon that land, and say, Sword, go through the
land:—Or if I send a pestilence into that land, and pour out
my fury upon it in blood:—Though Noah, Daniel, and Job,
were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver
neither son nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own
souls by their righteousness.” (xiv. 13, 14, 17, 19, 20.)
“Yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant, that shall be
brought forth, both sons and daughters.—And ye shall be com
forted concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem.
–And ye shall know that I have not done without cause all
that I have done in it, saith the Lord God.” (Verses 22, 23.)
LoNDoN, December 18, 1745.
A PLAIN ACCOUNT
op
THE PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTS
IN A LETTER TO THE
REVEREND MR. PERRONET
vicAR of shorkHAM, IN KENT
Written in the year 1748
REVEREND AND DEAR SIR,
1. SoME time since, you desired an account of the whole
economy of the people commonly called Methodists. And you
received a true, (as far as it went,) but not a full, account. To
supply what I think was wanting in that, I send you this ac
count, that you may know, not only their practice on every head,
but likewise the reasons whereon it is grounded, the occasion of
every step they have taken, and the advantages reaped thereby.
2. But I must premise, that as they had not the least ex
pectation, at first, of anything like what has since followed,
so they had no previous design or plan at all; but every thing
arose just as the occasion offered. They saw or felt some im
pending or pressing evil, or some good end necessary to be
pursued. And many times they fell unawares on the very
thing which secured the good, or removed the evil. At other
times, they consulted on the most probable means, following
only common sense and Scripture: Though they generally
found, in looking back, something in Christian antiquity like
wise, very nearly parallel thereto.
I. 1. About ten years ago, my brother and I were desired to
preach in many parts of London. We had no view therein, but,
so far as we were able, (and we knew God could work by whom
A PLAIN ACCOUNT OF THE METHODISTS. 249
soever it pleased him,) to convince those who would hear what
true Christianity was, and to persuade them to embrace it.
2. The points we chiefly insisted upon were four: First, that
orthodoxy, or right opinions, is, at best, but a very slender part
of religion, if it can be allowed to be any part of it at all; that
neither does religion consist in negatives, in bare harmlessness
of any kind; nor merely in externals, in doing good, or using
the means of grace, in works of piety (so called) or of charity;
that it is nothing short of, or different from, “the mind that
was in Christ; ” the image of God stamped upon the heart;
inward righteousness, attended with the peace of God; and
“joy in the Holy Ghost.” Secondly, that the only way under
heaven to this religion is, to “repent and believe the gospel; ”
or, (as the Apostle words it,) “repentance towards God, and
faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.” Thirdly, that by this faith,
“he that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth
the ungodly, is justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption which is in Jesus Christ.” And, Lastly, that
“being justified by faith,” we taste of the heaven to which
we are going; we are holy and happy; we tread down sin
and fear, and “sit in heavenly places with Christ Jesus.”
3. Many of those who heard this began to cry out that we
brought “strange things to their ears;” that this was doctrine
which they never heard before, or at least never regarded.
They “searched the Scriptures, whether these things were so,”
and acknowledged “the truth as it is in Jesus.” Their hearts
also were influenced as well as their understandings, and they
determined to follow “Jesus Christ, and him crucified.”
4. Immediately they were surrounded with difficulties;—
all the world rose up against them; neighbours, strangers,
acquaintance, relations, friends, began to cry out amain, “Be
not righteous overmuch; why shouldest thou destroy thyself?”
Let not “much religion make thee mad.”
5. One, and another, and another came to us, asking, what
they should do, being distressed on every side; as every one
strove to weaken, and none to strengthen, their hands in God.
We advised them, “Strengthen you one another. Talk together
as often as you can. And pray earnestly with and for one
another, that you may ‘endure to the end, and be saved.’”
Against this advice we presumed there could be no objection;
as being grounded on the plainest reason, and on so many scrip
^e 2. 2. '
*, *, Q
>
{
250 A PLAIN ACCOUNT OF
tures both of the Old Testament and New, that it would be
tedious to recite them.
6. They said, “But we want you likewise to talk with us
often, to direct and quicken us in our way, to give us the
advices which you well know we need, and to pray with us, as
well as for us.” I asked, Which of you desire this? Let
me know your names and places of abode. They did so.
But I soon found they were too many for me to talk with
severally so often as they wanted it. So I told them, “If
you will all of you come together every Thursday, in the
evening, I will gladly spend some time with you in prayer,
and give you the best advice I can.”
7. Thus arose, without any previous design on either side,
what was afterwards called a Society; a very innocent name,
and very common in London, for any number of people asso
ciating themselves together. The thing proposed in their
associating themselves together was obvious to every one. They
wanted to “flee from the wrath to come,” and to assist each
other in so doing. They therefore united themselves “in
order to pray together, to receive the word of exhortation,
and to watch over one another in love, that they might help
each other to work out their salvation.”
8. There is one only condition previously required in those
who desire admission into this society,—“a desire to flee
from the wrath to come, to be saved from their sins.”*
They now likewise agreed, that as many of them as had an
opportunity would meet together every Friday, and spend the
dinner hour in crying to God, both for each other, and for
all mankind.
9. It quickly appeared, that their thus uniting together
answered the end proposed therein. In a few months, the
far greater part of those who had begun to “fear God, and
work righteousness,” but were not united together, grew faint
in their minds, and fell back into what they were before.
Meanwhile the far greater part of those who were thus united
together continued “striving to enter in at the strait gate,”
and to “lay hold on eternal life.”
10. Upon reflection, I could not but observe, This is the very
thing which was from the beginning of Christianity. In the
* See the Rules of the United Societies.
ThE PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTS, 251
earliest times, those whom God had sent forth “preached the
gospel to every creature.” And the ou akpoatat, “the body of
hearers,” were mostly either Jews or Heathens. But as soon
as any of these were so convinced of the truth, as to forsake
sin and seek the gospel salvation, they immediately joined
them together, took an account of their names, advised them
to watch over each other, and met these karmyovuevot," cate
chumens,” (as they were then called,) apart from the great con
gregation, that they might instruct, rebuke, exhort, and pray
with them, and for them, according to their several necessities.
11. But it was not long before an objection was made to this,
which had not once entered into my thought:—“Is not this
making a schism? Is not the joining these people together,
gathering Churches out of Churches?”
It was easily answered, If you mean only gathering people
out of buildings called churches, it is. But if you mean, divid
ing Christians from Christians, and so destroying Christian
fellowship, it is not. For, (1.) These were not Christians
before they were thus joined. Most of them were barefaced
Heathens. (2.) Neither are they Christians, from whom you sup
pose them to be divided. You will not look me in the face and
say they are. What! drunken Christians! cursing and swearing
Christians! lying Christians! cheating Christians! If these are
Christians at all, they are devil Christians, as the poor Mala
barians term them. (3.) Neither are they divided any more
than they were before, even from these wretched devil Chris
tians. They are as ready as ever to assist them, and to perform
every office of real kindness towards them. (4.) If it be said,
“But there are some true Christians in the parish, and you
destroy the Christian fellowship between these and them;” I
answer, That which never existed, cannot be destroyed. But
the fellowship you speak of never existed. Therefore it can- O
not be destroyed. Which of those true Christians had any - 2.
such fellowship with these? Who watched over them in love? | e *
Who marked their growth in grace? Who advised and ex- %-
horted them from time to time? Who prayed with them and t
for them, as they had need? This, and this alone, is Christian - .
fellowship: But, alas! where is it to be found? Look east or
west, north or south; name what parish you please: Is this
Christian fellowship there? Rather, are not the bulk of the
parishioners a mere rope of sand? What Christian connexion
252 A PLAIN ACCOUNT OF
is there between them? What intercourse in spiritual things?
What watching over each other's souls? What bearing of one
another's burdens? What a mere jest is it then, to talk so
gravely of destroying what never was ! The real truth is just
the reverse of this: We introduce Christian fellowship where
it was utterly destroyed. And the fruits of it have been peace,
joy, love, and zeal for every good word and work.
II. 1. But as much as we endeavoured to watch over each
X4. %, other, we soon found some who did not live the gospel. I do
not know that any hypocrites were crept in; for indeed there
• *, was no temptation: But several grew cold, and gave way to the
2, 4. ** sins which had long easily beset them. We quickly perceived
*_* there were many ill consequences of suffering these to remain
‘... among us. It was dangerous to others; inasmuch as all sin is
2 of an infectious nature. It brought such a scandal on their
brethren as exposed them to what was not properly the
reproach of Christ. It laid a stumbling-block in the way of
others, and caused the truth to be evil spoken of.
2. We groaned under these inconveniences long, before a
remedy could be found. The people were scattered so wide in
all parts of the town, from Wapping to Westminster, that I
could not easily see what the behaviour of each person in his
own neighbourhood was: So that several disorderly walkers
did much hurt before I was apprized of it.
3. At length, while we were thinking of quite another thing,
we struck upon a method for which we have cause to bless God
ever since. I was talking with several of the society in Bristol
concerning the means of paying the debts there, when one stood
up and said, “Let every member of the society give a penny a
week till all are paid.” Another answered, “But many of them
are poor, and cannot afford to do it.” “Then,” said he, “put
eleven of the poorest with me; and if they can give anything,
well: I will call on them weekly; and if they can give nothing,
I will give for them as well as for myself. And each of you
call on eleven of your neighbours weekly; receive what they
give, and make up what is wanting.” It was done. In a while,
some of these informed me, they found such and such an one
did not live as he ought. It struck me immediately, “This is
the thing; the very thing we have wanted so long.” I called
together all the Leaders of the classes, (so we used to term
them and their companies,) and desired, that each would make
THE PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTS. 253
a particular inquiry into the behaviour of those whom he saw
weekly. They did so. Many disorderly walkers were detected.
Some turned from the evil of their ways. Some were put
away from us. Many saw it with fear, and rejoiced unto God
with reverence.- –
4. As soon as possible, the same method was used in
London and all other places. Evil men were detected, and
reproved. They were borne with for a season. If they forsook
their sins, we received them gladly; if they obstinately per
sisted therein, it was openly declared that they were not of
us. The rest mourned and prayed for them, and yet rejoiced,
that, as far as in us lay, the scandal was rolled away from the
society.
5. It is the business of a Leader,
(1.) To see each person in his class, once a week at the least,
in order to inquire how their souls prosper; to advise, reprove,
comfort, or exhort, as occasion may require; to receive what
they are willing to give, toward the relief of the poor.
(2) To meet the Minister and the Stewards of the society,
in order to inform the Minister of any that are sick, or of any
that are disorderly and will not be reproved; to pay to the
Stewards what they have received of their several classes in
the week preceding.
6. At first they visited each person at his own house; but
this was soon found not so expedient. And that on many
accounts: (1.) It took up more time than most of the Leaders
had to spare. (2.) Many persons lived with masters, mis
tresses, or relations, who would not suffer them to be thus
visited. (3.) At the houses of those who were not so averse,
they often had no opportunity of speaking to them but in
company. And this did not at all answer the end proposed,—.
of exhorting, comforting, or reproving. (4.) It frequently hap
pened that one affirmed what another denied. And this could
not be cleared up without seeing them together. (5.) Little
misunderstandings and quarrels of various kinds frequently
arose among relations or neighbours; effectually to remove
which, it was needful to see them all face to face. Upon all
these considerations it was agreed, that those of each class
should meet alltogether. And by this means, a more full in
quiry was made into the behaviour of every person. Those who
could not be visited at home, or no otherwise than in company,
had the same advantage with others. Advice or reproof was
254 A PLAIN ACCOUNT OF
given as need required, quarrels made up, misunderstandings
removed : And after an hour or two spent in this labour of
love, they concluded with prayer and thanksgiving.
7. It can scarce be conceived what advantages have been
reaped from this little prudential regulation. Many now
happily experienced that Christian fellowship of which they
had not so much as an idea before. They began to “bear one
another’s burdens,” and naturally to “care for each other.”
As they had daily a more intimate acquaintance with, so they
had a more endeared affection for, each other. And “speaking
the truth in love, they grew up into Him in all things, who is
the Head, even Christ; from whom the whole body, fitly
joined together, and compacted by that which every joint
supplied, according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, increased unto the edifying itself in love.”
8. But notwithstanding all these advantages, many were
at first extremely averse to meeting thus. Some, viewing it
in a wrong point of light, not as a privilege, (indeed an invalu
able one,) but rather a restraint, disliked it on that account,
because they did not love to be restrained in anything. Some
were ashamed to speak before company. Others honestly
said, “I do not know why; but I do not like it.”
9. Some objected, “There were no such meetings when I
came into the society first: And why should there now P I
do not understand these things, and this changing one thing
after another continually.” It was easily answered: It is pity
but they had been at first. But we knew not then either the
need or the benefit of them. Why we use them, you will
readily understand, if you read over the rules of the society.
That with regard to these little prudential helps we are conti
nually changing one thing after another, is not a weakness or
fault, as you imagine, but a peculiar advantage which we enjoy.
By this means we declare them all to be merely prudential, not
essential, not of divine institution. We prevent, so far as in us
lies, their growing formal or dead. We arc always open to
instruction; willing to be wiser every day than we were before,
and to change whatever we can change for the better.
10. Another objection was, “There is no scripture for this,
for classes and I know not what.” I answer, (1.) There is no
scripture against it. You cannot show one text that forbids
them. (2.) There is much scripture for it, even all those texts
which enjoin the substance of those various duties whereof this
THE PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTS. 255
is only an indifferent circumstance, to be determined by reason
and experience. (3.) You seem not to have observed, that
the Scripture, in most points, gives only general rules; and
leaves the particular circumstances to be adjusted by the
common sense of mankind. The Scripture, for instance, gives
that general rule, “Let all things be done decently and in
order.” But common sense is to determine, on particular
occasions, what order and decency require. So, in another
instance, the Scripture lays it down as a general, standing
direction: “Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do
all to the glory of God.” But it is common prudence which
is to make the application of this, in a thousand particular cases.
ll. “But these,” said another, “are all man’s inventions.”
This is but the same objection in another form. And the
same answer will suffice for any reasonable person. These
are man’s inventions. And what then? That is, they are
methods which men have found, by reason and common
sense, for the more effectually applying several Scripture
rules, couched in general terms, to particular occasions.
12. They spoke far more plausibly than these, who said,
“The thing is well enough in itself. But the Leaders are
insufficient for the work: They have neither gifts nor graces
for such an employment.” I answer, (1.) Yet such Leaders
as they are, it is plain God has blessed their labour. (2.) If
any of these is remarkably wanting in gifts or grace, he is soon
taken notice of and removed. (3.) If you know any such,
tell it to me, not to others, and I will endeavour to exchange
him for a better. (4.) It may be hoped they will all be better
than they are, both by experience and observation, and by the
advices given them by the Minister every Tuesday night, and
the prayers (then in particular) offered up for them.
III. 1. About this time, I was informed that several persons
in Kingswood frequently met together at the school; and, when
they could spare the time, spent the greater part of the night in
prayer, and praise, and thanksgiving. Some advised me to put
an end to this; but, upon weighing the thing thoroughly, and
comparing it with the practice of the ancient Christians, I could
see no cause to forbid it. Rather, I believed it might be made
of more general use. So I sent them word, I designed to
watch with them on the Friday nearest the full moon, that we
might have light thither and back again. I gave public notice
Wo ://
* ,
256 A PLA1N ACCOUNT OF
of this the Sunday before, and, withal, that I intended to
preach; desiring they, and they only, would meet me there,
who could do it without prejudice to their business or families.
On Friday abundance of people came. I began preaching
between eight and nine; and we continued till a little beyond
the noon of night, singing, praying, and praising God.
2. This we have continued to do once a month ever since,
in Bristol, London, and Newcastle, as well as Kingswood;
and exceeding great are the blessings we have found therein:
It has generally been an extremely solemn season; when the
word of God sunk deep into the heart, even of those who till
then knew him not. If it be said, “This was only owing to
the novelty of the thing, (the circumstance which still draws
such multitudes together at those seasons,) or perhaps to the
awful silence of the night:” I am not careful to answer in
this matter. Be it so: However, the impression then made
on many souls has never since been effaced. Now, allowing
that God did make use either of the novelty or any other in
different circumstance, in order to bring sinners to repentance,
yet they are brought. And herein let us rejoice together.
3. Nay, may I not put the case farther yet? If I can pro
bably conjecture, that, either by the novelty of this ancient
custom, or by any other indifferent circumstance, it is in my
power to “save a soul from death, and hide a multitude of
sins,” am I clear before God if I do it not, if I do not snatch
that brand out of the burning?
IV. 1. As the society increased, I found it required still
greater care to separate the precious from the vile. In order
to this, I determined, at least once in three months, to talk
with every member myself, and to inquire at their own mouths,
2, as well as of their Leaders and neighbours, whether they grew
in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. At
these seasons I likewise particularly inquire whether there be
any misunderstanding or difference among them; that every
hinderance of peace and brotherly love may be taken out of
the way.
2. To each of those of whose seriousness and good conversa
tion I found no reason to doubt, I gave a testimony under my
own hand, by writing their name on a ticket prepared for that
purpose; every ticket implying as strong a recommendation of
the person *o whom it was given as if I had wrote at length, “I
THE PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTs. 257
believe the bearer hereof to be one that fears God and works
righteousness.”
3. Those who bore these tickets, (these avu/8oNa or tes
serae, as the ancients termed them, being of just the same
force with the ervatoxal avatarukat, commendatory letters
mentioned by the Apostle,) wherever they came, were acknow
ledged by their brethren, and received with all cheerfulness.
These were likewise of use in other respects. By these it
was easily distinguished, when the society were to meet apart,
who were members of it, and who not. These also supplied
us with a quiet and inoffensive method of removing any dis
orderly member. He has no new ticket at the quarterly visi
tation; (for so often the tickets are changed;) and hereby it
is immediately known that he is no longer of the community.
TV. The thing which I was greatly afraid of all this time,
and which I resolved to use every possible method of pre
venting, was, a narrowness of spirit, a party zeal, a being
straitened in our own bowels; that miserable bigotry which
makes many so unready to believe that there is any work of
God but among themselves. I thought it might be a help
against this, frequently to read, to all who were willing to
hear, the accounts I received from time to time of the work
which God is carrying on in the earth, both in our own and
other countries, not among us alone, but among those of
various opinions and denominations. For this I allotted one
evening in every month; and I find no cause to repent my
labour. It is generally a time of strong consolation to those
who love God, and all mankind for his sake; as well as of
breaking down the partition-walls which either the craft of
the devil or the folly of men has built up; and of encourag
ing every child of God to say, (O when shall it once be!)
“Whosoever doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven,
the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.”
VI. 1. By the blessing of God upon their endeavours to
help one another, many found the pearl of great price. Being
justified by faith, they had “peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ.” These felt a more tender affection than
before, to those who were partakers of like precious faith; and
hence arose such a confidence in each other, that they poured
out their souls into each other's bosom. Indeed they had
great need so to do; for the war was not over, as they had
VOL. VIII.
258 A PLAIN ACCOUNT OF
supposed; but they had still to wrestle both with flesh and
blood, and with principalities and powers: So that temptations
were on every side; and often temptations of such a kind, as
they knew not how to speak in a class; in which persons of
every sort, young and old, men and women, met together.
2. These, therefore, wanted some means of closer union;
they wanted to pour out their hearts without reserve, particu
larly with regard to the sin which did still easily beset them,
and the temptations which were most apt to prevail over
them. And they were the more desirous of this, when they
observed it was the express advice of an inspired writer:
“Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for
another, that ye may be healed.”
3. In compliance with their desire, I divided them into
smaller companies; putting the married or single men, and
married or single women, together. The chief rules of these
bands (that is, little companies; so that old English word
signifies) run thus:
“In order to ‘confess our faults one to another,’ and pray
one for another that we may be healed, we intend, (1.) To
meet once a week, at the least. (2.) To come punctually at
the hour appointed. (3.) To begin with singing or prayer.
(4.) To speak each of us in order, freely and plainly, the true
state of our soul, with the faults we have committed in
thought, word, or deed, and the temptations we have felt since
our last meeting. (5.) To desire some person among us
(thence called a Leader) to speak his own state first, and then
to ask the rest, in order, as many and as searching questions
as may be, concerning their state, sins, and temptations.”
4. That their design in meeting might be the more effec
tually answered, I desired all the men-bands to meet me to
gether every Wednesday evening, and the women on Sunday,
that they might receive such particular instructions and ex
hortations as, from time to time, might appear to be most need
ful for them; that such prayers might be offered up to God,
as their necessities should require; and praise returned to the
Giver of every good gift, for whatever mercies they had received.
5. In order to increase in them a grateful sense of all his
mercies, I desired that, one evening in a quarter, all the men in
band, on a second, all the women, would meet; and on a third,
both men and women together; that we might together “eat
bread,” as the ancient Christians did, “with gladness and
THE PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTS. 259
singleness of heart.” At these love-feasts (so we termed them,
retaining the name, as well as the thing, which was in use from
the beginning) our food is only a little plain cake and water.
But we seldom return from them without being fed, not only
with the “meat which perisheth,” but with “that which
endureth to everlasting life.”
6. Great and many are the advantages which have ever since
flowed from this closer union of the believers with each other.
They prayed for one another, that they might be healed of the
faults they had confessed; and it was so. The chains were
broken, the hands were burst in sunder, and sin had no more
dominion over them. Many were delivered from the tempta
tions out of which, till then, they found no way to escape.
They were built up in our most holy faith. They rejoiced in
the Lord more abundantly. They were strengthened in love,
and more effectually provoked to abound in every good work.
7. But it was soon objected to the bands, (as to the classes
before,) “These were not at first. There is no Scripture for
them. These are man’s works, man’s building, man’s inven
tion.” I reply, as before, these are also prudential helps,
grounded on reason and experience, in order to apply the
general rules given in Scripture according to particular cir
cumstances.
8. An objection much more boldly and frequently urged, is,
that “all these bands are mere Popery.” I hope I need not
pass a harder censure on those (most of them at least) who
affirm this, than that they talk of they know not what; they
betray in themselves the most gross and shameful ignorance.
Do not they yet know, that the only Popish confession is, the
confession made by a single person to a Priest?—and this itself
is in nowise condemned by our Church; nay, she recommends
it in some cases. Whereas, that we practise is, the confession
of several persons conjointly, not to a Priest, but to each
other. Consequently, it has no analogy at all to Popish con
fession. But the truth is, this is a stale objection, which many
people make against anything they do not like. It is all Popery
out of hand.
VII. 1. And yet while most of these who were thus inti
mately joined together, went on daily from faith to faith; some
fell from the faith, either all at once, by falling into known,
wilful sin; or gradually, and almost insensibly, by giving way
260 A PLAIN ACCOUNT OF
in what they called little things; by sins of omission, by yield
ing to heart-sins, or by not watching unto prayer. The exhort
ations and prayers used among the believers did no longer
profit these. They wanted advice and instructions suited to
their case; which as soon as I observed, I separated them
from the rest, and desired them to meet me apart on Saturday
evenings.
2. At this hour, all the hymns, exhortations, and prayers
are adapted to their circumstances; being wholly suited to those
who did see God, but have now lost sight of the light of his
countenance; and who mourn after him, and refuse to be
comforted till they know he has healed their backsliding.
3. By applying both the threats and promises of God to
these real, not nominal, penitents, and by crying to God in their
behalf, we endeavoured to bring them back to the great “Shep
herd and Bishop of their souls;” not by any of the fopperies of
the Roman Church, although, in some measure, countenanced
by antiquity. In prescribing hair-shirts, and bodily austerities,
we durst not follow even the ancient Church; although we had
unawares, both in dividing ot. Two rol, the believers, from the
rest of the society, and in separating the penitents from them,
and appointing a peculiar service for them.
VIII. 1. Many of these soon recovered the ground they
had lost. Yea, they rose higher than before; being more
watchful than ever, and more meek and lowly, as well as
stronger in the faith that worketh by love. They now outran
the greater part of their brethren, continually walking in the
light of God, and having fellowship with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ.
2. I saw it might be useful to give some advices to all those
who continued in the light of God’s countenance, which the
rest of their brethren did not want, and probably could not
receive. So I desired a small number of such as appeared to be
in this state, to spend an hour with me every Monday morning.
My design was, not only to direct them how to press after per
fection; to exercise their every grace, and improve every talent
they had received; and to incite them to love one another more,
and to watch more carefully over each other; but also to have
a select company, to whom I might unbosom myself on all occa
sions, without reserve; and whom I could propose to all their
brethren as a pattern of love, of holiness, and of good works.
THE PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTS. 261
3. They had no need of being incumbered with many
rules; having the best rule of all in their hearts. No pecu
liar directions were therefore given to them, excepting only
these three:
First. Let nothing spoken in this society be spoken again.
(Hereby we had the more full confidence in each other.)
Secondly. Every member agrees to submit to his Minister
in all indifferent things.
Thirdly. Every member will bring, once a week, all he can
spare toward a common stock.
4. Every one here has an equal liberty of speaking, there
being none greater or less than another. I could say freely to
these, when they were met together, “Ye may all prophesy one
by one,” (taking that word in its lowest sense,) “that all may
learn, and all may be comforted.” And I often found the
advantage of such a free conversation, and that “in the multi
tude of counsellors there is safety.” Any who is inclined so to
do is likewise encouraged to pour out his soul to God. And
here especially we have found, that “the effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous man availeth much.”
IX. 1. This is the plainest and clearest account I can give
of the people commonly called Methodists. It remains only to
give you a short account of those who serve their brethren in
love. These are Leaders of classes and bands, (spoken of
before,) Assistants, Stewards, Visitors of the sick, and School
masters.
2. In the third part of the “Appeal,” I have mentioned how
we were led to accept of Lay-Assistants. Their office is, in the
absence of the Minister,
(1.) To expound every morning and evening. (2.) To meet
the united society, the bands, the select society, and the peni
tents, once a week. (3.) To visit the classes once a quarter.
(4.) To hear and decide all differences. (5.) To put the disor
derly back on trial, and to receive on trial for the bands or
society. (6.) To see that the Stewards, the Leaders, and the
Schoolmasters faithfully discharge their several offices. (7.)
To meet the Leaders of the bands and classes weekly, and the
Stewards, and to overlook their accounts.
X. 1. But, long before this, I felt the weight of a far dif
ferent care, namely, care of temporal things. The quarterly
subscriptions amounted, at a mean computation, to above three
hundred pounds a year. This was to be laid out, partly in
262 A PLAIN ACCOUNT OF
repairs, partly in other necessary expenses, and partly in paying
debts. The weekly contributions fell little short of eight
pounds a week; which was to be distributed as every one had
need. And I was expected to take thought for all these things:
But it was a burden I was not able to bear; so I chose out first.
one, then four, and after a time, seven, as prudent men as I
knew, and desired them to take charge of these things upon
themselves, that I might have no incumbrance of this kind.
2. The business of these Stewards is,
To manage the temporal things of the society. To receive
the subscriptions and contributions. To expend what is need
ful from time to time. To send relief to the poor. To keep an
exact account of all receipts and expenses. To inform the
Minister if any of the rules of the society are not punctually
observed. To tell the Preachers in love, if they think anything
amiss, either in their doctrine or life.
3. The rules of the Stewards are,
(1.) Be frugal. Save everything that can be saved honestly.
(2.) Spend no more than you receive. Contract no debts.
(3.) Have no long accounts. Pay everything within the week.
(4) Give none that asks relief, either an ill word or an ill look.
Do not hurt them, if you cannot help. (5) Expect no thanks
from man.
4. They met together at six every Thursday morning; con
sulted on the business which came before them; sent relief to
the sick, as every one had need; and gave the remainder of what
had been contributed each week to those who appeared to be in
the most pressing want. So that all was concluded within the
week; what was brought on Tuesday being constantly expended
on Thursday. I soon had the pleasure to find, that all these
temporal things were done with the utmost faithfulness and
exactness; so that my cares of this kind were at an end. I had
only to revise the accounts, to tell them if I thought anything
might be amended, and to consult how deficiencies might be
supplied from time to time; for these were frequent and large,
(so far were we from abundance,) the income by no means
answering the expenses. But that we might not faint, some
times we had unforeseen helps in times of the greatest perplex
ity. At other times we borrowed larger or smaller sums: Of
which the greatest part has since been repaid. But I owe some
hundred pounds to this day. So much have I gained by preach
ing the gospel !
THE PEOPLE CALLED METHODIsrs. 263
XI. 1. But it was not long before the Stewards found a great
difficulty with regard to the sick. Some were ready to perish
before they knew of their illness; and when they did know, it
was not in their power (being persons generally employed in
trade) to visit them so often as they desired.
2. When I was apprized of this, I laid the case at large
before the whole society; showed how impossible it was for the
Stewards to attend all that were sick in all parts of the town;
desired the Leaders of classes would more carefully inquire, and
more constantly inform them, who were sick; and asked, “Who
among you is willing, as well as able, to supply this lack of
service?”
3. The next morning many willingly offered themselves. I
chose six-and-forty of them, whom I judged to be of the most
tender, loving spirit; divided the town into twenty-three parts,
and desired two of them to visit the sick in each division.
4. It is the business of a Visitor of the sick,
To see every sick person within his district thrice a week.
To inquire into the state of their souls, and to advise them as
occasion may require. To inquire into their disorders, and pro
cure advice for them. To relieve them, if they are in want.
To do any thing for them, which he (or she) can do. To bring
in his accounts weekly to the Stewards.”
Upon reflection, I saw how exactly, in this also, we had
copied after the primitive Church. What were the ancient
Deacons? What was Phebe the Deaconess, but such a Visitor
of the sick?
5. I did not think it needful to give them any particular
rules beside these that follow :
(1.) Be plain and open in dealing with souls. (2.) Be mild,
tender, patient. (3.) Be cleanly in all you do for the sick.
(4.) Be not nice.
6. We have ever since had great reason to praise God for his
continued blessing on this undertaking. Many lives have been
saved, many sicknesses healed, much pain and want prevented
or removed. Many heavy hearts have been made glad, many
mourners comforted: And the Visitors have found, from Him
whom they serve, a present reward for all their labour.
XII. 1. But I was still in pain for many of the poor that
were sick; there was so great expense, and so little profit. And
* The Leaders now do this.
264 A PLAIN ACCOUNT OF
first, I resolved to try, whether they might not receive more
benefit in the hospitals. Upon the trial, we found there was
indeed less expense, but no more good done, than before. I
then asked the advice of several Physicians for them; but still
it profited not. I saw the poor people pining away, and several
families ruined, and that without remedy.
2. At length I thought of a kind of desperate expedient. “I
will prepare, and give them physic myself.” For six or seven
and twenty years, I had made anatomy and physic the diversion
of my leisure hours; though I never properly studied them,
unless for a few months when I was going to America, where
I imagined I might be of some service to those who had no
regular Physician among them. I applied to it again. I took
into my assistance an Apothecary, and an experienced Surgeon;
resolving, at the same time, not to go out of my depth, but to
leave all difficult and complicated cases to such Physicians as
the patients should choose.
3. I gave notice of this to the society; telling them, that all
who were ill of chronical distempers (for I did not care to ven
ture upon acute) might, if they pleased, come to me at such a
time, and I would give them the best advice I could, and the
best medicines I had.
4. Many came : (And so every Friday since :) Among the
rest was one William Kirkman, a weaver, near Old Nichol
street. I asked him, “What complaint have you?” “O Sir,”
said he, “a cough, a very sore cough. I can get no rest day
nor night.”
I asked, “How long have you had it?” He replied, “About
threescore years: It began when I was eleven years old.” I
was nothing glad that this man should come first, fearing our
not curing him might discourage others. However, I looked
up to God, and said, “Take this three or four times a day. If
it does you no good, it will do you no harm.” He took it two
or three days. His cough was cured, and has not returned to
this day.
5. Now, let candid men judge, does humility require me to
deny a notorious fact? If not, which is vanity? to say, I by
my own skill restored this man to health; or to say, God did it
by his own almighty power? By what figure of speech this is
called boasting, I know not. But I will put no name to such a
fact as this. I leave that to the Rev. Dr. Middleton.
6. In five months, medicines were occasionally given to above
THE PEOPLE CALLED METHODJSTS. 265
five hundred persons. Several of these I never saw before; for
I did not regard whether they were of the society or not. In
that time seventy-one of these, regularly taking their medi
cines, and following the regimen prescribed, (which three in
four would not do,) were entirely cured of distempers long
thought to be incurable. The whole expense of medicines during
this time, was nearly forty pounds. We continued this ever
since, and, by the blessing of God, with more and more success.
XIII. 1. But I had for some years observed many who,
although not sick, were not able to provide for themselves, and
had none who took care to provide for them: These were chiefly
feeble, aged widows. I consulted with the Stewards, how they
might be relieved. They all agreed, if we could keep them
in one house, it would not only be far less expensive to us, but
also far more comfortable for them. Indeed we had no money
to begin; but we believed He would provide “who defendeth
the cause of the widow:” So we took a lease of two little
houses near; we fitted them up, so as to be warm and clean.
We took in as many widows as we had room for, and provided
them with things needful for the body; toward the expense of
which I set aside, first, the weekly contributions of the bands,
and then all that was collected at the Lord’s Supper. It is
true, this does not suffice: So that we are considerably in debt,
on this account also. But we are persuaded, it will not always
be so; seeing “the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof.”
2. In this (commonly called The Poor House) we have now
nine widows, one blind woman, two poor children, two upper
servants, a maid and a man. I might add, four or five Preachers;
for I myself, as well as the other Preachers who are in town,
diet with the poor, on the same food, and at the same table;
and we rejoice herein, as a comfortable earnest of our eating
bread together in our Father's kingdom.
3. I have blessed God for this house ever since it began; but
lately much more than ever. I honour these widows; for they
“are widows indeed.” So that it is not in vain, that, without
any design of so doing, we have copied after another of the insti
tutions of the Apostolic age. I can now say to all the world,
“Come and see how these Christians love one another !”*
XIV. 1. Another thing which had given me frequent con
* This has been since dropped for want of support.
>~. c.
266 A PLAIN ACCOUNT OF
cern was, the case of abundance of children. Some their parents
could not afford to put to school: So they remained like “a wild
ass’s colt.” Others were sent to school, and learned, at least, to
read and write; but they learned all kind of vice at the same
time: So that it had been better for them to have been without
their knowledge, than to have bought it at so dear a price.
2. At length I determined to have them taught in my own
house, that they might have an opportunity of learning to read,
write, and cast accounts, (if no more,) without being under
almost a necessity of learning Heathenism at the same time:
And after several unsuccessful trials, I found two such School
masters as I wanted; men of honesty and of sufficient know
ledge, who had talents for, and their hearts in, the work.
3. They have now under their care near sixty children: The
parents of some pay for their schooling; but the greater part,
being very poor, do not; so that the expense is chiefly defrayed
by voluntary contributions. We have of late clothed them too,
as many as wanted. The rules of the school are these that
follow:—*
First. No child is admitted under six years of age. Secondly.
All the children are to be present at the morning sermon.
Thirdly. They are at school from six to twelve, and from one
to five. Fourthly. They have no play-days. Fifthly. No
child is to speak in school, but to the masters. Sixthly. The
child who misses two days in one week, without leave, is
excluded the school.
4. We appointed two Stewards for the school also. The busi
ness of these is, to receive the school subscriptions, and expend
what is needful; to talk with each of the masters weekly; to
pray with and exhort the children twice a-week; to inquire
diligently, whether they grow in grace and in learning, and
whether the rules are punctually observed; every Tuesday
morning, in conjunction with the masters, to exclude those
children that do not observe the rules; every Wednesday morn
ing to meet with and exhort their parents, to train them up at
home in the ways of God.
5. A happy change was soon observed in the children, both
with regard to their tempers and behaviour. They learned read
ing, writing, and arithmetic swiftly; and at the same time they
* This also has been dropped for some time. 1772.
THE PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTS. 267
were diligently instructed in the sound principles of religion,
and earnestly exhorted to fear God, and work out their own
salvation.
XV. 1. A year or two ago, I observed among many a dis
tress of another kind. They frequently wanted, perhaps in
order to carry on their business, a present supply of money.
They scrupled to make use of a pawnbroker; but where to
borrow it they knew not. I resolved to try if we could not find
a remedy for this also. I went, in a few days, from one end
of the town to the other, and exhorted those who had this
world’s goods, to assist their needy brethren. Fifty pounds
were contributed. This was immediately lodged in the hands
of two Stewards; who attended every Tuesday morning, in
order to lend to those who wanted any small sum, not exceed
ing twenty shillings, to be repaid within three months.”
2. It is almost incredible, but it manifestly appears from
their accounts, that, with this inconsiderable sum, two hundred
and fifty have been assisted, within the space of one year.
Will not God put it into the heart of some lover of mankind to
increase this little stock? If this is not “lending unto the
Lord,” what is? O confer not with flesh and blood, but
immediately
Join hands with God, to make a poor man live!
3. I think, Sir, now you know all that I know of this peo
ple. You see the nature, occasion, and design of whatever is
practised among them. And, I trust, you may be pretty well
able to answer any questions which may be asked concerning
them; particularly by those who inquire concerning my
revenue, and what I do with it all.
4. Some have supposed this was no greater than that of the
Bishop of London. But others computed that I received eight
hundred a-year from Yorkshire only. Now, if so, it cannot be
so little as ten thousand pounds a-year which I receive out
of all England
5. Accordingly, a gentleman in Cornwall (the Rector of
Redruth) extends the calculation pretty considerably. “Let me
see,” said he: “Two millions of Methodists; and each of these
paying two-pence a week.” If so, I must have eight hundred
and sixty thousand pounds, with some odd shillings and pence,
a-year.
* We now (1772) lend any sum not exceeding five pounds.
268 A PLAIN ACCOUNT OF THE METHODISTS.
6. A tolerable competence | But be it more or less, it is
nothing at all to me. All that is contributed or collected in
every place is both received and expended by others; nor have
I so much as the “beholding thereof with my eyes.” And so it
will be, till I turn Turk or Pagan. For I look upon all this
revenue, be it what it may, as sacred to God and the poor; out
of which, if I want anything, I am relieved, even as another
poor man. So were originally all ecclesiastical revenues, as
every man of learning knows: And the Bishops and Priests
used them only as such. If any use them otherwise now, God
help them !
7. I doubt not, but if I err in this, or any other point, you
will pray God to show me his truth. To have “a conscience
void of offence toward God and toward man” is the desire of,
Reverend and dear Sir,
Your affectionate brother and servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
THE
NATURE, DESIGN, AND GENERAL RULES
or Tale.
UNITED SOCIETIES
IN LONDON, BRISTOL, KINGSWOOD, NEWCASTLE
UPON-TYNE, &c.
1. IN the latter end of the year 1739, eight or ten persons
came to me in London, who appeared to be deeply convinced
of sin, and earnestly groaning for redemption. They desired
(as did two or three more the next day) that I would spend
some time with them in prayer, and advise them how to flee
from the wrath to come; which they saw continually hanging
over their heads. That we might have more time for this
great work, I appointed a day when they might all come toge
ther, which from thenceforward they did every week, namely,
on Thursday, in the evening. To these, and as many more as
desired to join with them, (for their number increased daily,)
I gave those advices, from time to time, which I judged most
needful for them; and we always concluded our meeting with
prayer suited to their several necessities.
2. This was the rise of the United Society, first in London,
and then in other places. Such a society is no other than “a
company of men having the form and seeking the power of
godliness, united in order to pray together, to receive the
word of exhortation, and to watch over one another in love,
that they may help each other to work out their salvation.”
3. That it may the more easily be discerned, whether they
are indeed working out their own salvation, each society is
divided into smaller companies, called classes, according to
their respective places of abode. There are about twelve
270 GENERAL RULES OF
persons in every class; one of whom is styled the Leader. It
is his business, (1.) To see each person in his class once a
week at least, in order to inquire how their souls prosper; to
advise, reprove, comfort, or exhort, as occasion may require;
to receive what they are willing to give toward the relief of the
poor. (2.) To meet the Minister and the Stewards of the society
once a week; in order to inform the Minister of any that are
sick, or of any that walk disorderly, and will not be reproved;
to pay to the Stewards what they have received of their several
classes in the week preceding; and to show their account of
what each person has contributed.
4. There is one only condition previously required in those
who desire admission into these societies,—a desire “to flee
from the wrath to come, to be saved from their sins:” But,
wherever this is really fixed in the soul, it will be shown by its
fruits. It is therefore expected of all who continue therein, that
they should continue to evidence their desire of salvation,
First, by doing no harm, by avoiding evil in every kind;
especially that which is most generally practised: Such is, the
taking the name of God in vain; the profaning the day of the
Lord, either by doing ordinary work thereon, or by buying or
selling; drunkenness, buying or selling spirituous liquors, or
drinking them, unless in cases of extreme necessity; fighting,
quarreling, brawling; brother going to law with brother; re
turning evil for evil, or railing for railing; the using many
words in buying or selling; the buying or selling uncustomed
goods; the giving or taking things on usury, that is, unlawful
interest; uncharitable or unprofitable conversation, particu
larly speaking evil of Magistrates or of Ministers; doing to
others as we would not they should do unto us; doing what we
know is not for the glory of God, as the “putting on of gold or
costly apparel;” the taking such diversions as cannot be used
in the name of the Lord Jesus; the singing those songs, or
reading those books, which do not tend to the knowledge or
love of God; softness, and needless self-indulgence; laying up
treasures upon earth; borrowing without a probability of
paying; or taking up goods without a probability of paying
for them.
5. It is expected of all who continue in these societies, that
they should continue to evidence their desire of salvation,
Secondly, by doing good, by being, in every kind, merciful
after their power; as they have opportunity, doing good of every
Tille UNITED SOCIETIES. 271
possible sort, and as far as is possible, to all men;—to their
bodies, of the ability which God giveth, by giving food to the
hungry, by clothing the naked, by visiting or helping them
that are sick, or in prison;—to their souls, by instructing
reproving, or exhorting all they have any intercourse with;
trampling under foot that enthusiastic doctrine of devils, that
“we are not to do good unless our heart be free to it:” By
doing good especially to them that are of the household of faith,
or groaning so to be; employing them preferably to others,
buying one of another; helping each other in business; and
so much the more, because the world will love its own, and them
only: By all possible diligence and frugality, that the gospel
the not blamed: By running with patience the race that is set
before them, “denying themselves, and taking up their cross
daily;” submitting to bear the reproach of Christ, to be as the
filth and offscouring of the world; and looking that men should
“say all manner of evil of them falsely for the Lord's sake.”
6. It is expected of all who desire to continue in these
societies, that they should continue to evidence their desir
of salvation,*
Thirdly, by attending upon all the ordinances of God. Such
are, the public worship of God; the ministry of the word, either
read or expounded; the supper of the Lord; family and private
prayer; searching the Scriptures; and fasting, or abstinence.
7. These are the General Rules of our societies; all which
we are taught of God to observe, even in his written word, the
only rule, and the sufficient rule, both of our faith and practice.
And all these, we know, his Spirit writes on every truly
awakened heart. If there be any among us who observe them
not, who habitually break any of them, let it be made known
unto them who watch over that soul as they that must give an
account. We will admonish him of the error of his ways; we
will bear with him for a season: But then if he repent not, he
hath no more place among us. We have delivered our own souls.
JOHN WESLEY,
CHARLES WESLEY.
May 1. 1743.
RULES OF THE BAND-SOCIETIES
DRAWN UP DECEMBER 25, 1738
THE design of our meeting is, to obey that command of God,
“Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another,
that ye may be healed.”
To this end, we intend,—
1. To meet once a week, at the least.
2. To come punctually at the hour appointed, without some
extraordinary reason.
3. To begin (those of us who are present) exactly at the
hour, with singing or prayer.
4. To speak each of us in order, freely and plainly, the true
state of our souls, with the faults we have committed in
thought, word, or deed, and the temptations we have felt, since
our last meeting.
5. To end every meeting with prayer, suited to the state of
each person present.
6. To desire some person among us to speak his own state
first, and then to ask the rest, in order, as many and as search
ing questions as may be, concerning their state, sins, and
temptations.
Some of the questions proposed to every one before he is
admitted among us may be to this effect:—
v/ 1. Have you the forgiveness of your sins?
2. Have you peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ?
3. Have you the witness of God’s Spirit with your spirit,
that you are a child of God?
v. 4. Is the love of God shed abroad in your heart?
5. Has no sin, inward or outward, dominion over you?
v. 6. Do you desire to be told of your faults?
7. Do you desire to be told of all your faults, and that plain
and home?-
DIRECTIONS TO THE BAND-SOCIETIES. 273
v-8. Do you desire that every one of us should tell you, from
time to time, whatsoever is in his heart concerning you?
9. Consider ! Do you desire we should tell you whatsoever
we think, whatsoever we fear, whatsoever we hear, concerning
you?
10. Do you desire that, in doing this, we should come as
close as possible, that we should cut to the quick, and search
your heart to the bottom?
11. Is it your desire and design to be on this, and all other
occasions, entirely open, so as to speak everything that is in
your heart without exception, without disguise, and without
reserve?
Any of the preceding questions may be asked as often as
occasion offers; the four following at every meeting:—
1. What known sins have you committed since our last
meeting?
2. What temptations have you met with?
3. How were you delivered?
4. What have you thought, said, or done, of which you
doubt whether it be sin or not?
DIRECTIONS
GIVEN TO THE BAND-SOCIETIES
DECEMBER 25, 1744
You are supposed to have the faith that “overcometh the
world.” To you, therefore, it is not grievous, -
I. Carefully to abstain from doing evil; in particular, -
1. Neither to buy nor sell anything at all on the Lord’s day.
2. To taste no spirituous liquor, no dram of any kind, unless
prescribed by a Physician.
3. To be at a word both in buying and selling.
4. To pawn nothing, no, not to save life.
5. Not to mention the fault of any behind his back, and to
stop those short that do.
VOL. VIII.
274 DIRECTIONS TO THE BAND-SOCIETIES,
6. To wear no needless ornaments, such as rings, ear-rings,
necklaces, lace, ruffles.
7. To use no needless self-indulgence, such as taking snuff
or tobacco, unless prescribed by a Physician.
II. Zealously to maintain good works; in particular,—
1. To give alms of such things as you possess, and that to
the uttermost of your power.
2. To reprove all that sin in your sight, and that in love and
meekness of wisdom. .
3. To be patterns of diligence and frugality, of self-denial,
and taking up the cross daily.
III. Constantly to attend on all the ordinances of God; in
particular, -
1. To be at church and at the Lord's table every week, and
at every public meeting of the Bands.
2. To attend the ministry of the word every morning, unless
distance, business, or sickness prevent.
3. To use private prayer every day; and family prayer, if
you are at the head of a family.
4. To read the Scriptures, and meditate therein, at every
vacant hour. And,—
5. To observe, as days of fasting or abstinence, all Fridays
in the year.
MINUTES
of
SOME LATE CONVERSATIONS
BETWEEN
THE REW, MR. WESLEYS AND OTHERS
CONVERSATION I
MoNDAY, June 25th, 1744
THE following persons being met at the Foundery,–John
Wesley; Charles Wesley; John Hodges, Rector of Wenvo;
Henry Piers, Vicar of Bexley; Samuel Taylor, Vicar of Quin
ton; and John Meriton; after some time spent in prayer, the
design of our meeting was proposed; namely, to consider,
1. What to teach;
2. How to teach; and,
3. What to do; that is, how to regulate our doctrine, disci
pline, and practice.
We began with considering the doctrine of justification:
The questions relating to, with the substance of the answers
given thereto, were as follows:
Q. 1. What is it to be justified?
A. To be pardoned and received into God’s favour; into such
a state, that, if we continue therein, we shall be finally saved.
Q. 2. Is faith the condition of justification?
A. Yes; for every one who believeth not is condemned; and
every one who believes is justified.
Q. 3. But must not repentance, and works meet for repent
ance, go before this faith?
A. Without doubt; if by repentance you mean conviction of
sin; and by works meet for repentance, obeying God as far as
276 MINUTES OF SOME
we can, forgiving our brother, leaving off from evil, doing good,
and using his ordinances, according to the power we have
received.
Q. 4. What is faith?
A. Faith in general is a divine, supernatural exeyxos (elen
chos) of things not seen; that is, of past, future, or spiritual
things: It is a spiritual sight of God and the things of God.
First. A sinner is convinced by the Holy Ghost, “Christ
loved me, and gave himself for me.” This is that faith by
which he is justified, or pardoned, the moment he receives it.
Immediately the same Spirit bears witness, “Thou art par
doned; thou hast redemption in his blood.” And this is saving
faith, whereby the love of God is shed abroad in his heart.
Q. 5. Have all Christians this faith? May not a man be
justified, and not know it?
A. That all true Christians have such a faith as implies an
assurance of God’s love, appears from Romans viii. 15; Ephes.
iv. 32; 2 Cor. xiii. 5; Heb. viii. 10; 1 John iv. 10, and 19.
And that no man can be justified and not know it, appears far
ther from the nature of the thing: For faith after repentance
is ease after pain, rest after toil, light after darkness. It ap
pears also from the immediate, as well as distant, fruits thereof.
Q. 6. But may not a man go to heaven without it?
A. It does not appear from holy writ that a man who hears
the gospel can, (Mark xvi. 16,) whatever a Heathen may do.
(Romans ii. 14.)
Q. 7. What are the immediate fruits of justifying faith?
A. Peace, joy, love, power over all outward sin, and power
to keep down inward sin.
Q. 8. Does any one believe, who has not the witness in him
self, or any longer than he sees, loves, obeys God?
* A. We apprehend not; seeing God being the very essence
of faith; love and obedience, the inseparable properties of it.
Q. 9. What sins are consistent with justifying faith?
A. No wilful sin. If a believer wilfully sins, he casts away
his faith. Neither is it possible he should have justifying faith
again, without previously repenting.
Q. 10. Must every believer come into a state of doubt, or
fear, or darkness? Will he do so, unless by ignorance, or
unfaithfulness? Does God otherwise withdraw himself?
A. It is certain, a believer need never again come into con
demnation. It seems he need not come into a state of doubt,
LATE CONVERSATIONS. 277
or fear, or darkness; and that (ordinarily at least) he will not,
unless by ignorance or unfaithfulness. Yet it is true, that the
first joy does seldom last long; that it is commonly followed
by doubts and fears; and that God frequently permits great
heaviness before any large manifestation of himself.
Q. 11. Are works necessary to the continuance of faith?
A. Without doubt; for a man may forfeit the free gift of
God, either by sins of omission or commission.
Q. 12. Can faith be lost but for want of works?
A. It cannot but through disobedience.
Q. 13. How is faith “made perfect by works?”
A. The more we exert our faith, the more it is increased.
“To him that hath, shall be given.”
Q. 14. St. Paul says, Abraham was not justified by works;
St. James, he was justified by works. Do they not contradict
each other?
A. No: (1) Because they do not speak of the same justifi
cation. St. Paul speaks of that justification which was when
Abraham was seventy-five years old, above twenty years before
Isaac was born; St. James, of that justification which was when
he offered up Isaac on the altar.
(2.) Because they do not speak of the same works; St. Paul
speaking of works that precede faith; St. James, of works that
spring from it.
Q. 15. In what sense is Adam’s sin imputed to all mankind?
A. In Adam all die; that is, (1.) Our bodies then became
mortal. (2.) Our souls died; that is, were disunited from
God. And hence, (3.) We are all born with a sinful, devilish
nature. By reason whereof, (4.) We are children of wrath,
liable to death eternal. (Rom. v. 18; Ephes. ii. 3.)
Q. 16. In what sense is the righteousness of Christ imputed
to all mankind, or to believers?
A. We do not find it expressly affirmed in Scripture, that
God imputes the righteousness of Christ to any; although we
do find that “faith is imputed” to us “for righteousness.”
That text, “As by one man’s disobedience all men were made
sinners, so by the obedience of One, all were made righteous,”
we conceive means, By the merits of Christ, all men are cleared
from the guilt of Adam’s actual sin.
We conceive farther, that through the obedience and death
of Christ, (1.) The bodies of all men become immortal after the
ch- ***.
278 MilNUTES OF SOME
resurrection. (2.) Their souls receive a capacity of spiritual
life. And, (3.) An actual spark or seed thereof. (4.) All
believers become children of grace, reconciled to God; and,
(5.) Made partakers of the divine nature.
Q. 17. Have we not then unawares leaned too much towards
Calvinism ?
|... We are afraid we have.
. 18. Have we not also leaned towards Antinomianism?
... We are afraid we have.
. 19. What is Antinomianism?
. The doctrine which makes void the law through faith.
. 20. What are the main pillars hereof?
(1.) That Christ abolished the moral law.
(2.) That therefore Christians are not obliged to observe it.
(3.) That one branch of Christian liberty is, liberty from
obeying the commandments of God.
(4.) That it is bondage to do a thing because it is com
manded, or forbear it because it is forbidden.
(5.) That a believer is not obliged to use the ordinances of
God, or to do good works.
(6.) That a Preacher ought not to exhort to good works;
not unbelievers, because it is hurtful; not believers, because it
is needless.
Q. 21. What was the occasion of St. Paul's writing his
Epistle to the Galatians?
A. The coming of certain men amongst the Galatians, who
taught, “Except ye be circumcised, and keep the law of Moses,
ye cannot be saved.”
Q. 22. What is his main design therein?
A. To prove, (1.) That no man can be justified or saved by
the works of the law, either moral or ritual. (2.) That every
believer is justified by faith in Christ, without the works of
the law.
Q. 23. What does he mean by “the works of the law?”
(Galatians ii. 16, &c.)
A. All works which do not spring from faith in Christ.
Q. 24. What, by being “under the law?” (Gal. iii. 23.)
A. Under the Mosaic dispensation.
Q. 25. What law has Christ abolished?
A. The ritual law of Moses.
Q. 26. What is meant by liberty? (Gal. v. 1.)
A. Liberty, (l.) From that law. (2.) From sin.
LATE CONVERSATIONS. 279
ON TUESDAY MoRNING, June 26th, wAs considERED THE
DOCTRINE OF SANCTIFICATION.
WITH regard to which, the questions asked, and the sub
stance of the answers given, were as follows:
Q. 1. What is it to be sanctified?
A. To be renewed in the image of God, in righteousness and
true holiness.
Q. 2. Is faith the condition, or the instrument, of sanctifi
cation?
A. It is both the condition and instrument of it. When
we begin to believe, then sanctification begins. And as faith
increases, holiness increases, till we are created anew.
Q. 3. What is implied in being a perfect Christian?
A. The loving the Lord our God with all our heart, and with
all our mind, and soul, and strength. (Deut. vi. 5, xxx. 6;
Ezek. xxxvi. 25–29.)
Q. 4. Does this imply that all inward sin is taken away?
A. Without doubt; or how could we be said to be saved
“from all our uncleannesses?” (Ver. 29.)
Q. 5. Can we know one who is thus saved? What is a rea
sonable proof of it?
A. We cannot, without the miraculous discernment of
spirits, be infallibly certain of those who are thus saved. But
we apprehend, these would be the best proofs which the nature
of the thing admits: (1) If we had sufficient evidence of their
unblamable behaviour preceding. (2.) If they gave a dis
tinct account of the time and manner wherein they were saved
from sin, and of the circumstances thereof, with such sound
speech as could not be reproved. And, (3.) If, upon a strict
inquiry afterwards from time to time, it appeared that all their
tempers, and words, and actions, were holy and unreprovable.
Q. 6. How should we treat those who think they have
attained this?
A. Exhort them to forget the things that are behind, and to
watch and pray always, that God may search the ground of
their hearts.
WEDNESDAY, June 27th, we BEGAN To considER PoinTs
OF DISCIPLINE :
WITH regard to which, the questions asked, and the sub
stance of the answers given, were as follows:
280 MINUTES OF SOME
Q. 1. What is the Church of England?
A. According to the Twentieth Article, the visible Church
of England is the congregation of English believers, in which
the pure word of God is preached, and the sacraments duly
administered.
(But the word “Church” is sometimes taken, in a looser
sense, for “a congregation professing to believe.” So it is
taken in the Twenty-sixth Article; and in the first, second,
and third chapters of the Revelation.)
Q. 2. Who is a member of the Church of England?
A. A believer, hearing the pure word of God preached, and
partaking of the sacraments duly administered, in that Church.
Q. 3. What is it to be zealous for the Church?
A. To be earnestly desirous of its welfare and increase: Of
its welfare, by the confirmation of its present members, in faith,
hearing, and communicating; and of its increase, by the
addition of new members.
Q. 4. How are we to defend the doctrine of the Church?
A. Both by our preaching and living.
Q. 5. How should we behave at a false or railing sermon?
A. If it only contain personal reflections, we may quietly
suffer it: If it blaspheme the work and Spirit of God, it may
be better to go out of the Church. In either case, if opportu
nity serve, it would be well to speak or write to the Minister.
Q. 6. How far is it our duty to obey the Bishops?
A. In all things indifferent. And on this ground of obeying
them, we should observe the Canons, so far as we can with a
safe conscience.
Q. 7. Do we separate from the Church?
A. We conceive not: We hold communion therewith for
conscience sake, by constantly attending both the word
preached, and the sacraments administered therein.
Q. 8. What then do they mean, who say, “You separate
from the Church?”
A. We cannot certainly tell. Perhaps they have no deter
minate meaning; unless, by the Church they mean themselves;
that is, that part of the Clergy who accuse us of preaching
false doctrine. And it is sure we do herein separate from
them, by maintaining that which they deny.
Q. 9. But do you not weaken the Church?
A. Do not they who ask this, by the Church, mean them
LATE CONVERSATIONS. 281
selves? We do not purposely weaken any man’s hands. But
accidentally we may, thus far: They who come to know the
truth by us, will esteem such as deny it less than they did before.
But the Church, in the proper sense, the congregation of
English believers, we do not weaken at all.
Q. 10. Do you not entail a schism on the Church? that is,
Is it not probable that your hearers, after your death, will be
scattered into all sects and parties; or that they will form
themselves into a distinct sect?
A. (1.) We are persuaded the body of our hearers will even
after our death remain in the Church, unless they be thrust out.
(2.) We believe notwithstanding, either that they will be
thrust out, or that they will leaven the whole Church.
(3.) We do, and will do, all we can to prevent those conse
quences which are supposed likely to happen after our death.
(4.) But we cannot with a good conscience neglect the pre
sent opportunity of saving souls while we live, for fear of conse
quences which may possibly or probably happen after we are
dead.
CONVERSATION II
BRIsrol, THURSDAY, August 1st, 1745
THE following persons being met together at the New-Room,
in Bristol; John Wesley, Charles Wesley, John Hodges,
Thomas Richards, Samuel Larwood, Thomas Meyrick, Richard
Moss, John Slocombe, Herbert Jenkins, and Marmaduke
Gwynne; it was proposed to review the Minutes of the last
Conference with regard to justification. And it was asked:
Q. 1. How comes what is written on this subject to be so
intricate and obscure? Is this obscurity from the nature of
the thing itself; or, from the fault or weakness of those who
have generally treated of it?
A. We apprehend this obscurity does not arise from the
mature of the subject; but, perhaps, partly from hence, that the
devil peculiarly labours to perplex a subject of the greatest
importance; and partly from the extreme warmth of most
writers who have treated of it?
Q. 2. We affirm, faith in Christ is the sole condition of
justification. But does not repentance go before that faith?
282 MINUTES OF SOME
yea, and, supposing there be opportunity for them, fruits or
works meet for repentance?
A. Without doubt they do.
Q. 3. How then can we deny them to be conditions of justi
fication? Is not this a mere strife of words? But is it worth
while to continue a dispute on the term condition?
A. It seems not, though it has been grievously abused. But
so the abuse cease, let the use remain.
Q. 4. Shall we read over together Mr. Baxter’s “Aphorisms
concerning Justification?”
A. By all means.
Which were accordingly read. And it was desired, that each
person present would in the afternoon consult the scriptures
cited therein, and bring what objections might occur the
next morning.
FRIDAY, August 2d, THE QUESTION was PROPosED:—
Q. 1. Is a sense of God’s pardoning love absolutely necessary
to our being in his favour? Or may there be some exempt cases?
A. We dare not say there are not.
Q. 2. Is it necessary to inward and outward holiness?
A. We incline to think it is.
Q. 3. Is it indispensably necessary to final salvation? sup
pose in a Papist; or a Quaker; or, in general, among those
who never heard it preached?
A. Love hopeth all things. We know not how far any of
these may fall under the case of invincible ignorance.
Q. 4. But what can we say of one of our own society, who
dies without it, as J. W., at London?
A. It may be an exempt case, if the fact was really so. But
we determine nothing. We leave his soul in the hands of Him
that made it.
Q. 5. Does a man believe any longer than he sees a recon
ciled God?
A. We conceive not. But we allow there may be infinite
degrees in seeing God: Even as many as there are between
him who sees the sun when it shines on his eye-lids closed, and
him who stands with his eyes wide open in the full blaze of his
beams.
Q. 6. Does a man believe any longer than he loves God?
A. In nowise. For neither circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails, without faith working by love.
LATE CONVERSATIONS. 283
Q. 7. Have we duly considered the case of Cornelius? Was
not he in the favour of God, when “his prayers and alms came
up for a memorial before God:” that is, before he believed in
Christ?
A. It does seem that he was, in some degree. But we speak
not of those who have not heard the gospel.
Q. 8. But were those works of his “splendid sins?”
A. No; nor were they done without the grace of Christ.
Q. 9. How then can we maintain, that all works done before
we have a sense of the pardoning love of God are sin, and, as
such, an abomination to Him?
A. The works of him who has heard the gospel, and does
not believe, are not done as God hath “willed and commanded
them to be done.” And yet we know not how to say that they
are an abomination to the Lord in him who feareth God, and,
from that principle, does the best he can.
Q. 10. Seeing there is so much difficulty in this subject,
can we deal too tenderly with them that oppose us?
A. We cannot; unless we were to give up any part of the
truth of God.
Q. 11. Is a believer constrained to obey God?
A. At first he often is. The love of Christ constraineth him.
After this, he may obey, or he may not; no constraint being
laid upon him
Q. 12. Can faith be lost, but through disobedience?
A. It cannot. A believer first inwardly disobeys, inclines
to sin with his heart: Then his intercourse with God is cut off;
that is, his faith is lost: And after this, he may fall into out
ward sin, being now weak, and like another man.
Q. 13. How can such an one recover faith?
A. By “repenting, and doing the first works.” (Rev. ii. 5.)
Q. 14. Whence is it that so great a majority of those who
believe fall more or less into doubt or fear?
A. Chiefly from their own ignorance or unfaithfulness:
Often from their not watching unto prayer: Perhaps some
times from some defect, or want of the power of God in the
preaching they hear.
Q. 15. Is there not a defect in us? Do we preach as we
did at first? Have we not changed our doctrines?
A. (1.) At first we preached almost wholly to unbelievers.
To those therefore we spake almost continually of remission
284 MINUTES OF SOME
of sins through the death of Christ, and the mature of faith in
his blood. And so we do still, among those who need to be
taught the first elements of the gospel of Christ.
(2.) But those in whom the foundation is already laid, we
exhort to go on to perfection; which we did not see so clearly at
first; although we occasionally spoke of it from the beginning.
(3.) Yet we now preach, and that continually, faith in Christ,
as the Prophet, Priest, and King, at least, as clearly, as strongly,
and as fully, as we did six years ago.
Q. 16. Do we not discourage visions and dreams too much,
as if we condemned them toto genere?
A. We do not intend to do this. We neither discourage nor
encourage them. We learn from Acts ii. 17, &c., to expect
something of this kind “in the last days.” And we cannot
deny that saving faith is often given in dreams or visions of the
night; which faith we account neither better nor worse, than
if it came by any other means.
Q. 17. Do not some of our assistants preach too much of the
wrath, and too little of the love, of God?
A. We fear they have leaned to that extreme; and hence
some of their hearers may have lost the joy of faith.
Q. 18. Need we ever preach the terrors of the Lord to those
who know they are accepted of him?
A. No: It is folly so to do; for love is to them the strongest
of all motives.
Q. 19. Do we ordinarily represent a justified state so great
and happy as it is?
A. Perhaps not. A believer, walking in the light, is inex
pressibly great and happy.
Q. 20. Should we not have a care of depreciating justifica
tion, in order to exalt the state of full sanctification?
A. Undoubtedly we should beware of this; for one may
insensibly slide into it.
Q. 21. How shall we effectually avoid it?
A. When we are going to speak of entire sanctification, let
us first describe the blessings of a justified state, as strongly
as possible.
Q. 22. Does not the truth of the gospel lie very near both
to Calvinism and Antinomianism?
A. Indeed it does; as it were, within a hair's breadth: So
that it is altogether foolish and sinful, because we do not quite
LATE CONVERSATIONS. 285
agree either with one or the other, to run from them as far as
eWer We can.
Q. 23. Wherein may we come to the very edge of Calvinism?
A. (1.) In ascribing all good to the free grace of God. (2.)
In denying all natural free-will, and all power antecedent to
grace. And, (3.) In excluding all merit from man; even for
what he has or does by the grace of God.
Q. 24. Wherein may we come to the edge of Antinomianism?
A. (1.) In exalting the merits and love of Christ. (2.) In
rejoicing evermore.
Q. 25. Does faith supersede (set aside the necessity of) holi
ness or good works?
A. In nowise. So far from it, that it implies both, as a
cause does its effects.
ABoUT TEN, we BEGAN TO SPEAK of SANCTIFICATION: witH
REGARD To whICH, IT was INQUIRED :
Q. 1. WHEN does inward sanctification begin?
A. In the moment we are justified. The seed of every
virtue is then sown in the soul. From that time the believer
gradually dies to sin, and grows in grace. Yet sin remains in
him; yea, the seed of all sin, till he is sanctified throughout
in spirit, soul, and body.
Q. 2. What will become of a Heathen, a Papist, a Church
of England man, if he dies without being thus sanctified?
A. He cannot see the Lord. But none who seeks it sincerely
shall or can die without it; though possibly he may not attain
it, till the very article of death.
Q. 3. Is it ordinarily given till a little before death?
A. It is not, to those that expect it no sooner, nor conse
quently ask for it, at least, not in faith.
Q. 4. But ought we to expect it sooner?
A. Why not? For although we grant, (1.) That the generality
of believers whom we have hitherto known were not so sancti
fied till near death: (2.) That few of those to whom St. Paul
wrote his Epistles were so at the time he wrote: (3.) Nor he
himself at the time of writing his former Epistles: Yet this
does not prove that we may not to-day.
Q. 5. But would not one who was thus sanctified be inca
pable of worldly business?
286 MINUTES OF SOME
A. He would be far more capable of it than ever, as going
through all without distraction.
Q. 6. Would he be capable of marriage?
A. Why should he not?
Q. 7. Should we not beware of bearing hard on those who
think they have attained?
A. We should. And the rather, because if they are faith
ful to the grace they have received, they are in no danger of
perishing at last. No, not even if they remain in luminous
faith, as some term it, for many months or years; perhaps till
within a little time of their spirits returning to God.
Q. 8. In what manner should we preach entire sanctifica
tion ?
A. Scarce at all to those who are not pressing forward. To
those who are, always by way of promise; always drawing,
rather than driving.
Q. 9. How should we wait for the fulfilling of this promise?
A. In universal obedience; in keeping all the command
ments; in denying ourselves, and taking up our cross daily.
These are the general means which God hath ordained for our
receiving his sanctifying grace. The particular are, -prayer,
searching the Scripture, communicating, and fasting.
CONVERSATION III
TUESDAY, May 13th, 1746
THE following persons being met at the New-Room, in
Bristol: John Wesley, Charles Wesley, John Hodges, Jona
than Reeves, Thomas Maxfield, Thomas Westell, and Thomas
Willis; it was inquired,—
Q. 1. Can an unbeliever (whatever he be in other respects)
challenge anything of God’s justice?
A. Absolutely nothing but hell. And this is a point which
we cannot too much insist on.
Q. 2. Do we empty men of their own righteousness, as we
did at first? Do we sufficiently labour, when they begin to be
convinced of sin, to take away all they lean upon? Should we
'not then endeavour with all our might to overturn their false
foundations?
LATE CONVERSATIONS. 287
A. This was at first one of our principal points: And it
ought to be so still. For, till all other foundations are over
turned, they cannot build upon Christ.
Q. 3. Did we not then purposely throw them into convic
tions; into strong sorrow and fear? Nay, did we not strive to
make them inconsolable, refusing to be comforted?
A. We did. And so we should do still. For the stronger
the conviction, the speedier is the deliverance. And none so
soon receive the peace of God, as those who steadily refuse
all other comfort.
Q. 4. Let us consider a particular case. Was you, Jonathan
Reeves, before you received the peace of God, convinced that,
notwithstanding all you did, or could do, you was in a state of
damnation?
J. R. I was convinced of it, as fully as that I am now alive.
Q. 5. Are you sure that conviction was from God?
J. R. I can have no doubt but it was.
Q. 6. What do you mean by a state of damnation?
J. R. A state wherein if a man dies, he perisheth for ever.
Q. 7. How did that conviction end?
J. R. I had first a strong hope that God would deliver me:
And this brought a degree of peace. But I had not that solid
peace of God till Christ was revealed in me.
Q. 8. But is not such a trust in the love of God, though it
be as yet without a distinct sight of God reconciled to me
through Christ Jesus, a low degree of justifying faith?
A. It is an earnest of it. But this abides for a short time
only; nor is this the proper Christian faith.
Q. 9. By what faith were the Apostles clean before Christ
died?
A. By such a faith as this; by a Jewish faith: For “the
Holy Ghost was not then given.”
Q. 10. Of whom then do you understand those words,—
“Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the
voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no
light?” (Isaiah l. 10.)
A. Of a believer under the Jewish dispensation; one in
whose heart God hath not yet shined, to give him the light of
the glorious love of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
Q. 11. Who is a Jew, inwardly?
A. A servant of God: One who sincerely obeys him out of
288 MINUTES OF SOME
fear. Whereas a Christian, inwardly, is a child of God: One
who sincerely obeys him out of love. But was not you sincere
before Christ was revealed in you?
J. R. It seemed to me that I was, in some measure.
Q. 12. What is sincerity?
A. Willingness to know and do the whole will of God. The
lowest species thereof seems to be “faithfulness in that which
is little.”
Q. 13. Has God any regard to man's sincerity?
A. So far, that no man in any state can possibly please
God without it; neither, indeed, in any moment wherein he is
not sincere.
Q. 14. But can it be conceived that God has any regard to
the sincerity of an unbeliever?
A. Yes, so much, that, if he persevere therein, God will infal
libly give him faith.
Q. 15. What regard may we conceive him to have to the
sincerity of a believer?
A. So much, that in every sincere believer he fulfils all the
great and precious promises.
Q. 16. Whom do you term a sincere believer?
A. One that walks in the light, as God is in the light.
Q. 17. Is sincerity the same with a single eye?
A. Not altogether. The latter refers to our intention; the
former, to our will or desires.
Q. 18. Is it not all in all?
A. All will follow persevering sincerity. God gives every
thing with it; nothing without it.
Q. 19. Are not then sincerity and faith equivalent terms?
A. By no means. It is at least as nearly related to works as
it is to faith. For example, Who is sincere before he believes?
He that then does all he can; he that, according to the power
he has received, brings forth “fruits meet for repentance.” Who
is sincere after he believes? He that, from a sense of God’s
love, is zealous of all good works.
Q. 20. Is not sincerity what St. Paul terms a willing mind,
m Tpo6vula? (2 Cor. viii. 12.)
A. Yes: If that word be taken in a general sense. For it
is a constant disposition to use all the grace given.
Q. 21. But do we not then set sincerity on a level with faith?
A. No. For we allow a man may be sincere, and not be jus
LATE CONVERSATIONS. 289
tified, as he may be penitent, and not be justified; (not as
yet;) but he cannot have faith, and not be justified. The very
moment he believes, he is justified.
Q. 22. But do we not give up faith, and put sincerity in its
place, as the condition of our acceptance with God?
A. We believe it is one condition of our acceptance, as
repentance likewise is. And we believe it a condition of our
continuing in a state of acceptance. Yet we do not put it in the
place of faith. It is by faith the merits of Christ are applied
to my soul. But if I am not sincere, they are not applied.
Q. 23. Is not this that “going about to establish your own
righteousness,” whereof St. Paul speaks, Rom. x. 3?
A. St. Paul there manifestly speaks of unbelievers, who
sought to be accepted for the sake of their own righteousness.
We do not seek to be accepted for the sake of our sincerity;
but through the merits of Christ alone. Indeed, so long as
any man believes, he cannot go about (in St. Paul’s sense) to
“establish his own righteousness.”
Q. 24. But do you consider, that we are under the covenant
of grace, and that the covenant of works is now abolished?
A. All mankind were under the covenant of grace, from the
very hour that the original promise was made. If by the cove
nant of works you mean, that of unsinning obedience made with
Adam before the fall, no man but Adam was ever under that
covenant; for it was abolished before Cain was born. Yet it is
not so abolished, but that it will stand, in a measure, even to the
cnd of the world; that is, If we “do this,” we shall live; if not,
we shall die eternally: If we do well, we shall live with God in
glory; if evil, we shall die the second death. For every man shall
be judged in that day, and rewarded “according to his works.”
Q. 25. What means then, “To him that believeth, his faith
is counted for righteousness?”
A. That God forgives him that is unrighteous as soon as he
believes, accepting his faith instead of perfect righteousness.
But then observe, universal righteousness follows, though it
did not precede, faith.
Q. 26. But is faith thus “counted to us for righteousness,”
at whatsoever time we believe?
A. Yes. In whatsoever moment we believe, all our past sins
vanish away: They are as though they had never been, and
we stand clear in the sight of God.
VOL. VIII.
290 MINUTES OF SOME
TUEsDAY, TEN o’clock.
MR. TAYLoR of Quinton, and T. Glascot, being added, it
was inquired,
Q. 1. Are not the assurance of faith, the inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, and the revelation of Christ in us, terms nearly
of the same import?
A. He that denies one of them must deny all; they are so
closely connected together.
Q. 2. Are they ordinarily, where the pure gospel is preached,
essential to our acceptance?
A. Undoubtedly they are; and, as such, to be insisted on,
in the strongest terms.
Q. 3. Is not the whole dispute of salvation by faith or by
works a mere strife of words?
A. In asserting salvation by faith, we mean this: (1.) That
pardon (salvation begun) is received by faith producing works.
(2.) That holiness (salvation continued) is faith working by
love. (3.) That heaven (salvation finished) is the reward of
this faith.
If you who assert salvation by works, or by faith and works,
mean the same thing, (understanding by faith, the revelation
of Christ in us,—by salvation, pardon, holiness, glory,) we will
not strive with you at all. If you do not, this is not a strife
of words; but the very vitals, the essence of Christianity is
the thing in question.
Q. 4. Wherein does our doctrine now differ from that we
preached when at Oxford?
A. Chiefly in these two points (1.) We then knew nothing
of that righteousness of faith, in justification; nor (2.) Of the
nature of faith itself, as implying consciousness of pardon.
Q. 5. May not some degree of the love of God go before a
distinct sense of justification?
A. We believe it may.-
Q. 6. Can any degree of sanctification or holiness?
A. Many degrees of outward holiness may ; yea, and some
degree of meekness, and several other tempers which would be
branches of Christian holiness, but that they do not spring from
Christian principles. For the abiding love of God cannot spring
but from faith in a pardoning God. And no true Christian
holiness can exist without that love of God for its foundation.
LATE CONVERSATIONS. 291
Q. 7. Is every man, as soon as he believes, a new creature,
sanctified, pure in heart? Has he then a new heart? Does
Christ dwell therein 7 And is he a temple of the Holy Ghost?
A. All these things may be affirmed of every believer, in a
true sense. Let us not therefore contradict those who main
tain it. Why should we contend about words?
CONVERSATION IV
TUEsDAY, June 16th, 1747
THE following persons being met at the Foundery : John
Wesley, Charles Wesley, and Charles Manning, Vicar of
Hayes; Richard Thomas Bateman, Rector of St. Bartholo
mew’s the Great; Henry Piers, Howell Harris, and Thomas
Hardwick; it was inquired,
Q. 1. Is justifying faith a divine assurance that Christ loved
me, and gave himself for me?
A. We believe it is.
Q. 2. What is the judgment of most of the serious Dissen
ters concerning this?
A. They generally allow, that many believers have such an
assurance; and, that it is to be desired and prayed for by all
But then they affirm, that this is the highest species or degree
of faith; that it is not the common privilege of believers:
Consequently, they deny that this is justifying faith, or neces
sarily implied therein.-
Q. 3. And are there not strong reasons for their opinion?
For instance: If the true believers of old had not this assur
ance, then it is not necessarily implied in justifying faith.
But the true believers of old had not this assurance.
A. David, and many more of the believers of old, undenia
bly had this assurance. But even if the Jews had it not, it
would not follow that this is not implied in Christian faith.
Q. 4. But do you not know that the Apostles themselves had
it not till after the day of Pentecost?
A. The Apostles themselves had not the proper Christian
faith till after the day of Pentecost.
292 MINUTES OF SOME
Q. 5. But were not those Christian believers, in the proper
sense, to whom St. John wrote his First Epistle? Yet to these
he says, “These things have I written unto you that believe
on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye
have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the
Son of God.” (v. 13.)
A. This does not prove that they did not know they had
eternal life, any more than that they did not believe. His
plain meaning is, “I have written unto you that you may be
the more established in the faith.” Therefore, it does not
follow from hence, that they had not this assurance; but only
that there are degrees therein.
Q. 6. But were not the Thessalonians true believers? Yet
they had not this assurance; they had only a “good hope.”
(2 Thess. ii. 16.)
A. The text you refer to runs thus: “Now our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, and God, even our Father, which hath loved us,
and given us everlasting consolation and good hope through
grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good
word and work.” This good hope does not exclude, but
necessarily implies, a strong assurance of the love of God.
Q. 7. But does not St. Paul say even of himself, “I know
nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified?” (1 Cor
inthians iv. 4.)
A. He does not say of himself here, that he was not justified,
or that he did not know it; but only, that though he had a
conscience void of offence, yet this did not justify him before
God. And must not every believer say the same? This, there
fore, is wide of the point.
Q. 8. But does he not disclaim any such assurance in those
words, “I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much
trembling?” (1 Cor. ii. 3.)
A. By no means. For these words do not imply any fear
either of death or hell. They express only a deep sense of his
utter insufficiency for the great work wherein he was engaged.
Q. 9. However, does he not exclude Christians in general
from such an assurance, when he bids them “work out” their
“salvation with fear and trembling?” (Phil. ii. 12.)
A. No more than from love; which is always joined with
filial fear and reverential trembling. And the same answer is
applicable to all those texts which exhort a believer to fear.
LATE CONVERSATIONS. 293
Q. 10. But does not matter of fact prove, that justifying
faith does not necessarily imply assurance? For can you believe
that such a person as J. A., or E. V., who have so much
integrity, zeal, and fear of God, and walk so unblamably in all
things, is void of justifying faith? Can you suppose such as
these to be under the wrath and under the curse of God;
especially if you add to this, that they are continually long
ing, striving, praying for the assurance which they have not?
A. This contains the very strength of the cause; and in
clines us to think that some of these may be exempt cases.
But, however that be, we answer,
(1.) It is dangerous to ground a general doctrine on a few
particular experiments.
(2.) Men may have many good tempers, and a blameless life,
(speaking in a loose sense,) by nature and habit, with prevent
ing grace; and yet not have faith and the love of God.
(3.) It is scarce possible for us to know all the circum
stances relating to such persons, so as to judge certainly con
cerning them.
(4.) But this we know, if Christ is not revealed in them,
they are not yet Christian believers.
Q. 11. But what will become of them then, suppose they
die in this state?
A. That is a supposition not to be made. They cannot die
in this state: They must go backward or forward. If they
continue to seek, they will surely find, righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. We are confirmed in this
belief by the many instances we have seen of such as these
finding peace at the last hour. And it is not impossible but
others may then be made partakers of like precious faith, and
yet go hence without giving any outward proof of the change
which God hath wrought.
CONVERSATION V
WEDNESDAY, June 17th
Q. 1. How much is allowed by our brethren who differ from
us, with regard to entire sanctification?
294 MINUTES OF SOME
A. They grant, (1.) That every one must be entirely sanc
tified in the article of death.
(2.) That, till then, a believer daily grows in grace, comes
nearer and nearer to perfection.
(3.) That we ought to be continually pressing after this, and
to exhort all others so to do.
Q. 2. What do we allow them ?
A. We grant, (1.) That many of those who have died in the
faith, yea, the greater part of those we have known, were not
sanctified throughout, not made perfect in love, till a little
before death.
(2.) That the term “sanctified” is continually applied by
St. Paul to all that were justified, were true believers.
(3.) That by this term alone, he rarely, if ever, means saved
from all sin.
(4.) That, consequently, it is not proper to use it in this
sense, without adding the word “wholly, entirely,” or the like.
(5.) That the inspired writers almost continually speak of
or to those who were justified; but very rarely, either of or to
those who were wholly sanctified.
(6.) That, consequently, it behoves us to speak in public
almost continually of the state of justification; but, more
rarely, in full and explicit terms, concerning entire sanctifica
tion,-
Q. 3. What then is the point wherein we divide?
A. It is this: Whether we should expect to be saved from
all sin before the article of death.
Q. 4. Is there any clear scripture promise of this; that God
will save us from all sin P
A. There is: “He shall redeem Israel from all his sins.”
(Psalm cxxx.8.) This is more largely expressed in the prophecy
of Ezekiel: “Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean: From all your filthiness, and from all your
idols, will I cleanse you. I will also save you from all your
uncleannesses.” (xxxvi. 25, 29.) No promise can be more clear.
And to this the Apostle plainly refers in that exhortation:
“Having these promises, let us cleanse ourselves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God.” (2 Cor. vii. 1.) Equally clear and express is that ancient
promise: “The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and
the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart and with all thy soul.” (Deut. xxx. 6)
LATE CONVERSATIONS. 295
Q. 5. But does any assertion answerable to this occur in
the New Testament?
A. There does, and that laid down in the plainest terms.
So St. John: “For this purpose the Son of God was mani
fested, that he might destroy the works of the devil;” (1 Epist.
iii. 8;) the works of the devil, without any limitation or
restriction: But all sin is the work of the devil. Parallel to
which is that assertion of St. Paul: “Christ loved the Church,
and gave himself for it; that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such
thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.”
(Ephes. v. 25, 27.) And to the same effect is his assertion in
the eighth of the Romans: “God sent his Son—that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, walking not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit.” (Verses 3, 4.)
Q. 6. Does the New Testament afford any farther ground
for expecting to be saved from all sin 7
A. Undoubtedly it does, both in those prayers and com
mands which are equivalent to the strongest assertions.
Q. 7. What prayers do you mean?
A. Prayers for entire sanctification; which, were there no
such thing, would be mere mockery of God. Such, in parti
cular, are, (1) “Deliver us from evil;” or rather, “from the
evil one.” Now, when this is done, when we are delivered
from all evil, there can be no sin remaining. (2.) “Neither
pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe
on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou,
Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in
us: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one.” (John xvii. 20, 21, 23.) (3) “I bow my knees unto
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ—that he would grant you
—that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to
comprehend, with all saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which
passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness
of God.” (Eph. iii. 14, 16–19.) (4.) “The very God of peace
sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit and
soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ.” (1 Thess. v. 23.)
Q. 8. What command is there to the same effect 7
A. (1) “Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in
296 MINUTES OF SOME
heaven is perfect.” (Matt. v. 48.) (2.) “Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind.” (Matt. xxii. 37.) But if the love of God
fill all the heart, there can be no sin there.
Q. 9. But how does it appear that this is to be done before
the article of death?
A. First. From the very nature of a command, which is
not given to the dead, but to the living. Therefore, “Thou
shalt love God with all thy heart,” cannot mean, Thou shalt
do this when thou diest, but while thou livest.
Secondly. From express texts of Scripture: (1) “The
grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men,
teaching us that, having renounced (apvnaauevoi) ungodliness
and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and
godly, in this present world; looking for—the glorious
appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ; who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.” (Titus ii. 11
-14.) (2.) “He hath raised up an horn of salvation for us, -
to perform the mercy promised to our fathers; the oath which
he sware to our father Abraham, that he would grant unto
us, that we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies,
should serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him, all the days of our life.” (Luke i. 69–75.)
Q. 10. Is there any example in Scripture of persons who
had attained to this?
A. Yes. St. John, and all those of whom he says in his
First Epistle, “Herein is our love made perfect, that we may
have confidence in the day of judgment: Because as he is, so
are we in this world.” (iv. 17.)
Q. 11. But why are there not more examples of this kind
recorded in the New Testament?
A. It does not become us to be peremptory in this matter.
One reason might possibly be, because the Apostles wrote to
the Church while it was in a state of infancy. Therefore
they might mention such persons the more sparingly, lest
they should give strong meat to babes.
Q. 12. Can you show one such example now? Where is
he that is thus perfect?
A. To some who make this inquiry one might answer, “If
I knew one here, I would not tell you. For you do not inquire
LATE CONVERSATIONS. 297
out of love. You are like Herod. You only seek the young
child, to slay it.”
But more directly we answer, There are numberless reasons
why there should be few (if any indisputable) examples. What
inconveniences would this bring on the person himself, set as
a mark for all to shoot at I What a temptation would it be
to others, not only to men who knew not God, but to believers
themselves ! How hardly would they refrain from idolizing
such a person | And yet, how unprofitable to gainsayers |
“For if they hear not Moses and the Prophets,” Christ and
his Apostles, “neither would they be persuaded, though one
rose from the dead.”
Q. 13. Suppose one had attained to this, would you advise
him to speak of it?
A. Not to them who know not God. It would only
provoke them to contradict and blaspheme: Nor to any,
without some particular reason, without some particular good
in view. And then they should have an especial care to
avoid all appearance of boasting.
Q. 14. Is it a sin, not to believe those who say they have
attained?
A. By no means, even though they said true. We ought
not hastily to believe, but to suspend our judgment, till we
have full and strong proof.
Q. 15. But are we not apt to have a secret distaste to any
who say they are saved from all sin?
A. It is very possible we may, and that on several grounds;
partly from a concern for the honour of God, and the good
of souls, who may be hurt, yea, or turned out of the way, if
these are not what they profess; partly from a kind of implicit
envy at those who speak of higher attainments than our own;
and partly from our slowness and unreadiness of heart to
believe the works of God.
Q. 16. Does not the harshly preaching perfection tend to
bring believers into a kind of bondage, or slavish fear?
A. It does: Therefore we should always place it in the
most amiable light, so that it may excite only hope, joy, and
desire.
Q. 17. Why may we not continue in the joy of faith even
till we are made perfect?
A. Why indeed! since holy grief does not quench this
298 MINUTES OF SOME LATE CONVERSATIONS.
joy; since, even while we are under the cross, while we
deeply partake of the sufferings of Christ, we may rejoice
with joy unspeakable.
Q. 18. Do we not discourage believers from rejoicing ever
more?
A. We ought not so to do. Let them all their life long
rejoice unto God, so it be with reverence. And even if light
ness or pride should mix with their joy, let us not strike at
the joy itself, (this is the gift of God,) but at that lightness
or pride, that the evil may cease and the good remain.
Q. 19. Ought we to be anxiously careful about perfection,
lest we should die before we have attained ?
A. In nowise. We ought to be thus careful for nothing,
neither spiritual mor temporal.
Q. 20. But ought we not to be troubled on account of the
sinful nature which still remains in us?
A. It is good for us to have a deep sense of this, and to be
much ashamed before the Lord: But this should only incite
us the more earnestly to turn unto Christ every moment, and
to draw light, and life, and strength from him, that we may
go on conquering and to conquer. And, therefore, when the
sense of our sin most abounds, the sense of his love should
much more abound.
Q. 21. Will our joy or our trouble increase as we grow in
grace?
A. Perhaps both. But without doubt our joy in the Lord
will increase as our love increases.
Q. 22. Is not the teaching believers to be continually
poring upon their inbred sin, the ready way to make them
forget that they were purged from their former sins?
A. We find by experience it is; or to make them under
value and account it a little thing : whereas, indeed, (though
there are still greater gifts behind,) this is inexpressibly great
and glorious.
MINUTES
Of
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS
BETWEEN
THE REW, MR. WESLEY AND OTHERS
FROM THE YEAR 1744, TO THE YEAR 1789 *
IT is desired, that all things be considered as in the imme
diate presence of God; that every person speak freely
whatever is in his heart.
Q. 1. How may we best improve the time of this Conference?
A. (1.) While we are conversing, let us have an especial
care to set God always before us.
(2.) In the intermediate hours, let us redeem all the time
we can for private exercises.
(3) Therein let us give ourselves to prayer for one another,
and for a blessing on this our labour.
Q. 2. Have our Conferences been as useful as they might
have been.”
A. No : We have been continually straitened for time.
Hence, scarce anything has been searched to the bottom.
To remedy this, let every Conference last nine days, con
cluding on Wednesday in the second week.
Q. 3. What may we reasonably believe to be God’s design
in raising up the Preachers called Methodists?
A. Not to form any new sect; but to reform the nation,
particularly the Church; and to spread scriptural holiness
over the land.
* This tract, which is usually denominated, “The Large Minutes,” contains the
plan of discipline as practised in the Methodist Connexion during the life of Mr.
Wesley. As its title intimates, it underwent several alterations and enlargements
from the year 1744 to 1789, when the last revision took place. It is here
reprintel from a copy which bears the date of 1791,-the year in which Mr.
Wesley died,—colla'ed with the edition of 1789-EDIT.
300 MINUTES OF
Q. 4. What was the rise of Methodism, so called?
A. In 1729, two young men, reading the Bible, saw they
could not be saved without holiness, followed after it, and
incited others so to do. In 1737 they saw holiness comes by
faith. They saw likewise, that men are justified before they
are sanctified; but still holiness was their point. God then
thrust them out, utterly against their will, to raise a holy
people. When Satan could no otherwise hinder this, he
threw Calvinism in the way; and then Antinomianism, which
strikes directly at the root of all holiness.
Q. 5. Is it advisable for us to preach in as many places as
we can, without forming any societies?
A. By no means. We have made the trial in various places;
and that for a considerable time. But all the seed has fallen
as by the highway side. There is scarce any fruit remaining.
Q. 6. Where should we endeavour to preach most?
A. (1.) Where there is the greatest number of quiet and
willing hearers. (2.) Where there is most fruit.
Q. 7. Is field-preaching unlawful?
A. We conceive not. We do not know that it is contrary
to any law either of God or man.
Q. 8. Have we not used it too sparingly?
A. It seems we have; (1.) Because our call is, to save that
which is lost. Now, we cannot expect them to seek us.
Therefore we should go and seek them. (2.) Because we are
particularly called, by “going into the highways and hedges,”
which none else will do, “to compel them to come in.” (3.)
Because that reason against it is not good, “The house will
hold all that come.” The house may hold all that come to
the house; but not all that would come to the field.
The greatest hinderance to this you are to expect from
rich, or cowardly, or lazy Methodists. But regard them not,
neither Stewards, Leaders, nor people. Whenever the
weather will permit, go out in God’s name into the most
public places, and call all to repent and believe the gospel;
every Sunday, in particular; especially were there are old
societies, lest they settle upon their lees. The Stewards will
frequently oppose this, lest they lose their usual collection.
But this is not a sufficient reason against it. Shall we
barter souls for money?
Q. 9. Ought we not diligently to observe in what places God
is pleased at any time to pour out his Spirit more abundantly?
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 301
A. We ought; and at that time to send more labourers
than usual into that part of the harvest.
But whence shall we have them? (1.) So far as we can
afford it, we will keep a reserve of Preachers at Kingswood.
(2.) Let an exact list be kept of those who are proposed for
trial, but not accepted.
Q. 10. How often shall we permit strangers to be present
at the meeting of the society?
Sr.~<
A. At every other meeting of the society in every place
let no stranger be admitted. At other times, they may; but
c ~ *
-- ".the same person not above twice or thrice. In order to this,
see that all in every place show their tickets before they
come in. If the Stewards and Leaders are not exact herein,
employ others that have more resolution.
Q. 11. How may the Leaders of classes be made more
useful P
A. (1.) Let each of them be diligently examined concern
ing his method of meeting a class. Let this be done with
all possible exactness at the next quarterly visitation. And
in order to this, allow sufficient time for the visiting of each
society.
(2.) Let each Leader carefully inquire how every soul in his
class prospers; not only how each person observes the outward
Rules, but how he grows in the knowledge and love of God.
(3.) Let the Leaders converse with the Assistant frequently
and freely.
Q. 12. Can anything farther be done, in order to make
the meetings of the classes lively and profitable?
A. (1.) Change improper Leaders.
(2.) Let the Leaders frequently meet each other's classes.
(3.) Let us observe which Leaders are the most useful;
and let these meet the other classes as often as possible.
(4.) See that all the Leaders be not only men of sound
judgment, but men truly devoted to God.
Q. 13. How can we farther assist those under our care ?
A. (1.) By meeting the married men and women together,
the first Sunday after the visitation,—the single men and
women apart, on the two following,-in all the large
societies: This has been much neglected.
(2.) By instructing them at their own houses. What
unspeakable need is there of this ! The world say, “The
302 MINUTES OF
Mcthodists are no better than other people.” This is not true.
But it is nearer the truth than we are willing to believe.
N. B. For (1.) Personal religion either toward God or
man is amazingly superficial among us.
I can but just touch on a few generals. How little faith
is there among us! How little communion with God! How
little living in heaven, walking in eternity, deadness to every
creature ! How much love of the world; desire of pleasure,
of ease, of getting money! How little brotherly love 1
What continual judging one another ! What gossiping,
evil-speaking, tale-bearing ! What want of moral honesty!
To instance only in one or two particulars: Who does as he
would be done by, in buying and selling, particularly in
selling horses! Write him a knave that does not. And the
Methodist knave is the worst of all knaves.
(2.) Family religion is shamefully wanting, and almost in
every branch.
And the Methodists in general will be little the better, till
we take quite another course with them. For what avails
public preaching alone, though we could preach like angels?
We must, yea, every travelling Preacher must, instruct them
from house to house. Till this is done, and that in good
earnest, the Methodists will be little better than other people.
Our religion is not deep, universal, uniform; but superficial,
partial, uneven. It will be so, till we spend half as much
time in this visiting, as we now do in talking uselessly.
Can we find a better method of doing this than Mr.
Baxter's? If not, let us adopt it without delay. His whole
tract, entitled Gildas Salvianus, is well worth a careful
perusal. A short extract from it I will subjoin. Speaking
of this visiting from house to house, he says:
“We shall find many hinderances, both in ourselves, and
in the people.
“l. In ourselves there is much dulness and laziness; so
that there will be much ado to get us to be faithful in the
work.
“2. We have a base, man-pleasing temper; so that we let
men perish, rather than lose their love. We let them go
quietly to hell, lest we should anger them.
“3. Some of us have also a foolish bashfulness. We know
not how to begin, and blush to contradict the devil.
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 303
“4. But the greatest hinderance is, wea mess of faith.
‘Our whole motion is weak, because the spring of it is weak.
“5. Lastly, we are unskilful in the work. How few know
how to deal with men, so as to get within them, and suit all
our discourse to their several conditions and tempers; to choose
the fittest subjects, and follow them with a holy mixture of
seriousness, and terror, and love, and meekness l’’ (P. 351.)
And we have many difficulties to grapple with in our people.
1. Too many of them will be unwilling to be taught, till we
conquer their perverseness by the force of reason and the power
of love.
2. And many are so dull that they will shun being taught
for fear of showing their dulness. And indeed you will find it
extremely hard to make them understand the very plainest
points. 3. And it is still harder to fix things on their hearts, without
which all our labour is lost. If you have not, therefore, great
seriousness and fervency, what good can you expect? And,
after all, it is grace alone that must do the work.
4. And when we have made some impressions on their
hearts, if we look not after them, they will soon die away.
But as great as this labour of private instruction is, it is
absolutely necessary. For, after all our preaching, many of
our people are almost as ignorant as if they had never heard
the gospel. I speak as plain as I can, yet I frequently meet
with those who have been my hearers many years, who know
not whether Christ be God or man. And how few are there
that know the nature of repentance, faith, and holiness! Most
of them have a sort of confidence that God will save them, while
the world has their hearts. I have found by experience, that
one of these has learned more from one hour's close discourse,
than from ten years’ public preaching.
And undoubtedly this private application is implied in those
solemn words of the Apostle: “I charge thee, before God and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and dead at
his appearing, preach the word, be instant in season, out of
season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all longsuffering.”
Obrethren, if we could but set this work on foot in all our
societies, and prosecute it zealously, what glory would redound
to God! If the common ignorance were banished, and every
shop and every house busied in speaking of the word and works
304 MINUTES OF
of God; surely God would dwell in our habitations, and make
us his delight.
And this is absolutely necessary to the welfare of our people,
many of whom neither believe nor repent to this day. Look
round and see how many of them are still in apparent danger of
damnation. And how can you walk and talk and be merry with
such people, when you know their case? Methinks, when your
look them in the face, you should break forth into tears, as the
Prophet did when he looked upon Hazael; and then set on
them with the most vehement and importunate exhortations.
O, for God’s sake, and for the sake of poor souls, bestir your
selves, and spare no pains that may conduce to their salvation!
What cause have we to bleed before the Lord this day, that
we have so long neglected this good work | If we had but set
upon it sooner, how many more might have been brought to
Christ! And how much holier and happier might we have
made our societies before now ! And why might we not have
done it sooner? There were many hinderances; and so there
always will be. But the greatest hinderance was in ourselves,
in our littleness of faith and love.
But it is objected, (1) “This will take up so much time,
that we shall not have time to follow our studies.”
I answer, (1.) Gaining knowledge is a good thing; but saving
souls is a better. (2.) By this very thing you will gain the most
excellent knowledge, that of God and eternity. (3.) You will
have time for gaining other knowledge too, if you spend all your
mornings therein. Only sleep not more than you need; and
never be idle, or triflingly employed. But, (4.) If you can do.
but one, let your studies alone. I would throw by all the libra
ries in the world, rather than be guilty of the loss of one soul.
I allow, in some of the country circuits, where you have
only a day to spend in each place, you have not time for this
excellent work. But you have, wherever you spend several
days together in one town.
It is objected, (2.) “The people will not submit to it.” If
some will not, others will. And the success with them will
repay all your labour. O let us herein follow the example of
St. Paul |
(1.) For our general business, “Serving the Lord with all
humility of mind.” (2.) Our special work, “Take heed to your
selves, and to all the flock.” (3.) Our doctrine, “Repentance
toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.” (4.) The
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 305
place, “I have taught you publicly, and from house to house.”
The object and manner of teaching: “I ceased not to warn
every one, night and day, with tears.” (5.) His innocence and
self-denial herein: “I have coveted no man’s silver or gold.”
(6.) His patience: “Neither count Imy life dear unto myself.”
And among all our motives, let these be ever before our eyes:
(1) “The Church of God, which he hath purchased with his
own blood.” (2.) “Grievous wolves shall enter in ; yea, of
yourselves shall men arise, speaking perverse things.” Write
this upon your hearts, and it will do you more good than
twenty years’ study.
Let every Preacher, having a catalogue of those in each
society, go to each house. Deal gently with them, that the
report of it may move others to desire your coming. Give the
children the “Instructions for Children,” and encourage them
to get them by heart. Indeed, you will find it no easy matter
to teach the ignorant the principles of religion. So true is the
remark of Archbishop Usher: “Great scholars may think this
work beneath them. But they should consider, the laying the
foundation skilfully, as it is of the greatest importance, so it is
the masterpiece of the wisest builder. And let the wisest of us
all try, whenever we please, we shall find, that to lay this
ground-work rightly, to make the ignorant understand the
grounds of religion, will put us to the trial of all our skill.”
Perhaps in doing this it may be well, (1.) After a few loving
words spoken to all in the house, to take each person singly
into another room, where you may deal closely with him, about
his sin, and misery, and duty. Set these home, or you lose all
your labour. (At least, let none be present but those who are
familiar with each other.)
(2.) Hear what the children have learned by heart.
(3) Choose some of the weightiest points, and try if they
understand them. As, “Do you believe you have sin in you?
What does sin deserve? What remedy has God provided for
guilty, helpless sinners?”
(4.) Often with the question suggest the answer. As, “What
is repentance? Sorrow for sin, or a conviction that we are
guilty, helpless sinners.” “What is faith? A divine convic
tion of things not seen.”
(5.) Where you perceive they do not understand the stress
of your question, lead them into it by other questions. For
VOL. VIII.
306 MINUTES OF
instance, you ask, “How do you think your sins will be par
doned?” They answer, “By repenting and amending my life.”
You ask farther, “But will your amendment make satisfac
tion for your past sins?” They will answer, “I hope so, or I
know not what will.” One would think, these had no know
ledge of Christ at all. And some have not. But others have ;
and give such answers, only because they do not understand
the scope of the question. Ask them farther, “Can you be
saved without the death of Christ?” They immediately say,
“No.” And if you ask, “What has he suffered for you?”
they will say, “He shed his blood for us.” But many cannot
express even what they have some conception of; no, not even
when expressions are put into their mouths. With these you
are to deal exceeding tenderly, lest they be discouraged.
(6.) If you perceive them troubled, that they cannot answer,
step in yourself, and take the burden off them; answering the
question yourself. And do it thoroughly and plainly, making a
full explication of the whole business to them.
(7.) When you have tried their knowledge, proceed to in
struct them, according to their several capacities. If a man
understand the fundamentals, speak what you perceive he most
needs, either explaining farther some doctrines, or some duty,
or showing him the necessity of something which he neglects.
If he still understands not, go over it again till he does.
(8.) Next inquire into his state, whether convinced or uncon
vinced, converted or unconverted. Tell him, if need be, what
conversion is; and then renew and enforce the inquiry.
(9.) If unconverted, labour with all your power to bring his
heart to a sense of his condition. Set this home with a more
earnest voice than you spoke before. Get to the heart, or you
do nothing.
(10.) Conclude all with a strong exhortation, which should
enforce, (1.) The duty of the heart, in order to receive Christ.
(2.) The avoiding former sins, and constantly using the out
ward means. And be sure, if you can, to get their promise,
to forsake sin, change their company, and use the means. And
do this solemnly, reminding them of the presence of God, who
hears their promises, and expects the performance.
(11.) Before you leave them, engage the head of each family
to call all his family together every Sunday before they go to
bed, and hear what they can repeat, and so continue, till they
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 307
have learned the “Instructions” perfectly; and afterwards let
him take care that they do not forget what they have learned.
Do this in earnest, and you will soon find what a work you
take in hand, in undertaking to be a Travelling Preacher!
Q. 14. How shall we prevent improper persons from
insinuating into the society?
A. (1.) Give tickets to none till they are recommended by a
Leader, with whom they have met at least two months on trial.
(2.) Give notes to none but those who are recommended
by one you know, or till they have met three or four times
in a class.
(3.) Give them the Rules the first time they meet. See
that this be never neglected.
Q. 15. When shall we admit new members?
A. In large towns, admit them into the Bands at the
quarterly love-feast following the visitation: Into the society,
on the Sunday following the visitation. Then also read the
names of them that are excluded.
Q. 16. Should we insist on the Band rules, particularly
with regard to dress?
A. By all means. This is no time to give any encourage
ment to superfluity of apparel. Therefore give no Band-tickets
to any till they have left off superfluous ornaments. In order
to this, (1.) Let every Assistant read the “Thoughts upon
Dress” at least once a year, in every large society. (2.) In
visiting the classes, be very mild, but very strict. (3.) Allow
no exempt case, not even of a married woman. Better one
suffer than many. (4) Give no ticket to any that wear
calashes, high-heads, or enormous bonnets.
To encourage meeting in Band, (1.) In every large society,
have a love-feast quarterly for the Bands only. (2.) Never
fail to meet them once a week. (3.) Exhort every believer
to embrace the advantage. (4.) Give a Band-ticket to none
till they have met a quarter on trial.
Observe 1 You give none a Band-ticket before he meets,
but after he has met.
Q. 17. Have those in Band left off snuff and drams?
A. No. Many are still enslaved to one or the other. In
order to redress this, (1.) Let no Preacher touch either on
any account. (2.) Strongly dissuade our people from them.
(3.) Answer their pretences, particularly curing the colic.
308 MINUTES OF
Q. 18. Do we observe any evil which has lately prevailed
among our societies?
A. Many of our members have married with unbelievers,
yea, with unawakened persons. This has had fatal effects.
They had either a cross for life, or turned back to perdition.
Q. 19. What can be done to put a stop to this?
A. (1.) Let every Preacher publicly enforce the Apostle's
caution, “Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers.” (2.)
Let him openly declare, whoever does this will be expelled
the society. (3.) When any such is expelled, let a suitable
exhortation be subjoined. And, (4.) Let all be exhorted to
take no step in so weighty a matter without advising with
the most serious of their brethren.
Q. 20. Ought any woman to marry without the consent
of her parents?
A. In general she ought not. Yet there may be an excep
tion. For if, (1.) A woman be under a necessity of marrying;
if, (2.) Her parents absolutely refuse to let her marry any Chris
tian; then she may, nay, ought to, marry without their consent.
Yet, even then, a Methodist Preacher ought not to marry her.
Q. 21. Do not Sabbath-breaking, dram-drinking, evil
speaking, unprofitable conversation, lightness, expensiveness
or gaiety of apparel, and contracting debts without due care
to discharge them, still prevail in several places? How may
these evils be remedied?
A. (1) Let us preach expressly on each of these heads. (2.)
Read in every society the “Sermon on Evil-Speaking. (3.)
Let the Leaders closely examine and exhort every person to put
away the accursed thing. (4.) Let the Preacher warn every
society, that none who is guilty herein can remain with us. (5.)
Extirpate smuggling, buying or selling uncustomed goods, out
of every society. Let none remain with us, who will not totally
abstain from every kind and degree of it. Speak tenderly, but
earnestly, and frequently of it, in every society near the coasts;
and read to them, and diligently disperse among them, the
“Word to a Smuggler.” (6.) Extirpate bribery, receiving any
thing, directly or indirectly, for voting in any election. Show
no respect of persons herein, but expel all that touch the ac
cursed thing. Largely show, both in public and private, the
wickedness of thus selling our country. And every where read
the “Word to a Freeholder,” and disperse it with both hands.
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 309
Q. 22. What shall we do to prevent scandal, when any of
our members become bankrupt?
A. Let the Assistant talk with him at large; and if he has
not kept fair accounts, or has been concerned in that base
practice of raising money by coining notes, (commonly called
the bill-trade,) let him be expelled immediately.
Q. 23. What is the office of a Christian Minister?
A. To watch over souls, as he that must give account.
Q. 24. In what view may we and our Helpers be considered?
A. Perhaps as extraordinary messengers, (that is, out of the
ordinary way,) designed, (1.) To provoke the regular Ministers
to jealousy. (2.) To supply their lack of service toward those
who are perishing for want of knowledge. But how hard is
it to abide here ! Who does not wish to be a little higher?
suppose, to be ordained !
Q. 25. What is the office of a Helper?
A. In the absence of a Minister, to feed and guide the
flock; in particular,
(1.) To preach morning and evening. (But he is never to
begin later in the evening than seven o’clock, unless in par
ticular cases.)
(2.) To meet the society and the Bands weekly.
(3.) To meet the Leaders weekly.
Let every preacher be particularly exact in this, and in the
morning preaching. If he has twenty hearers, let him preach.
If not, let him sing and pray.
N. B. We are fully determined never to drop the morning
preaching, and to continue preaching at five, wherever it is
practicable, particularly in London and Bristol.
Q. 26. What are the rules of a Helper?
A. (1.) Be diligent. Never be unemployed a moment. Never
be triflingly employed. Never while away time; neither spend
any more time at any place than is strictly necessary.
(2.) Be serious. Let your motto be, “Holiness to the Lord.”
Avoid all lightness, jesting, and foolish talking.
(3.) Converse sparingly and cautiously with women; par
ticularly, with young women.
(4.) Take no step toward marriage, without first consulting
with your brethren.
(5.) Believe evil of no one; unless you see it done, take
heed how you credit it. Put the best construction on every
-
310 MINUTES OF
thing. You know the Judge is always supposed to be on the
prisoner's side.
(6.) Speak evil of no one; else your word cspecially would
eat as doth a canker. Keep your thoughts within your own
breast, till you come to the person concerned.
(7.) Tell every one what you think wrong in him, and that
plainly, as soon as may be; else it will fester in your heart.
Make all haste to cast the fire out of your bosom.
(8.) Do not affect the gentleman. You have no more to do
with this character than with that of a dancing-master. A
Preacher of the gospel is the servant of all.
(9.) Be ashamed of nothing but sin: Not of fetching wood
(if time permit) or drawing water; not of cleaning your own
"shoes, or your neighbour's.
(10.) Be punctual. Do everything exactly at the time.
And in general, do not mend our Rules, but keep them; not
for wrath, but for conscience' sake.
(11.) You have nothing to do but to save souls. Therefore
spend and be spent in this work. And go always, not only to
those that want you, but to those that want you most.
Observe: It is not your business to preach so many times,
and to take care of this or that society; but to save as many
souls as you can ; to bring as many sinners as you possibly can
to repentance, and with all your power to build them up in that
holiness without which they cannot see the Lord. And remem
ber 1 A Methodist Preacher is to mind every point, great and
small, in the Methodist discipline ! Therefore you will need all
the sense you have, and to have all your wits about you!
(12.) Act in all things, not according to your own will, but
as a son in the Gospel. As such, it is your part to employ
your time in the manner which we direct; partly, in preach
ing and visiting from house to house; partly, in reading,
meditation, and prayer. Above all, if you labour with us in
our Lord's vineyard, it is needful that you should do that
part of the work which we advise, at those times and places
which we judge most for his glory.
Q. 27. What power is this which you exercise over both the
Preach.crs and the societies?
A. Count Zinzendorf loved to keep all things close: I love
to do all things openly. I will therefore tell you all I know of
the matter, taking it from the very beginning.
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 311
(1.) In November, 1738, two or three persons who desired
“to flee from the wrath to come,” and then a few more, came
to me in London, and desired me to advise and pray with them.
I said, “If you will meet me on Thursday night, I will help
you as well as I can.” More and more then desired to meet
with them, till they were increased to many hundreds. The
case was afterwards the same at Bristol, Kingswood, Newcastle,
and many other parts of England, Scotland, and Ireland. It
may be observed, the desire was on their part, not mine. My
desire was, to live and die in retirement. But I did not see that
I could refuse them my help, and be guiltless before God.
Here commenced my power; namely, a power to appoint when,
and where, and how they should meet; and to remove those
whose lives showed that they had not a desire “to flee from
the wrath to come.” And this power remained the same,
whether the people meeting together were twelve, or twelve
hundred, or twelve thousand.
(2.) In a few days some of them said, “Sir, we will not sit
under you for nothing; we will subscribe quarterly.” I said,
“I will have nothing; for I want nothing. My Fellowship sup
plies me with all I want.” One replied, “Nay, but you want
a hundred and fifteen pounds to pay for the lease of the Foun
dery; and likewise a large sum of money to put it into repair.”
On this consideration, I suffered them to subscribe. And when
the society met, I asked, “Who will take the trouble of receiv
ing this money, and paying it where it is needful?” One said,
“I will do it, and keep the account for you.” So here was the
first Steward. Afterwards, I desired one or two more to help
me, as Stewards, and, in process of time, a greater number.
Let it be remarked, it was I myself, not the people, who
chose these Stewards, and appointed to each the distinct work
wherein he was to help me, as long as I desired. And herein
I began to exercise another sort of power; namely, that of
appointing and removing Stewards.
(3.) After a time a young man, named Thomas Maxfield,
came and desired to help me as a son in the gospel. Soon after
came a second, Thomas Richards; and then a third, Thomas
Westell. These severally desired to serve me as sons, and to
labour when and where I should direct. Observe: These like
wise desired me, not I them. But I durst not refuse their assist
ance. And here commenced my power, to appoint each of these
312 MINUTES OF
when, and where, and how to labour; that is, while he chose to
continue with me. For each had a power to go away when
he pleased; as I had also, to go away from them, or any of
them, if I saw sufficient cause. The case continued the same
when the number of Preachers increased. I had just the same
power still, to appoint when, and where, and how each should
help me; and to tell any, (if I saw cause,) “I do not desire your
help any longer.” On these terms, and no other, we joined at
first: On these we continue joined. But they do me no favour
in being directed by me. It is true, my “reward is with the
Lord: ” But at present I have nothing from it but trouble
and care; and often a burden I scarce know how to bear.
(4.) In 1744 I wrote to several Clergymen, and to all who
then served me as sons in the gospel, desiring them to meet me
in London, and to give me their advice concerning the best
method of carrying on the work of God. And when their num
ber increased, so that it was not convenient to invite them all,
for several years I wrote to those with whom I desired to confer,
and they only met me at London, or elsewhere; till at length I
gave a general permission, which I afterwards saw cause to
retract.
Observe: I myself sent for these of my own free choice.
And I sent for them to advise, not govern, me. Neither did
I at any time divest myself of any part of the power above
described, which the providence of God had cast upon me,
without any design or choice of mine.
(5.) What is that power? It is a power of admitting into,
and excluding from, the societies under my care; of choosing
and removing Stewards; of receiving or not receiving Helpers;
of appointing them when, where, and how to help me, and of
desiring any of them to confer with me when I see good. And
as it was merely in obedience to the providence of God, and
for the good of the people, that I at first accepted this power,
which I never sought; so it is on the same consideration, not
for profit, honour, or pleasure, that I use it at this day.
(6.) But “several gentlemen are offended at your having so
much power.” I did not seek any part of it. But when it was
come unawares, not daring to “bury that talent,” I used it to
the best of my judgment. Yet I never was fond of it. I always
did, and do now, bear it as my burden;—the burden which God
lays upon me, and therefore I dare not lay it down.
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 313
But if you can tell me any one, or any five men, to whom I
may transfer this burden, who can and will do just what I do
now, I will heartily thank both them and you.
(7.) But some of our Helpers say, “This is shackling free
born Englishmen;” and demand a free Conference, that is, a
meeting of all the Preachers, wherein all things shall be deter
mined by most votes. I answer, It is possible, after my death,
something of this kind may take place; but not while I live.
To me the Preachers have engaged themselves to submit, to
serve me as sons in the gospel; but they are not thus engaged
to any man or number of men besides. To me the people in
general will submit; but they will not thus submit to any other.
It is nonsense, then, to call my using this power, “shack
ling free-born Englishmen.” None needs to submit to it un
less he will; so that there is no shackling in the case. Every
Preacher and every member may leave me when he pleases.
But while he chooses to stay, it is on the same terms that he
joined me at first.
“But this is making yourself a Pope.” This carries no face
of truth. The Pope affirms that every Christian must do all he
bids, and believe all he says, under pain of damnation. I never
affirmed anything that bears any the most distant resemblance
to this. All I affirm is, the Preachers who choose to labour
with me, choose to serve me as sons in the gospel. And the
people who choose to be under my care, choose to be so on
the same terms they were at first.
Therefore all talk of this kind is highly injurious to me, who
bear the burden merely for your sake. And it is exceeding mis
chievous to the people, tending to confound their understand
ing, and to fill their hearts with evil surmisings and unkind
tempers toward me; to whom they really owe more, for taking
all this load upon me, for exercising this very power, for shack
ling myself in this manner, than for all my preaching put
together: Because preaching twice or thrice a day is no burden
to me at all; but the care of all the Preachers and all the
people is a burden indeed!
Q. 28. What reason can be assigned why so many of our
Preachers contract nervous disorders?
A. The chief reason, on Dr. Cadogan's principles, is either
indolence or intemperance. (1.) Indolence. Several of them
use too little exercise, far less than when they wrought at their
314 MINUTES OF
trade. And this will naturally pave the way for many, especially
nervous, disorders. (2.) Intemperance,—though not in the
vulgar sense. They take more food than they did when they
laboured more: And let any man of reflection judge how long
this will consist with health. Or they use more sleep than
when they laboured more: And this alone will destroy the
firmness of the nerves. If, then, our Preachers would avoid
nervous disorders, let them, (1.) Take as little meat, drink, and
sleep as nature will bear; and, (2.) Use full as much exercise
daily as they did before they were Preachers.
Q. 29. What general method of employing our time would
you advise us to?
A. We advise you, (1.) As often as possible to rise at four.
(2.) From four to five in the morning, and from five to six in
the evening, to meditate, pray, and read, partly the Scripture
with the Notes, partly the closely practical parts of what we have
published. (3.) From six in the morning till twelve, (allowing
an hour for breakfast,) to read in order with much prayer, first,
“The Christian Library,” and the other books which we have
published in prose and verse, and then those which we recom
mended in our Rules of Kingswood School.
Q. 30. Should our Helpers follow trades?
A. The question is not, whether they may occasionally work
with their hands, as St. Paul did, but whether it be proper for
them to keep shop or follow merchandise. After long consi
deration, it was agreed by all our brethren, that no Preacher
who will not relinquish his trade of buying and selling, (though
it were only pills, drops, or balsams) shall be considered as a
Travelling Preacher any longer.
Q. 31. Why is it that the people under our care are no
better?
A. Other reasons may concur; but the chief is, because we
are not more knowing and more holy.
Q. 32. But why are we not more knowing?
A. Because we are idle. We forget our very first rule, “Be
diligent. Never be unemployed a moment. Never be tri
flingly employed. Never while away time; neither spend any
more time at any place than is strictly necessary.”
I fear there is altogether a fault in this matter, and that few
of us are clear. Which of you spends as many hours a day in
God’s work as you did formerly in man’s work? We talk,
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 315
—or read history, or what comes next to hand. We must,
absolutely must, cure this evil, or betray the cause of God.
But how? (1.) Read the most useful books, and that
regularly and constantly. Steadily spend all the morning in
this employ, or, at least, five hours in four-and-twenty.
“But I read only the Bible.” Then you ought to teach
others to read only the Bible, and, by parity of reason, to
hear only the Bible: But if so, you need preach no more.
Just so said George Bell. And what is the fruit? Why, now
he neither reads the Bible, nor anything else. This is rank
enthusiasm. If you need no book but the Bible, you are got
above St. Paul. He wanted others too. “Bring the books,”
says he, “but especially the parchments,” those wrote on
parchment. “But I have no taste for reading.” Contract
a taste for it by use, or return to your trade.
“But I have no books.” I will give each of you, as fast
as you will read them, books to the value of five pounds.
And I desire the Assistants would take care that all the
large societies provide our Works, or at least the Notes, for
the use of the Preachers.
(2.) In the afternoon follow Mr. Baxter's plan. Then you
will have no time to spare: You will have work enough for
all your time. Then, likewise, no Preacher will stay with us
who is as salt that has lost its savour. For to such this em
ployment would be mere drudgery. And in order to it, you
will have need of all the knowledge you have, or can procure.
The sum is, Go into every house in course, and teach every
one therein, young and old, if they belong to us, to be
Christians inwardly and outwardly.
Make every particular plain to their understanding; fix it in
their memory; write it in their heart. In order to this, there
must be “line upon line, precept upon precept.” What
patience, what love, what knowledge is requisite for this!
Q. 33. In what particular method should we instruct them?
A. You may, as you have time, read, explain, enforce, (1.)
“The Rules of the Society.” (2.) “Instructions for Children.”
(3.) The fourth volume of “Sermons.” And, (4) Philip
Henry’s “Method of Family Prayer.”
We must needs do this, were it only to avoid idleness. Do
we not loiter away many hours in every week? Each try
himself: No idleness can consist with growth in grace. Nay,
316 MINUTES OF
without exactness in redeeming time, you cannot retain the
grace you received in justification.
But what shall we do for the rising generation? Unless we
take care of this, the present revival will be res unius aetatis ;
it will last only the age of a man. Who will labour herein?
Let him that is zealous for God and the souls of men begin now.
(1.) Where there are ten children in a society, meet them
at least an hour every week.
(2.) Talk with them every time you see any at home.
(3.) Pray in earnest for them.
(4.) Diligently instruct and vehemently exhort all parents
at their own houses.
(5.) Preach expressly on education, particularly at Mid
summer, when you speak of Kingswood. “But I have no
gift for this.” Gift or no gift, you are to do it; else you are
not called to be a Methodist Preacher. Do it as you can, till
you can do it as you would. Pray earnestly for the gift, and
use the means for it. Particularly, study the “Instructions”
and “Lessons for Children.”
Q. 34. Why are not we more holy? Why do not we live in
eternity; walk with God all the day long? Why are we not
all devoted to God; breathing the whole spirit of Missionaries?
A. Chiefly because we are enthusiasts; looking for the end,
without using the means. To touch only upon two or three
instances: Who of you rises at four in summer; or even at
five, when he does not preach? Do you recommend to all our
societies the five o’clock hour for private prayer? Do you
observe it, or any other fixed time? Do not you find by
experience, that any time is no time? Do you know the
obligation and the benefit of fasting P How often do you
practise it? The neglect of this alone is sufficient to account
for our feebleness and faintness of spirit. We are continu
ally grieving the Holy Spirit of God by the habitual neglect
of a plain duty Let us amend from this hour.
Q. 35. But how can I fast, since it hurts my health?
A. There are several degrees of fasting which cannot hurt
your health. I will instance in one: Let you and I every
Friday (beginning on the next) avow this duty throughout the
nation, by touching no tea, coffee, or chocolate in the morning
but (if we want it) half a pint of milk or water-gruel. Letus dine
on potatoes, and (if we need it) eat three or four ounces of flesh
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 317
in the evening. At other times let us eat no flesh-suppers:
These exceedingly tend to breed nervous disorders.
Q. 36. What is the best general method of preaching?
A. (1.) To invite. (2.) To convince. (3.) To offer Christ.
(4.) To build up; and to do this in some measure in every
Sermon.
..Q. 37. Are there any smaller advices relative to preaching,
which might be of use to us?
A. Perhaps these: (1.) Be sure never to disappoint a con
gregation, unless in case of life or death.
(2.) Begin and end precisely at the time appointed.
(3.) Let your whole deportment before the congregation.
be serious, weighty, and solemn.
(4.) Always suit your subject to your audience.
(5.) Choose the plainest texts you can.
(6.) Take care not to ramble; but keep to your text, and
make out what you take in hand.
(7.) Be sparing in allegorizing or spiritualizing.
(8.) Take care of anything awkward or affected, either in
your gesture, phrase, or pronunciation.
(9.) Sing no hymns of your own composing.
(10.) Print nothing without my approbation.
(11.) Do not usually pray above eight or ten minutes (at
most) without intermission.
(12.) Frequently read and enlarge upon a portion of the
Notes. And let young Preachers often exhort, without
taking a text.-
(13.) In repeating the Lord's Prayer, remember to say “hal
lowed,” not hollowed ; “trespass against us ; ” “amen.”
(14) Repeat this prayer aloud after the Minister, as often
as he repeats it.
(15.) Repeat after him aloud every confession, and both
the doxologies in the Communion-Service.
(16.) Always kneel during public prayer.
(17.) Everywhere avail yourself of the great festivals, by
preaching on the occasion, and singing the hymns, which
you should take care to have in readiness.
(18.) Avoid quaint words, however in fashion, as object,
originate, very, high, &c.
(19.) Avoid the fashionable impropriety of leaving out the
w in many words, as honor, vigor, &c. This is mere childish
affectation.
3.18 MINUTES OF
(20.) Beware of clownishness, either in speech or dress.
Wear no slouched hat.
(21.) Be merciful to your beast. Not only ride moderately,
but see with your own eyes that your horse be rubbed, fed,
and bedded.
Q. 38. Have not some of us been led off from practical
preaching by what was called preaching Christ?
A. Indeed we have. The most effectual way of preaching
Christ, is to preach him in all his offices, and to declare his
law as well as his gospel, both to believers and unbelievers.
Let us strongly and closely insist upon inward and outward
holiness, in all its branches.
Q. 39. How shall we guard against formality in public wor
ship; particularly in singing?
A. (1.) By preaching frequently on the head. (2.) By taking
care to speak only what we feel. (3.) By choosing such
hymns as are proper for the congregation. (4.) By not sing
ing too much at once; seldom more than five or six verses.
(5.) By suiting the tune to the words. (6.) By often stopping
short, and asking the people, “Now, do you know what, you
said last? Did you speak no more than you felt 7”
Is not this formality creeping in already, by those complex
tunes, which it is scarcely possible to sing with devotion?
Such is, “Praise the Lord, ye blessed ones:” Such the long
quavering hallelujah annexed to the morning-song tune, which
I defy any man living to sing devoutly. The repeating the
same words so often, (but especially while another repeats
different words, the horrid abuse which runs through the
modern church-music) as it shocks all common sense, so it
necessarily brings in dead formality, and has no more of reli
gion in it than a Lancashire hornpipe. Besides, it is a flat
contradiction to our Lord’s command, “Use not vain repeti
tions.” For what is a vain repetition, if this is not? What
end of devotion does it serve? Sing no anthems.
(7.) Do not suffer the people to sing too slow. This natu
rally tends to formality, and is brought in by them who have
either very strong or very weak voices. (8.) In every large
society let them learn to sing; and let them always learn our
own tunes first. (9.) Let the women constantly sing their
parts alone. Let no man sing with them, unless he under
stands the notes, and sings the bass, as it is pricked down in
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 319
the book. (10.) Introduce no new tunes till they are perfect
in the old. (11.) Let no organ be placed anywhere, till pro
posed in the Conference. (12.) Recommend our tune-book
everywhere; and if you cannot sing yourself, choose a person
or two in each place to pitch the tune for you. (13.) Exhort
every one in the congregation to sing, not one in ten only.
(14.) If a Preacher be present, let no singer give out the
words. (15.) When they would teach a tune to the congrega
tion, they must sing only the tenor.
After preaching, take a little lemonade, mild ale, or candied
orange-peel. All spirituous liquors, at that time especially,
are deadly poison.
Q. 40. Who is the Assistant?
A. That Preacher in each Circuit who is appointed, from
time to time, to take charge of the societies and the other
Preachers therein.
Q. 41. How should an Assistant be qualified for his charge?
A. By walking closely with God, and having his work
greatly at heart; by understanding and loving discipline, ours
in particular; and by loving the Church of England, and
resolving not to separate from it. Let this be well observed.
I fear, when the Methodists leave the Church, God will leave
them. But if they are thrust out of it, they will be guiltless.
Q. 42. What is the business of an Assistant?
A. (1.) To see that the other Preachers in his Circuit behave
well, and want nothing. (2) To visit the classes quarterly,
regulate the Bands, and deliver tickets. (3.) To take in or
put out of the society or the Bands. (4.) To keep watch
nights and love-feasts. (5.) To hold quarterly-meetings, and
thereindiligently to inquire both into the temporal and spi
ritual state of each society. (6.) To take care that every
society be duly supplied with books; particularly with
“Kempis,” “Instructions for Children,” and the “Primitive
Physic,” which ought to be in every house. O why is not this
regarded ! (7.) To send from every quarterly-meeting a cir
cumstantial account to London of every remarkable conversion
and remarkable death. (8.) To take exact lists of his socie
ties every quarter, and send them up to London. (9.) To
meet the married men and women, and the single men and
women, in the large societies, once a quarter. (10.) To over
look the accounts of all the Stewards.
320 MINUTES OF
Q.”43. Has the office of an Assistant been well executed?
A. No, not by half the Assistants. (1.) Who has sent me
word, whether the other Preachers behave well or ill? (2) Who
has visited all the classes and regulated the Bands quarterly?
(3.) Love-feasts for the Bands have been neglected: Neither
have persons been duly taken in and put out of the Bands.
(4.) The societies are not half supplied with books; not even
with those above-mentioned. O exert yourselves in this! Be
not weary! Leave no stone unturned ! (5.) How few accounts
have I had, either of remarkable deaths, or remarkable conver
sions ! (6.) How few exact lists of the societies ! (7.) How
few have met the married and single persons once a quarter I
Q. 44. Are there any other advices which you would give
the Assistants?
A. Several. (1.) Take a regular catalogue of your societies,
as they live in house-row. (2.) Leave your successor a particu
lar account of the state of the Circuit. (3) See that every
Band-Leader has the Rules of the Bands. (4.) Vigorously, but
calmly, enforce the Rules concerning needless ornaments,
drams, snuff, and tobacco. Give no Band-ticket to any man
or woman who does not promise to leave them off (5.) As
soon as there are four men or women believers in any place,
put them into a Band. (6.) Suffer no love-feast to last above
an hour and an half; and instantly stop all breaking the cake
with one another. (7.) Warn all, from time to time, that none
are to remove from one society to another without a certificate
from the Assistant in these words: (Else he will not be received
in other societies:) “A. B., the bearer, is amember of our society
in C.: I believe he has sufficient cause for removing.” I beg
every Assistant to remember this. (8.) Everywhere recommend
decency and cleanliness: Cleanliness is next to godliness. (9.)
Exhort all that were brought up in the Church, to continue
therein. Set the example yourself; and immediately change
every plan that would hinder their being at church at least two
Sundays in four. Carefully avoid whatever has a tendency to
separate men from the Church; and let all the servants in our
preaching-houses go to church once on Sunday at least.
Is there not a cause? Are we not unawares, by little and
little, sliding into a separation from the Church? O use every
means to prevent this! (1) Exhort all our people to keep
close to the Church and sacrament. (2.) Warn them all against
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 321
niceness in hearing,-a prevailing evil. (3.) Warn them also
against despising the Prayers of the Church. (4.) Against calling
our society, “the Church.” (5.) Against calling our Preachers,
“Ministers;” our Houses, “Meeting-houses:” Call them plain
preaching-houses, or chapels. (6.) Do not license them as Dis
senters. The proper paper to be sent in at the Assizes, Sessions,
or Bishop’s Court is this: “A. B. has set apart his house in C.
for public worship, of which he desires a certificate.” N.B. The
Justice does not license the house, but the Act of Parliament.
(7.) Do not license yourself till you are constrained; and
then, not as a Dissenter, but a Methodist. It is time enough
when you are prosecuted to take the oaths. And by so doing
you are licensed.
Q. 45. But are we not Dissenters?
A. No: Although we call sinners to repentance in all places
of God’s dominion; and although we frequently use extempo
rary prayer, and unite together in a religious society; yet we
are not Dissenters in the only sense which our law acknow
ledges, namely, those who renounce the service of the Church.
We do not, we dare not, separate from it. We are not Seceders,
nor do we bear any resemblance to them. We set out upon
quite opposite principles. The Seceders laid the very founda
tion of their work in judging and condemning others: We laid
thefoundation of our workin judging and condemning ourselves.
They begin everywhere with showing their hearers how fallen
the Church and Ministers are: We begin everywhere with
showing our hearers how fallen they are themselves. What
they do in America, or what their Minutes say on this sub
ject, is nothing to us. We will keep in the good old way.
And let us never make light of going to church, either by
word or deed. Remember Mr. Hook, a very eminent and
a zealous Papist. When I asked him, “Sir, what do you do
for public worship here, where you have no Romish service?”
he answered, “Sir, I am so fully convinced it is the duty of
every man to worship God in public, that I go to church
every Sunday. If I cannot have such worship as I would, I
will have such worship as I can.”
But some may say, “Our own service is public worship.”
Yes; but not such as supersedes the Church Service; it pre
supposes public prayer, like the sermons at the University.
If it were designed to be instead of the Church Service, it
VOL. VIII.
322 MINUTES or
would be essentially defective; for it seldom has the four
grand parts of public prayer, deprecation, petition, interces
sion, and thanksgiving.
If the people put ours in the room of the Church Service,
we hurt them that stay with us, and ruin them that leave
us; for then they will go nowhere, but lounge the Sabbath
away without any public worship at all.
Q. 46. Nay, but is it not our duty to separate from the
Church, considering the wickedness both of the Clergy and
the people?
A. We conceive not ; (1.) Because both the Priests and the
people were full as wicked in the Jewish Church; and yet it
was not the duty of the holy Israelites to separate from them.
(2.) Neither did our Lord command his disciples to separate
from them; he rather commanded the contrary. (3.) Hence it
is clear that could not be the meaning of St. Paul’s words:
“Come out from among them, and be ye separate.”
Q. 47. But what reasons are there why we should not
separate from the Church?
A. Among others, those which were printed above twenty
years ago, entitled, “Reasons against a Separation from the
Church of England.”
We allow two exceptions: (1) If the parish Minister be
a notoriously wicked man. (2.) If he preach Socinianism,
Arianism, or any other essentially false doctrine.
Q. 48. Do we sufficiently watch over our Helpers?-
A. We might consider those that are with us as our pupils;
into whose behaviour and studies we should inquire every day.
Should we not frequently ask each, Do you walk closely with
God? Have you now fellowship with the Father and the
Son? At what hour do you rise? Do you punctually
observe the morning and evening hour of retirement? Do
you spend the day in the manner which we advise? Do you
converse seriously, usefully, and closely? To be more par
ticular: Do you use all the means of grace yourself, and
enforce the use of them on all other persons?
They are either Instituted or Prudential:—
I. The INSTITUTED are,
(1.) Prayer; private, family, public; consisting of depreca
tion, petition, intercession, and thanksgiving. Do you use each
of these? Do you use private prayer every morning and even
ing? if you can, at five in the evening; and the hour before or
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 323
after morning preaching? Do you forecast daily, wherever
you are, how to secure these hours? Do you avow it every
where? Do you ask everywhere, “Have you family prayer?”
Do you retire at five o’clock?
(2.) Searching the Scriptures by,
(i.) Reading: Constantly, some part of every day; regu
larly, all the Bible in order; carefully, with the Notes;
seriously, with prayer before and after; fruitfully, imme
diately practising what you learn there?
(ii) Meditating: At set times? by any rule?
(iii.) Hearing: Every morning? carefully; with prayer
before, at, after; immediately putting in practice? Have
you a New Testament always about you?
(3.) The Lord’s supper: Do you use this at every oppor
tunity? with solemn prayer before; with earnest and delibe
rate self-devotion ?
(4.) Fasting: How do you fast every Friday?
(5.) Christian conference: Are you convinced how import
ant and how difficult it is to “order your conversation right?”
Is it “always in grace?seasoned with salt 7 meet to minister
grace to the hearers?” Do not you converse too long at a
time? Is not an hour commonly enough? Would it not be
well always to have a determinate end in view; and to pray
before and after it?
II. PRUDENTIAL MEANs we may use either as common
Christians, as Methodists, as Preachers, or as Assistants.
(1.) As common Christians. What particular rules have
you in order to grow in grace? What arts of holy living?
(2.) As Methodists. Do you never miss your class, or
Band P
(3.) As Preachers. Do you meet every society; also the
Leaders and Bands, if any?
(4.) As Assistants. Have you throughly considered your
office; and do you make a conscience of executing every part
Of it?
These means may be used without fruit: But there are
some means which cannot; namely, watching, denying our
selves, taking up our cross, exercise of the presence of God.
(1.) Do you steadily watch against the world, the devil,
yourselves, your besetting sin?
(2.) Do you deny yourself every useless pleasure of sense,
~.
>
".
624 MINUTES OF
imagination, honour? Are you temperate in all things”
instance in food: Do you use only that kind and that degree
which is best both for your body and soul? Do you see the
uecessity of this?
(3.) Do you eat no flesh suppers? no late suppers?
(4.) Do you eat no more at each meal than is necessary?
Are you not heavy or drowsy after dinner?
(5.) Do you use only that kind and that degree of drink
which is best both for your body and soul?
(6.) Do you drink water? Why not? Did you ever?
Why did you leave it off? If not for health, when will you
begin again? to-day?
(7.) How often do you drink wine or ale? every day? Do
you want it?
(8.) Wherein do you “take up your cross daily P” Do
you cheerfully bear your cross (whatever is grievous to
nature) as a gift of God, and labour to profit thereby ?
(9.) Do you endeavour to set God always before you; to
see his eye continually fixed upon you? Never can you use
these means but a blessing will ensue. And the more you
use them, the more will you grow in grace.
Q. 49. What can be done, in order to a closer union of
our Helpers with each other.
A. (1.) Let them be deeply convinced of the want there
is of it at present, and the absolute necessity of it.
(2.) Let them pray for a desire of union.
(3.) Let them speak freely to each other.
(4.) When they meet, let them never part without prayer.
(5.) Let them beware how they despise each other's gifts.
(6.) Let them never speak slightingly of each other in any
sind.
(7.) Let them defend one another's characters in every
thing, so far as consists with truth: And,
(8.) Let them labour in honour each to prefer the other
before himself.
Q. 50. How shall we try those who think they are moved
by the Holy Ghost to preach P
A. Inquire, (1.) Do they know God as a pardoning God?
Have they the love of God abiding in them? Do they desire
and seek nothing but God? And are they holy in all manner
of conversation? (2.) Have they gifts (as well as grace) for
the work? Have they (in some tolerable degree) a clear, sound
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 325
understanding? Have they a right judgment in the things of
God? Have they a just conception of salvation by faith? And
has God given them any degree of utterance? Do they speak
justly, readily, clearly? (3.) Have they fruit? Are any truly
convinced of sin, and converted to God, by their preaching?
As long as these three marks concur in any one, we believe
he is called of God to preach. These we receive as sufficient
proof that he is “moved thereto by the Holy Ghost.”
Q. 51. What method may we use in receiving a new Helper?
A. A proper time for doing this is at a Conference after
solemn fasting and prayer.
Every person proposed is then to be present; and each of
them may be asked,—Have you faith in Christ? Are you
“going on to perfection?” Do you expect to be “perfected
in love” in this life? Are you groaning after it? Are you
resolved to devote yourself wholly to God and to his work?
Do you know the Methodist plan? Have you read the
“Plain Account?” the “Appeals?” Do you know the
Rules of the Society? of the Bands? Do you keep them?
Do you take no snuff, tobacco, drams? Do you constantly
attend the church and sacrament? Have you read the “Min
utes of the Conference?” Are you willing to conform to them?
Have you considered the Rules of a Helper; especially the First,
Tenth, and Twelfth? Will you keep them for conscience sake?
Are you determined to employall your time in the work of God?
Will you preach every morning and evening; endeavouring
not to speak too long, or too loud 7 Will you diligently in
struct the children in every place? Will you visit from house
to house? Will you recommend fasting, both by precept and
example? Are you in debt? Are you engaged to marry?
(N.B. A Preacher who marries while on trial, is thereby
set aside.)
We may then receive him as a probationer, by giving him
the “Minutes of the Conference,” inscribed thus:
* TO A. B.
“You think it your duty to call sinners to repentance.
Make full proof hereof, and we shall rejoice to receive you as
a fellow-labourer.”
Let him then read and carefully weigh what is contained
therein, that if he has any doubt it may be removed.
Observe: Taking on trial is entirely different from admitting
326 MINUTES OF
a Preacher. One on trial may be either admitted or rejected,
without doing him any wrong; otherwise it would be no trial at
all. Let every Assistant explain this to them that are on trial
When he has been on trial four years, if recommended by the
Assistant, he may be received into full connexion, by giving him.
the “Minutes,” inscribed thus: “As long as you freely consent
to, and earnestly endeavour to walk by, these Rules, we shall
rejoice to acknowledge you as a fellow-labourer.” Meantime,
let none exhort in any of our societies, without a note of per
mission from the Assistant. Let every Exhorter take care to
have this renewed yearly; and let every Assistant insist upon it.
Q. 52. What is the method wherein we usually procced in
our Conferences P
A. We inquire,
(1.) What Preachers are admitted? Who remain on trial?
Who are admitted on trial P Who desist from travelling P
(2.) Are there any objections to any of the Preachers?
who are named one by one.
(3.) How are the Preachers stationed this year?
(4.) What numbers are in the society?
(5.) What is the Kingswood collection?
(6.) What boys are received this year?
(7.) What girls are assisted?
(8.) What is contributed for the contingent expenses?
(9.) How was this expended ?
(10.) What is contributed toward the fund for super
annuated and supernumerary Preachers?
(11.) What demands are there upon it?
(12.) How many Preachers' wives are to be provided for?
By what societies?
(13.) Where and when may our next Conference begin?
Q. 53. How can we provide for superannuated and super
numerary Preachers?
A. Those who can preach four or five times a week are
supernumerary Preachers. As for those who cannot,
(1.) Let every Travelling Preacher contribute half-a-guinea
yearly at the Conference.
(2.) Let every one when first admitted as a Travelling
Preacher pay a guinea.
(3) Let this be lodged in the hands of the Stewards.
(4.) The present Stewards are John Murlin and John
Pawson.
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 327
(5.) Out of this let provision be made, first for the worn
out Preachers, and then for the widows and children of those
that are dead.
(6.) Every worn-out Preacher shall receive, if he wants it,
at least ten pounds a-year.
(7.) Every widow of a Preacher shall receive yearly, if she
wants it, during her widowhood, a sum not usually exceeding
ten pounds.
(8.) Every child left by a Preacher shall receive, once for
all, a sum not usually exceeding ten pounds.
(9.) But none is entitled to anything from this fund, till
he has subscribed two guineas.
(10.) Nor any who neglects paying his subscription for
four years together.
(11.) Let every Preacher who does not bring or send his sub
scription to the Conference, be fined two shillings and sixpence.
(12.) Let the fund never be reduced to less than a hun
dred pounds.
(13.) Let a Committee be named to see these Rules duly
executed. The present Committee are,—Christopher Hopper,
Thomas Coke, Thomas Hanby, John Allen, Robert Roberts,
Henry Moore, Thomas Taylor, William Thompson, Andrew
Blair.
(14.) Let an exact account of all receipts and disbursements
be produced at the Conference.
(15.) Let every Assistant bring to the Conference the
contribution of every Preacher in his Circuit.
Q. 54. Are not many of the Preachers' wives still straitened
for the necessaries of life?
A. Some certainly have been. To prevent this for the time
to come, (1.) Let every Circuit either provide each with a lodg
ing, coals, and candles, or allow her fifteen pounds a year. (2.)
Let the Assistant take this money at the Quarterly Meeting,
before anything else be paid out of it. Fail not to do this.
Q. 55. How can we account for the decrease of the work
of God in some Circuits, both this year and the last?
A. It may be owing either, (1.) To the want of zeal and
exactness in the Assistant, occasioning want of discipline
throughout: Or (2.) To want of life and diligence in the
Preachers: Or (3.) To our people’s losing the life of God,
and sinking into the spirit of the world.
328 MINUTES OF
It may be owing, farther, to the want of more field-preaching,
and of trying more new places.
Q. 56. What can be done in order to revive the work of God
where it is decayed?
A. (1.) Let every Preacher read carefully over the “Life of
David Brainerd.” Let us be followers of him, as he was of
Christ, in absolute self-devotion, in total deadness to the world,
and in fervent love to God and man. Let us but secure this
point, and the world and the devil must fall under our feet.
(2.) Let both Assistants and Preachers be conscientiously
exact in the whole Methodist discipline.-
(3.) See that no Circuit be at any time without Preachers.
Therefore let no Preacher, who does not attend the Confer
ence, leave the Circuit, at that time, on any pretence what
ever. This is the most improper time in the whole year.
Let every Assistant see to this, and require each of these to
remain in the Circuit till the new Preachers come.
Let not all the Preachers in any Circuit come to the
Conference.
Let those who do come, set out as late and return as soon as
possible.
(4.) Wherever you can, appoint prayer-meetings, and par
ticularly on Friday.
(5.) Let a fast be observed in all our societies, the last
Friday in August, November, February, and May.
(6.) Be more active in dispersing the books, particularly the
sermon on “The Good Steward,” on “Indwelling Sin,” “The
Repentance of Believers,” and “The Scripture Way of Salva
tion.” Every Assistant may give away small tracts: And he
may beg money of the rich to buy books for the poor.
(7.) Strongly and explicitly exhort all believers to “go on to
perfection.” That we may “all speak the same thing,” I ask,
once for all, Shall we defend this Perfection, or give it up?
Youall agree to defend it, meaning thereby, (as we did from the
beginning,) salvation from all sin, by the love of God and man
filling our heart. The Papists say, “This cannot be attained,
till we have been refined by the fire of purgatory.” The Calvin
ists say, “Nay, it will be attained as soon as the soul and body
part.” The old Methodists say, “It may be attained before we
die: A moment after is too late.” Is it so or not? You are
all agreed, we may be saved from all sin before death. The
substance then is settled; but, as to the circumstance, is the
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 329
change gradual or instantaneous? It is both the one and the
other. From the moment we are justified, there may be a
gradual sanctification, a growing in grace, a daily advance in
the knowledge and love of God. And if sin cease before
death, there must, in the nature of the thing, be an instan
taneous change; there must be a last moment wherein it does
exist, and a first moment wherein it does not. “But should
we in preaching insist both on one and the other?” Certainly
we must insist on the gradual change; and that earnestly and
continually. And are there not reasons why we should insist
on the instantaneous also? If there be such a blessed change
before death, should we not encourage all believers to expect
it? and the rather, because constant experience shows, the
more earnestly they expect this, the more swiftly and steadily
does the gradual work of God go on in their soul; the more
watchful they are against all sin, the more careful to grow in
grace, the more zealous of good works, and the more punctual.
in their attendance on all the ordinances of God. Whereas,
just the contrary effects are observed whenever this expectation
ceases. They are “saved by hope,” by this hope of a total
change, with a gradually increasing salvation. Destroy this
hope, and that salvation stands still, or, rather, decreases daily.
Therefore whoever would advance the gradual change in
believers should strongly insist on the instantaneous.
Q. 57. What can be done to increase the work of God in
Scotland?
A. (1.) Preach abroad as much as possible. (2.) Try every
town and village, (3) Visit every member of the society at
home.
Q. 58. How many Circuits are there now?
A. Of America we have no late account. There are seventy
four Circuits in England, Wales, and the Isle of Man; seven
in Scotland, and twenty-eight in Ireland.
Q. 59. Are our preaching-houses safe?
A. Not all; for some of them are not settled on Trustees.
Several of the Trustees for others are dead.
Q. 60. What then is to be done?
A. (1.) Let those who have debts on any of the Houses give
a bond, to settle them as soon as they are indemnified. (2.)
Let the surviving Trustees choose others without delay, by
endorsing their deed thus:
330 MINUTES OF
“We, the remaining Trustees of the Methodist preaching
house in , do, according to the power vested in us by this
deed, choose place of•
to be Trustees of the said House, in the
Witness our hands .”
N. B. The deed must have three new stamps, and must be
enrolled in Chancery within six months.
Q. 61. In what form may a House be settled?
A. In the following, which was drawn by three of the most
eminent Lawyers in London. Whoever therefore objects to
it, only betrays his own ignorance.
“The Indenture made , between Benjamin Heap, of
—,in the county of , on theone part, and Thomas Philips,
hatter, &c., on the other part, witnesseTH, That inconsideration
of five shillings, lawful money of Great Britain, by the said T.P.,
&c., tothesaid B.H., truly paid, before the sealing and delivering
hereof, (the receipt whereof the said B. H. doth hereby acknow
ledge,) andfordivers other considerationshim thereuntomoving,
the said B. H. hath granted, bargained, and sold, and by these
presents doth bargain and sell unto the said T. P., &c., their
heirs and assigns for ever, all that lately erected House or
tenement, with the yard thereunto adjoining, situate , in
, aforesaid, now in the tenure or occupation of*
together with all the ways, drains, and privileges to the said
premises appertaining, and all the profits thereof, with all the
right, title, and interest in law and equity: To HAVE AND To
Hold the said house, yard, and other premises, to the said
T. P., &c., their heirs and assigns for ever. NEvERTHELEss,
upon special trust and confidence, and to the intent, that they
and the survivors of them, and the Trustees for the time being,
do and shall permit John Wesley, of the City-Road, London,
Clerk, and such other persons as he shall from time to time
appoint, at all times, during his natural life, and no other
persons, to have and enjoy the free use and benefit of the said
premises; that the said John Wesley, and such other persons
as he appoints, may therein preach and expound God’s holy
word. And after his decease, upon further trust and confidence,
and to the intent, that the said T. P., &c., or the major part of
them, or the survivors of them, and the major part of the
Trustees of the said premises for the time being, shall, from
time to time, and at all times for ever, permit such persons as
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 331
shall be appointed at the yearly Conference of the people called
Methodists, in London, Bristol, Leeds, Manchester, or else
where, specified by name in a Deed enrolled in Chancery, under
the hand and seal of the said John Wesley, and bearing date
the 28th day of February, 1784, and no others, to have and to
enjoy the said premises, for the purposes aforesaid: Provided
always, that the persons preach no other doctrine than is con
tained in Mr. Wesley's ‘Notes upon the New Testament, and
four volumes of ‘Sermons. And upon farther trust and confi
dence, that, as often as any of these Trustees, or the Trustees
for the time being, shall die, or cease to be a member of the
society commonly called Methodists, the rest of the said Trus
tees, or of the Trustees for the time being, as soon as conveni
ently may be, shall and may choose another Trustee or Trus
tees, in order to keep up the number of Trustees for ever.
In witness whereof, the said B. H. hath hereunto set his hand
and seal, the day and year above-written.”
In this form the proprietors of the House are to make it
over to five, seven, or nine Trustees.
Q. 62. But is this form a safe one? Should we not have
the opinion of a Counsel upon it?
A. I think this would be throwing money away; (1.) Because
this form was drawn up by three eminent Counsellors: But,
(2.) It is the way of almost every Lawyer to blame what another
has done. Therefore, you cannot at all infer, that they think a
thing wrong, because they say so. (3.) If they did in reality
think it wrong, this would not prove it was so. (4.) If there
was (which I do not believe) some defect therein, who would go
to law with the body of Methodists? But, (5.) If they did,
would any Court in England put them out of possession; espe
cially when the intent of the deed was plain and undeniable?
Q. 63. Is anything farther advisable with regard to building?
A. (1.) Build all preaching-houses, where the ground will
permit, in the octagon form. It is best for the voice, and, on
many accounts, more commodious than any other. (2.) Why
should not any octagon House be built after the model of Yarm?
any square House, after the model of Bath or Scarborough?
Can we find any better model? (3.) Let the roof rise only
one-third of its breadth: This is the true proportion. (4.)
Have doors and windows enough; and let all the windows be
sashes, opening downward. (5.) Let there be no Chinese
332 MINUTEs. OF
paling, and no tub-pulpit, but a square projection, with a long
seat behind. (6.) Let there be no pews, and no backs to the
seats, which should have aisles on each side, and be parted in
the middle by a rail running all along, to divide the men from
the women; just as at Bath. (7.) Let all preaching-houses
be built plain and decent; but not more expensive than is
absolutely unavoidable: Otherwise the necessity of raising
money will make rich men necessary to us. But if so, we
must be dependent upon them, yea, and governed by them.
And then farewell to the Methodist discipline, if not doctrine
too. (8.) Wherever a preaching-house is built, see that
lodgings for the Preachers be built also.
Q. 64. Is there any exception to the rule, “Let the men
and women sit apart?”
A. In those galleries where they have always sat together,
they may do so still. Butlet them sit apart everywhere below,
and in all new-erected galleries.
Q. 65. But how can we secure their sitting apart there?
A. I must do it myself. If I come into any new House,
and see the men and women together, I will immediately go out.
I hereby give public notice of this: Pray let it be observed.
Q. 66. But there is a worse indecency than this creeping in
among us,—talking in the preaching-houses, before and after
service. How shall this be cured ?
A. Let all the Preachers join as one man, and the very next
Sunday they preach in any place, enlarge on the impropriety
of talking before or after service, and strongly exhort them to
do it no more. In three months, if we are in earnest, this
vile practice will be banished out of every Methodist congre
gation. Let none stop till he has carried his point.
Q. 67. Is there not another shocking indecency frequently
practised by filthy men against the wall of a preaching-house;
enough to make any modest woman blush?
A. There is: But I beg any one who sees another do this
will give him a hearty clap on the back.
Q. 68. Complaint has been made that sluts spoil our
houses. How may we prevent this?
A. Let none that has spoiled one, ever live in another. But
what a shame is this! A Preacher's wife should be a pattern of
cleanliness in her person, clothes, and habitation. Let nothing
slatternly be seen about her; no rags, no dirt, no litter. And
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 333
she should be a pattern of industry; always at work, either
for herself, her husband, or the poor. I am not willing any
should live in the Orphan-House at Newcastle, or any
preaching-house, who does not conform to this rule.
Q. 69. It has been complained also, that people crowd into
the Preachers' houses, as into coffee-houses, without any invita
tion. Is this right?
A. It is utterly wrong. Stop it at once. Let no person
come into the Preacher's house, unless he wants to ask a
question.
Q. 70. May any new preaching-houses be built?
A. Not unless, (1.) They are proposed at the Conference:
No, nor (2.) Unless two-thirds of the expense be subscribed.
And if any collection be made for them, it must be made between
the Conference and the beginning of February.
Q. 71. What can be done to make the Methodists sensible
of the excellency of Kingswood School?
A. Let every Assistant read the following account of it
yearly in every congregation:—
(1.) The wisdom and love of God have now thrust out a
large number of labourers into His harvest; men who desire
nothing on earth but to promote the glory of God, by saving
their own souls and those that hear them. And those to whom
they minister spiritual things are willing to minister to them of
their carnal things; so that they “ have food to eat, and rai
ment to put on,” and are content therewith.
(2.) A competent provision is likewise made for the wives
of married Preachers. These also lack nothing, having a
weekly allowance over and above for their little children; so
that neither they nor their husbands need to be “careful about
many things,” but may “wait upon the Lord without dis
traction.”
(3.) Yet one considerable difficulty lies on those that have
boys, when they grow too big to be under their mother's direc
tion. Having no father to govern and instruct them, they are
exposed to a thousand temptations. To remedy this, we have
a school on purpose for them, wherein they have all the instruc
tion they are capable of, together with all things necessary for
the body, clothes only excepted. And it may be, if God pros
per this labour of love, they will have these too, shortly.
(4) In whatever view we look upon this, it is one of the
334 MINUTES OF
noblest charities that can be conceived. How reasonable is the
Institution | Is it fit that the children of those who leave wife,
and all that is dear, to save souls from death, should want what
is needful either for soul or body? Ought not we to supply
what the parent cannot, because of his labours in the gospel?
How excellent are the effects of this Institution | The Preacher
eased of this weight, can the more cheerfully go on in his
labour. And perhaps many of these children may hereafter fill
up the place of those that shall “rest from their labours.”
(5.) It is not strange therefore, considering the excellence of
this design, that Satan should have taken much pains to defeat
it, particularly by lies of every kind, which were plentifully
invented and handed about for several years. But truth now
generally prevails, and its adversaries are put to silence. It is
well known that the children want nothing; that they scarce
know what sickness means; that they are well instructed in
whatever they are capable of learning; that they are care
fully and tenderly governed; and that the behaviour of all
in the house, elder and younger, is “as becometh the gospel
of Christ.”
(6.) But the expense of such an undertaking is very large,
so that we are ill able to defray it. The best means we could
think of at our Conference to supply the deficiency, is, once
a year to desire the assistance of all those in every place,
who wish well to the work of God; who long to sec sinners
converted to God, and the kingdom of Christ set up in all
the earth.
(7.) All of you who are thus minded have an opportunity
now of showing your love to the gospel. Now promote, as far
as in you lies, one of the noblest charities in the world. Now
forward, as you are able, one of the most excellent designs
that ever was set on foot in this kingdom. Do what you can
to comfort the parents who give up their all for you, and to
give their children cause to bless you. You will be no poorer
for what you do on such an occasion. God is a good pay
master. And you know, in doing this, you lend unto the
Lord : In due time he shall pay you again.
Q. 72. But how can we keep out of debt?
A. Let a collection be made for this school the Sunday
before or after Midsummer, in every preaching-house, great
and small, throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland.
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 335
Q. 73. How may we raise a general fund for carrying on
the whole work of God?
A. By a yearly subscription to be proposed by every
Assistant when he visits the classes at Christmas, and
received at the visitation following.
To this end he may then read and enlarge upon the
following hints in every society:—
(1.) How shall we send labourers into those parts where
they are most of all wanted? suppose the North-West of
Ireland, and the North of Scotland. Many are willing to
hear, but not to bear the expense. Nor can it as yet be
expected of them: Stay till the word of God has touched their
hearts, and then they will gladly provide for them that preach
it. Does it not lie upon us, in the mean time, to supply their
lack of service? to raise a general fund, out of which, from time
to time, that expense may be defrayed? By this means those
who willingly offer themselves may travel through every part,
and stay wherever there is a call, without being burdensome
to any. Thus may the gospel, in the life and power thereof,
be spread from sea to sea. Which of you will not rejoice to
throw in your mite, to promote this glorious work?
(2.) Besides this, in carrying on so large a work through
the three kingdoms, there are calls for money in various ways,
and we must frequently be at considerable expense, or the
work must be at a full stop. Many too are the occasional
distresses of our Preachers or their families, which require an
immediate supply. Otherwise their hands would hang down,
if they were not constrained to depart from the work.
(3.) Let then every member of our society once a year set
his shoulder to the work; contributing more or less as God
hath prospered him, at the Lady-Day visitation of the classes.
Let none be excluded from giving something,-be it a penny,
a halfpenny, a farthing. Remember the widow’s two mites !
And let those who are able to give shillings, crowns, and
pounds, do it willingly. The money contributed will be
brought to the ensuing Conference.
(4) Men and brethren, help ! Was there ever a call like
this, since you first heard the gospel sound? Help to relieve
your companions in the kingdom of Jesus, who are pressed
above measure.
“Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of
336 MINUTES OF
Christ.” Help to send forth able, willing labourers into your
Lord’s harvest: So shall ye be assistant in saving souls from
death, and hiding a multitude of sins. Help to spread the
gospel of your salvation into the remotest corners of the king
dom, till “the knowledge of our Lord shall cover the land, as
the waters cover the sea.” So shall it appear to ourselves, and
all men, that we are indeed one body, united by one spirit; so
shall the baptized Heathens be yet again constrained to say,
“See how these Christians love one another l” In this may
not even the Romanists provoke us to jealousy ? They have
a general fund at Rome, and another at Paris, which bears all
the expenses of their Missionaries throughout all the world.
Q. 74. What is the direct antidote to Methodism, the
doctrine of heart-holiness?
A. Calvinism: All the devices of Satan, for these fifty years,
have done far less toward stopping this work of God, than that
single doctrine. It strikes at the root of salvation from sin,
previous to glory, putting the matter on quite another issue.
Q. 75. But wherein lie the charms of this doctrine?
What makes men swallow it so greedily?
A. (1.) It seems to magnify Christ; although in reality it
supposes him to have died in vain. For the absolutely elect
must have been saved without him; and the non-elect cannot
be saved by him.
(2.) It is highly pleasing to flesh and blood, final perse
verance in particular.
Q. 76. What can be done to guard against it?
A. (1.) Let all our Preachers carefully read over ours and
Mr. Fletcher’s Tracts.-
(2.) Let them frequently and explicitly preach the truth,
though not in a controversial way. But let them take care
to do it in love and gentleness; not in bitterness, not
returning railing for railing: Let those who preach it have
all this to themselves.
(3) Do not imitate them in screaming, allegorizing, boast
ing: Rather mildly expose these things when time serves.
(4) Imitate them in this: They readily seize upon any
one that is newly convinced or converted. Be diligent to
prevent them, and to guard those tender minds against the
predestinarian poison.
(5.) Answer all their objections, as occasion offers, both in
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS. 337
public and private. But take care to do this with all possible
sweetness both of look and of accent.
(6.) Very frequently, both in public and private, advise our
people not to hear them.
(7) Make it matter of constant and earnest prayer, that
God would stop the plague.
Q. 77. We said in 1744, “We have leaned too much
toward Calvinism.” Wherein?
A. (1.) With regard to man’s faithfulness. Our Lord him
self taught us to use the expression: Therefore we ought never
to be ashamed of it. We ought steadily to assert upon his
authority, that if a man is not “faithful in the unrighteous
mammon, God will not give him the true riches.”
(2.) With regard to “working for life,” which our Lord
expressly commands us to do. “Labour,” epyašeaffe, literally,
“work, for the meat that endureth to everlasting life.” And
in fact, every believer, till he comes to glory, works for as
well as from life.
(3.) We have received it as a maxim, that “a man is to do
nothing in order to justification.” Nothing can be more
false. Whoever desires to find favour with God, should
“cease from evil, and learn to do well.” So God himself
teaches by the Prophet Isaiah. Whoever repents, should
“do works meet for repentance.” And if this is not in order
to find favour, what does he do them for ?
Once more review the whole affair:
(1.) Who of us is now accepted of God?
He that now believes in Christ with a loving, obedient heart.
(2.) But who among those that never heard of Christ?
He that, according to the light he has, “feareth God and
worketh righteousness.”
(3.) Is this the same with “he that is sincere?”
Nearly, if not quite.
(4.) Is not this salvation by works?
Not by the merit of works, but by works as a condition.
(5.) What have we then been disputing about for these
thirty years?
I am afraid about words, namely, in some of the foregoing
instances.
(6.) As to merit itself, of which we have been so dreadfully
afraid: We are rewarded according to our works, yea, because
VOL. VIII.
338 MINUTES OF SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS.
of our works. How does this differ from, “for the sake of
our works?” And how differs this from secundum merita
operum ? which is no more than, “as our works deserve.”
Can you split this hair? I doubt I cannot.
(7.) The grand objection to one of the preceding propositions
is drawn from matter of fact. God does in fact justify those who,
by their own confession, neither “feared God” nor “wrought
righteousness.” Is this an exception to the general rule P
It is a doubt whether God makes any exception at all. But
how are we sure that the person in question never did fear
God and work righteousness? His own thinking so is no
proof. For we know how all that are convinced of sin under
value themselves in every respect.
(8.) Does not talking, without proper caution, of a justified
or sanctified state, tend to mislead men; almost naturally
leading them to trust in what was done in one moment?
Whereas we are every moment pleasing or displeasing to God,
according to our works; according to the whole of our present
inward tempers and outward behaviour.
TILE
CHARACTER OF A METHOD]ST
Not as though I had already attained
TO THE READER,
1. SINCE the name first came abroad into the world, many
have been at a loss to know what a Methodist is; what are
the principles and the practice of those who are commonly
called by that name; and what the distinguishing marks of
this sect, “which is everywhere spoken against.”
2. And it being generally believed, that I was able to give
the clearest account of these things, (as having been one of
the first to whom that name was given, and the person by
whom the rest were supposed to be directed,) I have been
called upon, in all manner of ways, and with the utmost
earnestness, so to do. I yield at last to the continued
importunity both of friends and enemies; and do now give
the clearest account I can, in the presence of the Lord and
Judge of heaven and earth, of the principles and practice
whereby those who are called Methodists are distinguished
from other men.
3. I say those who are called Methodists; for, let it be
well observed, that this is not a name which they take to
themselves, but one fixed upon them by way of reproach,
without their approbation or consent. It was first given to
three or four young men at Oxford, by a student of Christ
Church; either in allusion to the ancient sect of Physicians
so called, from their teaching, that almost all diseases might
be cured by a specific method of diet and exercise, or from
their observing a more regular method of study and behaviour
than was usual with those of their age and station.
4. I should rejoice (so little ambitious am I to be at the head
of any sect or party) if the very name might never be mentioned
more, but be buried in eternal oblivion. But if that cannot be,
at least let those who will use it, know the meaning of the word
they use. Let us not always be fighting in the dark. Come,
and let us look one another in the face. And perhaps some of
you who hate what I am called, may love what I am by the grace
of God; or rather, what “I follow after, if that I may apprehend
that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.”
ThE
CHARACTER OF A METHODIST
1. THE distinguishing marks of a Methodist are not his
opinions of any sort. His assenting to this or that scheme
of religion, his embracing any particular set of notions, his
espousing the judgment of one man or of another, are all
quite wide of the point. Whosoever, therefore, imagines that
a Methodist is a man of such or such an opinion, is grossly
ignorant of the whole affair; he mistakes the truth totally.
We believe, indeed, that “all Scripture is given by the
inspiration of God; ” and herein we are distinguished from
Jews, Turks, and Infidels. We believe the written word of
God to be the only and sufficient rule both of Christian faith.
and practice; and herein we are fundamentally distinguished
from those of the Romish Church. We believe Christ to be
the eternal, supreme God; and herein we are distinguished
from the Socinians and Arians. But as to all opinions which
do not strike at the root of Christianity, we think and let
think. So that whatsoever they are, whether right or wrong,
they are no distinguishing marks of a Methodist.
2. Neither are words or phrases of any sort. We do not
place our religion, or any part of it, in being attached to any
peculiar mode of speaking, any quaint or uncommon set of
expressions. The most obvious, easy, common words, wherein
our meaning can be conveyed, we prefer before others, both
on ordinary occasions, and when we speak of the things of
God. We never, therefore, willingly or designedly, deviate
from the most usual way of speaking; unless when we express
scripture truths in scripture words, which, we presume, no
Christian will condemn. Neither do we affect to use any
particular expressions of Scripture more frequently than
others, unless they are such as are more frequently used by
the inspired writers themselves. So that it is as gross an
error, to place the marks of a Methodist in his words, as in
opinions of any sort.
CHARACTER OF A METHODIST. 34l
3. Nor do we desire to be distinguished by actions, customs,
or usages, of an indifferent nature. Our religion does not lie in
doing what God has not enjoined, or abstaining from what he
hath not forbidden. It does not lie in the form of our apparel,
in the posture of our body, or the covering of our heads; nor
yet in abstaining from marriage, or from meats and drinks,
which are all good if received with thanksgiving. Therefore,
neither will any man, who knows whereof he affirms, fix the
mark of a Methodist here,—in any actions or customs purely
indifferent, undetermined by the word of God.
4. Nor, lastly, is he distinguished by laying the whole stress
of religion on any single part of it. If you say, “Yes, he is;
for he thinks “we are saved by faith alone:’” I answer, You
do not understand the terms. By salvation he means holiness
of heart and life. And this he affirms to spring from true faith
alone. Can even a nominal Christian deny it? Is this placing
a part of religion for the whole? “Do we then make void the
law through faith? God forbid! Yea, we establish the law.”
We do not place the whole of religion (as too many do, God
knoweth) either in doing no harm, or in doing good, or in using
the ordinances of God. No, not in all of them together;
wherein we know by experience a man may labour many
years, and at the end have no religion at all, no more than
he had at the beginning. Much less in any one of these; or,
it may be, in a scrap of one of them: Like her who fancies
herself a virtuous woman, only because she is not a prostitute;
or him who dreams he is an honest man, merely because he
does not rob or steal. May the Lord God of my fathers
preserve me from such a poor, starved religion as this I Were
this the mark of a Methodist, I would sooner choose to be a
sincere Jew, Turk, or Pagan.
5. “What then is the mark? Who is a Methodist, according
to your own account?” I answer: A Methodist is one who has
“the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost
given unto him; ” one who “loves the Lord his God with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind, and
with all his strength.” God is the joy of his heart, and the
desire of his soul; which is constantly crying out, “Whom
have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire beside thee! My God and my all! Thou art
the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever !”
342 CHARACTER OF A METHODIST.
6. He is therefore happy in God, yea, always happy, as
having in him “a well of water springing up into everlasting
life,” and overflowing his soul with peace and joy. “Perfect
love” having now “cast out fear,” he “rejoices evermore.” He
“rejoices in the Lord always,” even “in God his Saviour,” and
in the Father, “through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom he
hath now received the atonement.” “Having” found “redemp
tion through his blood, the forgiveness of his sins,” he cannot
but rejoice, whenever he looks back on the horrible pit out of
which he is delivered; when he sees “all his transgressions blot
ted out as a cloud, and his iniquities as a thick cloud.” He can
not but rejoice, whenever he lookson the state wherein he now is;
“being justified freely, and having peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ.” For “he that believeth, hath the witness”
of this “in himself,” being now the son of God by faith. “Be
cause he is a son, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
his heart, crying, Abba, Father!” And “the Spirit itself beareth
witness with his spirit, that he is a child of God.” He rejoiceth
also, whenever he looks forward, “in hope of the glory that shall
be revealed; ” yea, this his joy is full, and all his bones cry out,
“Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who, according to his abundant mercy, hath begotten me
again to a living hope—of an inheritance incorruptible, unde
filed, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for me!”
7. And he who hath this hope, thus “full of immortality, in
everything giveth thanks; ” as knowing that this (whatsoever it
is) “is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning him.” From
him, therefore, he cheerfully receives all, saying, “Good is the
will of the Lord;” and whether the Lord giveth or taketh away,"
equally “blessing the nameof the Lord.” For he hath “learned,
in whatsoever state he is, therewith to be content.” He knoweth
“both how to be abased and how to abound. Everywhere and
in all things he is instructed both to be full and to be hungry,
both to abound and suffer need.” Whether in ease or pain,
whether in sickness or health, whether in life or death, he giveth
thanks from the ground of his heart to Him who orders it for
good; knowing that as “every good gift cometh from above,”
so none but good can come from the Father of Lights, into
whose hand he has wholly committed his body and soul, as into
the hands of a faithful Creator. He is therefore “careful”
(anxiously or uneasily) “for nothing;” as having “cast all his
CHARACTER OF A METHODIST. 343
care on Him that careth for him,” and “in all things” rest
ing on him, after “making his request known to him with
thanksgiving.”
8. For indeed he “prays without ceasing.” It is given him
“always to pray, and not to faint.” Not that he is always in
the house of prayer; though he neglects no opportunity of
being there. Neither is he always on his knees, although he
often is, or on his face, before the Lord his God. Nor yet is
he always crying aloud to God, or calling upon him in words:
For many times “the Spirit maketh intercession for him with
groans that cannot be uttered.” But at all times the language
of his heart is this: “Thou brightness of the eternal glory,
unto thee is my heart, though without a voice, and my silence
speaketh unto thee.” And this is true prayer, and this alone.
But his heart is ever lifted up to God, at all times and in all
places. In this he is never hindered, much less interrupted,
by any person or thing. In retirement or company, in leisure,
business, or conversation, his heart is ever with the Lord.
Whether he lie down or rise up, God is in all his thoughts;
he walks with God continually, having the loving eye of his
mind still fixed upon him, and everywhere “seeing Him that
is invisible.”-
- .9. And while he thus always exercises his love to God, by
praying without ceasing, rejoicing evermore, and in everything
giving thanks, this commandment is written in his heart, “That
he who loveth God, love his brother also.” And he accordingly
loves his neighbour as himself; he loves every man as his own
soul. His heart is full of love to all mankind, to every child of
“the Father of the spirits of all flesh.” That a man is not
personally known to him, is no bar to his love; no, nor that he
is known to be such as he approves not, that he repays hatred
for his good-will. For he “loves his enemies; ” yea, and the
enemies of God, “the evil and the unthankful.” And if it be
not in his power to “do good to them that hate him,” yet he
ceases not to pray for them, though they continue to spurn
his love, and still “despitefully use him and persecute him.”
10. For he is “pure in heart.” The love of God has puri
fied his heart from all revengeful passions, from envy, malice,
and wrath, from every unkind temper or malign affection. It
hath cleansed him from pride and haughtiness of spirit,
whereof alone cometh contention. And he hath now “put on
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
344 CHARACTER OF A METHODIST.
longsuffering:” So that he “forbears and forgives, if he had
a quarrel against any; even as God in Christ hath forgiven
him.” And indeed all possible ground for contention, on his
part, is utterly cut off. For none can take from him what
he desires; seeing he “loves not the world, nor” any of
“the things of the world; ” being now “crucified to the
world, and the world crucified to him; ” being dead to all
that is in the world, both to “the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eye, and the pride of life.” For “all his desire is
unto God, and to the remembrance of his name.”
11. Agreeable to this his one desire, is the one design of his
life, namely, “not to do his own will, but the will of Him that
sent him.” His one intention at all times and in all things is,
not to please himself, but Him whom his soul loveth. He has a
single eye. And because “his eye is single, his whole body is
full of light.” Indeed, where the loving eye of the soul is con
tinually fixed upon God, there can be no darkness at all, “but
the whole is light; as when the bright shining of a candle doth
enlighten the house.” God then reigns alone. All that is in
the soul is holiness to the Lord. There is not a motion in his
heart, but is according to his will. Every thought that arises
points to Him, and is in obedience to the law of Christ.
12. And the tree is known by its fruits. For as he loves
God, so he keeps his commandments; not only some, or most
of them, but all, from the least to the greatest. He is not con
tent to “keep the whole law, and offend in one point; ” but
has, in all points, “a conscience void of offence towards God
and towards man.” Whatever God has forbidden, he avoids;
whatever God hath enjoined, he doeth; and that whether it be
little or great, hard or easy, joyous or grievous to the flesh. He
“runs the way of God’s commandments,” now he hath set his
heart at liberty. It is his glory so to do; it is his daily crown
of rejoicing, “to do the will of God on earth, as it is done in
heaven; ” knowing it is the highest privilege of “the angels
of God, of those that excel in strength, to fulfil his command
ments, and hearken to the voice of his word.”
13. All the commandments of God he accordingly keeps, and
that with all his might. For his obedience is in proportion to
his love, the source from whence it flows. And therefore, loving
God with all his heart, he serves him with all his strength. He
continually presents his soul and body a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable toGod; entirely and without reserve devoting him
CHARACTER OF A METHODIST. 345
self, all he has, and all he is, to his glory. All the talents he
has received, he constantly employs according to his Master’s
will; every power and faculty of his soul, every member of
his body. Once he “ yielded” them “unto sin” and the
devil, “as instruments of unrighteousness;” but now, “being
alive from the dead, he yields” them all “as instruments of
righteousness unto God.”
14. By consequence, whatsoever he doeth, it is all to the
glory of God. In all his employments of every kind, he not
only aims at this, (which is implied in having a single eye,)
but actually attains it. His business and refreshments, as
well as his prayers, all serve this great end. Whether he sit
in his house or walk by the way, whether he lie down or rise
up, he is promoting, in all he speaks or does, the one business
of his life; whether he put on his apparel, or labour, or eat
and drink, or divert himself from too wasting labour, it all
tends to advance the glory of God, by peace and good-will
among men. His one invariable rule is this, “Whatsoeverye
do, in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God and the Father by him.”
15. Nor do the customs of the world at all hinder his “run
ning the race that is set before him.” He knows that vice
does not lose its nature, though it becomes ever so fashionable;
and remembers, that “every man is to give an account of him
self to God.” He cannot, therefore, “follow ’’ even “a multi
tude to do evil.” He cannot “fare sumptuously every day,”
or “make provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof.”
He cannot “lay up treasures upon earth,” any more than he
can take fire into his bosom. He cannot “adorn himself,”
on any pretence, “with gold or costly apparel.” He cannot join
in or countenance any diversion which has the least tendency
to vice of any kind. He cannot “speak evil” of his neigh
bour, any more than he can lie either for God or man. He
cannot utter an unkind word of any one; for love keeps the
door of his lips. He cannot speak “idle words;” “no corrupt
communication” ever “comes out of his mouth,” as is all
that “which is” not “good to the use of edifying,” not “fit to
minister grace to the hearers.” But “whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are’
justly “ of good report,” he thinks, and speaks, and acts,
“adorning the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in all things.”
340 CHARACTER OF A METHODIST.
16. Lastly. As he has time, he “does good unto all men;”
unto neighbours and strangers, friends and enemies: And that -
in every possible kind; not only to their bodies, by “feeding
the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting those that are sick or
in prison;” but much more does he labour to do good to their
souls, as of the ability which God giveth; to awaken those that
sleep in death; to bring those who are awakened to the atoning
blood, that, “being justified by faith, they may have peace
with God;” and to provoke those who have peace with God to
abound more in love and in good works. And he is willing to
“spend and be spent herein,” even “to be offered up on the
sacrifice and service of their faith,” so they may “all come
unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.”
17. These are the principles and practices of our sect; these
are the marks of a true Methodist. By these alone do those
who are in derision so called, desire to be distinguished from
other men. If any man say, “Why, these are only the com
t. mon fundamental principles of Christianity I’’ thou hast
“ said; so I mean; this is the very truth; I know they are no
other; and I would to God both thou and all men knew, that
I, and all who follow my judgment, do vehemently refuse to be
distinguished from other men, by any but the common prin
ciples of Christianity, -the plain, old Christianity that I teach,
renouncing and detesting all other marks of distinction. And
whosoever is what I preach, (let him be called what he will,
for names change not the nature of things,) he is a Christian,
not in name only, but in heart and in life. He is inwardly and
"/outwardly conformed to the will of God, as revealed in the
written word. He thinks, speaks, and lives, according to the
method laid down in the revelation of Jesus Christ. His soul
is renewed after the image of God, in righteousness and in all
true holiness. And having the mind that was in Christ, he
so walks as Christ also walked.- -
18. By these marks, by these fruits of a living faith, do wela.
bour to distinguish ourselves from the unbelieving world, from
all those whose minds or lives are not according to the Gospel
of Christ. But from real Christians, of whatsoever denomina
tion they be, we earnestly desire not to be distinguished at all ,
not from any who sincerely follow after what they know they
have not yet attained. No.: “Whosoever doeth the will of my
Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister,
HISTORY OF METHODISM. 34%
and mother.” And I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies
of God, that we be in no wise divided among ourselves. Is thy
heart right, as my heart is with thine? I ask no farther ques
tion. If it be, give me thy hand. For opinions, or terms, let
us not destroy the work of God. Dost thou love and serve
God? It is enough. I give thee the right hand of fellow
ship. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mer
cies; let us strive together for the faith of the Gospel; walking
worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called; with all lowli
ness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another
in love, endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace; remembering, there is one body, and one
Spirit, even as we are called with one hope of our calling;
“one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.”
A SHORT
HISTORY OF METHODISM
1. IT is not easy to reckon up the various accounts which
have been given of the people called Methodists; very many
of them as far remote from truth as that given by the good
gentleman in Ireland: “Methodists Ay, they are the people
who place all religion in wearing long beards.”
2. Abundance of the mistakes which are current concerning
them have undoubtedly sprung from this: Men lump together,
under this general name, many who have no manner of con
nexion with each other; and then whatever any of these
speaks or does is of course imputed to all.
3. The following short account may prevent persons of a
calm and candid disposition from doing this; although men
of a warm, or prejudiced spirit will do just as they did before.
But let it be observed, this is not designed for a defence of
the Methodists, (so called,) or any part of them. It is a bare
relation of a series of naked facts, which alone may remove
abundance of misunderstandings.
348 HISTORY OF METHODISM.
4. In November, 1729, four young gentlemen of Oxford,—
Mr. John Wesley, Fellow of Lincoln College; Mr. Charles
Wesley, Student of Christ Church; Mr. Morgan, Commoner
of ChristChurch; and Mr. Kirkham, of Merton College,—began
to spend some evenings in a week together, in reading, chiefly,
the Greek Testament. The next year two or three of Mr. John
Wesley's pupils desired the liberty of meeting with them; and
afterwards one of Mr. Charles Wesley’s pupils. It was in
1732, that Mr. Ingham, of Queen’s College, and Mr. Broughton,
of Exeter, were added to their number. To these, in April,
was joined Mr. Clayton, of Brazen-nose, with two or three
of his pupils. About the same time Mr. James Hervey was
permitted to meet with them; and in 1735, Mr. Whitefield.
5. The exact regularity of their lives, as well as studies,
occasioned a young gentleman of Christ Church to say,
“Here is a new set of Methodists sprung up; ” alluding to
some ancient Physicians who were so called. The name was
new and quaint; so it took immediately, and the Methodists
were known all over the University.
6. They were all zealous members of the Church of
England; not only tenacious of all her doctrines, so far as
they knew them, but of all her discipline, to the minutest
circumstance. They were likewise zealous observers of all
the University Statutes, and that for conscience' sake. But
they observed neither these nor anything else any further than
they conceived it was bound upon them by their one book,
the Bible; it being their one desire and design to be downright
Bible-Christians; taking the Bible, as interpreted by the
primitive Church and our own, for their whole and sole rule.
7. The one charge then advanced against them was, that
they were “righteous overmuch; ” that they were abundantly
too scrupulous, and too strict, carrying things to great ex
tremes: In particular, that they laid too much stress upon
the Rubrics and Canons of the Church; that they insisted
too much on observing the Statutes of the University; and
that they took the Scriptures in too strict and literal a sense;
so that if they were right, few indeed would be saved.
8. In October, 1735, Mr. John and Charles Wesley, and
Mr. Ingham, left England, with a design to go and preach to
the Indians in Georgia: But the rest of the gentlemen con
tinued to meet, till one and another was ordained and left the
HISTORY OF METHODISM. 349
University. By which means, in about two years’ time, scarce
any of them were left.
9. In February, 1738, Mr. Whitefield went over to Georgia
with a design to assist Mr. John Wesley; but Mr. Wesley just
then returned to England. Soon after he had a meeting with
Messrs. Ingham, Stonehouse, Hall, Hutchings, Kinchin, and
a few other Clergymen, who all appeared to be of one heart, as
well as of one judgment, resolved to be Bible-Christians at all
events; and, wherever they were, to preach with all their
might plain, old, Bible Christianity.
10. They were hitherto perfectly regular in all things, and
zealously attached to the Church of England. Meantime, they
began to be convinced, that “by grace we are saved through
faith;” that justification by faith was the doctrine of the
Church, as well as of the Bible. As soon as they believed,
they spake; salvation by faith being now their standing topic.
Indeed this implied three things: (1.) That men are all, by
nature, “dead in sin,” and, consequently, “children of wrath.”
(2.) That they are “justified by faith alone.” (3.) That faith
produces inward and outward holiness: And these points they
insisted on day and night. In a short time they became popular
Preachers. The congregations were large wherever they
preached. The former name was then revived; and all these
gentlemen, with their followers, were entitled Methodists.
11. In March, 1741, Mr. Whitefield, being returned to Eng
land, entirely separated from Mr. Wesley and his friends,
because he did not hold the decrees. Here was the first breach,
which warm men persuaded Mr. Whitefield to make merely for
a difference of opinion. Those, indeed, who believed universal
redemption had no desire at all to separate; but those who
held particular redemption would not hearof any accomodation,
being determined to have no fellowship with men that “were
in so dangerous errors.” So there were mow two sorts of
Methodists, so called; those for particular, and those for
general, redemption.
12. Not many years passed, before William Cudworth and
James Relly separated from Mr. Whitefield. These were pro
perly Antinomians; absolute, avowed enemies to the law of
God, which they never preached or professed to preach, but
termed all legalists who did. With them, “preaching the law”
was an abomination. They had “nothing to do” with the law.
They would “preach Christ,” as they called it, but without one
350 HISTORY OF METHODISM.
word either of holiness or good works. Yet these were still
denominated Methodists, although differing from Mr. White
field, both in judgment and practice, abundantly more than
Mr. Whitefield did from Mr. Wesley.
13. In the mean time, Mr. Venn and Mr. Romaine began
to be spoken of; and not long after Mr. Madan and Mr.
Berridge, with a few other Clergymen, who, although they had
no connexion with each other, yet preaching salvation by
faith, and endeavouring to live accordingly, to be Bible
Christians, were soon included in the general name of Method
ists. And so indeed were all others who preached salvation
by faith, and appeared more serious than their neighbours.
Some of these were quite regular in their manner of preach
ing; some were quite irregular; (though not by choice; but
necessity was laid upon them; they must preach irregularly,
or not at all;) and others were between both, regular in most,
though not in all, particulars.
14. In 1762, George Bell, and a few other persons, began to
speak great words. In the latter end of the year, they fore
told that the world would be at an end on the 28th of
February. Mr. Wesley, with whom they were then connected,
withstood them both in public and private. This they would
not endure; so, in January and February, 1763, they sepa
rated from him. Soon after, Mr. Maxfield, one of Mr. Wesley’s
Preachers, and several of the people, left Mr. Wesley; but
still Mr. Maxfield and his adherents go under the general
name of Methodists.
15. At present, those who remain with Mr. Wesley are
mostly Church-of-England men.* They love her Articles, her
Homilies, her Liturgy, her discipline, and unwillingly vary
from it in any instance. Meantime, all who preach among
ithem declare, “We are all by nature children of wrath:”
But “by grace we are saved through faith;” saved both from
ithe guilt and from the power of sin. They endeavour to live
according to what they preach, to be plain Bible-Christians.
Andthey meet together, at convenient times, to encourage one
another therein. They tenderly love many that are Calvinists,
* I have not been able to ascertain the precise time at which this tract was
written. It notices the separation of Maxfield in 1763; and the seeond edition of
it bears the date of 1765. It appears therefore to have been first published some
time about 1764; and was probably intended to screen Mr. Wesley and his friends
from the reproach attached to the conduct of those who separated from him.-EDIT.
ADVICE TO THE METHODISTS. 35l
though they do not love their opinions. Yea, they love the
Antinomians themselves; but it is with a love of compassion
only: For they hate their doctrines with a perfect hatred;
they abhor them as they do hell-fire; being convinced nothing
can so effectually destroy all faith, all holiness, and all good
works.
16. With regard to these, Mr. Relly and his adherents, it
would not be strange if they should grow into reputation. For
they will never shock the world, either by the harshness of their
doctrine, or the singularity of their behaviour. But let those
who determine both to preach and to live the Gospel expect that
men will say “all manner of evil of them.” “The servant is not
above his Master, nor the disciple above his Lord. If, then,
they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much
more them of his household?” It is their duty, indeed, “as
much as lieth in them, to live peaceably with all men.” But
when they labour after peace, the world will “make themselves
ready for battle.” It is their constant endeavour to “please
all men, for their good, to edification.” But yet they know it
cannot be done: They remember the word of the Apostle, “If
I yet please men, I am not the servant of Christ.” They go
on, therefore, “through honour and dishonour, through evil
report and good report;” desiring only, that their Master
may say in that day, “Servants of God, well done!”
ADVICE
To The
PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTS
Disce, docendus adhuc quae censet amiculus.—HoR.*
IT may be needful to specify whom I mean by this ambigu
ous term; since it would be lost labour to speak to Methodists,
so called, without first describing those to whom I speak.
* Thus translated by Francis:
“To the instruction of a humble friend,
Who would himself be better taught, attend.”-EDIT.
352 ADVICE TO THE
By Methodists I mean, a people who profess to pursue (in
whatsoever measure they have attained) holiness of heart and
life, inward and outward conformity in all things to the revealed
will of God; who place religion in an uniform resemblance of
the great object of it; in a steady imitation of Him they wor
ship, in all his imitable perfections; more particularly, in jus
tice, mercy, and truth, or universal love filling the heart, and
governing the life.
You, to whom I now speak, believe this love of human kind
cannot spring but from the love of God. You think there can
be no instance of one whose tender affection embraces every
child of man, (though not endeared to him either by ties of
blood, or by any natural or civil relation,) unless that affection
flow from a grateful, filial love to the common Father of all;
to God, considered not only as his Father, but as “the Father
of the spirits of all flesh;” yea, as the general Parent and
Friend of all the families both of heaven and earth.
This filial love you suppose to flow only from faith, which
you describe as a supernatural evidence (or conviction) of
things not seen; so that to him who has this principle,
The things unknown to feeble sense,
Unseen by reason's glimmering ray,
With strong commanding evidence
Their heavenly origin display.
Faith lends its realizing light,
The clouds disperse, the shadows fly;
The Invisible appears in sight,
And God is seen by mortal eye.
You suppose this faith to imply an evidence that God is mer
ciful to me a sinner; that he is reconciled to me by the death of
his Son, and now accepts me for his sake. You accordingly
describe the faith of a real Christian as “a sure trust and confi
dence ’’ (over and above his assent to the sacred writings)
“which he hath in God, that his sins are forgiven; and that
he is, through the merits of Christ, reconciled to the favour
of God.”
You believe, farther, that both this faith and love are wrought
in us by the Spirit of God; nay, that there cannot be in any
man one good temper or desire, or so much as one good
thought, unless it be produced by the almighty power of God,
by the inspiration or influence of the Holy Ghost.
PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTS. 353
If you walk by this rule, continually endeavouring to know
and love and resemble and obey the great God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, as the God of love, of pardoning mercy;
if from this principle of loving, obedient faith, you carefully
abstain from all evil, and labour, as you have opportunity, to
do good to all men, friends or enemies; if, lastly, you unite
together, to encourage and help each other in thus working
out your salvation, and for that end watch over one another
in love, you are they whom I mean by Methodists.
The First general advice which one who loves your souls
would earnestly recommend to every one of you is: “Con
sider, with deep and frequent attention, the peculiar circum
stances wherein you stand.”
One of these is, that you are a new people: Your name is
new, (at least, as used in a religious sense,) not heard of, till
a few years ago, either in our own or any other nation. Your
principles are new, in this respect, that there is no other set
of people among us (and, possibly, not in the Christian world)
who hold them all in the same degree and connexion; who so
strenuously and continually insist on the absolute necessity of
universal holiness both in heart and life; of a peaceful, joyous
love of God; of a supernatural evidence of things not seen; of
an inward witness that we are the children of God; and of the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, in order to any good thought,
or word, or work. And perhaps there is no other set of people,
(at least, not visibly united together,) who lay so much and yet
no more stress than you do on rectitude of opinions, on out
ward modes of worship, and the use of those ordinances which
you acknowledge to be of God. So much stress you lay even
on right opinions, as to profess, that you earnestly desire to
have a right judgment in all things, and are glad to use every
means which you know or believe may be conducive thereto;
and yet not so much as to condemn any man upon earth,
merely for thinking otherwise than you do; much less, to
imagine that God condemns him for this, if he be upright and
sincere of heart. On those outward modes of worship, wherein
you have been bred up, you lay so much stress as highly to
approve them; but not so much as to lessen your love to those
who conscientiously dissent from you herein. You likewise lay
so much stress on the use of those ordinances which you believe
to be of God, as to confess there is no salvation for you if you
VOL. VIII.
354 ADVICE TO THE
wilfully neglect them: And yet you do not judge them that are
otherwise minded; you determine nothing concerning those
who, not believing those ordinances to be of God, do, out of
principle, abstain from them.
Your strictness of life, taking the whole of it together, may
likewise be accounted new. I mean, your making it a rule, to
abstain from fashionable diversions, from reading plays, ro
mances, or books of humour, from singing innocent songs, or
talking in a merry, gay, diverting manner; your plainness of
dress; your manner of dealing in trade; your exactness in ob
serving the Lord’s day; your scrupulosity as to things that
have not paid custom; your total abstinence from spirituous
liquors (unless in cases of necessity); your rule, “not to men
tion the fault of an absent person, in particular of Ministers
or of those in authority,” may justly be termed new: Seeing,
although some are scrupulous in some of these things, and
others are strict with regard to other particulars, yet we do
not find any other body of people who insist on all these rules
together. With respect, therefore, both to your name, prin
ciples, and practice, you may be considered as a new people.
Another peculiar circumstance of your present situation is,
that you are newly united together; that you are just gathered,
or (as it seems) gathering rather, out of all other societies
or congregations; nay, and that you have been hitherto, and
do still subsist, without power, (for you are a low, insignificant"
people,) without riches, (for you are poor almost to a man,
having no more than the plain necessaries of life,) and without
either any extraordinary gifts of nature, or the advantages of
education; most even of your Teachers being quite unlearned,
and (in other things) ignorant men.
There is yet another circumstance, which is quite peculiar
to yourselves: Whereas every other religious set of people, as
soon as they were joined to each other, separated themselves
from their former societies or congregations; you, on the con
trary, do not; nay, you absolutely disavow all desire of sepa
rating from them. You openly and continually declare you
have not, nor ever had, such a design. And whereas the con
gregations to which those separatists belonged have generally
spared no pains to prevent that separation; those to which you
belong spare no pains (not to prevent, but) to occasion this
separation, to drive you from them, to force you on that divi
sion to which you declare you have the strongest aversion.
PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTS. 355
Considering these peculiar circumstances wherein you stand,
you will see the propriety of a Second advice I would recom
mend to you: “Do not imagine you can avoid giving offence.”
Your very name renders this impossible. Perhaps not one in a
hundred of those who use the term Methodist have any ideas
of what it means. To ninety-nine of them it is still heathen
Sreek. Only they think it means something very bad,—either
a Papist, a heretic, an underminer of the Church, or some
unheard-of monster; and, in all probability, the farther it goes,
it must gather up more and more evil. It is vain, therefore,
for any that is called a Methodist ever to think of not giving
offence.
And as much offence as you give by your name, you will
give still more by your principles. You will give offence to
the bigots for opinions, modes of worship, and ordinances, by
laying no more stress upon them; to the bigots against them,
by laying so much; to men of form, by insisting so frequently
and strongly on the inward power of religion; to moral men,
(so called,) by declaring the absolute necessity of faith, in order
to acceptance with God. To men of reason you will give
offence, by talking of inspiration and receiving the Holy Ghost;
to drunkards, Sabbath-breakers, common swearers, and other
open sinners, by refraining from their company, as well as by
that disapprobation of their behaviour which you will often be
obliged to express. And indeed your life must give them con
tinual offence: Your sobriety is grievously offensive to a drunk
ard; your serious conversation is equally intolerable to a gay
impertinent: and, in general, that “you are grown so precise
and singular, so monstrously strict, beyond all sense and reason,
that you scruple so many harmless things, and fancy you are
obliged to do so many others which you need not,” cannot but
be an offence to abundance of people, your friends and relations
in particular. Either, therefore, you must consent to give up
your principles, or your fond hope of pleasing men.
What makes even your principles more offensive is, this
uniting of yourselves together: Because this union renders you
more conspicuous, placing you more in the eye of men; more
suspicious,—I mean, liable to be suspected of carrying on some
sinister design (especially by those who do not, or will not,
know your inviolable attachment to His present Majesty);
more dreadful, to those of a fearful temper, who imagine you
356 ADVICE TO THE
have any such design; and more odious to men of zeal, if
their zeal be any other than fervent love to God and man.
This offence will sink the deeper, because you are gathered
out of so many other congregations: For the warm men in
each will not easily be convinced, that you do not despise either
them or their teachers; nay, will probably imagine, that you
utterly condemn them, as though they could not be saved.
And this occasion of offence is now at the height, because you
are just gathered, or gathering rather, so that they know not
where it will end; but the fear of losing (so they account
it) more of their members, gives an edge to their zeal, and
keeps all their anger and resentment in its strength.
Add to this, that you do not leave them quite, you still rank
yourselves among their members; which, to those who knownot
that you do it for conscience’ sake, is also a provoking circum
stance. “If you would but get out of their sight !” But you are
a continual thorn in their side, as long as you remain with them.
And (which cannot but anger them the more) you have
neither power, nor riches, nor learning; yet, with all their
power, and money, and wisdom, they can gain no ground
against you.
You cannot but expect, that the offence continually arising
from such a variety of provocations will gradually ripen into
hatred, malice, and all other unkind tempers. And as they who
are thus affected will not fail to represent you to others in the
same light as you appear to them,-sometimes as madmen and
fools, sometimes as wicked men, fellows not fit to live upon the
earth; the consequence, humanly speaking, must be, that, toge
ther with your reputation, you will lose, first, the love of your
friends, relations, and acquaintance, even those who once loved
you the most tenderly; then your business, for many will em
ploy you no longer, nor “buy of such an one as you are;”
and, in due time, (unless He who governs the world interpose,)
your health, liberty, and life.
What further advice can be given to persons in such a situa
tion? I cannot but advise you, Thirdly, “Consider deeply with
yourself, Is the God whom I serve able to deliver me? I am
not able to deliver myself out of these difficulties; much less am
I able to bear them. I know not how to give up my reputation,
my friends, my substance, my liberty, my life. Can God give
me to rejoice in doing this; and may I depend upon him that
he will? Are the hairs of my head all numbered; and does He
PEOPLE CALLED METHODISTS. 357
never fail them that trust in him?” Weigh this throughly;
and if you can trust God with your all, then go on in the
power of his might.
Go on, I would earnestly advise you, Fourthly: “Keep in
the very path wherein you now tread. Be true to your prin
ciples.” Never rest again in the dead formality of religion.
Pursue with your might inward and outward holiness; a steady
imitation of Him you worship; a still increasing resemblance
of his imitable perfections,—his justice, mercy, and truth.
Let this be your manly, noble, generous religion, equally
remote from the meanness of superstition, which places religion
in doing what God hath not enjoined, or abstaining from what
he hath not forbidden; and from the unkindness of bigotry,
which confines our affection to our own party, sect, or opinion.
Above all, stand fast in obedient faith, faith in the God of
pardoning mercy, in the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who hath loved you, and given himself for you. Ascribe
to Him all the good you find in yourself; all your peace, and
joy, and love; all your power to do and suffer his will, through
the Spirit of the living God. Yet, in the mean time, carefully
avoid enthusiasm: Impute not the dreams of men to the all
wise God; and expect neither light nor power from him, but
in the serious use of all the means he hath ordained.
Be true also to your principles touching opinions and the
externals of religion. Use every ordinance which you believe is
of God; but beware of narrowness of spirit towards those who
use them not. Conform yourself to those modes of worship
which you approve; yet love as brethren those who cannot con
form. Lay so much stress on opinions, that all your own, if it
be possible, may agree with truth and reason; but have a care of
anger, dislike, or contempt towards those whose opinions differ
from yours. You are daily accused of this; (and, indeed, what
is it whereof you are not accused?) but beware of giving any
ground for such an accusation. Condemn no man for not
thinking as you think: Let every one enjoy the full and free
liberty of thinking for himself: Let every man use his own
judgment, since every man must give an account of himself to
God. Abhor every approach, in any kind or degree, to the
spirit of persecution. If you cannot reason or persuade a man
into the truth, never attempt to force him into it. If love will
not compel him to come in, leave him to God, the Judge of all.
358 ADVICE TO THE METHODISTS.
Yet expect not that others will deal thus with you. No:
Some will endeavour to fright you out of your principles;
some to shame you into a more popular religion, to laugh and
rally you out of your singularity: But from none of these will
you be in so great danger, as from those who assault you with
quite different weapons; with softness, good-nature, and
earnest professions of (perhaps real) good-will. Here you
are equally concerned to avoid the very appearance of anger,
contempt, or unkindness, and to hold fast the whole truth of
God, both in principle and in practice.
This indeed will be interpreted as unkindness. Your former
acquaintance will look upon this,—that you will not sin or trifle
with them,-as a plain proof of your coldness towards them;
and this burden you must be content to bear: But labour to
avoid all real unkindness, all disobliging words, or harshness of
speech, all shyness, or strangeness of behaviour. Speak to.
them with all the tenderness and love, and behave with all
the sweetness and courtesy, you can ; taking care not to give
any needless offence to neighbour or stranger, friend or enemy.
Perhaps on this very account I might advise you, Fifthly,
“not to talk much of what you suffer; of the persecution you
endured at such a time, and the wickednessof your persecutors.”
Nothing more tends to exasperate them than this; and there
fore (although there is a time when these things must be men
tioned, yet) it might be a general rule, to do it as seldom as you
can with a safe conscience. For, besides its tendency to inflame
them, it has the appearance of evil, of ostentation, of magnifying.
yourselves. It also tends to puff you up with pride, and to
make you think yourselves some great ones, as it certainly does
to excite or increase in your heart ill-will, anger, and all unkind
tempers. It is, at best, loss of time; for, instead of the wicked
ness of men, you might be talking of the goodness of God.
Nay, it is, in truth, an open, wilful sin: It is tale-bearing,
back-biting, evil-speaking,—a sin you can never be sufficiently
watchful against, seeing it steals upon you in a thousand
shapes. Would it not be far more profitable for your souls,
instead of speaking against them, to pray for them ? to confirm
your love towards those unhappy men, whom you believe to
be fighting against God, by crying mightily to him in their
behalf, that he may open their eyes and change their hearts?
I have now only to commend you to the care of Him who
TRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST. 359
hath all power in heaven and in earth; beseeching Him, that,
in every circumstance of life, you may stand “firm as the
beaten anvil to the stroke;” desiring nothing on earth; ac
counting all things but dung and dross, that you may win
Christ; and always remembering, “It is the part of a good
champion, to be flayed alive, and to conquer!”
October 10, 1745,
THE
PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
WRITTEN IN 1740
Occasioned by a late Pamphlet, entitled, “A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE PRIN
CIPLES OF METHODISM "
TO THE READER.
1. I HAVE often wrote on controverted points before; but
not with an eye to any particular person. So that this is the
first time I have appeared in controversy, properly so called.
Indeed I have not wanted occasion to do it before; particu
larly when, after many stabs in the dark, I was publicly
attacked, not by an open enemy, but by my own familiar
friend. But I could not answer him. I could only cover my
face and say, Kat ovels exeuvov; Kat ov, Texvov; “Art thou
also among them? Art thou, my son?”
2. I now tread an untried path “with fear and trembling;”
fear, not of my adversary, but of myself. I fear my own
spirit, lest I “fall where many mightier have been slain.” I
never knew one man (or but one) write controversy, with what
I thought a right spirit. Every disputant seems to think (as
every soldier) that he may hurt his opponent as much as he
360 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST.
can; nay, that he ought to do his worst to him, or he cannot
make the best of his own cause; that so he do not belie or
wilfully misrepresent him, he must expose him as far as he is
able. It is enough, we suppose, if we do not show heat or
passion against our adversary. But, not to despise him, or
endeavour to make others do so, is quite a work of super
erogation.
3. But ought these things to be so? (I speak on the Chris
tian scheme.) Ought we not to love our neighbour as ourselves?
And does a man cease to be our neighbour, because he is of a
different opinion; nay, and declares himself so to be? Ought
we not, for all this, to do to him as we would he should do to
us? But do we ourselves love to be exposed, or set in the
worst light? Would we willingly be treated with contempt?
If not, why do we treat others thus? And yet who scruples
it? Who does not hit every blow he can, however foreign to
the merits of the cause? Who, in controversy, casts the
mantle of love over the nakedness of his brother? Who
keeps steadily and uniformly to the question, without ever
striking at the person? Who shows, in every sentence, that
he loves his brother only less than the truth?
4. I have made a little faint essay towards this. I have a
brother who is as my own soul. My desire is, in every word I
say, to look upon Mr. Tucker as in his place; and to speak no
tittle concerning the one in any other spirit than I would
speak concerning the other. But whether I have attained this
or no, I know not; for my heart is “deceitful and desperately
wicked.” If I have spoken anything in another spirit, I pray
God it may not be laid to my charge; and that it may not
condemn me in that day when the secrets of all hearts shall be
made manifest! Meanwhile,my heart's desireand prayer to God
is, that both I, and all who think it their duty to oppose me, may
“put on bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, long-suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven us.”
THE
PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
1. THERE has lately appeared in the world a tract, entitled,
“A Brief History of the Principles of Methodism.” I doubt
not but the writer’s design was good, and believe he has a real
desire to know the truth. And the manner wherein he pursues
that design is generally calm and dispassionate. He is, indeed,
in several mistakes; but as many of these are either of small
consequence in themselves, or do not immediately relate to me,
it is not my concern to mention them. All of any consequence
which relates to me, I think, falls under three heads:
First. That I believe justification by faith alone.
Secondly. That I believe sinless perfection. And,
Thirdly. That I believe inconsistencies.
Of each of these I will speak as plainly as I can.
2. First. That I believe justification by faith alone. This I
allow. For I am firmly persuaded, that every man of the off
spring of Adam is very far gone from original righteousness,
and is of his own nature inclined to evil; that this corruption
of our nature, in every person born into the world, deserves
God’s wrath and damnation; that therefore, if ever we receive
the remission of our sins, and are accounted righteous before
God, it must be only for the merit of Christ, by faith, and not
for our own works or deservings of any kind. Nay, I am per
suaded, that all works done before justification, have in them
the nature of sin; and that, consequently, till he is justified, a
man has no power to do any work which is pleasing and accept
able to God.
3. To express my meaning a little more at large: I believe,
three things must go together in our justification: Upon God’s
part, his great mercy and grace; upon Christ's part, the satis
faction of God’s justice, by the offering his body, and shedding
his blood; and upon our part, true and living faith in the
merits of Jesus Christ. So that in our justification there is not
362 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST.
only God’s mercy and grace, but his justice also. And so the
grace of God does not shut out the righteousness of God in
our justification; but only shuts out the righteousness of man,
that is, the righteousness of our works.
4. And therefore St. Paul requires nothing on the part of
man, but only a true and living faith. Yet this faith does not
shut out repentance, hope, and love, which are joined with faith
in every man that is justified. But it shuts them out from the
office of justifying. So that although they are all present toge
ther in him that is justified, yet they justify not all together.
5. Neither does faith shut out good works, necessarily to be
done afterwards. But we may not do them to this intent,-to be
justified by doing them. Our justification comes freely, of the
mere mercy of God; for whereas all the world was not able to
pay any part towards their ransom, it pleased him, without any
of our deserving, to prepare for us Christ’s body and blood,
whereby our ransom might be paid, and his justice satisfied.
Christ, therefore, is now the righteousness of all them that
truly believe in him.
6. Butlet it be observed, the true sense of those words, “We
are justified by faith in Christ only,” is not, that this our own
act, “to believe in Christ,” or this our faith which is within us,
justifies us; for that were to account ourselves to be justified
by some act or virtue that is within us; but that although we
have faith, hope, and love within us, and do never so many good
works, yet we must renounce the merit of all, of faith, hope,
love, and all other virtues and good works, which we either
have done, shall do, or can do, as far too weak to deserve our
justification; for which, therefore, we must trust only in God’s
mercy, and the merits of Christ. For it is he alone that
taketh away our sins. To him alone are we to go for this;
forsaking all our virtues, good words, thoughts, and works, and
putting our trust in Christ only.
7. In strictness, therefore, neither our faith nor our works
justify us, that is, deserve the remission of our sins. But God
himself justifies us, of his own mercy, through the merits of his
Son only. Nevertheless, because by faith we embrace the pro
mise of God’s mercy and of the remission of our sins, therefore
the Scripture says, that faith does justify, yea, faith without
works. And it is all one to say, “Faith without works,” and
“Faith alone, justifies us,” Therefore the ancient Fathers from
PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST. 363
time to time speak thus: “Faith alone justifies us.” And
because we receive faith through the only merits of Christ,
and not through the merit and virtue we have, or work we
do; therefore in that respect we renounce, as it were, again,
faith, works, and all other virtues. For our corruption through
original sin is so great, that all our faith, charity, words, and
works, cannot merit or deserve any part of our justification for
us. And therefore we thus speak, humbling ourselves before
God, and giving Christ all the glory of our justification.
8. But it should also be observed, what that faith is whereby
we are justified. Now, that faith which brings not forth good
works, is not a living faith, but a dead and devilish one. For
even the devils believe that Christ was born of a virgin; that
he wrought all kinds of miracles, declaring himself to be very
God; that for our sakes he died and rose again, and ascended
into heaven; and at the end of the world shall come again, to
judge the quick and the dead. This the devils believe; and so
they believe all that is written in the Old and New Testament:
And yet still, for all this faith, they are but devils; they remain
still in their damnable estate, lacking the true Christian faith.
9. The true Christian faith is, not only to believe the Holy
Scriptures and the articles of our faith are true; but also, to
have “a sure trust and confidence to be saved from everlasting
damnation by Christ,” whereof doth follow a loving heart, to
obey his commandments. And this faith neither any devil hath,
nor any wicked man. No ungodly man hath or can have this
“sure trust and confidence in God, that by the merits of Christ
his sins are forgiven, and he reconciled to the favour of God.”
10. This is what I believe (and have believed for some years)
concerning justification by faith alone. I have chose to express
it in the words of a little treatise, published several years ago;
as being the most authentic proof, both of my past and present
sentiments. If I err herein, let those who are better informed
calmly point out my error to me; and I trust, I shall not
shut my eyes against the light, from whatsoever side it comes.
11. The Second thing laid to my charge is, that I believe
sinless perfection. I will simply declare what I do believe
concerning this also, and leave unprejudiced men to judge.
12. My last and most deliberate thoughts on this head were
published but a few months since, in these words:
(1) “Perhaps the general prejudice against Christian per
364 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST.
fection may chiefly arise from a misapprehension of the nature
of it. We willingly allow, and continually declare, there is no
such perfection in this life, as implies either a dispensation
from doing good and attending all the ordinances of God; or
a freedom from ignorance, mistake, temptation, and a thou
sand infirmities necessarily connected with flesh and blood.
(2.) “First. We not only allow, but earnestly contend, that
there is no perfection in this life, which implies any dispensa
tion from attending all the ordinances of God, or from ‘doing
good unto all men, while we have time, though “specially unto
the household of faith. We believe, that not only the babes
in Christ, who have newly found redemption in his blood, but
those also who are “grown up into perfect men, are indis
pensably obliged, as often as they have opportunity, “to eat
bread and drink wine in remembrance of Him,” and to ‘search
the Scriptures; by fasting, as well as temperance, to “keep
their bodies under, and bring them into subjection;’ and,
above all, to pour out their souls in prayer, both secretly and
in the great congregation.
(3) “We, Secondly, believe, that there is no such perfection in
his life as implies an entire deliverance, either from ignorance or
mistake, in things not essential to salvation, or from manifold
temptations, or from numberless infirmities wherewith the cor
ruptible body more or less presses down the soul. We cannot
find any ground in Scripture to suppose, that any inhabitant of
a house of clay is wholly exempt, either from bodily infirmities,
or from ignorance of many things; or to imagine any is inca
pable of mistake, or falling into divers temptations.
(4) “‘But whom then do you mean by one that is perfect P”
We mean one in whom ‘is the mind which was in Christ,’ and
who so “walketh as Christ walked; a ‘man that hath clean
hands and a pure heart, or that is “cleansed from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit; one in whom ‘is no occasion of stumbling,
and who accordingly ‘doth not commit sin. To declare this
a little more particularly: We understand by that scriptural
expression, “a perfect man, one in whom God hath fulfilled his
faithful word, “From all your filthiness and from all your idols
will I cleanse you: I will also save you from all your unclean
nesses. We understand hereby one whom God hath “sancti
fied throughout, in body, soul, and spirit; one who “walketh in
the light as he is in the light, in whom is no darkness at all; the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son having cleansed him from all sin.”
PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST. 365,
(5.) “This man can now testify to all mankind, ‘I am cru
cified with Christ: Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ
liveth in me.’ He is ‘holy, as God who called him is holy, both
in heart and ‘in all manner of conversation.’ He ‘loveth the
Lord his God with all his heart, and serveth him “with all his
strength.’ He ‘loveth his neighbour, every man, “as himself;’
yea, “as Christ loved us;’ them, in particular, that “despite
fully use him and persecute him, because they know not the Son,
neither the Father.” Indeed his soul is all love, filled with
‘bowels of mercies, kindness, meekness, gentleness, longsuffer
ing. And his life agreeth thereto, full of ‘the work of faith,
the patience of hope, the labour of love. And whatsoever he
doeth either in word or deed, he doeth it all in the name, in
the love and power, ‘of the Lord Jesus. In a word, he doeth
‘the will of God on earth, as it is done in heaven.’
(6.) “This it is to be ‘a perfect man,’ to be sanctified through
out: Even ‘to have a heart so all-flaming with the love of God,”
to use Archbishop Usher's words, “as continually to offer up
every thought, word, and work, as a spiritual sacrifice, acceptable
to God through Christ.’ In every thought of our hearts, in
every word of our tongues, in every work of our hands, to ‘show
forth his praise, who hath called us out of darkness into his
marvellous light.’ O that both we, and all who seek the
Lord Jesus in sincerity, may thus be made perfect in one!”
13. If there be anything unscriptural in these words, any
thing wild or extravagant, anything contrary to the analogy of
faith, or the experience of adult Christians, let them “smite
me friendly and reprove me;” let them impart to me of the
clearer light God has given them. How knowest thou, Oman,
“but thou mayest gain thy brother;” but he may at length
come to the knowledge of the truth; and thy labour of love,
shown forth with meekness of wisdom, may not be in vain?
14. There remains yet another charge against me, that I
believe inconsistencies; that my tenets, particularly concerning
justification, are contradictory to themselves; that Mr. Wesley,
“since his return from Germany, has improved in the spirit of
inconsistency.” “For then he published two treatises of Dr.
Barnes, the Calvinist, or Dominican rather, who suffered in
1541; ”(let us spare the ashes of the dead. Were I such a
Dominican as he was, I should rejoice too to die in the flames;)
“the first on “Justification by faith only;” the other on ‘the
366 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST.
sinfulness of man’s natural will, and his utter inability to do
works acceptable to God, until he be justified. Which prin
ciples, if added to his former tenets,” (nay, they need not be
added to them, for they are the very same,) “will give the
whole a new vein of inconsistency, and make the contradic
tions more gross and glaring than before.”
15. It will be necessary to speak more largely on this head,
than on either of the preceding. And in order to speak as
distinctly as I can, I propose taking the paragraphs one by
one, as they lie before me.
16. (1.) It is “asserted that Mr. Law’s system was the
creed of the Methodists.” But it is not proved. I had been
eight years at Oxford before I read any of Mr. Law’s writings;
and when I did, I was so far from making them my creed, that
I had objections to almost every page. But all this time my
manner was, to spend several hours a day in reading the
Scripture in the original tongues. And hence my system, so
termed, was wholly drawn, according to the light I then had.
17. It was in my passage to Georgia, I met with those Teach
ers who would have taught me the way of God more perfectly.
But I understood them not. Neither, on my arrival there, did
they infuse any particularities into me, either about justifica
tion or anything else. For I came back with the same motions I
went. And this I have explicitly acknowledged in my second
Journal, where some of my words are these: “When Peter
Böhler, as soon as I came to London, affirmed of true faith in
Christ, (which is but one,) that it had these two fruits insepa
rably attending it, “dominion over sin, and constant peace from
a sense of forgiveness, I was quite amazed, and looked upon it
as a new gospel. If this was so, it was clear I had no faith.
But I was not willing to be convinced of this. Therefore I
disputed with all my might, and laboured to prove that faith
might be where these were not; especially, where that sense of
forgiveness was not; for, all the scriptures relating to this I had
been long since taught to construe away, and to call all Pres
byterians who spoke otherwise. Besides, I well saw, no one
could (in the nature of things) have such a sense of forgive
ness, and not feel it. But I felt it not. If then there was
no faith without this, all my pretensions to faith dropped at
once.” (Vol. I. p. 101.)
18. (2.) Yet it was not Peter Böhler who convinced me that
PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST. 367
conversion (I mean justification) was an instantaneous work.
On the contrary, when I was convinced of the nature and fruits
of justifying faith, still “I could not comprehend what he
spoke of an instantaneous work. I could not understand how
this faith should be given in a moment; how a man could at
once be thus turned from darkness to light, from sin and misery
to righteousness and joy in the Holy Ghost. I searched the
Scriptures again, touching this very thing, particularly the Acts
of the Apostles. But to my utter astonishment, I found scarce
any instances there of other than instantaneous conversions;
scarce any others so slow as that of St. Paul, who was three
days in the pangs of the new birth. I had but one retreat left,
viz., ‘Thus, I grant, God wrought in the first ages of Chris
tianity; but the times are changed. What reason have I to
believe he works in the same manner now?’
“But on Sunday, 23, I was beat out of this retreat too, by
the concurring evidence of several living witnesses, who testi
fied God had thus wrought in themselves; giving them, in a
moment, such a faith in the blood of his Son, as translated
them out of darkness into light, out of sin and fear into holiness
and happiness. Here ended my disputing. I could now only
cry out, ‘Lord, help thou my unbelief!’” (Vol. I. p. 91.)
The remaining part of this section, with the third and fourth,
contain my own words, to which I still subscribe.
And if there is a mistake in the fifth, it is not material.
20. (3.) It is true, that “on Wednesday, July 12, the
Count spoke to this effect:
(1) “Justification is the forgiveness of sins.
(2) “The moment a man flies to Christ, he is justified.
(3) “And has peace with God, but not always joy.
(4) “Nor perhaps may he know he is justified till long
after.
(5) “For the assurance of it is distinct from justification
itself.
(6) “But others may know he is justified, by his power
over sin, by his seriousness, his love of the brethren, and his
hunger and thirst after righteousness; which alone proves the
spiritual life to be begun.
(7) “To be justified is the same thing as to be born of
God: When a man is awakened, he is begotten of God, and
his fear, and sorrow, and sense of the wrath of God, are the
pangs of the new birth.”
368 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST.
It is true also, that I then recollected what P. Böhler had
often said on this head, which was to this effect:
(1) “When a man has living faith in Christ, then he is
justified.
(2.) “This is always given in a moment.
(3) “And in that moment he has peace with God.
(4.) “Which he cannot have without knowing that he has it.
(5) “And being ‘born of God, he sinneth not.
(6.) “Which deliverance from sin he cannot have without
knowing that he has it.”
21. I did not apprehend it possible for any man living to
have imagined, that I believed both these accounts; the words
whereof I had purposely so ranged, and divided into short sen
tences, that the gross, irreconcilable difference between them
might be plain to the meanest reader. I cannot therefore but
be a little surprised at the strength of that prejudice which
could prevent any one’s seeing, that, in opposition to the
Count’s opinion, (which in many respects I wholly disapproved
of) I quoted the words of one of his own Church, which, if
true, overturn it altogether.-
22. I have motning to object to the quotations made in the
seventh, eighth, and ninth sections. In the tenth are these
words: “Now, since Mr. Wesley went so far to gather such
materials together, let us see what was the system (or rather
the medley) of principles he had to return with to England.”
“OF THE AssuBANCE OF JUSTIFICATION.
“I BELIEVE that conversion is an instantaneous work; and
that the moment a man is converted, or has living faith in
Christ, he is justified: Which faith a man cannot have, with
out knowing that he hath it.
“Yet I believe he may not know that he is justified (that is,
that he has living faith) till a long time after.
“I believe, also, that the moment a man is justified he has
peace with God.
“Which he cannot have without knowing that he has it.
“Yet I believe he may not know that he is justified (that is,
that he has peace with God) till a long time after.
“I believe, when a man is justified he is born of God.
“And being born of God, he sinneth not.
PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST. 369
“Which deliverance from sin he cannot have without
knowing it.
“Yet I believe he may not know that he is justified (that
is, delivered from sin) till a long time after.
“Though I believe that others may know that he is justified,
by his power over sin, his seriousness, and love of the brethren.”
23. “OF THE CONDITIONS OF JUSTIFICATION.
“I BELIEVE that Christ ‘formed in us,’ subordinately to
Christ ‘given for us,’ (that is, our own inherent righteousness
subordinate to Christ’s merits,) ought to be insisted upon, as
necessary to our justification.
“And it is just and right that a man should be humble and
penitent, and have a broken and contrite heart, (that is, should
have Christ formed in him,) before he can expect to be justified.
“And that this penitence and contrition is the work of the
Holy Ghost.
“Yet I believe that all this is nothing towards, and has no
influence on, our justification.
“Again, I believe that, in order to justification, I must go
straight to Christ, with all my ungodliness, and plead nothing
else.
“Yet I believe that we should not insist upon anything we
do or feel, as if it were necessary previous to justification.”
24. “OF THE EFFECTs OF JUSTIFICATION.
“I BELIEVE that justification is the same thing as to be born
of God. Yet a man may have a strong assurance that he is
justified, and not be able to affirm that he is born of God.
“A man may be fully assured that his sins are forgiven, yet
may not be able to tell the hour or day when he received this
full assurance, because it may grow up in him by degrees.
Though he can remember that, from the time this full assurance
was confirmed in him, he never lost it, no, not for a moment.
“A man may have a weak faith at the same time that he
hath peace with God, not one uneasy thought, and freedom
from sin, not one unholy desire.
“A man may be justified, that is, born of God, who has
not a clean heart, that is, is not sanctified.
“He may be justified, that is, born of God, and not have
the indwelling of the Spirit.”
VOL. VII.
370 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST.
25. I entirely agree, “that the foregoing creed is a very
extraordinary and odd composition.” But it is not mine: I
neither composed it, nor believe it; as, I doubt not, every im
partial reader will be fully convinced, when we shall have gone
over it, once more, step by step.
The parts of it which I do believe I shall barely repeat: On
the others it will be needful to add a few words.
“OF THE AssURANCE OF JUSTIFICATION.
“I BELIEVE that conversion,” meaning thereby justification,
“is an instantaneous work; and that the moment a man has
living faith in Christ, he is converted or justified.” (So the
proposition must be expressed to make it sense.) “Which
faith he cannot have, without knowing that he has it.”
“Yet I believe he may not know that he has it till long
after.” This I deny: I believe no such thing.
“I believe the moment a man is justified he has peace with
God:
“Which he cannot have without knowing that he has it.”
“Yet I believe he may not know he has it till long after.”
This again I deny. I believe it not; nor Michael Linner
neither; to clear whom entirely, one need only read his own
words:
“About fourteen years ago, I was more than ever convinced
that I was wholly different from what God required me to be.
I consulted his word again and again; but it spoke nothing but
condemnation; till at last I could not read, nor indeed do any
thing else, having no hope and no spirit left in me. I had been
in this state for several days, when, being musing by myself,
those words came strongly into my mind, “God so loved the
world that he gave his only-begotten Son, to the end that all
who believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.’
I thought, ‘All ! Then I am one. Then He is given for me.
But I am a sinner: And he came to save sinners.’ Immedi
ately my burden dropped off, and my heart was at rest.
“But the full assurance of faith I had not yet, nor for the
two years I continued in Moravia. When I was driven out
thence by the Jesuits, I retired hither, and was soon after
received into the Church. And here, after some time, it pleased
our Lord to manifest himself more clearly to my soul; and give
PRINCIPLEs of A METHODIsT. 37]
me that full sense of acceptance in him, which excludes all
doubt and fear.
“Indeed, the leading of the Spirit is different in different
souls. His more usual method, I believe, is, to give, in one
and the same moment, forgiveness of sins, and a full assurance
of that forgiveness. Yet in many he works as he did in me;
giving first the remission of sins, and after some weeks, or
months, or years, the full assurance of it.” (Vol. I. p. 128.)
All I need observe is, that the first sense of forgiveness is
often mixed with doubt or fear. But the full assurance of
faith excludes all doubt and fear, as the very term implies.
Therefore, instead of, “He may not know that he has peace
with God till long after,” it should be, (to agree with Michael
Linner’s words,) “He may not have, till long after, the full
assurance of faith, which excludes all doubt and fear.”
“I believe a man is justified at the same time that he is
born of God.
“And he that is born of God sinneth not.
“Which deliverance from sin he cannot have, without
knowing that he has it.”
“Yet I believe he may not know it till long after.” This
also I utterly deny.
26. “OF THE CONDITIONS OF JUSTIFICATION.
“I believe, that Christ ‘formed in us” ought to be insisted
on, as necessary to our justification.”
I no more believe this than Christian David does, whose
words concerning it are these:—
“It pleased God to show me, that Christ in us, and Christ
for us, ought to be both insisted on.
“But I clearly saw we ought not to insist on any thing we
feel, any more than any thing we do, as if it were necessary
previous to our justification.
“And before a man can cKpect to be justified, he should be
humble and penitent, and have a broken and contrite heart,
that is, should have Christ formed in him.” No; that is quite
another thing. I believe every man is penitent before he is
justified; he repents before he believes the gospel. But it is
never before he is justified, that Christ is formed in him.
“And that this penitence and contrition is the work of the
Holy Ghost.
372 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST.
“Yet I believe that all this is nothing towards, and has no
influence on, our justification.”
Christian David’s words are, “Observe, this is not the foun
dation. It is not this by which (for the sake of which) you are
justified. This is not the righteousness, this is no part of the
righteousness, by which you are reconciled to God. You grieve
for your sins; you are deeply humbled; your heart is broken.
Well; but all this is nothing to your justifieation.” The
words immediately following fix the sense of this otherwise
exceptionable sentence. “The remission of your sins is not
owing to this cause, either in whole or in part. Your humilia
tion has no influence on that.” Not as a cause; so the very
last words explain it.
“Again, I believe that in order to obtain justification, I
must go straight to Christ, with all my ungodliness, and plead
nothing else.”
“Yet I believe we should not insist on anything we door feel,
as if it were necessary previous to justification.” No, nor on
anything else. So the whole tenor of Christian David’s words
implies.
OF THE EFFECTS OF JUSTIFICATION.
27. “I believe a man may have a strong assurance he is jus
tified, and not be able to affirm he is a child of God.”
Feder’s words are these: “I found my heart at rest, in good
hope that mysins were forgiven; of which I had a stronger assur
ance six weeks after.” (True, comparatively stronger, though
still mixed with doubt and fear.) “But I dare not affirm, I am
a child of God.” I see no inconsistency in all this. Many such
instances I know at this day. I myself was one for some time.
“A man may be fully assured that his sins are forgiven, yet
may not be able to tell the day when he received this full assur
ance; because it grew up in him by degrees.” (Of this also I
know a few other instances.) “But from the time this full
assurance was confirmed in him, he never lost it.” Very true,
and, I think, consistent.
Neuser's own words are, “In him I found true rest to my
soul, being fully assured that all my sins were forgiven. Yet
I cannot tell the hour or day when I first received that full
assurance. For it was not given me at first, neither at once;”
(not in its fulness;) “but grew up in me by degrees. And from
the time it was confirmed in me, I have never lost it, having
never since doubted, no, not for a moment.”
PRINPLES OF A METHODIST 373
“A man may have a weak faith, at the same time that he
has peace with God, and no unholy desires.”
A man may be justified, who has not a clean heart.
28. (11.) Not in the full sense of the word. This I doverily
believe is sound divinity, agreeable both to Scripture and ex
perience. And I believe it is consistent with itself. As to the
“hundred other absurdities which might be fully and fairly
made out,” it will be time enough to consider them, when they
are produced.
29. (12, 13.) But whether I have succeeded in attempting
to reconcile these things or no, I verily think Mr. Tucker has.
I desire not a more consistent account of my principles, than
he has himself given in the following words:
“Our spiritual state should be considered distinctly under
each of these views.
“1. Before justification; in which state we may be said to
be unable to do any thing acceptable to God; because then we
can do nothing but come to Christ; which ought not to be
considered as doing anything, but as supplicating (or waiting)
to receive a power of doing for the time to come.
“For the preventing grace of God, which is common to all,
is sufficient to bring us to Christ, though it is not sufficient to
carry us any further till we are justified.
“2. After justification. The moment a man comes to Christ
(by faith) he is justified, and born again; that is, he is born
again in the imperfect sense, (for there are two [if not more]
degrees of regeneration,) and he has power over all the stirrings
and motions of sin, but not a total freedom from them. There
fore he hath not yet, in the full and proper sense, a new and
clean heart. But being exposed to various temptations, he
may and will fall again from this condition, if he doth not
attain to a more excellent gift.”
3. Sanctification, the last and highest state of perfection in
this life. For then are the faithful born again in the full and
* “Mr. Charles Wesley,” the note says, “was not persuaded of the truth of the
Moravian faith, till some time after his brother's return from Germany.” There
is a great mistake in this. I returned not from Germany till Saturday, September
16. Whereas my brother was fully persuaded of the truth of the Moravian
faith (so called) on Wednesday, May 3, preceding. The note adds, “This,”
that is, justifying faith, “he received but very lately.” This also is a mistake.
What he believed to be justifying faith, he received May 21, 1788. (Vol.
I. pp. 93, 96.) .
374, PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST.
perfect sense. Then is there given unto them a new and clean
heart; and the struggle between the old and new man is over.*
30. (14.) That I may say many things which have been said
before, and perhaps by Calvin or Arminius, by Montanus or
Barclay, or the Archbishop of Cambray, is highly probable.
But it cannot thence be inferred that I hold “a medley of all
their principles;—Calvinism, Arminianism, Montanism,
Quakerism, Quietism, all thrown together.” There might as
well have been added, Judaism, Mahometanism, Paganism. It
would have made the period rounder, and been full as easily
proved; I mean asserted. For no other proof is yet produced.
31. I pass over the smaller mistakes which occur in the fif
teenth and sixteenth paragraphs, together with the prophecy or
prognostication concerning the approaching divisions and
downfal of the Methodists. What follows to the end, concerning
the ground of our hope, is indeed of greater importance. But
we have not as yet the strength of the cause; the dissertation
promised, is still behind. Therefore, as my work is great, and
my time short, I wave that dispute for the present. And per
haps, when I shall have received farther light, I may be con
vinced, that “gospel holiness,” as Mr. Tucker believes, “is a
necessary qualification, antecedent to justification.” This
appears to me now to be directly opposite to the gospel of
Christ. But I will endeavour impartially to consider what shall
be advanced in defence of it. And may He who knoweth my
simpleness, teach me his way, and give me a right judgment
in all things!
* The next note runs thus: “Mr. Wesley has such a peculiar turn and ten
dency towards inconsistencies in his principles, that in his Preface to Hali
burton's Life, (wrote February 9, 1738–9, just after his return from Germany,)
he contradicts all that he has said elsewhere for this sinless perfection; viz., “But
it may be said, the gospel covenant does not promise entire freedom from sin.
What do you mean by the word sin? the infection of nature, or those number
less weaknesses and follies, sometimes (improperly) termed sins of infirmity? If
you mean only this, you say most true. We shall not put off these, but with our
bodies. But if you mean, it does not promise entire freedom from sin, in its pro
per sense, or from committing sin; this is by no means true, unless the Scriptures
be false. For thus it is written, Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin,
unless he lose the Spirit of adoption, if not finally, yet for a while, as did this child
of God: For his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of
God. He cannot sin, so long as he keepeth himself; for then the wicked one
toucheth him not.’”
The question is not, whether this be right or wrong; but whether it contradict
any thing I have said elsewhere. Thrice I have spoken expressly on this subject,
—in a sermon, and in two prefaces. If in any of these I have contradicted what
I said before, I will own the former assertion as a mistake.
AN ANSWER
To
THE REW, MR. CHURCH'S REMARKS
ON THE REW, MR. JOHN WESLEY'S LAST JOURNAL
IN A LETTER TO THAT GENTLEMAN
“Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth it off.”
(1 Kings xx. 11.)
REVEREND SIR,
1. MY first desire and prayer to God is, that I may live
peaceably with all men: My next, that if I must dispute at all,
it may be with a man of understanding. Thus far, therefore, I
rejoice on the present occasion. I rejoice also in that I have
confidence of your sincerity, of your real desire to promote the
glory of God, by peace and good-will among men. I am like
wise thankful to God for your calm manner of writing; (a few
paragraphs excepted;) and yet more for this, -that such an
opponent should, by writing in such a manner, give me an
opportunity of explaining myself on those very heads whereon
I wanted an occasion so to do.
2. I do not want, indeed, (though perhaps you think I do)
to widen the breach between us, or to represent the difference
of the doctrines we severally teach as greater than it really is.
So far from it, that I earnestly wish there were none at all; or,
if there must be some, that it may be as small as possible;
being fully persuaded, that, could we once agree in doctrines,
other differences would soon fall to the ground.
3. In order to contribute, as I am able, to this, it will be my
endeavour to acknowledge what I think you have spoken right,
and to answer what I cannot think right as yet, with what
376 ANSWER. To
brevity and clearness I can. I desire to do this in as inof
fensive a manner as the nature of the thing will bear, and con
sistently with that brotherly love which I cannot deny you
without wronging my own soul.
4. You sum up your charge thus: “You have now, Sir, my
sentiments.—It is impossible for you to put an entire stop to
the enormities of the Moravians, while you still, I. Too much
commend these men: II. Hold principles in common with them,
from which these enormities naturally follow: And, III. Main
tain other errors more than theirs, and are guilty of enthusiasm
to the highest degree.” (Remarks, pp. 73, 74.)
I. l. You, First, charge me with too much commending the
Moravians. That the case may be fully understood, I will
transcribe the passages which you cite from the Journal con
cerning them, and then give a general answer:
“She told me Mr. Molther had advised her, till she received
faith, to be still, ceasing from outward works. In the evening,
Mr. Bray also was highly commending the being still: He
likewise spoke largely of the great danger that attended the
doing of outward works, and of the folly of people that keep
running about to church and sacrament.” (Vol. I. p. 247.)
“Sunday, November 4. Our society met, and continued
silent till eight.” (Ibid.)
“Sunday, June 22. I spoke thus: Eight or nine months
ago, certain men arose, who affirmed that there is no such
thing as any means of grace, and that we ought to leave off
these works of the law.” (Ibid. p. 275.)
“You, Mr. Molther, believe that the way to attain faith, is,
not to go to church, not to communicate, not to fast, not to use
so much private prayer, not to read the Scripture, not to do
temporal good, or attempt to do spiritual good.” (Ibid. p. 257.)
You undervalue good works, especially works of outward
mercy, never publicly insisting on the necessity of them.”
(Ibid. p. 330.)
“Some of our brethren asserted, (1.) That till they had true
faith, they ought to be still ; that is, (as they explained them
selves,) to abstain from the means of grace, as they are called,
the Lord’s supper in particular. (2.) That the ordinances are
not means of grace, there being no other means than Christ.”
(Ibid. p. 247.)
“I could not agree, either that none has any faith, so long
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 377
as he is liable to any doubt or fear; or that, till we have it, we
ought to abstain from the ordinances of God.” (Ibid.)
“Mr. Br—d speaks so slightingly of the means of grace, that
many are much grieved to hear him; but others are greatly
delighted with him. Ten or fourteen of them meet at our
brother Clarke's, with Mr. Molther, and make a mere jest of
going to the church or to the sacrament.” (Ibid. p. 255.)
“You, Mr. Molther, believe it is impossible for a man to use
these means, without trusting in them.” (Ibid. p. 258.)
“‘Believers,’ said Mr. Simpson, “are not subject to ordi
nances, and unbelievers have nothing to do with them.” (Ibid.
p.269.)
“‘Believers need not, and unbelievers may not, use them.
These do not sin when they abstain from them; but those do
sin when they do not abstain.’” (Ibid. p. 277.)
“‘For one who is not born of God to read the Scriptures, or
to pray, or to communicate, or to do any dutward work, is
deadly poison. If he does any of these things, he destroys
himself. Mr. Bell earnestly defended this.” (Ibid. p. 281.)
“At eight, the society at Nottingham met: I could not but
observe that not one who came in used any prayer at all. I
looked for one of our Hymn-books; but both that and the Bible
were vanished away, and in the room thereof lay the Moravian
Hymns and the Count's Sermons.” (Ibid. p. 314.)
“One of our English brethren, joined with you, said in his
public expounding, ‘As many go to hell by praying as by
thieving. Another, ‘I knew one who, leaning over the back
of a chair, received a great gift. But he must kneel down to
give God thanks: So he lost it immediately; and I know not
whether he will ever have it again. And yet another: “You
have lost your first joy. Therefore, you pray: That is the
devil. You read the Bible: That is the devil. You com
municate: That is the devil.’” (Ibid. p. 329.)
“They affirmed that there is no commandment in the New
Testament but to believe; that no other duty lies upon us;
and that, when a man does believe, he is not bound or obliged
to do anything which is commanded there.” (Ibid. p. 275.)
“Mr. St-told me, “No one has any degree of faith till he is
perfect as God is perfect.’” (Ibid. p. 270.)
“You believe there are no degrees in faith.” (Ibid.)
“I have heard Mr. Molther affirm, that there is no justify
ing faith where there is ever any doubt.” (Ibid. p. 328.)
378 ANSWER TO
“The moment a man is justified, he is sanctified wholly.
Thenceforth, till death, he is neither more nor less holy.”
(Ibid. p. 324.)
“We are to growin grace, but not in holiness.” (Ibid. p. 325.)
2. I have frequently observed that I wholly disapprove of a
these positions: “That there are no degrees in faith; that in
order to attain faith we must abstain from all the ordinances of
God; that a believer does not grow in holiness; and that he is
not obliged to keep the commandments of God.” But I must
also observe, (1.) That you ought not to charge the Moravian
Church with the first of these; since in the very page from
which youquote those words, “There is no justifying faith where
there is ever any doubt,” that note occurs: “In the preface to
the Second Journal, the Moravian Church is cleared from this
mistake.” (2.) That with respect to the ordinances of God,
their practice is better than their principle. They do use them
themselves, I am a witness; and that with reverence and godly
fear. Those expressions, however, of our own countrymen are
utterly indefensible; as I think are Mr. Molther's also; who
was quickly after recalled into Germany. The great fault of
the Moravian Church seems to lie in not openly disclaiming all
he had said; which in all probability they would have done, had
they not leaned to the same opinion. I must, (3.) Observe that
I never knew one of the Moravian Church, but that single per
son, affirm that a believer does not grow in holiness. And
perhaps he would not affirm it on reflection. But I am still
afraid their whole Church is tainted with Quietism, Universal
Salvation, and Antinomianism: I speak, as I said elsewhere, of
Antinomian opinions, abstracted from practice, good or bad.
3. But I should rejoice if there lay no other objection against
them, than that of erroneous opinions. I know in some measure
how to have compassion on the ignorant: I know the incredible
force of prepossession. And God only knows, what ignorance or
error (all things considered) is invincible; and what allowance
his mercy will make, in such cases, to those who desire to be
led into all truth. But how far what follows may be imputed
to invincible ignorance or prepossession, I cannot tell.
Many of “you greatly, yea, above measure, exalt yourselves,
(as a Church,) and despise others. I have scarce heard one
Moravian brother own his Church to be wrong in anything.
Many of you I have heard speak of it, as if it were infallible.
THE REW, MR. CHURCH. 379
Some of you have set it up as the judge of all the earth, of all
persons as well as doctrines. Some of you have said, that there
is no true Church but yours; yea, that there are no true Chris
tians out of it. And your own members you require to have
implicit faith in her decisions, and to pay implicit obedience to
her directions.” (Vol. I. p. 329.)
I can in no degree justify these things. And yet neither can
I look upon them in the same light that you do, as “some of
the very worst things which are objected to the Church of
Rome.” (Remarks, p.7.) They are exceeding great mistakes:
Yet in as great mistakes have holy men both lived and died;—
Thomas à Kempis, for instance, and Francis Sales. And yet
I doubt not they are now in Abraham’s bosom.
4. I am more concerned for their “despising and decrying
self-denial;” for their “extending Christian liberty beyond all
warrant of holy writ;” for their “want of zeal for good works;”
and, above all, for their supposing, that “we may, on some
accounts, use guile;” in consequence of which they do “use
guile or dissimulation in many cases.” “Nay, in many of them
I have found” (not in all, nor in most) “much subtlety, much
evasion and disguise; so “becoming all things to all men, as
to take the colour and shape of any that were near them.”
(Ibid. pp. 307, 258, 332, 327.)
I can neither defend nor excuse those among the Moravians
whom I have found guilty of this. But neither can I condemn
all for the sake of some. Every man shall give an account of
himself to God.
But you say, “Your protesting against some of theiropinions
is not sufficient to discharge you. Have you not prepared the
way for these Moravians, by countenancing and commending
them; and by still speaking of them as if they were in the
main the best Christians in the world, and only deluded or
mistaken in a few points?” (Remarks, pp. 11, 12.)
I cannot speak of them otherwise than I think. And I still
think, (1) That God has some thousands in our own Church
who have the faith and love which is among them, without
those errors either of judgment or practice. (2.) That, next
to these, the body of the Moravian Church, however mistaken
some of them are, are in the main, of all whom I have seen,
the best Christians in the world.
5. Because I am continually charged with inconsistency
380 ANSWER. To
herein, even by the Moravians themselves, it may be “needful
to give a short account of what has occurred between us from
the beginning.
“My first acquaintance with the Moravian brethren began
din my voyage to Georgia. Being then with many of them in
the same ship, I narrowly observed their whole behaviour.
And I greatly approved of all I saw.” (The particulars are
related in the First Journal.)
“From February 14, 1735, to December 2, 1737, being
with them (except when I went to Frederica or Carolina)
twice or thrice every day, I loved and esteemed them more
and more. Yet a few things I could not approve of These
I mentioned to them from time to time, and then commended
the cause to God.
“In February following I met with Peter Böhler. My
heart clave to him as soon as he spoke. And the more we
conversed, so much the more did I esteem both him and the
Moravian Church. So that I had no rest in my spirit till I
executed the design which I had formed long before; till, after
a short stay in Holland, I hastened forward, first to Marien
born, and then to Hernhuth.” *
It may be observed, that I had before seen a few things in
the Moravians which I could not approve of. In this journey
I saw a few more, in the midst of many excellent things; in
consequence whereof, “in September, 1738, soon after my
return to England, I began the following letter to the Moravian
Church. But being fearful of trusting my own judgment, I
determined to wait yet a little longer, and so laid it by un
finished:—
“‘MY DEAR BRETHREN,
“‘I CANNOT but rejoice in your steadfast faith, in your
love to our blessed Redeemer, your deadness to the world, your
meekness, temperance, chastity, and love of one another. I
greatly approve of your Conferences and Bands,t of your
methods of instructing children; and, in general, of your great
care of the souls committed to your charge.
“‘But of some other things I stand in doubt, which I will
mention in love and meekness. And I wish that, in order to
* These are the words of the Fourth Journal, Vol. I. page 331, &c.
+ The Band society in London began May 1, some time before I set out for
Germany.
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 381
remove those doubts, you would, on each of those heads, First,
plainly answer whether the fact be as I suppose; and if so,
Secondly, consider whether it be right.
“‘Is not the Count all in all among you?
“‘Do you not magnify your own Church too much 2
“‘Do you not use guile and dissimulation in many cases?
“‘Are you not of a close, dark, reserved temper and beha
viour P’
“It may easily be seen, that my objections then were nearly
the same as now.” Only with this difference,—I was not then
assured that the facts were as I supposed. “Yet I cannot say
my affection was lessened at all: (For I did not dare to deter
mine anything :) But from November 1, I could not but see
more and more things which I could not reconcile with the
gospel.”
“These I have set down with all simplicity. Yet do I this,
because I love them not? God knoweth: Yea, and in part, I
esteem them still; because I verily believe they have a sincere
desire to serve God; because many of them have tasted of his
love, and some retain it in simplicity; because they love one
another; because they have so much of the truth of the gospel,
and so far abstain from outward sin. And lastly, because their
discipline is, in most respects, so truly excellent; notwith
standing that visible blemish, the paying too much regard to
their great patron and benefactor, Count Zinzendorf.”
6. I believe, if you coolly consider this account, you will not
find, either that it is inconsistent with itself, or that it lays you
under any necessity of speaking in the following manner:
“What charms there may be in a demure look and a sour be
haviour, I know not. But sure they must be in your eye very
extraordinary, as they can be sufficient to cover such a multi
tude of errors and crimes, and keep up the same regard and
affection for the authors and abettors of them. I doubt your
regard for them was not lessened, till they began to interfere
with what you thought your province. You was influenced,
not by a just resentment to see the honour of religion and
virtue so injuriously and scandalously trampled upon, but by
a fear of losing your own authority.” (Remarks, pp. 18, 19.)
I doubt, there is scarce one line of all these which is consistent
either with truth or love. But I will transcribe a few more,
before I answer: “How could you so long and so intimately
converse with, so much commend, and give such countenance to,
382 ANSWER TO
such desperately wicked people as the Moravians, according to
your own account, were known by you to be? And you still
speak of them, as if they were, in the main, the best Christians
in the world. In one place you say, ‘A few things I could not
approve of; but in God’s name, Sir, is the contempt of almost
the whole of our duty, of every Christian ordinance, to be so
gently touched? Can detestation in such a case be too strongly
expressed? Either they are some of the vilest wretches in the
world, or you are the falsest accuser in the world. Christian
charity has scarce an allowance to make for them as you have
described them. If you have done this truly, they ought to be
discouraged by all means that can be imagined.”
7. Let us now weigh these assertions. “They” (that is, “the
charms of their sour behaviour”) “must be in your eye very
extraordinary.”—Do not you stumble at the threshold? The
Moravians excel in sweetness of behaviour. “As they can be
sufficient to cover such a multitude of errors and crimes.”
Such a multitude of errors and crimes / I believe, as to errors,
they hold universal salvation, and are partly Antinomians, (in
opinion,) and partly Quietists; and for this cause I cannot join
with them. But where is the multitude of errors? Whosoever
knows two or three hundred more, let him please to mention
them. Such a multitude of crimes too ! That some of them
have used guile, and are of a close reserved behaviour, I know.
And I excuse them not. But to this multitude of crimes I
am an utter stranger. Let him prove this charge upon them
who can. For me, I declare I cannot.
“To keep up the same regard and affection.”—Not so. I
say, my affection was not lessened, till after September, 1739,
till I had proof of what I had feared before. But I had not the
same degree of regard for them when I saw the dark as well as
the bright side of their character. “I doubt your regard for
them was not lessened till they began to interfere with what
you thought your province.” If this were only a doubt, it
were not much amiss; but it presently shoots up into an
assertion, equally groundless: For my regard for them
lessened, even while I was in Georgia; but it increased
again after my return from thence, especially while I was at
Hernhuth; and it gradually lessened again for some years,
as I saw more and more which I approved not. How then
does it appear that “I was influenced herein by a fear of
losing my own authority; not by a just resentment to see
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 383
the honour of religion and virtue so scandalously trampled
upon?”—Trampled upon! By whom? Not by the Moravians:
I never saw any such thing among them.
But what do you mean by “a just resentment?” I hope you
do not mean what is commonly called zeal; a flame which often
“sets on fire the whole course of nature, and is itself set on
fire of hell!” “Rivers of water run from my eyes, because
men keep not thy law.” This resentment on such an occasion
I understand. From all other may God deliver me !
8. You go on: “How could you so long and so intimately
converse with—such desperately wicked people as the Moravi
ans, according to your own account, were known by you to be?”
O Sir, what another assertion is this! “The Moravians, accord
ing to your own account, were known by you to be desperately
wicked people, while you intimately conversed with them l”
Utterly false and injurious. I never gave any such account. I
conversed intimately with them, both at Savannah and Hern
huth. But neither then, nor at any other time, did I know, or
think, or say, they were “desperately wicked people.” I think
and say, nay, you blame me for saying, just the reverse, viz.,
that though I soon “found among them a few things which I
could not approve;” yet I believe they are “in the main some
of the best Christians in the world.”
You surprise me yet more in going on thus: “In God’s
name, Sir, is the contempt of almost the whole of our duty, of
every Christian ordinance, to be so very gently touched?” Sir,
this is not the case. This charge no more belongs to the Mora
vians, than that of murder. Some of our countrymen spoke
very wicked things. The Moravians did not sufficiently dis
avow them. These are the premises. By what art can you
extort so dreadful a conclusion from them?
“Can detestation, in such a case, be too strongly expressed?”
Indeed it can; even were the case as you suppose. “Either
they are some of the vilest wretches in the world, or you are
the falsest accuser in the world.” Neither one nor the other:
Though I prove what I allege, yet they may be, in the main,
good men. “Charity has scarce an allowance to make for
them, as you have described them.” I have described them
as of a mixed character, with much evil among them, but more
good. Is it not a strange kind of charity, which cannot find
an allowance to make in such a case? “If you have described
-
384 ANSWER TO
them truly, they ought to be discouraged by all means that can
be imagined.” By all means ! I hope not by fire and faggot;
though the house of mercy imagines these to be, of all means,
most effectual.
9. You proceed: “How can you justify the many good things
you say of the Moravians, notwithstanding this character? You
say they love God: But how can this be, when they even plead
against keeping most of his commandments? You say, you
believe they have a sincere desire to serve God. How, then,
can they despise his service in so many instances? You declare
some of them much holier than any people you had yet known.
Strange! if they fail in so many prime points of Christian duty,
and this not only habitually and presumptuously, but even to
the denying their use and necessity. You praise them for
trampling under foot ‘the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye,
and the pride of life: And yet you make them a close, reserved,
insincere, deceitful people.
“How you will explain those things, I know not.” (Remarks,
pp. 20, 21.) By nakedly declaring each thing as it is. They
are, I believe, the most self-inconsistent people now under the
sun: And I describe them just as I find them; neither better
nor worse, but leaving the good and bad together. Upon this
ground I can very easily justify the saying many good things of
them, as well as bad. For instance: I am still persuaded that
they (many of them) love God; although many others of them
ignorantly “plead against the keeping,” not “most,” but some,
“of his commandments.” I believe “they have a sincere desire
to serve God:” And yet, in several instances, some of them, I
think, despise that manner of serving him which I know God
hath ordained. I believe some of them are much holier than any
people I had known in August, 1740: Yet sure I am that others
among them fail, not indeed in the “prime points of Christian
duty,” (for these are faith, and the love of God and man,) but in
several points of no small importance. Not that they herein sin
presumptuously, neither; for they are fully, though erroneously,
persuaded in their own minds. From the same persuasion they
act, when they, in some sense, deny the use or necessity of those
ordinances. How far that persuasion will justify or excuse them,
I leave to Him who knoweth their hearts. Lastly. I believe
they trample under foot, in a good degree, “the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eye, and the pride of life:” And yet many of
THE REW, MR. CHURCH. 385
them use reserve, yea, guile. Therefore, my soul mourns for
them in secret places.
10. “But I must observe,” you say, “that you fall not only
into inconsistencies, but into direct contradictions. You com
mend them for “loving one another in a manner the world know
eth not of;’ and yet you charge them with being “in the utmost
confusion, biting and devouring one another.’ You say, ‘They
caution us against natural love of one another; and had well
migh destroyed brotherly love from among us.”
“You praise them for “using no diversions, but such asbecome
saints; and for ‘not regarding outward adorning:” Yet you say
they ‘conform to the world in wearing gold and costly apparel;
and by joining in worldly diversions, in order to do good.’
“You call their discipline, ‘in most respects, truly excellent.”
I wish you had more fully explained yourself. I am sure it is
no sign of good discipline, to permit such abominations. And
you tell them yourself, ‘I can show you such a subordination
as answers all Christian purposes, and yet is as distant from
that among you as the heavens are from the earth.”
“You mention it as a good effect of their discipline, that
“every one knows and keeps his proper rank. Soon after, as
if it were with a design to confute yourself, you say, ‘Our
brethren have neither wisdom enough to guide, nor prudence
enough to let it alone.’
“And now, Sir, how can you reconcile these opposite descrip
tions?” (Ibid. pp. 21, 22.) Just as easily as those before, by
simply declaring the thing as it is. “You commend them.”
(the Moravians) “for loving one another; and yet charge them
with biting and devouring one another.” (Vol. I. pp. 245,256.)
Them / Whom ? Not the Moravians; but the English bre
thren of Fetter-Lane, before their union with the Moravians.
Here, then, is no shadow of contradiction. For the two sen
tences do not relate to the same persons.
“You say, ‘They had well-nigh destroyed brotherly love
from among us; partly by ‘cautions against natural love.”
(Ibid. p. 330.) It is a melancholy truth; so they had. But we
had then no connexion with them. Neither, therefore, does
this contradict their “loving one another in a manner the
world knoweth not of.”
“You praise them for using no diversions but such as become
saints;” (Ibid. p. 245;) “and yet say,” (Irecite the whole sen
VOL. VIII.
386 ANSWER TO
tence,) “I have heard some of you affirm, that “Christian
salvation implies liberty to conform to the world, by joining in
worldly diversions in order to do good.” (Ibid. p. 327.) And
both these are true. The Moravians, in general, “use no
diversions but such as become saints;” and yet I have heard
some of them affirm, in contradiction to their own practice, that
“one then mentioned did well, when he joined in playing at
tennis in order to do good.”
11. “You praise them for not ‘regarding outward adorn
ing.” (Ibid. p. 245.) So I do, the bulk of the congregation.
“And yet you say,” (I again recite the whole sentence,) “I
have heard some of you affirm, that “Christian salvation im
plies liberty to conform to the world, by putting on of gold and
costly apparel.” (Ibid. p. 327.) I have so. And I blame them
the more, because they are condemned by the general practice
of their own Church.
“You call their discipline “in most respects truly excellent.’
(Ibid. p. 245.) I could wish you had more fully explained
yourself.” I have, in the Second Journal. (Ibid. pp. 115
147.) “It is no sign of good discipline to permit such abomi
nations;” that is, error in opinion, and guile in practice.
True, it is not; nor is it any demonstration against it. For
there may be good discipline even in a College of Jesuits.
Another fault is, too great a deference to the Count. And yet,
“in most respects, their discipline is truly excellent.”
“You mention it as a good effect of their discipline, that
“every one knows and keeps his proper rank. (Ibid. p. 245.)
Soon after, as it were with a design to confute yourself, you
say, ‘Our brethren have neither wisdom enough to guide, nor
prudence enough to let it alone.” (Ibid. p. 255) Pardon me,
Sir. I have no design either to confute or to contradict myself
in these words. The former sentence is spoken of the Moravian
brethren; the latter, of the English brethren of Fetter-Lane.
12. You need not therefore “imagine, that either the strong
pretencesorwarm professions ofthe Moravians,” ortheir “agree
ing with me on some favourite topics,” (for my love to them was
antecedent to any such agreement,) “induce me to overlook their
iniquity, and to forgive their other crimes.” (Remarks, p. 23.)
No. I love them upon quite different grounds; even because
I believe, notwithstanding all their faults, they “love the Lord
Jesus in sincerity,” and have a measure of “the mind that was
in him.” And I am in great earnest when I declare once more,
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 387
that I have a deep, abiding conviction, by how many degrees
the good which is among them overbalances the evil; that I
cannot speak of them but with tender affection, were it only
for the benefits I have received from them; and that, at this
hour, I desire union with them (were those stumbling-blocks
once put away, which have hitherto made that desire ineffectual)
above all things under heaven.
II. 1. Your second charge is, “That I hold, in common
with them, principles from which their errors naturally follow.”
You mean justification by faith alone. To set things in the
clearest light I can, I will first observe what I hold, and
what you object; and then inquire what the consequences
have been.
First. As to what I hold. My latest thoughts upon justi
fication are expressed in the following words:—
“Justification sometimes means our acquittal at the last day.
But this is out of the present question; that justification
whereof our Articles and Homilies speak, meaning present
pardon and acceptance with God; who therein declares his
righteousness and mercy, by or for the remission of the sins
that are past.
“I believe, the condition of this is faith: I mean, not only,
that without faith we cannot be justified; but also, that, as
soon as any one has true faith, in that moment he is justified.
“Good works follow this faith, but cannot go before it.
Much less can sanctification, which implies a continued course
of good works, springing from holiness of heart. But—entire
sanctification goes before our justification at the last day.
“It is allowed, that repentance, and ‘fruits meet for repent
ance, go before faith. Repentance absolutely must go before
faith; fruits meet for it, if there be opportunity. By repent
ance I mean, conviction of sin, producing real desires and sin
cere resolutions of amendment; and by “fruits meet for repent
ance, forgiving our brother, ceasing from evil, doing good,
using the ordinances of God, and, in general, obeying him
according to the measure of grace which we have received.
But these I cannot, as yet, term good works, because they do
not spring from faith and the love of God.” (Farther Appeal
to Men of Reason and Religion, pp. 46, 47.)
2. “Faith, in general, is a divine, supernatural exeyxos (evi
dence or conviction) of things not seen, not discoverable by our
388 ANSWER TO
bodily senses, as being either past, future, or spiritual. Justi
fying faith implies, not only a divine exeryxos that God “was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself,” but a sure trust and
confidence that Christ died for my sins, that he loved me, and
gave himself for me. And the moment a penitent sinner thus
believes, God pardons and absolves him.” (Ibid. p. 48.)
Now, it being allowed, that both inward and outward holi
ness are the stated conditions of final justification, what more
can you desire, who have hitherto opposed justification by faith
alone merely upon a principle of conscience, because you was
zealous for holiness and good works? Do I not effectually
secure these from contempt, at the same time that I defend the
doctrines of the Church? I not only allow, but vehemently
contend, that none shall ever enter into glory, who is not holy
on earth, as well in heart as “in all manner of conversation.”
I cry aloud, “Let all that have believed, be careful to main
tain good works;” and, “Let every one that nameth the name
of Christ, depart from all iniquity.” I exhort even those who
are conscious they do not believe, “Cease to do evil, learn to
do well. The kingdom of heaven is at hand; ” therefore,
“repent, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance.” Are not
these directions the very same, in substance, which you your
self would give to persons so circumstanced?
3. “Many of those who are perhaps as zealous of good works
as you, think I have allowed you too much. Nay, my brethren,
but how can we help allowing it, if we allow the Scriptures to
be from God? For is it not written, and do not you yourselves
believe, ‘Without holiness no man shall see the Lord?’ And
how then, without fighting about words, can we deny, that holi
ness is a condition of final acceptance? And as to the first
acceptance or pardon, does not all experience as well as Scrip
ture prove, that no man ever yet truly believed the gospel who
did not first repent? Repentance therefore we cannot deny to
be necessarily previous to faith. Is it not equally undeniable,
that the running back into wilful, known sin (suppose it were
drunkenness or uncleanness) stifles that repentance or convic
tion? And can that repentance come to any good issue in his
soul, who resolves not to forgive his brother? or who obsti
nately refrains from what God convinces him is right, whether
it be prayer or hearing his word? Would you scruple your
self to tell one of these, “Unto him that hath shall be given;
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 389
but from him that hath not,’ that is, uses it not, “shall be taken
even that which he hath?’ Would you scruple to say this?
But in saying this, you allow all which I have said, viz., that
previous to justifying faith, there must be repentance, and, if
opportunity permit, “fruits meet for repentance.”
“And yet I allow you this, that although both repentance
and the fruits thereof are in some sense necessary before
justification, yet neither the one nor the other is necessary
in the same sense, or in the same degree, with faith. Not in the
same degree. For in whatever moment a man believes, (in the
Christian sense of the word,) he is justified, his sins are blotted
out, “his faith is counted to him for righteousness. But it is
not so, at whatever moment he repents, or brings forth any or
all the fruits of repentance. Faith alone therefore justifies;
which repentance alone does not; much less any outward
work. And consequently, none of these are necessary to jus
tification, in the same degree with faith.
“No in the same sense. For none of these has so direct,
immediate a relation to justification as faith. This is proxi
mately necessary thereto; repentance remotely, as it is neces
sary to the increase or continuance of repentance.* And even
in this sense, these are only necessary on supposition,—if there
be time and opportunity for them; for in many instances there
is not ; but God cuts short his work, and faith prevents the
fruits of repentance: So that the general proposition is not
overthrown, but clearly established, by these concessions; and
we conclude still, that faith alone is the proximate condition
of justification.”
4. This is what I hold concerning justification. I am next
briefly to observe what you object. “If faith,” say you, “is
the sole condition of justification, then it is our sole duty.”
(Remarks, p. 25.) I deny the consequence. Faith may be,
in the sense above described, the sole condition of justification;
and yet not only repentance be our duty before, but all obedi
ence after, we believe.
. You go on : “If good works are not conditions of our justi
fication,they are not conditions of our (final) salvation.” (Page
25.) I deny the consequence again. Good works, properly
so called, cannot be the conditions of justification; because it
* See this glaring misprint of one of the earliest editions corrected by Mr. Wes
ley himself in a subsequent part of this volume, page 428.—EDIT.
390 ANSWER TO
is impossible to do any good work before we are justified. And
yet, notwithstanding, good works may be, and are, conditions
of final salvation. For who will say it is impossible to do any
good work before we are finally saved?
You proceed: “Can we be saved in the contemptuous neg
lect of repentance, prayer,” &c.? (Page 26.) No, nor justified
neither; but while they are previous to faith, these are not
allowed to be good works.
You afterwards argue from my own concessions, thus:
“Your notion of true stillness is, ‘a patient waiting upon God,
by lowliness, meekness, and resignation, in all the ways of his
holy law, and the works of his commandments. But how is
it possible to reconcile to this, the position, that these duties
are not conditions of our justification? If we are justified
without them, we may be saved without them. This conse
quence cannot be too often repeated.” (Page 26.)
Let it be repeated ever so often, it is good for nothing. For,
far other qualifications are required in order to our standing
before God in glory, than were required in order to his giving
us faith and pardon. In order to this, nothing is indispensably
required, but repentance, or conviction of sin. But in order to
the other it is indispensably required, that we be fully “cleansed
from all sin;” that the “very God of peace sanctify us wholly,”
eventoto ÖAok\mpov judov, “our entire body, soul, and spirit.” It
is not necessary, therefore, (norindeed possible,) that we should,
before justification, “patiently wait upon God, by lowliness,
meekness, and resignation, in all the ways of his holy law.”
And yet it is necessary, in the highest degree, that we
should thus wait upon him after justification: Otherwise, how
shall we be “meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
saints in light?”
5. Soon after, you add: “In the passages last cited, you
plead for the necessity of a good life: But in others, the force
of your principles shows itself. An answer approved by you,
is, ‘My heart is desperately wicked; but I have no doubt or
fear; I know my Saviour loves me, and I love him. Both these
particulars are impossible, if the Scripture be true.” (Page 29.)
You amaze me ! Is it possible you should be ignorant that
your own heart is desperately wicked? Yet I dare not say, either
that God does not love you, or that you do not love him.
“Again: You say, you described the state of those who
have forgiveness of sins, but not a clean heart;” (page 30;)
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 391
not in the full, proper sense. Very true; but even then they
had power over both inward and outward corruptions; far from
being, as you suppose, “still wedded to their vices, and resolved
to continue in them.”
“In another place, after having observed that “sin does
remain in one that is justified, though it has not dominion over
him, you go on: “But fear not, though you have an evil
heart; yet a little while, and you shall be endued with power
from on high, whereby ye may purify yourselves, even as he is
pure. Sinners, if they believe this, may be quite secure, and
imagine they have nothing to fear, though they continue in
their iniquities. For God’s sake, Sir, speak out. If they that
have an evil heart have not, who has reason to fear?” (Page 31.)
All who have not dominion over sin; all who continue in their
iniquities. You, for one, if any sin has dominion over you. If
so, I testify against you this day, (and you will not be quite
secure, if you believeme) “The wrath of God abideth on you!”
“What do you mean by, “sin remains in one that is justi
fied?” that he is guilty of any known, wilful, habitual sin?”
(Page 32.) Judge by what is gone before:—I mean the same
as our Church means by, “sin remains in the regenerate.”
6. You proceed to another passage, which in the Journal
stands thus:
“After we had wandered many years in the new path of
salvation by faith and works, about two years ago it pleased
God to show us the old way of salvation by faith only. And
many soon tasted of this salvation, being justified freely, having
peace with God, ‘rejoicing in hope of the glory of God, and
having “his love shed abroad in their hearts.” (Vol. I. p. 275.)
Thus I define what I mean by this salvation, viz., “righteous
ness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.”
But you object, “Here you deny the necessity of good works
in order to salvation.” (Remarks, p. 33.) I deny the necessity,
may, possibility, of good works, as previous to this salvation;
as previous to faith or those fruits of faith, “righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.” This is my real sentiment,
not a slip of my pen, neither any proof of my want of accuracy.
7. “I shall now,” you say, “consider the account you give, in
this Journal, of the doctrine of justification.” (Remarks, p. 30.)
I will recite the whole, just as it stands, together with the
occasion of it:
392 ANSWER TO
“In the afternoon I was informed how many who cannot,
in terms, deny it,-explain justification by faith. They say,
‘(1.) Justification is two-fold; the first in this life, the second
at the last day. (2.) Both these are by faith alone, that is,
by objective faith, or by the merits of Christ, which are the
object of our faith.’ And this, they say, is all that St. Paul
and the Church mean by, “we are justified by faith only. .
But they add, (3) “We are not justified by subjective faith
alone, that is, by the faith which is in us. But good works
also must be added to this faith, as a joint condition both of
the first and second justification.’
“In flat opposition to this, I cannot but maintain, (at least,
till I have clearer light,) (1.) That the Justification which is
spoken of by St. Paul to the Romans, and in our Articles, is
not two-fold. It is one, and no more. It is the present remis
sion of our sins, or our first acceptance with God. (2.) It is
true, that the merits of Christ are the sole cause of this our
justification. But it is not true, that this is all which St. Paul
and our Church mean by our being justified by faith only;
neither is it true, that either St. Paul or the Church mean, by
faith, the merits of Christ. But, (3.) By our being justified
by faith only, both St. Paul and the Church mean that the
condition of our justification is faith alone, and not good
works; inasmuch as all works done before justification have in
them the nature of sin. Lastly. That faith which is the sole con
dition of justification, is the faith which is wrought in us by the
grace of God. It is a sure trust which a man hath, that Christ
hath loved him and died for him.” (Vol. I. pp. 254, 255.)
8. To the first of these propositions you object, “that justi
fication is not only two-fold, but manifold. For a man may
possibly sin many times, and as many times be justified or for
given.” (Remarks, pp. 37–39.)
I grant it. I grant also, that justification sometimes means
a state of acceptance with God. But all this does not in
the least affect my assertion, that “that justification which
is spoken of by St. Paul to the Romans, and by our Church
in the Eleventh, Twelfth, and Thirteenth Articles, is not
our acquittal at the last day, but the present remission of our
sins.”
You add, “You write in other places so variously about this
matter, that I despair to find any consistency. Once you held
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 393
‘a degree of justifying faith short of the full assurance of faitk,
the abiding witness of the Spirit, or the clear perception that
Christ abideth in him;’ and yet you afterwards “warned all
not to think they were justified before they had a clear assur
ance, that God had forgiven their sins. What difference
there is between this clear assurance, and the former full
assurance and clear perception, I know not.” (Page 40.)
Let us go on step by step, and you will know. “Once you
held ‘a degree of justifying faith, short of the full assurance of
faith, the abiding witness of the Spirit, or the clear perception
that Christ abideth in him.’” And so I hold still, and have
done for some years. “And yet you afterwards warned all not
to think they were justified before they had a clear assurance
that God had forgiven their sins.” I did so. “What difference
there is between this clear assurance, and that full assurance
and clear perception, Iknow not.” Sir, I will tell you. The one
is an assurance that my sins are forgiven, clear at first, but
soon clouded with doubt or fear. The other is such a plero
phory or full assurance that I am forgiven, and so clear a per
ception that Christ abideth in me, as utterly excludes all doubt
and fear, and leaves them no place, no, not for an hour. So that
the difference between them is as great as the difference be
tween the light of the morning and that of the mid-day sun.
9. On the second proposition you remark, (1.) That I “ought
to have said, the merits of Christ are (not the sole cause, but)
the sole meritorious cause of this our justification.” (Page 41.)
(2.) That “ St. Paul and the Church, by justifying faith, mean,
faith in the gospel and merits of Christ.” The very thing;
so I contend, in flat opposition to those who say they mean
only the object of this faith.
Upon the third proposition, “By our being justified by faith
only, both St. Paul and the Church mean, that the condition
of our justification is faith alone, and not good works;” you
say, “Neither of them mean any such thing. You greatly
wrong them, in ascribing so mischievous a sentiment to them.”
(Ibid.) Let me beg you, Sir, to have patience, and calmly to
consider, (1.) What I mean by this proposition. Why should :
you any longer run as uncertainly, and fight as one that beateth
the air? (2.) What is advanced touching the sentiments of the
Church, in the tract referred to above. Till you have done this,
it would be mere loss of time to dispute with you on this head.
394 ANSWER TO
I wave, therefore, for the present, the consideration of some
of your following pages. Only I cannot quite pass over that
(I believe, new) assertion, “that the Thirteenth Article, enti
tled, “Of Works done before Justification, does not speak of
works done before justification, but of works before grace,
which is a very different thing!” (Page 45.) I beseech you,
Sir, to consider the Eleventh, Twelfth, and Thirteenth Arti
cles, just as they lie, in one view: And you cannot but see that
it is as absolutely impossible to maintain that proposition, as
it is to prove that the Eleventh and Twelfth Articles speak
not of justification, but of some very different thing.
10. Against that part of the fourth proposition, “Faith is
a sure trust which a man hath, that Christ loved him and died
for him,” you object, “This definition is absurd; as it sup
poses that such a sure trust can be in one who does not repent
of his sins.” (Page 48.) I suppose quite the contrary, as I
have declared over and over; nor, therefore, is there any such
danger as you apprehend.
But you say, “There is nothing distinguishing enough in
this to point out the true justifying faith.” (Ibid.) I grant it;
supposing a man were to write a book, and say this of it, and
no more. But did you ever see any treatise of mine, wherein I
said this of faith, and no more? nothing whereby to distin
guish true faith from false? Touching this Journal, your own
quotations prove the contrary. Yea, and I everywhere insist,
that we are to distinguish them by their fruits, by inward and
outward righteousness, by the peace of God filling and ruling
the heart, and by patient, active joy in the Holy Ghost.
You conclude this point: “I have now, Sir, examined at.
large your account of justification; and, I hope, fully refuted
the several articles in which you have comprised it.” (Page 49.)
We differ in our judgment. I do not apprehend you have
refuted any one proposition of the four. You have, indeed,
amended the second, by adding the word meritorious ; for
which I give you thanks.
11. You next give what you style, “the Christian scheme
of justification;” (page 50;) and afterwards point out the
consequences which you apprehend to have attended the
preaching justification by faith; the Third point into which I
was to inquire.
You open the cause thus: “The denying the necessity of
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 395
good works, as the condition of justification, directly draws
after it, or rather includes in it, all manner of impiety and vice.
It has often perplexed and disturbed the minds of men, and in
the last century occasioned great confusions in this nation.
These are points which are ever liable to misconstructions, and
have ever yet been more or less attended with them. And it
appears from what you have lately published, that since you
have preached the doctrine, it has had its old consequences,
or rather worse ones; it has been more misunderstood, more
perverted and abused, than ever.” (Pages 1, 2.)
“The denying the necessity of good works, as the condition
of justification, draws after it, or rather includes in it, all man
ner of impiety and vice.” Here stands the proposition; but
where is the proof? Till that appears, I simply say, It does not.
“It has often perplexed and disturbed the minds of men.”
And so have many other points in St. Paul’s Epistles.
“But these are points which are ever liable to misconstruc
tions; and have ever yet, more or less, been attended with
them.” And what points of revealed religion are those which
are not ever liable to misconstructions? Or of what material
point can we say, that it has not ever yet, more or less, been
attended with them?
“In the last century it occasioned great confusions in this
nation.” It occasioned ! No; in no wise. It is demonstrable,
the occasions of those confusions were quite of another kind.
“And it appears, that since you have preached the doctrine,
it has had its old consequences, or rather worse. It has been
more misunderstood, more perverted and abused, than ever.”
What I worse consequences than regicide, (which, you say,
was the old one,) and making our whole land a field of blood?
Or has it been more perverted and abused than when (in your
account) it overturned the whole frame both of Church and
State P
12. You go on: “The terms of the gospel are, repentance
toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. But
when we undervalue either of these terms, we involve the
consciences of the weak in fatal perplexities; we give a handle
to others to justify their impieties; we confirm the enemies of
religion in their prejudices.” (Remarks, p. 2.)
All this I grant. But it affects not me. For I do not
undervalue either faith or repentance.
396 ANSWER TO
“Was not irreligion and vice already prevailing enough in
the nation, but we must—throw snares in people’s way, and
root out the remains of piety and devotion, in the weak and
well-meaning? That this has been the case, your own con
fessions put beyond all doubt. And you even now hold and
teach the principles from which these dangerous consequences
do plainly and directly follow.” (Page 3.)
“Was not irreligion and vice already prevailing enough,”
(whether I have increased them, we will consider by and by,)
“but we must throw snares in people’s way?” God forbid!
My whole life is employed in taking those snares out of
people's way, which the world and the devil had thrown there.
“And root out the remains of piety and devotion in the weak
and well-meaning?” Of whom speaketh the Prophet this? of
himself, or of some other man? “Your own confessions put
this beyond all doubt.” What! that “I root out the remains
of piety and devotion?” Not so. The sum of them all recited
above amounts to this and no more: “That while my brother
and I were absent from London, many weak men were tainted
with wrong opinions, most of whom we recovered at our
return; but even those who continued therein did, notwith
standing, continue to live a holier life than ever they did
before they heard us preach.” “And you even now hold the
principles from which these dangerous consequences do plainly
and directly follow.” But I know not where to find these con
sequences, unless it be in your title-page. There indeed I read
of the very fatal tendency of justification by faith only: “The
divisions and perplexities of the Methodists, and the many
errors relating both to faith and practice, which,” as you con
ceive, “have already arisen among these deluded people.”
However, you “charitably believe, I was not aware of
these consequences at first.” (Remarks, p. 4.) No, nor am I
yet; though it is strange I should not, if they so naturally suc
ceed that doctrine. I will go a step farther. I do not know,
neither believe, that they ever did succeed that doctrine, unless
perhaps accidentally, as they might have succeeded any doctrine
whatsoever. And till the contrary is proved, those conse
quences cannot show that these principles are not true.
13. Another consequence which you charge on my preaching
justification by faith, is, the introducing the errors of the Mora
vians. “Had the people,” say you, “gone on in a quiet and
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 397
regular practice of their duty, as most of them did before you
deluded them, it would have been impossible for the Moravian
tenets to have prevailed among them. But when they had
been long and often used to hear good works undervalued, I
cannot wonder that they should plunge into new errors, and
wax worse and worse.” (Page 12.)
This is one string of mistakes. “Had the people gone on
in a quiet and regular practice of their duty, as most of them
did before you deluded them.” Deluded them Into what?
Into the love of God and all mankind, and a zealous care to
keep his commandments. I would to God this delusion (if
such it is accounted) may spread to the four corners of the
earth ! But how did most of them go on before they were thus
deluded ? Four in five, by a moderate computation, even as
other baptized Heathens, in the works of the devil, in all the
“wretchlessness of most unclean living.” “In a quiet and re
gular practice of their duty!” What duty? the duty of cursing
and swearing; the duty of gluttony and drunkenness; the duty
of whoredom and adultery; or of beating one another, and any
that came in their way? In this (not very “quiet or regular”)
practice did most of those go on before they heard us, who have
now “put off the old man with his deeds,” and are “holy in
all manner of conversation.”
Have these, think you, “been long and often used to hear
good works undervalued?” Or are they prepared for receiving
the Moravian errors, by the knowledge and love of God? O
Sir, the Moravians know, if you do not, that there is no such
barrier under heaven against their tenets as those very people
whom you suppose just prepared for receiving them.
But “complaints,” you say, “of their errors, come very ill
from you, because you have occasioned them.” Nay, if it were
so, for that very cause they ought to come from me. If I had
occasioned an evil, surely I am the very person who ought to
remove it as far as I can; to recover, if possible, those who
are hurt already, and to caution others against it.
14. On some of those complaints, as you term them, you
remark as follows:– “Many of those who once knew in whom
they had believed” (these are my words) “were thrown into
idle reasonings, and thereby filled with doubts and fears.”
(Page 13.) “This,” you add, “it is to be feared, has been too
much the case of the Methodists in general.—Accordingly we
find, in this Journal, several instances, not barely of doubts and
398 ANSWER. To
fears, but of the most desperate despair. This is the conse
quence of resting so much on sensible impressions.—Bad
men may be led into presumption thereby; an instance of
which you give, Vol. I. p. 295.”
That instance will come in our way again: “Many of those
who once knew in whom they had believed were thrown,” by
the Antinomians, “into idle reasonings, and thereby filled
with doubts and fears. This,” you fear, “has been the case
with the Methodists in general.” You must mean, (to make
it a parallel case,) that the generality of the people now termed
Methodists were true believers till they heard us preach, but
were thereby thrown into idle reasonings, and filled with
needless doubts and fears. Exactly contrary to truth in every
particular. For, (1) They lived in open sins till they heard
us preach, and, consequently, were no better believers than
their father the devil. (2.) They were not then thrown into
idle reasonings, but into serious thought how to flee from the
wrath to come. Nor, (3) Were they filled with needless
doubts and fears, but with such as were needful in the highest
degree, such as actually issued in repentance toward God and
faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
“Accordingly, we find in this Journal several instances of
the most desperate despair. (Ibid. pp. 261, 272,294.)”
Then I am greatly mistaken. But I will set down at length
the several instances you refer to:
“I was a little surprised, in going out of the room, at one
who catched hold of me, and said abruptly, ‘I must speak with
you, and will. I have sinned against light and against love.’
(N. B. She was soon after, if not at that very time, a common
prostitute.) “I have sinned beyond forgiveness. I have been
cursing you in my heart, and blaspheming God, ever since I
came here. I am damned: I know it: I feel it: I am in hell:
I have hell in my heart. I desired two or three who had con
fidence in God, to join in crying to him on her behalf. Imme
diately that horrible dread was taken away, and she began to
see some dawnings of hope.” (Ibid. p. 261.)
“The attention of all was soon fixed on poor L S•
One so violently and variously torn of the evil one did I never
see before. Sometimes she laughed till almost strangled; and
then broke out into cursing and blaspheming; then stamped,
and struggled with incredible strength, so that four or five could
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 399
scarce hold her; then cried out, “O eternity, eternity 1 o
that I had no soul! O that I had never been born 12 At
last she faintly called on Christ to help her; and the violence
of her pangs ceased.” (Ibid. p. 272.)
It should be remembered, that from that time to this, her
conversation has been as becometh the gospel.
“Thursday, December 25, I met with such a case as I do not
remembereitherto have known or heardof before: L-S—,(the
same person) after many years' mourning, (long before she heard
of us,) was filled with peace and joy in believing. In the midst
of this, without any discernible cause, such a cloud suddenly
overwhelmed her, that she could not believe her sins were ever
forgiven at all, nor that there was any such thing as forgive
ness of sins. She could not believe that the Scriptures were
true; that there was any heaven, or hell, or angel, or spirit,
or any God. One more I have since found in the same state:
But observe, neither of these continued therein; nor did I
ever know one that did. So sure it is that all faith is the gift
of God, which the moment he withdraws, the evil heart of un
belief will poison the whole soul.” (Ibid. p. 294.)
Which of these is an “instance of the most desperate
despair?” Surely the most desperate of any, yea, the only
one which is properly said to be desperate at all, is that which
produces instant self-murder; which causes a poor wretch, by
a sin which he cannot repent of, to rush straight through death
into hell. But that was not the case in any of these instances;
in all which we have already seen the end of the Lord.
15. That I “raise separate societies against the Church,”
(Remarks, p. 14,) is a charge which I need not examine till the
evidence is produced. You next cite a Moravian's words to me:
(an Englishman joined with the Moravians:) “You have eyes
full of adultery, and cannot cease from sin; you take upon you
to guide unstable souls, and lead them in the way of damna
tion;” and remark, “This is only returning some of your own
treatment upon yourself. Here also you set the pattern.”
At what time and place, when and where, were “such abuses
as these thrown out by me against our Universities, and against
our regular Clergy, not the highest or the worthiest excepted?”
I am altogether clear in this matter, as often as it has been
objected: Neither do I desire to receive any other treatment
from the Clergy, than they have received from me to this day.
400 ANSWER TO
You have a note at the bottom of this page which runs thus:
“See pages 71, 77, and 73," where some Methodists said
they had heard both your brother and you many times preach
Popery.”
I am afraid you advance here a wilful untruth, purely ad
movendam invidiam.t. For you cannot but know, (1.) That
there is not one word of preaching Popery, either in page 71 or
77. And (2.) That when Mr. C. and two other Predestinarians
(as is related page 73) affirmed they had heard both my brother
and me many times preach Popery, they meant neither more
nor less thereby than the doctrine of universal redemption.
16. You proceed: “Kingswood you call your own house:
And when one Mr. C. opposed you there, you reply to him,
‘You should not have supplanted me in my own house, stealing
the hearts of the people. The parochial Clergy may call their
several districts their own houses, with much more propriety
than you could call Kingswood yours. And yet how have you
supplanted them therein, and laboured to steal the hearts of the
people ! You have suffered by the same ways you took to dis
charge your spleen and malice against your brethren.
“Your brother’s words to Mr. C. are,—“Whether his doctrine
is true or false, is not the question. But you ought first to have
fairly told him, I preach contrary to you. Are you willing,
notwithstanding, that I should continue in your house, gain
saying you ? Shall I stay here opposing you, or shall I depart 2'
Think you hear this spoken to you by us. What can you justly
reply?—Again, if Mr. C. had said thus to you, and you had
refused him leave to stay; I ask you, whether in such a case he
would have had reason to resent such a refusal? I think you
cannot say he would. And yet how loudly have you objected
our refusing our pulpits to you!” (Remarks, page 15.)
So you judge these to be exactly parallel cases. It lies
therefore upon me to show that they are not parallel at all;
that there is, in many respects, an essential difference between
them.
(1) “Kingswood you call your own house.” So I do, that
is, the school-house there. For I bought the ground where it
stands, and paid for the building it, partly from the contribution
of my friends, (one of whom contributed fifty pounds,) partly
* Wol. I. pp. 300, 301, and 305, of the present Edition.—EDIT.
+ For the purpose of exciting ill-will.-EDIT.
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 401
from the income of my own Fellowship. No Clergyman
therefore can call his parish his own house with more pro
priety than I can call this house mine.
(2) “Mr. C. opposed you there.” True; but who was Mr.
C.? One I had sent for to assist me there; a friend that was
as my own soul; that, even while he opposed me, lay in my
bosom. What resemblance then does Mr. C., thus opposing
me, bear to me opposing (if I really did) a parochial Minister?
(3) “You said to Mr. C., ‘You should not have supplanted
me in my own house, stealing the hearts of the people.” Yet
you have supplanted the Clergy in their own houses.” What,
in the same manner as Mr. C. did me? Have I done to any of
them as he has done to me? You may as justly say I have cut
their throats! Stealing the hearts of their people. Nor are
these their people in the same sense wherein those were mine,
viz., servants of the devil brought, through my ministry, to be
servants and children of God. “You have suffered by the same
ways you took to discharge your spleen and malice against your
brethren.” To discharge your spleen and malice / Say, your
muskets and blunderbusses: I have just as much to do with
one as the other.
(4.) “Your brother said to Mr. C., ‘You ought to have told
my brother fairly, I preach contrary to you. Are you willing
I should continue in your house, gainsaying you? Shall I stay
here opposing you, or shall I depart ’’ Think you hear this
spoken to you by us. What can you justly reply?” I can
justly reply, Sir, Mr. C.’s case totally differs from yours.
Therefore it makes absolutely nothing to your purpose.
17. A farther consequence (you think) of my preaching this
doctrine, is, “the introducing that of absolute predestination.
And whenever these errors,” say you, “gain ground, there can
be no wonder, that confusion, presumption, and despair, many
very shocking instances of all which you give us among your
followers, should be the consequences.” (Remarks, p. 52.)
You should by all means have specified a few of those instances,
or, at least, the pages where they occur. Till this is done, I can
look upon this assertion as no other than a flourish of your pen.
To conclude this head: You roundly affirm, once for all,
“The grossest corruptions have ever followed the spreading of
this tenet. The greatest heats and animosities have been raised
thereby. The wildest errors have been thus occasioned. And
VOIL. VIII.
402 ANSWER TO
in proportion to its getting ground, it has never failed to per
plex the weak, to harden the wicked, and to please the profane.
Your Journal is a proof that these terrible consequences have
of late prevailed, perhaps more than ever.” (Page 51.) Sup
pose that Journal gives a true account of facts, (which you
seem not to deny,) could you find there no other fruits of my
preaching, than these terrible ones you here mention?
O who so blind, as he that will not see!
18. But that we may not still talk at large, let us bring this
question into as narrow a compass as possible. Let us go no
farther as to time, than seven years last past; as to place, than
London and the parts adjoining; as to persons, than you and
me, Thomas Church preaching one doctrine, John Wesley the
other. Now then, let us consider with meekness and fear,
what have been the consequences of each doctrine.
You have preached justification by faith and works, at Bat
tersea, and St. Ann’s, Westminster; while I preached justifica
tion by faith alone, near Moorfields, and at Short's Gardens.
I beseech you then to consider, in the secret of your heart,
how many sinners have you converted to God? By their fruits
we shall know them. This is a plain rule. By this test let them
be tried. How many outwardly and habitually wicked men
have you brought to uniform habits of outward holiness? It
is an awful thought ! Can you instance in a hundred? in
fifty? in twenty? in ten? If not, take heed unto yourself
and to your doctrine. It cannot be that both are right
before God.
Consider now (I would not speak, but I dare not refrain) what
have been the consequences of even my preaching the other
doctrine. By the fruits shall we know those of whom I speak;
even the cloud of witnesses, who at this hour experience the gos
pel I preach to be the power of God unto salvation. The
habitual drunkard, that was, is now temperate in all things.
The whoremonger now flees fornication. He that stole, steals
no more, but works with his hands. He that cursed or swore,
perhaps at every sentence, has now learned to serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence. Those formerly
enslaved to various habits of sin, are now brought to uniform
habits of holiness. These are demonstrable facts. I can name
the men, with their several places of abode. One of them was
an avowed Atheist for many years; some were Jews; a con
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 403
siderable number Papists; the greatest part of them as much
strangers to the form, as to the power, of godliness.
When you have weighed these things touching the conse
quences of my preaching, on the one hand, (somewhat different
from those set down in your Remarks,) and of your preaching,
on the other, I would earnestly recommend the following words
to your deepest consideration:—“Beware of false prophets;
ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes
of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree”
(every true Prophet or Teacher) “bringeth forth good fruit.
Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down
and cast into the fire.” (Matt. vii. 15, &c.)
III. 1. Having spoken more largely than I designed on the
principle I hold in common with the Moravians, I shall touch
very briefly on those errors (so called) which you say I hold
more than theirs. (Remarks, page 55.)
You name, as the first, my holding that “a man may have
a degree of justifying faith before he has, in the full, proper
sense, a new, a clean heart.” (Ibid.)
I have so often explained this, that I cannot throw away
time in adding any more now; only this,—that the moment
a sinner is justified, his heart is cleansed in a low degree.
But yet he has not a clean heart, in the full, proper sense, till
he is made perfect in love.
2. Another error you mention is this doctrine of perfection.
(Page 60.) To save you from a continual ignoratio elemchi, I
wave disputing on this point also, till you are better ac
quainted with my real sentiments. I have declared them on
hat head again and again; particularly in the sermon on
“Christian Perfection.”
3. Into this fallacy you plunge from the beginning to the
end of what you speak on my third error, (so you term it,)
relating to the Lord’s supper; confuting, as mine, notions which
I know not. (Pages 56, 57.) I cannot think any farther answer
is needful here, than the bare recital of my own words:—
“Friday, June 27. I preached on, “Do this in remembrance
of me.’
“It has been diligently taught among us, that none but
those who are converted, who ‘have received the Holy Ghost,’
who are believers in the full sense, ought to communicate.
“But experience shows the gross falsehood of that assertion,
404 ANSWER TO
that the Lord's supper is not a converting ordinance. Ye are
witnesses: For many now present know, the very beginning of
your conversion to God (perhaps in some the first deep convic
tion) was wrought at the Lord's supper. Now, one single
instance of this kind overthrows that whole assertion.
“The falsehood of the other assertion appears both from
Scripture precept and example. Our Lord commanded those
very men who were then unconverted, who had not yet received
the Holy Ghost, who, in the full sense of the word, were not
believers, to do this in remembrance of him. Here the pre
cept is clear. And to these he delivered the elements with
his own hands. Here is example equally indisputable.
“Sat. 28.—I showed at large, (1.) That the Lord’s supper
was ordained by God to be a means of conveying to men either
preventing, or justifying, or sanctifying grace, according to
their several necessities. (2.) That the persons for whom it
was ordained, are all those who know and feel that they want
the grace of God, either to restrain them from sin, or to show
their sins forgiven, or to renew their souls in the image of God.
(3.) That, inasmuch as we come to his table, not to give him
anything, but to receive whatsoever he sees best for us, there
is no previous preparation indispensably necessary, but a desire
to receive whatsoever he pleases to give. And, (4.) That no
fitness is required at the time of communicating, but a sense of
our state, of our utter sinfulness and helplessness; every one
who knows he is fit for hell, being just fit to come to Christ,
in this as well as all other ways of his appointment.” (Vol. I.
p. 279) 4. “A stoical insensibility,” you add, “is the next error I
have to charge you with. You say, ‘The servants of God
suffer nothing;’ and suppose that we ought to be here so free as,
in the strongest pain, not once to desire to have a moment’s
eaSG.
“At the end of one of your hymns, you seem to carry this
notion to the very height of extravagancy and presumption.
You say, -
“Doom, if thou canst, to endless pains,
And drive me from thy face.’” *
“A stoical insensibility is the next error I have to charge you
with.” And how do you support the charge? Why thus:
* Remarks, p. 58.
THE REV. M.R. CIl URUH. 405
“You say, ‘The servants of God suffer nothing.” (Vol. I.
p. 290.) And can you possibly misunderstand these words, if
you read those that immediately follow 7–" His body was
well-nigh torn asunder with pain: But God made all his bed
in his sickness; so that he was continually giving thanks to
God, and making his boast of his praise.”
“You suppose we ought to be so free, as in the strongest
pain not once to desire to have a moment's ease.” O Sir,
with what eyes did you read those words?—
“I dined with one who told me, in all simplicity, ‘Sir, I
thought last week, there could be no such rest as you describe;
none in this world, wherein we should be so free as not to
desire ease in pain. But God has taught me better; for on
iPriday and Saturday, when I was in the strongest pain, I
never once had one moment's desire of ease, but only that the
will of God might be done.” (Ibid. p. 283.) Do I say here,
that “we ought not in the strongest pain once to desire to
have a moment's ease?” What a frightful distortion of my
words is this ! What I say is, “A serious person affirmed to
me, that God kept her for two days in such a state.” And
why not? Where is the absurdity?
“At the end of one of your hymns, you seem to carry this
notion to the very height of extravagancy and presumption.
You say,
“Doom, if thou canst, to endless pains,
And drive me from thy face.”
If thou canst; that is, if thou canst deny thyself, if thou canst
forget to be gracious, if thou canst cease to be truth and love.
So the lines both preceding and following fix the sense. I
see nothing of stoical insensibility, neither of extravagancy
or presumption, in this.
5. Your last charge is, that I am guilty of enthusiasm to the
highest degree. “Enthusiasm,” you say, “is a false persuasion
of an extraordinary divine assistance, which leads men on to
such conduct as is only to be justified by the supposition of
such assistance. An enthusiast is, then, sincere, but mistaken.
His intentions are good, but his actions most abominable.
Instead of making the word of God the rule of his actions, he
follows only that secret impulse which is owing to a warm
imagination. Instead of judging of his spiritual estate by the
improvement of his heart, he rests only on ecstasies, &c. He is
very liable to err, as not considering things coolly and carefully.
406 ANSWER. To
He is very difficult to be convinced by reason and argument, as
he acts upon a supposed principle superior to it, the directions
of God’s Spirit. Whoever opposes him is charged with resist
ing the Spirit. His own dreams must be regarded as oracles.
Whatever he does is to be accounted the work of God. Hence
he talks in the style of inspired persons; and applies Scripture
phrases to himself, without attending to their original mean
ing, or once considering the difference of times and circum
stances.” (Remarks, pp. 60, 61.)
You have drawn, Sir, (in the main,) a true picture of an
enthusiast. But it is no more like me, than I am like a
centaur. Yet you say, “They are these very things which
have been charged upon you, and which you could never yet
disprove.” I will try for once; and, to that end, will go over
these articles one by one.
“Enthusiasm is a false persuasion of an extraordinary divine
assistance, which leads men on to such conduct as is only to be
justified by the supposition of such assistance.” Before this
touches me, you are to prove, (which, I conceive, you have not
done yet,) that my conduct is such as is only to be justified by
the supposition of an extraordinary divine assistance. “An
enthusiast is, then, sincere, but mistaken.” That I am mis
taken, remains also to be proved. “His intentions are good;
but his actions most abominable.” Sometimes they are; yet
not always. For there may be innocent madmen. But, what
actions of mine are most abominable? I wait to learn.
“Instead of making the word of God the rule of his actions,
he follows only his secret impulse.” In the whole compass of
language, there is not a proposition which less belongs to me
than this. I have declared again and again, that I make the
word of God the rule of all my actions; and that I no more
follow any secret impulse instead thereof, than I follow
Mahomet or Confucius.
Not even a word or look
Do I approve or own,
But by the model of thy book,
Thy sacred book alone.
“Instead of judging of his spiritual estate by the improve
ment of his heart, he rests only on ecstasies.” Neither is this my
case. I rest not on them at all. Nor did I ever experience any.
I do judge of my spiritual estate by the improvement of my
heart and the tenor of my life conjointly. “He is very liable
Thi E REV. M.R. CHURCH. 407
to err.” So indeed I am. I find it every day more and
more. But I do not yet find, that this is owing to my want
of “considering things coolly and carefully.” Perhaps you
do not know many persons (excuse my simplicity in speaking
it) who more carefully consider every step they take. Yet I
know I am not cool or careful enough. May God supply this
and all my wants! “He is very difficult to be convinced by
reason and argument, as he acts upon a supposed principle
superior to it, the direction of God's Spirit.” I am very
difficult to be convinced by dry blows or hard names, (both of
which I have not wanted,) but not by reason and argument.
At least that difficulty cannot spring from the cause you
mention; for I claim no other direction of God’s Spirit, than
is common to all believers. “Whoever opposes him is charged
with resisting or rejecting the Spirit.” What! whoever
opposes me, John Wesley? Do I charge every such person with
rejecting the Spirit? No more than I charge him with robbing
on the highway. I cite you yourself, to confute your own words.
For, do I charge you with rejecting the Spirit? “His own
dreams must be regarded as oracles.” Whose? I desire
neither my dreams nor my waking thoughts may be regarded
at all, unless just so far as they agree with the oracles of God.
“Whatever he does, is to be accounted the work of God.”
You strike quite wide of me still. I never said so of what I
do. I never thought so. Yet I trust what I do is pleasing
to God. “Hence he talks in the style of inspired persons.”
No otherwise inspired than you are, if you love God. “And
applies Scripture phrases to himself, without attending to
their original meaning, or once considering the difference of
times and circumstances.” I am not conscious of anything like
this. I apply no Scripture phrase either to myself or any other,
without carefully considering both the original meaning, and
the secondary sense, wherein (allowing for different times and
circumstances) it may be applied to ordinary Christians.
6. So much for the bulk of your charge. But it concerns me,
likewise, to gather up the fragments of it. You say, “We
desire no more than to try your sentiments and proceedings by
the written word.” (Page 63.) Agreed. Begin when and where
you please. “We find there good works as strongly insisted on
as faith.” I do as strongly insist on them as on faith. But each
in its own order. “We find all railing, &c., condemned therein.”
Truc; and so you may in all I write or preach. “We are
408 ANSWER. To
assured, that the doing what God commands is the sure way of
knowing that we have received his Spirit.” We have doubtless
received it, if we love God (as he commands) with all our heart,
mind, soul, and strength. “And not by any sensible impulses
or feelings whatsoever.” Any sensible impulses whatsoever !
Do you then exclude all sensible impulses? Do you reject
inward feelings toto genere? Then you reject both the love
of God and of our neighbour. For, if these cannot be in
wardly felt, nothing can. You reject all joy in the Holy
Ghost; for if we cannot be sensible of this, it is no joy at all.
You reject the peace of God, which, if it be not felt in the
1nmost soul, is a dream, a notion, an empty name. You
therefore reject the whole inward kingdom of God; that is,
in effect, the whole gospel of Jesus Christ.
You have therefore yourself abundantly shown (what I do
not insinuate, but proclaim on the house-top) that I am
charged with enthusiasm for asserting the power as well as
the form of godliness.
7. You go on : “The character of the enthusiast above
drawn will fit, I believe, all such of the Methodists as can be
thought sincere.” (Page 63.) I believe not. I have tried
it on one, and it fitted him just as Saul’s armour did David.
However, a few instances of enthusiasm you undertake to
show in this very Journal.
And first, “You give us one” (these are your words) “of
a private revelation, which you seem to pay great credit to.”
You partly relate this, and then remark, “What enthusiasm
is here ! To represent the conjectures of a woman, whose
brain appears to have been too much heated, as if they had
been owing to a particular and miraculous spirit of prophecy!”
Descant, Sir, as you please on this enthusiasm; on the credit
I paid to this private revelation; and my representing the
conjectures of this brain-sick woman as owing to the
miraculous power of the Spirit of God: And when you have
done, I will desire you to read that passage once more, where
you will find my express words are, introducing this account:
“Sunday, 11. I met with a surprising instance of the power
of the devil.” (Vol. I. p. 295.) Such was the credit I paid
to this revelation 1 All which I ascribe to the Spirit of God
is, the enabling her to strive against the power of the devil
and at length restoring peace to her soul.
THE REW. M.R. CHURCH. 409
8. As a second instance of enthusiasm, you cite those words:
“I expounded out of the fulness which was given me.” (Ibid.
p. 295.) The whole sentence is, “Out of the fulness that was
given me, I expounded those words of St. Paul, (indeed of every
true believer,) ‘To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.” I
mean, I had then a fuller, deeper sense of that great truth, than
I ordinarily have. And I still think it right to ascribe this,
not to myself, but to the “Giver of every good and perfect
gift.”
You relate what follows as a third “very extraordinary in
stance of enthusiasm:” (Remarks, p. 65 :) “Tuesday, Feb.
17. I left London. In the afternoon, I reached Oxford; and
leaving my horse there, (for he was tired, and the horse-road
exceeding bad, and my business admitted of no delay,) set out
on foot for Stanton-Harcourt. The night overtook me in about
an hour, accompanied with heavy rain. Being wet and weary,
and not well knowing my way, I could not help saying in my
heart, (though ashamed of mywant of resignation to God’s will,)
“O that thou wouldest stay the bottles of heaven l or at least
give me light, or an honest guide, or some help in the manner
thou knowest. Presently the rain ceased, the moon broke out,
and a friendly man overtook me, who set me on his own
horse, and walked by my side, till we came to Mr. Gambold's
door.” (Ibid. p. 298.)
Here you remark, “If you would not have us look on this
as miraculous, there is nothing in it worthy of being related.”
It may be so; let it pass then as a trifle not worth relating:
But still it is no proof of enthusiasm. For I would not have
you look on it as miraculous. I do not myself look upon it
as such ; but as a signal instance of God's particular provi
dence over all those who call upon him.
9. “In the same spirit of enthusiasm,” (you go on, citing this
as a fourth instance,) “you describe Heaven as executing judg
ments, immediate punishments, on those who oppose you. You
say, ‘Mr. Molther was taken ill this day. I believe it wasthe hand
of God that was upon him.’” (Remarks, p. 66.) I do; but I do
not say, as a judgment from God for opposing me: That yousay
for me. “Again, you tell us of ‘one who was exceeding angryat
those who pretended to be in fits; and was just going to kick one
of them out of the way, when shedropped down herself, and wasin
violent agonies for an hour.” And you say you ‘left her under
a deep sense of the just judgment of God.” So she termed it;
410 ANSWER TO
and so I believe it was. But observe, not for opposing me.
“Again, you mention, “as an awful providence, the case of a
poor wretch, who was last week cursing and blaspheming, and
had boasted to many that he would come again on Sunday, and
no man should stop his mouth then.” His mouth was stopped
before, in the midst of the most horrid blasphemies, by asking
him, if he was stronger than God. “‘But on Friday, God
laid his hand upon him, and on Sunday he was buried.” I do
look on this asamanifest judgment of God on a hardened sinner,
for his complicated wickedness. “Again, “one being just going
to beat his wife, (which he frequently did,) God smote him in
a moment; so that his hand dropped, and he fell down upon
the ground, having no more strength than a new-born child.”
(Page 67.) And can you, Sir, consider this as one of the
common dispensations of Providence? Have you known a
parallel one in your life? But it was never cited by me, as it is
by you, as an immediate punishment on a man for opposing me.
You have no authority, from any sentence or word of mine,
for putting such a construction upon it; no more than you
have for that strange intimation, (how remote both from jus
tice and charity 1) that “I parallel these cases with those of
Amanias and Sapphira, or of Elymas the sorcerer !”
10. You proceed to what you account a fifth instance of
enthusiasm: “With regard to people’s falling in fits, it is
plain, you look upon both the disorders and removals of them
to be supernatural.” (Remarks, pp. 68, 69.) It is not quite
plain. I look upon some of these cases as wholly natural; on
the rest as mixed, both the disorder and the removal being
partly natural and partly not. Six of these you pick out from,
it may be, two hundred; and add, “From all which, you leave
no room to doubt, that you would have these cases considered
as those of the demoniacs in the New Testament; in order,
I suppose, to parallel your supposed cures of them with the
highest miracles of Christ and his disciples.” I should once
have wondered at your making such a supposition; but I now
wonder at nothing of this kind. Only be pleased to remember,
till this supposition is made good, it is no confirmation at all
of my enthusiasm.
You then attempt to account for those fits by “obstructions
or irregularities of the blood and spirits, hysterical disorder,
watchings, fastings, closeness of rooms, great crowds, violent
heat.” And, lastly, by “terrors, perplexities, and doubts, in
THE REV. M.R. CHURCH. 411
weak and well-meaning men;” which, you think, in many of
the cases before us, have “quite overset their understandings.”
As to each of the rest, let it go as far as it can go. But I
require proof of the last way whereby you would account for
these disorders. Why, “The instances,” you say, “of religious
madness have much increased since you began to disturb the
world.” (Remarks, pp. 68, 69.) I doubt the fact. Although,
if these instances had increased lately, it is easy to account for
them another way. “Most have heard of, or known, several of
the Methodists thus driven to distraction.” You may have
heard of five hundred; but how many have you known? Be
pleased to name eight or ten of them. I cannot find them, no,
not one of them to this day, either man, woman, or child. I
find some indeed, whom you told, they would be distracted if
they “continued to follow these men,” and whom, at that
time, you threw into much doubt, and terror, and perplexity.
But though they did continue to hear them ever since, they
are not distracted yet.
As for the “abilities, learning, and experience” of Dr.
M—, (page 70,) if you are personally acquainted with him,
you do well to testify them. But if not, permit me to remind
you of the old advice:—
Qualem commendes, etiam atque etham aspice, ne mor
Incutiant aliena tibi peccata pudorem.”
In endeavouring to account for the people’s recovery from
those disorders, you say, “I shall not dispute how far prayer
may have naturally a good effect.” Nay, I am persuaded you
will not dispute but it may have supernatural good effects also.
“However, there is no need of supposing these recoveries mira
culous.” (Page 71.) Who affirms there is? I have set down the
facts just as they were, passing no judgment upon them myself;
(consequently, here is no foundation for the charge of enthu
siasm;) and leaving every man else to judge as he pleases.
11. The next passage you quote as a proof of my enthusiasm,
taking the whole together, runs thus: “After communicating
at St. James’s, our parish church, I visited several of the sick.
Most of them were ill of the spotted fever, which, they informed
* Beware whom you commend, lest you should be blamed for the faults of
another man.
412 ANSWER TO
me, had been extremely mortal, few persons recovering from
it. But God had said, “Hitherto shalt thou come.’ I believe
there was not one with whom we were, but recovered.” (Vol. I.
p. 291.) On which you comment thus: “Here is indeed no
intimation of any thing miraculous.” No ! not so much as
an intimation | Then why is this cited as an instance of my
enthusiasm ? Why, “You seem to desire to have it believed,
that an extraordinary blessing attended your prayers; whereas,
I believe they would not have failed of an equal blessing and
success, had they had the prayers of their own parish Minis
ters.” I believe this argument will have extraordinary success,
if it convince any one that I am an enthusiast.
12. You add, “I shall give but one account more, and this
is what you give of yourself.” (Remarks, p. 72.) The sum
whereof is, “At two several times, being ill and in violent
pain, I prayed to God, and found immediate ease.” I did so.
I assert the fact still. “Now, if these,” you say, “are not
miraculous cures, all this is rank enthusiasm.”
I will put your argument in form :
He that believes those are miraculous cures which are not
so is a rank enthusiast:
But you believe those to be miraculous cures which are
not so :
Therefore, you are a rank enthusiast.
Before I answer, I must know what you mean by miraculous.
If you term everything so, which is not strictly accountable
for by the ordinary course of natural causes, then I deny the
latter part of the minor proposition. And unless you can
make this good, unless you can prove the effects in question
are strictly accountable for by the ordinary course of natural
causes, your argument is nothing worth.
You conclude this head with, “Can you work miracles? All
your present pretences to the Spirit, till they are proved by
miracles, cannot be excused, or acquitted from enthusiasm.”
(Page 73.)
My short answer is this: I pretend to the Spirit just so far
as is essential to a state of salvation. And cannot I be ac
quitted from enthusiasm till I prove by miracles that I am in
a state of salvation?
13. We now draw to a period: “The consequences of
Methodism,” you say, that is, of our preaching this doctrine,
The REV. M.R. CHURCH. 413
“which have hitherto appeared, are bad enough to induce you
to leave it. It has, in fact, introduced many disorders; enthu
siasm, Antinomianism, Calvinism, a neglect and contempt of
God’s ordinances, and almost all other duties.” (Page 75.)
That, whenever God revives his work upon earth, many
tares will spring up with the wheat, both the word of God
gives us ground to expect, and the experience of all ages.
But where, Sir, have you been, that you have heard of the
tares only; and that you rank among the consequences of
my preaching, “a neglect and contempt of God’s ordinances,
and almost of all duties?” Does not the very reverse appear
at London, at Bristol, at Kingswood, at Newcastle? In
every one of which places, multitudes of those (I am able to
name the persons) who before lived in a thorough neglect and
contempt of God’s ordinances and all duties, do now zealously
discharge their duties to God and man, and walk in all his
ordinances blameless.
And as to those drunkards, whoremongers, and other
servants of the devil, as they were before, who heard us a
while and then fell to the Calvinists or Moravians, are they
not even now in a far betterstate than they were before they
heard us? Admit they are in error, yea, and die therein,
yet, who dares affirm they will perish everlastingly? But
had they died in those sins, we are sure they had fallen into
“the fire that never shall be quenched.”
I hope, Sir, you will rejoice in considering this, how much
their gain still outweighs their loss; as well as in finding the
sentiments you could not reconcile together clearly and con
sistently explained. I am very willing to consider whatever
farther you have to offer. May God give us both a right
judgment in all things! I am persuaded you will readily
join in this prayer with,
Reverend Sir,
Your servant for Christ's sake,
JOHN WESLEY.
BRISTOL,
February 2, 1744–5.
THE
PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
FARTHER EXPLAINED
OCCASIONED BY
THE REW, MR. CHURCH'S SECOND LETTER
TO MR. WESLEY
IN A SECOND LETTER TO THAT GENTLEMAN
REVEREND SIR,
1. At the time that I was reading your former letter,
I expected to hear from you again. And I was not displeased
with the expectation; believing it would give me a fresh
opportunity of weighing the sentiments I might have too
lightly espoused, and the actions which perhaps I had not
enough considered. Viewing things in this light, I cannot
but esteem you, not an enemy, but a friend; and one, in
some respects, better qualified to do me real service than
those whom the world accounts so; who may be hindered by
their prejudice in my favour, either from observing what is
reprovable, or from using that freedom or plainness of speech
which are requisite to convince me of it.
2. It is, at least, as much with a vi w to learn myself, as
to show others (what I think) the truth, that I intend to set
down a few reflections on some parts of the tract you have
lately published. I say some parts; for it is not my design
to answer every sentence in this, any more than in the former.
Many things I pass over, because I think them true; many
more, because I think them not material; and some, because
I am determined not to engage in a useless, if not hurtful,
controversy.
PRINCIPLES OF A METEODIST. 415
3. Fear, indeed, is one cause of my declining this; fear, as I
said elsewhere,” not of my adversary, but of myself. I fear my
own spirit, lest “I fall where many mightier have been slain.”
I never knew one (or but one) man write controversy with what
I thought a right spirit. Every disputant seems to think, as
every soldier, that he may hurt his opponent as much as he
can; nay, that he ought to do his worst to him, or he cannot
make the best of his own cause; that so he do not belie, or
wilfully misrepresent, him, he must expose him as much as he is
able. It is enough, we suppose, if we do not show heat or pas
sion against our adversary. But not to despise him, or endea
vour to make others do so, is quite a work of supererogation.
4. But ought these things to be so? (I speak on the Chris
tian scheme.) Ought we not to love our neighbour as ourselves?
And does a man cease to be our neighbour, because he is of a
different opinion? nay, and declares himself so to be? Ought we
not, for all this, to do to him as we would he should do to us?
But do we ourselves love to be exposed, or set in the worst light?
Would we willingly be treated with contempt? If not, why do
we treat others thus? And yet, who scruples it? Who does
not hit every blot he can, however foreign to the merits of the
cause? Who, in controversy, casts the mantle of love over the
nakedness of his brother? Who keeps steadily and uniformly
to the question, without ever striking at the person? Who
shows in every sentence that he loves his brother only less than
the truth?
5. I fear neither you nor I have attained to this. I believe
brotherly love might have found a better construction than that
of unfairness, art, or disingenuity, to have put either on my not
answering every part of your book, (a thing which never once
entered my thoughts,) or on my not reciting all the words of
those parts which I did answer. I cannot yet perceive any
blame herein. I still account it fair and ingenuous to pass over
both what I believe is right, and what I believe is not danger
ously wrong. Neither can I see any disingenuity at all in quot
ing only that part of any sentence, against which I conceive the
objection lies; nor in abridging any part of any treatise to which
I reply, whether in the author's or in my own words.
6. If, indeed, it were so abridged as to alter the sense, this
• In the Preface to the Answer to Mr. Tucker.
416 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
would be unfair. And if this were designedly done, it would be
artful and disingenuous. But I am not conscious of having
done this at all; although you speak as if I had done it a thou
sand times. And yet I cannot undertake now either to tran
scribe your whole book, or every page or paragraph which I
answer. But I must generally abridge before I reply; and that
not only to save time, (of which I have none to spare,) but
often to make the argument clearer, which is best understood
when couched in few words.
7. You complain also of my mentioning all at once sentences
which you placed at a distance from each other. I do so; and
I think it quite fair and ingenuous to lay together what was
before scattered abroad. For instance: You now speak of the
conditions of justification, in the eighteenth and following
pages; again, from the eighty-ninth to the hundred and second;
and yet again, in the hundred and twenty-seventh page. Now,
I have not leisure to follow you to and fro. Therefore, what I
say on one head, I set in one place.
I. 1. This premised, I come to the letter itself. I begin, as
before, with the case of the Moravians; of whom you say, “I
collected together the character which you had given of these
men; the errors and vices which you had charged upon them,
and the mischiefs—they had done among your followers. And
I proved that, in several respects, you had been the occasion of
this mischief; and are therefore, in some measure, accountable
for it. Let us see what answer you give to all this.
“‘With regard to the denying degrees in faith, you men
tioned, that the Moravian Church was cleared from this mis
take. But did you not mention this as one of the tenets of
the Moravians? Do you not say, that you ‘could not agree
with Mr. Spangenberg, that none has any faith so long as he is
liable to any doubt or fear? Do you not represent Mr. Molther,
and other Moravians in England, as teaching the same? In
short, I have not charged the Moravian Church with anything;
but only repeat after you. And if you have accused them
when you knew them to be guiltless, you must bear the blame.
“‘They do use the ordinances of God with reverence and
godly fear.’ You have charged Mr. Spangenberg and Mr.
Molther with teaching that we ought to abstain from them.
And the same you say in general of the Moravian brethren, in
your letter to them. “But Mr. Molther was quickly after
FARTHER EXPLAINED- 4.17
recalled into Germany.’ This might be on other accounts. You
do not say it was out of any dislike of his doctrines or proceed
ings. Nor indeed can you, consistently with your next words:
‘The great fault of the Moravian Church seems to lie, in not
openly disclaiming all he had said; which, in all probability
they would have done, had they not leaned to the same opinion.”
“You ‘never knew but one of the Moravian Church affirm,
that a believer does not grow in holiness. But who was this?
No less a person than Count Zinzendorf, their great Bishop and
patron, whose authority is very high, all in all with them, and
to whom you think they pay too much regard.” (Second
Letter, page 79.)
2. This is the whole of your reply to this part of my answer.
I will now consider it, part by part.
First. “With regard to the denying degrees in faith, you
mentioned, ‘that the Moravian Church was cleared from this
mistake. But did you not mention this as one of the tenets
of the Moravians?” No; not of the Moravians in general.
“Do you not say, that you ‘could not agree with Mr. Span
genberg, that none has any faith, so long as he is liable to
any doubt or fear?’” I do say so still. But Spangenberg
is not the Moravian Church. “Do you not represent Mr.
Molther, and other Moravians in England, as teaching the
same?” I do; three or four in all. But neither are these the
Moravian Church. “In short, I have not charged the Moravian
Church with anything; but only repeat after you.” Indeed you
have, in the very case before us. You charge them with deny
ing degrees in faith. I do not charge them herewith. I openly
cleared them from any such charge near six years ago. “If,
therefore, you have accused them when you knew them to be
guiltless, you must bear the blame.” In this case I must entreat
you to bear it in my stead: For I have not accused them,—the
Moravian Church. It is you that have accused them. I have
again and again declared they are not guilty.
Secondly. “‘They do use the ordinances of God with rever
ence and godly fear.’ You have charged Mr. Spangenberg and
Mr. Molther with teaching, that we ought to abstain from
them.” That we? No. That unbelievers ought. The assertion
relates to them only. “And the same you say in general of the
Moravian brethren, in your Letter.” I say, they hold that un
believers ought to abstain from them. But yet I know and bear
VOL. VIII.
418 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
witness, they use them themselves, and that “with reverence
and godly fear.” “‘Mr. Molther was quickly after recalled to
Germany.’ This might be on other accounts. You do not say it
was out of any dislike of his doctrines or proceedings.” I do
not say so; because I am not sure; but I believe it was out of a
dislike to some of his proceedings, if not of his doctrines too.
“Nor indeed can you, consistently with your next words: ‘The
great fault of the Moravian Church seems to lie, in not openly
disclaiming all he had said.’” relating to this head. They did
privately disclaim what he had said of degrees in faith. But I
think that was not enough. And I still believe they would
have done more, “had they not leaned themselves to the same
opinion,” touching the ordinances.
Thirdly. “You ‘never knew but one of the Moravian Church
affirm, that a believer does not grow in holiness.” But who was
this? No less a person than Count Zinzendorf, their great
Bishop and patron, whose authority is very high, all in all with
them, and to whom you think they pay ‘too much regard.’”
Do you apprehend where the stress of the argument lies? I
never heard one Moravian affirm this, but the Count alone;
and him only once; and that once was in the heat of dispute.
Aud hence I inferred, it is not a doctrine of the Moravian
Church; nay, I doubt whether it be the Count’s own settled
judgment.
3. But I may not dismiss this passage yet. It is now my
turn to complain of unfair usage; of the exceeding lame, broken,
imperfect manner wherein you cite my words. For instance,
your citation runs thus: You“never knew but one of the Mora
vian Church affirm, that a believer does not grow in holiness.”
Whereas my words are these: “I never knew one of the Mora
vian Church, but that single person, affirm, that a believer does
not grow in holiness; and perhaps he would not affirm it on
reflection.” Now, why was the former part of the sentence
changed, and the latter quite left out? Had the whole stood in
your tract just as it does in mine, it must have appeared I do
not here charge the Moravian Church.
I complain also of your manner of replying to the first
article of this very paragraph. For you do not cite so much as
one line of that answer to which you profess to reply. My
words are, “You ought not to charge the Moravian Church
with the first of these” errors, “since in the very page from
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 419
which you quote those words, “There is no justifying faith where
there ever is any doubt,’ that note occurs, (viz., Vol. I. p. 328,)
“In the preface to the Second Journal, the Moravian Church
is cleared from this mistake.” If you had cited these words,
could you possibly have subjoined, “I have not charged the
Moravian Church with anything; but only repeat after you?”
4. I have now considered one page of your reply, in the man
ner you seem to require. But sure you cannot expect I should
follow you thus, step by step, through a hundred and forty
pages! If you should then think it worth while to make a
second reply, and to follow me in the same manner, we might
write indeed, but who would read? I return therefore to
what I proposed at first, viz., to touch only on what seems of
the most importance, and leave the rest just as it lies.
5. You say, “With regard to subtlety, evasion, and disguise,
you now would have it thought, that you only found this ‘in
many of them; not in all, nor in most.” (Page 80) “You
now would have it thought !” Yes, and always, as well as
now. For my original charge was, “I have found this in many
of you; that is, much subtlety, much evasion and disguise.”
(Vol. I. p. 327.) But you add, “Let the reader judge from
the following passages, whether you did not charge the Mora
vians in general with these crimes: ‘I had a long conference
with those whom I esteem very highly in love; but I could not
yet understand them in one point, Christian openness and plain
ness of speech. They pleaded for such a reservedness and close
ness of conversation. Yet I scarce know what to think, con
sidering they had the practice of the whole Moravian Church
on their side.” True, in pleading for such a reservedness of
conversation as I could not in any wise approve of; but not in
using much subtlety, much evasion and disguise: This I dare
not charge on the whole Moravian Church. Those words also,
“There is darkness and closeness in all their behaviour, and
guile in almost all their words,” I spoke, not of all the Mora
vians, nor of most ; but of those who were then in England.
I could not speak it of them all; for I never found any guile
in Christian David, Michael Linner, and many others.
6. “We are next to see how you get over the objection I
made good, in three several particulars, that you have prepared
the way for spreading of these tenets. The first you say nothing
to here; the Second you quote very partially thus: “By coun
420 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
tenancing and commending them.’ And why would you not
add ‘And being the occasion of so many of them coming
over among us?” Because I was not the occasion. I was in
deed the first Englishman that ever was at Hernhuth. But
before I was at Hernhuth, (I find on later inquiry,) the Count
himself had been in England.
“You ‘still think, that next to some thousands in our own
Church, the body of the Moravian Church, however mistaken
some of them are, are, in the main, the best Christians in the
world.” (Page 81.) I do, “ of all whom I have seen;”—you
should not omit these words. “Those dreadful errors and
crimes are here softened into mistakes.” I term them
“errors of judgment and practice.” “I have proved, that you
have charged the body with such.” At present, the proof
does not amount to demonstration. There needs a little
farther proof, that I charge any “dreadful crimes” on the
body of the Moravians.
I see no manner of inconsistency still, in those accounts of
my intercourse with the Moravians, which you suppose irre
concilable with each other. Let any one read them in the
Journal, and judge.-
7. “You had said, your “objections then were nearly the
same as now.’ You now add, ‘only with this difference: I was
not then assured that the facts were as I supposed; I did not
dare to determine anything. No! Not when by conversing
among them you saw these things? As indeed the facts are of
such a nature, that you could not but be assured of them, if
they were true. Nor do the questions in your Letter really
imply any doubt of their truth; but are so many appeals to
their consciences, and equivalent to strong assertions. And if
you had not been assured, if you did not dare to determine
anything concerning what you saw, your writing bare suspi
cions to a body of men in such a manner was inexcusable.
This excuse, therefore, will not serve you.” (Page 83.)
I apprehend it will. “I was not then,” in September, 1738,
“assured that the facts were as I supposed.” Therefore, “I
did not” then “dare to determine anything.” Be pleased to
add the immediately following words: “But from November
1,” 1739, “I saw more and more things which I could not
reconcile with the Gospel.”-
If you had not omitted these words, you could have had no
colour to remark, on my saying, “I did not dare to determine
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 421
anything:” “No! Not when by conversing among them you
saw these things?” No, I did not “dare to determine,” in Sep
tember, 1738, from what I saw in November, 1739. “But the
facts are of such a nature, that you could not but be assured
of them, if they were true.” I cannot think so. “Is not the
Count all in all among you? Do not you magnify your own
Church too much? Do you not use guile and dissimulation in
many cases?” These facts are by no means of such a nature,
as that whoever converses (even intimately) among the Mo
ravians cannot but be assured of them. “Nor do the questions
in your Letter really imply any doubt of their truth.” No!
Are not my very words prefixed to those questions?—“Of
some other things I stand in doubt. And I wish that, in order
to remove those doubts, you would plainly answer, whether the
fact be as I suppose.” “But ’’ these questions “are so many
appeals to their consciences.” True. “And equivalent to
strong assertions.” Utterly false. “If you had not been
assured, if you did not dare to determine anything concerning
what you saw,” (fifteen months after,) “your writing bare
suspicions to a body of men, in such a manner, was inexcu
sable.” They were strong presumptions then; which yet I
did not write to a body of men, whom I so highly esteemed;
no, not even in the tenderest manner, till I was assured they
were not groundless.
8. “In a note at the bottom of page 8, you observe, ‘The
Band-Society in London began May 1, some time before I set
out for Germany.’ Would you insinuate here, that you did not
set it up in imitation of the Moravians?” Sir, I will tell you
the naked truth. You had remarked thus: “You took the
trouble of a journey to Germany to them; and were so much
in love with their methods, that at your return hither, you set
up their Bands among your disciples.” (Page 17.) This was an
entire mistake; for that society was set up, not only before I
returned, but before I set out. And I designed that note to in
sinuate this toyou, without telling your mistake to all the world.
“I imagined, that, supposing your account of the Moravians
true, it would be impossible for any serious Christian to doubt
of their being very wicked people.” I know many serious Chris
tians who suppose it true, and yet believe they are, in the main,
good men. “A much worse character, take the whole body
together, cannot be given of a body of men.” Let us try :
“Here is a body of men who have not one spark either of
422 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
justice, mercy, or truth among them; who are lost to all sense
of right and wrong; who have neither sobriety, temperance, nor
chastity; who are, in general, liars, drunkards, gluttons,
thieves, adulterers, murderers.” I cannot but think, that this
is a much worse character than that of the Moravians, take
it how you will. “Let the reader judge how far you are now
able to defend them.” Just as far as I did at first. Still I
dare not condemn what is good among them; and I will not
excuse what is evil.
9. “The Moravians excel in sweetness of behaviour.” What,
though they use guile and dissimulation ?” Yes. “Where is
their multitude of errors?’ In your own Journal. I have taken
the pains to place them in one view in my Remarks ; the just
ness of which, with all your art, you cannot disprove.” You have
taken the pains to transcribe many words; all which together
amount to this, that they, generally, hold universal salvation,
and are partly Antinomians, (in opinion,) partly Quietists. The
justness of some of your remarks, if I mistake not, has been
pretty fully disproved. As to what you speak of my art, sub
tlety, and so on, in this and many other places, I look upon it
as neither better nor worse than a civil way of calling names.
“‘To this multitude of crimes I am also an utter stranger.’
Then you have charged them wrongfully. What do you account
guile?” &c. (Second Letter, p. 84.) I account guile, despising
self-denial even in the smallest points, and teaching that those
who have not the assurance of faith may not use the ordinances
of God, the Lord's Supper in particular, (this is the real, un
aggravated charge,) to be faults which cannot be excused.
But I do not account them all together “a multitude of
crimes.” I conceive this is a vehement hyperbole.
“The honour of religion,” said you, “and virtue trampled
apon:” I answered, “By whom ? Not by the Moravians.”
You reply, “And yet you have accused some of these as decry
ing all the means of grace.” No. What I accused them of,
was, teaching that an unbeliever (in their sense) ought to
abstain from them. “Neither did I know, or think, or say,
they were desperately wicked people.’ Your Journal is before
the world; to whom I appeal whether this has not so repre
sented them.” But how do you here represent your remark,
and my answer? My paragraph runs thus:—
“You go on, “How could you so long, and so intimately,
converse with such desperately wicked people as the Moravians,
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 423
according to your own account, were known by you to be?”
O Sir, what another assertion is this ! “The Moravians, ac
cording to your own account, were known by you to be
desperately wicked people, while you intimately conversed
with them !’ Utterly false and injurious! I never gave any
such account. I conversed with them intimately both at
Savannah and Hernhuth. But neither then, nor at any other
time, did I know, or think, or say, they were desperately wicked
people: I think and say just the reverse; viz., that though I
soon ‘found among them a few things which I could not ap
prove, yet I believe they are, in the main, some of the best Chris
tians in the world. After this, are you the person who com
plains of me for imperfect and partial quotations?” (Page 10.)
I added, “You surprise me yet more in going on thus:
In God’s name, Sir, is the contempt of almost the whole of
our duty, of every Christian ordinance, to be so very gently
touched ?’ Sir, this is not the case. This charge no more
belongs to the Moravians than that of murder.” (Page 11.)
You reply, “Mr. Sp and Mr. Molther are accused by
name. If falsely, I am sorry both for them and you.”
Accused ? True. But of what? of the contempt of every
Christian ordinance, of almost the whole of our duty? By
no means. The plain case is, I accuse them of one thing,
viz., teaching that an unbeliever should abstain from the
ordinances. You accuse them of another,-contemning
every Christian ordinance, and almost the whole of our duty.
And this you would father upon me. I desire to be excused.
10. As to what I said in my letter to the Moravian
Church, “You can hinder this if you will; therefore, if you
do not prevent their speaking thus, you do, in effect, speak
thus yourselves,”—it may be observed, (1.) That this letter is
dated August 8, 1741. (2.) That from that time the Mora
vian Church did in great measure prevent any of their
members speaking thus.
You proceed: “You distinguish between the English breth
ren and the Moravians. These English brethren, I presume,
were your followers. Afterwards you represent them as per
verted by the Moravians: ‘Before they had spoke these wicked
things, you say, ‘they had joined these men, and acted under
their direction. If they did not learn them from these new
teachers, from whom did they learn them? Not, sure, from
424 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
yourself, or any other Methodists. You cannot, therefore,
bring off the Moravians without condemning your own
people. Here, therefore, you have certainly overshot your
self.” (Page 85.) Perhaps not. “These English brethren were,
I presume, your followers.” No; this is your first mistake.
I was but a single, private member of that society. “After
wards you represent them as perverted by the Moravians.”
I do; but not yet connected with them. “Before they spoke
these wicked things, they had joined these men, and acted
under their direction.” This is another mistake. They did
not join these men, nor act by their direction, till long after.
“If they did not learn them from these new teachers, from whom
did they learn them? You cannot bring off the Moravians with
out condemning your own people.” They learned them from
Mr. Molther chiefly; whom I am not at all concerned to bring
off. Now let all men judge which of us two has overshot himself.
11. “In answer to my objections against the inconsistent
accounts you have given of the Moravians, you say, ‘They
are, I believe, the most self-inconsistent people under the
sun. Would not one imagine that you here speak of the same
persons, or of the whole body of them in general?” I do,
thus far: I ascribe the good to the body of them in general;
the evil to part only of that body, to some of those same persons.
“Your method of getting over the contradictions I had
charged upon you is much the same, -to distinguish either
between the Moravians and the English brethren, though
these had been their disciples,”—this has been abundantly
answered,—“ or between some of the Moravians and others.”
(Page 86.) I think a very good method; for propositions are
not contradictory unless they both speak of the same persons.
However, since youpersist toaffirm that I am guilty of the con
tradictions you charged upon me, (page 87.) I think there can
not be a sufficient reply without reciting the several instances.
12. First. “You commend them (the Moravians) for
loving one another; and yet charge them with biting and
devouring one another.” I answered, “Them Whom?
Not the Moravians, but the English brethren of Fetter-Lane,
before their union with the Moravians. Herein, then, is no
shadow of contradiction; for the two sentences do not relate
to the same persons.”
You reply, “Would you then have us to think that so much
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 425
anger and contradiction reigned among your Methodists?” I
“would have you think” this is nothing to the purpose. Prove
the contradiction, and you speak to the point. “It is plain
they had before this been perverted by the Moravians; and
that they were unwilling to be taught by any others.” They;
that is, nearly half of the society. But here is no proof of the
contradiction still.
(2) “You say, ‘They had well nigh destroyed brotherly love
from among us, partly by cautions against natural love, partly
by occasioning almost continual disputes.” So they had; but
we had then no connexion with them. Neither, therefore,
does this contradict their loving one another. You reply, “As
if they can truly love each other, who teach you not to do it,
and stir up divisions and disturbances among you.” You should
say, if you would repeat after me, “Who caution you against
natural love, and occasion many disputes among you.” Well;
allowing they do this, (which is utterly wrong,) yet where is
the contradiction? Yet they may love one another.
(3.) “You praise them for using no diversions, but such as
become saints; and yet say,” (I recite the whole sentence,)
“‘I have heard some of you affirm that Christian salvation
implies liberty to conform to the world, by joining in worldly
diversions in order to do good.’” And both these are true.
The Moravians, in general, use no diversions but such as be
come saints. And yet I have heard some of them affirm, in
contradiction to their own practice, that “one then mentioned
did well when he joined in playing at tennis in order to do
good.” To this you make no reply. Silence then consents,
that there is no contradiction here.
(4) “You ‘praise them for not regarding outward adorn
ing.’” So I do, the bulk of the congregation. “And yet you
say,” (I again recite the whole sentence,) “‘I have heard some
of you affirm that Christian salvation implies liberty to conform
to the world, by putting on gold and costly apparel.’” I have
so; and I blame them the more, because “they are condemned
by the general practice of their own Church.” To this also you
reply not. So I must count this the fourth contradiction which
you have charged upon me, but have not proved.
(5) “You call their discipline, in most respects, truly excel
lent. I could wish you had more fully explained yourself. “I
have, in the Second Journal, Vol. I. pp. 115-147. It is no
426 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
sign of good discipline to permit such abominations; that is,
error in opinion, and guile in practice. “True; it is not; nor
is it any demonstration against it: For there may be good
discipline even in a college of Jesuits. Another fault is, too
great a deference to the Count. And yet, in most respects,
their discipline is truly excellent.’”
You reply, “Such excellent discipline, for all that I know,
they may have; ” (that is, as the Jesuits;) “but I cannot
agree that this is scarce inferior to that of the apostolical age.”
It may be, for anything you advance to the contrary. “Here
I cited some words of yours, condemning their subordination,
(page 88,) which you prudently take no notice of.” Yes; I had
iust before taken notice of their too great deference to the
Count. But, the contradiction | Where is the contradiction?
(6) “You mention it as a good effect of their discipline, that
“every one knows and keeps his proper rank. Soon after, as it
were with a design to confute yourself, you say, ‘Our brethren
have neither wisdom enough to guide, nor prudence enough to
let it alone.’” I answered, “Pardon me, Sir, I have no design
either to confute or contradict myself in these words. The for
mer sentence is spoken of the Moravian brethren; the latter,
of the English brethren of Fetter-Lane, not then united with
the Moravians, neither acting by their direction.” To this
likewise you do not reply. Here is then a sixth contradiction,
alleged against me, but not proved.
13. However, you add, “Had you shown me mistaken in
any point you have attempted to reply to, still you confess errors
and wickedness enough among the Moravians, to render your
account of them very inconsistent. But you have not succeeded
in any one answer. You have not shown that I have, in any
one instance, misquoted you, or misunderstood the character
you had given of them, or argued falsely from what you had
said of them. And truly, Sir, all you have done has been
cavilling at a few particulars. But the argument I was urging
all this while you quite forgot.”
| Sir, if it be so, you do me too much honour, in setting pen
to paper again. But is it so? Have I all this while quite forgot
the argument you was urging? I hope not. I seem to remem
ber you was urging some argument to prove, that I “fall not
only into inconsistencies, but direct contradictions;” (Remarks,
p. 21 ;) and that I showed you mistaken, not only in one,
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 427
but in every point which you advanced as such; that I did
not confess any such errors or wickedness of the Moravians,
as rendered my account of them self-inconsistent; that I
“succeeded” in more than “one answer” to the objections
you had urged against it; and that I showed, you had “mis
quoted or misunderstood the character I had given of them,”
or “argued falsely from it,” not properly “in one instance,”
but from the beginning to the end.
Yet this I think it incumbent upon me to say, that wherein
soever I have contributed, directly or indirectly, to the spread
ing of anything evil, which is or has been among the Mora
vians, I am sorry for it, and hereby ask pardon both of God
and all the world.-
II. 1. I think it appears, by what you have yourself
observed, that, on the Second head, Justification by Faith,
I allow, in the beginning of the “Farther Appeal,” almost
as much as you contend for.
I desire leave to cite part of that passage again, that we
may come as near each other as possible. I would just
subjoin a few words on each head, which I hope may remove
more difficulties out of the way:--
“That justification, whereof our Articles and Homilie
speak, means present pardon, and acceptance with God; who
therein ‘declares his righteousness, or mercy, “by” or ‘for
the remission of sins that are past.’”
I say, past : For I cannot find anything in the Bible of
the remission of sins, past, present, and to come.
“I believe the condition of this is faith; I mean, not only
that without faith we cannot be justified, but also, that, as
soon as any one has true faith, in that moment he is justified.”
You take the word condition in the former sense only, as
that without which we cannot be justified. In this sense of
the word, I think we may allow, that there are several
conditions of justification.
“Good works follow this faith, but cannot go before it.
Much less can sanctification; which implies a continued
course of good works, springing from holiness of heart.”
Yet such a course is, without doubt, absolutely necessary
to our continuance in a state of justification.
“It is allowed, that repentance and “fruits meet for repent
ance’ go before faith. Repentance absolutely must go before
428 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
faith; fruits meet for it, if there be opportunity. By repentance
I mean conviction of sin, producing real desires and sincere
resolutions of amendment; and by “fruits meet for repentance,’
forgiving our brother, ceasing from evil, doing good, using the
ordinances of God, and, in general, obeying him according to
the measureof grace which we have received. But these I cannot
as yet term good works, because they do not spring from faith
and the love of God.” Although the same works are then
good, when they are performed by “those who have believed.”
“Faith, in general, is a divine supernatural exeyxos (evidence
or conviction) of things not seen, not discoverable by our
bodily senses, as being either past, future, or spiritual.
Justifying faith implies not only a divine exeyxos, that God
was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, but a sure
trust and confidence that Christ died for my sins, that he
loved me, and gave himself for me. And the moment a
penitent sinner thus believes, God pardons and absolves him.”
I say, a penitent sinner; because justifying faith cannot
exist without previous repentance.
“Yet, although both repentance, and the fruits thereof, are
in some sense necessary before justification, neither the one
nor the other is necessary in the same sense, or in the same
degree, with faith. Not in the same degree. For in whatever
moment a man believes, (in the Christian sense of the word,)
he is justified. But it is not so at whatever moment he
repents, or brings forth any, or all, the fruits of repentance.
Consequently, none of these are necessary to justification, in
the same degree with faith.
“Nor in the same sense. For none of these has so direct,
immediate a relation to justification as faith. This is proxi
mately necessary thereto; repentance remotely, as it is neces
sary to faith.” (So the error of the press is to be corrected.)
“And the fruits of repentance still more remotely, as they are
necessary to the increase or continuance of repentance. And
even in this sense, they are only necessary on supposition,—
if there be time and opportunity for them. For in many
instances there is not; but God cuts short his work, and
faith prevents the fruits of repentance.”
2. Thus far I believe we are nearly agreed. But on those
words, “Far other qualifications are required, in order to our
standing before God in glory, than were required in order to his
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 429
giving us faith and pardon; in order to this, nothing is indis
pensably required, but repentance, or conviction of sin; but in
order to the other, it is indispensably required, that we be fully
cleansed from all sin;” you remark, “Here, I apprehend, are
two great mistakes: (1) You make too little necessary before
pardon. (2.) Too much afterward. You confine repentance
within too narrow limits, and extend holiness beyond its just
bounds.
“First. By repentance you mean only conviction of sin.
But this is a very partial account of it. Every child that has
learned his Catechism can tell, that forsaking of sin is included
in it; living in obedience to God’s will, when there is oppor
tunity; and even when there is not, a sincere desire and pur
pose to do so, and a faith in God’s mercies thrbugh Christ
Jesus.” (Page 92.)
I had said, “In order to God’s giving us faith and pardon,
nothing is indispensably required but repentance,” that is,
“conviction of sin, producing real desires and sincere resolu
tions of amendment.” But you “apprehend that I am here
in a great mistake;” that I give a “very partial account of
repentance;” that I ought to “include therein a sincere desire
and purpose” to obey God. I do: I have said so expressly;—
and “living in obedience to God’s will, when there is oppor
tunity.” Very well; but I here speak of what is indispensably
required, that is, whether there is opportunity of actual obedi
ence or no;—“and a faith in God’s mercies through Christ
Jesus.” A very great mistake indeed!—my not including
faith in that repentance which I say is indispensably required
in order to faith !
“Secondly. You make sinless perfection necessary after jus
tification, in order to make us meet for glory.” And who does
not? Indeed men do not agree in the time. Some believe it
is attained before death; some, in the article of death; some,
in an after-state, in the Mystic or the Popish purgatory. But
all writers, whom I have ever seen till now, (the Romish them
selves not excepted,) agree, that we must be “fully cleansed
from all sin” before we can enter into glory.
3. After what has already been allowed, I cannot think it
needful to dispute farther, on the head of justification. Rather
suffer me to close this part of our debate, by transcribing what
I assent to, from that clear recapitulation of your sentiments
which you have given in pages 45 and 46:
“(1.) Justification is the act of God, pardoning our sins,
430 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
and receiving us again to his favour. This was free in him,
because undeserved by us; undeserved, because we had trans
gressed his law, and could not, nor even can now, perfectly
fulfil it.
“(2.) We cannot, therefore, be justified by our works; be
cause this would be, to be justified by some merit of our own.
Much less can we be justified by an external show of religion,
or by any superstitious observances.
“(3.) The life and death of our Lord is the sole merito
rious cause of this mercy, which must be firmly believed and
trusted in by us. Our faith therefore in him, though not more
meritorious than any other of our actions, yet has a nearer
relation to the promises of pardon through him, and is the
mean and instrument whereby we embrace and receive them.
“(4.) True faith must be lively and productive of good works,
which are its proper fruits, the marks whereby it is known.
“(5.) Works really good are such as are commanded by
God, (springing from faith,) done by the aid of his Holy.
Spirit, with good designs, and to good ends. These may be
considered as internal or external.
“(6.) The inward ones, such as hope, trust, fear, and love
of God and our neighbour, (which may be more properly
termed good dispositions, and [are branches of] sanctification,)
must always be joined with faith, and consequently be condi
tions present in justification, though they are not the means
or instruments of receiving it.
“(7.) The outward,” (which are more properly termed good
works,) “though there be no immediate opportunity of prac
tising them, and therefore a sincere desire and resolution to
perform them be sufficient for the present; yet must follow
after as soon as occasion offers, and will then be necessary
conditions of preserving our justification.
“(8.) There is a justification conveyed to us in our baptism,
or, properly, this state is then begun. But, should we fall
into sins, we cannot regain it without true faith and repent
ance, which implies (as its fruits) a forsaking of our sins, and
amendment of our whole life.”
I have only one circumstance farther to add, namely, that I
am not newly convinced of these things. For this is the doc
trine which I have continually taught for eight or nine years
last past; only, I abstained from the word condition, perhaps
more scrupulously than was needful.
4. With regard to the consequences of my teaching this doc
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 431
trine, I desire any who will not account it lost labour, to
consult with his own eyes, seriously and in the fear of God,
the Third and Fourth Journals. And if he pleases, he may
farther read over and compare, from the 395th to the 397th
page of my answer; with your reply, from the one hundred
and first inclusive, to the one hundred and fourth page.
Among the consequences you reckoned, (in your Remarks,)
besides, “introducing predestination, confusion, presump
tion, and despair, many very shocking instances of all
which’” (your words are) “you give us among your fol
lowers.” (Pages 52, 55.) I answered, “You should have
specified a few of those instances, at least the pages where
they occur. (Suppose, only three of each sort, out of any or
all the Four Journals.) Till this is done, I can look upon
this assertion as no other than a flourish of your pen.”
Upon this you exclaim: (Page 111 :) “I must beg the
reader to observe your method of citing my words. Many in
stances of omissions he has had already. But here is such a
one, as I believe few controversies can parallel. Would not any
one imagine from the view of these words, [Predestination, con
fusion, presumption, and despair,] that they occurred alltogether
in page fifty-two, of my Remarks, and that I observed nothing
farther concerning this point? Could it be thought that any
thing intervened between the page referred to, and the last sen
tence? And yet so it is, that near three pages intervene !”
Ha! do near three pages intervene ! Prodigious indeed! “And
this is called an answer !” So it is, for want of a better.
“Your business was to show, that the Calvinistical motions
have not prevailed among the Methodists, or that they were
no consequences of unconditional justification.” No, Sir, it
was not my business to show this. It was not my business
to prove the negative; but yours, to prove the affirmative.
Mr. Whitefield is himself a Calvinist. Such therefore
doubtless are many of his followers. But Calvinism has not
prevailed at all among any other of the Methodists, (so
called,) nor is it to this day any consequence of unconditional
justification, in the manner wherein I preach it.
5. You next “take the pains to lay before the reader an
instance or two of confusion,” &c. The first I read thus:
“While we were at the room, Mrs. J., sitting at home, took
the Bible to read; but on a sudden threw it away, saying, “I am
432 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
good enough. I will never read or pray more. She was in
the same mind when I came; often repeating, “I used to
think I was full of sin, and that I sinned in every thing I
did. But now I know better; I am a good Christian; I
never did any harm in my life; I do not desire to be any
better than I am. She spake many things to the same
effect, plainly showing that the spirit of pride and of lies had
the full dominion over her. I asked, “Do you desire to be
healed?” She said, ‘I am whole.’ ‘But do you desire to be
saved ?” She replied, ‘I am saved, Iail nothing, I am happy.”
“This is one of the fruits of the present salvation and
sinless perfection taught by you among the weak and igno
rant.” (Page 11.)
I should wonder if the scarecrow of sinless perfection was
not brought in some way or other. But to the point: You
here repeat a relation as from me, and that “in confirmation,”
you say, “ of your own veracity,” and yet leave out both the
beginning of that relation, part of the middle, and the end of it.
I begin thus: “Sun. 11.—I met with a surprising instance
of the power of the devil.” (Vol. I. p. 295.) These words,
of all others, should not have been left out, being a key to all
that follows. In the middle of the relation, immediately
after the words, “I am happy,” I add, “Yet it was easy to
discern she was in the most violent agony both of body and
mind; sweating exceedingly, notwithstanding the severe
frost, and not continuing in the same posture a moment: ”—
A plain proof that this was no instance of presumption, nor
a natural fruit of any teaching whatever.
It ends thus: “About a quarter before six the next morn
ing, after lying quiet a while, she broke out, “Peace be unto
thee” (her husband); ‘peace be unto this house; the peace
of God is come to my soul; I know that my Redeemer liveth.’
And for several days her mouth was filled with his praise,
and her talk was wholly of his wondrous works.” Had not
these words been left out, neither could this have passed for
an instance of despair. Though still I do not know but it
might have stood for an instance of confusion, &c.
I must not forget that this was cited at first as a proof of my
enthusiasm; as an instance of a private revelation, “which,”
you say, “I seem to pay great credit to,—representing the con
jectures of a woman, whose brain appears to have been too much
FARTHER EXPLAIN ED. 433
heated, as if they had been owing to a particular and miraculous
spirit of prophecy.” (Remarks, p. 64.) I answered, “Descant,
Sir, as you please on this enthusiasm; on the credit I paid to
this private revelation; and my representing the conjectures
of this brain-sick woman as owing to a miraculous power of
the Spirit of prophecy: And when you have done, I will
desire you to read the passage once more; where you will find
my express words are, introducing this account: ‘Sun. 11. I
met with a surprising instance of the power of the devil.”
Such was the credit I paid to this revelation 1 All which I
ascribe to the Spirit of God is, the enabling her to strive
against the power of the devil, and at length restoring peace
to her soul.” (Answer, page 408.)
I was in hopes you had done with this instance. But I am
disappointed: For in your Second Letter I read thus:
“The instances of enthusiasm and presumption which your
last Journal had furnished me with remain now to be reviewed.
The first was of a private revelation, which you appeared to pay
great credit to. You had represented everything the woman
had spoke in her agony as coming to pass.” (Page 130.) But I
had not represented anythingshe spoke then, whether it came to
pass or no, as coming from the Spirit of God, but from the devil.
You say, “When I read this first, I was amazed, and impa
tient to look again into your Journal. But I had no sooner
done this, but I was still more astonished. For you have very
grievously misrepresented the case.” If I have, then I will
bear the blame; but if not, it will light on your head.
“It is not this account which you had thus introduced;
but another, and a very different one, of what happened a day
or two before. Sunday, you mention her as being guilty of
gross presumption, which you attribute to the power of the
devil. But on Monday and Tuesday the opposite revelations
happened, which you relate without the least mark of diffidence
or blame.” (Ibid. p. 131.)
I am grieved that you constrain me to say any more. In the
sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh pages of the last Journal,” I gave
account of Mrs. Jones, which I term “a surprising instance of
the power of the devil.” It includes the occurrences of three
days. This you brought as a proof of my enthusiasm. I answer,
* Vol. L. pp. 295, 296, of the present Edition.—EDIT.
VOL. VIII.
434 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
“The very words that introduce this account,” prove it is no
instance of enthusiasm; meaning by this account, (as I suppose
is plain to every reader,) the following account of Mrs. Jones.
You reply, “It is not this account, which you had thus intro
duced, but another, and a very different one, of what hap
pened a day or two before.” Sir, it is the whole account of
Mrs. Jones which I thus introduce; and not another, not a
very different one. And I attribute the agony which she
(Mrs. Jones) was in, and most of the words which she spoke,
both on Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday, not to the Spirit of
God, but to the power of the devil.
6. The next instance which you relate as an instance of
despair, is that of a young woman of Kingswood; which you
break off with, “Take me away, &c.” (Page 112.) But why
did you not decipher that “&c.”? Why did you not add the
rest of the paragraph? Because it would have spoiled your
whole argument. It would have shown what the end of the
Lord was in permitting that severe visitation. The words are,
“We interrupted her by calling again upon God, on which
she sunk down as before, (as one asleep,) and another young
woman began to roar as loud as she had done. My brother now
came in, it being about nine o’clock. We continued in prayer
till past eleven; when God in a moment spoke peace into the
soul, first, of the first tormented, and then of the other. And
they both joined in singing praises to Him who had stilled the
enemy and the avenger.” (Vol. I. p. 235.)
7. I am sorry to find you still affirm, that, with regard to the
Lord’s supper also, I “advance many injudicious, false, and
dangerous things. Such as, (1.) That, “a man ought to com
municate, without a sure trust in God’s mercy through
Christ.” (Page 117.) You mark these as my words; but I
know them not. (2) “That there is no previous preparation
indispensably necessary, but a desire to receive whatsoever God
pleases to give.” But I include abundantly more in that desire
than you seem to apprehend; even a willingness to know and do
the whole will of God. (3) “That no fitness is required at the
time of communicating,” (I recite the whole sentence,) “but a
sense of our state, of our utter sinfulness and helplessness |
Every one who knows he is fit for hell, being just fit to come
to Christ, in this, as well as in all other ways of his appoint
ment.” But neither can this sense of our utter sinfulness and
FARTHER EXPLAIN ED. 435
helplessness subsist, without earnest desires of universal holi
mess. “There was another passage,” you say, “which you
chose to omit.” (Page 118.) Which this was, I do not under
stand. Nor do I perceive any one of these dreadful positions
(as you style them) to be contrary to the word of God.
8. You will likewise, at all hazards, stand your ground, as to
the charge of stoical insensibility. I answered before, “How do
you support the charge? Why thus: ‘You say, The servants
of God suffer nothing.’ And can you possibly misunderstand
these words, if you read those that immediately follow 2–' His
body was well-nigh torn asunder with pain. But God made all
his bed in his sickness. So that he was continually giving thanks
to God, and making his boast of his praise.” (Page 405.)
You reply, “If you meant no more than that a man under
the sharpest pains may be thankful to God, why did you call
this a strange truth?” (Page 118.) Because I think it is so. I
think it exceeding strange, that one in such a degree of pain
should be continually giving thanks to God. Not that I sup
pose him “insensible of his torments.” “His body,” I say,
“was well-nigh torn asunder with pain.” But the loveof God so
abundantly overbalanced all pain, that it was as nothing to him.
“The next instance is as follows: One told you, ‘Sir, I
thought last week there could be no such rest as you describe;
none in this world wherein we should be so free as not to desire
ease in pain. But God has taught me better. For on Friday
and Saturday, when I was in the strongest pain, I never once
had one moment's desire of ease.” Add, “But only that
the will of God might be done.”
Neither has this any resemblance of “stoical insensibility.”
I never supposed that this person did not feel pain; (nor in
deed that there is any state on earth wherein we shall not feel
it;) but that her soul was filled with the love of God, and
thankfully resigned to his will.
“Another instance is taken from one of your hymns, where
are these lines:-(Page 119.)
“Doom, if thou canst, to endless pains,
And drive me from thy face:’”
(Add,
“But if thy stronger love constrains,
Let me be saved by grace.”)
“This I thought the height of insensibility, extravagance, and
436 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
presumption. You see nothing of these in it. And yet you
explain yourself thus: ‘If thou canst deny thyself, if thou
canst forget to be gracious, if thou canst cease to be truth and
love: All which, in my opinion, is fixing the charge most
strongly upon you. For the supposition that Christ can do
these things”—Are you in earnest, Sir? Are you really
ignorant, that expressions of this kind do not suppose he can,
but quite the reverse? that they are one of the strongest
forms of obtestation, of adjuring God to show mercy, by all
his grace, and truth, and love? So far is this also from
proving the charge of “stoical insensibility.”
III. 1. I come now to consider the point of Church com
munion, of which you have spoke in the beginning of your
Treatise. In the entrance, you say, “We teach no other doc
trine than has always been taught in our Church. Our senti
ments concerning justification are reconcilable to our Articles,
Homilies, and Service. This I apprehend several of the
Methodists have been convinced of, and have therefore left our
communion entirely. You give us more instances than one of
this in your last Journal.” (Page 2.) No, not one. Nor did
I ever yet know one man who “therefore left the communion
of the Church,” because he was convinced that either her
Articles, Homilies, or Liturgy, opposed his sentiments con
cerning justification. Poor Mr. St— and Mr. Simpson were
induced to leave it by reasons of quite another kind.
You add, “We cannot wonder that some Methodists have
withdrawn from her, while they have been used to hear doc
trines which they must have been sensible have no place in her
Articles and Service.” So far from it, that all I know of them
are deeply sensible, the “doctrines they have been used to
hear” daily, are no other than the genuine doctrines of the
Church, as expressed both in her Articles and Service.
2. But our present question turns not on doctrine but dis
cipline. “My first business,” you say, “is to consider some
very lax notions of Church communion which I find in your last
Journal. Vol.I. p.262, you say, “Our Twentieth Article defines
a true Church, a congregation of faithful people, wherein the
true word of God is preached, and the sacraments duly admi
nistered.” (Page 3.) The use I would willingly make of this
definition, (which, observe, is not mine, be it good or bad,) is
to stop the boasting of ungodly men, by cutting off their pre
FARTHER EXPLAINED, 437
tence to call themselves of the Church. But you think they
may call themselves so still. Then let them. I will not con
tend about it.
But you cannot infer from hence, that my notions of Church
communion are either lax or otherwise. The definition which
I occasionally cite shows nothing of my sentiments on that
head. And for anything which occurs in this page, they may
be strict or loose, right or wrong.
You add, “It will be requisite, in order to approve yourself
a Minister of our Church, that you follow her rules and orders;
that you constantly conform to the method of worship she has
prescribed, and study to promote her peace.” (Page 5.) All
this is good and fit to be done. But it properly belongs to
the following question:
“What led you into such very loose notions of Church com
munion, I imagine, might be, your being conscious to yourself,
that, according to the strict, just, account of the Church of
England, you could not, with any grace, maintain your pre
tensions to belong still to her.” Sir, I have never told you
yet what my notions of Church communion are. They may
be wrong, or they may be right, for all you know. Therefore,
when you are first supposing that I have told you my notions,
and them assigning the reasons of them, what can be said, but
that you imagine the whole matter?
3. How far I have acted agreeably to the rules and orders
of our Church, is a farther question. You think I have acted
contrary thereto, First, by using extemporary prayer in public.
“The Church,” you say, “has strongly declared her mind on
this point, by appointing her excellent Liturgy, which you
have solemnly promised to use, and no other.” I know not
when or where. “And whoever does not worship God in the
manner she prescribes must be supposed to slight and contemn
her offices and rules; and therefore can be no more worthy to
be called her Minister.” (Ibid. p. 7.)
I do not “slight or contemn the offices” of the Church: I
esteem them very highly. And yet I do not, at all times, wor
ship God, even in public, in the very terms of those offices.
Nor yet do I knowingly “slight or contemn her rules:” For
it is not clear to my apprehension, that she has any rule which
forbids using extemporary prayer, suppose between the Morning
and Evening Service. And if I am “not worthy to be called
438 PRINCIPLES OF A METILODIST
her Minister,” (which I dare by no means affirm myself to
be,) yet her Minister I am, and must always be, unless I should
be judicially deposed from my ministry.
Your Second argument is this: “If you suppose the Scrip
ture enjoins you to use extemporary prayer, then you must
suppose our Liturgy to be inconsistent with Scripture; and,
consequently, unlawful to be used.” That does not follow ;
unless I supposed the Scripture to enjoin, to use extemporary
prayer and no other. Then it would follow, that a form of
prayer was inconsistent with Scripture. But this I never did
suppose.
Your Third argument is to this effect: “You act contrary
to the rule of the Church. Allow she is in the wrong; yet,
while you break her rule, how do you act as her Minister?”
It ought to be expressed, “How are you her Minister?” for
the conclusion to be proved is, that I am not her Minister.
I answer, (1.) I am not convinced, as I observed before,
that I do hereby break her rule. (2.) If I did, yet should I
not cease to be her Minister, unless I were formally deprived.
(3.) I now actually do continue in her communion, and hope
that I always shall.
4. You object farther, that I “disobey the governors of the
Church.” I answer, I both do, and will, obey them in all things,
where I do not apprehend there is some particular law of God
to the contrary. “Here,” you say, “you confess that in some
things you do not, and cannot obey your governors.” (Page 8.)
Did I confess this? Then I spoke rashly and foolishly; for I
granted more than I can make good. I do certainly apprehend
that the law of God requires me, both to preach, and, some
times, to pray extempore. Yet I do not know that I disobey
the governors of the Church herein: For I do not know that
they have forbidden me to do either.
But your “behaviour and method of teaching is irregular.
Have you any warrant from Scripture for preaching” up and
down thus? I think I have; I think God hath called me to
this work “by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery,”
which directs me how to obey that general command, “While
we have time, let us do good unto all men.”
“But we ought to do this agreeably to our respective situa
tions, and not break in upon each other's provinces. Every
private man may take upon himself the office of a Magistrate
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 439an
and quote this text as justly as you have done.” (Page 9.) No;
the private man is not called to the office of a Magistrate; but
I am to the office of a Preacher. “You was, indeed, authorized
to preach the gospel; but it was in the congregation to which
you should be lawfully appointed. Whereas you have many
years preached in places whereunto you was not lawfully
appointed; nay, which were entrusted to others, who neither
wanted nor desired your assistance.”
Many of them wanted it enough, whether they desired it or
no. But I shall not now debate that point. I rather follow
you to the First Part of the “Farther Appeal,” where this
objection is considered.
5. “Our Church,” it was said, “has provided against this
preaching up and down, in the ordination of a Priest, by
expressly limiting the exercise of the powers then conferred
upon him to the congregation where he shall be lawfully
appointed thereunto.”
I answered, (1.) “Your argument proves too much. If it
be allowed just as you propose it, it proves that no Priest, has
authority either to preach or administer the sacrament in any
other than his own congregation.” (Farther Appeal, p. 117.)
You reply, “Is there no difference between a thing’s being
done occasionally, and its being done for years together?” Yes,
a great one; and more inconveniences may arise from the latter
than from the former. But this is all wide : It does not touch
the point. Still, if our Church does expressly limit the excrcise
of the sacerdotal powers to that congregation whereunto each
Priest shall be appointed, this precludes him from exercising
those powers at all, in any other than that congregation.
I answered, (2.) “Had the powers conferred been so limited
when I was ordained Priest, my ordination would have signified
just nothing. For I was not appointed to any congregation at
all; but was ordained as a member of that ‘College of Divines,”
(so our Statutes express it,) ‘founded to overturn all heresies,
and defend the catholic faith.’”
You reply, “I presume it was expected you should either
continue at your College, or enter upon some regular cure.”
Perhaps so; but I must still insist, that if my sacerdotal powers
had been then expressly limited to that congregation whereunto
I should be appointed, my ordination would have signified
nothing. I mean, I could never, in virtue of that ordination,
440 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
have exercised those powers at all; seeing I never was appointed
to any single congregation, at least not till I went to Georgia.
I answered, (3.) “For many years after I was ordained
Priest, this limitation was never heard of. I heard not one
syllable of it, by way of objection to my preaching up and
down in Oxford or London, or the parts adjacent; in Glouces
tershire or Worcestershire; in Lancashire, Yorkshire, or
Lincolnshire. Nor did the strictest disciplinarian scruple
suffering me to exercise those powers wherever I came.”
You reply, “There is great difference between preaching
occasionally, with the leave of the incumbents, and doing it
constantly without their leave.” I grant there is; and there
are objections to the latter, which do not reach the former case.
But they do not belong to this head. They do not in the least
affect this consequence,—“If every Priest, when ordained, is
expressly limited, touching the exercise of the power then
received, to that congregation to which he shall be appointed;
then is he precluded by this express limitation from preaching,
with or without the incumbent’s leave, in any other congrega
tion whatever.”
I answered, (4) “Is it not, in fact, universally allowed, that
every Priest, as such, has a power, in virtue of his ordination,
to preach in any congregation, where the Curate desires his
assistance?”
You reply to this by what you judge a parallel case. But it
does not touch the restriction in question. Either this does, or
does not, expressly limit the exercise of the powers conferred
upon a Priest in his ordination to that congregation whereunto
he shall be appointed. If it does not, I am not condemned by
this, however faulty I may be on a thousand other accounts.
If it does, then is every Priest condemned whoever preaches
out of the congregation to which he is appointed.
Your parallel case is this: “Because a man does not offend
against the law of the land, when I prevail upon him to teach
my children;” therefore “he is impowered to seize” (read, he
does not offend against the law of the land in seizing) “an apart
ment in my house, and against my will and approbation to conti
nue therein, and to direct and dictate to my family!” (Page 11.)
An exact parallel indeed! When, therefore, I came to live in
St. Luke's parish, was it just the same thing as if I had seized
an apartment in Dr. Buckley's house? And was the continuing
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 441
therein against his will and approbation (supposing it were so)
precisely the same, as if I had continued in his house, whether
he would or no? Is the one exactly the same offence against
the law of the land as the other? Once more. Is the warning
sinners in Moorfields to flee from the wrath to come, the very
same with directing the Doctor’s family under his own roof?
I should not have answered this, but that I was afraid you
would conclude it was unanswerable.
I answered the former objector, (5.) “Before those words
which you suppose to imply such a restraint, were those
spoken without any restraint or limitation at all, which I
apprehend to convey an indelible character, ‘Receive the Holy
Ghost, for the office and work of a Priest in the church of
God, now committed unto thee by the imposition of our
hands.’” You reply, “The question is not, whether you are
in orders or not.” (Ibid. p. 12.) I am glad to hear it. I really
thought it was. “But whether you have acted suitably to the
directions or rules of the Church of England.” Not suitably
to that rule, if it were strictly to be interpreted, of preaching
only in a single congregation. But I have given my reasons
why I think it cannot be so interpreted. And those reasons
I do not see that you have invalidated.
I would only add, If I am in orders, if I am a Minister still,
and yet not a Minister of the Church of England, of what
Church am I a Minister? Whoever is a Minister at all is a
Minister of some particular Church. Neither can he cease to
be a Minister of that Church, till he is cast out of it by a
judicial sentence. Till, therefore, I am so cast out, (which I
trust will never be,) I must style myself a Minister of the
Church of England.
6. Your next objection is, “You not only erect Bands,
which, after the Moravians, you call the United Society, but
also give out tickets to those that continue therein.” These
Bands, you think, “have had very bad consequences, as was
to be expected, when weak people are made leaders of their
brethren, and are set upon expounding Scripture.” (Ibid.)
You are in some mistakes here. For, (1.) The Bands are not
called the United Society.(2.) The United Society was originally
so called, not after the Moravians, but because it consisted of
several smaller societies united together. (3.) Neither the Bands
nor the leaders of them, as such, are “set upon expounding
Scripture.” (4.) The good consequences of their meeting
442 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
together in Bands, I know; but the very bad consequences,
I know not.
When any members of these, or of the United Society, are
proved to live in known sin, we then mark and avoid them; we
separate ourselves from every one that walks disorderly. Some
times, if the case be judged infectious, (though rarely,) this is
openly declared. And this you style “excommunication;” and
say, “Does not every one see a separate ecclesiastical society
or communion?” (Page 13.) No. This society does not sepa
rate from the communion of the rest of the Church of England.
They continue steadfastly with them, both “in the apostolical
doctrine, and in the breaking of bread, and in prayers.” (Which
neither Mr. St— nor Mr. Simpson does, nor the gentleman
who writes to you in favour of the Moravians, who also writes
pressingly to me to separate myself from the Church.) A
society “over which you had appointed yourself a governor.”
No: so far as I governed them, it was at their own entreaty.
“And took upon you all the spiritual authority which the
very highest Church Governor could claim.” What! at Kings
wood, in February, 1740–1? Not so. I took upon me no
other authority (then and there at least) than any Steward of
a society exerts by the consent of the other members. I did
neither more nor less than declare, that they who had broken
our rules were no longer of our society.
“Can you pretend that you received this authority from our
Church?” Not by ordination; for I did not exert it as a
Priest; but as one whom that society had voluntarily chosen
to be at the head of them. “Or that you exercised it in sub
jection or subordination to her lawful Governors?” I think
so; I am sure I did not exercise it in any designed opposition to
them. “Did you ever think proper to consult or advise with
them, about fixing the terms of your communion?” If you
mean, about fixing the rules of admitting or excluding from
our society, I never did think it either needful or proper.
Nor do I at this day.
“How then will you vindicate all these powers?” All these
are, “declaring those are no longer of our society.” “Here is
a manifest congregation. Either it belonged to the Church of
England, or not. If it did not, you set up a separate commu
nion against her. And how then are you injured, in being
thought to have withdrawn from her?” I have nothing to do
with this. The antecedent is false: Therefore the consequent
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 443
falls of course. “If it did belong to the Church, show
where the Church gave you such authority of controlling and
regulating it?” Authority of putting disorderly members
out of that society? The society itself gave me that autho
rity. “What private Clergyman can plead her commission
to be thus a Judge and Ordinary, even in his own parish?”
Any Clergyman or layman, without pleading her commis
sion, may be thus a Judge and Ordinary. “Are not these
powers inherent in her Governors, and committed to the
higher order of her Clergy?” No; not the power of ex
cluding members from a private society, -unless on supposi
tion of some such rule as ours is, viz., “That if any man sepa
rate from the Church, he is no longer a member of our society.”
7. But you have more proof yet: “The Grand Jury in
Georgia found, that you had called yourself Ordinary of Savan
nah. Nor was this fact contradicted even by those of the Jury
who, you say, wrote in your favour: So that it appears, you have
long had an inclination to be independent and uncontrolled.”
This argument ought to be good; for it is far fetched. The
plain case was this: That Grand Jury did assert, that, in Mr.
Causton’s hearing, I had called myself Ordinary of Savannah.
The minority of the Jury, in their letter to the Trustees, refuted
the other allegations particularly; but thought this so idle an
one, that they did not deign to give it any farther reply, than,
“As to the eighth bill we are in doubt, as not well know
ing the meaning of the word Ordinary.” See Wol. I. p. 59.
You add, “I appeal to any reasonable man, whether you have
not acted as an Ordinary, nay, a Bishop, in Kingswood.” If
you mean, in “declaring those disorderly members were no
longer of that society;” I admit your appeal, whether I therein
acted as a Bishop, or as any Steward of a society may. “Nay,
you have gone far beyond the generality of the Dissenters them
selves; who do not commit the power of excommunication, and
appointing to preach,” (that is anotherquestion,) “to the hands of
any private Minister.” The power of excommunication. True;
but this was not excommunication, but a quite different thing.
How far, in what circumstances, and in what sense, I have
“appointed men to preach,” I have explained at large in the
Third Part of the “Farther Appeal.” But I wait for farther
light; and am ready to consider, as I am able, whatever shall
be replied to what is there advanced.
444 PRINCIPLES OF A METhiODIST
8. Your general conclusion is, “Whatever your pretences
or professions may be, you can be looked upon by serious and
impartial persons, not as a member, much less a Minister, of
the Church of England, but as no other than an enemy to her
constitution, worship, and doctrine, raising divisions and dis
turbances in her communion.” (Ibid. p. 76.) “And yet you
say, ‘I cannot have greater regard to her rules.” “I dare
not renounce communion with her.’” (Ibid. p. 15.)
I do say so still. I cannot have a greater regard to any
human rules, than to follow them in all things, unless where
I apprehend there is a divine rule to the contrary. I dare
not renounce communion with the Church of England. As
a Minister, I teach her doctrines; I use her offices; I conform
to her Rubrics; I suffer reproach for my attachment to her.
As a private member, I hold her doctrines; I join in her
offices, in prayer, in hearing, in communicating. I expect every
reasonable man, touching these facts, to believe hisown eyes and
ears. But if these facts are so, how dare any man of common
sense charge me with renouncing the Church of England?
9. Use ever so many exaggerations, still the whole of this
matter is, (1.) I often use extemporary prayer. (2.) Wherever
I can, I preach the gospel. (3.) Those who desire to live
the gospel, I advise how to watch over each other, and to put
from them such as walk disorderly. Now, whether these things
are, on other considerations, right or wrong, this single point I
must still insist on : “All this does not prove, either that I
am no member, or that I am no Minister, of the Church of
England. Nay, nothing can prove, I am no member of the
Church, till I either am excommunicated, or renounce her
communion, and no longer join in her doctrine, and in the
breaking of bread, and in prayer. Nor can anything prove,
I am no Minister of the Church, till I either am deposed
from my ministry, or voluntarily renounce her, and wholly
cease to teach her doctrines, use her offices, and obey her
Rubrics for conscience sake.
However, I grant, that whatsoever is “urged on this head
deserves my most serious consideration.” And whensoever I
am convinced, that by taking any methods, more or less dif
ferent from those I now take, I may better “consult the
honour of religion, and be able to do more good in the
world,” by the grace of God I shall not persist in these one
hour, but instantly choose the more excellent way.
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 445
IV. 1. What you urge on the head of enthusiasm also, I
think, “deserves my most serious consideration.” You may
add, “and presumption.” I let it drop once more; because I
do not love tautology; and because I look upon presumption
to be essential to enthusiasm, and, consequently, contained
therein. I will therefore weigh what you advance concerning
it, and explain myself something more at large.
“I am to examine,” you say, “how far you have cleared your
self of enthusiasm. . My account of this you set down, making
as many alterations and omissions as there are lines.” (Page
120.) Perhaps more; for Inever designed to recite the whole,
but only the material part of it. “If you did not wholly ap
prove of it, why would you not let me know what you disliked
in it?” Because I do not love many words. Therefore when
the argument stood thus, “He that does this is an enthusiast;
but you do this; ” I was generally content with answering
the second proposition, and leaving the first as I found it.
“I laid this charge against you and the Methodists in gene
ral; between you every part of the character has been verified.”
I answer for one; let the rest answer for themselves, if they
have not better employment.
That the question between us may be the more fully under
stood, I shall briefly compare together, (1.) Your remarks.
(2.) My answer. (3.) Your reply; though still I cannot
promise to repeat your words at length.
2. You remark, “Though you would be thought an enemy
to enthusiasm and presumption, yet in both you are far from
being inferior to the Moravians, or indeed to any others.”
(Page 60.) Strong assertions! Not inferior to any others? not
to the French Prophets, or John of Leyden “(1.) Enthu
siasm is a false persuasion of an extraordinary divine assist
ance, which leads men to such conduct as is only to be justified
by the supposition of such assistance.” I answer, “Before
this touches me, you are to prove (which I conceive you have
not done yet) that my conduct is such as is only to be justified
by the supposition of such assistance.” (Page 406.) You reply,
“This, I think, is proved in the preceding tract.” (Page 120.)
I think not. Let men of candour judge. Yet I am persuaded,
there was such an assistance at some times. You have also
to prove, that this was a false persuasion.
You remark, (2) “An enthusiast is, then, sincere, but mis
446 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
taken.” (Page 61.) I answered, “That I am mistaken remains
to be proved.” You reply, “The world must judge.” Agreed,
if by the world you mean men of reason and religion.
You remark, (3) “His intentions must be good; but his
actions will be most abominable.” I answered, “What actions
of mine are most abominable?” You reply, “The world must
be judge, whether your public actions have not been, in many
respects, abominable.” I am glad the charge softens. I hope
by and by you will think they are only abominable in some
respects.
You remark, (4) “Instead of making the word of God the
rule of his actions, he follows only secret persuasion or
impulse.” I answered: “I have declared again and again,
that I make the word of God the rule of all my actions; and
that I no more follow any secret impulse instead thereof, than
I follow Mahomet or Confucius.” You reply: “You fall
again into your strain of boasting, as if declarations could have
any weight against facts; assert, that “you make the word of
God the rule of all your actions, and that I ‘perhaps do not
know many persons’”—(Page 121.) Stop, Sir: You are
stepping over one or two points which I have not done with.
You remark, (5) “Instead of judging of his spiritual estate
by the improvement of his heart, he rests only on ecstasies,”
&c. I answered: “Neither is this my case. I rest not on
them at all. I judge of my spiritual estate by the improve
ment of my heart and the tenor of my life conjointly.” To this
I do not perceive you reply one word. Herein, then, I am
not an enthusiast.
You remark, (6.) “He is very liable to err, not considering
things coolly and carefully.” I answered: “So indeed I am;
I find it every day more and more. But I do not yet find that
this is owing to my want of ‘considering things coolly and care
fully.” Perhaps you do not know many persons (excuse my
simplicity in speaking it) who more carefully consider every step
they take. Yet I know I am not cool or careful enough. May
God supply this and all my wants!” (Page 407.) You reply,
“Your private life I have nothing to do with;” and then enlarge
on my “method of consulting Scripture,” and of using lots;—of
both which by and by. But meantime, observe, this does not
affect the question: For I neither cast lots, nor use that method
at all, till I have considered things with all the care I can. So
FARTHER EXPLAIN ED. 447
that, be this right or wrong, it is no manner of proof that I do
not “carefully consider every step I take.”
But how little did I profit by begging your excuse, suppose I
had spoken a word unguardedly ! O Sir, you put me in mind
of him who said, “I know not how to show mercy!” You have
need never to fight but when you are sure to conquer; seeing
you are resolved neither to give nor take quarter.
You remark, (7) “He is very difficult to be convinced by
reason and argument, as he acts upon a supposed principle supe
rior to it,-the direction of God’s Spirit.” I answered, “I am
very difficult to be convinced by dry blows or hard names, but
not by reason or argument. At least that difficulty cannot
spring from the cause you mention: For I claim no other direc
tion of God’s Spirit than is common to all believers.”
You reply, (1.) “I fear this will not be easily reconcilable to
your past pretences and behaviour.” (Page 124.) I believe it
will; in particular, to what I speak of the light I received from
God in that important affair. (Vol. I. p. 46.) But as to the
directions, in general, of the Spirit of God, we very probably
differ in this: You apprehend those directions to be extraordi
nary, which I suppose to be common to all believers.
You remark, (8.) “Whoever opposes him will be charged
with resisting or rejecting the Spirit.” I answered, “What!
whoever opposes me, John Wesley? Do I charge every such
person with ‘rejecting the Spirit?” No more than I charge him
with robbing on the highway. Do I charge you with rejecting
the Spirit?” You reply, “You deny that you charge the
opposers with rejecting the Spirit, and affirm, that you never
said or thought that what you do is to be accounted the work
of God.” Here you blend different sentences together, which
I must consider apart, as they were written. And, first, where
do I charge you with rejecting the Spirit? If I charge who
ever opposes me with this, undoubtedly I charge you. If I
do not charge you, that proposition is false; I do not so charge
whoever opposes me. Your next words are, “You affirm that
you never said or thought that what you do is to be accounted
the work of God. If it be the work of God, you need not deny
the other point.” Yes, Sir; whether it be or no, I must still
deny that I ever charged you with rejecting the Spirit in
opposing me.
You remark, (9) “His own dreams must be regarded as
448 PRINCIPLES OF A METHOD1st
oracles.” I answered, “Whose? I desire neither my dreams
nor my waking thoughts may be regarded at all, unless just so
far as they agree with the oracles of God.” To this also you
make no reply.
You remark, (10.) “However wild his behaviour may be,
whatever he does is to be accounted the work of God.” It was
to this I answered, “I never said so of what I do; I never
thought so.” This answer was ill expressed. And I might
have foreseen you would hardly fail to make your advantage of
it. I must therefore explain myself upon it a little farther
You said, “An enthusiast accounts whatever he does to be the
work of God.” I should have said, “But I do not account
whatever I do to be the work of God.” What that is which I
do account his work will be considered by and by.
You remark, (11.) “He talks in the style of inspired persons.”
I answered, “No otherwise inspired than you are, if you love
God.” You reply, “The point was not, whether you are actu
ally inspired, but whether you have talked in the style of those
who were so.” (Page 126.) That was so much the point, that
if it were allowed, it would overturn your whole argument. For
if I was inspired, (in your sense,) you could not term that inspi
ration enthusiasm without blasphemy; but you again mistake
my words. The plain meaning of them is, that I talk in the
style of those persons who are “no otherwise inspired than you
are, if you love God.”
You remark, (12.) “He applies Scripture phrases to himself,
without attending to their original meaning, or once consider
ing the difference of times and circumstances.” (Page 62.) I
answered “ am not conscious of anything like this. I apply
no Scripture phrase either to myself or any other, without care
fully considering both the original meaning, and the secondary
sense, wherein, allowing for different times and circumstances,
it may be applied to ordinary Christians.” (Page 407.) You
reply, “This also you deny to have done; holding, however,
some secondary sense, (what it is you have not told us,) in
which Scripture phrases may be applied to ordinary Christians.”
I have largely told you what I mean by a secondary sense, in
the First Part of the “Farther Appeal.” You add: “Many
things which were truly written of the preaching of Christianity
at first, you have vainly applied to yourselves.” Sir, I am to
answer only for myself; as I will for that expression, “Behold
FARTHER EXPLAIN ED. 449
the day of the Lord is come; he is again visiting and redeem
ing his people !”
3. I come now to what you expatiate upon at large, as the
two grand instances of my enthusiasm. The first is plainly
this: At some rare times, when I have been in great distress
of soul, or in utter uncertainty how to act in an important
case which required a speedy determination, after using all
other means that occurred, I have cast lots, or opened the
Bible. And by this means I have been relieved from that
distress, or directed in that uncertainty.
Instances of this kind occur in pages 12, 14, 15, 28, and 88
of the third Journal; as also in pages 27, 28, and 80 of the
last Journal.” I desire any who would understand this matter
throughly, to read those passages as they stand at length.
As to the particular instances, I would observe, (1.) That
with regard to my first journey to Bristol, you should, in any
wise, have set down those words that preface the scriptures there
recited: “I was entreated, in the most pressing manner, to
come to Bristol without delay. This I was not at all forward
to do; and perhaps a little the less inclined to it, because of the
remarkable scriptures which offered, as often as we inquired,
touching the consequence of this removal; though whether this
was permitted only for the trial of our faith, God knoweth, and
the event will show.” From the scriptures afterwards recited,
some inferred that the event they apprehended was yet afar
off. I infer nothing at all. I still know not how to judge; but
leave the whole to God. This only I know, that the continual
expectation of death was then an unspeakable blessing to me;
that I did not dare, knowingly, to waste a moment, neither to
throw away one desire on earthly things; those words being
ever uppermost in my thoughts, and indeed frequently on my
tongue:
Ere long, when sovereign wisdom wills,
My soul an unknown path shall tread,
Shall strangely leave, who strangely fills
This frame, and waft me to the dead.
O, what is death? 'Tis life's last shore,
Where vanities are vain no more;
Where all pursuits their goal obtain,
And life is all re-touch'd again.
I observe, (2.) That in two other of those instances, (Vol
* Vol. I. pp. 163, 165, 176,231, 264, 307, of the present Edition.—EDIT.
VOL. VIII.
450 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
I. pp. 163, 165,) it is particularly mentioned, that “I was
troubled;” and that, by the seasonable application of those
scriptures, that trouble was entirely removed. The same bless
ing I received (so I must term it still) from the words set down
in page 231; and in a yet higher degree, from that exceeding
apposite scripture mentioned in Vol. I. page 307.
I observe, (3.) That at the times to which your other cita
tions refer, I was utterly uncertain how to act in points of great
importance, and such as required a speedy determination; and
that, by this means, my uncertainty was removed, and I went
on my way rejoicing. (Vol. I. pp. 163, 165, 264.)
My own experience, therefore, which you think should dis
courage me for the future from anything of this kind, does, on
the contrary, greatly encourage me herein; since I have found
much benefit, and no inconvenience; unless, perhaps, this be
one, that you “cannot acquit me of enthusiasm;” add, if you
please, and presumption.
But you ask, “Has God ever commanded us to do thus?” I
believe he has neither commanded nor forbidden it in Scripture.
But then remember, “that Scripture” (to use the words which
you cite from “our learned and judicious Hooker”) “is not
the only rule of all things, which, in this life, may be done by
men.” All I affirm concerning this is, that it may be done; and
that I have, in fact, received assistance and direction thereby.
4. I give the same answer to your assertion, that we are not
ordered in Scripture to decide any points in question by lots.
(Remarks, p. 123.) You allow, indeed, there are instances of this
in Scripture; but affirm, “These were miraculous; nor can we,
without presumption,” (a species of enthusiasm,) “apply this
method.” I want proof of this: Bring one plain text of Scrip
ture, and I am satisfied. “This, I apprehend, you learned
from the Moravians.” I did; though, it is true, Mr. White
field thought I went too far therein. “Instances of the same
occur in your Journals. I will mention only one. It being
debated, when you should go to Bristol, you say, ‘We at length
all agreed to decide it by lot. And by this it was determined I
should go.” (Vol. I. p. 176.) Is this your way of carefully con
sidering every step you take? Can there be greater rash
ness and extravagance? Reason is thus, in a manner, rendered
useless, prudence is set aside, and affairs of moment left to be
determined by chance!” (Remarks, p. 124.)
FARTriBR EXPLAINED. 451
So this you give as a genuine instance of my proceedings;
and, I suppose, of your own fairness and candour ! “We
agreed, at length, to decide it by lot.” True, at length; after
a debate of some hours; after carefully hearing and weighing
coolly all the reasons which could be alleged on either side; our
brethren still continuing the dispute, without any probability of
their coming to one conclusion, we, at length, (the night being
now far spent,) all agreed to this. “Can there begreater rashness
and extravagance?” I cannot but think there can. “Reason
1s thus, in a manner, rendered useless.” No; we had used it as
far as it could go; from Saturday, March 17, (when I received
the first letter,) to Wednesday,28, when the case was laid before
the society. “Prudence is set aside.” Not so: But the argu
ments here were so equal, that she saw not how to determine.
“And affairs of moment left to be determined by chance!”
By chance / What a blunder, then, is that, “The lot is cast
into the lap; but the whole disposal thereof is of the Lord!”
This, I firmly believe, is truth and reason, and will be to the
end of the world. And I therefore still subscribe to that decla
ration of the Moravian Church, laid before the whole body of
Divines in the University of Wirtemberg, and not by them
accounted enthusiasm: “We have a peculiar esteem for lots,
and accordingly use them, both in public and private, to decide
points of importance, when the reasons brought on each side
appear to be of equal weight. And we believe this to be then
the only way of wholly setting aside our own will, of acquit
ting ourselves of all blame, and clearly knowing what is the
will of God.” (Vol. I. p. 146.)
5. You next remarked several instances of my enthusiasm.
The first was that of Mrs. Jones. The next ran thus: “Again,
you say, “I expounded out of the fulness that was given me.’”
(Remarks, p. 64.) I answered, “I mean, I had then a fuller,
deeper sense of what I spoke than I ordinarily have.” (Page
409.) But if you still think, “it would have been more decent to
have said, ‘According to the best of my power and ability, with
God’s assistance, I expounded;’” I will say so another time.
With regard to the third instance of enthusiasm, youremarked,
“If you would not have us look on this as miraculous, there is
nothing in it worthy of being related.” (Remarks, p. 64.) I
answered, “It may be so. Let it pass, then, as a trifle not
worth relating; but still it is no proof of enthusiasm. For I
452 PRINCIPLES OF A METholoist
would not have you look upon it as miraculous, but as a signal
instance of God’s particular providence.” (Page 409.) How
friendly and generous is your reply l—“You seem ashamed of
it. I am glad you give this fooling up, and hope for the future
you will treat your readers better.” (Second Letter, p. 131.)
Sir, I am not ashamed of it; nor shall I ever give this fooling
up, till I give up the Bible. I still look upon this “as a signal
instance of God’s particular providence.” But “how is this con
sistent with yielding it to be a trifle?” (Ibid. p. 132.) My words
do not imply, that I yield it so to be. Being urged with the
dilemma, “Either this is related as miraculous,” (and then it is
enthusiasm,) “ or it is not worth relating; ” I answered, (to
avoid drawing the saw of controversy,) “Let it pass, then, as
a trifle not worth relating. But still” (if it be a trifle, which
I suppose, not grant) “it is no proof of enthusiasm. For I
would not have you look upon it as miraculous.”
And yet I believe I yielded too much, and what might too
much favour your assertion, that “there is a great difference
between particular providences and such extraordinary interpo
sitions.” Pray, Sir, show me what this difference is. It is a
subject that deserves your coolest thoughts. “I know no ground
to hope or pray for such immediate reliefs. These things must
be represented either as common accidents or as miracles.” I
do not throughly understand your terms. What is a common
accident? that a sparrow falls to the ground, or something
more inconsiderable than the hairs of your head? Is there no
medium between accident and miracle? If there be, what is
that medium? When we are agreed with regard to these few
points, I shall be glad to resume the subject.
6. The fourth instance of my enthusiasm was this, that I
“related judgments inflicted on my opposers.” As to Mr.
Molther, I must observe once more, that I do believe
there was a particular providence in his sickness. But I do
not believe, (nor did I design to insinuate,) that it was a
judgment for opposing me.
You go on: “Again you mention, “as an awful providence,
the case of a poor wretch who was last week cursing and blas
pheming, and had boasted to many that he would come again
on Sunday, and no man should stop his mouth then. Buton Fri
day God laid his hand upon him, and on Sunday he was buried.”
(Remarks, p. 66.) I answered, “I look on this as a manifest
FARTHER EXPLAINED- 453
judgment of God on a hardened sinner, for his complicated
wickedness.” (Page 410.) You reply, “Add, if you please,
“His labouring with all his might to hinder the word of God.”
Here therefore is a confessed judgment for his opposition to
Vou.” (Second Letter, p. 133.) There is, for his thus opposing
with curses and blasphemy. This was part of his complicated
wickedness. Here then you “think I plead guilty.” Not of
enthusiasm, till you prove this was not “an awful providence.”
“Again: ‘One was just going to beat his wife, (which he
frequently did,) when God smote him in a moment, so that his
hand dropped, and he fell down upon the ground, having no
more strength than a new-born child. Have we any warrant
either from Scripture, or the common dispensations of provi
dence, to interpret misfortunes of this nature as judgments?”
(Remarks, p. 67.) I answered, “Can you, Sir, consider this as
one of the common dispensations of providence? Have you
known a parallel one in your life? But it was never cited by
me, (as it is by you,) as an immediate punishment on a man
for opposing me.” (Pages 409, 410.) You reply, “As if what
is not common, or what I have not known, must be a mira
culous judgment.” I believe it was, whether miraculous or
no, a judgment mixed with mercy.
You now add to the rest the following instance:—“One John
Haydon, a man of a regular life and conversation, being informed
that people fell into strange fits at the societies, came to see
and judge for himself. But he was still less satisfied than be
fore; insomuch that he went about to his acquaintance one after
another, and laboured above measure to convince them it was
a delusion of the devil. We were going home, when one met us
in the street, and informed us that J. H. was fallen raving mad.
It seems he had sat down to dinner, but had a mind first to end
the sermon on ‘Salvation by Faith.” In reading the last page,
he changed colour, fell off his chair, and began screaming terri
bly, and beating himself against the ground. The neighbours
were alarmed, and flocked into the house. I came in, and found
him upon the floor, the room being full of people, whom his
wife would have kept without, but he cried aloud, ‘No; let
them all come; let all the world see the just j .dgment of God.”
Two or three men were holding him as well as they could. He
immediately fixed his eyes upon me, and cried, ‘Ay, this is he,
who I said was a deceiver of the people. But God has over
454 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
taken me. I said it was all a delusion. But this is no delu
sion. He then roared out, ‘O thou devil! Thou cursed devil!
Yea, thou legion of devils ! Thou canst not stay! Christ will
cast thee out. I know his work is begun. Tear me to pieces
if thou wilt, but thou canst not hurt me.’ He then beat him
self against the ground again, his breast heaving at the same
time, as in the pangs of death, and great drops of sweat trick
ling down his face. We all betook ourselves to prayer. His
pangs ceased, and both his body and soul were set at liberty.”
(Vol. I. p. 190.)
If you had pleased, you might have added from the next
paragraph, “Returning to J. H., we found his voice was lost,
and his body weak as that of an infant. But his soul was in
peace, full of love, and rejoicing in hope of the glory of God.”
You subjoin, “This you may desire, for aught I know, to pass
as a trifle too.” (Remarks, p. 134.) No; it is so terrible an
instance of the judgment of God, (though at length “mercy
rejoiced over judgment,”) as ought never to be forgotten by
those who fear God, so long as the sun or moon endureth.
7. The account of people falling down in fits you cite as a
fifth instance of my enthusiasm; it being “plain,” you say,
that I “look upon both the disorders, and the removals of them,
to be supernatural.” (Remarks, p. 67.) I answered, “It is not
quite plain. I look upon some of these cases as wholly natural;
on the rest, as mixed; both the disorders and the removals being
partly natural and partly not.” (Page 410.) You reply, “It
would have been kind to have let us know your rule, by which
you distinguish these.” I will. I distinguish them by the cir
cumstances that precede, accompany, and follow. “However,
some of these you here allow to be in part supernatural. Mira
cles, therefore, are not wholly ceased.” Can you prove they
are, by Scripture or reason? You then refer to two or three
cases, related in Vol. I. pp. 188, 189. I believe there was a
supernatural power on the minds of the persons there men
tioned, which occasioned their bodies to be so affected by the
natural laws of the vital union. This point, therefore, you
have to prove, or here is no enthusiasm; that there was no
supernatural power in the case.
Hereon you remarked, “You leave no room to doubt that
you would have these cases considered as those of the demo
niacs in the New Testament, in order, I suppose, to parallel
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 455
your supposed cures of them, with those highest miracles of
Christ and his disciples, the casting out devils.” (Remarks,
p. 63.) I answered, “I should once have wondered at your
making such a supposition. But now I wonder at nothing of
the kind.” You reply, “Why so? What have I done lately,
to take off your surprise? Have I forfeited my character for
ingenuous and fair dealing with you?” (Second Letter, p.
135.) Since you ask me the question, I will answer it; I hope,
in love, and in the spirit of meekness. I scarce know, of all
who have wrote against me, a less ingenuous dealer; or one
who has shown a more steady, invariable disposition to put an
ill construction on whatever I say.
“But why would you not particularly explain these cases?”
I will explain myself upon them once for all. For more than
three hundred years after Christ, you know, demoniacs were
common in the Church; and I suppose you are not unapprized,
that during this period, (if not much longer) they were con
tinually relieved by the prayers of the faithful. Nor can I
doubt, but demoniacs will remain, so long as Satan is the
“God of this world.” I doubt not, but there are such at this
day. And I believe John Haydon was one. But of whatever
sort his disorder was, that it was removed by prayer is unde
niable. Now, Sir, you have only two points to prove, and
then your argument will be conclusive: (1.) That to think or
say, “There are demoniacs now, and they are now relieved by
prayer,” is enthusiasm. (2.) That to say, “Demoniacs were
or are relieved, on prayer made by Cyprian, or their parish
Minister,” is to parallel the actions of Cyprian or that Minister
with the highest miracles of Christ and his disciples.
8. You remarked, “It will be difficult to persuade any sober
person, that there is anything supernatural in these disorders.”
(Remarks, p. 69.) The remainder of that paragraph I abridged
thus: You attempt to account for those fits, by “obstructions
or irregularities of the blood and spirits; hysterical disorders;
watchings, fastings, closeness of rooms, great crowds, violent
heat;” and lastly by “terrors, perplexities, and doubts, in
weak and well-meaning men; which,” you think, “in many
of the cases before us, have quite overset their understand
ings.” (Remarks, p. 43.)
Ianswered, “As to each of the rest, let it goas far as it can go.”
(Let it be supposed to have some influence in some cases; per
456 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
haps fully to account for one in a thousand.) “But I require
proof of the last way whereby you would account for these
disorders.” Why, “the instances,” you say, “ of religious
madness have much increased since you began to disturb the
world.” I doubt the fact. You reply, “This no way disproves
it.” (Second Letter, p. 137.) Yes, it does, till you produce some
proof. For a bare negation is the proper and sufficient answer
to a bare affirmation. I add, “If these instances had increased
daily, it is easy to account for them another way,” as is done
in the First Part of the Farther Appeal, at the one hundred
and thirty-first and following pages. You say, “Most have
heard of or known several of the Methodists thus driven to
distraction.” I answered, “You may have heard of five hun
dred. But how many have you known P Be pleased to name
eight or ten of them. I cannot find them, no, not one of
them to this day, either man, woman, or child.” (Page 411.)
You reply, “This” (the naming them) “would be very im
proper and unnecessary.” Second Letter, p. 138.) However,
Sir, it is extremely necessary that you should name them to
me in private. I will then, if required, excuse you to the
public; which till then I cannot do.
The person I mentioned, whom you threw into much doubt
and perplexity, then lived in the parish of St. Ann, West
minster. I related the case just as she related it to me. But
she is able and ready to answer for herself.
9. You go on : “It is the most charitable supposition we
can make, that many of the cases you have mentioned in your
Journals, and some of which have been represented above, are
of this kind,” that is, instances of madness. (Second Letter,
p. 138.) O tender charity | But cannot your charity reach one
hair's breadth farther than this? No: For “otherwise” (that
is,if those persons were not mad) “the presumption and despair
are terrible indeed.” But what, if you were to suppose John
Haydon (to instance in one) was not mad, but under a tempor
ary possession; and that others were deeply convinced of sin,
and of the wrath of God abiding on them? I should think this
supposition (be it true or false) was full as charitable as the other.
I said, “I cannot find one such instance to this day.” You
reply, “Yet once you could not but be under some concern with
regard to one or two persons, who seemed to be indeed lunatic,
as well as sore vexed.” So they seemed; but it soon appeared
they were not. The very next paragraph mentions, that one
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 457
of these, within a few hours, was “filled with the spirit of
love, and of a sound mind.” (Vol. I. p. 231.)
But you are resolved, come what will, to carry this point;
and so add, “Toward the end of your Farther Appeal, (First
Part, p. 131,) you say, you have seen one instance of real,
lasting madness. This was one whom you took with you to
Bristol, who was afterwards prejudiced against you, and began
a vehement invective both against your person and doctrines.
In the midst of this he was struck raving mad.” Add, “And
so he continued till his friends put him into Bedlam; and
probably laid his madness to my charge.” If they did not, it
is now done to their hands.
10. “As to the cure of these fits, I observed,” (so you,
p. 139, proceed,) “that you had frequently represented them as
miraculous, as the instantaneous consequences of your
prayers.” My former answer to this was, “I have set down
the facts just as they were, passing no judgment upon them
myself, and leaving every man else to judge as he pleases.”
I am glad you give me an occasion of reviewing this answer;
for, upon reflection, I do not like it at all. It grants you more
than I can in conscience do. As it can be proved by abun
dance of witnesses that these cures were frequently (indeed
almost always) the instantaneous consequences of prayer, your
inference is just. I cannot, dare not affirm, that they were
purely natural. I believe they were not. I believe many of them
were wrought by the supernatural power of God; that of John
Haydon in particular; (I fix on this, and will join issue with
you upon it when you please;) and yet this is not barefaced
enthusiasm. Nor can you prove it any enthusiasm at all,
unless you can prove, that this is falsely ascribed to super
natural power.
“The next case,” you say, “relates to the spotted fever,
which you represent as being extremely mortal; but you believe
there was not one with whom you were but recovered. I allowed
that here is no intimation of anything miraculous.” (Remarks,
p. 72.) “You ask, ‘Why then is this cited as an instance of
my enthusiasm 7” (Page 412.) You sure cannot think, that
false pretences to miracles are the whole of enthusiasm.”
No; but I think they are that part of enthusiasm which you
here undertook to prove upon me. You are here to prove,
that I “boast of curing bodily distempers by prayer, without
the use of other means.” (Remarks, p. 71.) But if there is no
458 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
intimation in my account of anything miraculous, or that
proper remedies had not been applied; how is this a proof,
that I boast of curing bodily distempers, without applying any
remedies at all?
“But you seem to desire to have it believed, that an extra
ordinary blessing attended your prayers. Whereas, if the cir
cumstances could be particularly inquired into, most probably
it would appear, that either the fury of the distemper was
abated, or the persons you visited were seized with it in a more
favourable degree, or were, by reason of a good constitution,
more capable of going through it. Neither do I believe that they
would have failed of an equal blessing and success had they had
the assistance and prayers of their own parish Ministers.”
There, Sir; now I have done as you require; I have
quoted our whole remark. But does all this prove, that I “boast
of curing bodily distempers by prayer, without the use of any
other means?” If you say, Although it does not prove this,
it proves that “you seem to desire to have it believed, that an
extraordinary blessing attended your prayers;” and this is
another sort of enthusiasm: It is very well: So it does not
prove the conclusion you designed; but it proves another,
which is as good |
11. The two last instances of my enthusiasm which you
bring, (Remarks, pp. 72, 73.) I had summed up in two lines,
thus: “At two several times, being ill and in violent pain, I
prayed to God, and found immediate ease.” (Answer, p. 412.)
But since you say, I “must not hope to escape so; these
instances must once more be laid before me particularly;”
(Second Letter, p. 140;) I must yield to necessity, and set
them down from the beginning to the end:—
“Saturday, March 21. I explained in the evening the
thirty-third chapter of Ezekiel; in applying which, I was
seized with such a pain in my side, I could not speak. I
knew my remedy, and immediately kneeled down. In a
moment the pain was gone.” (Vol. I. p. 304.)
“Friday, May 8. I found myself much out of order: How
ever, I made shift to preach in the evening. But on Saturday
my bodily strength failed, so that for several hours I could
scarce lift up my head. Sunday, 10. I was obliged to lie down
most part of the day, being easy only in that posture. In the
evening, beside the pain in my back and head, and the fever
which still continued upon me, just as I began to pray I was
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 459
seized with such a cough that I could hardly speak. At the same
time came strongly into my mind: ‘These signs shall follow
them that believe.’ I called on Jesus aloud, to “increase my
faith, and to ‘confirm the word of his grace.” While I was
speaking, my pain vanished away, the fever left me, my bodily
strength returned, and for many weeks I felt neither weakness
nor pain. Unto thee, O Lord, do I give thanks.” (Ibid. p. 310.)
When you first cited these as proofs of enthusiasm, I am
swered, “I will put your argument into form:—
“He that believes those are miraculous cures which are
not so, is a rank enthusiast; but
“You believe those are miraculous cures which are not so:
Therefore, you are a rank enthusiast.
“What do you mean by miraculous? If you term every
thing so, which is ‘not strictly accountable for by the ordi
nary course of natural causes, then I deny the latter part of
the minor proposition. And unless you can make this good,
unless you can prove the effects in question are ‘strictly ac
countable for by the ordinary course of natural causes, your
argument is nothing worth.”
You reply, “Your answer to the objection is very evasive,
though you pretend to put my argument in form. You mis
take the major proposition, which should have been:
“He that represents those cures as the immediate effects
of his own prayers, and as miraculous, which are not so, is a
rank enthusiast, if sincere:
“‘But, This you have done: Ergo, &c.’”
To this clumsy syllogism I rejoin, (1.) That the words, “if
sincere,” are utterly impertinent: For if insincerity be supposed,
enthusiasm will be out of the question. (2.) That those words,
“as the effects of his own prayers,” may likewise be pared off;
for they are unnecessary and cumbersome, the argument being
complete without them. (3.) That, with or without them, the
proposition is false; unless so far as it coincides with that you
reject. For it is the believing those to be miracles which are
not, that constitutes an enthusiast; not the representing them
one way or the other; unless so far as it implies such a belief.
12. Upon my answer to the syllogism first proposed, you ob
serve, “Thus” (by denying the latter part of the minor) “you
clear yourself from the charge of enthusiasm, by acknowledging
the cures to be supernatural and miraculous. Why then would
460 PRINCIPLES OF A METhiOD1ST
you not speak out, and directly say, that you can work real
and undoubted miracles? This would put the controversy be
tween you and your opposers on a short foot, and be an effectual
proof of the truth of your pretences.” (Second Letter, p. 142.)
V. l. I have in some measure explained myself on the
head of miracles, in the Third Part of the Farther Appeal.
But since you repeat the demand, (though without taking any
notice of the arguments there advanced,) I will endeavour
once more to give you a distinct, full, and determinate answer.
And, (1.) I acknowledge that I have seen with my eyes, and
heard with my ears, several things which, to the best of my
judgment, cannot be accounted for by the ordinary course of
natural causes; and which I therefore believe ought to be
“ascribed to the extraordinary interposition of God.” If any
man choose to style these miracles, I reclaim not. I have dili
gently inquired into the facts. I have weighed the preceding
and following circumstances. I have strove to account for
them in a natural way. I could not, without doing violence
to my reason. Not to go far back, I am clearly persuaded,
that the sudden deliverance of John Haydon was one in
stance of this kind; and my own recovery, on May 10th,
another. I cannot account for either of these in a natural
way. Therefore I believe they were both supernatural.
I must (2.) Observe, that the truth of these facts is sup
ported by the same kind of proof, as that of all other facts is
wont to be, namely, the testimony of competent witnesses; and
that the testimony here is in as high a degree as any reasonable
man can desire. Those witnesses were many in number: They
could not be deceived themselves; for the facts in question they
saw with their own eyes, and heard with their own ears: Nor is
it credible, that so many of them would combine together with
a view of deceiving others; the greater part being men that
feared God; as appeared by the general tenor of their lives.
Thus in the case of John Haydon, this thing was not contrived
and executed in a corner, and in the presence of his own family
only, or three or four persons prepared for the purpose: No, it
was in an open street of the city of Bristol, at one or two in the
afternoon; and, the doors being all open from the beginning, not
only many of the neighbours from every side, but several others,
(indeed whosoever desired it,) went in, till the house could con
tain no more. Nor yet does the account of my own illness and
FARTHER EXPLAIN ED. 461
recovery depend, as you suppose, on my bare word. There
were many witnesses both of my disorder on Friday and Satur
day, and of my lying down most part of Sunday, a thing which
they were well satisfied could not be the effect of a slight indis
position; and all who saw me that evening plainly discerned,
(what I could not wholly conceal,) that I was in pain; about
two hundred of whom were present when I was seized with
that cough, which cut me short, so that I could speak no more;
till I cried out aloud, “Lord, increase my faith ! Lord, confirm
the word of thy grace!” The same persons saw and heard,
that at that instant I changed my posture, and broke out into
thanksgiving; that quickly after I stood upright, (which I
could not before,) and showed no more sign either of sickness
or pain.
Yet I must desire you well to observe, Thirdly, that my will,
or choice, or desire, had no place either in this, or any case
of this kind that has ever fallen under my notice. Five minutes
before, I had no thought of this. I expected nothing less. I
was willing to wait for a gradual recovery, in the ordinary
use of outward means. I did not look for any other cure,
till the moment before I found it. And it is my belief that
the case was always the same with regard to the most “real
and undoubted miracles.” I believe God never interposed
his miraculous power, but according to his own sovereign
will; not according to the will of man; neither of him by
whom he wrought, nor of any other man whatsoever. The
wisdom as well as the power are his : nor can I find that ever,
from the beginning of the world, he lodged this power in any
mere man, to be used whenever that man saw good. Suppose,
therefore, there was a man now on earth who did work “real
and undoubted miracles;” I would ask, By whose power doth
he work these ? and at whose pleasure? his own, or God's?
Not his own; but God’s. But if so, then your demand is not
on man, but on God. I cannot say it is modest, thus to
challenge God; or well suiting the relation of a creature to
his Creator.
2. However, I cannot but think, there have been already so
many plain interpositions of divine power, as will shortly leave
you without excuse, if you either deny or despise them. We
desire no favour, but the justice that diligent inquiry may be
made concerning them. We are ready to name the persons
on whom that power was shown, which belongeth to none but
462 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
God; (not one or two, or ten or twelve only;) to point out their
places of abode; and we engage they shall answer every per
tinent question, fairly and directly; and, if required, shall give
all those answers upon oath, before any who are empowered
so to receive them. It is our particular request that the cir
cumstances which went before, which accompanied, and which
followed after, the facts under consideration, may be thoroughly
examined, and punctually noted down. Let but this be done,
(and is it not highly needful it should 7 at least, by those who
would form an exact judgment,) and we have no fear that any
reasonable man should scruple to say, “This hath God
wrought !”
As there have been already so many instances of this kind,
far beyond what we had dared to ask or think, I cannot take
upon me to say whether or no it will please God to add to their
number. I have not herein “known the mind of the Lord,”
neither am I “his counsellor.” He may, or he may not; I
cannot affirm or deny. I have no light, and I have no desire
either way. “It is the Lord: Let him do what seemeth him
good.” I desire only to be as clay in his hand.
3. But what, if there were now to be wrought ever so many
“real and undoubted miracles?” (I suppose you mean by un
doubted such as, being sufficiently attested, ought not to bedoubt
ed of) Why, “This,” you say, “would put the controversy on a
short foot, and be an effectual proof of the truth of your pre
tences.” By no means. As common as this assertion is, there
is none upon earth more false. Suppose a teacher were now, on
this very day, to work “real and undoubted miracles;” this
would extremely little “shorten the controversy” between
him and the greater part of his opposers: For all this would
not force them to believe; but many would still stand just
where they did before; seeing men may “harden their hearts”
against miracles, as well as against arguments.
So men have done from the beginning of the world; even
against such signal, glorious miracles, against suchinterpositions
of the power of God, as may not be again till the consummation
of all things. Permit me to remind you only of a few instances;
and to observe that the argument holds a fortiori : For who
will ever be impowered of God again to work such miracles as
these were? Did Pharaoh look on all that Moses and Aaron
wrought as an “effectual proof of the truth of their pretences?”
..even when “the Lord made the sea dry land, and the waters
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 463
were divided;” when “the children of Israel went into the
midst of the sea, and the waters were a wall unto them on the
right hand, and on the left?” (Exod. xiv. 21, 22.) Nay,
The wounded dragon raged in vain;
And, fierce the utmost plague to brave,
Madly he dared the parted main,
And sunk beneath the o’erwhelming wave.
Was all this “an effectual proof of the truth of their pretences,”
to the Israelites themselves? It was not. “They were” still
“disobedient at the sea; even at the Red Sea !” Was the
giving them day by day “bread from heaven,” “an effectual
proof” to those “two hundred and fifty princes of the assem
bly, famous in the congregation, men of renown,” who said,
with Dathan and Abiram, “Wilt thou put out the eyes of
these men? We will not come up?” (Numbers xvi. 14;)
nay, “when the ground clave asunder that was under them;
and the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up?”
(Verse 32.) Neither was this an “effectual proof” to those
who saw it with their eyes, and heard the cry of those that
went down into the pit; but, the very next day, they “mur
mured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have
killed the people of the Lord!” (Verse 41.)
Was not the case generally the same with regard to the Pro
phets that followed? several of whom “stopped the mouths of
lions, quenched the violence of fire,” did many mighty works;
yet their own people received them not. Yet “they were
stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were slain with the
sword;” they were “destitute, afflicted, tormented !” utterly
contrary to the commonly received supposition, that the work
ing real, undoubted miracles must bring all controversy to an
end, and convince every gainsayer.
Let us come nearer yet. How stood the case between our
Lord himself and his opposers? Did he not work “real and
undoubted miracles?” And what was the effect? Still, when
“he came to his own, his own received him not.” Still “he
was despised and rejected of men.” Still it was a challenge
not to be answered: “Have any of the rulers or of the Phari
sees believed on him?” After this, how can you imagine,
that whoever works miracles must convince “all men of the
truth of his pretences?”
464 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
I would just remind you of only one instance more: “There
sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a cripple
from his mother's womb, who never had walked. The same
heard Paul speak; who steadfastly beholding him, and perceiv
ing that he had faith to be healed, said, with a loud voice,
Stand upright on thy feet. And he leaped and walked.” Here
was so undoubted a miracle, that the people “lifted up their
voices, saying, The Gods are come down in the likeness of
men.” But how long were even these convinced of the truth
of his pretences? Only till “there came thither certain Jews
from Antioch and Iconium;’ and then they stoned him (as
they supposed) to death ! (Acts xiv. 8, &c.) So certain it is,
that no miracles whatever, which were ever yet wrought in the
world, were effectual to prove the most glaring truth, to those
that hardened their hearts against it.
4. And it will equally hold in every age and nation. “If they
hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be’” con
vinced of what they desire not to believe, “though one rose from
the dead.” Without a miracle, without one rising from the
dead, eav tis 6exy to 6exmua avtov Troueuv, “if any man be
willing to do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it
be of God.” But if he is not willing to do his will, he will
never want an excuse, a plausible reason, for rejecting it. Yea,
though ever so many miracles were wrought to confirm it.
For let ever so much “light come into the world,” it will have
no effect (such is the wise and just will of God) on those who
“love darkness rather than light.” It will not convince those
who do not simply desire to do the will of their Father which
is in heaven; those who mind earthly things; who (if they do
not continue in any gross outward sin, yet) love pleasure or
ease; yet seek profit or power, preferment or reputation.
Nothing will ever be an effectual proof to these of the holy
and acceptable will of God, unless first their proud hearts be
humbled, their stubborn wills bowed down, and their desires
brought, at least in some degree, into obedience to the law of
Christ.
Hence, although it should please God to work anew all the
wonders that ever were wrought on the earth, still these men,
however “wise and prudent” they may be in things relating to
the present world, would fight against God and all his messen
gers, and that in spite of all these miracles. Meanwhile, God
will reveal his truth unto babes, unto those who are meek and
FARTHER EXPLAIN ED.- 465
lowly, whose desires are in heaven, who want to “know nothing
save Jesus Christ and him crucified.” These need no outward
miracle to show them his will; they have a plain rule,—the
written word. And “the anointing which they have received
of him abideth in them, and teacheth them of all things.”
(1 John ii. 27.) Through this they are enabled to bring all
doctrines “to the law and to the testimony:” And whatsoever
is agreeable to this they receive, without waiting to see it at
tested by miracles; as, on the other hand, whatever is contrary
to this they reject; nor can any miracles move them to receive it.
5. Yet I do not know that God hath anyway precluded him
self from thus exerting his sovereign power, from working mira
cles in any kind or degree, in any age, to the end of the world.
I do not recollect any scripture wherein we are taught, that
miracles were to be confined within the limits either of the apos
tolic or the Cyprianic age; or of any period of time, longer or
shorter, even till the restitution of all things. I have not
observed, either in the Old Testament or the New, any intima
tion at all of this kind. St. Paul says, indeed, once, concerning
two of the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, (so, I think, that text
is usually understood,) “Whether there be prophecies, they
shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease.” But
he does not say, either that these or any other miracles shall
cease, till faith and hope shall cease also; till they all be
swallowed up in the vision of God, and love be all in all.
I presume you will allow there is one kind of miracles (loosely
speaking) which are not ceased; namely, Tepata \revôovs, “lying
wonders,” diabolical miracles, or works beyond the virtue of
natural causes, wrought by the power of evil spirits. Nor can
you easily conceive that these will cease, as long as the father
of lies is the prince of this world. And why should you think
that the God of truth is less active than him, or that he will
not have his miracles also? only, not as man wills, neither
when he wills; but according to his own excellent wisdom
and greatness.
G. But even if it were supposed that God does now work
beyond the operation of merely natural causes, yet what im
pression would this make upon you, in the disposition your
mind is now in ? Suppose the trial were repeated, were made
again to-morrow. One informs you the next day, “While a
Clergyman was preaching yesterday, where I was, a man came
VOL. VIII.
466 PRINCIPLES OF A METHOD IST
who had been long ill of an incurable distemper. Prayer was
made for him, and he was restored to perfect health.”
Suppose, now, that this were real fact: Perhaps you would
scarce have patience to hear the account of it; but would cut it
short, in the midst, with, “Do you tell this as something super
natural? Then miracles are not ceased.” But if you should
venture to ask, “Where was this, and who was the person that
prayed?” and it was answered, “At the Foundery near Moor
fields; the person who prayed was Mr. Wesley;” what a damp
comes at once! What a weight falls on your mind, at the very
first setting out! It is well if you have any heart or desire to
move one step further. Or if you should, what a strong addi
tional propensity do you now feel to deny the fact! And is
there not a ready excuse for so doing?—“O, they who tell the
story are doubtless his own people; most of whom, we may be
sure, will say anything for him, and the rest will believe any
thing.” But if you at length allowed the fact, might you not
find means to account for it by natural causes? “Great crowds,
violent heats, with obstructions and irregularities of the blood
and spirits,” will do wonders. If you could not but allow it was
more than natural, might not some plausible reason be found
for ranking it among the lying wonders, for ascribing it to the
devil rather than God? And if, after all, you was convinced it
was the finger of God, must you not still bring every doctrine
advanced to the law and to the testimony, the only sure and
infallible test of all? What, then, is the use of this continual
demand, “Show us a sign, and we will believe?” What will
you believe? I hope, no more than is written in the book of
God. And thus far you might venture to believe, even with
out a miracle.
7. Let us consider this point yet a little farther. “What is
it you would have us prove by miracles? the doctrines we
preach?” We prove these by Scripture and reason; and, if
need be, by antiquity. What else is it, then, that we are to
prove by miracles? At length we have a distinct reply: “Wise
and sober men will not otherwise be convinced,” (that is, un
less you prove this by miracles,) “that God is, by the means
of such Teachers, and such doctrines, working a great and
extraordinary work in the earth.” (Preface, p. 6.)
So then the determinate point which you, in their name, call
upon us to prove by miracles, is this, “that God is, by these
FARTHER EXPLAIN ED. 467
Teachers, working a great and extraordinary work in the
..earth.”
What I mean by “a great and extraordinary work” is, the
bringing multitudes of gross notorious sinners, in a short
space, to the fear, and love, and service of God, to an entire
change of heart and life.
Now, then, let us take a nearer view of the proposition, and
see which part of it we are to prove by miracles.
“Is it, (1.) That A. B. was, for many years, without God in
the world, a common swearer, a drunkard, a Sabbath-breaker?
“Or, (2.) That he is not so now?
“Or, (3.) That he continued so till he heard these men
preach; and from that time was another man?
“Not so. The proper way to prove these facts is, by the
testimony of competent witnesses. And these witnesses are
ready, whenever required, to give full evidence of them.
“Or would you have us prove by miracles, (4.) That this
was not done by our own power or holiness? that God only
is able to raise the dead, to quicken those who are dead in
trespasses and sins?”
Surely no. Whosoever believes the Scriptures will want
no new proof of this.
Where then is the wisdom of those men who demand
miracles in proof of such a proposition ? one branch of which,
“that such sinners were reformed by the means of these
Teachers,” being a plain fact, can only be proved by testimony,
as all other facts are; and the other, “That this is a work of
God, and a great and more than ordinary work,” needs no
proof, as carrying its own evidence to every thinking man.
8. To sum up this: No truly wise or sober man can possibly
desire or expect miracles to prove either, (1.) That these doc
trines are true;—this must be decided by Scripture and
reason; or, (2.) That these facts are true;—this can only be
proved by testimony; or, (3.) That to change sinners from
darkness to light, is the work of God alone; only using what
instruments he pleases;— this is glaringly self-evident; or,
(4.) That such a change wrought in so many notorious sinners,
within so short a time, is a great and extraordinary work of
God: this also carries its own evidence. What then is it
which remains to be proved by miracles? Perhaps you will
say, It is this: “That God hath called or sent you to do this.”
468 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
Nay, this is implied in the third of the foregoing propositions.
If God has actually used us therein, if his work hath in fact
prospered in our hands, then he hath called or sent us to do
this. I entreat reasonable men to weigh this thoroughly,
whether the fact does not plainly prove the call; whether He
who enables us thus to save souls alive, does not commission
us so to do; whether, by giving us power to pluck these brands
out of the burning, He does not authorize us to exert it?
O that it were possible for you to consider calmly, whether
the success of the gospel of Jesus Christ, even as it is preached
by us, the least of his servants, be not itself a miracle, never to
be forgotten one which cannot be denied, as being visible at
this day, not in one, but a hundred places; one which cannot
be accounted for by the ordinary course of any natural cause
whatsoever; one which cannot be ascribed, with any colour
of reason, to diabolical agency; and, lastly, one which will bear
the infallible test,-the trial of the written word.
VI. 1. But here I am aware of abundance of objections.
You object, That to speak anything of myself, of what I have
done, or am doing now, is mere boasting and vanity. This
charge you frequently repeat. So, p. 102: “The following
page is full of boasting.” “You boast very much of the
numbers you have converted;” (p. 113;) and again, “As to
myself, I hope I shall never be led to imitate you in boasting.”
I think therefore it is needful, once for all, to examine this
charge thoroughly; and to show distinctly what that good
thing is which you disguise under this bad name.
(1.) From the year 1725 to 1729 I preached much, but saw
no fruit of my labour. Indeed it could not be that I should; for
Incither laid the foundation of repentance, nor of believing the
gospel; taking it for granted, that all to whom I preached were
believers, and that many of them “needed no repentance.”
(2.) From the year 1729 to 1734, laying a deeper foundation of
repentance, I saw a little fruit. But it was only a little; and
mo wonder: For I did not preach faith in the blood of the cove
mant. (3.) From 1734 to 1738, speaking more of faith in Christ,
I saw more fruit of my preaching, and visiting from house to
house, than ever I had done before; though I know not if any
of those who were outwardly reformed were inwardly and
thoroughly converted to God. (4.) From 1738 to this time,
speaking continually of Jesus Christ, laying Him only for the
FARTHER EXPLAIN.E.D. 469
£oundation of the whole building, making him all in all, the
first and the last; preaching only on this plan, “The kingdom
of God is at hand; repent ye, and believe the gospel;” the
“word of God ran” as fire among the stubble; it was “glori
fied” more and more; multitudes crying out, “What must we
do to be saved ?” and afterwards witnessing, “By grace we
are saved through faith.” (5.) I considered deeply with myself
what I ought to do; whether to declare the things I had seen,
or not. I consulted the most serious friends I had. They all
agreed, I ought to declare them; that the work itself was of
such a kind, as ought in nowise to be concealed; and indeed,
that the unusual circumstances now attending it, made it im
possible that it should. (6.) This very difficulty occurred :
“Will not my speaking of this be boasting ? at least, will it
not be accounted so ?” They replied, “If you speak of it as
your own work, it will be vanity and boasting all over; but if
you ascribe it wholly to God, if you give him all the praise,
it will not. And if, after this, some will account it so still,
you must be content, and bear the burden.” (7.) I yielded,
and transcribed my papers for the press; only labouring, as
far as possible, to “render unto God the things which are
'God's;” to give him the praise of his own work.
2. But this very thing you improve into a fresh objection.
If I ascribe anything to God, it is enthusiasm. If I do not (or
if I do) it is vanity and boasting, supposing me to mention it
at all. What then can I do to escape your censure? “Why,
be silent; say nothing at all.” I cannot, I dare not. Were
I thus to please men, I could not be the servant of Christ.
You do not appear to have the least idea or conception of what
is in the heart of one whom it pleases Him that worketh all in
all to employ in a work of this kind. He is in nowise forward
to be at all employed therein; he starts back, again and again;
not only because he readily foresees what shame, care, sorrow,
reproach, what loss of friends, and of all that the world
accounts dear, will inevitably follow; but much more, because
he (in some measure) knows himself. This chiefly it is which
constrains him to cry out, (and that many times, in the bitter
ness of his soul, when no human eye seeth him,) “O Lord, send
by whom thou wilt send, only send not me! What am I? A
worm ! A dead dog! A man unclean in heart and lips 1” And
when he dares no longer gainsay or resist, when he is at last
“ thrust out into the harvest,” he looketh on the right hand
470 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
and on the left, he takes every step with fear and trembling,
and with the deepest sense (such as words cannot express) of
“Who is sufficient for these things?” Every gift which he
has received of God for the furtherance of his word, whether
of nature or grace, heightens this fear, and increases his
jealousy over himself; knowing that so much the stricter
must the inquiry be, when he gives an account of his steward
ship. He is most of all jealous over himself when the work of
the Lord prospers in his hand. He is then amazed and con
founded before God. Shame covers his face. Yet when he sees
that he ought “to praise the Lord for his goodness, and to
declare the wonders which he doeth for the children of men,”
he is in a strait between two; he knows not which way to turn;
he cannot speak; he dares not be silent. It may be, for a time
he “keeps his mouth with a bridle; he holds his peace even.
from good. But his heart is hot within him,” and constrains.
him at length to declare what God hath wrought. And this he
then doethin all simplicity, with “great plainness of speech,”
desiring only to commend himself to Him who “searcheth
the heart and trieth the reins;” and (whether his words are the
savour of life or of death to others) to have that witness in him
self, “As of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God, speak we in
Christ.” If any man counts this boasting, he cannot help it.
It is enough that a higher Judge standeth at the door.
3. But you may say, “Why do you talk of the success of
the gospel in England, which was a Christian country before
you was born ?” Was it indeed? Is it so at this day? I
would explain myself a little on this head also.
And, (1.) None can deny, that the people of England, in
general, are called Christians. They are called so, a few only
excepted, by others, as well as by themselves. But I presume
no man will say, that the name makes the thing; that men are
Christians, barely because they are called so. (2.) It must be
allowed, that the people of England, generally speaking, have
been christened or baptized. But neither can we infer, “These
were once baptized; therefore they are Christians now.”
(3.) It is allowed, that many of those who were once baptized,
and are called Christians to this day, hear the word of God,
attend public prayers, and partake of the Lord’s Supper. But
neither does this prove that they are Christians. For, notwith
standing this, some of them live in open sin; and others.
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 471
(though not conscious to themselves of hypocrisy, yet) are
utter strangers to the religion of the heart; are full of pride,
vanity, covetousness, ambition; of hatred, anger, malice, or
envy; and, consequently, are no more scriptural Christians,
than the open drunkard or common swearer.
Now, these being removed, where are the Christians, from
whom we may properly term England a Christian country? the
men who have the mind which was in Christ, and who walk as
he also walked; whose inmost soul is renewed after the image
of God; and who are outwardly holy, as He who hath called
them is holy? There are doubtless a few such to be found.
To deny this would be want of candour. But how few ! how
thinly scattered up and down! And as for a Christian visible
Church, or a body of Christians visibly united together, where
is this to be seen?
Ye different sects, who all declare,
Lol here is Christ, or, Christ is there !
Your stronger proofs divinely give,
And show me where the Christians live!
And what use is it of, what good end does it serve, to term
England a Christian country? (Although it is true, most of
the natives are called Christians, have been baptized, frequent
the ordinances; and although a real Christian is here and there
to be found, “as a light shining in a dark place.”) Does it do
any honour to our great Master, among those who are not
called by his name? Does it recommend Christianity to the
Jews, the Mahometans, or the avowed Heathens? Surely no
one can conceive it does. It only makes Christianity stink in
their nostrils. Does it answer any good end with regard to
those on whom this worthy name is called? I fear not; but
rather an exceeding bad one. For, does it not keep multitudes
easy in their heathen practice? Does it not make or keep still
greater numbers satisfied with their heathen tempers? Does it
not directly tend to make both the one and the other imagine,
that they are what indeed they are not; that they are Chris
tians, while they are utterly without Christ, and without God
in the world? To close this point: If men arenot Christians
till they are renewed after the image of Christ, and if the peo
ple of England in general are not thus renewed, why do we
term them so? The god of this world hath long blinded their
hearts. Let us do nothing to increase that blindness; but
472 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
rather labour to recover them from that strong delusion, that
they may no longer believe a lie.
4. Let us labour to convince all mankind, that to be a real
Christian, is, to love the Lord our God with all our heart, and
to serve him with all our strength; to love our neighbour as
ourselves; and therefore do unto every man as we would he
should do unto us. Nay, you say, “Had you confined your
selves to these great points, there would have been no objeetion
against your doctrine. But the doctrines you have distin
guished yourselves by, are not the love of God and man, but
many false and pernicious errors.” (Page 104.)
I have again and again, with all the plainness I could,
declared what our constant doctrines are; whereby we are dis
tinguished only from Heathens, or nominal Christians; not
from any that worship God in spirit and in truth. Our main
doctrines, which include all the rest, are three,—that of repent
ance, of faith, and of holiness. The first of these we account,
as it were, the porch of religion; the next, the door; the third,
religion itself.
That repentance or conviction of sin, which is always pre
vious to faith, (either in a higher or lower degree, as it pleases
God,) we describe in words to this effect:—
“When men feel in themselves the heavy burden of sin, see
damnation to be the reward of it, behold with the eye of their
mind the horror of hell; they tremble, they quake, and are
inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of heart, and cannot but
accuse themselves, and open their grief unto Almighty God,
and call unto him for mercy. This being done seriously, their
mind is so occupied, partly with sorrow and heaviness, partly
with an earnest desire to be delivered from this danger of hell
and damnation, that all desire of meat and drink is laid apart,
and loathing of all worldly things and pleasure comethin place.
So that nothing them liketh them more, than to weep, to lament,
to mourn; and both with words and behaviour of body to
show themselves weary of life.”
Now, permit me to ask, What, if, before you had observed
that these were the very words of our own Church, one of your
acquaintance or parishioners had come and told you, that ever
since he heard a sermon at the Foundery, he “saw damnation”
before him, “and beheld with the eye of his mind the horror
of hell?” What, if he had “trembled and quaked,” and been
FARTHEIR EXPLAIN ED. 473
so taken up “partly with sorrow and heaviness, partly with an
earnest desire to be delivered from the danger of hell and
damnation,” as to “weep, to lament, to mourn, and both with
words and behaviour to show himself weary of life?” Would
you have scrupled to say, “Here is another ‘deplorable in
stance’ of the ‘Methodists driving men to distraction l’ See,
“into what excessive terrors, frights, doubts, and perplexities,
they throw weak and well-meaning men quite oversetting
their understandings and judgments, and making them liable
to all these miseries.’”
I dare not refrain from adding one plain question, which I
beseech you to answer, not to me, but to God: Have you ever
experienced this repentance yourself? Did you ever “feel in
yourself that heavy burden of sin?” of sin in general, more
especially, inward sin; of pride, anger, lust, vanity? of (what
is all sin in one) that carnal mind which is enmity, essential
enmity, against God? Do you know by experience what it is
to “behold with the eye of the mind the horror of hell?”
Was “your mind” ever so “taken up, partly with sorrow and
heaviness, partly with an earnest desire to be delivered from
this danger of hell and damnation, that even all desire of meat
and drink” was taken away, and you “loathed all worldly
things and pleasure?” Surely if you had known what it is
to have the “arrows of the Almighty” thus “sticking fast in
you,” you could not so lightly have condemned those who
now cry out, “The pains of hell come about me; the sorrows
of death compass me, and the overflowings of ungodliness
make me afraid.”
5. Concerning the gate of religion,—(if it may be allowed
so to speak,) the true, Christian, saving faith,-we believe it
implies abundantly more than an assent to the truth of the
Bible. “Even the devils believe that Christ was born of a
virgin; that he wrought all kind of miracles; that for our
sakes he suffered a most painful death to redeem us from
death everlasting. These articles of our faith the very devils
believe, and so they believe all that is written in the Old and
New Testament. And yet, for all this faith, they be but
devils. They remain still in their damnable estate, lacking
the very true Christian faith.
“The right and true Christian faith is, not only to believe
that the Holy Scriptures and the articles of our faith are true,
474 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
but also to have a sure trust and confidence to be saved from
everlasting damnation, through Christ.” Perhaps it may be
expressed more clearly thus: “A sure trust and confidence
which a man hath in God, that by the merits of Christ his
sins are forgiven, and he reconciled to the favour of God.”
For giving this account of Christian faith, (as well as the
preceding account of repentance, both which I have here also
purposely described in the very terms of the Homilies,) I
have been again and again, for near these eight years past,
accused of enthusiasm; sometimes by those who spoke to my
face, either in conversation, or from the pulpit: but more fre
quently by those who chose to speak in my absence; and not
seldom from the press. I wait for those who judge this to be en
thusiasm, to bring forth their strong reasons. Till then, I must
continue to account all these the “words of truth and sober
ness.”
6. Religion itself (I choose to use the very words wherein I
described it long ago) we define, “The loving God with all
our heart, and our neighbour as ourselves; and in that love
abstaining from all evil, and doing all possible good to all
men.” The same meaning we have sometimes expressed a little
more at large thus: “Religion we conceive to be no other than
love; the love of God and of all mankind; the loving God “with
all our heart, and soul, and strength,’ as having ‘first loved us,’
as the fountain of all the good we have received, and of all we
ever hope to enjoy; and the loving every soul which God hath
made, every man on earth, as our own soul.
“This love we believe to be the medicine of life, the never
failing remedy for all the evils of a disordered world, for all the
miseries and vices of men. Wherever this is, there are virtue
and happiness going hand in hand. There is humbleness of
mind, gentleness, longsuffering, the whole image of God, and,
at the same time, a peace that passeth all understanding, and
joy unspeakable and full of glory.
“This religion we long to see established in the world, a
religion of love, and joy, and peace; having its seat in the
heart, in the inmost soul, but ever showing itself by its fruits;
continually springing forth, not only in all innocence, (for love
worketh no ill to his neighbour,) but likewise in every kind of
beneficence, spreading virtue and happiness all around it.”
If this can be proved by Scripture or reason to be enthusiastic
or erroneous doctrine, we will then plead guilty to the indict
FARTHER EXPLAIN ED. 475.
ment of “teaching error and enthusiasm.” But if this be the
genuine religion of Christ, then will all who advance this
charge against us be found false witnesses before God, in the
day when he shall judge the earth.
7. However, with regard to the fruits of our teaching, you
say, “It is to be feared, the numbers of serious men who have
been perplexed and deluded are much greater than the numbers
of notorious sinners who have been brought to repentance and
good life.” (Page 113.) “Indeed, if you could prove that the
Methodists were, in general, very wicked people before they
followed you, and that all you have been teaching them is,
the love of God and their neighbour, and a care to keep his
commandments, which accordingly they have done since, you
would stop the mouths of all adversaries at once. But we
have great reason to believe that the generality of the Meth
odists, before they became so, were serious, regular, and well
disposed people.” (Page 103.)
If the question were proposed, “Which are greater, the
numbers of serious men who have been perplexed and deluded,
or of notorious sinners who have been brought to repentance
and good life,” by these Preachers, throughout England, within
seven years? it might be difficult for you to fix the conclusion.
For England is a place of wide dimensions; nor is it easy to
make a satisfactory computation, unless you confine yourself
within a smaller compass. Suppose then we were to contract
the question, in order to make it a little less unwieldy. We
will bound our inquiry, for the present, within a square of
three or four miles. It may be certainly known by candid
men, both what has been and what is now done within this
Ristance; and from hence they may judge of those fruits else
where, which they cannot be so particularly informed of.
Inquire then, “Which are greater, the numbers of serious
men, perplexed and deluded by these Teachers, or of notorious
sinners brought to repentance and good life,” within the forest
of Kingswood? Many indeed of the inhabitants are nearly
as they were; are not much better or worse for their preach
ing; because the neighbouring Clergy and Gentry have suc
cessfully laboured to deter them from hearing it. But between
three and four hundred of those who would not be deterred
are now under the care of those Preachers. Now, what num
ber of these were serious Christians before? Were fifty?
476 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST
Were twenty? Were ten? Peradventure there might five such
be found. But it is a question whether there could or no.
The remainder were gross, open sinners, common swearers,
drunkards, Sabbath-breakers, whoremongers, plunderers, rob
bers, implacable, unmerciful, wolves and bears in the shape of
men. Do you desire instances of more “notorious sinners”
than these? I know not if Turkey or Japan can afford them.
And what do you include in “repentance and good life?”
Give the strictest definition thereof that you are able; and I
will undertake, these once notorious sinners shall be weighed
in that balance, and not found wanting.
8. Not that all the Methodists (so called) “were very wicked
people before they followed us.” There are those among them,
and not a few, who are able to stop the boasting of those that
despise them, and to say, “Whereinsoever any of you is bold, I
am bold also:” Only they “count all these things but loss, for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus.” But these we
found, as it were, when we sought them not. We went forth to
“seek that which was lost;” (more eminently lost;) “to call”
the most flagrant, hardened, desperate “sinners to repentance.”
To this end we preached in the Horsefair at Bristol, in Kings
wood, in Newcastle; among the colliers in Staffordshire, and
the tinners in Cornwall; in Southwark, Wapping, Moorfields,
Drury-Lane, at London. Did any man ever pick out such places
as these, in order to find “serious, regular, well-disposed peo
ple?” How many such might then be in any of them I know
not. But this I know, that four in five of those who are now
with us were not of that number, but were wallowing in their
blood, till God by us said unto them, “Live.”
Sir, I willingly put the whole cause on this issue: What are
the general consequences of this preaching? Are there more
tares or wheat? more “good men destroyed,” (that is the pro
per question,) or “wicked men saved?” The last place where we
began constant preaching is a part of Wiltshire and Somerset
shire, near Bath. Now, let any man inquire at Rhode, Brad
ford, Wrexall, or among the colliers at Coleford, (1.) What
kind of people were those “before they followed these men?”
(2.) What are the main doctrines they have been teaching for
this twelvemonth? (3.) What effect have these doctrines upon
their followers? What manner of lives do they lead now? And
if you do not find, (1.) That three in four of these were, two
FARTHER EXPLAIN ED, 477
years ago, notoriously wicked men; (2.) That the main doc
trines they have heard since, were, “Love God and your neigh
bour, and carefully keep his commandments;” and, (3.) That
they have since exercised themselves herein, and continue so
to do;—I say, if you, or any reasonable man, who will be at
the pains to inquire, does not find this to be an unquestionable
fact, I will openly acknowledge myself an enthusiast, or what
soever else you shall please to style me.
Only one caution I would give to such an inquirer: Let
him not ask the colliers of Coleford, “Were not the generality
of you, before you followed these men, serious, regular, well
disposed people?” Were you not “offended at the profaneness
and debauchery of the age?” And “was it not this disposition
which at first made you liable to receive these impressions?”
(Second Letter, p. 103.) Because if he talk thus to some of
those who do not yet “follow these men,” perhaps he will not
live to bring back their answer.
9. But will this, or a thousand such instances as this, “stop
the mouths of all adversaries at once?” O'Sir, would one expect
such a thought as this in one that had read the Bible? What,
if you could convert as many sinners as St. Paul himself?
Would that “stop the mouths of all your adversaries?” Yea,
if you could convert three thousand at one sermon, still you
would be so far from “stopping all their mouths at once,” that
the greater part of them would gnash upon you with their
teeth, and cry, “Away with such a fellow from the earth!”
I never, therefore, expect “to persuade the world,” the
majority of mankind, that I “have been,” for some years, “ad
vancing nothing” but what has a clear, immediate connexion
with “the true knowledge and love of God; ” that God hath
been pleased to use me, a weak, vile worm, in reforming many
of my fellow-sinners, and making them, at this day, living
witnesses of “inward and pure religion; ” and that many of
these, “from living in all sin, are quite changed, are become”
so far “holy, that ” though they are not “free from all sin,”
yet no sin hath dominion over them. And yet I do firmly
believe, “it is nothing but downright prejudice, to deny or
oppose any of these particulars.” (Preface, page 5.)
“Allow Mr. Wesley,” you say, “but these few points, and
he will defend his conduct beyond exception.” That is most
true. If I have indeed “been advancing nothing but the true
.478 PR1NCIPLES OF A METHODIST
knowledge and love of God,” if God has made me an instru
ment in reforming many sinners, and bringing them to “inward
and pure religion;” and if many of these continue holy to this
day, and free from all wilful sin, then may I, even I, use those
awful words, “He that despiseth me, despiseth Him that sent
me.” But I never expect the world to allow me one of these
points. However, I must go on as God shall enable me. I
must lay out whatsoever he intrusts me with, (whether others
will believe I do it or no) in advancing the true Christian know
ledge of God, and the love and fear of God among men; in
reforming (if so be it please him to use me still) those who are
yet without God in the world; and in propagating inward and
pure religion,-righteousness, peace, and joyin the Holy Ghost.
10. But you believe, I only corrupt those who were good
Christians before, teaching them to revile and censure their
neighbours, and to abuse the Clergy, notwithstanding all their
meekness and gentleness, as I do myself. “I must declare,”
say you, “we have, in general, answered your pretence with all
meekness and temper; the railing and reviling has been chiefly
on the side of the Methodists.” (Second Letter, page 16.)
Your first charge ran thus: “How have such abuses as these
been thrown out by you against our regular Clergy, not the
highest or the worthiest excepted !” (Remarks, p. 15.) I
answered, “I am altogether clear in this matter, as often as
it has been objected: Neither do I desire to receive any other
treatment from the Clergy, than they have received from me
to this day.” (Page 399.)
You reply, (1.) “One instance of your misrepresenting and
injuring a Preacher of our Church Imentioned.” (Second Letter,
p. 105.) Mentioned! Well, but did you prove it was an injury
or misrepresentation? I know not that you once attempted it.
(2.) You next quote part of a letter from the Third Journal;
(vol. I. p. 184;) wherein, according to your account, the
“most considerable of our Clergy are abused, and at once
accused in a very gross manner.” (Second Letter, p. 106.) Set
down the whole paragraph, and I will prove that this also .
naked truth, and no abuse at all. You say, (3) “You ap
proved of Whitefield’s railing against the Clergy;” that is, I
say, “Mr. Whitefield preached concerning the ‘Holy Ghost,
which all who believe are to receive;’ not without a just,
though severe, censure of those who preach as if there were no
FARTHER EXPLAINED. 479
Holy Ghost.” (Vol. I. p. 210.) Nor is this railing, but melan
choly truth. I have myself heard several preach in this man
ner. (4.) You cite my words: “Woe unto you, ye blind leaders
of the blind! How long will you pervert the right ways of
the Lord?” and add, “I appeal to yourself, whether you did
not design this reflection against the Clergy ingeneral who
differ from you.” No more than I did against Moses and
Aaron. I expressly specify whom I design: “Ye who tell the
mourners in Zion, Much religion hath made you mad.” You
say, (5) (with a N. B.,) “All the Clergy who differ from you,
you style so, page 225; in which, and the foregoing page,
you causelessly slander them as speaking of their own holiness
as that for the sake of which, on account of which, we are justi
fied before God.”-
Let any serious person read over those pages. I therein
slander no man: I speak what I know; what I have both heard
and read. The men are alive, and the books are extant. And
the same conclusion I now defend, touching that part of the
Clergy who preach or write thus; viz., if they preach the truth
as it is in Jesus, I am found a false witness before God. But if
I preach the way of God in truth, then they are blind leaders
of the blind. (6.) You quote those words, “Nor can I be said
to intrude into the labours of those who do not labour at all,
but suffer thousands of those for whom Christ died to perish
for lack of knowledge.” (Vol. I. p. 214.) I wrote that letter
near Kingswood. I would to God the observation were not
terribly true! (7.) The first passage you cite from the “Earn
est Appeal,” (pages 25, 26) evidently relates to a few only
among the Clergy; and if the charge be true but of one in
five hundred, it abundantly supports my reasoning. (8.) In
the next, (Ibid. page 30,) I address all those, and those only,
who affirm that I preach for gain.
You conclude: “The reader has now before him the manner
in which you have been pleased to treat the Clergy; and your
late sermon is too fresh an instance of the like usage of the
Universities.” (Second Letter, p. 107.) It is an instance of
speaking the truth in love. So I desire all mankind may use
me. Nor could I have said less either to the University or
the Clergy without sinning against God and my own soul.
11. But I must explain myself a little on that practice which
you so often term “abusing the Clergy.” I have many times
great sorrow and heaviness in my heart on account of these my
480 PRINCIPLES OF A METHODIST.
brethren. And this sometimes constrains me to speak to them,
in the only way which is now in my power; and sometimes,
though rarely, to speak of them; of a few, not all in general.
In either case, I take an especial care, (1.) To speak nothing
but the truth. (2.) To speak this with all plainness. And,
(3) With love, and in the spirit of meekness. Now, if you
will call this abusing, railing, or reviling, you must. But still I
dare not refrain from it. I must thus rail, thus abuse sinners
of all sorts and degrees, unless I will perish with them.
When I first read your declaration, that our brethren “in
general had treated us with all meekness and temper,” I had
thoughts of spreading before you a few of the flowers which
they have strewed upon us with no sparing hand. But, on
reflection, I judged it better to forbear. Let them die and be
forgotten
As to those of the people called Methodists, whom you sup
pose to “rail at and abuse the Clergy,” and to “revile and
censure their neighbours,” I can only say, Which are they?
Show me the men. And if it appear, that any of those under
my care habitually “censure” or “revile” others, whether
Clergy or laity, I will make them an example, for the benefit
of all the rest.
Touching you, I believe I was afraid without cause. I do
not think you advanced a wilful untruth. This was a rash word.
I hereby openly retract it, and ask pardon of God and you.
To draw toward a conclusion: Whosoever they are that
“despise me, and make no account of my labours,” I know that
they are “not in vain in the Lord,” and that I have not “fought
as one that beateth the air.” I still see (and I praise “the
Father of Lights, from whom every good and perfect gift de
scendeth”) a continual increase of pure religion and undefiled,
of the love of God and man, of the “wisdom ” which is “pure
and peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy,
and of good fruits.” I see more and more of those “who before
lived in a thorough contempt of God’s ordinances, and of all
duties, now zealously discharging their duties to God and man,
and walking in all his ordinances blameless.” A few indeed I
have seen draw back to perdition, chiefly through a fear of being
“righteous overmuch.” And here and there one has fallen into
Calvinism, or turned aside to the Moravians. But, I doubt not,
these “are in a better state” than they were before they heard
us. Admit they are in error, yea, and die therein, yet who dares
LETTER, TO THE BISHOP OF LONDON. 481
affirm they will perish everlastingly? But had they died in
gross sin, we are sure they had fallen into “the fire that
never shall be quenched.”
I have now considered, as far as my time would permit,
(not everything in your letter, whether of moment or no,
but,) those points which I conceived to be of the greatest
weight. That God may lead us both into all truth, and that
we may not drop our love in the pursuit of it, is the con
tinual prayer of,
everend Sir,
Your friend and servant for Christ’s sake,
JOHN WESLEY.
June 17, 1746.
A LETTER,
TO THE
RIGHT REV. THE LORD BISHOP OF LONDON
OCCASIONED BY HIS LORDSHIP'S LATE CHARGE TO HIS CLERGY
Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person, neither let me give flattering
titles unto man. For I know not to give flattering titles; in so doing, my
Maker would soon take me away. Job xxxii. 21, 22.
MY LoRD,
1. WHEN abundance of persons have for several years laid to
my charge things that I knew not, I have generally thought
it my duty to pass it over in silence, to be “as one that heard
not.” But the case is different when a person of your Lord
ship’s character calls me forth to answer for myself. Silence
now might be interpreted contempt. It might appear like a sul
len disregard, a withholding honour from him towhom honour
is due, were it only on account of his high office in the Church,
VOL. VIII.
482 LETTER. To
more especially when I apprehend so eminent a person as this
to be under considerable mistakes concerning me. Were I
now to be silent, were I not to do what was in my power
for the removal of those mistakes, I could not “have a con
science void of offence,” either “towards God or towards man.”
2. But I am sensible how difficult it is to speak in such a
manner as I ought, and as I desire to do. When your
Lordship published those queries, under the title of “Obser
vations,” I did not lie under the same difficulty; because, as
your name was not inscribed, I had “the liberty to stand, as
it were, on even ground.” But I must now always re
member to whom I speak. And may the God “whom I
serve in the gospel of his Son,” enable me to do it with deep
seriousness of spirit, with modesty and humility; and, at the
same time, with the utmost plainness of speech; seeing we
must “both stand before the judgment-seat of Christ.”
3. In this, then, I entreat your Lordship to bear with me;
and in particular, when I speak of myself, (how tender a
point 1) just as freely as I would of another man. Let not
this be termed boasting. Is there not a cause? Can I re
frain from speaking, and be guiltless? And if I speak at all,
ought I not to speak (what appears to me to be) the whole
truth? Does not your Lordship desire that I should do this?
I will then, God being my helper. And you will bear with
me in my folly, (if such it is) with my speaking in the sim
plicity of my heart.
4. Your Lordship begins, “There is another species of
enemies, who give shameful disturbance to the parochial
Clergy, and use very unwarrantable methods to prejudice
their people against them, and to seduce their flocks from
them; the Methodists and Moravians, who agree in annoying
the established ministry, and in drawing over to themselves
the lowest and most ignorant of the people, by pretences to
greater sanctity.” (Charge, p. 4.)
But have no endeavours been used to show them their
error? Yes; your Lordship remarks, “Endeavours have not
been wanting. But though these endeavours have caused
some abatement in the pomp and grandeur with which these
people for some time acted,” (truly, one would not have ex
pected it from them !) “yet they do not seem to have made
any impression upon their leaders.” (Ibid. p. 6.)
ThE BISHOP OF LONDON. 483
Your Lordship adds, “Their innovations in points of dis
cipline I do not intend to enter into at present. But to in
quire what the doctrines are which they spread.” (Ibid.
p. 7.) “Doctrines big with pernicious influences upon prac
tice.” (Ibid. p. 8.)
Six of these your Lordship mentions, after having pre
mised, “It is not at all needful, to the end of guarding
against them, to charge the particular tenets upon the particular
persons among them.” (Ibid. p. 7.) Indeed, my Lord, it is
needful in the highest degree. For if the Minister who is to
guard his people, either against Peter Böhler, Mr. Whitefield,
or me, does not know what our particular tenets are, he must
needs “run as uncertainly, and fight as one that beateth the air.”
I will fairly own which of these belong to me. The in
direct practices which your Lordship charges upon me may
then be considered; together with the consequences of these
doctrines, and your Lordship's instructions to the Clergy.
5. “The First that I shall take notice of,” says your
Lordship, “is the Antinomian doctrine.” (Ibid. p. 8.) The
Second, “that Christ has done all, and left nothing for us to
do, but to believe.” (Ibid. p. 9.) These belong not to me.
I am unconcerned therein. I have earnestly opposed, but did
never teach or embrace, them.
“There is another notion,” your Lordship says, “which we
find propagated throughout the writings of those people, and
that is, the making inward, secret, and sudden impulses the
guides of their actions, resolutions, and designs.” (Ibid. p. 14.)
Mr. Church urged the same objection before: “Instead of
making the word of God the rule of his actions, he follows
only his secret impulse.” I beg leave to return the same
answer. “In the whole compass of language there is not a
proposition which less belongs to me than this. I have de
clared again and again, that I make the word of God “ the
rule’ of all my actions; and that I no more follow any
‘secret impulse’ instead thereof, than I follow Mahomet or
Confucius.” (Answer to Mr. Church, page 406.)
6. Before I proceed, suffer me to observe, here are three
grievous errors charged on the Moravians, Mr. Whitefield, and
me, conjointly, in none of which I am any more concerned
than in the doctrine of the metempsychosis ! But it was
“not needful to charge particular tenets on particular
484 lETTER. To
persons.” Just as needful, my Lord, as it is not to put a
stumbling-block in the way of our brethren; not to lay them
under an almost insuperable temptation of condemning the
innocent with the guilty. I beseech your Lordship to
answer in your own conscience before God, whether you did
not foresee how many of your hearers would charge these
tenets upon me; nay, whether you did not design they
should. If so, my Lord, is this Christianity? Is it
humanity? Let me speak plain. Is it honest Heathenism?
7. I am not one jot more concerned in instantaneous justifi
cation, as your Lordship explains it, viz., “A sudden, instanta
neous justification, by which the person receives from God a
certain seal of his salvation, or an absolute assurance of being
saved at last.” (Charge, p. 11.) “Such an instantaneous work
ing of the Holy Spirit as finishes the business of salvation once
for all.” (Ibid.) I neither teach nor believe it; and am there
fore clear of all the consequences that may arise therefrom. I
believe “a gradual improvement in grace and goodness,” I mean,
in the knowledge and love of God, is a good “testimony of our
present sincerity towards God; ” although I dare not say, It is
“the only true ground of humble assurance,” or the only
foundation on which a Christian builds his “hopes of accept
ance and salvation.” For I think, “other foundation” of these
“can no man lay, than that which is laid, even Jesus Christ.”
8. To the charge of holding “sinless perfection,” as your
Lordship states it, I might likewise plead, Not guilty; seeing
one ingredient thereof, in your Lordship’s account, is “freedom
from temptation.” (Ibid. p. 17.) Whereas I believe, “there
is no such perfection in this life as implies an entire deliverance
from manifold temptations.” But I will not decline the
charge. I will repeat once more my coolest thoughts upon
this head; and that in the very terms which I did several
years ago, as I presume your Lordship cannot be ignorant :
“What, it may be asked, do you mean by ‘one that is per
fect, or, “one that is as his Master?' We mean one in whom
is ‘the mind which was in Christ,’ and who so “walketh as He
walked; a man that ‘hath clean hands and a pure heart; or
that is “cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; one
“in whom there is no occasion of stumbling, and who, accord
ingly, ‘doth not commit sin. To declare this a little more
particularly : We understand by that scriptural expression, “a
THE BISEIOP OF LONDON. 485
perfect man, one in whom God hath fulfilled his faithful word:
“From all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse
you. I will also save you from all your uncleanness. We
understand hereby, one whom God hath sanctified through
out, even in ‘body, soul, and spirit; one who “walketh in the
light, as He is in the light, in whom ‘is no darkness at all;’
the blood of Jesus Christ his Son having “cleansed him from
all sin.”- •
“This man can now testify to all mankind, ‘I am crucified
with Christ; nevertheless I live; yet I live not, but Christ
liveth in me.’ He ‘is holy, as God who called him is holy,”
both in life, and ‘in all manner of conversation. He ‘loveth
the Lord his God with all his heart, and serveth him with all
his strength.’ He ‘loveth his neighbour” (every man) “as
himself; yea, “as Christ loved us;’ them in particular that
‘ despitefully use him and persecute him, because “they know
not the Son, neither the Father. Indeed, his soul is all love,
filled with “bowels of mercies, kindness, meekness, gentleness,
long-suffering. And his life agreeth thereto, full of ‘the work
of faith, the patience of hope, the labour of love.’ And ‘what
soever he doeth, either in word or deed,” he doeth ‘it all in the
name, in the love and power, ‘of the Lord Jesus.” In a word,
he doeth the will of God “on earth, as it is done in heaven.’
“This is to be ‘a perfect man, to be “sanctified throughout,
created anew in Jesus Christ; even ‘to have a heart so all
flaming with the love of God,' (to use Archbishop Usher's
words,) “as continually to offer up every thought, word, and
work, as a spiritual sacrifice, acceptable unto God through
Christ.’ In every thought of our hearts, in every word of our
tongues, in every work of our hands, “to show forth his praise
who hath called us out of darkness into his marvellous light.”
O that both we, and all who seek the Lord Jesus in sincerity,
may thus ‘be made perfect in one !’”
9. I conjure you, my Lord, by the mercies of God, if these
are not the words of truth and soberness, point me out wherein
I have erred from the truth; show me clearly wherein I have
spoken either beyond or contrary to the word of God. But
might I not humbly entreat, that your Lordship, in doing this,
would abstain from such expressions as these: “If they will but
put themselves under their direction and discipline,—after their
course of discipline is once over,” (ibid. p. 15,) as not suitable
486 LETTEP. To
either to the weight of the subject, or the dignity of your Lord
ship's character. And might I not expect something more than
these loose assertions, that this is “a delusion altogether
groundless; a notion contrary to the whole tenor both of the
Old and New Testament; ” that “the Scriptures forbid all
thought of it, as vain, arrogant, and presumptuous;” that they
“represent all mankind, without distinction, as subject to sin
and corruption” (subject to sin and corruption l strong words!)
“during their continuance in this world; and require no more
than an honest desire and endeavour to find ourselves less and
less in a state of imperfection.” (Ibid. pp. 15, 16.)
Is it not from your Lordship's entirely mistaking the ques
tion, not at all apprehending what perfection I teach, that you
go on to guard against the same imaginary consequences, as
your Lordship did in the “Observations?” Surely, my Lord,
you never gave yourself the trouble to read the answer given in
the “Farther Appeal,” to every objection which you now urge
afresh; seeing you do not now appear to know any more of
my sentiments than if you had never proposed one question,
nor received one answer, upon the subject!
10. If your Lordship designed to show my real sentiments
concerning the last doctrine which you mention, as one would
imagine by your adding, “These are his own words,” (ibid.
p. 18,) should you not have cited all my own words? at least
all the words of that paragraph, and not have mangled it as
Mr. Church did before?
It runs thus: “Saturday, 28. I showed at large, in order to
answer those who taught that none but they who are full of
faith and the Holy Ghost ought ever to communicate, (1.) That
the Lord's supper was ordained by God to be a means of con
veying to men either preventing, or justifying, or sanctifying
grace, according to their several necessities. (2.) That the per
sons for whom it was ordained are all those who know and feel
that they want the grace of God, either to restrain them from
sin, or to ‘show their sins forgiven, or to ‘renew their souls’
in the image of God. (3.) That inasmuch as we come to his
table, not to give him anything, but to receive whatsoever he
sees best for us, there is no previous preparation indispensably
necessary, but a desire to receive whatsoever he pleases to give.
And, (4.) That no fitness is required at the time of communi
cating, but a sense of our state, of our utter sinfulness and help
THE BISHOP OF LONDON. 487
lessness; every one who knows he is fit for hell, being just
fit to come to Christ, in this, as well as all other ways of his
appointment.” (Vol. I. p. 280.)
In the Second Letter to Mr. Church, p. 434, I explain myself
farther on this head: “I am sorry to find you still affirm, that,
with regard to the Lord's supper also, I ‘advance many injudi
cious, false, and dangerous things. Such as, (1.) That a man
ought to communicate without a sure trust in God’s mercy
through Christ.’ (Page 117.) You mark these as my words;
but I know them not. (2.) ‘That there is no previous prepa
ration indispensably necessary, but a desire to receive whatso
ever God pleases to give. But I include abundantly more in
that desire, than you seem to apprehend, even a willingness
to know and do the whole will of God. (3.) ‘That no fitness
is required at the time of communicating,’ (I recite the whole
sentence,) “but a sense of our state, of our utter sinfulness
and helplessness; every one who knows he is fit for hell, being
just fit to come to Christ, in this, as well as in all other ways
of his appointment.” But neither can this sense of our utter
sinfulness and helplessness subsist without earnest desires of
universal holiness.”
And now, what can I say? Had your Lordship never seen
this? That is hardly to be imagined. But if you had, how
was it possible your Lordship should thus explicitly and
solemnly charge me, in the presence of God and all my
brethren, (only the person so charged was not present,) with
“meaning by those words to set aside self-examination, and
repentance for sins past, and resolutions of living better for
the time to come, as things no way necessary to make a worthy
communicant?” (Charge, p. 18.)
If an evidence at the bar should swerve from truth, an
equitable judge may place the thing in a true light. But if
the judge himself shall bear false witness, where then can we
find a remedy?
Actual preparation was here entirely out of the question. It
might be absolutely and indispensably necessary, for anything
I had either said or meant to the contrary: For it was not at
all in my thoughts. And the habitual preparation which I had
in terms declared to be indispensably necessary was, “a willing
mess to know and to do the whole will of God,” and “earnest
desires of universal holiness.” Does your Lordship think, this
488 LETTER. To
is “meant to set aside all repentance for sins past, and reso
lutions of living better for the time to come?”
11. Your Lordship next falls with all your might upon that
strange assertion, as you term it, “We come to his table, not
to give him anything, but to receive whatsoever he sees best for
us.” “Whereas,” says your Lordship, “in the exhortation at
the time of receiving, the people are told that they must give
most humble and hearty thanks,—and immediately after re
ceiving, both Minister and people join in offering and present
ing themselves before God.” (Ibid. pp. 20, 21.) O God! in
what manner are the most sacred things here treated! the most
venerable mysteries of our religion | What quibbling, what
playing upon words, is here! Not to give him anything. “Yes,
to give him thanks.” O my Lord, are these the words of a
Father of the Church !
12. Your Lordship goes on : “To the foregoing account of
these modern principles and doctrines, it may not be improper
to subjoin a few observations upon the indirect practices of
the same people in gaining proselytes.” (Ibid. pp. 23, 24.)
“I. They persuade the people, that the established worship,
with a regular attendance upon it, is not sufficient to answer
the ends of devotion.”
Your Lordship mentioned this likewise in the Observations.
In your fourth query it stood thus: “Whether a due and
regular attendance on the public offices of religion, paid in a
serious and composed way, does not answer the true ends of
devotion.” Suffer me to repeat part of the answer then given:—
“I suppose by ‘devotion’ you mean public worship; by the
‘true ends’ of it, the love of God and man; and by “a due and
regular attendance on the public offices of religion, paid in a
serious and composed way, the going as often as we can to our
parish church, and to the sacrament there administered. If so,
the question is, Whether this attendance on those offices does
not produce the love of God and man. I answer, Sometimes it
does, and sometimes it does not. I myself thus attended them
for many years; and yet am conscious to myself, that, during
that whole time, I had no more of the love of God than a stone.
And I know many hundreds, perhaps thousands, of serious per
sons who are ready to testify the same thing.”
I subjoined, (1) “We continually exhort all who attend on
our preaching, to attend the offices of the Church. And they
THE BISHOP OF LoNDON. 489
do pay a more regular attendance there than ever they did
before. (2.) Their attending the Church did not, in fact, answer
those ends at all till they attended this preaching also. (3.) It
is the preaching remission of sins through Jesus Christ which
alone answers the true ends of devotion.”-
II. 13. “They censure the Clergy,” says your Lordship,
“as less zealous than themselves in the several branches of the
ministerial function. For this they are undeservedly reproached
by these noisy itinerant leaders.” (Charge, pp. 24, 25.)
My Lord, I am not conscious to myself of this. I do not
willingly compare myself with any man; much less do I re
proach my brethren of the Clergy, whether they deserve it or
not. But it is needless to add any more on this head than
what was said above a year ago:—
“I must explain myself a little on that practice which you
so often term “abusing the Clergy.” I have many times great
sorrow and heaviness in my heart on account of these my
brethren. And this sometimes constrains me to speak to them,
in the only way which is now in my power; and sometimes
(though rarely) to speak of them; of a few, not all in general.
In either case, I take an especial care, (1.) To speak nothing
but the truth. (2.) To speak this with all plainness; and, (3.)
With love, and in the spirit of meekness. Now, if you will call
this abusing, railing, or reviling, you must. But still I dare
not refrain from it. I must thus rail, thus abuse sinners of
all sorts and degrees, unless I will perish with them.” (Second
Letter to Mr. Church, pp. 479, 480.)-
III. 14. “They value themselves upon extraordinary strict
nesses and severities in life, and such as are beyond what the
rules of Christianity require. They captivate the people by such
professions and appearances of uncommon sanctity. But that
which can never fail of a general respect is, a quiet and ex
emplary life, free from the many follies and indiscretions which
those restless and vagrant Teachers are apt to fall into.”
(Charge, p. 25.)
By “extraordinary strictnesses and severities,” I presume
your Lordship means, the abstaining from wine and animal
food; which, it is sure, Christianity does not require. But if
you do, I fear your Lordship is not throughly informed of the
matter of fact. I began to do this about twelve years ago, when
I had no thought of “annoying parochial Ministers,” or of
“captivating” any “people” thereby, unless it were the Chica
490 LETTER. To
saw or Choctaw Indians. But I resumed the use of them both,
about two years after, for the sake of some who thought I made
it a point of conscience; telling them, “I will eat flesh while
the world standeth,” rather than “make my brother to offend.”
Dr. Cheyne advised me to leave them off again, assuring me,
“Till you do, you will never be free from fevers.” And since
I have taken his advice, I have been free (blessed be God!)
from all bodily disorders.” Would to God I knew any method
of being equally free from all “follies and indiscretions!” But
this I never expect to attain till my spirit returns to God.
15. But in how strange a manner does your Lordship repre
sent this! What a construction do you put upon it! “Appear
ances of an uncommon sanctity, in order to captivate the people.
Pretensions to more exalted degrees of strictness, to make their
way into weak minds and fickle heads.” (Ibid. p. 25.) “Pre
tencestogreater sanctity, whereby they draw over to themselves
the most ignorant of the people.” (Ibid. p. 4.) If these are
“appearances of uncommon sanctity,” (which, indeed, might
bear a dispute,) how does your Lordship know that they are
only appearances? that they do not spring from the heart?
Suppose these were “exalted degrees of strictness,” is your
Lordship absolutely assured that we practise them only “to
make our way into weak minds and fickle heads?” Where is
the proof that these “pretences to greater sanctity,” (as your
Lordship is pleased to phrase them,) are mere pretences, and
have nothing of reality or sincerity in them?
My Lord, this is an accusation of the highest nature. If we
are guilty, we are not so much as moral Heathens. We are
monsters, not only unworthy of the Christian name, but unfit for
human society. It tears up all pretences to the love of God
and man; to justice, mercy, or truth. But how is it proved?
Or does your Lordship read the heart, and so pass sentence with
out any proof at all? O my Lord, ought an accusation of the
lowest kind to be thus received, even against the lowest of the
people? How much less can this be reconciled with the apos
tolical advice to the Bishop of Ephesus: “Against a Presbyter
receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses;”
and those face to face. When it is thus proved, “them that
sin, rebuke before all.” Your Lordship doubtless remembers
* I continued this about two years.
THE BISHOP OF LONDON. 491
the words that follow : (How worthy to be written in your
heart!) “I charge thee, before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things
without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality.” (1 Timothy v. 19–21.)
IV. 16. “They mislead the people into an opinion of the
high merit of punctual attendances on their performances, to
the neglect of the business of their stations.” (Ibid. p. 26.)
My Lord, this is not so. You yourself, in this very Charge,
have cleared us from one part of this accusation. You have
borne us witness, (ibid. p. 10,) that we disclaim all merit,
even in (really) good works; how much more in such works
as we continually declare are not good, but very evil such
as the attending sermons, or any public offices whatever, “to
the neglect of the business of our station.”
When your Lordship urged this before, in the “Observa
tions,” I openly declared my belief, “that true religion cannot
lead into a disregard or disesteem of the common duties and
offices of life; that, on the contrary, it leads men to discharge
all those duties with the strictest and closest attention; that
Christianity requires this attention and diligence, in all stations,
and in all conditions; that the performance of the lowest offices
of life, as unto God, is truly a serving of Christ; and that this
is the doctrine I preach continually; ” (Farther Appeal, Part
I. p. 60;) a fact whereof any man may easily be informed.
Now, if, after all this, your Lordship will repeat the charge,
as if I had not once opened my mouth concerning it, I cannot
help it. I can say no more. I commend my cause to God.
17. Having considered what your Lordship has advanced
concerning dangerous doctrines and indirect practices, I now
come to the instructions your Lordship gives to the Clergy of
your diocese.
How awful a thing is this 1 The very occasion carries in it
a solemnity not to be expressed. Here is an angel of the Church.
of Christ, one of the stars in God’s right hand, calling together
all the subordinate Pastors, for whom he is to give an account
to God; and directing them (in the name and by the authority
of “the great Shepherd of the sheep, Jesus Christ, the First
Begotten from the dead, the Prince of the kings of the earth”)
how to “make full proof of their ministry,” that they may be
“pure from the blood of all men; ” how to “take heed unto
492 LETTER. To
themselves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost
hath made them overseers; ” how to “feed the flock of God,
which he hath purchased with his own blood l’’ To this end
they are all assembled together. And what is the substance
of all his instructions?—“Reverend brethren, I charge you
all, lift up your voice like a trumpet; and warn and arm and
fortify all mankind against a people called Methodists 1”
True it is, your Lordship gives them several advices; but
all in order to this end. You direct them to “inculcate the
excellency of our Liturgy, as a wise, grave, and serious
service; ” to “show their people, that a diligent attendance
on their business is a serving of God; ” “punctually to per
form both the public offices of the Church, and all other
pastoral duties; ” and to “engage the esteem of their
parishioners by a constant regularity of life.” But all these
your Lordship recommends eo nomine, as means to that great
end, the arming and fortifying their people against the
Moravians or Methodists, and their doctrines.
Is it possible ! Could your Lordship discern no other
enemies of the gospel of Christ? Are there no other heretics
or schismatics on earth, or even within the four seas? Are
there no Papists, no Deists in the land? Or are their errors
of less importance? Or are their numbers in England less
considerable, or less likely to increase? Does it appear, then,
that they have lost their zeal for making proselytes? Or are
all the people so guarded against them already, that their
labour is in vain? Can your Lordship answer these few
plain questions, to the satisfaction of your own conscience?
Have the Methodists (so called) already monopolized all
the sins, as well as errors, in the nation? Is Methodism the
only sin, or the only fatal or spreading sin, to be found
within the Bills of Mortality? Have two thousand (or more)
“ambassadors of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of
God” no other business than to guard, warn, arm, and fortify
their people against this O my Lord, if this engrosses
their time and strength, (as it must, if they follow your
Lordship's instructions,) they will not give an account with
joy, either of themselves or of their flock, in that day !
18. Your Lordship seems in some measure sensible of this,
when you very gently condemn their opinion, who think the
Methodists “might better be disregarded and despised, than
THE BISHOP OF LONDON. 493
taken notice of and opposed, if it were not for the disturbance
they give to the parochial Ministers, and their unwarrantable
endeavours to seduce the people from their lawful Pastors.”
(Charge, p. 22.) The same complaint with which your Lord
ship opened your Charge: “They give shameful disturbances
to the parochial Clergy; they annoy the established ministry,
using very unwarrantable methods, first, to prejudice their
people against them, and then to seduce their flocks from
them.” (Ibid. page 4.)
Whether we seduce them or no, (which will be presently con
sidered,) I am sorry your Lordship should give any countenance
to that low, senseless, and now generally exploded slander, that
we do it for a maintenance. This your Lordship insinuates, by
applying to us those words of Bishop Sanderson: “And all
this to serve their own belly, to make a prey of the poor deluded
proselytes; for by this means the people fall unto them, and
thereout suck they no small advantage.” (Ibid. p. 15.) Your
Lordship cannot but know, that my Fellowship, and my bro
ther's Studentship, afford us more than sufficient for life and
godliness; especially for that manner of life which we choose,
whether out of ostentation or in sincerity.
19. But do we willingly “annoy the established ministry,” or
“give disturbance to the parochial Clergy?” My Lord, we do
not. We trust, herein, to have a conscience void of offence.
Nor do we designedly “prejudice their people against them.”
In this also our heart condemneth us not. But you “seduce
their flocks from them.” No, not even from those who feed
themselves, not the flock. All who hear us, attend the service
of the Church, at least as much as they did before. And for
this very thing are we reproached as bigots to the Church by
those of most other denominations.
Give me leave, my Lord, to say, you have mistook and mis
represented this whole affair from the top to the bottom. And
I am the more concerned to take notice of this, because so many
have fallen into the same mistake. It is indeed, and has been
from the beginning, the Tpotov Wrevôos, “the capital blunder,”
of our bitterest adversaries; though how they can advance it,
I see not, without “loving,” if not “making, a lie.” It is not
our care, endeavour, or desire, to proselyte any from one man
to another; or from one Church, (so called,) from one congre
gation or society, to another; (we would not move a finger to
494 LETTER. To
do this, to make ten thousand such proselytes;) but from
darkness to light, from Belial to Christ, from the power of
Satan to God. Our one aim is, to proselyte sinners to repent
ance; the servants of the devil, to serve the living and true
God. If this be not done, in fact, we will stand condemned:
not as well-meaning fools, but as devils incarnate. But if it
be, if the instances glare in the face of the sun, if they increase
daily, maugre all the power of earth and hell; then, my Lord,
neither you nor any man beside (let me use great plainness of
speech) can “oppose” and “fortify people against us,” with
out being found even “to fight against God.”
20. I would fain set this point in a clearer light. Here are,
in and near Moorfields, ten thousand poor souls for whom
Christ died, rushing headlong into hell. Is Dr. Bulkely, the
parochial Minister, both willing and able to stop them? If
so, let it be done, and I have no place in these parts. I go
and call other sinners to repentance. But if, after all he has
done, and all he can do, they are still in the broad way to
destruction, let me see if God will put a word even in my
mouth. True, I am a poor worm that of myself can do nothing.
But if God sends by whomsoever he will send, his word shall
not return empty. All the messenger of God asks is, Aos Trov
aro; (no help of man ) cat ym cuvmao." The arm of the
Lord is revealed. The lion roars, having the prey plucked out
of his teeth. And “there is joy in the presence of the angels
of God, over” more than “one sinner that repenteth.”
21. Is this any annoyance to the parochial Minister? Then
what manner of spirit is he of? Does he look on this part of
his flock as lost, because they are found of the great Shepherd?
My Lord, great is my boldness toward you. You speak of the
consequences of our doctrines. You seem well pleased with the
success of your endeavours against them, because, you say, they
“have pernicious consequences, are big with pernicious influ
ences upon practice, dangerous to religion and the souls of men.”
(Ibid. pp. 8, 22.) In answer to all this, I appeal to plain fact. I
say once more, “What have been the consequences (Iwould not
speak, but I dare not refrain) of the doctrines I have preached
for nine years last past? By the fruits shall ye know those of
whom I speak; even the cloud of witnesses, who at this hour
experience the gospel which I preach to be the power of God
* Give me a point on which to stand, and I will move the world.—EDIT.
THE BISHOP OF LONDON. 495
unto salvation. The habitual drunkard that was, is now tem
perate in all things; the whoremonger now flees fornication;
he that stole, steals no more, but works with his hands; he
that cursed or swore, perhaps at every sentence, has now
learned to serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with
reverence; those formerly enslaved to various habits of sin are
now brought to uniform habits of holiness. These are demon
strable facts; I can name the men, with their places of abode.
One of them was an avowed Atheist for many years; some were
Jews; aconsiderable number Papists; the greatest part of them
as much strangers to the form, as to the power, of godliness.”
My Lord, can you deny these facts? I will make whatever
proof of them you shall require. But if the facts be allowed,
who can deny the doctrines to be, in substance, the gospel of
Christ? “For is there any other name under heaven given to
men, whereby they may thus be saved?” or is there any other
word that thus “commendeth itself to every man’s conscience
in the sight of God?”
22. But I must draw to a conclusion. Your Lordship has,
without doubt, had some success in opposing this doctrine.
Very many have, by your Lordship’s unwearied endeavours,
been deterred from hearing at all; and have thereby probably
escaped the being seduced into holiness, have lived and died
in their sins. My Lord, the time is short. I am past the noon
of life, and my remaining years flee away as a shadow. Your
Lordship is old and full of days, having past the usual age of
man. It cannot, therefore, be long before we shall both drop
this house of earth, and stand naked before God: No, nor
before we shall see the great white throne coming down from
heaven, and Him that sitteth thereon. On his left hand shall
be those who are shortly to dwell in everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels. In that number will be all who
died in their sins; and, among the rest, those whom you pre
served from repentance. Will you then rejoice in your success?
The Lord God grant it may not be said in that hour, “These
have perished in their iniquity; but their blood I require at
thy hands !” I am
Your Lordship's dutiful son and servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
LoNDoN
June 11, 1747.
LETTER TO A CLERGYMAN.
REVEREND SIR, TULLAMoRE, May 4, 1748.
I HAVE at present neither leisure nor inclination to enter
into a formal controversy; but you will give me leave just to
offer a few loose hints relating to the subject of last night's
conversation:
1. Seeing life and health are things of so great importance,
it is, without question, highly expedient that Physicians should
have all possible advantages of learning and education.
2. That trial should be made of them, by competent judges,
before they practise publicly.
3. That after such trial, they be authorized to practise by
those who are empowered to convey that authority.
4. And that, while they are preserving the lives of others,
they should have what is sufficient to sustain their own.
5. But supposing a gentleman, bred at the University in
Dublin, with all the advantages of education, after he has
undergone all the usual trials, and then been regularly
authorized to practise :
6. Suppose, I say, this Physician settles at , for some
years, and yet makes no cures at all; but, after trying his
skill on five hundred persons, cannot show that he has healed
one; many of his patients dying under his hands, and the
rest remaining just as they were before he came:
7. Will you condemn a man who, having some little skill in
physic, and a tender compassion for those who are sick or
dying all around him, cures many of those, without fee or
reward, whom the Doctor could not cure?
8. At least did not, (which is the same thing as to the case
in hand,) were it only for this reason, because he did not go to
them, and they would not come to him?
LETTER TO A CLERGYMAN. 497
9. Will you condemn him because he has not learning, or
has not had an University education?
What then? He cures those whom the man of learning
and education cannot cure !
10. Will you object, that he is no Physician, nor has any
authority to practise?
I cannot come into your opinion. I think, Medicus est qui
medetur, “He is a Physician who heals;” and that every man
has authority to save the life of a dying man.
But if you only mean, he has no authority to take fees, I
contend not; for he takes none at all.
11. Nay, and I am afraid it will hold, on the other hand,
Medicus non est qui non medetur; I am afraid, if we use
propriety of speech, “he is no Physician who works no
cure.”
12. “O, but he has taken his degree of Doctor of Physic,
and therefore has authority.”
Authority to do what? “Why, to heal all the sick that
will employ him.” But (to wave the case of those who will
not employ him; and would you have even their lives thrown
away?) he does not heal those that do employ him. He that
was sick before, is sick still; or else he is gone hence, and is
Ino more Seen.
Therefore, his authority is not worth a rush; for it serves
not the end for which it was given.
13. And surely he has no authority to kill them, by hinder
ing another from saving their lives!
14. If he either attempts or desires to hinder him, if he con
demns or dislikes him for it, it is plain to all thinking men,
he regards his own fees more than the lives of his patients.
II. Now to apply: 1. Seeing life everlasting, and holiness,
or health of soul, are things of so great importance, it is highly
expedient that Ministers, being Physicians of the soul, should
have all advantages of education and learning.
2. That full trial should be made of them in all respects, and
that by the most competent judges, before they enter on the
public exercise of their office, the saving souls from death.
3. That after such trial, they be authorized to exercise that
office by those who are empowered to convey that authority.
(I believe Bishops are empowered to do this, and have been
so from the apostolic age.)
VOL. VIII.
498 LETTER TO A CLERGYMAN.
4. And that those whose souls they save ought, meantime,
to provide them what is needful for the body.
5. But suppose a gentleman bred at the University in
Dublin, with all the advantages of education, after he has
undergone the usual trials, and been regularly authorized to
save souls from death:
6. Suppose, I say, this Minister settles at , for some
years, and yet saves no soul at all, saves no sinners from their
sins; but after he has preached all this time to five or six
hundred persons, cannot show that he has converted one from
the error of his ways; many of his parishioners dying as they
lived, and the rest remaining just as they were before he
Came :
7. Will you condemn a man, who, having compassion on
dying souls, and some knowledge of the gospel of Christ, with
out any temporal reward, saves them from their sins whom the
Minister could not save?
8. At least did not; nor ever was likely to do it; for he
did not go to them, and they would not come to him.
9. Will you condemn such a Preacher because he has not
earning, or has not had an University education?
What then? He saves those sinners from their sins whom
the man of learning and education cannot save.
A peasant being brought before the College of Physicians,
at Paris, a learned Doctor accosted him, “What, friend, do
you pretend to prescribe to people that have agues? Dost
thou know what an ague is?”
He replied, “Yes, Sir; an ague is what I can cure, and you
cannot.”
10. Will you object, “But he is no Minister, nor has any
authority to save souls?”
I must beg leave to dissent from you in this. I think he is
a true, evangelical Minister, 8vakovos, “servant” of Christ and
his Church, who ovro Buakovet, “ so ministers,” as to save souls
from death, to reclaim sinners from their sins; and that every
Christian, if he is able to do it, has authority to save a dying
soul.
But if you only mean, “He has no authority to take
tithes,” I grant it. He takes none: As he has freely received,
so he freely gives.
11. But, to carry the matter a little farther: I am afraidi wi:
hold, on the other hand, with regard to the soul as well as the
LETTER. To A CLERGYMAN. 499
body, Medicus non est qui non medetur.” I am afraid,
reasonable men will be much inclined to think, he that saves
no souls is no Minister of Christ.
12. “O, but he is ordained, and therefore has authority.”
Authority to do what? “To save all the souls that will put
themselves under his care.” True; but (to wave the case of
them that will not; and would you desire that even those
should perish?) he does not, in fact, save them that are under
his care: Therefore, what end does his authority serve? IIe
that was a drunkard is a drunkard still. The same is true of
the Sabbath-breaker, the thief, the common swearer. This is
the best of the case; for many have died in their iniquity, and
their blood will God require at the watchman’s hand.
13. For surely he has no authority to murder souls, either
by his neglect, by his smooth, if not false, doctrine, or by
'hindering another from plucking them out of the fire, and
bringing them to life everlasting.
14. If he either attempts or desires to hinder him, if he
condemns or is displeased with him for it, how great reason is
there to fear that he regards his own profit more than the
salvation of souls ! I am,
Reverend Sir,
Your affectionate brother,
JOHN WESLEY
* He is not a Physician who effects no cures.—EDIT.
A LETTER
To
THE REVEREND DR. FREE
TULLAMoRE, May 2, 1758
REVEREND SIR,
1. A LITTLE tract appearing under your name was yesterday
put into my hands. You therein call upon me to speak, if L
have any exceptions to make to what is advanced: and promise
to reply as fairly and candidly as I can expect, “provided those
exceptions be drawn up, as you have set the example, in a short
compass, and in the manner wherein all wise and good people
would choose to manage a religious dispute.” (Page 22.)
2. “In a short compass,” Sir, they will certainly be drawn
up, for my own sake as well as yours: For I know the value of
time, and would gladly employ it all in what more immediately
relates to eternity. But I do not promise to draw them up in
that manner whereof you have set the example. I cannot, I
dare not; for I fear God, and do really believe there is a judg
ment to come. Therefore, I dare not “return evil for evil,”
neither “railing for railing.” Nor can I allow that your
manner of treating this subject is that “wherein all wise and
good people would choose to manage a religious dispute.”
Far, very far, from it. I shall rejoice if a little more fairness
and candour should appear in your future writings. But I
cannot expect it; for the nigrae succus loliginis, “wormwood
and gall,” seem to have infected your very vitals.
3. The quotation from Bishop Gibson, which takes up five
out of nineteen pages, I have answered already; * and in a man
ner wherewith I have good reason to believe his Lordship was
entirely satisfied. With his Lordship, therefore, I have no
present concern; my business now is with you only: And seeing
you are “now ready,” as you express it, “to run a tilt,” I must
make what defence I can. Only you must excuse me from
meeting you on the same ground, or fighting you with the same
* In “A Letter to the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of London.”
LETTER TO THE REV. D.R. FREE. 501
weapons: My weapons are only truth and love. May the
God of truth and love strengthen my weakness |
4. I wave what relates to Mr. V ’s personal character,
which is too well known to need my defence of it; as like
wise the occurrence (real or imaginary I cannot tell) which
gave birth to your performance. All that I concern myself
with is your five vehement assertions with regard to the peo
ple called Methodists. These I shall consider in their order,
and prove to be totally false and groundless.
5. The first is this: “Their whole ministry is an open and
avowed opposition to one of the fundamental articles of our
areligion.” (Page 4.) How so? Why, “the Twentieth Article
declares, we may not so expound one scripture, that it be
repugnant to another. And yet it is notorious, that the
Methodists do ever explain the word ‘faith’ as it stands in
some of St. Paul’s writings, so as to make his doctrine a
direct and flat contradiction to that of St. James.” (Page 5.)
This stale objection has been answered an hundred times,
so that I really thought we should have heard no more of it.
But since it is required, I repeat the answer once more: By
faith we mean “the evidence of things not seen; ” by justi
fying faith, a divine evidence or conviction, that “Christ
loved me, and gave himself for me.” St. Paul affirms, that
a man is justified by this faith; which St. James never
denies, but only asserts, that a man cannot be justified by a
dead faith: And this St. Paul never affirms.
“But St. James declares, ‘Faith without works is dead.”
Therefore it is clearly St. James's meaning, that a faith
which is without virtue and morality cannot produce salva
tion. Yet the Methodists so explain St. Paul, as to affirm
that faith without virtue or morality will produce salvation.”
(Page 6.) Where? in which of their writings? This needs
some proof: I absolutely deny the fact. So that all which
follows is mere flourish, and falls to the ground at once; and
all that you aver of their “open and scandalous opposition to
the Twentieth Article” (ibid.) is no better than open and
scandalous slander.
6. Your Second assertion is this: “The Methodist, for the
perdition of the souls of his followers, openly gives our Saviour
the lie, loads the Scripture with falsehood and contradic
tion; ” (and pray what could a Mahometan, or infidel, or the
devil himself do more?) “yea, openly blasphemes the name of
502 LETTER TO THE REV. DR. FREE.
Christ, by saying that the works of men are of no consideration
at all; that God makes no distinction between virtue and vice,
that he does not hate vice or love virtue. What blasphemy
then and impiety are those wretches guilty of who, in their
diabolical frenzy, dare to contradict our Saviour's authority,
and that in such an essential article of religion l” (Pages 7–9.)
Here also the Methodists plead, Not Guilty, and require you
to produce your evidence; to show in which of their writings
they affirm that God “will not reward every man according to:
his works; that he makes no distinction between virtue and
vice; that he does not hate vice or love virtue.” These are
positions which they never remember to have advanced. If
you can, refresh their memory.
7. You assert, Thirdly, the Methodists, by these positions,
“destroy the essential attributes of God, and ruin his character
as Judge of the world.” Very true; if they held these positions.
But here lies the mistake. They hold no such positions.
They never did. They detest and abhor them. In arguing,
therefore, on this supposition, you are again “beating the air.”
8. You assert, Fourthly, the Methodists “teach and propa
gate downright Atheism,-a capital crime; and Atheists in
some countries have been put to death. Hereby they make
room for all manner of vice and villany; by which means the
bands of society are dissolved. And therefore this attempt
must be considered as a sort of treason by Magistrates.”
(Pages 10, 11.)-
Again we deny the whole charge, and call for proof; and,
blessed be God, so do the Magistrates in Great Britain. Bold,
vehement asseverations will not pass upon them for legal evi
dence: Nor indeed on any reasonable men. They can distin
guish between arguing and calling names: The former be
comes a gentleman and a Christian: But what is he who can
be guilty of the latter?
9. You assert, Lastly, that any who choose a Methodist
Clergyman for their Lecturer, “put into that office, which
should be held by a Minister of the Church of England, an
enemy, who undermines not only the legal establishment of
that Church, but also the foundation of all religion.” (Page 13.)
Once more we must call upon you for the proof; the proof
of these two particulars, First, that I, John Wesley, am “an
enemy to the Church; and that I undermine not only the legal
establishment of the Church of England, but also the very foun
LETTER TO THE REV. DR. FREE. 503
dation of all religion.” Secondly. That “Mr. V— is an
enemy to the Church, and is undermining all religion, as
well as the establishment.”
10. Another word, and I have done: Are there “certain
qualifications required of all Lecturers, before they are by law
permitted to speak to the people?” (Page 14.) And is a
subscription to the Thirty-nine Articles of religion one of
these qualifications? And is a person who does not “conform
to such subscription” disqualified to be a Lecturer? or, who
“has ever held or published anything contrary to what the
Church of England maintains?” Then certainly you, Dr. John
Free, are not “permitted by law to speak to the people;” nei
ther are you “qualified to be a Lecturer” in any church
in London or England, as by law established. For you
flatly deny and openly oppose more than one or two of those
Articles. You do not in anywise conform to the subscription
you made before you was ordained either Priest or Deacon.
You both hold and publish (if you are the author and publisher
of the tract before me) what is grossly, palpably “contrary to
what the Church of England maintains,” in her Homilies as
well as Articles; those Homilies to which you have also sub
scribed, in subscribing the Thirty-sixth Article. You have sub
cribed them, Sir; but did you ever read them? Did you ever
read so much as the three first Homilies? I beg of you, Sir, to
read these at least, before you write again about the doctrine of
the Church of England. And would it not be prudent to read
a few of the writings of the Methodists before you undertake a
farther confutation of them? At present you know not the
men, or their communication. You are as wholly unacquainted
both with them and their doctrines, as if you had lived all your
days in the islands of Japan, or the deserts of Arabia. You
have given a furious assault to you know not whom ; and you
have done it, you know not why. You have not hurt me
thereby; but you have hurt yourself, perhaps in your cha
racter, certainly in your conscience. For this is not doing
to others “as you would they should do unto you.” When
you grow cool, I trust you will see this clearly; and will no
more accuse, in a manner so remote from fairness and candour,
Reverend Sir,
Your servant for Christ’s sake,
JOHN WESLEY.
A.
SECOND IDETTER
To
THE REVEREND DR. FREE
FonMoN CASTLE,
August 24, 1758.
REVEREND SIR,
IN the preface to your Sermon, lately printed, you men
tion your having received my former letter, and add, that “if
the proofs you have now brought do not satisfy me as to the
validity of your former assertions; if I am not yet convinced
that such positions are held by people who pass under the
denomination of Methodists, and will signify this by a private
letter, I shall have a more particular answer.” I desire to live
peaceably with all men; and should therefore wish for no more
than a private answer to a private letter, did the affair lie be
tween you and me. But this is not the case: You have already
appealed to the Archbishop, the University, the nation.
Before these judges you have advanced a charge of the highest
kind, not only against me, but a whole body of people.
Before these, therefore, I must either confess the charge,
or give in my answer.
But you say, “I charge blasphemy, impiety, &c., upon the
profession of Methodism in general. I use no personal
reflections upon you, nor any invective against you, but in the
character of a Methodist.” That is, you first say, “All
Methodists are pickpockets, rebels, blasphemers, Atheists; ”
and then add, “I use no reflections upon you, but in the
character of a Methodist;” but in the character of a pickpocket,
blasphemer, Atheist. None but ! What can you do more?
But this, you say, is the practice of all honest men, and a
part of the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free. Nay,
surely there are some honest men who scruple using their oppo
ments in this manner. At least, I do: Suppose you was an
SECOND LETTER TO THE REW. D.R. FREE. 505
Atheist, I would not bring against you a railing accusation. I
would still endeavour to “treat you with gentleness and meek
ness,” and thus to “show the sincerity” of my faith. I leave
to you that exquisite “bitterness of spirit, and extreme viru
lence of language,” which, you say, is your duty, and term zeal.
(Preface, p. 5.) And certainly zeal, fervour, heat, it is. But
is this heat from above? Is it the offspring of heaven, or a
smoke from the bottomless pit?
O Sir, whence is that zeal which makes you talk in such a
manner to his Grace of Canterbury? “I lay before you the
disposition of an enemy who threaten our Church with a gene
ral alteration or total subversion; who interrupt us as we walk
the streets,” (Whom? When? Where?) “in that very dress
which distinguishes us as servants of the state,” (altogether
servants of the state?) “in the now sad capacity of Ministers
of the falling Church of England. Such being the prostrate,
miserable condition of the Church, and such the triumphant
state of its enemies, none of the English Priesthood can expect
better security or longer continuance than the rest. They all
subsist at mercy. Your Grace and those of your order will fare
no better than those of our own.” Sir, are you in earnest? Do
you really believe Lambeth is on the point of being blown up?
You go on: “In the remote counties of England, I have
seen a whole troop of these divines on horseback, travelling with
each a sister behind him.” O Sir, O Sir,
What should be great you turn to farce!
Have you forgot, that the Church and nation are on the brink
of ruin? But pray when and where did you see this? in what
year, or in what county? I cannot but fear you take this story
on trust; for such a sight, I will be bold to say, was never seen.
With an easy familiarity you add: “My Lord, permit me
here to whisper a word” (Is not this whispering in print some
thing new 7) “that may be worth remembering. In our
memory, some of the Priesthood have not proved so good sub
jects as might have been expected, till they have been brought
over with preferments, that were due to other people.” Mean
ing, I presume, to yourself. Surely his Grace will remember
this, which is so well worth remembering, and dispose of the
next preferment in his gift where it is sojustly due. If he does
not, if he either forgets this or your other directions, you tell
506 SECOND LETTER
him frankly what will be the consequence: “We must apply to
Tarliament;” (p. 6;) or to His Majesty; and, indeed, how
can you avoid it? “For it would be using him,” you think,
“extremely ill, not to give him proper information, that there”
are now a set of people offering such indignity to his crown and
government.
However, we are not to think your opposing the Methodists
was “owing to self-interest” alone. Though, what if it was?
“Was I to depart from my duty, because it happened to be my
interest ? Did these saints ever forbear to preach to the mob
in the fields, for fear lest they should get the pence of the
mob? Or do not” the pence and the preaching “go hand in
hand together?” No, they do not; for many years neither I,
nor any connected with me, have got any “pence,” as you
phrase it, “in the fields.” Indeed, properly speaking, they
never did. For the collections which Mr. Whitefield made, it
is well known, were not for his own use, either in whole or part.
And he has long ago given an account, in print, of the manner
wherein all that was received was expended.
But it is not my design to examine at large, either your dedi
cation preface, or Sermon. I have only leisure to make a few
cursory remarks on your “definition” of the Methodists, (so
called,) and on the account you give of their first rise, of their
principles and practice; just premising, that I speak of those
alone who began, as you observe, at Oxford. If a thousand
other sets of men “pass under that denomination,” yet they
are nothing to me. As they have no connexion with me, so I
am in no way concerned to answer either for their principles or
practice, any more than you are to answer for all who “pass
under the denomination of Church-of-England men.”
The account you give of their rise, is this: The Methodists
began at Oxford. “The name was first given to a few persons,
who were so uncommonly methodical, as to keep a diary of the
most trivial actions of their lives, as how many slices of bread
and butter they ate, how many country dances they danced at
their dancing club, or after a fast how many pounds of mutton
they devoured. For upon these occasions they ate like lions,
having made themselves uncommonly voracious.” Of this, not
one line is true; for, (1.) It was from an ancient sect of Phy
sicians, whom we were supposed to resemble in our regular diet
and exercise, that we were originally styled Methodists. (2.) Not
TO THE REV. D.R. FREE. 507
one of us ever kept a diary of “the most trivial actions” of
our lives. (3) Nor did any of us ever set down, what, or how
much, we ate or drank. (4.) Our “dancing club” never ex
isted; I never heard of it before. (5.) On our “fast-days.”
we used no food but bread; on the day following, we fed as on
common days. (6.) Therefore our voraciousness and eating
like lions is also pure, lively invention.
You go on: “It was not long before these gentlemen began
to dogmatize in a public manner, feeling a strong inclination to
new-model almost every circumstance or thing in the system of
our national religion.” Just as true as the rest. These gen
tiemen were so far from feeling any inclination at all “to new
model” any “circumstance or thing,” that, during their whole
stay at Oxford, they were High Churchmen in the strongest
sense; vehemently contending for every “circumstance” of
Church order, according to the old “model.” And in Georgia
too, we were rigorous observers of every Rubric and Canon; as
well as (to the best of our knowledge) every tenet of the
Church. Your account, therefore, of the rise of the Method
ists is a mistake from beginning to end.
I proceed to your definition of them: “By the Methodists,
was then and is now understood, a set of enthusiasts, who, pre
tending to be members of the Church of England, either offend
against the order and discipline of the Church, or pervert its
doctrines relating to faith and works, and the terms of salva
tion.”
Another grievous mistake. For whatever “is now, by the
Methodists then was” not “understood any set of enthusiasts,”
or not enthusiasts, “offending against the order and discipline
of the Church.” They were tenacious of it to the last degree,
in every the least jot and tittle. Neither were they “they
understood to pervert its doctrines, relating to faith and works,
and the terms of salvation.” For they thought and talked of
all these, just as you do now, till some of them, after their
return from Georgia, were “perverted” into different senti
ments, by reading the book of Homilies. Their perversion,
therefore, (if such it be,) is to be dated from this time. Conse
quently, your definition by no means agrees with the persons.
defined.
However, “as a Shibboleth to distinguish them at
present, when they pretend to conceal themselves, throw out
this, or such like proposition, “Good works are necessary to
508 SECOND LETTER,
salvation.” You might have spared yourself the labour of
proving this: For who is there that denies it? Not I: Not
any in connexion with me. So that this Shibboleth is just
good for nothing.
5. And yet we firmly believe, that a man is justified by
faith, without the works of the law; that to him that worketh
not, but believeth on Him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith,
without any good work preceding, is counted to him for righte
ousness. We believe (to express it a little more largely) that
we are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of
Christ, by faith, and not for our own works or deservings.
Good works follow after justification, springing out of true, .
living faith; so that by them living faith may be as evidently
known as a tree discerned by the fruit. And hence it follows,
that as the body without the soul is dead, so that faith which
is without works is dead also. This, therefore, properly speak
ing, is not faith; as a dead man is not properly a man.
You add, “The original Methodists affect to call themselves
Methodists of the Church of England; by which they plainly
inform us, there are others of their body who do not profess to
telong to it. Whence we may infer, that the Methodists who
take our name, do yet, by acknowledging them as namesakes
and brethren, give themselves the lie when they say they are of
our communion.” Our name ! Our communion 1 Apage cum
distá tuá magnificentid 1 * How came it, I pray, to be your name
any more than Mr. Venn's? But waving this: Here is another
train of mistakes. For, (1.) We do not call ourselves Methodists
at all. (2.) That we call ourselves members of the Church of
England is certain. Such we ever were, and such we are at this
day. (3.) Yet we do not by this plainly inform you, that there
are others of our body who do not belong to it. By what rule
of logic do you infer this conclusion from those premises?
(4) You have another inference full as good: “Hence one may
infer, that, by acknowledging them as namesakes and brethren,
* Mr. Wesley seems in this instance, as in several others, to have been pur
posely inaccurate in his quotation, to avoid the malediction couched in the ori
ginal words of Terence :
I in malam rem hinc cum istác magnificentiá,
Fugitive / (Phormio. Act. v. sc. 6, v. 37.)
which Dr. Patrick has rather broadly translated: “Go, be hanged, you rascal,
with your vain rodomontades!”
Mr. Wesley’s accommodated quotation of it may be thus rendered:
“Away with this your grandiloqueut verbiage 1”—EDIT.
TO THE REW, DR. FREE. 509.
they give themselves the lie when they say they are of our com
munion.” As we do not take the name of Methodists at all, so
we do not acknowledge any “namesakes” in this. But we
acknowledge as “brethren” all Dissenters (whether they are
called Methodists or not) who labour to have a conscience void
of offence toward God and toward man. What lies upon you
to prove, is this: Whoever acknowledges any Dissenters as
brethren, does hereby give himself the lie, when he says he is a
member of the Church of England.
However, you allow, there may be place for repentance:
“For if any of the founders of this sect renounce the opinions
they once were charged with, they may be permitted to lay aside
the name.” But what are the opinions which you require us to
renounce? What are, according to you, the principles of the
Methodists?
You say in general, “They are contradictory to the gospel,
contradictory to the Church of England, full of blasphemy,
impiety, and ending in downright Atheism:”—
For, “(1.) They expound the Scripture in such a manner
as to make it contradict itself.-
“(2.) With blasphemy, impiety, and diabolical frenzy, they
contradict our Saviour, by denying that he will judge man
according to his works.
“(3.) By denying this they destroy the essential attributes
of God, and ruin his character as Judge of the world.”
In support of the First charge, you say, “It is notorious;
and few men of common sense attempt to prove what is notori
ous, till they meet with people of such motorious impudence as
to deny it.”
I must really deny it. Why, then, you will prove it by Mr.
Mason's own words. Hold, Sir: Mr. Mason’s words prove
nothing. For we are now speaking of original Methodists; but
he is not one of them; nor is he in connexion with them; neither
with Mr. Whitefield nor me. So that what Mr. Mason speaks,
be it right or wrong, is nothing to the present purpose. There
fore, unless you can find some better proof, this whole charge
falls to the ground.
Well, “here it is: Roger Balls.”—Pray who is Roger Balls?
No more a Methodist than he is a Turk. I know not one good
thing he ever did or said, beside the telling all men, “I am no
Methodist,” which he generally does in the first sentence he
510 SECOND LETTER,
speaks, when he can find any one to hear him. He is therefore
one of your own allies; and a champion worthy of his cause !
If then you have no more than this to advance in support of
your first charge, you have alleged what you are not able to
prove. And the more heavy that allegation is, the more unkind,
the more unjust, the more unchristian, the more inhuman, it is
to bring it without proof.
In support of the Second charge, you say, “Our Saviour
declares our works to be the object of hisjudgment. But the
Methodist, for the perdition of the souls of his followers, says
our works are of no consideration at all.”
Who says so? Mr. Whitefield, or my brother, or I? We
say the direct contrary. But one of my “anonymous corre
spondents says so.” Who is he? How do you know he is a
Methodist? For aught appears, he may be another of your
allies, a brother to Roger Balls.
Three or threescore anonymous correspondents cannot yield
one grain of proof, any more than an hundred anonymous
remarkers on Theron and Aspasio. Before these can prove
what the Methodists hold, you must prove that these are
Methodists; either that they are original Methodists, or in
connexion with them.
Will you say, “If these were not Methodists themselves, they
would not defend the Methodists?” I deny the consequence:
Men may be far from being Methodists, and yet willing to do
the Methodists justice. I have known a Clergyman of note say
to another, who had just been preaching a very warm sermon,
“Sir, I do not thank you at all for this. I have no acquaint
ance with Mr. Whitefield or Mr. Wesley; and I do not agree
with them in opinion; but I will have no more railing in my
pulpit.”
From the principles of the Methodists, you proceed to their
practice: “They hunt,” say you, “for extraordinary marks and
revelations, whereby to know the state of the soul.” The marks
by which I know the state of any soul, are the inward fruit of
the Spirit,-love, joy, peace, and meekness, gentleness, good
ness, longsuffering, temperance, patience; shown, not by words
only, but by the genuine fruit of outward holiness.
Again : “They magnify their office beyond the truth, by
high pretences to miraculous inspiration.” To this assertion,
we have answered over and over, We pretend to no other inspi
TO THE REV. DR. FREE. 511
ration than that which, not only every true gospel Minister,
but every real Christian, enjoys.
Again: “The end of all impostors is some kind of worldly
gain; and it is difficult for them to conceal their views entirely.
The love of filthy lucre will appear, either by the use they
make of it, or the means of getting it.” As to the use made of
it, you are silent. But as to the means of getting it, you say,
“Besides inhumanly wringing from the poor, the helpless
widows, the weeping orphans,” (the proof! the proof!) “they
creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with
divers lusts.” It is easy to say this, and ten times more; but
can you prove it? And ought you to say it, till you can?
I shall not concern myself with anything in your Appendix,
but what relates to me in particular. This premised, I observe
on No. I. There are several instances in my Journals, of per
sons that were in agonies of grief or fear, and roared for the
qisquietness of their heart; of some that exceedingly trennbled
before God, perhaps fell down to the ground; and of others
whom God, in his adorable providence, suffered to be lunatic
and sore vexed. The particular instances hereof, to which
you refer, have been largely vindicated already, in the Two
Letters to the Rev. Dr. Church, as well as that to the late
Bishop of London.
In the six following numbers I am not concerned. The
Eighth contains those words from my Second Journal: “The
rest of the day we spent in hearing the wonderful work which
God is beginning to work all over the earth.” Of this likewise
I have spoken at large to Dr. Church and Bishop Gibson.
The sum is, it is a great work when one notorious sinner is
thoroughly changed in heart and life. It is wonderfully great,
when God works this entire change in a large number of
people; particularly when it is done in a very short time:
But so he hath wrought in Kingswood, Cornwall, Newcastle.
It is therefore a truly wonderful work, which God hath now
more than begun to work upon earth.
I have now, Sir, briefly answered for myself, which, if
required, I will do more at large. But I trust it does already
appear, to every impartial reader, that of the many and heavy
allegations you have brought with an unparalleled bitterness of
spirit, and an acrimony of language almost without precedent,
you have not yet proved one. How far you are to be com
mended for this, (unless by Messrs. Balls and the Monthly
512 LETTER. To
Reviewers,) it is not fit for me to judge. Let all lovers of truth,
of humanity, and candour, determine. At present, I have no
more to add, than that I beseech the Father of everlasting com
passion to show more mercy to you, than you have shown to,
Reverend Sir,
Your servant for Christ's sake,
JOHN WESLEY.
A LETTER
THE AUTHOR OF “THE CRAFTSMAN ?”
CONCERNING
REAL CHRISTIANITY, DISPARAGED UNDER THE NAME
OF METHODISM
[PRINTED IN THE YEAR 1745]
TO THE AUTHOR OF “THE CRAFTSMAN ?”
SIR,
IN your late paper of June 22, I find (among many to the
same effect) these words: “Methodists place all merit in faith,
and grace, and none in good works. This unwarrantable strange
sect of a religion, founded on madness and folly, hold that there
is no justification by good works, but by faith and grace only.
They hereby banish that divine part of our constitution, reason,
and cut off the most essential recommendation to heaven, virtue.
“Men who are far gone in their mad principles of religion,
suspend the hand of industry, become inactive, and leave all
to Providence, without exercising either their heads or hands.
“The doctrine of regeneration is essential with political
Methodists;—who are now regenerated, place all merit in
faith, and have thrown good works aside.”
I am pressed by those to whose judgment I pay great regard,
to take some notice of these assertions; and the rather, because
THE AUTHOR OF THE CRAFTSMAN. 513
you sometimes seem as if you thought the Christian institu
tion was of God.
Now, if you really think so, or if you desire that any man
should believe you do, you must not talk so ludicrously of
regeneration; for it is an essential doctrine of Christianity.
And you may probably have heard, or even read in former
years, that it was the Author of this institution who said,
“Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of
Cod.”
This he represents as the only possible entrance into the
experimental knowledge of that religion, which is not founded
(whatever you may suppose) on either madness or folly, but
on the inmost nature of things, the nature of God and man,
and the immutable relations between them.
By this religion, we do not banish reason, but czalt it to
its utmost perfection; this being in every point consistent
therewith, and in every step guided thereby.
But you say, “They hereby cut off the most essential
recommendation to Heaven, virtue.” What virtue? that of
self-murder; that of casting their own infants to be devoured
by beasts or wolves; that of dragging at their chariot-wheels
those whose only crimes were the love of their parents, or
children, or country? These Roman virtues our religion
does cut off; it leaves no place for them. And a reasonable
Deist will allow, “that these are not the most essential recom
mendation to Heaven.” But it is far from cutting off any
sort, degree, or instance of genuine virtue; all which is con
tained in the love of God and man, producing every divine
and amiable temper.
And this love we suppose (according to the Christian
scheme) to flow from a sense of God’s love to us; which
sense and persuasion of God’s love to man in Christ Jesus,
particularly applied, we term faith ; a thing you seem to be
totally unacquainted with. For it is not the faith whereof we
speak, unless it be a “faith working by love,” a faith “zeal
ous of good works,” careful to maintain, nay, to excel in
them. Nor do we acknowledge him to have one grain of
faith, who is not continually doing good, who is not willing
“to spend and be spent in doing all good, as he has opportu
nity, to all men.”
Whoever therefore they are, that “throw aside good
VOL. VIII.
514 ANSWER TO A LETTER PUBLISHED
works; that suspend” (as you prettily phrase it) “the hand
of industry, become inactive, and leave all to Providence,
without exercising either their heads or hands;” they are no
more led into this by any doctrine of ours, than by the
writings of Paul of Tarsus.
And yet “this unaccountable strange sect” (so I believe
we appear to you) “place no merit at all in good works.”
Most true. No, nor in faith neither; (which you may think
more unaccountable still ;) but only in “the blood of the
everlasting covenant.” We do assuredly hold, (which I beg
to leave with you, and to recommend to your deepest consi
deration,) that there is no justification, in your sense, either
by faith or works, or both together; that is, that we are not
pardoned and accepted with God for the merit of either, or
both; but only by the grace or free love of God, for the
alone merits of his Son Jesus Christ.
I am,
Sir,
Your friend, though not admirer,
JOHN WESLEY.
AN ANSWER TO A LETTER
PUBLISHED IN THE BATH JOURNAL, APRIL 17, 1749
SIGNED, N. D.
TO THE AUTHOR OF “A LETTER,” &c.
LIMERICK, May 27, 1749.
SIR,
You ask, why I “do not warn the members of our society
against fornication and adultery.” I answer, For the same
reason that I do not warm them (in those short hints) against
rebellion or murder; namely, because I do not apprehend
them to be in immediate danger thereof. Whereas many
of them are in continual danger, either of “taking the name
of God in vain, of profaning the day of the Lord, or of
drunkenness, or brawling, or of uncharitable or unprofitable
conversation.”
IN THE BATH JOURNAL, 515
But you say, “Many persons of great eminence among
you have been publicly charged with the commission of these
crimes.” But will you undertake to make those charges
good? Whenever your “Christian charity, and hearty
desire for our success in so important a work,” shall oblige
you to instance particulars, I do hereby promise to give you
a particular answer.
“But has not a Preacher of your sect preached and
printed to prove the lawfulness of polygamy?” I answer,
No Preacher in connexion with me has ever done any such
thing. What Mr. Hall of Salisbury has dome, is no more to
me than it is to you; only that I am a greater sufferer by it.
For he renounced all the Methodists several years since:
And, when I was at Salisbury last, turned both me and my
sister out of his house. No man therefore of common,
heathen humanity, could ever blame me for the faults of that
unhappy man.
In declaring my “abhorrence of all vices of that kind,” I
cannot be more plain or explicit than I have been. I can
only declare again, that I believe neither fornicators, adul
terers, nor unclean persons shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven; and that I rank together sorcerers, whoremongers,
murderers, idolaters, and whosoever maketh or loveth a lie.
I well know, “a weak brother,” as you define him, that is,
a man of “profane eyes, and an unholy imagination,” if you
talk either of love-feasts, or persons confessing their faults to
one another, will immediately run over all the scenes of the
“New Atalantis.” But I leave that to himself. I must not
neglect a scriptural advice, because such an one is offended
at my following it.
Your “friendly advice to avoid spiritual selfishness,” I will
endeavour to follow as soon as I understand it. At present,
I do not; neither do I well understand how any “sober
Christian should think me guilty of arrogance or self
conceit,” because I relate a fact in which I had no share at
all; namely, that other men “prayed for one another, that
they might be healed of the faults they had confessed; and
it was so.”
You add, “Dr. Middleton absolves you from all boasting,
in relation to the miracle you worked upon Kirkman.” Dr.
Middleton does me too much honour, in taking any notice
516 ANSWER TO A LETTER.
of so inconsiderable a person. But, miracle or no miracle,
the fact is plain: William Kirkman is, I apprehend, yet
alive, and able to certify for himself, that he had that cough
threescore years, and that since that time it has not yet
returned. I do not know that any “one patient yet has
died under my hands.” If any person does, let him declare
it, with the time and circumstances.
You conclude: “Let me beg of you, as a fellow-Christian,
to remove that great load of scandal that now lies upon your
sect; and that you will not, by a careless or premeditated
silence, bring yourself and your followers under a just suspi
cion of not being enemies to certain vices which you seem
afraid even to name.”
Alas, Sir, is your “hearty wish for my success” dwindled
down to this? and your “sorrow for any oversight that
should afford ground of cavil to those who are disposed to
think unfavourably of me?” Sir, I take knowledge of you.
I no longer wonder at your so readily answering for Dr.
Middleton. I am persuaded none has a better right so to
do: No, not the gentleman who lately printed in the public
papers a letter to the Lord Bishop of Exeter. Well,"Sir, you
may now lay aside the mask. I do not require you to
style yourself my “fellow-Christian.” But we are fellow
creatures, at least fellow-servants of the great Lord of heaven
and earth ! May we both serve him faithfully ! For his
sake, I remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
P. S.—I did not receive yours till last night.
END OF THE EIGHTH VOLUME,